Texas Archeo!ogical and Paleontological Society

84

BONE IMPLEMENT BURIAL, COLLIN
COUNTY, TEXAS
By R. K. Hmams
While on a field trip to the upper part of Pilot Creek in May,
1942, the writer noticed file end of a bone protruding above the
surface.

Pilot Creek had just been out of its banks and had washed

the soil down to plow level.

On reaching down to pick up the

bone, it was found that it would not move because of being embedded in hard earth which had not been disturbed by cultivation.
Investigation proved the bone was part of a group of eight digging
implements belonging to a burial.
Description o] Size
This village site is located on the west side of Pilot Creek, about
eight miles above the junction of Pilot Creek and East Fork of the
Trinity River.

It is located on a small rise covering about five acres

of land. Flint, mussel shells, and bone debris indicates that the
site was occupied over a long period of tirne. In places, evidence
of camp debris extends to’ a depth of two feet.
Many fine projectile points, and scrapers have been found over
the surface of the site. They are of the same types as found in all
East Fork pottery sites.
have been found.

Several nice bone awls and bone beads

There are two peculiar facts concerning this site

which were als~ noticed at the Ragland Site, situated about 20 miles
down East Fork of the Trinity,

(The Ragland site was excavated

in January and February, 19402, by members of the Dallas Archaeological Society).

The pottery sherds, which were found at this

site, and at the Ragland site, run about 95 per cent plain undecorated sherds, and are heavily shell tempered.

At both sites pottery

is scarce, while at other East Fork pottery sites pottery is more
plentiful and runs about 40 to 50 per cent decorated. Bone work
at each o~ these two sites is very plentiful, while at other East
PLATE 15
Diagram of burial showing skeleton in flexed position.
This
buria! contained eight large bison scapulae bone implements.

Bone Implement Burial, Collin County, Texas

87

Fork pottery sites it is found, but is scarce. These two sites are
different from other East Fork pottery sites, and probably are related to each other. Further work at this site probably will show a
still closer relation to the Ragland site.
ButYl
Many burials have been plowed into by the farmer who cultivates
the land. The writer has observed several of these and all have
been buried in flexed position with no burial offerings. One
burial with shell beads has been reported from this site, but the
writer has been unable to interview the person who did the excavation. Upon uncovering this burial it was found that the skeleton was in flexed position, lying on the left side; the head was to
the east and the hands were covering the face. Throughout the
grave were many mussel shells and fragments of charcoal. The
burial offering was placed at the knees of the skeleton. In the
burial construction first a carefully made bed of mussel shells and
ashes was built. Then the ei~ht bone implements were arranged
on the bed of shells and ashes. Of all the burials the writer has
excavated on East Fork, this one seems to have been the most carefully planned of any. (See Plate 15)
The bone implements were placed in the following manner: Plate
16, No. ! (the discovery piece) was on top; then five were underneath this one in the following order, Plate 16, Nos. 2, 8, 5, 6, and
7. Then one (No. 4, Plate 16) was placed on edge on the norda
side and one (No. 3, Plate 16) was placed on edge on the south
side of the others. (See burial diagram, Plate 15).
Description of Bone Implements
All eight implements found with this burial were made from
scapulae of the bison. They are of two types: one type was made
to be used in the hand unhafted, and the other has a hole worked
in the top so that a handle could be inserted.
Type l---Unha]ted
Of the eight implements, two are of this type. They are plain
at the top and were probably used in the hand. Plate 16, Nos. 3 and
4. No. 3 is 12’~/4 inches long and 5 inches wide at the cutting edge.

88

Texas Archeolog$cal and Paleontological Society

No. 4 is 13a,~ inches long and 5 inches wide at the cutting edgo.
Both are well polished from use.
Type ll--Ha/ted
Of the eight implements, six are of this type.
nice hole worked in the top end.

Each one ha~ a

Plate 16, Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, and 8.

The implement shown on Plate 16, No. 1 is 18 inches long and
4~ inches wide at cutting edge.
diameter and 31/.~ inches deep.

The halting hole is 1 inch in

No. 2 is 13½ inches long and 6

inches wide at the cutting edge. The halting hole is 11/~ inch in
diameter and 31/~ inches deep. The hole was broken out on the
hack side and was used after the break oecured as a hand implement. Plate 16, No. 5 is 121/~ inches long and 4~2 inches wide at
the cutting edge.
inches deep.

the cutting edge.
inches deep.

The halting hole is 1 inch in diameter and 3

Figure 6 is 101/,t inches long and 4 inches wide at
The halting hole is i inch in diameter and 21~

As may be seen in Plate 16, this implement has a

small piece broken off of the top.
halting hole visible.
the cutting edge.
inches deep.

This break leaves part of the

No. 7 is 10 inches long and 4 inches wid$ at

The halting hole is ~ inches in diameter and 2

No. 8 is 11 inches long and 41/~9 inches wide at the

cutting edge.

The hafting hole is 1~ inches in diameter and 3

inches deep.

The hole was broken out on the back side and was

used as a hand implement after the break oecured.

All six of this

type are well polished from use.
The method of making the halting hole on all six is plainly
visible.

Fire (probably live coals) was used to burn through the

solid part of the bone.

After this was burned through, the spongy

part of the bone was chipped away until a nice smooth hcle was
made to take the handle.
9024 Roanoak Street,
Dallas 18, Texas.
August 1, 1944.

PLATE 16
This plate shows photographs of eight large bone implements
made from bison scapulae.

Plate

