48

Texas ArcheologicaI and paleontological Society

EVIDENCF. OF EUROPF_ikN INFLUENCE IN
THE PICTOGRAPHS OF WEST TEXAS
By VICTOR J. S~r~TH
II.

Human Forms, Horses, and Cathie

In Section I of this paper,,O "Representations of Shelter,"
drawings chiefly representing the old Spanish Missions were
discussed and illustrated. In this report it is not d]~’~icult to
gather together in one short paper all of the important remaining evidences of European influence upon the pictograph and petroglyph art work of the West Texans Indians.
Art is almost always the product of leisure. Once the white
man began to press the Indians w~stward and to the south,
little time was left for the laborious carved or painted recording of events or interests in pictorial form.
In addition to the missions, however, evidence of white
influence is found at many of the pictograph sites in the form
PLATE 9
West Texas Pictographs: A variety of pictographs showing European influence.
!. Cattle and horseshoe tracks. Such symbols are said to picture
the better trails and river crossings. Cabeza de Vaca reported eating pinion pine nuts in this vicinity during his famous expedition
across Texas.
2. Pennants showing possible influence of Fort Bliss and Fort
Hancock or Fort Concho and Fort Chadbourne.
3. Devil figure may ha~e resulted~’from use of chapel by priests
in Mendoza’s Expedition. This unidentified camp was located not
far from Paint Rock where this pictograph was found. Gun and
stage coach show further evidence of European influence.
4. Men with hats. The stockade design is thought to represent
f.he location of a military post. Several reasonably good maps have
been found in West Texas by engineers and archaeologists.
5. Figures of women, one somewhat like a sunbonnet.
6. Additional human figures, women or priests in robes.
PLATE 10

West Texas Pictographs showing horses.
1. Conventional riders.
2. Indian riders.
3. European rider (with hat) and others of undetermined type.
4. Free horses.
5. Free horses, one with suggestion of harness or saddle.
6. Cowboy, lasso, and horse group.

Plate 9

&

5

~’~
6
Plate 10

Evidence of European Influence in West Texas Pictographs

53

of men with hats, women, cattle, horses, and a relatively few
weapons, and flags. The writer knows of no such evidence
among the numerous petroglyph sites visited: Most of the
painted drawings are in the conventional cinnabar red
though in the E1 Paso area quite a number of white drawings
are to be observed. Brewster County, where cinnabar is still
mined profitably, probably was the mining center for red
ores suited to drawing and it is probable that a brisk barter
trade in bits of cinnabar ore was known for centuries past
in West Texas.
A tabulation of counties visited by the writer, over a
period of years, which have Indian drawings reflecting European influence follows. Those who are interested in reading
further should consult the bibliography attached to this
paper.
County
Brewster
Concho
E1 Paso

Hudspeth
Jeff Davis

Man on
WomMisCattle HorseMan Horse Priest an Misc. sions
~
~
---2
-1
~
~
7
--3
4
2
~
1
-3
....

......
1
-1
.......

Presidio
9 (Herd)Reeves
--Terrel!
5
1
Val Verde
1
1
16

3

5

--

!

--

--

1
1

-1
5
2

2
2

1
6

-1,
2
--

14

13

4

11

8

--

1

-3
4
11

The writer has always maintained that the~pictographs of
the Indians were not mere idle scrawls but were either
r.epresentations of important events, as the artist saw them,
or drawings of objects representing symbolism or generally
understood messages. It is evident from a study of the
above table that the European himself was of much interest
since man, priest, woman, or man-on-horse occur with most
frequency and with wide distribution.
It has not been possible for the writer to visit the Panhandle region of Texas. Floyd Studer and Forrest Kirk-

54

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

land4 have reported, however, cattle and the man-on-horse
pictograph, as well as "numerous pictures of guns" from this
section of West Texas.
In identifying women among the drawings it is sometimes
difficult to make a definite classification, especially when
the crudely drawn skirt is short and might have been a part
of the skin costume of a warrior. Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, however, reports very definite skirted figures7 which are undoubtedly female, though they cannot be classified as definitely historic.
Some discussions have appeared which tend to suggest
that the position of arms akimbo are more likely to represent
white men than other types of arm position. This may be
true but another explanation is mentioned here in order to
suggest a line of study not heretofore approached, that of
correlating the pictographs of all types with a study of the
Indian sign language. This would make an interesting and
possibly important contribution. Jackson records many
arm and hand positions in his extensive studies.I Arm posi-

PLATE

11

West Texas Pictographs:
1. Catholic priest and cross thought to be influenced by Sosa’s
Expedition (see text).
2. Group of horsemen thought to picture Mendoza’s Expedition
through the Big Bend to a point beyond San Angelo.
3. Lone rider. Many pictographs, such as these, show loss of
detail due to weathering of rock.
PLATE 12
Evidence of European influence among the pictographs of West
Texas.
1. Lone horseman and group of horsemen (lower left). Also
note parts of two huge human figures, hand negatives, man with
shield, and the work of vandals. Ajua Frio, Brewster County.
2. A group of cattle. San Estaben, Presidio County. Legend
has it that the Indians stole cattle from the early ranchmen of this
area.

PLATE

13

1. Mission and priest pictograph, Meyer’s Springs. Note many
older pictographs.
2. Skirted figures suggestin~ European dress. Judge Sims calls
this group a wedding with "rejected suitor standing on his head."
More likely a funeral since inverted figures indicate death.

-b

One

Plate 11

Plate 12

Plate

Evidence o:~ European Influence in West Texas Pictographs

61

tions are also strikingly illustrated in the report by Dr.
Cyrus N. Ray~ from a Stephens County Cave.
Possibly the most important item related to European influence among the pictographs, however, lies in the fact that
¯ this is one of the sure indications of the age of the drawings.
In West Texas, for example, the Indians who observed and
recorded pictures of Catholic priests most likely observed
the expedition of Gaspar de Sosa9 and a party of 170, including a number of priests, known to have passed through the
Pecos River country in their northward movement of 1590.
Again, the em:liest possible date for observing horses in the
Big Bend were those of the Mendoza Expedition which
passed through what is now the heart of the Big Bend in the
winter of 1684, traveling into the Concho Country beyond
or near the site of the Paint Rock drawings.9
Horses without riders frequently indicate horse stealing,
according to Mallory.~ In West Texas a number of "runsoff-the-horse" conventionalizations are to be observed. Mendoza~ complains that horses were stolen from his expedition
by Indians, as he passed through the Big Bend in 1683-84.
The figure of the lasso is also associated with horse stealing.
This symbol is also found in West Texas as well as horse
shoe prints which indicate horses, good horse trails, or river
fords in the Big Bend pictographs.
It has been interesting to note a certain change in the
tone of papers which discuss pictographs generally. Early
writers, with a few exceptions, rather discounted the drawings as of little scientific importance. In more recent years
it has been pleasing to note that a more serious consideration
has been given to the car~fu! recording of drawings, warnings against their destruction, and a serious study of their
characteristics. Certainly we may say with safety that those
expressions represented the things in which the artist was
most interested, his conception of events as they happened,
as well as some success in conventionalized drawings which
carried messages or gave directions. In the Hueco Tanks
neighborhood, for example, an Indian painting with dragon
flies and a wavey "water sign" symbol announces the loca-

62

Texas Archeologica~ and I~aleontological Society

tion of a hidden source of water on the edge of the desert as
plainly as the crudely painted sign left by a pioneer traveler
of 1850 who lettered this message addressed to thirsty travelers: "Water in Hear."
Alpine, Texas.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Jackson, A. T., Picture-Writing of Texas Indians, Archaeological Papers, VO1. II, University of Texas, 1938.
2. Kirkland, Forrest, A Study of Indian Pictographs in
Texas, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 9.
3. A Description of Texas Pictographs, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10.
4. Indian Pictographs and Petroglyphs in the Panhandle
Region of Texas, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological
Society Bulletin, Vol. 14.
5. Indian Pictures in the Dry Shelters of Val Verde County, Texas, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 11.
6. Mallery, Garrick, Picture Writing of the American
Indians, Bureau of Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution,
Tenth Annual Report, 1888-89.
7. Ray, Cyrus, Prehistoric Paintings Covered with Stalegmite Deposits, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 14.
8. Smith, Victor J., Indian Pictographs in the Big Bend
of Texas, Texas Folk-Lore Society of Austin. Publication
No. 11, 1923. West Texas Historical and Scientific Society,
Alpine.
9. Early Spanish Exploration in the Big Bend of Texas,
West Texas Historical and Scientific Society, Alpine, Pub.
No. 2, 1928.
10. Evidence of European Influence in the Pictographs of
West Texas, I. Representations of Shelter, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 14.
11. Archaeological Notes of the Big Bend Region, Texas
Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Abilene, Vol. 3.

