THE KENT-CRANE SITE: A SHELL MIDDEN
ON THE TEXAS COAST
T. N. CA~BF~L~.
In a previous volume of this bulletin’ I published a report
on the Johnson site, which was designated as the type site
for the Aransas focus of the Texas coast. That report also
included a brief summary of the Aransas focus based upon
the excavation of the Johnson site and two additional sites
on Live Oak Peninsula, the Live Oak Point site and the KentCrane site. The purpose of the following paper is to present
an analysis of the arehaelogical materials from the KentCrane site and to show the place of this site ir~ the current
conception of the Aransas focus.
SAte Location and Description
The Kent-Crane site, an extensive shell midden, lies on
the west side of Live Oak Peninsula. about five miles north
of Rockport, Aransas County, Texas (Fig. 3, B). Live Oak
Peninsula, which extends northward between Copano Bay
and Aransas Bay, is in the middle section of the Texas coast.
This locality is a part of what is known to physiographers as
the Coastal Prairie.2 The terrain of the Coastal Prairie is
very flat and in places marshy. As the name implies, it is
predominantly grassland; but there are local areas of woodland, notably along stream courses and on sandy ridges.
Live Oak Peninsula is a sandy wooded area, being covered
with a chaparral or thorny brush vegetation, but there is
evidence which indicates that in aboriginal times Live Oak
Peninsula was a grass-covered prairie. Within the past
hundred years chaparral vegetation has moved northward
and eastward along the Texas coast,3 and Price and Gunter4 have presented historical evidence which shows that as
1.
2.
3.
4.

Campbell, 1947.
Fenneman, 1938, Pl~. 100-120.
That,, 1939, p. 8.
Price and Gt~nter, 1943. pp. 12-13 ; Gunter. 1950. pp. 366-367.

FIGURE 3
Kent-Crane Site. Texas Coast.
A, cross-section of midden deposit; B. mal~
showing location of Kent-Crane Site and other excavated sit~ on Live Oak Peninaula0
Arnns~ County, Texa~.

I<’tENT~A~N~
~OSS ,,~ECTION

$lTC~

The Kent-Crane Site

41

late as 1870 the entire Aransas Bay coast line was truly a
prairie.
The climate of the Aransas Bay area has certain unfavorable aspects from the point of view of human occupation
under aboriginal conditions. Temperatures are mesothermal, but precipitation is unreliable. Little rainfall occurs
in winter, limiting the surface water supply during that
season; and in some years rainfall is so deficient that such
years may be classified by climatologists as desert years.~
The Kent-Crane midden forms a low ridge that closely
parallels the beach of Copano Bay for some 600 meters. It
is 20 to 30 meters wide and varies in thickness from a few
centimeters to a maximum of approximately 1.8 meters.
The greater part of the deposit, however, appears to vary
between .9 and 1.2 meters. It rests on a bed of clay, PrObably the Beaumont formation, which attains an elevation of
about 1 meter above mean high tide (Fig. 3, A).e In certain places wave action has exposed the midden deposit in
vertical section, and here artifacts and shell from the midden
litter the beach. No record exists of disturbance by cultivation, but a drainage ditch is said to have been cut through
the midden about the year 1922. Today the midden is
covered by a dense thicket composed of shrubs and smalI
trees, the latter principally oak.
Excavation
This site was visited by George C. Martin and Wendell
Potter in their archaeological survey of the Rockport area
in 1927-1929.7 On April 13, 1930, Martin and Potter made a
test excavation at one of the vertical sections facing Copane
Bay. They dug a strip 15 feet wide some 3 feet back into
the midden, at which place they found the deposit to exceed.
1.2 meters in thickness.
During the period of January 2 to March 29, 1941, a Uni5. Russell, 1945, pp. 43, 46-47.
6. At one locality a bed of fossil oyster and clam shells is exposed in section,,
showing it to be included in the clay formation. There is no evidence which sugge~tz;
that man had anything to do with its origin.

7.

~dartln, n. d., p. 6, Site

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

42

versity

of

Texas-Works

Progress

Administration

field

party,e under the direction of William A. Duffen, extensively
tested the Kent-Crane site.

Near the central part of the

long midden a trench 100 feet (30.47 meters) wide was carried from the beach directly across the site, a distance of 75
feet (22.85 meters). Some 275 meters to the north a trench
45 feet (13.71 meters) wide was similarly excavated for a
distance of 20 feet (6.09 meters) into the midden deposit.
Finally, a short distance south of the main excavation a
test block 10 feet (3.04 meters) square was removed at a
point lying on the longitudinal axis of the midden.
Shortly after excavation began it became apparent that
there was a stratigraphic break in the midden deposit. Two
distinct layers could be traced on any given profile (Fig.
3, ’A). Stratum 1, the lower, rested on basal clay and was
black, ashy, and rather compact. In the main excavation
near the center of the midden Stratum 1 averaged between
60 and 75 centimeters in thickness. Stratum 2, the upper
layer, contrasted with Stratum 1 in both texture and color.
It was loose and quite brownish. S~atum 2 was not represented everywhere in the areas excavated, being notably
thin or absent in the eastern part. Near the central part,
however, it showed a thickness that varied from 30 to 45
centimeters. Roughly speaking, Stratum 1 comprised the
lower two-thirds of the deposit, Stratum 2 the upper onethird. The clay base upon which the midden rested had a
surface that was relatively flat, very few irregularities being
observed.
In the main excavation the artifacts were segregated into
three groups based on their vertical distribution.
In
Stratum 1 the artifacts from the lower half (Stratum la)
were separated from those in the upper half (Stratum lb);
and those from Stratum 2 were kept separate from the
others. In the two smaller excavations to the north and
8.
known
Estate,
by Mr.

Work Project No. 16770. In the files at the University of Texas this site is
as 72D9o13. The land upon which the site lies belongs to the Kent and Crane
whence the hyl~henated name Kent-Crane. Permission to excavate wa~ given
William Kent of San Francisco, California.

The Kent-Crane Site

43

south the vertical position of each artifact in its layer was
recorded.
Contents of the Midden
Excavation revealed that the midden was composed principally of marine shells and soi!, with the former predominating. The shells were rather densely packed, and the soil
filled the interstices between the shells and shell fragments.
There was no evidence of alternating shell and soil layers.
In addition to shells, which were mainly conch (Busycon
perversum Say and Fasciolaria papillosa Sowerby) oyster
(Ostrea virginica Gmelin), and clam (Macrocallista nimbosa Solander),9 there was also a liberal sprinklin of
animal bones, identifiable bones and fragments indicating
fish, birds, such mammals as deer and peccary, and one
reptile, a turtle,m Scattered rather uniformly throughout
the midden deposits were artifacts of shell, bone, and stone,
as well as small fragments of asphalt; and near the surface,
as well as on it, were a few potsherds. Badly disturbed
remains of at least two burials were also included. A few
fossil bone fragments were mixed with the midden debris,
evidently having been collected by the inhabitants of the
site. T ~
Bu~a~
Martin~2 reports .that a human skeleton was found at the
Kent-Crane site in 1922, apparently during or shortly after
the time when the drainage ditch was cut through the midden. He estimates that the bones came from a depth of
approximately 30 centimeters, but he gives no data concerning the type of burial. Martin also reports the occurrence
of a human skull fragment containing three teeth that seems
9.
No sample collection of shells from the Kent-Crane site was made. The species
listed here are those indicated by sbell~ t;s~.~i in the manufactur~ of artifacts. The
identifications were made by Mr. Richard W, Fo~ter, A~sistant Curator of Mollusks,

Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvar~l University. At the nearby Johnson site
(Campbell, 1947, p. 45) a sample c~lleetion of shells was made which gives nn indication of the shellfish f~rms used for food hy the people responsible for the two middens.
10. Th~e identlfi~tJons were mnde in the field by W. A. Duffen,
11. Thee fragments were examined by Dr. A. S. Romer, D~rector of the Museum
of ~mparat~ve Z~logy, IIarvard University,. One is the ~th of a fossil
~ne or la~r) one i~ po~ibly a tulle bone, and the three remaining fragmen~ are
unidentlfiable.
12. Martin. n. d., p. 6,

to have come from near the base of his excavation, some 15
centimeters above the clay layer at the bottom of the midden. He states specifically that it was not part of a burial.
In Duffen’s main excavation a disturbed burial was encountered at the base of the midden. It rested on the surface of the clay stratum and was 50 centimeters below the
midden surface at that point. Portions of the lower half
of the skeleton remained, consisting of a part of the pelvis,
all of the right leg bones, and the lower half of the left leg.
There seemed to be a north-south orientation of these bones,
the pelvis being to the north. Lying near the left knee was
the clam shell scraper shown in Plate 6, L.
This information is too scant to permit us to make a
statement about the burial customs of the inhabitants of
the Kent-Crane site. All that can be said is that some
burials were placed in the midden deposit.
Description o:~ the Ar~:facts
A total of 689 objects showing human handiwork was obtained during the course of Duffen’s excavation.13 Of this
number only 596 are complete enough to be identified and
included in the various categories of a trait list. Omitting
the potsherds, which are very few in number, and also the
lumps of asphalt showing impressions of basketry mud matting, all of these objects are made from three classes of
material--shell, bone, and stone.
Percentages of these
materials run approximately as follows: shell 31%, bone
33%, and stone 36%.,
Before proceeding with a description of these artifacts,
a brief preview of the conclusions will be presented. This
will help to give perspective to the descriptive material that
follows. Materials from two cultures are represented at the
Kent-Crane site, namely, the Aransas focus and the Rockport focus. The Aransas material is stratigraphically overlain by the Rockport material, which is scant in nature and
consists of the potsherds and two small arrowpoints, all of
13. The few objects collected from the site by Martin and Potter have not been
examined and thus do not enter into the frequency figures given in this section.

PLATE 6

Shell
arti,~a:e;t~- -~rom
’

Kent-Crane Site. Texas
’

e~[

strainer.

Coast.

A’ I

artifact;

J-K’

The Ke~-Cra~e ~ite

47

which occur near or on the surface of the shell midden. In
effect, we almost have a pure site of the Aransas focus,
which is the main pre-pottery horizon in this section of
the Texas coast.
SHELL OBJECTS. The shell objects, 175 in number, are
made from three kinds of shell---conch, oyster, and clam.
Objects made from conch shell predominate (88%), and consist principally of cutting, scraping, piercing, and percussion tools made either from the body whorl or the columella. No clearly identifiable ornaments of conch shell are
included. Oyster shells were perforated and probably used
for digging tools, and clam shells were occasionally used for
cutting or scraping purposes.
Conch Shell Adzes.
In Stratum 1 occurred fifty-four
adzes made from conch body whorls. Twenty-four of these
came from Stratum la, thirty from Stratum lb. Many of
these are now damaged in some way, but all bear the
characteristic ground cutting edge. As far as it is possible
to tell, and it is possible in most cases, these adzes were
made from one species of conch, Busycon perversum Say.
The large body whorl was always utilized, and there was
a. general tendency to select large conchs with thick shells.
All of these tools show the marked natural curvature of the
shell.
Adzes in various stages of completion were found, and
these indicate the steps taken in the manufacture of an adze.
First a large, roughly triangular body-whorl fragment was
removed from the conch shell and then trimmed to a general
rectangular form, usually leaving the thick body-whorl
angle. It was possible, in forty-six out of fifty-four cases,
to determine that the ground edge was formed at the anterior end of the shell fragment.,~ Thus the longitudinal axis
of the adze corresponds to the longitudinal axis of the
original shell, and the cutting edge of the adze was made
at right angles to this axis. The lateral edges of these adzes
14.

By anterior is meant the anterior part of the shell, or that end of the shell

which point~ in the normal direction of movement of the living conch. This is the

narrow or pointc~i end of the shell.

48

Texas A~cheologica! and Paleontological Society

show little evidence of having been ground. Instead they
are roughly finished, apparently by percussion, and only
in rare instances do they show any traces of smoothing.
There is no evidence of cutting or sawing of the shell in
order to remove and shape the whorl sections. It looks as
though they were broken off in some way and then roughly
shaped by percussion.
The cutting edge invariably shows strong beveling on the
inner or concave face of the sheR (Plate 6, A-F). In addition it was customary to grind the opposite or convex face
just enough to give a smoothly convex cutting edge. In
forty of the fifty-four adzes this exterior grinding of the

cutting edge is clearly visible. That the adzes were halted
or used with the convex surface or face of the shell outward
is suggested by the minor fracture scars along the cutting
edge. In almost all cases where fracturing of this sort has
occurred it has taken place on the convex face of the
cutting edge.
Plate 6, A-F, shows some of the variations in size and
outline of these shell adzes. The smallest (Plate 6,
occur in Stratum la, but large ones are present there also.
In shape little stratigraphic segregation is ascertainable.
The general rectanglar form is most common (Plate 6, A, D),
but a few (six instances) show a cutting edge that is somewhat wider than the opposite end, giving a trianguloid appearance (Plate 6, C). Sometimes the cutting edge is
ground closer to the canal of the conch shell, in which case
it has a strongly convex outline (Plate 6, E). In two
specimens both ends of the adze are ground to a cutting
edge (Plate 6, F).
The smallest adze in the series has a width of 5.6 centimeters and a length of 8.6 centimeters; the largest a width
of 8.1 centimeters and a length of 17.5 centimeters. The
common variations in proportions of length and breadth are
suggested by Plate 6, A-F. Thickness varies with the age
and size of the conch utilized. For the series in Stratum 1
it averages between 4 and 5 millimeters.
In addition to the adzes there are nine conch whorl frag-

The Kent-Crane Site

49

merits which have irregular outlines and appear to have
been struck from the original shell, nothing further having
been done to them. These are larger than most of the adzes
in the series, and it would have been a comparatively simple
matter to continue the work and fashion them into adzes.
Two of these occur in Stratum la and seven in lb.

With these should be considered five adze blanks (one
in Stratum la, four in Stratum Ib) that are complete in every
respect except that the cutting edges have not been provided. The outlines are duplicated in the series of completed adzes. Finally, there are thirteen whorl fragments
(four in Stratum la, nine in Stratum lb) which seem to be
parts of broken adzes, for they have the appropriate sizes
and outlines for adzes and are broken cleanly across between the mid-section and the cutting edge. None of these
bears a beveled cutting edge.
In Stratum 2 only five shell adzes are represented, and
all of these are fragments. They differ in no respect from
those of Stratum 1. The cutting edges are heavily ground
on the inner sides and lightly ground on the outer. It is
evident that the conch shell adze tradition fades out in this
horizon, but no comparable cutting tool replaces it. This
layer also contained three shell fragments that could be poll
ends of adzes.
Four shell adzes and one shell fragment of what was probably an adze were collected from the beach at the KentCrane site. These had evidently eroded from that portion
of the site nearest the beach. They duplicate forms from
the excavation.
Conch Columella Gouges. Forty-seven gouges, made from
the colume!lae of large, heavy conch shells, came from
Stratum 1, twenty-nine from la and eighteen from lb.
Twenty-one were made from the columellae of FascioIaria
papillosa Sowerby (Plate 7, D; note the spiral fluting which
is characteristic of this species of conch), and twenty-six
were made from columellae of Busycon perversum Say
(Plate 7, A, C). These gouges were made by removing the

50

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological

Society

body whorl and spire of the conch and then grinding the
anterior or canal end of the columella to a chisel-like edge
(Plate 7, D, gives two views of this cutting edge).

The

cutting edge is always obliquely ground on the side which
bears the canal, so that the facet extends backward on both
sides of the canal and has a general U shape. In most cases
the opposite face is lightly ground to give the cutting edge a
smoothly convex outline.

The ragged whorl margin that

spirals up the columella is commonly ground a little to
give a certain amount of smoothness, suggesting that this
tool was probably not halted but used in the hand.
Most of the gouges are heavy and have broad cutting
edges (Plate 7, D), but they vary from this toward a narrower edge (Plate 7, C), a few being almost pointed.

Only

one has any appreciable portion of the whorl still attached
(Plate 7, A), and the broad poll end of this particular gouge
is neatly finished and slightly ground to give smoothness.
These gouges vary considerably in length, but many are
now rather short, evidently because they were broken while
in use. The longest complete specimen is 15.1 centimeters.
A few show a certain amount of battering or damage to the
cutting edge.
In Stratum 2 only four gouges occur, all broken transversely. They duplicate those from Stratum 1 in every particular; in fact, they may have originally come from Stratum
1, the later occupants of the site having collected them. Like
the conch shell adzes described in the preceding section, the
conch columella gouges also fade out in Stratum 2; and no
comparable cutting tool takes the place of this tool type.
Conch Shell Hammers. In his field report Duffen mentions that the Conch shell hammers came only from the lower
part of the deposit, but no specimens are included in the
collection obtained from the Kent-Crane site. Presumably
they are of the same sort as those found at the Johnson site,
which is placed in the same focus as the Kent-Cane site. All

PLATE 7

Shell,

bone, gotlges:
and stone
artifacts
from awl;
Kent-Crane
Te~,-s Coast.
conch colt~mel|a
B, conch
columella
E-J, M. Site,
Q-S, l~ne ~twl~; K, ~patulate
~ne obj~t; L. ~ne pin ; ~. antler ~laking t~l ; O-P. ~dlng stones.

The Kent-Crane Site

53

we can do here is record the presence of conch shell
hammers, t ~
Conch CoIumella Awls. Only one of these is represented
(Plate 7, B), a small columella (length 8.7 centimeters) with
the anterior end ground to a strong, relatively sharp point.
This was found in Stratum la. One large beach-rolled columella from Stratum lb may have served as an awl, but it
shows no traces of having been ground to a point by human
hand.
Conch Shell Scrapers. Five scrapers made from the lip portion of the conch body whorl occur in Stratum 1, four from
la and one from lb. In each specimen the lip shows signs
of heavy usage in the form of chipping and abrasion. Two
of these are made from light, thin-walled conch shells, one
from a very thick, heavy-walled whorl, and two are intermediate between these two extremes. The scraper illustrated in Plate 6, H, is the largest in this small series of
scrapers, having a width of 8.5 centimeters and a length of 12
centimeters.
Conch Shell Discs. Two small discs made from the whorl
of the conch were found in Stratum 1 (one each from la
and lb). A third disc was collected from the beach adjacent to the midden. In each of these specimens the circumference has been ground to a somewhat smooth and
rounded edge. The smallest has a diameter of 6.5 centimeters, the largest a diameter of 7.8 centimeters. There is
no indication of perforations or surface decoration, such as
might be expected in a gorget. The disc illustrated in Plate
6, G, has much more curvature than the remaining two and
could have been used very well as an eating implement.
Unfinished Conch Shell Object. One well-worked fragment of an unidentified conch shell object was found in
Stratum lb (Plate 6, I). Originally it seems to have had a
lance01ate form, and its present maximum width is 3.5 centimeters. On its concave surface are four conical pits, two
large and two small, which are roughly aligned and which
15.

See Campbell. 1947. pp. $1-52, for description of the c~nch ~hell hammer.

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

54

evidently represent attempts to drill holes through the wall.
The largest of the four pits reached a point about two-thirds
through the wall. The edges of this object are ground down
to a smoothly rounded form.
Clam Shell Scraper or Kni]e. Associated with the burial
at the base of the midden was a clam shell scraper or knife
(Plate 6, L). A portion of the outer margin has been
roughly chipped to a slightly concave edge. The clam has
been identified as Macrocall~ta nimbosa Solander.
Per]orated Oyster Shells. Stratum la produced twenty
perforated oyster shells (Ostrea virg~nica Gmelin) ; none was
found in the layers above. The perforations (Plate 6, J-K)
vary from small and rounded to large and roughly oval, a
few being quadrangular. These holes are located at or near
the highest point of the shell, and the edges of the holes are
quite rough. Apparently the hole was made by a series of
sharp blows on the convex face of the shell. The shells
selected for this treatment range from 9.2 to 14.4 centimeters
in length. It is difficult to decide whether or not the shell
margins show signs of wear or use, for all are eroded to a
considerable degree. Martin~6 states that he found perforated oyster shells on the surface at this site. They are
described as "pierced with a single hole, sometimes round,
sometimes square," and are stated to be fairly numerous.
Disc-shaped Beads. Duffen’s excavation revealed no ornaments of this type, but MartinIv reports and illustrates a
disc-shaped bead of shell. It is described as having a diameter of 1.3 centimeters, and the illustration shows it to have
a small hole through the center. It was found on the beach
at the extreme southern edge of the site.
BONE OBJECTS.
The bone artifacts from the KentCrane shell midden number 193 and, so far as it is possible
to tell, were made from the bones of birds and mammals,
particularly the deer. Mammal bones were used principally
for awls and pins, and bird bones bulked large in the making
16.
17.

Martin, ibldo$ 1929, p. 54 and plate or.posite.
Martin. n. ~t., p. 6.

The Kent.Crane Site

55

of beads. Aside from pottery, which is not considered to
belong to the major cultural complex at this site, bone objects constitute the only medium of artistic expression. Some
bone awls, pins, and beads bear incised and drilled designs
of a simple geometric character.
Awls.
These are fairly numerous among the artifacts
made from bone at this site. They number fifty-four and
are made principally from mammal bones.
The most
popular type is an awl made from a deer ulna, but running
it a close second is an awl made from split bone. The bone
splinter awl runs a poor third. One awl appears to have
been made from a deer mandible, and another was made
from an unsplit bird bone shaft. This assemblage of awls
is described below.
Twenty-nine deer ulna awls are present in the collection,
twenty-one from Stratum la and eight from Stratum lb.
Ten of these are represented by distal fragrnents of sufficent length to permit fairly accurate identification. In general these awls are short but have a very thin sharp point
(Plate 7, R-S). The shortest complete awl is 9.5 centimeters
in length, the longest 11.2 centimeters.
From Stratum la came a fragment of what appears to be
an awl made from a deer mandible. Although damaged at
both ends, the presumed distal end bears a glossy polish
(Plate 7, Q).
Seventeen awls of split mammal bone are included in the
series of awls. The mammal is probably deer in all cases.
These awls are all confined to Stratum 1, nine coming from
la, eight from lb. One awl is a deer metapodial which has
been split through the middle of the articular head and on
through the shaft (Plate 7, E). This awl is the longest (16.6
centimeters) in the whole series; it has a groove encircling
the shaft near the articular head, and it is also well ground
and polished along the shaft edges and near the point.
Another awl is made from the proxiraal end of a small deer
femur (Plate 7, I). Five awls consist of long slivers split
upward from the distal articular surface of a deer metapodial
(Plate 7, J). The surfaces are smoothly ground and polished.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

56

All of these were damaged in some way, and the longest
~ragment, apparently about 80% complete, measures 12.6
centimeters. Four awls were made from deer metapodial
shafts (Plate 7, H: Plate 8, Q), but all have been broken
near the mid-section. With one exception the points are
broad and somewhat blunt. Another awl in this group is
polished over its entire surface and has a small notch in its
base (Plate 7, M).
Six split bone awl fragments are unique in that they are
decorated. They were evidently made from split shafts of
mammal long bones. Ir~ five of these the shaft slivers were
first ground down so that the implements had a flatly oval
cross section; then they were highly polished and decorated
on both flat surfaces. Of these decorated awls three are
rather similar in that hatching and crosshatching are used
to isolate undecorated triangular areas (Plate 8, T-V). One
has what appears to be a zigzag design formed by small
shallowly drilled pits (Plate 8, Y). One (Plate 8, Q) bears
a series of short parallel incised lines, as well as what appears to be the beginning of a zigzag design. Finally, there
is one awl fragment which is crudely hatched on both flat
surfaces (Plate 8, W). These lines tend to be clustered in
groups of three.
Martin,s reports and illustrates two split bone awls from
the Kent-Crane site. Both were found in his test excavation, one coming from a depth of 60 centimeters, the other
from about 15 centimeters above the clay base of the midden.
Judging from these depth figures, Martin’s awls came from
our Stratum 1. They have lengths of 7.1 and 8 centimeters
respectively.
Six awls were made from splinters of long bone shafts
(one from Stratum la, five from lb). One of these is
apparently made from bird bone, but the others are made
from mammal bones (Plate 7,. F-G). Only the points of
these awls show grinding and polishing. They vary in
length from 4 to 8.7 centimeters.

18.

Martin, n. d., p. 6; 1229, p. 57 and plate opposite.

C

B

L

J

H

M

N

T

O

U

PLATE 8
Bone artifacls,
Coast.

pottery, and evidences of basketry

from

Kent-Crane Site, Texas

A-P. bone I~,ads; Q-W. Y-BIL bone awls and pins; CC-DD.

incised bone

ments; X, [~]]~]-JJ, NN-RR, potsherd,~: KK-MM. ba~ketry teehnique~ deriw~l from
preasions in a~pha]t.

In

i~ttery rim profiles vessel interiors are to the left.

The Kent-Crane Site

One awl from Stratum lb was made from a small unsplit
bird bone shaft (Plate 8, BB). The point was formed by
grinding the end of the shaft obliquely.
Pins. In Stratum 1 were fifteen fragments of what
appear to have been long, slender, rod-like implements,
pointed at one end and possibly both ends. These are here
called pins to distinguish them from the awl fragments
described above. They differ from the awl fragments only
in being narrower and less flatly oval in cross section, and
in one specimen there is evidence which suggests that it was
pointed at both ends. Eleven of these pins are undecorated,
but four are decorated in the same techniques and designs
(with one exception) as the awls that have just been
described.
The decorated fragments (seven from Stratum la, four
from lb) include only one which is relatively coraplete
(Plate 7, L), and this specimen shows tapering at both
ends, suggesting that some or even possibly all of these
pins were originally pointed at both ends. Seven fragments
are pointed tips only (Plate 8, AA), and three are medial
fragments. An additional fragment has a bluntly rounded
point, perhaps indicating that one end sometimes may not
have been so sharp as the other. In cross section these
undecorated pins vary from oval to round, and they have
evidently been made from the split shafts of mammal long
bones. All are smoothly ground, and several even have a
glossy polish. It is impossible at present to say how long
these pins were originally, but the most nearly complete
specimen has a present length of 13.2 centimeters.
The four decorated pin fragments (two each from Stratum
la and lb) have incised and drilled designs. They are flatly
oval in cross section and are decorated on only one of the
two flat surfaces. The designs are simple, consisting of zigzag lines (Plate 8, R-S) in three specimens; the fourth is
decorated with a series of small, closely spaced drilled pits
forming a lozenge pattern (Plate 9, Z).
Spatulate Bone Objects. Two bone fragments are much
like the pins except that they have parallel sides, are much

6O

Texas A~’cheological and Paleontological Society

flatter in cross section, and have thin, spatulate ends (Plate
7, K). It is quite likely that their missing opposite ends
were pointed and that they should be included with the
pins or awls.
Tubular Beads. Among the various bone objects from the
Kent-Crane site tubular beads are the most numerous.
Eighty such beads were found, of which sixty-seven were
undecorated and thirteen decorated with incised designs.
Of the undecorated beads, twenty-three are from Stratum
la, forty-three from lb, and one from Stratum 2. Four of
the undecorated beads were made from the small long
bones of mammals, but the remainder were fashioned
from the much lighter shafts of bird bones. They vary in
diameter from 3 to 5 millimeters, and in length from 1.4 to
6.3 centimeters. In Plate 8, A-E, are shown examples from
each of the main size groups. Most of these beads have
smooth and well-finished ends, but some are rather rough.
On the latter the method of cutting bone is evident: the
bone was encircled with a groove and then broken at this
weakened zone. Some beads have a glossy finish, presumably due to long wear and considerable handling. The
single bead from Stratum 2 is poorly finished and made from
mammal bone.
Like the undecorated beads, the decorated ones are cylindrical and, with one exception, made from bird bones. The
exceptional one is made of mammal bone. These beads
differ from the undecorated beads only in being a little
larger in size on the average, in being better finished and
smoothed at the ends, and in having incised designs.
Execution of the design varies from very crude to fine, precise work, strictly comparable to that on the incised awls
and pins described above. The designs are simple and
geometric in character. Three beads are crosshatched over
the entire surface (Plate 8, K), and another has a design
consisting of three zones of crosshatching, one encircling
each end and a third in the middle (Plate 8, L). One bead
is made from a bone with a triangular cross section, and
on each of the three surfaces three parallel lines zigzag

The Kent-Crane Si~e

61

back and forth the full length of the bead (Plate 8, O).
Another has a similar zigzag design, but it runs around the
bead rather than along it (Plate 8, N.)

Still another has a

diagonal band of crosshatching at one end and four diagonally hatched lines at the other (Plate 8, M). Two beads
have parallel lines filled with hatching that run diagonally
along the bead (Plate 8, I) ; these diagonal elements are two
in number and located on opposite sides of the bead. One
bead fragment, which exhibits the most precise incising
in the series, has broad bands of hatching outlined by parallel lines. These bands run diagonally across the bead and
are separated by narrow undecorated bands which stand
out negatively (Plate 8, J). Finally, there are three beads
that have short, transverse hatch marks running the length
of the bead. The marks vary somewhat in width, depth,
and regularity, as may be seen in Plate 8, F-H).
There is no significant stratigraphic change in bead design
and technique of execution. The only important observation that needs to be made is that bone bead making, like
other traits previously noted, almost dies out in the last
stage of occupation at the Kent-Crane site.
Miscellaneous Bone and Antler Objects. Two shafts of
mammal long bones, represented by fragments, have incised
decoration. One fragment (Plate 8, DD) has two parallel
zigzag lines and marginal notching; the other (Plate 8, CC)
has t~vo rows of transverse hatch mar~.~. Both fragments
are from Stratum lb.
From each stratum came a number of bird bones showing
evidences of having been worked (ten from Stratum la,
eight from lb, and four from 2). All appear to be articular
and adjoining shaft sections of bird long bones and ~vere
unquestionably the residue from the manufacture of bone
beads. In every specimen the shaft end shows a clean transverse break. A groove had been cut into the bone, which
was then broken by force.
Eight fish vertebrae are included in the collection of bones
from this site. They may have been used as beads, but of

62

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological Society

this there is no clear proof. The only supporting evidence is
the fact that the thin central septum seems to have been
perforated. These vertebrae vary from tiny (7 millimeters
in diameter) to fairly large (1.9 centimeters in diameter).
Six of these came from Stratum lb, and one each came from
Stratum 2 and the surface (Plate 8, P).
Antler flakers are represented by five specimens, of which
four are tip fragments. All have bluntly rounded points, and
one in particular (Plate 7, N) shows considerable wear on
an area about 1.5 centimeters from the tip on the longitudinally convex side.
Stratigraphically these are distributed as follows: three in Stratum la, one each in lb and
2. In Stratum la there were nine antler tips, two showing
evidences of having been cut, rather than broken, from the
antler shaft. In each case a deep groove had been cut around
the antler, and the tip was then snapped off by force. In
Stratum 2 was one small but complete, unworked antler,
th~ base still attached.
STONE OBJECTS. At the Kent-Crane site 208 objects of
stone were found. These include 172 objects of chipped stone
--projectile points, knives, blades, and a drill. The material
used for these was almost entirely flint, though an occasional
projectile point was made of quartzite. Among the other
stone objects are twenty abrading stones of coarse limestone
and sandstone, seven hammerstones of flint nodules or
quartzite pebbles, four pieces of pigment showing striations,
and five fragments of sflicified fossil bone, some of which
appear to show attempts at chipping. These various rocks
are not found on the Coastal Prairie. The people who lived
at thAs site must have gone inland for their stone or else
have obtained it through trade with inland groups.
Projectile Points. The Kent-Crane site yielded 103 projectile points of chipped stone. This figure does not include
twenty fragments whose size and partial outlines indicate
that they are surviving portions of projectile points. The
stone used for manufacturing these projectile points is almost
entirely flint. This flint is of a good grade for chipping
purposes, and it occurs in a variety of colors and shades,

Flint projectile ~in~s frt*m

PL A’I~I,~ 9
Kent-Crane Site. Texas Coast.

The Kent-Crane Site

.gray and buff predominating.
made of quartzite.

65

Two projectile points are

One feature present in some projectile points requires
brief comment. This is the presence of dark stains and
small bits of asphalt on the stems of fourteen dart points.
In a few cases it is possible to discern the total area covered
by this substance, which is evidently used as an adhesive
to facilitate halting. This area covers the whole stem up
to a line drawn across the shoulders. No trace of asphal~
occurs on any of the unstemmed points.
In this group of 103 projectile points only two specimens
can be identified as arrowpoints (Plate 10, M and Q); the
remainder are considered to be dart points. Martin,9 implies that no chipped projectile points were found in his
test pit, but he says that the surface of the ridge has frequently yielded "finely made arrowheads and spearheads."
He adds that at the northern and southern ends of the site
"birdpoints" are the most common projectile points found.
By "birdpoints" he means small arrowpoints as opposed to
the larger forms, for which we are using the term "dart
point." Thus there is evidence of a greater frequency of
arrowpoints at the Kent-Crane site than our data here shows.
Inasmuch as the evidence from excavation points conclusively toward the occurrence of arrowpoints only at the very
top of the cultural deposit, Martin’s statement about finding them on the surface is not surprising. Pie does not state
just how many projectile points of the various forms were
found on the surface, and he does not illustrate any from
this site which can be identified in his plates. As stated
previously, the arrowpoints represent Rockport focus occupation at the Kent-Crane site, and Martin’s remarks suggest
that Rockport focus materials are more common at the
northern and southern ends of the midden.
The projectile points from this site have been sorted out
into small groups on the basis of rather close similarities in
outline and size. Plates 9 and 10 illustrate every one of

19o

Martin, n. d., p. 6.

Texas Archeological ant Paleontological Society

66

these small groups, as well as a number of single occurrences
whose forms are judged to be distinctive, and Table I shows
the provenience by strata of each of these groups and single
occurrences. It is believed that this method of presentation
will provide a satisfactory basis for later comparative studies
of projectile point forms.
The largest general class of dart points in the Kent-Crane
series consists of those which have stems with lateral edges
that are more or less parallel and bases that vary from
slightly concave to slightly convex. In this class are placed
forty-eight points represented by specimens shown in Plate
9, A-P. The main variations are in size, relative proportions
of stem and blade, and shoulder treatment. Thirty of these
occur in Stratum 1, eighteen in Stratum 2. Those in
Stratum 2 are notably smaller in size.
TABLE I
PROVENIENCE OF PROJECTILE POINTS SHOWN IN
PLATES 9 AND 10
Plate

9,
9,
9,
9,

Stratum

la

Stratum

lb

Stratum

2

Surface

Total

--

~

1
2
2
4

-----

-----

3
2
5
7

1

~

B
C
D
E

2
-3
3

9, A

1

’9, F

2

1

3

--

6

9, G
9, H
I
9,
J
9,
9, K
9, L
9, M

3
2
2
1
1
2
--

2
1
-~

1
--~

6
3
2
1

-2
--

-1
2

-----~

9, N

--

1

-1
1

1
--2
2

9,
9,
9,
9,
9,

O
P
Q
R
S

-1

1

--

5
2

~

~

1

-1
~

~
~
~

--

~

1

1

1
2
1
2
5

The Kent,-Cra~e Site

9
9
9
9
9
9
9

T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z

-1
-1
---1

1
-2
-1
1
3
1

-2
2
-2
2
---

---------

1

2

1

--

--

7

2

1

--

10

4
1

2

10, A
10, B
10, C
10, D
10, E
10, F
10, G
10, H
10, I
10, J
10, K
10, L
10, M
10, N
10, O
10, Q

---

1
--

-1

---

1
1

1
--1
---

-1
--1
--

--1
----

-----1

1
1
1
1
1

Totals

42

39

20

2

103

The next largest class consists of dart points which are
characterized by a triangular outline with diagonally
directed side notches that form an expanding stem. These
points are rather short and broad of blade; they have welldeveloped shoulders which are frequently barbed; and they
differ from one another chiefly in basal outline, which may
be straight, slightly concave, or slightly convex. The greatest width is usually at the base, rather than across the
shoulders. In this group are twenty-seven specimens illustrated by Plate 9, R-AA. Seventeen of these are from
Stratum 1, nine from Stratum 2.
A third class, represented by sixteen dart points, con-

Texas Archeological and Paleontological SocieSy

sists of stemless, triangular points with pronounced basal
thinning (Plate I0, !k-D, O). All except one of these occur in
Stratum 1.

At least four variants are recognizable, of

which the most common (ten cases) is a triangle with
straight to slightly convex base and lateral edges (Plate
I0, C). This is very similar to type Taylor Thinned Base
of the Clear Fork focus.~o A second variant differs from the
first by having alternately beveled lateral edges (Plate
10, B) and is similar to type Baird Beveled Blade of the
Clear Fork focus,zl A third variant has an elongated
triangular form, and the base and lateral edges are slightly
convex (Plate 10, A and D). The fourth variant is similar
to the third, but has a concave base and large basal flake
scars (Plate 10, O).
Two dart points from Stratum 1 are probably intrusive
from the Edwards Plateau aspect of Central Texas. One of
these (Plate 10, K) appears to be a variant of type Pedero
hales Indented Base, diagnostic of the Round Rock focus~;
and the other is a Nolan Beveled Stem point (Plate 10, L),
which is diagnostic of the Clear Fork focus.~3 Other dart
points in the Kent-Crane series may eventually be recognized as intrusive from South Texas cultures that have not
yet been clearly defined. The arrowpoint shown in Plate
10, M, belongs to type Perdiz Pointed Stem, a type which
has a very wide distribution in late prehistoric times in the
Texas area.
To summarize, stemmed and triangular points are favored
in the early part of the occupation at the Kent-Crane site.
The diagonally notched group later increases in favor as the
stemmed and triangular points decline. True arrowpoints
are in use only in the final stage of occupation (Rockport
focus).
Knives and Blades.
Only six chipped flint knives are
complete enough to permit grouping on the basis of out20.
21.
22.
23.

Kelley, 1947, p. 99
Op. VAt., p. 99 and
Opo vat., p. 99 and
Op. eit., p. 99 and

and Plate X, b.
Plate X, a.
Plate X, e.
Plate Xo d.

PLATE 10
Flint artifacts from Kent-Crane Site, Texas Coast. A-I, K-O, Q, projectile po|nt~s;
P, W0 knives; S. piano-convex end-scrapers: T-U. side-scrapers ; V, scraper-graver.

The Kent-Crane Site

line.

71

Two of these came from Stratum la, four from lb.

But there are sixteen fragments whose size and general appearance seem to indicate that they can be classed as knives.
Seven of these came from Stratum la, seven from Ib, and two
from Stratum 2.
The six fairly complete knives are all triangular in outline, and the lateral edges are slightly convex. The differences are chiefly those of size and slight modifications of
the base, which varies from straight (Plate 10, P) to slightly
convex (Plate 10, W, showing thermal fracture scars). The
extremes of size are illustrated in Plate 10, P and W. These
knives are relatively thin, none being over 8 millimeters in
thickness.
The term "blade" is here used to refer to chipped flin~
artifacts which have the general form of knives but are very
thick and crudely chipped. Seven such artifacts were found
at the Kent-Crane site, and they are about evenly distributed
stratigraphically (two in Stratum la, two in lb, and three
in 2). These blades are oval in outline and are very roughly
chipped out by the percussion technique. All are rather
small, the largest having a maximum length of 5.4 centimeters; in thickness they vary from 1 to 2.3 centimeters.
Drills and Gravers.
One small flint flake with a thin,
sharp point (Plate 10, R) came from Stratum lb. Both
faces bear flake scars. Presumably this was used for purposes of perforation; the point is thin and does not seem
strong enough to have been used for engraving.
Six small flint flakes with beak-like protuberances are
probably engraving tools and doubtless were used in carving designs on bone. In each case the small protuberance
or point shows minute pressure flake scars on each lateral
edge. One of these gravers is a combination scraper-graver
(Plate I0, V), for the side opposite the point has a small,
neatly chipped concave scraping edge. Two gravers came
from Stratum la and four from lb.
Scrapers. Only one end- scraper of the piano-convex type
appears in the series (Plate 10, S), and it has one lateral

72

Texas Archeological and Paleo~tologica! Society

edge that is also steeply retouched.

The bulbar face bears

several large flake scars, and the dorsal surface shows two
large thermal fracture scars.

This scraper came from

Stratum lb.
The remainder of the scraping tools are side-scrapers with
varying amounts of retouching along one or two long edges.
Two of these are from Stratum lb, seven from lb, and four
from Stratum 2. Of these thirteen scrapers only three show
very much chipping (Plate 10, T). The rest are flakes which
show a certain amount of careless retouching along portions
of one or two long edges. One (Plate 10, U) is a lunate flint
flake with slightly concave lateral edge which bears minute
serrated chipping.
Abrading Stores. Twenty limestone and sandstone fragments, principally the latter, show that they were used for
purposes of abrasion. Fifteen of these stones were found
in Stratum la, five in lb. Seven show long, shallow grooves
(Plate 7, O), and the remainder bear very shallow, oval,
basin-like areas (Plate 7, P). These stone fragments have
no consistent shapes, and they range in size from small, thin,
water-worn stones 5 centimeters long to thicker, heavier
fragments 16.4 centimeters long. Small size and portability
seem to have been their chief prerequisites. There can be
little doubt that they were used in the manufacture of bone
and shell artifacts, so numerous at this site.
Hammerstones.
Seven hammerstones may be grouped
on the basis of the kind of material used. Two (one each
from Stratum la and lb) are oval, stream-rolled pebbles
which show battering along their edges. One is made of
quartzite and the other of a very heavy bluish stone. The
five remaining hammerstones consist of heavily battered
flint nodules. All of these are relatively small and tend to
be oval in outline; the largest has a maximum diameter of
6.2 centimeters. These nodular hammerstones were all
found in Stratum 2.
Pigment. In Stratum 1 were four pieces of soft stone that
appear to have been used as sources of pigment. Two pieces

The Kent-Crane Site

73

of reddish brown pigment came from la, and one of these
shows striations in three small, basin-like areas. Apparently
the pigment was removed in minute quantities by scratching
with a sharp instrument, probably of stone. Two pieces of a
soft, yellowish stone bear abraded facets which seem to indicate use as a source of pigment.

Both came from

Stratum lb.
Worked Fossil Bone.

Five fragments of highly sflicified

fossil bone were obtained from the Kent-Crane midden, and
two of these show traces of what appears to be attempted
chipping.

From Stratum la is a rib fragment (length 9.2

centimeters) with rough flake scars at both ends. From
Stratum 2 is a horse tooth which has been split longitudinally, and one of the resulting sharp edges has a small,
roughly chipped concavity that could have served as a concave scraping edge. It cannot be proved that these two
bones were actually chipped by man, but the evidence is
strongly suggestive of it. If it is assumed that man did this
work, the most likely explanation of the presence of such
bones in the midden is to be found in the local shortage of
stone for making tools and implements. Any material that
even looked suitable might have been collected.
ASPHALT. Martin2~ reports finding a lump of asphalt
"several pounds in weight" near the base of the test pit
which he dug at the Kent-Crane site. Duffen’s excavations
revealed no lumps of this size, but a large number of
smaller lumps were scattered throughout the shell deposit.
Twenty-three of these small lumps are of special interest
because they bear impressions of basketry and matting.
These fragments are small, but a few show unmistakable
evidences of the twined technique in basketry (Plate 8, KKMM, drawn from squeezes). No impression in any way
suggested coiled basketry. Specific information on techniques used in matting could not be obtained, the evidence
for matting consisting only of impressions of coarse parallel

24.

Martin, n. d., V, 6.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

74

elements without any indicating of transverse elements
tying them together.
The fragments of asphalt showing basketry impressions
range in thickness from 7 to 18 millimeters, and it is reasonable to conclude that they represent a heavy coating for
waterproofing purposes. It has already been shown that
asphalt was also used as an adhesive for attaching dart
points to their shafts.
POTTERY. The pottery from the Kent-Crane site includes three types which are being designated as Rockport
Black-on-gray, Rockport Plain, and Rockport Incised. Full
descriptions of these types are to be given in another publication. The sherds from the Kent-Crane site number only
ninety-six and, as stated above, all came from the surface
or in the upper 15 centimeters of Stratum 2. Martinz~
mentions that potsherds were found in the area where the
drainage ditch was cut through the site in 1922. He does
not describe the sherds which he found.
The Rockport Black-on-gray fragments include one rim
sherd (Plate 8, X) from a vessel with an incurred rim and
fiat lip, the latter being painted with asphalt; and fifteen
body sherds, eight having a wavy line decoration (Plate 8,
NN-PP) and the remainder bearing parts of unrecognizable
designs.
Four of the last group show asphalt-coated
interiors.
Eight Rockport Plain rim sherds (Plate 8, EE-II) are from
vessels with incurved or straight rims. All lips are fiat
save one, which is rounded. None of this group of sherds
shows any trace of asphalt coating.
The majority of sherds are body sherds from either Rockport Plain or Rockport Black-on-gray vessels, but more
likely the former, as they seem to belong to the same vessels
as the rim sherds of Rockport Plain. Only about four vessels appear to be represented. Sixty-seven body sherds are
placed in this group. One is a bottom sherd (Plate 8, JJ)
25.

Ibid.

The Kent-Crane Site

75

indicating a vessel base which is very close to being conical.
Only four sherds show any trace of asphalt coating. Light
scoring on the interior is exhibited by one set of these body
sherds.
Finally there are five sherds of Rockport Incised pottery,
all obviously from the same vessel. They are reddish-brown
in color, and the paste is very sandy, showing tiny white
inclusions. Three sherds which fit together (Plate 8, QQ)
show roughly parallel incised lines, apparently forming a
zone just below the lip, and just below this zone two lines
form an angle. A fourth sherd (Plate 8, RR) exhibits a
pair of fringed lines.
Conclusio~
All except the upper few centimeters of deposit at the
Kent-Crane site is referred to Aransas focus occupation.
The only Rockport focus traits present at this site are potsherds and arrowpoints, and these occur in the upper 15 centimeters of deposit or on the surface. The Rockport occupation in the areas tested by excavation is therefore very slight.
Further excavation in other parts of the site would undoubtedly result in the accumulation of much more data on
Rockport focus occupation, and this is borne out by Martin’s
surface collections at the site, which show more Rockport
projectile point types at the extreme northern and southern
parts of the site.
The Kent-Crane site furnishes us with the largest sample
to date of Aransas material culture. The various bone, shell,
and stone objects which characterize the Aransas focus occur
here in large enough numbers to give the main outlines of
the culture. The Kent-Crane site and the smaller Johnson
site nearby provide the greater part of the evidence which
supports the concept of an Aransas focus.
The Kent-Crane site has some traits not found at the
other Aransas focus sites and thus adds to our knowledge
to that extent. These include conch shell disks, a few types
of bone awls and pins, carving on bone, and a rather large
number of projectile point forms. Intrusive dart points from

Texa~ Archeo~ogical and Paleontologica~ Societ11
the Edwards Plateau aspect of Central Texas also occur in
the Kent-Crane site.
There is no way of safely estimating the length of occupation at this site. It must have been used over a longer period
of time than most of the sites in this section of the Texas
coast, for the midden deposit, although not notably thick, is
the thickest on record. The occupation was long enough for
some modification in culture to have taken place within the
Aransas component. Projectile point forms, for instance,
show significant percentage shifts. Then there is the somewhat perplexing diminution in the frequencies of all types
of artifacts in Stratum 2. The deposit continued to accumulate, but the number of objects found is low relative to
Stratum 1. Some sort of a decline appears to have taken
place. It is possible that the stratigraphic break between
Stratum 1 and 2 represents a period when the site was unoccupied, and that later it was used by an Aransas group
whose culture had undergone some modification. It is
barely possible that the upper part of the Kent-Crane site
records a slow transition from an Aransas to a Rockport
culture. This is speculation, but it raises a question which
future field investigators must keep in mind.
No objects of European origin were found at the KentCrane site, and there is no reason to suspect that any part
of the Aransas occupation is of post-European date. The
Rockport occupation, however, very likely was late prehistoric or historic in date, as European objects have been
found in association with Rockport materials at a number of
sites on the Texas coast.
Literature Cited
Campbell, T. N.
(1947) The Johnson site: Type site of the Aransas focus
of the Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo~ogical
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 18, pp. 40-75.
Fenneman, Nevin
(1938) Physiography of eastern United States.

New

The Kent-Crane Site

York and London.
Gunter, Gordon
(1950) Unusual climatic conditions in Texas in 19491950 and its relation to the spread of huisache. The
Texas Journa~ o~ Science, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 366-367.
Kelley, J. Charles
(1947) The cultural affiliations and chronological position of the Clear Fork focus. American Antiquity, Vol.
13, No. 2, pp. 97-109.
Martin, George C.
(n. d.) Preliminary archaeological survey of a portion
of the Texas coast made by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1928-1929. Privately printed.
Price, W. Armstrong, and Gordon Gunter
(1943) Certain recent geological and biological changes
in South Texas, with consideration of probable causes.
Proceedings and Transactions of the Texas Academy of
Science for 1942, Vol. 26, pp. 138-156.
Russell, Richard Joel
(1945) Climates of Texas. Anna~s of the Association
American Geographers, Vol. 35, No. 2, pp. 37-52.
Tharp, Benjamin Carroll
(1939) The vegetation of Texas. Texas Academy Publications in Natural History, Non-Technical Series, No. 1.

