100

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

CADDOAN PREHISTORY: THE

BOSSIER FOCUS
CLARENCE H.

WERB

Bossier Focus is the name which Krieger and the author
have given to an archaeological unit of the Caddoan area
which appears on a number of sites in Northwest Louisiana,
East Texas and possibl~ Southwest Arkansas. This cultural
assemblage has never been described and has. been mentioned
only. occasiona.lly in discussions of prehistory of the fourstate Caddoan area. This neglect is occasioned by the unspectacular nature of the sites and artifacts, the occurrence
of the sites away from the major river valleys and the
rarity of mound building--for these reasons Moore’s survey
of the Red, Ouachita and D’Arbonne (.1,2,3) valleys apparently missed Bossier sites completely. In Ford’s analysis (4)
of site collections, he describes and illustrates sherds collected by E. F. Neild which represent several Bossier pottery
types. However, no intensive study of Caddoan potteries
and culture Periods had been made and these sherds, as
well as others now recognized as relating to several cultural
entities, were lumped together as "Caddoan." Harrington
(5) illustrates one or two vessels of Bossier types from
Southwest Arkansas. These are probably instrusive, as none
of the sites described by him have cultural entities which
could be inte.rpreted as Bossier Focus components.
It now appears that a study of the Bossier Focus may cast
considerable light on culture developments in the Caddoan
area, particularly with regard, to origin and transmission of
certain pottery types or decorative elements. There is increasing evidence that Krieger’s (6) separation of culture
complexes in the Caddoan area into Gibson (earlier) and
Fulton (later) Aspects, which through much of the area are
so sharply differentiated as to suggest cultural discontinuity,
must be interpreted differently in certain developmental
centers. In the Spiro area and along the middle Red River
area of Arkansas and Louisiana there are indications of a

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

lOl

sequential development from the earliest Gibson period
through intermediate or transitional cultures to the proto=
historic and historic Caddoan groups. In the Red River
center, which is also the historic and traditional center of
the southern Caddos; the Haley, Bossier, McCurtain and
Belcher Foci show varying evidences of this culture transition.
Bossier Focus Sites
Surface collections indicate that this focus is represented
at some 40 to 50 sites in Northwest Louisiana, especially in
Bossier, Caddo and DeSoto parishes. Typical sites from
which we have an adequate collection to assure more than
accidental Bossier sherds include High Island, Sinner, Pease
and Maddox Places and Vanceville Mound in Bossier Parish; Marston Place and Gahagan Mound in Red River Parish;
Gilmer Bayou, Margetich, Huckabay, Mooringsport, Swanson’s Landing, Wallace Lake, Belcher II and Mounds Plantation in Caddo Parish; Smithport Landing, Chamarre,
East Smithport, Williams Point, Keatchie and Thigpen
sites in DeSoto Parish; Colbert and Greer Places in Bienville
Parish; Wilkinson and Allen in Natchitoches Parish; Smith
Place in Lincoln Parish; and Harrison Bayou site in Harrison
County, Texas. The University of Texas’ collections indicate
components on sites in a number of counties of central East
Texas, adjoining the Louisiana line. A recent survey of the
McGee Bend Reservoir (7) in Jasper, Sabine, San Augustine,
Angelina and Nacogdoches Counties, Texas, shows Bossier
Focus sherds from 16 sites. This indicates that the Focus
occurs in an area from the Angelina River in Texas almost
to the Ouachita River in Louisiana.
Community Plan

Nearly ai! of the sites are outside of the major river valleys, usually located on a small stream or lake. Many of the
larger sites are on hills fronting the valley, where tributaries break through these hills. Only the four mound sites,
Mounds Plantation, Belcher, Gahagan and Vanceville, and
one non-mound site, Marston Place, are on the valley floor of
the Red River--contrasting with the Belcher Focus, which

102

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

seems to be considerably riverine and mound using. At four
of the Bossier Focus sites, small conical sand mounds were
placed on hills overlooking the valley, on or near the village
sites. Their purpose or provenience have never been established. All have been dug into and a b~trial was reported
in one instance. Two beautifully symmetrical quartz lance
points were stated to have been the only artifacts with this
burial.
Village sites are usually compact, from a very small area
to 10 acres in size, and the communities seem to have been
sedentary in most instances, with evidence of prolonged
habitation. Krieger (8) has emphasized the contrast between the large, widely separated centers of economic and
ceremonial activity during the Gibson Period and the numerous small villages of the Fulton Period. This change
seems to have been in progress during the Alto-Bossier
transition, to be discussed later. Nearly all of the Bossier
sites have artifacts suggesting several occupation periods,
ranging at various sites from late Archaic to Glendora Focus
sherds and glass trade beads. European trade material
has never been found on Bossier sites unless Glendora pottery is represented. In a recent article (9) is was noted
that artifacts which have been related elsewhere to the late
Archaic occur in Northwest Louisiana on non-pottery sites
and also on sites where Bossier and Alto sherds were found.
One to three Marksville or Troyville Stamped sherds have
been found on four Bossier sites and numerous multiple
notched large projectile points, similar to those reported
from Marksville sites, occur at the Sinner Place. Eight sites
show marker Pottery types of the Coles Creek-Plaquemine
periods, in four instances to the extend of 4 to 5 per cent of
decorated sherds (Table 1). Certain incised and brushed
ware§ of Placluemine types in central Louisiana appear to be
identical or very similar to Bossier types in this area, suggesting contemporaneity of these two cultures.
Subsistence and Commerce
No direct evidence of agriculture has appeared, probably
due to very limited testing. It can only be inferred by the

Caddoan Prehts$ory:

The Bossier Focus

103

location of the sites near streams, the presence of rough
metates and manos, and the general prevalence of agriculture during the indicated time period. Animal and fish bones
in village middens indicate hunting and fishing as important
in the ecbnomy. Gathering of nuts and shellfish is suggested by the frequency of pitted stones or~ "nut stones" and
presence of shells in midden material. There is no indication of widespread commerce, most of the artifacts being
made of local materials. The absence of esoteric ceremonial
objects from burials also denotes a comparatively simple,
locally self-sufficient subsistence..
Architecture
Inadeql~ate data are available to warrant definite conclusions concerning house types. At the Belcher Mound site,
the second occupation period of Mound B (Belcher II) appears from the sherd collection to relate to Bossier Focus
peoples. No burials, whole vessels or artifacts other than
sherds were found. The initial Belcher I (Haley Focus) premound structure had been covered by 2 feet of fill, producing
a small, circular, flat topped mound which was capped completely with charcoal-streaked red clay. Through this cap
there were two irregular ovals ofpost molds (10), the inner
oval 13 by 15 feet in diameter, formed by 5 to 8 inch molds,
2 feet in depth. The outer oval, from the same surface, was
20 by 22 feet in diameter, formed of 3 to 4 inch molds, not
over 1 foot in depth. Both ovals were interrupted by burial
pits from higher levels, possibly obscuring entranceways. No
charred materials were found, differing from structures at
other levels in the mound. Internal post molds formed no
definite pattern. There was no ashbed within the smaller
structure but one was present between it and the larger oval.
If the ovals represented two different buildings, the ashbed
must have related to the larger, as it lay outside of and too
near ~the inner oval of molds for safety.
At the Greer Place in Bienville Parish, a mixed Coles
Creek-Alto-Bossier site, numerous post molds (10) were
found exten~ting through a layer of white and yellow sand,
about 8 inches beneath the plowed surface. Molds were so

104

Texas Archeo~og~cal and Paleontological Society

numerous that no definite house outlines could be distinguished, although some suggestion of two irregularly oval
structures with one or two possible projecting entranceways
could be imagined. Three small cache pits contained sherds,
shells and animal bones. Three firebeds were within the
area outlined by the special sand, one large firebed being of
especial interest because it overlay a cache pit, 2~/2 feet in
diameter, which had been dug into the hard clay subsoil to
a depth of 4 feet. It contained only a few pottery sherds.
Although two burials nearby had Coles Creek pottery in
association, no Coles Creek sherds were on or above the
house floor, whereas most of the 172 decorated sherds from
the cache pits, the house floor or the overlying soil were of
recognizable Bossier types. This led us to believe that the
structure or structures could safely be related to the Bossier
Focus.
Burial Customs
Only a few burials have been found or reported which we
can relate specifically to the Bossier Focus. In every instance the burials were in small, shallow pits, not over 2
feet in depth from the present surface, and scattered or~ the
village site. No large cemeteries have been located and no
burial mounds are indicated, unless the small sand mounds
previously mentioned prove to be such. No good evidence
on this point is available. There is no indication of special
preparation of the pits or pit floors. Skeletons were fully
extended, supine, with placement of one to three pottery
vessels above or near the head. With exception of one
pottery pipe, no artifacts other than pottery have accompanied the burials, and the pottery is not a specialized burial
ware.
At the Pease Place, one adult burial was exposed by plowing in recent years. Fragments of an engraved bowl were
secured at the time and later we found the body of a bottle
beside the skull. Both vessels were of the type Maddox
Band Engraved (Plate 11, Noso 1 and 2). Mr. Pease states
that other burials have been plowed up in the lbast, scattered
over the site, and he has not observed objects other than oc-

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

105

casional pottery with them. The head of the above burial
was directed toward the north.
Several burials have been plowed up or eroded out at the
nearby Sinner site, but no artifacts to our knowledge have
been found. At the Marston site, a flood cut through the
village, washing out bones and large pottery sherds of Bossier types. We found the remaining portion of one burial,
without artifacts, apparently extended, supine and the head
directed toward the east or northeast. A pipe (Plate 14,
No. 1) had been found nearby.
In construction of a road at Williams Point the burial of
an adult was exposed, from which a pottery pipe was
secured. We were unable to locate this pipe, but discarded
sherds also.found with the burial were assembled to reconstruct a jar of type Pease Brushed-Incised. Both of these
artifacts were stated to have been near the skull.
Mr. Brock Smith, of Dubach, Lincoln Parish, found several
burials on the Smith place near D’Arbonne Creek, a tributary of the Ouachita River. We were privileged to see two
of these burials with the artifacts, which had been removed
(Plate 17, Nos. 1 through 5) and are now at Louisiana State
University. The burials were adults, extended, supine and
single, about 1~ to 2 feet beneath the present surface. The
vessels were stated to have been above or near the skulls,
intact, and no other artifacts were found.
Burials have been found at other sites where Bossier
Focus is represented, but apparently the burials related to
other culture periods. At the Greer and Colbert Places,
several single burials were found; in two instances (Greer)
Coles Creek pottery was present. Other burials found by
ourselves and others were adults, fully extended and without
artifacts. This is not infrequent in Coles Creek sites and we
presumed that these were Coles Creek and not Bossier
burials.
At Smithport Landing, Monroe Dodd located a small cemetery which contained 12 burials. Associated pottery was of
the late Alto types or plain, and in one instance included a

106

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Soc~,ety

total of 9 vessels. Ford found Alto type pottery with burials
at Allen and Wilkinson sites and also illustrates a vessel (4)
of Natchitoches Engraved (Glendora Focus) from the latter
site. At the same site, we found the burial of a child which
had no accompanying artifacts. The skeleton was fully
extended, with the head directed toward the east. Despite
the regular admixture of Alto and Bossier pottery sherds on
the sites, in no instance to my knowledge have vessels of
the two types been found with the same burial.
Ceramics

Discussion of pottery types of the Bossier Focus is limited
to some degree because it must be based largely on sherd
collections. However, we have more than 8,000 decorated
sherds from Bossier sites in Louisiana and Texas, in addition
to whole vessels~or photographs of vessels bearing typical
decoration 5f six of the seven .pottery types a~tributed to
Bossier potteries.
The vessels generally are small to average in size, seldom
exceeding 7 to 8 inches in height or diameter. The characteristic vessel shape for the five rough or utility types is the.
jar with ovoid body and everted rim, 5 to 8 inches in height,
with circular flat base. In the engraved types, the bowl and
bottle are characteristic forms, with cups, vases and jars
infrequent. The pottery is unspectacular in comparison
with the highly decorated wares of the Haley, Belcher, Texarkana and Glendora Foci in this same general area. Rough
utility wares decorated with incised, punctated, ridged and
brushed elements predominate and, even in the engraved
types, complicated or curvilinear designs are less frequent
than straight line, band or geometric designs. However, the
percentage of decorated sherds is comparatively high and
plain vessels seem to be infrequent. Red filming or inserPLATE
Pottery types of Bossier Focus. IWos. 1 ~nd 2, Maddox Band Engraved,
Nos. ~-5, T~ylor Engraved (Nos. 3 and 4 from l~rieger (6) ; No. 5 from Belcher
Site). No. 6 Pease Brushed-Incised; Nos. 7 and 8, Belcher Ridged; No. 9.
Sinner Linear Punetated (Harrington (5), Washington Site° Plate LVID.
Noso 10-12, Dunkin Incised, late variant, (No. 12 from East Mound, courtesy
of Dr. and i~,Irs. T. L. Hodges and Alex Krieger). Vessels x

6

I

Plate 1!

108

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

tion of pigment into engraved lines is rare; compound or
effigy vessels and even effigy appendages have not been
found.

Occasional highly polished sherds with engraved

decoration are found, but generally even the engraved wares
were smoothed but unpolished. Spurred or ticked lines,
negative discs and scrolls occur chiefly (or exclusively?) on
Taylor Engraved vessels which may not be indigenous to
Bossier Focus potteries. Rattle vessels, sun and swastika
symbols have not been found.
Vessels were made by coiling. The paste is generally firm,
of good texture, with hardness of 2.5 to 3. Clay tempering
predominates, with occasional bone or tufa tempering in the
rougher wares. Shell temper is absent at every site except
Belcher II, where sherds of two Belcher Ridged and one
brushed vessel were tempered with shell. It may be added
that at Belcher II level, 703 sherds were found, of which 627
could be typed reliably. Of the latter, although 80 per cent
were of Bossier types, 13 per cent were from recognizable
Belcher and Texarkana pottery types. Evidently the Bossier
occupation period at the Belcher site was comparatively
late, with introduction of Belcher Focus wares which occurred in subsequent periods at this site; in fact, it is a
reasonable supposition that the three shell tempered vessels
at this level were Belcher Focus vessels, as Belcher Ridged
and brushed types are found in both Belcher and Bossier
Foci. It may be stated, therefore, that shel! temper is
absent from Bossier Focus potteries.
Pottery Types
I. Maddox Band Engraved. Vessel forms in this type include bowls, bottles and small jars. (Plate 11, Nos. 1,2). Bottles are small, with flat circular bases, globular or ovoid
bodies and slightly tapering spouts which usually flare moderately at the rim. Bowls generally are 6 to 9 inches in diameter, with rounded bottoms, vertical or slightly inverted
rims and rolled or notched, slightly thickened lips. The paste
is homogeneous, usually clay tempered (rarely bone or tufa).
Thickness averages 1/s to 1/4 inch. Surfaces are smoothed,
occasionally polished; the surface color ranges from buff to

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

109

reddish brown, but a moderate number of sherds are black.
The decoration features hatched or cross hatched bands
(Plate 12, Nos, 1-6), usually narrow, rather carefully engraved. Less frequently plain bands or zones are outlined
by hachured areas. The designs are usually simple with rectangular or occasionally curvilinear vertical and horizontal
patterns. Bottles often have combined engraved lines and
bands or stepped patterns encircling the shoulder and lines
may encircle the spout near the lip. (Plate 17, No. 1). Bottles with this kind of decoration and with tapering spouts
may readily have been derived from Hickory engraved bottles of Alto focus pottery. Notched lips are not infrequent in
all vessel forms of Maddox Band engraved type, including
bottle spouts if they do not have flaring rims. (Plate 17,
No. 1).
In Ford’s analysis of site collections (4) sherds of Maddox
Band engraved are illustrated in Fig. 16c and 18b.
II. Taylor Engraved. Vessel forms include bowls, bottles,
vases and jars, although the first two predominate. The variety of forms is much more limited than seen in this type
as it appears in Titus and Belcher potteries. Bottle shapes
are not definite, although probably similar to the bottle of
Maddox Band Engraved. Bowls are round bottomed (hemispherical) with inward slanting rims which are often curved
sharply to produce a more acute angle at the shoulder than
is usual with Maddox bowls (Plate 11, No. 5). The paste,
surface finish and colors are similar to Maddox Band Engraved. Notched rims are absent or rare. Decoration features curvilinear lines, spurred lines, scrolls, bisected bands
(usually curving and bisected by spurred line), and negative discs (Plate 12, Nos. 7-10). Interlocking scrolls are very
frequent A few red filmed sherds have been found. Differing from Taylor Engraved bowls in the Belcher and Titus
pottery, the bowl sherds from Bossier sites never show
decorations on the bottoms. In our original description of
Belcher pottery (11) vessels which we now classify as Taylor Engraved are described under Belcher Engraved, subtypes d, f, k and e and illustrated in Plate 15, Nos. 3 and 5
and Plate 16, Nos. 1-3.

110

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

It is difficult to decide whether Taylor Engraved should be
included as an integral type of Bossier Focus potteries, as it.
occurs regularly in Titus and Belcher ceramics, from which
it could possibly have been intrusive into the Bossier Focu~
during its later stages. However, there are good evidences~
that Bossier Focus was generally earlier than Titus ands.
Belcher Foci and Taylor Engraved sherds are found on the.
majority of Bossier sites in quantities not greatly inferior.
to Maddox Engraved. One may therefore infer that Taylor
Engraved was an integral type in Bossier pottery, probably
spreading from there to Belcher and Titus Foci, where it~
was elaborated.
III. Pease B~’ushed-Incised. (Plate 11, No. 6; Plate 12, Nos_
12-19; Plate 17, Nos. 4-5). Vessel forms include jars and pots,.
predominantly ovoid jars with everted rims. Temper is
almost invariably clay ~r mixed clay and grit, rarely bone or
tufa (accidental?), never shell. The color is buff to mottled
grayish-black, often variable due to irregular firing. SurN
faces are rough and irregular: Bases are flat and circular.
The bodies are usually wider in their lower segments, curv-.
ing inward toward the neck, and the diameter at the lip i~
generally less than the maximum diameter of the body.
The rims are usually narrow, flaring, often with rolled or
thickened lips, the latter frequently notched. An occasional
vessel has a tall, everted rim: The outer surface of the rim.
is usually roughened by brushing, scoring or incising, which
may be vertical, diagonal or, rarely, horizontal. The body
is covered over its entire outer surface with panels which
are also roughened by brushing or incising (diagonal, vertical, herringbone) and the panels are separated by vertical
notched ridges, nodes or deep punctates. In the typicaI
vessel, the panels are 1~ to 1½ inches in width, varying from
10 to 30 in number around the body. The inside of the vessel
is well smoothed, often showing tool marks.
This pottery type is undoubtedly related to, and may be
directly descendant from, the type Haley Complicated Incised (6) of the Haley Focus (Gibson Aspect). In the latter
type fields of vigorous incising are outlined by applique

t~LATE
Sherds
]o6).

of

T~’lor

:Bossier

Focus

Engraved

l~ottery

(Nos.

and S|nner Linear :PImctated

7-11)0
(Nos,

12

~yDes.
Pease

20-~1).

BIaddox

Band

Engraved

:Brushed-:Inctsed

(Nos.

Caddoan Prehis$ory:

The Bossier Focus

113

notched ridges and punctates, usually applied in diagonal or
curvilinear patterns. Vessel forms are similar to Pease type,
but tend to be larger, with tall everted rims. During the
latter stages of the Haley period there is a tendency toward
vertical fields separated by widely spaced nodes, ridges or
punctates, and roughened either by incising or brushing
(brushing never appears in the early pottery of any of the
Gibson Foci). Rims are still high, but the general appearance of the vessels and their decoration is shifting toward
the Pease type.
Pottery from the East Mound, a Haley Focus site on
Antoine River in southern Arkansas, includes a number of
vessels which have shapes similar to Peas~ vessels and
decoration consisting of incised fields, often herringbone,
separated by incisions, nodes or lines of punctates. Som~
of the fields are vertical, others horizontal. This pottery is
illustrated by Krieger (8) in the forthcoming /~Ato Focus
volume. Ford (4) illustrates sherds of Pease Brushed-Incised from the Wilkinson and Harrisor~ Bayou sites in Figs.
16h and 18d, f, g. "
IV. Belcher Ridged. (Plate 11, Nos, 7, 8; Plate 13, Nos. 1-5;
Plate 14, No. 5). This type was originally described by the
author and Dodd (12) in discussing pottery types from the
Belcher Mound. Belcher Ridged sherds or vessels were
abundant in the last three of the four occupation levels of
Mound B, and the type is found at all Bossier and Belcher
Focus sites.
As the type appears in Bossier Focus, vessel forms include
urns or jars, pots and cups. The jars average 7 to 10 inches
in height, 3/16 to 5/16 inch in thickness of walls. Temper is
usually clay or grit, occasionally bone or tufa; the paste is
firm and durable. External color ranges from tan to black,
although tan to reddish brown predominates. Bases are fiat
discs, bodies ovate, rims everted or rolled outward. Rolled
rims are undecorated; everted rims are 1 to 1~/2 inches in
height and decorated on the outer surface with vertical or
horizontal incising (rarely brushing). Bodies have vertical,
closely placed (~/s to ~/s in.) narrow ridges formed by vertical

114

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

tooling and extending from neck to base on practically every
vessel.
Although this type is common to Bossier and Belcher Foci
potteries, certain differences appear. At Belcher Focus sites,
Belcher ridged is often shell tempered; the color is more
frequently dark brown to black; rims are more often rolled
and, if flaring, not as tall as in Bossier; the ridges are more
closely placed and uniform; vessel walls are thinner and
vessel shapes more symmetrical.
In addition to its presence in Bossier and Belcher Foci,
Belcher Ridged is stated by Krieger (13) to be intrusive in
Texarkana Focus sites, apparently from Belcher Focus pottery since it is accompanied by the type Belcher Engraved.
Ford and Willey (14) illustrate one sherd of Belcher Ridged,
which they tentatively called Maddox Finger Brushed, from
the late occupation of the Crooks Mound Site. Ford (4) illustrates other sherds of this type from Northwest Louisiana
sites (Fig. 16 j; 18 i), describing it under the formula 63; 42.
As was pointed out in the Belcher report (11), we cannot
agree that the ridging was always formed by finger brushing,
having found tool scratches or marks on many vessels, hence
prefer to designate the type as Ridged without reference to
method of producing the ridges.
V. Sinner Linear Punc~ate. (Plate 11, No. 9; Plate 12, Nos.
20-31; Plate 14, Nos. 3, 4). Vessel shapes include jars, cups
(compound in one instance) and globular pots. The vessels
are usually smaller than Belcher Ridged or Pease BrushedIncised vessels, but wall thickness is comparable. The paste
is firm, tempered with clay or clay and grit, rarely bone.
External colors range from buff to mottled gray-black (differential firing). Bases are flat discs; jar bodies are ovate,
cups and pots globular; rims are everted and often notched
at the lip. The bodies and often the external surface of the
rims are decorated with lines formed by closely placed tool
punctations which are so regular as. often to give the suggestion of heavily cord marked decoration. Less often the
linear punctations are made by finger nail impressions. The
lines are often arranged in fields with alternating direction

7

I~LATE
Sherds of Bossier Focus pottery lyp(~s, ]3elcher Ridged (Nos. 1-5)
Incised, late variant,

(Nos. 6-15)

and .Maddox ]:h.ush,’_-d

(Nos~

])unkin

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

117

of diagonally placed lines; vertical rows of nodes at times
quadrate the body surface (Plate 11, No. 9) and occasionally
the decorative technics of Sinner Linear Punctated and
Pease Brushed-Incised are combined, with regular vertical
fields roughened by linear punctations, separated by nodes,
applique ridges or heavy punctations.
Although never a frequent type at any site, Sinner Linear
Punctated is rather widespread. Moore (2) illustrated a pot
with this decoration (Fig. 96, page 95) from the Keller Place,
a mound site on the Ouachita River in Calhoun County,
Ark. The vessel has a notched rim and 5 vertical rows of
applique nodes separate the fields of punctations. Moore
noted that the tool punctated lines produce an effect similar
to cord marking. Harrington (5) illustrated two vessels of
this type, a pot in Plate LVII and conjoined cups in Plate
XCVI, a, from the Washington site in Arkansas. Dr. and Mrs.
Hodges of Bismark, Ark., include in their collection of 1,000
vessels from the Mid-Ouachita area seven vessels of Sinner
Linear Punctate type (Plate 14, Nos. 3, 4) ; no other Bossier
Focus types are represented, although many of the Belcher
and Glendora Foci types are included.
Lake Borne Incised type in the Tchefuncte period (15), the
earliest known pottery in the lower Mississippi valley, features linear punctations in closely placed parallel lines,
arranged in herringbone, triangles, squares, diamonds and a
key design. Indeed, there is a startling similarity of decoration technique and design arrangement between Lake Borne
Incised and Sinner Linear Punctated, considering the fact
that intervening cultures--Marksville, Troyville and Coles
Creek--lack this incising technique. The nearest approaches
are the drag and punch technique of Weeden Island Incised,
the linear stamping of Deptford and Troyville potteries and
occasional linear arrangement of fingernail or tool punctations in Coles Creek and Plaquemine potteries. In none of
these are the linear punctations closely placed to cover the
entire vessel surface, nor do the punctated lines have the
same similarity to cord marking seen in Sinner Linear
Punctated.

Texas Archeo~ogicaI and Paleontological Society

118

In the Crooks site report (14) Ford and Willey illustrate
linear punctated sherds, one type, LaSalle Punctated, attributed to the late horizon. A second group of 4 sherds in Fig.
19 includes one (No. d) which has the appearance of Sinner
Linear Punctated.
VI. Dunkin Incised, Late Variant.~ (Plate 11, Nos. i0-12;
Plate 13, Nos. 6-15). Vessel forms include jars, vases, pots
and cups. The paste is homogeneous, clay, clay and grit,
rarely bone or tufa tempered. Hardness ranges from 2 to 3.
Inner surfaces are smoothed, tool marked; outer surfaces
rough to slightly smoothed. Surface colors are characteristically tan to brown, a few reddish tan or dark brown.
Bottoms are fiat discs, bodies seldom tall; rims may be
tall, generally slanting outward or curving outward, rarely
incurving. Notches are often present on the lip, which may
be direct or slightly thickened and nearly always rounded.
Thickness varies from 3/16 to 5/16 inch; average ¥4 inch.
Decoration consists of parallel, roughly incised lines, typically horizontal but sometimes diagonal or vertical, applied
over .the entire body in most instances, at othdr times only the
rim or upper portion of the vessel. Where diagonal incisions
are present, fields of nested triangles, diamonds, squares or
herringbone arrangements are noted. Incised lines are
closely placed, usually bold, although gradations from deep
tra.iling to light scoring are to be found.
This type seems to be a continuation of the parallel incising technique which is found in all potteries of the lower
Mississippi Valley and most of the Caddo area, from Tche*In

Plaquemine

Potter~,

vessels

with

parallel

hori~ntal

inct~d

lln~

around

the ~ms, cruder and appa~ntly d~enera~ from Coles C~k Incised, were call~
~a~y Incised by Ford and ~workers. Ca~ula Incl., ~n~n Incl..
Bayou Inc~ and P~on~s Diagonal Incis~ ~ ~ ~ vaHan~ of the same
time pe~od, with diRgonM, ve~i~ and cross incising. In K~er’n earlier publication (6). v~Is £~m Al~ F~us ~ving hori~n~ p~llel inci~ng around
~ms and plain or nail punc~t~ b~i~ w~e refe~ to and illustrated as Hardy
Incl.; t~se ~th d~n~ incis~g ~ Dunkin Incise. Du~ng the Al~
3~Bo~ier t~nsition, numerous v~iations in pla~ent and ~ecu~on of incis~
lin~ a~p~, ~ ~st n~l~ multiplici~ of ty~ would ~ult if ~p~a~ n~
w~e given to ~h variant. By mutu~ ~reem~t, the ~pe Dunkin Ine~ ~f~
~ ~t~ of the earlier AIw pe~ wi~ fi~, s~th w~e; st~igh~sid~
~k~, v~e and ~wl forms and fi~, smith incising. Dunkin Inci~
variant, refers ~ the Phase S---Bossier and late HMey inci~ ~t~ ~ d~crib~
a~ve. S~ K~er "The AI~ Fo~" (8).

Pottery pipes, ~o. 1 froln ~,larstol~ Place, No. 2 from Pease Place, 8tllller
Ll~ear Punctated pottery, Nos. :~ and 4 (~fid-Ouachita Area. courtesy Dr.
:rod .Mrs. T. L. Hedges, photographs by Alex Krleger).
Belcher Ridged
pottery, No. 5, fron~ l~eleher ~lot~d. ~’os. l thrll 4, x 1-2; .No. 5, x 1-8.

Caddoan Prehis$ory:

The Bossier Focus

121

functe to historic Glendora. Its immediate predecessors
appear to be Coles Creek, Mazique and Chase Incised of the
Coles Creek period; Davis and Dunkin Incised of the Alto
potteries.
Dunkin Incised, late variant, is generally cruder than
these, with sloppy or irregular, application of incisions and
the development of everted rims, whereas .most incised vessels of the earlier periods mentioned above have no definite
shoulders and rims. Dunkin Incised, late variant, in fact,
seemed to develop in the later stages of Alto and~ I-Ialey potteries, also in the period of transition from Coles Creek to
Plaquemine in central Louisiana, and the incised pottery of
Bossier focus seems to be part of this general development
(Plate 17).
VII. Brushed Wares. Every site of the Bossier Focus has a
considerable amount of brushed pottery varying from 2 to 25
per cent of decorated sherds. Undoubtedly many of these
may be attributed to other cultures represented on these
sites, as brushing becomes very frequent in all later periods,
but this universal appearance, even on almost pure Bossier
sites, makes it necessary to include brushed wares among
the Bossier pottery types. No whole vessels have been
found, l~either are there illustrations from reports elsewhere
which give good clues to definite vessel shapes.
Many of the sherds are similar to two types illustrated by
Ford (4) on pages 91 and elsewhere, now attributed to
Plaquemine and Caddo potteries. Ford and his co-workers
later called these two Anna Random Brushed and lYladdox
Cross Brushed. A third type of rather firm and regular
brushing was termed Plaquemine Brushed. A few sherds
on Bossier sites show the vertical brushing of Glassell
Brushed, of the Belcher Focus, but without shell tempering.
Believing that occasional cross brushing is fortuitous and
that .unnecessarily complicated typology should be eliminated, the name Maddox Brushed is assigned by the author
to cover brushed wares indigenous to Bossier focus.
Maddox Brushed. (Plate 13, Nos. 16-24). Vessel forms of
this type apparently are quite similar to those of Pease

122

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Brushed Incised and Belcher Ridged, as are the paste, colors
and general appearance of sherds.

Rims are everted, occa-

sionally thickened or rolled and frequently notched. If rims
are brushed, the arrangement is usually horizontal. On the
body, brushing may be irregular, horizontal, vertical or in
herringbone bands similar to the incised wares. In a few
instances vessel surfaces have widely spaced (probably
quadrating) vertical nodes or ridges, with brushing between.
This arrangement is similar to that of Pease Brushed-Incised
except for the wide spacing of the nodes or ridges.
Decoration by brushing has not been described for the
Coles Creek, Troyville or Marksville periods in central Louisiana and the lower Mississippi Valley, but one brushed type,
Chinchuba Brushed, is described for the Tchefuncte Culture
(15). The situation is much the same as noted in discussion
of linear punctated types, where similarly a decoration
technic present in, Tchefuncte is interrupted by the Marksville-Troyville-Coles Creek sequence, to reappear in the Bossier horizon. Brushed wares also are present in Plaquemine
of central Louisiana and appear in Phase 3 of the Davis Site.
(8), possibly intrusive from Plaquemine pottery. Similarly
the Haley Focus of southwest Arkansas in its later stages
reveals the development of brushing in place of incising
over the bodies of utility vessels.
Other Pottery Complexes
It has been observed that two or more pottery complexes
are represented at practically every site at which Bossier
Focus pottery is found. Eliminating Dunkin Incised, late
variant, other non-definitive incised sherds, and all brushed
wares, all of which may be held in common by two or more
complexes, one finds that marker sherds of Marksville-Troyville, Coles Creek-Plaquemine, Alto and Glendora pottery
complexes are present on various listed sites (Table I).
Moreover, two sites have sherds of Belcher Focus and one
site has Choctaw and Natchez sherds. Marston, Pease, Sinner and High Island are strong Bossier sites, with less than
5 per cent Alto sherds and ~ninimal amounts of other recognizable complexes. These sites occur in a north-south axis

Caddoan

PreMstory:

Focus

The Bossier

123

TABLE I. PERCENTAGE OF DECORATED SHERDS’~
FROM VARIOUS SITES WHICH ARE MARKER
SHERDS OF POTTERY COiVfPLEXES.

Marston Place ........ 1223
Sinner Place ............ 772
Pease Place .............. 778
High Island ................ 290
Harrison Bayou ...... 237
Swanson’s Landing 167
Gflmer Bayou .......... 122
Keatchie ...................347
Smithport Landing 584

0.1
0
0
0
0.4
4.6
0
0
4.6

1.5
3.5
2.3
0.6
4.8
7.4
5.4
1.4
28.4

45.4
43.1
46.8
38.1
29.8
20.0
22.8
14.9
7.1

0
0.3
1.0
2.0
0
0
0
0.6
2.0

0
0
(5)
0
0
(5)
0
(6)
0

Wilkinson Place ...... 347

1.1

29.4

11.5

1.0

0

........ 206

1.5

16.0

4.5

Colbert Place ............ 930

11.0

10.1

16.4

Chamarre Lake

0

(5) (7)

0.1

(5)

Greer Place .............. 300

4.0

14.1

16.0

1.7

0

Mounds Plantation 397

2.5

7.0

21.7

2.5

(8)

Belcher II .................. 703

0

3.6

40.5

0

(9)

(I) Coles Creek types include Cole~ Creek, Chase. Mazique and French Fork
Incised, Chevalier Stamved and Rhinehart Punctated.
(2) Alto ~pes include Pennington Punctate--Incised, Wech~s Fingernail Impressed, Wilkinson Fingernail Punctat~d, Crockett Curvilinear Incised,
Hickory and Holly Engraved.
(3) Bossier types include Pease Brushed-Incised, Belcher Ridged, Sinner ]Linear
Punctated, ~daddox and Taylor Engraved,
(4) Giendora typos include Natchitoches Engraved and Keno Trailed.
(5) One to three Marksville-Troyville sherds at each of these sites, including
Marksvil]e and Troyville Stamped and Churupa Punctated,
(6) Brushed sherds suggesting Bullard Brushed of Frankston Focus constitute
40% of decorated sherds at Keatchie site: 1 sherd of Belcher Engraved.
(7),Three sherds of Chickachee
Incised (Natchez).

Combed

(Choctaw)

and

one of

Fatherland

(8) Belcher Focus, 2~’~ o£ decorated ~herds.
(9) Belcher Focus 6.6% and Texarkana Focus. 6.7% of decorated sherds.

*Dunkin Incised, late variant, and all Brushed sherds are omitted from tabulation because they are common to several pottery complexes.

124

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological Society

on a series of lateral waterways along the eastern hill escarpment of Red River valley in Bossier and subjacent Red River
parishes.
Harrison Bayou, Swanson’s Landing, Gilmer
Bayou and Keatchie, all outside of the river valley, have a
major representation of Bossier Focus pottery, with appreciable amounts from other complexes. Smithport, Wilkinson and Chamarre Lake sites have Alto Focus pottery as the
major component, with smaller amounts of Bossier Focus
pottery; these sites are in a group on the west side of the
valley and "further south than the major Bossier group.
Colbert and Greer places, about 4{} miles east of Shreveport
and located on Black Bayou which flows into Red River
below Natchitoches, are mixed sites with appreciable
amounts of Coles Creek, Alto and Bossier potteries.
Motmds Plantation and .Belcher are mound sites in the
river valley, with representation of several culture periods.
At Belcher, controlled excavations of Mound B, which had
4 habitation levels separated by almost sterile sand fills,
afforded good clues of Bossier temporal relationship, in that
Belcher II, where 72 per cent of recognizable sherds were of
Bossier types, was preceded by a ttaley Focus (Gibson Aspect) habitation and burials, with characteristic burial customs, projectile types (Alba Barbed), long stemmed pipe
and pottery which in burial vessels and house floor sherds
was a mixture of Haley and Alto Focus types. On the Other
hand, Belcher habitation levels III and IV exhibited typical
Belcher Focus (Fulton Aspect) pottery on house floors and
in burials, together with other artifact types and culture
traits which distinguish this Focus in its several components.
It is interesting to speculate as to the reason why so many
sites where Bossier Focus is represented have a number of
other culture complexes in evidence. Although only those
sites are tabulated from which we have more than 100 decorated sherds, the same situation prevails throughout the
area. This is especially true of Alto Focus pottery types,
which the table shows to be present with Bossier on each of
the 15 listed sites. Stevenson (7) reports a similar situation
in the McGee Bend Reservoir in east Texas, where Alto
~ypes were found on 12 of the 16 sites which had Bossier rep-

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

125

resentation. Krieger (8) states that these Alto sherds are
chiefly of the Phase 3 or late Alto types and limited to rough
utility wares, which to a considerable extent is true in Louisiana. Four of the sites listed in Table I are considered as
major or unquestioned Alto sites--Smithport, .Wilkinson,
Colbert and Greer, in addition to Allen which is not listed-since they yield a practically full range of Alto pottery types,
in addition to the appreciable percentile representation.
Relative Frequency o] Bossier Pottery Types
Table II shows the percentage occurrence of the various
pottery types ascribed to Bossier Focus in the 15 sites deTABLE II. PERCENTAGE OF DECORATED SHERDS
IN VARIOUS BOSSIER POTTERY TYPES*

Marston Place ........... :..4.0
Sinner Place ................. 1.9
Pease Place ................. 2.0
High Island ..................2.4
Harrison Bayou .......... 0.8
Swanson’s Landing .... 0
Gilmer Bayou .............. 0
Keatchie ........................ 2.0
Smithport Landing .... 0.5
Wilkinson Place .......... 1.5
Chamarre Lake .......... 0
Colbert Place
.3.7
.2.8
Greer Place
Mounds Plantation .... 0.5
Belcher II .................. _0.7

0.2
2.2
4.4
1.4
2.0
0
0
0.3
0
0.9
0
0.8
0.8
0
1.0

.19.0
18.6
19.8
16.3
27.0
9.4
13.4
11.4
4.5
3.2
4.5
2.5
3.0
3.0
3.4

21.0
12.0
16.0
16.0
0
10.0
3.0
0.6
1.4
5.0
0
5.0
6.0
18.0
35.4

1.2
8.4
4.6
2.0
0
0.6
6.4
0.6
0.7
0.9
0
4.4
3.3
0.2
0

19.0
37.4
38.0
33.4
14.3
43.0
32.3
13.2
36.6
36.0
54.0
38.5
41.0
38.0
26.2

*The figures indlc~t~ percentages of all decorated sherds i~rom the
the given type represents ; not the percentage of Bossier sherds alone.

site

27.0
7.0
8.6
9.0
41.0
12.0
16.6
24.5
6.8
5.0
13.5
8.5
8.0
2.5
2.7
which

126

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

scribed above. It is to be remembered that Dunkin Incised,
late variant, also occurs in Alto and Plaquemine potteries.
However, its occurrence is remarkably constant, between 32
and 43 per cent in 10 of the 15 sites, regardless of complexes
represented.

It is also to be noted that the four adjoining

Bossier sites, Marston, Sinner, Pease and High Island, present
quite consistent figures for six types.

The considerably

higher percentage of brushed sherds at Marston, with some
relative increase in Maddox Band Engraved and decrease in
Sinner Linear Punctated, may have temporal significance.
This is the only non-mound site of Bossier Focus which is
situated in the Red River valley; of all sites it more nearly
approaches a pure Bossier Focus site, with very low p~rcentage of Alto and Coles Creek sherds (one Coles Creek,
19 Alto sherds in a total of 1,223). This site may well have
existed at a later time than the others, and may represent a
movement of Bossier peoples from the hillsides down into
the valley; inadequate studies of the Vanceville mound are
available to indicate whether this site may represent a
similar trend.
Away from the four-site center of Bossier Focus, the pottery types tend to show a more spotty distribution (although
smaller sherd sampling at several sites may have its ’effect).
Pease Brushed-Incised, Dunkin Incised, late variant, and
Maddox Brushed are found at all 15 sites; Belcher Ridged is
absent from 2 sites; Sinner Linear Punctated and Maddox
Engraved from 3 sites each and Taylor Engraved from 5
sites. Pease Brushed-Incised and Belcher Ridged are the
two most consistent and reliable indicators of Bossier Focus
pottery, especially in the absence of marker types of Belcher
Focus, where Belcher Ridged would be confusing.
At the typical Bossier sites, the engraved types constitute
only 4 to 6 per cent of the total decorated sherds, contrasting
with the finding of 17.7 and 11.8 per cent engraved sherds in
the Belcher Focus levels III and IV of the Belcher Mound
site.

Caddoan Preh~stor~:

The Bossier Focu~

127

Other Clay ArtiSacts
Clay Pipes. A large fragment of an elbow pipe (Plate 14,
No. 2) was found on the surface of the Pease Place. Neither
end is complete, but the bowl and stdm ends of the fragment
seemed about equal in size and caliber of opening. The surface was smoothed and decorated with engraved, ticked or
spurred lines encircling the stem and bowl, with a concentric
circle of spurred lines between. The pipe found with the
Williams Point burial was stated to be of the elbow type,
but was not seen by the author. The pipe which was washed
out near the burial at the lYIarston Place (Plate 14, No. 1) is
a modification of the elbow pipe. The base is cuboidal, of
solid, well fired, clay tempered pottery, bearing incised concentric Circles on 3 sides and notching of all edges. Again
the bowl and mouthpiece are broken, but the remaining
parts show openings of approximately equal caliber joined
by a small hole. There is a suggestion of mild flare to the
sides of the bowl.
Stem or bowl fragments of long stemmed pottery pipes
were found at Mounds Plantation and Harrison Bayou sites.
Since these have been associated universally with the Gibson
period and have not been found at other Bossier sites, they
undoubtedly derive from the Alto Focus occupation at these
two sites.
Pottery Discs. Fragments of flat pottery discs were found
at numerous sites, including Marston, Pease, Swanson’s
Landing, Gilmer Bayou, Wilkinson, and 3 each at Sinner,
Colbert and Greer Places, of the sites listed in Table I. These
discs vary from approximately 2 to 4 inches in diameter,
have a smooth central perforation and may be cut from
decorated sherds or be flat undecorated discs (from vessel
bases?). An entire large disc (Plate 16, No. 1) from the
Marston Place is 3¼ inches in diameter and the central
perforation measures % inch. The excellent balance of this
disc lends weight to the supposition that these objects were
spindle whorls.
Clay Figurines. Fragments of figurines are about as widely
distributed as discs. 6 figurine fragments were found at

128

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Marston Place, indicating almost certainly that they were
made by Bossier Focus people, since this is almost a pure
site. One or more fragments (Plate 16, No. 4) came from the
East Smithport, Sinner, Pease, Wilkinson, Greer and Colbert
(6 fragments) sites. No entire figurines have been found
and no head or face fragments. If the figurines were entire
and proportionate to the size of the fragments, they ranged
from 2 to 3 inches in height.
Other Objects. One bead-like object made from a pottery
she,d (Plate 16, No. 2) was found at Sinner Place. It is
1 1/16 by 1 inches in size, shield shaped, with smooth central
perforation. A small pestle or pin shaped object (Plate 16,
No. 8) from the Marston Place is different from anything
seen in this area. Except for its very small size (l~/s inches
in length) and base, it suggests the Middle Mississippi pottery trowels.
Chipped Stone Arti]acts
The multi-cultural status of the sites described makes it
difficult to assign artifacts to a given culture, especially since
no objects other than pottery and pipes have been associated
with burials. We can only assay the artifact assemblage
generally found on sites which have a major Bossier pottery
representation, eliminating those types known to have narrow cultural affiliations (for example, long-stemmed pipes).
Every site which exhibits Bossier pottery, with exception
of the large mound sites, has a variety of chipped stone artifacts, including large and small projectile points, several
types of scrapers, and drills. This is a consistent finding in
northwest Louisiana and in the MeGee Bend Reservoir (7).
A similar situation prevailed in theHenrietta Focus of central North Texas (6) and Fourche Maline in Oklahoma, in
which instances it was thought to represent a carry-over of
Archaic traits, including use of the atlatl.
Large Projectile Points. At the Sinner, Pease, Swanson’s
Landing, Harrison Bayou, Keatchie and Gilmer Bayou sites,
large projectiles were 3 to 10 times as numerous as the small
points; at Smithport twice as numerous; while at Allen, Col-

Caddoan Prehis~ory:

The Bossier Focus

131

bert and Greer the small (arrow) points exceeded the large
(dart) points in frequency.

The four latter are major Alto

Focus sites and three of them have Coles Creek representation, whence many of the small points may be derived.
The larger (dart) points (Plate 15) include lozenge-shaped
(Nos. 15, 16), simple haft or contracting base (Nos. 18-21)
and barbed, with expanded (No. 17) or contracting base, all
of which appeared in the Tchefuncte (15), Poverty Point
(9) and Marksville (14) cultures in Louisiana and seem to
be carried over from the late Archaic horizon. One of the
contracting base or simple haft type (No. 19) was found at
the Marston site, where there is no evidence of Archaic or
Marksville artifacts. This finding, with its widespread occurrence on other sites, suggests that some of these early
dart types may have been carried over into the Bossier
period.
On several sites, but particularly at the Sinner and nearby
Pease places, many large projectiles with expanded base,
barbed shoulders and multiple side notches (Plate 15, Nos.
6-7) were found. Points of this type were associated with
Marksville culture at the Crooks site (14) and on the
Ouachita River in Arkansas (~16). Other expanded base
barbed (corner notdhed) points (Plate 15, No. 17) from
several sites may or may not have serrated edges.
We have previously described (17) the San Patrice concave base projectile point (Plate 15, Nos.. 8, 9), with concave
base thinned by bilateral short channel grooving. These
have been found on 6 of the 15 sites in Table I, in addition
to a number of other unlisted sites.
Small Projectile Points. Those sites where small points
exceeded the large in frequency showed a preponderance
of Alba Barbed (Plate 16, Nos. 24-26), the dominant projectile type of Alto (6, 8) and Gahagar~ (18) Foci of the
Gibson Aspect, and several types (including the "fir-tree")
attributed to Coles Creek cultures (Plate 16, Nos. 27-35).
Two points of type Alba Barbed (Plate 16, Nos. 24, 25) were
among the five small points found at Marston Place. It i~

132

Texas ArcheotogicaI and Paleontological Society

possible, but by no means certain, that this type carried over
into Bossier Focus.
Bassett Pointed Stem type, the characteristic projectile
of Belcher and Texarkana Foci, a keen, small point with
straight sides, acutely barbed shoulders and short pointed
stems, was found on only two of the listed sites. At the
Belcher Mound, this type appeared at the third or Belcher
Focus level, after the Bossier habitation period.
Several other types of small projectile, found on the Bossier sites (Plate 16, Nos. 19-23) are of uncertain provenience.
As yet it is not possible to establish the resident type of
small or large points for Bossier Focus, although there is
good indication that both are present.
Scrapers. Large and small, triangular, oval, keel-shaped,
and reworked projectile ("bunt") scrapers are all represented, with both side and end scraper types. The most
frequent types, considered likely as resident types of the
Bossier Focus, are small oval or triangular, thin, usually
3~ to 1 inch in length; larger triangular scrapers or knives
(Plate 15, Nos. 11, 12) and the Albany type beveled scraper
or spokeshave (Plate 15, Nos. 13-14) previously described as
being limited to this area and often associated with the San
Patrice concave base projectile (17)..
Drills. As with projectiles and scrapers, several types of
drills found on these sites are of uncertain association. Included are narrow, diamond-sectioned (Plate 16, Nos. 14, 15) ;
small expanded-base (Plate 16, Nos. 10-12) and a few large
expanded base or T-shaped. The small, expanded base type
is more often found on Coles Creek sites but probably was
used also by Bossier peoples. The other two types have
been associated with the late Archaic throughout the southeast.
Ground Stone Objects
Celts. Rectangular and rectanguloid celts or adzes with
squared base and mildly curved edges (Plate 15, No. 4)
constitute the predominant type.
Edges are usually
rounded, but in many instances natural flat stones were used

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

133

with minimal modification. For this reason thickness varied
considerably.

The usual range of size is 4 to 5~ inches in

length and 2 to 3 inches in width.

Triangular celts (Plate

15, No.5) are less frequent, often larger and thicker and less
symmetrical than the small triangular celts of the Coles
Creek period.

Long, massive, thick polled celts are even

scarcer and have usually been attributed to the late Archaic.
Small chisels or wedges are rare.
Grooved Axes. Although less numerous than celts, grooved
axes have been found at a few of these sites. They are fully
grooved, rectanguloid with squared or mildly rounded bases,
quite thick with less acute blades than the celts. The average objects are 3½ to 5 inches in length, 2 to 3 inches in
width and ! to 1½ inches thick.
Manos’ Metates, Pitted and Pecking Stones. Oval or
spheroidal manos, usually rough edged, and sandstone
mortars, or milling slabs, with shallow basins occur on most
of these sites. No metates which show evidence of back-andforth grinding were found, and apparently circular grinding
in comparatively small basins prevailed. Many of the
manos (Plate 15, No. 2) and even mortars (Plate 15, No. 3)
had pits on one or both sides, indicating use for both "grinding
and nut cracking. Other pitted stones are numerous, and
combination pitted and pecking stones are not infrequent.
Pecking stones, with or without pits, are about convenient
hand size; some pitted stones, however, are large with multiple pits. No large mauls and only a few hammerstones of
moderate size have been found.
Stone Beads. No beads have been found with burials of
this focus. A few tubular or long, rectangular (Plate 16,
No. 5) polished beads of tan or grey stone may relate to the
Archaic (as they also occur on non-pottery sites). An engraved (effigy?) bead of gray slate from the Sinner site is
illustrated by Ford (4) and a modified barrel-shaped counter-drilled bead of banded slate was found at Smithport
Landing. An odd-shaped bead form (Plate 16, No. 3) of
ferruginous sandstone was a surface find at the Sinner site.

134

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

Red jasper and bird effigy beads, so numerous at Poverty
Point site (9), have not appeared in Bossier Focus sites.
Problematical Stone Artifacts. Ford (4) illustrates portions of a greenstone gorget (3 hole?), granite boatstone and
slate bead (small biconical bannerstone?) collected by Neild
from the Harrison Bayou site. A carved stone mask or effigy
pendant from Sinner site appears in the same illustration.
An entire two-hole gorget (Plate 16, No. 9) was found by
the author washed out from the Gilmer Bayou site, apparently from midden material, as there was noevidence of a
burial. Several fragments of bannerstones came from the
Pease site and the occasional finding of gorget, boatstone or
bannerstone portions have been reported at other Bossier
components.
Other Polished Stone Objects. No association of stone
pipes, pipe fragments or plummets with Bossier Focus has
come to the author’s attention. A rectangular, thin, polished
stone tablet, having the appearance of an unperforated
gorget, was found in midden material in the fill o:[ one of
the Smithport burials (Alto Focus). It is 2% by 13~ inches
in diameter. Polished pendants, sometimes natural pebbles
perforated near one end, are rare finds.
Bone, Shell, Copper, Galena, Quartz

No objects of shell, copper or galena have been found with
Bossier Focus burials, nor have there been surface finds of
objects made of these materials.
One bird bone which apparently had been made into a
bead was a surface find at the Smithport Landing. Unworked
quartz crystals or fragments are frequent; a small notched
crystal pendant (Plate 16, No. 7) came from the village surface at Greer Place.
Trait List o5 Bossier Focus

On the basis of the preceding discussion, it is considered
that the following list constitutes those culture traits which,
in the light of our present limited knowledge, probably
characterize the Bossier Focus:

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

137

COMMUNITY PLAN
Sedentary communities
Settlements typically on hillsides near minor streams, lakes or
springs; often on hills fronting the river valley
Mounds rare; occasionally small sand mound on hilltop overlooking valley; four mound Sites in river valley
Village usually rather compact and small
Often evidence of Archaic materials on same site
European trade materials not found unless Glendora component
represented
Burials on village site, scattered
One to four other cultures represented on same site

SUBSISTENCE

AND COMMERCE

Agriculture, hunting, fishing and gathering indicated
Materials largely local--no indication of widespread commerce
ARCHITECTURE
House floor on village---multiple post molds, apparently irregularly oval
Individual post molds
White sand on floor
Projecting entranceway, post rows
Multiple firebeds, not specially prepared
Cyst-like cache pit under ashbed (4 ft. depth, empty)
Post molds opposite sides of ashbed
House ovals on small mound; entrance uncertain; no central ashbed; no regular interior post molds; individual post molds

POTTERY
Clay temper predominates, occasional bone, tufa
Shell temper entirely or almost entirely missing
Highly polished engraved wares rare
Red filming, effigy vessels, rattle vessels, modeled animal heads
on bowl rims, spurred lines, negative discs--all absent or rare
Preponderance of incised, punctated, ridged and brushed utility

vessels
Everted rim jar usual shape for utility vessels
Bottles and bowl usual shape for engraved vessels
Pottery types---Maddox Band Engraved; Taylor Engraved; Pease
Brushed-lncised; Belcher Ridged; Sinner Linear Punctated; Dunkin Incised, late variant; Maddox Brushed
Other loci or periods represented by pottery at sites: iV~arksvilleTroyville; Coles Creek-Plaquemine; Alto; Belcher; Texarkana;
Glendora
Elbow pottery pipes, plain or engraved
Rectangular pottery pipe, incised
Perforated pottery discs
Pottery figurines, human (fragments)
Pottery trowel (?)
Bead from pottery sherd

CHIPPED STONE
Projectile points, large (possibly foreign)
Projectile points, small (some foreign))
Scrapers, small oval or triangular

138

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Drills, small flake, expanded base
Drills, small rectangular (resident?)
Albany type spokeshave and San Patrice concave base type
points (foreign?)
GROUND STONE

Celts
Small, thick triangular
Larger rectangular, thin or thick
Fully grooved axes (foreign?)
Two-hole gorget (rare, not a resident type?)
Oval manos
Rough sandstone metates or mortars
Pitted stones--numerous
Large and small hammerstones
Hones of brown sandstone
Bead, stone, pendant type (resident?)
Beads, tubular, stone (resident type?)
ANTLER, TOOTH, SHELL, COPPER, GALENA PRODUCTS

Information inadequate; none found in surface collections or
in few burials excavated
BONE, QUARTZ CRYSTAL
Bone Bead (resident?)
Quartz crystals, unworked
Quartz crystal pendant (resident?)
BURIAL CUSTOMS

Few burials found in various sites, detailed information not
available
Single burials in shallow pits
Fully extended burials, supine
Burials in village
No evidence of special preparation of pits or of specialized
burial ware
¯ Burial offerings lirnited--usually pottery, rare pipe
Pottery placed above or near head
No burial mounds in evidence
SKELETAL MATERIAL
Inadequate information for generalizations

Relationship to Other Cultures
Late Archaic. It has been noted that a group of culture
traits related to chipped and ground stone artifacts has
occurred at many of the hillside sites, along with Bossier
materials, also on similarly located non-pottery sites
throughout northwest Louisiana. These traits occur elsewhere in the Eastern United States in the late Archaic period
and have been the subject of careful study in Alabama,

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

139

Tennessee, Kentucky and south Louisiana. Evidences of
continuation of these Archaic traits into the early pottery
making periods are ample. The absence of Tchefuncte and
Poverty Point artifacts and the minimal amounts at Marksville-Troyville period sherds at Bossier Focus sites, in contrast with the regular distribution of Archaic objects,
suggests a late survival of the Archaic in northwestern
Louisiana, with possible carry over of Archaic traits into
the Alto-Bossier period. Only the evidence of extensive
testing and distributional studies at these sites, with stratigraphical control, will answer this question.
Tche~uncte. No artifacts which constitute marker traits
of the Tchefuncte culture have been recognized from Bossier
Focus sites. However, it has been noted that the pottery
type Sinner Linear Punctated bears more similarity in decoration technic and appearance, although completely different
in paste and vessel shape, to the linear punctated pottery of
the Tchefuncte Period than to any other pottery of the
lower Mississippi or Red River areas. Other incised and
nail punctated wares, together with rim notching, bear similarities with Tchefuncte technics which largely are missing
in intervening cultures (Marksville-Troyville-Coles Creek).
Although some Tchefuncte traits, especially in stone work,
projectile types and pottery traits, were transmitted to the
succeeding Marksville period, yet undoubtedly the well
organized Marksville groups effected spectacular changes
in the lower l~Iississippi and central Louisiana areas. Evidences of this are the development of large ceremonial,
mound building centers, the well developed burial complex
and introduction of new technics of pottery decoration. It
is interesting to speculate that other, as yet undiscovered,
pottery making peoples of the lower valley escaped domination of the Marksville-Troyville centers and carried on those
Tchefuncte methods of utility pottery decoration which reappear in Alto and Bossier potteries--overall fingernail
punctations, rim notching, linear punctations. Beyond this
speculation, for which there certainly is no basis of present
facts, it is fully indicated that Tchefuncte pottery was
"ancestral in large part to the predominantly smooth-sur-

140

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

faced wares that later came to dominate the Mississippi
Valley" (15).
MarksvilIe-Troyville. Despite the presence of a Marksville
site (Fredericks Place) in the Red River valley just below
the center of Bossier cultural development, and the finding
of a few distinctive sherds of stamped wares on Bossier sites,
there is little evidence of Marksville influence on the Bossier
pottery. The significance of the many multiple-side-notched
projectile points at the Sinner site is undetermined, especially since these seem to be infrequent in central Louisiana
Marksville and common on the Mid-Ouachita, with Marksville type pottery. This may be a local development in the
North Louisiana-Arkansas Marksville.
Coles Creek-Plaquemine. Incomplete publication of the
Louisiana State University materials leaves the Coles CreekPlaquemine situation unsettled. There seems little doubt
that the same close relationship exists between these cultures as between Marksville and Troyville, with certain
changes in community organization, pottery decoration, and
other artifact traits as Plaquemine developed out of Coles
Creek in central Louisiana. There are also indications that
the term "Coles Creek" relates to a time period with certain
artifact and cultural relationships between various units
over a wide area. Weeden Island is closely related but distinct; the Coles Creek potteries of central and north Louisiana are quite different and that of north Louisiana is dissimilar to the Pre-Caddo of the Crenshaw Mound.
Under these circumstances it is difficult to relate the AltoBossier developments to Coles Creek-Plaquemine. Krieger
(8) considers the earliest Alto (Phase 1) as preceding Coles
Creek of central Louisiana and probably Phase 2 at the Davis
Mound as coeval with "early Coles Creek," whereas Phase 3
is correlated with "late Coles Creek." As will be indicated
later, Bossier Focus is thought to have developed largely
out of late or Phase 3 Alto and we consider it probably contemporaneous with Plaquemine. On the Mississippi, Plaquemine is thought to precede and overlap Natchez. In the
middle Red and Mid-Ouachita River areas, Natchez pottery

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

141

is found with that of Belcher Focus and the historic Glendora Focus. We have already noted that Bossier Focus
seems to antedate Belcher Focus in northwest Louisiana.
Contemporaneity of Plaquemine and Bossier periods is
also indicated culturally in that almost identical incised and
brushed wares occur in both; vessel shapes are not too dissimilar; small projectile points, usually attributed to Coles
Creek-Plaquemine, occur on Bossier sites out of proportion
to or in the absence of pottery sherds of these two complexes;
and small drills made from flakes, which are not found in
Belcher or Glendora F’oci, seem to be common to Coles
Creek-Plaquemine and Bossier.
Ford and Willey’s report (14) of the Crooks site does not
clarify the relative position of the sherds which they list
together as "late period types." In Fig. 42 of this report,
types Sanson Incised, Catahoula Incised and Haynes Bluff
Plain, which probably would be assigned to the Plaquemine
period; Coles Creek Plain; Wilkinson Punctated, which we
now consider as a body treatment of several Alto types; and
Harrison Bayou Incised, which we would include in Dunkin
Incised, late variant, of the Bossier Period, all are ]isted as
found in the secondary mantle as well as in the wash on
the secondary mantle. No stratification of this mantle is
described and it is to be noted that about half of the Marksville Period sherds came from this same secondary mantle.
We also have no provenience indicated for illustrated sherds
which appear to be of types Sinner Linear Punctated (Fig.
19 a-d of the Crooks report) and Belcher Ridged (Fig. 20 g)
except that they belong to the late horizon.
Alto Focus. Repeated reference has been made to sherds
of A!to Focus types found on all sites in Louisiana and from
the majority of the McGee Bend Reservoir sites in Texas
at which Bossier Focus is represented. These specific Alto
types have been mentioned and illustrated by Krieger (6),
also have been discussed at conferences, but have not been
full described in the literature. Complete descriptions will
appear shortly in Krieger’s volume on the Davis site near
Alto, Texas, a large mound site which is one of the two

142

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

farthest southwest of the clay-sated tumuli which are so
characteristic of the Mississippi Valley.
Krieger correlates three Alto Focus (Gibson Aspect)
periods, Phases I, II and III, with premound, initial platform
mound and overlying mantle. In his previous publication (6)
he estimates Alto as beginning at approximately 1100-1200
A. D., at which time fine line engraved, black ware; tapering
spout bottles and incised scroll decoration were introduced
into this area. These types---Holly and Hickory Engraved
and Crockett Curvilinear Incised--lasted throughout all
phases of the Davis Mound and are represented in comparatively small amounts on the five sites which were listed as
major Alto sites in Northwest Louisiana-Wilkinson, Smithport, Allen, Colbert and Greer. Furthermore, 4 of the 5
vessels which Moore (1) and we (18) found in the tremendous Gahagan burial pits were of Holly Fine Engraved type
and three bottles found adjacent to the mound in recent
years, exposed by river caving and presumably but not
certainly with burials, were Hickory Fine Engraved.
Gahagan cannot be classed as belonging to Alto Focus, due
to its distinctive burials, stone and copper artifacts and
ceremonial traits. Krieger thinks the Alto burial pottery
may have been trade material, but considers Gahagan as
belonging to the early part of the Gibson Aspect.
Phases 2 and 3 of the Davis site mark the beginning of
considerable increase in amounts of straight line incised
pottery, often with fingernail punctated bodies which appear
on all of the Bossier Focus sites. Also, during Phase 3,
brushed sherds, which were related by Krieger to Plaquemine types, were found in relatively small amounts.
Krieger (8) suggests that in early Alto and other early Gibson periods, communities were few and widely separated, but
with large well developed ceremonial and civil centers. By
phase 3 times at Davis a trend had started which continued
throughout the entire Fulton Aspect, except in the large
mound sites on the Red River (especially Belcher and Texarkana Foci), toward living in many small villages which
seemed to have lost mound building, special burial and other

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

143

ceremonial traits. The cause for this dispersion into numerous small villages has not been ascertained--whether
natural causes related to sustenance, the breakup of strong
civil authority, rebellion against cruel burial ceremonials
with their attendant human sacrifice, or changed relationships with neighboring tribes.
Alto people spread during these times to many sites in
central east Texas, northwestern Louisiana and possibly
Arkansas---it is likely that hundreds of sites, mostly on the
smaller streams or in the hill country, have late Alto representation. In addition to pottery sherds, this is indicated
in our sampling by white sandstone hones and Alba Barbed
small projectiles. On these same dispersed sites, we see
development of the Bossier pottery complex alongside or
out of the Alto--chiefly the utility wares. Vessels from the
Smith Place burials (Plate 17) combine Alto Bossier shapes
and decorative elements. It is still not certain whether Alto
Focus is directly ancestral to Bossier (physically or culturally) or whether Bossier peoples, deriving cultural influences from both Coles Creek and Alto, coexisted with
Alto people in numerous villages during the latter phases
of Alto Focus. It seems certain that Bossier is generally
later than Alto, occupying an intermediate or transitional
period between characteristic Gibson (Alto) and Fulton
(Belcher) cultures. This is certainly the situation at the
Belcher site, the only excavated stratified site where Bossier
is represented.
Belcher Focus. We have noted that Belcher Focus artifacts are not widely represented on the many Alto-Bossier
hillside sites, also that Belcher Focus differs in continuing
the riverine, large ceremonial center, southern cult participating and mound building or using traditions of the Gibson
period, even though its pottery and artifact traits and trade
relationships place it in the Fulton period temporally.
Bossier and Belcher people seem to have had contact only
when the former entered the major river valley.
Yet we see two pottery types--Belcher Ridged and Taylor
Engraved--common to both loci, with evidence that the

144

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

former (and possibly both) originated in Bossier times.
Maddox Band Engraved bowls of Bossier Focus have shapes
and decoration arrangement not too different from Barkman
Engraved bowls of Belcher and Texarkana Foci. Utility
vessel shapes are quite similar in Bossier and Belcher potteries except for minor variation, as previously noted, in
rim height and treatment. Rim notching becomes less frequent. Small fiat triangular scrapers, brown sandstone
hones and Bassett Painted Stem small projectiles are other
Belcher artifacts which possibly also are Bossier Focus
traits.
Conclusions
Bossier Focus is a culture of the Caddoan area, primarily
found in numerous scattered hillside sites of Northwestern
Louisiana, but also in central East Texas, often in association with one to several other culture complexes on the same
site. There is a suggestion that part of the stone artifact
assemblage of this culture may have been carried over from
the late Archaic; evidence of usage of both atlatl and bow is
at hand. The Bossier pottery complex seems to derive from
the long sequence of Tchefuncte-Marksville-Troyville-Coles
Creek-Plaquemine of central Louisiana and the Alto Focus
of East Texas which, during its late period, spread across the
adjoining portions of East Texas and Northwest Louisiana.
Bossier Focus appears to precede and contribute in certain
pottery types and possibly other minor traits to the riverine
people of Belcher Focus, although close relationship does
not appear to exist.
The people responsible for Bossier Focus apparently were
hunters, fishermen and agriculturists living in small, closely
placed communities away from the major streams. Locally
self contained, they traded very little, were satisfied with
limited contacts and avoided highly developed ceremonials.
PLATE

17

Pottery from burials on Smith Place, Lincoln Parish.
Note the tapered
spout hottle with notched rim and encircling lines as well as pm~c~ateso
colnbining Al[o and Bossier decorative elements on a modified Hickory
EngPav(-d bottle shape. Also note ~’esssel 4, combining Dunkin Incised, Late
Varian| ,l;~ngra~,,i~g of the type seen in Plaq~emi~e a~d Alto vessels around
the rim, with notch,~d lip and Pease Brushed-Incised hod3" (Bossier Elements).
Vessels .x 1-3.

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

Plate 17

145

146

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

They produced several types of pottery, modifying ideas of
others and initiating at least one decorative technic which
they transmitted to a later cultural group, the remains of
which we know as Belcher Focus. This latter seems to be
immediately ancestral to Glendora peoples, identifiable as
Kadohadacho, Natchitoches and other historic Caddoan
groups.
There are frequent references in early narratives of certain "fringe" or unusual tribes among or near the Caddoans,
whose language or customs seemed different and who
usually lived away from the major streams on which Caddos
were found. Two of these "fringe" groups were the Adai,
near the Natchitoches in Louisiana, and the Eyeish, near the
Hasinai (on Eyeish creek, in the McGee Bend Reservoir) in
East Texas. Possibly ~uture research can establish whether
these isolated groups may represent descendants of Bossier
Focus peoples.
1560 Line Avenue,
Shreveport, Louisiana.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

(1)

Moore, C. B., Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River, J1.
Acad. Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1912.

(2) Idem, Antiquities o3 the Ouachita Valley, J1. Acad. Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1909.

(3)

Idem, Aboriginal sites in Louisiana and in Arkansas,
J1. Acad. Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1913.

(4)

Ford, J. Ao, Analysis o] Indian Village Site Collections
From Louisiana and Mississippi, Dept. of Conservation,
Louisiana Geological Survey, New Orleans, La., 1936,
Figs. 16, 18.

(5) Harrington, M. R., Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas,
Indian Notes and Monographs, the Heye Foundation,
New York, N. Y., 1920, Plates LVII b, XCVI a, possibly
LXXIX b.
(6) Krieger, Alex D., Culture Complexes in Northern Texas, Austin (University of Texas) Press, 1946.

Caddoan Prehistory:

The Bossier Focus

147

(7) Stephenson, Robt. L., The McGee Bend Reservoir, to be
published.
(8) Krieger, Alex D., The Alto Focus, in print.
(9) Webb, C. tI., Evidences o~ Pre-Pottery Cultures in
Louisiana, Amer. Antiquity, VoI. 13, p. 230, 1948.
(10) Webb, C. H., House Types Among the Caddo Indians,
T.A.P.S. Vol. 12: pp. 49-75, 1940.
(11) Webb, C. It. and Dodd, Monroe, Jr., Pottery Types
From the Belcher Mound Site, T.A.P.So, Vol. 13, 1941,
pp. 92-95, Plate 15, nos. 3 and 5; Plate 16, nos. 1, 2,
(12) Idem, p. 101; Plate 17, no. 7.
(13) E:rieger, A~ex D., personal communication.
(14) Ford, J. A. and Willey, G., Crooks Site, Dept. of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, New Orleans,
La., 1940, Fig. 20 g; page 58.
(15) Ford, J. A. and Quimby, G. I., 5r., The Tche]uncte Culture, An Early Occupation of the Lower Mississipp~
Valley, Amer. Antiquity Supplement, Vol. X, no. 3,
1945; plate 4; page 61.
(16) Hodges, T., personal communication.
(17) Webb, C. H., Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone
Artifacts From Northwest Louisiana, T.A.P.S., Vol.
1946.
(18) Webb, C. H. and Dodd, M., Further Excavations of the
Gahagan Mound; Connections with a Florida Culture,
T.A.P.S., Vol. 11, 1939.

