CENTRAL AREA
The central area includes, generally speaking, the middle courses of the Colorado and Brazos Rivers, with their
tributaries, plus some additional territory. It extends
westward to include Tom Green and Edwards Counties,
northward to a line extending from Jones to Kaufman
Counties, on the east to the middle Trinity River, and on
the south to the coastal and Southwest areas. Its most
striking physiographic feature is the Edwards Plateau, a
great limestone uplift dissected by numerous shallow canyons and valleys. Many springs are found in these canyons
and along the Balcones Fault which marks the Plateau’s
southern ~ margins, This country is now. heavily covered
¯ with oak, mesquite; juniper, and elm on uplands and valley
bottoms alike. There is a common belief that less than a
century ago the uplands were luxurious grassland, with
~orests largely confined to the stream bottoms. The abundance of water, large and small game animals, various wild
roots, berries, nuts, fish, birds, etc. provided an unusually
favorable environment for primitive man. Flints of many
varieties were abundantly available in many places, in quarries and stream gravel, and used in great quantity.
As in other sections of Texas, the central area offers
no particularly distinctive traits for the Paleo-American
Stage. There are numerous surface finds of projectile points
which would be regarded as Paleo-American in the Great
Plains, but most of these are found on sites which produce
a large amount of Archaic material. This is particularly
true of points resembling the Plainview and Angostura
types, as discussed under Edwards Plateau. Aspect. One
fine Clovis point was found partially embedded in alluvium
near somewhat disarticulated mammoth remains at the
McLean Site in Taylor County, south of-Abilene (Bryan
and. Ray, 1938; Ray, 1942). Clovis points are, however, of
very rare occurrence in central Texas even though they continue to appear as far south as the Coastal Plain and the
Rio Grande delta. Folsom points are also uncommon, a few
having been found by Dr. Ray in the Abilene area and a half

lOO

Texas Archeological Society

dozen others coming from scattered localities as surface
finds. Five Folsom points come from the dump pile of Kincaid rockshelter (see below). Of all the early types of projectile points, the Scottsblu]f appears to be the rarest, only
three or four fragments coming from central Texas, although this type too extends farther south into the lower
Rio Grande valley and Coastal Plain. There are a number of puzzling aspects to the Paleo-American Stage in central Texas which cannot be solved without excavations
directed toward them.
The Archaic Stage is represented by Edwards Plateau
Aspect, a long-lived culture complex characterized by a
great variety of dart points and many other artifacts of chipped flint. This c~omplex is well known from numerous controlled excavations conducted by the WPA-University of
Texas from 1936 to 1941, but almost none of this valuable
data has been published. The tremendous numbers of projectile points, knives, and scrapers of flint, and great piles
of discarded hearth stones, indicate that economy was"
based on hunting, deer bones being by far the most frequent. Numerous grinding tools testify that vegetal products were also of considerable economic importance.
The Neo-American Stage is represented by the Central
Texas Aspect. Sites are similar~ to those of Edwards plateau
Aspect, on stream terraces and promontories, and in caves
and rockshelters, but the quantities of refuse are far less.
Usually the Central Texas Aspect material, appears as a
thin veneer over middens containing Edwards Plateau
material for the most part. Some of the large more or less
permanent sites, particularly those located on a fertile
terrace, may have been partly supported by agriculture,
but the fact remains that neither food remains nor implements have been found as evidence of agricultural practices. Pottery occurs widely in central Texas, much of it
identifiable as trade ware brought in from surrounding
areas; some sites, however, have numerous small sherds
of peculiar ware not found elsewhere and which may be
of local origin.

Ce~rgl Area

191

It has been suggested that the Austin and Toyah Foci
of the Central Texas Aspect extended into historic times
(Krieger, 1946; Kelley, 1947), but this suggestion has not
been properly demonstrated. Flint artifacts of native origin
have been found at mission sites, such as Goliad and San
Saba, and some rock-crevice burials with European trade
items have been found. However, there has as yet beer~ no
successful welding of historic material into an Historic
Stage for the area as a whole, with its relationship to the
Neo-American Stage. The Stansbury Site on the Brazos
River in Hill County, excavated by the River Basin Surveys before being iriundated by Whitney Reservoir, appears to have been the location of a Tehuacane (Tawakoni)
Indian village (Stephenson manuscript in preparation).
PALEO-AMERICAN STAGE
Brief summaries of the two excavated sites

of this

Stage in Central Texas follow:
K~ncaid Site, Uvalde County. This small cave four
miles north of Sabinal, Texas, was excavated in 1948 by the
Texas Memorial Museum, and the occupation area outside
of it excavated in 1953 by the University of Texas Field
School in Archaeology in collaboration with the Texas
Memorial Museum. The five Folsom points found in a dump
pile left by looters provided a tantalizing problem, so that
the excavators hoped to find more such points in place.
Despite a great amount of laborious work, no more such
points were found; however, a wealth of new information
resulted. Most’interesting, it was found that Paleo-American occupation of the cave existed in contemporaneity with
animals now extinct: particularly Pleistocene horse, bison,
and mammoth, and other animals such as turtle and alligator. At this remote time, the human inhabitants were evidently annoyed with mud on .the cave floor and brought in
many large stream-worn stones, laying them in a fairly
level pavement over at least half the cave area. This pavement overlay a clay pond deposit which is now higher than
the river terraces outside the cave. Many bones of extinct

102

Texas Archeological Society

animals lay over the pavement: Directly overlying the
Pleistocene deposits, and separated from them by an
erosional disconformity, was a thick occupation deposit of
the Edwards Plateau Aspect. At the base of this deposit
were found several projectile points c~Iosely resembling the
Plainview and Angostura types, and others of lanceolate
form not easily classified, (Sellards, 1952, p. 94; Campbell
and Evans, extensive report in preparation):
Montell Shelter, Uvalde County. A small shelter was
excavated in 1947 by Evans and Meade of the Texas
Memorial Museum. It produced a large burned-rock midden of typical Edwards Plateau Aspect nature in the upper
parts. Lower down were remains of extinct fauna, prim
cipally tapir (Sellards, 1952, p. 144). The artifacts have
not yet been described. They suggest lanceolate forn~s of
the Paleo-American Stage but as none are complete the
identification is .difficult.
ARCHAIC STAGE
Edwards Plateau Aspect
The Clear Fork Complex of Dr. C. N. Ray (1929, 1938,
1945, 1948) was the first definition of archaeological material which is now considered an intregral part of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. Dr. Ray’s pioneering work in the
Abilene area was paralleled" by ~hat of Prof. J. E. Pearce
of the University of Texas, who excavated in the burntrock middens of Travis and Williamson Counties, recognizing certain differences between their upper and lower
levels. In 1935 E. B. Sayles published his famed Survey o]
Texas Archeology, the first definition of trait complexes
for the state as a whole. His Round Rock and Guadalupe
Phases are now considered to be slightly different expressions of the Edwards Plateau;Aspect. From 1936 to 1941 the
WPA-University of Texas Statewide Archaeological Survey conducted numerous excavations in central Texas, principally along the Colorado River ir~ sites that are now beneath the waters of Lake Buchanan, Lake Travis, and Lake

Central Area

103

Austin. One of the archaelogists of this Survey, J. Charles
Kelley, spent some years in analyzing the specimens and
excavation data from these sites, as well as from surface
collections in many central Texas counties. So far, only a
short chronological study of this material, without type definitions or descriptions, has been published (Kelley, 1947a).
Kelley recognized three loci in the Edwards Plateau
Aspect: the Clear Fork, Round Rock, and Uvalde, incorporating in this scheme some of the ideas of his predecessors.
The three foci are, however, chiefly recognized on the
basis of comparative distribution and frequency of certain
types of projectile points. On the other hand, it is well
known that the types considered diagnostic of the three
loci commonly occur together in the same sites and levels
in the Central Texas Area. Without the basic data to
demonstrate this three-fold division, if it can be demonstrated, the writers can 0nly discuss the Edwards Plateau
Aspect as a cultural unit,~.as we have done ~in the trait list
below.
A notable feature of this Aspect is the seemingly sedentary nature of the larger sites.~ The great accumulations of
burned and cracked limestone~ hearth rocks which typify
these sites could not have resulted in any way except
through the continued use of the same location for generations or even for centuries. Since, however, it is virtually
certain’that these people n~ver practiced agriculture, it is
probable that the sites were not inhabited the year around,
but that each small band wandered over the surrounding
area in search of plant and animal food, returning to the
central location for part of the year.
The majority of these sites are found on river terraces,
but others occur 5n promontories of the limestone, and in
caves and rockshelters. Whatever their location, almost all
these sites, of which s~everal hundred are known, are marked
by masses of burned and cracked limestone. Controlled
excavations have proved beyond question tha~ the stone~
are accumulations of broken limestone slabs; basin~-sb~p~
hearth pits were dug and lined with such slabs, which

104

Texas Archeological Society

cracked under heat and were thrown out, then replaced
with new slabs. Such accumulations have been called
"mounds" but since they were not purposefully erected they
should be called "burnt-rock middens." Between the rock
fragments there is usually black earth and ashes, in which
great numbers of flint artifacts and flint workshop material are found, as well as cracked animal bone, snail shells,
mussel shells, and occasionally a human burial. So few
burials have been found, however, even in the completely
excavated middens, that they cannot possibly account for
all the dead of these people. The majority must have been
disposed of some other way, buried well away from the
camp sites and middens, or cremated.
We have already mentioned the occurrence of projectile points in sites of the Edwards Plateau Aspect Which,
in the Great Plains, have consistently been associated with
Pleistocene fauna. The Clovis and Folsom points very seldom
if ever occur in association with Edwards Plateau Aspect
material, so that it is probable that they constitute a distinct time period, or periods, as one would expect. The
Scottsbluf~ type is very rare but the few specimens known
cannot be associated with any particular complex as yet.
The great majority of the early projectile points belong to
the Plainview and Angostura types or are of similar lanceolate shapes that are difficult to classify in the present incomplete state of this typology. Over 200 such points have
been recorded from central Texas, and doubtlessly several
times this number could be recorded in private collections.
Those for which we possess some data can be divided into
surface specimens, and those which come from excavated
sites of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. There are at least 100 of
the latter from the WPA-University of Texas excavations in
the Lake Buchanan and Lake Travis basins alone, and 20
more from other sites in which tests have been dug. The
early types, however, are always found in very small numbers relative to the total of dart points from each site; it is
unusual to find more than one or two ir~ every 100 points
of all kinds. There are several, possible explanations for

Central Area

so many projectile points which elsewhere belong to a
Paleo-American Stage occurring here in scores of sites
which contain a full-blown Archaic complex of artifacts:
1. They were picked up by the Archaic people from
Pleistocene sites, just as we would pick them up today as
curios; the later Indians likewise took them back to camp
as curios or they actually re-used them (re-use is sometimes
definite when the artifact shows re-shaping with fresher
chipping marks).
2. They were accidental inclusions in refuse deposits
of Edwards Plateau components, brought up from lower
levels by the digging Of hearth pits, graves, house pits,
etc.; but if this were the case there was no evidence of
the "accident" that the archaeologist could discover in any
of the excavations.
3. The Paleo-American Stage lasted longer in central
(and coastal) Texas than it did in the Great Plains farther
north, so that when the Archaic Stage became establishe~l,
this region was still inhabited by people making types df
artifacts abandoned long before elsewhere; the great game
animals of the late Pleistocene would have disappeared by
this time, but somehow the ancient hunters kept existing
here by turning to plant food as well as game and fish.
4. The Paleo-American Stage did not survive longer
in central Texas, but the Archaic Stage began much farther
back *~han we have been supposing.
There is insufficient evidence to settle on any answers
to these questions. Both (1)and (2) doubtlessly account
for some specimens in places where they appear foreign or
intrusive. Choosing between (3) and (4) is a knotty prob. lem which cannot be solved by logic alone; there is a great
need for radiocarbon dates to determine the length of life
of the Edwards Plateau Aspect and the ages of the terraces
in which this material is commonly found. This question
.of how the Paleo-American and Archaic Stages may or
may not have overlapped is not peculiar to central Texas,
but occurs in the same manner in north-central, coastal,

]06

Texas Archeological Society

and southwestern Texas and also has wide implications for
North America as a whole.
In present knowledge, it seems beyond doubt that the
Edwards Plateau Aspect existed for several thousand years.
Radiocarbon dates on the Archaic Stage east of the Mississippi River have surprised archaeologists by showing that
their previous estimates of 500 B. C. (or even 500 A. D.!)
for the beginning of this cultural pattern were far too
modest. At least a dozen dates in Kentucky, New York, and
other states show that its beginning was not later than
3,500 B. C. and may have been as long ago as 5,000 B. C. In
central Texas we consider that a beginning date of not
later than 4,000 or 5,000 B. C. is entirely reasonable, and
that radiocarbon dates may necessitate moving this even
farther back. The ending date has also been revised backward in recent years to somewhere between 500 "and 1,000
A. D. by the present writers, due to pushing backward the
estimated beginning date of the next culture stage, the
Neo-American, in this region.
Several classifications have been made for cultural
material in this area, and have proved to be exceedingly
confusing to all archaeologists. The terms used by Kelley
(1947 a, 1947 b) may be compared with those preceeding
him, as follows, for use in consulting the literature: .
KELLEY TERMS

PREVIOUS TERMS

Edwards Plateau Aspect

Pearce: Texas Kitchen Midden
Culture, Bottom and Middle
Levels.

Clear Fork Focus

Ray: Clear Fork Complex; Sayles: Abilene Branch; Gladwin: Round Rock Stage.

Round Rock Focus

Sayles: Round R o c k Phase;
Gladwin: probably Guadao
lupe and Menard Phases;
Huskey: Mound A Culture,
Lower Level.

Central Area

U2alde Focus

Sayles: Late Edwards Plateau
Culture; Huskey: Mound A
Culture, Upper and Middle
Levels.

We may repeat that none of these divisions has ever
been demonstrated with intensive analysis of artifacts in
different levels, or pertinent data on excavations. Until
. this is done and available we will consider the Edwards
Plateau Aspect as a unit in the trait list below. It certainly
is a cultural unit in a broad sense, the differences in the
complexes named above generally being based on shifting
frequencies of selected types of projectile’ points.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component:

None designated.

Principal Excavated Components: Fall Creek Sites in
Lake Buchanan Basin, Llano and Burnet Counties
~Jackson, 1938); lower levels ~f Lehmann Rockshelter in Gillespie County" (Kelley, 1947 b); MerreH
Site in Williamson County (Campbell, i948); Cedar
Park Site in Witliamson Cou~-ty (J. E. Pearce notes
in Univ. of Texas files); Belton~ Reservoir Sites
(Miller and Jelks, 1952iin Coryell County;~ sites in
the vicinity of Abilene, (Ray, !930, 1937)i sites reported by Huskey (1935) in the Nueces River canyons
in Edwards, Real, and Uvalde Counties; one component of the Kincaid Shelter in Uvalde Cour~ty (repo,rt in preparation by Campbell and Evans); lower
component of Collins Site in Travis County (report
in preparation by Suhm). About 40 excavations of
the WPA-University of Texas are not listed here,
the notes and collections being, on file at the University.
TYPE OF SITE:
Rockshelters and open. camp sites near water; occupation areas commbnly indicated by. masses of burned
and cracked limestone mixed with ashes and cultural material. The cracked limestone occurs in caves

Texas Archeological Society

108

and rockshelters as well as on open sites, sometimes reaching over an acre of ground and a thickness of six feet.
HOUSES:
No data, but probably
structure.

a

simple

and

impermanent

LIVELIHOOD:
Hunting, food-gathering, and probably fishing although fish bones seldom recovered in sites. Deer
the chief animal hunted although bison bones occur
frequently, as do those of various small mammals
and birds.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Absent.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow points: Absent.
Dart points: Pedernales (diagnostic of Round Rock
Focus of Kelley), Nolan (diagnostic of Clear Fork
Focus of Kelley), Montell (diagnostic of Uvalde
Focus of Kelley); Frio, Fairland, Castroville, Bulverde, Lange, Marcos, Marshall, Martindale, Travis,
Uvalde, and Williams are also all commoh types.. Kinney, PaImiltas, Wells, and Tortugas are minor types,
while Abasolo, Lerma, Langtry, Shumla,. Pandale,
Pandora, Morhiss, and Yarbrough appear only rarely:
Darl, and possibly Ensor points are believed to have
appeared only toward the close of this stage (Miller
and Jelks, 1952), and the same may be true of Ellis
and Edgewood points.
Gravers: Thick,-retouched flakes. Short, heavy graver
(?) tips sometimes occur on edges of scrapers or
spokeshaves.
Scrapers: Clear Fork type end scrapers (so-called
"Clear Fork gouge"); large snub-nosed end scraper’s;
disc-like or oval scrapers; heavy side scrapers made

Central Area

109

of large flint spalls retouched on one or more edges;
miscellaneous small flakes or spalls with slight edgework; spokesha~ve scrapers with small concave bit;
very large curved scrapers with long, thick, concave
bit.
Knives: Very numerous with all variations of shape
from triangular to a broad leaf, with parallel-edged
forms intermediate; all of these have concave,
straight, and convex edges. Double-pointed form
rare. "Curved" knives fairly common, with one edge
more or less straight and other convex. Corner-tang
¯ knives and various others with stem off-center but
not at corner. Knives generally under 1/~ inch thick.
Axes: Common, generally thicker than knives, made
by crude percussion chipping only, and less variety
in shape; commonly oval to rounded-triangular shape
with bases usually convex, sometimes straight.
Choppers: Heavy percussion-chipped tools made from
broken flint nodules, the stream-worn surface of one
end fitting the hand, the other end fashioned into a
jagged edge useful for splitting bones; if the cutting
end is Well fashioned with a definite blade, the object is a "fist axe" but such workmanship is uncommoil.

Picks:. Heavy core tools like choppers but smaller in
diameter, worked over all or nearly all the surface,
and crudely pointed.
Drills: Usually have heavy shafts two to four inches
long; oval in cross-section; bases may be oval to
square, worked on both faces, but the majority of
"drills" appear to have been re-fashioned from
broken projectile points of several types.
Scrap: All sites.have quantities of flint scrap, both
waste flakes and cores; these never show any consistency in form either in the manner of flake removal or in reducing the cores.

Texas Archeological Society

II0

ARTIFACTS

OF GROUND STONE:

Manos: Always of one-hand size, either shaped or unshaped. Shaped manos usually, of limestone or sandstone, roughly oval in outline and worn on one or
two faces; two convergent faces sometimes produced
a wedge shape. Unshaped stream pebbles usually
of granite, showing wear on at least one face.
Milling stones: Oval or circu~lar depressions worn in
one or both faces of unshaped’ stone slabs; most
commonly limestone, sometimes sandstone.
Pipes: Large, egg-shaped, made of limestone pebbles
without much exterior modification, holes drilled
from both ends meet in middle; one has been found
with bone-tube mouthpie~ce (very rare).
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Pendants: Thin, flat, oval plaques, usually limestone
but occasionally slate or metamorphic rock, holes
drilled through one or both ends for suspension;
sometimes decorated with extremely fine lines in
geometric patterns.
Boatstones: a few crude examples of limestone appear
to be indigenous; others may be importations from
the Southeast United States.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
Bone awls, infrequent.
Flaking tools of deer ulna and antler, infrequent considering amount of flint working done.
Drill handles (?) : Short cylinders of antler withsocket
in one end.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
A few perforated mussel shells (so-called "hoes").

NIISCELLANEOUS:
Pigments: Red and yellow ochre lumps, scraped for
paint material. Pieces of dark bluish-gray graphite
rubbed and scraped around edges, faces sometimes

Central Area

Ill

hollowed out, apparently also for pigment.
Hones: pieces of limestone and sandstone with narrow
grooves worn in faces, probably to sharpen bone
tools.
Shaft abraders: rounded, elongate pieces of limestone
with rounded groove running crosswise and a series
of deep, narrow incised lines at right angle to the
groove (Kelley, 1948, has described them).
"Tablets": Small flat objects of limestone and limonite
or ochre with very finely incised lines in geometric
patterns.
Hammerstones, generally of quartzite.
"Sinkers": Flat limestone pebbles, oval or irregular
in outline, with two notches chipped into opposite
edges.
"Waco sinkers": Small" egg-shaped quartzite pebbles
with two notches chipped across the opposite ends.
These occur commonly in the northeast part of the
central area, between Waco and Dallas, very infrequently elsewhere.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
. Individuals buried singly in flexed position in pits
usually unlined but occasionally lined with limestone slabs set on edge. Few or no offerings of a
durable nature were placed in graves. There is no
consistent orientation of the head. Very few burials
have been found in sites of this Aspect, hence burial
or cremation away from villages may have been
practiced.
RELATIONS:
Dart point types Wells, Gary, Ellis, Yarbrough occur in
small numbers, made of local flints, sUggesting diffusion from East Texas Archaic, although these types
continue into pottery-bearing Gibson Aspect. The
types Tortugas and Bulverde conversely occur in the
Alto Focus of Gibson Aspect, where they appear to
be made of local flints and the result of eastward

112

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

diffusion

(Newell and Krieger, 1949).

Sharing of other artifact types, particularly projectile
points, with other~Archaic complexes such as Aransas
Focus in the coastal area, FalcSn Focus in the southwest area, Pecos River Focus in the Trans-Pecos
area, and Carrollton Focus in the north-central area.
ESTIMATED AGE:
From 4,000 or 5,000 B. C. to 500 or 1,000 A.D. This does
not mean that the surrounding complexes mentioned
above are all of equal age.
SOURCES:
Campbell, 1948; Gladwin, 1934 a, 1937; Hu.skey, 1935;
Jackson, 1938, 1939; Kelley, 1947 a, 1947 b, 1948; Kelley
and Campbell, 1942; Leighton, 1936; Pearce, 1932; Ray,
1929, 1930, 1931, 1934, 1937, 1938, 1940, 1941, 1945, 1948;
Sayles, 1935
NEO-AMERICAN STAGE
Central Texas Aspect

Central Texas Aspect sites are found in an area extending from the Brazos River drainage on the east and
north, to approximately Tom Green and Edwards Counties
on the west, and to the central coastal plain on the south.
Like the Edwards Platedu Aspect, it roughly conforms to
the Edwards Plateau limestone region, with a slight extension into the coastal plain area to the east and southeast.
However, the Central Texas Aspect occupies a later chronological position than the Edwards Plateau Aspect, being
marked by the appearance of pottery, small, thin arrow
points, beveled knives, small snub-nosed scrapers, and
other new traits. Much Of this pottery can be identified as
trade ware from various directions. The remainder may
have been made in this area; at least its outside origin is
doubtful.
P~-evious designations for the Central Texas Aspect
include J. E. Pearce’s Texas Kitchen Midden Culture, Upper

Cenfral Area

113

Level, and E. B. Sayles’ Wichita Phase, in part.
Kelley recognized two principal divisions of the Central Texas Aspect,* the Toyah and Austin Foci, largely on
distributional differences in arrow point types. He tenta~
tively linked the Toyah Focus with the Jumano Indians
of the early historic period (Kelley, 1947b, p.121), and the
Austin Focus has been identified as the archeological remains of Tonkawa Indians (Krieger, 1946, pp. 165-168).
Although .the linkage with these historic groups is not imProbable, it is best regarded as only tentative, as European
items are conspicuously absent in Central Texas Aspect
sites, and the archeological remains and their distribution
¯ do not altogether fit the early historic descriptions of the
Tonkawa and Jumano Indians.
Differences in distribution of the pottery types and
some of the arrow point types have been observed, and
regional variations in arrow point typology and quantitative representation of severa! types of artifacts have been
noted. Thus, it appears that the Central Texas Aspect
should probably be divided into several loci. However,
data are insufficient at present to accurately define the
hypo~thetical loci; consequently the following trait list has
been compiled for the aspect as a whole.

COMPONENTS:
Type Component: None designated.
Principal Excavated Components: Fall Creek Sites in
the Lake Buchanan Basin, San Saba, Llano, and
Burnet Counties (Jackson, 1938); sites in Belton
Reservoir, Cbryell County (Miller and Jelks, 1952);
Blum Rockshelter in Whitney Reservoir, Hill
County (Jelks, 1953) ; Lehmann Rockshelter in Gillespie County, upper level (Kelley, 1947b); Pictograph,
Buzzard, and Sheep Rockshelters in Whitney Reser*Stephenson (1950,..p. 154) listed a third focus, the Nueces, in the Centr2.1
Texas Aspect. The i~ueces and the Tradinghouse have beeh tentatively
suggested as foci of the Central Texas Aspect by Kelley (unpublished manuscript), again on the basis of arrow 9oint typology, but neither has been
described or defined in detail.

Texas Archeological Society

114

voir, Hill and Bosque Counties (Stephenson, report
in preparation); upper component at Kincaid Shelter, Uvalde County (Campbell and Evans, report in
preparation); and upper component at Collins Site,
Travis County (Suhm, report in preparation).
TYPE OF SITE:
Rockshelters and small open
large and small streams.

campsites

along

both

HOUSES:
No data. Probably never more than brush huts in most
cases.
LIVELIHOOD:
Hunting of deer, bison, and various small game; gathering of wild plant products; fishing indicated by presence of bone fishhooks and fish bones in sites.
Evidence of agriculture is lacking, but .is suggested
by the position of some semi-permanent villages on
fertile terrace soil; trade with agricultdral tribes to
the west, north, east, and perhaps Middle America
to the south, is fully evident in a variety of intrusive
potsherds.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery Types: Leon Plain found sparsely but widely.
Doss Red Ware (Kelley 1947 b) occurs rarely and
may be Huastecan trade pottery. Brushed and punciated utility ware similar in paste to Leon Plain occurs
rarely.
Temper: Usually heavily tempered with finelY crushed
bone.
Form: No complete vessels known, but some sherds
are from jars .with high, slightly flaring rim, bases
perhaps rounded or concoidal; bowls, shape unknown.
Decoration:Usually plain, sometimes surface well
polished On both bowls and jars; Brushing, scoring,
fingernail punctation are rare decorations. Polished

Central Area

bowl sherds occasionally have baked red
remnants of fugitive red wash.

115

film

or

OTHER ARTIFACTS OF CLAY:
No data.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Perdiz (principal diagnostic of Kelley’s
Toyah Focus), Scallorn (principal diagnostic of
Kelley’s Austin Focus), Fresno, Cliffton, Alba, Bonham, Young, and possibly Cuney.
Dart Points: Ensor, DarI, and probably Ellis.
Scrapers: Snub-nosed side and end scrapers; retouched flakes.
Spokeshaves.
Drills: Delicate shaft (often chipped on only one face),
small, usually with unworked base.
Knives: Diamond-shaped with four beveled edges;
triangular and leaf-shaped forms.
Choppers: Large and crudely chipped.
Gravers, sometimes combined with scraper on same
flake.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Edged manos; other having parallel sides, rounded ends
and both faces showing evidence of having been
used; large unshaped, water-worn quartzite pebbles
having only one face showing evidence of use.
Milling stones: Limestone and sandstone slabs with
round or oval depressions showing rotary motion.
Sandstone abrading stones or bones.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
No data.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
Notched bison ribs and deer metapodials.
Bone awls.
Deer-ulna and antler flaking tools.

Texas Archeological Society

116

Bone beads, cylindrical and usually made from birdleg bones.
Tabular-shaped objects cut from ribs of large animals.
Bone fishhooks.
Bone needles (?).
Possibly antler projectile points.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Oliva shell beads.
Pendants cut from wall of conch and mussel shells,
sometimes decorated with dots.
Mussel shell spoons and disk-shaped beads.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Hammerstones.
Pigments, especially yellow and red ochre.
P_;ctographs on walls of rockshelters.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Flexed burials, usually single, sometimes placed in
crude stone-lined pits; few or no burial offerings.
RELATIONS:
In the Brazos River valley there is evidence of contact
with both the Fulton and Gibson Aspects to .the east.
Projectile point types Alba, Ellis, and Bonham,
Copena knives, and potsherds of Alto and Sanders
types all indicate contact with Gibson Aspect. Fulton
Aspect potsherds, particularly from Frankston Focus,
have been found westward into the Colorado River
valley. Southwestern trade pottery occurs in the
Abilene area.
Marine shells suggest trade with coastal Indians.
Obsidian must have come from Mexico or New Mexico.
Arrow points of types Fresno, Perdiz, and Scallorn
shared with Rockport and Galveston Bay Foci of
coastal area; types Perdiz and Fresno with Bravo
Valley Aspect; type Perdiz with Frankston Focus of

Central Area

117

Fulton Aspect and Wylie Focus of north-central
area; types Scallorn, Fresno, Young and CIiffton with
Henrietta Focus in north-central area.
A conch-shell gorget typical of Spiro Focus in eastern
Oklahoma may belong to the Central Texas Aspect.
ESTIMATED AGE:
Kelley:
Jelks:

1200-1500 A. D.
800-1500 A. D.

Krieger: formerly about 1200-1500 A. D. but would now
place beginning somewhere between 500 and 1,000
SOURCES:
Jackson, 1938; Jelks, 1953; Kelley, 1947 a, 1947 b, 1947 c;
Krieger, 1946; Miller and Jelks, 1952.
HISTORIC STAGE
Few sites in central Texas can be definitely assigned to
the Historic Stage. At some of the Spanish missions native
artifacts of flint, bone, and shell have been found which can
be related to at least some of the Indians collected at these
missions. Otherwise, there is only one Historic occupational
site of consequence on record so far, the Stansbury Site in
Hil! County. This is probably the location of a Tehuacane
(Towakoni) village of the late 18th and early !9th centuries. In addition to European material, there are marked
differences between the native artifacts of Stansbury, the
missions, and the Central Texas Aspect sites. Typologically,
the Stansbury material may be more closely related to His~
~oric sites such as Spanish Fort on the Red River, and those
in northeastern Texas, than it is to any known prehistoric
complex in the same area. These Historic links with known
tribes are among the most serious gaps in the archaeology
of Texas, and should be one of the best problems for future
research.

