A SERIES OF EIGHTEEN INDIAN SKELETONS
EXCAVATED IN SHACKELFORD
COUNTY, TEXAS
ROBERT E. FOP,RESTER,

Je.

Located ten miles southwest of Albany, Shackelford
County, Texas, is an extensive surface site in which eighteen
skeletons were found. The area consists of rolling plains
dotted with small hills and mesas. It is situated just east
of the Albany Scarp which bounds the higher western plains.
Elevation is approximately 1500 feet above sea-level. A
prehistoric site, over one mile long and about three hundred
yards wide, is located on the north and west side of a small
stream known locally as the Salt Prong of Hubbard Creek,
(Figure 4, B). Normally, the locale is covered by mesquite
trees, prickly-pear cacti, pencil cacti, cat-claw brush, and
scrub grasses; however, this area was cleared in 1944. At
present, there are no natural springs or permanent waterholes within five miles.
The locale is well suited for fall and winter camps. It
is just off the high plains where there are bitter winter
winds; and the site probably afforded a constant water
supply. The presence of permanent water may be deduced
from two facts; first, that a large camp would probably be
situated close to an ample water supply~ and secondly, a
great number of fresh-water mussel-shells are present in
the ref~use, in too large a number to have been carried any
distance.
The soil, at least to a depth of five feet, is an unstratified
red-colored loess. The rocks on the near-by hills are all of a
compact lime type. About three to five inches of water
and wind deposited earth covered the site. This soil is now
eroding in many places. Burned limestone hearths abound
in the eroded areas, which also reveal fragmentary bones
and mussel shells, in addition to the common flint flakes.
Artifacts are rare in the site, but this is possibly due to extensive "pot-hunting." The few projectile points found are
of a great diversity of types, which could indicate oeeupa-

A Series o~ Eighteen Indian Skeletons Excavated

tion by successive waves of Indians.

133

Fauna of the area in-

cludes bison, two varieties of deer, bear, rabbit, skunk,
opossum, raccoon, prairie-dog, squirrel, badger, and a diversity of water fowl.
Of interest in this non-pottery area is a small sherd of
plain red ware. This sherd has not been identified, but
appears to be of a fairly late horizon.
At this site on the Salt ’Prong, four burial plots have
been excavated. These plots contain from one to nine
skeletons. Each skeleton is numbered with reference to the
order of excavation. Excavation was begun in July, 1938.
Burial Plot I, (Figure 4, C), was first detected by the presence of fiat rocks that had been raised from their normal
position by the blade, of a "bull-dozer." This .burial contained one adult male about thirty-five years old. The
individual was lying on the right side with the head in a
westerly direction. The burial was at a depth of approximately forty-five centimeters. The "bull-dozer" had so
shifted the rocks that the bones were disarranged from the
original burial position. One flat rock,. ~’ou~hly two feet
square, had been placed over the ches~’~region. L~rge and
small flat rocks were then thrown onto the flat ’slab of
rock until the ground level was reached.
:
Burial Plot II was located one hundred and forty-seven
fee.t west southwest of Burial Plot I, (Figure 4, C). It was
placed on to~p of a small elevation, onehundred yard.s w.est
of the Salt PrOng Branch. Several rocks on the surface
formed an oval five feet long and four feet wide, with the
long axis of the oval running east and west. Thirty-five
rocks were placed on the grave, each small enough to have
been carried from the stream-bed by one man without aid.°
Two large rocks were laid flat over the head and chest
region. The bones lay fifty cm. below the present surface.
The grave floor was flat, and was without a rock lining.
No ash or charcoal levels were found, although bits of charcoal were mixed throughout the grave fill. Fire traces were
noted on certain bones, notably the charred lower mandible

134

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

FIGURE 4

A Ser~es of Eighteen Indian Skeletons Excavated

of a child.

135

This charred mandible lay in the chest region of

Skeleton One, and was the only bone in the grave which was
badly charred; it was also the only bone of a child.

Two individuals were interred in this grave. Skeleton
One is a twenty year old male who was well articulated.
Position of the body was semi flexed on the right side, with
the head to the south. The fore-arms were crossed; the left
hand lay against the right cheek, and the right hand was
to the chin. A projectile point, three inches long (Figure
5, A. a) was found in situ directly above the proximal end
of the right femur, on a plane with the head and neck of the
greater trochanter. It was directly under the left ilium and
under the left femur. This position precludes the possibility of the point being a burial offering. Evidently this individual was shot in the right coccygeal region from the
rear.
Skeleton Two is an eighteen year old male. It was buried
at the same time as Skeleton One. The bones were completely disarticulated and scattered at random from the skull
to the pelvis of Skeleton One, mainly in the open space
between the flexed knees and the shoulders.
All of the long bones of Skeleton Two were present, but
many of the vertebrae, smaller ribs, and hand and foot bones
were missing. Found embedded in the coronoid fossa of the
right humerus was a second point, Figure 5, A, b). The tang
and one barb was broken, but both this and the point from
the groin of Skeleton One (Figure 5, A, a) appear to be
specimens of Ray’s Sand Dune culture.~
When the point was removed from the humerus, it was
1.
Ray, C. N.,
Section," BuLletin
1. ~V.. 12-15.

°’A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene
of t~e Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol.

FIGURE 4
A. Map of ShackeIford County, Texas.

B. Map of area surrounding site on Salt Prong of Hubbard Creek.
C. MaI~ giving distribution of carn~ and Burial Plot~.
D. Diagram of Burial Plot IIL

136

Tezas Archaeoh~.a~ a~d Paleonto~o~ca[ Society

found that a diagonal chip from the tip of the point was
missing and the chip was not in the bone. The absence of
the chip may be explained in two ways. First, that the point
was broken before use; or secondly, the point first struck
another object and was deflected, thus losing a chip.
The distal end of the right ulna was broken and had marks
on the outer side of the bone such as would be caused
by cutting with a stone implement. There were no corresponding marks on the interior of the ulna or on the
radius; thus eliminating the possibility of animal teeth
marks. This presents the possibility of taking a hand as
a war trophy.
Burial Plot III was found undisturbed approximately
one hundred and fifty yards north-east of Burial Plot I,
(Figure 4, A). This burial plot contained skeletons, buried
at different times (Figure 4, D). The area is roughly oval
in outline, being slightly wider at the east end. Dimensions
of the burial plot are fifty-four inches from north to south
and. seventy-five inches from east to west.
Skeleton One is an aged female. The body was placed
in a flexed position on the right side with the head orientt~l
to the west. The grave is~ sixty cm. below the present
surface.
Skeletons Two and Three are decomposed infants. Both
Were buried with Skeleton Four. Depth of this grave was
seventy-five cm.
Skeleton Four is an adult male. He was located directly
under Skeleton One; the head has an eastward orientation.
This individual had an exceptionally thick cranium. Under
the occipital bone of the skull of this skeleton was a burial
FIGURE 5

A. a. Projectile point similar to Sand Dune Culture.
b, Projectile point embedded in human humerus.
e. Projectile point.
B. ~n~rraved bone tube~ ~soeiated with Skeleton 1, Burial Plot IV.
C~ Shell pendan.t~ a. is c~nvex side of pendant, b. iv rever~e side of the ~ame
pendant.
D. Diagram of Burial Plot IV.
E. Bone implement a~ociatod with Skeleton 4, Burial Plot

A Series o] E~ghteen Indian, Skeletons Excavated

A

~

FIGURE

137

138

Texas Archaeological a~d Paleontological Societ~

offering of bone tools consisting of one deer antler tip
(Figure 5, E, g), three deer split radii (Figure 5, E, a, b,
and c), one unfinished awl (Figure 5, E, e), one polished deer
radius awl eight inches long (Figure 5, E, e), and one flaking tool from a deer ulna (Figure 5, E, f). These seven
items were bundled into a compact mass and were in a good
state of preservation. A broken projectile point was found
(Figure 5, A, c), which appears to fit into the Sand Dune
Culture also.
Skeleton Five appeared to be a slightly later burial. It
was marked off from the remainder of the grave by a vertical wall of two flat rocks (Plate 19, E). This is an adult
male, lying on the left side with the head to the south
in a tightly flexed position. Eight inches behind the skull
was a burial offering of five items. The offering consists
of two fresh water mussel shells, one laid inside the other,
two deer ulna tools, and one snake skeleton without a skull.
The snake skeleton had one hundred and seventy-four vertebrae, some giving the appearance of having been roasted.
Skeletons Six and Seven were infants who were buried at
the same level, four inches apart. Skeleton Six was in a
flexed position with the head to the northwest. The graves
were one-hundred and thirty-five cm. below the present
surface.
Skeleton Eight is a young female. The body position was
on the back with the head to the north-east The right hand
was across the flexed knees; the left arm was bent across
the chest, and the left hand was cupped about the right
elbow.
Burial Plot 1V is located about seventy-five yards northeast of Burial Plot III (Figure 4, C), and appeared from
PLATE 19
A.
B.
C.
tary.
D.

Occipital view of the skull of Skeleton 3. Burial Plot IV, showing the Inca bone.
Side view of the skull of Skeleton 3, Burial Plot IV.
Burial Plot IL Two adult male skeletons, one articulated and the other fragmenGrave orientation is to the south.
Burial Plot II showing the rocks covering the grave.

E. Burial plot III showing rocks covering graves.
F. Burial Plot III, Skelton :No. 6. An infant.

PLATE 19

A Series of Eighteen Indian Skeletons E~rcavated

141

the surface to be a number of single graves near one an~
other. Excavation revealed that it consisted of six skeletons in a small space, surrounded by a rock "fence" (Figure 5, D). This "fence" was buried approximately four
inches, although a few stones were evident on the surface. The burial plo~ is in the form of an oval nineteen feet
long and sixteen feet wide, the long axis runs east and
west. A "door" or unfinished gap six feet wide exists in
the south south-east side. The "fence" was built of a single
course of fiat limestone rocks, averaging one foot by eighteen inches by six inches in size. The rocks were placed
flat on the ground and end to end.
Skeleton One is a child. It had been buried before Skeleton Two. In the process of burying Skeleton Two, the
Child’s bones were disarticulated, and were found in the
grave fill of Skeleton Two. Intermingled with the bone
fragments of the child were the fragments of two slightly
curved tubes, engraved with geornetrical lines at each end
and banded at the center, Figure 5, B. Some wear or
polish was evident on the interior surface of each end of
the tubes. The size, shape, ornamentation, and wear of this
pair of bone tubes indicates that possibly they were the
handles of a large basket.
In the mathematical center of this oval was found Skeleton Two, at a depth of eighty-five cm. This adult female
was tightly flexed on the left side, with the left hand to the
face, and the head in the direction of the "door" in the
"fence." There were no artifacts associated with Skeleton
Two. A few limestone slabs were vertical against the walls
of the grave.
Skeleton Three, that of an adult male, lay three and onehalf feet west of Skeleton Two, at a depth of seventy-five
cm. It was flexed on the left side, with the right hand to
the face, and the head to the south. One artifact was
found; a notched and incised marine shell pendant (Figure
5, C, a and b). The small end of the pendant was touching
the sacrum, indicating of a burial offering which was drop-

142

Texas Archaeological and Paleontologica~ Society

ped .into the grave just prior to closing it. The skull ,of
Skeleton Three contains the Inca or interparietal bone, which
is large and very well defined from the occipital bone
(Plate 19, A).
Skeleton Four and Five were infants associated with
Skeleton Three of this burial group. They were placed
on the chest and pelvis of the adult male. Both infants had
their heads to the east, and were ina flexed,position:
Skeleton Six is a young female. It lay on the same
level with Skeleton. Three with the skull six inches south
of the skull of Skeleton Three. The. axis Of the skeleton was
north-east to southwest..The left arm was crossed over the
abdomen. Three or four inches west of the chin, just in
front of the right humerus, lay a shell pendant (Figure 5, C,
c). This pendant was made of a fresh water mussel shell
and had been broken at each end, after which the broken
edges, were smoothed and new holes drilled for cords. The
small end pointed toward the head, indicating that it was
W6rn with the wide end down.
Summary: There seems to be a correlation between this
site and the Sand Dune Culture as is evidenced by typological similarity of projectile points.
The group had trade relations with the coast as is indicated by the marine shell pendant.
The site seems to have been occupied for a long period
of time, but the frequency of occupation cannot be determined.
,Two individuals died unnatural deaths, presumably caused
by projectile points in the body.
All of the adult crania: were dolicocephalic, or long
headed, Chart 1.

A Series o~ Eighteen Indian Skeletons Excavated

:143

