I~zdian Pi~togra.phs and Petroglyphs in Panhandle

9

INDIAN PICTOGRAPHS AND PETROGLYPHS
IN THE PANHANDLE REGION OF TEXAS
BY FOP.REST

KIRKLAND~*

In these times when so much stress is being laid on evidence of
age, when so many archeologists are concentrating on work that
promises to shed light on the age of America’s oldest inhabitants,
and when the burden of so many archeo!ogical reports seems to be
the proof of great age, it may seem a bit unusual for one to continue year after year working and reporting on a project that deals
chiefly with comparatively recent cuhures and, so far, has been
useful only in dating historic time. The study which the writer
and his wife have been making of Texas Indian pictographs is just
such a project.I
The two weeks we spent last summer (1941) in the Panhandle
region was our seventh vacation devoted to the project. Through
the splendid cooperation of Floyd V. Studer of Amarillo, Curator
of Archeology and Paleontology at the Panhandle Plains Museum
at Canyon, and the owners and foremen of the ranches on which
we worked, we were able to visit and copy every legible picture at
eleven sites in the region--every known site with the exception of
two or three which contain only a few unimportant designs. Washed
out bridges and roads prevented our reaching these.
The object of this paper is to describe and reproduce the best
examples of the Panhandle Indian pictures. And although none
of the~ pictures date back more than a few hundred years at most,
the great majority being historic, we believe they furnish interesting and valuable information about certain Indian tribes that
once inhabited the state--information that is well worth collecting and reporting now while it is still available.

The soft sand-

stone on which the designs were painted or carved is already beginning to disintegrate and destroy this crude but interesting record
left by the Indians.
The Panhandle pictures are chiefly petroglyphs- carved,
scratched, or pecked into the rocks. They are of two apparently
1.
Forrest Kirkland; Texas
1937, 1938, 1.939, 1940, 1941.
*Deceased, See Obituaries.

Archeological

and

Paleontological

Society

Bulletins,

10

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

unrelated types, evidently representing different cultures and, no
doubt, are widely separated in time. One type, (Plate 3, No. 3)
found at only two sites, consists of crude human and animal figures
and human tracks coarsely pecked into the exposed surface of hard
limestone boulders. The other type found at eight sites consists
of human and animal representations and various kinds of marks
and designs ca.r~,ed into soft sandstone or lightly scratched on the
sandstone surfaces. These petroglyphs are found on the protected
walls of cliffs and sandstone blocks or in small shelters. Although
there are differences in the subject matter at several sites the similarity of the work indicated that it was produced by related Indians
or tribes.
Pictographs were found at only two sites. A highly conventionalized representation of a man, five feet high, holding a spear in
his right hand (Plate 4, No. 6), and four positive hand prints, all
in dim red paint, were all that remained at one site in Tule Canyon.
Faint indications of another man holding a bow could be made out
on an exposed wall of the cliff. This was also in red. There is
little doubt that this unimportant group is comparatively recent.
The ~ther pictograph site which also contains many petroglyphs
is on a small tributary of the Canadian River in a rock shelter at
Rocky Dell about six miles northwest of Adrian. This is the largest
and best known group of pictures in the Panhandle (Plate 1; Nos. 1,
2, 3). It was reported as far back as 1853 and was described in
Mallery’s classic monograph on American Pictographs in 1880.
Jackson gives an excellent review of its history in his "Picture
Writing of Texas Indians."
The outstanding picture at the site is that of a strange animal
13 ft. long, with horns, a vicious mouth, and a forked tail, (Plate
1; No. 1). It faces a smaller animal with long ears and tail and
what appears to be an ~nthropomorphic man 4 ft. tall. This
strange animal is said to represent the plumed serpent, guardian
of the water--a myth of the Pueblos; who were in New Mexico a
PLATE 1
PIGTOGRAI~HS AT ROCKY DELL NEAR ADRIAN
NOS. 1 and 2 are continuous on the back wall. No. 3 is directly
under No. 2. Much damage had been done to pictographs by chalking.
The most interesting ~igure--the plumed serpent--guardian of the
water. No. 3, with man on horse, shows European influence.

Plate

Indian Pic~ographs and Petroglyphs in Panhandle

little more than a hundred miles to the west.

13

This may be true

since Pueblo potsherds have been found at the site, but the writer
has found no proof of the claim.

There are several positive hand-

prints in white, red, and black, and numerous other smaller pictures
of animals and men at the site. The colors used were red, black,
yellow, and white. Unfortunately the principal designs have been
chalked so heavily that it was difficult to make accurate copies.
Some antiquity has been claimed for these pictographs, but it should
be noted that one of the dimmest groups at the site shows a buffalo
hunt with a man riding a horse, (Plate 1; No. 3). This is the only
pictograph at the site showing white influence, but it is unmistakable
evidence that at least part of the designs are comparatively recent.
The many petroglyphs at the site are either sharply incised into or
lightly scratched on the shelter wall or floor and are in poor state
of preservation. They consist of many aimless lines, simple geometrical designs (Plate 2; Nos. 1, 4), and human and animal representations, (Plate 2; Nos. 5, 6, 7).

The dozen or more outlines

of sandals on the shelter floor are unique, (Plate 2; Nos. 1, 2, 3,
5).

No other such designs were found in the Panhandle, nor have

we found similar designs anywhere else in Texas.
tepees were only found at this site, (Plate 2; Nos. 2, 8).

Pictures of
The horse-

back rider and the church date the work as historic, (Plate 2; No. 2).
No similarity between the pictographs and petroglyphs at the site
could be recognized that even suggested that they were made by
the same Indians. The fact that similar petroglyphs were found at
seven other sites nearby containing no pictographs leads to the
conclusion that they were not made by the same Indians.

The site

was probably a buffalo hunting camp visited at different times by
various tribes wtfich would easily account for the two radically
different types of work, even since historic time.
The next site of importance in the Panhandle is on Mujeres
Creek about 15 miles west of Rocky Dell.

It contains only petro-

glyphs which are both scratched and carved into the protected surface of a sandstone bluff above the creek.

There is a narrow

shelf of earth at the base of the cliff which afforded a small partially protected camping space. The pictures are scattered along
the bluff for about 50 feet and extend from 5 ft. above the ground

14

Texa~ Araheological and Paleontological Society

to about 12 ft. The scratched designs were probably never very
clear; but the carved pictures are still in good condition.
An interesting feature was first noticed at this site---the scraping
off of the rock within certain pictures to give them a smooth surface. The grooved outline of the picture, however, was not scraped
away, (Plate 3; Nos. 1, 2). In two cases smaller petroglyphs were
carved on this smooth surface within the large picture (Plate 3;
No. 2), proving that the surfaces were ~raped away by Indians
and not by later white visitors who have carved names, initials, and
dates on most of the smoothed areas as well as on other parts of
the diff.
The twenty or more buffalo pictures at this site average about
2 ft. long and are similar to those at three other sites along the
Canadian River, but are more expertly done, (Plate 3; No. 2). The
interesting little group or story telling pictures are almost always the
work of late historic nomads. This is confirmed here by the large
number of horse pictures, (Plate 3; No. 1). The numerous pictures
of guns definitely date the site as very recent, perhaps, just before
the Indians were driven out of the district.
The group of war implements carved into the cliff above the
other petroglyphs and more than 10 ft. above the ground is the most
interesting and detailed group of such weapons yet discovered in

PLATE 2
P}~I~OGLYPHS AT ROCKY DELL
They show no evidence of having been made by the same Indians
that made the picto~raphs. Nos. I, 4, show aimless lines and simple
geometrical designs. Nos. 5, 6, 7, human and animal representations.
Nos. 2, 8, pictures of tepees found only at this site. Nos. I, 2, 3, 5,
show outline of sandals which we found no other place in the Panhandle, nor anywhere else in Texas.

PLATE 3
AT ~UJERES CREEK
Nos. 1, 2. Petroglyphs at Alibates Creek house ruins, No. 3.
Nos. 1, 2, contained petroglyphs with smooth surfaces, first noticed
here. Group of war implements, No. 2, most interesting and detailed
group yet found in Texas. No. 1, shows deeply carved picture of man
wearing robe, which was carefully painted red after it was carved.
First painted petroglyph we had found. No other color at site.
No. 3, crude pictures of man, turtles, headless animal and exaggerated human tracks pecked into the top surface of hard limestone
boulders. It has been suggested that the petroglyphs may be connected with the house ruins.
PETRO~YPHS

Plate 2

Plate 3

Indian Pictographs and Petroglyphs in Panhandle

19

Texas, (Plate 3; No. 2). It consists of three bows, thirteen arrows,
three war clubs, and one gun; most of which are decorated with
feathers or other ornaments. The average length of these weapons
is 20 inches.
Another picture at this site is unique among the petroglyphs we
have copied in Texas.

It is a deeply carved picture of a man about

nine inches high wearing a robe of some sort. The unusual thing
is that it was carefully painted red after it was carved, (Plate 3;
No. 1).

No other color of any kind was found at the site.

We discovered a small petroglyph site on rocks at the end of a
small mesa in front of the ranch house at Browns Camp on the
Matador Ranch.
Creek site.

This site is only three miles west of the Mujeres

A good spring which now furnishes water for Browns

Camp runs from beneath the mesa cap rock. The petroglyphs which
belong to the latc historic period are on exposed or poorly protected rocks and although they were originally carved deep into
the rocks they are now quite dim, (Plate 4; No. 4).

If lightly

scratched designs were ever made at this site, they are completely
gone now.
\VC’e copied the pictures at two more sites on the Matador Ranch.
The.,," are about three miles west of the Dipping Vat Camp which
is twelve miles northwest of Adrian.

One site is on an isolated

mass of soft gray sandstone in a valley near the mouth of Aqua
Piedro Creek. The few deeply cut Indian pictures can hardly be
distinguished from names, dates, and cattle brands carved on the
same surfacd by cow hands.

They are unquestionably very recent

and are unimportant.
The other site is on a red sandstone bluff on the bank of Aqua
Piedro Creek.

It contains ~veral deep cut designs including two

buffalo pictures more than five feet long (Plate 5; Nos. 9, 10), and
a few small lightly scratched pictures of men and horses. The pictures are similar to those at Mujeres Creek but more crudely executed.

There are two more groups of these late historic petroglyphs on
the north side of the Canadian River on the Bivens Ranch, situated
about ten miles west of the U. S. Highway 287 crossing. One is at
Chimney Rock where the Panhandle Plains Museum has built a substantial field house and begun excavating an extensive group of

2O

Texa# Archeological and Paleon$o~ogical Society

house ruins between the Chimney Rock and the end of the mesa.
The petroglyphs are on the bluff at the end of the mesa and on the
side of Chimney Rock itself. Although tbey are badly weathered
and dim and contain no horses or other definite proof of white
contact, they resemble the other late historic pictures so closely that
we feel sure they belong in that period, (Plate 5; Nos. 7, 8).
It does not seem likely that even deep carved lines in the soft
sandstone could have survived the six or seven centuries necessary
to connect them with th~ ruins at the foot of the cliff.
A few of the pictures at this site show more realistic human form
than is usual for petroglyphs, (Plate 5; Nos. 11, 12). They resemble the designs painted on historic buffalo robes and on hiStoric pictographic records like the autobiographies of Sitting Bull.
One of these figures has its surface scraped away like the designs
at Mujeres Creek, suggesting a similar date for the work. Two or
three other pictures of men at the site which we judged to be the
work of white men may actually have been made by these very late
Indians.
About three miles east of Chimney Rock on the end of a small
mesa near the mouth of Lehey Creek is the other late historic petroglyph site. It contains both scratched and carved pictures of animals and men, (Plate 5; Nos. 13, 14). The projectile point pictures at this site are similar to those found at many other late sites
in various parts of Texas.
The eighth and last late historic petroglyph site which we studied
in the Panhandle is on the north rim of the Palo Duro Cauyon a
short way from the Newton Harrell Ranch house, which is located
seventeen miles south of Washburn. The designs are carved and
scratched on the floor of a small shelter in the bank of a spring
creek. The decorations on the men’s clothing are of more than
ordinary interest and the "thunder bird" reminds one of the promi-

PLATE 4
No. 4, petroglyphs at Brown’s Camp west of the Mujeres Creek
site. No. 5, designs carved and scratched on floor of small shelter.
The decorations on the men’s clothing are of more than ordinary
terest and the "thunder bird" reminds one of the prominent birds at
Meyers Springs, Terrell County. No. 6, a highly conventionalized
pictograph of a man in red, in Tule Canyon near Tulia, Texas.

Plate 4

Indian Pictographs and Petroglyphs in Panhandle

23

nent painted birdsa at Meyers Springs in Terrell County, (Plate
4; No. 5).
We found an entirely different type of petroglyphs on Alibates
Creek, three rhiles from the Canadian River only a few yards from
the well known Alibates Creek house ruins, forty miles north of
Amarillo. The crude pictures were roughly pecked into the top
surfaces of hard limestone boulders. They consisted of a man, two
turtles, a headless animal, and two exaggerated human tracks. On
the same boulders and on others nearby were numerous small cupshaped depressions apparently small mortars not related to the pictu:res in any way. The largest track measures 24 in. long: The
designs are now so badly weathered that they are not easily made
out, (Plate 3; No. 3).
The house ruins, situated only a few yards away, have been carefully excavated and approximately dated by intrusive pottery from
New Mexico at 1200 or 1300 A.D. It has been suggested that the
petroglyphs and the ruins are the work of the same people, which
may be the case, since the rocks are sufficiently hard to have retained the impressions for a long time and the designs show signs
of considerable age; but unfortunately no evidence of any kind
could be found to prove the association.
We investigated another site near.the Gulf Camp, five miles south
of Stinnett, which was reported to have contained eight human
tracks pecked into the top of boulders. We found that all of the
boulders containing the tracks had been removed and divided between several men working at the refinery. We Were able to locate
only one of the rocks which contained two tracks. The stone and
workmanship was similar to that at Alibates Creek. However, the
tracks--one adult and one child--were actual size and so realistically done that one can readily understand why they were first
reported as fossil human tracks,~ (Plate 3; No. 4). An effort should
be made to locate more of these interesting petroglyphs to obtain
more information about the culture.
The above report accounts for every site zeported to us in the
Panhandle region except a pictograph site containing two or three
dim pictures in the Palo Duro Canyon about two miles east of the
2,
Kirkland, 1937, Plate 19; Nos. 1, 3.
*Webb, W. E., I872.

Texa~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

24

Newton Harrell ranch house, a petroglyph site containing three
pictures of buffalos three miles west of Brown Camp on the Matador
Ranch, and a site in Hansford County about fifteen miles west of
Gruver. There are no doubt, other sites in the district not yet discovered or reported but very likely they will fall into one of the
three types discussed above.
REFERENCES CITED
Jackson, A. T., 1938. Picture Writing of Texas Indians. Anthropological Papers, Volume II, The University of Texas, Austin.
Mallery, Garrick, 1882-83. Pictographs of the North American
lndiazrs. Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology.
Ewers, John Canfield, 1939. Plains Indian Paintings. Plates 17,
22, 23, 28.
Webb, W. E., 1872. Bu]]alo Land.
Kirk|and, Forrest, 1937. Plate 19; Nos. 1, 3. A Study of Indian
Pictures in Texas. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Bulletin, Volume 9.
1938. .4 Description of Texas P~tographs. Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Volume 10.
1939.
Texas.

lndian Pictures in the Dry Shelters o] Val Verde County,
Texas Archeologica! and Paleontological Society Bulletin,

Volume 11.

!940. Pictographs of lrutian Masks at Hueco Tanks. Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, ¥olume 12.
1941. Petroglyphs of the .4bilene District. Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Volume 13.
PLATE 5
pETROGLYPHS AT AQUA PIEDRO CREEK, ]V~ATADOR RANCH; CHIMNEY
ROCK, BIVINS RANCH; LEHEY CRI3EK, NEAR THE CANADIAN

Nos. 7 and 8 resemble other late historic petroglyphs and probably
belong to the same period. Nos. 9 and 10, buffalo pictures more than
five feet long. Nos. 11 and 12, show more realistic human form than
is usual for petroglyphs. Nos. 13 and 14, scratched and carved pictures at mouth of Lehey Creek.

()

Plate 5

