Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

148

NF.WJS NOTES AND t~DITORIALS
NO BULLETIN PRINTED IN 1944
There was no Bulletin of the Society printed in 1944, for the
very good reason that too few articles of any kind were received by
the Editor to enable the Society to publish a book during that calendar year.

By January, 19~15, enough material was on hand to make

a small book, and the Society intended to issue this during the spring
of 19~15. When the time allotted to do the Bulletin editing arrived,
all of the printing company’s printers, except one, were engaged in
War activities. There was a shortage of civilian workmen everywhere at that time. During the summer of 194.,5 enough additional
good material was ~nt in to insure the publication of a Bulletin
of a quality up to" the standards of the organization. The Society’s
finances never have been in better condition, and sufficient resources
are on hand for payment of the costs of larger books, if enough
good articles could be obtained. If an article details some essentially sound and constructive work, and has either good photographic records or. black ink drawings as illustrations, even though
it may be the work of an untrained writer, it can be made to fit
after some alterations of text are made. The Editor does not have
the time available, however, to rewrite indifferently written articles.
If any of the members know ’of unpublished articles which meet
the Society’s standards, the Editor would like to have the opportunity to read them. The Society pays no salaries to its officers,
nor does it pay for manuscripts other than alloting a few copies
to the writer of each article. Of most Bulletin issues, only three
hundred copies have been printed, and no year’s issue has exceeded four hundred copies. Permanent files of these books are
in the possession of most of the great museums and university
libraries of America, and those of some foreign countries. When
a member’s book has been read, and then provided he does not plan
to retain it, the copy shou.ld be donated to a reputable .scientific
library as the~ volumes come in the category of rare books, even
when newly printed.

The Bulletins are the main foundation literature records of the
original archeological research done in Texas and some adjoining

News Notes and EditoriaIs

149

states during the past eighteen years, and as such should not be
carelessly destroyht.
This volume of the Bulletin will be sent to all of those who paid
dues in either 19.’~-~ or 1945, and only one dues payment of $3.00
will be collected for those two years, and this volume is numbered
the sixteenth in the series of annual bulletins.

The Society prefers

to print articles on original research, rather than compilations
of work already done, and to use original photo’graphs and drawings
wherever possible, but it has been found advisable to reprint two
pages of pictures in connection with Dr. Roberts article which were
used in the preliminary report of the site in 1943.
CYRUS N. RAY, Editor.

ORGANIZATION OF THE SHREVEPORT SOCIETY
FOR NATURE STUDY
The Shreveport Society for Nature Study was organized in May,
1945, with an initial membership of approximately fifty individuals.
A Board of Directors consisting of twelve members was elected to
conduct the affairs of the Society until the first annual meeting in
September, 1945, and was empowered to submit a constitution and
by-laws at this meeting. Temporary officers chosen by the Board
were as follows: Chairman, Dr. Clarence H. Webb; Vice-Chairman,
William C. Spooner; Secretary, W. Brainerd Wright, all of Shreveport, Louisiana.
This society has for its purposes the study of any field of natural
science, die establishment and maintenance of museum collections
and exhibits, and the furthering, by all educational means, of interest and knowledge concerning the natural sciences and resources
of the area. Membership in the society is open to al! interested
persons in the Tri-State area of North Louisiana, East Texas, and
South Arkansas. The organization, including its exhibits, library
and properties, will be hound in the Louisiana State Exhibit Building on the State Fair Grounds at Shreveport, Louisiana. Special
educational memberships will be established and it is planned to
foster a Junior Society to encourage interest and participation of
faculties and students of the various schools and colleges of the area.

150

Ten:as A~’cheologic#d a~d Paleontological Soc~e~1]

Several preliminary meetings were held, at the first of which a
distinguished guest, Dr. Kirk Bryan of Harvard University, encour.
aged the formation of the society. He spoke flatteringly of the
splendid work done by the Texas Archeological and PaleontoIogical
Society as an example of the effectiveness of a properly organized
group.
Two projects in natural science fields are now engaging the interests of the society. One of the charter members, Mr. Alfred
Glassell of Shreveport, who is also president of "Ducks Unlimited,"
is collecting a comprehensive group of waterfowl from the coastal
marshes. The archeological group, with the technical assistance of
Curator Brainerd Wright, is preparing a panoramic display of the
Indian cultures of Louisiana, arranging the artifacts, with explana.
tory notes and drawings, by culture periods from the earliest Folsom.
Yuma to the historic Caddo, Tunica and Chitimacha.
Any visitors to Shreveport who are interested in natural sciences
are invited to visit the State Exhibit Building and to contact Curator
Wright or the other officers of the society.
C. H. WEBB, M. D.
The Children’s Clinic,
Shreveport, -Louisiana.

CONCERNING THE CONTRIBUTORS
There are eight main articles in this issue of the Bulletin and of
these the writers of only three are professionally engaged in either
archeological or anthropological work, the others derive their incomes from different professions and have only amateur status in
archeology, however, Mr. Carl Chelf was formerly connected with
the Texas Memorial Museum at Austin, Texas, and Mr. R. K. Harris
with the Halt of State, Dallas, Texas, but both are now otherwise
engaged.
Three physicians and s~urgeons of two different schools of medical
practice have written articles for this issue, covering interests in
geology, paleontology, anthropology, and archeology. C.H. Webb,
M. D., of Shreveport, Louisiana, and J. L. Hodges, M. D., and

151

News Notes and Editorials

Mrs. Hodges, of Bismarck, Arkansas, have written very scholarly
articles concerning the Caddoan remains of their respective states.
This is in accordance with the old Southern tradition that a physiclan’s education eminently fitted him to appreciate seientlfie and
scholarly hobbies.

It would be far better for the progress of the

world, and for the welfare of their patients if more of the moderr~
doctors cultivated an interest in hobbies connected with seiertce and
culture.

A physician’s education gives him at least a reading

knowledge of many different sciences, each of which opens gates
into a multitude of by-paths which can be followed.

One of the

most fascinating of all of these to a doctor is physical anthropology,
which simply expands his knowledge of modern human anatomy,
and attempts to explain why our bones are as they are, and how
they got that way.

Drs. Stewart and Shapiro who have reports in

this Bulletin are such anthropology experts.

Dr. Shapiro is con-

netted with the American Museum of Natural History,. in New
York, and Dr. Stewart with the Smithsonian Institution.

The ordi-

nary doctor who has to devote most of his time to his vocation perhaps may never get to be rated as an expert on prehistoric physical
anthropology, but he nevertheless can enjoy many thrilling moments
digging up ancient anan’s remains and then digging out the secrets of
the beetle browed skulls which he finds.
l)r. Ales Hrdlicka of the Smithsonian Institution, Dr. Robert
Broom of South Africa, and Sir Arthur Keith were all first
trained as physicians and surgeons, and the latter two practiced.
Dr. Charles H. Mayo, St., was a member of this Society for
many years before his death, and often wrote letters to dae Society’s
officers commending the work.
In one of these letters he stated
d~at every mat~ would live longer and be happier if he had one, or
better, two hobbies, of a nature different from what he did to earn
his living.
Prof. Alex Krieger of Texas University has written a very much
needed article on exactness in terminology. There perhaps is no
professional or amateur group so careless and inexact in their terminology as archeologists, and the national journal contributors and
editors are as inexact in expression as the amateur, if not worse.

152

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

This Editor once had some comments to make on the subject in
The American Antiquity Quarterly.

*Writers in scientific publica-

tions should beware of the inaccurate socalled English terminology
of newspapers. It seems that many newspaper writers never consult a dictionary for exact word meanings, but flounder around
either in localisms or in a special jargon of their own; The purpose of writing is to be understood by the greatest number of readers,
and to the extent local slang phrases, or other such forms o[ uncommort speech are used, by that much one limits reader understanding to the areas where such provincialisms arc current. Scientific writing especially is likely to be read on ~vcral continents
where different English dialects are used. To be understood generally one should u~ terms defined in some dictionary of the English
language and primary definitions wherever possible (unless it is a
question of naming newly discovered objects). Preferably an Englishman should use English works of reference and an American
writer the standard dictionaries of his own country, and then one can
determine his probable meaning.

It might be in order to list here

some characteristically inaccurate terminology used by archeologists
in articles printed in our leading national journals. We there learn
that skeletons are "accompanied" by such inanimate objects as beads,
axes, and pottery, and also that John Smith "recovered" flint kniv~,
arrow heads, and scrapers, which perhaps were two thousand years
old. If John Smith is of Indian ancestry and "recovered" some of
his patrimony, then perhaps the term might be correct, but if he is
European in ancestry, it might be difficult to prove that his ancestors
lost the artifacts which he "recovered." Again the word "possible"
is no substitute where probable is intended, according to any available dictionary. Ignorance in high places is also no substitute for a
d,~ctionary. A French kiug’s ignorance coupled with high office,
served to create and to perpetuate on down into modern times, an
error in the form of the Roman numeral four on clock faces. Another

*Cyrus N. Ray, Accuracy in Terminology, Correspondence, American Antiquity Quarterly, Society for American Archeology,
January, 1936. It would seem that this article was not altogether
appreciated in some quarters, because some one who failed to sign,
appended some unusual, partial definitions from far down the column, (not primary definitions), to the end of my correspondence.
If a definition is quoted on this comment, let us hope that it wil!
not be tailored to fit, that it is a primary definition, and a!l of that

definition.

News Notes and Editorials
example from the decadent era after World War I
in English of a terminological abortion, which
promptly buried, in the term "normalcy." There
in English dictionaries to express this idea, but

153

was the embalming
should have been
are adequate terms
immediately after-

ward all of the newspapers blossomed forth with a nauseous superfluity of "normalcy."
But newspaper and radio carelessness should have no part in
scientific writing. Fortunately primary definition dictionary English
has about the same meaning everywhere, regardless of which end
a word the accent is placed upon by the inhabitants of different regions. There is one American news magazine which picks unusual,
obscure, or obsolete words out of the dictionary and scatters them
lavishly through its pages for a time. There is no good reason why
these should be used in scientific writing when more generally used
words of the same meaning are available. Such words are as grass,
they spring up today and are gone tomorrow.
Another tendency in some archeological writing is to an overuse
of quotation marks on questionable words which the writer seeks
to use, but yet wishes to disavow responsibility for. If the word
or phrase is quoted from another this is alright, but if not, and
a paper is too thickly starred with unnecessary quotation marks, the
reader is given the idea that the writer’s attitude is too apologetic.
The paper of Mr. R. K. Harris is a short but interesting description
of some very unusual bone tools. In April, while in Dallas, Texas,
to address the Texas Geographic Society, the Editor inspected these
very large bone artifacts at the home of Mr. Hhrris, where he has
fitted up a very interesting private museum collection.
Mr. Carl Chelf is now a man of ~nature years, but many years
ago’ when the Editor first met him he was an enthusiastic boy collector of arrow heads, aged twelve. Mr. Chelf has continued his
valuable work since then. Much research still needs doing on questions concerning the atlatl, the spear, and the bow and arrow.
Mr. A. H. Witte is an amateur archeologist like many of
and has done some good work both in the field of prehistoric
archeology, and in the study of a fam6us historical site of his
region.--C. N. R.

