38

Texa~ Arckeological and PaYeontological Society

EVIDENCE OF EUROPEAN INFLUENCE IN
THE PICTOGRAPHS OF WEST TEXAS
BY VICTOR J. SMITH

I.

Representations o] Shelter

Man has always been occupied with problems of food, shelter,
clothing, and combat. It is to be expected that the things in which
his interest centered would form the motifs for most of his efforts in
the field of art. Two other factors, however, probably influenced
his selection of petroglyph and pictograph studies. These are the
ego of man sho~m in his efforts to record events reflecting credit
upon himself, and of magic, by which some charm or extra power
is derived. It seems true that these last two factors were of great
influence since an examination of thousands of recorded primitive
drawings yield so many records of warfare, and the hunt, as evidenced by animals or hunting scenes. Relatively few drawings indicate articles of clothing since little distinctive apparel was worn
which could be described within the narrow limitations of rock inscription or painting. It is of some interest, however, to note that
here and there among early inscriptions and drawings are to be
found conventionalized building or shelter forms. This is to be
expected in the Southwest since its occupation by the Spaniards
developed the distinctive type of architecture represented by the
Missions. The interesting fashion in which the Indian artist represented this massive outline, the window openings, roofs, and the
surmounted cross are illustrated in drawings accompanying this
article.
It is important to note that petroglyphs and pictographs generally fall into roughly classified groups as follows:
1. Representations of events, people, situations, or objects, possibly crudely drawn, but intended to show the object or the events
exactly as the artist observed them.
2. Drawings which include symbolism or the representation of
an idea rather than the actual event or object. We may also credit
certain areas of the Old World as well as some of the tropical areas

PLATE 8
Deco~’ative and conventionalized forms, Chalk Draw, Brewster County. Six shelter units are shown in a row with indicated lodge of the
medicine man or chief.

Evidence of European Influence in Pictogra.phs

41

of the New World with taking the next great culture step and using
pictures for the purpose of representing the sound of syllables or
letters, but it is with the items 1 and 2 above that our discussion is
now centered with respect to the purpose of this paper, i. e., to point
out the use of pictograph representations and conventionalization of
building forms (shelter) among the Indian drawings of West Texas.
Such representations of shelter have appeared among some of the
oldest records of this form of art. Frobineus and Fox2 report rock
engravings representing ancient pile dwellings from the Camonica
Valley of Northern Italy. Crediting these drawings to the Iron
Age they report, "Of particular interest are the frequently recurring pictures of pile dwellings with gable, cupola, or barrel roofs.
Similar structures with gable roofs often topped with phallic symbols are still built by the peasants of Asturias and Galicia in Northwestern Spain who use them as granaries."
In Mallery’s extensive report5 concerning picture-writing there
appear enough shelter representations to indicate that the practice
was not uncommon among the American Indians generally. For
example, he reproduces records of authentic conventionalizations of
the medicine lodge, the lodge of the spirit, the grand medicine lodge,
the trading store, lodges, lodges occupied by girls, agency houses,
dwellings, earth lodges, the tipi, the adobe house, etc. Some of these
drawings are at once to be recognized to be crude but clear representations of log construction, smoking chimneys, etc. Many, on
the other hand, are highly conventionalized from long use, the
meaning of which would not likely be known except by means of the
early and careful type of research and record presented by Mallery.
Reference to the types of shelter or dwellings among North American picture-writing recorded by Mallery (Plateel) will indicate the
similarity of those he observed to many of the West Texas drawings. The exact meaning of the latter has long been lost in obscurity and can now be only a matter of interpretation of the ev.idence and careful comparison with known translations. Other West
Texas forms merge into reasonably definite pictures and are easily
identified as structures of the Spanish Mission type.
My first opportunity to record a conventionalized shelter among
the pictographs was in t921, when Dr. R. A. Smdhalter and myself
made a reconnaisance trip into southern Brewster County. A small

42

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

limestone cliff in Chalk Draw yielded an interesting group of geometrical forms (Plate 8), some decorative and others indicating
conventionalization such as symbols for lightning or for water.

Of

most interest, however, was a row of six lodges, one of which Was
evidently of more importance as if occupied by the leader of the
group. Here, as elsewhere, the main lodge was identified by an
extra rectangular decoration or symbol.

These pictographs, as well

as all others reported from Texas in this paper, were drawn with
red pigments or cinnabar red.

It is to be remembered that Brewster

County is still extensively mined for cinnabar ore (mercury) and
there seems to be no doubt but that this basic pigment was extensively sought after, traded, and highly prized by the Indians. Jack:
son3 in his comprehensive study of Texas pictographs reports almost
this same symbol from Presidio County, which is a short distance
to the West in the Big Bend.

Students interested in a broad survey

of Texas pictographs should by all means consult Mr. Jackson’s valuable contribution.

Other conventionalized drawings in West Texas are likely to
represent temporary dwellings as a series of circles. Research has
indicated this at a number of places, prominently so at Rock Circle
Village in Brewster County. In areas where it was difficult to drive
stakes, stones were nsed to weight down the sides of circular shelters,
hence a series of circles were drawn to represent such a village site.
Other more conventionalized drawings with a similar probable meaning are of rectangular and irregular forms.
Matlery very properly points out the distinctions between the
types of lodges constructed by different tribal groups and records
the symbolism used to distinguish these different types among the
pictographs. He also calls attention to the niceties of interpretation
according to arrangement and the position of elements on a drawing,
if confusion is to be avoided in their solution.
Six reproductions to exact scale in my pictograph collection group
themselves somewhat together as being comparable in size, color,
PLATE 9
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

1. Point o~ the Rocks, Jef~ Dgvis County.
2. Ajua Frio, Brews~er County.
3. Paint Rock, Concho County.
4, 5 and 6. Three units from l~Ieyers Springs, Terrell County.

Plate .~

Evidence of European Influence in Pic~ographs

45

and subject matter, though they are widely scattered geographically.
These are Mission building forms and are illustrated in Plate 9,
Figures 1 to 6;

Figure 1 was copied at the Point of the Rocks

Ranch, near Skillman Grove

in Jeff Davis County (Location 20,

1921) in an overhanging shelter which contained several dim paintings. A hand and arm with star could be recognized as well as the
24 inch wide mission with cross as represented in the illustration.
This was a line drawing and probably could have been drawn with
crayon.

Figure 2 was found on a boulder at the foot of Ajua Frio

Bluff in Brewster County (Location 22, 1921).

This drawing is

smaller in area individually but more massive in effect and is surrounded by correlated and adjacent designs of some interest.

At

Ajua Frio a group of horses and riders suggest other European influences which are altogether quite rare in West Texas generally
with the exception of the Meyers Springs group in the Eastern portion of the Trans-Pecos.

At Meyers’ Springs there are numbers of

priests bearing the cross, stage coach, horses, guns, and other evidence of European influence.7

The third figure was sketched and

photographed at Paint Rock (Location 79, 1924), Texas, by permission of Judge O. L. Sims.

Added interest is centered in the

double roof area (each with a cross) and in the row of nine conventionalized window openings. In this, as well as in many other
cases pointed out by Kirkland,z~ there is much to be considered with
respect to the art of simplified design among the pictographs as
well as items of balance, arrangement of mass, and movement. Figure 4 embodies the idea of an interesting conventionalization representing people entering the church (a series of dots). It is probable, however, this may intend to represent the idea of a center aisle
leading to the altar, since the line wall areas enclose the "footsteps."
Most of the missions did have a walled area to the front of the
structure, hence our thought of footsteps represented in a manner
similar to the indication of horses traveling by a series of "horseshoe" tracks.
It is generally conceded that the time and effort of the artist in
the production of pictographs were not the result of idle scrawling6
as many of them were high out of reach and their production difficult.

It may, therefore, indicate that the recurrence of the cross

on structures could be the result of some belief in the power of the

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

46

white man’s religion and that in other cases the thought of the tepee
or other shelter held a meaning somewhat comparable to our thoughts
of "home" today.
West Texas Historical and Scientific Society Museum
Alpine, Texas.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Campbell, Floy, Alphabets in the Making, School Arts Magazine, Vol. XII, No. 7, 1913.
2. Frobenius and Fox, Prehistoric Rock Pictures in Europe and
A]rica, Museum of Modern Art, New York, 1937.
3. Jackson, A. T., Picture.Writing o] Texa.~ Indians, Archeological Papers, Vol. II, University of Texas, 1938.
4. Kirkland, Forrest, A Description o] Texas Pictographs, Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Bulletin No. 10, Abilene,
1938.
5. Mallery, Garrick, Bureau of Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, Tenth Annual Report, 1893.
6. Smith, Victor J., Indian Pictographs oJ the Big Bend in Texas,
Texas Folk-Lore Society, Publication Numbe~ II, 1923.
7.

Early Spanish Exploration in the Big Bend o] Texas, West

Texas Historical and Scientific Society, Alpine, Publication No. 2,
1928.

PLATE 10
Miscellaneous West Texas pictographs representing shelter units.

7

8

/3

/,/..
iPlaLe 10

