NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS
REPORT OF THE NOMENCLATURE COMMITTEE

At the Sixth Plains Archaeological Conference in Lincoln,
Nebraska, on November 25, 1948, I outlined the several suggestions
approved at our meeting in Austin on October 23, 1948, regarding
the aims and objectives of a committee on archaeological nomenclature. Considerable discussion followed. Briefly, the following
points were adopted: (1) The work of the committee should be
continued. (2) The committee should consist of two members, one
from the northern Plains area and one from the southern Plains
area. (3) The terms defined should include all technical terms
commonly used in archaeological publications. (4) The scope of
the definitions should be confined, at first to those used in the
Plains area and later expanded to include all archaeological areas
of North America. (5) The committee should solicit help from as
many archaeologists as is practicable. (6) The results of the work
should be eventually published in handbook form and circulated
as widely as possible.
,~ack Hughes, now working for the River Basin Surveys in the
Missouri Basin, was appointed to represent the northern Plains area
on the committee and I was appointed to represent the southern
Plains area. We decided to use the following procedure in working
out a list of terms and definitions:
(1) Establish a card file of
approximately 1,000 terms. (2) For each term, provide the standard definition as given in Webster’s New International Dictionary.
(3) Then we will check archaeological literature and note all
variations in meaning of these terms as used in the past, giving
credit to the writers and noting the specific areas and situations
in which these terms were used. (4) When this card file has been
completed as nearly as seems practicable the material will be
mimeographed and circulated among archaeologists throughout .the
Plains area. Each archaeologist will then have an opportunity to
criticize and select his preference for definitions of these terms or
suggest additional definitions, or additional terms. (5) The results
of this circularization of the material will then be tabulated and
the most widely accepted definitions will be assigned to each term,
with secondary definitions included where necessary.
Other
pertinent data regarding use of the terms including author and area
will also be included. (6) The final results will be published in
the form of a pocket dictionary, and given as wide circulation as
possible.
To date the committee is working on the card file of terms,
selecting dictionary definitions and special definitions, and an-

News Notes and Editorials

133

notating each term with as much data as seems pertinent to the
problem at hand. Occasional reports of progress will be made in
this bulletin and elsewhere. If the reader has any suggestions on
either terms, definitions or methods of procedure they would be
most welcomed by the committee and may be seat to me at the
Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas.
ROBERT L. STEPHF&~SON.

THE 1949 ANNUAL MEETING
The twenty-second Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeo!ogical
and Paleontological Society was held May 1-5 on the campus of Sul
Ross State College at Alpine, Texas, in association with the Southwestern Division of the American Association for the Advancement
of Science. The Society is especially indebted to the local committee at Alpine for helping to make our visit there both enjoyable
and interesting; to the program committee of the Society, consisting of Dr. T. N. Campbell, Dr. J. Charles Kelley, and Dr. Alex
D. Krieger, for the interesting papers on our section of the program
and to Dr. Erik K. Reed of the National Park Service at Santa
who was in charge of the over-all program for the Social Sciences.
The following papers were read:
Jane Holden, Further Excavations at F~ngerpr~nt Cave.
Cyrus N. Ray, Report on Research in the AbiIene Region.
E. J. Adams, Remains of Early Man and Extinct Animals ~n Texas.
Ernest Wallace, The Comanche on the White Man’s Road.
E, H. Sellards, Preliminary Report on Excavations at the Kincaid
Shelter, Uvalde County.
Herbert C. Taylor, Jr., A Tentative CulturaI Sequence for the Area
About the Mouth o] the Pecos.
J. Charles Kelley, Archaeology and the Modern World. This was
the 1949 John Wesley Powetl Lecture for the Southwestern Division
of the A.A.A.S.
mE. W.

FINANCIAL CONDITION OF THE SOCIETY
In Vol. 19 the secretary-treasurer called attention to the critical
financial condition of the Society and suggested several alternative
possibilities. Fortunately, the sale of a rather large number of
copies of the Bulletin during the year solved the problem temporarily. As a result, it was decided at the Alpine meeting to post-

134

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

pone for the time any increase in annual dues, even if it became
necessary to reduce the size of the Bulletin.
The Society still has available most volumes of the Bu~Iefn at the
original price of $3.00 each. If your file is incomplete, why not
complete it while copies are available and while publication costs
are high? Possibly you can persuade some institutional library
or individual to order, or to become a member of the Society.--E. W.

TI-I:E 1949

BD-LLETIN

We regret that Vol. 20 is considerably smaller than usual The
financial situation is not altogether to blame. Not enough manuscripts were received. This was possibly due to the fact that copy
for Vol. 20 was sent to the printer much earlier this year than has
been customary.
--E. W.

TI-IE 1950 BULLETIN

Manuscripts for inclusion in Vol. 21 should be sent to the editor
as soon as possible. Your co-operation in this matter will enable
him to get out a better Bulletin on time.
--E. W.

THE 1950 ANNUAL MEETING
Those present at the Alpine meeting voted to have the next annual
meeting of the Society in October, 1950, at Canyon, Texas, with
West Texas State College acting as host institution. Tentative plans
indicate that it will be a meeting you will not want to miss.
Anyone having papers or suggestions for the program should
communicate with the program committee as soon as possible.
Members of the committee are Dr. T. N. Campbell, Dr. J. Charles
Kelley, and Dr. Alex D. Krieger, Department of Anthropology,
University of Texas, Austin.
--E. W.

