CERTAIN ARCHAEOLOGICAL NOTES ON
THE HIGH PLAINS OF TEXAS

BY AI)OLI~H HENRY

WITTE

During the summer of 1946, the writer spent several
weeks on the High Plains of Texas on a field trip sponsored
by Dr. E. H. Sellards, Director, Texas Memorial Museum,
Austin, Texas. The Gray County burial was investigated in
1938 while a Mineral Resource Survey, sponsored by the
Bureau of Economic Geology, was in progress.
Alkali Lakes and Dunes

A number of alkali lakes northwest of Lubbock ~were
examined in some detail for archeological data concerning
early man. Silver, Yellow, Illusion, Bull, Soda, Coyote, Government, and other lakes were explored. A considerable number of Indian stone artifacts were noted around and in the
vicinity of the lakes mentioned. Where sand dunes were
observed, these usually displayed evidences of occupation
by Indians. Several burials were noticed but none were excavated because of limited time available. Pueblo sherds,
small points, small scrapers, four-edged and oval knives likely fal! within the presumed heavy Pueblo occupation of the
area during late prehistoric times. The few large shouldered
points and heavy choppers discovered in the same sites possibly point to other culture complexes.
Large Basin Artifacts

Due to t.he prolonged drouth some of the lakes explored
were almost without water. An examination of the dry surface of the lake basins disclosed a number of stone artifacts
in an area usually submerged by lake waters. Silver Lake
basin yielded a brown four-edged knife, points of various
sizes, manos, and obsidian chips. In Illusion Lake basin we

The High Plains o] Texas

77

found burnt rocks, a gray flint knife and an obsidian point.
Surprisingly, two small notched stones of white quartzite
were discovered. (See Plate 5).
In Bull Lake basin, Indian stone artifacts were fairly
common. Three bases of large projectile points with parallel
sides were discovered eroding out of a low stratified beach.
These points were somewhat suggestive of certain Yuma
forms. A small amount of digging in the same beach uncovered several worked spalls in silu only a few inches below
the surface. Several small triangular points with side notches,
one Olivella shell bead, an incomplete four-edge knife, hammer stones, and so on were observed. Here also were found
five additional notched stones, or sinkers, somewhat similar
to the two previously discovered, in Illusion Lake which is
located a few miles away. (See Plate 5). Three of these
crudely notched stones were of a coarse, reddish quartzite,
found locally and used commonly all over the High Plains
area and eastward and south down the Brazos River drain=
age to Baylor and Archer Counties. The other two notched
stones are igneous in origin, one a brown rhyolite, the seconda light gray granite. Similar igneous stones were observed in local gravel deposits. No additional notched stones
were discovered, and culture complex affiliations are not

known.
The Waco sinker, described in 1938 by Mr. Frank H.
Watt,~ apparently does not resemble except in a general way,
the Alkali Lake sinker reported in this paper. In addition,
as far as it is known, the Waco sinker is largely restricted
in distribution to the eastern half of Texas.
Some flint sources in the Texas High Plains
Contrary ~-o a somewhat general belief, rocks suitable
for modification into artifacts are not rare, and occur in and
around the High Plains in many, many places. Quartzite,

*Watt, Frank H., Cettlral Texas Archeologist, Number Four, 1938.

78

Texas Archeological and Pa~eontological Society

chalcedony, silicified woods, cherts, and various hard igneous stones are common in many outcrops around Yellow
and Illusion Lakes. This condition is also true in Bull Lake.
Worked slabs and nodules of chalcedony were observed on
the north side of Bull Lake where the rough material is
weathering out of the limestone escarpment.
Quartzites, cherts, and other flintlike rocks in the form
of large pebbles were observed in the vicinity of Monument
Lake. Gravels and boulders outcrop in many, many places
below the great east and south facing escarpment at the
edge of the High Plains. Gravel strata with suitable stones
are especially common along McClellan Creek, Salt Fork,
Mulberry Canyon, Garcia Lake and in the vast bad lands of
the Palo Duro Canyon. Other sources of artifact materials
were the widespread gravel strata bordering the Canadian
River.

The writer was greatly interested in the discovery in the
Canadian River terrace deposits of large numbers of smal],
flattish boulders of schistose fibrolite. These stones consist
of sillimanite fibres arranged in fans and rosettes. Occasional specimens show black ilmenite crystals interwoven with
the bunches of sillimanite and are exceptionally heavy. It
is recalled that Kidder: in his classic report on the Pecos
Pueblo excavations, described and illustrated a number of
very fine fibrolite ax heads. Fibrolite was a common and
satisfactory ax material in the Pecos Pueblo. They appear
to have been especially prized for beauty and utility. Kidder
further states that fibrolite does not seem to occur in the
Pecos.valley and that the source where the Pueblos obtained
them is unknown. In addition, it is a well established fact
that considerable trade relations existed between Pecos Pueblo
and the Canadian River tribes, perhaps almost during the
entire existence of the Pueblo. In conclusion, the writer believes that the many distinctive fibrolite axes found in Pecos

Kidder, A. V. The Arti[acts of Pecos, The Yale University Press, 1932.

The High Plains of Texas

Pueblo were, more than likely, trade items from the Texas
Panhandle along with varigated flints, bison hides, et cetera.
Alibates agatized dolomite

Many of the projectile points, scrapers, spalls and knives
found in the alkali lake region are fashioned from a beautiful red, or brown, banded, or variagated flint. This fact is
also true all over the Texas Panhandle and to an unknown
distance northward, also eastward and southward almost
to Dallas and down along the Red River drainage. The material is well known in eastern New Mexico, and was a common trade item in the Pecos Pueblo and others on the Rio
Grande. Many of the fluted points from such famous sites
as Folsom, Clovis, and Plainview are of the same banded or
varigated flint.
As far back as 1906, C. N. Gould’ mentioned white, massive dolomite ledges, more or less flinty, along Alibates Creek
and the Canadian River in Pottery County, Texas. This dolomite belongs to the Quartermaster formation of the Double
Mountain Group, upper Permian. Flint ledges also outcrop
across the Canadian River on the north side. Other flint
ledges were observed by the writer east and southeast of
Amarillo, also east of Silverton in Briscoe County below the
escarpment. Since these variegated flints were obtained by
Indians from so-many different outcropplngs, the entire
Alibates flint situation should be reexamined. One fact is
highly obvious at this time; definitely, all the variegated flint
artifacts discovered in this vast region did not originate in
the Alibates quarries in Potter County. The author suggests
extreme caution in classifying as to definite source any of
the flint artifacts in the High Plains, or in North Texas,
for that matter.

The matter of flint sources is complex and far from
being satisfactorily settled in the Wichita Falls area where
3Gould, C. N., U. S. Geol. Survey, Paper 181,1907.

8O

Texas Archeo~ogical ~nd Paleontological Society

the writer has lived for a number of years. In the vicinity of
Wichita Falls, flint artifacts of red, brown, and variegated
colors are common. In certain sites the colored flints equal
at least one tenth of the total collected. For the past several
years the best available information definitely has indicated
that these were trade items from the Alibates quarries. At
the present time additional data is at hand. This information does not strengthen the trade item theory. In north
central Texas remnants of Pleistocene gravel strata extend
along most of the rivers. In many places these strata cap
high old stream terraces. The writer has carefully explored
a number of these spots within the last few months. On the
north side of Red River in a gravel deposit near Terrel, Oklahoma, rough, angular flint nodules were found. Some specimens were more than four inches in diameter, and the colors were red, brown, and various shades of red and yellow.
Similar rough flint nodules were gathered from the gravel
terraces bordering Big Wichita River and at no great distance from the city of Wichita Falls.
It appears to the writer that it would be very difficult
to distinguish these local river terrace specimens from Texas
Panhandle flint materials. Many of the colors and textures
overlap. Obviously, a lot of field work remains to be done
in order to trace out the distribution of certain rough flint
nodules along our Texas rivers.
A sitti~g burial in Gray County, Texas
Gray County is drained largely by North Fork of Red
River. The western and northern parts are on the High
Plains; the central and eastern parts are in the breaks and
slopes that mark the descent from the high to the low plains
of the eastern Texas Panhandle. The altitude ranges from
PLATE

Top: notched stones ~rom Illusion and Bull Lakes.
Middle: Gray County burial, rear view.
Bottom: some burial, front view.

Plate

The High Plains o] Texas

81

2800 to 3250 feet above sea level. Brief explorations along
North Fork and the larger tributaries disclosed many campsites, middens, workshops, burnt rock hearths and traces of
prehistoric occupation. Stone elbow pipes, large and small
points, mostly the small triangular type with side notches,
small scrapers, bone .tools, stone beads, fine long flint drills
and four-edged knives were collected. Somewhat in variance
With Hains pottery types, a number of thick shell-tempered
pot sherds were discovered in certain of the middens. Heavy,
grooved quartzite malls were observed in several local collections. Mr. Lloyd Erwin of McLean assisted the author
with accurate information. Mr. Erwin’s own private collection contained many fine chipped artifacts, elbow pipes,
and a complete pot or two. He presented Dr. E. H. Sellards
with a finely fluted Folsom type point from a high stream
terrace locality on the south side of McClellan Creek and
north of the town of Allenreed.
One day during the survey, the writer was shown a few
human skull fragments and a portion of the lower jaw with
a few teeth intact. The source was a small dry gulch leading
down from the high escarpment on the north side of North
Fork and not far from Le Fors. A search soon located the
burial up near the level of the tableland and at the beginning of the ravine.

Our excavation uncovered the articulated skeleton of a
rather small male. The skull was missing, and this had largely been destroyed by recent erosion when the top of the burial became exposed. The placement of the skeleton indicated a sitting position, facing eastward. The left humerus
extended down the left side of the pelvis. The left ulna and
radius extended horizontally across to the right, just back
of left and right calcaneum. The right arm rested on the
right femur and the hand was near the right knee. A view
from the back of the burial indicated some torsion towards
the right involving the upper part of the skeleton. No clue
as to the cause of death was discernable. The age of the person, judging from the few teeth discovered, was apparently

82

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

about twenty-five. A careful search failed to disclose artifacts of any sort within the burial. However, the adjacent
tableland is mantled in burnt and broken stone, flint chipper’s debris, and other evidences of prehistoric occupation.
(See Hate 5).

