Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor"

155

IMPORTANCE OF
THE "GILMORE CORRIDOR" IN CULTURE
CONTACTS BETWEEN MIDDLE AMERICA
AND THE EASTERN UNITED STATES’
ALZX D. I~UE~Ea
For more than a century, students of archaeology have
theorized about prehistoric connections between the high
civilizations of Mexico and Central America, and the agricultural, mound-building Indians of the Eastern United
States.

While it is generally

agreed that the

know-

ledge of agriculture had to be carried into the United States
from Middle or South America, there is little agreement on
just what other culture traits were introduced with agriculture, or during subsequent periods. The practice of
mound building is often mentioned, as are various forms of
polished pottery, artifacts suggesting ritualistic uses, and-by inference--complex ceremonies dedicated to the earth,
sun, fertility, etc., and various religious and civil offices in
complex social systems.
For the most part, it is very difficult to present definite
archaeological evidence for the introduction of traits other
than agricultural from the Middle American civilizations.
There is no escaping the probability that culture borrowing
occurred, very likely at different times and from different
Middle American areas, and affecting various parts of the
Eastern United States in varying degrees, but we are just
beginning to achieve the necessary controls over culture
complexes and their chronological relationships to see these
problems in perspective. For one thing, "mound building"
is not a single trait, there being several kinds of mounds in
the Eastern States as a whole, erected for different purposes
and representing several distinct periods of development.
1 Baaed on an address to the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society at
its annual meetinz. October 25, 1947. in Lubbock. Texas. Publication was deferred
one year when it was found that the 1947 Bulletin had sufficient material. Several
passages have been re-w-xltten and exvanded.

156

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

Thus, "burial mounds" were sometimes erected as protective
caps over a large grave, log tomb, or crematory basin, and
may contain nothing within the mound material itself;, other
"burial mounds" may contain village refuse and graves dug
downward into the mound.

"Temple mounds" may have

square or rectangular flat tops on which important buildings
were erected or ceremonies performed, or they may be oddshaped, or consist of several terraced platforms; some contain
the remains of houses, and even burials, subsequently covered when new additions were made to the mound. Generally speaking, the low round, more or less conical mounds
were used in connection with disposal of the dead and occur
~n earlier culture horizons in the Eastern United States than
do the flat-topped "temple mounds," although when the
latter appear, the burial-mound trait sometimes continues
along with them.
I have never understood why archaeologists so often
speak of "mound buil~ling" having been introduced into the
Eastern States from the Middle American civilizations,
without specifying which kind of mound is meant. At the
same time, nearly all accept the Asiatic origin of cord-impressed Woodland pottery, and many other traits of the
Woodland culture. Since conical burial mounds, built over
graves, log tombs, or cremations, like cordmarked Woodland
pottery, are found very widely in Asia, it would seem rather
obvious that one cannot speak simply of "mounds" being
derived from Middle America. On the other hand, there
are reasons for believing that the erection of flat-topped,
more or less pyramidal, mounds of clay in the Eastern United
States was due to an initial stimulus from some part of Middle America: it is very difficult to state which part, or at
which time, for no survey of the purely clay mounds has
been made in the southern countries even though they occur
very widely.2
2 Attentlon has always been directed toward the more spectacular mounda with
stone facing, a~d the ~ram~ of stone ~n Midge ~erica, rather th~

entirely of cJay. ~though the lair we~ ~ quite common and ~robably
considerable t~me s~an. Stone was never us~ in or on the mounds of the Uni~
S~t~ as a building materia].

Importance of the "’Gilmore Corridor"

157

In the field of pottery-making, there may also be said to
have been two major, very widespread traditions existing
over long periods of time in the eastern half of the United
States, including much of the Great Plains region. These
are: (1) the afore-mentioned Woodland pottery, devoted
very largely, if not entirely, to cooking vessels, taller than
wide, with their bottoms pointed, convex, or fiat, and the
surfaces roughened by the use of cord-wrapped paddles in
shaping the walls; and (2) a much more complex tradition
including many forms of polished bowls, bottles, and beakers,
and smoothed-over cooking jars, many of them decorated
in a wide variety of techniques such as incising, engraving,
punctating, applique elements, and modeling in effigy forms.
Where the cultures producing these potteries mingled, the
ceramic styles influenced one another in various ways, but
the main contrasts are fairly definite. The first tradition
(Woodland) belongs generally to the more northern regions
such as the northern and central Great Plains, Great Lakes,
Northeast, and Middle West, while the second (Mississipplan) belongs to the middle and lower valleys of the Mississippi River basin and the Southeastern States from the
southern Great Plains to the Atlantic Ocean.
Again, we know little as to the time or place of the original entry of either tradition into the United States. The
Woodland is commonly regarded as much the earlier of the
two, and in both cases there is a distinct tendency at present
to set the dates farther back than has been the vogue during
the last fifteen or twenty years. Thus, the earliest Woodland
culture, probably non-agricultural, could hardly have appeared as late as 500 A. D., as many have claimed, but is now
thought to date closer to 500 or even 1000 B.C. The Mississippian cultures, long thought to have appeared no earlier
than 1000 or even 1200 A.D. (even as late as 1400 A. D. by
some), are being pushed back some centures although there
is as yet no concrete evidence for a date earlier than roughly
500 A. D.3 The Mississippian cultures were positively horti3 Many :~actors must be considered in any such e~timate.
These, and the ~n~tire ~te, a~ discu~d by the wrier in a ~ubli~tion entitl~ "The G~rge C. Davis
Si~, Che~k~ ~unty, Texas," by H. Pe~ Newell and Alex D. Kri~r, ~ be i~u~

in 1949 ~ a Memoir of the ~ for Amer~n A~h~lo~,

158

Texas Archeological and PaleontoIogical Society

cultural, and there is evidence of farming in some of the
relatively late Woodland communities, such as those of the
Hopewell culture. As to whether agriculture was introduced into the Eastern United States before any truly Mississippian culture appeared, or whether agriculture first
appeared with the Mississippian cultures and then spread
northward and was adopted by the later Woodland cultures,
there is difference of opinion and either theory has possibilities. It would be tempting to deduce that the first practice
of agriculture, centered around corn, temple-mound building, the complex tradition of Mississippian pottery-making,
as well as various fertility cults and perhaps civil and
religious structures were all introduced at about the same
time from some Middle American source and spread widely
over the East, eventually affecting the more northerly or
Woodland peoples as well. I believe most archaeologists
favor such an interpretation, but caution demands that we
proceed only so fast as archaeological data permit. The facts
necessary to valid interpretations emerge slowly, for enormous areas are involved and there is never enough excavation. However, steady progress is evident and before many
years we should be able to gather enough data and ideas to
present sound correlations.
In the past few years the dating of Mississippian cultures
has been aided to some extent by studies carried eastward
across Texas from the Southwestern United States;" where
tree-ring dating has produced, with great labor, a generally
reliable scale. These projections, and geological studies,
have also cast much light on the age of non-pottery cultures
in central Texas.~ The pottery-bearing cultures of the central Great Plains have similarly been brought into chronological perspective through their relationships with the
dated Southwestern horizons and those of north Texas.~
The extension of dates from the relatively well-established
4 A. D. Krieger, Culture Comple~es and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of Texas Publication, No. 4640, 1946 ; and The Eastward Extension of Puebloan
Datings Toward Cultures of the Mississippi Valley. American Antiquit:~, Vol. 12,
pp. 141-:148, 1947.
5 J. Charles Kelley, The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the
Clear Fork Focus. American Antiquity, VoL 13, ]pp. 97-109, 1947.
6 Waldo R. Wedel, Culture Chronolo~-y in the Central Great Plains, American
Antiquity, Vol. 12, ]pp. 148-156, 1947.

Importance o] the "Gilmore Corridor"

159

Mexican and Mayan cultures, northward around the Gulf
coast, has proved more difficult because the few "trade"
objects have either been found in uncertain circumstances,
or have proved difficult to date in terms of Mexican archaeology. When objects of Middle American origin can be
more accurately placed and dated in Texas and adjacent
states, they will also aid in attaining better chronologies for
cultural developments in the Eastern States, at least in the
western portions and the Mississippi Valley.
Another important matter is that archaeologists no longer
insist quite so strongly that all borrowing between these
provinces was in one direction. Where it has long been
assumed that all "higher" traits in the Eastern States were
derived from Middle America, it is now granted that some
may have passed the other way.7 This, of course, depends
upon the strength of such contacts as took place, and further
knowledge of how the comparable artifacts are to be dated
in both regions; if improved datings show them to belong
many centuries apart and the gaps cannot be filled, the
resemblances may prove to be superficial and not the result
of culture borrowing in either direction.
Possible Routes Of Contact
Speculations on the route or routes by which Middle
American and Mississippian cultures were in contact, or
along which migrations may have taken place, generally
include Texas, it being insisted that when more is known of
Texas archaeology, such "routes" wil! become evident.
Presumably, they should reveal agricultural practices, probably accompanied by temple-mound building, the making
of potteries traceable to Middle American peoples, and specialized artifacts or ritualistic paraphernalia of such definite
form that their origins would be clear. The following routes
are generally considered most likely:
1. The Gulf coast littoral and coastal plain of Texas,
traverse being by land, or boat, or both.
7 Richard S. Maclqeish, A Preliminary
American Antiquity, Vo]. 13, pp. 1-15, 1947.

Report on

Coastal

Tamaulipas,

Mexi~,

160

Texas ArcheoIog$cal and Paleontological Society

2. Across the Gulf of Mexico by boat from the Mexican
east coast or Yucatan peninsula to the mouths of the Mississippi, thence probably some distance up the river.
3. A long interior route through northern Mexico into the
Southwestern States or extreme western Texas, thence eastward across the southern Plains.
4. Through the West Indies to Florida and inland to the
north and west.
There is, of course, no need to settle on any one such route
to the exclusion of the others. More than one may have been
used, simultaneously or at different times. As for (2), there
is no evidence for it, but since some coastal Indians of
IvIiddle America are known to have make long trips by canoe,
it will always be an intriguing possibility. Routes (3) and
(4) are the subject of research by others; my present impressions are that the diffusion of culture elements by either of
them may have provided relatively late accretions rather
than such fundamental practices as agriculture, building of
temple mounds, and rituals connected with agriculture.
This leaves (1), the Gulf coast of Texas, as a short and
seemingly feasible route of contact. We shall examine it
briefly and then turn to a parallel route farther inland
which has received almost no attention.
The Gulf Coast
Due to conditions not generally appreciated by those
unfamiliar with its geography, the coastal fringe of Texas
and Tamaulipas presents certain difficulties in the location of
archaeologica! sites. Excavations have been few and far
between, but at least 100 sites are known,e Along the
southern end of the Texas coast, and the northern Tamaulipas coast, the shorelines and adjacent land are now undergoing almost constant change due to the cutting back of
8 T. ~. Campbell, The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aran~as Focus of the Texaa
Coast (this Bulletin, Vol. 18, pp. 40-75, 1947) presents the best and virtually the only
report on a controlled excavat2on along this coast He review~ the ~orevious literature
and states that through the non-pottery Aran.~m.s Focus, "It is bolted thereby to
establish at least one reference roint in the archaeology of the Texas coast’~
He is
also organizing all availahle data on the archaeology of this coast for further
publications.

Importance o:f the "Gilmore Corridor"

161

off-shore islands by landward winds and tides; sand is lifted
from the island fronts and the mainland shores, being carried
inland and dropped in the lagoons or added to the active
dune fields on the mainland2

Hurricanes often accelerate

this process, in at least "one case churning up and cutting
back the sandy shore some 50 feet in a single day.’° Although
the northern end of the 100-mile long Padre Island is relatively well watered and supports enough grass for cattle
grazing, the southern end presents such desert conditions
that winds and storms have literally moved it shoreward
since 1881 by removing sand from its Gulf front and depositing it in the Laguna lYIadre, which is filling to such an extent
that it is only a few inches deep in places.,1
These conditions make it highly probable that archaeological sites on the exposed shoreline (usually the seaward
sides of the great off-short islands, but also including unprotected segments of the mainland) have been largely
destroyed. Thus, direct evidence of canoe travelers along
the outer shores is almost impossible to find.’2 On the other
hand, the sand and clay mantles of aeolian origin in the
lagoons and the mainland shores have undoubtedly covered
many other sites, now occasionally exposed in the sides of
erosion gullies in the dunes. Pottery-bearing camp sites are
sometimes found on the modern surfaces, but are thought
to date generally within the last 500 years. The buried sites,
so far as known, are non-pottery, and since many are being
exposed simultaneously by surface (rain) erosion and shoreline cutting, they should be excavated before disappearing
forever.
9 W. Armstrong Price and Gordon Gunter, Certain Recent Geelogl~al and Biological Changes in Soath Texas. with Consideration of Probable Causem Proceedings and
transactions of the Texa~ Academy of Science, vv. 3-21, 1942.
10 The late A. :~. Anderson of Brownsville, Texa~, was an unsua]ly keen observer, making extensive and well documented archaeological collections in the
soi~thern tip of Texas and northern Tamaulipas. His notes describe the tremendous
shoreline destruction after a single hurricane at the Boca San Jose, Tamaulipas,
virtually obliterating all archaeological evidence in the vicinity.
11 Price and Gunter, op. cit.
12 At least four dugout canoes have been found on the sh~re~ of Padre and
Mustang Islend~, possibly suggesting Indian travel. However, "~hey could not have
been preserved any great length of time, no camp sites or other cultural remains
have been found near them, and ocean currents may have been entirely responsible
for del)ositing the canoes on these shores from very distant points.
Chunks of
pumice from Mexico and perhaps even the West Indies are very common on the island
and lagoon beaches, having floated great distances.

162

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

These most unfavorable conditions are, however, principally found in what is now a semi-arid climatic zone extending from the northern side of Baffm Bay, Texas (about
100 miles north of the Rio Grande mouth), southward to the
Rio Soto la Marina (about 150 miles south of the Rio Grande
mouth). This zone is termed DB’d by Thornthwaite,,3 who
bases his distinctions on precipitation effectivity rather than
on gross annual precipitation; thus DB’d is semi-arid, mesothermal, and precipitation is deficient in all seasons. On the
coasts of Texas and Tamaulipas this semi-arid corridor is
about 250 miles wide but away from the coast it expands
enormously over northern Mexico and southwestern Texas.
On the coastal plain the annual rainfall is now between 25
and 30 inches in this corridor, decreasing to 20 inches ab.out
100 miles westward, and to 15 inches still farther into .the
interior (Plate 18).
Proceeding northward and northeasward along the Texas
coast, rainfall increases quite uniformly in gross terms and
in terms of its effectivity. From Baffin Bay to a point between Copano and San Antonio Bays lies Thornthwaite’s
CB’d zone .(sub-humid, mesothermal, precipitation deficient
in all seasons). From the latter point to just south of the
Brazos River mouth is the CB’r zone (sub-humid, mesothermal, precipitation adequate in all seasons), in which
annual rainfall is between 35 and 45 inches; and from the
latter point to the Louisiana border at Sabine Lake is the
BB’r zone (humid, mesothermal, precipitation adequate in
all seasons), with rainfall over 45 inches, over 50 inches
beyond Sabine Lake. It will be noted (Plate 18) that these
climatic borders run roughly at right angles to the Texas
coast, then turn northward to extend far into the interior
of the United States.
Southward from the Rio Soto la Marina in Tamaulipas,
virtually the same succession of climatic zones occurs along
the Gulf coast of Mexico, but in this direction the precipitation (both gross and effective) increases much more rap13 C. Warren Thornthwaite, The Climates of North America According to a New
Classification, Geographical Review, Vol. 21, pl). 633-56, 1931, Plate III.

Importance o] the "Gilmore Corridor"

163

idly than in Texas in the opposite direction; hence the zones
are much narrower. A B!k’r zone (hurffid, tropical, precipitation adequate in all seasons) is reached in Veracruz state
about 200 miles south of the Soto la Marina, and continues
around the Gulf into the Yucatan peninsula.
Two questions naturally arise for the archaeologist: (1)
What effects would the present climates of southern Texas
and Tamaulipas have had on native economies, communication, and the diffusion of agriculture and other advanced
traits? (2) .Has climate been stable during the whole time
of development of agricultural civilizations in Mexico and
the United States (as well as the New World in general)
up to the present? Certainly the many speculations on
culture contacts and diffusions between the various major
regions have always been made in a climatic vacuum--as
though climate and land resources had always been just as
we now see them.
The Thornthwaite classification, based on effectivity of
precipitation, is far more valuable for practical economics
than mere statistics on rainfall. In the region under consideration, 35 inches annual precipitation falling in all seasons
appears to be the critical boundary between deficient (d)
and adequate moisture (r) for raising of crops without
artificial means of supplying water. In other regions, such
as the arid Southwest, far less precipitation is needed for
effectivity because most of it falls in the seasons of direct
benefit. On the Gulf coast, the DB’d and CB’d climates, at
least, would have made native agriculture without irrigation practically impossible over an area roughtly 400 miles
wide along the coast (about 200 miles on either side of the
Rio Grande); and due to the fanning out of these zones
toward the interior, the unfavorable area would increase
to 600 or 700 miles across, and even more in the deep interior
of north Mexico and western Texas.
This does not mean that the DB’d and CB’d zones are
barren or waterless--far from it. Vast areas of grass and
mesquite are contained in them, with some oak along the
water courses, and innumerable ponds and lakes of drink-

!64

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

able water are to be found along the Gulf littoral, even on
the off-shore islands. Small game, deer, perhaps antelope,
peccaries, great numbers of water fowls, fresh and salt
water fishes, shell fish, mesquite beans, Opuntia fruit, and
doubtlessly other foods would supply a considerable if not
abundant subsistence under present conditions. That the
ecological balance is in very delicate adjustment, however,
is shown by the tremendous damage to plant and animal life
on the coastal plain between Kingsville and Raymondville,
Texas, during the droughts of the early 1880’s and 1896-1903.
This is the area in which active dune fields are now found,
and since historical records suggest that it was a verdant
plain in the middle 19th century, the present dune activity
probably resulted from the recent droughts mentioned.,Similar shifts, perhaps of longer duration and more widespread, have undoubtedly occurred before. At any rate, the
semi-arid zones as they stand now, with their scanty and
erratic summer rain, are far from uninhabitable but would
provide an effective barrier several hundred miles wide to
the spread of native argriculture without irrigation.
The next question is whether climate has varied sufficiently in the past two or three millenia to expand or contract
this non-agricultural gap. The current researches of Dr.
Price, in which the writer and Dr. T. N. Campbell have
assisted, will provide much significant data on this matter.
The number of recent climatic fluctuations and their dates
have not been fully determined, but there is much to indicate that some, at least, have been of sufficient intensity to
narrow and widen the semi-arid zones. Such fluctuations
would, of course, be most evident in the driest or most
critical zones, but should also have affected the adjacent
sub-humid and humid zones to some extent.
It is possible that during considerably moister periods the
DB’d and CB’d zones disappeared temporarily along the
coast, in which case it could be argued that prehistoric
cultures based on agriculture could have spread around the
Gulf coast. However, there is no archaeological evidence of
14 Price and Gunter, op. cir.,

Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor"

165

any such diffusion at any time, and the northern limits of
Middle American culture seem never to have passed the
lower Rio Soto la Marina, i. e., the present southern limit
of the DB’d climatic zone. In the Tampico area about 85
miles farther south, Ekholm has defined six ceramic periods
which may be correlated with virtually the whole known
sequence of ceramic cultures in Middle America.,~ It is
difficult to state how much of the sequence at Tampico is
represented as far north as the Rio Soto la Marina. MacNeish has shown that some of the latest types of pottery in
the Tampico sequence, those associated with the Huastecan
tribes, occur on camp sites along the coastal fringe as far
north as the vicinity of Brownsville on the Texas side of the
Rio Grande.’6 The writer would disagree with him in that
this pottery demonstrates the northward extension of
PIuastecan culture, for the pottery may have been entirely
obtained from tIuastecan peoples living no farther north
than the Soto la Marina. Further surveys will undobutedly
clarify these matters.
Climatic factors were probably partly responsible for the
failure of the Middle American province to be extended
farther north, but if climate had been more favorable in
times past, there must have been other reasons as well. The
Middle American cultures certainly did not reach the
Huasteca region in any form as well developed or vigorous
as in the great cities of central Mexico and the tropics of
southern Mexico and Yucatan; this attenuation toward the
north may have been accompanied by a disinclination to
push still farther north. Also, the coastal strip of Tamaulipas and Texas could hardly have been very inviting to
agricultural peoples because of its low, marshy topography,
"heavy" soils, and such territory may already have been
occupied by tribes unreceptive to influence. The accounts
of Cabeza de Vaca and other early explorers emphasize
again and again that the coastal peoples of Texas were warlike and unfriendly to all strangers, Europeans and other
1~; Gordon F. Ekho|m, Exeavatlons at Tampico and Panu©o in the Huasteea,
Mexico, Ame~n Muse~ of Na~ral Hist., Anthro~l~i~ Pave~, ~oI. 38,
PL 5, 1944.

166

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Indians as well.

It was unsual for American natives to

treat Europeans as bitter enemies from the start.
Proceeding eastward around the Texas Gulf coast, precipitation increases uniformly, and the effects of wind
erosion correspondingly decrease; the more stable vegetation cover prevents the coverage of sites by dunes, and
extensive shell heaps have accumulated around the lagoon
and bay shores. The exposed outer coast has undoubtedly
been cut backward to some extent by winds and tides,
destroying sites facing the open Gulf waters, but probably
to a less extent than along the southern reaches.
Theoretically, the CB’r or moist sub-humid zone of
Thornthwaite would be suitable for native agriculture, but
there is no satisfactory evidence that it ever was practiced in
this zone in southern Texas,,7 any more than in the. zones
previously discussed. Still farther east, the BB’r zone,
humid, with over 45 inches annual precipitation, conforms
more or less with the heavy forest of eastern Texas. The
great pine belt does not extend quite as far west as the
present BB’r boundary (Plate 18). In northeastern and cen-tral-eas.t Texas the village sites of pre-Columbian agricultural
and pottery-making Mississippian tribes (the latest of which
were Caddoans) correspond rather well with the area of
pine forests. However, along the southeastern Texas coast,
and for some !00 rnfles inland, there is as yet no more direct
evidence for agriculture (in the form of charred remains of
domestic plants) than along the rest of the Texas coast. The
absence of large village sites and temple mounds in this
area also contrasts with the Mississippian cultures farther
inland. On the other hand, pottery does occur on many shell
and midden heaps, and the soils in wooded areas back from
the grassy and marshy coastal strip are loose and easily
tilled; hence it is quite possible that some agriculture
actually was practiced, if only to a limited degree. With
plenty of game, fish, shell fish, nuts, and other wild foods,
17 It is cer~in that corn agriculture was practiced in this and the CB’d zone
in north.central Texas, in the upper Brazos and Red River valleys and b~tweem See
Krieger, Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas, sectioas on ]F~enrtetta
Focus.

Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor"

167

agriculture may have been no more than a supplementary
pursuit; the archaeologist simply desires more direct proof.
In very similar surroundings, the later peoples of nearby
southern Louisiana undoubtedly did raise crops of corn,
perhaps other plants as well.
As to travel along the Texas coast, this could have been
done easily by boat. We simply have no means of proving
that it was an important means of communication. By land,
there would have been no serious physical barriers, but
anyone desiring to make long trips would have had to pass
around numerous large bays and lagoons reaching far inland,
necessitating a great deal of extra mileage.

At the eastern

end, travel around Galveston Bay and Sabine Lake would
have presented no great difficulty unless the Trinity, Neches,
or Sabine River, or any of several large bayous, was in flood.
At such times, water spreads for miles through dense woods
and matted, jungle-like undergrowth which is difficult
enough to cross when dry, and almost, impossible to wade,
swim, or push a boat through when flooded. Such conditions
last for weeks.
In summary, the Texas and-Tamaulipas coasts present a
very negative picture in respect to the diffusion of agricultural practices from the Middle American province toward
the Mississippi Valley. Even in allowing for past shifts in
climatic boundaries, we still do not find any archaeological
evidence for agriculture at any time along the entire coast
from the Rio Soto la Marina around to southeastern Texas,
where the growing of domestic crops was possibly present,
but if so, the practice could well have spread westward from
Louisiana. Neither do we see the slightest evidence of influences from Middle American cultures on the coast of Texas
north of the Rio Grande delta, and by this I mean influences
that modified the nativ~ cultures. Individuals or small
parties could, and undoubtedly did, pass along the coast
from time to time, either for purposes of trade or to visit
far-off lands for the same reasons that human beings have
always felt compulsion to "look around."

168

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

The "’Gilmore Corridor"
In 1935, Dr. Melvin R. Gilmore of the University of
Michigan Ethnobotanical Laboratory becaxne interested in
the possible routes by which native agriculttu-e had been
introduced into the Eastern United States. The late Elmer
Johnson, economic geographer at the University of Texas,
informed me that in 1935 Dr. Gilmore spent several months
in Austin and other parts of Texas, collecting botanical specimens and exploring the agricultural problem. The only
published statement of his thoughts in this connection is a
very brief one.,~ Its substance is that the coastal belt was
unsuitable in several ways, while a more plausible one lay
farther inland. This, the undulating prairie belt between
the low coastal plain and the Edwards Plateau uplift, he
called the "Gilmore Corridor." This prairie was very easy
to travel, being open grassland for the most part, but crossed
by numerous rivers from the Texas interior, and streams
arising from springs in the Edwards Plateau margin or
Balcones Escarpment. The bottoms of all these streams are
well wooded with oak, pecan, walnut, hickory, gum, cypress,.
hackberry, persimmon, and many other trees, but are narrow
and not choked with excessive undergrowth. Land game,
fish, and water fowls, not to mention many vegetal foods,
would provide ample subsistence. Dr. Gilmore believed
that native agriculture had been practiced in these numerous
bottomlands, presumably from Mexico entirely across Texas,
at least in this "Corridor." He does not state where it begins
or ends.
It may be seen in Plate 18 that in southern and central
Texas this corridor crosses the present climatic zones DB’d
(semi-arid), CB’d (dry sub-humid), and CB’r (moist subhumid). We have seen that the first is too dry for native
agriculture without irrigation, chiefly because of the scanty
and erratic summer rain. The second now provides sufficient
summer rain in much of central Texas for corn crops on the
prairies and bottomlands, although they are not infrequently
destroyed by summer droughts of several weeks duration.
18 Science News Letter, June 29, 1935, p. 419.

Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor"

169

50"+

/

/

PLATE IS
Texas and adjoining areas, showing zones of preclpit~tlon effec~vlty
(after Thornthwaite) ~nd general position of "Gilmore Corridor," according
to the author’s interpretation.
Dr. Gilmore did not specify the limits of
the "’dorridor" through which he thought agriculture h~l been diffused.
Agricultural Indians are known to h~ve occupied the humid zone east of
the pine frontier, and much of northern Texa~, in pre-Columbtan times,
but evidence has not been found for agriculture between the Rio Soto ia
Marina and this eastern pine frontier.
Note that in most of Texas the
precipitation boundaries run at right angles to the coast, but in the lower
Rio Grands region rainfall decreases inland in zones parallel to the coast.

170

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Conditions are more favorable in the moist sub-humid zone
farther east, nearly all of it now being successfully farmed
without irrigation; occasionally, however, as in the present
year, deficient rainfall results in great damage to some crops
while aiding others, such as cotton.
Spealdng generally, there is no apparent factor at present
which would have prohibited Indian farmers from successfully growing corn, beans, or squash on the central Texas
bottomlands and terraces in most years, had they desired
to do so. Many hundreds of camp sites are known in the
Edwards Plateau region and along the Gulf-ward flowing
streams in the "Corridor." They are largely characterized
by great accumulations of burned limestone hearth rocks,
fractured by heat (the "burnt-rock middens"), in and around
which are found enormous numbers of flint artifacts, manos,
and m~]l~ng stones used with rotary motion.,~ These sites,
unless divided by stream sediments, give every appearance
of more or less sedentary occupation by small groups who
may have lived on them for centuries, scouring the surrounding country for game, fish, and plant foods. A
thorough survey of economic resources and their exploitation, population density and length of occupation of favored
sites, etc., would form a most interesting study even though
exact data may never be obtained,zo We may be safe in
stating that i~ agriculture were ever practiced in central
Texas in pre-Columbian times, it was probably in a distinctly supplementary capacity because of the fairly rich
natural food resources.
If it could be demonstrated that crops were raised in the
"Gilmore Corridor," say a thousand years ago or more, this
information would provide an important link in the spread
of agriculture from northern Mexico in the general direction
of the humid BB’r zone (Plate 18) and the eastern woodlands
19 Kelley, op. clt., (note 5) has recently outlined the distinctive tra~ts and distribution of the Round Rock and Glear Fork Foci in the Abilene and Edwards Plateau
regions, and the Uvalde Focus in the general Nuec¢~ River area.
20 The writer is indebted to Glen L. Evans of the Tex~ Memorial Museum for
many stimulating conversations along this line.
Evans and Grayson E. Meade have
recently conducted excavations in southwestern Texas, partly to gain some insight into
these interesting economic problems of the pas~.

Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor"

beyond.

171

However, this proof is not at hand, and even i] it

were, it would not serve to close the non-agricultural gap,
only to reduce it somewhat. A broad belt of semi-arid DB’d
climate on both sides of the lower Rio Grande would still
mark, so far as any archaeological evidence reveals, a permanently non-agricultural gap some hundreds of miles wide.
Its width may have varied from time to time, but even so,
the problem o~ how and when agricultural knowledge
reached the Eastern United States would remain the same,
and the argument would be reduced to whether it is more
likely that this knowledge could be carried across some 40{}
miles of intervening territoIT than across 600 or 800 miles.
In short, Dr. Gilmore’s idea that this corridor was an easy
and logical route for the diffusion of agriculture was well
taken. The archaeologist, however, can only show that it
was a route of communication. Since none of the foreign
peoples who may have used this corridor stayed in it long
enough to influence the resident cultures, it may be inferred
that movements through it by traders, travelers, or migrating groups were rapid. An individual or small party could
have crossed from the Rio Grande to the Red River in a
few weeks if compelled to. I believe we consistently underrate the ability of Indians to cover very great distances, often
for seemingly trivial reasons.
If rapid crossings were made in this manner from time to
time, it is of considerable significance in chronological correlations, for it means that no time must be allowed for the
slow diffusion of Middle American elements across most of
Texas. Let me hasten to add, however, that any picture of
migrants or traders regularly using this route as a sort of
highway is bound to be erroneous. If small groups passed
along it more often than once in a century or so, we should
expect to find much more material evidence of it.
What evidence is there that the "Gilmore Corridor" was
ever used for such long journeys? First, it is well known
that early exploring expeditions quite commonly followed
Indian trails, being led along them by guides so as to visit
important settlements; or, if not literally following such

172

Texas Archeologica~ and Paleontological Society

paths, they frequently had to cross and skirt tl~e same topographic features. Trappers, traders, and colonists would
later use the trails traced by explorers, wagon roads would
develop, and eventually railroads and modern highways
would more or less correspond to ancient routes over a given
terrain.
Thus, a route passing through the "Gilmore Corridor"
from northeastern Mexico to the agricultural Caddoar~ villages in eastern Texas, eventually came to be known in
Spanish days as the San Antonio Road and is now closely
followed by a modern highway. This highway is shown in
Plate 18 as beginning in iYIonterrey, Mexico, crossing the
Rio Grande at Laredo and passing north by northeast to San
Antonio; from here it turns to the northeast and crosses
the Colorado River at Bastrop, the Brazos near Bryan, the
Trinity between Madisonville and Crockett, and the Neches
southwest of Alto; from here it turns eastward to Nacogdoches, the official end of the San Antonio Road in the 18th
century. It can, however, be considered as extending farther
east to Natchitoches on the Red River in central Louisiana,
for in the early 18th century much trade and diplomatic
business was carried on between those two posts, Spanish
and French respectively. The road might further be extended to the Natchez towns on the Mississippi or to the
mouth of Red River, the Red being an all-important artery
of communication. The original road passed a few miles
north of modern Bryan and Madisonville, but otherwise
the modern highway conforms almost exactly to it.
Plate 18 shows that the San Antonio Road closely parallels
the great curve of the Gulf coast, consistently 130 to 150
miles inland. From Monterrey to Nacogdoches is about 600
miles by highway; from there to Natchitoches is 100 miles;
and from there to the Mississippi about 125 miles.
If one supposes that a trail conforming to the general
course of the San Antonio Road was already known to preColumbian Indians, it is quite possible that several early
explorers made use of it, at least in part. As early as 1542
the De Soto expedition under Luis de Moscoso (who came

Importance o~ the "’Gilmore Corridor"

173

to command after De Soto’s death) attempted to reach
Mexico City overland. From some point in southern Arkansas, Moscoso led the party southwestward through
country inhabited by Caddoan-speaking peoples, reaching
villages of the Hasinai division of this family, probably in
the Angelina and Neches River valleys; from here they
passed on to a large river identified by Swanton as the Trinity, but at this point they abandoned the overland trip,
returning "by the same route" to the Mississippi to attempt
to reach Mexico by boat.2, What is particularly interesting
is that the Spaniards seem to have had a very good idea of
how to reach Mexico overland, and~ since they passed
through the Hasinai country, later traversed by the San
Antonio Road, it is quite possible that they were actually
on it as far as the Trinity. That Moscoso decided to abandon
this attempt was probably due in part to accounts of wild
and hostile tribes west of that river.2~
After being shipwrecked on Matagorda Bay, La Salle made
two attempts in 1686 and 1687 to reach the Illinois country.
While exploring the possible routes by which to lead his
men to Illinois, La Salle seems to have gone rather directly
northward and northeastward to the "Cenis" (French equivalent of Hasinai) villages before he was murdered. He may
therefore have been guided northward to intercept a trail
conforming to the San Antonio Road, thence northeastward
to the Hasinai villages. Scholars might well consider such
n-latters in tracing the journeys of early explorers, usually
extremely vague.
In 1690 Fray Canafias de Jesus Maria founded the mission
Santlssimo Nombre de Maria close to the Neches river, in
proximity to several large villages of the Neche and other
Hasinai tribes. In 1691 Father Massanet founded mission
San Francisco de los Tejas within a few miles of the first one.
In 1-714 the French established a fort at Natchitoches in Louisiana, and in 1715 St. Denis made a rapid trip to Mexico City,
21 John 1~ Swanton, Source ]~faterial on the History and Ethnolo~ of the Caddo
Indians, Bureau of American t~thnolo~-, Bulletin 132, pp. 31-32, 1942.
22 Idem, po 32. Swanton says tl~t the tribes beyond the Trinity "were evidently
Tonkawa or Bidai." but we should have to know whether these tribes were living in
central Texw at this time before accepting such an identification.

174

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

passing through the Hasinai villages and crossing the San
Marcos River in central Texas, undoubtedly following the
course of the San Antonio Road. In 1716 several Spanish
missions were established in eastern Texas, including that
at Nacogdoches. In this year St. Denis made another trip to
Mexico, and from then on, especially with the founding of
missions in the San Antonio area, there must have been
almost constant travel between northern Mexico and the
I-Iasinai country. The San Antonio Road had become quite
literally a highway across Texas and has remained so to the
present day. The travelers started from different points in
northern Mexico, and had various objectives in eastern
Texas, but that they generally "funneled" their route
through the "Gilmore Corridor" seems undeniable. The
Tejas or I-Iasinai tribes of the eastern Texas forests, with
their intensive agriculture, large towns, temples, fairs, etc.,
were always held in great contrast to the impoverished and
thinly scattered peoples west of them.
Except for the mountain ranges of Trans-Pecos Texas and
the fairly rugged canyons of the Edwards Plateau, there are
few topographic ~eatures in Texas to hinder travel on foot
or horse. We can be sure that natives and Europeans alike
could and did travel over the state in many directions. We
should not, therefore, overestimate the importance of the
"Gilmore Corridor" or expect that expeditions made great
detours in order to reach it. Its usefulness was most apparent to those traveling back and forth between northeastern
Mexico and the eastern forests, and it was evidently considered very preferable to the coastal plain. To judge from
published journals, there was much less hostility from the
natives in this belt than along the coast. Also, it should be
remembered that this corridor skirts the Edwards Plateau,
the main canyons of which run from northwest to southeast,
across the line of travel to easterr~ Texas. Once past the
Plateau, one could take any of many courses to the east,
northeast, and north, continuing into Oklahoma without
hindrance from any natural barriers.
Archaeological evidence does not yet permit a definite
statement on how long ago this corridor was used for long-

Importance of the "’Gilmore Corridor’;

range travel.

175

MacNeish has recently outlined the occur-

rence of certain artifact types which suggest a "chain of
contacts" across central Texas, reaching from the Huastecan
cultures in Tamaulipas to the Caddoan region ,of easterr~
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Oklahoma. This study was
made primarily to account for the presence-of ceremonial
elements at the Spiro mounds in eastern Oklahoma.z3 MacNeish’s article throws into relief the probability that the
"central Texas route" was preferred to others in this direction, but I do not believe that the projectile-point styles on
which he bases his argument are very convi.ncing for the
particular problem of contact between ~he Huastecan area
and Caddoan cultures. That is, one can hardly assume that
the people who left certain styles of projectile points along
this route were also the bearers of highly developed Middle
American ceremonial traits. Nevertheless, his data points to
the use of this corridor by pre-Columbian Indians.
There are a few published references to clay and stone
figurine heads of Mexican origin in localities in or near the
"Gilmore Corridor." Other such objects are on record in
the University of Texas files and.dre being carefully checked
as to the conditions of discovery. When not found in connection with Indian habitation sites they are of small value
and in more than one case the figurine was traceable to
modern visitors to Mexico. Even the most trustworthy
speciments are quite hard to identify as to date and place of
origin.2, When all such cases are thoroughly examined, it
should be possible to gain a good idea of their source and
the time or times during which they were carried into Texas.
23 See note 7.
24 A carved herd of "hard volcanic ash" ~rom a gravel I)it in Dallas, Texas, was
reported in this Bulletin, Vol. 4, ~)I). 79-80, 1932, by Ellis W. Shuler.
A head of
green, stone from a stratified archaeological site in Travis County near At~stin ",vas
reported by Carl Chelf in this Bulletin, Vol. 13, ~0p. 58-62, 1941.
In Vol. 17. 1946,

Mr. and Mrs. J. H. !Ray described a clay head similar to those of the Mexican god
Xipe Totec; this was found near Cisco in north-central Texas. A very similar "Xipe
Totec" head was found in 1947 near :Fort Worth by Miss Sylvla Golden and reported
to R. L. Stephenson of the Smithsonian Institution, :River Basins Survey.
A small,
flat clay head, possibly mold-made, comes from near the swimming pool at Barton
Springs in Austin, the site of a large aboriginal careD. The carved stone head with
~onlcal cap, mentioned by Mac~Nelsh (op. cir.) as certainly Huastecan, was found long
ago in Callahan County, but whether in a habitation site or not is unknown.
When

found in the open country of northern Texas, the Mexican figures may well have been
carried along some western route.

176

Texas Arch~oIogicaI and Paleontological Society

In contrast to the present indefinite information provided
by figurines in scattered parts of Texas, the Davis mound
site near Alto in Cherokee County, central east Texas, gives
evidence of a comparatively strong influence from Middle
American cultures.

This material will soon be published

(see note 3). Briefly, a ceramic complex including quantities
of highly polished black and brown pottery with finely engraved designs was found in and under a large platform
mound of clay. The closest apparent affiliations of this pottery lie with early Formative cultures in southern Mexico
and the Maya region; on the other hand, certain non-ceramic
traits at Davis suggest at least partial contemporaneity with
such relatively early eastern cultures as Adena, Tchefuncte,
Copena, and Hopewell. The writer estimates that these influences merged at the Davis site by about 500 A.D. i~ not
earlier.
It is therefore remarkable to note that the Davis site is
directly on the "Old San Antonio Road" just east of the
Neches River crossing between present Alto and Crockett.
There is some argument as to just where the first Spanish
missions were located in this vicinity, but by the time the
"Road" had become firmly established in the 18th century, ~t
passed over the same narrow terrace on which the mound is
located. This may of course be pure coincidence, but the
possibility cannot be ignored that the trail from Mexico that
later became the San Antonio Road was already in use many
centuries before the Spanish explorations. Furthermore, a
migrating group passing northeastward toward the Mississippi Valley region would have found in the Neches valley
one of the first really attractive environments for agricultural pursuits along this route. In protohistoric times the
Neches valley also marked the western extent of firmly
established agricultural communities of the Hasinai.
So far as archaeological records reveal at present, the
Davis site may represent an initial introduction of agricultural knowledge into the entire region of the Eastern United
States woodlands. It ~would be foolish to insist on such a
claim, however, for there is too much involved and not

Importance of the "GiI~nore Corridor"

177

enough direct evidence yet by which to trace the spread of
agriculture in space and time.
As to. the establishment of agricultural life in the Neches
valley more than 800 miles from the Soto la Marina river,
the intervening country being entirely non-agricultural so
far as known, there should be no theoretical objections.
Archaeologists are prone to insist that nothing can be proved
without continuous distributions. In this respect they are
rather in a rut and out of step with living history. When an
unhappy or disgruntled or hungry segment of a population
decides to seek a new homeland, it has often wandered great
distances before settling down in a new environment. Due
to its economic basis of existence, the group will in all probability seek a natural environment in which it can pursue
a similar economy, in this case an intensively agricultural
one supplemented with some hunting, fishing, and collecting
of wild plant foods.
Thus, to anyone familiar with the geography of Texas, it is
not at all surprising that a Middle American agricultural
group would cross most of the state before reaching a humid
forested region where it could continue the habitual economy
under climatic conditions similar to the homeland. The Rio
Soto la Marina is only the closest point in Mexico from which
such a movement is conceivable. We know next to nothing
of this northern outpost, however, and if it were settled in
comparatively late times, a much more southern part of
Mexico could well have been the original point of departure.
The distance covered may thus have been 1000 miles or even
considerably more. My point is that the movement of a
given cultural group, its causes, and place of settlement are
of first importance, the actual distance traveled quite incidental. A trek of 100 miles is no more !ogical or easier to
prove than one of 1000 miles.
Conclusions
There is no present evidence for pre-Columbian agriculture on either side of the lower Rio Grande in the zone of
precipitation effectivity designated DB’d by Thornthwaite.
Neither is such evidence at hand for agriculture in the

178

Te:cas A~’cheoIogicaI and Paleontological Society

southern half of Texas in the CB’d (dry sub-humid) and
CB’r (moist sub-humid) zones. Since native crops could
probably have been raised without irrigation in most years
in the two sub-humid zones, three possible explanations have
come to mind: (A) due to past climatic changes, the area in
which these zones are now found was less favorable when
agriculture was being spread into northern Mexico; (B) the
climate was favorable but the pre-Columbian Indians in this
belt were adverse to adopting it;: or (C) agriculture was
adopted as a supplement to the economy but we have not
found the evidence. It is highly improbable that agriculture
was practiced in the drier semi-arid zone at any time. Further
work on the correlation of culture and climate may show
more definitely the width of these zones when the knowledge
of agriculture reached into northeastern Mexico.
In pre-Columbian times as well as in the European period,
long-distance travel between northeastern Mexico and the
eastern woodlands Was often funneled through the "Gilmore
Corridor" in preference to other routes, although due to the
general absence of serious physical barriers in most of Texas,
such travel undoubtedly was carried over other routes as
well. The "Gilmore Corridor" simply presents certain natural advantages for traverse in a ~northeast-southwest direction across the southern parts of Texas, and was evidently
much prefered to the coastal fringe.
As a route of communication over a very long period, it is
quite possible that. the "Gilmore Corridor" was also the
route by which agricultural knowledge was carried to the
Eastern United States, crossing rapidly the broad expanses
of northeastern Mexico and Texas which were either unsuitable for it or inhabited by tribes adverse to adopting it. This
much granted, it is further conceivable that other culture
traits were similarly carried rapidly across these expanses
in either or both directions, leaving no traces of their establishment among the intervening peoples.

