130

Texa8 Archeological and Paleontological Society

FORREST KIRKLAND

Forrest Kirkland, who died April 2, 1942, was born near Mist,
Arkansas, November 24, 1892. He obtained his early education in
Arkansas and his art training in Battle Creek, Michigan.
Mr. Kirkland was a very successful advertising artist in Dallas
for many years.
In 1932 he became interested in geology as a hobby and collected many fossils and among them found a new species of fossil
jellyfish which was named after him (Rhisostomoides kirklandi) by
Dr. Kenneth E. Caster.
His collecting of fossils brought him into the region of Indian
rock paintings and in 1933 after viewing the rock paintings at Paint
Rock, Texas, he began to make exact copies of Indian paintings in
colors. It was his intention eventually to publish a book of these
paintings in colors. Annually since 1937 when The Bulletin published the first of the series Mr. Kirkland has prepared well written,
beautifully illustrated, articles on Texas Indian pictographs and
petroglyphs for publication therein.
His work was unique in that he was the first person to copy every
legible picture in a cave or shelter to an exact scale and in color.
Mr. Kirkland was a member of the Dallas Art Association and
organized and was President of the Dallas Archeological Society,
Director in the West Texas Historical and Scientific Society, member of the Society for American Archaeology, American Association
for the Advancement of Science, Regional Vice-President of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, and Fellow of the
Texas Academy of Science.
His work had won much recognition in American art circles, and
his pictographs were shown at the Addison Gallery of American Art
May 20-June 19, 1938, also at The Buffalo Museum of Science, Buffalo, N. Y., in 1940. The entire collection was shown at the Hall
of State, Dallas Historical Museum, and the Dallas Museum of Fine
Arts intends to show his works soon.
Texas art and science have both lost a master craftsman in Forrest Kirkland.

FORREST KIRKLAND

