ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF WHITNEY BASIN:
A PRELIMINARY REPORT1

BY

ROBERT L. STEI~HE~TSOI~

Location and Character of the Reservoir
In the spring of 1947 work was begun by the Corps of
Engineers, Dept of the Army, and the U. S. Bureau of Reclamation, Brazos River Conservation and Reclamation District on the concrete and earth fill dam on the central
Brazos River. This dam is located five miles southwest of
the town of Whitney, Hill County, Texas, at 92°27"45"’W.
longitude, 31°52"05’’ N. latitude. The Brazos in this area
forms the entire boundary between Hill and Bosque Counties. When completed, the dam will be 163 ft. high, with
1,673 ft. of concrete section and 8,258 ft. of earth embankment, forming a reservoir, to be used primarily for power,
flood control, and irrigation of the central Brazos River
Basin. The maximum flood stage surface of this reservoir is
designed to reach an elevation above sea level of 573.0 ft.
This will affect the present river level as far upstream as the
eastern boundary of Somervell County, a distance of some
58 river miles, and form a pool with a maximum depth of
150 ft. and a maximum width of 9 miles. The normal pool
of the reservoir is designed to reach an elevation of 520.0 ft.
This normal pool will have a maximum depth of 100 feet
and a maximum width of 3.5 miles, affecting the present
river level as far upstream as 45 miles. However, the river
at this level will overflow its present banks only as far upstream as the mouth of the Nolans River.
The Corps of Engineers in cooperation with the U. S.
Bureau of Reclamation and the National Park Service has
* This report is preliminary and time has not yet been available to coordinate
the findings with the literature covering this area. A careful study of such literature
as is available will be made for a later final report.

130

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

helped to provide funds for the Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution to conduct an archaelogical
survey of the area to be inundated by this reservoir. This
work was accomplished under the direction of Dr. ~Frank
H. H. Roberts, Jr., Associate Chief, Bureau of American
Ethnology.’ The survey was begun by the author on May
18, 1947, and carried to completion by him on October I,
1947, a total of 136 days being expended. The Corps of
Engineers, further, loaned two laborers for a period of 30
days.
The survey began at the damsite and continued upstream to the maximum limits of the flood area, and extended laterally into Hill and Bosque counties to a distance
of approximately one-half mile beyond the proposed limits
of the maximum flood pool.
Sixty one archaeological sites were located in this area,
23 of which are in Bosque County, and 38 in Hill county.
Prior to the survey recorded data were available on only 3
sites in Whitney Basin. These sites were the first three visited by the author and are listed as: (1) the Towash site
(42-39B1-1)’; (2) the L. D. Odom site (42-39B1-2); and
(3) the J. W. Greenwade shelter (42-39B1-3). Surface collections were made by Watt at all three of these sites in 1936
and 1937, but no excavation was carried on.
Acl~nowledgments
To the Corps of Engineers, Dept. of the Army, the U.
S. Bureau of Reclamation, and to the National Park Service, is due sincere gratitude ~or providing funds to make
this survey possible. During the course of the survey, the
district office of the Corps of Engineers, under direction
of Col. D. W. Griffiths, was very cooperative and helpful.
The Resident Engineer at Whitney, Mr. Mark Haima, and
~Approval for submitting tbis article has been kindly granted the author by Dr.
Roberts.
*Watt, Frank H., 1937.

Survey of Whitney Basin

131

his entire staff were extremely helpful in furnishing not
only maps and information regarding the area but also in
lending laborers for use on the survey. Grateful acknowledgment is made to these two organizations and to their individual members.
Also, during and subsequent to the survey, the Dept.
of Anthropology of the University of Texas, under the
chairmanship of Dr. J. Gilbert McAllister and, later, Dr.
Thomas N. Campbel!, extended its complete facilities to
the survey. The Dept. provided file information and laboratory and storage space. Mr. Alex D. Krieger and Mr. J.
Charles Kelley, of that department, gave unstintingly of
their time and valuable technical advice and criticism. Sincere thanks is expressed to this department and its members.
Grateful acknowledgment is also made to all of the informants and land-owners in the area of the x~hitney Basin.
Mr. Geo. ’Benson of Whitney, Mr. J. T. Parks and Mr. Walter J. Parks of Morgan, and Miss Gertrude Hill of Whitney
conducted the author personally to many sites and provided valuable information relative to these sites. Mrs. A.
Greenwade, Mr. Geo. Counts, Mr. A. L. Richards, Mrs.
Claude Parks, and others, all of Whitney, provided useful
historical information. Besides these people, Mr. J. L. Stansbury, Mr. Isaac Pollard, Mr. Albert Kyle and many others
generously granted permission to investigate and excavate
on their lands; and deep and sincere thanks is due them.
To Mr. Adolph Henry Witte of Henrietta, Texas, and
to Mr. Frank H. Watt of Waco, Texas, is extended grateful
acknowledgment for their visits to the survey. When the
author visited them to examine sites and study collections
~rom their respective geographical areas, their hospitality
was most generous. Finally, to Mr. Jack Colligan, geologist,
Corps of Engineers, thanks is due for use of his time and
private airplane in providing an aerial investigation of the
entire Whitney Basin.

132

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Historical Information
At this writing, time has not been sufficient to permit
a study of the early French and Spanish history of this area.
Such a study will undoubtedly prove very helpful in establishing temporal and cultural identities in the archaeological sites located. Quite extensive accounts of the early Spanish and French expeditions into Texas in the 16th, 17th,
and 18th centuries are available and, when time permits,
will be reviewed and incorporated into the final report on
this survey.

The following brief report on the American history of
the area from 1836 to 1870 is deduced only from the accounts of local informants. A careful study of the literature
pertaining to this area will later be made. The accounts of
local informants have been checked against each other insofar as possible, but no attempt has been made to check
them against the literature covering the period. Consequently, the following historical statement may be accepted only
with reservations until such time as a final review of the
literature is made.
According to one informant, the Greenwade and Walling families were among the first permanent settlers in the
Whitney Basin. They arrived in 1836, and established homes
in Walling Bend, Bosque County, near the present site of
the Whitney Dam. A few other families settled in this area
the same year, and occasional families moved in in succeeding
years. The majority of these people, however, settled on the
Hill County side of the river. At that time the Brazos River
formed a sort of defensive barrier against the "wild" Indians to the southwest. The Indians living northeast of the
river were regarded as ~’tame" Indians. The "wild" Indians
were described as nomadic raiders, who traveled in small
parties and stole or robbed whenever convenient for them.
Their raids seldom resulted in a settler’s death, but sometimes white captives were taken. These "wild" Indians were
identified as "Comanches". At that time (perhaps a little

Survey of Whitney Basin

133

later than 1836) a trading house was operating in the vicinity of what is now Waco, some 35 miles further down
the Brazos. The "wild" Indians often went to that trading
house.

This informant knew of two camps of ~tame" Indians
in the vicinity. One was located on the northeast bank of
the Brazos. One-half mile above the present highway bridge
on State Highway No. 22. (This is the Towash Site, 4239B1-1 of this report). It was a large camp of Towash Indians and consisted of many small ~wigwams". It was inhabited for many years and was here when her grandfather
arrived in 1836. They had a burying ground somewhere
near the camp. The other was a large camp of Choctaw Indians on the east bank of the Brazos in Lofer’s Bend. (This
is the Ed Mixon site, 42-39B1-4 of this report). Both groups
enjoyed mutual friendship traveling between the two villages by a regular trail. They also were friendly to the settlers and known to them as beggars but were seldom known
to steal.

In 1854, Mrs. Greenwade’s grandfather built a long
house on the southeastern edge of the Towash camp. The
house is still in use and has been continually occupied since
that date. The informant lived here many years and in her
youth has been in both the Towash and Choctaw camps
many times (1867-1870). Around 1868 "when I was about
9 or 10 years old" an epidemic of measles killed many people
in both the Towash and Choctaw camps. These Indians
gradually left the area sometimes shortly after t870.
Another informant who lives at the site of the Towash
store was interviewed. He told of a colony of 16 settlers
from Mississippi settling some 200 yards north of his present home. They remained there to establish the town known
as Towash. In 1846~ enough settlers were living there to

4This date is variously reported as 1846 to 1854.

Probably 1853-4 is more nearly

134

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

establish a trading house, and a permanent church was built.
Also a dam was built across the Brazes here, and a grist mill
was built to grind corn for the settlers who "came for many
miles to get their corn milled". Some 25 or 30 buildings had
been erected by 1853, and this was the largest town in Hill
County when that county was established as such in 1853.
Ruins of the mill, the bridge and the trading house or store
are still standing. The church is still in use at the present
time.
The village established by this colony of settlers is only
a half mile northwest of the Towash Indian camp. Counts
corroborated the Greenwade statements about the Indians
in the area at that time, but denied any knowledge of the
"depredations of the ’wild’ Indians". The only case he knew
of was the theft of an ox which was later returned to the
owner.
Eleven miles further up the Brazos is the locality known
as Fort Graham. This was "A frontier military post established on the site of a Waco Indian village by Brevet Major
R. A. Arnold, Second United States Dragoons, on March
27, 1849. Named in honor of Lt. Col. William M. Graham
who died at Mona Del Rey, September 6, 1847. Abandoned
November 9, 1853, after settlements had been made further
west".° Informants stated that a large Indian camp had
existed at this place prior to establishment of the fort, and
after the fort was abandoned a smaller Indian village stil!
remained. This smaller village was abandoned somewhere
around 1870. It was inhabited by a group of Anadarka Ind~.~s under the leadershlo of Jose Maria, and was know., .qs
the Jose Maria village. These Indians hunted and fished some
a..d raised small patches of corn. However, their main dependence for food was upon begging from the whites. This
latter vrait they were notorious for.
In 1847, Dr. Ferdinand Roemer° made a trip by muleback from Torrey’s Trading House (near the present site
Plaque set up on the site by the State Historica! Society of Texas, 1936.
~goemer, Ferdinand, Texas, 1849.

Survey of Whitney Basin

135

of Waco) to a "Caddoe village" which was 30 miles journey
up the Brazos. Roemer’s description of the geographical location of the village fits this locality and the distance from
Torrey’s Trading House would bring him very near here.
The archaeological sites 42-26D7-1, 42-26D7-3, and 4226D7-4 were located in the present survey in this vicinity
and it is believed that all three are sections of a single site,
representing the "Caddoe village" of Roemer’s account. Later, Fort Graham was established on this village site and the
Indians, being friendly, lived around the fringes of the fort.
After the fort was abandoned, the Anadarka group under
Jose Maria were the only remaining Indians and they abandoned the village around 1870.

Other historical information relating to the Indian occupation of the Whitney Basin in this period is very meager.
Mr. Ed Nichols relates that the "last bunch of Comanches
that camped all night in Bosque County" was in 1869. A
group of-four Comanches wearing "tall feathers on their
heads" met and chased him. This occurred some four miles
up Steele’s Creek from the present town of Morgan, in
Bosque County.
Nichols locates at least two Indian camps that he has
seen and visited. They were camps of friendly Tonkawas.
One camp was within 50 yards of the present Santa Fe R. R.
bridge across Steele’s Creek. (This is site 42-26D7-34 of this
report.) This camp was occupied in the middle 1860’s. Another camp of friendly Tonkawas was built on Steele’s Creek
in front of the Nichols’ house. This would be in the vicinity
of the business district of the present town of Morgan. These
Tonkawas came there in 1865 and stayed until "The Comanches quit raiding" or about 1869.
Thus, at least six of the sites located in this survey (4239B1-1 and 4 and 42-26D7-1, 3, 4, and 34) are known to
have been inhabited at various times between 1836 and 1870.
The Choctaw, Towash, Anadarka, and Tonkawa are reported by informants with first hand knowledge to have

136

Texas ArcheoIogieal and Paleontological Society

been k~cated at these sites. Who occupied the sites prior to
that time and for how long is unknown. All informants
agree that by 1869 or 1870 all Indians, both ¢~wild" and
’¢tame" had left the Whitney Basin. For what reason or
where they went is not known.
Historic Sites
42-39B1-1, Towash site is an important historic Indian
village, in Hill County, inhabited by Towash Indians who
appear to be related to the Taovayas and/or Tauhuaconi
Wichita-speaking) tribes. The village is known to have
been abandoned in the early 1870’s and to have been occupied prior to 1836, probably a long time prior to that date.
Culturally, the camp bears a great resemblance to the Taovayas village of Spanish Fort on the Red River, which is
thought to have been occupied from the middle 18th century to the late 1840’s.
42-39B1-4, Mixon site, is reported to be a Choctaw camp
in Hill County, but its exact !ocation was not found.
42-39B1-7, McCown site is probably a marginal area
of site 42-39B1-1.
42-26D7-1,3,4, are together referred to as the Fort Graham sites. These three are probably separate parts of a single
site in Hill County covering some 30 acres or more and representing the "Caddoe Village" visited by Roemer in 1847.’
In 1849 Fort Graham was established here and some of the
Indians, being friendly, remained around the fringes of the
Fort. When this fort was abandoned in 1853 the Anadarka
group under Jose Maria were the only remaining Indians.
About 1870 the site was abandoned.
42-26D7-34, & 35, Yates site and J. Benson site respectively, in Bosque County, were occupied by the Tonkawas
in the 1860’s.
~Roemer,

Dr.

Ferdinand,

1849.

Survey of Whitney Basin

137

Rocl¢ Shelter Sites
42-39B1-3 & 20, Greenwade shelters in Bosque County
are small, culturally poor sites inhabited sporadically by
small groups of Indians. Arti£acts imply some aspect of the
Balcones Phase is represented here.
42-26D7-5, Pictograph cave, in Hill County. This rock
shelter seems to represent one of the late pre-pottery or nonpottery cultures of the general Balcones phase, extending
into, or in contact with, the early pottery cultures of east
Texas. It was apparently a rather poor culture, depending
on gathering and hunting of deer and small animals, but not
Bison, for food. As the type of shelter requires considerable
time for deposition of the six feet of fill, a fairly long, but
probably sporadic occupation is implied. On the basis of two
sherds of Sanders Focus pottery found here, a possible beginning date for occupation might be placed at somewhere
prior to 1300 A.D.~ and extending some two or three hundred years, perhaps longer. Extensive trenching was carried
on in this shelter, and three distinct strata were noted. The
top 4" was compacted sterile animal manure. Stratum II
containing all the cultural material, extended to a depth of
some 42" and was composed o~ a grey to brown ash mixed
with some windblown soil and rubbish and tremendous numbers of snail and mussel shells. In the bottom o~ this stratum
was a fairly large rectangular fire hearth filled with concentrated ash and charcoal and many fire-broken limestone
rocks. At this same level was a circular slab-lined cist. This
cist contained nothing other than the same material as filled
the rest of the stratum. Stratum III consisted of sterile, decomposed roof material. Six pictographs, painted with red
hematite pigment occurred on the shelter walls.
42-26D7-12, Buzzard cave, in Hill County. This rock
shelter was extensively trenched and two occupational zones
were noted. The lower zone, at a depth of 22" to 24" conSKricger,

A.

D.,

1946.

138

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

sisted of only a few artifacts but these were quite distinct
from the artifacts o£ the upper zone. Pitted stones, ~manos,
smoothed stones, miscellaneous scrapers (none of the snubnose type), hammerstones and mussel shell fleshing tools
occurred in this zone. Above this lower zone was a comparatively sterile area of some 10" in depth. The upper zone
produced an artifact complex represented by small arrow
points, (over 50% of which were Perdiz Pointed Stem type),
small snub-nose scrapers, small flint drills, a beveled fourbladed knife, an obsidian projectile point, and 5 potsherds of
Doss Redware (?)°. Snail and mussel shells also occurred in
great numbers, some of the latter showing perforation
and/or roughened edges. On the basis of this artifact complex, the culture found in the upper zone seems to represent a camp of the Toyah Focus. This focus has been identified by Kelley,1° on the basis of the above named types of
artifacts, as a manifestation of one group of the Jumano
Indians. These Indians were nomadic traders embracing an
area from southeastern New Mexico to east Texas in their
seasonal migrations /?or trading purposes. They have been
traced both historically and archaeologically from circa 1450
to 1750 A. D. Kelley is of the belief that this site represents
a rather early appearance of this group. If so, the culture
represented in the upper zone of this shelter can be tentatively dated somewhere around the late 15th or early 16th
centuries. The older culture manifestation, appearing at a
lower stratigraphic depth and separated from the upper
zone by a compar~atively large depth of shelter fill would
seem to be linked to the pre-pottery cultures of the Balcones
Phase. It would date perhaps one or two centuries earlier
than the Toyah Focus appearance or circa 1250 A. D. or
earlier.
°These sherds were sent to Mr. Stanley Stubbs, Laboratory of Anthropology,
Santa Fe, New Mexico, for comment.
Stubbs states they are definitely not Puebloan.
Krleger is equally certain they are not east Texas types.
Their identity is probably
with the central and southwest Texas types found by Kelley at Presidio, Texas, and
other localities.
1°Kelley, J. Charles, manuscript on ]uraano and Patarabuey~ Relations at La
Junta Los Rios in preparation.
(Title subject to change.)

Survey o] Whitney B~zsin

139

42-26D7-20, Sheep Cave, Hill County. This shelter was
extensively trenched and a stratigraphic profile noted. However only one culture complex appeared and that in the second stratum at a depth of 4" to 24". Artifacts here were
few but mainly of the dart point types. Scrapers were few.
Blades, hammerstones, unshaped manos, hematite pigment,
used mussel shells, bone awls, and antler flakers comprised
the remainder of the artifact. Eight potsherds apparently
of Sanders Focus types~ were found. In the floor of stratum
III and apparently intrusive from stratum II was a slablined cist similar to the one in pictograph cave. At this same
level and one foot toward the shelter wall a burial occurred.
It was tightly flexed, on the left side, facing south with the
head toward the east. A large rock rests on the right shoulder and side, partly crushing the skeleton. Bone preservation was good and nearly all bones were present. However,
the skull is missing but the mandible is present and in place.
All bones showed good articulation and no evidence of post
burial disturbance could be found. The rami were examined
closely and no evidence of cutting was apparent. The method of removing the skull without the mandible is unknown.
This site seems to represent a camp of one of the groups
who were at least in contact with the early pottery making
cultures o feast Texas. The buria!, with mandible and no
skull, is similar to burials of the Henrietta Focus" to the
north, but lack of Henrietta Focus pottery and projectile
points implies a different cultural group. The shelter was
apparently occupied by a single group of primarily gathering and hunting people for a moderately long period circa
the 14th and 15th centuries A. D.
Nine other rock shelter sites were located but none produced any informative data.
Open Occupatio~ml Areas
During the course of the survey, some 40 other sites were
located. These consisted of open occupational areas, sixteen
Tentative identification by Krieger, A. D.
~*Krleger, A. D., 1946.

140

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

o£ which are located in the upper terrace of the Brazes River
and twenty-four on the lower terrace. Brief examination of
these sites and minor test trenching showed little or no difference between the sites of the upper terrace and those of
the lower terrace. All of these sites appear to represent camps
o~ nomadic hunting groups in the pre-pottery, pre-bow and
arrow horizons. Except as previously noted, pottery and
small arrow points are lacking from all sites in this area,
with three possible exceptions. These are three open sites,
from each o£ which one arrow point was recovered.
S~n~nary and Conclusions

It is apparent from the large number o£ sites located in
this area that the central Brazes Valley provided an important occupational area for large numbers of people over an
extensive period of time. Just how long this time span covers
is impossible to say now. It is possible that some o£ the sites
south of Whitney Basin in McLennan County are very old.=
No evidence of these old sites has come to light in the Whitney area, however. The earliest culture manifestation in the
Whitney Basin seems to represent a late aspect o£ the Balcones Hiase in the Archaic Horizon. This aspect is evident
in many small, open, occupational areas, producing an artiJ~act complex differing somewhat from the complexes represented by the known aspects of the Balcones Phase. It is
more similar to the Edwards Plateau Aspect than any of
the others of the Phase, but projectile points are very different, and antler handles, stone cist burials, heavy choppers, and other characteristics ox¢ this aspect have not been
found here. The general artifact complex seems to represent an, as yet undescribed, aspect, or possibly one or more
loci of such an aspect, of the Balcones Phase?" Further excavation in Whitney Basin, should bring this aspect and/or

aaWatt, Frank H., 1938.
*~ Difficulty is encountered in central Texas in assigning focus and aspect status
to the culture complexes, due to the relatively few elements appearing in each complex
upon which such assignment may be made.

Survey o] Whitney Basin

141

its loci into full view. The description of this is, consequently, left for a later report and not attempted here. It may
be said that an archaic, pre-pottery, pre-bow-and-arrow horizon does appear in this area and is represented in a large
number of sites. This horizon is not confined alone to the
Whitney Basin, but extends down the Brazos River at least
through McLennan County and probably upstream at least
through Johnson, Somerville and Hood Counties.
The later bow-and-arrow horizon is represented in Whitney Basin by at least one known focus of the central Texas
aspect and perhaps other loci of this aspect. The Toyah
Focus, representing a group of Jumano Indians living normally in southwest central Texas, but whose trading territory extended from southeastern New Mexico to east Texas,~° is identified in a single rock shelter site, (42-26D7-12).
In this site it overlies an older, archaic culture complex. A
second focus is identified in two other rock shelter sites
(42-26D7-5 and 20) and probably in three open sites. This
may represent a marginal extension of the Austin Focus, or
possibly a mixture of peoples from north and east Texas and
Austin Focus. At least, it is certain that tb.ese people had
some contact with east and north Texas peoples. Further
excavation will determine the nature of th~s foc~.~s or loci.
It is cert,~in, a!so, that the late pre-hlstoric pottery-using
peoples, while occupying intensively the Brazos Valley in
McLennan County, only 15 miles downstream, extended
their range into the Whitney Basin only rarely, if at all.
Finally, sites known in recent historic times were located. These are camps of the Tonkawa, Towash, Anadarka,
and Choctaw (?).
Age ~ssignment for the sites in the Whitney Basin must
at present remain only relative in all but the historic sites.
The end of Indian occupation in the area came circa 1870.

I~ Kelley,

J.

Ch=rles,

maauscript

~nnl~t Los Rios i~ prep~ratio*~.

on

]~:mano and

(Tiile subiect to change.)

Palarabueye

Relations at

La

142

Texas Archeolog~cal and PaIeon$ologioal Society

The Tonkawa sites are reported to have been inhabited for
only a short time in the 1850’s and 1860’s. The Towash site
began sometime before 1836 and extended up to the early
1870’s, as did the Anadarka site at Fort Graham. The prehistoric Toyah Focus site may be tentatively assigned to the
late 15th or early 16th century. Other late loci (if more
than one is represented) may be assigned a date no earlier
than the i4th century and probably later, extending into
the 16th or 17th centuries. The archaic horizon certainly
overlaps the later one and may extend back some two or
three centuries prior to it.

It is contemplated that, as a result of the recommendations made in the report of this survey, a program of excavation will be carried on, in the near future, in this area.
Such excavation will also be under the direction of the Bureau o£ American Ethnology.
REFERENCE CITED
Cutbirth, R. N.
1943. Ed Nichols Rode a Horse, Texas Folklore Society and
Dallas.

University Press in

Kelley, J. C.
Excavation & Interpretation of 5 Central Texas Archaeological Sites.
script.
Kelley, J. C.
]umano and Patarabueya Relations at La Junta Los Rios.
subject to change).
Krieger, A. D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas.

Manuscript.

Manu-

(Title

University of Texas

Publication No. 4640.
Roemer, F.
I849. Texas Bonn, Germany.
Watt, E. H.
1937. Glass Indian Trade Beads in Central Texas.
Archaeological Society.
Bul. No. 3.
Watt, F. H.
1938. The Waco Sin]~er,
Bul. No. 4.

Bulletin

of

Witte, A. H.
1938. Spanish Fort, an Historic Site.
PaIeontological Society. Vol. 10.

the

Central

Bulletin

of

Bulletin of the Central Texas

Texas

Archaeological

the Texas

Society,

Archeological

and

