A TENTATIVE CULTURAL SEQUENCE FOR
THE AREA ABOUT THE MOUTH
OF THE PECOS’
HERBERT C. TAYLOR, JR.

This paper is cdncerned with the archaelogy of the area
about the confluence of the Pecos River and Rio Grande.
The region is cut by deep arroyos, in the walls of which are
found the rock shelters which comprised the homes of the
pre-historic Pecos River cave dwellers. Within a radius of
thirty miles of the Pecos River mouth is found a distinctive
type of pictograph, from whence is derived the appellation,
"Pecos River Focus pictograph area.’’z
Objectives of this article are: first, the location and synthesis of all reported sites in the area; and second, the presentation of a tentative cultural sequence.
On the map (Plate 13) an attempt has been made to locate
all sites so far reported.
Because several institutions
and individuals have conducted archaeological investigations in the area, sites have frequently been reported under
different names or numbers in various publications. Many
have been located only in a cursory or tentative manner.
On the map (Plate 13) an attempt has been made to locate
all sites so far reported, and doubtless other sites have yet
to be located. Hearsay reports of sites are not included.
I Condensed from portions of a thesis to be presented to the Faculty of
the graduate School of the University of Texas in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of Master of Arts. So much of this tentative
construction springs from suggestions by Dr. J. Charles Kelley that the work
must be regarded as largely his. Pie should not be, however, pilloried for errors herein; the responsibility of this presentation is the writer’s.
In addition to Dr. Kelley, the writer is indebted to :Dr. T. N. Campbell,
Dr. J. Gilbert McAlllster and Mr. A. D. Krleger of the University of Texas
Department of Anthropology, and to Mr. A. T. Jackson, formerly field
archaeologist for the University, for suggestions and criticisms. In the field],
]:)on Valeriano Diego, Mr. Guy Skiles, and Mr. E. M. Zuberbueler have the
thanks of the writer for not only giving permission to enter their land but
for providing ever~ assistance to him.
Thanks are also due for assistance in the field to l~r. A. D. Peterson of
Pennsylvania State College, and Senores Ramon and Raul Diego-Rlza.
The field work was financed by my parents, Mr. and Mrs. H. C. Taylor
of I-louston, Texas. Much of the research Was done by my wife, Mrs. Ruby
Taylor, Assistant Curator of the Anthropolog’~r Museum, Uni_ver~,ity
~. For a delineation and description of the area see "x’aylor,
chaeologlcal Reconnaissance in Northern Coahuila,’" Texas Archaeclogica!
and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 19, Ahilene, 1948.

74

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

PLATE 18

The following chart shows which sites in this area have
been investigated by workers in the field. The site number given in the left hand column is that marked on the
map in this article; the quadrangular number .gives the
site number found on the master site map of the University of Texas, employing a system recommended by the
Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society. Under
the column marked "Jackson’s PWTI"3 the site number is
t~iat given in A. T. Jackson’s Picture Writing o[ Texas Indians; the next two columns contain the numbers or names
employed elsewhere by Jackson and by the writer in notes
And publications. Finally, the primary source for the location and description of the site is given. Only the article
containing the original description or most exact location
is employed; later references are omitted. Since in some
"instances the same site has been reported in different locations, the identification and site number are based upon
personal examination.
~ In the chart certain abbreviations have been employed: PWTI- Picture
Writing of Texas Indlan~ by Jackson; Al~NO--"Archaeologlcal l~econnais~ance in ~o~he~ CoahuH~" by Taylor; ~BB~Blg Bend Basket Maker
Paper; TAP~Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin:

A Tentative Cultural Sequence :for Lower Pecos Area

75

Correlation of Site Numbering Systems
Site
No.

Quadranguo
lar System
No,

pS~o!
Notes
Jack- I No.
or
Jackson’s. INoteSNameNo.Tayl°r’Sor

I Coah.
t Coah.
3

I

5
6
7

Cbah.
Coah.
Coah.

Loc~
Name

Sources

La Elephante
San
Martin

ARNC

Angellta i ARNC

I Coah.
, Coah.
I Coah. 8

’ ’

I ARNC
’ tAPaqc

Coah.

9
10

Coah 10

Cave
60B9-1

12

60B8 -1

13

60B8-3

14

60B8-4

91

15
16

60B8-2
60B8-5

90

Painted
Canyon B
Painted
Canyon A

17

60B8-6

88

Presa
Canyon A

96

I-Iorseshoe
Cave
92

Presa

18
19

60B5-1
60B8-7

89

Canyon

20
21
22
23

60B8-8
60B8-10
60B8-11
60B5-2

84
87

No. S
No. 7 & 8

82

1 &

24

60B5-3

25

60B5-4

26

60B8-9

27

60B7-I
71
72

~ Cave
Parlda

60B4-4

60B4-8
60B4-3

PWTI
PWTI
PWTI
!
PWTI
Fate Bell Pearce & Jackson
U.T. publication
Shelter

Jackson, FN
Taylor, FN ’48
P%VTI

60B4-2

60B4-7

Panther I Panther
Cave
Cave

Cave

60B4-1

60B4-6

I PWTI

B

PWTI

29

32

PWTI
Kelley, FN ’48
PWTI

guberbueler

28

60B4-~

Z Canyon
Shelter
Z Canyon i Painted
Gallery
Rocks

Woolsey, UT Notes
’35, Butler,
Thesis
PWTI
PWTI, Kelley, FN
’48, Taylor,
FN ’48

PWTI

Painted
~ Cave

31’

,
PWTI

11

Painted
Cave
Parida

Cave
Goat
,Cave

.~vgoore’
head
Cave
80

~

PWTI

PWTI
PWTI
: P~VTI

,, 70
69

I PWTI

PWTI

Palnte~
Cave

PWTI
PWTI

76

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

CORRELATION OF SITE NUMBERING SYSTEMS (Continued)
Site

36

38
39

Quadrangular System
No.

60B4-10
60B4-9
60B4-11
60B4-~2

Jackson’s
PWTI
No.

I Jackson’s
|Notes
[No. or
rName

Shumla 1

78

I-D~lden~ trAPS ’37

Shumla
Caves

BBBMP I
BBBMP

Shumla 3
Shumla 4
Kelley
Cave

605~6-2
60A6-3

60A6=6

Sources

PWTI

Shumls
Caves

76

BBBMP I

Kelley

FN

’32

I Taylor

FN

’47

T~ylor ~N

Langtry
Rock
Midden
Eagle
Cave

I

Taylor FN "47

"~kiles
Cave

60A6-5

46

Local
Name

74

60A6-4
45

Name

Murrah
Cave

60:B4-13
60B4-14
42

Taylor’s
Notes
No. or

Taylor FN ’48
Eagle
Cave

BBBMP IE[.PWTI

Sites
Rattle47

60A5-1

73

snake

PWTI

Canyon

60A5-2

A few words of warning might be set down here concerning the use of the map; sites here numbered 42, 43, and 44
all lie upon Mile Canyon although spatial limitations prevented their being so depicted. Site number 10 is only nominally a pictograph site; the cave wall has collapsed and one
bit of painted limestone was found in the debris.
There are several types of sites in the area, the most
common being rock shelters containing evidences of human
occupation in the form of middens, or refuse heaps on the
cave floor.
In one instance, site number 16, hearths were found along
a canyon rim without other evidences of occupation. A few
sites, numbers 9, 45, and 48, are composed of piles of burnt
rock. Several names have been applied to this type of site:
"burnt rock mounds" of Texas, sotol pits, etc. Perhaps a better system of nomenclature would be to employ the term
burnt rock middens, since these piles were obviously incidental accumulations and not deliberately constructed

A Tentative Cultural Sequence ]or Lower Pecos Area

77

mounds., In contrast to the rock shelters the burnt rock
middens seem to be virtually artifact sterile.
Pictographs occur in two types of sites, on the walls of
occupied rock shelters and in gallery-like form on cliff-sides
and stream cutbacks. Sites 1, 2, 3, and 15 are examples
of this latter type.
Archaeological investigation of the pictographs of western
Texas had its inception only recently. In his classic pictographic study Garrick Mallery devotes only a few lines to
Texas paintings,s Colonel M. L. Crimmins6 and Professor
Victor J. Smith7 were pioneers in locating and describing
pictographs in the area and in 1938 A. T. Jackson published
his exhaustive Picture Writing el Texas Indians.o
Mr. and Mrs. Forrest Kirkland, in a series of publications
in the late thirties, set up a classificatory system for these
paintings,s It was in the course of this study that the Kirklands noted a distinctive type of pictograph peculiar to the
area immediately about the confluence of the Pecos and the
Rio Grande. (See Plate 14).
These paintings are distinguishable from those which occur elsewhere in West Texas by several criteria:
1) They are polychromatic.
2) The atlatl, but never the bow, is depicted in them.
3) They show evidence of greater age than other types
of pictographs in the area; frquently other types of paintings are found superimposed upon them.
4) There seems to be group composition in the paintings.
4 l~rieger, A. D., "Some Suggestions on Archaeological Terms," Texas
Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 16, 1945, pp. 41-46.
5 Mallery, Garrick, 4th and 5th Annual Reports of the Bureau of American Ethnology.
6 Crlmmins, Colonel i~I. L., "The Pictographs at Hueco Tanks," Texas
Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 3, Abilene, :1931.
7 Smith, ~’ictor J., "Indian l~ictographs of the Big Bend in Texas."
Publications of the Texas Folklore Society, No. II, Austin, 1923. Smith,
Ytetor J,, "The Human I-Iand in l~rimitive ~rt," Publications of the Texas
Folklore Society, :No. IV, Jkustin, 1925.
8 3~ckson, .&. T., Picture Writing of Texas Indians, University of Texas
Publications, :No. 3809.
9 I~irkland, Forrest, articles in Texas A~chaeologlcsl and Paleontological
Society Bulletins~ Vols. 9, 10, and 11. (See bibliography).

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

78

5) The figures are highly conventionalized.
In actuality, there seem to be three discrete types of
paintings in the area.1°
1)

The previously discussed Pecos Focus paintings.

2) Crude realistic representations of men and animals
done in red or black. This type depicts the bow and is sometimes found superimposed upon the Pecos Focus pictographs.
3)

(Plate 15).

Linear representations of men depicting firearms,

horses and a U. S. Army officer dressed in a uniform of the
latter part of the nineteenth century.
Thus, we have in the region a sort of pictographic stratigraphy. The third type must be, inferentially, Apache, since
they are known to have occupied the area in the nineteenth
century and similar types of paintings are found among the
Navajo. The second type seems to be late pre-historic and
is found widely throughout West Texas. On the other hand,
the first type seems to be early, and, as has been pointed
out, is peculiar to the area under discussion. In an effort
to explain the presence of a complex type of early pictograph in such a restricted locality, it will be necessary to
consider, briefly, the development of concepts concerning
the pre-historic cultural sequence in western Texas.
When the first reports of an early hunting and gathering
horizon in western Texas were made the culture was
identified as an off-shoot of the Basket Maker and thus
gained the alliterative title of Big Bend Basket Maker.,,
The culture was assigned no place in relative chronology,
save that it was prehistoric. Its material remains consisted
mainly of flint dart points, arrowheads, other flint artifacts,
sandals, matting, coiled basketry, netting and pictographs.
]0 Mr. Forrest l~Irkland described only the first two types; the paintings in Press Canyon, described herein, would seem to be a third.
11 Smith, Victor J., "Archaeological !~Totes of the Big Bend l~eglon of
Texas," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Abtiene,
1931, p. 69.

A Tentative Cultural Sequence for Lower Pecos Area

81

This conglomerate of cultural bag and baggage was held
to prove its affinity to the Basket Maker of New 1Vfexico.
Soon the workers in the field challenged this concept.,~
They argued that a lithic, hunting tradition was basic to
the early pre-history of most of North America and that
the consequent similarity of cultural material did not prove
an immediate relationship to the Southwestern Basket
Makers.
E. B. Sayles tentatively identified three early food-gathering groups in West Texas: Hueco Cave Dweller in the E1
Paso region, Big Bend Cave Dweller, and Pecos River Cave
Dweller in the area about the mouth of the Pecos,,s
In 1940 Kelley, Campbell and Lehmer published the report of extensive archaeological field work and geologicalchronological correlations in the Big Bend.v, Briefly, this
paper identified three successive cultural horizons and for
the first time, gave relative chronology to the cultures.
The Pecos River Focus is the earliest of these cultures,
having come to an end before the beginning of the Kokernot
formation, giving it a possible terminal date of before 1000
A.D. Its diagnostic characteristics are the Langtry Stemmed
projectile point, retouched flint knives with a straight or
slightly curving edge, shell ornaments, non-split stitch coiled
basketry, round toed sandals, and painted pebbles. It was
pre-agricultural and pre-ceramic.
The Chisos Focus which follows the Pecos Focus, is characterized by distinctive projectile points such as the Paisano
12 Setzler, t~. :M[., "A. Prehistoric Cave Culture In Southwest Texas,"
American Anthropologist, Vol. 87, 1935.
Reed, :Ertk, Summary of ~ letter in ~n editorial note en~tled "~tg ~end
B~ket M~ers," El Palacio, Vol. XL~, S~t~ Fe, 1937.
ffudd, N. ~., "Progress In the ~uthw~t," Essays in Historical Anthropology of North America, Smtthsontan InstIudon, Washing~n, D.
1940, pp. 429-30.
1~ Sayles, E. B., An Archaeological Su~eM of Texas, Gil~ Pueblo, 1935.
14 Kelley, 3. Ch~les, T, N. Campbell ~d Donald 5. ~hmer, "The
socl~t!on of ~chaeologic~ MuterIa~ ~d Geologic~ Deposits In the Big
Bend Region of Texas," Sul Ross State Teachers College BulletIn, Vol.
~I, ~o. 3, September 1940.

82

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Indented Base,,s fish-tailed sandals, split stitch basketry and
agriculture.
The third cultural phase is that of the Livermore Focus,
which seems to have been contemporaneous with the Chisos
Focus but which probably was .ancestral to the Bravo Valley Aspect. This period is characterized by arrowpoints,
cluding side-notched points, the so-called Livermore point,
snub nose scrapers and flake knives.
The cultural sequence outlined above is the accepted one
for western Texas and has been considered to be applicable
to the area about the mouth of the Pecos.
¯ Originally, workers r_eporte~d that one culture only was
represented in the area. This concept, it is believed, was
mistaken and resulted from the excavational techniques employed. In the Witte Museum report on Shumla cave,e it is
stated that the assumption was that only one culture was
represented and thus no effortwas made to determine stratigraphy. Other workers employed the layer technique; this
resulted in cutting across stratigraphic lines with a consequent failure to see changes in the culture.
Artifacts found in these sites include diagnostic points of
the Pecos and Chisos foci as well as Livermore arrowheads.
There seems, however, to have been a difference between
the cultural sequence here and that in the Big Bend.
Analysis of Davenport’s,~7 Holden’s,e and Pearce and
Jackson’s1, reports, plus examination of an unpublished analysis of projectile point types by depth in Fate Bell Shelter
by Jacksonao and a test trench of site number 26 by A. D.
Peterson and the writer2, brought forth a distinction in the
cultural sequences in the two areas.
15 The writer regrets that, in a previous paper ("An Archaeological
l~econnaissance in Nortllern Coahulla~" Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, 1948) Dr. ~[£e]ley w~s misquoted as saylng that
Paiaano Indented Base is characteristic Rlso of the Pecos Focus.
16 OP. Cit~, Big Bend Basket MakeP Paper~ No. 1.
17 OP. tit., Davenport.
18 TIolden, W. C., "Excavation of Murrah Cave," Texas Archaeological
and Paleontoloflical Society Bulletin, Vol. IX, Abtlene, 1937.
19 Fearce and Jackson, University of Texas Bulletin No, 3327.
20 Jackson, A. T., Unpublished M. S., U. T. files.
21 Taylor, Field Notes, June 1948.

A Tentative Cultural Sequence for Lower Pecos Area

85

In the Big Bend, Pecos Focus sites cease to exist before
the deposition of the Kokernot formation; a few Chisos
Focus artifacts are intrusive in these sites but a fairly clear
line of demarcation is apparent between the loci. In the
area about the mouth of the Pecos, Langtry Stemmed points
are found at the bottom of the deposits, then working upward one finds variants upon this point type, and also, typical Chisos Focus points. The Langtry Stemmed projectile
points do not cease in the upper layers, but there are greater
numbers of Chisos type points. Livermore points have been
reported from a few sites in the area, and where figures
exist, they seem to have been found in the upper layer of
the forward mid-section of the midden.
It is now proposed, on the basis of the evidence given, to
present a tentative cultu._ral sequence for the area about the
mouth of the Pecos. It is admittedly conjectural, designed
to fit the facts that we have thus far discovered, in the
light of what is known concerning areas peripheral to it.
Let it be emphasized that this reconstruction is tentative, not
presented as a final or sweeping one, but it is felt that enough
field work has been done in the area, not only to justify but
to necessitate the beginnings of, interpretation.
Sometime before 1000 A. D. western Texas was occupied
by an hunting and gathering group which possessed the material culture which archaeology has designated Pecos River
Focus. During the dry period represented by the closing
phases of the Calamity formation, i. e., at about 1000 A. D.
or shortly after, this group largely abandoned the Big Bend
area and either moved to or remained in the area about the
confluence of the Pecos and Rio Grande.
The emphasis of this group presumably had been upon
hunting, but the archaeological evidence shows that in their
location about the mouth of the Pecos River, their chief subsistence was derived from river mussels and wild plant food.
This probably resulted from drought conditions then prevailing with a consequent decrease in the number of large
animals. The culture then had recourse to religious or magi-

86

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

cal devices in an effort to produce game. A hunting cult developed, the proof of which is to be found in the paintings-conventionalized men carrying the implements of the chase,
atlatl and throwing stick, beneath these men the small
paintings of deer,, frequently with dart shafts sticking in
them; above these paintings frequently is depicted the puma,
menacing and very large in proportion to the men, enormous
in proportion to the deer. Possibly the painted pebbles found
in this region also reflect this hunting cult. Meanwhile,
in the Big Bend area, the Chisos Focus appeared and supplanted the Pecos River Focus culture, but at the mouth
of the Pecos the old culture still thrived. As a consequence
we find certain artifacts diagnostic of the Chisos Focus as
intrusives from the west, but the Pecos River Focus continued to be, until a relatively late period, the dominant culture. Agriculture and pottery-making were never, however, adopted in the lower Pecos River area, since this area
has been too arid.
For the later sedentary, agricultural peoples, the dry, barren country about the mouth of the Pecos was undesirable.
Probably in the immediate pre-historic period it was only
seasonally or sporadically occupied, the caves being used
as hunting stations or camping spots by peoples from the
west. Here we find the solution to the Livermore points
found in a few of the caves and probably during this period
were painted the second type of pictographs found in the
area, possibly by Jumano or a similar people.~2
During the historic period the Apache ranged across the
area driving out the more peaceful inhabitants, and left the
third type of pictograph found in the region.
In brief summary, the evidence seems to point to a longlived cultural continuum of the Pecos River Focus in the
area, later affected but not dominated by assimilation of the
material culture of the Chisos Focus. This culture seems to
have finally disappeared approximately coincident with the
appearance of an agricultural sedentary culture into the
22 Suggested as a l~ossibllity by Dr. J. Charles Kelley.

A Tentative Cultural Sequence ]or .Lower Pecos-Area

g,7

Big Bend area farther west. ,Following this the area was
traversed by wandering bands of hunters from West Texas
and later by the Apache.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Crimmins, Colonel M. L., "The Pictographs at Hueco
Tanks," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Bulletin, Vol. III, Abilene, 1931.
Davenport, J. W., ArchaeologicaI i~xploration of Eagle
Cave, Langtry, Texas. Big Bend Basket Maker Papers No.
4, Witte Memorial Museum, San Antonio, 1938.
Holden, W. C., "Excavation of Murrah Cave," Texas Ar~
chaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, ~rol,: 9,
Abilene, 1937.
Jackson, A. T., Picture Writing of Texas Indians, Anthro:
pological Papers, Vol. II, University of Texas Publication,
1938.
.................................... , An analysis of Projectile Points .b~;
Depth, Fate Bell Shelter, (Incomplete). Unpublished M. S.
Judd, N. M., "Progress in the Southwest," Essays in Historical Anthropology of North A~nerica, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C., 1940.
Kelley, 3. Charles, M. S. to be published on pictographs of
region.
....................................... , T. N. Campbell and Donald J. Lehmer, "The Association of Archaeological Materials and Geological Depos,:ts in the Big Bend Region of Texas," Sul Ross
State Teachers College Bulletin, Vol. XXI, No. 3, September 1940.
Kirkland, Forrest, "A Comparison of Texas Indian Pictographs with Paleolithic Paintings in Europe." Central Texas
Archaeologist, No. 3.
, "A Study of Indian Pictures in
Texas," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Bulletin, Vol. 9, Abilene, 1937.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

................................... , "A Description of Texas Pictographs," Texas Archaeological and PaleontologicaI Society
Bulletin, Vol. 10, Abilene, 1938.
................................... , "Indian l~ictures in Dry Shelters of
Val Verde County," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 11, Abilene, 1939.
Martin, George C., "Archaeological Exploration of Shumla
Caves," Big Bend Basket Maker Papers, No. 3, Witte Memorial Museum, San Antonio, 1933.
...................................... , Report on Four Shumla Cave Pockets, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 7, Abilene, 1935.
Krieger, A. D., "Some Suggestions on Archaeological
Terms," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Bulletin, Vol. 16, 1945, pp. 41-46.
Pearce, J. E. and A. T. Jackson, A Prehistoric Rock Shelter
in Val Verde County, Texas, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1,
No. 3, University of Texas Publications, 1933.
Reed, Erik, "Big Bend Basket Makers," El Palacio, Vol.
XLIII, Santa Fe, 1937.
Sayles, E. B., An Archaeological Survey o] Texas, Gila
Pueblo, 1935.
Setzler, F. M., "A Prehistoric Cave Culture in Southwest
Texas," American Anthropologist, Vol. 37, 1935.
Smith, V. J., "Indian Pictographs of the Big Bend in
Texas," Publication o] the Texas Folklore Society, No. II,
Austin, 1923.
...................................... , "Archaeological Notes of the Big
Bend Region of Texas," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. III, Abilene, 1931.
Taylor, H. C., Jr., "An Archaeological Reconnaissance in
Northern Coahuila," Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 19, 1948:
Woolsey~ A. M., Notes on Horseshoe Ranch Cave, (M. S.),
University of Texas, 1936.

