NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS
ON THE VALIDITY OF TEPEXPAN MAN
The publication Tepexpan Man, by Helmut de Terra, Javier
mero, and T. D. Stewart (Viking Fund Publications in Anthropology, Number Eleven) has recently been distributed. In format and
quality this publication conforms to the high standards set by the
first ten of the Viking Fund series. The printing, cartography, and
illustrative figures are well done. The volume purports to summarize an all-out attack in a portion of the Valley of Mexico upon
the interlocking problems of geology, climate, paleontology, and
archaeology--problems which must be understood before the Ice
Age inhabitants (and cultures) of the Valley can be identified. For
professional anthopologists it is unnecessary to emphasize the importance of a research effort calculated to extend the known sequences of occupation in the Valley of Mexico backward to the
Pluvia] epochs. Inevitably such a project will be caught in the
the spotlight of critical scientific interest.
Chapter headings reflect the sound concepts around which the
report is organized. These are: Geographic Environment, Geologic
History of Tepexpan Region, Discovery of Tepexpan lYlan and Geologic Interpretation, Artifact Sites in Upper Pleistocene Alluvium,
Stratigraphic and Chronologic Key, Dating of Prehistoric Cultures,
Archaeological Data on Pre-ceramic Cultures, Pottery Sites in the
Tepexpan Region, the Carved Bone of Tepexpa~ (all the above by
de Terra), the Physical Aspects of Tepexpan Man (by Romero),
to which six appendices and a paper by T. D. Stewart, originally
given at the American Anthropological Assoc.~ation sessions of December 1947, are appended.
The study attempts to identify, correlat-~, and date the beach
lines, lake sediments, volcanic deposits, faunal and floral populations, and cultural debris of the Tepexpa.~ region. This I interpret as an attempt to understand the late glacial period ecology of
the Valley. After excavations in the old lake bed (which yielded
fossil mammoth--either Archidiscodon imperator or Parelephas
coIumbi--and Tepexpan man), a surface sur~,ey of open sites in the
vicinity, and an e:~amination of many exposed geologic sections,
de Terra establishes a series of successi~e human occupations which
he correlates with climatological and geological phenomena. On
pp. 52-53 his thoughts are summarized in two charts. He shows
San Juan (his earliest culture phase, which is immediately followed by Tepexpan man) as existing during the last pluvial.
logically this period is the Cochran~ period (or Wisconsin IV or
Long Draw) of the continent. The £epexpan skeleton is dated at
7,000 to 8,000 B. C. After the ret:eat of the glaciers, a culture
named "Chalco" is recognized, wh~h finally, after long duration,

106

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

gives way to the Archaic of Mexico at some time late in the centuries before Christ. The few San Juan artifacts and the Chalco
materials are dated chiefly on the basis of their relationships to
beach lines and on the basis of inexpert typological sorting, of
what appear to have been selected artifact series. No evidence
that the cultures were observed in stratified relationships to each
other was mentioned. The entire section which deals with the
"cultures" leaves much to be desired. For example, the exploration of the evidence for equating the age of the carved elephant
tooth ~vith Tepexpan man and the labelling of the Tepexpan
culture as "Folsom-like" is questionable to the point of being
ridiculous. One particularly questions the typological soundness
of setting up a Tepexpan culture, inferentially associated with the
man, especially when the author himself confides that the Tepexpan culture is purely arbitrary.
In summary, this attempt to report a study, employing as it does
many kinds of data, is quite impressive and in part convincing.
In it we see exemplified the type of multifaceted analysis of the
paleo-Indian question which must be utilized if we are to solve
the questions s~rrounding our early cultures and their bearers.
Now I am impelled to move on to another matter of ~ critical
importance in the evaluation of the Tepexpan man himself.
(Omitted is a consideration of the vaguely defined cultures. These
and their sequence can be reobserved and checked in the field.)
In order to make rr.y point, it will be necessary to refer to earlier
releases bearing on ]:epexpan man. The present volume, which is
one of several repor~ on what might have been one of the most
important discoveries in the endless quest for reliable data b~aring
on Ice Age man in tae Western hemisphere, does not allay the
nagging doubt to whic]~. I have been increasingly subject regarding
the validity of the claims for antiquity for Tepexpan man.
I
have read, in sequence and with an ever-mounting uneasiness,
accounts of the Tepe×pa~ finds in Li]e Magazine, March 31, 1947,
pp. 109 ff; in American Antiquity, ~rol. 13, No. 1, July 1947; in the
American Anthropological Association News Bulletin, Vol. II, No. 3,
June 1948; in American A~iquity, Vol. 14, No. I, July 1948; Amer-.
ican Anthropological Association News Bulletin, Vol. II, No. 4, September 1948; and finally t~2s beautifully printed volume bearing
the Viking Fund seal.
In .~ddition I listened to Dr. de Terra’s
address at Santa Fe, New ~/fexico, during the AA/k sessions in
December 1947. I presumed then that the anthropological profession had at its disposal all ~he data likely ever to be available
regarding the find.
Since the record is compleX, and legitimate.questions remain
unanswered, these paragraphs are written as a commentary on

News Notes and Editorials

both field and reporting techniques.

107

(In the AAA News Bulletin,

Vol. 3, No. 1) February 1949, p. 18, there was an article by Glenn
Black, entitled "Tepexpan Man: a Critique of Method", published
shortly after this review was written. Black’s article described in
some detail the glsring technical incompetencies of the Tepexpan
man operations as revealed by photographs.

Inasmuch as he has

competently reviewed many details, I have greatly condensed my
statements regarding techniques.
As a practitioner of the simple, long used techniques of field
archaeology, I am convinced that a!l manipulations of archaeologically derived data are valid only insofar as the data recovered are
accurate. It seems axiomatic that uncontrolled primary data are
likely to ~,ield questionable conclusions. Unfortunately, the record
of the recovery of Tepexpan man seems to indicate little control.
For example, in the latest publication,~ we are flatly told on page
39 that "the man had fallen face down," and again on page 91
there is figure 16 showing a skull face down labelled "Skeleton in
situa, sketch showing . . . the original position of the skull." But
plates 22 and 23 both show the staring skull nested in a basin
scooped from the surrounding clods, resting firmly on its foramen
magunum! However, the capiton for plate 22 asserts that the
skull has been moved from its original position tO obtain a better
photo. If the skull is not in situ, why leave it in the hole? But
in contrast, in a preliminary reportz we read or/page 41 that "the
skeletal remains . . . suggest Aitalics ~nineQ tha~ the body was embedded face down." Was it or was it not face down? Finally, we
are told3 on page 37 that many of the body bones were found a
month after the original discovery by sifting the spoil dirt. Why
do these uncertainties exist; particularly if " ... one of the workmen pointed to a dark roundish object which had been left untouched in the muck formation. Engineer Arellano of the Instituto
Nacional de Geologiao who had accompanied me that morning to
assist in disbursement of the workers, witnessed my digging the
human skull out of the clay where it must have seen the last light
of day many thousands of years ago. It lay 48 inches below the
surface and 14 inches beneath the caliche. The skull was then
left at the same spot for witnesses to study its original stratigraphic
position."4 Nowhere is there a photograph of the skeleton or
skull as purportedly discovered. Thus, despite the last quotation
above, I feel justified in asking, "What was the original position
of the skeleton and who saw it that way?"

1.
2.
~
~[

de
de
de
de

Terra,
Terra.
Terra,
Terra,

Romero, and Stewart, 1949, p. 39.
1947, p. 41.
1947, p. 37.
1947, I~..~6.

108

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

It is stated that the body lay 109 cm. from the present surface.
It lay in muck of pluvial origin, over which, supposedly, lay a 4
inch band of caliche, the latter covered with recent sediments. If
the data as to the original position of the skeleton are uncertain,
can we couple this fact with the crude and uncontrolled digging
and the lack of any good photographs recording unbroken strata
above the burial and ask whether there is any doubt as to the
original relation of the man to the muck? And more particularly,
was the Caliche continuous directly above the skeleton? Plate 22
shows the skull very close to the pit wall, and there appear to be
unbroken bands of soil in the pit wall just behind it. But we have
already learned from the cap~ion of the plate that the skull had
been moved for photography.
Therefore, its photographically
implied proximity to the evidently unbroken natural soil profile
(a proximity which would have helped argue against an intrusive
pit from above the caliche) is completely unvalidated. At such a
shallow depth the possibility of an intrusion is insistent. One’s
fears are not allayed by the explanation that "root canals were
found to penetrate the skull cavity uadisturbed from the caliche
downward..."~ As an explanation, this is not overwhelmingly
convincing. Generally, root canals in the soil within the skull
would argtm for, rather than against, a break in the ovelying
caliche. Roots and root channels in the soil inside skulls of much
less age than is claimed for Tepexpan have been found. Is it not
more reasonable to suppose that the roots of modern plants would
seek and find an opening in the impervious caliche in order to tap
the resources of the rich moisture~laden muck of the old swamp?
The possibility of intrusion in such an important find at a shallow
depth must be forever ruled out; in this case the data do not allow
us to be certain.
But why continue? In the face of many discrepancies, I am
constrained to make the guess that the excavation was done by an
inexperienced crew of workmen, without supervision, and that
neither de Terra nor his associates saw the excavation at the
critical point when an intrusive pit from the surface through the
caIiche either could have been observed or definitely ruled out,
nor did they observe the skeleton at the time of discovery by workmen. In fact, on page 37 we read that "[it was] ... suspected that
some fragments of the skeleton . . . had been removed by the
workmen while digging aga’.,nst my authorization." When was
this unauthorized digging done--before or after the skull was first
seen by de Terra?

2.

de Ter~’a,

]947.

Ioc. cit.

News Notes and Editorials

109

As for the reporting itself, the volume is characterized by an
all-pervasive vagueness regarding the raw detailed facts surrounding the skeletal find.

Good examples may be seen on pages 36

and 39. The vagueness of statement and the absence of data in
the critical points seems to be a sort of verbal magic used in lieu
of observed facts. Because of the uncertainty of primary data,
the authors of the appendices apparently have been forced to echo
the basic vagueness, although in a critical find of this nature
great caution is certainly appropriate.

According to physical

anthropological evidence, the fossil man in question, to no one’s
surprise, could be either modern or ancient. So we are forced to
rely for dating on the geological evidence, and this is not definitely
set forth. In general the report seems to be written in an attempt
to obscure or eradicate the thought that the entire excavation operation was bumbling and inept. It seems to be another case of
excavation: by individuals either untrained in, or unwilling to
follow, the long-established observational and control techniques
generally employed by competent archaeologists in excavation
work. And as previously mentioned, the text indicates uncertainty
and inexperience when the author deals with the artifact assemblages recovered in the Tepexpan area. One has the impression that he is completely at sea when using the concepts
and procedures employed in typological study: typology, of course,
if unsupported by other evidence, is not the archaeologist’s strongest inferential tool.
It will be argued that it is easy to criticize another’s work, or
that hindsight is better than foresight. The answer is simply that
the use of a normally cautious approach to a suspect area, which
in the excavator’s mind. was laden with scientific potency, is not an
unreasonable thing to expect of an experienced student of man,
climate, and culture. Certainly, a better digging job would have
made unnecessary many circumlocutions found in the study.
In summary, then, I point out (1) that .the Tepexpan man find
was not made by trained observers in a controlled situation, (2)
that the possibility of intrusion is strong, (3) an evasive quality
in the reporting, and (4) what seems to be an attempt to cover up
errors of field judgment which resulted in loss or critical data.
It seems a pity that the considerable expenditures involved on a
long term project of this scope and importance should result in
incomplete data, unsatisfactorily reported.
I am unable to determine whether the author’s inadequate reporting is intentionally
obscure or whether it is due to unfamiliarity with the standards
which American archaeologist attempt to achieve.

110

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

In conclusion, I do-.not, on any grounds, deny the antiquity of
Tepexpan man. I do not deny that any or all of the graphic, ~or
verbal, or inferential proof may indeed be true. But based entirely
on the nature of the evidence and the manner of presentation in the
report, I do strongly doubt it.

It would have been easier for all

concerned if the author had detailed the exact facts of the find,
and set out any gaps in his controls. A full recital of .the facts,
including uncertainties, followed by inferential evidence, would
have been more convincing. As things now stand, the surface
survey of the Tepexpan area, the correlations of geological, climatological, geographical, paleontological, and cultural data, the
speculations about intra-valley relationships, and so on, may be
valid and of continuing use to later students. But Tepexpan man
himself should perforce be added to the list of finds of putative
but unproved antiquity.
JESSE D. JENNINGS,
Department of Anthropology,
University of Utah.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
de Terra, Helmut
1947. "Preliminary Note on the Discovery of Fossil Man at
Tepexpan in the Valley of Mexico," American Antiquity, Vol.
XIII, No. 1, pp. 40-44.
de Terra, Helmut; Javier Romero; and T. D. Stewart
1949. "Tepexpan Man," Viking Fund Publications in Anthropology, Number Eleven.

CLEAR FORK POINTS
Dear Mr. Holden:

Among the artifacts that you sent to Mr. Krieger some weeks
ago was the point found with the elephant remains about which
we corresponded earlier. Krieger called my attention to this
fact, and I took the liberty of making a drawing of the point at
that time. Krieger showed me also one other point in the lot that
seemed to stand out from others, and while our artist was on the
job, I had made a drawing of this point also. Feeling sure that
sooner or later you would yourself have occasion to use drawings

News Notes and Editorials

111

of these points, I requested the artist to make an extra drawing of
each of these for you, which I am sending herewith.
I am glad to have had this opportunity of making the drawing
of the point found with the elephant remains. With best wishes,
Very sincerely yours,
E. H. SELLARDS

4-7-

d.7

0

FIGURE 2,
Two artifacts from the Lower Clear Fork Silt.
No. 47--73-311: "Found embedded in lower Clear Fork silt at McLean
site almost in contact wlth two teeth of mammoth and near its bones. Witnessed by :Dr. Kirk Bryan, Samuel Vaughn, and Dr: Cyrus N. Ray.
No. 47--70: "Found embedded in Lower Clear Fork silt, 1938. Witnessed
bY Ray, Bryan, and Vaughn. See 1938 Sci. l~Iag. A.AoA.S."

