TRINITY ASPECT OF THE ARCHAIC
HORIZON: THE CARROLLTON
AND ELAM FOCI
WILSON W. CROOK, ,JR., AND R. K. HARRIS

Two manifestations of the archaic type culture, so widespread elsewhere in Texas, have recently been established
in the Upper Trinity River region of Northeast Texas. This
extends the recognized area of this great complex completely across the state, the Big Bend and Edwards Plateau
aspects having been previously described from West Texas
and Central Texas, respectively. (See Fig. 1).
As proposed, the Carrollton focus and the Elam focus will
constitute the basis for the new Trinity aspect of the Archaic
Horizon. The two individual loci are composed of a combination of published descriptions, together with a large
amount of unpublished material long in the hands of local
investigators. Their assemblages of artifact types and traits
wil! form the subject of this paper, along with certain conclusions, comparisons with other archaic units, and indicated affinities with adjacent areas whose cultures have not
yet been fully defined.
Description of the Region
The Trinity aspect of the archaic centers in the Dallas
County region where the three forks of the Trinity flov~
together to form the main stream. A large number of
archaeological sites in this area provide the type stations
of both the Carrollton and Elam loci; to these are added
others extending up the Elm Fork of the Trinity to the
vicinity of Gainesville, Cooke County, and downstream on
the Trinity at least to Trinidad, Henderson County. There
are further indications that a close relationship may exist
between the Carrollton and the multitudinous Waco sinker
sites enumerated by Watt’ extending the general region to
include the mid-reaches of the Trinity, Chambers Creek in
1.
1938.

Watt. Frank H., The Waeo sinker, Central Texas Archaeologist, IV. 21-70,

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Soviety

8

o,,.,.,,.,,

+. f ~

F"

5~

+++."~’~

""o.,,’,-.
___5_~ ,,,
+ <,+~~-\-,

-<+

,y

"

\

t

~ ]-

’-"""+"<:o"""+’~

.-, ,,~"
~.,,.

_

-+’""

i~ ,,,

I

Ill Co.v+,’oll’l:o,"+ Foe:.u,$ S.tes

& W

he Focus 5,’l’es

TYPE LOCALITIES
T R I N I T"/ A,5 PECT

, .(,,_,+,_,,+ :

LOC/~LE

~,J

FIGURE 1
Location of Trinity Aspect.

/

¢

X,

....

L?. .

Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon

Navarro County, Aquilla Creek in Hill and McLennan
Counties, and west to the Brazos near Waco. Likewise there
are distant, less-pronounced similarities between the Carrollton and the Yarbrough~ site in Van Zandt County, and
materials from near Lufkin in Angelina County; there are
still additional resemblances to certain features of the archaic cultures of Northwest Louisiana and Eastern Oklahoma as well. The Elam focus shows a number of similarities to archaic materials known from Lamar County and
otherwise throughout East Texas. The close ties with the
Edwards Plateau loci to the west and southwest will be selfevident in the ensuing sections. Thus the Trinity aspect
occupies Northeast Texas and possibly extends into Louisiana and Oklahoma, as will be seen in Fig. 1.
A pronounced three-terrace system is evident along the
Trinity near Dallas, and along the louver reaches of its major
tributary, the Elm Fork, northwestward. The typical vertical section of the low or first terrace (T-l), and the floodplain (T-0), is shown in Fig. 2; the first terrace is called the
Union Terminal at Dallas3 and the Carrollton on the Elm
Fork in northwest Dallas County4, the two having been
proven continuous and identical. This Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace is of complex origin, the two lowermost formations (A and B) called the Hill and Shuler, having been
definitely identified as representing the Wisconsin stage of
the Pleistocene; apparently after considerable erosion and
sloping along the stream valleys during the Altithermal
period, the two upper formations (C and D), named the
Albritton and Pattillo, were deposited on the eroded flanks
of the old terrace during early Medithermal times of the
Recent. A very late period of deposition laid down a fifth
formation (E), the Carter, in the present floodplain below.~

2. :N’ewell, H. Perry and A. D. Krieger. The George C. Davis site, Cherokee
Count’, Texas. American Antiquity Memoir No. 5, 1949.
3. Shuler, E. W. Terrace~ of the Trinity River, Dalla~ County, Texas, Field and
Laboratory, III, 44-53, 1935.
4. Pattillo, L. Gray. River terraces in the Carrollton area, Dallas County, Texas,
Field and Labor~tory, VIII, 27-32, 1940.
5. Crook, Wilson W., Jr. The floodplain and first terrace alluvial chronology of
the Trinity River.Elm Fork system, Dallas County, Texas, ms. for Field and Labor~
tory, 1952.

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

CULTURE .,%

A
T’-O

FoR

MAT’IONS
FIGURE 2

Trinity Aspect o:f the Archaic Horizon

11

The elevation of the Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace
varies frora 10 feet above the floodplain along the Elm Fork
to as much as 30 feet above the bottoms on the main Trinity; both the Elm Fork and Trinity now run in intrenched
channels cut some 20 feet below the floodplain.
Without exception, the known sites of the Carrollton and
Elam foci are contained within the top two formations of
the Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace, usually in a buried
condition. Almost without exception, these sites also occur
in the vicinity of a small tributary stream where it cuts
through the terrace deposits to reach the floodplain below;
many of these secondary streams are definitely intermittent
today, so~ne being totally dry washes, poorly situated for
camp sites at the present. Therefore, the age of the cultures
and the environment in which they existed are inextricably
bound up with the geology and the climatic cycles responsible for the Albritton and Pattillo formations.
The dual depositional sequence exemplified by these two
formations occupying an intermediate position between the
terminal Pleistocene and the latest deposition has been
roughly equated with the similar sequences observed in
other sections. Thus the Albritton and Pattillo are thought
to correspond with the lower and upper components of the
Calamity formation in the Big Bend6, the lower and upper
Elm Creek silts (or Nugent silts 1-4) at Abilene7, and the
lower and upper Cienega clays at Whitewater Draw, Arizona.s These two formations are interpreted as being indicative of climatic periods of greater moisture than that of very
late times, yet demonstrably younger and less than those of
the Pleistocene, yielding an assignment to the period of the
"Little Pluvial" or the Medithermal.
An estimate of "about 3,000 years ago" for the "Little
Pluvial" is common amongst geologists, and radiocarbon
6. Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell and D. Jo Lehmer. The association of
archaeological materials with geological deposlt~ In the Big Bend region o~ Texas,
Weat Texaa Historical and Scientific Society Publication, X, 1940.
Ray, Cyrus N. : Kirk Bryan ; M. M. Leighton. et at. Various publications.
7.
Antevs, Ernst. Climate and early man in North America. in Early Man by
8.
G. G. MacCurdy, 1937.

12

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

datings of about 4,000 years ago for materials in the Lower
Cienega, and about 2,500 years ago for others in the Upper
at Whitewater Draw, generally prove out this assumption.
On this basis and certain other comparisons, the Albritton
formation has been tentatively dated at 4,000-6,000 years
ago, and the Pattillo at 1,750-3,500 years ago. As Carrollton
focus materials have been recovered in situ in the upper
part of the Albritton, on the Albritton-Pattillo contact line,
and in the basal six inches of the Pattillo above, the period
that this focus predominated is considered to extend from
the last of Albritton times, across the intervening hiatus,
and into the first stages of Pattillo depositional times. This
is estimated as being roughly 4,000-3,000 years ago. Elam
focus materials occur in situ in the middle and upper portions of the overlying Pattillo formation, hence their span
is considered to be from 2,500 to 1,500 years ago.
Reports on the age of a Carrollton focus charcoal sample
from the base of the Pattillo at the Wheeler site have not
yet been received, but should eventually greatly clarify the
time estimates on the duration of the cultures.
The Carro~lton Focus
Two major sites, the Wheeler near the confluence of Denton Creek and the Elm Fork (See Station 3, Fig. 1) and the
Lake Dallas just below the old Lake Dallas dam (Station 1,
Fig. 1), form the type localities for the Carrollton focus.
Both are on the Elm Fork, both lie in situ at the base of the
Patillo formation in the Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace,
and the two are but 10 miles apart, directly north and south
of each other. Artifact assemblages from the two sites are
practically indistinguishable from each other, and with one
possible exception, exactly duplicate each other in the various divisions.
FIGURE 2
Top: 1deal section of Trinity River terraces.
T-0, Floodplain; T-l, Union
Terrninal-Carrollton terrace; T-2, Travis School-Farmer’s Branch terrace: T.3, Love
Field-Bethel terrace,
Bottom : Ideal sections of T-0 and T-1 formations and included archaeological
mains. A, Hill formation; B, Shuler formation; C, Albrttton formation; D, Pattlllo
formation : E, Carter formation ; I, Carrollton focus ; II, Elam focus ; III, Wylie focus.

Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon

13

The Wheeler site, as previously describedg, is exposed in
the walls of a multiple gravel pit operation cut into the
Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace just south of Denton
Creek as it enters the Elm Fork floodplain. The site lies
almost precisely at the edge of the terrace where it drops
off 10 feet to the floodplain below; Denton Creek and the
Elm Fork, both some hundreds of yards away, are themselves incised below the floodplain some 20 feet, making
the total elevation of the terrace surface at the site 30 feet
above present-day stream level. At this point the Pattillo
formation is five feet thick, as usual composed of a brown,
fluvial sand; the cultural materials and occupation zone
occur definitely in si~u from the underlying Albritton-Pattillo contact line upwards for about six to eight inches,
leaving a sterile overburden of some four and a half feet
above. No human evidences whatsoever occur upon the terrace surface.
The Lake Dallas site is contained in a cut-off segment
of the Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace lying between
an old abandoned channel and the present channel of the
Elm Fork, just below the old Lake Dallas dam. The geologic
sequence of formations and their individual lithic composition is almost precisely identical with that described for
Wheeler; this has been determined from two gravel pit exposures in the vicinity and from Smithsonian River Basin
Surveys test pits and trenching by the authors,m The elevation of the terrace at Lake Dallas is very similar to that
at Wheeler, although the slope toward the stream channels
is more gentle. The former cultivation of the surface Pattillo formation sands for a peanut field has created a "blowo
sand" situation in which great quantities of the sand have
been stripped away mud shifted--as evidenced by the high
banks and fresh dunes concentrated along fence lines--and
the combined removal and sifting action has exposed great
numbers of artifacts formerly buried. This would have pro9. Crook. The Wheeler site: a 3500 year-old culture in Dallas County, Texas.
Field and Laboratory, XX, 2. 43-65. 1952,
10. Harris, R. K. Ms. in preparation.

14

Texas .A~’cheo/ogical a~d Paleontological

duced an uncertain interpretation so common to such sites
had it not been for the striking identity of the geology and
archaeological materials with those found in s~t~ and undisturbed at the Wheeler site. As further convincing proof~ the
Smithsonian test pits encountered flint chips down to the
base of the Pattillo sands and even into the upper Albritton
clays beneath; test-trenching by the authors produced one
large archaic type projectile point in ~t~ in the Pattillo
sand just two inches above the Albritton-Pattillo contact
line, absolutely identical to the situation at Wheeler.
At neither site was there any indication of extinct fauna
in either the Pattillo or Albritton formations, as is true
without exception everywhere else in the Dallas region.
Indeed, animal remains were quite rare in both sites, although charred bone from hearths at the Wheeler location
yielded fragments of deer antler and several teeth of B~so~
b~so~. Also, the Wheeler site produced one fragmentary
human skull in s~t~ in the cultural zone in the basal six
inches of the Pattillo formation. This was completely decalcified but not fossilized. It is of the extremely longheaded, slab-sided, keeled-vaulted human physical type already well-known from the Abilene area, the Texas Coast,
Xral Verde County on the Rio Grande, and from the California Early Horizon, the Pericu in Lower California, and
Punin and Lagoa Santa in South America.lt It is therefore
not surprising that the other Texas remains are accompanied by or are located in regions of archaic type cultural
materials.
All materials of the Carrollton focus are lithic, no others
having seemingly survived, if originally present. Projectile
points constitute the vast majority of the artifact assemblage, and thereby need must comprise the majority of index, or distinctive, traits. Next in importance are the scrapers, particularly the "gouges" so definitive of early archaic
complexes elsewhere. Pottery is non-existent, grinding
11. MacGowan, Kenneth. What have the bones to ~ay7 in Ear]~" Man tn tho New
Work], 19~0.

PLATE 1
Carrollton focus.
Nos. 2-6, 8-9, 13-14, 16-15. 22-23, 25-27, 30 32 Wheeler Site.
Nos. 1, 10-:12. 15, 19-21, 2S.29, 31 Lake Dallas Site.
No. 7 Denton Creek Sit~*.
No.
24 Bachman’s Dam Site.
All specimens ~ size.

Trinity Aspect o] the Archaic Horizon

17

stones exceedingly rare, and ground stone work restricted
to sinkers, certain worked stones, and the smoothed edges
.of projectile points. Percussion chipping is the rule, with
one exception, and a most striking feature is the heavy
predominance of flintmtotally absent as a native material
in Northeast Texas!mas much as 80% in the projectile point,
knife, and borer classifications, while the local quartzite
provides the basic material for the majority of the utilitarian
implements.
Projectile points, shown in Plate I, are mainly of the
archaic types. A large variety, over 50 mm in length, constitutes almost 50% of the total (Nos. 1-4, Plate I) ; mediumsized and small points comprise an equal number, being 3550 nun, and under 35 mm in length, respectively. These are
all percussion chipped, very thick in cross-section, and with
a certain crudeness of manufacture apparent. Some are
stemmed with parallel sides and a square base (Nos. 7-9,
Plate I); some roughly-shouldered and of a version of the
Gary Contracting Stem type (Nos. 12-13, Plate I); a few
are leaf-shaped (Nos. 6, 17, Plate I); some possess basal indentions to form the stem (Nos. 10-11, and No. 22 which has
been obviously reworked to add one basal indention, Plate
I); others are slightly-shouldered or one-shouldered (Nos.
1, 14, 17, Plate I); and the smaller types most commonly
fall within the specifications of the Ellis Stemmed poinV
(Nos. 15-16, Plate I).
A constant minor percentage (about 5%) of the total projectile point assemblages from nearly all Carrollton sites
is composed of Plainview-like, unfluted-Folsom, or other
"early" types (Nos. 19-25, Plate I). These are virtually
distinguishable from those recovered in pure "early" site~
on the High Plains, yet are intermixed and plainly associated with the archaic types at these Carrollton sites. They
are marked by their excellent pressure flaking (the one
exception mentioned earlier), thinness in section, and cor~sistent grinding of the edges along the lower sides and bas~;
the familiar concave base and leaf-shape further charac~-

18

Texas Archeo~ogical and Paleontologica! Society

terize this type-all in obvious contrast with the percussionchipped, stemmed-and-shouldered, thick archaic forms.
Ground edges are also present on the stems and in the
indentions of a number of other forms (Nos. 3, 7, 9, 10, 11,
Plate I), a technique thought to be connected with Early
Man. This is almost assuredly a "carry-over" trait in the
process of disappearance-only 10% of the archaic-type
points have this feature in the Carrollton focus-which
entirely vanishes in the later complexes. Sanding of the
edges for attachment is most common in the forms with
basal indentions (Nos. 10-11 and No. 22 as reworked), but
also occurs on the parallel-sided stemmed types (Nos. 7-9)
and a few others; as mentioned previously, all the Plainview-like points exhibit this feature. In contrast to the percussion-chipped edges of the archaic points, the smoother
edges are most striking.
Drilling and boring tools fashioned from broken projectile points or fragments of broken points are another definite trait. These are often reworked from those seemingly
of the "early" variety, although some from broken archaic
points are also present. Most commonly the basal fragment
was utilized for this purpose, possibly indicating hafting.
Some of these are illustrated as Nos. 26 and 28 (reworked
archaics) and Nos. 27 and 29 (reworked early types), Plate I.
Two forms of knives are generally present. One is superior
in workmanship to the archaic percussion technique of the
projectile points, being well-flaked and fashioned, while
the other is of the rough blade-like type. Unfortunately,
most of the better types are found as fragments, but it is
possible to determine that they were usually of a leafshaped design and were not of the famous "corner-tang"
type.,2 Nos. 30-32, Plate I, are typical.
Of the scrapers, the "gouges" are by far the most common
and provide one of the real index traits of the complex.
12. Patterson, J, T. The corner-tang flint artifacts of Texas, Univer~ty of Tex~m
Bulletin, No, 8618. 1936.

Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon

21

Gouges constitute almost 60% of all scrapers at both the
Lake Dallas and Wheeler sites (some 84 specimens from the
two combined), and are always present in all other Carrollton focus sites. They are very similar to Ray’s Clear
Fork gouges13, especially the type 2 or planer-gouge (although others are present), but appear to be a smaller
version. The technique is typically piano-convex, with a
roughly-triangular form and a steeply-beveled working
edge; it is remarkable that the Carrollton gouges are almost
universally made from the same grey quartzite material.
Types are shown as Nos. 1-10, Plate II.
Side-scrapers are generally large, roughly-flaked, and
most consistently of a reddish quartzite. They present no
unique features except size. (See Nos. 11-16, Plate II.) Flakescrapers and cutting-scraping tools are also included, with
one or more sides showing secondary chipping and evidences
of use; these tend more commonly to be re-utilized flint
flakes. (Examples are Nos. 20-22, Plate II.)
A few intentionally fashioned implements which probably performed the functions of graving, spokeshaving, etc.,
are present, though quite rare. These are illustrated as Nos.
17-19, Plate II.
Hammerstones and choppers are fairly common, being
usually made from quartzite nodules. The hammerstones
display battered areas, while the choppers are very roughly
made with large, crude, percussion flaking. These are typified by Nos. 1-3, Plate III.
Worked-stone and ground-stone implements consist of
several categories. Sinker stones, identical to types depicted
as the "Waco Net Sinker" by Wattla, are made from quartzite cobbles and are present in varying numbers at nearly all
sites; 33 come from the Lake Dallas site alone. Some are
shown as Nos. 4-5-7-8, Plate III. Several worked cobbles of
quartzite, comparable in technique but not in precise form,
may represent this classification at Wheeler; this is the one
13. Ray. The Clear Fork Culture complex, Texas Arehat~logteal & Paletontologieal Society Bulletin, VIII, 1938.
14. Watt. Op, tit.

22

Te~ A~cheo~ogic~ ~nd Pa~eontologic~ ~ociet~

division in which exactly duplicating artifacts cannot be
matched from the two sites, but one Wheeler specimen is of
identical material and poorly worked upon the ends almost
identical to crude sinker forms recovered from other true
sinker sites. Two of these worked stones are Nos. 6, 9, Plate

III.
Grinding stones are quite rare, but are present. Only one
has been found at Wheeler (since previous publication),
three from Lake Dallas, out of a combined total of more
than 500 artifacts. These are one-hand size, somewhat
rectangular with shaped rounded corners, both uniface
(Wheeler) and biface (Lake Dallas), and always of sandstone. Two examples are Nos. 10-11, Plate III.
One other prominent "trait" should be included--the unusual fireburnt clay "blobs" prevalent in Carrollton sites.
Although very numerous in the cultural debris, their meaning is vague. No evidence has yet been found of wattlemarkings or finger-impressions to indicate either a connection with huts or squeezings. Most of them display a
burnt area or actually include charcoal, hence they may
be remnants of floors or hearth linings, or, simply, the
burned area where fires were built upon the formerlyexposed Albritton clay surface. Several are shown as Nos.
23-27, Plate II.
The large broken point depicted as No. 5, Plate I, is ~tot a
common type nor a trait form; only this single example has
been found (Wheeler), but its unique and unmistakable
design is of great value in correlation and for this purpose
has been illustrated.
Other, smaller, Carrollton sites are shown in Fig. 1 as
Station 2 on Denton Creek upstream from Wheeler, Station
4 below Bachman’s Dam in Dallas, Station 8 near Seagoville
in Southeast Dallas County, Station 9 on Bachelor’s Creek
in Kaufman County, and Station 10 near Trinidad in Henderson County, downstream on the Trinity--all referable
to this focus. Though few in numbers, their artifact assemblages contain practically all of the typical forms de-

Trinity Aspect o] the Archaic Horizon

23

scribed and their geologic conditions of occurrence are likewise quite comparable. Of interest in this respect is the
Bachman’s Dam site which lies in situ wholly within the
upper 30 inches of the Albritton clays and is thus the earliest
example of the complex known so far.
The Elam Focus
One major site, the Wood, and a nearby smaller one, the
Milton, provide the type stations for the Elam focus1~
Typologically, and in the geologic sequence of occurrence,
this complex is later than the Carrollton and is a direct
outgrowth of it, representing the continued development
in situof the same basic culture pattern (and by inference,
thereby, of the same human physical type) over a long
period of time. Although the derivation from the Carrollton
is undeniable, the differences are pronounced enough to be
recognizable as a separate entity and to deserve designation as a separate focus.
The Wood site is located adjacent to Elam Creek where
it cuts through the Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace to
reach the Trinity River floodplain southeast of Dallas. (Station 5, Fig. 1) Large gravel pits at the site reveal the common first terrace stratigraphic sequence pre.viously described. The Pattillo sand formation overlies the Albritton
clay as usual, but varies in depth from as much as five feet
on the lower, eroded slopes nearest the stream valleys, to
as little as six inches on the high, unaltered portions. This
is construed as the combined result of differential deposition determined by the maximum elevation to wl~ich the
Pattillo period flooding attained, and the present-day "blowsand" stripping now going on where cultivation has affected
the higher parts of the terrace. Three fairly well separated
occupational zones are present at the site, giving a stratified
sequence. The lowermost component lies in situ at the base
of the Pattillo formation, more than four feet deep at one
exposure, and appears to be a late vestige of the Carrollton
15.
Crook. The Wood and Milton sites: ~vo ]ate archa|c occupat|on ~it~ near
Dallas, Ms. for Fle|d and La~omtor:F, 19~$.

24

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

focus; the

middle component comprises the Elam focus ma-

terials and is observed in situ in the middle and upper Pattillo at depths ranging from 15 to 30 inches from the surface;
a small and apparently early Wylie focus component is
found directly upon the surface.
Just a mile southeast is the Milton site, situated adjacent
to a small, unnamed, intermittent stream where it cuts
through the Union Terminal-Carrollton terrace to reach
the Trinity. (Station 6, Fig. 1.) Gravel pits expose an almost
identical stratigraphic sequence as at the Wood site, with
the Pattillo formation here being two to three feet in depth.
The elevation of the terrace is the same as at the Wood
site, both lying roughly 20 to 30 feet above the floodplaim
Only the Elam focus is present at this locality, occurring
in situ at an average depth of 15 inches in the Pattillo; this
is very similar to the middle component Elam focus situation at Wood. Artifacts are few in total number, but their
striking identity with those of the Wood middle component-and here not confused by the presence of any other
materials--is confirmation of the stratigraphic separation
interpreted for the other site.
In general the Elam focus assemblage follows the characteristics of the Carrollton; definitely non-pottery and
archaic in type, entirely lithic, and with a great scarcity
of bone fragments. In this last wise, only the modern species
of bison, deer, and wild turkey can possibly be suggested
as present, and no human remains have been identified. A
number of the Carrollton traits seem to have disappeared
by Elam times, while a few new ones have been added;
certain other Carrollton traits have diminished in percentage of occurrence, while other surviving forms display a
definite diminuation in size. Very apparent is the increasing popularity of the native local quartzite as a material,
now even constituting over 50% of the projectile points
whereas in the Carrollton it provided a scant 20%. Thfi’s is
interpreted as a further removal in time from former flint
sources and an increasing adaptation to the Dallas County

8

pLATE 3

9

Tr~i~t A~pect o~ the A~eh~e Horizo~

region environment. (It is interesting to note that in the
later Wylie focus sites, flint becomes exceedingly rare!)
Again projectile points are dominant, Elam types being
shown in Plate IV. Early-type, Plainview-like, etc., points
and archaic type points with ground edges have both disappeared. The large archaic types, which constituted almost
50% of the Carrollton forms, are practically gone. In their
stead are medium-sized (35 mm to 50 mm) and small (under 35 mm) archaic types, rather evenly divided in numbers, though the medium slightly predominates. Percussion
chipping with a relatively thick cross-section is still the
rule. The technique of stemming and shouldering-or-barbing is advanced over the Carrollton with more definite features, some even foreshadowing the "cornered" type known
from the later Wylie focus; the very slightly shouldered
and leaf-like shapes are almost completely replaced. A
number of Yarbrough Stemmed points occur, this being a
type elsewhere attributed as a late archaic form in Northeast Texas (Nos. 28-31, Plate IV).
The drills made from reworked broken projectile points
are gone, and replacing them are definitely-fashioned drills
made for that sole purpose originally. Two of these are
shown as Nos. 32-33, Plate IV, with No. 32 exhibiting a
right-beveled technique.
Thick, rough, leaf-shapes become the dominante knife
form (Nos. 36-37, Plate IV), with one double-ended leafshaped specimen also known. These are all of quartzite, the
poorer flaking qualities of which perhaps accounting for the
cruder form of the implements over those of the Carrollton;
these last, as described, were mostly of flint.
Scraping and cutting flakes continue in use much as before, being still normally of flint waste materials. Two are
pictured as No~ 34-35, Plate IV. Gravers seem to be absent.
Gouges have nearly disappeared, in contrast to their predominance in the Carrollton, and the few still surviving are
greatly diminished in size, though still exhibiting the same
technique, design, and quartzite material. (Compare Nos.

28

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

1-3, Plate V, with Nps. 1-10, Plate II.) More important is
the new scraper form shown as Nos. 4-6, Plate V, which
now appears. This type is roughly ovate, piano-convex, and
very highly "turtle-b£cked" in form; without exception it
is made of quartzite, usually yellowish in color.
Side-scrapers retain their indeterminate form and are
quite generally indistinguishable from those of the Carrollton. (Nos. 7-9, Plate V.)
Sinker stones and worked stones no longer constitute
part of the complex, having disappeared entirely. Grinding
stones are still rare, three from the Wood site, none from
lVlilton. One is shown as No. 13 in Plate V, being unifaced
and similar to those from Carrollton and fashioned from an
iron-impregnated East Texas sandstone. Hammerstones and
choppers continue present, made from large quarzite nodules
and similar in all respects to those of the earlier focus. (Nos.
10, 14, Plate V.) The strange clay "blobs" have disappeared,
perhaps as a result of Elam sites occurring alter the Pattillo
formation had commenced its deposition and therefore no
longer being situated directly upon the clay surface of the
underlying Albritton.
The Loving site near the mouth of Prairie Creek, southeast of Milton, is another Elam focus location. Continuing
below it and shown generally as Station 7 in Fig. 1 are the
18 archaic, non-pottery sites described by Kirkland16 which
almost certainly belong to the Elam focus. These present
very similar geologic occurrences and the description and
illustration of their combined total of 460 artifacts conform
most closely in typology and percentage of importance of
the various forms.
Comparisons and Conclusions
Materials collected along Elm Creek (the beginning of the
Elm Fork of the Trinity) near Gainesville, Cooke County,
bear a suspicious resemblance to the Carrollton focus.lV
16. Kirkland, Forrest. A eerie~ of non-pottery sites in Dallas County, Text,
The Retard, Dallu County Archaeological Society, III, 6, 1942.
17. Mos~. Hubert. Personal ¢oramunication. $u]¥, 19~2.

Trinity Aspecf o] the Archaic Horizon

29

These present a seeming mixture of Plainview-like points
end large archaic types, and several hearths and burials
have been recorded at some depth in a sand formation,
possibly an extension of the Pattillo. The sinker sites in the
Waco region include identical sinkers to those of the Carrollton focus~ and an illustration of "typical projectile points
accompanying sinker sites" shows many archaic types which
can be matched almost point-for-point in the Wheeler-Lake
Dallas groups, including the illustration of one PIainview~ike point. In addition, gouges in "small numbers" are known
to occur with them. A very close relationship with the Carrollton is indicated. The Yarbrough site in Van Zandt County, just 60 miles east of Dallas beyond Kaufman County
(where one Carrollton site is known!), is famous for its
mixture of Plainview-like points and archaic points in a
non-pottery complex. This, coupled with the seeming sporadic occurrence of early-type points over Northeast Texas
and Northwest Louisiana, leads to the possibility that a
version of the Carrollton focus extends in that direction
as well.
Non-pottery levels and sites in Lamar County and elsewhere in Northeast Texas resemble the Elam focus archaic
materials of a later stage. Substantiating this late assignment are several of the early pottery cultures of the region.
It is a known fact that most of the Wylie focus’ 8 sites, shown
generally as Station 11 in Fig. I, along the East Fork of
the Trinity (Collin, Rockwall, and Kaufman Counties) seem
to be a mixture of late archaic elements with a pottery-andagricultura! complex. Generally, pottery and associated pottory culture type projectile points occur in the topmost six
inches or so of the sites, grading downward into an underlying, non-pottery, archaic zone to depths of 30 inches or
more. The archaic projectile points in the underlying zone,
as well as the remnant ones mixed with the pottery type
ones above, are very close to Elam focus types; in addition,
an occasional gouge is found on a Wylie site, and the Elam
I$. St~phenson, Robert L. The Hogge Bridge site and the Wylie focus, Amer|ca~
fi..ntiqu|ty, XXVII, 4, 19~2.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

3O

"turtle-back" ovate scrapers become common in a more
evolved and better-developed form. That the Wylie focus
represents a continuation of the Carrollton-Elam sequence,
whereby a very late manifestation of the latter became
mixed with incoming pottery culture traits, is strongly
suggested. The Wood site with its three components may
well represent the entire sequence in stratigraphic succession.
The Alto focus ~ in its lowest level appears to represent
somewhat the same mixture of late archaic with new pottery culture elements. Some of its materials may indicate
an evolvement out of a late archaic similar in a number
of respects to the Elam focus.
On the basis of pottery types in the Wylie focus attributed
to trade-contact, an age of between 1,000 and 500 years ago
may be postulated, carbon dating of early Alto focus corn
gives an age of roughly 1,500 years ago. Thus it would
appear that Elam focus traits survived beyond the conclusion of the Pattillo depositional period (estimated 1,750
years ago), and sometime in the hiatus before the Carter
deposition began (ca. 650 years ago), became mixed with
arriving pottery elements---doubtlessly, at varying times in
different areas. It is considered that this time of mixture
terminates the Elam focus, and thereby the Trinity aspect
of the archaic.
At the other end of the occupational span, the Plainviewlike points and the archaic points with ground edges indicate
some sort of "carry-over" or very late contact between the
early archaic and the Early Man hunting cultures. The projectile points are n~uch too consistent in all sites to be the
result of fortuitous collecting from earlier sites, they are
much too differently made to be a variant archaic form, and
as mentioned before are practically indistinguishable from
those at ~ue sites. Possibly the early cultures lingered on
into archaic times; the earliest archaic people may have
intermixed with late remnants somewhere in their migra19.

Newell and Krieger, Op. ~|t.

PLATE

5.7.

12.

Trinity Aspect o] the Archaic Hor~zon

33

tions, gradually absorbing them entirely; or the dessication
of the Altithermal may have driven the last early survivors
down off of the High Plains along the river courses, where
they encountered the early archaics already in occupation.
It places an interesting speculation upon the beginning of
the archaic and the termination of the early hunting cultures.
Correlations are possible between the Trinity aspect and
other archaic materials in Texas, as well as with archaic
cultures outside the state. In general, the Edwards Plateau
and Big Bend aspects give evidence of long-continued occupation of the same basic cultural type, gradually developing
and changing in situ; both possess numerous examples of
being buried in formations of some considerable geologic
antiquity, though inevitably referable to the early Medithermal or "Little Pluvial" period rather than ~the Pleistocene, and none has as yet presented a proven association
with extinct fauna. In all these respects, they are comparable to the Trinity aspect.
Specifically, the Merrill site2o on Brushy Creek near
Round Rock, Williamson County, contained a number of
similarities to the Carrollton focus--important, as this is
the type station of the Round Rock focus. There, materials
occurred deeply buried in the first terrace in a four-segment
sequence: top, a surface midden with late artifacts; next
below, a four-and-a-h~lf foot gravel layer with earlier archaic materials; then a two foot midden with earlier archaic
artifacts; and beneath that, a six foot silt layer with earlier
archaic types. The lower three zones are considered a mixture of Round Rock and Clear Fork loci by the investigators,
with a large time gap between them and the surface midden;
suggested dating has been "either 6,000 or 4,000 years ago"
for the louver portions, about A. D. 1500 for the surface
midden. As no extinct fauna occurred in the formations,
the geologic structdre seems roughly comparable to the
Dallas sequence, with the gravel corresponding to the Pattillo and the underlying silt to the AlbrittonMthus placing
20.
Campbell. The Merrill site: archaeological remains associated with alluvial
terrace deposits, Texas Archaeological & Paleontological Society Bulletin, XVIII, 1948.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

34

the buried midden in the equivalent to the Albritton-Pattillo hiatus. The Carrollton focus has been shown to extend
in time from the upper Albritton, across the hiatus, into
the lower Pattillo, with the Wheeler site occupation seemingly coeval with the Merrill buried midden and the lower
portion of the overlying gravel. Hence, it is no surprise to
see ix the Merrill site illustrations straight-sided, squarebased, stemmed points very close to Nos. 7-9, Plate I; a
"Yuma-like" point somewhat similar to Nos. 19-23, Plate I;
two gouges similar in technique, though larger, to those on
Plate II; and another of those remarkable points like No. 5,
Plate I. Significantly, these are all from the buried midden
or in the overlying gravel as though washed in from it.
Thus a rough contemporaneity can be assumed between the
Carrollton fgcus and the lower portions of the Merrill site.
Additionally, Watt observes that "sinkers are reported
from the middle level of the Burnt Rock Mounds of Central
Texas"--the term "Burnt Rock’’21 being the common name
for that phase of the archaic before the Round Rock focus
was so designated. However, no sinkers were found at the
Merrill site, the Round Rock type site.
The Carrollton gouges are a smaller, quartzite version of
the larger flint ones of the other early Edwards Plateau
aspect focus, the Clear Fork of the Abilene region--hence
an implied relationship here, along with some projectile
point similarities. As the Round Rock and Clear Fork loci
have been recorded as mixed both at the Merrill site and
in Jackson’s deep site22 on the Colorado River above Austin
in Travis County, the two are regarded as contemporaneous,
and thus the logical interlocking affinities with both as seen
in the Carrollton ma~terials. Incidentally, both of these Edwards Plateau complexes also exhibit a few grinding stones
and many choppers, in general comparable to the Carrollton.
Not much comparison exists between the Carrollton and the

21.
Pearce. J. E. Present .tatus of Tex~ arehae~lo~, Texas /~rcha~alaa,ical &
Pal¢on~o~cal Society Bullet,n, 1V, 1932.

22.

Jackson. A. T. A d~p areha~logieal

Arc~logical & Pal~ntolo~cai ~iety Bnlle~, XI, 1939.

9

Trinity Aspect o] the Archaic Horizon

37

loci of the Big Bend aspect, other than roughly equivalent
geologic position throughout the Medithermal or "Little
Pluvial" depositions; however, other authors have recognized similarities between the Big Bend and Edwards Plateau manifestations, gouges are known from along the Pecos
River sites, and a type of sinker has been found in Val Verde
County. As mentioned previously, the long-headed, slabsided, keeled-vaulted human type is most prominently
known from the Abilene and Val Verde areas as a further
comparison.
Certain of the projectile point forms in the Grove focus23
(archaic) of Oklahoma show similarity to those of the Carrollton; especially noteworthy is the appearance of Plainview-like points as well in the Middle Grove. However, no
gouges or sinkers are present24. Further afiel~l, a number of
the Carrollton point types resemble those of the Borax
Lake-Pinto Basin-Silver Lake-Lake Mojave desert cultures
of California.25 Nos. 7-9, Plate I, especially resemble Borax
Lake points according to Harrington.26 The general geologic assignment of these cultures and estimated datings now
conform roughly with the early archaic. A vague resemblance in several categories can also be noted with some
of the Eastern archaic, manifestations.27
As for the Elam focus, Kirkland observed~e that the materials from his 18 non-pottery sites, now incorporated as
Elam, "resemble those from the middle and upper levels of
the Burnt Rock Mounds." In this, the authors concur, the
artifacts being obviously derived from the earlier Carrollton and developed from it at a later period quite in line
with the observed long-continued evolution in the various
Edwards Plateau sites. The Elam ovate "turtle-back" scrap23.
Bell, Robert E. and David A. Baerrets. A survey of Oklahoma archaeology,
Texas Archaeological & Paleontological Society Bulletin, XXII.
Ibid. Persoaa] communication, April. 1952.
24.
25. Harrington, M. R.; Elizabeth W. Crozier and William H. Campbell; Malcolm
$. Rogers, et al. Various publications.
26.
Harrington. Personal communications. May, 1952.
27.
Rttchie. ~V. A. Ne*v evidence relating to the archaic occupation of New
York, Researches and Transactions of the New York State Archaeological Association,
VIII, 1, 1936~
28.
Ktrkland. Op. ell

Te~ A~cheo~ogie~l a~d Pal~o~tolog~cal Society

ers bear a marked similarity to those shown as typical of
the Early Woodland of Oklahoma (which follows the Grove
archaic), while the point types more closely match, in some
instances, those of the late Grove focus--again in line with
the observed sequences.
In time, though not in typology, the Carrollton focus
roughly equates with the Chiricuahua, and the Elam focus
with the San Pedro, of the Cochise culture of Arizona; likewise with the corresponding elements at Ventana Cave.Zg, 3o
Actually, the archaic of Texas appears to have arrived
perhaps as far back as the Altithermal (6,000-8,000 years
ago), certainly by the beginning of the Medithermal depositions as demonstrated in so many sites. The earliest manifestations of it, especially in the Edwards Plateau region,
show a very heavy flint industry with exceptionally large
average projectile point and gouge-and-scraper forms; this
is true also of the early Grove in Oklahoma. If the geologic
interpretation of the Dallas area is correct, the archaic arrived here--still in the early Medlthermal--but somewhat
after its beginning; therefore the Carrollton focus should
be slightly later than the very earliest Round Rock-Clear
Fork (and Maravillas in the Big Bend, and possibly the
early Grove), and the artifact typology bears this out with
a number of smaller forms. Thus if one would arbitrazily
divide these other complexes into an Early-Middle-Late
classification, the Carrollton would conform more closely
to the NIiddle division and the Elam to the Upper--not
precise, but a fairly workable comparison.
The establishment of the Trinity aspect does much to
fill in a gap in the Northeast Texas chronology which has
long proven a hindrance in the understanding of many other
problems in this region.
Dallas, Texas
August 13, 1952
29. Antevs. Op. ett.
30. Haury, Emil W. The stratigraphy of Ventana Cave, Arizona, American Antiquity, VIII, 3, 1943.

