52

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

A SECOND HISTORIC CADDO SITE AT
NATCHITOCHES, LOUISIANA
Bxr C. H. WE~B
Comparatively few sites have been found in the historic Caddo
territory which exhibit the association 0f native artifacts and European trade materials, despite the extent of this territory and the
existence of trade contact with Caddo tribes for over a hundred
years in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
ticularly true of historically identified sites.

This is par-

The obvious impor-

tance of such materials in delineatlng the artifact types of the historic Caddo tribes and establishing their relationships to the materials found at the hundreds of pre-histori¢ sites in the area justifies
the present report of a second Natchitoches site.

In 1935 Walkert .described the burials and artifacts which had
been discovered during construct.ion of the Fish Hatchery on Cane
River one mile below Natchitoches, Louisiana, noting that in all
probability the site was that of the Natchitoches Indians during
existence of the French fort at this town, which was established in
1714. Trade beads and metal tools were found in burials with
native pottery. A marked similarity was noted by Walker
tween the engraved Natchitoches ware and numerous vessels illustrated by Mo’orez from the Keno and Glendora sites on Bayou
Bartholomew and the Ouachita River above Monroe, Louisiana.
He states that this similarity is explained historically by Henri de
Tonti’s account of finding the "Ouasita" and "Nachitoches" together at the latter’s village and also by La Fon’s map of the Territory of Orleans in 1806, on which the old trading path from
Natchitoches t6 the villages on the Oua~hita is shown. Walker
cites other historical details of the early white contacts with the
Natchitoches Indians and the Doustiony, a related tribe, both
whom lived at .various places on Cane and Red Rivers near Natchitoches until after 1805.
Walker quotes Dunn3 as explaining the maze of rivers and
bayous in this vicinity (Plate 9) by stating that the Natchitoches
island known to the early French explorers, about 50 miles long by

A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, La.

53

3 or 4 miles wide, was formed by Cane River on the west and
Rigolette de Bon Dieu on the east.

Originally flowing through a

channel now referred to as Old River (see Plate 9) Red River cut
through into Cane River about 176.5 and then in 1832 broke into
Rigolette de Bon Dieu, which it follows today as far as the town
of Colfax.

Nicholas King’s’~ map of Red River in Louisiana, embodying the
findings of the Freeman-Custis expedition of 1806, shows the main
channel of the river~at that time t6 course through the present Cane
River in agreement with Dunn’s statement. A north branch is shown
corresponding to the Rigolette mentioned by Dunn and following
the present channel of the Red River.
Walker1 states that St. Denis described the old village of the
Natchitoches as being on an island formed by the separation of
the river into two branches which reunited farther downstream.
No indication is given whether this island is the early "Natchitoches
Island" between the present channels of Red River and Cane River
or the island between Cane and Old Rivers (Red River channel
before 1765). It will be noted on the map (Plate 9) that the
Fish Hatchery site and the Lawton site to be described are t6 the
west of Cane River, hence on the island between it and Old River,
but not on "Natchitoches Island."
The Loavton Site

During the summer of 1944, Mr. A. G. Lawton of Natchitoches
was engaged in constructing a cotton gin on his plantation situated
on the west bank of Cane River, eight miles below Natchitoches,
between Natchez and Bermuda (Plate 9). Excavations for the
foundation struck some six or seven burials, several of which conrained Indian pottery or glass beads. These were found only across
the sour,~west corner of the gin (Plate 10, No. !) almost paralleling
the shore of Cane River and about 200 feet from the stream. Mr.
Lawton states that the burials were almost in direct line, with
practically all of the heads directed toward the southeast. One
vessel was stated to have been alongside the chest, the others all
near the heads. Several groups of beads were found, generally
at the neck, although a workman states that a few were found at
the wrist of one skeleton.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

54

About ten days later I had the opportunity, through the kindness
of Mr. Lawton, of being present and salvaging artifacts during
further excavations for a scale platform on the northwest side o~
the gin, where three additional burials were found.

Unfortunately

the season was advanced and haste was necessary in getting the gin
completed before harvesting season, hence a tractor and scraper were
used in excavating for the scale pit, resulting in serious damage to
the burials.

When burials were struck, however, I was permitted

to work out the details while grading continued elsewhere, so that
a majority of the artifacts, though damaged, was saved. The skeletal
material, especially the skulls, was beyond reconstruction and only
gross details could be observed under the circumstances.

Permis-

sion has been granted to conduct more leisurely excavations in the
adjoining areas after the crops are gathered and we have hopes of
securing skeletal material for study.
The burials were found at an average depth of 2 to 3 feet, within
or just beneath a heavy layer of clay, which is overlaid by some
18 inches of sand, undoubtedly deposited from overflows when this
stream was a main channel of Red River.

A cursory examination of the surrounding area showed no evidence of surface artifacts, although grass on the gin plot and crops
in the adjacent fields interfered. It is possible that overflow sands
have covered all surface materials. I am told that human bones
were struck by the p!ow in an adjoining field and that other bones
have been plowed up in a field some three or four hundred yards
downstream.

Buria!s
The upper portion of Burial 1 (Plate 10, No. 1) had been removed
during the original excavations for the gin, only a few trade beads
having been found at the neck.

The intact leg bones indicated the

extended burial o~[ an adult in the supine position, the head directed
southeast.

The right femur was markedly thickened in its upper

portion, with very roughened surface, giving the appearance of a
PLATE 9
Map of the Natchitoches area, showing location of l~ish Hatchery
and Lawton sites.

i
Plate 9

A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, La.

healed osteo-periostifis or infected fracture.

57

The tibiae showed no

evidence of syphilitic infection.
Burial 2, an adult (probably female), 62 to 64 inches in length,
was about 8 feet west of the gin wall, lying supine and fully extended with the head toward the southeast. The skull was struck
and badly crushed. Above and to each side of the skull were a
small bottle (Plate 11, No. 2) and fragments of a bowl (Plate 11,
No. 3).
Burial 3 was that of a child, apparently 3 to 4 years of age, fully
extended in the supine position with the head directed northwest.
A group of 12 trade beads was found at the neck and a single pottery vessel (Plate 11, No. 4) was above and to the right of the
skull.

The vessel had been intact but the neck was carried away by

the scraper and could not be found.

The hones which remained

showed no’ evidence of disease.

Burial 4 was that of an infant, found near Burial 3, and was
so badly disturbed that details of artifact placement are not definite.
Fragments of two pottery vessels, both showing old breaks, were
found near the skull. These were a redware bowl (Plate 11, No. 5)
and the body of a bottle or jar (Plate 11, No. 6). A group of 20
beads was found at the neck.
ArtiJacts

It is to be noted that no objects of metal, stone or shell were
found, differing from the Fish Hatchery site, where Walker
ports the finding of shell beads, stone arrow points and celts, metal
scissors, hawkbetls, bracelets and an iron spike. The limited number of burials so far uncovered at the Lawton site may account for
this difference.
The beads (Plate 10, No. 2) have not been submitted to experts
but none has the appearance of native beads, some being evidently
glass, others possibly are of a porcelain compound. Of the 35 which
I have seen, 27 are of various shades of blue, sometimes with longitudina! white stripes; 7 are white, 4 of these having stripes of various
colors; and 2 are red. The cut or worn ends of the red beads show
that the body is made of a very dark material with a thin red sur-

58

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

face coating. Most of the beads are round or oval, but two are
oblong, 12 to 15 ram. (1-2 to 5-8 inch) in length. Diameters
generally average 6 to 8 ram. (1-~ to 5-16 inch) with extremes of
2 ram. and 1 cm.
The eight pottery vessels are all shell tempered, as are four
sherds which were found in the soil near a burial. The paste is
generally firm or slightly brittle, with surface leaching of the shell
to produce a porous or roughened appearance in some instances.
Two of the bowls and one bottle are of softer paste, so that they
break or suffer leaching more readily. The vessels are light, with
wall thickness of 4 to 5 ram., and are comparatively small, the
greatest diameter being 16 cm. (6¼ in.). Surface coloration varies
from an orange tinted buff to" a dark brown, except for the red
slipped vessel described below.
One entire vessel and portions of two others were saved by Mr.
Lawton from the first burials and were kindly loaned to me for
study. The unbroken specimen (Plate 10, No. 3) is a cup, 9.2 cm.
in height, 8 cm. in diameter, of firm, slightly porous ware which
has a tan surface color. The base is circular and flat; the body is
decorated with vertical incised lines; the narrow rim flares moderately. The short neck has a projecting rounded collar bearing two
parallel rows of punctates. Vessels of similar shape, often larger,
with vertical incised lines have been found at several sites in the
hills bordering Red River Valley above Natchitoches, although such
vessels or sherds are clay tempered and in association with a punctate-incised ware typical of these sites. Similar vessels, both shell
and clay tempered, were found at the Belcher Mound site in Caddo
Parish.5
A second vessel (Plate 10, No. 4) is represented by the basal
half which is. 16 cm. in diameter. The small part of the decoration
present consists of parallel, curving, roughly engraved lines. It is
very similar in appearance to that illustrated by Walker1 in Plate
5 b, which has a sub-globular body, narrow neck and wide, cup-like
rim.

Sufficient sherds of a third vessel (Plate 11, No. 1) were present
to warrant its reconstruction. The diameter is 14.8 cm. at the lip,
the height 8.7 cm. The paste is firm and very little of the shell

A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, La.

59

temper shows on the surface, which is smooth but not highly polished, and is dark brown in color. The base is circular and not
flattened; the narrow rim curves outward and is separated from the
body by a rounded collar. The engraved decorations cover the rim
and body, the chief motif, five times repeated, being a scroll with
recurred ends formed by a medially bisected band. Spaces bordering the scrolls are filled by negative discs and hatched or cross
hatched triangles. The rim bears a negative meander, outlined by
small arcs and also medially bisected by a spurred or dentate line.
Details of the decoration appear in Plate 12, No. 2.
Vessel 1 (Plate 11, No. 2) of Burial 2 is a small bottle, 8 cm. in
height, 6.5 cm. in body diameter and 3.8 cm. at the orifice.

The

paste is firm with fine shell tempering, the surface is pitted or
vacuolated from leaching of shell particles, the surface color is
orange tinted tan with black areas from differential firing.

The

base is small, circular and flat; the body is globular with flattened
shoulders; the neck is short with rounded collar and flaring rim.
Parallel lines encircle the shoulder and base, while the body surface
between these lines bears a design (Plate 13, No. 1), four ti~nes repeated, of interlocking scroll bands above and below a meander,
all formed by trailed lines.

The interlocking scroll

bands are

formed by three parallel lines.

Vessel 2 (Plate 11, No. 3) of Burial 2 is an open bowl, 16 cm. in
diameter at the lip and 8 cm. in height, with 3 to 4 ram. tbicknes~
of walls. The paste is inferior, being porous and badly leached,
splitting easily. A few surface areas evidence a former polish.
The small circular base is semi-flattened; the body is a modified
hemisphere; the rim continues the outward flare of the upper body
to terminate in a rolled lip. The engraved decoration, three times
repeated, features a double scroll (Plate 13, No’. 2) with folded
ends and joined at a right angle at the vessel ba~. The adjacent
scrolls interfit and the intervening spaces are filled by negative
discs. The rim has a rectilinear stepped pattern, the steps corresponding to spaces between the body scrolls. Spurred or dentate
lines bisect the feature bands on both body and rim.
Vessel 1 of Burial 3 (Plate 11, No. 4) seems to" be the body of a
short-necked bottle, similar to vessels from Glendora and Keno

Texas A~’cheological and Paleontological Society

6O

shown in Figs. 9, 10, 11, 129, 130, etc., in Moore’s report,2 which
vessels it closely resembles in shape and decoration. It is 9.3 cm.
high, 11 cm. in diameter, made of dark, shell tempered paste, 5 ram.
thick, with a smooth orange-tan surface which shows a few dark
areas of irregular firing.

The decoration (Plate 16, No. 1)

of

closeIy spaced parallel trailed lines forms a figure repeated five
times on the body, three times on the shoulder, of combined meande~
and interlocking scrolls, the chief element being a three
scroll.

lira:.

Spaces above, below and between the scrolls are filleM by

parallel vertical arcs.

Vessel 1 of Burial 4 (Plate 11, No. 5) is a beautiful small bowl
of yellow paste covered with a bright red slip which has flaked
off in some areas. The diameter is 14 cm. the height 6.8 cm. The
small circular base is flat; the body semi-globular; the rim flares
outwardslightly and terminates in a rolled lip. The engraving
shows the yellow paste through the red background, but is slightly
irregular, the design being unbalanced. The chief design motif
is a folded meandering band, the meanders being five times repeated around the vessel (Plate 14, No. 2). A second meander is
pendant from the shoulder and a third appears on the rim, each
of the three being medially bisected by a spurred line. Intervening
spaces are typically filled by discs, ovals and hatched areas.
Vessel 2 of Burial 4 (Plate 11, No. 6) is the globular body of a
bottle, 9.5 cm. in height and diameter. One small neck sherd shows
an outward convexity, indicating the typical bulbous neck found
on similar vessels at Keno and Glendora. The paste is soft with
brown surface coloration, the surface smooth but not burnished.
The engraved decoration (Plate 12, No. 1) is comparatively simple,
a three line curving panel featuring interlocking ~rolls, five times
repeated, and outlined above and below by vertical or diagonal arcs.

PLATE 10
1.

Sketch of Lawton site showing location of burials.

No. 2.

Trade beads from Lawtor~ site.

No. 3.

Pottery cup, first burial group.

No. 4.
outline.

~’ottery jar or bottle, first burial group, with suggested

!

,Y
Plate 10

63

A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, La.

The similarities of shape, size, temper and decorative patterns
between this pottery and the vessels described by Walkerl from the
Fish Hatchery Site, as well as the presence of trade materials in
each instance, indicate cultural identity.

The historical evidence

outlined by Walker certainly justifies the presumption that they
are to be attributed to the Natchitoehes Indians, an historic Cadda
tribe, or to the closely related Doustiony who lived along the river
in this same area, remaining here even when the Natehitoches temporarily moved south to reside with the Acolapissa (Swanton‘$)
and uniting with the Natchitoches in later years.
Natchitoches Pottery Types
On the basis of comparative study of the vessels from the Fish
Hatchery and Lawton sites at Natchitoches and the culturallywas
well as historicallywaffiliated Keno and Glendora sites ~n the
Ouachita, we may safely delineate certain pottery types which are
characteristic of these historic

Caddo tribes.

Using decorative

method and desi~ elements as the chief criterion, and vessel shape
as a lesser, two types may be distinguished.

In the first type, which

Ford and others6 at Louisiana State University have called Natchitoches Negative Meander, but which Krieger7 and the writer prefer
to call Natchitoches Engraved, may be grouped the engraved bowls,
platters and bottles, featuring as typical motifs the meander and
the scroll--interlocking, folded, redoubled---both usually formed
by negative bands which are medially bisected by a spurred (dentare) line.

These major motifs are flanked or outlined by negative

discs, arcs, hatched or cross-hatched areas, the decoration covering
the entire or major part of the external surface.

A high percentage

of the vessels has shell tempering although some vessels show absence of recognizable temper. Vessels of this type are often covered
with red slip or pigment ~red or white) may be inserted into d~e
engraved lines.

The major design elements may be repeated three,

four or five times around the vessel.
The typical bowl is open and shallow, with moderately flaring
rirn, although bowls with vertical walls or vertical rims arc occasionally seen.

Inslanting rims are rare, the one vessel of this type

(Moore2, Fig. 149) which appears at Keno having the characteristics of Belcher Engraved5 and

probably

representing

a

pre-

64

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

historic burial or trade vessel.

The bottles of Natchitoches En-

graved, illustrated in Plates 10, No. 4, 11 No. 6, and 12 No. 1 of this
report, Plate 5 b of Walker’s report1 and Figs. 16, 17, 20, 21, 71
and 131 and Plate II of Moore’s report from the Ouachitaz are
globular or squat, with short bulbous necks and slightly flaring
rims.

The several long-necked bottles from the Ouachita sites do

not have characteristic decorations and are suspected of being prehistoric or trade pieces.

It is certainly evident at these sites that

.intrusive vessels from at least the Natchez (Figs. 58, 80, 154) and
Belcher (Fig. 149) types occur.

The bottles have the complicated meander and scroll patterns
described for the bowls, covering most of the body surface, although the necks are undecorated. The spurred line does not appear
so regularly as on the bowls. Tripod bottles (Moore Fig. 71) are
rare. Effigy bottles are illustrated from Glendora (Moore, Plate
I) and Keno (Moore, Plate VII), both red-slipped and the latter
a tetrapo’d vessel. Pot shapes bearing the Natchitoches Engraved
type of decoration are unusual (Moore, Fig. 65 and Plate IV).
Many of the bottles from the Ouachita sites are highly polished and
red filming was frequent. Such highly ornate bottles have not been
found at the Natchitoches sites, but WalkerI describes three such
vessels, illustrated in articles by Beyer and Jones, found in sites
between Natchitoches and Shreveport.
The second pottery type, which we call Keno Trailed, is typically
a small to medium size bottle, with bulging or cylindrical neck,
decorated with numerous closely placed trailed lines, featuring
meanders, scrolls, concentric circles and arcs, and other curvilinear
designs. Numerous examples are illustrated by Moore~ from Glendora (Figs. 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 18, 19, 22-26, 81) and Keno (Figs.
129, 130, 141). They are not illustrated by Walker in the Fish

PLATE 11
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.

1. Natchitoches Engraved bowl, ~irst burial group.
2. Keno Trailed bottle, Burial 2.
3. Natchitoches Engraved bowl, Burial 2.
4. Keno Trailed bottle, Burial 3.
5. Natchitoches Engraved bowl, Burial 4.
6. Natchitoches Engraved bottle, Burial 4.

A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, La.

67

Hatchery report, but the two specimens from the Lawton site (Plates
tl, No. 2, 11 No. 4, 13 No. 1, and 14 No. 1) establish this type
at Natchitoches. Other vessel forms which have Keno Trailed
designs include the open bowl (Glendora Fig. 55) and the vase
(Greer site on the Arkansas River., Moorelz Figs. 62 and 67).
Other Sites Showing Natchitoches Pottery Types

Fordlo excavated at the Alien Plantation and Wilkinson place in
the western fringe of hills bordering the Red River Valley above
Natchitoches. Both sites showed trade materials, either with the burials or in surface finds. Most of the, decorated vessels from both sites
bore incised or punctated designs, but at the Wilkinson place, Neild
had previously secured the typical Natchitoches Engraved bowl illustrated by Ford10 in his Analysis of Village Site Collections from
Louisiana and Mississippi (Fig. 17, page 92).
Dickinson8 described several vessels from the Clements site in
Northeast Texas, where trade contact was evidenced by the presence
of glass beads with the burials. Two of the vessels (Plate 19)
could be classed as Natchitoches Engraved, a third has deeply
trailed lines forming a geometric instead of the curvilinear designs
of Keno Trailed. He quoted Jackson9 who described other vessels from the same site:
"The designs include sun symbols, interlocking scrolls, one swastika, raised lines, fingernail imprints and incised triangular designs.
The workmanship shows a fair degree of excellence. Certain designs
show a marked similarity to some from Louisiana and Arkansas.
as pictured by Moore."
Dickinson states "Inasmuch as the Clements place was not a great
distance from the Cadodachos settlements which Bolton lo’cates in
the vicinity of Texarkana, one would expect the pottery to be
representative of the Great Caddo."

Jackson9 mentions six ottmr sites in East Texas at which trade
materials were found. At the Womack site on Red River, in Lamar
County, numerous metal objects as well as glass beads were found.
Most of the pottery was crude but two large bowls were well made.
One had cross hatched triangles pendant from band lines; the
other is described as having intricate interlocking scrolls between

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

68

bands, similar to a number of bowls from a prehistoric site in
Harrison County, Texas.
Moore~ ~ illustrates three bottles and several bowls (Figs. 58-60,
62, 63) from the Battle Place on Red River which in shape and
decoration conform to the type Natchit~ches Engraved.

M.P.

Miroir of Texarkana has a large number of vessels from this site,
all (like those illustrated by Moore) coming from burials in the
fields surrounding the large mound.

Most of these vessels duplicate

the pottery types described by Webb and Dodd5 from the Belcher
Mound, including Belcher Engraved, Foster Trailed-Incised, Cowhide Stamped
Ridged.

(originally called Belcher Stamped), and Belcher

However, there are two typical Natchitoches Engraved

vessels and one Natchez type (Fatherland Incised) from the ~ame
cemetery.
At the Douglas and Greet sites on the lower Arkansas River,
Moore7z illustrates Natehitoches Engraved and Keno Trailed vessels (Figs. 46, 54, 58, 59, 61-67).

It is t6 be noted that some of

the vessel shapes are atypical, and that two bowls (Figs. 69 and 70)
have the shape of Belcher Engraved bowls, and have no body
decoration, ahhough
graved.

the rim designs suggest

Natchitoches En-

One or two other vessels from these sites represent types

found at the Belcher Mound.

Trade materials appear at the Douglas

site and probably at Greet.
Hctdges and Hodges13 recently described pottery from the Watermelon Island site on Ouachita River in Hot Spring County, Arkansas. Two mounds and a large number of village sites on the
1,100 acre island have afforded pottery of numerous types, but the
authors state "The Caddoan complex predominates."

Frorn burials

on the village sites they secured a number of ves~ls, some of
which they describe as having typical Natchitoches or Glendora
decorations, while the descriptions of other vessels tallies with ~veral types described by Do’dd and myself5 from the Belcher site
(Belcher Engraved bottles and bowls, Cowhide (formerly Belcher)
Stamped and Foster Trailed-Incised). They state that no trade
objects have been found on the island.
Krieger7 states that the A. J. Hatchel mound on Red River just
west of Texarkana, entirely free of trade materials, had one in-

69

A Second Historic Caddo S~te at Natchitoches, La.

trusive burial with vessels similar to Natchitoches Engraved, and
50 sherds from the topmost level which were elassified as Natchitoches Engraved, Keno Trailed and Menard Puncture.

The lat-

ter is a type which sometimes is found with Natchitoches Engraved
and Keno Trailed and is illustrated in Figs. 14, 18, of Moore’s12
Arkansas River report and in Figs. 61 and 68 of his Ouachita report.z Krieger states that these findings indicate a brief occupation of the Hatchel site by protohistoric Caddo of the Glendora Focus
(the classificatory name under which he groups Natchitoches, the
two Ouachita sites and others with identical ~naterials).

In his

opinion the Hatchel site could quite possibly have been the upper
Nasoni village and tribe shown by Swanton4 (1942, Fig. 1) in approximately the same position on Red River.
The prehisto’ric pottery at the Belcher Mound site in Caddo
Parish, Louisiana, (Webb and Do~td5) shows interesting relationships to the later Natchitoches and Glendora wares. The engraved
and trailed types at Belcher rarely have shell temper, more frequently having clay, tufa or no recognizable temper at all. The
paste is more homogeneous and generally darker in color than the
Natchitoches wares.

Among thirty odd bottle forms, two small

specimens have pedestal bases, short tubular necks and a smoothl,
trailed curvilinear design typical of Keno’ Trailed (see Webb and
l)odd, Plate 171) ; all of the others have long necks, and globular
or sub-globular bodies with engraved designs.

Three of the bottles

have scroll or meander designs with spurred lines and negative
discs, suggestive but not typical of the Glendora bottle designs.

Of

the five prevalent bowl types, two (formerly part of Belcher Engraved, but now separated as Taylor Engraved as also is the type
shown ira Plate 15, 4) have inslanting rims which are decorated
with scroll bands or meanders, outlined by negative discs and sometimes by cross hatched spaces (Webb and Dodd~ Plate !5, 2 and 3).
Most of the~ vessels have undecorated body surfaces, but three
show decoration with trailed concentric circle or spiral motifs.
Shell temper is absent in these Belcher carinated bowls and the
walls are very thin, often 2 to 3 ram. thick.

Spurred line bisection

of the ~roll bands is frequent and white or red pigment is usually
inserted into the lines.

One vessel is red filmed.

One small fl~t

bowl, differing from any of the others, has a three line interlocking

Texas Archeological and PaleontoZogical Society

7O

scroll design covering most of the body surface outlined by punetates.
It is clay tempered, fired black and has white pigment in the lines.
One would class it definitely as Natehitoches Engraved.
Two tall jars (Webb and Dodd, Plate 15, 6) have high vertical
rims decorated with engraved interlocking ~rolls, outlined by negative discs. The shapes are entirely atypical of Natchitoches Engraved, but the decorative features are very similar. This vessel is
also listed at present as Taylor Engraved.
There is a conceivable relationship between Foster Trailed-Incised
vessels (Webb and Dodd, Plate 17, 2) and Keno Trailed vessels.
The vessel shapes are entirely different, but there is a similar conception of parallel curvilinear trailed lines covering a major part
of the vessel, with the design motifs repeated 3, 4 or 5 times around
the vessel.
We may conclude, then, that the Belcher Mound affords one
typical Natchitoches Engraved and two’ Keno Trailed vessels (clay
tempered) and shows numerous other possible relationships to or
influences on the later Natchitoches.Ouachita types.
Discussian
Considerable progress has been made in the past few years
toward bringing some order out of the welter of confusion concerning the artifacts, and especially pottery, found in the area
inhabited by the historic Southern Caddoan tribes, which covers
northwest Louisiana, southwest Arkansas, east Texas and portions
of Oklahoma.

Until a few years ago everything from this area

was likely to be ascribed to the Caddo Indians, with little areal or
temporal discrimination.

The chronological studies of F6rdlo, 1,

and his associates at Louisiana State University were of considerable help, but they primarily involved central Louisiana and Mississippi, and only a few north Louisiana sites were considered.
Lemley15 and Lemley and Dickinson16 first gave definite indication of a Pre-Caddo culture (later identified as Coles Creek) at the

PLATE 12
No. 1.

Design from Natchitoches Engraved bottle, Burial 4.

No. 2.

Design Natchitoches Engraved bowl, first group.

Plate 12

A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, La.

73

Crenshaw Mound site on Red River in Arkansas, and later identified
Marksville and Coles Creek cultures at the Kirkham place in Clark
County, Arkansas.

Go’ldschmidt17

had previously

suggested

a

chronological sequence of Caddo pottery types in northeast Texas
on the basis of differences in pottery types, burial customs and the
fortuitous finding of an intrusive burial pit which transsected a
previous placement.
Since this time excavations have been conducted by the Universities of Texas and Oklahoma in these states, some others under
government projects and others by individuals in the four state
area.

Conferences and exchange visits helped to clarify interrelated

problems. Krieger7 of the University of Texas, after study of the
very large collection at this institution, field notes of archaeological
projects especially at the Hatchel and Davis sites, visits and conferences in each of the related areas, has recently suggested a classification based on the MeKern System, to" be used as a basis for
further study and clarification. It has been my privilege to consult
with him on a number of occasions, particularly concerning the
classification of sites and typology of artifacts from northwest
Louisiana, as well as to visit the major collections of the four
state area, and it is my opinion that his summary will be immensely
valuable to future w~rkers.
Krieger establishes two aspects, the earlier Gibson and the later
Fulton.

The Gibson Aspect includes the Spiro Focus, of which com-

ponents besides the Spiro Mound are present in six Oklahoma and
two northeast Texas counties; the Haley Focus, components of which
include the Haley and one component of the Crenshaw Mound on
Red River in Arkansas (Moorel1 and LemleylS), stage I of the
Hatchel Mound on Red B.iver west of Texarkana and the Mineral
Springs, Washington and Site i of Ozan, described by HattingtonI 8; the Gahagan Focus, including the Gahagan Mound (Moore] 1
\Vebb and Dodd19) in Red River Parish, Louisiana, and possibly
smaller sites in the same area; the Alto Focus, including the Davis
Mound site in Cherokee County and several other sites in MeLenhen, Naeogdo’ehes, Angelina and San Augustine Counties, Texas;
the Sanders Focus, including the T. M. Sanders site in Lamar

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

74

County and other sites in Van Zandt, Hopkins and Wood Counties.
Texas.
To a varying degree in the different fool, the Gibson Aspect is
reported by Krieger to exhibit such traits as: construction of platform tumuli, more frequently rectangular; burial tumuli; burial
complex of multiple burials, often in very large pits, with large
group offerings along wails or in corners of pits; pottery with
clay, sand or bone (no shell) temper, including fine line engraving
of polished vessels, curvilinear incised wares, varying plain or
puncxated wares, square-botto~ed vessels and frequent evidence of
Cotes Creek as a precedent, accompanying or influencing pottery
type; long stermned pottery pipes; effigy pipes of stone or pottery;
carved or incised conch shell dippers and gorgets; copper plaques,
ear spools, ~nasks or beads; ear spools of shell, wood, pottery or
stone; spatulate celts; quartz crystals and galena nodules; white
sandstone hones; finely made bone pins and awls; Copena type
blades; small

(arrow)

points more com~non than larger

(dart)

points.
The Fulton Aspect as outlined by Krieger, includes the Texarkana
Focus, with components at stage I1 of the Hatehel Mound, nine
others in Bowie, Cass, Titus, Franklin and Red River counties in
Northeast Texas and the Ozan sites 11 and 15 described by Harrington~a; the Belcher Focus, including also the McClure, Friday
and Foster mound sites on Red River in Arkansas (Moore~ ~), one
component each at the Battle and Crenshaw sites in the same area,
and one component of the H. R. Taylor, Cash and J. M. Riley sites
in East Texas; the Titus Focus, including eleven sites in Titus, Morris and surrotmdiug counties in Northeast Texas;

the Frankston

Focus, prehistoric, and historic Asinai, in a large hum}mr of sites
in Anderson, Cherokee, Nacogdoches and surrounding counties in
central east Texas; the Glendora Focus, including Glendora, Keno,
Natehitoches, and the last oecupational component at Battle, Greet
and Douglas sites in Arkansas, Clements. Hunt and Womaek sites

PLATE 13
No. 1.

Design from Keno Trailed bottle, Burial 2.

No. 2.

Design from Natchitoches Engraved bowl, Burial 2.

I

Plate 13

A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, La.

77

in East Texas. Suggested as probable additional loci in the aspect,
although not well delineated as yet, are the McCurtain, in southeastern Oklahoma, and the Bossier, in northwest Louisiana and extreme east Texas (hillside sites containing incised, punctated and a
few engraved pottery types).
Traits which in varying degree characterize the Fulton .Aspect sites
are: rare construction of tumuli; use of preexisting tumuli in some
instances; burial complex of single extended burials with vessels
around head, shoulders and occasionally around legs; pottery showing increasing frequency of shell tempering and red filming, numerous types of engraved, trailed, incised,

punetated and brushed

wares; square-bottomed vessels rare or absent; rattle bowls (hollow
knobs) and effigies on rims in the pottery of most loci; scroll
design motifs in al! except Frankston Focus; design predominantly
repeated four times; elbow pottery pipes; conch shell and mussel
beads; brown sandstone hones; spall scrapers with edge retouch;
perforated bear and canis teeth; small (arrow) points more prevalent than large (dart) points; circular house patterns with grouped
inner posts and projecting entrance-way (not invariable).
Krieger estimates that the Gibson Aspect existed approximately
between 1400 and 15~t0 A. D., contemporaneous with the latter
part of Ford and Willey’s~’z~ Temple Mound I (Coles Creek) period,
while the Fulton aspect covered the period from 1540 to the historic
era.
The Titus, McCurtain, Texarkaua and Belcher Foci would
occupy the earlier part of this period, intermediate between the
Gibson Aspect and the protohistoric-historic Caddo groups of the
Glendora Focus. The Frankston Focus would also reach the historic era as the Asinai tribes of east Texas.
While granting that the Fulton Aspect repre~nts prehistoric and
historic Caddo tribes in a continuous physical and cultural sequence,
Krieger questions the backward extension of such sequence to include the Gibson Aspect peoples as remote physical and linguistic
ancestors of the Caddo’s, despite evidences of continuity in the potteries.
With respect to the G/endora Focus, he states "The origins of
Glendora Focus pottery, omitting the filming and shell te~nper features, apparently are to be found in the wares of the prehistoric

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

78

Belcher and Titus Foci. The typical meandering band of Natchitoches Engraved, which doubles back on itself four times around
the vessel and is flanked with discs or cross hatched areas, seem
to have been anticipated in the four-times repeated scrolls of Ripley
and Taylor Engraved. Individual vessels of GIendora pottery are
sometimes difficult to distinguish from specimens of Taylor Engraved and certain Belcher site vessels."
Historical evidence has recently appeared which more definitely
established the Belcher Focus sites as prehistoric Caddo sites. Swanton’s4 valuable contribution of source material on the History and
Ethnology of the Cadda Indians (page 79) quotes the records of
the Freeman-Custis expedition of 1806, which with Caddo Indian
guides, proceeded up Red River until turned back by Spaniards
above the great bend (Fulton).
"On the evening of the 19th they passed a beautiful prairie, on
the north-east side of the river, 125 miles’* from the Coashutta V,.’Ilage.

This prairie was the site of an old Caddo village, deserted

by that nation in consequence of a surprise, and the massacre of
the greatest part of the inhabitants, by the Osage Indians.

The

Caddos with the exploring party, expres~d a wish to visit this place
when they were approaching it; and shewed a remarkable hill in
its rear, on which their old chiefs used frequently to meet in council.
¯ . . This remarkable mount or hill stands on a level plain about
two miles from the river, having the prairie on which the Caddo
Village stood in front, or between it and the river.

It is about two

miles in length, 250 or 300 feet in elevation, very narrow at the
top, in many places not exceeding two or three paces, and so steep,
that it is with difficulty it can be ascended .... This hill is an
irregular mass of iron colored porous rock, in which there are a
great number of small round pebbles .... In front of this mount
lies a beautiful and rich meadow, extending from its base to the
river and downwards for about two miles.

It is interspersed with

small clumps of trees and has a small pond or lake in its centre.
Around and near to this pond, are to be seen the vestiges of tho
Caddo habitations; it was the largest of their villages and their
" *By river travel, not direct.

A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, La.

79

cultivated fields extended for five or six miles from it in every
direction."
The site is marked on the Nicholas King map reproduced by
Swanton and checking with Moore’s11 map of sites visited on the
Red River showed it to be in the vicinity of the Foster, Moore
and Dooley Ferry sites.

In comparry with Mr. M. P. Miroir of

Texarkana, who has collected from this area of Red River for
years, I went over this region last year, inquiring of local residents
as to such an unusual hill.

It was readily found, being a local

landmark, and corresponds to the description given by the expedition in all respects except as to height, which was somewhat exaggerated, as often occurred in the early narratives.

It is the only

hill in this region presenting an unbroken front of two miles on
the valley; I can attest to its steepness, having climbed it, and from
the narrow crest one has an unbroken view of the valley for miles.
In front of the hill is an old river cutoff, almost silted in, which
must be the lake referred t~ (the only type of lake which occurs
naturally in the Red River Valley) and at the junction of this old
river and the present river channel, two miles from the hill, is the
Foster mound site with extensive surface finds.

A limited search

by us and statements by local residents indicate the ab~nce of other
sites in this immediate vicinity.

This would reasonably identify

Foster site (a pure Belcher Focus component) as the deserted Caddo
village described in the Freeman-Custis report.
The Belcher Focus also, it seems to me, serves to bridge the gap
back to the Gibson Aspect in a line of cultural continuity, as we see
Jn this focus a carry over of distinctive Gibson cultural traits:
mound building; multiple burials in large or small pits; piling of
artifacts in the cornefs of pits; pearl beads; the use of copper
(limited to covering of ear plugs) ; large stone ear plugs; engraved
conch shell cups; carved shell gorgets; socketed antler-tip or bone
projectile points. These, with the obvious evidences of relationships in ceramics, indicate a more gradual and progressive transition
of culture than we would anticipate from the ~dden influx of new
peoples.

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

80

Conclusions
A second historic site near Natchitoches may be added to
previously described Fish Hatchery site, to the Glendora and Keno
sites on the Ouachita River and to the final component at the
Battle, Greet, Douglas and Watermelon Island sites in Arkansas
and the Clements, Hunt and Womack sites in Texas to’ constitute
the Glendora Focus of historic or protohistoric Caddo sites.

The

typical culture traits which distinguish this focus are: absence of
mound construction; residence directly on or near major streams
in fertile valleys; presence of trade artifacts in most instances; single burials, extended in the supine position; pottery placed by head
or upper body; head deformation; pottery types include Natchitoches Engraved, Keno Trailed and possibly Menard Punctate Banded; intrusions include Natchez (Fatherland 3-lined Incised), Belcher Engraved or Taylor Engraved; shell temper and red slip frequent; diminishing frequency or absence of stone artifacts.

The

Caddo tribes represented by this focus are thought to be derived
directly from those whose prehistoric remains constitute the Belcher and Titus Foci and possibly others of the Fulton Aspect.
Relationship with the more distant (culturally and temporally)
Gibson Aspect cultures is less evident, but may have occurred
through those of the Belcher Focus.
The Children’s Clinic,
1560 Line Ave.,
Shreveport, La.

REFERENCES
!. Walker, W. M.: A Caddo Burial Site at Natchitoches, Louisiana, Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 94, No. 14, 1935.
2.

Moore, C. B.: Antiquities of the Ouachita Valley, Journal of

the Academy of Natural Sciences, Vol. II, Part I, 1909.

PLATE 14
No. 1.

Design from Keno Trailed bottle, Burial 3.

No. 2.

Design from Natchitoches Engraved bowl, Burial 4.

Plate 14

A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, La.

83

3. Dunn: History of Natchitoches, Louisiana Hist. Quart., Vol.
3, No. 1, 1920. Quoted by Walker, W. M., Vide Supra.
4. Swanton, John R.: Source Material on the History and
Ethnology of the Caddo Indians, Smithsonian Institution, Bureau
of Amer. Ethnology, Bull. 132, 1942.
5. Webb, C. H., and Dodd, M. : Pottery Types from the Belcher
Mound Site, Bull. T. A. P. S., Vol. 13, 1941.
6. Ford, J. A., et al, Unpublished Manuscript.
7. Krieger, A. D., Unpublished Manuscript, personal communication, 1944.
8. Dickinson, S. D.: Certain Vessels from the Clements Place,
an Historic Caddo Site, Bull. T. A. P. S., Vol. 13, p. 117, 1941.
9. Jackson, A. T.: Types of East Texas Pottery, Bull. T. A. P.
S., Vol. 6, p. 38, 1934.
10. Ford, J. A.: Analysis of Indian Village Site Collection~
from Louisiana and Mississippi, Department of Conservation,
Louisiana Geological Survey, 1936.
11. Moore, C. B.: Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River, Jour.
Acad. Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1909.
12. Mo’ore, C. B.: Certain Mounds of Arkansas and Mississippi,
Jour. Acad. Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1908.
13. Hodges, Dr. and Mrs. T. L.: The Watermelon Island Site in
Arkansas, Bull. T. A. P. S., Vol. 15, p. 66, 1943.
14. Ford, J. A. and Willey, G.: Crooks Site, a Marksville Period
Burial Mound in LaSalle Parish, Louisiana Department of Conservation, La. Geol. Survey, 1940.
15. Lemley, H. J.: .Discoveries Indicating a Pre-Caddo’ Culture
on Red River in Arkansas, Bull. T.A.P.S., Vol. 8, 1936.
16. Dickinson, S. D., and Lemley, H. J.: Evidences of the
Marksville and Coles Creek Complexes at the Kirkham Place, Clark
County, Ark., Bull. T.A.P.S., Vol. 11, 1939.
17. Goldschmidt, W. R.: A Report on the Archaeology of Titus
County, Bull. T.A.P.S., Vol. 7, 1935.
18. Harrington, M. R.: Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas, Indian
Notes and Monographs, the Heye Foundation, New York, N. Y.,
1920.
19. Webb, C. H. and Dodd, M.: Further Excavations of the
Gahagan Mound, Bull. T.A.P.S., Vol. 11, 1939.

