The Archeoi ogy of the Post Oak Savannah
of East Central Texas
Ross C. Fields

ABSTRACT
This paper presents an overview of the Native American culture history of the Post Oak savannah of East
Central Texas, focusing especially on the Late Holocene epoch. This is accomplished chiefly by reviewing the
data from Cooper Lake in the upper Sulphur River basin and the Jewett Mine in the upper Navasota River basin
and adjacent Trinity River valley. Relevant information from three other project areas in the region--Lake Fork
Reservoir, Richland!Chambers Reservoir, and the Gibbons Creek Mine--is discussed in less detail, resulting in
data from a north-south transect along the western edge of East Texas.

INTRODUCTION
The primary goal of this paper is to present an
overview of the culture history of the Post Oak
savannah of East Central Texas. I had planned originally to accomplish this by synthesizing the wealth
of data recovered during the last two decades in
and near five project areas--Cooper Lake, Lake
Fork Reservoir, Richland/Chambers Reservoir,
Jewett Mine, and Gibbons Creek Mine--which provide a north-south transect along the western edge
of East Texas. However, this paper focuses on data
from the two areas with which I am most familiar
(Cooper Lake and Jewett Mine), using them as a
springboard to point out overall trends in the prehistory of the region. Even within these two areas, I
chiefly discuss the archeological data from the sites
where the most work has been done and where
components can be isolated. What this leaves out
are the data from survey and testing projects, as
well as the data from excavated sites where the
remains of multiple components cannot be separated. Where appropriate and feasible, however,
information from the other project areas listed above
is discussed herein, but I have not attempted detailed evaluations of the archeological data from
these other projects.
The Post Oak savannah occupies that part of
the West Gulf Coastal Plain that lies between the
pine forests of deep East Texas and the Blackland
Prairie to the west (Figure 1). As such, it is at the
western edge of the eastern U.S. woodlands. As the

name indicates, it is a vegetational region
characterized by hardwood forests mixed with
prairies. The forests are dominated by a variety of
species of nut-producing oaks and hickories, and
these apparently played a vital role in prehistoric
subsistence. The region also supports a rich fauna,
with taxa such as white-tailed deer, turtles, and
various small mammals being especially important
prehistorically.
The southern part of the area under study here
is drained by the southeastward-flowing Trinity
and Brazos rivers, while the Sulphur and Sabine
rivers flow eastward through the northern part. The
climate throughout the region is temperate. Mean
annual temperatures range from 63° F in Delta
County in the north, to 68° F in Grimes County in
the south, with a corresponding increase in the
length of the growing season from 233 days to 278
days. Mean annual precipitation varies from 36.6
inches to 45.0 inches; rainfall tends to be more
abundant in the northern counties (Delta, Hopkins,
Rains, Van Zandt, and Wood) and in Grimes and
Madison Counties at the southeastern edge of the
region, while rainfall averages less than 40 inches
elsewhere (Natural Fibers Information Center 1987).
Just when this modern climate, and flora and
fauna approximating those of the historic period
prior to disruption by modern land use practices,
became established remains debatable, but the data
presented by Collins and Bousman (1993:59) suggest that this happened about 3,000 years ago. Offering abundant natural resources, the region was

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

302

Texas Archeological Society

eastern edge of the Blackland Prairie
specifically to avoid dealing with Northeast
Texas on the east, and North Central and
Central Texas on the west. Thus, this study
intentionally skirts the Caddo heartland, and
it ignores the wealth of data obtained from
numerous projects on the central and western
Blackland Prairie, the Eastern Cross-timbers,
and the eastern Edwards Plateau (e.g., Ray
Roberts Reservoir, Lewisville Lake, Lavon
OIR
Lake, Lake Ray Hubbard, Mountain Creek
Lake, Bardwell Lake, Navarro Mills
Reservoir, Aquilla Reservoir, Whitney Lake,
Waco Lake, Fort Hood, Stillhouse Hollow
Lake, North Fork Reservoir, and Granger
Lake [see Prikryl 1993 for a summary]). For
at least certain parts of the prehistoric period,
these areas had culture histories that were
GIBBONS
distinctly different from those of East Central
Texas, and this provides some rationale for
viewing them separately. This is not to say,
of course, that these areas are irrelevant to
the archeology of the Post Oak savannah. In
fact,
one of the things that makes East Central
LEGEND
~ Post Oak Sovonnoh
Texas interesting is its position at the edge of
Cross Timbers
the Caddoan area and only a short distance
~ Blocklond Proirie
east of chert-rich Central Texas (e.g.,
[-----] Piney Woods
Frederick and Ringstaff 1994).
~ Gulf Coost PrQiries & Morshes
The study area for this summary, then, encompasses parts of 14 counties, extending
some 300 km from Delta County on the
Figure 1. Map showing the Post Oak savannah of East Central
north to Grimes County on the south (see
Texas and major archeological projects.
Figure 1). The northern edge is defined to
include Cooper Lake because, while it is
actually
in the eastern Blackland Prairie, this part
occupied intensively by Native Americans at this
of the Sulphur River valley has yielded important
time and later, and this partly explains the high
information recently about the prehistory of this
frequency of archeological sites dating to the Late
edge of the Caddoan area, and Post Oak savannah
Holocene (Figure 2). Also contributing to the scarcehabitat is present in part of the Cooper Lake basin.
ness of earlier archeological remains, however, are
The study area is not extended any farther north,
changes in the landscape that removed many prehowever, to avoid the distinctly different (at least
Late Holocene sites through erosion, and deeply
during the Late Prehistoric period) Red River valburied others. Thus, while the record recovered to
ley (Bruseth 1995).
date is primarily a Late Holocene one, this almost
The second anchor for this discussion is the
certainly exaggerates a general increase through
Jewett
Mine and adjacent Lake Limestone. These
time in occupational intensity in the Post Oak saproject
areas are about 200 km south of Cooper
vannah. Because earlier sites are so few and
Lake
in
the
upper Navasota River valley, with some
paleoenvironmental conditions are so poorly unof
the
Jewett
Mine sites straddling the divide
derstood, this narrative focuses mainly on just the
between the Navasota and Trinity rivers. Important
last few thousand years of the archeological record.
projects between Cooper Lake and the Jewett Mine
The study area for this summary is based only
include Lake Fork Reservoir, which is in the Sabine
partly on environmental factors. This review is
River drainage, and Richland/Chambers Reservoir,
limited to the Post Oak savannah and the adjacent

L

Fields m The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

Cooper
Lake

Upper
Riohlond/
Jewett
Gibbons
Totols
Sobine
Chombers
Mine
Creek
Bosio
Reservoir
Mine
0
12 0
8 0
13 0
9 0
62,

2O0O

Figure 2. Histograms of uncalibrated, non-modern
radiocarbon assays from archeological contexts at selected
project areas in the Post Oak savannah; assays are grouped
in 250-year increments. Cooper Lake assays are on
nutshells/charcoal, most corrected for carbon isotope
fractionation; Sabine Basin assays are on nutshells/
charcoal, not corrected for fractionation; Richland/
Chambers Reservoir assays are mostly on charcoal/
nutshells with a few on human bones, not corrected for
fractionation; Jewett Mine assays are mostly on charcoal/
nutshells with a few on soi! humates or human bones, most
corrected for fractionation; Gibbons Creek Mine assays
are on charcoal/nutshells, most corrected for fractionation.

which is situated near where the Trinity River enters
the Post Oak savannah. One of the notable gaps in
archeological coverage for the region occurs
downstream from this latter project area (i.e., the
stretch of the Trinity River valley that separates
Freestone and Leon Counties on the west from
Anderson and Houston Counties on the east).
The southern limit of the study area is marked
by the Gibbons Creek Mine on the lower Navasota
River. While the Post Oak savannah runs southwestward from Grimes County all the way to the

303

it difficult to incorporate the results of these projects
into a cultural historical narrative.
The summary below is broken down into three
major time periods, the first dealing with archeology that is more than about 4,000 years old (i.e.,
predating the Late Archaic period), the second encompassing the interval from ca. 2000 B.C. to about
A.D. 800 (i.e., the Late Archaic and Woodland or
Early Ceramic periods), and the third discussing
prehistoric archeology postdating A.D. 800 (i.e.,
the Late Prehistoric period). Use of this simple
scheme accomplishes several things. First, it provides a way to separate out the earliest remains,
which are so skimpy that it is hard to do more than
catalog their existence. Second, it partly parallels
traditional chronologies based on technological
changes in weaponry and food preparation (i.e., the
introduction of the bow and arrow and pottery vessels), so it should be easy to relate what is said here
to chronologies in other areas. And third, it allows
for more narrative flow than would be possible if
the timeline was segmented into a greater number
of temporal units, some of which currently have
only limited support in the radiocarbon evidence.
One issue that this summary does not address
is use of the region by Native Americans during the
historic period. Materials dating to this interval are
few and far between in the project areas listed above,
with the most conspicuous historic Native American sites in the Post Oak savannah--Gilbert,
Pearson, and Vinson (Duffield and Jelks 1961; Jelks
1967; Smith 1993)--representing Wichita groups
that moved southward into Texas in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries. While this certainly is an
interesting topic, its proper geographic frame of
reference is all of North Central Texas rather than
the Post Oak savannah. Further, except for the publication of the report on the 1960s excavations at
the Vinson site (Smith 1993), not much new information has appeared recently on these Nortefio sites.

other side of the Guadalupe River, the study area
discussed here does not extend beyond the Brazos
River. There are two main reasons for this. First,
the prehistory of the southern part of the Post Oak

PRE-LATE ARCHAIC PERIOD

savannah apparently has more to do with the archeology of Central and Coastal Texas than eastern
Texas. And second, while there have been some
interesting recent studies of sites in the Brazos River
valley (e.g., Bowman 1985, 1991; Roemer and
Carlson 1987; Thoms 1993), most of the projects
on the Brazos and beyond to the Colorado River
have been relatively limited in scope, and this makes

Cooper Lake

Only one site with an isolable component dating to this interval, the Finley Fan site (41HP159),
has been excavated and analyzed (Gadus et al.
1992), although it is likely that materials of this age
occur mixed with later deposits at a number of sites,
especially along the upland edge adjacent to the

304

Texas Archeological Society

valley. The Finley Fan site is situated in the upper
deposits of a thick Holocene alluvial fan. Most of
the archeological materials are Late Archaic in age,
but a Middle Archaic component (Analysis Unit 3/
4) dating to 4450-3250 B.C. was found in the lower
part of the excavations. The work in this low-density cultura! deposit found four cultural features, all
of which are burned rock concentrations interpreted
as food-processing facilities or general-purpose
hearths, and recovered a small collection of 462
lithic artifacts. The artifacts are dominated by unmodified debitage, but small numbers of dart points
(1 Yantis and 2 untyped fragments), other shaped
tools, modified flakes, cores, and ground/battered
stones were found as well (Figure 3). No faunal or
macrobotanical remains were recovered because of
poor preservation.

I

I

Figure 3. Yantis dart point from the Middle
Archaic component at the Finley Fan Site
(41HP159), Cooper Lake.

The remains appear to represent small occupational loci adjacent to the hearths. The intensity of
use appears to have been quite low, and comparisons with later sites at Cooper Lake suggest that the
Middle Archaic occupations of Finley Fan were
relatively short lived and infrequent. Nonetheless,
the materials recovered are more suggestive of residential occupations than use strictly for procurement!processing tasks.

small collection of classifiable dart points (1
Golondrina, 1 Hoxie, 1 Woden, 1 untyped specimen with a parallel stem, and 4 untyped lanceolate
points; Figure 4) suggest that a Late PaleoindianEarly Archaic component is present (although a
couple of sandy paste sherds in these deposits attest
to the inclusion of later materials as well). These
deposits contained a single burned rock hearth and
yielded a modest collection of 997 lithic artifacts.
The formal tool assemblage contains an unusually
high percentage of unifaces, with most of the other
tools being dart points and other bifaces. Because
of poor preservation, almost no faunal or
macrobotanical remains were recovered.
A somewhat later component was identified as
Analysis Unit 415 at the Charles Cox site
(41LN29A). While no radiocarbon dates were obtained from these deposits, a pre-Late Archaic age
is suggested for some of the remains by the dated
Late Archaic deposits above, and by the relatively
high proportion of untyped expanding-stem and
parallel-stem dart points (n=9; Figure 5), although
four later points (Axtell, Gary, and Neches River
types) and a single earlier point (San Patrice) are
included as well. No cultural features were found in
this unit, but scattered burned rocks suggest the
former presence of burned rock hearths. The lithic
artifact collection consists of 2,359 specimens, with
the formal tools being dominated by dart points and
other bifaces. This component yielded no faunal
remains at all and very few macrobotanical remains.
Based on comparisons to other sites in the
area, both of these pre-Late Archaic components
are interpreted as residentia! bases that were used
infrequently. While somewhat higher use intensity
is indicated for Charles Cox than the Lambs Creek

Jewett Mine and Lake Limestone

Components predating the Late Archaic period also are scarce in the upper Navasota River
basin, with only two excavated sites apparently containing substantial materials dating to this temporal
interval (Fields 1990). Both sites are in the uplands
along a tributary to the Navasota River, and the
archeological remains are contained in sandy colluvium. The earlier of these is Analysis Unit 4/5 at
the Lambs Creek Knoll site (41LN106), where a
single radiocarbon assay of ca. 8000 B.C. and the

1

2

Figure 4. Dart points from the Late Paleoindian-Early
Archaic component at Lambs Creek Knoll (41LN106),
Jewett Mine: a, Golondrina; b, Hoxie; c-d, untyped
lanceolates.

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

0

1

2

0
c

cm

Figure 5. Dart points from the possible Early to
Middle Archaic component at the Charles Cox
site (41LN29A), Jewett Mine: a-c, untyped
expanding stem; d-e, untyped parallel stem.

Knoll site, it is difficult to relate this to differences
in occupation length and/or frequency of use, and
there is insufficient evidence to suggest that this
reflects an increase in population densities through
time. The evidence from these two sites is consistent with the idea that the upper Navasota River
basin was used by foragers during this time, and
that population densities were low.

LATE ARCHAIC AND
WOODLAND PERIOD
Cooper Lake
In the upper Sulphur River basin, components
dating to the Late Archaic and Woodland periods
are moderately common, with the best excavated
examples occurring at six sites: Finley Fan
(41HP159), Tick (41DT6), Spike (41DT16), Johns
Creek (41DT62), Hurricane Hill (41HP106), and
41HP137 (Fields et al. 1993; Gadus et al. 1992;
McGregor 1989; Perttula 1990a). Analysis Unit 1/2
at the Finley Fan site is the sole isolated and excavated Late Archaic component. Although datable
materials were scarce, the evidence suggests that
this component dates to ca. 1650-150 B.C. The
work in this part of the site identified two burned
rock hearths and yielded 2,939 lithic artifacts. The
formal tools are dominated by bifaces and a variety
of kinds of dart points (2 Dawson, 2 Gary, 2 Kent, 2
Morrill, 2 Trinity, 1 Wesley, 1 Yantis, 4 Yarbrough,

I

305

1

2

I

I

cm

e

Figure 6. Dart points from the Late Archaic component at
the Finley Fan site (41HP159), Cooper Lake: a, Dawson;
b, Gary; c, Kent; d, Morrill; e, Trinity; f, Wesley; g-h,
Yarbrough; i, untyped stemless; j-k, untyped expanding
stem.

4 untyped specimens, and 12 fragments; Figure 6),
but gouges, unifaces, cobble tools, and ground/battered stones also were recovered. Faunal and
macrobotanical remains were not preserved.
As in the earlier component at this site, the
Late Archaic remains appear to represent small,
hearth-associated occupational loci. The intensity
of use, although somewhat higher than for the earlier component at the Finley Fan site, is low compared to later sites in the area, and it is suggested
that the Late Archaic occupations of the Finley Fan
site were short lived and infrequent. The artifacts
recovered appear to indicate residential, rather than
limited purpose extractive tasks, however.
Tick and Spike are similar kinds of sites
situated in alluvium on low floodplain knolls
adjacent to the South Sulphur River. Both have
middens dating to the Woodland and Early Caddoan
periods and containing abundant artifacts and faunal
remains. The Woodland component at Tick

306

Texas Archeological Society

(Analysis Unit 3/4) appears to date chiefly to ca.
A.D. 50-700, while that at Spike (Analysis Unit 3/
4) dates primarily to ca. A.D. 0-800. No features
were found in the Woodland component at Tick,
but the Woodland deposits at Spike contained two
possible dumps of hearth debris, one small pit, and
one large pit. The artifact collections from these
deposits consist of !7,559 lithic items, 82 ceramic
vessel sherds, and 75 bone/antler/shell tools or
ornaments (mostly awls, but also antler pressure
flakers, beamers, a graver/scraper, and beads). The
19 arrow points recovered represent later materials
translocated down from the overlying later deposits,
and this is probably true for the ceramics as well,
since they are so few in number and no different
from the pottery in the overlying Late Prehistoric
contexts. The formal lithic tools are dominated by
bifaces and dart points; perforators, gouges,
unifaces, cobble tools, burins, ground stones,
hammerstones, and pitted stones are present in much
smaller numbers. These deposits contained 172 dart
points, with 76 percent of the classifiable specimens
being Gary points; most of the remainder are typed
as Dawson and Kent (Figure 7). Both components
yielded large faunal collections containing a diverse
array of taxa, with turtles, deer, rabbits, other small
mammals, and mussels being most common; Spike
also yielded a few elements identified as bison. The
modest collections of macrobotanical remains

Figure 7. Dart points from Woodland contexts, Cooper
Lake: a, Dawson; b-f, Gary; g-h, Kent.

consist mostly of hickory nutshells, with
Pediomelum (formerly Psoralea) rhizome
fragments, acorns, and vetch/peavine seeds
occurring in small numbers.
The Johns Creek site sits in probable alluvial
deposits on a low knoll adjacent to Johns Creek on
the floodplain of the South Sulphur River. The radiocarbon assays provide equivocal evidence about
the chronology of the site, but the diagnostic artifacts suggest occupations over much or all of the
Woodland period and a light later deposit is present
as well. The Woodland component (Analysis Unit
3/4) lacks midden deposits and no cultural features
were found, but a sample of 3,348 lithic artifacts
was obtained. The collection of formal tools consists mostly of bifaces and dart points, with small
numbers of perforators, gouges, unifaces, cobble
tools, burins, ground stones, hammerstones, and
pitted stones. The three arrow points clearly are
intrusive, while the collection of 56 dart points is
dominated by specimens classified as Gary or Kent
(77 percent of the classifiable specimens). Organic
materials were poorly preserved, and the faunal
collection is too small to be informative. The meager macrobotanicat collection contains hickory and
pecan nutshells, acorns, and wild plum seeds.
Hurricane Hill is a large upland site with a
complex history of use, although most of the archeological remains appear to represent occupations during the middle part of the Late Prehistoric
period and the Woodland period. Woodland materials are best represented in a portion of the site
termed the Southwest Rise, where a midden deposit
and numerous cultural features were encountered
and a modest artifact sample was obtained (Perttula
1990a, 1995). Unfortunately, this part of the site
yielded almost no faunal or botanical remains, and
it has not been dated. The artifacts assigned to the
Woodland period component consist of 19 dart
points (79 percent typed as Gary), 51 other chipped
stone tools, 8 cores, and 1 hematite axe. Small
numbers of arrow points (n=4) and ceramics (n=45)
were recovered, but these mostly represent later
use by Caddoan peoples. While a few of the features relate to the later component (e.g., an extended burial and an intrusive pit), most of the
features are interpreted as being associated with the
Woodland component. Included are 12 pits, 9
postholes or possible postholes, 6 possible flexed
burials, 4 single cremations, 2 multiple cremations,
and 1 hearth. The burials appear to constitute a
structured cemetery, perhaps representing a fairly

Fields w The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

short span of time, and the postholes and pits may
mark an adjacent locus of domestic activities. According to Perttula (1990a:276-277), the remains
are indicative of multi-seasonal, although not yearround, use for residential purposes. While the
deltal3C values of-15.0 and -17.6 obtained on the
collagen fraction of bones from Burials 15 and 17
imply that Ca plants, possibly including maize, were
an important part of the diet, maize has not been
recovered from any Woodland site in the project
area, and the lack of dates from the Southwest Rise
opens the door for questioning the Woodland age
assessment of these burials. While Hurricane Hill
is one of the more intriguing sites at Cooper Lake,
integrating the data from its Woodland component
with the information from other Woodland sites in
the area is complicated by the limited controlled
excavations there and the fact that it has not been
dated.
Site 41HP137, which is located in an upland
setting near Hurricane Hill, is a small site that appears to have both Woodland and Late Prehistoric
components. Because of uncertainty about the extent to which materials from these components may
be mixed, it is difficult to interpret 41HP137 on an
assemblage level. Regardless, the site did yield an
interesting collection of botanical remains from two
pit features that were dated to the Woodland period
(140 B.C. and A.D. 490). This collection consists
of hickory nutshells, cultivated squash rind fragments, acorn shells, and tuber and rhizome fragments identified tentatively as Psoralea (McGregor
1989:8-15), and this hints at a subsistence base
containing both wild and cultivated plants.
In sum, it appears that the Woodland period
saw a substantial increase in the intensity of site
use over the Archaic period, and this probably at
least partly reflects increased population densities.
Occupations of at least moderately long duration
are suggested for most, if not all, of the Woodland
components at Cooper Lake, and frequent reuse is
indicated for several. This increased redundancy in
the use of certain locales suggests decreased
residential mobility. The Cooper Lake sites appear
to have been used for broad ranges of procurement,
processing, and maintenance activities, but there is
no evidence of sedentary populations. Subsistence
pursuits focused on the hunting of a wide variety of
woodland, woodland-edge, and aquatic taxa and
on the gathering of wild plant foods. While there is
some indication of the use of squash, there is no
evidence for substantial reliance on horticulture.

307

Thus, these Woodland components may be
interpreted as hunter-gatherer residential bases.

JEWETT MINE AND
LAKE LIMESTONE
The upper Navasota River basin was occupied
intensively during the Late Archaic and Woodland
periods (Fields 1987, 1990; Fields and Klement
1995; Fields et al. 1991; Mallouf 1979). Late Archaic components have been isolated at the following eight sites: Buffalo Branch (41FT311, Analysis
Unit 3), Rena Branch (4tFT334, Analysis Unit 5/
6), Charles Cox (41LN29A, Analysis Unit 3), Alley Road (41LN149B, Analysis Unit 4/5), Moccasin Springs (41LN247C, Analysis Units 3-5), Old
Union Bridge (41LT12, Analysis Unit 4), Carl
Sadler (41LT17, Analysis Unit 4/5), and 41LT44
(Analysis Unit 1). Components dating predominantly to the Woodland period are present at the
Rena Branch (Analysis Unit 4), Charles Cox
(Analysis Unit 2), Harris Hole (41LN30, Analysis
Unit 1/2), Alley Road (Analysis Unit 3), Old Union
Bridge (Analysis Unit 3), and Carl Sadler (Analysis Unit 3) sites. The Bottoms (41FT89, Analysis
Unit 3), Buffalo Branch (Analysis Unit 2), Lambs
Creek Knoll (41LN106, Analysis Unit 3), and Cottonwood Springs (41LN107, Analysis Unit 2/3) sites
have components with mixed Late Archaic and
Woodland materials or components dating to the
Late Archaic-Woodland transition. In all, 20 components dating to this interval have been isolated,
and 62 of the 85 radiocarbon dates from archeological contexts at the mine pertain to this interval
(4000-!250 B.P., see Figure 2).
Three of these sites (Old Union Bridge, Carl
Sadler, and 41LT44) are situated along the Navasota
River, five sites (Charles Cox, Harris Hole, Lambs
Creek Knoll, Cottonwood Springs, and Alley Road)
are along tributaries to the Navasota River, and
four sites (Bottoms, Buffalo Branch, Rena Branch,
and Moccasin Springs) are along the upper reaches
of tributaries to the Trinity River. Old Union Bridge,
Carl Sadler, and Harris Hole are in alluvial settings,
while the deposits at the other sites are primarily
colluvial. Midden staining was present at Charles
Cox (Analysis Units 2 and 3) and maybe Old Union
Bridge, and most sites have limited ranges of feature
types. The features identified include the following:
51 concentrations of burned rocks interpreted as
hearths, shallow baking pits, or discarded hearth

308

Texas Archeological Society

debris (and large quantities of scattered burned
rocks); 1 possible non-rock hearth; 2 pits of
unknown function; t concentration of ground stone
tools; and 8 definite or possible human burials.
Seven of the burials were at a single site
(Cottonwood Springs), where they constituted a
small cemetery dating to ca. 2800-2000 B.P. Six of
the burials in this cemetery contained cremations,
and two were accompanied by exotic offerings
(galena and a slate gorget).
The artifact collections [~om these 20 components consist of 59,441 lithic items and just 104
ceramic vessel sherds. Most of the formal lithic
tools are dart points and other bifaces, but other
tool types--perforators, gouges, unifaces, cobble
tools, ground and battered stones, pitted stones, and
pigment stones--occur as well. Small numbers of
arrow points were recovered from some components (totaling 29 points and fragments), but they
appear to be intrusive from later occupations. The
dart point collection consists of over 400 specimens. The best represented groups among the classifiable specimens are Dawson (19 percent), Gary
(9 percent), Kent (8 percent), Neches River (6 percent), and Godley (5 percent), as well as a variety
of untyped expanding-stem (14 percent), parallelstem (14 percent), and contracting-stem (7 percent) forms (Figure 8). Dawson, Gary, Godley, and
Kent points appear to have been used throughout
this interval, while Neches River points are most
frequent in Woodland components. Minor types
that are most common in Late Archaic components
are Axtetl and Yarbrough.
Most of the ceramics (92 percent) are in
Woodland components or mixed Woodland and
Late Archaic components, and it is certain that the
few sherds in Late Archaic contexts are intrusive.
Interestingly, the ceramics are almost evenly split
between the sandy paste ware that one would expect
for this time period (e.g., Story 1990) and grog- or
bone-tempered ceramics, which are found more
often in later contexts at the mine and elsewhere in
the southern part of East Texas. Given this, it is
possible that many of these are intrusive later
specimens and that ceramics were an even less
prominent part of the material culture than is implied
by the small number of sherds found in Woodland
contexts at the mine. Another interesting aspect of
the ceramic collection is the inclusion of two
additional, unusual kinds of pottery: two sherds
that are tempered with shell and two sherds that are
untempered but have a fine kaolin paste. At least

the shell-tempered specimens, and maybe the
kaolin-paste sherds as well, may be related to the
possibly early shel!-tempered ceramics found at
Richland/Chambers Reservoir (McGregor and
Bruseth 1987:180). The ceramics from Woodland
contexts in the mine area are too few and too small
to contribute much information about the range of
vessel forms, and only a very few display
nondistinctive decorations (e.g., random body
punctations or incised lines).
Because of the sandy sediments and poor
preservation, some of the Late Archaic and
Woodland components at the Jewett Mine and Lake
Limestone have yielded no faunal remains at all.
Where animal bones have been recovered, they tend
to be few in number and highly fragmented. The
only identifiable specimens are deer and turtle.
Macrobotanical remains also are not wel! preserved,
although most of these components have yielded
burned nutshells. The nutshells are predominantly
hickory (Carya), with a few sites also containing
walnut (Juglans). Based on these limited data, it
appears that subsistence pursuits focused on

b

0

1

2

cm

k

Figure 8. Dart points from Late Archaic and Woodland
contexts at the Jewett Mine: a, Axtell; b-d, Dawson; e-f,
Gary; g, Godley; h-i, Kent; j, Neches River; k, Yarbrough.

Fields M The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

woodland resources, and there is no evidence for
horticulture during this time.
Of these 20 Late Archaic and Woodland components, 15 (at 11 sites) are interpreted as residential bases and five (at three sites) as procurement/
processing locations. Five of the residential base
components (at three sites) are located along the
Navasota River, while the others are in the uplands
to the east. All five of those in riverine settings are
interpreted as general-purpose residential bases (i.e.,
lacking a special focus on particular activities). In
contrast, the upland components consist of two general-purpose residential bases (at two sites) and
eight residential bases at which activities focused
heavily on plant processing and secondarily on hunting (at seven sites). This distinction suggests that
Late Archaic-Woodland settlement systems were
scheduled based on the occurrence of plant foods.
Eleven of the residential sites appear to have been
occupied with low or moderately low frequency,
suggesting low population densities overall. A
greater intensity of use is indicated for the other
four residential bases, and this probably reflects
more-frequent reoccupation, the relatively long
term nature of the occupations, or both.
The five analysis units interpreted as procurementiprocessing locations appear to have had a primary focus on plant processing and a secondary
focus on hunting-related activities. Four components (at two sites) are in the Trinity River basin in
the eastern part of the study mea, while the fifth is
along a Navasota River tributary to the west. The
moderately high to high frequency of use suggested
for three of these is surprising in view of the low
use frequency indicated for most of the residential
sites, and it suggests highly scheduled reuse of particular resource patches.
The data from these 20 components are consistent with the idea that Late Archaic-Woodland
groups were chiefly foragers. Procurement/processing locations suggesting logistical use are not
frequent, and the few that have been identified
suggest intensive exploitation of particular locales.
Settlement systems appear to have been highly
scheduled, probably on a seasonal basis, with residential sites in riverine settings differing from those
in the uplands. Comparisons with earlier components are difficult, but the much greater frequency
of Late Archaic-Woodland components and the
overall greater intensity of use suggest increased
population densities, decreased territories, or both.
This also is suggested by the occurrence of the

cemetery at
(41LN107).

the

Cottonwood

Springs

309

site

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD
Cooper Lake
The Cooper Lake area has yielded abundant
information on the Late Prehistoric period, especially for the early part (A.D. 800-1300). Components dating to this interval can be isolated at five
of the excavated sites--Tick (41DT6, Analysis Unit
2), Spider Knoll (41DT11), Spike (41DT16, Analysis Unit 1/2), Thomas (41DT80), and Doctors Creek
(41DT124)--and these are the ones providing most
of the summary data below (Cliff 1989; Fields et al.
1993, 1994; Martin 1989). Many other excavated
sites (e.g., Manton Miller [41DT1], Ranger,
[41DT37], Luna [41DT52], Lawson [41HP78],
Arnold [41HP102], Hurricane Hill [41HP106], Cox
[41HP105], and 41HP137) have cultural deposits
of this age as well, although separation of the early
Late Prehistoric remains from earlier or later ones
has proven difficult.
Three of the five sites where early Late Prehistoric components can be isolated are on floodplain knolls adjacent to the river and appear to be
in alluvial contexts, while the other two (Spider
Knoll and Doctors Creek) are on old terraces with
limited colluvial deposition. All five sites have
middens, and all but Tick have numerous cultural
features, including 14 hearths, 3 possible hearth
dumps, 1 shell-filled pit, 58 other pits, 13 pits/
postholes, 63 postholes, and 10 human burials. At
the Spider Knoll site, the spatial arrangement of the
features suggests the patterned use of the site over
time. One area was used most consistently for
domiciliary activities and outside activities associated with small and medium pits and probably
structures such as brush arbors and drying racks,
another area was used primarily for outside activities associated with large pits, and a third area was
used chiefly for trash disposal. This patterned use
of space implies residential occupations that were
long lived, but the houses built at the site were not
the sorts of substantial structures expected for
year-round occupations. Instead, they probably
were more like brush arbors more suitable for seasonal use. Such patterning was not found at the
other sites, but this probably can be ascribed to the
more limited excavations there.

310

Texas Archeological Society

The artifacts from the five components assigned most securely to the early part of the Late
Prehistoric period consist of 40,763 lithic items,
3,041 ceramic vessel sherds, 6 ceramic pipe sherds,
and 777 bone/shell/antler tools or ornaments (mostly
awls, but also engraved pins, antler pressure flakers,
beamers, gravers/scrapers, pestles, beads, and a fishhook). The formal lithic tools are dominated by
bifaces and projectile points, and other tool forms-perforators, gouges, unifaces, cobble tools, burins,
ground stones, pitted stones, and hammerstones-occur in smaller numbers. Arrow points are about
three times more frequent than dart points (920 vs.
310), but the latter occur in sufficient numbers to
show that the atlatl continued to be used after the
introduction of the bow and arrow. The most common arrow point groups are Colbert (21 percent of
the classifiable specimens) and Steiner (16 percent),
with Catahoula (8 percent), Friley (7 percent),
Scallorn (6 percent), and Alba (3 percent) points
occurring in moderate numbers (Figure 9); most of
the untyped specimens have contracting stems (12
percent), expanding stems (7 percent), parallel stems
(6 percent), or bulbar stems (4 percent). Gary points
are by far most numerous among the classifiable
dart points (65 percent), with most of the remainder
typed as Gary/Kent (8 percent) or Kent (7 percent).
Most of the ceramics (71 percent) are tempered
primarily with grog, while bone, sometimes in

Figure 9. Arrow and dart points from early Late Prehistoric
contexts at Cooper Lake: a, Alba; b, Catahoula; c-e,
Colbert; f, Friley; g, Scallorn; h-i, Steiner; j-k, Gary; 1,
Kent.

. combination with grog, is the second most common
tempering agent (24 percent). Shell tempering
occurs infrequently (2 percent), and these sherds
almost certainly are intrusive from later deposits at
the sites. Because the sherds tend to be small, it is
difficult to determine vessel forms, but it seems
that they represent primarily simple bowls, globular
bowls, barrel-shaped jars, small globular jars, and
large restricted jars. Only !0-20 percent of the
pottery is decorated, mostly with punctations and/
or incised or engraved lines. Relating the sherds to
defined types usually is not easy, but most of the
decorated specimens bear similarities to such
Caddoan types as Crockett Curvilinear-Incised and
Pennington Punctated-Incised (Figure 10). Present
in small numbers are sherds with decorative
treatments (e.g., overhanging incised lines, incised
lips, or punctated raised panels) that are more
common on ceramics from the Lower Mississippi
Valley (Phillips 1970), and some of these have
been classified to Coles Creek types. Also present
in consistently small numbers are base-body sherds
from flowerpot-shaped vessels that are strongly
reminiscent of Williams Plain. Most of the ceramic
pipe sherds are not very distinctive, but at least one
represents a long-stemmed Red River pipe
(Hoffman 1967).
All five sites yielded large faunal collections.
All show that deer, turtles, rabbits, and mussels
were important subsistence resources, and all contain a variety of other taxa as well, including fish,
amphibians, turkey and other birds, and various
small mammals. None of the sites yielded bison
remains. Hickory nutshells occur ubiquitously (but
not abundantly), and a variety of other kinds of
macrobotanical remains have been recovered. Included are acorns, pecans, Pediomelum rhizome
fragments, squash rind fragments, maize, and seeds
of Rubus, vetch/peavine, hackberry, maygrass, sunflower, knotweed, Cheno-am, grape, honey locust,
sumpweed, bedstraw, sedge, spurge, bindweed, and
Graminae.
The archeological data from the early Late
Prehistoric components at Cooper Lake indicate an
increase in the intensity of site use over the
Woodland period, and this probably reflects
continued increases in population densities. All five
of the components summarized above show evidence
of long--duration occupations and frequent reuse.
This suggests increased redundancy in site use and
further decreases in group mobility. The sites appear
to have been used for broad ranges of procurement,

Fields m The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

311

evidence in the skeletal remains analyzed
by Derrick and Steele (1993), suggest a
diet rich in carbohydrates, such as is
provided by maize or, more likely,
starchy seeds. Unfortunately, carbon
isotope analyses, which could help
resolve this question, have not been
performed on the Cooper Lake skeletal
materials dating to this interval.
The Cooper Lake area appears to
have been used less intensively during
the latter half of the Late Prehistoric
period than before. Only two excavated
sites, Hurricane Hill (41HP106) and
Peerless Bottoms (41HP 175), date to this
interval (Fields et al. 1993; Perttula
1990a). Late Prehistoric period materials occur widely across the Hurricane
Hill site, being especially common on
the North Rise and the South Rise. The
primary occupation may date to ca. A.D.
1200-1400 (based on thermoluminescence dates on ceramics), although it
probably was used earlier and later in
the Late Prehistoric period as well. The
extensive excavations on the North Rise
and South Rise sampled six middens and
identified almost 200 cultural features.
The features include 134 stains/postholes,
21 large pits, 15 small pits, 5 hearths, 4
refuse concentrations, 6 extended buri012
4
als, 2 flexed burials, and 2 cremations.
Patterns in the posthole distributions incm
dicate that two houses were present on
Figure 10. Ceramics from early Late Prehistoric contexts at Cooper
the North Rise and three on the South
Lake: a-e, Crockett Curvilinear-Incised/Pennington Punctated-Incised;
Rise, with both areas probably also conf, Williams Plain; g, Coles Creek Incised.
taining extramural features such as drying racks and brush arbors. Three of the
houses were circular to sub-rectangular
processing, and maintenance activities, and the
and two were rectangular, with diameters ranging
possibility of ephemeral structures at several sites
from 5.0 to 7.6 m.
hints that they may have been used as seasonal
The artifact collection from these two areas
campsites. There is no evidence for fully sedentary
consists of roughly 8,800 sherds, 42 ceramic pipe
populations, however, and the absence of constructed
fragments, 500 dart points, 106 arrow points, ca.
mounds or elaborate burials (almost all of the burials
127,000 other stone artifacts, and 60 bone/shell tools
at Cooper Lake lack grave goods) points to lessand ornaments. Most of the typeable dart points are
complex social systems than those of early Late
classed as Gary (79 percent), while the most comPrehistoric Caddoan groups to the north, east, and
mon arrow point types are Bonham (23 percent),
south. The macrobotanical remains indicate primary
Alba (21 percent), Hayes (20 percent), and Perdiz
reliance on wild plant foods, with tropical cultigens
(16 percent). The abundance of dart points surely
making modest contributions. The high caries rates
reflects mixing with earlier deposits rather than presummarized by Burnett (1990:401-402), and
dominant use of the atlatl over the bow and arrow.

312

Texas Archeological Society

As for the earlier pottery characterized above, most
of the ceramics (69 percent) are grog-tempered,
with bone occurring in 29 percent. Shell temper is
especially infrequent (less than 1 percent). The vessel forms represented include bottles, carinated
bowls, scalloped-rim bowls, and everted-rim jars
as well as simple bowls and jars. Only 8 percent of
the sherds are decorated, with the main decorative
techniques being incising, punctating, and engraving. Most of the decorated sherds can be related to
Caddoan types such as Canton Incised, Sanders
Engraved, Crockett Curvilinear-Incised, Pennington
Punctated-Incised, and Maxey Noded Redware. The
relatively large collection of ceramic pipes includes
a number of examples of the long-stemmed Red
River style. The bone/shell implements consist
mostly of awls, but antler flakers, fishhooks, beads,
and a beaver incisor tool are represented as well.
The faunal collection consists of a diverse array
of taxa, the best represented of which are deer,
turtles, and rabbits (but no bison). The macrobotanical
remains indicate utilization of hickory nuts, hazelnuts, and acorns while only traces of maize and
squash were found in the features on the South Rise.
Subsistence practices appear to have focused on the
collection of wild plants as well as the hunting of
game that frequented the woodland edge. Cultigens
are present, but the small quantity of these plants
suggests limited utilization. The data from a small
sample of six of the burials at Hurricane Hill seem to
be contradictory, with the carbon isotope values
(ranging from-15.2 to -17.6) suggesting that maize
(or some other C4 plants) was important, but with the
caries rates apparently being !ow.
The Peerless Bottoms site is buried within
alluvial fan deposits along Finley Branch on the
south side of the South Sulphur River floodplain.
The chronometric and artifactual evidence indicate
that it dates primarily to the latter part of the Late
Prehistoric period, probably ca. A.D. 1400-1500.
The excavations located five potential cultural
features-one hearth and four possible posts or
stakes--and recovered a large artifact sample
consisting of 1,930 ceramic vessel sherds, 7 pipe
fragments, 1 ceramic bead, 126 arrow points, 4 dart
points, 360 other chipped stone tools (including an
unusually large number of small end scrapers), 219
cores, 13,365 pieces of unmodified debitage, 30
ground or battered stones, and 16 bone tools. The
majority of the typeable arrow points are classed as
Turney (33 percent) or Perdiz (31 percent), with
most of the remainder being Cliffton, Fresno, and

2

!

Figure l 1. Arrow points from the late Late Prehistoric
component at the Peerless Bottoms site (41HP175),
Cooper Lake: a, Cliffton; b, Fresno; c-d, Perdiz; e, Talco;
f-h, Turney.

Talco (Figure 11). Both of the classifiable dart
points are typed as Gary.
The ceramic collection is unusual not only because of the large number of sherds, but also because many of the sherds are relatively large,
allowing reconstruction of vessel sections. The
sherds are distinctive in that 41 percent contain
shell temper (the remainder have grog and/or bone)
and 5 percent are red-slipped. A number of vessel
forms are represented, including several kinds of
carinated bowls, simple bowls, deep bowls, globular jars, large and small cylindrical jars, and bottles,
and a couple of the forms that are more typical of
Plains vessels than Caddoan ones (Fields et al.
1993). Nonetheless, most of the ceramics can be
related comfortably to such Caddoan types as Ripley
Engraved, Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved,
McKinney Plain, Nash Neck-Banded, and Emory
Punctated-Incised (Figure 12). Only two of the pipe
fragments are distinctive; one appears to be part of
an elbow-shaped pipe, while the other has a short
stem that is not typical of either elbow-shaped or
Red River pipes. The bone tool collection, although
small, is interesting because it contains a grooved
bison (?) rib possibly representing a rasp.
Faunal remains were not well preserved, and
only a small collection was recovered. The bestrepresented taxa are deer and turtles, with birds,
small mammals, bison, and pronghorn occurring in
smaller numbers. The macrobotanical remains consist mostly of hickory nutshells, with Pediomelum
rhizome fragments, honey locust and water locust

Fields m The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah ofEast Central Texas

313

times during this interval, but the other
certainly was not. Thus, limited residential
mobility is indicated, and these sites probably were similar, functionally, i.e., small
farmsteads occupied by groups with mixed
hunter-gatherer and horticultural economies. There is no evidence for substantially greater reliance on cultigens than
during the early part of the period, and
there is no indication of a shift to a bisonoriented hunting strategy, although bison
are present at Peerless Bottoms and not at
the earlier sites (except the Woodland component at the Spike site).
The small number of isolable compo012
4
nents
dating to this late interval makes it
I
I
I
cm
clear that this stretch of the Sulphur River
valley was occupied less densely during
this time than before. In fact, small numbers of late artifacts occur at many sites
that predominantly predate ca. A.D. 1300,
and because of their small numbers these
artifacts suggest that most of the late components in the project area represent nonFigure 12. Ceramics from the late Late Prehistoric component at the
intensive, presumably limited-purpose use.
Peerless Bottoms site (41HP175), Cooper Lake: a, untyped rim with
Thus, there is reason to question whether
scroll motif; b-c, Emory Punctated-Incised; d, Ripley Engraved; e,
the two excavated and analyzed compountyped red-filmed rim with crenelated lip; f, red-filmed Avery
nents discussed above are typical for the
Engraved.
area. From this perspective, it appears that
settlement systems during the latter half of
the Late Prehistoric period may have enseeds, pecans, acorns, black walnuts, hackberries,
tailed limited numbers of residential sites but relasquash rind fragments, and maize cupules occurtively large numbers of limited-function
ring less commonly. The subsistence data are conprocurement/processing sites. This implies an insistent with the interpretation of a mixed
crease in logistical mobility over the early Late
hunter-gatherer and horticultural economy. The disPrehistoric period.
tributional evidence suggests that the area sampled
represents an outside activity area associated with
an undiscovered structure, and comparisons with
Jewett Mine and Lake Limestone
other sites in the project area suggest that this component represents a single long-lived residential
Eleven components dating predominantly to
occupation, probably a small farmstead.
the Late Prehistoric period have been defined at the
In sum, the middle and late parts of the Late
Jewett Mine and Lake Limestone: Rena Branch
Prehistoric period at Cooper Lake are somewhat
(41FT334, Analysis Unit 2), Charles Cox
difficult to interpret because of the limited number
(41LN29A, Analysis Unit 1), Lambs Creek Knoll
of excavated components, but it is clear that there
(41LN106, Analysis Units 1 and 2), Alley Road
were changes in settlement strategies from the early
(41LN149B, Analysis Units 1 and 2), Moccasin
part of this period. The two analyzed components
Springs (41LN247D, Analysis Unit t/2/3), Old
appear to have seen long-lived occupations involvUnion Bridge (41LT12, Analysis Units ! and 2),
ing broad ranges of activities, and at least one, and
and Carl Sadler (41LT17, Analysis Units 1 and 2)
probably both, were used by sedentary groups. One
(Fields 1987, 1990; Fields et al. 1991; Mallouf
of the sites may have been reused a number of
1979). The Bottoms site (41FT89) also has an

314

Texas Archeological Society

important Late Prehistoric component (Analysis
Unit 112/5), but it is mixed with Woodland materials
and is difficult to interpret on an assemblage basis.
Just 21 of the 85 radiocarbon dates from
archeological contexts at the mine pertain to this
interval (1250-250 B.P., see Figure 2), and this
apparently reflects decreased intensity of use over
the preceding periods.
Two of these sites (Old Union Bridge and Carl
Sadler) are on the Navasota River, three (Charles
Cox, Lambs Creek Knoll, and Alley Road) are along
tributaries to the Navasota River, and three sites
(Bottoms, Rena Branch, and Moccasin Springs) are
along the upper reaches of tributaries to the Trinity
River. The Old Union Bridge and Carl Sadler sites
are in alluvial settings, while the deposits at the
others are mostly colluvial. Middens were present
at the Bottoms, Moccasin Springs, and perhaps Old
Union Bridge sites. Eight components lack cultural
features entirely, and only four concentrations of
burned rocks interpreted as hearths or discarded
hearth debris, two postholes, one pit of unknown
function, one burial, and one cache of cores were
found in the remaining three components. Sixteen
additional burned rock concentrations and three pits
were recorded at the Bottoms site, but it is hard to
be certain that these are associated with the Late
Prehistoric component. This is especially the case
for the rock concentrations, since rock hearths and
scattered non-feature burned rocks are much more
common in earlier (i.e., Late Archaic-Woodland)
contexts in the region. One additional human burial
dating to the Late Prehistoric period was found at
the Cottonwood Springs site (Fields and Klement
1995), but the associated occupational debris was
so sparse at this predominantly Late Archaic-Woodland site that a late component was not isolated.
The artifacts from the 11 Late Prehistoric components consist of 43,465 lithic specimens, t,703
ceramic vessel sherds, 4 ceramic pipe fragments,
and 6 bone tools (with mixed Analysis Unit 112/5 at
41FT89 contributing an additional 15,336 lithics,
556 vessel sherds, and 7 pipe fragments). The formal lithic tools are dominated especially heavily by
projectile points, but perforators, gouges, other
bifaces, unifaces, cobble tools, ground and battered
stones, pitted stones, and pigment stones are present
also. The collection from one site (Moccasin
Springs) contains an unsually large number of scrapers made on blades. The projectile point collection
consists of over 500 specimens, with arrow points
being almost twice as frequent as dart points. While

the bow and arrow was the predominant method of
taking game, it appears that the atlatl continued to
be used as well, especially during the early half of
the period. Perdiz is by far the best-represented
arrow point type (43 percent of the classifiable
specimens; Figure 13), although this late style occurs almost exclusively at only a few sites (Bottoms, Moccasin Springs, and Old Union Bridge).
Early arrow points that occur more widely but in
small numbers include specimens typed as Scallorn
(5 percent), Steiner (4 percent), and a variety of
untyped forms with expanding or parallel stems (12
and 7 percent, respectively). The most common
dart point types, chiefly from components dating to
the early part of the period, are Dawson (20 percent
of the classifiable specimens), Kent (10 percent),
Neches River (7 percent), and Gary (6 percent); 37
percent are untyped points (16 percent with parallel
stems, 12 percent with expanding stems, and 9 percent with contracting stems). The collection of bone
tools, all of which are from Moccasin Springs, contains two antler pressure flakers, three pointed tools
fashioned from long bone splinters (two have parallel grooves along their margins suggesting use as
rasps), and one deer metatarsal with parallel grooves
across one face which also may be a rasp.
The ceramics are overwhelmingly (96 percent)
grog or bone-tempered. Most of the remainder are
classified as the sandy paste ware that occurs in

g
h

J

k

cm

rn

Figure !3. Arrow and dart points from Late Prehistoric
contexts at the Jewett Mine: a-<t, Perdiz; e, Scallorn; f,
Steiner; g, untyped parallel stem; h-i, untyped expanding
stem; j, Dawson; k, Gary; 1, Kent; m, Neches River.

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

315

small numbers in Woodland contexts at
the mine and elsewhere across southeastern Texas, and a few sherds be!ong to the
kaolin-paste ware also found earlier in
the region. It is unclear if these minor
groups represent ceramics actually used
during the Late Prehistoric period or if
they are intrusive from the earlier deposits. While most of the tempered ceramics
are plain, some exhibit decorations (e.g.,
random body punctations, brushing, diagonal incising, pinching, engraving,
neck-banding, and appliqued strips or
nodes) that are characteristic of pottery
in Caddoan sites to the east (Figure 14).
The motifs on a few sherds are strongly
reminiscent of those on defined Caddoan
types (e.g., Holly Fine Engraved,
Killough Pinched, Maydelle Incised,
Patton Engraved, Poyner Engraved, and
Weches Fingernail Impressed), although
design execution tends to be sloppier on
the sherds from the Jewett Mine sites.
Hence, it appears that some, and probably all, can be related to the Caddoan
ceramic tradition in one way or another,
be they pots made by Caddo peoples or
cm
copies made by local groups.
012
4
I
I
I
While sherds occur ubiquitously in
the Late Prehistoric components, they are
frequent in only a few. In fact, 95 percent
are from just two sites (Moccasin Springs
Figure 14. Ceramics from Late Prehistoric contexts at the Jewett
and Old Union Bridge), with the mixed
Mine: a-b, untyped diagonal incised rims; c-d, untyped engraved
component at the Bottoms site also yieldrims; e-f, Holly Fine Engraved; g, Poyner Engraved; h, Weches
ing a sizable sample of 556 sherds. In al!
Fingernail Impressed; i, punctated body; j, Maydelle Incised; k,
three of these cases, most of the sherds
brushed rim; 1, Killough Pinched.
probably relate to use during the latter
part of the Late Prehistoric period. These
late ceramics apparently represent a variety of bowl
sources used by these people. Deer, turtles, and
and jar forms. The later collections also are distinrabbits are the most common taxa from this site,
guished by being the only ones to contain ceramic
with other small mammals, bison, fish, birds, lizpipes. Although few in number, the recovered speciards, and snakes being represented as well. Carya
mens appear to represent short-stemmed forms that
nutshells are by far the most common plant reare unlike either the elbow-shaped form or the longmains; recovered in small quantities were Quercus
stemmed Red River form that are found most often
nutmeats and shells, Corylus nutmeats, and several
across eastern Texas.
kinds of seeds (Cheno-am, Vitis, Leguminosae, and
As for the earlier components, faunal and
Portulaca). There is no evidence for horticulture at
macrobotanical remains tend to be poorly preserved.
these components.
Most of the Late Prehistoric components have
Five of the Late Prehistoric components, four
yielded small numbers of animal bones, but only
along the Navasota River (at Old Union Bridge and
Moccasin Springs contained abundant faunal reCarl Sadler) and one at the far eastern end of the
mains that give a good idea of the range of restudy area (Moccasin Springs), are interpreted as

316

Texas Archeological Society

residential bases; another upland site (Bottoms) may
have been used in a similar fashion during this
time, but the Late Prehistoric component at this site
cannot be separated from the earlier Woodland materials. The other six Late Prehistoric components
(at Rena Branch, Charles Cox, Lambs Creek Knoll,
and Alley Road) are interpreted as procurement/
processing locations. These sites suggest that the
Late Prehistoric period saw a change in settlement
strategies from the Late Archaic and Woodland
periods, and that there were changes within the
Late Prehistoric period as well.
While many of these components are not well
dated, two of the residential components (at Moccasin Springs and Old Union Bridge) and one unit
with both Late Prehistoric and Woodland materials
(at the Bottoms site) stand out from the others in
their high frequencies of vessel ceramics, most of
which can be related to Late Caddoan types, and
the occurrence of ceramic pipes. These three components are the only ones to contain Perdiz points,
and it is likely that these components date primarily
to the latter half of the Late Prehistoric period (although small numbers of other kinds of points suggest that earlier occupations are represented also).
The other Late Prehistoric components, both those
interpreted as residential bases and as procurement/
processing locations, contain far smaller collections
of typeable arrow points and hence are more difficult to assess temporally, but most of the types
represented are suggestive of occupations dating to
the early half of the period.
All three of the residential bases dating to the
early part of the period are along the Navasota
River. Two of these appear to have been focused on
plant processing and to a lesser extent on huntingrelated activities, while the third exhibits no such
emphases. One appears to have been occupied moderately infrequently, but high-intensity use is indicated for the other two components. The greater
use intensity could be due to the long-term nature
of the occupations, more frequent reoccupation, or
both. Vessel ceramics are more common than in the
early Late Prehistoric procurement/processing locations or the residential bases dating to the Woodland period, suggesting that ceramic containers were
used relatively frequently at these sites.
Five of the early Late Prehistoric procurement/
processing locations appear to have been focused
on activities related to hunting, and the sixth may
have been used for varying purposes during different
occupations. All six are located east of the Navasota

River, suggesting primarily logistical use of the
uplands and a restriction of residential activities to
the fiver valley. This change from earlier periods,
and the heavy emphasis on hunting-related
activities, supports the idea of organizational
differences between early Late Prehistoric settlement systems and those of the Late Archaic and
Woodland periods. These components exhibit substantial variability in the frequency of reoccupation,
with low-frequency use indicated for one,
moderately low frequency use suggested for two,
and high-frequency use indicated for three. As noted
above, vessel ceramics are relatively infrequent here
compared to the residential bases, and this probably
reflects the shorter occupations and narrower ranges
of activities.
As noted above, only two excavated components date predominantly to the latter part of the
Late Prehistoric period. Both are residential bases,
with the one along the Navasota River having been
focused primarily on plant processing and secondarily on hunting and the one in the uplands supporting a similar range of activities but with relatively
little manufacture of plant processing tools. Both
were used intensively, probably reflecting the relatively long term nature of the occupations and/or
their frequent reoccupation. The especially high frequencies of vessel ceramics suggest relatively great
extra-regional mobility and/or interaction, as well
as pointing to changes in cooking technologies,
supporting the conclusion that the site occupations
were relatively long lived.
Based mostly on the abundance of Caddoan
ceramics in these components but the lack of evidence for permanent occupations (i.e., structures),
Fields et al. (1991) suggested that these sites were
used by Caddo Indians as base camps in support of
forays by hunting parties or other procurement/processing task groups, or perhaps by groups in transit
between the eastern and central parts of the state. It
is equally plausible, however, that they were created by local hunter-gatherer groups and that the
ceramics are the result of trade or the borrowing
of ideas about ceramic manufacture and decoration. The small sample of two human burials
found so far in late Late Prehistoric contexts at
the mine supports this latter interpretation in that
both almost certainly are not those of Caddoan
farmers. Both contained flexed skeletons lacking
offerings, and the bones yielded delta~3C values
(-21.1 and -22.3) much lower than would be expected for people who consumed maize regularly.

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas
In sum, the Late Prehistoric period seems to
have seen two major changes in settlement
strategies. In the early part of the period, residential
bases were situated in the Navasota River valley,
and the uplands were used primarily for huntingrelated activities. This represents a shift to more
logistically organized strategies from the forager
systems that characterized the Late Archaic and
Woodland periods. The late part of the Late
Prehistoric period may have seen a return to forager
strategies, although it is also possible that the
scarcity of procurement/processing locations dating
to this period is more apparent than real. Perhaps
such sites are present but were not used with
sufficient intensity to be distinguishable archeologically (as suggested by the archeological record
at the Cottonwood Springs site), or maybe the
procurement/processing sites created during this
period are outside the Jewett Mine study area.

TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL
TRENDS IN THE DATA
Technologies
Several notable patterns regarding when and
how technologies changed in the Post Oak savannah
can be seen in the archeological data. First, the fact
that dart points make up about one-quarter of the
projectile points in Late Prehistoric contexts at
Cooper Lake and about one-third of those in
comparable contexts at the Jewett Mine suggests
that the atlatl continued to be used after the bow
and arrow was introduced at about A.D. 800. This
appears to have been particularly true through the
first half of the Late Prehistoric period; later
components still contain some dart points, but in
much lower frequencies. While some of these points
undoubtedly represent mixing with earlier deposits,
the numbers are so high and the pattern so consistent
that it seems unlikely that this accounts for all of
the dart points in the Late Prehistoric sites. Other
project areas in the Post Oak savannah contribute
limited information on this issue, in part because
most sites are multicomponent and poorly stratified
(at best). For example, Bruseth et al. (1987:241,
245, 247) posit continued use of the atlatl during
the Late Prehistoric period at Richland/Chambers
Reservoir, but the small artifact sample from one
site in an alluvial setting in this project area
(41FT193) suggests that this was not the case at all

317

locations (McGregor and Bruseth 1987:173). At
the Gibbons Creek Mine, Late Prehistoric
components are present at most of the excavated
sites (e.g., 41GM181A, 41GM201, 41GM205,
41GM281, and 41GM282; Rogers 1993, 1995), but
because of the difficulty of isolating components
and dating them, it is hard to tell if the bow and
arrow and atlatl were used contemporaneously.
The second technological change discussed
here is the use of ceramic containers. While Woodland contexts at both Cooper Lake and the Jewett
Mine do contain small numbers of sherds (the ratios of sherds to shaped chipped stone tools are
only 0.1:1 and 0.2:1, respectively), there is reason
to suspect that some, or maybe even all, of the
ceramics are intrusive from later occupations. Thus,
it appears that ceramics were at best a minor part of
the material culture during the Woodland period.
Pottery is only marginally better represented in early
Late Prehistoric contexts at the Jewett Mine (ratio
of sherds to shaped chipped stone tools = 0.5:1),
and it is clear that activities related to the use of
ceramics were not important at the sites used during this temporal interval. In contrast, vessel sherds
outnumber shaped chipped stone tools in early Late
Prehistoric contexts at Cooper Lake (1.1:1) and
especially in contexts dating to the latter part of the
Late Prehistoric period in both project areas (5.7:1
at Cooper Lake and 2.8:1 at the Jewett Mine). Thus,
both areas exhibit time-related trends in the importance of pottery, and regardless of time period, ceramics played a more prominent role in the material
culture at Cooper Lake than at the Jewett Mine.
It is difficult to use the data from other project
areas in the Post Oak savannah to elaborate on this
pattern because of problems with isolating components and because of varying recovery strategies
(e.g., the extensive use of plowing and systematic
surface collections at Lake Fork Reservoir). Nonetheless, the mean ratios of sherds to shaped chipped
stone tools in sites dating predominantly to the
Woodland and Late Prehistoric periods at both
Richland/Chambers Reservoir (ratio = 1.1:1, based
on Bird Point Island, Adams Ranch, Irvine, Polecat
Hill, Little Cedar Creek, and 41FT161B; data taken
from Table 18-3 in Bruseth et al. [1987:237] with
biface fragments added) and the Gibbons Creek
Mine (ratio = 1.0:1, based on 41GM166, 41GM181,
41GM201, 41GM205, 41GM224, 41GM281, and
41GM282; data taken from Rogers [1993, 1994,
1995]) are intermediate between the mean site values for the Jewett Mine (0.8:1) and Cooper Lake

Texas Archeological Society

318

(1.5:1). In contrast, the ratio (51:1) for sites at Lake
Fork Reservoir (Bracheen, Gilbreath, Grimes,
Hines, Killebrew, Osborn, Spoonbill, and Taddlock;
data taken from Tables 5-1 and 6-4 in Bruseth and
Perttula [1981]) is vastly higher than any of the
others, indicating the much more prominent role
played by ceramic vessels in the material culture of
the settled villagers who lived in this part of the
Sabine River valley.
Additional evidence of changes in cooking
technologies can be found in the features. For example, burned rock concentrations interpreted as
hearths or shallow baking pits are most frequent in
Archaic contexts at both Cooper Lake and the Jewett
Mine, although nonfeature burned rocks (disturbed
or displaced hearths?) are not so restricted. In fact,
based on ratios of shaped chipped stone tools to
total burned rocks, it appears that the greatest
changes occurred between the early and late parts
of the Late Prehistoric period in both areas (Figure
15). This parallels the dramatic increase in the use
of ceramic containers for food preparation during

2O

15

LEGEND
¯ --, Cooper Loke
0 0 Jewett Mine

¸10

this same interval. The ratios for the few pre-Late
Archaic components are quite similar, as is the
ratio for the single Late Archaic component at Cooper Lake and the mean value [’or the Late Archaic
components at the Jewett Mine. These low ratios
suggest similar cooking practices involving extensive use of rocks for heat retention during baking
and roasting. The great variability in the values for
the Late Archaic components at the Jewett Mine
probably reflects intersite variability in the resources
processed and perhaps seasons of use (see "Site
Functions and Settlement Patterns" below).
Interestingly, the ratios for the Woodland and
early Late Prehistoric components are virtually the
same within each project area but different between
project areas. The moderate value for the early Late
Prehistoric period at Cooper Lake probably can be
attributed at least partly to the moderately frequent
use of ceramic vessels, and the increased use of
boiling at the expense of roasting and baking. The
comparable value for the Woodland period suggests that this may not be the sole explanation,
however, since there is no evidence for substantial
use of pottery during this period. Although not testable with the data currently at hand, this change
also could reflect the use of new plant foods that
did not require roasting or baking. The fact that the
Woodland and early Late Prehistoric values for the
Jewett Mine are lower than those for Cooper Lake
suggests that groups occupying the southern Post
Oak savannah did not follow the same trajectory in
terms of changes in cooking practices as did those
living in the northern part. This may relate to the
lesser importance of ceramic vessels during the early
Late Prehistoric period at the Jewett Mine than at
Cooper Lake, and it might indicate differences in
the kinds of subsistence resources as well.

~5

l
Subsistence

0Pre-Late
Archoic

Late
Archoic

Lole
Early
Lore Prehistoric

Figure 15. Graph of shaped chipped stone tools/weight of
burned rocks by time period for Cooper Lake and the
Jewett Mine (includes only components assignable to
single periods and excludes the early Late Prehistoric
component at Rena Branch [41FT334] because of its
anomalously high value; where the ratios are derived
from multiple components, the symbols indicate means,
while the bars show ranges).

Almost no direct data pertaining to subsistence
have been recovered from the components predating
the Late Archaic period. Slightly better information
is available for the Late Archaic and Woodland
periods at the Jewett Mine, while the Cooper Lake
sites have contributed useful information for the
latter part of this interval. The overall subsistence
pattern prior to the Late Prehistoric period appears
to have entailed hunting of a wide variety of animals
that frequented woodland, woodland-edge, and
aquatic environments, with only minima! use of

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

319

grassland taxa, and gathering of wild plant foods
including hardwood nuts, seeds, and tubers/
rhizomes. Very limited amounts of squash at one
site at Cooper Lake indicate some use of cultigens,
but there is no reason to think that they contributed
significantly to the diet. Hence, the Native
Americans who lived in the Cooper Lake and Jewett
Mine areas during the Late Archaic and Woodland
periods appear to have been hunter-gatherers.
Similar hunting patterns prevailed throughout
the succeeding Late Prehistoric period in both project
areas, with one possible minor exception. Specifically, bones positively identifiable as bison are most
common in contexts dating to the latter part of the
Late Prehistoric period, although bones identified as
possible bison are not so restricted. This may hint at
increased use of bison after A.D. 1400, and some
support for this can be found in the increased frequencies of formal scrapers at some late sites, but
neither the overall tool assemblages nor the faunal
collections themselves point to a shift toward bison-oriented economies. Rather, it appears that bison were simply a small part of what was a
predominantly woodland-oriented hunting strategy.
While the poor preservation of macrobotanical
remains at the Jewett Mine sites makes it difficult
to be certain, the plant remains recovered to date
and the limited stable carbon isotope evidence indicate that Late Prehistoric groups in the upper
Navasota River basin used wild plant foods and
were not horticulturalists. This is not the case for
the Cooper Lake area, however. Most of the Late
Prehistoric sites in the upper Sulphur River basin
have yielded small quantities of maize and squash,
as well as hardwood nuts, a variety of kinds of
seeds, and tuber/rhizome fragments. It is clear that
tropical cultigens contributed to the diet of groups
who occupied the area during both the early and
late parts of the period, but they are not sufficiently
abundant to indicate true agricultural economies.
Instead, it appears that limited horticulture may
have been incorporated into a hunter-gatherer system that had its roots in the preceding Woodland
period, or perhaps even earlier. Possibly contradicting this interpretation are the stable carbon isotope
values from a sample of the burials at Hurricane
Hill, which suggest a possible substantial reliance

The regional data show that the woodlandoriented hunting strategy evidenced at Cooper Lake
and the Jewett Mine prevailed throughout the Post
Oak savannah. This is the case in contexts dating to
the early and late parts of the Late Prehistoric period
at Lake Fork Reservoir (Perttuta 1990b:Part II, 3052), Woodland and Late Prehistoric contexts at
Richland/Chambers Reservoir (Bruseth et al.
1987:238), and Woodland and Late Prehistoric
contexts at the Gibbons Creek Mine (Nash 1993;
Rogers 1994:120, 149). Bison bones occur in small
numbers in some of these sites, but they are not
especially frequent in contexts dating to the late
part of the Late Prehistoric period. Hence, the
regional data do not support diachronic changes in
hunting strategies.
Greater variability is evident in the use of plant
foods across the Post Oak savannah. Sites at Lake
Fork Reservoir indicate that maize was an important subsistence resource throughout the Late Prehistoric period (Perttula 1990b:Part II, 30-52), and
it appears that groups who lived in this stretch of
the Sabine River basin relied on farming far more
than did groups at Cooper Lake. Moving southward
to the Trinity River basin, macrobotanical remains
from contexts postdating the Late Archaic period
point to use of the same kinds of wild plant foods-hardwood nuts, a variety of seeds, and tubers/rhizomes--that were used at Cooper Lake (Bruseth et
al. 1987:243). The only tropical cultigen is maize,
and it occurs in very small quantities only in contexts dating to the last half of the Late Prehistoric
period. Hence, groups who lived in this area clearly
were predominantly hunters and gatherers. Subsistence data from the Gibbons Creek Mine are especially sparse, but hardwood nutshells occur in most
sites and liliaceous bulb fragments were recovered
from a single site (Dering 1993, 1994; Rogers
1993:74, 174, 214, 1994:120, 149, 1995:56, 153).
Consistent with the lack of cultigens at Gibbons
Creek is the low stable carbon isotope value on
human remains from a Late Prehistoric burial at
41GM205 (Rogers 1993:D-1 through D-3).

on C4 plants such as maize. Given the limited analysis to date of the human remains from this site,
however, it is difficult to know how much reliance
to put on these isotope values.

Judging from their comparably diverse assemblages of stone tools, it appears that all of the excavated sites at Cooper Lake were used in a generally
similar manner: predominantly as residential sites

Site Functions, Settlement Strategies,
and Use Intensity

320

Texas Archeological Society

of one sort or another. None functioned primarily
as processing or procurement locations. It is certain
that these kinds of sites exist in the area, however,
and the fact that none have been identified probably can be attributed to their low archeological
visibility. In fact, there are hints that a number of
chiefly early Late Prehistoric sites were used in a
much more restricted fashion during the latter part
of the Late Prehistoric period, and that this may
have been related to a change toward more logistically organized settlement strategies.
The functional differences that can be seen
between sites at Cooper Lake appear to have been
more a matter of degree than kind and can be best
seen in the features. For example, the Archaic
components at the Finley Fan site have only a single
kind of feature, and these apparently represent
relatively short term use as a hunter-gatherer
campsite. At the other end of the scale, the Late
Prehistoric component at Hurricane Hill clearly
represents a settlement of hunter-gathererhorticulturalists who were sedentary, or nearly so,
and the Peerless Bottoms site can be interpreted in
this way as well. Occupying the middle ground are
the early Late Prehistoric components at Spider
Knoll, Spike, Thomas, and Doctors Creek. These
sites have middens and numerous features and,
judging from the structural evidence at Spider Knoll,
appear to have seen repeated occupations of perhaps
seasonal length by hunter-gatherer-horticulturalists.
Some of the Woodland components probably
represent occupations similar in nature to those of
the early Late Prehistoric period judging from the
presence of middens at Tick and Spike, and the
small cemetery and associated features on the
Southwest Rise at the Hurricane Hill site, while
others may represent less frequent residential use
(e.g., the Johns Creek site).
The excavated data from Cooper Lake are too
sparse to allow much to be said about settlement
strategies during the Archaic period. Nonetheless,
low-intensity use by hunter-gatherer groups is
likely, and this probably reflects low population
densities, high residential mobility, short-duration
occupations, and infrequent site reuse. The increased
intensity of use during the Woodland period probably represents longer-term site occupations and
more frequent reuse of some sites, and this may be
traced to decreased residential mobility and perhaps increased populations. There is no evidence
for increased logistical mobility among these

hunter-gatherer groups, however. This pattern
reached its culmination in the early part of the Late
Prehistoric period. While horticulture contributed
to the resource base, the area was still occupied by
groups with at least moderate residential mobility.
Individual sites probably were occupied for no
longer than a season at a time, although they were
reused frequently. Settlement strategies changed significantly in the latter part of the Late Prehistoric
period. Fewer sites were used for residential purposes, but they were occupied by groups who were
largely sedentary. Many other sites were used much
less intensively, probably chiefly for procurement/
processing tasks, and this appears to represent increased logistical mobility over the early Late Prehistoric period.
Most of the excavated components at the Jewett
Mine, especially those dating to the Late Archaic
and Woodland periods, also are interpreted as having been used for residential purposes based on
their diverse stone tool assemblages, but it is difficult to compare these sites to those at Cooper Lake
because nondurable features such as postholes and
pits are poorly preserved in the thick sands that
blanket the area. Nonetheless, these kinds of features were not frequent at the few sites where they
might have been preserved (e.g., the Bottoms and
Moccasin Springs sites), and this suggests that the
Jewett Mine residential occupations were of shorter
duration than most of those at Cooper Lake (i.e.,
less than seasonal length). Several kinds of residential sites have been documented at the mine, however. Some were focused primarily on plant
processing and secondarily on hunting-related activities as well as a range of maintenance activities,
while at others these activities were more balanced.
These differences probably can be attributed to the
sites having been used at different times of the year
when different resources were available.
The Jewett Mine also has a number of
components, most dating to the early Late
Prehistoric period, that are interpreted as
procurement/processing locations based on limited
diversity in the stone tool assemblages. Huntingrelated activities are especially well represented at
many of these, while plant processing may have
been more important than hunting at others. Several
explanations can be offered for the difference
between the Jewett Mine and Cooper Lake in terms
of the frequency of these kinds of components at
the excavated sites, with the most likely one

Fields -- The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

revolving around the different kinds of depositional
settings in the two project areas (i.e., it is easier to
isolate components in the often thick sands at
Jewett). Perhaps also contributing to the difference,
though, is the fact that the Jewett Mine sites
represent a broader range of environmental settings
(i.e., a major river valley, a major drainage divide,
and major and minor tributary valleys) than the
Cooper Lake sites, all of which are within or
immediately adjacent to a major river valley.
In sum, the Jewett Mine sites point to a similar
trajectory in changes in settlement stategies, albeit
with differences in timing, as that identified at Cooper Lake. The few pre-Late Archaic components at
Jewett suggest non-intensive use by mobile huntergatherers, indicating low population densities and
infrequent site reuse. More intensive use is indicated for the Late Archaic and Woodland periods.
This may mark increased population densities, more
frequent reuse of individual sites, or longer-term
occupations. The hunter-gatherers who occupied
the area still operated primarily as foragers, however, moving their residential bases frequently.
Settlement systems may have been scheduled on a
seasonal basis, with different activity sets (i.e., related to different subsistence resources?) represented
at residential sites in riverine and upland settings.
During the early Late Prehistoric period, residential
activities were increasingly restricted to lowland
sites, while the uplands were used mostly for hunting-related procurement/processing tasks. This indicates that logistical strategies became more
important, but, unlike at Cooper Lake, there is no
evidence that this was accompanied by increased
sedentism within the upper Navasota River basin
itself. During the late part of the Late Prehistoric
period, the Jewett area apparently saw a return to
forager-oriented hunter-gatherer strategies entailing more equable use of upland and lowland settings. The high intensity of use and the infrequency
of sites suggest that individual occupations were
longer lived and that residential mobility was lower
than during the Late Archaic and Woodland periods, however.
These patterns in occupational intensity are
illustrated by Figure 16, which plots the numberg
of shaped chipped stone tools per square meter of
controlled excavations by time period, excluding
the pre-Late Archaic components since the data are
so scanty (the ratios have been adjusted for different
time period lengths). Shaped chipped stone tools

321

60~

50-

LEGEND

40-

¯ ~ Cooper Leke
o -o Jewett Mine

30-

20 ~

10-

Lete
Archoic

Woodlond

Eorly
Lore
Lore Prehistoric

Figure 16. Graph of shaped chipped stone tools/m2
excavated by time period (corrected for differences in
length) for Cooper Lake and the Jewett Mine (includes
only components assignable to single periods and excludes
the Late Archaic component at 41LT44 because of its
anomalously high value; where the ratios are derived
from multiple components, the symbols indicate means
while the bars show ranges).

are used instead of total lithic artifact counts, as
were used by Fields et al. (1991, 1993) for both
Cooper Lake and the Jewett Mine, because of
differences between the areas in lithic procurement
and reduction strategies.
Specifically, the Jewett Mine sites have high
ratios of debitage to shaped chipped stone tools
(58:1 at Jewett vs. 21:1 at Cooper Lake, using only
the sites excavated by Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
to eliminate recovery and analysis biases), apparently because of the much more common use of
fine-grained materials (67 percent of the debitage
at Jewett is of fine-grained chert, as opposed to 3
percent at Cooper Lake [these figures are site
means rather than total percentages]) and the staged
reduction of bifaces imported from Central Texas
at Jewett (as indicated by the relatively numerous
biface caches there). This is reflected not only by
high debitage frequencies at the Jewett Mine sites,
but also by the fact that more of the debitage from
Jewett is small and entirely decorticate (84 percent

322

Texas Archeological Society

of the debitage at Jewett is smaller than 21 mm and
71 percent is entirely decorticate, while the figures
for Cooper Lake are 63 and 49 percent [these figures are site means rather than total percentages]).
Hence, including debitage in the density calculations would unfairly inflate the values for the
Jewett sites.
Figure 16 shows that both areas start out with
a very low intensity of use during the Late Archaic
period. The patterns for the two areas diverge after
this, however. At Cooper Lake, use intensity increased steeply through the Woodland and early
Late Prehistoric periods, followed by a decrease in
the latter part of the Late Prehistoric period. This
trend points to increasingly frequent site reuse and
probably longer individual occupations, followed
by less intensive residential use during the late Late
Prehistoric period.
The Jewett Mine sites show a much more
gradual increase in use intensity through the early
part of the Late Prehistoric period, consistent with
the idea that site occupations were not as frequent
or as long lived as at Cooper Lake and that
population densities may have been lower. As noted
above, the evidence indicates that, for the latter part
of this interval, this may have been related to
increased logistical use and less residential use. A
much steeper increase in intensity is indicated for
the late part of the Late Prehistoric period, perhaps
indicating rough comparability (although still lower
overall) with the early Late Prehistoric period at
Cooper Lake. The fact that the ratios for the two
late components at Jewett are higher than that for
the single late component at Cooper Lake is
intriguing given that the latter appears to represent
a single--component occupation by largely sedentary
hunter-gatherer-horticulturalists, while the former
are more likely to represent repeated, shorter-term
residential occupations by hunter-gatherers.
Assuming it is not a function of the small number
of sites involved, this difference may reflect the
more logistical nature of the late Late Prehistoric
settlement strategies at Cooper Lake (i.e., more
frequent performance of procurement/processing
tasks away from residential sites, resulting in
decreased tool densities).
Between Cooper Lake and the Jewett Mine, it
appears that most of the excavated sites at Lake
Fork Reservoir served residential functions, at least
during the Late Prehistoric period. This is most
clearly the case at the Hines and Spoonbill sites

where posthole patterns representing houses were
found, but many other sites (e.g., Taddlock, Steck,
Gilbreath, Grimes, Killebrew, Osborn, and Sandhill)
have middens and clearly were used for more than
procurement/processing activities (Bruseth and
Perttula 1981). Further, Perttula (1994) lists a number of known or potential mound sites in this stretch
of the Sabine River basin, and it is clear that this
part of the Post Oak savannah was used intensively
by sedentary farmers during most if not all of the
Late Prehistoric period.
Moving farther southward, the data suggest
that most of the excavated sites at Richland/Chambers Reservoir also were used for residential purposes during the Late Prehistoric period (Bruseth
et. al 1987:241,244, 246), although there are some
sites in the area, for example the streamside concentrations of mussel shells and artifacts at 41FT 193
and 41NV139, that probably were used in a more
limited fashion. The house patterns at the Bird Point
Island site point to occupations of some duration by
hunter-gatherers during the first half of the period,
while other components that are contemporaneous,
slightly earlier, or later (e.g., at Bird Point Island,
Adams Ranch, Irvine, and Little Cedar Creek) have
middens and numerous features suggesting intensive use but no houses. These components may
represent occupations that were seasonal in length,
comparable to most of the early Late Prehistoric
components at Cooper Lake. Shorter-term, but still
residential, occupations may be represented by the
Late Archaic-Woodland components at sites such
as Bird Point Island, Adams Ranch, and 41FT200,
judging from the artifact assemblages and the presence of large depressions interpreted as roasting
ovens associated with hunter-gatherer band coalescence at the first two of these (Bruseth et. al
1987:225,237).
At the Gibbons Creek Mine in the southern
Navasota River basin, the excavated sites appear
generally similar to most of those at the Jewett
Mine in that they generally lack middens (except at
41GM28!), they have numerous burned rock
features but few other features, and they contain
generalized (rather than specialized) stone tool
assemblages (Rogers 1993, 1994, 1995). Based on
these similarities, it is possible that the Gibbons
Creek sites, dating mostly to the Woodland and
Late Prehistoric periods, represent short-term
residential occupations by hunter-gatherers. On the
other hand, there are two pieces of evidence

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

suggesting that some of these sites may have
functioned more as procurement/processing
locations than residential campsites. Specifically,
the sites at the Gibbons Creek Mine have much
lower frequencies of shaped chipped stone tools
(the overall ratio of debitage to shaped chipped
stone tools is 106:1) than do the sites at the Jewett
Mine or Cooper Lake (58:1 and 21:1, respectively),
perhaps implying that the occupations were
especially short-lived. And second, the Gibbons
Creek sites have greater quantities of burned rocks
(the overall ratio of burned rock weight to shaped
chipped stone tools is 2.2:1, excluding 41GM166,
4tGM281, and 41GM282, for which burned rocks
are not quantified in the report) than the Jewett
Mine or Cooper Lake sites (1.3:1 and 0.3:1,
respectively), suggesting that certain kinds of
processing activities were quite important.

Sociocultural Interaction
It is difficult to address the topic of sociocultural interaction with much precision because of
the complex relationships between trade, other kinds
of interaction between groups, and the various kinds
of mobility (i.e., residential vs. logistical, intra-regional vs. extra-regional). Nonetheless, there are
some clear patterns.
First, truly exotic items are universally scarce.
For example, obsidian flakes (at Cooper Lake and
the Jewett Mine)~ galena (at Cooper Lake, Jewett
Mine, and Gibbons Creek Mine), and marine shell
beads (at Cooper Lake) have been recovered, but
they are so few in number that it is clear that they
represent down-the-line exchange rather than any
substantial involvement in especially far-flung trade
networks. Tools and flakes of chert from the Ozark
Mountains apparently occur in fair numbers at Lake
Fork Reservoir (Perttula 1984:140), but these materials have not been identified in other project areas (It is likely that these Ozark cherts were from
gravel aggregates in Ouachita Mountain sources).
The distributions of the typed projectile points,
as presented in Prewitt’s paper in this volume, convey some information about interaction, but they
must be used with caution since projectile point
styles seldom correlate specifically with social
groups. Nonetheless, the fact that many of the most
common types in the Post Oak savannah (e.g., Gary,
Dawson, Kent, Yarbrough, Alba, Catahoula, Friley,
and Steiner) occur widely across eastern Texas but

323

not beyond to the west, indicates that there was
sufficient interaction among groups who lived in
the eastern part of the state to lead to some degree
of uniformity in dart and arrow point styles. The
only major types that have more westerly distributions are Perdiz and Scallorn. While both of these
could represent increased interaction with groups
who lived to the west during parts of the Late Prehistoric period, the case is stronger for Perdiz (i.e.,
the second half of the Late Prehistoric period) than
for Scallorn given the heterogeneity evident in this
latter type.
Interestingly, there are a few projectile point
types, most of them minor, that point to differences
between the northern and southern parts of the Post
Oak savannah, and suggest relatively localized interaction spheres. For example, the Archaic dart
point types Trinity and Yantis occur mostly in the
north and suggest ties between the Post Oak savannah and areas to the east, while Archaic types Axtell
and Hoxie have restricted distributions to the south
and extending westward to Central Texas. Later
dart point styles Godley and Neches River oletha
also are relatively common south and west of the
Trinity River. Among the arrow points, triangular
types such as Turney, Talco, and Maud occur in the
north but not the south, as do occasional examples
of types such as Homan, Keota, Huffaker, and
Washita. The former securely link this part of the
Post Oak savannah to Northeast Texas proper, while
the latter indicate interaction with groups living
north of the Red River and west onto the Plains.
The ceramics also point to some clear
differences between the northern and southern parts
of the Post Oak savannah. The Woodland-age sandy
paste ceramic tradition that is characteristic of the
southern part of East Texas is not represented at all
at Cooper Lake, and the pottery dating to the early
part of the Late Prehistoric period in the upper
Sulphur River basin shows clear ties to the Caddoan
area to the east and north, based on the
predominance of Crockett Curvilinear-Incised/
Pennington Punctated-Incised among the decorated
wares, the consistent occurrence of Williams Plain
pottery, and the occasional occurrence of Spiro
Engraved ceramics as well as sherds assignable to
Coles Creek types. The pottery from the single
excavated late Late Prehistoric site also indicates
strong connections both northward to the Red River
and eastward to the Cypress Creek basin, judging
from the presence of types such as Avery Engraved,

324

Texas Archeological Society

Ripley Engraved, Taylor or Wilder Engraved,
McKinney Plain, and Emory Punctated-Incised.
This late collection also contains sherds representing
a few globular jars that are more reminiscent of
Plains vessel forms than those found in this part of
the Caddoan area, however, and this points to
westward or northwestward contacts.
At the Jewett Mine, most of the presumably
early pottery is the sandy paste ware typical of the
southern part of East Texas, while a few shelltempered sherds and a few sherds with kaolin pastes
hint at local experimentation with ceramic manufacture. The pottery from early Late Prehistoric
contexts indicates interaction with Caddoan groups
to the east, based on the small numbers of sherds
typeable as Holly Fine Engraved and Weches Fingernail Impressed. The later pottery, with its high
incidence of brushing and a few sherds typeable as
Maydelle Incised, Killough Pinched, Poyner Engraved, and Patton Engraved, also indicates ties to
Caddoan groups living east of the Trinity River,
specifically to Hasinai Caddo groups in the Neches
and Angelina River basins.
Not far south of Cooper Lake, Caddoan pottery is especially abundant at Lake Fork Reservoir,
and most of the types identified (e.g., Canton Incised, Sanders Engraved, Ripley Engraved, and
¯McKinney Plain) point north to the Red River or
east toward the Cypress Creek basin (Bruseth and
Perttula 1981:77-91). Moving farther south to
Richland/Chambers Reservoir, sandy paste pottery
apparently is present, as are a few arguably early
shell-tempered sherds that may relate to similar
ceramics at the Jewett Mine. Otherwise, the ceramics clearly relate to Caddoan wares, with most of
the identified types (e.g., Maydelle Incised, Poyner
Engraved, and Weches Fingernail Impressed) indicating contact with groups in the Neches River
drainage east of the Trinity. The ceramics from
most of the excavated sites at the Gibbons Creek
Mine (Rogers t993:102, 160-!73, 2!0-212,
1994:116, 1995:108-123, 168-171) are the sandy
paste ware that occurs throughout Southeast Texas,
first in Woodland contexts and then in some Late
Prehistoric contexts (e.g., on the upper coast). Two
sites (41GM281 and 41GM282) also have sizable
samples of pottery tempered with grog or bone.
Some of these probably are related to the Late Prehistoric San Jacinto ware that occurs on the upper
coast to the east and southeast, while small numbers of sherds bear designs similar to those seen on
Caddoan pottery to the northeast.

The final line of evidence concerning
interaction deals with lithic raw material
procurement and the use of nonlocal sources. Figure
17 shows that Cooper Lake and the Jewett Mine are
dramatically different in this respect, and the
evidence indicates that the relationships between
the use of nonlocal lithics and interaction (or maybe

LEGEND
,--, Cooper Lake
O-O Jewett Mine

~ 60-1

Pre-Late
Archaic

Late
Archaic

Woodland

Early
Late
Late Prehl.stOrlC

Figure 17. Graph of percentages of shaped chipped stone
tools of nonlocal materials by time period for Cooper
Lake and the Jewett Mine (includes only components
assignable to single periods and excludes the Late
Prehistoric component at the Hurricane Hill site because
of its anomalously high values [between 3-7 percent];
where the percentages are derived from multiple
components, the symbols indicate means while the bars
show ranges).

mobility) are not always simple. Cooper Lake shows
a simple decrease through time in the use of nonlocal
materials, although they were not frequent during
any time period. Most of the identified specimens
probably represent gravels from the Red River, and
the data could suggest an overall decrease in
interaction with groups living to the north. This is
not supported by the ceramic evidence, however,
and it is equally plausible that the graph reflects
decreased demand for higher quality materials rather
than decreased interaction. In any case, the lithics
point to greater use of materials from the Red River
than from Central Texas. They do not say much
about interaction to the west, east, or south,

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

however, since these areas do not contain lithic
materials that are likely to have been imported or
that could be distinguished readily from the !oca!
Cooper Lake materials. The nonlocal items that
were imported were brought in as finished tools,
and the very small quantities of debitage of these
materials reflect tool refurbishing rather than
manufacture.
A very different pattern is evident at the Jewett
Mine. Nonlocal lithics, mostly from Central Texas,
were used commonly during all time periods, but
especially during the Late Archaic period and the
late part of the Late Prehistoric period. This certainly indicates substantial interaction with groups
who lived west of the Blackland Prairie, and the
fact that it did not change much over time is intriguing in view of the other changes that occurred,
apparently suggesting that lithic raw material procurement strategies were largely separate from the
strategies that conditioned settlement patterns. An
explanation for this can be found in the tools and
debitage made of these materials and the occasional
caches of nonlocal lithics. Specifically, the data
indicate that these materials were brought into the
Jewett Mine area as large biface and uniface blanks,
which were then reduced further. Sometimes they
were made into tools that were used in the Jewett
area, and sometimes the tools or blanks were exported for use elsewhere. This accounts for the
extreme intersite variability in the percentages of
nonlocal lithics shown in Figure 17, since some
sites saw more reduction of imported lithics while
use of tools of these materials was more common at
other sites. This pattern indicates that the Jewett
area served as a conduit for the transport of Central
Texas materials into the eastern part of the state for
much of the Holocene, which is not surprising given
its location at the western edge of the woodlands
and not far east of numerous source areas for abundant high quality lithics.
Elsewhere in the Post Oak savannah, lithics
from Central Texas occur in small numbers at the
Gibbons Creek Mine, but the vast majority of the
tools in the Gibbons Creek sites are made of local
materials (Robert Rogers, personal communication
1995). As at Cooper Lake, it is hard to know if this
relates to limited sociocultural interaction or little
demand for Central Texas lithics. The data from
Richland!Chambers Reservoir suggest a decrease
in the use of chert over time, reflecting decreased
mobility westward across the Blackland Prairie and
decreased territory sizes (McGregor 1987, 1993),

325

but it is unknown how this relates to changes in
interaction. At Lake Fork Reservoir, nonlocal lithics
from a variety of sources (i.e., Central Texas, the
Ouachita and Arbuckle Mountains via the Red
River, and Ozark Mountains gravels) are present,
and there are changes through time in the frequencies of these materials (Perttula 1984). It is difficult
to factor out the effects of interaction and mobility,
however. In sum, there is much variability across
the Post Oak savannah in the use of lithics obtained
from nonlocal sources, and it is clear that the frequency of imported lithics is not always a good
indicator of sociocultural interaction. On a gross
level, however, it is noteworthy that most of the
nonlocal materials from Cooper Lake and Lake Fork
Reservoir in the northern part of the region are
from the Red River, while to the south most of the
nonlocal materials were derived from Central Texas.

SUMMARY
Because the archeotogical record of the Post
Oak savannah dates mostly to the Late Holocene, it
is difficult to say much about the pre-Late Archaic
cultures of the region. In fact, for much of the
western edge of East Texas, even Late Archaic
components are so infrequent that it is hard to discern coherent patterns in the archeological data.
Nonetheless, it is clear that the region was used by
hunter-gatherers during this time, and the evidence
from Cooper Lake and especially the Jewett Mine
indicates that these groups operated largely as foragers, i.e., moving their residentia! bases frequently
to take advantage of temporal and spatial changes
in resource availability. Population densities probably were low, and group territories may have been
relatively unconstrained. Large territories and widespread interaction may account for the extensive
distributions of the most common dart point types,
but there are a few types with restricted distributions suggesting distinct localized interaction
spheres in the northern and southern parts of the
region. This north-south distinction is also evident
in the importation of nonlocal lithics, with materials from the north being more common in the Sulphur and Sabine basins and Central Texas materials
being more frequent in the Trinity and Navasota
basins.
While it sometimes has proven difficult to isolate components dating to the Woodland period,
the data from Cooper Lake, Richland/Chambers

326

Texas Archeological Society

Reservoir, the Jewett Mine, and the Gibbons Creek
Mine suggest that a forager-oriented hunter-gatherer settlement strategy persisted throughout this
period. Squash remains were found at one Woodland site at Cooper Lake, but there is no other
evidence that horticulture contributed to the subsistence base. Further, there is no indication of
sedentism. It does appear, however, that the Post
Oak savannah was used more intensively during
this time than before. This likely reflects increases
in populations, more frequent reoccupation of favored sites, and occupations of longer duration than
during the Archaic period. Ceramic technology was
introduced in parts of the region during this interval
(e.g., Richland/Chambers Reservoir, Gibbons Creek
Mine, and maybe Jewett Mine), but this was not
universally the case and there is no evidence that
this technological change was accompanied by significant changes in lifeways. Nonetheless, the occurrence of sandy paste pottery only in the southern
part of the region and the apparent differences in
the timing of this innovation indicate that the northsouth distinction noted above for the Archaic period continued into the Woodland period. That this
was the case is also indicated by the patterns in the
use of nonlocal lithics.
The settlement strategies of the Native Americans who occupied the Post Oak savannah changed
during the Late Prehistoric period, and intraregional
variability became even more pronounced during
this time than before. There is no doubt that these
changes were related in part to the development of
the Caddo culture in Northeast Texas proper and
adjacent parts of Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Louisiana. This was most conspicuously the case in the
part of the Post Oak savannah traversed by the
Sabine River, as this area was occupied throughout
the period by sedentary Caddoan farmers.
Groups with a mixed hunter-gatherer-horticultural economy occupied the Cooper Lake area to
the north in an intensive fashion during the Late
Prehistoric period, with the first half of the period
being marked by seasonal residential mobility and
the latter half by increased sedentism and increased
logistical use but decreased population densities.
The Richland/Chambers Reservoir area saw a similar trajectory involving intensive use during the
early half of the period and decreased population
densities in the latter half. At Richland/Chambers
Reservoir, however, the greatest evidence for
sedentism, albeit occasional (i.e., it is not the case

at all sites) and not associated with horticulture,
was during the early Late Prehistoric period, with
more forager-oriented, residentially mobile systems
entailing limited horticulture being the case after
that. In both of these areas, the decreased intensity
of use during the late part of the period may have
been related to population aggregations elsewhere
in the Post Oak savannah or, perhaps more likely,
in the Caddoan area itself.
Evidence for horticulture or any degree of
sedentism at all is lacking from the two southernmost project areas considered here: the Jewett Mine
and the Gibbons Creek Mine. At the former, the
settlement strategies of local hunter-gatherer groups
changed during the early Late Prehistoric period
such that residential occupations were restricted to
the Navasota River valley while the uplands to the
east were used mostly for hunting-related activities.
This change may have been prompted by pressures
from Caddoan groups to the east, but the lack of data
from the pmt of the Trinity River basin east of the
Jewett Mine prevents serious evaluation of this hypothesis. The late part of the Late Prehistoric period
saw another change in how Native Americans used
the area, but there are ambiguities about how this
change should be interpreted. It may be that the
region was occupied by local forager-oriented
hunter-gatherers who interacted regularly with
Caddoan groups to the east, or it may be that the
area was used mostly by the Caddo on hunting trips
or other kinds of forays to the west. It is harder to
reconstruct settlement strategies at the Gibbons Creek
Mine, although the most recent work there does hint
at changes during the late part of the Late Prehistoric period that may parallel those at the Jewett
Mine. In any case, it is clear that the lower Navasota
River basin was occupied by mobile hunter-gatherers throughout the Late Prehistoric period.
The kinds of ceramics and projectile points
and the types of nonlocal lithic materials from Late
Prehistoric contexts all point to continued
distinctions between the northern and southern parts
of the Post Oak savannah, and these probably mark
increasingly localized developments. In the north,
the strongest ties were with groups living to the
east in Northeast Texas proper and to the north
along the Red River and beyond. This area was not
homogeneous culturally, however. Groups living in
the Sabine Basin were fully involved in the Caddo
culture, while those farther north in the Sulphur
Basin were only marginally so. To the south,

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

especially in the Navasota Basin, Caddoan lifeways
never took hold, but it is clear that there was
substantial interaction with Caddoan groups to the
east. Further, continued contact with Central Texas
is reflected in the use of nonlocal lithics, and some
of the ceramics from the Gibbons Creek Mine point
toward the upper coast.
On one level, the intraregional variability that
characterized the Post Oak savannah during the
Late Prehistoric period can be ascribed to varying
degrees of integration into the Caddoan culture, a
situation that is not surprising given the peripheral
location of the region relative to the Caddo heartland. This is not a wholly satisfactory explanation,
however. It is clear that some of this variability had
its roots in distinctions dating to the Archaic period, and it probably can be explained best as the
result of overlap between persistent local variations
on common adaptive strategies, differences in interaction spheres, variability in the adoption of new
technologies and subsistence practices, and differences in the acceptance of new ideologies among
groups who had occupied the woodlands of eastern
Texas for millenia. Of course, this issue pertains to
an area much larger than the Post Oak savannah,
emphasizing the critical need for more comparative
studies that integrate archeological data between
regions rather than simply within them.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many people have contributed to this summary in one way or another. Most importantly, the
Fort Worth District of the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers and Northwestern Resources Co. funded
the excavations at Cooper Lake and the Jewett Mine
that served as the foundation for the study. Eloise
Gadus and Wayne Klement also contributed immeasurably, both in directing the field crews who
gathered the data at Cooper and Jewett and in analyzing and interpreting that data. Others at Prewitt
and Associates who participated either in the analyses or in discussions about what the information
might mean include Steve Tomka, Elton Prewitt,
and Doug Boyd. Outside our organization, Tim
Perttula, Dan McGregor, and Robert Rogers freely
shared information from the parts of the Post Oak
savannah where they have worked. Finally, I would
like to express my appreciation to the behind-thescenes players at Prewitt and Associates who lend
their expertise to making our reports look and sound

327

good: Sandra Hannum for drafting and layout, Brent
Scott for artifact paste-up, Ellen Atha for artifact
illustrations, and Linda Nance Foster for editing
and production.

REFERENCES CITED
Bowman, B. F.
1985 Winnie’s Mound (41BU17): A Study in the Prehistory of Burleson County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 56:39-74.
1991

The Foster Site Cremation: A Single Individual,
Partition Cremation in Milam County, Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 36( 133):31-42.

Bruseth, J. E.
1995 The Development of Caddoan Polities Along the
Middle Red River Valley of Eastern Texas and Oklahoma. In The Native History of the Caddo: Their
Place in Southeastern Archaeology and
Ethnohistory, edited by T. K. Perttula and J. E.
Bruseth. MS in review for publication.
Bruseth, J. E., D. E. McGregor, and W. A. Martin
1987 Hunter-Gatherers of the Prairie Margin: Summary
of the Prehistoric Archaeological Record. In HunterGatherer Adaptations Along the Prairie Margin:
Site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology, edited by D. E. McGregor and J. E.
Bruseth, pp. 229-256. Richland Creek Technical
Series, Vol. III. Archaeology Research Program,
Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
Bruseth, J. E. and T. K. Perttula
1981

Prehistoric Settlement Patterns at Lake Fork Reservoir. Texas Antiquities Permit Series Report No. 2.
Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin, and Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.

Burnett, B. Ao
1990 The Bioarcheological Synthesis of the Eastern Portions of the Gulf Coastal Plain. In The Archeology
and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.
A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman,
J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J.
Reinhard, pp. 385-418.2 Vols. Research Series No.
38. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Cliff, M. B.
1989 Archaeological Investigations at the Thomas Site
(41DT80). In A rchaeological Investigations at CooperLake: 1987Season, edited by R. W. Moir, D. E.
McGregor, and D. H. Jurney, pp. 6-1 through 6145. Review Draft. Archaeology Research Program,
Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.

328

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Collins, M. B. and C. B. Bousman
1993 Historic Context: Quaternary Environments and Archeology in Northeastern Texas. In Areheology in
the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K.
Perttula, pp. 49-67. Cultural Resource Management
Report 3. Department of Antiquities Protection,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Fields, R. C., L. W. Klement, C. B. Bousman, S. A. Tomka, E.
F. Gadus, and M. A. Howard
1991 Excavations at the Bottoms, Rena Branch, and Moccasin Springs Sites, Jewett Mine Project, Freestone
and Leon Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 82. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Fields, R. C. (editor)
1987

Excavations at the Alley Road Site (41LN149B) and

Dering, J. P.

the Harris Hole Site (41LN30), Jewett Mine Project,

1993

Flotation Samples from Sites 41GM181,41GM201,

Leon County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No.

and 41GM205: The Archaeobotanical Remains. In

61. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Data Recovery of Three Prehistoric Sites at the

1994

Excavations at the Charles Cox, Lambs Creek Knoll,
and Buffalo Branch Sites, Jewett Mine Project, Leon

Grimes County, Texas, by R. Rogers, pp. C-I

and Freestone Counties, Texas. 2 Vols. Reports of

through C-7. Document No. 910529. Espey, Huston

Investigations No. 70. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,

& Associates, Inc., Austin.

Austin.

Plant Remains from 41GM224, Gri~nes County,
Texas. In Excavations at Site 41GM224 in the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine Permit 38A Area, Grimes
County, Texas, by R. Rogers, pp. D-1 through D-6.
Document No. 930476. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Derrick, S. M. and D. G. Steele
1993

1990

Gibbons Creek Third Five-Year Mine Permit Area,

Analysis of Human Remains from 41DT6 and
41DT16. In Excavations at the Tick, Spike, Johns

Frederick, C. D. and C. Ringstaff
1994 Lithic Resources at Fort Hood: Further Investigations. In Archeological Investigations on 571 Prehistoric Sites at Fort Hood, Bell and Coryell
Counties, Texas, edited by W. N. Trierweiler, pp.
125-181. Research Report No. 3l, United States
Army Fort Hood Archeological Resource Management Series. Directorate of Engineering and Housing, Environmental Management Office, Fort Hood.

Creek, and Peerless Bottoms Sites, Cooper Lake
Project, Delta and Hopkins Counties, Texas, by R.
C. Fields, E. F. Gadus, L. W. Klement, C. B.
Bousman, and J. B. McLerran, pp. 271-286. Reports of Investigations No. 91. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Duffield, L. F. and E. B. Jelks
1961 The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron
Bridge Resem, oir, Rains County, Texas. Archaeology Series No. 4. Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Fields, R. C., E. F. Gadus, L. W. Klement, C. B. Bousman, and
J. B. McLerran
1993

Excavations at the Tick, Spike, Johns Creek, and
Peerless Bottoms Sites, Cooper Lake Project, Delta

Gadus, E. F., R. C. Fields, C. B. Bousman, S. A. Tomka, and
M. A. Howard
1992 Excavations at the Finley Fan Site (41HP159), Cooper Lake Project, Hopkins County, Texas. Reports
of Investigations No. 78. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.
Hoffman, M. P.
1967 Ceramic Pipe Style Chronology Along the Red River
Drainage in Southwest Arkansas. The Arkansas Archeologist 8(1 ): 1 - 14.
Jelks, E. B. (editor)
1967 The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 37:1-248.

and Hopkins Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 91. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Ma!louf, M. G.
1979

Archeological Investigations at Lake Limestone, Fall

Fields, R. C., E. F. Gadus, L. W. Klement, and K, M. Gardner

and Winter 1977. Research Report No. 71. Texas

1994

Excavations at the Spider Knoll Site, Cooper Lake

Archeologica! Survey, The University of Texas at

Project, Delta Count2,’, Texas. Reports of Investiga-

Austin.

tions No. 96. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Fields, R. C. and L. W. Klement
1995 Excavations at the Cottonwood Springs Site, Jewett
Mine Project, Leon County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 102. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.

Martin, W. A.
1989 Archaeological Investigations at the Doctors Creek
Site (41DT124). In Archaeological Investigations
at Cooper Lake 1987 Season, edited by R. W. Moir,
D. E. McGregor, and D. H. Jurney, pp. 7-1 through
7-110. Review Draft. Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas
McGregor, D. E.
1987

Lithic Raw Material Utilization. In Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along the PraitTe Margin: Site
Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology, edited by D. E. McGregor and J. E: Bruseth,
pp. 185-196. Richland Creek Technical Series, Vol.
III. Archaeology Research Program, Institute for

Perttula, T. K.(Continued)
1990b Historic Context: The Evolution of Agricultural Societies in Northeast Texas before A.D. !600. Historic context funded by the Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
1994

Caddoan Mound Sites in the Sabine River Basin of
Northeast Texas. Caddoan Archeology Newsletter
IV(4):4-19.

1995

Early Ceramic Settlement in Northeast Texas: Archeological Investigations of the Hurricane Hill Site
(41HP106), Cooper Lake. In Advances in Texas Archeology: Contributions from Cultural Resource
Management, Volume 1, edited by J. E. Bruseth and
T. K. Perttula, pp. 131-154. Cultural Resource Management Report 5. Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
1989

Excavations at Site 41HP137. In Archaeological
Investigations at Cooper Lake: 1987 Season, edited
by R. W. Moir, D. E. McGregor, and D. H. Jurney,
pp. 8-1 through 8-28. Review Draft. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth
and Man, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

1993

329

Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions: Evidence for
Changing Territorial Size in North Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:247-

Phillips, P.

267.

1970

Archaeological Survey in the Lower Yazoo Basin,
Mississippi, 1949-1955. Papers of the Peabody Mu-

McGregor, D. E. and J. E. Bruseth
1987

seum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Volume 60.

Artifact Chronology. In Hunter-Gatherer Adapta-

Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,

tions Along the Prairie Margin: Site Excavations

Harvard University, Cambridge.

and Synthesis" of Prehistoric Archaeology, edited by
D. E. McGregor and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 171-184.

Prikryl, D. J.

Richland Creek Technical Series, Vol. III. Archae-

1993

Introduction to the Regional Plan for Archeological

ology Research Program, Institute for the Study of

Resoumes, Prairie-Savanna Archeological Region.

Earth and Man, Southern Methodist University, Dal-

In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region,

las.

Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N. A.
Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 189-203. Cultural

Nash, M.
1993

Faunal

Resource Management Report 3. Department of
Remains

from

Sites

41GM205

and

Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commis-

41GM181, Area A. In Data Recover3, of Three Pre-

sion, Austin.

historic Sites at the Gibbons Creek Third Five-Year
Mine Permit Area, Grimes County, Texas, by R.
Rogers, pp. F-1 through F-10. Document No.

Roemer, E., Jr. and S. B. Carlson
1987 Excavations at 41BU16: State Highway 21 at the

910529. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Brazos River, Burleson County, Texas. Contract
Reports in Archaeology No. 1. Texas State Depart-

Natural Fibers Information Center
1987

ment of Highways and Public Transportation, High-

The Climate of Texas Counties. Natural Fibers In-

way Design Division, Austin.

formation Center, The University of Texas at Austin, in cooperation with Office of the State

Rogers, R.

Climatologist, Texas A&M University, College Sta-

1993

tion.

Data Recovery of Three Prehistoric Sites at the
Gibbons Creek Third Five-Year Mine Permit Area,
Grimes County, Texas. Document No. 910529.

Perttula, T. K.
1984

Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Patterns of Prehistoric Lithic Raw Material Utilization in the Caddoan Area: The Western Gulf Coastal

1994

Plain. In Prehistoric Chert Exploitation: Studies

Texas. Document No. 930476. Espey, Huston &

from the Midcontinent, edited by B. M. Butler and

Associates, Inc., Austin.

E. E. May, pp. 129-148. Occasional Paper No. 2.
Center for Archaeological Investigations, Southern
Illinois University at Carbondale.
1990a The Hurricane Hill Site (41HPl06): Excavations at
Cooper Lake, Hopkins Count3,, Texas. Second Draft.
Contributions in Archaeology No. 9. Institute of
Applied Sciences, University of North Texas,
Denton.

Excavations at Site 41GM224 in the Gibbons Creek
Lignite Mine Permit 38A Area, Grhnes County,

1995

Archeological Excavations at Prehistoric Sites
41GM166, 41GM281, and 41GM282 at the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine, Grimes Count)’, Texas.
Document No. 940611. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

330

Texas Archeological Society

Smith, J. E.
1993 The Vinson Site (41LT1): A Nortefio Focus Indian
Village in Limestone County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 64:65-162.
Story,
1990 Cultural History of the Native Americans. In Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain,
by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D.
Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and
K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. 2 Vols. Research Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Thorns, A. V. (editor)
1993 The Brazos Valley Slopes Archeological Project:
Cultural Resources Survey and Assessment for the
Texas A&M University Animal Science Teaching
and Research Complex, Brazos County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 14. Archaeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College
Station.

