AN EXPERIMENT IN RELATIVE DATING OF
ARCHEOLOGICAL REMAINS BY
STREAM TERRACES1
JACK T. Huch~s
Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to indicate the value of
stream terraces in relative dating of archeological remains.
Two different chronological arrangements of the same cultural materials are presented for comparison: one based
on stratigraphic, typological, and other non-physiographic
evidence; and one based on stream terraces.
In the summer of 1948, an opportunity arose to work in
an area which is particularly well-suited to this purpose.
Angostura Reservoir, the area investigated, is located at
the southern tip of the Black Hills, on the Cheyenne River
in Fail River County, South Dakota. Stream terraces are
well-developed, and archeological remains frequently occur both in and on them. The remains represent diverse
cultures and periods. Tentative cultural classification and
tempo~:ai arrangement of many of the remains have been
made possible by considerable non-physiographic evidence.
Investigations were part of the saivage program being
conducted by the Smithsonian Institution, River Basin Surveys, Missouri Valley Project. During three and a hail
months, from June 3 to September 16, Mr. J. l~I. Shippee
and I explored the area for archeological remains, and
tested, with a few local helpers, some of the most promising sites discovered. For two weeks of this period, we as1. This article owes much of its content and form to stimulating conversation with Dr. Theodore E. White, vertebrate paleontologist of the Smithsonian Institution River Basin Surveys, and to helpful criticism by Dr. Alex
D. Krleger, archeologist of the University of Texas; Mr. Glen I~ Evans,
geologist of the Texas l~femorlal ]~fuseum, and Dr. ~raldo R. ~Vedel, archeologist of the U. S. National Museum.
Any value possessed by the paper
should be credited largely to them; any defects, solely to me.
The paper was written in the spring of 1949, but was .not submitted for
publication at that time, since more intensive archeological,work was
planned for the summer of 1949, and since there .was some promise of more
thorough geological work as well. Geological work was not continued, however, and the paper stands essentially as first written. Further archeological
work has greatly amplified and somewhat modified the picture presented
here, but not to such an extent that revision seems essential.

98

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontologica~ Society

sisted Dr. Theodore E. White in a detailed study of the
terraces at one locality, and in a general survey of terracing
throughout the area. Terrace study in the vicinity of the
Long site (39FA65), a buried occupational area with lanceolate~shaped, obliquely-flaked points, was carried out by
means of borings, profiles, and sections. Terracing elsewhere in the future reservoir was observed from several
vantage points, widely toured, and examined at various
strategic places. This type of investigation, although leaving much to be desired, was greatly facilitated by the generally clear definition of the terraces, and by the open vistas,
active erosion, and scant cover of the country. Results of the
geological work have been presented in another report
(White and Hughes, no date).
Sequence Based on Stratigraphic, Typological,
and Other Evidence
To date, seventy-one sites have been recorded in Fall
River County. Five of these were recorded from reports
and have not been visited; fifty have been examined but
not tested; fourteen have been tested more or less extensively; and two have been excavated.
The sites represent a variety of peoples, from nomadic
hunters to sedentary farmers, who have lived in the area
from late Pleistocene or early Recent to protohistoric or
historic times. Twenty-four of the sites possess a total of
twenty-nine components which are assignable to eight complexes, tentatively labeled "loci," of different ages. Cultural classification and temporal arrangement of these loci
have been discussed in another paper (Hughes, 1949). Terrace data were not analyzed prior to preparation of that
paper; as a result, the sequence therein is based principally
on non-physiographic evidence.
This sequence is reproduced in Figure 1. The loci are
listed, with the oldest at the top, as follows: Hot Springs,
Cheyenne Falls, Jackson Narrows, Limestone Butte, Sheps
Canyon, Horsehead Creek, Red Canyon, and Dry Creek.
(The usual practice of listing from youngest to oldest has

Experiment in Relative Dating o] A+’cheoIog~cal Remains

. No~:

F<~i li~

~-~th o~htest at to++

P.LA TE lo
Stre<~m terraces ~nd areheological remains <>f the Cheyenne River
age of Western South Dakota.

99

100

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological Society

been reversed in order to facilitate comparison with the
terrace sequence, the older terraces being hi~her than the
younger ones.)
Sequence Based on Stream Terraces
Five major terraces, at elevations above the stream bed
of approximately 160, 80, 40, 20, and 10 feet, are recognizable. In the terminology of geologists of the University
of Nebraska State Museum, these may be designated, respectively, T-4, T-3, T-2, T-l, and T-0. Since no remains
were found in or on T:4j it does not concern us here. The
remaining terraces are shown in generalized cross section
by Figure 1. T-3 forms mesa-like benches; T-2, broad, extensive flats; T-1 and T-0, narrow crescents. Floods frequently cover T-O, occasionally T-l, but do not appear to
have covered T-2 in historic times.
Terrace composition, revealed by numerous cut-banks,
generally conforms to the pattern indicated in Figure 1. At
the base of each terrace is bedrock (Pierre shale at most exposures); above this is the terrace body, usually grading
from coarse channel fill near the bottom to fine floodplainfill near the top; and above this is the terrace veneer, consisting of sand and silt dropped by wind, washedfrom adjacent slopes, or deposited by exceptional floods at a time
when deposition normally was confined to the next lower
terrace. In the latter case, at least, the veneer theoretically
corresponds in age mainly to the body of the next lower terrace. Sediments of the veneer usually are different in appearance from those of the body. The change may be abrupt
or gradual; it sometimes is marked by a soil zone. Composition and thickness of the veneer depend largely on local
conditions, and vary widely within a single terrace as well
as between different terraces.
It is obvious that the Cheyem_ne River and its tributaries
in the Angostura area have lowered their channels to a considerable extent from the time of formation of the highest
terrace to the present, and that the terraces reflect an alternation of erosional and depositional conditions throughout

Experiment in Relative Dating oS Archeological Remains

101

this lowering process. The terraces may have resulted
principally from alternate erosion and deposition on each
side of a valley due to much stream meandering; they may
have resulted chiefly from alternate erosion and deposition
throughout a valley due to major climatic fluctuations; or
they may have resulted from a combination of these and
other factors.
If the terraces are chiefly meander benches, they are not
necessarily correlative with terraces elsewhere. If they
are mainly climatic features, they should be correlative
with terraces of the same kind where corresponding climatic
fluctuations and gradient conditions occurred. If they are
partly meander benches and partly climatic features, correlation would be difficult but perhaps not impossible.
Whether terraces are meander benches, climatic features,
or both is a problem which must be solved in each drainage before correlation of remains by terraces (or of terraces
by remains) from one drainage to another can be made. The
use of independently dated archeological remains as index
fossils should be a valuable supplement to standard geologica! methods in determining the nature of terraces in mar~y
drainages.
For present purposes, however, it makes little difference whether Angostura terraces are meander benches or
climatic features, since in either case they are useful in suggesting the relative ages of the remains associated with them.
Twenty of the twenty-nine components assignable to one
or another of the eight loci are located in or on terraces.
The terrace positions and focal identifications of these components are shown in Figure 1. The sequence of loci as
indicated by terrace positions of these components also is
given. The other nine components are not considered in this
report, since they are not associated with terraces.
The Hot Springs focus is oldest; Jackson Narrows, Limestone Butte, and Sheps Canyon are of intermediate age;
Horsehead Creek a.nd Dry Creek are youngest. Cheyenne
Falls may fit into any of the three positions, and Red

102

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Canyon may fall into either of the last two~

Terrace posi-

tions alone do not permit chronological arrangement, with
respect to one another, of the three loci of intermediate age,
nor of the two youngest loci.*
The Hot Springs focus has two components (39FAll and
65), one occurring in the veneer of T-3, and one on the surface of T-3.

The former occurrence suggests that the focus

corresponds in age to the body of T-2.

No components of

any other loci have an occurrence as old or older than the
body of T-2. Hot Springs, therefore, may be considered the
oldest known focus.
The single component (39FA13) of the Cheyenne Falls
focus occurs on the surface of T-3, giving no clue as to
where the focus fits into the terrace or culture sequence.
The absence of Cheyenne Falls components on ].ower and
younger terraces may mean that these were still unformed
during existence of the focus, and that it is nearly as old
as the Hot Springs focus; but this absence may reflect other
factors, or merely inadequate investigation.
The Jackson Narrows focus has four components (39FA9,
38, 56, and 68), all of which occur in the veneer of T-2. This
suggests that Jackson Narrows corresponds in age to the
body of T-1. Since the focus appears to be younger than
Hot Springs and older than certain other loci, it may be
assigned to an intermediate position.
The Limestone Butte focus has three components (39FA10,
30, and 54), two occurring in the veneer of T-2, the other
in the body of T-1. These occurrences lend archeological
support to the geological theory that a veneer corresponds
in age mainly to the body of the next lower terrace. Like
Jackson Narrows, the Limestone Butte focus is assignable to
an intermediate position. Physiographic evidence does not
show which is the older.
*The more frequent occurrence of identifiable components in veneers than
in bodies probably reflects the fact that terraces were rarely suitable for extensive habitation until they were nearing completion.

Experiment in Relative Dating of Archeologica~ Remains

103

The Sheps Canyon focus has three comopents (39FA9",
l 0, and 14), two occurring in the veneer of T-2 and one on
the surface of T 2. Like ffackson Narrows and Limestone
Butte loci, Sheps Canyon is referable to an intermediate
position. The surface occurrence suggests that the Sheps
Canyon focus may be somewhat younger, but this cannot be
demonstrated physiographically.
The Horsehead Creek focus has two components* (39FA23,
Areas A and B), one occurring on the surface of T-1 and one
near the surface of T-O. This indicates that Horsehead
Creek corresponds in age to the last phase of the formation of the youngest terrace. A component of another focus
has a similar occurrence. Horsehead Creek, therefore, while
not necessarily the youngest known focus, may be considered one of the youngest.
The Red Canyon focus has three components (39FA9, 56,
and 68), all occurring on the surface of T-2. This indicates
that Red Canyon is younger than the veneer of T-2, but
fails to show whether it belongs in the intermediate or
youngest position.
The Dry Creek focus has two components (39FA45 and
48); one occurring on the surface of T-2 and one near the
surface of T-0. The latter occurrence indicates that Dry
Creek, like the Horsehead Creek focus, is one of the youngest known loci. Physiographic evidence fails to demonstrate
which is the younger.
Conclusions
In the Cheyenne River drainage of western South Dakota,
an archeological sequence based on stream terraces,
although generalized and incomplete, does not conflict with
one previously established on the basis of non-physiographic
evidence. On the contrary, it tends to bolster the previously
inferred sequence, and, in the absence of the latter, would
have served as a satisfactor~ substitute. It is evident that
stream terraces should be used in relative dating of cultural
*~lulti-component sites account fo~" th~s and other cases of duplicated site
*These were treated as a single component in Hughes. ]949.

104

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

remains wherever circumstances
permit.
Combined
archeological and geological research eventually may result
in accurate dates and widespread correlations for both remains and terraces.
References
Hughes, Jack T.
1949. "Investigations in Western South Dakota and
Northeastern Wyoming," American Antiquity, Vol. 14,
No. 4, pp. 266-277.
White~ Theodore E. and Hughes, Jack T.
N. D. "A preliminary Appraisal of the Physiographic
History of Horsehead Creek in the Vicinity of 39FA65,"
prepared by Missouri Valley Project, River Basin Surveys, Smithsonian Institution, for Missouri River Basin
Recreation Survey, Region Two, National Park Service. (Mimeographed.)

