SANDALS OF FEATHER CAVE
W~. B. RoosA
Feather Cave is a large limestone cave six miles east of
Capitan, in Lincoln County, New Mexico.

It is on the

shoulder of a hill north of the Rio Bonito 500 yards from
U. S. Highway 380.
The cave faces to the sousth, with the long axis running
north and south. The entrance, once much larger, has
partially filled up with spall rock from the ceiling and
debris from outside so that it now slopes down sharply into
the cave proper. The cave measures 240 feet by 61 feet in its
greatest dimensions. It has a high ceiling which has been
blackened by early fires and stained by the action of groundwater. The rear of the cave is strewn with large rough
boulders from the ceiling. The central portion is fairly level
and the fill is relatively rock free.
Excavations were started late in the summer of 1950, and
resumed in the summer of 1951. The 1950 excavation consisted of an east-west trench across the cave at the widest
point. The 1951 excavation was a trench rn_nning north and
south for 90 feet, with an east-west trench meeting it at the
south end to form a reversed capital "L". The 1950 and
1951 east-west trenches converged at the south end of the
north-south trench.
The excavations were conducted under the auspices of
The Field School of the University of New Mexico, and were
directed by Dr. Paul Reiter. Nine students participated in
the 1950 session, while twenty-one were present in 1951.
While the cave has not yet been fully excavated, it is felt
that a preliminary report on sandals is of value, especially
since it is possible that new types were found.
The sandals are of a close weave wicker work, and with
one possible exception are made of yucca. They fall into
the two general classes: Four Warp of which there are 8
complete specimens, 20 semi-complete, and 16 fragmentary;
and Two Warp with 10 complete, 30 semi-complete, and 25

Texas Archeo~og~cal and Paleontolog~ca~ Society

FIGURE
Sandal tyl)es, Feather Cave.

Sandals o:~ Feather Cave

fragmentary specimens.

135

In addition there are 5 amorphous

specimens not readily assignable to either category..
Type 1: Two Warp Toe Sandal~38 complete or semi-complete, 25 fragmentary.
Narrow whole leaves of yucca form the warp, weft, and
ties of this type. The specimens analyzed (No. 581, No. 582)
have nine leaves in’each warp element.

This number varies

from eight to ten, but the basic pattern is the same. (See
Fig. 6, 1). The upper four leaves with wide ends at the
heel run full length, while the five lower ones, with wide
ends at the toe, leave the body of the sandal to form the side
tie straps. The wide ends of the warp leaves extend beyond
the heel and toe and are shredded forming heel and toe
buffers.
Two pairs of upper warp leaves, one from each element,
are joined in a knot across the toe. The remaining pair from
each side is looped around the first pair, leaving the short
ends extending up to form part of the front ties. Weft
elements of two-three leaves each are introduced through the
loops in the warp, with the short ends forming the rest of the
front ties. The five lower warp leaves are added to each
side and are secured by looping the wefts, one at a time,
under and over the opposing warp bundle. The wide ends of
the weft leaves are shredded and brought out on the bottom
of the sandal, forming a pad on the underside.
The regular weft elements of four to six leaves each are
added one at a time. They differ from the first two in that
the small ends are not anchored in the warp, but remain
free on the upper surface of the sandal. Each weft element
starts and ends on the opposite side from the one preceding
it. They are not interwoven, however, the wide butt ends
cross each other on the sole, each one being tucked up under
the preceding one.~

I. Since toe oonstr~ctlon eerves as a means of class~ficatlon, the author has
start~l ~e d~ptions at the ~e. However. Jt s~ms qu[~ likely tha~ the w~t
s~ f~m the ~ttom, and t~t ~th two and four warp ~pes we~ s~ at t~
h~l and ftnish~ at the ~.

136

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Heel treatment varies. In eleven of the fourteen specimens with nearly intact heels, strands from the opposing
warp elements are joined in a square knot, two are tightly
wovdn with no knot, and one is finished with a square knot
in the last weft.
The ties of the seventeen specimens with nearly complete
sets follow the general pattern of a toe loop and side straps,
none of sandals has any form of heel straps or ties. On all
specimens the elements of the toe loop (four or five leaves
each) are terminated in a large square knot. Toe loops are
centered and are for the second and third toes. Each side
tie separates into two straps which loop around the toe loop,
terminating in one or two large square knots. (See Fig 6,
4 and 5). Counting the toe loop knot, three sandals have
two large knots in the ties; three more have two knots (actually one and a half knots, since the side straps do not form
a complete knot) bound together with the loose ends of both
knots; ten sandals have three separate knots, while one has
three knots bound together. Side ties consist of from four
to six leaves each, nine sandals having five, eight with six,
and three with four.
Structurally the specimens of this type are nearly identical, however, they vary somewhat as to size and shape.
Sandal No. 775--Plate 19A, a. This is a large sandal, 8.7"
long, 1.8" wide at the toe, 2.8" at side straps, and 1.8" at the
heel. It is symmetrically tapered about the long axis. The
heel is finished by joining warp strands in a square knot.
There are four leaves in each side and toe tie element and
two large knots in the ties.
Sandal No. 19~--Plate 19A, 6. This sandal is smaller,
6.6" long, 1.6" wide at toe, 2.5" at side straps, and 1.1" at
heel. There are four leaves in each side and toe tie element,
and two knots in the ties. The taper is symmetrical about
the long axis, and it appears to be for the right foot. There
is no knot at the heel.

Sandal No. 783---Plate 19B, a. From its general appearance
and the cake of mud on the sole it is apparent that this sandal

Sandals o:~ Feather Cave

137

was worn in wet weather. These sandals tend to lose form
and disintegrate when wet, which would account for its unusual shape.

It is 6.3" long, and 4.2" wide at widest point.

There are five leaves ir~ each side and toe tie element, and
two knots bound together in the ties.
Sandal No. 748---Plate 19B, b. This sandal is small, 5.1"
long, 1.7" wide at toe, 2.5" at side straps, and 1" at heel.
Taper is symmetrical about the long axis..Most of the ties
are missing. A two element twisted cord of cotton or milkweed fiber (probably the latter) has been fastened to the
stub of one of the front ties. This sandal is further distinguished by virtue of its having been chopped in two by
the author’s shovel.
Sandal No. 437--Plate 19C, b. This is a large sandal with
little taper, 7.1" long, 2.8" wide at toe, 3.5" at side straps, and
2.9" at the heel. It has five leaves in each side and toe tie
element and three knots in the ties. The sandal is relatively
wider than those previously mentioned. It may not be a
complete sandal since the heel ends of the warp elements
appear to have been broken off. Strands from the warp
elements are joined in a heel knot. These sandals are weak
in the heel, since all show signs of wear there, and 17 are
nearly complete except for the heel. It is quite possible that
the original heel of this sandal broke off and that the heel
knot is a "field repair." If it is complete, it represents a
legitimate subtype.
Sandals of this type are more or less symmetrical about the
long axis. A few are markedly asymmetrical and may have
been intended as lefts and rights. All specimens show signs
of wear, especially at the heels. In a few, some of the weft
leaves are shredded. Since not all of the weft leaves are
shredded in any sandal, this may be the result of wear and
aging, rather than a deliberate process.
All of the specimens fall in the size range of sandals 194,
and 775. The term "Toe Sandal" is used because of the
nature of the ties. However, it is apparent that some of the
larger ones are at least three-quarter, if not full length.

138

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontologica~ Society

Type 2:

Asymmetrical Two Warp Toe Sandal--Plate

19C, a.
This type is represented by one specimen, No. 527.~

It is

the largest sandal in the collection, 9.5" long, 2.5" wide at
toe, 3.5" at side straps, and 1.5" at heel. It is markedly asymmetrical about the long axis, and appears to be for the left
foot. It differs structurally from type 1, in the toe construction.

(See Fig. 6, 2).

There are seven leaves in each side

tie, and four in each toe tie element.

The ties are joined in

two knots. The heel is finished with a knotted weft leaf. It
was found at a depth of 12 inches.
Type 3: Two Warp Toe Sandal--Not Illustrated.
This type is represented by one specimen, No. 278, found
at 8 inches. It is incomplete, and shows no evidence of ties
There is no pad on the sole and no toe or heel buffer. It is
large, 7.2" long, 3" at toe, and 2" wide at heel; and appears
to be made of very wide leafed yucca or grass. The specimen is too fragile to permit dissection.
Type 4: Four Warp Fishtail Toe Sandalm26 specimens
complete or semi-complete, 16 fragmentary.
This type of sandal has a great deal in common structurally
with types 1, and 2. All three types have: 1. Eight fulllength warp leaves, four of which form part of the front
ties; 2. Eight to ten warp leaves which form the side tie
straps; 3. Two weft elements which form part of the front
ties; 4. A pad on the sole formed by wide ends of weft;
5: Heel and toe buffers formed by wide ends of warp leaves;
and 6. T’ney share the same types of ties and knots.
Lefts and Rights are not identifiable in type 4. Each warp
element consists of two leaves with wide ends at the heel.
The outer warp elements are joined in a square knot at the
toe. The inner warp elements cross over the toe (entwined
about each other) so that each goes to the opposite side,
then over and under the outer warp and up to form part of
the toe tie. (See Fig. 6, 3.)

PLATE 19
San,la| tyD~,

Feather C~ve.

Sandals o] Feather Cave

141

Warp elements of four or five leaves each are added under
the inner warp elements.

The first two wefts (two leaves

each) form part of the toe ties, and anchor the bottom warp
elements in much the same way as in types 1 and 2.
In most cases ties are identical with the two warp sandals.
(Fig. 6, 4 and 5.) Ties consist of a toe loop and side straps.
The toe loop is well centered and is for the second and third
toes. Of the nine sandals with more or less complete sets,
four have the two knot tie, two have three knots, two have
two knots bound together, while one (No. 444) has two
knots bound together and a third free knot.
In most cases the side straps enter the body of the sandal
on the bottom between the middle and outer warp elements.
Including fragmentary specimens, ten sandals have braided
ties. The braid is a flat four element braid or sennet.
Heel treatment varies slightly, especially in the degree to
which the warp ends cross over each other. (See Plate 19,
D and E.) Warp elements are not tied together at the heel
as in some of the two warp sandals, however, the last weft
leaf is woven tightly around the warp elements (See Fig.
6, 3.)
Sandal No. 154---Plate 19D, c. This is a fairly large
specimen, 5.5" long, 2.7" wide across origin point of toe ties,
3.6" maximum, 2.7" at side straps, and 1.2" at the heel. It
deviates from the norm in that the side straps enter
the body on the upper surface rather than the sole. The ties
terminate in two knots.
Sandals No. 732--Plate 19D, a and b. These two small
sandals were found together and may be a pair. One is
4.4" long, 2" wide at toe, 2.6" maximum, and 1" at heel;
while the other measures 4.2" long, 2.4" wide at toe, 3.2"
maximum, and 1.4" at the heel. Ties are identical, both
having two knots bound together.
Sandal No. 438--Not Illustrated. This specimen measures
5.5" long, is 3.2" at maximum width, and 1.1" at the heel.
The toe of this one varies from the norm in that only

142

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the outside right warp follows the pattern and terminates
in the front knot.

The right middle warp goes over and

under the outside warp and comes up to form part of the
right half of the toe loop. The left side of the toe foilows
the toe construction of Cosgrove’s type lc2 in that the left
inside warp terminates in the front knot, while the outside
warp becomes part of the left half of the toe tie loop. The
ties employ three knots.
Sandals No. 441 and 445. These are pictured in Plate 19E
to show the range of size in the type. There are several
fragmentary specimens which if complete would be larger
than No. 441, however it is the largest nearly complete sandal of this type. It is 6.9" long, while the small one is 3.8"
long.
Sandal No. 524 Plate 19F, b. The heel is missing from
this one. It measures 6.1" long, 2.9" wide at toe, 3.9" maximum, and 3.3" at the ties. It is distinguished by having
braided ties, and the fact that the right side tie enters the
body of the sandal on the sole, while the left enters on the
upper surface between the inside and outside warps. Since
the specimen is incomplete, we hesitate to assign it to a
different class or subclass. Sandals of this general type
were found by Cosgrove3 and Howard4, and in Isleta Cave,
a Basketmaker III Site 11 miles east of Isleta, New Mexico,
by Reiter. Cosgrove’s specimens are similar in outline, but
not in structure.
Type 5: Four Warp "Half Sole" Toe Sandal--2 specimens.
Sandal No. 195--Plate 19F, a. This specimen is 4.4" long,
2.7" in maximum width, and 2.6" wide at the heel. Toe
construction follows closely that of type 4. The essential
differences in the two types are in the heel treatment, and
the ties. Weft strands are prevented from sliding off at the
heel by a square knot joining strands from the inner warp
elements. The side ties of this type are not part of the warp
2. Cosgrove, 1947. Figures 87, 88.
3. Cosgrove, 1947, Figures 87. 88, ~YPes la, and
4. Howard, 1930, Plate XXXIV, 2.

Sandals o] Feather Cave

143

elements, but rather are separate leaves which are looped
around the outer warp elements. The ties consist of a toe
loop and side straps, and terminate in two knots which are
bound together.
Sandal No. 151mNot Illustrated. This is quite similar to
No. 195, however it is incomplete, lacking the toe. The heel
differs in having three small square knots uniting strands
from all four of the warp elements instead of one knot.
This sandal was found at 14", while No. 195 was at 24".
A very similar sandal is illustrated by Howard5, and one
was found recently by a student in a cave near Hot Springs,
New Mexico. Cosgrove equates Howard’s sandal to his type
lb. However, the toe construction of our specimen does not
agree with Cosgrove’s drawing. Since Howard does not
analyze his sandal, it is impossible to say that our specimen is identical.
The sandals were found at depths of 1" to 51~/2 inches in
loose, dry fill, disturbed in places by rodent holes. Of the
100 specimens of types 1 and 4 assignable to a specific level,
70% were at or above the 18 inch level, while 84% were at
or above the 24 inch level. Roughly 50% of the sandals were
at or above the 12 inch level.
The one specimen of type 2 was at 12 inches, while that of
type 3 was at 8 inches. The two specimens of type 5 were
found at 14 inches and 24 inches. It is possible that types
2, 3 and 5 represent later developments than types 1 and 4
both of which were found as deep as 51 inches.
Comparison of types 1 and 4 shows 68.3% of type 1 at or
above 18 inches, as opposed to 75% of type 4 at the same
level. In type 1, 80% are at or above 24 inches, while 90%
of type 4 are at the same level. Distribution of the two types
is fairly even, with type 1 having a slightly higher percentage in the lower levels.
There is little evidence on which to base a sequence of
types. In type 4 sandals, those with braided ties occur only

Howard,

1930.

Plate

XXXIV,

I.

144

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

in the first 18 inches. This might indicate that braided ties
are a recent development in this type of sandal.
Two and four warp yucca leaf sandals with sole pads
formed from the wide ends of the leaves are fairly common
in the Southwest; ranging from northeastern Arizona to the
Big Bend Area of Texas. Tos sandals have been found
as far north as Jemez Cave% however, they are most common in the Big Bend and Hueco areas of Texas and" New
Mexico.~
A two warp toe sandal common to this area has been designated "Fish-taft" by Roberts,8 Smith,9 and others. Many
of the sandals of this type are roughly obovate with a round
toe and a "Fish-tail" heel. Jackson pictures a specimen
from Culbertson County, Texas which is more rectangular
in shape, and closely resembles our types 1 and 2.
Cosgrove found several types of fish-tail sandals in the
Hueco Mountain Area. His type 4a is rectangular in outline, while type 4b has a more obovate shape. Both types
have warp elements which leave the body of the sandal to
become side straps--a feature shared by our types 1, 2, and
4. Our types 1 and 2 most closely resemble Cosgrove’s type
4a in shape and structure, however, they also show a close
structural relationship to type 4b, but lack the obovate shape.
In outward form our types 1 and 2 also resemble his types
2 and 3. These differ from ours in toe construction and
have ties which are separate elements.
The obovate two warp "Fish-tail" sandals are very similar
in shape and construction to our "Type 4, Four Warp Fishtail Toe Sandals." Our type 4 shows much greater similarity
in shape and structure to Cosgrove’s type lc. As has been
noted, toe structure of the two types is different while heel
treatment is similar, but not identical. All of our specimens
(of types 1, 2 and 4) are unique in having weft elements
which form part of the toe loop. While this may occur in
6.
7.
8,
9,
10.

Alexander and Retter, 1935. p. 59.
Saylcs. 1935. Table 8.
Roberta, 1929, Plate 2,
Smith, 1933~ Type ta, Plate 13. No.
Jackson, 19370 Plate 31. :No. 2.

Sandals o:~ Feather Cave

145

the specimens of Robert, Smith, Cosgrove and others, it is
not mentioned or shown.
CONCLUSIONS
Sandals of types 1, 2 and 4 are of a general type common
to the Big Bend and Hueco areas. They show most marked
resemblances to sandals found in the Hueco Mountain district and along the Rio Grande north of E1 Paso by Cosgrove
and assigned by him to the Hueco Basket-maker culture.
Type 5 is similar to ones found by Howard in Guadalupe
Mountains, and assigned to a Basket-maker culture. Type
3, if it is a valid type, has not been analyzed to permit valid
comparisons.
From the sandals, the proximity of the sites, and other
associated artifacts found in the cave, it appears that Feather
Cave represents a site of the Hueco or Hueco Basket-maker
culture. Lehmer has defined the Hueco as the earliest phase
of the Jornada branch of the Mogollon.l I
The problem of whether we call the culture "Hueco
Basket-maker" or "Hueco Phase of the Jornada Branch of
the Mogollon" appears largely to be one of definition of
terms. If we restrict the term Basket-maker to a culture on
a certain technological level in the San Juan area, we are
wrong to call them Basket-makers; the same of course applies to like use of the term Mogollon. If on the other hand
we use a broad definition for the terms Basket-maker and
Mogollon we may be quite justified in applying either term
to this area without necessarily implying close relationships
to other areas.
BIBIAOGI~HY
Alexander, H. G. and Reiter, P.
(1935) "Report on the Excavation of Jemez Cave, New
Mexico," Monographs of The School of American Research, No. 4. Santa Fe.
Cosgrove, C. B.
(1947) "Caves of the Upper Gila and Hueco Areas in
11.

Lehmer

1948. po 7Io

146

Texas Archeologlcal and Paleontological Society

New Mexico and Texas," Papers of the Peabody lYluseum, Vol. XXIVmNo. 2. Cambridge.
Howard, E. B.
(1930) "Archaeological Research in the Guadalupe
Mountains," University of Pennsylvania, Museum Journal, Vol. 21, Nos. 3 and 4, pp. 184-202. Philadelphia.
Jackson, A. T.
(1937) "Exploration of Certain Sites in Culbertson
County, Texas," Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Bulletin, Vol. IX, pp. 146-192. Abilene.
Lehmer, D. J.
(1948) "The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon," University ef Arizona Bulletin, Social Science Bulletin No. 17,
Vol. XIX, No. 2. Tucson.
Roberts, F. H., Jr.
(1929) "Recent Archeological Developments in the
Vicinity of E1 Paso, Texas," Smithsonian Miscellaneous
Collections, Vol. 81, No. 7. Washington.
Sayles, E. B.
(1935) "An Archeological Survey of Texas," Medallion
Papers, No. XVH. Globe.
Smith, V. J.
(1933) "Sandals of the Big Bend Culture with additional
notes concerning Basket-maker evidence," Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Bulletin, Vol. V,
pp. 57-65. Abilene.

