Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

32

PREHISTORIC NOVACULITE QUARRIES
OF ARKANSAS
BY HAPmY J. LEMLE¥

Among the best known quarries from which the Indians procured
their flint are the novaculite quarries of Arkansas.1
Novaculite is a siliceous rock, believed to be of sedimentary
origin, having a hardness of seven in a scale in which the diamond
is rated at ten, and occurs in many colors, red, white, pink, blue,
yellow, gray, black, and numerous shades between.

Branner2 gives

the following as an analysis of a typical novaculite: "Silica, 99.45;
alumina, .26; soda, .54; potash, .19; lime, .12; magnesia, a trace;
water, .06."

Novaculites are of two classes, known as the Arkansas and the
Ouachita. The former, a true novaculite, is a fine grained, homogeneous stone 6f waxy luster, translucent, with a marked conchoidal
fracture. The Ouachita stone is less dense, coarser, less translucent
and lacks the waxy ~uster of the true novaculite; and has the dead
appearance of unglazed porcelain. Both stones were used in the
manufacture of stone implements, and for the past hundred years
have been used for whetstones.
The novaculites are found in formations of from 500 to 600 feet
in thickness along the edges of the Ouachita Uplift in west central
Arkansas. Branner3 estimates that there are between 300 and 500
miles of novaculite ridges in the state. On these ridges, principally
in the neighborhood of Hot Springs, but reported at other points
between Hot Springs and the Oklahoma line, a~e ancient pits from
which the novaculite used by the Indians was taken. Implements
of this material are found in great profusion in Arkansas and,
Bureau of American Ethnology. Bulletin 30, Pt. I, page 865.
1.
2.
Branner, Geo, C., "Outlines of Arkansas’ Mineral Resources,"_State Geological
Survey, Little Rock, Arkansas, page 179, 1927.
3,
BYanner, Geo. C,, op. cit. p. 180.

No. 1.
No. 2.
No. 3.

PLATE 7
Hammerstones, Arkansas novaculite quarries.
More hammerstones from novaculite quarry.
Quarry pit. No. 4. Debris from quarry.

Plate 7

Prehisto~c Novaculite Quarries of Arkansas

35

sparsely, as far east as Virginia and as far west as New Mexico.
The quarries near Hot Springs are the largest found in the novaculite area. Groups of these are located on the crest of Indian
Mountain, about two miles northeast of that city, and also near
Magnet Cove on the south arm of Basin Mountain, locally known
as Spanish Diggings Mountain,~* about twelve miles east of Hot
Springs.
Indian Mountain Quarries
These consist of a large excavation on the crest of the ridge and
a number of smaller pits nearby. The large excavation, which is
partially filled with debris, is oval in shape, about 150 by 200 feet,
with its long axis approximately north and south. It has the appearance at the present time of two conical pits, each about 25 ~eet
deep, with a low saddle between. The entire excavation is lined
with small broken pieces of novaculite; and it is possible that the
low saddle refer.red to is a large pile of debris heaped up in the
center thereby giving it the appearance of two pits with shallow
diggings between. Surrounding the large excavation and the smaller
pits referred to, and extending over the adjoining area, are enormous
amounts of broken pieces and chips of novaculite, of almost every
color. This area represented .the work shop used in connection
with the mine. Crude quartzite hammer-stones, used in the excavation and in reshapirig the material, are found in considerable numbers both in and around the quarries. Those collected by us range
in size from two to eight inches in diameter.
The pits on Indian Mountain were observed by Featherstonhaugh
in 1834.z He described them as follows:
"Lofty hills are found there, composed entirely of this material
(novaculite). On one of these I saw several large pits, twenty to
thirty feet deep and as many in diameter, resembling inverted cones,
the insides of which were covered with broken chips of this beautiful
mineral, some white, some red, some carmine, some blue, some quite
opalescent. In and nea~ these pits round and long masses were scattered about, of a hard green stone I had found in place eighteen miles
distant, and none of them too large for the hand. They were, undoubtedly, Indian tools, and these were the quarries from ~vhence the

*So called on account of an erroneous belief that the quarries represented old Spanish diggings.
4. Feather~tonhaugh, G. W., Geological Report of an Examination made in 1834
of the Elevated Country between the Missouri and Red Rivers, Washington, 1835, p. 69.

36

Texaz Archeologizal and Paleontological Society

Indians had formerly obtained the materials they had used for their
arrow heads, and other weapons of offense."

Featherstonhaugh’s estimate of the diameter of the larger pits
falls far too short.
Holmes visited Indian Mountain in 1891, and later described the
quarries.5 He referred to what appeared to be evidence of fire in
some of the lateral diggings. The blackened patches mentioned by
him have now disappeared. At least, the writer has been unable to
find them. However, modern quarrymen who have dug into some
of the ancient quarries around Hot Springs report finding ashes in
the bottoms of some of the pits.
Quarries Near Magnet Cove
The diggings on the south arm of Basin Mountain resemble in a
general way those on Indian Mountain, but are much more extensive. A series of deep and shallow pits extends almost continuously along .the crest of the ridge for a distance of about 3 1-2
miles. In and around these pits are enormous accumulations of
rejectage, in which an occasional hammerstone may be found.
Griswold,6 who evidently saw only a part of the quarries, describes them as follows:
"The so called ’Spanish Diggings’ near Magnet Cove are situated
on ~he crest of a very narrow ridge of novaculite which rises sharply
from the valley of Cove Creek to a height of 500 feet or more above
it. The ’diggings’ consist of round or oval-shaped hollows made ir~
the ledges of the very crest of the ridge, varying from a few feet up
to a hundred or more for the longer axis, by fifty feet in width.
They are comparatively shallow, the largest being perhaps twentyfive feet deep.. They extend along the top of one ridge for more than
a mile, almost changing the top of the ridge from a rounded back to
a hollow trough."

Holmes made a hurried examination of these quarries on the
occasion of his visit to "Indian Mountain and incorporates in his
report a description furnished him by Professor Jenney.7 Jenney
states that the excavations examinel by him consisted of a number
of shallow diggings covering a belt 300 to 600 feet in width and
Holmes, W. H., Bulletin 60, Pt I, Bureau of American Ethnology. I). 178, 1919.
5.
6.
Griswold, L. S., ’~The Novaculites of Arkansan," Annual Report of the G~logi~l Su~ey of Arkansas for 1890, Vol. III, p. 175.
7.
Holmes, W. H., oP. cir. p. 198.

Prehiatori~ Novc~dite Quaan-ies of Arl~nsas

37

extending for a distance of one and a half miles on the crest of
the mountain.
Mr. J. M. Lowery, of Hot Springs, who owns the land upon which
most of the diggings are located, reports that in the year 1932, a
shaft was sunk in one of the larger pits to a depth of 35 feet through
debris, and that when the shaft was abandoned at this depth, debris
was still in evidence.

So far as we are aware, no complete scientific investigation has
been made as to the depth of, or actual area covered by, the quarries on either Indian or Basin Mountain.
Hope, Arkansas.

