NOTES ON THE AYALA SITE, LOWER RIO
GRANDE VALLEY, TEXAS
T. N. CA1VIPBELL AND JACK Q. FRIZZELL

Introduction
In the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas.and Tamaulipas
two archaeological cultures have thus far been recognized.
Knowledge of these cultures is based primarily on reconnaissance, for no real excavation has as yet been attempted.
The first and best known of these two cultures is the
Brownsville, which is largely coastal in its distribution and
is characterized by an abundance of artifacts made of shell.
This was first recognized by Anderson,, who in 1932 pub" lished a brief paper which listed the most common kinds
of artifacts but gave no name to the culture. In 1935 Sayles~
referred to this culture as the Brownsville Phase, naming it
after the city of Brownsville. Sayles showed its distribution
on the Texas side of the Rio Grande (roughly the delta
region), supplied a trait list, and indicated that it belonged
to a relatively late time period. In 1947 MacNeish3 presented
the main outlines of this same culture, referring to it as the
Brownsville complex. He mapped its full distribution (a
strip along the Gulf coast between the Arroyo Colorado in
southern Texas and the San Fernando River in northern
Tamaulipas), and he also cited evidence to show that it
began at some unknown date after 1,000 A. D. and survived
into the historic period.
The second culture, which has an inland distribution, is
less clearly defined and several different names have been
applied to it. As now known, it is characterized primarily
by stone artifacts. This culture was first recognized in 1935
by Sayles," who called it the Coahuiltecan Phase. He showed
1 Anderson, 1932.
2 Sayles, 1935, p. 40; Plate X, d, e, f, p. 42; Table 5, p. 102; Table 9, p.
3 MacNeish, 1947, pp. 2, 5-8, 10.
110; p. 117; Table 13, p, 124; M~ C, p. 132.
4. Sayles, 1935, p. 41; Table 5, p. 102; Table 9, p. 110; p. 117; Table 13.
124; ~.ap C, p. 132.

64

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

its distribution in Texas only (a long strip north of the
Rio Grande extending from Eagle Pass to Hidalgo), and his
tables suggested a comparatively late date for the culture.
As a result of extensive reconnaissance in Tamaulipas, Mac°
Neish~ in 1947 described two related inland culture complexes, the Repelo and the Abasolo, which appear to be
closely related to Sayles’ Coahuiltecan Phase. According to
MacNeish, the Repelo complex is the earlier (about 500 to
1,000 A. D.) and is largely confined to the inland area lying
between the Rio de las Palmas and San Fernando rivers
in Tamaulipas. The Abasolo complex is later (about 800
A. D. to historic times) and occupies the inland area extending from the Rio de las Palmas of Tamaulipas northward across the Rio Grande into southern Texas. Of these
two inland complexes described by MacNeish, the Abasolo
appears to be virtually the same as the Coahuiltecan Phase
of Sayles. Hughes6 has reported archaeological materials
from northern Tamaulipas which evidently belonged to
MacNeish’s Repelo and Abasolo complexes. In his paper on
the Clear Fork Focus, Kelley7 used the term Monte Aspect,
which apparently includes Sayles’ Coahuiltecan Phase as
well as the Repelo and Abasolo complexes of MacNeish. It
is hoped that this varied terminology will soon be systematized. We prefer to use Kelley’s broad term, Monte, until
local subdivisions in the lower Rio Grande Valley have been
clearly distinguished on the basis of excavation.
Recent discoveries at the Ayala sites in the Lower Rio
Grande Valley have provided specific information on
Brownsville burial customs and physical type. Stratigraphic
evidence at this site also indicates a Monte (CoahuiltecanAbasolo) occupation fo!lowed by a Brownsville occupation.
The Ayala site is approximately 50 miles above the mouth
of the Rio Grande.
5 :~Iaet~eish, 1947, pp. 1-3, 10.
6 Hughes, 1947. Mullerried (1934, pp. 217-219) has also described a small
collection from northern Tamaulipas which seems to belong to the same
basic culture.
7 Ke!ley, 1947, p. 104 (footnote 26).
8 In the files at the University of Texas this site is designated as 79D5-1.

Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas

65

Discovery and Investigation oS the Ayala Site
In the summer of 1948, lYlr. M. E. Ayala of McAllen (Hidalgo County) built a house on his farm 1.5 miles south of
that city. This house faces east on South Depot Road. A
sewer trench was dug from the rear of the house westward
toward a low bluff overlooking a former channel of the
Rio Grande, and during the course of excavation workmen
encountered a series of burials at depths ranging from 2
to 6 feet. The bones were removed from the trench by the
workmen as they were encountered and were placed in small
piles along the trench. The initial discovery was made on
July 2.
A newspaper story covering the first three burials was
published by the McAllen Valley Evening Monitor in its
issue of July 8. On July 9, Mr. Paul T. Vickexs, manager of
the McAllen Chamber of Commerce, wrote to the Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, describing the
finds and enclosing a clipping of the newspaper story.
Frizzell, whose home is in the nearby town of Weslaco, was
asked to investigate the Ayala burial locality. On July 17,
Frizzell visited the Ayala farm and found that five additional burials had been removed between July 9 and 14. He
collected all the available information on these burials, drew
a sketch map and a profile, took photographs, and returned
to Austin with a portion of the badly damaged skeletal material and most of the artifacts collected from the burial area.
On July 23 and 24, three more burials were found, making
a total of eleven. The skeletal materials and associated artifacts from these last three burials were sent to the University of Texas by lVlr. Charles A. Fink of the lYlcAllen Valley
Evening Monitor.~
The Ayala Site and Its Archaeological Materials
The Ayala site has a distinctive physiographic location.
It lies on high ground which rises about 15 feet above a
9 We are much indebted to Messrs. Ayala, VIckers, and FInk for their
cooperation, and we are especially grateful to ]M~r. Fink for his generous
e.ffor.ts in. our. .behalf. Mr. Lewis Carver of the l~cAllen Valley Evening
h~onitor also ~mdly supplied data on other burials previously found In the
vicinity of McAllen.

66

Texas A~cheological and Paleontologica! Society

former channel of the Rio Grande. This old channel has a
width of approximately 2,500 feet at the Ayala locality, and
it is now used as a floodway. According to Mr. Ayala, the
records show that the Rio Grande occupied this channel
in the latter part of the eighteenth century, when the area
was first settled by Europeans. Today the Rio Grande is
six miles south of the Ayala site. The site is now sparsely
covered by large mesquite trees, and there is no record of
its ever having been under cultivation.
The sewer trench, which extended from the newly con°
structed house to the low bluff overlooking the old river
channel, was 2.5 feet wide, 7 feet deep, and approximately
180 feet long. In the vertical walls of this trench two alluvial layers could be distinguished. At the top was a layer
of light silt 4 feet thick, and below it was a layer of darker
silt which continued downward to the bottom of the trench.
In Plate 12a, the approximate vertical distribution of the
burials is shown. This profile is based on the measurements
and observations of both Frizzell and Fink. It should be
made clear that in some cases the burials had already been
removed before the stratigraphic data were collected. Some
of the burials were entirely in the upper layer (Burials 1
and 2), some were entirely in the lower layer (Burials 7, 8,
9 and 10), and the remainder lay near the division between
the two soil layers (Burials 3, 4, 5, and 6). The position of
Burial 11 could not be obtained. In Burials 5, 6, 7, and 8,
portions of which still remained in the walls of the trench,
Frizzell noted darker soil surrounding the bones; but the
outlines of the original burial pits could not be traced. It
would appear that most .of these burials were made during
the period when the upper laydr of silt was being deposited.
Except for Burial 10, which was a group burial, all of the
Ayala site burials were single burials. The available information on the orientation and position of the skeletons in
these burials is not very satisfactory, but all accounts indicate flexed burials. The reports also indicate that in several
burials the forearms were crossed, and in one burial it is

Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Gra~te Valley, Texa~

67

PROFILE SHOWING VERTIC~... DLSTRISUTION OF B~JRIALS
AT THI~ AYALA SITE

A

F

G

H

0

P

PLATE

12

A~-,’tla Site, Lower ]Rio GrRndo Valley, Texas. A, profile showing vertical
distribution of burials; B-C, F-I, L-~M, bone beads; D, O]lva bead; E, rroJectile point; J-K, nonch s~ll beads; N-O, flint gouges; P. knife.

~68

Texas Archeolog~ca~ and Paleontological Society

stated that the hands were adjacent to the face. The skull
and some long bones of Burial 1 show traces of red ochre.
The skeletal material is badly damaged because of the
manner in which it was removed from the earth. Burials 5,
6, 7, and 9 are not represented by any skeletal material. Five
skulls have been partially restored, so that some information
: en sex and age is available. The individuals in Burials 1 and
2 were adult males. Those in Burials 3 and 4 were adults, but
the bones are too fragmentary for sexing. Burial 8 was that
of an adult female; and Burial 10, the group burial, seems
to have contained two adults, one of which is a female, and
three children. Burial 11 was that of an infant. The total
number of individuals in the eleven burials was fifteen.
These burials present some evidences of death by violence.
The skull of the adult female in Burial 8 appears to have
received a strong blow on the right side of the frontal bone
adjacent to the coronal suture. One of the adults in Burial
t0 probably died from a dart wound, for the distal fragment
of a small dart point is embedded in the right side of the
centrum of one of the lumbar vertebrae. The dart point entered the centrum near its lower border and penetrated
it in an upward oblique direction.
The badly fragmented cranial material from the Ayala
site has been reconstructed to the maximum extent possible.
Two female calvaria are complete enough for preliminary
measurements,~o which indicate a dolichocranic or longheaded population. The female from Burial 8 has a cranial
index of 74.7, and the female from Burial 10 has a cranial
index of 73.
The artifacts definitely associated with the burials are
all ornaments. Encircling the neck vertebrae of the female
in Burial 8 were 94 beads which formed a necklace. This
necklace included 60 Oliva shells ,, with spire tips removed
10 The skeletal material from the Ayala site will e~2entually be sent to
a physical anthropologist for further study.
11 Fourteen of these OHva beads (Oliva sayana Ravened are now at the
University of Texas. The smallest has a length of 47.~ ram., the longest
a length of 60 ram. Thlrty-eight Ol|va beads were kept by /Cir. A.yala, and
the remainder were taken by an unidentified collector in McAllen.

Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande V~rlley, Texas

69

(Plate 12, d) ; two disk-shaped beads (Plate 12, j) made from
conch columella, each with a diameter of 18 ram. and a
thickness of 4 mm.; and 32 tubular bone beads. The shortest
bone bead has a length of 5 mm. and a maximum diameter
of 6 mm.; the longest a length of 16 mm. and a maximum
diameter of 6 mm. Five of the bone beads have encircling
grooves--three with one groove (Plate 12 c and h) and two
with two grooves (Plate 12, i). The remainder of the bone
beads are undecorated (Plate 12, f, g, l, m).
With one of the infants in Burial 10 was a necklace composed of very small tubular bone beads. Sixteen of these
tiny beads were recovered. The shortest has a length of 4
.ram. and a maximum diameter of 2.5 mm.; the longest a
length of 12 ram. and a maximum diameter of 6 ram. Encircling the neck vertebrae of one of the adults in this same
burial was another necklace, this one composed of alterhating shell and bone beads. Seventeen beads from this
necklace are in the University of Texas collection. Ten of
these are disk-shaped conch shell beads (Plate 12, k) of approxLmately the same size (diameter 17 mm., thickness
3.5 mm.). The remaining seven are tubular bone beads;
they are also of approximately the same size (length 16 ram.,
maximum diameter 12 ram.) and have notched ends (Plate
12, b)
It is clear that the Ayala burials were placed in a midden
deposit. This is indicated by the materials from the soil
surrounding the burials. These materials include flint flakes
and artifacts, baked clay fragments, snail and bivalve shells,
and animal bones.
Near Burial 5, but seemingly not associated with it, was
12 Burials similar to those at the Ayala site have been reported from the
same vicinity near :McAllen (Yr. Lewis Carver, letter, October 8, 1948).
In October, 19~8, ~r. Jason Matthews uncovered two burials near his residence on South 10th Street, which is about two miles east of the Ayala
site. These burials came from a depth of approximately six feet below the
surface; the skeletons were in a flexed 2position and associated with them
were beads and "bone o~naments.’" At about the same time l~fr. ~Valter Hart
excavated "four or five" burials from an east-west ridge on his farm Just
~outh of ]E[cAllen. Two are described as flexed burials, but information on
the position of the remainder is lacking. A projectile point was embedded
in one of the skulls.

70

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

a large flint gouge of Clear Fork t3rpe’~ (Plate 12, n). This
specimen has a length of 62 mm., a width of 38 ram., and a
thickness of 18 mm. It is chipped on both faces. Near Burial
8.was a very small gouge or scraper (Plate 12, o) which is
triangular in outline and chipped on both faces. It has a
length of 22 mm., a width of 22 mm., and a thickness of 7
nun. Likewise near Burial 8 was one complete dart point
(Plate 12, e) and also one distal fragment of a dart point.
An asymmetrically triangular knife was also found near one
unidentified burial (Plate 12, p). Fifteen flint flakes were
also collected from the soil surroundLng the various burials.
The faunal material includes deer (Odocoileus), coyote
(Canis latrans), pocket gopher (genus unidentifiable, but
probably Geornys14), and snake (genus unidentified). One
marine shell is represented in the midden, the transverse
arc shell (Arca transverse Say). Reference has already been
made to ornaments made from two marine shells, Ol~va and
conch. The snail shells, as yet unidentified, are all land
sn~ls of the same species.Is
Interpretation
Two conclusions have been drawn from the evidence
presented above. First, the midden in which the burials
were placed can be identified with the Monte (Coahuiltecan-Abasolo) culture; second, because of the associated ornaments, two of the burials (Burials 8 and 10), and probably
all of them, can be attributed to the Brownsville culture.
None of the flint artifacts from the midden, except possibly the small gouge or scraper (Plate 12, o) can be attributed to the Brownsville culture. Sayles has listed the
small gouge or "core scraper",o as occurring in his Brownsville Phase, but Anderson and MacNeish do not mention
this type for the Brownsville. On the other hand, the large
Clear Fork gouge is an important artifact type in Sayles’
13 RRy, 1938, pp. 197-198.
14 Davis, 1940, pp. 7, 23-31. Gsornys personatus occurs in this are~ ~Ry.
See ~so Campbell, 1948, p. 179.
15 ~sistance Jn identl~ ~e faunal material w~ given by Mr. Glen
~ Evans; ~sist~t Dlr~tor of ~e Te~ ~emorl~ Museum, Austin.
16 Sayles, 1935, T~le 6, P. 102.

Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texaz

71

Coahuiltecan Phase,,7 and Hughes,, illustrates what appears
to be one of these from northern Tamaulipas (MacNeish’s
Repelo-Abasolo area). Insofar as it is possible to tell from
published accounts, the dart point (Plate 12, e) and the
knife (Plate 12, p) are much more likely to belong to the
Monte than to the Brownsville culture.
The beads associated with the burials are characteristic
Brownsville ornaments. MacNeish reports that Brownsville
burials "are predominantly flexed, and about half the time
are without burial furniture. When burial furniture does
occur, it usually consists of beads, pendants, and Huasteca
pottery.",~ But Abasolo burials, according to MacNeish,
are "semi-flexed, in shallow pits and without burial furniture."~o Sayles reports Coahuiltecan Phase burials as "partially cremated .... covered with large stones,"2~ and he
makes no mention of burial furniture. We thus seem to be
reasonably safe in assigning the Ayala burials to the
Brownsville culture.
In summary it may be stated that the Ayala site consists
of a Monte (Coahuiltecan-Abasolo) midden into which
Brownsville culture burials were intruded. The evidence
supports MacNeish’s statement that in the Lower Rio
Grande Valley some sites show Brownsville materials overlying Abasolo materials.~2 However, it should be pointed
out that the present scanty information from the Ayala site
needs to be confirmed by controlled excavation. Preliminary measurements of skulls from the Ayala site indicate
that the Brownsville population was long-headed.
Bibliography
Anderson, A. E.
1932. Artifacts of the Rio Grande delta region. Bulletin
the Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
17 Idem.
18 Hughes, 1947, :Plate 5, p.
19 ]~facNetsh, 1947, pp, 6-7. Mason (1935, pp. 34, 37) mentions Brownsville
burials which contain Hua~teca pottery and shell beads,
20 1Pfacl~eish, 1947, D. 2.
21 Sayles, 1935, Table 5, p. 102.
22 ~acNeish, 1947, p. 7.

72

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

Campbell, T. N.
1948. The pocket gopher at the Johnson site: a correction.
Bulletin ol the Texas Archeological and Pateontoloffical Society, Vol. 19, p. 179.
Davis, William R.
1940. Distribution and variation of pocket gophers (Genus
Geomys) in the southwestern United States. Texa~
Agricultural Experiment Station, Bulletin No. 490.
Hughes, Jack T.
1947. An archaeological reconnaissance in Tamaulipas,
Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 3339.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947. The cultural affi~ations and chronological position
of the Clear Fork Focus. American Antiquity, Volo
13, No. 2, pp. 97-109.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1947. A preliminary report on coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 1-15.
Mason, J. Alden
1935. The place of Texas in pre-Columbian relationships
between the United States and Mexico. Bulletin o~
t.he Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 7, pp. 29-46.
Mullerried, Federico I~ G.
1934. Sobre artefactos de piedra en la porcion oriental del
estado de Coahuila. Anales det Museo Nacional de
Arqueologia, Historia, y Etnogra~ia, Quinta Epoca,
Tomo I, pp. 205-219. Mexico.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1938. The Clear Fork culture complex. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological. Society~
Vol. 10, pp. 193-207.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. An archaeological survey of Texas. Medallion Pa-.
pets, No. 17, Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
September, 1948

