Texas Archeolog~cal Society

378

COASTAL POTTERY TYPES
GOOSE CREEK PLAIN
(Plate 71)
PASTE
Method of manufacture: Coiled.
Temper: Sand or sand combined with clay-grit; rarely, pulverized bone.
Texture: Fine to coarse, depending on size of either sand or
clay-grit particles. Sandiest sherds feel like sandstone,
particles loose on surface; in others the sand grains are
imbedded in clay.
Color: Gray, brown, and gray-brown, mainly in dark shades
ranging to nearly black; also reddish-brown, buff, tan,
orange-brown, yellow. Much fire-mottling, so that several
shades may occur on same vessel. Cores dark gray and
brown to black.
Surface finish: Poorly smoothed and uneven both inside and
outside, possibly indicating paddle-and-anvil method of
finishing, at least in some cases. In others, marks of scraping and smoothing tools show on surfaces. Occasionally,
interior deeply striated with parallel lines (I) or grid of
crossed lines (H), possibly produced by smoothing interior with coarse grass.
FOI~M
Wall thickness: Range 3 to 10 mm., average about 5 mm.
Lip: Usually a rather sharp edge, but may be flat and flush
with rim or rounded and turned outward slightly
Base: Characterized by a round, thick knob to which vessel
wall was attached, and which projected downward to form
a conical bottom (A). The edges of these knobs, and
sherds broken from them, show coiling technique was
used. Flat or slightly convex bases also known.
Vessel shape and size: General absence of complete vessels,
but largest sherds suggest three forms: (1) deep bowls
with more or less hemispherical bodies; (2) cylindrical
vessels; (3) vessels essentially cylindrical but curving
inward gently between the middle and mouth (Wheat,
1953, Plate 31). The conical, knobbed base may occur on
all three forms, but this is uncertain. The bowls range to
45 cm. in diameter, the cylindrical vessels to 25 cm. or
more in height. Drilled holes sometimes appear just below the lip and may have been for suspension; others
appear in pairs on either side of a crack (B, D) and must
have been used to repair cracked vessels with cords or
thongs.

DECORATION
Lip notching fairly common, as short incisions running at right
angles or diagonally along outer edge, or in diagonals and
crossed diagonals on top of flattened lip. A red wash was

PLATE 71

Texas Archeological Society

380

applied to the exterior in rare cases; in others, the firing
produced a rather bright red.
CULTURAL AFF ~I~LIATIONS
A Galveston Bay Focus type, the undecorated counterpart of
Goose Creek Incised. Both types share occasional striation
of the interior with the Rockport types (Plates 73) of the
central Gulf Coast area in Texas. There appears to be no
specific relationship to the Caddoan ceramic traditions farther inland; such traits as are shared with Caddoan wares
(clay-grit temper, occasional red film) are of more general distribution in the Southeast United States than these
complexes.

DISTRI]3UTION
All around Galveston Bay as well as some distance inland and
westward along coast; extent into Louisiana has not been
investigated.
ESTIMATED AGE
Pre-European, but otherwise difficult to determine. Wheat
(1953, Plate 33, K) illustrates a trade sherd of type TcheSuncte Stamped from Louisiana in an excavated site in the
Addicks Reservoir basin west of Houston; if this dates the
Goose ~reek pottery types, they may have been in existence as early as 500 A. D. The conical bottoms are remindful of certain Woodland potteries of the Eastern
United States which could date before the time of Christ.
On the other hand, this ware may be a survival into late
pre-Columbian times, made by the Attakapan Indian
groups who inhabited this part of Texas.
REFERENCES
Wheat, 1953, pp. 184-189, Figs. 19-21 and Plate 31.

GOOSE CREEK INCISED
(~Plate 72)
PASTE, FORM
See Goose Creek Plain.
DECORATION
Treatment: Incising, punctating.
Designs: In all known cases, decoration is confined to rim zone.
Most common design consists of from one to six parallel
horizontal lines just below lip, beneath which a single row
of punctates occurs occasionally (F, H, I, K, R, S). Pendant triangles filled with diagonal lines or punctates may
also occur,below the bottom line (B, E, G, 3", M, N). Other
elements include diagonal ladders (A), ticking on border
lines (~), crossed diagonals (,D, P), ticked diagonals between upper and lower border lines (L), and diamonds or

PLATE 72

Texas Archeological Soc. iet]t

382

squares filled with cross-hatching (0, T). The widely
spaced vertical lines on a vessel body (Q) probably represent an intrusive element. The lines and punctates are,
in general, quite finely executed.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A Galveston Bay Focus type (see Goose Creek Plain for further remarks). The use of simple horizontal lines encircling the vessel rim, sometimes with a row of punctates
below the bottom line, is found in the types Coles Creek
Incised and Hardy Incised in central and eastern Louisiana.
For this reason, Goose Creek Incised (and Goose Creek
Plain) may have existed contemporaneously with the Troyville, Coles Creek, and Plaquemine periods of the lower
Mississipp.i Valley, although the Galveston Bay pottery is
very unhke the latter in most features.
DISTRIBUTION, ESTIMATED AGE
Same as Goose Creek Plain.
REFERENCES
Wheat, 1953, p. 190, Figs. 19-21 and Plates 32, 33.

ROCKPORT BLACK-ON-GRAY
(Plate 73)
PASTE
Method of manufacture: Probably coiled.
Temper: Most sherds have a fine sandy appearance with no
visible added tempering material.
Texture: Generally fine, compact, homogeneous; hard, does
not crumble or break easily.
Color: Predominantly dark gray and brown; light gray, buff,
reddish-brown, yellowish-brown also occur. Cores dark
brown to black. Areas of soot may darken parts of surface. Some fire-mottling.
Surface finish:
Poorly smoothed, uneven, to fairly well
smoothed. Interiors sometimes deeply striated (F’, K, P),
perhaps in scraping with coarse grass or twigs.
FORM
Wall thickness: Extreme range 1.5 to 7 mm., 2 to 4 mm. being
common near Gulf shores while farther inland the walls
are thicker.
Lip: Rounded or flat, often notched or crenelated (Potter,
1930, Plates 7, Nos. 5-10 and 9, No. 17).
Base: Little data; some convex, others possibly conical.
Vessel shape and size: Potter (1930, Plates 8, 9) illustrates
bottle necks, hemispherical bowl, and gourd-like ollas;
probably similar bowls are most common shape. Plate 73.
D, S are rim sherds from wide-mouthed j.ars; J is bottle
neck; C, N, R, T are bowl rims (N, R, interior views; C, T,

~LATE 73

Texas Archeological Society

384

exterior). Handles very rare on coast, more common farther inland. Holes appear, either for suspension or for repairing cracks.
DECORATION
Treatment: Painting with asphaltum; occasional punctating;
rarely, red wash.
Designs: Narrow squiggles or bands (A, B, E, J, T), usually
running vertically on bowl rims and bottle spouts, sometimes alternated with vertical rows of punctates (Potter,
1930, Plate 8, Nos. 11-15). Also broader meandering or
zigzag bands (C, D, F, G, L, M) and random streaks (~I-I,
R); large dots (V, W) which may be arranged in vertical
rows around upper parts of ollas (Potter, 1930, Plate 9, No.
16). A narrow band may cover lip, extending down sides a
short distance (S), or a wide band may encircle vessel on
inside (N) or outside of rim. Some interiors are almost
covered with asphaltum, probably to waterproof them (U).
Other smears lie alongside of and partly over broken edges
(I, Q), indicating attempts to waterproof cracked vessets.
In rare cases, a red wash covered at least part of the exterior surface before the asphaltum lines were applied, giving a polychrome effect (F, L).
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A Rockport Focus type, closely linked with Rockport Plain and
Rockport Incised, the three types constituting a ware which
contrasts strongly with all other wares in Texas. As yet,
the origin of this ware has not been traced to any particular
source in other regions--that is, to other culture complexes in the Southeast or Southwest United States, or
Middle America. The deeply striated interiors of some
vessels are quite like those of Goose Creek Plain and Goose
Creek Incised (,Plate 71, H, I), but in other respects these
types are quite unlike.
DISTRIBUTION
Central portion of Texas Gulf Coast, particularly around Batfin, Corpus Christi, Aransas, Copano, San Antonio, and
Matagorda Bays, and extending inland as far as Goliad,
where two missions and a presidio were established in the
middle 18th century.
ESTIMATED AGE
From an unknown date prior to 1400.,A. D. until at least as late
as 1750, perhaps after 1800. At Mission Espiritu Santo, established in 1749 at Goliad, Texas, there are not only
sherds of this type which must have been carried inland
from the coastal bays, but a thicker pottery made at the
mission and decorated with asphaltum in exactly the same
manner as on the coast. The ware also agrees closely with
pottery made by the Karankawa in the 19~h century, as
described by Gatschet. Probably several coastal tribes,
such as Mariames, Copano, Cojane, etc., made this pottery
as well as the so-called "Karankawa".
REFI~I~EI~CES
Potter, 1930 (describes techniques and illustrates designs under "Class III"); Martin, 1931; Campbell, 1947.

Texas Archeological Society

385

ROCKPORT PLAIN
PASTE, FORM
Same as Rockport Black-on-Gray. The shell temper described
by Potter (1930) for his "Classes I and II" is really pulverized bone, so far as the authors have been able to determine; angular chunks of ~bone appear scattered in some
sherds, but it is neither common nor evenly distributed in
individual sherds.
DECORATION
Aside from some notched and crenelated lips, the vessels are
plain. The type is based only on rim sherds large enough
to indicate that entire vessels were undecorated; the body
sherds alone could not be distinguished from the undecorated parts of Rockport-Black-on-Gray and Rockpor~
cised vessels.
CULTUrRAL AFFILIATIONS
A Rockport Focus type, somewhat si_m,ilar to Goose Creek
Plain of Galveston Bay Focus (Plate ~1), but thinner, with
much finer and more compact paste, harder (with sharper
edges where broken), and vessel forms on the whole probably quite distinct.
DISTRIBUTION, ESTIMATED AGE, REFERENCES
Same as Rockport Black-on-gray.

ROCKPORT IN.CISED
PASTE, FORM
Essentially the same as Rockport Black-on-gray but somewhat
thicker. For remark on "shell temper" reported by Potter, see Rockport Plain.
DECORATION
Treatment: Incising.
Designs: Simple geometric elements in narrow zone around
rim: horizontal or diagonal lines, crossed lines, triangles,
etc. (examples in Potter, 1930, Plate 7, Nos. 1-4). They compare with those of Goose Creek Incised (present Plate 72)
except that punctates were seldom, if ever, used.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A Rockport Focus type, closely allied to Rockport Black-ongray and Rockport Plain, but much less common than
either of them. Undecorated body sherds cannot be distinguished from those of the other two types in the present
state of analysis. Detailed comparisons have not ,been made
between the design elements of Rockport Incised and Goose
Creek Inc~sed but it appears likely that those of the former
were derived from the latter by a diffusion of ideas along
the coastal plain; neither has any close relative elsewhere,
so far as known.
DISTRIBUTION, ESTIMATED AGE, REFERENCES
Same as Rockport Black-on-gray.

