The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas
and Northern Mexico
Solveig A. Turpin

ABSTRACT
This paper focuses on major behavioral trends and changes in the prehistoric and historic archeological
record of the Lower Pecos River region of Texas and northern Mexico. Of particular importance is the long record
of hunter-gatherer adaptations in the region, marked by spectacular prehistoric rock art styles and a commonality
in material culture dominated by well-preserved wood and plant artifacts from the dry rock shelters.

INTRODUCTION
The Lower Pecos region, the smallest of the
defined cultural regions in Texas, encompasses an
elliptical area that centers on the mouth of the
Pecos River and extends perhaps 150 km north and
south of the Rio Grande, from the vicinity of modern-day Sheffield to the Valle de la Babia in
Coahuila, Mexico (Figure 1). The east-west axis
roughly follows the Rio Grande from Del RioCiudad Acuna to beyond the historically famous
hamlet of Langtry.
Traditionally, the geographical boundaries of
the region have been defined by the extent of the
most distinctive of four prehistoric rock art styles,
the Pecos River style, and by a commonality in
material culture recovered from dry rock shelters,
the latter partly a product of preservation. The concept of a Lower Pecos cultural area is in fact a
construct based on the florescence of regionally
specific characteristics, such as the distinctive Pecos
River style pictographs and projectile points that
bear local names--Langtry, Val Verde, and
Pandale--between 5000 and 3000 years ago, during the Middle Archaic period. Before and after the
Middle Archaic, the Lower Pecos shares many of
its traits with adjacent regions, apparently affected
by cultural influences radiating from Texas and
northern Mexico. Thus, the trajectory of Lower
Pecos cultura! adaptations can be visualized as an
ellipse whose apogee is the Middle Archaic period.
Typically, hunter-gatherer adaptations are
strongly correlated to environmental factors, and
the Lower Pecos is no exception. The climatic se-

quence has been reconstructed from fauna (Dibble
and Lorrain 1968; Lundelius 1984); pollen (Bryant
1966, 1969; Story and Bryant 1966; Bryant and
Shafer 1977); macroflora (Dering 1979); coprolites
(Williams Dean 1978; Stock 1983); flood sequences
(Patton and Dibble 1982); and ethnohistory (Turpin
1987a). The cool mesic Late Pleistocene savanna,
capable of supporting herds of now-extinct
megafauna, succumbed to increasing aridity some
9000 years ago. Semi-desert conditions prevailed,
reaching their peak about 5000 years ago and relaxing around 3000 B.P. during a short but influential
mesic interlude. A return to aridity was again broken late in prehistory or early history, until the
fragile balance was tipped by the resurgence of the
drying trend, and the introduction of domestic herd
animals in the 1880s.
Topographically, the Lower Pecos region is
flat to rolling rangeland dissected by entrenching
tributaries to the three major rivers--the Devils, the
Pecos, and the Rio Grande, their confluences now
inundated by Amistad Reservoir. Although all were
(and are) important sources of water, and by
extension faunal and floral resources, the three
differ in potability. The saline Pecos, originally
called the Salado, the muddy Rio Grande, and the
clear, spring-fed Devils, were undoubtedly the
nucleus of prehistoric occupation but springs,
seeps, and tinajas (potholes) permitted exploitation
of upland and tributary resources that apparently
waxed and waned in intensity depending upon
climatic conditions. The poorly known southern
half of the Lower Pecos region, between the Rio
Grande and the Sierra del Carmen, is deficient in

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

542

Texas Archeological Society

0

10

50 km

Ozona ~
Lower Pecos
Cultural

Del Rio

Ciudad

Negras~

,Eagle

Pass

® Nueva Rosita
uiz ~

Sabinas

Figure 1. Map of the Lower Pecos cultural area with its southern limits undefined.

permanent water sources, forcing its inhabitants to
develop a different adaptive strategy.
Geologic factors that influenced prehistoric
occupation include the numerous rock shelters
hollowed from the sheer limestone cliffs (Figure
2), the copious quantities of lithic raw material
available as gravels or eroding chert beds, and the
strictures imposed on accessibility between upland
and riverine resources. The prehistoric settlement
pattern reflects the high incidence of rock shelters
on the Pecos River and the Rio Grande, and their
lesser presence on the Devils River where huge
open camps are found at the mouths of every
tributary. Erosion, exacerbated by over-grazing and
modern droughts, has reduced the soil cover in
historic times; the end result is evident in the
siltation of Amistad Reservoir. The modern flora

and fauna are similarly a
product of livestock husbandry, but the vegetational
communities retain the basic
components utilized during
much of prehistory.
Archeotogical research
in the Lower Pecos region
can be divided into three
eras: the antiquarian search
for museum specimens that
prevailed in the 1930s; the
salvage program in anticipation of the construction of
Amistad Reservoir (then
Diablo Reservoir) between
1958 and 1969; and the current resurgence of individual and privately-funded
research. The last 15 years
have seen rock shelter excavations and broad area
surveys, but the most recent
trend is a phenomena! interest in the diverse body of
Native American rock art
preserved in the dry shelters and overhangs. The
published and unpublished
information generated by 60
years of research is so abundant that the reader is often
directed to summary articles
rather than primary sources,

a lamentable practice that often leads to bibliographic drift, but one mandated by the number of
citable resources.
Over 275 radiocarbon dates contribute to one
of the most precise regional chronologies in Texas
(Table 1), although several nomenclatures have
been proposed (see Turpin 1991a). The one used
to guide this overview was first proposed by Dibble
(in Prewitt 1983) and later refined as more assays
were generated. The traditional quadrapartite
division into Paleoindian, Archaic, Late
Prehistoric, and Historic periods is expanded into
11 subperiods (including one phase and one
probable horizon) for the prehistoric era, leaving
the historic period intact.
The culture history of the Lower Pecos is a
microcosm of hunting and gathering societies

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

543

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD, AURORA
SUBPERIOD, PRE-12000 B.P.
The first inhabitants of the Lower Pecos
region apparently arrived on the banks of
the Rio Grande sometime between 12,000
and 14,000 years ago, bearing a fully developed cultural system that centered on the
procurement of big game. Scattered and
burned horse, camel, bison, and bear bones
in the small site of Cueva Quebrada are the
first radiocarbon-dated evidence of
Paleoindian occupation of the region
(Lundelius 1984). Bone beds of equivalent
age at Bonfire Shelter (Figure 3) undoubtedly represent the intermittent slaughter and
butchering of elephant, camel, horse, and

Figure 2. A typical rock shelter overlooking the Rio Grande
(41VV656).

throughout the world, alternating between an
emphasis on a hunting economy to one dominated by gathering. The stamp of arid lands
adaptation is seen in the material culture, technology, and the settlement patterns, which are
aspects of prehistoric lifeways most influenced
by environment and economics. The excellent
preservation of normally perishable items, and
the diverse and elaborate body of art, both mural and mobiliary, takes us beyond the mundane
into the political, social, and religious spheres
of hunter and gatherer lifeways.
Two competing models of prehistoric
adaptation have been generated from two
different perspectives on the material record.
One school postulates a static Archaic continuum that endured for 9000 years (Kirkland
and Newcomb 1967; Shafer 1976, 1981, 1986;
Shafer and Bryant 1977); my perceptions are
one of both abrupt and gradual changes within
the parameters of hunter and gatherer society
(Turpin 1990a). These diametrically opposed
viewpoints are in part a function of research
focus. The first is derived from the natural
environment, and such material classes as food,
fiber, coprolites, and stone tools, and can be
theoretically described as an ecological,
functional, or adaptive model. The latter
perspective is conditioned by an emphasis on
less tangible items and processes, including rock
art, mortuary customs, and settlement patterns.

Table 1. Periods in the Chronology
of the Lower Pecos Region
Radiocarbon
Period

Subperiod

Paleoindian

< 12,000-9,800
Aurora

14,500-11,900

Bonfire

10,700-9,800

Late Paleoindian

9,400-9,000
Oriente

Early Archaic

9,4OO-8,80O
9,000-6,000

Viejo
Middle Archaic

8,900-5,500
6,000-3,000

Eagle Nest

5,500-4,1 O0

San Felipe

4,100-3,200

Late Archaic

3,000-1,000
Cibola

3,150-2,300

Flanders

2,300-?

Blue Hills

2,300-1,300

Late Prehistoric

Historic

Years B.P.

1,000-350
Flecha

1,320-450

Infierno

450-250
350-0

544

Texas Archeological Society
zational skills consistent with coordinated
group procurement strategies. More importantly, the big game hunting strategies and the
characteristic projectile point styles incorporate the Lower Pecos into the Paleoindian
sphere as it was expressed across North
America just prior to the extinction of many of
these species.

LATE PALEOINDIAN PERIOD,
ORIENTE SUBPERIOD
(9400 TO 8800 B.P.)
Although commonly called the Late
Paleoindian period because of continuities in
lithic technology, the Oriente period sees the
Figure 3. Excavation in the lowest bone beds at Bonfire
first tentative beginnings of the Archaic adapShelter (41VV218).
tation that was to become the hallmark of the
Lower Pecos region. Johnson (1964) first noticed the mixture of Archaic and Paleoindian
cultural traits at Devils Mouth where the economy
bison, but the absence of stone tools weakens the
was not noticeably oriented towards big game huntcase (Bement 1986; Dibble and Lorrain 1968). Although the perspective afforded by these two sites
ing. Broad resource procurement was evidenced at
Baker Cave in deposits of this age (Hester 1983),
is perforce limited, and perhaps biased, both are
compatible with the widely held concept of
and the fiber industry was apparently well underway (Andrews and Adovasio 1980), at least in northPaleoindians as big game hunters exploiting the
ern Mexico. These technological and economic
specialized environment of the terminal Pleistocene.
shifts are appropriate responses to the onset of the
long drying trend that Bryant (1966) called the
Stockton Stage.
PALEOINDIAN PERIOD, BONFIRE
SUBPERIOD (10,700 TO 9800 B.P.)
More definitive is the massive accumulation
of now-extinct bison associated with Folsom and
Plainview dart points in Bone Bed 2 at Bonfire
Shelter (Dibble and Lorrain t968). On at least three
occasions, herds totalling an estimated 120 animals
were driven over the cliff above the shelter, tumbling into the interior where they were butchered
and processed. Radiocarbon dates confirm an age
range centering on 10,000 B.P., concurrent with a
mesic period that Bryant (1966) called the Medina
stage. The flood sequence at Arenosa Shelter, near
the mouth of the Pecos River, shows a series of
fine-grained sedimentary layers indicative of a humid interlude predating 9500 B.P. (Patton and
Dibble 1982).
Bone Bed 2 at Bonfire Shelter is the oldest
known example of the jump technique of killing
herd animals, and this presumably implies organi-

EARLY ARCHAIC PERIOD, VIEJO
SUBPERIOD (8900 TO 5500 B.P.)
The Early Archaic period, or Viejo subperiod,
as currently defined, is far too long and amorphous
to be considered a meaningful cultural unit. Spanning some 3400 years, the period sees the entrenchment of many of the traits that sum to the Archaic
tradition that defines the Lower Pecos region. The
Viejo subperiod occupies the latter half of Bryant’s
(1966) Stockton Stage, the 5000-year long trend to
aridity that presumably conditioned the adaptive
strategies of Lower Pecos people. Localized phenomena, observed at Black Cave (Turpin 1982) and
Seminole Sink (Turpin 1988), suggest intermittent
periods of erosional intensity sometime prior to
6800 B.P., perhaps connected to the onset of the
drying trend (Turpin 1991a:28).

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

During the Viejo subperiod, rock shelter habitation becomes the norm with sites such as Hinds
Cave yielding evidence of segmented space; that is,
the rock shelter has activity areas defined by interior burned rock middens, prickly pear floors, latrines, and perishable items (Lord 1984). Dietary
information gained from coprolite analysis implies
an extremely successful adaptation to an increasingly arid environment (Williams Dean 1978), presumably through a reliance on desert succulents.
Brown (1991:118) has summarized the evidence
for the introduction of sotol and agave (likely
lecheguilla) into rock shelter deposits during the
Early Archaic period.
These same plants are the basis of the Lower
Pecos fiber industry and the source of raw materials for clothing, matting, basketry, sandals, and
twine (Andrews and Adovasio 1980; McGregor
1992; Schuetz 1956, 1963). Commonalities with
the northern Mexican fiber assemblages, and continuity over time, led Adovasio (Andrews and
Adovasio 1980) to postulate a Coahuilan origin or
affiliation.
The projectile points considered characteristic
of this subperiod, although they bear localized
names such as Baker and Bandy, are widespread
throughout Central Texas where they are known as
Uvalde and Martindale (Turner and Hester 1993).
A number of other generic projectile point types,
called by descriptive terms such as Early Barbed,
Early Stemmed, and Early Corner-Notched, remain
ambiguously defined.
The one mortuary site of this age that has been
excavated (Turpin 1988) has cultural analogs in
Coahuila and the karst regions of Texas. A skeletal
population of 21 individuals recovered from a
vertical shaft cave, Seminole Sink, suggested that
the people experienced only temporary, perhaps
seasonal, dietary stress and little trauma (Marks et
al. 1988). However, dental pathologies were
common and were accompanied by early tooth loss
that probably resulted from a high intake of sugar
and carbohydrates.
The mixture of young and old, male and female, in this one site, hints at an egalitarian society
where all ages and both genders were accorded the
same treatment after death. The broad distribution
of this mortuary practice can be attributed to both
the physical convenience afforded by a natural tomb,
and the psychological value of returning the dead
to the earth (Turpin 1988).

545

Little else is known about the social structure
and world view of these Early Archaic people. Two
forms of portable art that characterize the Archaic
period as a whole may have their beginnings at this
time: painted pebbles and unbaked or poorly fired
clay figurines. Neither form of art is well-dated, but
the painted pebbles have been stylistically sequenced and placed within an Archaic context that
spans all the subdivisions (Parsons 1986; see also
Mock 1987). These flat, smooth river rocks are
systematically decorated with a limited number of
motifs that often portray human attributes (Parsons
1986; Mock 1987). In fact, the pebble often reflects
the organization of the human body with eyes in
the upper, narrower end, and identifiable genitalia,
usually female, in the lower, wider end. It has been
suggested that the pebble served as a substitute for
real people in curing and fertility rites or as personal, as opposed to public, ritual paraphenalia.
Clay figurines are less common but they too
are miniature humans, with pronounced female
sexual characteristics but headless (Shafer 1975;
Chandler et al. 1994). They are even more poorly
dated than the painted pebbles, in part due to their
rarity and in part due to poor provenience. They are
only included here because they, like the painted
pebbles, are Archaic phenomena of ambiguous age.

THE MIDDLE ARCHAIC PERIOD,
EAGLE NEST SUBPERIOD
(5500 TO 4100 B.P.)
About 5500 B.P., the beginnings of an insularity that reaches its peak in the subsequent San Felipe
subperiod are signalled by the appearance of
Pandale projectile points, a distinctly beveled style
with a limited regional distribution. This shift in
lithic technology coincided with the culmination of
Bryant’s (1966) Stockton Stage in an extremely
hot, dry interlude he called the Ozona Erosional
after disconformities in strata at Arenosa Shelter
(Dibble 1967) and the Devils Mouth site (Johnson
1964). At about the same time, Black Cave suffered another massive erosional event that flushed
the deposits, exposing Pleistocene-age eboulis
(Turpin 1982).
At Baker Cave, Brown (1991:123) observed a
shift to the labor-intensive processing of lecheguilla,
sotol, and yucca around 5000 B.P., resulting in

546

Texas Archeological Society

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico
what he called an economy of scale. Brown
(1991:123) suggests that considerable energy was
invested in food production as a least-risk response
to environmental deterioration. Implied are increased diet breadth, group mobility, and community size.

MIDDLE ARCHAIC PERIOD, SAN
FELIPE SUBPERIOD
(4100 TO 3200 B.P.)

547

and their redundancy evidences their role in ritual
performances.
Regionalization and intensified ritu!l activity
are an unlikely correlate to increased flooding of
the Pecos River (Patton and Dibble 1982), an environmental phenomenon probably related to the
denudation of the landscape during this hot, dry,
climatic interval (Figure 5). Component counts
(Marmaduke 1978) and relative frequencies of projectile point styles (Turpin 1990b) indicate two shifts
in the settlement pattern: increases in population
density along the rivers and in the number of upland sites presumably devoted to exploitation of
food resources.
Such a conjunction of events can parsimoniously be explained as a result of people adapting
their economic and social strategies to desertification of the natural environment. As upland water
sources dwindled, the general population concentrated along the three major rivers, occupying rock
shelters and open camps where their domestic debris accumulated rapidly. Desert succulents, the
mainstay of the diet, may well have increased at the
expense of grasses and trees, but the manner in
which they were obtained changed from band foraging to task-oriented collecting. Small groups
spread out across the landscape, gathering foodstuffs and returning them to the home base, thus
proliferating upland work stations and temporary
camps. The increase in population density, but not
numbers of people, presented social challenges that

Signs of increasing regionalization during the
San Felipe subperiod include the further refinement
of local projectile point styles, such as Langtry, Val
Verde, and Arenosa dart points, and the emergence
of the first and most complex of four prehistoric
pictograph styles, the Pecos River style (Figure 4).
These monumental polychrome pictographs rank
among the oldest, yet most elaborate, religious art
forms in the New World (Kirkland and Newcomb
1967; Turpin 1994a, 1994b). The central characters are shamans, the religious practicioners of
hunting and gathering societies throughout the
world. Anthropomorphic figures with animal characteristics such as feathers, wings, claws, fur, and
horns are equipped with atlatls, darts, fending
sticks, and enigmatic pouches that hang from their
elbows. The mountain lion, colloquially called panther, figures prominently in the Pecos River style
bestiary, which also includes deer, birds, fish, and
fantastic insects.
At least three primary tenets
of shamanism are expressed in the
art: the power of magical flight
(Turpin 1994a); the ability to assume the form of an animal familiar (Turpin 1994b); and the
concept of parallel supernatural
and natural worlds accessible
through a central axis (Turpin
1994a) or holes in the earth
(Turpin 1992a, 1992b). The size,
complexity, and accessibility of
the paintings indicate they were
produced by a group effort for
public consumption; their consistency in theme and style demonstrates that a unified belief system
Figure 5. Intermittent flooding of the Pecos River left a detailed stratigraphic
prevailed over the entire Lower
record at Arenosa Shelter (41VV99), excavated prior to Amistad Dam
Pecos area as currently defined;
closure.

548

Texas Archeological Society

were met by the institution of ritual communication
that was manifested in the rock art.

LATE ARCHAIC,
CIBOLA SUBPERIOD
(3150 TO 2300 B.P.)

bearing their characteristic arms. Ethnographic
sources of much later date describe coordinated
winter bison hunts near the mouth of the Pecos and
along the Devils River, so perhaps the in-migrations of the Late Archaic were seasonally scheduled events as well.
Based on the depiction of bison hunts and
atlatls in the miniature Red Linear pictographs, I
have tentatively correlated the paintings to the Late
Archaic intrusion of the bison hunters (Turpin
1984, 1990c). Using a much smaller sample of pictographs, Newcomb (Kirkland and Newcomb
1967) also attributed them to the Archaic period,
although Gebhard (1965) thought they were more
recent (ca. A.D. 900 to A.D. 1400) and perhaps related to Kokopelli, the hump-backed flute player of
the American Southwest. The one experimental radiocarbon assay, run on samples from one of the
presumed bison painted at Cueva Quebrada, produced a date of 1280 B.P. (Ilger et al. 1994), placing it within the closing centuries of the Late

The beginning of the Late Archaic period, aptly
named the Cibola subperiod, is signalled by abrupt
economic, technological, and site distribution
changes that in turn coincide with an apparent break
in the climatic trend toward aridity that transpired
some 3000 years ago. The rapid spread of cultural
traits that demonstrate spatial continuities meets
Willey and Phillips’ (1958) definition of a horizon.
In Bryant’s (1966) original climatic reconstruction,
this interlude was called the Frio Interval to recognize the resurgence of pollen types typical of cooler,
more mesic conditions. The faunal evidence from
Bonfire Shelter is incontrovertible. The uppermost
bone bed produced the estimated remains of approximately 800 modern bison, accompanied by broad-bladed dart
points usually considered to be Central
Texas types, and securely radiocarbondated to around 2600 years ago (Dibble
and Lorrain 1968). Bison bones have
also been recovered in lesser amounts
at Eagle Cave, Castle Canyon, Arenosa
Shelter, and Skyline Shelter in deposits
of approximately the same age. A tentative shift in settlement patterning is suggested by the distribution of characteristic projectile point styles such as
Marshall, Castroville, and Montell.
Relative percentages decrease in large
stratified rock shelters and increase at
the Devils Mouth site, an open terrace
camp, a trend that is consistent with expectations for an economic strategy that
centered on mobile food sources.
Dibble (Dibble and Lorrain 1968)
provided both environmental and culFigure 6. Forrest Kirkland’s rendition of the Red Linear rock art type
tural explanations for the evidence from
site (41VV201) in Seminole Canyon State Historical Park. Processions
Bonfire Shelter. In his model, cooler,
of headressed warriors are a key characteristic of this style. The group
wetter climatic conditions permitted the
at lower right apparently depicts a ritual connected with childbirth,
grasslands of the Great Plains to recoloanother common Red Linear rock art theme. Frost wedging has
nize the Lower Pecos, bringing with
seriously damaged this pane!, eliminating whole figures and their
them large herds of migratory game
context. Figures average less than 10 cm tall (reproduced courtesy of
the Texas Memorial Museum, University of Texas at Austin).
animals and their attendant hunters

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

Archaic period but well beyond the end of the
Cibola subperiod.
Other favored themes in this style are processions of headdressed warriors sometimes apparently
involved in conflict with other males (Figure 6),
and deer hunting scenes that incorporate geometric
designs that may imply traps or nets. Several secluded sites are devoted to scenes of sexual intercourse, pregnancy, and birth, perhaps hinting that
the paintings were part of puberty rites that prepared the initiates for adult life. The Red Linear
artists were capable of endowing these tiny crude
stick figures with animation and vivacity not found
in any of the other Lower Pecos pictograph styles.
This artistic skill and the consistency in theme,
style, and minor details, displayed from the Devils
River to the Rio Grande west of the Pecos, suggest
that the conventions were developed in another medium, such as hide painting, and brought into the
Lower Pecos in fully developed form. Whether that
introduction coincided with the demonstrated movement of people off the Plains in Cibolo times remains hypothetical.
Although little research attention has been devoted to the issue, the changes in resource distribution and the influx of new people must have had a
fragmenting effect on the resident population
whether they coexisted, migrated, or were absorbed.
When the grasslands retreated, the vacuum was
filled by desert-adapted people, apparently with affiliations to northern Mexican groups.

THE LATE ARCHAIC PERIOD,
FLANDERS SUBPERIOD
(ca. 2300 B.P.)
The Flanders subperiod of the Late Archaic is
the most elusive time period in the regional chronology. The hallmark of the period, the Shumla
dart point style, has antecedents in Nuevo Leon and
Coahuila where it is found in deposits dating from
3100 to 1850 years ago, reaching its peak popularity about 2300 B.P. (Turpin 1991a). The few dates
available from rock shelter excavations north of the
Rio Grande are ambiguous. Bryant (1966) recognized a return to aridity that he called the Juno
Interval, so presumably the Flanders subperiod
people were practicioners of the ancient exploitation strategies of Early and Middle Archaic development. There can be little doubt that people using

549

Shumla dart points left a substantial material record
in many sites, stratigraphically above the Cibola
deposits, but the most prolific sites have been the
most poorly excavated. A reasonable hypothesis is
that northern Mexican people were able to expand
into the Lower Pecos once environmental conditions stabilized to their liking. Little more can be
said until excavations concentrate on deposits of
this age.

LATE ARCHAIC PERIOD,
BLUE HILLS SUBPERIOD
(2300 TO 1300 B.P.)
Compared to the regional insularity of the
Middle Archaic period and the distinctive spread of
the Cibola horizon, the Blue Hills period is diffuse.
The characteristic projectile points, primarily Ensor
and Frio, are shared across broad expanses of Texas
(see Prewitt, this volume). The fiber industry is
somewhat elaborated by the appearance of more
ornate painted mats as part of a mortuary complex
that is dominated by bundled burials. Although some
evidence suggests that bundled burials are a generalized Archaic trait, most of the datable examples
are of Blue Hills age (Turpin et al. 1986). Flexed
corpses, sometimes lashed into a fetal position, were
wrapped in mats, and tied into a compact package
that was then interred in dry rock shelter deposits.
Ornaments and items of clothing are sometimes
preserved and, on rare occasions, tissue, skin, hair,
and flesh are naturally mummified (Huebner 1995).
Contrary to expectations voiced by a number of
anthropologists, infants were apparently accorded
special treatment, their tiny bodies wrapped in rabbit skin robes, deer skins, and mats, and placed on
grass beds, often with their broken cradle boards.
Based on a single experimental radiocarbon
date (Ilger et al. 1994), it is possible that the Red
Linear pictographs, described in a preceding section, are contemporaenous. A response to the cyclical return to aridity may be mirrored in yet another
peak in the number of components (Marmaduke
1978) and projectile point frequencies (Turpin
1990a) attributable to this period. The number of
upland sites bearing Late Archaic points coupled
with an increase in the proportionate number of
unifaces, usually considered as vegetal material processing tools, has led to speculation that there was
an escalating reliance on desert plants. A higher

550

Texas Archeological Society

recovery of fish bones and scales in some shelter
deposits suggests exploitation of previously less
important food sources, but at other sites, such as
Skyline Shelter, riverine resources were always a
significant component of the diet.
The terminal Late Archaic blended into the
Late Prehistoric period with little evidence of severe
disjunctions in the cultural trajectory. Dart points
and arrow points coexist in strata dated to the transitional centuries, perhaps in part because these same
upper deposits are generally the most disturbed.

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD,
FLECHA SUBPERIOD
(1320 TO 450 B.P.)
The Late Prehistoric period is marked by
changes in artifact types, site types, settlement patterns, exploitation strategies, rock art styles, and
mortuary customs. The temptation to credit these
innovations to an influx of a singular people is
dampened by the lack of stratified or well-dated
single component sites that might coordinate or
sequence these events.
Sometime between A.D. 600 and A.D. 900,
the bow and arrow were adopted in the Lower
Pecos region, signalling the advent of the Flecha
subperiod (Turpin 1991a:Table 1.12). Unfortunately, the upper levels of most rock shelters are
highly disturbed, so it is difficult to distinguish
components based on arrow point styles, none of
which are unique to the Lower Pecos region.
Although the Late Prehistoric people continued to take advantage of the natural shelter offered
by caves and overhangs, they apparently began
processing desert succulents in a manner that left a
distinctive feature on open sites. Ring middens-crescentic accumulations of burned rock--consistently date to the Late Prehistoric period, although
some caution is introduced by the mixture of projectile point styles on these open sites and the common sense recognition that charcoal is less likely
to survive in older features. Brown (199 t:127) suggests that pit-baking ovens were relocated, moving
from rock shelters to open sites situated near stands
of plants and firewood where a temporary surplus
could be produced.
The technological and economic changes are
accompanied by the introduction of foreign burial
customs and fully developed art styles. Although

interment in rock shelter deposits continues, the
practice of bundling may have fallen into disuse
over time (Turpin 1991a:35). Two exhumed mummies date to this period; the earlier, an adult male
buried about 1150 years ago, was accorded the
typical Archaic mortuary treatment: flexed,
wrapped in mats, and tied into a package with a
long human hair rope (Turpin et al. 1986). Analysis of the preserved intestinal contents showed that
this individual had consumed a most eclectic diet
during his last days. The more recent burial, a prepubescent child, was laid, flexed, in a rock shelter
grave outlined by sotol stalks, cushioned by a grass
and prickly pear bed, and covered with an antelope
skin robe some 600 years ago. Huebner (1995) was
able to demonstrate that the child suffered from
severe malnutrition, verging on starvation. Yet a
third rock shelter burial produced another innovation that can be relatively dated to the Late Prehistoric period: a threaded and twined bullrush mat,
rolled like a carpet, was exhumed from a grave that
contained the seated and flexed remains of two
people. A similar mat was radiocarbon dated to 570
years ago, leading McGregor (1991) to consider
this weaving technique to be a Late Prehistoric
introduction to the Lower Pecos fiber industry.
A more drastic change in mortuary customs is
evidenced by the appearance of cairn burials, piles
of rocks usually built on high promontories or
points overlooking the canyons. Only one such
cairn has been excavated (Turpin 1982); it produced two dart points and two arrow points, mirroring the overlap of the two artifact forms so often
seen in rock shelter deposits. The presumed recent
age of these features is substantiated by their codistribution with tipi rings, a house style clearly
attributable to the Infierno phase (see below).
The latest mortuary practice documented by
radiocarbon dates is cremation and disposal in a
vertical shaft cave. The incinerated remains of an
adult male were dropped down the shaft at Seminole Sink where they lay atop the talus cone for
some 400 years (Turpin 1988). Technically, this
event falls within the Infierno phase time frame,
but there is no evidence to link the two beyond age.
The case for the migration of new people into
the Lower Pecos is furthered by the appearance of
two fully-developed pictograph styles--both
shared with western and southern desert areas-and a different set of petroglyph motifs related to a
series of sites that extend northwest across the

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

Eldorado Divide. All are dated to the Late Prehistoric period by stylistic criteria; one experimental
radiocarbon date narrows the time frame of one
style, the Red Monochrome, to about A.D. 800.
The Red Monochrome style (Figure 7) consists of frontally posed, static, life-size human figures and realistic animals, such as dogs, turkeys,
catfish, deer, mountain lions, rabbits, and turtles,
painted, as the name suggests, in red pigment
(Turpin 1986a). A variation on the human figure is
nicknamed "lizard man" for the bent knees and
elbows. A most curious attribute is the common
depiction of protuberances or "buns" on the side
of the head. Single feather headdresses are common. Presumably female figures wear long skirts
but the males are often naked with pronounced
genitalia. Some are armed with bows; others are
impaled by arrows, an emphasis on conflict that
carries over into historic period pictographs that
show clear antecedents in the Red Monochrome
style (41VV205, Missionary Shelter [Turpin
[1987b, 1989:Figure 18-5]).
The two largest panels in this style line the
walls of low-lying shelters, above standing pools
of water, leading Kirkland (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967) to name it the Flooded Shelter
style. The larger inventory of smaller sites known
to date shows a clear preference for isolated, often
high, shallow overhangs with little or no cultural
debris, as though the artists were avoiding the longoccupied shelters with their ornate Pecos River
style paintings. Most of the Red Monochrome sites
are near the mouth of the Pecos River, but some
examples are found on the Devils River, as far

551

north as the mouth of the Dry Devils.
Several Red Monochrome sites, including at
least one painted in black pigment, have been defined in the Big Bend area. Lowrance (1982) attributed them to Jumano artists, citing ethnohistoric
descriptions of clothing and hairstyles that could be
artistically rendered as "buns." The Jumanos, and
their allies, the Cibolos, were placed along the Rio
Grande, from La Junta to south of modern-day Del
Rio, by seventeenth century Spanish chroniclers, so
Lowrance’s (1982) hypothesis is not without merit.
Another intrusive art style, the Bold Line
Geometrics, is less securely dated to the Late Prehistoric period because its abstract iconography
provides few temporal clues (Turpin 1986b). Design motifs are variations on straight lines and
blank spaces that are combined into nested zigzags,
herringbones, cross-hatches, and blanket patterns
(Figure 8a-b). In the latter, diamond-shaped cells
are linked, forming a spider web design that uses
blank space as a design element. Many of the geometric pictographs are associated in some way with
water, painted surrounding seeps in the shelter
walls or, in the case of Parida Cave, above interior
springs. Again, most of the sites are found near the
mouth of the Pecos River, with a few aberrant examples recorded on the Devils River and Red Bluff
Creek. The Bold Line Geometrics are most clearly
affiliated with the generic Desert Abstract styles of
northern Mexico and the American Southwest,
perhaps identifying one source of the intrusive
traits of the Lower Pecos Late Prehistoric period.
Although petroglyphs are rare in the Lower
Pecos, the largest and most famous site, Lewis

Figure 7. Forrest Kirkland’s rendition of the Red Monochrome rock art type site (41VV78), which he called the Flooded
Shelter style. Note bow and arrow, protuberances over the ears of two figures, and the realistic animals (reproduced
courtesy of the Texas Memorial Museum, University of Texas at Austin).

552

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Examples of the Bold Line Geometrics style pictographs: a, nested zigzag lines (41VV 138); b, blanket pattern
(41VV 187). No scale.

Canyon (Figure 9), also shows an iconographic
shift from curvilinear designs associated with freef!oating atlatls to abstract geometrics (Turpin
1993), dominated by what Newcomb (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967) called the line-and-circle motif.
Although difficult to date, one of the later
petroglyphs appears to be an arrow point, suggesting a Flecha period age. A series of similar but
smaller petroglyph sites are found north of Lewis
Canyon, on the Eldorado Divide, but geometric
petroglyphs are also one of the most common artistic expressions in northern Mexico.

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD,
INFIERNO PHASE
(ESTIMATED 450 TO 250 B.P.)

The Infierno phase inventory consists of less
than a score of sites characterized by circles of
paired stones that were presumably pole supports
for brush or hide-covered structures (Figure 10),
and by a tool kit that is dominated by four artifact
types: small triangular stemmed arrow points,
steeply beveled end scrapers, four-beveled knives,
and plain ceramics. The type site, Infierno Camp,
contains over 100 rings; the lesser sites have as few
as one and as many as eight stone rings. In one
!ocale, a single ring sits beside eight oblong
cairns, presumably burial mounds. The
Infierno people exhibited a distinct preference for high promontories, usually overlooking springs or semi-permanent water
holes. These locations are usually reduced
to bedrock so the chances of recovering
stratified or datable materials are greatly reduced.
Only one tipi ring has been excavated
(Turpin and Bement 1989), and it produced
no materials suitable for radiocarbon dating. The site was selected because it overlooked an early Plains Indian rock art site
that presumably dated to about 1700. Among
the surface artifacts whose ages spanned the
entire spectrum of Lower Pecos prehistory
were a plainware sherd and a Guerrero arrow point, both indicative of protohistoric
Figure 9. Texas Archeological Society volunteers clearing dirt,
or early historic occupation. It is important
and recording buried petroglyphs at Lewis Canyon (41VV223).

Turpin -- The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

553

and temporally limited, and its
tool kit and site features clearly
distinguish it from generic Late
Prehistoric assemblages.

HISTORIC PERIOD
(350 B.P. TO PRESENT)
Technically, the historic
period began in the Lower
Pecos region in 1590 when
Gaspar Castafio de Sosa, then
Lt. Governor in Nuevo Le6n,
and a contingent of some 160
to 170 souls crossed the Rio
Grande, somewhere near
Ciudad Acuna, en route from
Figure 10. Excavated tipi ring at Live Oak Creek (41VV828). The diameter of
Villa Almaden (Monclova) to
the stone ring is approximately 2.5 meters.
the Pecos Pueblo (Hammond
and Rey 1966; Schroeder and
Matson 1965). Undoubtedly,
to note that not one of the Infierno phase single
however, the native people had already experienced
component sites has yielded a single Europeanthe repercussions of the Spanish movement north,
derived historic artifact.
if only through the ripple effect as indigineous northThe rare ceramic sherds collected from Infierno
ern Mexican groups migrated to avoid slavery and
phase sites are poorly fired, calcite-tempered
disease (Hackett 1926, 1931; Steck 1932). Castafio,
brownwares of uncertain origin. They most strongly
like the many Spaniards that followed, found little
resemble sherds of native pottery recorded at the
but hardship in the Lower Pecos region. ExpediApache mission of San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz,
tions sent to explore the Rio Grande as a prelude to
abandoned in 1771 (Tunnell and Newcomb 1969).
settlement and the establishment of viable trade
A similar sherd was recovered from the Sotol site
routes brought back such discouraging reports
in Crockett County from a stratum that dated to the
(Bolton 1908; Castafieda 1938, 1946; Daniel 1955;
range between 460 and 340 years ago, the only
Weddle 1968) that colonizing missions were abanradiocarbon date even remotely attributable to
doned, and forays across the river often became
Infierno phase materials.
largely military manuevers in retaliation for" raids
The Infierno people clearly came into the
on communities in Coahuila and Nueva Vizcaya
Lower Pecos region late in prehistory. Seventeenth
(Bolton 1962; Weddle 1968).
century Spanish documents describe native northThe closest the Spanish ever came to estabern Mexican people travelling en masse to the mouth
lishing a physical presence in the Lower Pecos reof the Pecos River for annual bison hunts, perhaps
gion was an abortive attempt to found a presidio,
recording a cyclical round that predates European
Sacramento, on the San Diego River, south of
contact. Ethnohistoric references to bison hunting
Ciudad Acuna, ira 1737. Prior to its completion, the
in and around the region suggest that the Lower
presidio was removed to the Santa Rosa valley,
Pecos was again part of the great sea of grass that
near modern-day Muzquiz. Returned to the San
characterized the American frontier (Tul-pin 1987a),
Diego site in 1773, the presidio, renamed Agua
reverting to semi-desert only after the introduction
Verde, lasted only seven years before the troops
of livestock ira the late t 880s.
were removed to San Fernando de Austria
The Infierno phase is the only archeological
(Zaragoza) in 1780 (Moorhead 1975:226).
unit in the Lower Pecos that meets Willey and
After their first experiences with the arid mounPhillips" (1958) criteria for phases. It is spatially
tainous reaches of northern Mexico. including the

554

Texas Archeological Society

Lower Pecos region, the Spanish movement north
bifurcated, heading east through the gateway mission of San Juan Bautista and west through La
Junta, the confluence of the Mexican Conchos River
and the Rio Grande. The vast intervening area became known as the despoblado, or unpopulated
zone (Daniel 1955), despite the fact that it sheltered
refugee and renegade native populations for three
centuries. Spanish government and military reports
provide an inventory of native people (Bolton 1908;
Griffen 1969; Hackett 1926), and chronicle the immense changes that took place as population movements quickened and warfare intensified. In the
late seventeenth century, the Jumanos and Cibolos
are often mentioned as allies of the Spanish in the
general area of the Lower Pecos. By 1729, indigenous people and intrusive northern Mexico groups
alike were overrun by the Apaches, who were reportedly in complete control of the Rio Grande
(Weddle 1968:200). Their supremacy was shortlived, for the Comanches and their allies, the
Kiowas, came down out of the north, forcing the
Apaches into political and military limbo in the
mountains of northern Mexico. By the turn of the
century, beset by revolution and engaged in wars
on both continents, the Spanish empire was forced
to abandon its frontier, leaving its colonial population undefended.
With the coming of Anglo-American
sovereignty in the middle of the nineteenth century,
linking east and west became a priority that
depended upon the extermination of the erstwhile
Plains Indians that controlled much of the Desert
West. Mapping expeditions were followed by stage
and mail routes; trade caravans; freighters; cattle
drovers; and mineral exploration (Turpin 1989).
Fort Clark was established in 1852, squarely athwart
one of the well-traveled Comanche traces. In 1857,
Camp Hudson was built to protect a ford of the
Devils River that later came to be called Bakers
Crossing for one of the early settlers. After a hiatus
imposed by the Civil War, the U.S. military resumed
its attempt to eradicate the Native American
presence along the Rio Grande. Comanches and
Kiowas annually rode south to raid the settled
communities of northern Mexico, causing the
Mexican govermnent to complain bitterly to
Washington. Kickapoos carried on their undeclared
war against Texans from their secure base in the
mountains near Santa Rosa (Musquiz) until 1874
when U.S. troops illegally raided their villages in a

clear case of boundary transgression. Driven from
the American side, renegade Apaches took refuge
in the vast arid reaches of the Bols6n de Mapimf,
south of the Big Bend, where they were pursued by
Mexican troops as late as t881.
The completion of the southern transcontinental railroad in 1882 opened the Lower Pecos to
markets in the east and west. Small towns sprang
up around depots at sites that later gave their names
to projectile point styles: Langtry and Shumla.
Pioneer stockmen with their herds of sheep and
cattle colonized the marginal rangeland and forever
changed the face of the countryside. The very fact
that substantial herds of cattle found sufficient graze
agrees with the ethnohistoric record of bison hunting
in and south of the Lower Pecos, suggesting that
the great sea of grass that characterized the
American Frontier once again extended to and
below the Rio Grande (Turpin 1987a). The modern
environment is a product of historic land use
exacerbated by natural phenomena, such as the
famous droughts of the 1950s and the floods of
1954 and 1974.

HISTORIC PERIOD
ARCHEOLOGY
The historic Native American period is represented archeologically by one rock shelter, reported
in the 1940s (Kirkland 1942), a few scattered metal
arrow points, and 16 rock art sites that incorporate
Euro-American elements (Figure 11) or bear strong
affinities to defined Plains Indian styles (Turpin
1989; Turpin and Davis 1993). Tipi rings found
adjacent to some of the historic pictographs may
represent the living sites of the artists, but proof
awaits more temporally diagnostic artifacts and radiocarbon assays (Turpin and Bement 1989). An
internal chronology signalled by theme, style, and
iconographic details sequences the paintings and
elucidates a trend from initial curiosity to bitter
enmity (Turpin 1989). A change in site distributional patterns, shifting from deeply entrenched
canyons to open areas near accessible water
sources, can be attributed to the demands of horse
husbandry. The overall scarcity of sites is the
legacy of a period of social unrest wherein mobility often meant survival.
The historic Euro-American period has
attracted little scholarly attention. The construction

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

555

Figure 11. Kirkland’s copy of historic pictographs at Meyers Springs in Terrell County
(41TE9). Typical themes are the thunderbird, horned headressed figures, horses, and
weapons. The group scene in the left center shows a horse in battle armor, placing it early in
the historic period, before the development of the "finest light cavalry in the world," the
mounted Plains wan’iors. The central rider is about 20 cm in length.

of the Southern Pacific Railroad left an
archeological trail that includes abandoned tracks
and tunnels, depots, graves, and work camps with
domestic, commercial, and industrial features
(Briggs 1974; Turpin 1995). The ranching era is
poorly represented by site survey data that records
rock shelter habitations (Turpin 1987c) and a few
early ranch headquarters (Turpin 1990d).
SUMMARY

The cultural trajectory of Lower Pecos
prehistory originates in stereotypic Paleoindian big
game hunters who apparently entered the region
some 12,000 to 14,000 years ago. Based on the two
known sites of this age, the economy was oriented
toward the procurement of megafauna such as
elephant, camel, horse, and bison. The later Folsom
and Plainview hunters had apparently perfected the
jump technique of bison hunting, suggesting
organizational skills consistent with group
procurement strategies that center upon migratory
herd animals.
The extinction of the large game herds and the
onset of a trend toward aridity triggered a transition

to Archaic lifeways about 9400 years ago. The
people apparently exploited a broader resource
base, developing a reliance on plant products, both
as food and as raw material for the burgeoning fiber
industry, while retaining established lithic
traditions. The transition culminated in a robust
adaptation that gives the outward but perhaps
misleading impression of great stability for a period
of some 4000 years. Rock shelters became the
nucleus of the settlement pattern, showing
differentiated activity areas of a domestic nature.
Mortuary customs included disposal of the dead in
convenient vertical shaft caves, regardless of age
or gender.
Then, about 5500 years ago, the cultural system began a series of internal adjustments, presumably in response to an increasingly arid
environment. The end result would be the consolidation of traits into the full-blown Archaic expression that defines the Lower Pecos as a distinct
cultural entity. A model that parsimoniously explains this development was formulated by analogy
to emerging complex societies documented
ethnohistorically and archeologically in arid lands
around the world.

556

Texas Archeological Society

In this model, changes in the distribution of
essential resources, most prominently potable
water, triggered responses in the settlement pattern
and procurement strategies, leading to a disproportionate concentration of people along the major
rivers. Aridity does not imply a shortage of food,
especially if desert succulents increase at the
expense of grasslands, but gathering and
processing of thorny plant foods and small
mammals requires specialized techniques and
knowledge. The responsibility for food procurement, especially hunting and gathering in the
uplands, would have been delegated to mobile task
groups who operated from these bases on the
rivers. Diversification broadened the diet to include
labor intensive processing of a wider range of
foodstuffs, activities that took place in open camps
and rockshelters as well.
New methods of social control were mandated
by the redistribution of human populations, who
were in effect circumscribed by the availability of
water. The inevitable tensions introduced by proximity elicited a restructing of society that was accompanied by the intensification of ritual that was,
in turn, manifested by the florescence of publicly
produced mural art. A common belief system, rooted
in the principles of shamanism and expressed in
cave paintings, held sway over the area that is now
defined as the Lower Pecos cultural region. This is
the apogee of the Lower Pecos cultural trajectory:
the consolidation of an ethnic identity that trembled
on the verge of societal complexity that was never
achieved, possibly for lack of the ability to generate an adequate surplus, the necessary and sufficient condition for sedentism.
Sometime around 3000 years ago, the insular
Lower Pecos cultural persona relaxed, perhaps disrupted by the advent of new people with a different economic strategy and social structure. A mesic
interlude permitted the grasslands of the Great
Plains to expand to the Rio Grande, drawing herds
of bison and their attendant hunters. Even episodic,
perhaps seasonal, influxes of people bearing a fully
developed cultural system of their own must have
had a perceptible effect on the resident population;
at present it can only be discerned in settlement
patterns, tool types, and possibly art styles.
The return to aridity and the retreat of the
grasslands created a vacuum filled by desert-adapted
people who came north across the Rio Grande from
northern Mexico. Soon, the Lower Pecos found

affinities with Central Texas, sharing in the generalized Late Archaic lithic assemblage while perfecting its fiber industry, retaining its characteristic
burial customs, and keeping a balance between
rockshelters and open campsite occupations. Measures of population density again rise, reaching and
exceeding the heights achieved during the Middle
Archaic peak, but the processes behind the increase
are less clear.
The Late Prehistoric period experienced a cultural upheaval, including changes in settlement patterns, site types, mortuary customs, art styles, and
artifact types. Pictograph styles show affinities with
northern Mexico and the Big Bend region of Texas;
lithic tool types are shared with the rest of Texas;
and mortuary customs appear to be introduced from
the north and northwest. Clearly, people, rather than
ideas, were on the move.
Late in prehistory, one intrusive group is identified by a distinctive artifact assemblage, including small arrow points and ceramics, a preference
for promontories with sweeping views, and residences that used paired stones as pole supports for
a thatch or hide cover. The people of the Infierno
phase may be precursors to ethnohistorically described bison hunters who again seasonally congregated at the mouth of the Pecos during yet another
mesic interlude.
The Spanish found little of value in the Lower
Pecos, isolating it as part of the great uninhabitable
desert of their northern frontier; but native peoples
found refuge in the rugged terrain. Indigenous
groups were soon replaced by Apaches who, in
turn, were driven south by the Comanches. Under
American hegemony, a concerted effort to clear the
way west resulted in the extirpation of native people
by the time the second transcontinental railroad
was completed in 1882.
The recent era has been largely dominated by
an economy based on animal husbandry, illustrating one reason why a hunting and gathering lifeway
was maintained over the millenia. The most modern methods can not wrest a surplus from the
indominable landscape of the Lower Pecos region,
the effects of a century of over-grazing have further
reduced the productive capabilities of these marginal lands, and siltation is reclaiming Amistad Reservoir 50 years ahead of schedule. The economic
hope of the region has turned to commercial wildlife exploitation and ecotourism-- a return to hunting and gathering.’?

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

REFERENCES CITED
Andrews, R. L. and J. M. Adovasio
1980 Perishable Industries from Hinds Cave, Val Verde
County, Texas. Ethnology Monographs 5. Department of Anthropology, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh.
Bement, L. C.
1986 Excavation of the Late Pleistocene Deposits of Bonfire Shelter, Val Verde County, Texas. Archeology
Series 1. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bolton, H. E.
1908

Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1705.
Barnes and Noble, New York.

1962

Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century: Studies in
Spanish Colonial History and Administration.

557

Daniel, J. M., Jr.
1955 The Advance of the Spanish Frontier and the
Desploblado. Master’s thesis, Department of History, The University of Texas at Austin.
Dering, J. P.
1979 Pollen and Plant Macrofossil Vegetation Records
Recovered from Hinds Cave, Val Verde County,
Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Dibble, D. S.
1967 Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-66. MS on
file, Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Dibble, D. S. and D. Lorrain
1968 Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val
Verde County, Texas. Miscellanous Papers 1. Texas
Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.

Russell and Russell, New York.

Briggs, A. K.
1974 The Archeology of 1882 Labor Camps on the Southern Pacific Railroad, Val Verde County, Texas.
Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Gebhard, D.
1965 Prehistoric Rock Paintings of the Seminole Canyon
Area, Val Verde County, Texas. Submitted to the
National Park Service by the University of California at Santa Barbara.
Griffen, W. B.

Brown, K. M.
1991 Prehistoric Economics of Bakers Cave: A Plan for
Research. In Papers on Lower Pecos Prehistory,
edited by S. A. Turpin, pp. 87-140. Studies in Archeology 8. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bryant, V. M., Jr.
1966 Pollen Analysis: Its Environmental and Cultural
Implications for the Amistad Reservoir Area.
Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

1969

Culture Change and Shifting Populations in Central Northern Mexico. Anthropological Papers 13.
University of Arizona, Tucson.

Hackett, C. W. (editor)
1926 Historical Documents Relating to New Mexico,
Nueva Vizcaya, and Approaches Thereto in 1772.2
Vols. Carnegie Institute of Washington, Washington, D.C.
1931

Pichardo ’s Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana and
Texas, Volume 1. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Late Full-Glacial and Postglacial Pollen Analysis of
Texas Sediments. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Hammond, G. P. and A. Rey (editors)
1966 The Rediscovery of New Mexico, 1580-1594. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Castafieda, C. E.
1938 The Mission Era, The Missions at Work, 1731-1761.
Volume III of Our Catholic Heritage in Texas, 15191936. Von Boeckmann Jones, Austin.

Hartnady, P. W.
!988 Premature Tooth Loss in the Archaic Trans-Pecos
Region of South Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville.

1969

1946

The Mission Era, the Passing of the Missions, 17621782. Volume IV of Our Catholic Heritage in Texas,
1519-1936. Von Boeckmann Jones, Austin.

Chandler, C. K., T. R. Hester, and H. J. Shafer
1994 New Data on Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos
Area, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 65:347-353.

Hester, T. R.
1983 Late Paleo-Indian Occupations at Baker Cave,
Southwestern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 53:101-120.
Huebner, J.
1995 Stable Isotope Analysis of Bone and Soft Tissues
from Four Mummies from the Eastern Chihuahua
Desert of Texas. Paper presented at the II World
Congress on Mummy Studies, Cartagena, Colombia.

558

Texas Archeological Society

Ilger, W. A., M. Hyman, and M. W. Rowe
1994

Radiocarbon Dates for a Red Linear Style Pictograph. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
65:336-346.

Mock, S. B.
1987 The Painted Pebbles of the Lower Pecos: A Study
of Medium, Form and Content. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.

Johnson, L.
1964

The Devil’s Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at

Moorhead, M.

Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas. Ar-

1975

cheology Series 6. Department of Anthropology,

The Presidio, Bastion of the Spanish Borderlands.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

The University of Texas at Austin.
Kirkland, F.
1942

Historic Materials from Fielder Canyon Cave. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontologi-

Parsons, M.
1986 Painted Pebbles, Style and Chronology. In Ancient
Texans’, by H. J. Sharer, pp. 180-185. Texas Monthly
Press, Austin.

cal Society 14:16-71.
Kirkland, F. and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967

Patton, P. and D. S. Dibble
1982 Archeologic and Geomorphic Evidence for the

The Rock Art of Texas Indians. University of Texas

Paleohydrolic Record of the Pecos River in West

Press, Austin.

Texas. American Journal of Science 282:97-121.

Lord, K. J.

Prewitt, E. R.

1984

1983

The Zooarcheology of Hinds Cave (41VV546).
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology,

Remote Sensing of Archeological Remains in the
Stockton Plateau Region of Texas: An Experiment
in Site Recognition and Prediction. Master’s thesis,

Texas A&M University, College Station.

Department of Anthropology, The University of
Lowrance, M.
1982

Texas at Austin.

Rock Art of Brewster County, Texas. The Artifact
20(1-4). E1 Paso Archeological Society, E1 Paso.

Schroeder, A. H. and D. S. Matson
1965

Lundelius, E.
1984

A Colony on the Move: Gaspar Castano de Sosa’s
Journal 1590-1591. School of American Research,
Salt Lake City.

A Late Pleistocene Mammalian Fauna from Cueva
Quebrada, Val Verde County, Texas. Special Publication of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History

Schuetz, M. K.

8:456-481. Carnegie Museum of Natural History,

1956

Pittsburgh.

An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 27:129160.

Marks, M. K., J. C. Rose, and E. L. Buie
1988

Bioarcheology of Seminole Sink. In Seminole Sink:

1963

Part III. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Excavation of a Vertical Shafi Tomb, Val Verde
County, Texas, compiled by S. A. Turpin. Memoir
22. Plains Anthropologist 33(122), Part 2:75-118.

33:131-165.
Shafer, H. J.
1975

Marmaduke, W. S.
1978

Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos Region, Texas.
American Antiquity 40(2): 148-158.

Prehistoric Culture in Trans-Pecos Texas: An Ecological Approach. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of

An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material:

1976

Defining the Archaic: An Example from the Lower
Pecos Region, Texas. In The Texas Archaic: A Sym-

Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

posium, edited by T. R. Hester, pp. 1-9. Special
McGregor, R.

Report 2. Center for Archaeological Research, The

1991

University of Texas at San Antonio.

Threaded and Twined Matting: A Late Introduction
to the Lower Pecos Region. In Papers on Lower

1981

The Adaptive Technology of the Prehistoric Inhab-

Pecos Prehistory, edited by S. A. Turpin, pp. 141-

itants of Southwest Texas. Plains Anthropologist

148. Studies in Archeology 8. Texas Archeological

26(92): 129-138.

Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at

1986

Ancient Texans. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.

Austin.
1992

Prehistoric Basketry of the Lower Pecos, Texas.

Shafer, H. J. and V. M. Bryant, Jr.

Monographs in World Archaeology 6. Prehistory

1977

Press, Madison, Wisconsin.

Archeological and Botanical Studies at Hinds" Cave,
Val Verde County, Texas. Special Series 1. Anthropological Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Turpin m The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

Steck,
1932 Forerunners of Captain de Leon’s Expedition to
Texas, 1670-1675. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 36(!):!-28.
Stock,
1983 The Prehistoric Diet of Hinds Cave, Val Verde
County, Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.

559

Turpin, S. A. (Continued)
1990a Rock Art and Its Contribution to Hunter Gatherer
Archaeology: A Case Study from the Lower Pecos
River Region of Southwest Texas and Northern
Mexico. Journal of Field Archaeology 17(3):26328!.
1990b Speculations on the Age and Origin of the Pecos
River Style. Atnerican Indian Rock Art !6:99-122.
1990c New Perspectives on the Red Linear Style Picto-

Story, D. A. and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
1966 A Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the
Atnistad Reservoir Area. Report to the National

graphs of the Lower Pecos River Region. Plains
Anthropologist 35(132):375-381.

1990d Taming the Devils Country. Heritage Magazine

Science Foundation by the University of Texas at
Austin.

8(2): 16-19. Texas Historical Foundation, Austin.

1991a Time Out of Mind: The Radiocarbon Chronology of
the Lower Pecos River Region. In Papers on Lower

Tunnell, C. D. and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1969 A Lipan Apache Mission, San Lorenzo de la Santa
Cruz 1761-1777. Bulletin 14. Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.

Pecos Prehistory, edited by S. A. Turpin, pp. 1-49.
Studies in Archeology 8. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1993

1991b Sin Nombre and E1 Fortin: Pecos River Style Picto-

graphs in Northern Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 60:267-281.

The Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Second Edition. Gulf Publishing Company, Houston.

Turpin, S. A.
1982 Seminole Canyon: The Art and the Archeology. Research Report 83. Texas ArcheologicalSurvey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1984

The Red Linear Style Pictographs of the Lower
Pecos River Region, Texas. Plains Anthropologist
29(105):181-198.

1986a Pictographs in the Red Monochrome Style in the
Lower Pecos River Region. Bulletin of the Texas
A rcheological Society 55:123-144.
1986b Toward a Definition of a Pictograph Style: The
Lower Pecos Bold Line Geometrics. Plains Anthropologist 31(112): 153-161.
1987a Ethnohistoric Observations of Bison in the Lower
Pecos River Region: Implications for Environmental Change. Plains Anthropologist 32(118):424-429.
1987b The Vanishing Rock Art of Texas Indians. Heritage
Magazine 5(1):36-43. Texas Historical Foundation,
Austin.
1987c Be It Ever So Humble: Rock Shelter Homes of
Early Settlers. Heritage Magazine 5(3):22-23. Texas
Historical Foundation, Austin.

1988

(compiler) Seminole Sink: Excavations of a Vertical
Shaft Tomb, Val Verde County, Texas. Memoir 22.

1992a More About Mortuary Practices in the Lower Pecos
River Region of Southwest Texas. Plains Anthropologist 37(138):7-17.
1992b Sacred Holes in the Ritual Landscape of the Lower

Pecos River Region. Plains Anthropologist
37(140):275-278.
1993

Hunting Camps and Hunting Magic: Petroglyphs of
the Eldorado Divide, West Texas. North American
Archaeologist 13(4):295-316.

1994a On a Wing and a Prayer: Flight Metaphors in Pecos
River Pictographs. In Shamanism and Rock Art in
North America, edited by S. A. Turpin, pp. 73-102.
Special Publication 1. Rock Art Foundation, Inc.,
San Antonio.
1994b The Were-Cougar Theme in Pecos River Style Art
and its Implications for Traditional Archeology. In
New Light on Old Art: Recent Advances in HunterGatherer Rock Art Research, edited by D. S. Whitley
and L. L. Loendorf, pp. 75-80. Monograph 36. Institute of Archaeology, University of California, Los
Angeles.
1995

41VV540: A Railroad Era Industrial Site in Val
Verde County, Texas. Cultural Resource Program
Report 95-1. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Austin.

Plains Anthropologist 33(122), Part 2.

1989

The Iconography of Contact: Spanish Influences on
the Rock Art of the Middle Rio Grande. In
Columbian Consequences, Volume 1: Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West, edited by D. H. Thomas, pp. 277-299.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Turpin, S. A. and L. C. Bement
1989 The Live Oak Hole Complex: Plains Indian Art and
Occupation in the Lower Pecos River Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59:65-82.

560

Texas Archeological Society

Turpin, S. A. and M. W. Davis
1993

The Devils River State Natural Area: The 1989 TAS
Field School. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 61 : 1-50.

Williams Dean, G.
1978 Ethnobotany and Cultural Ecology of Prehistoric
Man in Southwest Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University,
College Station.

Turpin, S. A., M. Henneberg, and D. K. Riskind
1986

Late Archaic Mortuary Practices in the Lower Pecos

Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips

River Region, Texas. Plains Anthropologist

1958

Weddle, R. S.
1968

San Juan Bautista: Gateway to Spanish Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Method and Theory in American Archaeology. The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

31(I 14):295-315.

Zintgraff, J. W. and S. A. Turpin
1991

Pecos River Rock Art. McPherson Publishing Company, San Antonio.

