The Deeply Buried Gibson Site

223

TI-I~. DI~.PLY BURIED GIBSON SITE
B~ C~aus N. P~
The first deeply buried Abilene region sites were discovered by
the writer in January, 1929, in Shackelford County, Texas, at depths
of 6-8 feet below the sell surface, (1), (2).

During the fall of that

year several other exposures at the same depth, and one at 14 feet,
were found in Jones County (3). At the latter place, the Myatt
Site, enough excavation was done in the eight feet stratum to expose
a mineralized recent fauna consisting of beaver, bison, deer, and
antelope and several species of mussels (4). With these were flint
chips and several flint blades.

On an extremely cold Sunday, early in January, 1930, the writer
became restless at confinement indoors and decided to explore some
canyon for evidence despite the weather. In looking about for such
a site he saw what seemed to be a favorable location in the distance.
It proved to be an almost vertical bank thirty feet high, above a
creek which was then dry at that place.
Hearth Over Twenty-]our Feet Deep

As the writer walked down the dry bed and examined the upper
bank levels he saw no midden strata exposed at the usual eight
feet level. On glancing down in front of his feet however he saw
the middle of a large flint blade lying amongst some charcoal and
red silt fragments, which evidently had just fallen from the bank.
Examination of the bank at about four feet from the bottom, showed
the exposed edge of a hearth 40 inches in diameter, which was filled
with charcoal and burnt stones. Soon several other portions of flint
blades, a mane, and a hammerstone were found in the loose gravel
below the bank in position as though they had just fallen out of it.
Three rather distinct levels of charcoal which contained small
hearths were found. The first level at approximately 24 1-2 feet
lay in hard red silt immediately below a stratum of very hard compact gravel (5). During 1930 the writer found embedded in the
charcoal stratum two thick leaf-shaped percussion fractured blades
which had been thinned at the broader end by taking out a flake up
the center of that face. Plate 42, Nos. 16 and 17. These were later

224

Texas Archeologic.al. and Paleontological Society

made the type points of those named by the writer from this Site
in 1934 (6).
Below this level were streaks of charcoal at various places in the
extremely hard red joint clay or silt, and at a depth of about 27
feet below the top soil surface there were more signs of an ancient
occupied level such as hearth rock groupings which were set in
charcoal and a definite thickening in the thin flint flake exposures.
Midden Strata Below Water Line at Thirty Feet
Some outcrops of flint flakes, charcoal and hearths, were found
down to and below the present creek water level at this site, or
approximately 30 feet below the soil surface. The creek is shallow
there, and water does not remain long after rains, so there were
periods when dry weather would permit digging below the creek bed.
The writer has an idea that the charcoal and artifact bearing levels
may extend even farther below the surface than is at present known.
The writer has systematically examined this site after rains for the
intervening period of more than ten years. During most of that
period the results have been disappointing. It is true that hundreds
of flint flakes have been found embedded, numerous hearths have
been exposed, and the charcoal seams have been found to extend
back through the bank at the various levels. The stream is slowly
undercutting the bank, and it is caving off, but the structure is very
dense and hard. Only an estimate can be made, but there perhaps
has been a recession due to cave-offs of as much as five or six feet in
the vertical bank during the past ten years time.
Originally the charcoal seams were exposed over a distance of
125 feet, but for the past six or seven years there has been no erosion
on the southern third of the site. The hard gravel stratum and the
midden levels below it, the "Durst Silts," have been covered by
materials which caved off from the softer later silt levels above,
which now prevents examination of the lower levels.
PLATE 40
1. Clo~e view of exposed base of Gibson point embedded twentyfive feet below the soft surface in a charcoal stratum. Picture taken
from a narrow shelf above by Dr. Otto O. Watt. 2. Picture of the
bank showing depth (25 ft.) of the embedded Gibson point. 3. The
upper corner of handkerchief marks the location in bank of an embedded Abilene blade.
Depth below surface 24 ft. 3 inches.
Note
reflection in water below.

Plate 40

Deeply Bu~ed Gibson

227

However the stream has continued to undercut the north portion,
and during the past three years more artifacts have been found em[~dded than at any period since 1930.

Proboscidian Bone Found Embedded
During the summer of 1938 Dr. Kirk Bryan and his assistant
Samuel Vaughan visited this Site and helped the writer excavate a
proboscidian’s leg bone from the gravel stratum near the bottom of
the same creek bank at a measured distance up-stream of 967 feet,
from the main artifact bearing portion (7).*
While there have been no hearths exposed at that particular place,
one was found in the gravel at the same level at an estimated distance of three hundred feet farther up the creek. On September
17th the writer found a well battered flint hammerstone embedded
47 feet upstream from, and at the same level in the gravel stratum
as, the proboscidian bone.
In the loose gravel of the creek bed, opposite to where the proboscidian’s leg bone lay embedded in the gravel stratum, the writer has
found several complete artifacts and numerous man-made flint flakes.
The blade shown in Plate 42, No. 8, was found there in the loose
gravel about a month before the bone was exposed by erosion in the
gravel stratum a few feet distant.
For some reason the site conditions seem to have been generally
unfavorable for the preservation of bone, and the proboscidian’s leg
bone is the only one which has been found.
New Type Point Found by President Jones
Until during the past year no embedded artifacts had been found
which differed from the original thick leaf-shaped paleolithic type
Abilene points, although several other types had been found in the
loose creek bed gravel immediately below where the Gibson Site
strata cave off. See Plate 42, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
The first knowledge that all of the deeper hearth levels might not
contain the same types of artifacts came during the Fall of 1939
when the writer conducted President Clifford Jones and Dr. W. C.
~The estimated distance in the re~vrt in Science, Feb. 24, 1940, of 1500 feet, was
too great.

228

Texas ArcheologicaI awcl Paleontological Society

Holden of Texas Technological College t~> the Site; and while inspecting it, President Jones found a crude projectile point embedded
down near the water level at an approximate depth of thirty feet
trom the soil surface. This point was roughly percussion fractured and had a rounded knob on the end as a haft.

Mano Found Embedded Thirty Feet Deep
At about the same level, 30 feet, and a few months earlier in 1939.
the writer saw about two inches of what resembled the rounded edge
of a mano exposed down near the water’s edge. It was firmly embedded in the hard dark red "Durst Silt" found in the deeper levels
of this site. On excavation, it was found to be a quartzite mano 4 3-4
inches long, 3 7-16 inches wide and 1 6-16 inches thick. See Plate
z].3, Panel A, No. 3 (8). Another paleolithic type leaf-shaped Abilene
point was found immediately below the Gibson hearth strata in
caved-off debris just after a rain in 1939. It is of the same type as
those previously found embedded at a depth of about 24 1-2 feet.
It is 3 1-16 inches long, 1 5-8 inches broad, and eleven-sixteenths of
an inch thick. See Plate 42, No. 1.
ztnother DiHerent New Type o] Point Found
One Sunday morning in July, 1940, the writer found a point of a
type different from any heretofore described from this Site and it
will hereafter be designated as a Gibson point. When found, nearly
an inch of the base projected from the hard red silt at a depth below
the soil surface of twenty-five feet, which is a foot beneath the compact gravel stratum that seems to separate the "Elm Creek Silts"
above from the "Durst Silts" below. Without touching the artifact,
the writer returned to Abilene and informed Dr. Otto O. Watts of
Hardin-Simmons University, and Mr. E. J. Gardiner of the University of Texas, the latter is foreman of a paleontological excavation
project for the Geological Department of Texas University. The two
above mentioned gentlemen came to the site as witnesses of the
discovery, and both Dr. Watts and the writer photographed the point
PLATE 41
1. Near view of embedded Abilene type knife.
Depth 24 ft. 3
inches. 2. Distant view of site. E.J. Gardiner of Texas University
pointing to Gibson point embedded in bank, depth 25 feet. 3. Mr.
Gardiner and the writer indicating two embedded flints, a Gibson
point, and a thin flint flake.

Plate 41

The De~ply Buried Gibson Si~e

while it was embedded in the bank.

231

This Gibson point has a re-

cessed base and one round base projection on each side quite similar
to those of the Folsom points. The small flaking up the center of
the recess on one face is only one-fourth of an inch wide and sevensixteenths of an inch on the other. The point is 2 3-16 inches long,
and one inch wide at the widest place, which is eleven-sixteenths of
an inch from the end of the base projections, and from this widest
portion on to the end is a distance of 1 1-2 inches. The point is
bevelled to the right and this bevelling is narrow, being only threeeighths of an inch wide.

From the widest part near the ba~, the

bevelled edges run straight to a point.

The Gibson point is five-

sixteenths of an inch thick. There is a thick gray patina similar to
that on many other Gibson Site flints. See Plate 40, Nos. 1, 2;
Plate 41, Nos. 2 and 3; Plate 42, No. 15.

The workmanship is not near so crude as that of the Abilene
blades found at a depth of 24 1-2 feet in this Site, but it lacks very
much of being considered fine or comparable with either the typical
Yuma, or the Folsom blades. However something similar in workmanship and shape was found on the surface of the eroded McLean
Site in 1938 where typical Folsom and Yuma and generalized crude
channelled points have also been found (9).
Anottver Crude Abilene Blade Found
On August 20th the writer visited the Gibson Site after another
rain and found the edge of an artifact projecting slightly from the
hard silt about three inches below the bottom of the gravel stratum
which lies at about 24 feet below the soil surface. On removing
the flint blade it was found to be another one of the crude Abilene
type, but also different from some others. It was made by percussion and is thick, with wavy edges. The blade is 3 7-16 inches
long, 1 13-16 inches wide, and thirteen-sixteenths of an inch thick.
The widest and thickest portion is about the center of the point.
Both ends are brought down to crude chisel-like edges which turn
slightly from the long axis of the blade near the ends. The ends
~em to be the working edges, since they have been retouched enough
to take the sinuous edge out of them, but this has been left on the
sides. This artifact also has a gray patina. See Plate ,I~, No. 3;
Plate 41, No. 1; Plate 42, No. 18. No end scrapers have ever been
found embedded in this Site. Two small side scrapers have been

232

Teza~ Archeologic¢l c~nd Paleontologicc~l Society

found embedded in place, and several other crude worked and used
pieces of flint which probably were used as scraping tools. See
Plate 42, Nos. 11, !2, 13, and 14.
.4 Crudely Channelled Pre-Folsom,
On August 31 another visit was made to the Site and a channelled point was found in the loose gravel below it. See Plate 42,
No. 7. This point is made of agate and is so nearly clear that objects may be seen through it when held to a light. The point is
2 1-8 inches lon~, 1 3-16 inches wide and five-sixteenths of an inch
thick near the point which is beyond the end of both center flakes..
A large central flake and two smaller ones have been taken up from
the base on one face, the central larger one is 1 3-8 inches long. On
the other face one large central flake has been taken from the base
up for a distance of one inch, and this covers most of the surface,
although a small area is left on the edge which has a little retouch
and the edge shows evidence of having been ground off like a
Folsom point, although not so efficiently. The base is roughly
square, with no recess, and there is a slight retouch of the bottom
edge on one face. In the face which has the inch long flake up the
center there is a deep wide flake which goes diagonally across the
point from the right edge to the left, which apparently was done to
extend the thinning farther up the blade. The blade exhibits crude
workmanship and is in no wise comparable in quality with the fine
Folsom technique, although the basic ideas are there, and it seems
as though the primitive workmen had begun to experiment with the
ideas so elaborated elsewhere, and perhaps later.
Of course there is no certainty that the point originally came out
of the deep strata but only a strong probability. In this category
belong several other types which include two shouldered and tanged
points, see Plate 42, Nos. 2 and 8, and one type of the Clear Fork
gouge. This was found in 1930 and is a long, relatively slender
well worked blade with the gouge type of working edge. What
makes it more probable that the latter came out of the strata is that
it is of the same sort of flint as those found embeddSd, and has
PLATE

42

Artifacts of the Gibson Site. Top row shows artifacts from loose
gravel below strata. Two bottom rows show artifacts found embedded
in midden strata.

Pla~e 42

"

The Deeply Buried Gibso~ Site

235

similar patination and coloring. See Plate 42, No. 10. However as
stated elsewhere in the 1940 Bulletin, no Clear Fork gouges have
yet been found embedded in any of the deeply buried stratified
sites near ASilene. However, it is the well considered opinion of
the writer that if such artifacts are ever found embedded in the lower
river or creek bank strata of this region it will be in the Gibson
Site. The evidence there seems to be of greater age than is shown in
the Hodges Site, and in most other local lower river bank terraces.
Several Ancient Culture Types Revealed
So long as only percussion fractured crude Abilene points were
found embedded in the Gibson Site at just below the 24 feet deep
gravel stratum the problem seemed simple, but now that a better
type of point of crude Folsom shape, but without the channel, has
been found deeper at 25 feet, and again and deeper yet at 30 feet,
another type of projectile with a round ball-shaped tang has been
found, this complicates the problem. The evidence now seems to be
shaping up to show that during the long period when the four feet
of dark red hard silt which lies beneath the 24 feet gravel stratum
was formed, that various flint culture types were used and covered
up at different levels. We may have in this Site an undisturbed
superimposed record of the early phases of the inhabitation of
America.
Very little excavating has yet been done at the site beyond that
which nature has done by erosion and cave-offs. In 1930 the
writer did some excavation assisted by Dr. Otto O. Watts and E. B.
Sayles, and pictures were then taken of the Site by Sayles which were
printed first in Volume 2, 1930, of this Society’s Bulletin in an
article by the writer entitled "Report on Some Recent Archeological
Researches in the Abilene Section," Plates 11, 14 and 15.
Later E. B. Sayles republished some of the same pictures in his
survey of Texas in 1935. In 1934 the writer consented to Gila
Pueblo doing some excavation of the Gibson Site and Mr. Sayles
and two workmen dug there for a time, but if any illustrated report
on the excavated flint materials has ever been published, this writer
is not aware of it. During the time Mr. Sayles was there he had
Drs. E. B. Howard, Ernst Antevs, and M. M. Leighton inspect the
site. Some of the latter also issued reports on the Site under

Texa~ Archeological trnd Paleontological Society

236

numeral designations (10).

In their published reports several of

the above named persons designated the lower silts as of Pleistocene age.
Drs. A. E. Jenks, E. H. Sellards, Kirk Bryan, and J. E. Pearce
and many other scientists have inspected the site with the writer,
and he wishes to state that the site is open to the inspection of
accredited scientific workers of standing, but it would be highly
inadvisable, at the present or at any time soon, to make the location known to the general public.
Excavation of the Gibson Site on any large scale would be very
expensive, and there is some doubt in the writer’s mind that it
would be as productive of artifacts as has the long time observation of the results of erosion. The material has a dense hard clayey
composition which would make the labor of screening it difficult.
However there is the possibility that excavation by a careful competently trained party might reveal many things not now known.
P. O. Box 62,
Abilene, Texas.
Bibliography

(1) Ray, Cyrus N., New Evidences of Ancient Man in .4merica,
Scientific American Magazine, May, 1929.
(2) Mason, J. Alden, The Texas Expedition, The Museum Journal, Sept.-Dec., 1929.
(3) Ray, Cyrus N., Traces of ¢tncient Man Reported, Science
News-Letter, Dec. 21, 1929.
(4)

Ray, Cyrus N., Report on Some Recent .4rcheologlcal Re-

searches in the ztbilene Section, Vol. 2, 1930, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, pp. 48 to 52, Plate 11,
Nos. 1 and 2, Plate 14, Nos. 8, 9, 10.

(5)

Ibid., Plate 14, Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, Plate 15.

(6) Ray, Cyrus N., Flint Cultures of Ancient Man, Vol. 6, 1934,
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Plate 18, Nos. 82, 83, 85, 86, and 87.

The Deeply Buried Gibson Site

237

(7) Bryan, Kirk, Deep Sites Near Abilene, Texas, Vol. 10, 1938.
Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society.
(8) Ra)~, Cyrus N., Was the American Mano and Metate an Invention Made During Pleistocene Time? Science, Feb. 23, 1940.
(9) Ray, Cyrus N., and Bryan, Kirk, Folsomold Point Found in
Alluvium Beside a Mammoth’s Bones, Science, Sept. 16, 1938.
(10) Leighton, M. M., Geological Aspects o] the Findings o]
Primitive Man Near .4bitene, Texas, Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona,
Plate III.

