LAKE SITES OF THE SOUTH PLAINS
OF TEXAS
W. C. WATTS
It has been said that civilizations stand upon three legs: land,
timber, and water. With respect to these three the Plains Indians of
the Llano Estacado had an abundance of grass-covered land, no timher, and a scarcity of water. Had it not been for the enormous
bison herds and other herbivorous animals which frequented the
territory for grazing, the red man wouId have had little eaus~ for
inhabiting the region.
The scarcity of water was the outstanding handicap. South of the
Canadian River and the Pale Duro there are no perpetual rivers to
supply water. Except for shallow excavations in the sand hill
region, the Indians did not dig wells into the vast stratum of water
underlying the Plains. This source of water, reached by wells, is
the thing that eventually made it possible for the white man to move
into the territory and develop it.
This underground water makes its way to the surface through
the wails of the canyons and those of the "alkali" lakes of the territory in the form of springs. These springs supply water for two of
the four types of sites where evidences of Indian habitation are
found.
A third type is shown by the sites which follow th~ sand hills in
their east to west course across the Plains. According to Bryan1
th~-e sand hills follow an old Pleistocene river bed. Here the
water crone so close to the surface that the later Indians were able
to obtain it for use. The reference is made here to later Indians, for
Bryan believes that below the sand hills, in the old river bed, will
be found evidence of Pleistocene man. He believes this river is a
continuation of the same formation whic~ passes between Clovis,
New Mexico, and Portales, New Mexico, where Howard and Cotter
have reported evidences of Pleistocene man.
The fourth type of Indian camps are those sites which are found
near the "surface" lakes of the territory. These lakes are not shown
1. Bryan. Frank, "Review of the Geology o1~ the Clovis Finds tleVort~.d by Howard
and Cotter," American Antiquity, Vo]. 4, No. 2, October, 1938, p. 129.

T¢zas A.rctreological a~d Paleontological Society

on the map, but are widely distributed over the entire area. There
are few sections that do not have one or more of these surface lakes.
Three such lakes lie within the city limits of Lubbock.
It might appear from listing these four sources: canyon springs,
"alkali" lake springs, sand hills, and surface lakes, that water would
be abundant. However, this is not the case. The springs emptying
into the canyons and "alkali" lakes supply only a limited amount of
water and the surface lakes are filled only during rainy seasons.
Therefore, at any place on the South Plains where water is more or
less permanent, one is certain to find evidences of Indian habitation.
We have, then, four types of sites according to the four sources of
water.
This report is concerned primarily with the camp sites near the
"alkali" lakes. The term lake as here used is a bit misleading, because the "alkali" lakes are not lakes as known in most sections of
this country. The most conspicuous thing about them is the absence
of water. They may cover several square miles in area, but water
is rarely found in them except near the small springs coming from
the escarpment. Their dry, level beds glisten with gypsum and
alkali. (See Plate 19, Panel A, No. 1).
A view of one of these lakes shows up rather suddenly. They
are surrounded by an abrupt drop in the land, often f~rming a steep
escarpment. In most cases the Tertiary is completely missing and
outcroppings df the Lower Cretaceous are found at the base of the
escarpment. This depression from the level surface of the Plains
offered protection for the Indian camps.
From the map (see Plate 18), one notices that with the exception
of Shafter Lake and Cedar Lake, the "alkali" lakes form two
groups, one near the head of Yellowhouse Creek, and the other
group in Lynn and Terry Counties. Of this latter group Rich Lake,
Tahoka Lake and Twin Lakes were among the last sites of the South
Plains to be occupied by the Indians. Captain R. G. Carter of
Washington, the last surviving officer of the old Fourth U. S. Cavalry under the command of General R. S. Mackenzie, shows on a
PLATE 18.
Map of Lake Sites of the South Plains of Texas.

O~

I
Plate 18

Lake Sitvs o] ~he So~h Plains of Texa~

81

map outlining their various expeditions the following contacts with
these lakes.

The detachment left the supply camp and camped at

Tahoka Lake on December 4, 1874.

The next day they proceeded

to Rich Lake where they had action with Indians.

It was possibly

a minor encounter, for they moved on to the canyon near Lubbock
the following day.

As to Twin Lakes, Frank P. Hill2 of the Lynn County News,
Tahoka, Texas, reports that the last Indian encounter on the South
Plains occurred there in 1879. It is also from Twin Lakes that the
ill-fated Tenth U. S. Colored Cavalry departed on the trail of Indians in 1877. Cook3 tells of how they ran out of water and wandered for 96 hours trying to find an additional supply. Five members of the group died of thirst before making their way back to the
original camp.
From these references it is seen that Indian occupation of the
"alkali" lakes dates well into historic times.
This writer has collected from each of the three camp sites mentioned above; however, he does not have an extensive collection from
Tahoka Lake and Twin Lakes. From Rich Lake he has over 300
artifacts which will be described in t~s paper. When the "alkali"
lakes are referred to as a type, it has reference only to their geological formation. Whether Rich Lake represents a cultural type it
would be impossible to say until more extensive study is made of the
other lake sites.
Rich Lake is on the western edge of the Terry and Lynn County
group of lakes. Because of its location it occupies a strategic place
with respect to the other lakes as well as to the sites along the Yellowhouse canyon. On its northwest side a small spring seeps from
the lower wall of the escarpment. This spring supplied a limited
amount of water for the camp which was located some 400 yards
from the spring. As a reason for this separation of camp and
spring, it is possible that game used the same source of water, and
as the Indians had their camp at a distance, the game would come
2, A Guide to th~ South Plains of Texas, Compile~l by the Texas State Highway
Department, Division No. I~, Lubbock, Texas,
3. Cook, John R., The Border and the Buffalo, Crane & Co., Topeka, Kansas,
190~’, p. 264-285.

Tez~

82

Arch~olog4cal and Paleontological Society

close to it seeking water. The camp follows the lake shore for 200
yards, and extends about the same distance back from it. Being on
the first elevation above the lake bottom, it is well below the level
of the Plains. This offered a degree of protection in that the camp
could not have been seen until one came near the edge of the escarpment.
ArtiJacts ]rein Rich Lake
Points
A total of 137 projectile points were collected at the camp. Most
of these are complete. Only those fragments are included in the
survey where enough of the point remains to identify its base and
general shape. The exact use of all of these points is difficult to
say; some of the larger ones may have been used as knives. Kidder
makes the following comments concerning points of the southwest:
All prehistoric stone-headed arrows so far found in the
southwest bear points weighing less than 35 grains.
That at Pete8 and other former settlements of the arrowusing Pueblo peoples there occur hundreds of points of
comparable weight for every one of the larger.

(3)

That at the pueblo sites such large points as have been
found halted have usually been set in short handles for
use as knives, but never as arrows.

( )

That small points, which can hardly have been other than
arrow-haads, appear in great quantity among the bones of
slaughtered buffalo in the trap-ravines of the Great
Plains, while on the other hand, the heads of all Basketmaker spear-throwing darts that have come to light are
much larger and heavier than those which we can be sure
were arrow-heads.’’z;

At Rich Lake we find as many of the large points as we do the
smaller ones. Using 35 grains as a criterion for separation, 69 of
the 137 points are heavier and 68 lighter than 35 grains. Dividing
the 69 larger points (See Plate 19, Panel B.), according to Renaud,5
4. Kidder, A. V.. Arrow-Heads or Dart Points. American Antkluttx, VoL IV,
No. 2, October, 1938, p.
5. Renaud, E. B., ’~rypology of Lithie Artifacts," Bulletin of Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, VoL 10, 1938, p. 72-74.

Lake Sites of the South Plains of Texas

83

five of these are of Type I, stemless, and 65 are of Type II, stemmed.
There are none of Type III among the larger points. The five of
Type I appear to be the oldest artifacts from the site. Four of the
five are possibly Folsom fragments. The fifth is not of Folsom type
but it is heavily patinated. These four possible Folsom frag~nents
along with another more complete point from the same site, belonging to Frank Jackson of E1 Paso, were sent to J. D. Figgins, then
Director of the Colorado Museum of Natural History. In a letter
to the writer, dated October 8, 1934, he classified the five points as
"undoubtedly referable to the Folsonl culture." These points are
surface finds. They may have been brought in from other sites or
they may have eroded from the present camp site.
Of the remaining 65 larger points, 42 have shoulders with barbs
and 23 are without barbs. Some of these show evidence of having
been re-sharpened, a practice of the Indians of this territory where
flint is scarce. Two of the larger points were made of obsidian,
which probably was brought from New Mexico, and six are of flint
from Alibates Creek, of the Canadian River. One point is of chert,
one of petrified wood, twelve are of brown flint and 43 of gray to
black flint. One point is of quartzite.
Of the 68 small points of weights less than 35 grains which came
from the site (see Plate 19, Panel B.) fifteen are of Type I, 20 are
of Type II, and 33 are of Type III (20 with lateral notches and
13 with basal notches in addition to the lateral notch). The Type
III basal points are also found in the sand hills, in the Pueblo
ruins, and in the slab-house culture of the Canadian River.
Scrapers
Of scrapers 64 came from the site, and of the~ 38 are end ~rapers
which vary in si~ and shape as shown in (Plate 19, Panel C.). One
of these is a scraper which is heavily patinated. In addition, this
scraper shows no evidence of pressure flaking which is common to
the unpatinated scrapers. (See Plate 19, Panel C, Figure 13).
Twenty-five side scrapers, and one shaft scraper, were found in
the site.
Punches and Drills
Ten punches and drills were found in the site.

Five are drills,

84

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Socle~y

one of which is fragmentary, and five are punches, four of which
are fragraentary. (See Plate 19, Panel C, Figures 1 and 2).
Knives

Twelve knives were found in the site, five of which were fragmentary. (See Plate 19, Panel C). Two of the knives are beveled and
made of flint from Alibates Creek, a branch of the Canadian River.
One is Type D (see Figure 4), and the other is a variation of Type
C (see Figure 3), according to Poteet’s6 system of classification.
Poteet’s classification has Type C as diamond shaped. This particular knife is diamond shaped, yet there is a short protrusion on
one face which seems to be functional. Poteet makes no mention of
such a variation. Two knives showing similarity in shape came
:from slab,house ruins of the Canadian River. One is from the
Antelope Creek ruins, excavated by E. J. Lowrey, and is exhibited
in the West Texas Museum in Lubbock. The other came from the
Saddle.Back ruin. A’picture of tiffs knife will be found in Holden’s7 description of the site. Porter Montgomery has two knives
from Dalhart, Texas, which also suggest this modification.

Obieets o/Stone
Some of the most interesting specimens of the collection are
found among the stone artifacts. This group includes a pendant
made of a hard slate-like rock. (See Plate 19, Panel C, Figure 10).
The finding of this pendant came about under rather unusual circumstances. It had been broken into halves by a plow. Mrs. Watts
6. Poteet. Sybil. "The Oceurrene~ mad Distribution of Beveled Kniv~," Bull~in
of Tex~ Areha~logi~l and Pal~n~logi~l ~ciety, Yol, 10, 1938.
q. Holden, W. C., "Ex~vation of ~ddl~Back Ruina," Bull~in of Areh~lo~t~[
and Pal~n~logical ~iety, Vol. ~, 1933, Plate 9, p. 40.

PLATE 19.
Panel A., Fig. 1, Rich Lake; Fig. 2, Scored Stone.
Panel B., Fig. 1, Patinated Stemle~ss Point; Figs. 2-3-4-5, Fragments referable to Folsom Culture; Fig. 6, Typical larger Type II
Stemmed Points; Fig. 7, Typical smaller Type I Stemless Points; Fig.
8, Typical smaller Type II Stemmed Points; Fig. 9, Typical smaller
Type HI Basal Point.
Panel C., Fig. 1, Drills; Fig. 2, Punches; Fig. 3, Variation of Type
C. Bevelled knife; Fig. 4, Bevelled knife Type D.; Figs. 5-6-7-8, knives;
Fig. 9, Cross of chert; Fig. 10, Stone Pendant; Figs. 11-12, Bone Implements; Fig. 13, Patinated End Scraper; Fig. 14, Types of End
Scrapers.

Plate 19

Lake Sites of the So~th Plains of Texas

87

found the top half at one time, and a year later she found the bottom half.

Its extreme simplicity, its symmetry, and the beautiful

cur~,es of its sides, make it a work of art.
The pendant is seven centimeters long and 1.8 centimeters wide.
It appears to have been ground into form. There is a striation in
the rock which has been arranged to blend with tile general contour
of its shape, The hole at the top is bored from both directions.
This is a characteristic found among the later Puebloan cultures;
however, it is doubtful that the pendant is of Puebloan origin. The
writer could find no duplicate of it at the museums in Santa Fe, and
the curators could throw no Iight upon its origin. Kidders reports
that in his excavation of Pecos ruins he found that pendants of stone
were exceedingly rare, with the exception of those of turquoise.
This pendant from Rich Lake, even though it is more rectangular,
shows some similarity to pendants reported by Ray9 from a cremated burial near Colorado, Texas.
FtuskeylO reports finding scored stones in "Mound A" of the
Nucces Canyon of Texas. One such artifact is in the writer’s collection from Rich Lake. (See Plate 19, Panel A, Figure 2). The
stone is thirteen centimeters long, eight centimeters wide and four
and one-half centimeters thick on one edge, the opposite edge being
narrower, in fact highly rounded. On the wider edge are seven lines
scratched parallel with the face of the stone.
No whole metate was found. The fragments found at the camp
appear to come from two general types. One is large, thin, flat,
and made of sandstone. The other is thicker, smaller in diameter,
and made of a harder type of stone.
There are three general types of manos. The most common are
of quartzite river stones, and are relatively thick and oval in shape.
A second type is round, thin, and often slightly convex along one
axis. This type ranges from five to seven inches in diameter. The
$. Kidder, A. V., ’1~e Artifacts of P~cos, Phillips Academy, by the Yale Unive~ity
Pr~, 1932, p. 100.
9. ~, ~s N., "~me Unusual Cr~a~ Burials Near Colorado,
Bulle~n o~ Te~ A~b~I~ and P~n~l~ ~i~, VoL 8, 1936, Pla~ 1,
I0. Huak~, Vane, "An Areha~I~lc~ Su~ of the ~u~ Canyon of Text."
BuH~in of Tex~ Arc~l~t~ and P~n~l~i~l ~i~y, Vol. 7, Pla~ 15, p. 166.

88

T~x, aa Arch~ologieal ~nd Paleontological Soeiegy

third type of mano is more rectangular in shape, and is usually flat
on one face and convex along one axis on the opposite face.
In ,the collection is found a thin sandstone artifact which is oval
in shape, five and one-half inches long and three and one-half inches
wide. One face is convex to the longer axis and the opposite face
is concave to the sarne axis. There is another small flat rectangular
stone, one edge of which has been ground to a sharp bevel.
Chert is the principal stone used for harmner stones. Two small
hand axes were found which also are made of chert. Another chert
artifact is crudely shaped, similar to a Celtic cross. (See Plate 19,
Panel C, Figure 9).
There is one sandstone artifact which probably is of Puebloan
origin. It is a spherical ball one and three-eighths inches in diameter. The writer has in his collection another such sphere seveneighths of an inch in diameter, taken from a camp near Post. Kidder reports thirty such specimens from the Pecos ruins. He describes
them thus:
"Most of these are almost perfectly spherical, but their shape is
apparently in every case natural. None are battered, nor do any
show smooth areas or wear.facets. The size-range in the thirty
specimens collected is from seven-eighths of an inch to three and
one.fourth inches, with an almost perfect gradation between the
extremes. Possible use might have been: in games; as kick.stones;
or as slingshot beads; or their roundness may have had esthetic or
even ceremonial attraction.’’11
Paint rock is relatively abundant. Fossiliferous limonite from
the lower Cretaceous is the source of the paint rock.
Bone Implements
Bone implements are scarce even though the camp contains quite
a bit of bone that is highly mineralized. Two bone implements are
shown in (Plate 19, Panel C, Figures 11 and 12). From Tahoka
Lake the writer has one six inch bone awl which is complete.
11,

Kidder, Op,

Lake Si~es o] ~he Sou~h P~ins o3~ Texas

89

Pottery
The writer has neither found pot sherds at Tahoka Lake nor at
Twin Lakes. At Rich Lake only two sherds from but two pots have
been found. So far as these three "alkali" lakes are concerned, evidences of pottery are not as common as at the other three types
of South Plains camp sites.
Rims from the two pots from Rich Lake were identified by Dr. N.
S. Stallings of the Laboratory of Anthropology, Santa Fe, New
Mexico. One is a Brownware, which was distributed through southern New Mexico and West Texas, from 900 to 1400 A. D. The
second is the exuberant black, Corrugated Puebloan, ware.
Puebloan pottery is abundant in the sand hills and in the surface lakes. It is also in the canyon sites near Lubbock. Mr. Stallings of the Laboratory of Anthropology at Santa Fe identified the
following sherds of the writer’s collection coming from canyon sites
within ten miles of Lubbock.
From Buffalo Springs one sherd was of Glaze I Red, of aberrant
paste. It is unusual and may have been made locally. From Boles
ranch, sherds from two camps were identified. One camp had a
Rio Grande Glaze, F?, twelfth century to early eighteenth century.
The other camp had an earlier pottery. One sherd was an areal
phase of Mera "Ceramic Clues"--1306 A. D. to 1375 A. D. It
occurs south of Albuquerque and is a mixture of Socorro and Mesa
Verde Black on White. Other sherds were Chupadero, Black on
White, 1200 A. D. to 1650 A. D. A third type of sherd was of Three
Rivers, Red-on-Terracotta from around Alamogordo. It had a wide
trade range during the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth centuries.
From a surface lake five miles north of Lubbock, near the juneture of the Yellowhouse, and Black Water Draw, thirteen sherds
have been found which represent four different pots. According to
Dr. Stallings two of these pots are of the E1 Paso Brown (900 A. D.
to i400 A. D. or later), five of the sherds are from a Rio Grande
Glaze II (fifteenth century). Six are of Chupadero Black on White,
which have a range through Eastern Arizona, Northern Chihuahua,
New Mexico, and Texas (twelfth to seventeenth centuries), with the
maximum expansion in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.

9O

Texas Archeological and Paleon~loglcal Society

Summary and Conclusions
Rich Lake appears to have a mixture of several cultures. Puebloan influence is suggested in the black exuberant corrugated pottery, the four obsidian points, the spherical sandstones, and the
prevalence of small Type III basal arrow-heads. Puebloan pottery,
however, is found more along the Yellowhouse Canyon and its
near-by "surface" lakes than at the "alkali" lakes of Lynn and Terry
Counties. This might suggest that the course of the Yellowhouse
was used by the Puebloans as a guide and as a water supply as they
crossed the level and uncharted high plains, and that the "alkali"
lakes were visited less frequently.
Pottery distribution on the South Plains needs to be more thoroughly studied to find the extent of Puebloan influence.
Canadian River influence can be seen at Rich Lake. The small
Type III basal arrow-heads mentioned above are also found in the
slab-house culture of this river as well as in the sand hills. Another
suggestion of Canadian River influence is the occurrence of flint
from Alibates Creek. 7.7 percent of the flint artifacts from Rich
Lake are of Alibates flint. The variation of the Type C beveled
knife found at Rich Lake and in the slab-house culture might warrant further study.
The scored stone is similar to those from the Nueces Canyon. The
stone pendant is somewhat like those taken from the cremated burial
near Colorado, Texas.
The gray and brown flint probably came from the Edwards plateau to the south and southeast. There is no flint in this immediate
portion of the South Plains.
The Brown-ware shows an influence from the southwest, possibly
from around El Paso.
The five fragments referable to Folsom suggest age. The other
large Type I stemless point from the camp is not Folsom, but is
highly patinated. One end scraper from the site is heavily patinated
and shows crude percussion flaking.
The writer ventures one hypothesis as to the "alkali" lakes.

No

Lake Sites of the South Plains of Texa~

91

one people lived at the lake sites over a long period of time; however, the camps must have been occupied often by first one culture,
then another. The apparent mixture of cultures and the absence of
evidence of permanent houses support this hypothesis. These various peoples could have occupied the camps while passing across
the Plains or as hunting headquarters during the buffalo season.
Much more study needs to be made of sites on the South Plains.
The degree of influence exerted by bordering cultures as well as
features of cultural similarity between the four geographical types
of sites need to be determined.
Texas

Technological College, Lubbock, Texas.

