Texa,; Archeological Society

400

DART POINT TYPES
ABASOLO POINTS
(Plate 79)
DESCRIPTION
Outline:
Triangular to leaf-shaped blade with straight to
slightly convex edges. Base is weakly convex to well
rounded, almost semicircular, which is chief distinction
from closely related Tortugas points (Plate 120). Blade
often beveled, either along right or left edge of each
face; in some cases the edges are not so much beveled as
steeply chipped on both edges of one or both faces. Base
may be thinned to facilitate hafting.
Dimensions:

Length generally about 4 to 6 cm. but may range

as high as 8 cm. Width generally 2 to 3 cm. but may range
as high as 4.5 or 5 cm. Very similar to Catdn points (Plate
84) but distinctly larger. Also similar to Desmuke points
(Plate.8?) but base rounded rather than having converging
edges.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
One of principal types (with Tortugas points) of Falc6n Focus
in southwest Texas, continuing southward to southern
Tamaulipas and northern and eastern Nuevo Leon in Mexico. Going northward into Texas, it appears in Pecos River
Focus, but only sporadically elsewhere, as in the Aransas
Focus on the central Gulf coast, Ed\vards Plateau Aspect,
and possibly the East Texas Aspect.
DISTRIBUTION
Most common in Rio Grande valley below Laredo and continuing into Tamaulipas, Mexico. Becomes progressively
less frequent eastward along Gulf coast and northward into
Central Texas and Pecos River mouth, but may be ex¯ pected to occur occasionally in all :parts of Texas except
extreme north and Panhandle.

AGE
Began between 5000 and 3000 B. C. and survived until perhaps
500 A. D. in most of distribution area, but apparently survived until 18th century along lower Rio Grande. Always
in pre-ceramic cultural association, so far as known.

ESTIMATED

REFERENCES
Named by R. S. MacNeish, manuscript in preparation on archeology of southern Tamaulipas.

Texas Archeological Society

402

ANGOSTURA POINTS
(Plate 80)

DESCRIPTION
Outline: Basically a narrow leaf shape with convex edges and
base considerably narrower than in other earl~y, lanceolate
forms. In many cases, perhaps due to excessive grinding
of proximal (lower) edges, there is a distinct inward curve
below the mid-section (B-D, F, H, V, W). In other cases,
there is a very faint shoulder below which the smoothed
stem edges are quite straight as they converge toward the
base (L, O-R, X). The broadest part is usually approximately at mid-section but may be slightly above or below;
rarely, it is well toward the tip (Y, Z) or near the base
(AA). The Angostura type is not known to include beveled edges, but specimens K-O have been included in
Plate 80 to show how closely some beveled specimens resemble the unbeveled ones. As the exact association of
such examples is unknown, it is not known whether they
are contemporaneous with the unbeveled points .or are
later, rechipped, and of a distinct type. The situation is
parallel to that of unbeveled Pla~nview points (Plate I16)
and beveled Meserve points (Plate 104).
Dimensions: Texas specimens’range in length from about 5 to
10.5 cm., in maxlmum width from 1.8 to 4.2 cm., and in
base width from about 1.2 to 1.8 cm. The bases are thus
distinctly narrower than those of pIainvlew points although
th~ midsections are of about equal width if the largest examples (W, X, BB) are omitted.
CULTURAL AF~FILIATIONS
Undefined. In general, such artifacts are early post-glacial,
about same age and association as Plainview, ScottsbluS],
Eden, and Meserve points.

DISTRIBUTION
Great Plains. from Central Texas northward probably into
Canada.
ESTIMATED AGE
6000 to 4000 B. C., perhaps surviving later in Central Texas.
REFERENCES
First described by Hughes (1949) as Long points at the Long
Site in Angostura Reservoir basin in South Dakota. Now
generally referred to as Angostura points. Plate 80 examined by Hughes, who accepts all specimens as of this type
except beveled ones (K-O), and Y. Present description is
for Texas specimens; a complete survey of type throughout Great Plains is needed.
BAIRD BEVELED BLADE POINTS
See Tortugas Points (Plate 120).

PLATE 80

Texas Archeological Society

4O4

BULVERDE POINTS
(Plate 81 )
DESC~RIPTION
Outline:
Blade usually triangular with straight to slightly
convex edges, but occasionally strongly convex to leafshaped.
Shoulders sometimes squared (I, J, L, N, P,
U, W) but usually have short barbs. In a few cases, barbs
extend nearly to base of stem (S, X, Y), possibly indicating separate type although barbs of all lengths form a
continuous gradation around fairly uniform stem shape.
Stem usually rectangular or slightly contracting (C, F, L,
M) and characterized by wedge shape; that is, from shoulder area, stem is thinned evenly to very sharp edge at
base, with stem edges finely chipped. Base usually straight,
may be very slightly concave or convex.
Dimensions:
Total length ranges from about 4.5 to 9 cm.,
average about 6 cm. Stem usually ~.~ to 1/4 total length.
Stem width fairly uniform at 1.5 to 2 cm.
CU~LTU,RAL AFFILIATIONS
Primarily an Edwards Plateau Aspect type. occurring less
frequently in adjoining pre-ceramic complexes from Pecos
River Focus to East Texas Aspect and Aransas Focus on
coast, Closely related to Carrollton points (Plate 82) but
lacks stem smoothing of latter type. Occurs in association
with pottery in Alto Focus of Gibson Aspect in East Texas.
Also similar to Tray,s points (Plate 121) except for more
prominent shoulders and barbs, and wedge-stem, lacking
in Travis type. When slightly concave bases occur (I, O,
V), Bulverde type
(Plates 113-115).

tends

to

approach

Pedernales

type

DISTRIBUTION
Common in Central Texas, less so in adjoining areas.

]~STIMATED AGE
3000 B. C. to 500 or 1000 A. D.
REFERENCES
Kelley, 1947b, Plate 14, J; Newell and Krieger, 1949, p. 170
and Figure 59, L-Q; Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 176 and
Plate 59, No. 8; Bel! and Hall, 1953, p. 9 and Plate 4.
"Strawn Stemmed"

(Kelley,

1947b, Plate 14, C)

would

probably be partly included in the Bulverde type as here
defined.

PLATE 81

Texas Archeological Society

406

CA~ROLLTON POINTS
(Plate 82, A-L)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Triangular blade with prominent shoulders, squared
or barbed; blade edges straight to slightly convex. Stem
roughly rectangular, base straight to slightly convex. Stem
edges, and sometimes base, commonly smoothed.
Dimensions:

Total length ranges from about 3 to 6 cm., but

shortest specimens (A-C) probably reworked after tips
shattered. Stem ~ to nearly ½ total length. Maximum
width acros~ shoulders 2.5 to 4 cm.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Reported as major type in Carrollton Focus of Trinity Aspect,
Archaic Stage. Occurs as minor type in East Texas Aspect
of Archaic Stage. Related to Bulverde points of Edwards
Plateau Aspect (Plate 81), but much less variation in
form, especially barbs, workmanship generally crude,
stems not wedge-shaped in longitudinal section, and Bulverde type lacks smoothing of stem edges and base.

DISTRIBUTION
Center of distribution appears to be in Dallas area, near junction of East Fork and Trinity River, with frequency decreasing toward northeast Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE
2000 to 1000 B. C. (Crook and Harris, 1952).
REFERENCES
Crook and Harris, 1952; 1954a, p. 3, Plate 1, Nos. 1-4, who call
the type "Carrollton Stemmed".

PLATE 82

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

4O8

CASTROVILLE POINTS
(Plate 83)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Large triangular blade with edges often quite straight,
but sometimes slightly convex (D, I, J, L, O, S), concave
(B, K, P), or recurred (C, G, O). Shoulders occasionally
small (A, C, E), but strong barbs common. Barbs grade
from long, narrow (D, F, G, H, J) to massive with tips in
line with stem base (L-N, Q-T). In latter cases, artifact
probably blocked out first as large triangle with convex
base, then notches cut inward from base. One barb often
longer than other. Stems very broad and usually expand
with rather straight edges; they may also be nearly parallel-edged (B, D, E, K, P). Bases straight to convex. The
broad stems and general straightness of both stem and
blade edges usually form an easily recognized combination.
Dimensions: Total length about 5 to 9 or 10 cm., average about
7 cm. Width across shoulders or barbs ranges from 3 to 6
cm. Maximum stem width ranges from 2.4 to 3.6 cm. Stem
length usually 1/4 to {~{~ total length.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A

major type of Edwards Plateau Aspect, Archaic Stage.
Closely associated with Will~ams points (Plate 124) but
distinguished by greater width and angularity of stem, and
larger barbs; also similarities with Lange points (’Plate 97).

DISTRIBUTION
Common in Central Texas, decreasing toward North-Central
area and toward central coast.
ESTIMATED AGE
4000 B. C. to 1000 A. D. or greater part thereof.
RI~FERENCES
Kelley, 1947b (not illustrated); Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 176
and Plate 23, No. 6 (Plate 23, No. 7 would now be classified as a Lange point, however). Bell and Hall, 1953, report this type as "common throughout Oklahoma, especially
in eastern section of state," but the examples they illustrate look like Williams points.

PLATE 83

Texas Archeological Society

410

CATAN POINTS
(Plate 84)
DESCRIPTION
Outline:
Same as Abasolo points (Plate 79) and similarly
usually beveled on either right or left edge of both faces,
occasionally on both edges of one or both faces.
Dimensions: Smaller than Abasolo points, ranging from 2 to 4
cm. in length and 1.5 to 2.5 cm. in width. In dimensions
they could be classed as arrow points, but in thickness and
use of bevels they are like other dart points. Between 4
and 4.5 cm. in length they overlap the smallest "Abasolo
points.
CULTURA,L AFFILIATIONS
Linked with Matamoros points (Plate 103) as diagnostic types
of Mier Focus, Axchaic Stage, in Southwest Texas. The
two types are small counterparts of the Abasolo and
Tortugas types, respectively, and where there is control
over their associations, they appear in later periods than
the two larger types. In Tamaulipas and on the Texas
coast, Catdn and Matamoros points occur in association
with pottery whereas their larger coun.terparts are prepottery. AbasoIo and Tortugas points occur far inland in
Texas, but the two smaller types do not, as far as known.
DISTRIBUTION
From southern Tamaulipas to central Gulf coast of Texas, inland over Southwest Texas.

ESTIMATED AGE
May have first appeared about 500 A. D. and (at least in
Brownsville, Rockport, and Mier Foci) survived until the
18th century.
R]gFERENCES
Named by R. S. MacNeish, manuscript in preparation on archeology of southern Tamaulipas.

PLATE 84

Texas Archeological Society

412

CLOVIS POINTS
(Plate 85)
This description is tentative; an adequate one must be made from
a study of fluted points wherever they occur in North America.
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Usually a narrow leaf shape with broadest part near
mid-section or somewhat farther toward the tip. In rare
cases the broadest part is at or near the base (F), forming
a triangle. The edges are usually convex but may be fairly
straight, especially toward the proximal (lower) end~
where they have been ground smooth. Excessive grinding
at proximal end occasionally produced recurved edges (G,
H, L, O, P). The two lateral projections near the base of
O are unique, and as edges are ground smooth above, belo~v, and over these projections, they must have been chipped that way originally. Compared with Folsom points
(Plate 92), the flutes of Clovis points are usually crudely
made and seldom reach as much as half way from base
toward tip; G is an exception. Sometimes more than a
single blow was needed to remove the flute (D, J, K).
Nearly al! known Clovis points are fluted but most have a
longer or more even-sided flute on one side than the
other. It is possible that some have no flutes, which would
make them very difficult to distinguish from some Plainview points (Plate 116). As on Plainview points, the bases
are always concave and often recurved with the concavity
rounding into the basal corners.
Dimensions: Length varies from about 6 to 14 cm. on specimens from Texas, width about 2 to 4 cm. While there is
no doubt that most Clovis points are considerably larg.er
and heavier than Folsom points, the two types overlap In
size, so that B-E are smaller than specimen M on Plate 92.
However, the thinness of FoIsom points makes them lighter; their flutes extend nearly to the tip in most cases, they
often have a small nipple in the middle of the basal concavity which is never seen in Clovis points, and the distribution and geological association of the two types are
quite distinct.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
These specimens have been isolated finds for the most part.
On the basis of extensive excavations at the Blackwater
Draw Site near Clovis, New Mexico, by the University of
Pennsylvania Museum in the 1930’s and the Texas Memoria! Museum in recent years, Sellards (1952) has defined a Llano Complex which is characterized by Clovis
points. It remains to be seen how far beyond the southern Great Plains this complex is applicable. The Llano
Complex belongs to the Paleo-Amerman Stage herein.
DISTRIBUTION
’
Borax Lake Site in northern California and Naco Site in southern Arizona across United States to Atlantic seaboard; a
few specimens from Alaska, Durango, Mexico, and Costa
Rica. Examples from most parts of Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE
Somewhat greater than that of Folsorn points, probably at least
10,000 B. C. and perhaps as early as 15,000 B. C. at beginning. Excavated specimens in Great Plains and Arizona
repeatedly associated with extinct mammoths, animals
which did not certainly survive until Folsom times.

REFERENCES

Krieger, 1947a, pp. 12-13, Plate 1; Sellards, 1952. Figs. 7-9, 17,
19-22A.

PLATE 85

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

414

"DALLAS PENTAGONAL POINTS"
Crook and Harris (1954a, Plate 1, Nos. 12, 13) illustrate two examples of "Dallas Pentagonal points". An examination of
similar specimens from northeast Texas in the University of
Texas collections raises the question of whether these are sufficiently distinct from Carrollton and Elam points (Plate 82)
to warrant a separate type.
DA~RL POINTS
(Plate 86)
DESCRIPTION
Outline:
Blade usually a long, slender triangle with edges
straight to slightly convex. Shoulders vary from almost
none to slight, angular projections; barbs absent. Blade
commonly beveled, usually on right edge of both faces,
bevel being narrow and very steep. Blade edges sometimes very finely serrated, on beveled as well as unbeveled specimens: Stem edges parallel to flaring and sometimes well smoothed by grinding. Bases usually concave
from slightly to deeply, but may be straight (L, N, O, T,
Y, AA, DD). Stems sometimes beveled as well as blades.
Dimensions: Total length about 2.5 to 7 cm., average about 5
cm. Width 1 to 1.5 cm. Stem varies from nearly !/~ to as
little as 1/6 of total length.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Believed to have appeared toward end of Edwards Plateau
Aspect, Archaic Stage, and to have continued into Central
Texas Aspect, Neo-American Stage. Closely related to
Yarbrough type (Plate 125), with which there is considerable overlap in features and which occupies a similar
time position in East Texas, continuing from Archaic
Stage into Gibson Aspect of Neo-American Stage. Tendency toward extreme narrowness, concave base, and frequent beveling provide principal contrasts with Yarbrough
type.
DISTRIBUTION
Common in Central and North-Central Texas and westward to
Pecos River mouth.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly from about time of Christ to 1000 A. D.
RI~FERENCES
Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 175 and Plate 23, No. 1; Bell an@
Hall, 1953, Plate 4.

PLATE 86

Texas Archeological Society

416

"DENTON NU~-STEMMED POINTS"
Crook and Harris (1954a, Plate 1, Nos. 10, 11) illustrate two examples of "Denton Nub-Stemmed Points". The present authors regard these as falling within the range of Gary points
(Plate 94) and would include them with that type at least
until specific reasons are given for a subdivision.
DESMUKE POINTS
(Plate 87)
DESORIPTION
Outline: Small, shoulderless, roughly lozenge-shaped points.
Blade edges straight to convex; base contracts more or less
to point rather than being convex to semicircular as in
case of Abasolo points (Plate 79). Edges of base tend to
be straight, or one edge fairly straight while other may be
convex; base and blade frequently meet at a distinct angle.
Blades sometimes beveled along either right or left each
of both faces, but not as frequently as in Abasolo type.
Dimensions: Total length 3 to 5 cm., average about 4 cm.
Maximum width 1.5 to 2.5 cm. Cross-section may be thick
and diamond-shaped with ridge on each face.
CULTURAL AFFI.LIATIONS
Archaic Stage in Southwest Texas, probably belonging to
Falc6n or Mier Focus, or both, but most frequent in interior where no complexes have been accurately defined.
Probably related to both Abasolo and Catdn points (Plates
79, 84) but distribution much more limited than that of
either of the other types.
DISTRIBUTION
Apparently most frequent along middle parts of Frio and
Nueces River valleys, decreasing southward toward lower
Rio Grande, and toward coast in Nueces and Kleberg
Counties. Not recognized as yet along rest of Texas coast
or in Central Texas. Many specimens made of a white
quartzite (A-N) found in Duval, McMullen, and probably
other adjacent counties; elsewhere, made of various flints
(O-HH).
ESTIMATED AGE
Not determined.
REFERENCES

None.

Y

PLATE 87

Z

AA

418

Texas Archeological Society
EDEN POINTS

(Plate 92, P-R)
No satisfactory study of this type has been made, although Krieger
(1947a) and Wormington (1948) have argued for its distinction
from other types of the early post-glacial period. Its name derives from the Eden Valley in southwestern Wy.oming, where
both Eden and Scottsblu]] points were found m association
with extinct bison at the Finley Site (Moss, et al, 1951, describe
the geology of the site and illustrate the artifacts but do not
describe them or use type names).
Generally speaking, the Eden point is a long and very narrow
artifact, beautifully chipped with flake scars in more or less
matching pairs on both faces, meeting along a central ridge
("collateral chipping"). It is usually diamond-shaped in crosssection and has no shoulders. The basal edges are ground and
may be slightly narrower than the blade, due to excessive
grinding. The distribution of this type conforms essentially to
the High Plains, and in Texas it is confined to the Llano Estacado, so far as known. The estimated age is between about
7000 and 4000 B. C. although it may not have lasted the entire
span. Usually found with Scottsbluff type in Plains but not
nearly as widespread as the latter.
EDG]~WOOD POINTS
(’Plate 88)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Short triangular blade with edges sometimes straight,
usually convex. Blade occasionally beveled on right edge
of both faces. Shoulders prominent to well barbed. Stem
edges expand widely with base often as wide as shoulders.
Base may be nearly straight (B, N, T) but is usually concave.
Dimensions: Total length about 3 to 5 cm., average about 4
cm. Maximum width 2 to 3 cm. Stem width usually 1.5 to
2 cm. and stem usually ~ to ’~z total length.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Not common in any known complex but occurs with some
consistency in components of East Texas Aspect, Archaic
Stage, and to a lesser extent in Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Edgewood points resemble Ellis points (Plate 89) in size
and proportions, differing mainly in their concave bases.
As the two types appear to have about the same distribution in time and space, it may be argued that they should
be combined into one. Edgewood points also resemble
three of the larger Edwards Plateau Aspect types: Fairland, Fr~o, and Mart~ndale points (Plates 91, 93, 102) in
some respects and some of those on Plate 88 perhaps belong to these types. In general, Edgewood points are
smaller and broader in proportion to length than the above
Central Texas types, and lack basal notching,
DISTRIBUTION
Principally found in northeast Texas, and sporadically from
there toward Central and North-Central Texas, perhaps
also toward coastal plain.
ESTI,MATED AGE
Probably late in Archaic Stage, appearing shortly before or
after time of Christ.
REFERENCES
None.

PLATE 88

420

Texas Archeological Society
ELAM POINTS
(Plate 82, M-U)

DESCRIPTION
Outline: Small, stubby blade with edges straight to convex.
Shoulders weakly developed to nearly absent. Stem roughly rectangular with edges parallel or slightly expanded or
contracted, base straight to slightly convex. Stem edges
often smoothed, base less often.
Dimensions: Total length about 2 to 3.6 cm., average 2.5 to 3
cm. Stem usually about half the total length, sometimes a
little more or less. Small size may indicate use as arrow
points, but thickness and workmanship compares with
other dart-point types.
CULTUB~&L AFFILIATIONS
Characteristic of Elam Focus in Archaic Stage, also occurring
as minor type in East Texas Aspect. Some overlapping
with Ellis points (compare T with Plate 89, C, D, H), but
shoulders generally less well developed, stem and blade
more equal in size, stem edges do not expand as much, and
consistently smaller in size range.

DISTRI~I~U.TION
Apparently most common in Dallas area in East Fork and
Trinity River valleys, fading out in northeast Texas, but
not known in any notable numbers anywhere.
ESTIMATED AGE
500 B. C. to 450 A. D. (,Crook and Harris, 1952).
REFERENCES
Crook and Harris, 1952: !954a, p. 11, Plate 6, Nos. 6-12, who
call the type "Elam Stemmed." Probably includes "Orla
Stemmed" of Stephenson (1949b).
ELLIS POINTS
(Plate 89)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Short triangular blade with edges straight to convex,
occasionally slightly concave (A, G, Y). Shoulders prominent to well barbed. Stem expands toward base but never
as broad as shoulders; stem edges tend to be straighter
than in most types with cut-out corners. Bases straight to
convex.
Dimensions: Total length about 3 to 5 cm. Maximum width
across shoulders about 2 to 3 cm.; smaller specimens (B-E)
may have been re-chipped. Stems equal I/4 to nearly ’~
of total length and are 1.5 to 2 cm. wide.
CULTbZRAL AFFILIATIONS
Widely distributed in Archaic Stage, more or less throughout
Texas except for Southwest section and probably the upper
Panhandle. Never numerous in ad~,. particular area but
may be of greatest relative frequency in East Texas Aspect.
In same area, type survived into association with pottery
in Alto Focus of Neo-American Stage (Newell and Krieger,
1949, pp. 166-167). Survival into pottery association is
possible but not proved in other areas. Although similar
in size and proportions to Edgewood points (~Plate 88),
Ellis appears to have a much wider distribution and lasted
somewhat later. An extended study would probably show

PLATE 89

422

Texas Archeological Society
this type to be very widespread in the eastern United
States in late Archaic and early Woodland cultural association, like Gary points (Plate 94), but less frequent.

DISTRIBUTION
See paragraph above.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 1000 B. C. or earlier to 500 or 1000 A. D.
REFERENCES
Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 166-167 and Fig. 8; Miller and
Jelks, 1952, pp. 171-172 and Plate 22; Ford, 1952, p. 115
and Fig. 45; Bell and Hall, 1953. Specimens illustrated by
Stephenson (1949b, Plate 8, No. 20) appear to be closer
to Palmillas type (Plate 110) than to Ellis.
ENSOR POINTS
(Plate 90)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Blade triangular and varying considerably in length
and width; edges often quite straight, otherwise slightly
convex, occasionally finely serrated. Shoulders vary from
slight to pronounced; barbs, if present, are short. Stems
very broad across neck, due to notches being shallow, and
bases commonly wider than shoulders so that basal corners are in line with blade edges. Occasionally base is
less wide than shoulders but shallow notches and broad
stem neck suggest Ensor type (Q, T, HH). Bases most
commonly straight but may be concave (G, I, M, R, U, V,
Z, BB, JJ) or convex (J, O, DD, EE).
Dimensions: Total length about 3 to 7 cm., average perhaps
5 cm. Maximum width across base or shoulders from 2 to
3 cm. Stem seldom more than 1 cm. long, therefore from
’~{~ to 1/7 of total length.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Edwards Plateau Aspect, probably relatively late in its total
span and continuing into Central Texas Aspect; also Pecos
River Focus and possibl:~: other cultural units in late Archaic or early Neo-Amerlcan Stage. Overlaps with Marcos
points (Plate 100) but the latter are generally larger, have
much deeper notches which produce narrower stem neck
and base always less wide than blade, and consequently
have longer barbs.
DISTRIBUTION
Occurs most frequently in Central Texas and lower Pecos
River area, decreasing southward toward lower Guadalupe
River and eastward to upper Sabine River.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 1000 or 2000 B. C. to 500 or 1000 A. D.
REFERENCES
Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 172, Plate 22, panel 2 (only five in
top row and first two specimens in second row; last three
in second row would now be classed as Frio points). The
"Juno Broad Base" points illustrated by Taylor (1948,
Plate 9, D; 1949) would rather clearly be included in
Ensor type. See also Bell and Hal!, 1953, pp. 8-9 and Plate
8 (only the specimen on right belongs to this type).

PLATE 90

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

424

FAIRLAND POINTS
(Plate 91 )
DESCRIPTION
Outline:
Triangular blade with edges sometimes straight,
usually convex. Shoulders narrow, seldom barbed. Stem
formed by long, shallow notches so that strongly flaring
base usually as wide as, or wider than, shoulders. Base
characterized by wide, deep concavity which produced
very sharp corners; unusually fine edge-chipping makes the
bases thinner and sharper than they appear in the photographs. Blade edges sometimes finely serrated, rarely
beveled.
Dimensions:

Total length about 3.5 to 7 cm., average perhaps

5 cm. Maximum width across shoulders or base about 2
fo 3 cm. Stem 1/5 to nearly ~ of total length.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Edwards Plateau Aspect, Archaic Stage, but not as common
as several other types. Some resemblance to Darl points
(Plate 86) but Fairtand much wider, stem corners flare
outward more widely with sharper, tips, stem edges not
smoothed nor blade beveled as much as in Darl type. Differs from Edgewood points (Plate 88) in having smaller
shoulders, much longer outward and downward sweeping
notches, and sharper, thinner stem corners.

DISTRtBU~rION
Central Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly not as long-lived as more common types of Edwards
Plateau Aspect; say about 1000 B. C. to 500 A. D. or part
thereof.
REFERENCES
Kelley, 1947b, p. 124 and Plate 14, C.

PLATE 91

Texas Archeological Society

426

FOLSOM POINTS
(Plate 92, A-O)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Usually leaf-shaped with broadest part near middle
or somewhat forward of middle; in some cases it is far
forward, closer to the tip (M); in others the edges are
parallel part of the distance forward (D, E, N). Base
always concave, sometimes very deeply so, with small
nipple or protrusion in center (B, D, E, I, L, M). Channel
or flute removed nearly full length from both faces, making central sections very thin (A-N). In some cases, flute
occurs on one face only. It is now becoming recognized
that some Folsom points are unfluted, being too thin for
this, while the general outline, deep basal concavity, and
nipple occur as on fluted specimens (O). While the central nipple is sometimes called the ?striking platform"
(for removal of the flutes), this function may be disproved by its occurrence on unfluted specimens. The
blade edges are almost always smoothed by grinding from
the base about as far forward as the point of greatest
width.
Dimensions: Length ranges from about 3 to 8 cm., most specimens from Texas and elsewhere being from 3 to 5 cm.
Widths range from 1.6 to 2.8 cm. The largest one shown
cM) is a giant for this type and is larger than some
Iovis points (-Plate 85) ; A and B are also unusually large.
Interestingly, all three of these large examples are from
Uvalde County in the southwestern section of Central
Texas. On the whole, Fo/som points are quite small, a
matter generally obscured by their confusion for many
years with Clovis points. Also, due to their thinness, they
usually weigh much less than Clovis points even when
approaching the latter in size.
CULTURAL ~ILIATIONS
Generally associated with so-called "Folsom culture" although
this complex has never been defined. FoIsom points have
been found in several cases with extinct Pleistocene bison
species, spall scrapers, snub-nosed scrapers, tiny gravers.
and a few other artifacts. When found under controlled
conditions, they seldom occur in the same association :with
the older Clovis points on the one hand, or the later
Scottsblu]], Eden. Plainview, Meserve, and Angostura
points (the so-called "Yuma points") on the other.
DISTRIBUTION
Great Plains from south-central Canada to central Texas,
including eastern and central New Mexico, and extending almost to Gulf coast of Texas. Much more restricted
than that of Clovis points, although due to the fact that
the latter have dften been called "Folsomoid", "Folsomlike", and "Generalized Folsom" points, this important
difference in distribution has usually been obscured in the
literature.
ESTIMATED AGE
Approximately 8000 B. Co, based on a radiocarbon date of
98834---300 years ago, obtained from bison bone in the
Folsom level of the Lubbock, Texas, city reservoir site
(Sellards, 1952). This one date does not reveal the whole
span of time for Folsom artifacts, but these had given way
to other types by approximately 7000 B. C.

RIDFERENCES

Roberts, 1934, p. 18, and 1935.
11-12; Wormington. 1949.

Plates 5-8; Krieger, 1947a, pp.

PLATE 92

:Fexas Archeolog~cal Society

428

FRIO POI.NTS
(Plate 93)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Triangular blade which is often short and broad,
edges usually straight to convex but also fairly often concave or recurved (D, E, R, W, CC, DD, EE). Shoulders
occasionally weakly developed (A-C, L, T, Z, AA) but
usually strong or with good barbs. Stem formed by corner
notches, often as wide as, or wider than, shoulders. Base
always concave but in many cases recurred due to a deep
U-shaped notch in center (A, B, D, F-L, O-T, V, X, Z, BB,
DD) ; in others, the notch is not prominent but the recurred
basal edge suggests that it was chipped with this principal
in mind (remaining specimens).
Dimensions:

Total length about 3 to 7 cm., average perhaps

5 cm. Maximum width across shoulders or base 2 to 4 cm.
Stem ~,~ to 1/6 of total length.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Minor type in Edwards Plateau Aspect and Pecos River Focus,
Archaic Stage. The smaller specimens (A-P) resemble
Edgewood points (Plate 88). Some resemblance to Fairland points (Plate 91) but basal corners rounded or squared
rather than sharply pointed, and corner notches of different shape. Also some resemblance to Martindale points
(Plate 102) but lacks the two-curve "fish-tail" basal edge
of the latter.
DISTRIBUTION
General in Central Texas but apparently more common in
western portions and extending to lower Pecos River or
farther. Also in south-central portion.

F_~TIMATED AGE
Possibly 2000 or 3000 B. C. to 500 A. D.
REFEt%ENCES
Kelley, 1947b, p. 124 and Plate 14, D; Miller and Jelks, 1952,
Plate 22, panel 2 (last 3 specimens, erroneously included
in Ensor points), and Plate 23, No. 9.

PLATE 93

430

Texas Archeological Society
GARY POINTS
(Plate 94)

DESCRIPTION
Outline: Triangular blade with edges usually straight to convex but sometimes concave or recurved (C, F, H, J, U, W,
X). Shoulders may be small but usually flare out widely
almost at right angles; barbs, if present at all, are short
(I). Stems usually contract strongly to pointed or somewhat rounded base but may at times approach being parallel-sided (I).
Dimensions: Total length about 4 to 8 cm., occasionally a little
shorter (C) or longer (S). Maximum width across shoulders 2 to 5 cm. Stems more constant in length than blades,
so that on shorter specimens (A, C-F) stem about ~ total
length, on longer ones ’~.~ to ’/4.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Common in East Texas Aspect, Archaic Stage, surviving into
association with pottery in Alto Focus and possibly other
foci of both Gibson and Fulton Aspects. Neo-American
Stage, in Caddoan area. May have survived almost to
Historic Stage in some localities in Caddoan area (e.g., in
McCurtain Focus). Also occurs very widely in Eastern
United States in Archaic Stage and in early Woodland
period with pottery, even more widely than do Ellis points
(Plate 89). Wells points (Plate 123) resemble Gary but
are narrower in proportion to length, the stems are consistently about ;4 the total length and usually well smoothed, and Wells points are of much more limited distribution,
being virtually confined to East, Central, and the eastern
end of North-Central Texas in our present knowledge.
The smaller Gary points somewhat resemble Langtry points
(Plate 98) and the larger, crudely chipped ones (V-Y)
closely resemble Almagre points (Plate 77), both of which
occur in Pecos River Focus and down Rio Grande ~o FalcSn
area. However, none of the three types (Gary, Langtry,
Almagre) occurs as an established type in the large intervening area of Central Texas to provide an historical connecting link. On the other hand, all three should be on
approximately the same time level in eastern and western
Texas, and they may have been historically connected at
one time, never gaining any favor in the central area
where so many other styles were common.
ESTIMATED AGE (Texas only)
Possibly 2000 B. C. to 1000 A. D. for the most part, then possibly being retained in some foci as late as 1500 or 1600 A.
D. They are consistently collected on the same sites with
Caddoan pottery types, but specific data on association is
lacking except in Alto Focus.
REFERENCES
Called "Gary Contracting Stem" points by Newell and Krie~er.
1949, pp. 164-165 and Fig. 57; Ford, 1952, p. 115 and Fig.
45: Stephenson, 1952, Fig. 95, row A; Crook and Harris.
]954a, pp. 4, 11, and Plate 6. In same reference. Crook and
Harris illustrate what they call "Denton Nub-Stemmed’"
points, but since no specific description of Gary points was
available at that time, and they do not explain the differences between "Denton Nub-Stemmed’" and Gary points, it
is questionable whether a different type is valid.

PLATE 94

Texas Archeological Society

432

JUNO BROAD BASE POINTS
See Ensor points (Plate 90).
KENT POINTS
(Plate 95)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Blade crudely triangular, often asymmetrical, edges
usually convex but not in same degree; may be rather
straight (G, K, N, T, V, AA) and in a few cases, concave
(D, L, P): Shoulders weakly developed to right-angular;
barbs (V, AA) uncommon and stronger on one side than
other. Stems more or less parallel-edged, but like blades,
usually poorly chipped and uneven. Bases usually convex,
occasionally straight (P, Q, U, BB). Rarely, blade beveled.
Dimensions: Total length 3.5 to 7 cm., occasionally a little
more or less, average about 4 to 5 cm. Maximum width
across shoulders 1.5 to 3 cm. Stem ~ to 1/5 total length,
1 to 1.5 cm. wide. Due to crude chipping, these specimens
are usually notably thicker than other types. Those from
Central Texas (W, X, BB) are generally larger than those
from coast.
CULTU~RAL AFFILIATIONS
Most common in Aransas Focus, Archaic Stage; infrequent in
Edwards Plateau Aspect and East Texas Aspect. Somewhat resemble Yarbrough points (Plate 125) but more
crudely chipped and asymmetrical, lack stem smoothing,
expanded stem edges, and frequently straight bases of
latter--differences which are more striking on actual specimens than photographs can indicate.
DISTRIBUTION
Central portion of Coastal area~

northeastward to Addicks

Reservoir area west of Houston and into East Texas area;
northward into Central Texas. Frequency decreases going
inland from Coastal area.

ESTIMATED AGE
Probably relatively late in Archaic Stage, in Christian era.
REFE~RENCES
Campbell, 1952, p. 66 and Plate 9, A-P (no type name given);
Wheat, 1953, various specimens on Plates 35-40 in several
of his "provisional types".

PLATE

95

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

~34

KINNEY POINTS
(Plate 96)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Triangular to leaf-shaped blade, edges almost straight
in some cases (P, Q, T, V) but usually convex. On longer
and narrower specimens the edges may be almost parallel
for some distance forward from base. In rare cases, lower
edges are smoothed (I, W) and specimen may be confused
with Plainview points (,Plate 116). Bases always concave,
from slightly (J, K, X) to deeply (F, I, P), usually in
single broad arc but occasionally in recurve (I, N, V, Z).
Dimensions:

Length 4.5 to 11 cm., maximum width about 2 to

3.5 cm. However, it is quite possible that longest and
broadest specimens (or even all of them) are knives
rather than projectile points, but there seems to be no
feasible way to distinguish them. It seems possible that
at least some of the "Kinney points" were used as projectile points, particularly those which are of symmetrical
outline with thinned, concave bases (such as F, P-R), and
these grade imperceptibly into larger and heavier specimens which are probably knives (S-AA). It seems better
to illustrate the range than to attempt at this time to decide which should be called knives.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
’Minor type in Edwards Plateau Aspect, Aransas Focus, Pecos
River Focus, and FalcSn Focus, all in Archaic Stage. Similar in shape and distribution to Tortugas points (Plate
120) but larger on the whole, unbeveled, and grade from
triangular to leaf-shaped. Also resemble Pandora and
Re]ugio points (Plates 112, 117), but these have straight
and convex bases, respectively, and differ somewhat in
general proportions and distribution.
DISTRIBUTION
Most frequent from central coast inland northwestward toward
Pecos River mouth.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 1000 or 2000 B. C. to 1000 A. D.
REFERENCES
None,

PLATE 96

Texas Archeological Society

436

LANGE POINTS
(Plate 97)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Large triangular blade with edges straight to convex, occasionally concave or recurved (B, E, R, U, X).
.Shoulders prominent and often well barbed (C, J, M, S,
U, W, X). Stem edges expand and are often straight, resembling those of Castroville type (Plate 83) but not as
wide.

Base almost always straight but may be slightly

concave or convex.
Dimensions: Total length about 5 to 8.5 cm. (stubby specimens like E-G may have reworked blades). Maximum
width across shoulders 2.7 to 4 cm. Stems 1.7 to 2.5 cm.
wide at base and ~A to 1/5 of total length.
CULTI2RAL AFFILIATIONS
Primarily Edwards Plateau Aspect, extending into East Texas
Aspect, Aransas ~Focus on coast, and toward plains below
Panhandle. Although quite similar to Castrov~lle points
(Plate 83), the stems are generally less wide, the long and
massive barbs which align with the base are absent, the
bases are usually straight rather than convex, the blade
edges are somewhat more variable, and Lange points are
considerably more widespread than Castroville, which so
far as known, are typical only of Edwards Plateau Aspect.
The stems are comparable in shape to those of Marshall
points (Plate 101) but are longer, and the blades lack the
massive roundness of the latter.
DI STRI.BUTION
Most common in Central Texas, extending with decreasing frequency into East Texas, toward the central coast, and
northwestward into the plains.
ESTIMATED AGE
About 4000 B. C. to 1000 A. D. or greater part thereof.
R]gFERENCES
None, unless included in Castroville type by Kelley, Miller and
Jelks. Some of present specbnens may be Cas~rovi~le, particularly B, E, L, M, U.

PLATE 97

Texas Archeological Society

438

LANGTRY POINTS
(Plate 98)
DESC~RIPTION
Outline: Triangular blade with edge~ stra!ght to concave 0r
recurved, seldom convex, which ~s umque among Texas
dart-point types.
Usually exceedingly thin and finely
chipped, even the largest ones. Shoulders prominent to
widely outflaring, often uneven (A, E, G, J): barbs may
sweep widely outward (Q, R, V). Stems long, contracting,
at times nearly parallel-edged (B-E, I-K, R, Y) or even
expanding slightly (L, M). Bases are usually concave,
even when stem contracts strongly (A, H, N, S, T, BB),
but may be straight or (rarely) convex. Possibly more
than one type is represented, but features intergrade so
that separation difficult.
Dimensions: Total length about 4 to 7 cm, average about 6
cm. Maximum width across shoulders about 2.2 to 4 cm.
Base .6 to 1.6 cm. wide. Stem often ~ total length but
ranges to ~/4.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Common type of Pecos River Focus and, with Shumla points
(Plate 119), diagnostic of that focus. Extends down Rio
Grande valley as minor type in FalcSn Focus: occurs
rarely in Edwards Plateau Aspect but uncertain ~vhether
made there or intrusive from Pecos River Focus. Some
larger, thicker, and considerably heavier specimens designated as a "crude variety" of Langtry type have here
been placed in Almagre type (Plate 77), which has distinct distribution. Certain Langtry points with contracting
stem and convex base (F, G) closely resemble some Gary
points (Plate 94) in East Texas, but a firm connecting link
through Central Texas is lacking (see discussion under
Gary points).

DISTRIBUTION
Apparently centered in Pecos River-Rio Grande eonfluence
area, extending over adjacent parts of Trans-Pecos Texas
and northern Coahuila in the general Big Bend Area, and
southeastward down Nueees and Rio Grande valleys about
as far as MeMullen and Starr Counties, respectively. Also
occurs in Tamaulipas panhandle next to Rio Grande valley.
ES"TIMATI~D AGE
An unknown time before Christ to 700 or 800 A. D.

REFERENCES
Kelley, Campbell and Lehmer, 1940, Fig, I and Plates 4. 5, 20:
Kelley, 1947a. p. 104: Taylor, 1948, p, 84, 1949, p. 81. Bell
and Hall, 1953 report this type as common throughout Oklahoma, but this appears to be a wrong identification of
the type.

PLATE 98

Texas Archeolog~caL Society

44O

LERMA POINTS
(Plate 99)
I~ESCRIPTION
Outline:
Usually long, slender, double-pointed leaf-shaped
blade, although one end may be somewhat more rounded
than pointed (B, D, J, K, P), and a few specimens are
rather broad (A, H, N, P). It is not thought that all are
projectile points, for the broader ones, at least, may be
double-pointed knives. However, for the most part their
thickness and steep edges make them unsuitable for knives
and their symmetry suggests the balance needed for projectile points. They are thickest in the middle and thinned down enough at one end to be halted.
Dimensions:

Length 5.5 to

10 cm., most being 6 or 7 cm.

Maximum width 2 to 3 cm., at middle or close to it.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Minor type in Edwards Plateau Aspect, Pecos River Focus,
and perhaps Aransas Focus, all of Archaic Stage. Similar
to ReSugio points (Plate 117) when one end tends to be
somewhat rounded; however, they have a distinct distribution in northern ,Mexico as well as Texas.
DISTItIBUTION
Western part of Central Texas to Pecos River mouth, southward to central coast and Southwest Texas, and south of
Rio Grande to southern Tamaulipas.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly appeared earliest in southern Tamaulipas, several
thousand years before Christian era: in Texas from well
before time of Christ to somewhat after.
REFERENCES
Named by R. S. MacNeish, manuscript on archeology of southern Tamaulipas.
LONG POINTS
See Angostura points (Plate 80).

PLATE 99

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

442

MARCOS POINTS
(Plate I00)
DESCRIPTION
Outline:

Generally broad triangular blade with edges straight,

slightly convex, or gently recurved. Always barbed because deep notches cut into corners at about 45 degree
angle; barb tips frequently in line with base (A, B, H, M,
N, R, S-U). Angle of notches also always makes stem
strongly expanding; bases straight to convex, rarely
slightly concave (K, V), generally not as wide as barbs.
Dimensions:

Total length 4.5 to 9 or 10 cm., average 5 or 6

cm. Maximum width across barbs about 3 to 4.5 cm. Stem
base about 2 to 3 cm. wide and stem rather consistently
about 1 cm. long, thus 1/5 to 1/9 of total length.

CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Minor type of Edwards Plateau Aspect and Pecos River Focus,
Archaic Stage. Bears resemblances to Ensor points (Plate
90) but is distinguished by deeper notches and narrower
stem neck in proportion to blade width, and is generally
broader with much longer barbs. Also bears resemblances
to CastrovilIe points (Plate 83) but stems not as broad
across neck and expand more sharply, notches cut inward
from corner rather than upward from base, and massive
squared barbs of latter absent. As with most types, individual specimens are often difficult to assign to one or
another with complete confidence.
DISTRIBUTION
Approximately from lower Pecos River valley across central
Texas to middle Brazos River, and from Possum Kingdom
Reservoir area on upper Brazos southward to central
Coastal area.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 2000 B. C. to 1000 A. D. or greater part thereof.
REFERENCES

None.

PLATE 100

Texas Archeological Society

444

MARSHALL POINTS
(Plate 101 )
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Blade varies from triangular to broad oval, edges
from nearly straight to greater part of a semicircle. Shoulders always strongly barbed, the more massive barbs commonly being in line with the base. Notches may have removed most of corner (A-C, E, G, P) but usually were
cut upward into the blade from the base. Stem may be
parallel-sided (A-,H, J, K) or slightly expanded, and is
often quite short in proportion to the massive blade. Base
straight or slightly concave or convex.
Dimensions:

Total length about 5 to 11.5 cm., most between 6

and 8 cm. Maximum width about 3 to 5 Cmo, across barbs
or middle of blade. Stems 1.2 to 2.5 cm. wide and ¥4 to b~
of total length.
CULTURAL A~ILIATIONS
A common type of Edwards Plateau Aspect. Those with parallel-sided stems and slightly concave bases approach closely
to the Pedernales points with the least concave bases
(Plate 114, H-M) and some of them may actually be
Pedernales points; however, typical Pedernales points have
notably deeper bases than Marshall points (Plates 113-115)o
DISTRIBUTION
Common only in Central Texas; occurs infrequently in NorthCentral Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 3000 or 4000 B. C. to 1000 A. D. or greater part thereof.
REFERENCES
None, except that some such specimens were probably included
in groups called "Smithwick Small Stem" and "Bluffton
Barbed" by Kelley (1947b, p. 124 and Plate 14, B, I).

PLATE 101

Texas Archeological Society

446

M/kRTIN, DALE POINTS
(Plate 102)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Triangular blade with edges sometimes straight, usually convex. Shoulders pronounced to well-barbed, but
barbs seldom reach to base (.P, R, V, Z). Stem varies from
nearly parallel-edged (E, P) to strongly expanding. The
most distinguishing feature of these points is that the
base is formed by two distinct convex curves meeting in a
depression in the center, a "fish-tail" best seen in specimens C, D, I, J, M, Q, S, T, Y, Z-CC. On other specimens
the base appears to be a simple recurve but close examination shows the double-convex "fish-tail". It is assumed
that this form of base was the result of deliberate effort
setting it apart from other bases.
Dimensions:

Total length 3.5 to 7 cm, average 4 to 5 cm.

Maximum width across shoulders 2.5 to 4.5 cm. Stems 2 to
3.5 cm. wide and 1/5 to nearly ~ total length.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Minor type of Edwards Plateau Aspect, similar to Frio and
Uvalde points (Plates 93, 122). These three types are distinct mainly in the shape of the stem and method of indenting the base, but they also have somewhat different distributions.

DISTRIBUTION
Central Texas only, so far as known.
ESTIaMATED AGE
Possibly 3000 or 4000 B. C. to 1000 A. D. or greater part thereof.
REFERENCES
Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 176 and Plate 23, No. 9 mention this
type but illustrate what appears to be a Fr~o point. The
same applies to that illustrated by Bell and Hall (1953,
Plate ~). who have wrongly identified this type as common in Oklahoma.

PLATE 102

Texas Archeological Society

448

MATAMOROS POINTS
(Plate 103)

DE~CRIFrION
Outline: Same as Tortugas points (Plate 120) and similarly
usually beveled on either right or left edge of both faces,
occasionally on ,both edges of one or both faces.
Dimensions: Smaller than Tortugas points, ranging from 2 to
4 cm. in length and 1.5 to 2.5 cm. in width. In dimensions
these could be classed as arrow points, but in thickness and
use of bevels they are like other dart points. Between 4 and
4.5 cm. in length they overlap the smallest Tortugas points.
CULTURAL ~_FFI, LIATIONS
Linked with Catdn points (Plate 84) as diagnostic types of
Mier Focus, Archaic Stage, in Southwest Texas. The two
types are small counterparts of the Tortugas and Abasolo
types, respectively, and where there is control over their
associations, they appear in later periods than the two
larger types. In Tamaulipas and on the Texas coast, Matamoros and Catdn points occur in association with pottery
whereas their larger counterparts are pre-pottery. Tortugas and Abasolo points occur far inland in Texas, but the
two smaller types do not, as far as known.
DISTRIBUTION
From southern Tamaulipas to central Gulf coast of Texas, inland over Southwest Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE
May have first appeared about 500 A. D. and (at least in
Brownsville, Rockport, and Mier Foci) survived until historic times in the 18th century.
REFERENCES
Named by R. S. MacNeish, manuscript in preparation on archeology of southern Tamaulipas.

PLATE

103

Texas Archeological Society

45O

MF~ERVE POINTS
(Plate 104)
DF,SC:RIPTION
Outline: Lower part like Plainview points (Plate 116), upper
part modified by beveling or re-shaping of broken blade.
The lower parts retain the smoothed edges of Pla~nview
points, from which it is probable that some of them actually were Plainview points at one time. The shortest
blades were in most cases obviously given new points
after being broken, in the course of which some were
beveled, usually on the right edge of both faces (A-C, E,
F, K, M, Q, S, AA, BB), but others were plain (D, G, N,
U). Some of the longer ones probably were made with
beveled edges originally (H-J, L, O, P, 1R, T, V-Z). Both
beveled and unbeveled examples sometimes have finely
serrated edges (T-BB). Neither beveling nor serration
occurs on true Plainview points.
Dimensions: Total length about 3 to 8 or 9 cm. Blade much
more variable than stem (smoothed part), which, unless
reduced in length by secondary chipping, is 2 to 3 cm. long.
Maximum width about 2 to 2.7 cm., same as Plainview
points; basal concavity (simple arc or recurve) also like
that of Plainview.
CULTU,RAL AFFILIATIONS
Some are isolated finds, not definitely associated with any
known complexes in Texas; others belong to Edwards
Plateau Aspect, East Texas Aspect, and other Archaic complexes. Some have been collected on pottery sites.
DISTRIBUTION
Virtually entire State but very rare in Trans-Pecos Texas;
Great Plains; Louisiana, Arkansas, Missouri, etc.
ESTIMATED AGE
Probably cover great time span, depending on when original
specimen was picked up and re-worked. In Nebraska
some are as old as Plainview points (Davis, 1953), showing
that principal of beveling was known in Paleo-American
Stage, at least in Nebraska. Beveling was not widespread.
however, until the Archaic Stage, to which most such specimens probably belong.
REFERENCES
Davis, 1953. Similar specimens have been included in "Dalton
points" for several years in the Archaic Stage of Missouri. An extended description of Meserve points, by
Davis, is quoted in Bell and Hall, 1953, pp. 6-7.

K

PLATE 104

L

M

452

Texas Archeological Society
MONTELL POINTS
(Plate 105)

DESCRIPTION
Outline: Triangular blade with edges sometimes straight but
also commonly convex (G, N, T), concave (A, E, F, K, OQ), or recurred (J, L, W, X). Shoulders sometimes squared but more often have barbs from small to large, sometimes aligned with base (G, J, N, T-X). Stem occasionally
parallel-edged but usually expands and is split in center
with a deep V-shaped notch. The notch may occasionally
be somewhat rounded (Q-S) but this clear bifurcation of
the stem is an easily recognizable feature. The base itself
was almost always strongly convex before the notch was
made.
Dimensions:

Total length about 4 to 10 cm, most being about

6 to 7 cm. Maximum width across shoulders or middle of
blade seldom less than 3 cm. and may range to 5 cm.
Maximum width of stem 2 to 3 cm.; stem length quite
uniform at about 1 cm., thus V4 to 1/10 of total length.
CULTUB,AL A~FFILIATIONS
Occurs in Edwards Plateau Aspect and Pecos River Focus, but
not among most common types of either. Not known as
established type in other complexes.
DISTRIBUTION
Central Texas and westward to Pecos River mouth, possibly
into Big Bend area.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 2000 or 3000 B. C. to 500 or 1000 A. D.
REFERENCES
Kelley, 1947b, p. 124 and Plate 14, F, considers this type diagnostic of a "Uvalde Focus".

PLATE 105

Texas Archeological Society

454

MORHISS POINTS
(Plate 106)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Triangular blade with edges almost always convex
(L has straight edges but may be a Bulverde point).
Shoulders generally small, from hardly visible (C, H) to
right-angular. Barbs, if present, very small (E, L). Stem
parallel-edged with convex base to somewhat contracted
with straight to convex base. In general, stem very broad
and rounded with blade not greatly wider.
Dimensions:

Total length about 5 to 9 cm., average 7 to 8 cm.

Maximum width across shoulders about 2.~ to 4 cm. Maximum stem width about 1.8 to 2.5 cm.; stems ~z.~ to 1/5 of
total length. One of largest and heaviest types classed as
dart points in Texas.
CULTURAL A~FILIATIONS
Minor type in complex not yet well defined, for which Morhiss
Site in Victoria County is principal known component.
This site has numerous chipped-stone artifact types of
both Aransas Focus and Edwards Plateau Aspect, Archaic
Stage, which is expected from its position near the boundary between Central Texas and the Coastal Plain. The
Morh~ss type, however, appears to be a rather local development which is uncommon both toward the open coast
and the interior.

DISTRI~BUTION
See paragraph above.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 2000 B. C. to 1000 A. D.
REFERENCES
None. Similar specimens may be included in "Garcetas Broad
Base" points (Kelley, 1947a, p. 104).

PLATE 106

Texas Archeological Society

456

MORRILL POINTS
(Plate 107)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Long, slender artifacts with triangular blade, edges
straight to slightly convex. Shoulders very weak and in
some cases (N, V, X) virtually absent. Stem usually parallel-edged, occasionally slightly expanded or contracted. Stein
edges often smoothed; base straight, occasionally slightly
concave or convex. Blade edges may be finely serrated
(M, N, V,/kA).
Dimensions:

Total length 4.5 to 8 cm. but shortest specimens

are of crude workmanship (A-I) and of questionable classification. The more definite specimens (J-BB) are rather
uniform in length at 5.5 to 8 cm., with most between 6
and 7 cm. Width across blade of most definite specimens
very uniform at 2 to 2.5 cm. (J-BB, except O). Stems 1.5
to 2 cm. long, ~, to V4 of total length; occasionally nearly

~. (s, v).
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
~Minor type of East Texas
linked with Wells points
continuing into pottery
American Stage. Similar

Aspect, Archaic Stage. Closely
(Plate 12-3) in East Texas, bath
association in Alto Focus, Neoto Travis points in Edwards Pla-

teau Aspect (Plate 121) but latter more variable in stem
shape, base, and lack smoothing of stem edges.

DISTRIBUTION
Primarily in central part of East Texas area, possibly occurring
rarely in remainder of East Texas and eastern part of
Central Texas. The crudest points are generally of reddish
chert, difficult to shape, while the best ones are of flint,
so that it is difficult to determine which chert specimens
should be included.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 1000 B. C. to 500 or 1000 A. D.
REFERENCES
Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 167-168, Fig. 58.

PLATE 107

Texas Arckeolog~cal Society

458

NOLAN POINTS
(Plate 108)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Triangular blade of greatly variable length and width,
edges convex or recurved, seldom straight. A slender,
needle-sharp tip often results from convergence of recurved edges (~D, E, G, J, N, R). Shoulders may be almost
absent (E, F, H, K) but usually strong and slant toward
tip; barbs absent. Stem varies from narrow to broad, generally parallel-edged but sometimes expanded or contracted slightly. Bases usually straight but may be convex
and in rare cases slightly concave (E). The type is most
easily recognized by strong, steep bevels on the stem,
usually along the right edge of both faces, occasionally
on left edge. Rarely, blade is beveled too.
Dimensions:

Total length about 4.5 to 13 cm. Maximum width

2 to 4 cm. Stems 1.1 to 3 cm. wide but most between 1.5
and 2 cm. Stem length fairly uniform at about 2 cm. from
base to top of curve into shoulder.
CULTI~RAL AFFILIATIONS
Major type of Edwards Plateau Aspect; minor type in Pecos
River Focus and Aransas Focus, all in Archaic Stage. Possibly survives into association with pottery in Henrietta
Focus and Central Texas Aspect, but if so, such specimens
are very poorly made. Those in Pecos River and Aransas
Foci notably smaller and less well made than in Edwards
Plateau Aspect.
DISTRIBUTION
Throughout Central Texas, extending to upper Brazos River
drainage, lower Pecos River, and central Coastal area.
ESTIMATED AGE
Entire life of Edwards Plateau Aspect, possibly 4000 B. C. to
500 or 1000 A. D.
REFERENCES
Kelley, 1947a, p. 99 and Plate I0, D refers to this type as
"Nolan Beveled Stem" and considers it as the diagnostic
trait of his "Clear Fore Focus" although it occurs throughout the Edwards Plateau Aspect; he includes C. N. Ray’s
"Clear Fork Dart Points 1 and 2" within it. Also Miller
and Jelks, 1952, pp. 1"/5-176; Campbell, 1952, p. 68 and
Plate 10, L.

PLATE 108

Texas Archeologtcal Society

46O

PAISAN’O POINTS
(Plate 109, A-L)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Little data available; specimens A-L believed to be
characteristic. Blade triangular with convex edges which
are frequently serrated.

Stem

formed

by shallow

side

notches, hence shoulders weak or absent (B, D, G, J, K).
Stem consists of two protrusions flaring outward at about
45 degree angle to nearly downward (D, L). Stem corners
rounded, base concave to deeply indented.
Dimensions:

From data available, length about 3.5 to 6 cm.,

width across shoulders about 1.6 to 2.5 cm. Stem V4 to 1/6
of total length.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
So far, said to be typical only of Chisos Focus in Big Bend
area. As chipped-stone artifacts of any kind are uncommon in this focus, the Paisano type is one of the most
scantily represented in Texas, yet it seems distinctive. In
its shal!ow side notches it somewhat resembles the Ensor
type (Plate 90). The stems somewhat resemble those of
San Patrice points.
DISTRIBUTION
Southern part of Trans-Pecos Texas (Big Bend).
ESTI~MATED AGE
Possibly 800 to 1200 A. D.
REFERENCES
Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940, Fig. 2; Taylor, 1949, p. 81.

PLATE I09

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

462

PALMILLAS POINTS
(Plate 110)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Small triangular to leaf-shaped blade, edges straight
to convex, occasionally concave (E) or recurved (U, II,
JJ). Shoulders vary from slight (G, P, Q-S, X, GG) to
well barbed (A, B, T, Y, Z, AA, KK) and various grades
in between. Chief characteristic is small bulbous stem,
with expanded, rounded sides and convex base. Occasionally specimens with straight base probably should be included (W, X, BB).
Dimensions: Total length about 3 to 6 cm.; longer specimens
(FF, II-LL) may belong to Williams type instead (Plate
124). Maximum width across shoulders about 1.7 to 3 cm.
Stems 1 to 2 cm. wide and ~ to 1/6 of total length.
CULTU,RAL AFFILIATIONS
A minor type in most complexes of Archaic Stage in various
parts of Texas. Probably late in this stage, surviving in
some areas into Neo-American Stage. Similar to Williams
points (Plate 124) but smaller and probably later.
DISTRIBUTION
From East Texas across state to Trans-Pecos area, and from
upper Brazos and Trinity valleys to central and eastern
coastal plain. Although very widespread, does not appear
to be common in any particular area.
in Mexico to southern Tamaulipas.

Extends southward

ESTIMATED AGE
Probably within Christian era.
REFERENCES
Named by R. S. MacNeish, manuscript in preparation on archeology of southern Tamaulipas. Wheat, 1953, includes
such points in several of his sub-types from the Addicks
Reservoir area west of Houston.

PLATE

Texas Archeological Society

464

PANDALE POINTS
(Plate 111)
DESCRIPTION
Outline:

Long and slender blade, more often leaf-shaped than

triangular, edges usually strongly convex, occasionally
straight (A) or recurved to long needle-like tip (I, P, Y).
Shoulders poorly developed, often absent. Type most easily
recognized by beveling of blade so strongly that it is more
like a propeller in cross-section than the ordinary edgebevel; that is, the twist begins along the centerline of the
blade rather than near the edge. Stems are also beveled,
but in opposite direction from blade, so that artifact has
peculiar cork-screw twist, the purpose of which is unknown, The photographs fail to show this adequately.
Stems variable, from parallel-edged to somewhat expanded or contracted, and bases straight, concave, or convex.

Dimensions:

Total length about 3.5 to 9 cm., most between 5

and 7 cm. Maximum width across shoulders or middle of
blade about 1.5 to 3 cm. Stems 1 to 1.5 cm. wide and ~ to
1/7 of total length.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Belongs primarily to Pecos River Focus, extending rarely into
Edwards Plateau Aspect. In general outline of stem and
blade it is similar to Nolan type (Plate 108), but this lacks
beveled blades. In outline it is also somewhat similar to
the Travis type (Plate 121), which lacks the combination
of twisted blade and beveled stem. While the blades of
many types will sometimes be twisted because the original
flint flake was not very well flattened by chipping, Pandale
points were made to twist by chipping them that way.
DISTRIBUTION
Appears centered in Pecos-Rio Grande confluence area, decreasing toward Central Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 2000 B. C. to 700 or 800 A. D.
REFERENCES
Named "Pandale Twisted Blade" by Kelley.

PLATE 111

Texas Archeological Society

466

PANDORA POINTS
(Plate 112)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Triangular to leaf-shaped blade, edges almost straight
in a few cases (U-Y) but usually convex. On longer and
narrower specimens the edges may be almost parallel from
~. to ~ the distance forward. By definition, bases straight
or nearly so, to distinguish from Kinney points (Plate 96)
with concave bases and Re]ugio points (Plate 117) with
strongly convex bases. Rarely, basal edges faintly smoothed.
Dimensions:
Length about 4.5 to 12 cm., maximum width
about 2 to 3 cm. However, it is quite possible that the
longest and broadest specimens (or even all of them) are
knives rather than projectile points, but there appears to
be no definite way of distinguishing them~ It seems possible that at least some of the "Pandora points" were used
as projectile points, particularly those of narrow, symmetrical outline with thinned bases. The gradation into broader specimens which are more likely to be knives (~M, N,
X, Z) is constant and probably individuals will differ in
their opinions as to which should be called projectile points
and which knives.
CULTURAL AFFILI,ATIONS
Uncertain at present, but a minor type, at least, in Edwards
Plateau Aspect and Carrollton Focus of Archaic Stage.

DISTRIBUTION
Most common in portion of Texas where Central and Coastal
areas meet, in Victoria, Refugio, and neighboring counties. Occurs infrequently in Central, North-Central, and
eastern side of Trans-Pecos Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 2000 B. C. to 1000 A. D. but may be older or yohnger.
RF_~FERENCES
Crook and Harris (1954a, Plate 1) refer to similar specimens as
"Wheeler Leaf points".

PLATE 112

468

Texas Archeological Society
PEDERNALES POINTS
(Plates 113-115)

DESCRIPTION
Outline: Blade usually triangular but often leaf-shaped (Plates
113, P, R, S; 114, Q, R, S, U, V) and varying greatly in
dimensions and proportions. Edges usually straight or convex, but occasionally concave (Plates 113, D, F, J, L: 115,
A), recurved, or narrowed to a slim, needle-like tip (Plate
113. C, I). Shoulders vary greatly from weak to narrow
and right-angular and through various degrees of barbs
from very small to very large, reaching almost to base
of stem (Plate 115 is arranged to show the longest barbs;
Plate 114, V, has one barb reaching to base, the other
shorter). While blade is highly variable, the type is best
recognized by its more or less rectangular stem with concave to deeply indented, U-shaped, base. The base is often
thinned, either with two or three small longitudinal flakes
removed, or a single large flake, on either or both sides,
so that a stem alone, broken off below the shoulders, may
sometimes be confused with the basal portion of a Plainview point (Plate 116); however, the stems of Pedernales
points are only very rarely smoothed and the difference is
usually apparent to one familiar with both types. The
stems may contract somewhat or bulge outward with convex edges.
Dimensions: Total length varies from about 3 to 13 cm., but
the smallest specimens (Plates 113, A; 114. A-G) probably
have re-chipped blades for the most part, and the largest
(Plate 114, S, V) may never have been trimmed down and
finished properly. Most specimens range between 6 and 9
cm. in length and 3 to 5 cm. in greatest width. Width of
stem ranges from about L5 to 3 cm., and stem length is
fairly uniform at 1.5 to 2 cm. regardless of total length.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
The most common dart-point type of Edwards Plateau Aspect,
Archaic Stage, occurring over a very wide area with the
variations shown in Plates 113-115. A minor type in Pecos
River Focus, with much less variation in size and stem
usually slightly contracted with moderatel.v concave base
(like Plate 114, L). May be confused with Butverde l~oints
(Plate 91) when shoulders are small and base not deeply
concave. Also some confusion with Lange points (Plate 97).
DISTRIBUTION
Very common over all of Central Texas, extending much less
ax~mmonly into the adjacent portitms of Coastal. NorthCentral, and Trans-Pecos Texas. Not found, unless very
rarely and probably intrusively, in East and Southwes~
Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE
Entire span of Edwards Plateau Aspect, possibly 4000 B. C. to
500 or 1000 A. D. Poorly shan~d examples may be found
occasionally in association with pottery complexes at 1000
A o D. or later, but proof of such late occurrence is r~eeded.
REFERENCES
Kelley, 1947a. Plate X, A, and 1947b, Plate 14, A, regards this
type as diagnostic of a "Round Rock Focus" but presents
no statistics to show it is relatively any more common in
this focus than in others of Edwards Plateau Aspect. See
also Miller and Jelks, 1952, ~. 175 and Plate 23, Nos. 3-5;
Bel! and Hall, 1953, p. 9 and Plate 4.

PLATE 113

PLATE 114

472

Texas Archeological Society
PLAINVIEW POINTS
(Plate 116)

DESCRIPTION
Outline: Basically lanceolate with edges more or less parallel
for ~ to ~ the distance from base to tip, a form best illustrated by the nine most nearly complete specimens from
the type site at Plainview in the Texas Panhandle
Variations in form consist of slight expansion in the middle (E, K-N, Q, S, T) and a gentle recurve of lower edges
(G, K, L, N, V, BB) which probably is due to excessive
grinding of these edges. Grinding of basal edges almost
always occurs. Flaking scars sometimes run parallel across
faces or are roughly matched in pairs (B, C, I, K, N, R, S,
W-BB) ; usually they are irregular. Bases are always concave in some degree, from shallow (N) to a deep recurve
(D, L).
Dimensions: Length about 4.5 to 8 cm., maximum width about
1.8 to 2.8 cm. Base width almost always between 2 and
2.6 cm., although slightly narrower (A, B, E, H, J) or
broader ones (K, L) occur. Concavity in base 1 to 8 ram.
in depth.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Found unmixed with other projectile-point types at Plainview
Site, but associated with side and end scrapers, and extinct
species of bison. In the Red Smoke Site, Nebraska, apparently associated with Meserve points (Davis, 1953).
Elsewhere, sometimes found with Sco~tsbIuff, Eden, and
Meserve points, suggesting an early post-glacial age. Complexes for this period have not been defined except for "~he
Llano Complex of Sellards (1952), which as yet contains
no definite Pla~nview points. Many examples come from
sites of the Archaic Stage in Texas, especially Edwards
Plateau Aspect, Carrollton Focus, and East Texas Aspect.
Apparently made for a long time, extending from close of
Folsom time through rest of Paleo-Amer~can Stage and
well into Archaic Stage.
DIS’PRIBUTION
Occurs practically throughout Texas although never frequent
in any site or area; same may be said for distribution
throughout Great Plains into south-central Canada. Specimens are known from Alaska and from northeastern Mexico; also from Arizona, Ne~v Mexico, and from such states
as Louisiana, Arkansas, Missouri, and o~hers farther east.
Comparable to distribution of Clovis fluted points (Plate
85), covering the greater part of North America; and shape
is much lik~ that of Clovis points except for absence of
~uting.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 7000 ~B. C. to 2000 B. C. or somewhat later. Re-chipped
examples may be of any age from 7000 B. C. to historic
times.
REFERENCES
Krieger, in Sellards, Evans, and Meade, 1947; Krieger, 1947a;
Wormington, 1948.

PLATE 116

Texas Archeological Society

474

REFUGIO POINTS
(Plate 117)
DESCRIPTION
Outline:

Long and slender blade, triangular to leaf-shaped;

edges usually convex, occasionally nearly straight (V, W),
and sometimes brought tQ a long, needle-like tip (B, F,
R). On narrowest specimens, edges may be nearly parallel
for some distance (B, E, F, N, Y-AA). By definition, bases
convex to semicircular, to distinguish from Kinney points
(Plate 96) with concave bases, and Pandora points (Plate
112) with straight bases. Most of body usually quite thick
with ridge on both faces (best seen in D, F, G, Z, AA),
but lower 1~, or so is notably thinned down to facilitate
hafting. Thus, although no real shoulders are present,
most of these artifacts have what amounts to a stem section set off from the blade; in this respect they also differ
from Kinney and Pandora points. Black asphaltum stains
sometimes occur on this stem section on specimens near
the coast (J, K), indicating use of asphaltum in cementing haft.
Dimensions: Length about 6 to 10 cm., seldom more or less.
Maximum width 2 to 3 cm. As with Kinney and Pandora
points, it may be argued that some of these specimens are
knives.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A minor type in various Archaic complexes:

Pecos River Fo-

cus, Carrollton Focus, FalcSn Focus, and Edwards Plateau
Aspect. Probably closely related to Lerma points (Plate
99) as well as Kinney and Pandora.
DISTRIBU~rION
Found widely in central Coastal area, Southwest, Central, and
North-Central areas, and lower Pecos River. Perhaps most
frequent on central coast.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 2000 B. C. to 1000 A. ~D.
REFERENCES
None, except that Crook and Harris (1954a) refer to similar
specimens as "Wheeler Leaf" points.

PLATE 117

Texas Archeological Society

476

SANDIA POINTS
Hibben (1941, Plates 10-12) illustrates a few of the specimens obtained from Sandia Cave in north-central New Mexico. These
points are about 5 to 10 cm. or more in length and are characterized by the presence of a single shoulder which slants forward; the opposite edge is a single line or curve from tip to
base, or very slightly indented opposite the one shoulder. Two
types are recognized:

Type 1 has the stem contracted to a

pointed or rounded base; Type 2 has parallel stem edges and a
concave base. On both types the stem edges are usually ground
smooth.
In Sandia Cave these points were found in the same deposit with
many Pleistocene animals now extinct and were below the
posit with Folsom points.

Recently, radiocarbon age determi-

nations of about 19,000 years (17,000 B. C.) have been obtained
on the lower deposit.

If the dates apply to the Sandia points

themselves, they are the oldest dated artifacts in America,
much older than Folsom points. Hibben (1941, p. 31) has stated
that Sandia points "occur sporadically from southeastern Colorado to central Texas," but the present authors are aware of
only a few possible Sandia points in this State, all of them in
private collections from

the High Plains

(Llano Estacado).

Lop-sided specimens of more common Texas types may be
mistaken for Sandia points.

Texo~ Archeological Society

477

SAN PATRICE POINTS
(Plate 109, M-EE)
DESCRIPTION
Outline:

Triangular blade, often stubby, with edges straight,

convex,

or

concave;

occasionally,

blade

is

leaf-shaped

(AA). Shoulders weak, often absent. Blade sometimea
beveled on right or left edge of both faces (Y) but more
often all four edges appear steep because of removal of
center of stem and blade by thinning or fluting (note
thinned area in drawings S-EE and in P, Q). Stem edges
sometimes cut inward with notches (M, N, Q, W, X, AA,
DD), otherwise parallel or somewhat contracted. Some
stem edges are concave (O,
but since all stems are smoothed by grinding, such concavities appear to be due to excessive grinding in the
same manner as on some Clovis, Folsorr~, Meserve, and
Plainview points (Plates 85, 92, 104, 116). Bases always
concave, often deeply.
Dimensions:

Total length about 2 to 5 cm., average about 3.5

cm. Maximum width across shoulders about 2 to 3.2 cm.
Flutes ~,~ to 2/3 of total length.

CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Undefined Archaic complex in northwest Louisiana and East
Texas Aspect, but rare in latter.

Probably some of these

specimens are simply re-chipped Clovis points (Plate
but most appear complete in original form, particularly
those with notched-in stems. Thus an interesting possibility that fluting principle survived much longer in this
area than elsewhere. Some resemblance to Paisano points
(Plate 109, A-L) but these never smoothed or fluted and
there is no known connecting link across the several hundred miles of Central Texas.
DISTRI,BUTION
Northwest Louisiana, northeast Texas, eastern Oklahoma; probably Arkansas.
ESTIMATED AGE
Difficult to estimate other than in Archaic Stage.

REFERENCES
Webb, 1946, pp. 13-17 and Plate 1, Nos. 7-19; 1948, pp. 239-231.

Texas Archeological Society

478

SCO~SBLUF[F POINTS
(Plate 118)
DESCRIIY£ION
Outline: Triangular to leaf-shaped blade, edges straight to
convex. The edges are sometimes parallel for at least half
the length of the blade (C, H, J, L-O, R). Shoulders small
but definitely cut inward at right angle to blade, or slanting forward slightly; barbs absent. Stem essentially a
rectangle but edges may expand a little (E-I, K, N, R).
Base usually quite straight but may be very slightly concave (E) or convex (I, K). Stem edges commonly ground
smooth. Blade faces often chipped with parallel scars
running across (B, D, H-J, N-R), or with matched pairs
of scars meeting in a central ridge (C). Whether regularly
or irregularly chipped, ScottsbluJf points ordinarily have a
"fat" feel due to their being a thick oval in crossksection;
a few are thin and flat (D, E).
Dimensions: Tota! length about 5 to 15 cm. Maximum width
usually 2.5 to 3.5 cm.; such narrow specimens as C, G,
very unusual. Stems vary from 2 to 3 cm. in width and
1.2 to 2.5 cm. in length. Stems thus from about 1~I~ to 1/10
or less of total length.
CULTLrRA~ AFFILIATIONS
Like Plainview points, the Scottsbluff t.ype is found ~videly in
the Great Plains region, sometimes m association with extinct species of bison and geological circumstances which
indicate an early post-glacial age. The largest series of
points from individual sites are those from Eden Valley in
western Wyoming (~Moss, et al., 1951) and the Sage Creek
or Hornet Site near Cody, Wyoming (unpublished). Other
such associations occur in Nebraska (Davis, 1953). In Texas
nearly all known specimens are in surface collections, some
primarily of material belonging to the Archaic Stage,
others of isolated nature.
DISTRIBUTION
Found in all parts of Texas except Trans-Pecos and most of
Coastal area, but always infre.quently. Appear to be concentrated in northeast Texas ~n general area of Sulphur
and upper Sabine River systems, where about half the
known specimens in Texas are found. Also occur in northern Louisiana and Arkansas and probably more widely in
eastern United States, as well as throughout the Great
Plains from Texas and New Mexico to south-central
Canada.
ESTIMATED AGE
6000 or 7000 B. C. to 2000 B. C., but difficult to estimate upper
limits until type has been adequately studied in distribution and association.
REFERENCES
Krieger, 1947a; Wormington, 1948.

PLATE 118

Texas Archeological Society

480

SHUMLA POINTS
(Plate 119)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Small triangular blade with edges sometimes convex
but usually straight, concave, or recurved. Almost always
barbed, from short (F, K) to long, sweeping out laterally
(L, M, S, T), or extending into line with stem base (D,
G-J, O-R, U, X-CC). Stem edges more or less parallel,
may expand or contract somewhaL Base usually convex,
but may be straight (C, G, H, L, Q, T) or, rarely concave
(N). ~lade edges frequently serrated (A, M, N, X).
Dimensions:

Total length ranges from about 3 to 9 cm. but

most fall between 4 and 6 cm. Maximum width about 2.5
to 5 cm. but most fall between 3 and 4 cm. Stems fairly
uniform at 1 to 1.5 cm. wide and 1 to 1.5 cm. long; about
~.z~ to 1/6 of total length.
CULTUR4kL AFFILIATIONS
Closely linked with Langtry points (Plate 98) as a major type
of Pecos River Focus. Both types also appear as minor
elements in FalcSn Focus and are rare in Edwards Plateau
Aspect.
DISTRIBUTION
Centered about Pecos-Rio Grande confluence area, becoming
less frequent down Rio Grande and Nueces River in Southwest Texas. May also extend into Big Bend and northern
Coahuila to west of Pecos’River mouth.
ESTIMATED AGE
An unknown time before Christ to 700 or 800 A. D.
REFERENCES
Taylor, 1948, Plate 9, D.
TAYLOR THINNED BASE POINTS
See Tortugas points (Plate 120).

PLATE 119

Texas Archeological Society

482

TORTUGAS POINTS
(Plate 120)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Large triangular blade with no stem and edges usually straight to slightly convex; occasionally they may be
slightly concave or recurved (K, T, U). Very frequently
beveled along right edge of both faces; occasionally beveled along left edge or on all four edges (K, M). Bases
straight to concave as a general rule; slight convexity may
be allowed (T) but definite convexity would place similar
specimens in Abasolo type (Plate 79). Thinning of base
common, with short longitudinal flakes removed, sometimes large flakes giving effect like fluting (I)~ F).
Dimensions: Length about 3.5 to 8 cm., maximum width about
2 to 4 cm., but majority of fairly uniform size (like M-O,
Q-Y). Smallest ones overlap in length with Matamoros
points (Plate 103) but are tentatively classed as Tortugas
because of width and weight (A, C, F).
CULTURAL AF~FILIATIONS
Major type, with Abasolo points, of Falcbn Focus, continuing
into Mier Focus along with their two smaller counterparts,
Matamoros and Cat~n points~ Occurs as minor type in
Aransas Focus, Edwards Plateau Aspect, and Pecos River
Focus, all of Archaic Stage. Occurs in association with
pottery in Neo-American Stage only in Alto Focus in East
Texas; however, it occurs only very rarely if at all in the
Archaic Stage of East Texas.
DISTRIBUTION
Widely spread in Coastal, Central, and eastern part of TransPecos Texas, extending to Neches River valley in East
Texas, but common only in Southwest Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 4000 B. C. to 1000 A. D., based partly on terrace associations in lower Rio Grande valley.
REFERENCES
Kelley, 1947a, refers to "Baird Beveled Blade" and "Taylor
Thinned Base" points in connection with the Edwards
Plateau Aspect, while h~ Southwest Texas he coined a
third name, "Tortugas Triangular Blade" (1947a, p. 104).
The present authors have found it impossible to distinguish
between these three groups of triangular, beveled points
in form or distribution, and have therefore grouped them
into a single type. The name Tortugas is used for this type,
since it was coined for Southwest Texas, where this form
is very common and includes all the variations of the
"Baird" and "Taylor" groups found in Central Texas. The
specimens called "Baird ~Beveled Blade" and ’~raylor Thinned Base" at the Davis Site in East Texas (Newell and
Krieger, 1949, pp. 168-170 and Fig. 59, A-K) should now
be classed as Tortugas points.

PLATE 120

Texas Archeological Soctety

484

TRAVIS POINTS
(Plate 121)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Slender triangular to leaf-shaped blade, edges straight
to convex, Many specimens have tip slimmed down to
needle-like point (E, F, H, I, AA-CC). Shoulders very
slight and rounded. Stem usually rectangular with parallel
edges, but may expand or contract slightly. Base usually
straight but may be slightly concave or convex.
Dimensions: Total length about 4.5 to 9 cm., average about 7
cm. Maximum width quite uniform at about 2 to 2.5 cm.,
seldom more or less. Stern width about 1.5 to 2 cm. Stem
length fairly uniform at about 1.5 to 2 cm., ~/~: to 1/5 of
total length.
CULTURAL AF~FILIATIONS
A major type of Edwards Plateau Aspect, Archaic Stage. Overlap in shape and other features with several other types of
Edwards Plateau Aspect may cast doubt on validity of
Travis type, but it ~vas felt that in practice it could usually
be distinguished. Some closely resemble Angostura points
(Plate 80) in outline, but stems generally more prominent
and shorter, and lack smoothing. Some overlap with Bulverde points (Plate 81) but lacks barbs and wedging down
of stem to thin basal edge. Specimens with concave bases
(AA-DD) resemble Darl points (Plate 86) but are larger
and lack beveling and stem smoothing. Travis points
closely resemble some Nolan (Plate 108) in outline but
lack beveled stems. They are also narrower and have
much less prominent shoulders and barbs than Lange
points (Plate 97).
DISTRIBUTION
Mainly Central Texas, possibly extending into other sections
less frequently.
ESTIMATED AGE
Full span of Edwards Plateau Aspect, possibly 4000 B. C. to
500 or 1000 A. D.
REFERENCES
None. "Strawn Stemmed"

(Kelley, 1947b, Plate 14, C)

may

be included.
TRINITY POINTS
(Plate 82, V-HH)
DESCRIPTION
Outline:
Blade triangular with edges straight to convex.
Shoulders poorly developed due to stem being formed
by two long sha}low notches, crudely chipped.
Stem
broad, bulging laterally so as to align with blade edges,
or nearly so. Base straight to strongly convex. Stem edges
sometimes smoothed, base occasionally so.
Dimensions: Total length about 3 to 6 cm., average 4 to 5 cm.
Maximum width across shoulders or stem, ranging from 2

PLATE 121

Texas ArcheologicaL Society

486
to 2.5 cm.
nearly ~.

Stem

’/4

to

~.~

of total

length,

occasionally

CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A major type of Carrollton Focus, Archaic Stage. Appears
occasionally in East Texas Aspect. Shallow side notches
somewhat resemble those of Ensor points (Plate 90) but
notably longer, and stems more bulbous. Stems resemble
those of Palmillas and Williams points (Plates 111, 124)
but general proportions and workmanship quite distinct,
as well as distribution.
DISTRIBUTION
Apparently most common in Dallas area in valleys of East Fork
and Trinity River, extending into northeast Texas and
southward toward Brazos River.
ESTIMATED AGE
2000 to 1000 B. C. (Crook and Harris, 1952).
REFERENCES
Stephenson, 1949b; ~Erook and Harris, 1952; 1954a, p. 3, Plate 1,
Nos. 5-9, who call type ’~Frinity Notched". Present description follows Crook and Harris more closely than
Stephenson.
UVALDE POINTS
(Plate 122)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Triangular to leaf-shaped blade, edges straight to
convex, rarely concave (H, N). Shoulders prominent,
rounded, or with good barbs. Stem expands strongly,
sometimes being as wide as shoulders. Bases have deep
U-shaped concavity similar to Pedernales points (Plates
113-115) but stems are much shorter and flare outwar~d
more. Blade edges sometimes serrated (BB).
Dimensions: Total length about 4 to 10 cm., average about 6
cm. Maximum width 2 to 3.5 cm., stems 1.5 to 2 cm. wide
and ~/4 to ~/~ of total length.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A minor type of Edwards Plateau Aspect, Similar to Fr~o
points (Plate 93) but blades longer and narrower, stems
not as wide or as flaring; the stem tips point downward
rather than outward and the central notch of Frio points
is missing. Also similar to Martindale points (Plate 102)
but tack the two-curve "fish-tail" base of the latter.
Judgment between these three types would be difficult in
some cases, however.
DISTRIBUTION
Primarily Central Texas, extending toward central Coastal
area in lower Guadalupe River valley, and toward Pecos
River-Rio Grande confluence area, where the few specimens may be intrusive from Central Texas.
ESTIMATF~D AGE
Some part of span 4000 B. C. to 1000 A. D. More restricted
distribution may indicate it is not as old as some other
Edwards Plateau types.
REFERENCES
None.

PLATE 122

Texas Archeological Society

488

WELLS PO I I~UrS
(Plate 123)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Slender triangular blade with edges usually straight,
sometimes slightly convex. Shoulders small, sometimes
missing on one or both edges, occasionally jut out (A, E, ~T,
Q, R, BB, FF), but not barbed. Most characteristic feature
is very long stem, usually contracted but may approach
being parallel-edged (C-F, T, DD, EE). Base nearly
pointed in some cases but rounded in others; occasionally
concave (T, BB, EE, FF, ,I-H-I)o Stem edges usually ground
smooth. Blade edges often serrated (D, M, O, P, CC, DD).
Dimensions:

Total length 4.5 to 8 cm., most being 6 or 7 cm.

Maximum width 1.5 to 2.5 cm., seldom more (Y) or less
(C). Stem often ½ of total length, seldom less than ~.

CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Primarily East Texas Aspect of Archaic Stage, surviving into
Alto Focus of Neo-American Stage, the only known association with pottery. Also occurs infrequently in Edwards
Plateau Aspect, Archaic Stage.
DISTRIBUTION
Central part of East Texas, extending westward into Central
Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE
About 1000 B. C. to 1000 A. D. or part thereof.
REF]~RENCES
Newell and Krieger, 1949, p. 167 and Fig. 58, Q-W.

Probably

includes the "Sisterdale Shouldered" points of Stephenson (1949b).
"W~HEELER LEAF POINTS"
Illustrated by Crook and Harris (1954a, Plate 1, Nos. 17-19) as a
type of the Carrollton Focus, Trinity Aspect of Archaic Stage.
They include slender triangular points with both straight and
convex bases, similar to those which the present authors have
included in the types Pandora (Plate 112) and Refugio (Plate
117).

PLATE 123

Texas Archeological Society

490

WILLIAMS POINTS
(Plate 124)
DESCRIPTION
Outline:

Broad triangular to leaf-shaped blade with edges

usually slightly

to strongly convex, occasionally

nearly

straight (A, I-L, N, R). Tips sometimes slimmed to needle
sharpness (B, E, O).

Shoulders pronounced, usually well

barbed. Stem formed by corner notches, always expanded,
with convex base.

The stem edges and base may meet at

an angle (A, ,B, I, O, R, U), but usually the stem and base
form a rounded bulb (C, F, K, L-N, S).
Dimensions:

Total length about 5 to 8 cm.

Maximum width

2.5 to 5 cm., most between 3 and 4 cm. Stems usually between 2 and 2.5 cm. wide and ¥4 to 1/6 of total length.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A major type of Edwards Plateau Aspect. Similar to Pal~nillas
type (Plate 110), which also has bulb-shaped stem, but
larger, broader, better barbs, and much more restricted in
distribution.
blades

as

(Plate

83).

Stems not as broad or straight-edged, nor

straight-edged,
Also

similar

as

those

to

Marcos

of

Castrovilte

type

(Plate

type.
100),

which has straighter base, deeper notches.
DISTRIBUTION
Common in Central Texas, extending infrequently into East
and Coastal Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE
4000 B. C. to 1000 A. D. or greater part thereof.
REFERENCES
None.

PLATE 124

Texas Archeological Society

492

YARBROUGH POINTS
(Plate 125)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Small, slender triangular blade with edges straight to
slightly convex, sometimes asymmetrical. Shoulders from
small to prominent, not barbed. Stem edges parallel to
somewhat expanded and often ground smooth. Base usually straight but may be slightly concave or convex.
Blade

sometimes

beveled,

usually

along

right

edge

of

both faces.
Dimensions:

Total length about 3.5 to 8 cm., most between 5

and 6 cm. Maximum width 1.6 to 2.5 cm., most about 2 cm.
Stem width 1 to 1.5 cm. and stem length consistently about
~i~ to V4 of total length.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A major type of East Texas Aspect, Archaic Stage, continuing
into association with pottery in Alto Focus and perhaps
other loci of Gibson Aspect, Neo-Arnerican Stage. Some
evidence that it may also survive in some foci of Fulton
Aspect.

Occurs

in

Clam Focus of Trinity Aspect,

and

apparently extends from late Edwards Plateau Aspect into
early Central Texas Aspect in same manner as Darl points.
It is closely related to the Darl type (Plate 86) but lacks
the extreme slenderness of the latter, the shoulders are
more prominent, the base is more consistently straight
(rather than concave), and the blade is less frequently
beveled. In general, the smaller specimens of both types
are easier to distinguish than the larger ones (compare
bottom rows of Plates 86 and 125).
DISTRIBUTION
Common in East Texas,

decreasing toward west in North-

Central and Central Texas. Occurs in Oklahoma.
ESTIMATED AGE
Possibly 500 B. C. to 1000 A. D. or somewhat ~ater.
R]~FERENCES
Newell and Krieger, 1949, p. 168 and Fig. 57; Miller and Jelks,
1952, pp. 172-175 and Plate 22; Bell and Hall, 1953: Crook
and Harris, 1954a, p. 11 and Plate 6. Probably includes,
in

part,

(1949b).

the

"Sterrett

Stemmed"

points

of

Stephenson

PLATE 125

