Texas Archeologica~l Society

563

NEWS NOTES
THE 1953 ANNUAL MEETING
The 24th annual meeting of the Texas Archeological
Society was held on October 31, 1953, at the Museum of
the University of Oklahoma in Norman. A get-together
was held the preceding evening in the Oklahoma Memorial
Union Building. The program was opened with an address
of welcome by Dean L. H. Snyder of the University’s Graduate College. The following papers were presented:
"The Central Texas Aspect", Edward B. Jelks, National
Park Service, River Basin Surveys, Austin, Texas.
"The Taovayas (Wichita) Indians in Southwestern History", Elizabeth Ann Harper, University of Oklahoma.
"Excavations at the Kincaid Shelter", Dee Ann Suhm
and Dorothy Garner, University of Texas.
"The Life of Primitive Man as Shown by his Environment", Oren F. Evans, University of Oklahoma.
"Archeology and History of the Falcon Dam Area, Lower
Rio Grande Valley", Alex D. Krieger, University of Texas.
A question and answer period on various archeological
problems was held at the conclusion of the above papers,
and an informal gathering held that evening in the Museum,
where the splendid exhibits on Oklahoma archeology were
enjoyed by all. A field trip to archeological sites west of
Norman was made by some members the following day,
Sunday.
A business meeting was held at 1:30 P. M. on October
31, opened by the President, Dr. Robert E. Bell. The Secretary-Treasurer, Edward B. Jelks, read the minutes of the
previous (1952) meeting, which were approved by voice
vote. The Secretary-Treasurer then initiated new business
by reporting on the fiscal condition of the Society. He reported (1) that membership increased from 177 to 236 during the year; and (2) that the Society had a balance on deposit in the First National Bank of Lubbock of $1,480.38 on
August 31, 1953. Receipts of dues as of October 31 brought
the total assets to about $1,800. The cost of publishing Volume 24 of the Bulletin was estimated at $1,000, which would
leave a surplus of about $800 after all bills ~vere paid.

Texas Archeolog$ca! Society

564

As no Auditing Committee had been appointed to examine the Society’s books, it was agreed by voice vote to
accept the financial report published on page 261 of the
Bulletin, Volume 24, 1953.
The Editor of Publications, Alex D. Krieger, reported
that Volume 24 of the Bulletin, with 266 pages, was somewhat smaller than that of 1952 because of the cost of publishing the Index earlier in 1953. Zinc cuts were used for
the first time for photographic reproductions in the 1953
Bulletin, and not only proved to be of excellent quality but
resulted in a considerable saving over copper engravings.
Mr. Krieger then spoke about some time-saving methods in
preparing manuscripts and illustrations before submitting
them to ~he Editor.
R. K. Harris, chairman of the Nominating Committee,
presented a slate of nominees for the various offices. This
was adopted by voice vote in lieu of formal balloting. The
list of new officers appears in the front of this Bulletin.
Billy Hanks of San Angelo was appointed chairman of
a Membership Committee, with a request to develop a plan
for increasing our membership. Wilson W. Crook, Jr., of
Dallas was appointed chairman of the Arrangements Committee, charged with selecting a satisfactory location for the
1954 meeting.
Following a vote of thanks to the University of Oklahoma and to Robert E. Bell for providing such excellent
facilities for this meeting, the formal business was concluded. The President, however, asked for informal reports
on local archeological activities, which were given by the
following persons:
L R.K. Harris, on field projects of the Dallas Archeological Society.
2. V.L. Pritchard, vicinity of Weatherford.
3.

Carl Compton, the Denton Archeological Society.

4.

Albert Field, Lampasas area.

5. Ed Jelks, recent field work and publications by Central Texas Archeological Society in Waco (for Frank Watt).
6. Jack T. Hughes, current projects being carried out
by the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society (Canyon).

