Historic Material From Fielder Canyo~ Caw

61

HISTORIC MATERIAL FROM FIELDER
CANYON CAVE
BY FORREST KIRKLAND

Fielder Canyon runs into the Pecos River on the northeast side
about one mile below the Ozona-Langtry highway crossing in the
northwest corner of Val Verde County, Texas. There are numerous
caves in the district, usually high up the sides of the cliffs and
small mountains.

Many of these caves contain evidence of occu-

pation by the typical Texas "Basket-Maker" Indians.
The cave which we will describe here is in Fielder Canyon about
three miles from its mouth, and under the cap rock thirty feet below
the top of the canyon wall. A long, steep talus extends from the
mouth of the cave downward to the bottom of the canyon which is
about 200 feet below. The mouth of the cave is about 5 feet square.
Its inside width is about 8 feet, its depth 12 feet, and its height 5
feet. There are several large flat rocks in front of the cave. Beyond
these rocks the ground recedes down the talus in narrow flat spaces
like an irregular stairway.
Discovery o] the Cave
The cave was discovered by Waiter Babb, a local rancher, twenty
years ago when his dogs ran a bobcat~ into a hole in the top of the
cave.

In trying to get at the cat, he discovered four or five arrow

foreshafts and a number of small glass beads on a ledge in the cave.
The foreshafts are said to have been of hard wood, about 8 1nches
long and tipped with barbed metal arrow points. The necks of the
points were inserted into the ends of the shafts which were encircled
by flat strips of metal.

These objects were taken to the ranch but

were soon lost and forgotten.

While visiting at the Babb Ranch in 1938, a teacher in the Ozona
~hool happened to mention finding a metal arrow point ou a ridge
near the mouth of Fielder Canyon. This brought to mind the arrow
shafts and beads found many years before and led to a visit to the
cave which was located with some difficulty. Instead of finding
*U. S. loealism for a type of the lynx (Ed.).

62

Texas Archeo~gical ~nd Pal~on$ologic~ Society

additional metal arrow points as was expected, an assortment of
metal objects, broken glass, and trade beads, were discovered on the
cave floor and on the ground around the flat rocks in front of the
entrance. Everything in sight was collected and divided between
the two. The teacher has since moved from Ozona and there is no
record of his part of the material.
Description o] Objects From the Site
The writer and his wife were shown the material in Mr. Babb’s
collection during the summer of 1939 while copying pictographs on
the Babb Ranch. The collection consisted of: More than 150 conical, bell like, metal ornaments one inch long, three-sixteenths of
an :inch in diameter at one end and one.sixteenth inch at the other,
(Plate 15, Nos. 14, 15).
Over 50 flat uniformly cut pieces of metal one inch long, threefourths of an inch wide at one end and one.fourth inch wide at the
other--blanks from which the ornaments were made, (Plate 15;
Nos. 12, 13).
Several fragments of flat hoop iron one inch wide from which
the objects described above appear to have been cut, (Plate 15;’
No. 9). Also fragments of the same material three-fourths of an
inch wide and one-half an inch wide, (Plate 15; Nos. 10, 11).
One iron buckle, one and one-fourth inches long and one and
three-eighths inches wide, similar to buckles used on harness, (Plate
15; No. 4).
Two oblong brass rings formed from heavy brass wire three-sixteenths of an inch iu diameter. The larger ring measures two and
three-fourths inches the long way; the smaller, two and one-half
inches--a shape and size suitable for bracelets, (Plate 15, Nos.
1, 2).
Two brass buttons about three-fourths of an inch in diameter,
PLATE 15
ARTICLES FOUNV IN F~E~D~ CANYON
Nos. 1, 2, Brass rings; No. 3, Rusty scissors; No. 4, Iron buckle;
No. 5, Fragment of flint arrowhead; No. 6, Blue, and white trade
beads; Nos. 7, 8, Buttons ~rom uniforms; Nos. 9, 10, 11, 12, Strips of
~lat hoop iron and rusty tin from which ornaments were made; No. 13,
Ornaments in stages of manufacture; No. 14, Single ornaments;
15, Ornaments stacked, two and three together.

Historic Mate~a,l Fro~ Fielder Canyon Cave

65

similar to buttons used on uniforms. One button contains a raised
floral design, (Plate 15, No. 7) ; the other, a floral border with the
head of a wolf in the center, (Plate 15; No. 8). The school teacher
is said to havre a button from the cave similar to the latter except
that it contains the head of a horn.
Fourteen glass beads about one-eighth of an inch in diameter.
Six are light blue and eight are white, (Plate 15; No. 6).
Several fragments of heavy, colored glass bottles.
One broken flint projectile point, (Plate 15; No. 5) ; and a flake
of flint.
We at once recognized the unusual nature of tim material, but
our schedule for 1939 would not allow for immediate investigation.
However in August, 1940, we returned to Babb’s ranch to work out
the problem if poszible. And with the full cooperation of Mr. Babb,
we visited the site, explored for additional material, took photographs, and gathered all the information possible about the cave,
the material, and the early history of the community.
A shallow deposit was found on one side of the cave floor. This
was not completely removed because test pits proved that it consisted only of about two inches of sheep manure and several inches
of sterile chalk from the roof of the cave. We found no midden
or other signs that the cave had been occupied for any great length of
time. Mr. Babb said that he and the teacher found a few metal
ornaments and beads on the cave floor; but we found only two of
the ornaments inside of the cave.
Most of the material found by Babb and the teacher was on the
surface at the base of the flat rocks in front of the cave. It could
not have come from the cave floor, because a crevice in the rock
at the entrance would have caught anything falling from the floor
above. No artifacts were found in the crevice. Most of the objects appeared to have been originally lost on the ground outside
the cave.
Few artifacts were exposed on the surface
site; but by carefully sifting the loose earth
we found on the levels in front of the cave: 75
ornaments, 14 metal blanks, 3 fragments of

when we visited the
between our fingers,
complete bell-shaped
sheet iron, one blue

66

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

glass bead, one fragment o! thick glass bottle, and a pair of small
scissors, (Plate 15; No. 3).
The scissors were found on the surface about twenty feet from
the entrance to the cave. They measure four and one-half inches
long, they are bradded together and have about one-fourth of an
inch broken from one point. They are not different from cheap
modern factory made scissors. They have no trade mark, firm
name, or other means of identification stamped on them. The other
objects are merely duplicates of those already described.
It will be noted that all of the material collected is of European
origin except the projectile point and the sliver of flint. It seems
most likely that these were accidentally associated with the modern
objects since the hill above the cave is covered with flint flakes and
it may have been an ancient flint workshop.
We could find no direct evidence that Indians lost the material
at the cave. However, similar metal ornaments were universally
used by historic Indians, and similar caves in secret, out of the way
places were commonly occupied by them. It seems most unlikely
that a white trader who might have carried such goods would have
occupied a cave in so difficult a location when a desirable place
with level ground, shade trees, and a spring of good water, was
available at the mouth of the canyon only three miles away.
Old Military Post in Fielders Canyon
In the meantime, Mr. Babb had discovered an old half-forgotten
military post about two miles down the canyon from the cave, which
throws considerable light on the cave and its contents. He had
collected from the site of the old post almost a bushel of iron and
glass objects, including many fragments of thick round-bottomed
liquor bottles identical with the glass fragments found at the cave.
If the glass at the cave was contemporaneous with the other objects
PLATE 16
SANDALS, SHEATH, BAG, AND WAR CLUB SHOWING USE OF ’ORNAMENTS
No. 1, Sandals with fringe of tin ornaments, No. 2, Quiver with tin
ornaments as sheaths for tassels of bright red feathers. No. 3, Fringe
of tin ornaments at bottom of bag. No. 4, Tin ornaments as sheaths for
tassels of red feathers. Nos. 2, 3, 4, Articles in Mrs. Anna W. Dove’s
collection at the Dallas Museum of Fine Arts, probably made by the
Pacific Coast Indians.

t’tate It.;

Historic Material From Fielder Canyon Cave

69

there, as it seems to have been, the occupation of the cave must have
been during or after the" time of the encampment. This makes it
seem reasonable to suppose that the old post may have been the
source of the sheet iron bands, buckle, buttons, and other metal
objects found at the cave.
A statement from H. H. Fielder, whose father settled at the mouth
of the canyon which bears his name, was furnished the writer by
Mrs. Josephine Couch of Ozona, Texas, who for some time has been
collecting information in that district for a history of the Langtry
country. He said, "In the early part of ’79 my father, C. S. Fielder,
his brother Zeno Fielder, with my mother and three sisters and myself came to this country. We first camped in the motte~ ~ at Howard
Springs (at the mouth of Fielder Canyon) . . . Renegade Apaches
were thick at that time. They gave little trouble except for the
stealing of horses. During the spring of ’79 my father went to San
Felippe Springs (Del Rio, Texas) and asked an officer in Bullis’
command for soldiers to be placed in our locality. I cannot tell you
just when the soldiers were camped there (at the old fort) or for
how long they stayed, but I do remember them camped there at the
old "Soldiers Camp". It was just a few and they did scout duty
throughout this locality."
Mrs. Couch said that from all the information she had gathered
the camp was established during the summer of 1879 and was occupied by soldiers for al~out five years. She identified the two buttons
from the cave as those used by two-troups of Bullis’ scouts.
Similar Objects Found At Other Places
Bell-shaped metal ornaments were in common use by most Indians
in early pioneer days, and it is said they were an important item in
the stock of early Indian traders.

This is borne out by the fact that

many ornaments of this kind have been found on a camp in Central
Texas near an old Indian trading post, and around the site of Old
Spanish Fort on the Red River.
An assortment of metal objects were taken from a cache between
Marathon and Alpine and are now in the Big Bend Memorial Museum at Alpine. This cache contained several brass rings similar
**U. S. loealism for a clump of trees in prairie, usually liveoaks in Texas.

7O

Texa~ Archeological a~l Paleontological Society

to the two found at Fielder Canyon Cave and many of the metal
bell-shaped ornaments. A large number of these ornaments and
many glass beads were also found with a burial in Jones County,
Texas, and are now in the Abilene Museum. Similar ornaments
made of brass have recently been found in a mortuary on the Potomac River below Washington, D. C.
Use Made o] the Ornaments
The bell-shaped ornaments are quite common on clothing and
ceremonial objects in most ethnological collections. They were
usually made from bright tin and were used as decorations on
such articles as bags, sheaths, war clubs, and ceremonial images,
(Plate 16; Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4). On these objects they usually served
as sheaths for tassels of bright colored feathers or hair. They were
also used in great numbers as fringes on dance costumes and sandals.
In this way they acted as little bells, giving off a pleasant tinkling
sound with each movement of the dancer.
Conclusions
The assortment of metal objects from the Fielder Canyon site
indicate that it may have been a place where ceremonial paraphernalia and garments were manufactured. The bell-shaped ornaments
were unquestionably manufactured there, because they were found
in all stages of manufacture. The scissors are too light to have
been very serviceable in cutting the metal for the ornaments, but
they would have been excellent for cutting cloth or other thin materials used in making garments. The beads, buttons, and brass
rings fit into the garment factory theory.
The flat rocks in front of the cave would have served well as
work tables; and the fact that most of the objects were found on
or in the soil at the base of these rocks seems best explained by
assuming that the objects were accidentally dropped from these
work tables and trampled into the earth and lost.
Our investigation, therefore, indicates that the Fielder Canyon
Cave site was occupied for a comparatively short time, probably by
roving bands of late historic Indians shortly after 1879, that the
occupants of the site had contact with the military post situated two
miles down the canyon, from which they secured at least some of the

Histo~’ic Material From Fielder Canyon Cave

71

objects found at the site, and that the site was probably used as a
place for manufacturing ornaments, garments, and ceremonial obj ects.

REFERENCES
1.

Letter from Mrs. Couch, dated October 11, 1940.

2.

Central Texas Archeologist, No. 3, pp. 52~55; and conversa-

tion with Frank H. Watt, Waco, Texas.
3.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin,

Vol. 10, Plate 31.
4.

Conversation with Victor J. Smith, Alpine, Texas.

5. Informatiou from card accompanying the objects in the Dallas
Fine Arts Museum, belonging to Mrs. Anna W. Dove, Estes Park,
Colorado.

6.

American Antiquity, Vol. IV, No. 1, Plate IV.

