148

Texas ArcheoIogica~ and Paleontological Society

RECENT ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH
IN OKLAHOMA
ROBERT E.

BELL

During the past two years considerable archaeological
activity has been conducted throughout the state of Oklahoma. Thi~ has not been an extensive nor especially planned
program of development, but rather a sudden intensification
in archaeological work brought about by the various Federal
River Basin Reservoir projects. Most of the work accomplished has been survey or salvage work in an effort to
beat the bulldozer or rising flood waters to an important
site. No less than seven surveys have been completed, six
of them representing reservoir areas. Emergency excavations have been accomplished in two of the reservoirs, .and
small test trenches have been opened in newly discovered
sites relatively near the University.
In order to give you an idea as to what has been done, I
prefer to discuss these various projects separately, rather
than to attempt an overall summary statement.
There are three reservoir areas in which little of consequence was found--Canton Reservoir in western Oklahoma,
Hulah Reservoir in north central Oklahoma, and the Heyburn Reservoir in east central Oklahoma. In each of these
areas only occasional camp sites were noted by the survey
party, hence nothing in the way of excavations has been
contemplated for these localities. For once it has been a
pleasure not to find something, for this means our efforts
can be devoted to other localities and that little will be
lost in so far as the archaeological record is concerned.
Southwestern Oklahoma Survey
Mr. David Wenner conducted a survey in sections of
Harmon and Greer counties in the southwestern portion of
the state. The survey included portions of Salt Fork,
Prairie Dog Fork and the North Fork of Red River. A totaI
of 15 sites was recorded, two of them being extensive village

Recent ArchaeoIogical Research in Oklahoma

149

areas and the remaining thirteen representing smaller camp
sites.
No test excavations were attempted though surface collections indicated materials representing the Texas Henrietta focus. Some sherds resemble the Sanders materials,
and a few Pueblo sherds were reported from the area. No
Folsom or early man sites were noted. Excavations in this
region should be valuable in establishing cultural contacts
between the Pueblo area and Oklahoma.
Wister Reservoir
One of the more important archaeological areas within
the state falls within the Wister Reservoir in Le Flore
county. This reservoir lies in. the eastern part of the state
and includes rich archaeological sections of the Poteau and
Fourche Maline rivers. We have been fortunate in one
respect, however, for a large number of the sites known in
this area were excavated during the extensive W.P.A. operations a few years ago.
Out of a total of 32 sites within the Wister reservoir, 19
had been completely or partially excavated. It is from these
sites that we have the archaeological complex known as
Fourche Maline. Of the remaining 13 sites, 4 were tested
and one of these was selected for additional investigations.
This site is known as the Scott site, and it appears to be an
important example of the Fourche Maline culture.
The Scott site represents a midden deposit which has an
average thickness of about five feet in the deepest part. A
block about 20 feet by 30 feet wds carefully excavated by
arbitrary six inch levels in the thickest portion of the
midden. The site offers a clear transition from pre-pottery
to pottery bearing levels, the pottery being confined to the
upper portions 0f the midden. The final analysis of the Scott
site. should help to clear up somewhat the position of the
Fourche Maline culture and its general relationships to the
eastern Archaic horizons. Until this time we have had no
clear understanding as to the presence of pottery in what
otherwise appeared to be an Archaic or pre~pottery culture.

150

Te~:as Archeological and Paleontological Society

Work at the Scott site indicates that the Fourche Maline
complex should properly be subdivided into two periods--a
¯ pre-pottery and a pottery bearing period. The final outcome
of the Fourche Maline status can only await analysis of the
Scott and other excavated sites within that region. This
work has already been started.
Tenkiller Reservoir
During the past summer a survey was conducted in the
Tenkiller Reservoir along the Illinois river in eastern Oklahoma. A total of 38 archaeological sites were recorded, and
test pits were dug into the most promising of those discovered. The majority of the sites were non-pottery sites
and may represent an early Archaic horizon within that
locality. One site appears to represent the Spiro focus of
the Gibson aspect, and another the Fort Coffee focus of the
Fulton aspect. Some excavation work is anticipated in this
region during the coming summer.
Onapa and Canadian Reservoirs
In July and August, David Wenner directed a survey of
two reservoir areas near Eufala, Oklahoma; the Onapa Reservoir on Deep Fork, and the Canadian Reservoir on the
North Fork of the Canadian. Both areas were quite productive as far as archaeological materials are concerned.
A total of 41 sites were recorded for the Canadian Reservoir, many of these representing historic villages. The
Onapa Reservoir produced a total of 25 sites, again many of
them containing historic materials such as trade beads, gun
flints, broken china and crockery. Since this area is that
occupied by the Creek Indians in historic times it is surprising that these contact sites appear to be abundant. If
further work demonstrates that these sites are Creek, then
an interesting problem is presented. The aboriginal pottery
wares found on these sites are almost identical to three
wares associated with the Creeks in GeorgiaNWalnut
Roughened, Okmulgee Fields Incised, and Kasita Red filmed.
It has been thought that these historic wares found in
Georgia became extinct around 1750 and that they were

Recen~ Archaeological Research in Oklahoma

151

not made after that date. Since the Creeks did not enter
Oklahoma until 1830, the ~tate of 1750 for Georgia must be
in error. For it would hardly seem reasonable that the
Creeks suddenly revived three pottery wares that they had
not produced for 80 years. If the material is not Creek, then
we must account for some tribe within that region for
which we have no historical records.
Not all the sites in this region are historic, and sherd
collections suggest relationships to both the Gibson and
Fulton aspects.
Cedar Creek
One site representing early man has been noted just
north of Carnegie along Cedar Creek. Throughout the
gravels of the stream bed various types of projectile points
and also the bones and teeth of extinct animals can be
found. Typical Folsom points, Yuma like points and Plainview points have all been found. One can also find points
which are from later horizons, such as those which are
common on the Southern Plains. These materials appear
to be concentrated along a stretch of about two miles of
Cedar Creek and are apparently eroding out of the banks
as the rains wash away the soils. At this time we have been
unable to locate the original sources for the materials.
Several trips and some testing of the river terraces have
produced no results to date; however, we are constantly
hopeful that we can locate some specimens in situ and
establish the archaeological position of these various types.
Lee-Bowen and Brown Si~es
Two sites have been located within short driving distance
of the University. These are located on the Washita river to
the southwest of Norman. At various week-end intervals,
students in anthropology participate in test excavations at
these sites. Although no extensive work has been done,
we have learned a great deal about these two village sites.
At the Lee-Bowen site in Garvin county, an L-shaped
trench, 25 feet on each side has been excavated. This, trench
cut across three refuse or storage pits so that considerable

152

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

cultural material was recovered.

Dr. Schmitt has prepared

a statement on this site, and considers it to be an example
of the hunting~agricultural economy existing in the Low
Plains in late prehistoric times.
The Brown site is located about 15 miles westward from
the Lee-Bowen site along the Washita river in Grady county.
A smaller area has been tested but considerable material
has been recovered.

The types of artifacts from the Brown

site generally resemble those from Lee-Bowen; however,
there are some specific differences.
Both of these sites have certain features which resemble
the Texas Henrietta focus; there are also many features
which resemble other sites in Garvin county along the lower
Washita. In all probability both of these sites will eventually be grouped into a Washita focus which is related to the
Texas Henrietta focus to the south and to the Paint Creek
focus in Kansas to the north.

No correlation with historic

tribes is possible at the present time.
Fort Gibson Reservoir
The Fort Gibson Reservoir is located in the northeastern
section of the state along the lower section of Grand river.
The survey has reported a total of 26 sites from this area,
two of them being important mound groups and the remainder representing village or camp areas.

Some non-

pottery sites were found which may represent an early
Archaic horizon somewhat similar to that noted for the
Illinois River area.
During the past summer extensive excavations were conducted at the Norman site within this reservoir. Previous
work at this site indicated that it represented the Spiro focus
of the Gibson aspect.

Since one large conical mound re-

mained unexplored at this site, it was considered necessary

Recent Archaeological Research in Oklahoma

153

that it be examined in order to place our understanding of
the Spiro focus materials on a more secure foundation. Excavations at this site were conducted as a cooperative project
between the Smithsonian Institution and the University of
Oklahoma.
Some limited excavations were conducted in the village
area where portions of several houses and refuse pits were
uncovered.

Our major efforts, however, were

directed

toward the large conical mound.
This mound was the largest of a group of six, and it
measured approximately 27 feet high and 90 feet in diameter.
Excavation was not complete although sufficient knowledge
of its contents had been gained to consider our work at this
mound as completed.

The mound proved to be a domicil-

liary sub-structure mound with no less than six construction
phases represented. A series of five flat topped mounds had
been built one on top of the other, the last of these having
been capped with a cone-shaped mantle.

Although very

little in the way of artifact material was recovered, the
mound is interesting for several reasons.

The feature of

placing a conical capping over the last occupation ’ surface
appears unusual~. Glass trade beads were found within the
upper mantle. The mound is circular in outline rather than
square or rectangular as in most sub-structure mounds.

In

addition, the construction periods were marked only by a
heightening of the mound, not a general enlargement of the
structure.

Each addition was merely placed upon the old

occupation surface and did not include the sides of the
mound. This again appears unusual for this type of mound.
Analysis of this material is now in progress and a report
should be available in the near future.
A second mound group, the Harlin site, contains seven
mounds,

and at the

present

time

remains

untouched.

154

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

Present plans include excavations at this site during the
coming summer.

It, too, apparently represents the Gibson

aspect--probably Spiro focus.
Summary
If something in the way of a summary statement were
made, it would include the fact that 172 new archaelogical
sites have been recorded. These sites appear to range in age
from Paleo-Indian materials represented by Folsom up to
historic villages of living tribes now found in Oklahoma.
Excavations have shed additional light upon the Fourche
Maline complex, the Spiro focus and the more recent
Washita River remains.

We have a better idea as to the

distributions of various cultures which will help in understanding the role of Oklahoma in American prehistory. Last,
but not least, we know the types of sites that are to be
inundated by reservoir areas, and we know where immediate
excavations should be done. Getting this work done remains
for the future.

