SOUTHWEST TEXAS
This section includes the whole southern horn of Texas
except for the coastal belt. Its northern boundary is placed
at Frio River, a tributary of the Nueces, because the Frio~
marks a rather sudden shift in archeological material from
that characteristic of Central Texas. This entire section of
Texas is popularly known as the "Monte", a vast expanse of
undulating plain and rocky outcrops of low relief, uniformly
covered with thorny brush. It is also called a "mesquite
savannah" by geographers, although many other sma!l trees
other than mesquite bear thorns and are adapted to the low
rainfall, high humidity, and great heat of this region. There
are evidences that the mesquite, as in other parts of western
and southern Texas, is a recent invader which, because of
its extremely long roots, is able to reach a gradually falling
water-table better than other plants. Grasses, wild flowers,
and prickly-pear cactus are other common plants. Except
for the bottomlands of the Frio and Nueces Rivers, there are
no oaks, pecans, or other large trees in this region. Cypresses
occur along the Rio Grande banks and those of tributary
rivers from Mexico. Deer, wolves, jaguars, cougars, and
numerous small animals are still found although the carnivores have largely been killed off. Bison and antelope
were still found here in the 19th century. Fish abound in
the Rio Grande, including the alligator gar; and alligators
are still sometimes found.
The first Europeans to enter this area are believed to
have been Cabeza de Vaca and his three companions, who,
after being shipwrecked on the central Texas coast, survived six years of captivity and hardships, and finally, in
the fall of 1534, escaped their captors somewhere south of
San Antonio and attempted to reach P~nuco (near present
Tampico) overland. After crossing the Rio Grande, more
or less in the vicinity of present Lake Fatc6n or Roma, they
came to mountain ranges in what is now eastern Nuevo
Leon, rounded them, and decided to explore the country to
the other ocean the Pacific. A reconstruction of their ad-

Southwest Texas

135

ventures and route has been prepared for publication by
Krieger ("Cabeza de Vaca in Texas and Mexico"). As
early as 1583, a permanent Spanish settlement was made
within 40 miles of FalcSn Dam, at present Cerralvo in eastern Nuevo Leon, and the lower Rio Grande valley became
well: known to the Spanish by 1600 A. D. Both Cabeza de
Vaca and the later Spaniards remark on the extreme density
of Indi~in population in the Rio Grand~ va!ley and lands to
the south 5f it~ even though these Indians planted no crops.
Radical Changes in environment are indicated, for the area
is now most uninviting and poor in plant resources.
The first known permanent settlements in South Texas
were th~se established by Jose de Escandon between 1749
and 1755 on both banks of the Rio Grande, from Laredo to
the delta. However, due to the presence of many Spaniards
in the-hills and mountains just south of the Rio Grande for
over 150 years preceding this time, it is to be expected that
historic objects were obtained by South Texas Indians at
almost any time between 1583 and 1749.
Numerous surface collections have been made in this
region; particularly along both sides of the Rio Grande
valley.

No formal excavations were made, however, until

the University of Texas, supported by grants from the River
Basin Surveys of the National Park Service, made a thorough
survey of the FalcSn Dam reservoir area in Zapata and Starr
Counties, between 1950 and 1953. A large monograph on
this work, "Archeology, Ethnology, and Early Spanish History of the FalcSn Reservoir Area," has been prepared by
Krieger and awaits publication. Not only were numerous
prehistoric sites found in this survey, but ruins of early
Spanish buildings were found in at least 29 locations and
records made of them. Prehistoric sites now buried under
river sediments were very common, and two of them excavated (Cason, 1952; Hartle, mimeographed report to River
Basins--Survey). Bulldozers were used to remove the terrace silts,

136

Texas Archeological Society

PALEO-AMERICAN STAGE
No sites in Southwest Texas can be said to belong certainly to this stage. However, no less than 11 localities were
found in the FalcSn Reservoir area with mammoth bones in
deposits which could easily have contained associated artifacts, but these had largely been destroyed by erosion. In
one case, a flint chip was found beneath the skull of a mammoth (Cason, 1952, p. 243). A possible association of mammoth and lanceolate projectile point was noted by Jack To
Hughes on the Mexican side of the reservoir in 1950. A fragment of Plainview point and a more or less complete Angostufa point were found by Luis Aveleyra and Sra. Sol Rubin
de la Borbolla in a site near old Guerrero (now under Lake
FalcSn),’ which otherwise contained ordinary artifacts of
FalcSn Focus (see below). Hughes’ survey in 1950 als0 collected a basal fragment of what is probably a Scot~sbIuf]
point, in a site otherwise clearly of FalcSn Focus. Mr. Frank
A1 Weir and Mr. Fred Ruecking, Jr., of McAllen, Texas, have
discovered two sites in Starr County north of Rio Grande
City, in which there are several fragments of Scottsbluff,
Plainview, and Angostura-like points, as well as one that
may be a Clovis although its fluting is rather indefinite. The
last-mentioned sites also yield large amounts of Falc6n Focus
material.
As so often in Texas, we cannot determine whether the
Paleo-American types of projectile points actually define
the presence of this stage, or whether they survived in small
numbers into cultural units which belong in an Archaic
Stage. So far as the authors are aware, only one true Folsom
point has been found in Southwest Texas, a very small specimen from Webb County, association unknown. There is no
reason to doubt that this area was occupied in early postglacial times, and the future definition of this stage is to be
expected eventually.
ARCHAIC STAGE
In the FalcSn Reservoir area, two loci are recognized
as belonging to this stage: FalcSn and Mier..They are based

Southwest; Texas

137

on about 28,000 a~tifacts collected by the University of Texas
and River Basin Surveys projects, and private collections
found in the same general area. Excavations proved beyond
doubt that FalcSn Focus remains are associated with both
the Zapata and the Rosita Terraces in this valley, which
reach heights of 65-70 feet and 40-45 feet above the Rio
Grande’s normal level (manuscript by Glen L. Evans). A
lower terrace, 20-25 feet above the river, is subject to frequent overflow and no archeological remains have been
found within it. Three terrace systems of roughly equivalent heights are widely known in the southwestern United
States and Great Plains, where they appear to belong to
early, middle, and late post-glacial ’times in a very general
way. We know that the Zapata Terrace must be of ~considerable antiquity, for the river is never able to overflow
it, even during the tremendous flood of June, 1954. Excavations in the Royer Site conducted by Cason were in ~archeological zones buried as much as 11 feet beneath the original
top of this valley fill; therefore these zones were occupied
while the valley was still being alluviated up to this high
level, and before the fills which are now the lower terraces
were ever laid down.
In one of the high-terrace excavations, however, Cason
found a small, highly polished pendant of greenish limestone, in place, where it undoubtedly had been buried before
the Zapata Terrace reached its full height (Cason, 1952,
Plate 30, I). Polished-stone artifacts are never found in a
Paleo-American context anywhere in America, but they do
appear very widely in the Archaic Stage.

None of the

Paleo-American projectile-point types mentioned above were
found in Cason’s Royer Site trenches, although this would
have been the proper place for them if the Zapata Terrace
were early post-glacial in time. We therefore wonder whether all three of the great post-glacial terraces in this valley
are of somewhat more recent date than comparable terraces elsewhere; that is, they may cover no more than 5,000
years rather than 10,000 or so. Terrace dating is not suf-

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

138

ficiently refined in Texas or elsewhere to make more exact
estimates.
This point is important because of its implications regarding the total time of existence of FalcSn Focus and its
later descendant, Mier Focus. Not only did typical FalcSn
artifacts, including large dart points, exist for at least several thousand years, but they appear to have continued in
use with virtually no change, right up to the Spanish colonizations in the 18th century. They were even found lying on
the floors of stone houses, along with iron, copper, glass, and
Spanish majolica ware!
With so little culture change, and such great numbers
of simple flint artifacts, it may be implied that Indians of
the Coahuiltecan linguistic family occupied Southwest Texas and Mexico across the Rio Grande for several thousand
years, never progressing beyond the simplest sort of existence, and never being influenced to any notable extent
by developments elsewhere. The notes made by Cabeza de
Vaca on the many tribes he encountered between the place
of escape and the "river of the gourds" (undoubtedly the
lower Rio Grande) agree very closely wi~h this archeological picture of the South Texas "Monte".
FalcSn Focus
COMPONENTS:
Type Components: Excavations in Sites 78-B9-4 (not
named) and 78-B9-17 (Royer Site: see Cason, 1952).
Other Components: About 111 sites in FalcSn Reservoir
basin in Texas, 20 sites in Mexico, and private collections from LaSalle, Dimmit, Webb, Duval, Zapata,
Starr, Hidalgo, Brooks, and other counties.
TYPES OF SITES:
Open camps of all sizes, from a few feet across to perhaps 80 acres, in banks of Rio Grande and tributary
rivers and arroyos, .as well as on rocky uplands well
away from any present water. Natural water holes

Southwest Texas

139

or "tinajas" are found in arroyos otherwise dry and
also have archeological sites nearby. In silty river
terraces, occupation sites are thin and separated by
layers of sediments, .but as many as 11 have been
traced in a single bank.
HOUSES:
No archeological data. Cabeza de Vaca describes houses
as made of poles covered with mats and carried about
from one camp to the next.
LIVELIHOOD:
Hunting of all kinds of game, eating of reptiles, insects,
grul~s, etc.,and preparation of mesquite meal described by de Vaca. He does not mention fishing but this
may be presumed from later accounts. Tunas, or
prickly-pear fruit were staple food in summer. Archeological sites revealgreat abundance of land-snail
shells which must also have been a food staple. No
animal or fish bones found in sites; de Vaca states
that the tribes he met pulverized all such bones and
ate them as gruel.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Psints: Abseflt:
Dart Points: Tortugas type most common; also Abasolo, Re]ugio, and possibly Langtry, Shumla, and
Almagre. The last three are infrequent and may be
late in FalcSn Focus or belong to Mier Focus. Types
Plainview, Angostura, and Scot~sbluf~ present in
four known sites, probably as survivals from PaleoAmerican Stage.
Large, crude fist axes very common.
Knives: Triangular and leaf-shaped very common,
with bases convex, straight, and concave.
Scrapers: Heavy side scrapers common, oval. scrapers
less so. Heavy end scrapers common, With bits convex, straight, and concave (the latter are also .called

Texas Archeolbgical Society

140

"gouges"). End scrapers made across broken edges
of knife blades common.
Pick-like tools: Like fist axes but smaller in diameter
and chipped to a sharp point.
Gravers, very rare.
Drills, very rare.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
None definitely associated. Wooden pest]es used in dug
pits described by de Vaca for grinding of mesquite
beans.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
One small pendant with two holes at each end definitely
associated.

ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
One small circular bead fragment.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
None.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Polished stream pebbles found in all sites. Some are
white quartz and egg-shaped; others are oblong and
flat on at least one side, of all materials found in
gravels except flint. Definitely carried to Sites for
some purposes. Egg-shaped ones may have been
charms or amulets; flat ones possibly once painted
(see Pecos River Focus), but if so, no traces of paint
remain.
Fossil shells and concretions, probably also picked up
as charms.
Scraped pigments of hematite, limonite, and chalk.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Three flexed skeletons found but lack of artifacts prevents association with definite complex.
RELATIONS:
Tortugas and Abasolo dart points shared with Central

Southwest Texas

141

Texas Aspect, Pecos River Focus, Aransas Focus, and
several complexes in Tamaulipas.
Langtry, Shumla, and AImagre points, if they belong to
this focus, show relationship with Pecos River Focus.
Almagre points found southward into southern Tamaulipas.
Lack of stone grinding implements is unique in Texas
archeology.
ESTIMATED AGE:
Possibly 5000 B. C. to 500 or 1000 A. D.
SOURCES:
Krieger and Hughes (mimeographed preliminary report,
1950); Hartle (mimeographed report on Site 78-B9-4
(1951); Cason, 1952; Krieger, manuscript.
Mier Focus

This complex will~ not be described in detail, as it represents the continuation of FalcSn Focus traits plus the following changes: Tortugas and Abasolo points continue, but
alongside of them are distinctly smaller counterparts of the
same shapes and with beveled edges, named Matarnoros and
Catdn points by MacNeish in Tamaulipas; tiny arrow points
appear, of the Fresno and Perdiz types known widely in
Texas, and a local type with three concave edges named
Start points; the Langtry, Shumla, and Almagre points already mentioned for FalcSn Focus possibly belong to Mier
instead; and a half dozen stone pestles found in prehistoric
sites may belong to this focus.
While this is admittedly scant evidence for another foCUS, it has some justification in that the Matamoros and
Catdn points do have chronological significance in the coastal
section of Texas. They occur in the pre-ceramic Aransas
Focus and probably continue into association with pottery
in Rockport Focus; they occur in the Rio Grande delta area
in Brownsville Focus, where Huastecan pottery Occurs as
trade ware (information from Campbell). In southern

142

Texas ArcheologiCal Society

Tamaulipas, the two large types Tortugas and Abasolo are
pre-ceramic, whereas their two descendants, Matamoros
and Catdn, are found in pottery levels (information from
MacNeish). Tortugas and Abasolo points occur widely in
Central and Western Texas, but the smaller Matamoros and
CatCh points do not. The appearance of the latter two types
may therefore be expected to mark a certain time horizon
in the FalcSn area. Probably the small arrow-point types also
have chronological significance and appeared later in thi~
area than the Mata~noros and Catdn points; still they must
have been pre-European.
A Mier Focus is thus transitional between FalcSn Focus
and the historic horizon. It might also be regarded as a late
phase of FalcSn Focus.
NEO-AMERICAN STAGE
This is not present in Southwest Texas. The native
tribes remained without agriculture or pottery until they
were taught these~arts by the Spanish friars. The bow and
arrow alone would be insufficient reason to establish this
stage.
HISTORIC STAGE
Indians of the Coahuiltecan stock were once qu~i~e thickly populated along the Rio Grande from Eagle Pass downward, and along its Mexican tributaries. For over 200
years they bitterly resisted Spanish enslavement and encroachment on their lands. In spite of this, the friars managed to pacify some of them, teaching them Spanish arts
and crafts (pottery-making, stone masonry, carpentry, smithing, etc.), and irrigation agriculture. Certainly by the middle
18th century there were some thousands of "civilized" Indians, not only around the missions, but back in their native
homes as well. After 1800 they rapidly became extinct due
to depredations of the Apache and Comanche and taking
sides in various wars: Mexico’s independence from Spain,
independence of Texas from Mexico, the United States’ war
with Mexico, and even the Civil War. The Coahuiltecan

Southwest Texas

143

stock is believed to have been totally extinct for at least
50 years.
This interesting history of acculturation is partly reflected in the archeological work in FalcSn Reservoir basin,
where 29 ancient stone buildings were identified, measured, and photographed before the lake rose. over their
ruins. Excavations were made in six of them, and in four
were found mixtures of Indian and Spanish artifacts on
the floors. This indicates that the houses themselves were
in some cases built by Indians after Spanish instruction.
Great amounts of a peculiar pink pottery were found in such
sites, not wheel-made and easily distinguished from the
wheel-made, glazed, and painted wares made by the Spanish
themselves.
While no evidences of irrigation ditches were found for
the colonial period in the FalcSn area, it is likely that agriculture was learned by at least some of these Indians.

