226

Tex.as Arch~ological and Paleontological Society

SOME UNUSUAL ABILt~NI~ Rt~GION BURIALS
CYRus N. I~Y
During the years of 1937-38-39 several more burials were found
by the writer in the Abilene region, and these revealed a greater
than usual diversity in physical types, and in burial techniques.
Early in October, 1937, three more skeletons of the Stone Slab
Cist Mound burials were found. The first one was of an additional
cist in R. M. (3) which contained remains of another skeleton, which
was very imperfectly preserved (see two pictures of an Abilene long
headed skull on Plate 49). Rodents had gnawed and scattered the
bones in burrows and those remaining were too fragmentary to reconstruct, but evidently had the same type of physical features, and
state of partial mineralization of those previously reported on from
this rnound.1 This brings the number of cists found in R. Mound
(3) up to eleven. The fossil human bones from this, and other
burial mounds of long headed skeletons, adhere to a moist surface
exactly like fossil ~nammoth bones.
Two More Stone Stab Cist Burials
On an adjoining farm the writer found two more stone slab cist
burials, one was a shallow grave under a rock pile in which an
imperfectly preserved skeleton was found buried about a foot deep.
A deep slab rock cist burial was then located close by and arrangements were made with the landowner to excavate it. On the date
arranged a rain prevented the trip. It seems that the rain did not
extend so far as the farm on which the mound was located, and that
then certain unscientific ineddlers intervened and proceeded to wreck
the covered mound which contained two longheaded burials. When
the writer arrived on the succeeding Sunday one skeleton had been
irreparably smashed, and the top of another one then lay exposed,
and the probability was that it soon would also have been destroyed.
The ends of the long bones had been smashed. But for the intervention of such undesirable elements both skeletons could have been
excavated in perfect condition. The writer then obtained perinission
PLATE 49.
Figs. 1-2, Side and front views of an Abilene Type skull found by
Will Myatt in a Stone Slab Cist located 30 miles north of Abilene.

Plate 49

Some Unusual Abilene Region Burials

229

to take out the skull, which was removed in condition so that it was
later reconstructed. No artifacts were found with any of these
burials, It is a very unfortunate condition that so many ranch and
farm owners permit unscientific persons, or even careless boys, to
destroy sites which should be carefully and painstakingly excavated
by trained or experienced scientists, so that the records of the past
might not be lost. There are rarely any artifacts with these burials,
and their excavation by irresponsible persons is pure vandalism.
Sand Dune Cuhure Burial
Sand Dune Culture burials were usually made in the almost pure
sand of the sand dune regions, and it seems that such soils contained chemicals which caused decay of the bones to such an extent
that only small fragments were usually found where they had been
plowed up in fields. In such situations also there were no stone
markers. In one instance where, a, plow had crushed a skull, the
writer found the other bones arranged in a sitting position.
On October 31, 1937, the writer conducted A. T. Jackson and
W. G. McMillan to a burial site situated on the Brazos River Bank
about five miles south of Lueders, Texas (see Plate 50). This site
is in hard soil two or three miles from the sand dune region wbere
the flint implements of this Culture are usually found. This burial,
unlike others of the Sand Dune Culture, was stone covered.
The writer will here incorporate the notes of Mr. A. T. Jackson
concerning our joint excavation of the site.
"Along the river, at the point where this burial was found, there
is a low flood plain, 10 to 15 feet above the normal river channel.
The second terrace, in which the burial was made, is about 45 feet
above the river channel.
"There is a campsite on the gravelly hill to the north and west
of the grave, and a burnt-rock midden some 150 feet south of the
grave. On the surface are many fragments of flint and other stonework, and a few artifacts.
The grave was located some 200 feet west of the east base of the
old second terrace, and 400 feet west of the river, and was discovered by Dr. Cyrus N. Ray. It was easily detected because of
about a dozen fairly large, and some smaller, stones protruding from

230

Texas Archeolog~al and PaJeon~ological Society

4 to 8 inches above the present ground surface.

The area covered

by the stones was approximately 60x45 inches.
On removing the top stones others were found beneath, until about
100 were uncovered. They had an average size of about 10x7x2
inches, with perhaps 20 that measured around 15x10x6 inches.
There were found, just beneath the top layer of stones, at a depth
of 8 and 10 inches, two well made serrated projectile points. Ray
classes them as of "typical Sand Dune type" (see Vol. 1 Texas
Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin). A third
projectile point was at a depth of 12 inches and about 10 inches east
of the first two. Three others were found near the right hip at a
depth of 18 inches. The depth of the seventh point, found in dug
soil, is uncertain. Two of the specimens were in perfect condition;
the remaining five had parts missing.
The long, thin specimens were of a good grade of flint and of
excellent workmanship. All of them had more or less serrated
edges. They are very similar to certain points found by the Anthropology Department of the University of Texas in late pre-historic
and historic graves in Cherokee and Anderson Counties, Texas.
There also were two crudely worked or "roughed out" flint specimens in the grave; likewise parts of three small mussel shells, at
various depths.
Topmost of the bones were the socket-ends of the femora, at a
depth of 18 inches. They were in red, hard-packed soil and in a
rather poor state of preservation. The pelvic bone was to the north,
with the knees to the south. The feet were doubled back against
the pelvis. The vertebrae and ribs were beneath the leg bones, with
an increasing depth toward the south. The skull was not uncovered,
because of the approach of darkness, which precluded any further
work that day.
The bones were not mineralized; on the contrary, they were ~ft
and spongy.
PLATE 50.
Fig. 1, Sand Dune burial before excavation; Fig. 2, After top earth
removed; Fig. 3, After bones exposed. (A. M. 2).

Plate 50

S~nw Un,~sual Abilene Region Burials

233

While apparently pre-historic, the burial appears to have no great
age."
On the following Sunday the writer returned to the site and
removed the other bones. The vertebrae and many of the ribs lay
near the bottom of the grave. Three more broken points of the same
kind were found close to the ribs. The loose earth excavated the
previous Sunday was screened, and four more points were found.
All of the latter but one were broken, this one was much smaller than
the others but was of the same pattern. Fourteen serrated points
were found (see Plate 51). The number of broken points might
indicate that they were broken when burial was made for reasons
similar to tho~ of the Pueblos who broke the pots buried with the
dead.
There was no trace whatever of the skull. While none of the
bones were very hard, enough were preserved to indicate that had
the head been buried with them some of its parts would have remained, usually the teeth remain longer in good condition than the
other parts of a skeleton, but there were no teeth in the grave. Evidently the head was not hurled with this skeleton. There was nothi_ng unusual in the shafts of the long bones. The articular ends were
in poor condition. There was no flattening of the tibiae nor perceptible curvature of the femora. Such poorly preserved skulls as
have been found however indicate that Sand Dune man was long
headed.
Four Cremated Pit B~
Late in November, 1937, the writer examined a high bank beside
the Brazos River, situated at a distance of approximately thirty miles
northwest of Abilene, and there found four cremation burial pits
of a type not previously found in this region.
While cremated burials in the Abilene region are not new (see ~
and 3) this type is somewhat different from the others previously
found.
The top of the hill at this place extends close to the river and
has there caved off into a steep bank, the top of which for about
six to eight feet is vertical. All along the edge near the top is the
exposed debris of a campsite, which is covered with about a foot
or more of sterile soil. This layer of debris is about eight inches

234

Texas Archeological ~nd Paleontological Society

thick. At two places the writer noticed that the top soil had washed
off of layers of flat stones which were considerably larger than the
fist sized stones of the camp site, and that these were laid closely
and horizontally in two layers. On climbing up from below, it was
noticed that the clay bank had caved off in such manner as to expose
the sides of two large round jar like pits in the earth. These pits
were capped over the tops with double layers of horizontally laid
flat stones, which were mostly ten or twelve inches across. In the
Pit (1) or left hand pit, was a closely flexed skeleton in sitting
position with the face to the east, and just below the legs and in
front and below it to the east was the skeleton of a small child.
This pit was 43 inches deep below the cap stones, and the bottom
was rounded out like a basin. Around the upper parts of the adult
skeleton were quantities of ashes and charcoal as though the bodies
had first been placed in the pit, a fire made on top of them, and
then the pit ~ealed over with the stone layers. No artifacts were found
in this pit burial, but several large unworked mussel shells were
buried with them. None of the bones were scorched.
Pit (2) was only a few feet east of the first one and this pit contained another adult similarly buffed, and it was of about the same
depth. It also had several large mussel shells in it. There were
two small thin plain triangular un-notched arrow points in this
grave. It also showed the same signs of fire in the upper portion
of the pit. None of the bones were scorched.
We then began making test holes in the top earth back of the
vertical bank, and there found another similar stone structure about
two feet north of Pit (2). On excavating Pit (3) we found that it
was much shallower and smaller than the others. It contained quantities of ashes, charcoal, and fine burnt fragments of bone, and shell.
Considering the shallow depth of this pit it must have contained the
results of a child’s cremation. This cremation had been so complete that no specimens were obtained. The pit was about 18 inches
deep. About the same distance north of Pit (1), a test hole showed
a fourth stone structure, which was about three feet deep. This
Pit (4) contained burned fragments of an adult’s skeleton, and
burned mussel shells, and more charcoal and ashes than the others.
PLATE 51.
Fourteen Sand Dune Culture points found with (A. M. 9.) burial.

~

Plate 51

Some Un~sual Abil~e Regio~ Burials

237

The writer knows of two other sites near Abilene where unknown
persons have excavated several cremated burials, and scattered such
remains around over the soil surface, but there is nothing left now
except charred human bone fragments to indicate the manner of
burial of the remains.
The two adult skulls from these pit burials were in fairly good
condition. Evidently tbe pit was sealed over the top before the fire
had acted on the bones. Both of the skulls are long headed, and have
considerable similarity to the Abilene type, but none of the long
bone features exist. The tibiae are not flattened, nor are the shafts
of the fenmra curved, but are as straight as those of any modern
white man. Considering the shallow covered camp site position in
the earth, from which the pits were originally dug, the writer does
not believe that these burials are of any considerable age, although
the campsite shows no evidence of any historic occupation.
However, some of these relatively shallow sub-surface pre-historic
sites may be much older than we how assume. The remains of some
Roman occupation levels are said to be not very deeply buried also.
Burial Over Nine Feet Deep
At a place on the Matthews Ranch situated thirty miles north of
Albany, Texas, and about two miles south of the site where the
writer first found two skeletons of the Abilene type of dolichocephalic
man’~ a small boy found a skull exposed in a deeply buried stone
cist in a high vertical Brazos River bank. As usually happens in
such cases he did not leave the bones in place, and did not notify
some one capable of properly removing it, but removed it in fragmentary condition. Thus far the writer has not been able to get to
see the skull. Shortly thereafter Mr. J. C. Putnam heard of the
find and kindly notified us.
A visit was made to the site in August, 1938, and the following
facts learned. Fortunately the ground was hard and the footing so
insecure that the boy had left the other bones in the bank.
At this locality there is a west facing river bank of an estimated
height of between thirty.five and forty feet which slopes steeply
down to the water’s edge. There is a vertical section of this bank at
the top which is about twelve feet high. Below the vertical section
the bank is so steep that steps had to be cut for footholds in digging

238

Texas Archeological and P~eon~ological Society

out the burial. At a depth below the surface beginning at seven
feet the pinkish tan earth is replaced by a dark colored earth zone
which contains burnt hearth rocks, flint flakes, charcoal, numerous
mussel shells, and animal bone fragments.
This dark colored midden zone extends downwards to a little
below eight feet from the surface, where it is again replaced by pinkish tan silt, which extends without much color change to below the
water’s edge.
In none of the pinkish soil levels either above or below the black
midden zone is there evidence of a campsite with the exception of
one very deeply buried hearth, which lies 30 feet or more below
the top soil surface, and contains burnt rocks, charcoal and mussel
shells. (See Plate 55, No. 3).
In most of the levels below ten feet only occasional mussel shells
and stones of hearths are seen. The black zone however, is thickly
studded with hearths and the other debris of an old campsite.
When viewed from below the bank the old midden level’s black
band may be plainly seen exposed down to a depth of more than
eight feet below the present soil surface, and extending for a distance of perhaps two hundred yards or more at this place. It is
¯tudded with mussel shells, burnt rocks, and occasional flint flakes.
The burial had been made from below the bottom of this black
zone, and the measured vertical distance below the soil surface to
the top of the skeleton was nine feet and two and one-half inches.
(9 ft., 2½ in.). (See Plate 52, Nos. 1, 2 and 3). Over the top
of the skeleton was a limestone structure of stones (see Plate 52,
No. 2) none of which were over a foot in diameter. The skeleton
lay in flexed position under the stones with the head to the southwest
and apparently lying on the back. (See Plate 52, No. 3). There
were many small mussel shells immediately above the burial stones,
and all amongst them. At a distance of about two inches above the
layer of stones which covered the bones, was a solid layer of the

PLATE 52.
Fig. 1, Man pointing to burial exposed ten feet deep in Brazos River
bank; Fig. 2, Close-up picture of burial excavation half finished; Fig.
3, View of bones exposed after all the top covering of stones has been
removed.

Plate 52

Unusual Abilene Region Bur4.als

241

~hells of the same species of small mussel mentioned above. These
shells were thickly laid like shingles with the convex surfaces
upward and the shells closely overlapping. The effect would have
been to shed rain off of the grave, and it probably represents the old
soil surface when burial was made. This layer was close below the
bottom of the black midden zone. As there was no sign of any disarrangement of the soil, either in the black midden zone above, nor
of the pinkish tan soil above that, it is evident that the burial was
made-at a period shortly before the deeply buried midden level began
to aecumulate, or from an old floor level above which slightly more
than eight feet of silt has since accumulated. The burial was originally probably enly about fourteen inches below the soil surface
of that period.
The long bones were mostly found in good condition except some
projecting articular ends of arm bones which evidently had been
broken off by those who removed the skull. The leg bones were
nearly intact, and appear to have most of the peculiarities of those
reported on by Dr. Hrdlicka in the 1938 issue of this Bulletin.
However, the internal surfaces of the tibiae are also very deeply guttered, which is a feature not previously noted in tibiae from the
Abilene section.
This burial represents the deepest buried, and possibly one of the
oldest yet found in the Abilene region, although far deeper midden
levels have often been found by the writer in the same region. A
competent physical anthropologist will be asked to examine these
bones~also, and a report in more detail can then be made.
The mussel s~lls fOUnd with this burial vary in size very little,
~d evidently are only of one species, contrary to the usual practice, which was to use shells of several much larger species, and of
various sizes. There must have been several gallons of these small
shells with the burial, ~ writer preserved a large paper bag full
of whole shells. These range from 1~ to 2 inches in diameter, and
are nearly round, with plain outside surfaces. In no other local
burial has such a great quantity of shells been found. Usually there
are not more than from three to six or eight large mussel shells
buried with the long headed flexed skeletons.
1939 Excav~ns
During the year 1939 four more burials were found.

The first

242

Texas Archeological and Paleontological So~ty

one, found in January, was incomplete.

This burial had eroded

from the gullied bank of Mulberry Creek at a place about fifteen
miles west of Abilene.

Only the complete frontal bone and some

fragznents of the lower portion of the skull were found.
burial was a flat sandstone metate.

With this

Not enough was found of this

skull to determine much about head shape but it seems to be of a
long head.
Shallow Burial
North of Abilene about twenty-five miles, on top of a hill situated
about one-fourth mile from the Brazes River, two stone grave burials
were found. The first of these A. M. (3) was covered with a surface
pavement of limestones set closely together; this structure measured
about six feet across.
Beneath this surhce layer were two long flat stones set up edgewise with other flat stones lying horizontally in the space between
them. Under the horizontal stones a flexed skeleton lay on its back.
The skull was badly crushed by the weight of the stones.
The left femur of this skeleton showed much evidence of bone
disease. The shaft showed exostoses (bony outgrowths) and the
head of the bone was deformed, muc~ mushroomed, and eroded. The
writer has looked closely for evidences of bone erosion, such as
syphilitic involvement would cause, in the many burials which he
has previously excavated; but this is the first instance where any
such signs of bone disease have been found except one Abilene skull
which had exostoses which closed the ear openings.
This burial was unusually shallow (20 inches) and many of the
long bones were in fragile condition, however the femur was the
best preserved. This skull was placed in the local museum and left
embedded in the matrix as found. The burial is prehistoric, but
probably is not very old. There was little or no mineralization of
these bones. No artifacts were found.
PLATE 53:
No. 1, Basket Maker petroglyph showing man holding two spears
and pierced by two.
Photographs courtesy M. V. Brownfield.
No. 2, Showing negative hand prints outlined in red.
No. 3, Closeup of a hand print.

Plate 53

Some Unusual Abilen~ Reglo~ BuriaLs

245

This single burial was made under a heavy stone structure which
extended down to a depth of three feet and eight inches. The top of
the stone structure measured seven by seven feet. A total of sixtyfive large flat limestones were removed from the grave. Near the
bottom some large stones were set edgewise and in the bottom under
these were other flat stones lying horizontally. Under the bottom
horizontal layer was a flexed long headed skeleton, the head of
which lay to the south. The bottom six inches of the hole had been
cut down into the hard caliche. This skeleton was in a state of
chalky mineralization, and probably is of an older type than that
of Burial A. M. (3). No artifacts were found with this burial.
Reek Shelter Burial With Basket
In southern Nolan County, about forty-five miles southwest of
Abilene there is a rock shelter which contains much ashes and midden
debris. On the walls of this shelter are seven negative hand prints.
These negative prints are in white, outlined in red. Evidently the
wall had been moistened, and then the outspread palm of the hand
was placed on the stone, and red powdered oxide of iron thrown
against it. This left the hand outlined in red. Apparently the iron
went into and became part of the limestone (see Plate 53, Nos. 2, 3).
Such hand prints are world wide in distribution, and some in Europe
are undoubtedly thousands of years old. Also on the same ledge
is a typical basket maker square-shouldered man’s figure, cut into
the stone (see Plate 53, No. 1). This figure holds two spears, one
in each hand, and two other spears are shown sticking into his body.
Unfortunately vandals have about obliterated the man’s figure,
and are still engaged in scratching the hand prints off of the rocks.
In July, 1939, while Mr. Forrest Kirkland was copying these
pictographs in colors, W. C. Fields, the nephew of the owner of the
ranch, began to dig in the floor of the rock shelter, and soon unearthed a human lower jaw, and a basket. The writer was notified
by Mr. Kirkland and on visiting the place was able to locate the
skull. The burial was of a child of about eight years of age, and
the skull is well preserved with the exception of some portions which
rats had gnawed. The skull does not resemble those of the Abilene
~pe of long headed man, but is that of a more modern Indian type.
The burial had been made in a narrow space between the back wall

246

Texas Arch¢ologieal ~nd Paleontological Society

of the shelter and the edge of a huge stone which had at some time
fallen from the roof (see Plate 54, No. 1). Smaller stones had
been used to cover over the top of the space between. The basket
had been gnawed on the edges by rats, but large portions of the
edge were intact as well as the center of the basket, with the exception
that a circular section 3½ inches in diameter had been cut out of
the center. The cut was clean, and undoubtedly made by a knife
of some sort, and this portion had not been gnawed. Lying inside
the basket was a thin sharp flint flake.
The basket is badly warped, but the texture is firm, and in good
condition. The material seems to be of willow sticks, and yucca
blades. (See Plate 54, Nos. 2 and 3).
There is a dark colored band one-half inch, or three stick widths
wide, at a distance of 1 1-16 inches or seven woven stick widths
below the basket edge. The band shows inside as well as outside,
and may have been woven in of previously colored blades instead
of being painted on afterwards. There are some darker portions
below and above the band which may have been decorations, but
of this the writer is uncertain. The basket is 111/~ inches in diameter.
The cut out central disk probably was done at the time of burial
in conformity with the Pueblo Indian belief that objects buried with
the dead should also be "killed" or broken. This is the first specimen of Indian basketry ever found in the Abilene region, in so far
as this writer knows.
At this site thick deposits of ashes and burnt rocks extend down
to a depth of at least five or six feet or more. Test holes revealed
three different strata of ashes, each of which was separated by a
sterile layer. The top layer is separated by a sterile layer which
is only a few inches deep, but the sterile stratum between the second
and third layers of ashes is broad. One of the deeper layers of ashes
extends under the huge fallen rock below the hand pictographs and
petroglyph. (See Plate (54) No. (1)). The pictures were made
PLATE 54.
Fig. 1, The finder of the basket, J. C. Fields, standing inside the
shelter where the burial was found.
Fig. 2, Picture of the inside of the basket.
Fig. 3, Picture of the outside of the basket.

Plate 54

~om~ Unu~ Abilene Re~ion Burials

249

along the rock face which was left exposed when the rock fell, and
they evidently were made at a much later period than the one when
the deeper layers of ashes were deposited.
Small arrow heads are found in all layers. The land owner, Mr.
M. U. Brownfield, who has done considerable digging there, believes
that the larger projectile points are found only in the top layer, and
the fine thin small points in the lower levels.
However the writer found the small thin points in the top level
also. Some obsidian flakes, and a few potsherds have been found
in the site by others.
Types o] Artifacts
The writer found obsidian flakes, but no potsherds. One polished
stone bead was found. The types of small arrow heads found come
within the classification of pottery culture types, which were illustrated by the writer in Vol. 7, 1935, Bulletin of this Society, in an
article entitled "The Pottery Complex Artifacts of the Abilene"
Region," Plate 8. According to that classification, the writer found
in the rock shelter the following artifacts, 1 (P. Flake drill) ; seven
points of (P. Arrow B.) two of (P. Arrow D.), although these
lacked the notch in the base; two more of this triangular type had
two notches on each side near the base; three small slightly expanded
based barbed points like those shown to the left of the obsidian
flakes on row 5 of the plate 8 cited above; three plain triangular
points (P. Arrow E.).
One medium sized roughly flaked knife was found. Several very
small knives which were flat on one side and pointed at each end,
were found. These knives were about 1 1-2 inches in length.
No oval pottery type scrapers were found of any of the types
illustrated on plate 10, panel 129 of the Bulletin referred to above.
A few side scrapers, and many thin flake knives were found.
Much indiscriminate digging has been done at this site, but thus
far no systematic attempt has been made to excavate it.

125½ Pine Street,
Abilene, Texas.

250

Texas Archeological and Paleo~tologlva~ Society

Bibliography
(1) Cyrus N. Ray, Multiple Burials in Stone Cist Mounds of
the Abilene Region, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 5, 1933.
(2) Cyrus N. Ray, Archeological Research in Central West
Texas, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
¥ol. 4, 1932, pp. 66-67.
(3) Cyrus N. Ray, Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found Near
Colorado, Texas, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 8, 1936, pp. 9-16.
(4) Cyrus N. Ray, New Evidences of Ancient Man in America,
Scientific American Magazine, May, 1929, pp. 430-431.

