76

Texas ArcheologieaI and Pa2eontological Soaiety

A SURVEY OF THE HISTORIC EARTHENWARE OF THE LOWER ARKANSAS
VALLEY*
By S. D. DICKINSON and S. C. DELLINGER
Pottery typical of the Lower Arkansas River Valley was described
and illustrated in 1908 by C. B. Moore, who had investigated sites
from the mouth of that stream to Natural Steps, in Pulaski County,
20 miles above Little Rock.1

He made no attempt to ascertain

the origin of the wares, other than indicating that some of them
apparently belonged to the historic horizon,z

Later Moore called

attention to the fact that Arkansas River pottery possessed certain
traits common to both the Middle and Lower Mississippi provinces,3
as defined by Holmes.4
In 1924 M. R. Harrington was sent by the Heye Foundation to
investigate a large aboriginal cemetery which was being destroyed
by pot-hunters in Carden Bottoms, Yell County, Arkansas.

Here

the diggers were finding elaborately decorated ware, much of which
was similar to what Moore had found farther downstream.

After

having observed the Carden Bottoms specimens, Harrington divided
them into six groups: plain, culinary ware consisting of bowls, pots,
and bottles; vessels having designs painted in red and white, or red,
white, black or brown; incised ware; engraved pottery; red painted
vessels, the surface of which had been scraped after firing leaving
designs in relief; and effigy forms,s
*This is paper 710, Research Series, University of Arkansas.
1.
Mo~re, C. B., "Certain Mounds of Arkansas and Mi~issippi," Journal of the
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol XIII, 1908.
2. Idem. p. 482.
3. Moore, C. B., "Some Aboriginal Sites on Mi~i~ippi River," Journal of the
Academy of Natural Sciences off Philadelephia, VoL XVI, 1911, p. 370.
4.
Holmes, W. H., "Ancient Pottery of the Mississippi Valley," Fourth Annual
Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, 1882-83, p. 369.
5.
Harrington, M. It., "A Pot-Hunter’s Paradise," Indian Notes and Monographs,
Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, Vol. 1, No. 2, New York, 1924,
(secondary source, Moorehe~l, W. K., "Archaeology of the Arkansas River," Yale

University Press, 1931, pp. 10-11).

PLATE 14
Typical Caddo vessels from
influence from the Ouachita:
with interlocked scroll design;
swastikas; d, bowl with curved

the Arkansas River Valley; showing
a, engraved cazuela; b, tripod bottle
c, bottle with pedestal and engraved
sides and everted rim.

Plate

House Types Among the Caddo Indians

79

Harrington wrote concerning the origin of the wares:

"It is certain, however, that a considerable part of the pottery is
typically Caddp, especially the ware engraved after firing and much
of that with patterns incised before heat was applied. Another large
element dark, and not so well made, with occasional animal effigies,
resembles the typical pottery of eastern Arkansas, which may be
Quapaw; the painted ware may belong to this group, and it may
not--the exact connection has not yet been satisfactorily worked out.
Certainly, the impression produced by the Carden Bottoms collection as a whole is that it was made by at least two or perhaps three
separate peoples."
"Careful work would have proved or disproved the possibility of
this, and very simply. If some graves contained only Caddo pottery, others only painted ware, and still others only ware of the eastern Arkansas type, we might hope to show occupancy by three different peoples; but if all classes of pottery are usually found together in the same grave, there would be ground for assuming that
one people of mixed culture had lived in Carden Bottoms.’’6
Attempting to solve this problem, the University of Arkansas Museum excavated an aboriginal cemetery at the Mainard Place near
Natural Steps. The ceramic material obtained here was similar to
what had previously been found throughout the Lower Arkansas.
Engraved ware quite like Caddoan pottery, and incised pieces occured in the same graves with painted vessels, some of which were
effigies. The wares, therefore, appear to have been contemporaneous; and the variation in paste composition, form and decoration
may be attributed to a fusion of cultures.
Though pottery resembling the Caddo is distributed all along the
Lower Arkansas River, it is not the dominant ware. Sites near the
Fourche La Fave and Peiit Jean, tributaries of the Arkansas which
flow through Logan, Perry, and Yell counties in the central part
of the state, have yielded the greatest number of Caddo-like vessels.
This earthenware, which decreases as one proceeds downstream, most
closely resembles pieces from the Upper Ouachita River.
6. Harrington, M. R., "A Pot-Hunter’s Paradise," Indian Notes and Monographs,
Museum of the American Indian. Heye Foundation, Vol. :1, No. 2, New York, 1924,
(secondary source, Moorehead, W. K., ’*Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley.’"
Yale University Press, 1931, pp.

I0-Ii}.

80

Texas A~’che.ological and Paleontological Society

Composition of the paste is very similar to that of pottery from
the latter stream.

Blackish Brown, Iron Gray and Mouse Gray are

common colors7 of the paste core, which has either a lumpy or
compact texture.

Shell and grit aplastics were both used.

Exterior

surfaces were smudged and polished, sometimes to a relatively high
degree.
There is also a marked similarity between shapes of vessels from
the two valleys.

Cazuelas, bowls with flaring sides, and those with

curving~ walls and everted rim (Plate 1¢, a and d) are equally represented in both areas.

Bottles, likewise, are closely related as

evidenced by bulbous and straight necks, pedestals, and tripods (P1.
14, b and c).

On the other hand, platters (P1. 15, a) are more

abundant along the Arkansas than in the Ouachita region, whereas
the urn is less frequently found.

The Arkansas Valley Caddoan

manifestation, however, does exhibit certain shapes not found elsewhere in the state: a cylindrical jar with convex sides (P1. 15, b) ;
a globular vessel with equidistant openings (P1. 15, c) ; and a bowl
with rounded body and straight rim somewhat like a cazuela but
deeper.

With the exception of the last, these forms are rare.

Moreover, the decorations are either identica! or else closely related.

Engraved frets, bars, and scrolls with a crosshatched back-

ground interspersed with circles are the principal motifs on this
ware. Tripod bottles of both groups frequently have a series o~ horizontal lines encircling the neck and scrolls or triangular motifs extending across the body to the legs.
The dominant ware of ~dae Lower Arkansas can be distinguished
from the Caddoan by a characteristic paste, the core of which may
be Buff-Pink, Light Vinaceous Cinnamon, Light Pinkish Cinnamon
or sometimes Smoke Gray or Clear Payne’s Gray in color.

Shell

temper was used most frequently, though volcanic tuff is occasionally noted.
7.
Ridgeway,
C., 1912.

The former leached in some cases, leaving a porous
R.,

"Color

Standards

and

Color

Nomenclature,."

Washington,

D.

PLATE 15
Unusual Caddo types found in the Arkansas Valley: a, platter with
engraved inte]’ior design; b, cylindrical jar, engraved designs; c, globular form, engraved.

Plate 15

Su~’vey of the Historic Earthenware o] the. Lower Arkansas

texture; otherwise the paste is compact.
2.5 to 4.

83

Hardness varies from

From the standpoint of form, two divisions are recognizable: the
functional, including vessels which had a pure utilitarian origin;
and the zoomorphic and eccentric which express an additional
esthetic impulse. Slipped and unslipped vessels occur in both
groups. Likewise, there are common decorative techniques and
motifs, such as incised designs, monochrome and polychrome painting, and cameo work which has relief designs resulting from the
removal of areas in the slip. Ochre Red or Etruscan Red pigment
was employed as a wash for the monochrome and cameo. In combination with white kaolin alone, or with white and a carbonaceous
substance, these reds were used in polychrome decoration. The
colors are quite reminiscent of those on Middle Mississippi pottery,
although painted earthenware is far more abundant along the Arkansas. In both areas black was the least common pigment.
Functional forms are limited to bowls and bottles. The typical
bowl has rounded sides and everted rim, althougl~ there is considerable variation in size, curvature, and decoration. Culinary vessels
are large, some of them being 8 inches high and 15 inches wide.
in general, the height is about one-half of the maximum width.
They are rarely decorated. When ornamentation has been added,
it is usually a band of simple rectilinear motifs incised on the exterior surface below the rim lip (P1. 16, b).
Cameo decoration occurs chiefly on those functional bowl forms
which are more shallow than the culinary ones (P1. 17, a). Bowls
decorated in this fashion have a solid band of red covering or~ both
sides of the rim and a more complicated design, composed of several
elements, arranged on the interior walls of the body. Designs on
interior surfaces are indeed unusual elsewhere in this state.
The chief motifs forming the decoration of cameo bowls are: the
circle; a plain semi-circle; semi-circle with triangnlar projections;
a hollow quadrate; a terraced figure; the swastika; scrolls with
projecting triangles; and a figure suggestive of antlers. With the
exception of the last two elements, all are commonly found on Middie Mississippian painted ware, and are likewise arranged in groups
of 3 and 4. The scroll with triangular projections (P1. 17, b),

84

Texas Arch~ological and Paleontological Society

moreover, is analogous to an engraved motif with crosshatched triangles on occasional bottles from northeast Arkansas and Moundsville, Alabama.~ It is thought that the latter design is symbolic of
the plumed serpent. Likewise, Moore has suggested that the antler
figure (P1. 17, c) was emblematic of Quetzalcoat.9 Concerning
this, it is noteworthy that the Quapaw, according to La Harpe in
1722, were worshipping only the snake deity;lo and Bossu saw an
idol of a horned serpent among theso people in 1771.11 The other
motifs, like their Middle Mississippian counterparts, are cosmic
symbols according to Willoughby’s interpretation,Iz which was
based on Ashe’s account of a Quapaw dance.~ 3
As painting of vessels was most common in the Middle Mississippi
complex, and engraving among the Caddo, it seems that the two
techniques spread to the Lower Arkansas where they fused to form
the cameo style of decoration. Caddoan ware of yellow paste with
red slip and engraved designs sometimes occurs on Red River in
Arkansas, and Moore illustrates several specimens from Glendora,
Louisiana.~4 It is noticeable that on these pieces the slip serves
as the background for the engraved patterns, whereas in the cameo
the reverse is true. The University of Texas Department of Anthropology has obtained from sites on Red River in the northeastern
part of that State some red painted vessels with designs carved
through the slip,15 which seem remotely related to the cameo pottery, but here again the engraved portions constitute the design.
With the exception of a specimen reported by Ford from the Father8.
Moore, C. B., "Moundsville Revisited,’" Journal, Academy of Natural Sciences,
of Philadelphia, Vol. XIII, 1907, p. 377.
9.
Moore, C. B., "Certain Mounds’ of Arkansas and Mississippi," Journal of the
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, VoL XIII, 1908, p. 528.
10.
La Harpe, B. de, "Journal Historique de L’Etablissernents des Francais a la
Louisiane," ]~olmare, New Orleans, 1831, p. 317.

Ii. Bossu, ,I. B., "Noveaux Voyages dans l’Arnerique Septentrionale," Changuion,
Amsterdam, 1"/77, p. 160.
12. Willoughby, G. C., "An Analysis of the Decoration upon Pottery from the
Mississippi Valley," Journal of American Folk-Lore, Vol. I0, Houghton, Mifflin and
Company, Boston and New York, pp. 9-20.
13. Ashe, T., "Travels in America," Phillips, London. 1808, pp. 305-305.
14. Moore, C. B., "Antiquities of the Ouachlta Valley," Journal, Academy of
Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, Vol. XIV. 1909, Plates IV, V.
16. Jackson, A. T., Personal Correspondence.
PLATE 16
Quapaw functional forms; a, polychrome bottle with hourglass
neck; b, culinary bowl with incised rectilinear motifs; c, bottle having
incised decoration of swastikas.

Survey of the Historic Earthenware of th~ Lower Arkansas

87

land Plantation, Mississippi,16 the writers know of no typical examples of cameo ware from outside the Arkansas River Valley.
The most common functional bottle form has a spheroid body and
a neck shaped somewhat like an hourglass, which is peculiar to
the Arkansas Valley (PI. 16, a). Possibly, this type is an extreme
modification of the Caddo bulbous neck. Middle Mississippian
influence is suggested by a red wash and interlocked, alternating
red and white scrolls which such bottles generally have as decoration. Another form exhibiting a relationship with pottery from
northeast Arkansas is a bottle having a compressed body and a
wide but short neck (PI. 16, c). This bottle, unlike its plain Middie Mississippian counterpart, frequently has an incised decoration
of swastikas, or scrolls.
Clearly the effigy pottery from Carden Bottoms and other sites
in the same valley is related to that of eastern Arkansas, as Harrington points out, but one does not know to what part of the eastern
~ction of the state he refers. Presumably, it is to the northeast where
so much effigy ware of the Middle Mississippi complex has been
found, since he describes the pottery as "dark, and not so well made."
Arkansas River zoomorphic-eccentric forms, however, are usually
of yellow paste and are painted whereas those from northeast Arkansas are not. One unpainted human effigy water bottle of dark paste
from the Menard Site, though, was illustrated by Moore.17 This
bottle type is very rare in Arkansas River sites; in fact, human
effigy bottles are less frequent here than vessels modeled in the
semblance of a human head, which is in direct contrast to the occurrence of such forms in the Middle Mississippi complex. Excepting Moore’s specimen, only two bottles representing the human form
have been reported from Lower Arkansas Valley (P1. 18, b).
Arkansas River head vessels differ from those in the northeast
section of the state. For example, they are not vases but bottles
having the characteristic hourglass neck (P1. 18, c). Moore described, however, a human head bottle with a wide mouthed, straight
16.
Ford, g. A., "Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
Mississippi," Anthropological Study No. 2, Department of Conservation, Louisiana
Geological Survey, 1936, Fig. 9,
17.
Moore, C. B., "Certain Mounds of Arkansas and Mississippi," Journal of the
Academy o£ Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. XIII, 1908, Figs. 16 and 17.

88

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

neck from Pecan Point. 18 Furthermore, the modeling of Arkansas
River specimens is less realistic with a tendency toward the grotesque, which is achieved by making the features conform to the
vessel shape instead of vice versa as was done by the Middle Mississippi potters.
The chief zoomorphic form of the Arkansas River is a bowl with
curved sides and the head and tail of a bird or other animal, though
occasionally a grotesque head having a tall coiffure has been
modeled (P1. 18, a and d). Less common are vessels executed in
naturalistic fashion to represent fish and quadrupeds--favorite subjests in the Middle Mississippi complex.
Related to zoomorphic specimens are the teapot-shaped vessels
(P1. 19, b), which presumably were developed through conventionalization of a frog or turtle effigy.19 As Moore pointed out,
the focus for this form seems to have been in the Lower Arkansas
from which it spread northward,z° The Middle Mississippi teapots, however, are rarely painted, whereas those from the Arkansas
River have a red wash, and sometimes polychrome decoration. Moore
also reports his finding two teapots in Louisiana, one at the Glendora Site on the Ouachita,zl and another at the Keno Place on
Bayou Bartholomew.22 He suggests that they were probably carried in trade from the Arkansas River.23 It is noteworthy that the
Keno specimen occurred with glass beads,2z~ and the Glendora cemetery likewise contained European objects,z5 An historic Natchez
site has also yielded a red painted teapot,z6 Other eccentric forms
18.
Moore, C. B., "Some Aboriginal Sites on Mississippi River," Journal, Academy
of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. XIV, 1911, Plate XXXVL
19.
Holmes, W. H.. "Ancient Pottery of the ~,Iississippi Valley," :Fourth Annual
Report. Bureau of American Ethnology, 1882-$3, p. 403.
20.
Moore. C. B’., "Some Aboriginal Sites on Mississippi River," Journal of the
Academy of Natural Ssience~ of Philadelphia, Vol. XIV, 1911, p. 404.
21,
Moore, C. B., "Antiquities of the Ouaehita Valley," Journal of the Academy
of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. XIV, 1909, p. 75.
22, Idem. 13. 124.
23.
Moore, C. B,, "Some Aboriginal Sites on Mi~i~ippi River," Journal of the
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. XIV, 1911, p. 404.
24.
Moore, C. B., "Antiquities of the Ouachita Valley," Journal of the Academy
of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. XIV, 1909, p. 124.
2~.
Idem. p. 28.
26.
Ford, J. A.~ "Analysis of Indian VilIage Site Collections from Louisiana and
Mississlp~i," Anthropological Study :No. 2, Department of Conser~’ation, Louisiana
Geological Survey, :New Orleans, 1936, Fig. 57, p. 57.

PLATE 17
Bowls with cameo decoration: a, semicircular motifs arranged to
form a swastika; b and c, dentated scrolls and antler motifs, possibly
symbolic of the plumed serpent.

Survey of the Histori~ Earthenware of the Lower Arkansas

such as the bottle with a loop handle, the shoe-shaped jar, and the
hourglass shape point toward Middle Mississippi influence (P1. 19,
c, d and a respectively).
Obviously, the wares discussed in this paper belong to the historic horizon, for Moore states that almost every site examined by
him along the Arkansas yielded brass objects and glass beads,z7 In
one instance he found trade objects associated with a painted bottle.z8 Furthermore, the University of Arkansas Museum has a
wide mouthed bottle which occurred with cones of sheet brass in a
grave in Yell County. The presence of the aforementioned cameo
bowl and painted teapot at the historic Fatherland, Mississippi Site,
as well as the known historic position of Caddo pottery, further
established the same time period for Arkansas River earthenware.
Identification of the makers of the pottery, however, can be determined with less exactitude. As is well known, the Quapaw or
Akancas, who were situated during the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries in four villages near the confluence of the Arkansas, White,
and Mississippi rivers,29 claimed as their territory an area extending 300 miles westward,so It is also evident that they were potters
for Marquette states that, ’q’hay cook it (maize) in great earthen
jars, which are very well made. They have also plates of baked
earth which they use in various ways.’’31 St. Cosine also wrote of
their, "using large earthen pots instead of kettles, and well made
pitchers.’’3z According to the latter observer, these Indians made
drums by stretching a skin over a pot.33 Such references to the
size of the pieces suggest the large culinary vessels which have already been mentioned ir~ this paper.
The Menard Mound Site where Moore found 160 burials, 10 of
which contained objects of unquestionable European origin,3a is in
27. Moore, C. B.. "Certain Mound~ of Arkansas and Mi~sissil~pi," Journal of the
Academy of l~t’aturnl Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. XIII, 1908, p. 482.
28.
Idtm. p. 525.
29.
~ H~, B. de, "Jou~al Hh~que de l’E~blissemen~ d~ Fraucais a la
~ui~ane," Boimara, New Orl~ns, 1831, p. ZlT.
Z0.
"Ann,s of ~n~s," 9th ~n~s, 2nd ~ion, 1806-18~, pp. I087-1~8.
Sl.
Ken~n, E., EdiCt, ’~he India~s of ~o~h Ameri~, from the J~uit Rel~
tlona and AHi~ ~m~,’" VoL II, Har~u~, Br~ and Company, New York,
p. 281.
~2.
Sh~, J. G., EdiCt, ’~rly Voy~ Up and ~wn the Mississippi,"
Mun~, A]~ny, 1861, p.
33.
Idem. p.
~. M~re, C. B., "Ce~in Moun~ of Arkans~ ~d Mi~alsslvpi," Journal of
~e A~emy of Natu~ Sclenc~, VoL XIII, Philadelphia, 1908, p. 490.

92

Texas Archeological and Paleo~tological Society

the neighborhood of the old Quapaw towns. As these Indians were
the only tribe known to have resided continuously in this neighborhood throughout the historic period, we may conclude that die
pottery from these graves is Quapaw. It must be borne in mind,
however, that these burials were in the field, not in the mound,
which may~ not have been erected by that culture.
Apparently, there was also a minor Natchesan influence here, for
several vessels illustrated by Moore are comparable to some from
the Fatherland Plantation which has been identified as the Grand
Village of the Natchez. These have a flattened body on a pedestal,
and a wide orifice with short, vertical rim. Moore’s specimens,
having incised decorations consisting of continuous scrolls and curvilinear meanders arranged around a circle, correspond to Ford’s
Natchesan types 41; 21; 5 and 43; 21; 5, respectively.3~ Intercourse such as the Quapaw and Natchez maintained during the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries would easily account for the
presence of this foreign element in the Arkansas Valley.
As previously stated, the Caddo types associated with the painted
wares occur more frequently in those counties which are situated
between the Arkansas River and the headwaters of the Ouachita.
The distance separating these two valleys is not great, consequently
the Caddoes could easily have gone northward, established villages,
and were later absorbed. Naturally, if such an intrusion had taken
place one would expect to find along this route sites having engraved and polished wares and little or no painted pottery. This
was the case at the Bluffton Mounds in the southern part of Yell
County--the only scientifically excavated campsite in that region.
Incidentally, no indications of European contact were noted here.
It is now impossible to determine when the Caddo entered the
Arkansas Valley. They may have preceded the Quapaw, but there
is some circumstantial evidence of at least one late migration. The
35.

Ford,

J’,

A.,

"Analysis

of

Indian

Village

Site

Gollections

from

Louisiana

and Mississippi," Anthropological Study No. 2, Department of ConServation, Louisiana
Geological Survey, New Orleans, 1936, p. 54-55.

PLATE 18
Quapaw effigy forms: a, monochrome bird bowl; b, unpainted human effigy; c, polychrome head vase; d, monochrome bowl with grotesque head.

Plate 18

Survey of the Historic Earthenware of the Lower Arkan~as

95

1782 revised map of Guillaume de l’Isle locates the Ouatehitas village just south of the Arkansas River in the region in which engraved, burnished ware is most abundant, whereas his map of 1718
does not show this town.
Although a northward movement of people from the Upper Ouachita would seem to hav~ been most responsible for the presence of
Caddo pottery in the Arkansas Valley, it probably was not the only
culture thrust from southwest Arkansas. Throughout the historic
period both Quapaw and Caddo used a trace which ran diagonally
across the state from near the mouth of the Arkansas to the bend of
Red River. Relations between the tribes appear to have been more
than casual, for the Cadodaquious informed Joutel that the Cappa
were one of their allies.36

The heterogeneous character of Arkansas River pottery is consistent with the mixed culture of the historic Quapaw. According
to recent studies, the De Soto expedition did not encounter these
Indians;37 consequently, the latter must have established themselves near the mouth of the Arkansas sometime between 1541 and
1673, when Marquette discovered them. They probably were already familiar with Middle Mississipian pottery when they resided
in the Wabash-Ohio region, and their migration southward afforded
them additional opportunity to observe the effigy and painted wares
of southeast Missouri and northeast Arkansas. It is also possible
that they borrowed certain traits from the Tunican or Natchez people whom they may have replaced on the Lower Arkansas.3s At
a later period the Quapaw were adept at culture assimilation. In
fact, they strengthened their own number by offering refuge to
remnants of various tribes.39
In determining the character and position of the most recent wares
in the Lower Arkansas River Valley attention has been paid chiefly
36.
Vol.
37.

Joutel, H., "Relation" reprinted in l~argry, P., "Memoires et Documents,"
3, ’Paris,

1879, p.

Swanton, J. R.,

409.
"Final Report of the De Soto Expedition Gommisslon," ~/6th

Congress, 1st Session, House Document :No. 71, Washington, 1939, p. 51.
38.

Idem. p. 52.

39°
Charlevoix, P. F. X. de, "Journal of a Voyage to ]North America,"
tlon printed for R. and J. Dodsley, London, 1761, p. 246.

transl~-

Bossu, J’. B., "Noveaux Voyages dans rAmerique Septentrionale," Chianguion,
Amsterdam, 1777, P. 144.
Nuttall. T., °’JournaJ of Travels into the Arkansa
Year 1819," T, H. Palmer, Philadelphia, 1821, p. 84.

Territory

During

the

96

Texa~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

to the relation of the pottery to other historic ceramic groups. There
is the possibility, however, that certain traits common to all came
from earlier complexes. Painting with red ochre, for example, may
have been a feature borrowed by Arkansas River, Middle Mississippi,
and Caddo potters from the Coles Creek complex. No extensive
stratigraphic studies have been made in the Lower Arkansas River
region, but sufficient specimens of Coles Creek and Deasonville
potsherds have been collected by the University of Arkansas Museum
to indicate the presence of these horizons. Furthermore, occurrence
of Coles Creek ware at the Crenshaw Site on Red River,ao Coles
Creek and Marksville on the Little Missouriz~ and Ouachita,’~2
Deasonville, Coles Creek and Marksville in southeasterna3 and
northeastern Arkansasaz~ point to a distribution so widespread that
some influence might be expected in all succeeding complexes.
Museum, University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville, Arkansas.
May 31, 1940.

40.
Lemley, H. J., "Discoveries :indicating a Prc~Gaddo Culture on Red River
in Arkansas"; Dickinson, S. D., "The Ceramic Relations of the Pre-Gaddo Pottery
from the Crenshaw Site," Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Abilene, Texas, 1936, pp. 25-68.
41.
Dickinson, S. D., and Lemley, YL J., "Evidences of the Marksville and Coles

Creek Complexes at the Kirkham Place, Clark County, Arkansas," Bulletin, Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Abilene, Texas, 1939, pp. 139-189.
42.
Dellinger, S. C., and Dickinson, S. D., "Manual of Aboriginal Pottery ,ff
Arkansas," in press.
43.
Lemley, H. J., and Dickinson, S. D., "Archcological :Investigations on Bayou
]$facon in Arkansas," Bolletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Abilene. Texas, 1937, pp. 11-47.
,t4.
Dellinger. S. C., and Dickinson, S. D., "Possible Antcced~ents of the Middle
~Iississippi Ceramic Complex in Northeastern Arkansas," in press.

PLATE 19
Quapaw eccentric forms: a, hourglass form; b, teapot; c, bottle
with loop handle; d, shoe-shaped vessel.

Plate 19

