Two Unusual Types o$ Chipped Stone Ar~ifac$

9

TWO UNUSUAL TYPES OF CHIPPED STONE
ARTIFACT FROM NORTHWEST
LOUISIANA
By C: H. W~B
Two apparently unusual types of chipped stone artifacts
have been noted in our collection of approximately ten
thousand specimens found on the surface of more than one
hundred sites in the northwestern portion of Louisiana.
We have not found either descriptions or illustrations of
similar artifacts in the various articles describing cultures
or chipped stone objects from other areas, although a few
projectile points of the types to be described have been
observed in the collection at the University of Texas, these
points having been found in surface collections from the
contiguous counties of East Texas. Also of interest is the
fact that neither type has been reported in association with
the known pottery containing cultures of Louisiana or East
Texas.
The present description is presented with the request that
others who have found artifacts of either type communicate
"with the author so that a better knowledge of their distribution may be secured.
A. Spokeshaves or Beveled Scrapers (Albany Type)
There are thirty of these chipped stone artifacts which
appear to be hefted spokeshaves or beveled scrapers (Plate
1, Nos. 1-6). They were found on fifteen sites in five parishes of Louisiana, all bordering on Red River, with one
specimen from a site in Harrison County, Texas, just across
the boundary line. Two or more specimens were found at
seven sites, the largest number, five, from Albany Landing
in Caddo Parish, from which the ~ype name is taken.
Two characteristic features of these artifacts are (a) sidenotcMng, usually fairly deep, producing an expanded heft,
the base of which is typically concave or straight, rarely
convex, and (b) a single beveled blade.

10

Texas A~’cheological and PaleontoIogical Society

Two subtypes are to be distinguished. In the first (Plate 1’,
Nos. 1-3) the artifacts are made from flat, waterworn pebbles of tan chert and in most instances much of the original
surface remains unworked, the chipping of the bevel and
the side notches, with some thinning of the base, representing the only alterations. Whenthe first few objects of this
type were found, we considered them to be unfinished
blades or rejects, especially since the chipping was rather
rough, but the consistent appearance of the entire group has
convinced us that this is a distinct type of artifact.
The beveled blade is nearly always concave (Plate 1, Nos.
1-3), sometimes strongly curved, and is diagonally placed
so that the end of the instrument is narrower than the base,
although a definite point is lacking or is very blunt. The
bevel is quite obtuse, the blade rough and dull and the
reverse side seldom has chipping or flaking along the blade.
The cutting or scraping edge, therefore, is formed at the
junction of the bevel and the rough, unworked face. The
lack of a point, the obtuse bevel and the rough, dull edge all
suggest a scraping instead of a cutting tool.
There a~e twenty-two artifacts of this subtype, varying
in length from 3 to 7.5 cm. (1¥4 to 3 in.), in width from 2 to
4 cm. (3~ to 11~ in.), and in thickness from 3 to 12 ram. In
every instance of this subtype, the bevel is in the same relative position, so that if the handle of the tool were held in
the right hand with the blade down, the bevel would face
the user.
The other subtype, represented by eight specimens, shows
considerable refinement of technic in manufacture, with
chipping over the entire surface (Plate 1, Nos. 4-6). Most
of the specimens, in fact, appear to be reworked from projectile points, although demonstrating the same general idea

PLATE

I

Nos. 1-3, Albany type beveled scrapers, subtype 1.
Nos. 4-6, Albany type beveled scrapers, subtype 2.
Nos. 7-19, San Patrice type points. "Nos. 7-10 have the typical
shape, with shoulder near the midpoint. Nos. 11-15 have short basal
segments. Note serrated edge of No. 12 and beveled edge of No. ’15.
Nos. 16-19 are unusual shapes.

I?-.

lq

I~
Plate I

Two Unusual Types o$ Chipped Stone Artifact

13

of a beveled blade which is diagonally placed. In two instances, the opposite edge of the specimen is beveled on the
reverse side, but the diagonal placement of the main bevel
and its convexity place these two specimens in the type of
beveled scrapers (instead of bilaterally beveled projectiles).
Five of the eight specimens in the subtype appear to have
been reworked from projectiles of the type tO be described
later, having concave bases thinned by longitudinal flaking.
Most of the objects in this subtype have more carefully
flaked bevels which are not quite as obtuse as in the first
subtype, nor are they usually as strongly curved, although
generally the blade is convex. With two exceptions, the
points are more acute than in the first subtype, although this
is probably accidental and due to their being reworked from
projectile points which had previously been thinned at the
edge opposite the bevel.
The artifacts of this subtype vary from 3 to 5 cm. in length,
~rom 2 to 3.5 cm. in width and from 5 to 8 ram. in thickness.
Six of the eight have the bevel in the same relative position
as in the first subtype, but the other two are reversed (Plate
1, No. 5) as though adapted for use by a left handed individual.
B.

Concave-base Projecti~e Points (San Patr~ce Type)

Uns~emmed projectile points are comparatively infrequent
in Northwest Louisiana. In our collection, the San Patrice
concave-base point (Plate 1, Nos. 7-19) occurs more often
and has a wider distribution than any other unstemmed
projectile. We have noted this type in other collections
from the area, also in the collection from adjoining counties
of East Texas at the University of Texas, and in collections
from Southwest Arkansas. Brown illustrated several points
of this type from Wilkinson County, Mississippi (1), but
does not give their association.
Fifty-five points of this type in our collection come from
twenty sites in six parishes of Northwest Louisiana and one
site in Harrison County, Texas. Eleven sites are represented
by a single specimen, the remaining sites affording from two

14

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

to nine, the largest number coming from the type site on San
Patrice Creek in DeSoto Parish.
These points are of medium size, between the small arrow
points (commonly termed "bird points") and the large projectiles which are thought to be atlatl lance points.

They

range from 2.5 to 5 cm. (1 to 2 in.) in length, 2 to 3.2 cm.
(13/16 to 1~’4 in.) in width and are typically thin, 4 to 7 ram.
at the thickest section.

They are made from various mate-

rials, nearly half of them from the tan colored chert described in A. In contrast to the beveled scrapers, however,
these points are well made, symmetrical, with carefully executed chipping and flaking.
The typical artifact (Plate 1, Nos. 7-10) is unhafted, with
concave base, the concavity ~usually being deep and occasionally V-shaped. The edges are always concave in the
basal portion, usually straight or convex in the upper portion, producing a well defined shoulder at the level of greatest width. I:f the upper or blade segment of the edge is
convex (Plate 1, Nos. 9, 16), the points are rather obtuse;
if straight or concave (Plate 1, Nos. 8, 12, 14, 15), the points
are acute. The length of the concave basal segment of the
edge varies, the shoulder in the typical specimen (Plate 1,
Nos. 7-10) being near the middle. In other instances the
basal segment is longer (Plate 1, No. 16) or shorter (Plate
1, Nos. 11-15). If very short (Nos. 11-14) this concave portion produces a distinct notch.
Characteristic of these projectile points, in addition to
the concavity of~ the base, is a thinning of the basal segment
by a wide groove on each face, effected by the removal of
one to three longitudinal flakes. This grooving extends from
the basal concavity to or beyond the level of the shoulder,
involving one-third to two-thirds of the total length of each
face. In some instances there is a short groove on one face
and a much longer groove on the reverse. This grooving
produces an inverted Y-shaped ridge on each face, the ridge
seldom being very high because of the thinness of the artifacts~

Two Unusual Types o] Chipped Stone A~ifact

15

The basal portion of each edge is moderately smooth,
while the upper portion is brought to a good blade by
secondary flaking in most instances. Unless the artifact is
quite wide, the primary flaking of the faces extends from
the edge to the inverted Y ridge. Some roughness and irregularities are noted, so that neither in regularity nor
length of flaking do these artifacts equal the fine execution
of the Folsom or Yuma types.
However, the bilateral grooving of the bases, their concavity and the smoothing of the basal margins are suggestive of Folsom traits and undoubtedly served the same purpose, i. e., to facilitate attachment of a deeply notched shaft.
A transverse section through the basal portion of a San
Patrice point is fairly similar to a comparable section of
the Folsom point.
Discussion
There are several facts which suggest that the Albany
type bevelhd scraper and the San Patrice projectile point
belong to the same general culture period. Both are found
on hillside sites bordering the Red River valley in Northwest
Louisiana and contiguous areas, although the San Patrice
point may have a wider distribution. Neither seems to be
related to the known pottery making or mound building
cultures of this area. The sites on which they are found
usually have several varieties of large projectiles and
scrapers, which may be rough or well finished; both celts
and grooved axes, although the latter predominate; occasional large drills and tubular stone beads; pitted stones and
hammerstones. We have designated this as probably a late
Archaic horizon in Northwest Louisiana (2) but as yet the
culture traits have not been carefully worked out, and the
comparative scarcity of the two artifact types~ described
above makes it difficult to place them in an exact cultural
assemblage.
Some of the sites from which these artifacts are found
contain pottery sherds in varying amounts, while other sites
are lacking in pottery. Where present, most of the identifiable sherds belong to the Alto (3) and Bossier (4) Foci,

16

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

which are comparatively recent, extending from a period
contemporaneous with Coles Creek to a proto-historic Caddoan period.

A few of the sites containing Bossier Focus

materials also have occasional sherds and projectile points
of types described by Ford and Willey (5) from the lYlarksville-Troyville sites of Central Louisiana, in addition to the
artifacts which we consider as Archaic. Evidently these
sites have a long habitation history, although apparently
never very thickly populated.
Of the fifteen sites on which the Albany type scrapers
were found and the twenty sites from which the San Patrice
points came, ten sites produced artifacts of both types. These
sites include the type sites, Albany Landing in Caddo Parish
and San Patrice in DeSoto Parish, at each of which a number of artifacts of both types were found. We have already
noted that the second subtype of Albany beveled scraper is
typologically similar to or actually reworked from points of
the San Patrice type.
The similarities between the basal segments of the San
Patrice point and Folsom fluted points is given a flavor of
more than accidental resemblance by the finding of a number of fluted points, also unfluted Clovis and Yuma types
from the hill sections of Northwest Louisiana, to be reported later, l~Ioreover, one specimen each of the fluted
(Folsomoid?) and Yuma types have been found at the San
Patrice site and a fluted point was found at another of the
ten sites from which San Patrice and Albany type artifacts
were secured. This may be an accidental association, and
there is no particular reason to consider the two artifact
types being discussed as having any considerable antiquity,
but neither have we evidence as to how long the trait of
basal thinning of atlatl projectiles persisted. The idea of
making points with thinned concave bases and smooth basal
edges may have been carried over from a late survival of
channel grooving or fluting in this area. Another possibility is that a later Archaic people could have found fluted
points, whole or broken, and reworked them to produce the
first points of San Patrice type, then made others in a similar

Two Unusua~ Types of Chipped Stone Artifact

17

shape. Several of the points illustrated (Plate 1, Nos. 17-19)
suggest this possibility. Completely independent invention
of this method of basal treatment is, of course, a third possibility.
In conclusion, two types of artifacts are reported which,
so far as we can discover, have not been described previously. They are found on sites in the hilly areas of Northwest Louisiana and adjoining regions. They apparently
are not members of the artifact assemblage of the pottery
making and mound building cultures, but rather seem to
fit into an Archaic horizon which may be comparatively
late, despite a similarity of treatment of the basal segment
of the projectile point with that of the Folsom fluted point.
The Children’s Clinic,
Shreveport, Louisiana.
REFERENCES
1. Brown, C. S.: Archaeology of Mississippi~ University,
Miss., 1926, page 141.
2.

Unpublished manuscript.

3. Krieger, Alex: Archaeological Horizons in the Caddo
Area, in E1 Norte de Mexico y el Sur de Estados Unidos,
Sociedad Mexicana de Anthropologia, Mexico, D. F., 1943.
4.

Unpublished manuscript.

5. Ford, J. A., and Willey, Gordon: Crooks Site, a Marksville Period Burial Mound in LaSalle Parish, Louisiana,
Dept. of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, New
Orleans, La., 1940.

