A Deep Burial on ~he Clear Fork o] the Brazos River

9

A DEEP BURIAL ON THE CLEAR FORK
OF THE BRAZOS RIVER
By FRXNr: H. H.

ROBERTS, JR.

Discovery of the deepest buried human remains thus far found in
the region of Abilene, Texas, was reported to the Smithsonian Institution on July 1, 1943, by Dr. Cyrus N. Ray.

The information con-

tained in Dr. Ray’s telegram indicated that an investigation of the
occurrence was warranted and arrangements were made for the
writer to go to Abilene. Arriving on July 7, he spent the following
five days studying the place where the bones were uncovered, visiting other deeply buried sites exposed in the banks of streams, and
examining the numerous artifacts and skeletal material collected
from them. The nature of these sites and the character of the implements and associated objects which they yield are well known
through the writings of Dr. Ray and because they bespeak a certain
antiquity are important in the study of the early occupation of North
America. Coming as it did from one of the older levels, the present
skeleton gave promise of throwing additional light on the physical
type of the people inhabiting the area at that time.
During the latter part of June, 1943, high water in the Clear
Fork of the Brazos River did considerable damage to its banks,
especially those along that portion of the stream traversing the
Putnam Ranch some 60 miles northeast of Abilene. After the water
had subsided to about its normal level three boys, James Putnam,
Jack Tucker, and’ Don Tucker, were swimming in a pool at the base
of the east bank some distance below the ranch buildings. In the
almost vertical wall several feet above their heads, where a large
block of earth had fallen away, they noticed what appeared to be a
cavity lined with something that extended slightly beyond its edges.
By cutting places, in the hard clay for their feet they were able to
climb to the hole and discovered that the projecting material was,
bone. Using a pocket knife, James Putnam and one of the other boys
dug around the bones and saw that they had part of a human skull.
Carrying the pieces home James turned them over to his uncle, J. C.
Putnam. This was on June 24. Two days later Mr. Putnam took
the pieces of skull to Dr. Ray and the following day, June 27, the

10

Texas Archeological avd Paleontological Society

Doctor and Mr. H. H. Adams, a geologist living in Abilene, went
to the Putnam Ranch.

After photographing the skull mold, which was still intact, Dr. Ray
and Mr. Adams assisted by J. C. and James Putnam, with young
James and several other boys as an audience, proceeded to remove
the skeleton, which extended back into the bank. They were afraid
to leave the remains in place until others could be called to see
them as the caving condition of the bank and the possibility of a new
rise in the stream made their situation precarious. It was found
that the body had been buried in a tightly flexed position, lying on
the left side with the head toward the south,l, 2 Most of the hand
bones were missing. In the Abilene region flexed burials generally
had the hands placed at the head on each side of the facez and in
the present case they probably were carried away with portions of
the skull when the section of the bank fell off and into the water.
All of the long bones, scapulae, innominates, vertebrae, and most
of the ribs were present and in fairly good condition. Some of the
bones were damaged in the process of remo~(al, yet are suitable for
study purposes.
The pit in which the body was placed had been filled with earth
containing an admixture of ashes and charcoal, evidently dirt scooped
up from around the hearth of the camp occupied by the deceased and
his companions. Just why such material was used instead of that
dug from the pit is not known, of course, but many of the so-called
primitive peoples often followed such a practice and it is possible
that it may have had something to do with beliefs pertaining to the
spirit’s needs in the world beyond, perhaps it was in a sense a connecting link between the here and the hereafter. There were no
stones or shells in the grave and apparently no artifacts. While
PLATE 1
No. 1.
When the finder, James Putnam removed the deeply
buried skull from the Brazos River bank silt it left a mold of the
skull in the bank. This picture of the mold, taken soon afterward
by Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, shows hand and wrist bones which were embedded inside the mold.
No. 2. This picture shows the long bones in place after the earth
had been removed.

No. 3. This shows two sides of the flint artifact with drawings
of longitudinal and cross sections.

Plate 1

A Dee~ Burial on the Clear Fork of the Brazos River

13

cleaning the bones and bone fragments in the laborato~’y, however,
the tip end from a chipped instrument was discovered. It was so
thoroughly caked with clay that it appeared to be a small piece of
bone and no doubt was mistaken for such in the field. Because of
its fragmentary condition this bit of worked stone probably was not
a mortuary offering, as a matter of fact none of the deep burials
in the region have had artifacts with them and this has complicated the problem of determining the cultural affinities of the
remains. The type and possible significance of the present specimen
will be considered more fully in a subsequent paragraph.
In the interval between the removal of the bones and the writer’s
first visit to the site, in company with Dr. Ray, Mr. Adams and Dr.
R. H. Tull of Abilene, there had been no new flood in the stream
nor additional caving of the bank. Hence it was possible to judge.
satisfactorily conditions existing at the time the disinterment took
place. There is no doubt that the skeleton came from that location
because a few fragments of bone found in the loose earth that
had been dumped on the talus below, there were some metatarsals still in situ at the back of the pit, and the lower half of a fibula
that fit a piece previously obtained was embedded in the bottom of
the grave. The fill in the pit had not been completely worked out
and in the back portion it was quite evident that an undisturbed
series of strata, layers that were clearly in evidence for a considerable
distance up and down the stream, had risen above it to the top of the
bank and present surface. This demonstrated that the burial was
not a relatively recent penetration and that there had been a long
period of alluviation in the valley, prior to the present channel-cutting era, after the body had been placed there.

A portion of the southern and western periphery had been broken
out by the caving of the bank during the high water and the digging
when the bones were removed, but it was possible to follow and
uncover the remaining sides of the grave to determine its approximate
size and shape. The pit had been roughly oval in contour with diameters of about 2 and 3 feet. It was rather shallow, the measurements naturally being taken from the top of the stratum that was the
surface of the ground when the grave was dug. The uneven bottom
sloped upward from a depth of 15 inches at the north end to’ 1 foot
at the point where it was broken away at the south. The depth at
the south end, however, probably was even less, as Dr. Ray observed

14

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

that the head had lain somewhat lfigher than the body.z No stones
were used either as a lining for the grave or to cover the remains.
In this respect the interment differed from others previously noted
in the area as they had, at least, a few stones over the bones.3, 4 In
this connection it might be mentioned that there appears to be a
definite progression in grave types in this district. The oldest, as
exemplified by the present example, was a simple pit. This was
followed by a pit with stones over the top of the fill and it, in turn,
by one lined with stones and covered with similar material, a slab
cist form of grave. The order is indicated by the depths at which
they occur and the nature of the strata in which they were dug. That
they were not the product of different peoples is shown by the fact
that the skeletal remains suggest a single group. The different
styles of burial probably represent development over a long period,
one in which other cultural elements probably passed through comparable changes.
The grave was 11 feet above the normal low water level, and 21
feet below the present valley floor. The vertical wall rising directly
above it measured 10 feet 8 1-2 inches. Recent erosion and gullying
had carried away the additional 10 feet 3 1-2 inches, leaving a sharp
upward slope to the valley floor proper, but a few feet upstream
there was a vertical bank from the latter to the water and it was
obvious that all of the strata it contained originally had extended
across the area directly above the pit. The deepest burial found
prior to this was one lying 9 feet 2 1-2 inches below the surface.4
tt was on the Matthews Ranch several miles upstream from that on
the Putnam property.
The profile of the deposits exposed by the present stream showed
clearly that the interment was made on the south bank of an old

PLATE 2
No. 1. This shows the skull mold hole above the handkerchief,
and footholds below, cut into the steep bank preparatory to doing
excavation.

No. 2. This picture shows the partly excavated long bones still in
place in the bank.
No. 3. Beside the excavation is James Putnam, and below is the
ranch owner, Mr. J. C. Putnam, who’ brought the skull sixty miles
to Abilene to report the discovery.

Plate 2

A Deep Bur~al on ~he Clear Fork o] $he Brazos River

17

stream, Plate 5, Number 1, one that had flowed at approximately
right angles to the existing water course and that had been largely
silted up prior to the burial, although a shallow channel 20 to 25
feet north of the grave probably contained water at the time when
the pit was dug. Streaks of sand and gravel in its bottom indicated
a flowing stream and the over-lying stratum of silt extending across
and beyond the top of the grave suggested that it had not been deposited until some time subsequent to the digging of the pit and the
stoppage of wafer in the stream bed. The group of which the de" ceased was a member probably was camping a!ong the old stream
when misfortune overtook that particular individual.
The earth in which the grave was dug, as well as the strata above,
appears to belong to a series of silts designated Elm Creek in one
study5 and called Nugent by Dr. Ray. These silts underlie the
valley floors of the Clear Fork and some of its larger tributaries,
possibly also portions of the main Brazos Valley.

For the most

part they are thick and horizontally bedded and consist o~ almost
uniformly-textured clayey silts and sandy silts. There are few large
gravel lenses. Humus-stained zones, from a few inches to a foot or
two in thickness, usually mark the tops of the silt layers but they are
not true soils and are cracked in such a fashion as to suggest that
they developed under alternating moist and dry conditions. In general they indicate deposition by slack-water sheet floods spreading
over the broad valley floors when conditions were more humid than
the present. A climate suitable to such phenomena probably has not
prevailed in the region since the closing days of the Late Glacial,
the Wisconsin substage, or the pluvial period which in m~re southerly
precincts corresponds to it. For this reason the silts have been
judged to be late Pleistocene in age.5 Yet it is possible, as some
authorities maintain, that the humid period in this area did not
parallel the ice stage farther north but lagged somewhat and the
deposits attributed to it actually had their beginnings in the Early
Recent rather than in the terminal Pleistocene. At all events the
fact ~hat the burial was in the lower part of the silts places it fairly
early in the period of their formation.

It was hoped that there might be some additional evidence, beyond that of the stratum in which it was buried, to indicate the possible age and cultural affinities of the skeleton. Careful inspection
of the banks for some distance up and down stream, at all levels

18

Texas Archeologica~ and Paleontological Society

from the water line to the valley floor, failed to produce either artifacts or animal bones that might have a bearing on the problem.
Elsewhere in the Abilene area implements of the Clear Fork Culture
Complex, some examples of the Durst-Abilene type artifacts, and
sporadic Folsom and Yuma points have been found in the lower
Elm Creek silts~ and the presence of a burial here indicated that it
should be a good location for man-made objects as well. None was
forthcoming, however. In the study of the banks several interesting
manifestations were observed, but they offered n5 help in correlating the human remains with known cultural materials. Eight feet
beneath the burial was a thick layer of ashes, with some admixture
of charc~oal, that extended a considerable distance down stream.
There was nothing to indicate whether it was the result of human
or natural agencies, although its dimensions suggest thd latter.
About a half mile farther down stream were some evidences of
human occupation in the remains of hearths occurring at two different levels. The upper one was 14 feet 10 inches below the present
surface, while the lower was at a depth of 27 feet 4 inches, Plate 5,
Number 2. Along the top of the stratum that had been the surface
when the upper hearth was in use were numerous fragments from
cut and split animal bones. A number showed the effects of fire.
None of the pieces was complete enough or from the proper bone
to determine the exact species of the animal, but most of the fragments can be identified as coming from deer and bison.
The lower heart.h had been entirely exposed by the washing away
of the bank. Many of the rocks were still in situ, however, and
there is no doubt that they at one time formed a fire place on a
definite surface of occupatiori. Neither of these levels yielded any
artifacts and it was not possible to’ determine their cultural horizon.
PLATE3
1~o. 1. This shows another picture of the skull mold in the center of the picture.
No. 2. In this picture Dr. Frank H. t!. Roberts is shown standing
on the pile of earth excavated from around the skeleton. James
Putnam stands to the left of the excavation.
No. 3. This shows a general view of the full height of the bank
which is difficult to show in a close-up picture of the grave, on
account of a slope at the top of the bank produced by recent
erosion. At the far left of the picture, Dr. Roberts is shown standing in the excavation.

Plate 3

A Deep t~ur~al on ~he Clear Fork oF the Brazos River

21

The lower hearth obviously antedated the period of the burial and
the upper one was considerably later. There did not appear to be
any habitation level at this location corresponding to that where the
burial occurred, although there was a dark-stained zone marking an
old surface and top of one of the silt layers that did correlate with it.
Neither were there traces of the old stream bed along which the
burial was made.
The only possible clue to the cultural horizon of the skeleton is
the small piece of worked stone found with the bone fragments in
the laboratory and it is far from being good, clearcut evidence~
As a matter of fact it is quite disappointing. In the first place
there is definite question as to its actual provenience. Whether it
was in the grave in direct association with the bones, was merely
a fortuitous inclusion in the earth used in the fill, came from the old
surface above the pit, or was dislodged from one of the superimposed
layers is not known. The lack of such material in any of the levels
in the area adjacent to the grave would seem to discount the latter
contingency but offers no suggestions on the other alternatives. If
it had been in direct association with the bones there is the intriguing possibility that it might be the tip end from the projectile
point that killed the individual, while if it simply was in the fill it
would only indicate a broken and discarded implement that happened to be there.
The type of the object itself is about as unsatisfactory from the
standpoint of significance as the conditions under which it was
found. It was made from gray chert and while it has no patina,
the color has bleached considerably as the result of age. Although
relatively fine, when compared with specimens from the older cultures in the area, the flaking appears to have been done by percussion rather than by pressure. A few of the facets left by the
removal of the flakes extend obliquely downward and entirely acros~
the face of the blade, suggesting the technique used in the manufacture of the finer types of Yuma points, but most of them expand
either vertically to about the longitudinal midsection or slant some~
what toward the tip. At first glance it was thought that the pieces
might be from one of the smaller, finer Yuma types but further
examination showed ~,his not to be the case. The edges are bevelled
to the left. This feature is not so apparent when the blade is viewed
full face as it is in cross section, Plate 1, Number 3, section, when

22

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

it is quite evident. The bevelling is fairly narrow with a sharp
slope to the edge. This, together with the slender character of the
point, suggests that it probably is the tip from an awl or drill rather
than from a projectile. The left-handed bevelling indicates that it
was an implement to be used with a clockwise direction in drilling:
If it is part of a drill the postulation that it was a piece of the
weapon employed against the individual buried there would, of
course, be negated. Bevelled projectile points at an early period
are not unknown in the area. As a rule, however, they are heavier
and thicker in form and the bevelling is on the right side of the blade
instead of the left.6 It could be part of one of the’slender, smaller
projectile points from one of the relatively late cultures, yet its
apparent inclusion in the Elm Creek Silts would argue against that
possibility. The whole matter could be dismissed, of course, with
the conclusion that it merely was a late penetration into an old
horizon. Under the circumstances this does not seem to be warranted, hence it is more likely that the present specimen should 5e
regarded as a portion of a drill.
Because drills are rather ubiquitous in their cultural and chronological occurrence and are so basic in their general features that
there is little to differentiate them or to indicate what horizon they
may represent, such an identification adds to the difficulty. Implements of the Clear Fork Culture are found consistently in the Elm
Creek Silts and for that reason it might be concluded that the fragment belonged in that category were it not for the fact that drills or
awls of stone are quite rare in that complex.7 However, it may well
be that it is an example from one of the stages of that culture and the
burial was that of one of the men who made Clear Fork implements.
The artifact measures 23.8 ram. (15-16 of an inch) in length, is 8.7
ram. (11-32 of an inch) in width at the broken end, and is 2 ram.
(5-64 of an inch) thick.
Several features about the skeleton impressed Dr. Ray and the
writer as being indicative of a somewhat primitive form of recent
man. This was especially true in the case of the very heavy brow

PLATE 4
This picture shows the bones from the twenty-one feet deep river
bank burial after they were removed, and the long bones mended
by Dr. Ray.

A Deep Burial on the Clear Fork of the Brazos River

25

ridge, the thickness of the frontal bone, the apparently sharply receding forehead, the lower border of the nasal aperture, and the
conformation of the long bones.

In the latter a certain bowing of

the femora and the manner in which they and the tibiae articulated
suggested the possibility of at least a slight bent-knee gait.

It als6

appeared that the articulation at the elbow was somewhat peculiar
and that it might have produced an outward turning of the lower
arms. Not being sufficiently familiar with these conditions to pass
on them properly, however, conclusions were held in abeyance
awaiting expert opinion. After the writer’s return to Washington
the bones were shipped to him by Dr. Ray and arrangements were
made to have them studied by physical anthropologists versed in
the characteristics of the American Indians. They were first sent
to Dr. Harry L. Shapiro, Chairman of the Department of Anthropology, the American Museum of Natural History, New York, with
mention of the features, listed above, that appeared to be significant.
Upon the completion of his study Dr. Shapir~ sent the writer the
following memorandum:
"It is unfortunate that the Clear Fork skeleton is so fragmentary,
particularly in its cranial parts which, of course, are the most critical.
I have examined the bones and the fragments that survive and I confess that I do not find anything of exceptional interest. The long
bones are moderately robust and suggest a tallish individual. The
tibiae have a marked degree of platycnemia and the femora of
platymeria. Both of these characteristics are common enough in
modern types of man although apparently more frequent in earlier
"phases of recent man. The femora are not especially bowed and
I discover no evidence (unless platycnemia and platymeria be so
taken) for a bent knee gait. The elbow joint seems equally unexceptional.
"What remains of the vault of the skull is too scrappy to provide
solid basis for judgment, but the frontal does have an exceptionally
ht~avy brow ridge and an apparently sharply receding forehead.
This suggests a primitive form of recent man. The lower border of
the nasal aperture also is on the primitive side. The jaw is fairly
broad with everted gonial angles and gives an impression of strength
and ruggedness. From these characteristics it seems fair to say that
while the skull might be approximated by occasional recent Indians,

26

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

it does agree more frequently with the more primitive forms of
neoanthropic man found in America.
"The mending of the broken and fragmentary portions represents
a considerable job and it is hardly justifiable for a great many
of the bones. But if it is possible to leave the skeleton with me for
a while, I ~ould be interested in doing some reconstruction and
measurement. Even if a more detailed study should also fail to
uncover anything unusual, it might still be worth "recording the
characteristics of a find presumably of some antiquity."
The skeleton was left with Dr. Shapiro for several months but,
becau~ of the pressure of work involved in the installation of a
new exhibit hall at the American Museum together with other official duties, he was unable to’ give further attention to it. After
it had been returned to the writer it was taken to Dr. T. D. Stewart,
Curator of the Division of Physical Anthropology, U. S. National
Museum, who spent considerable time in an effort to reconstruct
the skull and in repairing some of the other bones. The results of
Dr. Stewart’s studies are incorporated in the report which appears
elsewhere in this number of the Bulletin.
It is interesting to note in passing that both he and Dr. Shapiro
agree that the skeleton could be that of an early Indian.

Hence

there would be nothing anachronistic in its being found in deposits
that are late Pleistocene or Early Recent in age.
In discussing
other and si~nilar remains found by Dr. Ray a number of years ago
Dr. E. A. Hooton of the Department of Anthropology at Harvard
University reached a similar conclusion. He expres~d the opinion
that the crania from the deep burials in the Abilene region exemplified a very primitive type of American Indian and probably repre.

PLATE 5
No. 1. General view of burial site. Dip in strata at left indicates
former stream bed. Grave is in bank at the left of the upper figure,
games Putnam, one of the discoverers of the bones. Mr. H. H.
Adams is standing on the pile of earth dug from the bank when
the skeleton was removed.

No. 2. Stones forming deep level hearth are on the low bench
at the left of the standing figure, Dr. R. H. Tull of Abilene, while
upper level hearth is indicated by stones projecting from bank in
upper left corner of picture, about midway between the high water
mark and the top of the bank.

29

A Dee~ Burial on the Clear Fork of the Brazos River

sented one of the earlier strata of the American population.

He also

pointed out that while they were a neoanthropic or morphologically
modern type it was not impossible for them to date back ta the end
of the Pleistocene becau~ physically modern types of men were in
existence in the Old World before the end of the Glacial Period.8
Since, as is generalIy believed, the New World was populatel by
migrations from northeastern Asia, conditions in the Old World have
a direct bearing on the problem and it is significant to know that
modern types of man had a respectable antiquity in that region.
All three authorities, Shapiro, Stewart, and Hooton, agree that
the geologic age of such skeletal remains must be determined by
that of the stratum in which they are found, rather than by their
morphological features, although the determination is more convincing when some of the latter tend to the primitive side.

Asso-

ciated archeological and paleontological objects, of course, are a
help in fixing an approximate or relative date but like morphological
features they too may not be conclusive.

In the present instance

there was no paleontQlogical evidence and, as already noted, the
single archeological specimen is of little assistance.

Because of this

the most that can be said is that the deeply buried skeleton is of a
type that could be early, that it was hurled in silts that seem to be
late Pleistocene or Early Recent geologically, i. e. 10,000 to 15,000
years ago, and that the individual may have been one of those who
made implements of the Clear Fork Culture Type.
Bureau of American Ethnology,
Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D. C.
*Editorial Note: The statements published by others, to which
Dr. Roberts refers, that Yuma, Folsom, Abilene and Clear Fork
l~oints are ever found in the so-called Elm Creek Silts are inaccurate. The Editor has found nearly all of such points collected in the
Abilene region, and never yet has found one in the Nugent or socalled Elm Creek Silts. The Yuma, Folsom, Abilene, Jones, Gibson,
and Clear Fork Points have all been found in the deepest buried
silt of the two Clear Fo:ck Silts or the Lower Clear Fork Silt,
termed Durst by Leighton. Clear Fork Points are found in the top
section of the Loxver Clear Fork Silt and extend up into the Upper
Clear Fork Silt.--Cyrus N. Ray, Editor.

3O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

REFERENCES
(1) Cyrus N. Ray. Human burial covered by twenty-one feet
of silt. Bulletin Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 15, 1943, pp. 110-116.
(2) Cyrus N. Ray. A Texas Skeleton.
2546, Oct. 15, 1943, p. 344.

Science, Vol. 98, No.

(3) Cyrus N. Ray. New Evidences of Ancient Man in America.
Scientific American, May, 1929, pp. 430-431.
(4) Cyrus N. Ray. Some Unusual Abilene Region Burials.
Bulletin Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 11,
1939, pp. 226-250.
(5)
M. M. Leighton. Geological Aspects of the Findings of
Primitive Man Near Abilene, Texas. (Preliminary report). Medallion Papers, No’. XXIV, Gila Pueblo, Globe. Arizona.

(6) Cyrus N. Ray. The Deeply Buried Gibson Site. BulletSn
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 12, 1940, pp.
223-237.
(7) Cyrus N. Ray. The Clear Fork Culture Complex. Bulletin
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, 1938,
pp. 193-207.
(8) Ernest A. Hooton. Notes on five Texas Crania. Bulletin
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 5, 1933, pp.
25-38.

