Implications of Environmental Diversity in the Central
Texas Archeolog cal Reg n
Linda Wootan Ellis, G. Lain Ellis, and Charles D. Frederick

ABSTRACT
The Central Texas environment is usually described in terms of Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces. However,
Blair’s provinces obscure wide environmental diversity, even within the relatively small area subsumed under
Elton Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) version of the Central Texas archeological region. As a result, hunter-gatherers
distributed across Prewitt’s Central Texas would have faced substantially-even radically-different subsistence
challenges, and any synchronic regional description or comprehensive explanation of prehistory in the region
as a whole would necessarily gloss over a wide range of diversity. Furthermore, under conditions of uniform
precipitation change, environments in different parts of Central Texas will not change uniformly. Even ira single
climate history applies all across the region, different cultural or processual histories will occur in different places
because substantially different adaptive challenges will be imposed on people who already had substantially
different subsistence regimes. Thus, any regional culture or processual history would have to gloss over a wide
range of adaptive responses that lie at the heart of any prehistory of Central Texas. Consequently, to achieve any
accuracy about the cultures and/or processes that characterize Central Texas prehistory as a whole, it is necessary
to simplify our descriptions of cultures and/or processes to a series of quintessential constructs that do not refer
to the people or activities we are interested in understanding as prehistorians.

Rounding off lies at the heart of working with symbols and speech. Rounding off compresses
information. It simplifies matters and reduces the many to the few, reduces the complex to the
manageable .... We have to simplify to get things going, at least at first. No harm in that. But actions
have costs.

--Kosko (1993:90)
When you speak, you simplify. And when you simplify, you lie.
--Kosko (1993:86)

INTRODUCTION
Central Texas traditionally has been treated as
a relevant match-up between prehistory and geography. However, despite the fact that archeologists
have begun to question their basic approaches to,
and assumptions about, Central Texas prehistory
(e. g., Potter and Black 1995; Ellis 1994; Black et
al. 1993; Collins 1991), the validity and utility of
the term "Central Texas" has yet to be evaluated to
determine the extent to which the term is relevant
to either culture history or processual approaches to
archeology. In our view, the term "Central Texas"
obscures too much environmental variability to be

useful as a spatial concept around which to build
our knowledge of prehistory: despite the fact that
typologically similar artifacts occur widely in and
around Central Texas, the environment subsumed
within this area is simply too variable to support
talk about "Central Texas archeology" except in
overgeneralized terms.
Our argument is as follows. Although the Central Texas environment traditionally has been described in terms of Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces,
more recent environmental studies show that there
is wide environmental diversity within Blair’s provinces, even within the relatively small area subsumed under Prewitt’ s (1981) version of the Central

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

402

Texas Archeological Society

Texas archeological region. By looking at an array
of hypothetical hunter-gatherer territories distributed across Prewitt’s Central Texas, it is obvious
that groups exploiting different parts of the region
would face substantially-even radically-different
subsistence challenges at any given time. Thus, any
synchronic regional description or explanation of
prehistory in the region would gloss over a wide
range of diversity.
Furthermore, recent paleoclimate research has
produced a series of conflicting models of Central
Texas climate history: if Centra! Texas can be subsumed under a single climate model, then at least
one of the extant climate models must be false. In
any event, examining hypothetical change in precipitation shows that under conditions of uniform
precipitation change, environments in different parts
of Central Texas will not change uniformly. Even if
a single climate history applies to all of the region,
different culture or processual histories will occur in
different parts of the region because substantially
different adaptive challenges must be met by peoples
who already had substantially different subsistence
practices. Simply put, any regional culture or
processual history would have to gloss over or ignore a wide range of adaptive responses that lie at
the heart of any prehistory of Central Texas. As a
result, to achieve any accuracy about the cultures
and/or processes that characterize Central Texas prehistory as a whole, it is necessary to simplify our
descriptions of cultures and/or processes to a series
of quintessential, lowest-common-denominator constructs. However, the price of such simplification is
high because to attempt to identify accurate regionwide quintessential constructs creates fictive entities that do not refer to the people or activities we
are interested in learning about as prehistorians.
WHERE IS CENTRAL TEXAS,
ANYWAY?
Central Texas has traditionally encompassed
most or all of the Edwards Plateau and varying
adjacent areas. However, the "Central Texas"
geographic region has no well-fixed boundaries:
they shift with each new problem. Studies that focus
on geologic problems generally depict Central Texas
differently from studies that focus on natural
vegetation, fauna, or archeology. For example,
Spearing’s (1991:112) geologic study of Texas
defines Central Texas as encompassing all of the

Edwards Plateau, the Hill Country, and the Llano
Uplift, with the Balcones Escarpment representing
its eastern margin. However, in Gehlbach’s
(1991 :Figure 1) analysis of terrestrial vertebrates,
Central Texas begins at the eastern margins of the
Edwards Plateau and extends past the escarpment
to the Trinity River on the northeast and Grimes
and Washington counties on the southeast. Thus, it
appears that "Central Texas" is not so much a
discrete geographic area, as it is more a study area
that is defined by the nature of a particular problem
and by the state of current understanding about the
phenomena relevant to that problem.
If Central Texas is more a study area than a
discrete geographic area, then how do we draw
geographic boundaries for the Central Texas archeological region? If the boundaries are drawn on
the basis of specific problems, then by what criteria
do we affix geographic boundaries to cultural
boundaries? For purposes of the present discussion,
we focus on the relationship between the geographic
boundaries that presently define the Central Texas
archeological region and the environmental domains
they encompass.
Over the past 40 years, the geographic boundaries of the Central Texas archeo!ogical region have
shifted (Figure 1). As archeological research progressed and new data came to light, the geographic
boundaries shifted to reflect the results of new investigations. However, as Suhm (1960:63) pointed
out, there are no precise boundaries for the region
and "one can anticipate that they will always remain somewhat fuzzy."
In 1954, Suhm et al. (1954:102-1!2) used trait
complexes to define the boundary of the Edwards
Plateau Aspect or Archaic Stage in Central Texas
prehistory. It covered a large area from the Brazos
River basin on the northeast and southeast, and
extended westward to about Sterling County on the
northwest and the headwaters of the Devil’s and
Nueces rivers on the southwest. It reached approximately as far north as Jones County and then as far
south as Victoria County (Suhm et al. 1954:Figure
4). A second somewhat more restricted area was
defined for the later chronological stage known as
the Central Texas Aspect of the Neo-American Stage.
The Central Texas Aspect was seen as extending
from the Brazos River drainage on the east and
north, to about Tom Green and Edwards counties on
the west, and to the central Gulf Coastal Plain on the
south (Suhm et al. 1954:112 and Figure 5).

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick u Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

403

(Weir 1976:2). No southern boundary was
noted, and no map was given.
A similar geographic area was included
within the Central Texas archeological region defined by Brown et al. (1982) during
Kansan
Texan
~
the Texas Historical Commission’s Resource Protection Planning Project. Using
an interdisciplinary approach, geographic
Austroboundaries were defined based on specific
riparian
Chihuahuan
sociocultural systems. These boundaries
Balconian ~
were seen as "transitional demarcations"
that may or may not have changed through
time, and were designed after Suhm (1960)
Tamaulipan
and Weir (1976). For Central Texas, these
boundaries remained relatively unchanged
Suhm (1960)
from Archaic times through the Late PreBrown et al. (1982)
historic
(Brown et al. 1982:Figures 4 and
Prewitt (1981 )
5). The Brown et al. (1982) study defined
Biotic province boundaries
(Blair 1950)
the Central Texas Archaic/Late Prehistoric
geographic extent as extending to just below the escarpment on its southern edge.
Figure 1. Selected versions of the Central Texas Archeological
Region and their relationship to Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces.
At its eastern margins it was seen as extending northeastward along a line running
from southern Bexar County to eastern Lee
By 1960, the geographic boundaries of
County. Its northern boundary extended just
prehistoric Central Texas more closely resembled
to the north of the middle stretches of the Colorado
the 1954 boundaries ascribed to the Central Texas
River and included the southern portions of RunAspect, except that the eastern boundary had shifted
nels and Coke counties. Its western boundary into include portions of the Trinity River basin. Suhm
cluded eastern Val Verde County, most of Crockett
(1960:63 and Figure 1) defined the Central Texas
County, and western Reagan County.
archeological region as:
Currently, the most commonly used geographic
boundaries for the Central Texas archeological reembracing the middle stretches of the Colorado
gion are those defined by Prewitt (1981). In his
and Brazos rivers and their tributaries. More
attempt to devise a cultural chronology for the area,
specifically, it customarily extended westward
Prewitt (1981:72 and Figure 2) narrowed the deto include Tom Green and Edwards counties,
fined boundaries to include fewer counties on its
northward to a line reaching from Jones to
northern, western, and eastern margins. Prewitt
Kaufman counties, eastward to the middle Trin(1981:71) did note that although geographic boundity River, and southward to approximately the
aries may shift through time, the greater Central
central section of the Gulf Coastal Plain.
Texas archeological region was seen as including:

~

Weir’ s (1976) definition of prehistoric Central
Texas appears to include an area similar to that
defined by Suhm (1960). For Weir (1976:1), Central
Texas included "the headwaters of the Nueces and
Guadalupe rivers, and the middle stretches of the
Colorado and Brazos rivers including their
tributaries." His northern and northeastern
boundaries were less explicit, being defined only as
"from the Plateau onto the Blackland Prairies, and
northward onto the Grand and Rolling prairies"

the eastern half of the Edwards Plateau, the
Llano Uplift, most of the Lampasas Cut Plains,
the Comanche Plateau, the southern end of the
Grand Prairie, and the Blackland Prairies bordering the Balcones Escarpment from near
Waco to near Uvalde.
It should be noted, however, that Prewitt’s Central
Texas, although smaller than previously defined regions, still includes all or part of 47 Texas counties.

404

Texas Archeological Society

Regardless of which definition one accepts,
the Central Texas archeological region has vague
geographic boundaries, and encompasses an
environmentally diverse area that is characterized
by dramatic changes in landscapes, climatic
variations, and vegetative zones. Note that the wider
the definition one accepts for "Central Texas"
(whether geographic or archeological), the greater
the environmental diversity it contains. In what
follows, we will arbitrarily accept Prewitt’s
definition of "Central Texas." Because Prewitt’s
Central Texas is relatively small, if it subsumes too
much environmental diversity to be a plausible
match-up between geography and culture, the other
schemes will, too.

ENVIRONMENTAL DIVERSITY IN
PREWITT’S CENTRAL TEXAS
To understand why the term "Central Texas"
may not be especially informative for archeological purposes, it is useful to begin with a discussion
of current conditions of environmental diversity.
Until recently, Blair’s (1950) discussion of biotic
provinces has been the virtually universal reference
of choice in archeological discussions of flora and
fauna.
One feature of this historical practice is that
Blair’s model subsumes a very large portion of all
archeological versions of "Central Texas" under a
single biotic rubric-the Balconian province. In
Prewitt’s Central Texas, the counties not contained
in the Balconian province are contained in the
Texan, Kansan, and Tamaulipan provinces. The historical association between Prewitt’s (and others’)
Central Texas and Blair’s Balconian province has
helped reinforce the notion that the former is a
relevant match-up between prehistory and geography. The distributions of geology, large-scale landforms, biota, and typologically distinct artifacts
seem to provide a basis for judging that the spatial
conjunction of artifactual and environmental evidence is too close to be a coincidence.
However, Blair’s biotic provinces are fairly
blunt descriptive instruments. The Central Texas
archeological region encompasses all or part of six
natural vegetative regions: Oak Woods and Prairies,
Blackland Prairies, Edwards Plateau, Llano Uplift,
Rolling Plains, and South Texas Plains. The major
regions represent broad and general distributions of

plant communities that can be distinguished on the
basis of physiographic and biological differences.
These major regions can be divided further into
subregions representing varying, distinctive
vegetative patterns that occur within the larger,
associated plant communities (Lyndon B. Johnson
School of Public Affairs [LBJ] 1978:20-24 and
Figure 2; McMahan et al. 1984; Van Auken 1988).
Table 1 and Figure 2 show the natural regions and
subregions included in Prewitt’s Central Texas.
Two of the Edwards Plateau subregions, the
Live Oak-Mesquite Savanna and the Balcones
Canyonlands, lie entirely within the Balconian
province. The undissected uplands of the central
and western Edwards Plateau are known as the Live

Table 1. Natural Regions and Subregions
in and Around Prewitt’s Central Texas
Regions
Oak Woods and Prairies

Subregions
Post Oak Savanna*
Eastern Cross Timbers
Western Cross Timbers

Blackland Prairies

Blackland Prairie
Grand Prairie

Rolling Plains

Mesquite Plains
Escarpment Breaks**
Canadian Breaks**

Llano Uplift

Mesquite Savanna
Oak & Oak-Hickory
Woodlands

Edwards Plateau

Live Oak-Mesquite
Savanna
Balcones Canyonlands
Lampasas Cut Plains

South Texas Plains

South Texas Brush
Country
Bordas Escarpment**
Subtropical Zone*

* Prewitt’ s Central Texas does not contain these subregions,
but Suhm’s does.
** Neither Prewitt’s nor Suhm’s Central Texas includes these
subregions.

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

405

al. 1984:10, 17). Of the more than
400 species of terrestrial vertebrate
found on the Edwards Plateau, only
a few are actually endemic to the
area (Dixon 1987, cited in Toomey
et al. 1993).
In the more mesic Balcones
Canyonlands subregion, plant
communities are dominated by evergreen woodlands and deciduous
forests. The steep slopes are covered by short-stature woodlands
ranging from evergreen juniper
and juniper-oak to deciduous
mixed-oak-hardwood woodlands.
Along high gradient perennial
streamsides, bald cypress and sycamore predominate, while intermittent drainages support sycamore woodlands or cedar elm.
Floodplains along major, perennial
waterways have gallery forests
whose composition varies considerably from east to west. For example, in the eastern, more mesic
LO-MS-Live Oak-Mesquite Savanna
BrC-South Texas Brush Country
bottoms, pecans and chinkapin
LCP-Lampasas Cut Plains
WCT-Western Cross Timbers
oaks predominate, while in the
BaC-Balcones Canyontands
ECT-Eastern Cross Timbers
BP-Blackland Praide
MP-Mesquite Plains
western, more xeric bottoms, live
GP-Grand Prairie
LU-Llano Uplift (Mesquite Savanna & Oak
oak
and cedar elm predominate.
OW--Oak Woodlands
and Oak-Hickory Woodlands subregions)
~ ~ ~ ~. Blair’s boundaries
..... Prewitt’s boundaries
Grasslands are primarily restricted
to drainage divides and include
100 km
both mid- and short-grass varieties (LBJ 1978:Figure 2; Riskind
Figure 2. Natural subregions of Centra! Texas (LBJ School of Public
and Diamond 1986:24-25; Van
Affairs 1978) and Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces. Subregions of the Llano
Auken 1988:52-55). Although
Uplift cannot be resolved clearly at this scale. Note the gross environmental
there are several species of terresdiversity within the biotic provinces and Prewitt’s Central Texas.
trial reptiles, nesting songbirds,
and mammals endemic to the
Balcones Canyonlands (Blair
Oak-Mesquite Savanna. This portion of the Edwards
1950: t 12; Kutac and Caran 1994:10), the area also
Plateau is more xeric and is characterized by a
reflects an intermixture of fauna (Gehlbach
grassland-woodland-shrubland mosaic. Here, woody
1991:420).
plants and scrubs grow in clusters surrounded by
The Lampasas Cut Plain overlaps two biotic
continuous grasslands such as Texas wintergrass
provinces, the Balconian and the Kansan.
and little bluestem. The patchy landscape of the
Biologically, it represents a transitional area
central portion of the region supports more woodland
between the Edwards Plateau and the Oak Woods
mixtures of mesquite, Texas oak, Shin oak, cedar
and Prairies region (Kutac and Caran 1994:1 !), and
elm, and hackberry. At its western edge, mesquitestudies often disagree as to which vegetative region
juniper shrublands mixed with yucca, sotol, and
this area is most closely affiliated. Some studies
Texas prickly pear predominate (LBJ 1978:Figure
suggest that it is most closely affiliated with the
2; Diamond et al. 1987:204, 208-211; McMahan et
plant communities of the Edwards Plateau

406

Texas Archeological Society

vegetative region (see LBJ 1978; Riskind and
Diamond 1986), while others think the area is more
closely related to the prairie vegetative region (see
Diamond and Smeins 1985; McMahan et al. 1984).
In general, the more mesic climate of the Lampasas
Cut Plain results in taller trees than those found in
the upland Live Oak-Mesquite Savanna of the
Edwards Plateau. There are, however, fewer
drainages and more open grassland prairies than in
the Balcones Canyonlands, and there are fewer
southern elements, such as Mexican pinyon and
Lacey oaks. The shallow soils of the area support a
more open woodland of post oak, blackjack oak,
Ashe juniper, hickory, and mesquite, intermixed
with tall-, mid-, and short-grass prairies (Riskind
and Diamond 1986:29). Many of the fauna in this
subregion are at their edge of range (Gehlbach
1991:422).
The Llano Uplift is part of the Balconian biotic province. Its sandier soils and rolling topography are dominated by Oak-Hickory Woodlands
interspersed with Mesquite-Whitebrush Savannas.
These two subregions are patchily distributed in the
region and cannot be distinguished as subregions in
Figure 2. Weathering of the granite has produced
coarse textured, gravelly to stony sandy loams supporting a mesquite-whitebrush savanna. Pockets of
deep, well-watered sandy soils occur in the stream
bottoms and support an Oak and Oak-Hickory
Woodlands. While live oak, post oak, and blackjack oak abound, there is a conspicuous absence of
the Texas oak and Ashe juniper that are so common
throughout the Edwards Plateau. In general, the
uplift area has a greater affinity with plant communities to the north/northeast rather than with plant
communities to the west and south (Arbingast et al.
1973:10; Diamond et al. 1987:204, 208-211; LBJ
1978:22; Riskind and Diamond 1986:29).
The Mesquite Plains, a subregion of the Rolling
Plains, tie within the Kansan biotic province.
Although it represents the southernmost extension
of the Great Plains, the Mesquite Plains receive
more precipitation. The moderately rolling
topography is dissected by narrow intermittent
stream valleys that also make the Mesquite Plains
better drained than the Great Plains. The soils,
ranging from coarse sands to red-bed clays, support
a predominately mesquite-grasslands mosaic (Blair
1950:109-112; Gould 1962:12-13). Grasslands
include a number of mid- and tall-grass species;
however, mesquite appears to have increased

significantly during historic times. Oaks are also
present, and cedar mixes with the deciduous trees
in the western portions of the Mesquite Plains
(Diamond et al. 1987:207-212; LBJ 1978:22-23).
Only a few faunal species are endemic to the area;
rather, most are intermixtures of species that prefer
either eastern evergreen woodland or western
grassland habitats. For example, of the more than
30 species of snakes found in the area only one
species, Tatrix harteri, is restricted to the Mesquite
Plains (Blair 1950:110-112).
The Blackland Prairie and the Grand Prairie
lie within the Texan biotic province. They form the
southernmost extension of the True Prairie communities to the north (Diamond and Smeins 1985:307).
The dark, calcareous clay soils of the Blackland
Prairie support predominately tall-grass prairies that
have, in recent years, been invaded by mesquite,
blackjack oak, and post oak. Isolated bands of
Blacktand Prairies occur within the Oak Woods
and Prairies region to the east (LBJ 1978:19-20),
while the Balcones Escarpment serves as its western boundary. This area forms a range barrier to the
east-west dispersal of a number of faunal species
(Gehlbach 1991:423).
The slight topographic and lithologic differences between the Grand Prairie and the Blackland
Prairie create somewhat different vegetative zones.
The Grand Prairie, with its gently sloping, almost
level, surfaces and shallower Mollisols, supports a
mid-grass rather than tall-grass prairie. Annual
forbs, such as GailIardia (members of the sunflower family) and Draba (members of the mustard
family), are also abundant. However, due to increased grazing activities, perennial forbs (and
grasses) have increased significantly. Woody plants,
such as mesquite, blackjack oak, and hackberry,
are confined to the valleys and stream margins
(Dyksterhuis 1946; LBJ 1978).
The Western and Eastern Cross Timbers, subregions of the Oak Woods and Prairies, lie within
the Texan biotic province. These continuous belts
of woodland/forest extend southward from the Red
River, crosscutting, rather than paralleling, the major fiver valleys and flanking the Grand Prairie.
Due to the difference in rainfall amounts, the Western Cross Timbers are less well-developed than the
Eastern Cross Timbers.
In the Western Cross Timbers region, the
vegetative patterns reflect the character of the
underlying geological formations and the rainfall

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

patterns. The original savanna-like landscape has
been severely modified by grazing. Today, the
overstory vegetation consists primarily of
woodlands of blackjack oak, post oak, and black
hickory. Mesquite is a recent invader. Originally,
the understory vegetation was essentially prairielike, in that tall-and mid-grass species predominated.
However, since the 1850s, short-grass species and
perennial grasses, such as buffalograss, have almost
wholly displaced the tall- and mid-grass species
(Dyksterhuis 1946; LBJ 1978:20-21). Fauna in the
Western Cross Timbers subregion is a mix of both
eastern Austroriparian species and western grassland
species (Gehlbach 1991). (For a more detailed
discussion of the environment of the Western Cross
Timbers subregion, see Gardner [1992].)
The Eastern Cross Timbers subregion consists
of a narrow strip of woodland/forest that separates
the Grand Prairie from the Blackland Prairie. This
subregion has woody vegetation that is common to
both the Western Cross Timbers and the Post Oak
Savanna.~ Blackjack oak, post oak, and black
hickory are also common in the Eastern Cross Timbers. However, due to the more abundant rainfall in
this subregion, forests are denser and taller here
than they are in the Western Cross Timbers. In
places where the oak overstory is thinner, prairies
of mid-grass species, such as little bluestem, are
also found. During historic times, this subregion
has also been severely impacted by cultivation and
grazing. As a result, the Eastern Cross Timbers
subregion has been heavily overrun by mesquite,
juniper, and other woody brush types (Diamond et
al. 1987:206-209; LBJ 1978:20; Texas Almanac
1994:95).
The South Texas Brush Country, a subregion
of the South Texas Plains, is an area of thorny
brush and grassland. Originally a more open grassland or savanna, historical land use patterns, such
as grazing, have significantly altered the landscape.
Thorny short brush, such as cactus and bullnettle,
and tal! brush, such as mesquite and spiny hackberry, are now the principal vegetation in the area.
Mid- and short-grass species predominate (Diamond
et al. 1987:207, 210-211; LBJ 1978:21; Texas Almanac 1994:95).
Thus, when moving from north to south or
from east to west across Prewitt’s Central Texas,
loca!ly specific physiographic, climatic, and biotic

407

elements interact to produce a wide range of
distinctive environments. Within each major natural
region, there are distinctive subregions whose plant
communities are distributed along soil and moisture
gradients with local modifying factors such as
exposure, relief, and soil depth (see Van Auken
1988:55). The importance of the close relationship
between geology, soils, topography, climatic, and
biotic elements should not be underestimated
because each has important influences on the
structure and content of the environment. Moreover,
it is important to recognize that despite the fact that
the defining features of each subregion produce a
much more differentiated description of major
environmental features than do Blair’s (1950) biotic
provinces, these subregions nonetheless do obscure
a great deal of local environmental variation.
The pattern of environmental diversity in Central Texas becomes much more complex when the
regional variability of mean annual precipitation is
added to the picture (Figure 3). In general, precipitation declines from east to west, with isohyets
bulging markedly westward at the southeast edge
of the Edwards Plateau. Mean annual precipitation
ranges from about 36 inches in the southeastern
corner to less than 22 inches at the west-central
edge. Since biological productivity within any natural subregion depends largely on precipitation (cf.
Owen and Schmidly 1986), one can readily divide
each of the subregions on the basis of precipitation,
forming "subsubregions" that comprise specific
moisture regimes within the larger patterns of climate, geology, soils, topography, and vegetation
that make up the natural subregions. Net primary
above-ground productivity of vegetation decreases
by about 145 g/m2/yr for each 2 inch decrease in
mean annual precipitation from east to west (Table
2). Thus, for example, the area of the Live OakMesquite Savanna at the 22 inch isohyet (763 g/m2/
yr) is about half as productive as the area at the 32
inch isohyet (1490 g/m2/yr). These precipitationbased subsubregions therefore represent distinct
subdivisions of biological productivity within their
respective subregions and regions.
As areas with a particular range of mean annual precipitation values, the subsubregions also
are places that have distinct probability distributions for the occurrence of more or less than average yearly precipitation. As a result, in each

~The Post Oak Savanna is east of the area depicted in Figure 2.

408

Texas Archeological Society

year with a 2 inch deviation from
mean annual precipitation in the
Live Oak-Mesquite Savanna
subsubregion at the 22 inch and 32
inch isohyets would reduce annual
productivity by about 145 g/m2 in
both places. However, the area at
the 22 inch isohyet would have a
19 percent productivity loss,
whereas the area at the 32 inch isohyet would have a 10 percent loss.
Thus, the amount of precipitation
in the west might fall below the
failure threshold for a particular resource without doing so in the east.
Hence, in a year that was relatively
dry all over the region, resource
failure might occur in a western
subsubregion without occurring in
an eastern one.
It is within these smaller-scale
patterns of local environmental
vm’iation that culture and processual
histories have been played out during the course of prehistory. At any
given time, Central Texans had at
36"
34"
28"
30" 32"
26"
24"
22"
their disposal a cultural geography
2" isohyet (after Larkin
.
(consisting, among other things, of
and Bomar 1983)
100 km
their knowledge of how resources
Net primary above-ground
are distributed in space and time in
productivity (g/m2/yr)
their territories) and a range of
Figure 3. Precipitation and natural environments. Isohyets divide natural
learned, more or less patterned prosubregions into "subsubregions" with different productivity characteristics,
cedures for accomodating their subincreasing the resolution of environmental diversity in Prewitt’s Central
sistence activities to known patterns
Texas.
of resource availability. Some subsistence activities, such as the
Mariames’ well known "tuna trek"
(cf. Potter and Black 1995), are patterned at the
subsubregion, the annual total productivity of any
strategic level, and reflect tried and true formulas for
given plant resource would vary from year to year-being in the right general area at the right general
sometimes drasticallyias a function of normal ostime to accomplish certain subsistence goals. Other
cillations above and below the mean (including
subsistence activities are patterned at the tactical
normal seasonal oscillations). Consequently, each
level, and reflect tried and true gambits for achieving
subsubregion is characterized by a different probstrategic goals in a specific place at a specific time
ability distribution with respect to the frequency at
under specific conditions. For example, Eskimos
which a given plant resource would fail as a result
and Ngatatjaras frequently leave areas with abunof precipitation that was too much, too little, too
dantly available resources to obtain information about
early, or too late.
resource availability elsewehere, or to exploit less
Since the different subsubregions occupy difsecure resource bases, knowing that if they fail, they
ferent places on the overall precipitation gradient, a
have a safety net (Binford 1983:204-205).
normal oscillation that produces a resource failure
For lack of a better term, we will refer to
in one subsubregion might not produce a resource
patterned strategic and tactical subsistence
failure in another. For example, a relatively dry
22"

24"

26"

28"

30"

32"

34"

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

409

Table 2. Relationship between net primary above-ground
productivity and mean annual precipitation
Mean Annual

Net Primary Above-

Precipitation

Ground Productivity
(g/mVyr)

Note:

20"

618

22"

763

24"

908

26"

1054

28"

1199

30"

1345

32"

1490

34"

1635

36"

1780

Comparative Productivity Differentials (g/mVyr)
20"

22"

24"

26"

28"

30"

0

145

290

0

32"

34"

435

580

145

290

435

725

870

1015

1160

580

725

870

1015

0

145

290

0

145

435

580

725

870

290

435

580

725

0

145

290

435

580

0

145

290

435

0

145

290

0

145

36"

0

Calculated from data in Owen and Schmidly (1986:Table 2) by linear regression of productivity against mean annual
precipitation. Comparative productivity differentials are rounded.

procedures as "practices" in which fulfilling
subsistence goals depends on successful integration
of strategies and tactical activities on a day-to-day,
season-to-season basis. Indeed, some of the most
important tactical gambits are the ones that enable
a group to respond successfully to an unforeseen
resource failure by adjusting their strategic mobility
plans and/or implementing back-up tactics that
ordinarily would not have been the chosen course
of action (cf. Binford 1983:207-208). At any given
time, then, a successful adaptation is one in which a
population has (and passes on to its children)
subsistence practices enabling them to deal with
resource failures that follow normal oscillations
around precipitation means, including wet and dry
extremes. In other words, a successful subsistence
practice is one in which the members of any given
group had back-up procedures (including
scheduling, mobility, social, and other mechanisms)
that would allow them to cope successfully with
resource failures of particular kinds and magnitudes.
However, a strategy or tactical gambit that serves
as a back-up response to worse-than-average
conditions in one subsubregion would probably
work as a prime response to average conditions in
another. Thus, successful subsistence practices in
any given subsubregion would consist of an array
of strategic and tactical decision-making responses
that are implemented at varying frequencies that
largely correspond to the frequencies at which
variations in precipitation lead to resource

abundance or failure. Given the broad range of
natural subregions in Prewitt’s Central Texas, it
should be very surprising indeed if prehistory in the
region could be accurately and precisely described
in terms of a single culture or processual history
because subsistence practices and cultural geographies are culture traits which must be as highly
variable as the region or subregion they were
developed in.

A THOUGHT EXPERIMENT:
HUNTER-GATHERERS
ON A DIVERSE LANDSCAPE
In order to see the effects of environmental
diversity on the possibility of a unified culture or
processual history in Central Texas, it would be
useful to impose some hunter-gatherer territories
onto the landscape. However, no nonspeculative
estimates of territory size are available for the region
since little attention has yet been paid to exactly
what the term "highly mobile" means when it is
applied in the region. Since the Alaskan Nunamiut
are undoubtedly familiar to many readers, they
provide a good worst-case example since the
Nunamiut occupy an area that is much less
climatically favorable than Central Texas. The
residential core of a Nunamiut annual range may be
up to 5,400 km2, and the area exploited during a
year may be up to 25,000 km2 (Binford 1983:110).

410

Texas Archeological Society
22"

24"

26"

28"

30"

32"

34"

small expanses of Brush
Country and Oak Woodlands.
Moreover, the western territory
is substantially drier, and hence
less productive than the eastern
one: plant productivity ranges
from 908-1343 g/m2/yr in the
western territory and from 12721573 g/m2 in the east. The most
productive area of the western
territory is only marginally more
productive than the least
productive eastern area.
In contrast to these territories, another fits almost entirely
within the Live Oak-Mesquite
Savanna. Unlike other territories
containing the Savanna, this one
occupies the driest Savanna
subsubregions in Prewitt’s Central Texas. However, even this
territory is not overly homogeneous because it contains a precipitation gradient that ranges
from a high of just under 26
34"
36"
26"
28"
30" 32"
22"
24"
inches to a low of about 21
2" isohyet
..... Prewitt’s boundaries
inches, a difference that differentially affects biological proHypothetical 5,400 km2 residential core (inner circle) with
ductivity in the territory. An
25,000 km2 exploitation territory (outer circle)
examination of all of the territo,,
ries shows that regardless of
1 O0 km
which subregions they occupy,
Figure 4. Hypothetical Nunamiut-size territories superimposed over Central
they all subsume a precipitation
Texas. Even these overly large territories contain comparatively different
gradient of at least 4 inches and
ranges of environmental characteristics and biological productivity.
a productivity gradient of at least
290 g/m2/yr. They also occupy
generally different positions on
the scale between minimum and maximum precipiIf a series of idealized, Nunamiut-size residential
tation in Prewitt’s Central Texas. Even if huntercores and exploited territories are distributed around
gatherer groups occupied and exploited huge
Prewitt’s Central Texas (Figure 4), we can see that
territories, the territories would subsume a wide
despite the very large size of these territories, the
variety of natural/moisture subsubregions, many of
people occupying them face quite different adaptive
which would not closely resemble the mix or range
challenges.
of subsubregions in other territories.
For example, superimposing these territories
Of course, it is unlikely that Central Texans
at the southern corners of the region yields two
required or used Nunamiut-size territories to supterritories with large areas of interfingered
port themselves. If we envision a distribution of
Canyonlands and Live Oak-Mesquite Savanna.
5,400 km2 territories (the smaller circles), we see
However, the western territory is composed almost
that groups occupying smaller territories would be
entirely of this mix with a relatively small amount
exploiting less geographically diverse environof Brush Country, whereas the eastern territory
ments that were restricted to narrower portions of
includes a large expanse of Blackland Prairie and

@

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

the precipitation and productivity gradients. As a
result, we see groups faced with subsisting within
smaller arrays of distinct subsubregions. Thus, as
territory size decreases to more realistic parameters, the array of distinct environments exploited
by different Central Texas groups would multiply
dramatically so that there is no quintessential Central Texas environment or cultural geography, even
if there are at least some quintessentially Central
Texan culture traits.
However, subsistence practices (i.e., combinations of strategic and tactical activities) would not
be on the list of quintessential traits because the
different environments of the region would require
Central Texans to make widely divergent economic
choices from season to season and year to year. In
other words, to the extent that environment-specific subsistence practices are part of the cultures to
be described in an accurate Wi!ley and Phillips-like
culture history of Central Texas, this very important aspect of culture would not be shared throughout the region. There is virtually no chance that
subsistence strategies would be similar enough all
across the region to be subsumed under a single
description of adaptive process that accurately captures the variability of strategic and tactical decision-making that must accompany the region’s
environmental variability. Even in periods when
typologically similar artifacts occur all across the
region, the economic aspects of culture would be so
variable that no single description could accurately
circumscribe them withouit simplifying them so
much that the description does not refer meaningfully to an economy that actually existed.

CLIMATE CHANGE IN
CENTRAL TEXAS
Diachronic environmental variability
compounds the improbability of a culture or
processual history that could characterize the region
as a whole. The reason for this is that the diverse
environmental baseline would lead to differential
environmental responses (and opportunities) for
people in different parts of the region. To illustrate
this, it would be useful to examine the effects of
climate change on hunter-gatherer populations.
Unfortunately, paleoclimate research has not
advanced to the point where one can examine the
history of climatically induced environmental change

411

in a rigorous way. Hence, we will resort to another
hypothetical exercise. Before doing so, however, let
us examine the state of paleoclimate research since
many readers will be put off by the foregoing claim
about the utility of existing paleoclimate models.
Over the last several decades, paleoclimate
models have become an increasingly common element of archeology in Central Texas. A broad array
of kinds of evidence has been used to build these
models, and a broad array of models has been forthcoming. Among the kinds of evidence that has been
used are fossil vertebrates (e.g., Lundelius 1967;
Toomey 1993; Toomey et al. 1993), pollen (e.g.,
Bryant and Shafer 1977; Bryant and Hol!oway
1985), geomorphic changes (e.g., Blum and Valastro
1989; Holliday 1985, 1989; Hall 1990; Nordt 1992;
Johnson and Goode 1994; Johnson 1995), stable
isotope ratios (e,g., Humphrey and Ferring 1994;
Nordt et al. 1994), and fossil invertebrates (Elias
1994; Johnson and Goode 1994; Johnson 1995).
Although some of the models are based on a variety of kinds of evidence (e.g., Toomey et al. 1993;
Johnson and Goode 1994; Johnson 1995), others
are based on a single line of evidence (Nordt et al.
1994) or a very narrow range of evidence
(Humphrey and Ferring 1994). Moreover, the source
locales for climatic data in most of the models
typically come from a highly limited geographic
area (e.g., Nordt et al. 1994), and many of the
source locales are peripheral to the Central Texas
region (e.g., Humphrey and Ferring 1994) in all but
the broadest definition of the term "Central Texas."
Note that although some of the models were not
constructed explicitly for use in Central Texas (e.g.,
Holliday 1985, 1989; Humphrey and Ferring 1994;
Hall 1990), they nevertheless get used as a basis for
discussing paleoclimate in Central Texas.
Figure 5 illustrates a range of paleoclimate models that have been constructed for major high-temperature and/or dry periods (i.e., the Altithermal or
similar events) in and around Central Texas. In
general, the figure shows that different lines of evidence from different places in and around the region
have yielded largely different temporal reconstructions of paleoclimate.
It would do little good to elaborate on the
differences between the models (see Potter 1995:1417 for a discussion) because the basic point has
already been made implicitly in Figure 5: the current
models are mutually exclusive on major and/or
minor issues. Part of the mutual exclusivity of the

412

Texas Archeological Society

For example, cut-and-fill cycles are
geomorphic responses to the amount and
I Johnson (1995)
speed of surface runoff (as well as
I
Humphrey and Ferring (1994) I
intrinsic thresholds); soil formation
I Holliday (1989)
I
episodes are responses to periods of
I
I Nordt et al (1994)
surface stability; differential tree-ring
Meltzer (1991) ~
I
growth is a response to changes in the
moisture intake of the plant; and pollen
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
1
I
assemblages respond to changes in
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
vegetation
structure. Obviously,
Radiocarbon Years BP
significant long-term changes in rainfall
Figure 5. Major hot and/or dry periods postulated by selected models
would affect all four proxies. However,
for areas in and around Central Texas. Shorter hot/dry periods have
each proxy has a different sensitivity
been omitted.
and threshold response to climatic
variations (Butzer 1982:27-28). For
example, noncomplacent tree species will begin to
models follows from the fact that different
record a pattern of diminished precipitation
researchers have used different proxy variables as a
immediately, whereas a change in rainfall could
basis for constructing climate history, which
take an archeologically significant amount of time
introduces two dimensions of uncertainty about the
to register a detectable change in either
accuracy of their results.
geomorphology, soil, or pollen records. Research in
First, as Caran (1994) notes, none of the proxcentral Europe indicates that cycles of downcutting
ies that have been used to date in models that are
were clearly visible in the European geomorphic
applied in Central Texas are "first-order" proxies
record after several centuries. However, striking
from which one can make "first-order" inferences
changes in the pollen record were only visible after
from proxy measurements directly to one or more
several millennia. This implies that "slope-soilclimatic variables. For example, Nordt et al. (1994)
stream subsystems had lower critical thresholds than
use stable carbon isotope measurements from hudid
the vegetative subsystems" (Butzer 1982:29).
mic materials as a basis for reconstructing vegetaThus,
it is difficult to compare the significance of
tion history, from which they then infer temperature
data from one proxy with that of another, which is
and moisture history. Although the inference from
another way of saying that it may be too optimistic
proxy measurements to vegetation can be considto believe that different proxies should be expected
ered a first-order inference, all subsequent climatic
to yield directly comparable results.
inferences are second- or higher-order inferences,
Moreover, some proxies are subject to
the soundness of which depends on both the soundequifinality constraints (e.g., Butzer 1982; Blum
ness of the first-order inference and the soundness
of the middle-range theories (sensu Kosso 1991)
1987:103-108; Caran 1994) such that the same outcome
can be caused by different things. Nordt
that support additional inferences from hypotheti(1992),
for example, links stream entrenchment at
cal vegetation structure to climate conditions. Thus,
Fort Hood to periods of aridity. However, Hereford
inaccuracy and/or imprecision may enter into model
(1984) links aggradation in Arizona to increased
construction as a function of how accurately and
aridity, while Macklin et al. (1992) link stream
precisely changes in first-order proxy measurements
entrenchment in Great Britain to periods of indirectly reflect the climate values inferred from
creased humidity. Hence, individual fluvial systems
them. Since each additional order of inference has
may exhibit a wide range of adjustments under
its own precision constraints (e.g., quantified stanchanging climatic conditions, and many of these
dard errors of estimates or unquantified levels of
adjustments may have more to do with internal
uncertainty), the accuracy of second- and highersystemic constraints than with climatic change
order inferences can be maintained only by accept(Blum 1987:103-108). Thus, the accuracy of a cliing increasing levels of imprecision, or conversely,
mate model is only as high as the researcher’s abildecreasing levels of confidence.
Second, each different proxy operates within
ity to constrain interpretation according to a well
developed body of middle-range theory that reduces
different process-response (i.e., causal) networks.
I

I

1

Bryant and Holloway (1985)
4 Toomey et al (1994)

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

ambiguity about the relationships between proxies
and climatic processes. As a result, part of the models’ mutual exclusivity probably follows from the
fact that different proxies may record the same climate event in different ways, at different magnitudes, and/or at different times relative to the time
of the event’s onset. This is another way of saying
that two or more different climatic models could be
accurate accounts of climate history, but might appear to be mutually exclusive because the proxies
record the same climatic events at different levels
of temporal precision.
Other elements of mutual exclusivity may result from problems of assigning dates to climatic
events. For climate to be an explanatory variable,
the timing of climatic change must be correlated in
a determinate way with the timing of change in
cultural or processual history. Any lag between the
time of a change in a crucial climatic variable and
the time that the change becomes measurable in
one or more proxy variables introduces spurious
chronological correlations between climatic and cultural/processual events. In particular, the models
are affected by chronological precision constraints.
It is especially telling that the chronological boundaries of various events typically fall at even increments of 1000 or 500 radiocarbon years B.P. The
fact that climatic events are chronologically
bounded in this manner should suggest that the
chronological precision usually obtained from
paleoclimate studies does not come very close to
the chronological precision that often can be obtained in a stratigraphic sequence of occupations
that reflect different culture-history units or subsistence practices. This issue is important because any
given 500 radiocarbon-year interval is long enough
to contain two of Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) phases, or
to subsume part of three of his phases, including
two phase-to-phase shifts. Thus, the boundaries between climatic events are not dated precisely enough
to tell whether a particular climatic event occurs
several hundred years before or after a particular
cultural!processual change. As a result, the matchup between climate history and culture/processual
history must be regarded as loose. The key problem
to be resolved in using paleoclimate as an explanatory dimension is thus to correlate the timing of
crucial climatic thresholds and crucial changes in
the record of cultural or processual history.
Climate is a set of average values accompanied by more or less patterned annual or seasonal

413

oscillations. As such, a climate is characterized by
a range of low-, high-, and extreme-magnitude oscillations around average conditions. The range of
these oscillations places limits on the extent that
many floral and faunal species can flourish or survive in a given area. From a particular species’
perspective, a climatic threshold is a set of boundary conditions within which the range of oscillations around average conditions limits its ability to
survive and successfully reproduce. With climatic
change, a species in a given territory may be progressively decimated by increases in the frequency
of years with unfavorable weather conditions. At
some point, the range of weather oscillations includes too few favorable years, and climate crosses
a crucial threshold beyond which a species cannot
survive. Since one species’ Purgatory can be
another’s Eden, a climatic change that progressively
decimates or extirpates one species may cross a
crucial threshold that eliminates climatic obstacles
to colonization or expansion of populations.
For instance, the ability of agaves and cacti to
withstand low winter temperatures depends on their
ability to "harden" by internally redistributing water and organic molecules (Nobel 1994:102-103).
The degree of hardening, however, depends on the
speed at which temperature declines from fall to
winter values. Furthermore, at any degree of hardening, the length of time that subfreezing temperatures are sustained determines whether cellular
dehydration and tissue damage are severe enough
to kill the plant. For agaves and cacti to colonize a
new territory, therefore, average climatic conditions
must cross a threshold where years with rapid fallto-winter cooling and sustained very low temperatures are rare enough to support reproductively
successful populations. Moreover, years with rapid
spring-to-summer heating and sustained very high
temperatures must remain rare enough to avoid killing off seedlings and pups (Nobel 1994:103-106).
Climatic thresholds vary from organism to organism, but all species of flora and fauna have them.
It is important to identify climatic thresholds
because in cases where climate best explains culture
change, crossing a climatic threshold is the causal
factor that leads to culture change (e.g., Meltzer
1991). Consider Johnson’s recent and forthcoming
(Johnson and Goode 1994; Johnson 1995) model of
climate and culture change for the eastern half of
Central Texas. Johnson (Johnson and Goode
1994:26) correlates the development of burned rock

414

Texas Archeological Society

middens in the Middle Archaic with a gradual
drying trend that led to the expansion of succulents,
and their exploitation by people who baked them in
rock ovens. Johnson’s model relies on an unstated
claim that climate crossed a threshold that allowed
xerophytes to expand their range in Middle Archaic
times. Although Johnson’s climate/culture model is
plausible and well-argued (especially in Johnson
1995), that his model does not address climatic
thresholds leaves several issues implicit and
unaddressed. First, when did climate conditions
cross the threshold that allowed xerophytes to occur
in sufficient densities to become enough of a staple
to lead to formation of burned rock middens all
across the eastern Edwards Plateau? Second, did
the warming trend start from thresholds above the
tolerance level for xerophytes, or did the warming
occur in a climate that already widely supported
them across the region? If these thresholds were
crossed early, and xerophytes were both widespread
and sparsely exploited before the Middle Archaic,2
then climate changes (at least with respect to
climate/xerophyte relationships) would not explain
culture change. If these thresholds were crossed
later, then climate change might explain the
adoption of xerophytes as a staple without
explaining why burned rock middens began to form.
Third, and of most importance, is the crucial culturechanging threshold one that led to the expansion of
xerophytes, or another that led to the extirpation of
a different resource? In other words, Johnson could
be absolutely correct about a correlation between
an unquantified warming trend and the emergence
of certain culture traits without being correct about
whether climate change has an explanatory role,
and without having identified the correct climate/
resource relationship(s) that led to culture change.
Thus, the point is not whether Johnson’s or
anyone else’s model is accurate (although at least
several of them must be false for Central Texas);
rather, the point is that even if they are accurate, they
are not sufficiently precise to permit a critical
evaluation of the results of using them in descriptions

and explanations of culture change. The varying
degrees of remoteness between proxies and climatic
variables, the absence or imprecision of evidence
about the magnitude of climatic events, and the
chronological imprecision of climate history,
combine to indicate that the models can be used only
in impressionistic ways. Of course, many may not
be persuaded by this argument, if for no other reason
than that our current explanatory needs require some
climate model. However, as Caran (1994) argues, it
is important to recognize that the paleoclimate models
we currently apply to Central Texas are not ready to
bear the descriptive and explanatory burden which
we as prehistorians require of them. Note that we are
not arguing that paleoclimate models should not be
used. Rather, we argue that they be treated
consciously as the provisional, imprecise constructs
that they are. Indeed, a productive line of research
would be to use climate/culture models to formulate
problem-specific hypotheses about the timing of
crucial climate thresholds, and to identify proxies
capable of showing whether those specific thresholds
were crossed.3

ANOTHER ENVIRONMENTAL
THOUGHT EXPERIMENT
In the absence of a precise climate history, we
also argue that one cannot offer a rigorous empirical basis for examining environmental variations
that would take place under changing climatic conditions in Central Texas. However, we can examine
the relevance of the term "Central Texas" by positing a hypothetical and uniform climatic event that
affects the region. By understanding what it would
mean to extend a single model of climate change to
all of the region, one can appreciate in some detail
the extent to which virtually any model of climate
change produces a Central Texas environment of
extraordinary diversity which, in turn, appears to
require an equally diverse history of culture or human adaptation.

~-Sotol occurs in stratified context in a hearth dated at about 8000 B.P. at 41UV88 (unpublished data from the Five Burned
Rock Midden Sites Project, in progress at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory).
3In Johnson’s case, the objective would be to identify the climatic variables that limit sotol and other edible xerophytes, and
to identify specific proxies that can address these specific limits. Perhaps a combination of dendroclimatological analyses (cf.
Stahle and Cleaveland 1988) of radiocarbon-dated charcoal, analyses of temperature- and moisture-sensitive fauna (cf. Toomey
et al. 1993), and epimerization analyses of land snails (cf. Goodfriend and Mitterer 1993) would narrow down the timing of the
moisture and temperature thresholds that allow particular xerophytes to flourish.

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

415

Modern precipitation gradient

and the vegetation productivity
losses that would occur at the isohyets. Figure 6 also implicitly shows
that shifting the precipitation regime
produces a new mosaic that (1) cannot be any more uniform than the
previous mosaic, (2) does not simply shift environmental conditions
around on the landscape, and (3) presents differential adaptive challenges
to people occupying different areas
of the region.
Ecological adjustment (sensu
Collins and Bousman 1993:55-56)
should occur in each natural subregion as a result of starting with the
same basic assortment of plants, but
changing only precipitation among
the nonbiological variables that create natural environments. Thus, ecological adjustment within a given
subsubregion would be equivalent
to reproducing a drier, less productive version of the existing vegetation regime, which would be roughly
equivalent to moving a subsubregion
20"
22"
24"
26"
28" 30"
32"
34"
to the east by one pair of isohyets
Hypothetical precipitation gradient after uniform 2" decrease
with a concomitant loss of 145 g/
m2/yr in net primary above-ground
Points discussed in text
productivity at each isohyet. How1 O0 km
Productivity decline
ever, where precipitation (rather than
geology, soils, and/or topography)
Figure 6. Hypothethical climate change in Prewitt’s Central Texas.
is the limiting variable on vegetaUniform precipitation change shifts modem isohyets 2 inches to the east.
Productivity declines by 145g/m2/yr at each isohyet. Numbered points are
tion composition, drying could proenvironments discussed in text.
duce basic floristic change in those
locations where oscillations around
average precipitation falls below
Since moisture gradients are a major determithresholds necessary to sustain the major comnant of environmental conditions (and a central one
ponents of the plant populations. Precipitation
in discussions of paleoenvironmental change), conchange could also affect some plants more than
sider what happens when the precipitation gradiothers, producing partial floristic change. Vegetation
ents shift. Suppose that an Altithermal-like event
change in any given subsubregion, therefore, could
strikes the region, lowering mean annual precipitaoccur along a continuum that ranges from: (1)
tion by 2 inches (about 5 cm) and shifting the isoreduction of total biological productivity with no
hyet values to the east.4 Figure 6 shows the
change in relative frequencies of plant species, to
conjunction of natural subregions and precipitation
(2) reduction of productivity and changes in species
gradients before and after the precipitation shift,
relative frequencies, or to (3) reduction of
22"

24"

26"

28"

30"

32"

34"

4This scenario oversimply assumes that other climatic variables do not change and that nonclimatic controls over the locations
of isohyet positions keep the isohyets where they are. The implications of this unrealistic assumption arise later, and ultimately
reinforce our claims.

416

Texas Archeological Society

productivity with minor to major floristic change in
the species composition of the vegetation regime.
The kinds of climate change that archeologists
discuss would not occur in any Central Texan’s
lifespan. However, within the human time-frames
that it takes for the precipitation shift to occur,
Central Texans would encounter ecological adjustments in terms of increased frequency of resource
failures following on dry seasons and decreased
frequency of resource failures following on wet seasons. In other words, subsistence tactics for exceptionally wet years would become increasingly
unnecessary, subsistence tactics for exceptionally
dry years would have to be implemented with increasing frequency, and subsistence tactics for formerly average years would become the decisions
implemented in wetter-than-average years. Furthermore, they would encounter cases of partial and/or
basic floristic change in terms of changed probabilities of alternative resources in the event that any
diminished or lost plant resource (and herbivores
that feed on it) was replaced by a new plant resource
(and its herbivores). Consequently, back-up and/or
alternative tactics for exploiting alternative resources
probably would be implemented more frequently.
Their ability to sustain their populations would be
contingent on their ability to transform their backup and infrequently used strategies and tactics into
more or less typically used strategies, and an ability
to recognize alternative resources and incorporate
those into their back-up and/or typical practices.
The variable subsistence challenges that climate
change would present to Central Texans can be
illustrated by examining shifts in subsubregions under the initial heuristic assumption that precipitation
change leads to ecological adjustment without floristic change.
In the hypothetical scenario, some subregions
are simply reproduced to the east (points 1 in Figure
6). In other cases, the eastward shift of isohyets
reproduces a relatively small subregion as a
relatively large one (points 2) and vice versa (points
3). As a result, the precipitation shift not only moves
the isohyets east and changes the amounts of
territory subsumed between pairs of isohyets, it
also expands and contracts the amount of area that
is subject to resource failures that accompany highand low-magnitude oscillations around mean annual
precipitation. In some cases, the precipitation shift
cannot simply result in an eastward shift of the
natural subsubregions. The precipitation shift at

points 4 cannot result in eastward shifts of
vegetation regimes because the geologic, edaphic,
and topographic characteristics of the subsubregions
do not exist to the east.
Consequently, nonbiological elements of the
subsubregions limit the extent to which uniform
precipitation change can result in uniform environmental change, and the topographic and other environmental controls that modify the shapes of the
isohyets ensure that the spatial properties of any
given 2 inch precipitation gradient will not be reproduced to the east. The climate shift also creates
subsubregions (points 5) that did not previously
exist in Central Texas, and ecotones (points 6) between subsubregions that are juxtaposed for the
first time. Thus, under conditions of uniform precipitation change: (1) there are changes in the
amount of area covered by different portions of the
precipitation gradient, (2) some subsubregions are
lost as new ones are created, and (3) some spatial
juxtapositions of subsubregions are lost as new ones
are created. Regardless of whether one deals with
prehistory in a framework of culture history or process, these patterns of environmental change would
pose adaptive challenges if Central Texans were to
successfully weather the climate change.
In many cases, subsubregions shift east to areas of equivalent size and with similar nonbiological
environmental characteristics. If people alter their
territories to follow the isohyets, then they adapt to
climate change by shifting their exploitation zones.
They also apply their subsistence practices on
slightly different landscapes that otherwise contain
the environmental/spatial characteristics with which
they are already familiar, and for which they have
subsistence practices that require them to simply
learn a new landscape. Their primary adaptive challenges are likely to be social if groups to the east do
not follow the isohyets and, hence, do not conveniently oblige the immigrants’ subsistence goals by
creating a residential and exploitation vacuum that
circumvents increased competition for a decreasingly productive resource base.
However, if people map onto territories rather
than precipitation regimes, they are unlikely to
follow the isohyets east (at least until enough
subsistence failures accumulate to persuade them
otherwise). In this circumstance, former back-up
strategies and tactics must become quite regular
(albeit, perhaps, not typical) components of yearto-year subsistence activities. Their primary

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick m Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

adaptive challenge is to transform subsistence
practices for drier-than-average years into strategies
for average years, which certainly would involve
adjusting mobility patterns. The effects of uniform
drying on mobility requirements can be approximated by examining the pattern of change in net
primary vegetation productivity that would occur
by the end of the precipitation decline.
Although there would be a uniform, regionwide reduction in the amount of above-ground
productivity, the percentage decrease would vary
considerably. For example, average productivity in
the area between the original 20-22 inch isohyets
(point 7 in Figure 6; Table 3) would decline by 1923 percent across the gradient between isohyets. In
contrast, average productivity between the original
34-36 inch isohyets (point 8 in Figure 6) would
decline by 8-9 percent. Depending on how directly
a percentage decrease in total productivity
translates into a percentage increase in the amount
of territory needed to harvest a consistent food
supply, groups in the west would have to increase
their mobility rates much more than that of eastern
groups. This pattern would be aggravated in years
with worse-than-average precipitation under the
new moisture regime. If both areas have years with
precipitation 2 inches below their new means, a
one-year 145 g/m2 loss in the west would amount
to a productivity loss of 23-31 percent beyond
already reduced annual average productivity levels,

417

whereas in the east, the additional loss would be
about 9-10 percent.
To accomodate a climate change with a 2 inch
decrease in mean annual precipitation with regular 2
inch oscillations below the mean, people in the west
would have to adjust their subsistence practices to
an environment that averages about 19-23 percent
below previous productivity levels, and regularly
falls about 38-47 percent below average productivity before the climate change. People in the east,
however, would only have to adjust to 8-9 percent
average losses, and regular losses of only 16-18
percent below former levels of productivity. Therefore, we would expect not only average mobility
requirements to increase more in the west, but also
additional mobility would be necessary to compensate for the increase in drier-than-average years.
During the period when mean annual precipitation
is declining, climatic thresholds that lead to alteration of mobility patterns would be reached earlier
in the west than in the east, and the timing of mobility changes from east to west would vary along with
the need for them. In other words, the gradients for
precipitation and productivity (which are parallel
because of the latter’s dependence on the former)
are also mobility gradients in the sense that areas
with lower total productivity are by definition areas
that produce less above-ground vegetation, and areas with less above-ground vegetation require more
mobility to harvest a given quantity of vegetation.

Table 3. Relative productivity losses with 2 inch decrease of mean
precipitation and 2 inch oscillation below new mean
Original Mean

New Mean
Annual Precipitation/

Change

Productivity

Annual Precipitation/

New Mean

2 in Below

Productivity (g/m2/yr)

Productivity (g!m2!yr)

Productivity

New Mean

20" ! 618

18" / 473

-23 %

328

-31%

-47 %

22" ! 763

20" / 618

-19 %

473

-23 %

-38 %

24" / 908

22"/763

-16 %

618

-19 %

-31%

26" / 1054

24" ! 909

-14 %

763

-16 %

-28 %

28" ! 1200

26" / 1054

-12 %

909

-14 %

-24 %

30" / 1345

28"/1200

-11%

1054

-12 %

-22 %

32" / 1490

30" / 1345

-10 %

1200

-11%

-19 %

34" / 1635

32" / 1490

-9 %

1345

-10 %

-18 %

36" / 1780

34" / 1635

-8%

1490

-9%

-16%

Productivity Change at
2 in Below New Mean:
re: New Mean
re: Original

418

Texas Archeological Society

Because the precipitation shift often expands
or contracts the area under a given precipitation
regime, productivity and mobility gradients will
expand or contract accordingly. Thus, the spatial
rearrangement of productivity and mobility gradients would not be uniform, requiring people exploiting the same precipitation gradients to
differentially adjust their mobility to very different
spatial patterns of declining productivity.
The treatment of productivity has, so far, ignored the underlying environmental diversity within
which total productivity is reduced. Drainages in
Central Texas are better watered than the adjacent
uplands because of concentrated flows from springs
and/or precipitation, and productivity in drainages
would probably decline at a slower rate than it
would in the uplands, creating differential declines
in productivity within any given subsubregion. Still
further, productivity in spring-fed drainages would
decline slower than in runoff-fed drainages, producing additional local differences. However, topography (and hence the spatial distribution of
springs and drainages) is one of the variables that
creates environmental diversity, and some subregions (e.g., the Balcones Canyonlands) are characterized by greater incision than others (e.g., the
Live Oak-Mesquite Savanna). As a result, differential upland/drainage productivity losses at the
subsub-regional scale would be accompanied by
further differences related to the overall drainage
pattern at the subregional spatial scale.
Moreover, it is highly unlikely that ecological
adjustment from one subsubregion to another would
be accomnpanied by proportional species-to-species
reduction in productivity. Although each natural
subregion is partially defined by a characteristic
array of plants, the existence of precipitation
gradients within each subregion guarantees that each
characteristic species in each subregion occupies a
territory varying somewhat from optimal moisture
conditions. This means that each species in each
subsubregion is closer to, or farther from, the
climatic thresholds that determine whether it
flourishes, barely survives, or cannot survive.
Despite the fact that each subsubregion has the
same basic array of characteristic

flora,

there is

considerable, indeed subtle, variation in the
proportional representation of characteristic plants.
Furthermore, the boundaries between subregions
are neither

sharp nor impermeable. The major

characteristic species in one subregion typically

extend beyond subregional boundaries to comprise
minor species in adjacent subregions. Thus, variable
representation of characteristic flora in a subregion
is accompanied by a variable representation of
minor species that are characteristic of other
subregions.
The different subsubregions vary not only as a
function of the differential representation of characteristic species: they simultaneously vary as a
function of the extent to which the locally peculiar
spread of characteristic species in adjacent
subsubregions spills over to become a minor component of the vegetation regime. Since all of the
species--characteristic and minor--in any given
subsubregion occupy different positions relative to
their optimal moisture conditions, the decline in
precipitation will lead to differential change in proportional species representation by subsubregion as
a result of an initial variability in the mix of characteristic and minor species, and the initial positions
such species occupy relative to their optimal moisture regimes.
Note, therefore, that our initial heuristic assumption that ecological adjustment is the only process accompanying declining productivity is
unrealistic. Floristic change, at least in the form of
species changing from minor to major components
(and vice versa), should also occur in at least some
of the subsubregions. Moisture is a major variable
that distinguishes the vegetation of the Live OakMesquite Savanna, the Balcones Canyonlands, and
the Lampasas Cut Plains. With more xeric conditions, stream flows would decline in the more
ephemeral drainages of the Canyonlands, especially
in the westernmost reaches since they are not springfed to the degree that the easternmost reaches are.
This would create conditions differentially favoring the xeric species of the Savanna habitat, and
increase their proportional representation in the
Canyonlands (perhaps to the extent they become
characteristic rather than minor species in some
areas). The trees on the Cut Plains are limited by
moisture regime, so floristic change in the arboreal
community would be likely. The characteristic species of the Western Cross Timbers are especially
limited by precipitation, and the creation of a new
subsubregion would largely eliminate them in favor of minor species with greater xeric tolerance.
Floristic change would also then be highly probable at the southernmost reaches of the Blackland
Prairies and Oak Woodlands. In other words, the

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

productivity of resources with higher thresholds to
xeric conditions would be differentially favored over
resources with lower thresholds all across the region, and in some cases this would result in substantial floristic change.
At the beginning of this scenario, we spoke in
terms of subsubregions (and juxtapositions thereof),
but we have now arrived at a discussion cast almost
entirely in terms of overlapping environmental gradients and processes that are differentially distributed in space. As a result, even under conditions of
uniform precipitation change, the vegetation of Central Texas would undergo productivity changes, ecological adjustment, and changes in species
proportions and mixes, all of which would occur
highly differentially in space.
Progressive (and, we confess, partial) "decompression" of the environmental information that gets
lost when speaking in terms of biotic provinces and
natural subregions shows that environmental responses to climate change would be enormously
complex, contextually and historically contingent,
and, therefore, extremely variable from place to
place. The different subsubregions (which are lesssimplified, smaller lies than provinces, regions, and
subregions) start off with different mixes of geology, soil, topography, and climate, assuring they
will have different floral species compositions,
which in turn assures that the Central Texas environment cannot respond in a uniform way. If one’s
version of "Central Texas" is larger than Prewitt’ s,
then our claims may be far too conservative, because a larger version of "Central Texas" will contain more climatic, edaphic, and topographic
diversity, and will be characterized by even more
diverse responses. Thus, just as there is no
quintessentially Central Texas environment today,
there could be no quintessentially Central Texas
environmental response under realistic conditions
of uniform or nonuniform climate change.

IS A PREHISTORY OF CENTRAL
TEXAS POSSIBLE?
Moreover, just as there could be no quintessentia! environmental response, there could be no
quintessential adaptive response by Central Texans.

419

Some would have the option of following the
isohyets and reproducing their subsistence practices
in a new place; others would not. Some would face
radical changes in resource productivity and/or
resource composition; others would barely notice
the difference. Given a wide array of environments
and practices for exploiting them, Central Texans
would necessarily face highly divergent subsistence
challenges under changing climatic conditions. The
issue is not whether they could meet those
challenges: hunter-gatherers are, after all, intelligent,
highly-skilled people, and environmental change
would not occur so rapidly that their cultural
geographies and subsistence practices would
become obsolete before they could be fixed? Rather,
the issue is whether they would notice a difference
in the effectiveness of their strategies and tactics,
and reach the same conclusions about how to change
them, if necessary. Central Texans who started out
with very different subsistence practices from place
to place in the region would not respond in a uniform
way to climate change because some might have
little to respond to, and others would be responding
to different problems of different kinds and
magnitudes.
In other words, cultural responses to environmental change would take substantially different
trajectories from substantially different starting
points because hunter-gatherers are smart enough
to recognize in advance that some things will work,
and others will not. As a result, an accurate history
of changing relationships between climate and culture in the region as a whole could not rely on
"cultures" defined as quintessential sets of traits
unless prehistorians are willing to ignore most of
the aspects of culture that have to do with subsistence, or to suggest that variable subsistence practices are not particularly relevant to the cultures
they are interested in describing and explaining.
The long-standing fascination with burned rock
middens (BRMs) in Central Texas serves as a case
in point.
In recent years, some researchers (Prewitt n.d.;
Goode 1991; Johnson and Goode 1994; Johnson
1995) have adopted one or another version of the
"sotol hypothesis" for the origin and spread of
BRMs, which often are viewed as a quintessentially
Central Texan trait. According to this hypothesis,

5Especially if among their tactics they had procedures for scouting out resources in bad years, which would be the ideal
laboratory for developing new tactics in a changing environment.

420

Texas Archeological Society

BRMs formed as a result of the long-term construction of earth and rock facilities for cooking succulents and semisucculents. However, sotol does not
grow well in clayey soils (Dering 1995), and yucca
does not grow well in the coarse soils favored by
sotol (Johnson 1994). Given the gross distributions
of these soils within and beyond Prewitt’s Central
Texas, a climatic event that increases the range of
these plants would do so differentially. For example, in a climate shift favoring xeric plants, sotol
would be favored in the sandier soils of the Llano
Uplift, whereas yucca would be favored in the
clayier soils of the Blackland Prairies. Thus, the
regionwide adoption of technologies leading to the
formation of BRMs would necessarily be accompanied by subsubregional variations in the mix and
amount of succulents available for exploitation. To
the extent that different succulents require different
procurement, scheduling, and/or processing strategies, regionwide formation of BRMs also would be
accompanied by a variety of ways of doing things
that lead to forming middens.
Moreover, even if it is true, as Black et al.
(1993:27) hypothesize, that BRMs "resulted from a
single phenomenon throughout their distribution in
time and space," and even if this single phenomenon
was the repetitive construction of ovens for cooking
succulents (which Black et al. [1993] do not
explicitly claim), local solutions to the problem of
integrating other resources into the subsistence
system would vary from place to place. These
solutions would vary as a combined function of the
differential spatial and seasonal availability of
different succulents, and the differential spatial and
seasonal availability of supplementary and back-up
resources. As a result, if Black et al. (1993) are
correct in claiming that BRMs are typically smaller
in the western part of Central Texas because
resource density was lower there and led to less
repetitive occupation of sites, they are correct
because west-Central and east-Central Texans faced
substantially different subsistence problems related
to the differential productivity of different
environments in Central Texas. These problems
would have included scheduling, mobility, and the
social organization of work, especially with respect
to integrating exploitation of other resources into

the procedures and schedule for exploiting
succulents. Given that there is enormous
environmental diversity within the western and
eastern portions of Central Texas, the easternwestern division obscures a substantial amount of
relevant descriptive and explanatory detail.
Consequently, even if it turned out that all BRMs in
Central Texas formed through the sequential
construction of intersecting ovens used to cook
succulents, we would know very little about the
role of BRMs in Central Texas prehistory unless
and until we also found out how succulent
exploitation was integrated into diverse subsistence
strategies in diverse environments. Again, it is
important to note that if one adopts a version of
"Central Texas" that is larger than Prewitt’s, our
claim is an understatement.
To the extent that BRMs are a quintessentially
Central Texan trait, they are very unlikely to fit into
a quintessentially Central Texan behavioral pattern.6
The same is true for the typologically distinct projectile points and other tools that have been a traditional mainstay for defining phases and stages. The
reason for this is that to whatever extent burned
rock technologies and tools are cultural traits shared
universally across the region, changes in their patterns of spatio-temporal distribution do not and cannot refer to the cultural or other phenomena that
account for the changes. Making a successful living by hunting and gathering is a pastime for welltrained professionals who cannot survive without
well-honed subsistence strategies that (among other
things) apply mobility, scheduling, and other organizational skills to a particular landscape according
to a well-understood cultural geography. However,
subsistence practices and cultural geographies are
culture traits, and environmental diversity requires
different practices and geographies among the
hunter-gatherers occupying Central Texas. Thus, it
is virtually certain that the subsistence traits which
provided the basis for generation-to-generation
transmission of burned rock technologies and various tool types were not universally shared across
the region. Consequently, the spatio-temporal distribution of regionally similar artifacts and features
in Central Texas cannot coincide with a spatiotemporal distribution of regionally similar cultural

6Indeed, since Black et al. (1993:28) note that"rock oven cooking extends far beyond the borders of Texas up into Oklahoma,
down into Mexico, and west into and beyond the American Southwest," it would be truly extraordinary if the same subsistence
activities or systems account for burned rock middens throughout their spatio-temporal distribution.

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick-- Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

421

subsistence traits that were necessary for
the reproduction of culture in general.
In fact, a real problem for culture
history would be to explain how it is that
BRMs occur over most of Prewitt’s Central
Texas, while many of their culturally
associated artifacts do not. Over the period
of Archaic midden formation, it is not clear
that there actually were any typologically
distinct artifacts that were used region-wide.
The distributions of projectile point types the usual index of choice for culturechronology building and identification of
cultural affiliation - do not coincide with
Suhm’s (1960) Central Texas
Prewitt’s (or anyone else’s) Central Texas.
Figure 7 shows the distribution of three
Prewitt’s (1981 ) Central Texas
commonly found projectile points (from
Pedernales
Turner and Hester 1993). Only one of these
Castroville
covers all of Prewitt’s region, but none of
Bulverde
- ’, ,,. ,, ,, ,,., - Spatial overlap of Pedernales, Castroville, Bulverde, Fdo, Fairland,
them cover all of Suhm’s (1960) Central
Lange, Marcos, Marshall, Martindale/Uvatde, and Travis
Texas, and all of them cover greatly
different areas compared to each other.
Figure 7. Distribution of selected projectile points relative to
Interestingly, the area of overlap of at least
Suhm’s (1960) and Prewitt’s (1981) versions of Central Texas.
ten common projectile points covers a
Point distributions are based on figures in Turner and Hester
relatively small proportion of Prewitt’s
(1993). Note that spatial overlap of at least 10 point types excludes
much of what has been accepted historically as "Central Texas."
region, and quite a small proportion of
Suhm’s.7 Hence, it is obvious that to
whatever extent point types refer to distinct
"cultures," different parts of Central Texas must
folly to construct a traditional culture history withhave had different histories of different peoples
out either (1) addressing the behavioral systems
doing different things in different environments.
that composed the culture or (2) anticipating the
Indeed, the term "Central Texas" does not refer to
kinds of data and processes that will explain culan area that is especially relevant to a history that
tural phenomena because the resulting culture hisuses projectile points as an index of sociocultural
tory can only accidentally contain the evidence
affiliation, because the area contains neither the
necessary for successful description and explanapeople nor the behavioral patterns of interest. That
tion. Phases defined for Central Texas have been
is to say, if distinct "cultures" produced distinct
roundly and soundly criticized (Peter et al. 1982;
projectile points, the prehistory of Central Texas
Johnson 1987; Black 1989) for failing to meet the
cultures extends well beyond Central Texas, no
criteria needed to establish them as entities that
matter how it is defined.
refer to culture-historical units. If our argument is

CONCLUSIONS

Lewis Binford has been criticized for many
things over his career. However, one of the things
he was right about from the beginning (Binford
1962, 1965, 1968; see also Wylie t982) is that it is

approximately correct, then successful phase-building for Central Texas necessarily will be subject to
the problems Binford has noted, because it will not
produce culture-historical units that actually refer
to any particular entity that can fit successfully into
the describe-first/explain-next procedures of traditional culture history (Willey and Phillips 1958;
Sabloff and Wiltey 1967; see Ellis 1994). This is

7As this is being written, Prewitt (this volume) is finishing a major re-evaluation of the distribution of projectile points. His
findings will undoubtedly modify the basis for Figure 7.

422

Texas Archeological Society

because virtually any culture-historical units that
accurately describe regionwide phenomena can do
so only by stripping away or ignoring the culture
traits that make hunter-gatherers hunter-gatherers
rather than merely producers of similar artifacts.
By accurately referring to all Central Texans
in terms of the things they universally share (which
apparently is little beyond rock ovens if Black et al.
[1993] and Turner and Hester [1993] are both correct), well-produced culture-historical units will refer only vacuously to any actual social or other
entities: they will refer at best to abstractions, and
not to people who actually lived, worked, and died
in Central Texas. In recognition of this problem,
LeRoy Johnson, who from the 1960s to the late
1980s was at the vanguard of calls to use "proper"
methods for defining culture-history units, has progressively abandoned the expectation that phases
do or can refer to the same thing regionwide
(Johnson and Goode 1994; Johnson 1994, 1995),
and has suggested (personal communication to G.
L. Ellis) that even if we produced "proper" phases,
they would not be good for much. Similarly, if we
replaced regionwide "phases" with regionwide "adaptations," we would replace one normative,
referentless construct with another: the term "human adaptation" will not refer to anyone in Central
Texas if we speak broadly and accurately enough
to refer to everyone in Central Texas.
The term "Central Texas" does not refer to a
simple thing. Using the term as if it does transforms
both Central Texas and Central Texans into mythical
things that can only be described and explained in
mythical terms. Central Texas’s environments are
too diverse. Its environmental responses to climate
change would be equally diverse and differentially
distributed no matter what climate changes occurred.
Hence, its human history must be diverse, and must
be expected to have taken different paths in response
to climate change. A prehistory of Central Texas
appears to be possible only if one is willing and
able to deal with it as an area with enormous
environmental diversity exploited by people with
different subsistence systems and, surely, different
large-scale sociocultural affiliations that extended
well beyond the region itself. The cost of
simplification in Central Texas -whether in culture
or processual history- is that only a truth-eliminating
brush paints strokes broad enough to cover Central
Texas. Thus, speaking in terms of what applies all
across Central Texas makes the region’s prehistory

manageable by making it refer to very little. If ease
of manageability is what archeologists want, then
the cost of simplification is reasonable. On the other
hand, for researchers who, like us, hold the perverse
belief that reality resides in the details of variability
rather than the abstractions of commonality, the
cost of simplification is too high, and it is long past
time to reconsider how-or even if-one can continue
to use the term "Central Texas" as a meaningful
concept around and within which to organize our
understanding of prehistory.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Much of the research for this article was performed in conjunction with the "Five Burned Rock
Midden Sites Project," a joint effort of the Texas
Department of Transportation (TxDOT) and the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin. The authors are grateful for TxDOT’s generous support. The authors, if
not the article, were aided by comments from Lee
Johnson and Steve Black.

REFERENCES CITED

Arbingast, S. A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, A. Lo, D. L.
Karney, C. P. Zlatkovich, M. E. Bonine, and R. G. Steele
1973

Atlas of Texas. Revised Edition. Bureau of Business
Research, University of Texas at Austin.

Binford, L. R.
1962 Archaeology as Anthropology. American Antiquity
28:217-225.
1965

Archaeological Systematics and the Study of Culture Process. American Antiquity 31:203-210.

1968

Some Comments on Historical versus Processual
Archaeology. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 24:267-275.

1983

In Pursuit of the Past: Decoding the Archaeological Record. Thames and Hudson, New York.

Black, S. Lo
1989 Central Texas Plateau Prairie. In From the Gulf to
the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in Central,
South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R. Hester, S.
L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J.
Reinhard, and L. C. Bement, pp. 17-38. Research

Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick m Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

Black, S. L., K. Jolly, and D. R. Potter
1993 The Higgins Experiment Field Report. Wurzbach

423

Collins, M. B.
1991 Thoughts on Future Investigations of Burned Rock

Project Working Papers. Texas Archeological

Middens. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas:

Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at

An Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R.

Austin.

Hester, pp. 1-24. Studies in Archeology Number
13. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Uni-

Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.The Texas Journal of
Science 2:93-117.
Blum, M.D.
1987 Late Quaternary Sedimentation in the Upper
Pedernales River. Unpublished Masters Thesis, Department of Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
1990

Climatic and Eustatic Controls on Gulf Coastal Plain
Fluvial Sedimentation: An Example from the Qua-

versity of Texas at Austin.

Collins, M. B. and C. B. Bousman, with contributions by T. K.
Perttula
1993 Quaternary Environments and Archeology in Northeast Texas. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning
Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N.
A. Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 49-67. Cultural
Resource Management Report 3. Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

ternary of the Colorado River. Gulf Coast Section

Association of American Geographers 79:345-456.

Dering, J. P.
1995 Appendix I: Modern and Contact-Period Vegetation
in the Area of the Jonas Terrace Site of Northern
Medina County. In The Archeology of the Jonas
Terrace Site, 41ME29, of the Southernmost Edwards
Plateau, by L. Johnson. Texas Department of Transportation and Texas Historical Commission, Austin,
in press.

Brown, T., K. L. Killen, H. Simons, and V. Wulfkuhle
1982 Resource Protection Planning Process for Texas.

Diamond, D. D., D. H. Riskind, and S. L. Orzell.
1987 A Framework for Plant Community Classification

Society for Economic Paleontology and Mineralogy
Foundation Eleventh Annual Research Conference,
Program with Abstracts, pp. 71-83.

Blum, M. D. and S. Valastro, Jr.
1989 Response of the Pedernales River of Central Texas
to Late Holocene Climatic Change. Annals of the

Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

and Conservation in Texas. The Texas Journal of
Science 39:202-221.

Bryant, V. M. and R. G. Holloway
1985

A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of

Diamond, D. D., and F. E. Smeins

Texas: An Overview of the Pollen Evidence. In

1985

Composition, Classification and Species Response

Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North Ameri-

Patterns of Remnant Tallgrass Prairies in Texas.

can Sediments, edited by V. M. Bryant and R. G.

American Midland Naturalist 113:294-308.

Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas.

Dixon, J. R.
1987

Bryant, V. M. and H. J. Sharer
1977 Late Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas: A
Model for Archeologists. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 48:1-26.

Amphibians and Reptiles of Texas. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.

Dyksterhuis, E. J.
1946 Vegetation of the Fort Worth Prairie. Ecological
Monographs 16:1-29.

Butzer, K. W.
1982

Archaeology as Human Ecology: Method and
Theory for a Contextual Approach. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Caran, S,C.
1994 Quaternary Paleoenvironmental and Paleoclimatic
Reconstruction in the Southern Great Plains: A Discussion and Critique. Paper presented at the 52nd
Annual Plains Anthropological Conference and 65th
Texas Archeological Society Annual Meeting, Lubbock, Texas.

Elias, S. A.
1994 Insect Fossil Evidence of Late Glacial Environments
at the Aubrey Clovis Site, Texas. Program andAbstracts of the 13th Biennial Meeting, p. 77. American Quaternary Association. University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis.

424

Texas Archeological Society

Ellis, G. L.
1994 Archeological Overview and Theoretical Perspectives. In Significance StandardsJbr Prehistoric Cultural Resources: A Case Study from Fort Hood,

Humphrey, J. D. and C. R. Ferring
1994 Stable Isotopic Evidence for Latest Pleistocene and
Holocene Climatic Change in North-Central Texas.
Quaternary Research 41:200-213.

Texas, by G. L. Ellis, C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler,
Report CRC-94/04, Tri-Services Research Center

Johnson, L.
1987 A Plague of Phases: Recent Sociocultural Taxonomy

Series. United States Army Construction Engineer-

in Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

and J. M. Jackson, pp. 41-99. USACERL Technical

logical Society 57:1-26.

ing Research Laboratory, Urbana, Illinois.
1994
Gardner, K. M.
1992

Modern Enviroument. In An Archeological Survey

Kimble County, Texas. Office of the State Arche-

of the Proposed South Bend Reservoir Area: Young,

ologist Report 38. Texas Department of Transporta-

Stephens, and Throckmorton Counties, Texas, ed-

tion and Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

ited by J. W. Saunders, C, S. Mueller-Wille, and D.
L. Carlson, pp, 13-17. Archeological Surveys No.

1995

partment of Transportation and Texas Historical

University, College Station.
Gehlbach, F. R.
The East-West Transition Zone of Terrestrial Vertebrates in Central Texas: A Biogeographical Analy-

Commission, Austin, in press.
Johnson, L. and G. T. Goode
1994

Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:1-51.

Goode, G.
Late Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in Central
Texas. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An
Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester,

Kosko, B.
1993

Archeological Research Laboratory, University of

Fuzzy Thinking: The New Science of Fuzzy Logic.
Hyperion, New York.

pp. 71-93. Studies in Archeology Number 13. Texas
Texas at Austin.

A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene
Climates, as well as Archeological Periods, on the

sis. The Texas Journal of Science 43:415-427.

!991

The Archeology of the Jonas Terrace Site, 41ME29,
of the Southernmost Edwards Plateau. Texas De-

6. Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M

1991

The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk as Seen
from the Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16, of

Kosso, P.
1991 Method in Archaeology: Middle-Range Theory as
Hermeneutics. American Antiquity 56:621-627.

Goodfriend, G. A. and R. M. Mitterer
1993

A 45,000-yr Record of a Tropical Lowland Biota:
The Land Snail Fauna from Cave Sediments at Coco

Kutac, E. A. and S. C. Caran
1994

Ree, Jamaica. Bulletin of the Geological Society of

Birds and Other Wildlife of South Central Texas.
University of Texas Press, Austin.

America 105:18-29.
Larkin, T. J. and G. W. Bomar
Gould,
1962

1983
Texas Plants-A Checklist and Ecological Summary.

Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas
Department of Water Resources, Austin.

Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Hall, S. A.
1990

Channel Trenching and Climatic Change in the
Southern U.S. Great Plains. Geology 18:342-345.

Lundelius, E. L., Jr.
1967 Late-Pleistocene and Holoceue Faunal History of
Central Texas. In Pleistocene Extinctions, edited by
P. S. Martin and H. E. Wright, Jr., pp. 287-319.
Yale University Press, New Haven.

Hereford, R.

Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs

1984

1978

Climate and Ephemeral-Stream Processes: Twentieth-Century Geomorphology and Alluvial Stratig-

Preserving Texas’ Natural Heritage. Project Report
31. Natural Heritage Policy Research Project, Uni-

raphy of the Little Colorado River, Arizona. Bulletin

versity of Texas at Austin.

of the Geological Society of America. 95:654-668.
Macklin, M. G.
Holliday, V, T.
1985

Archaeological Geology of the Lubbock Lake Site,
Southern High Plains of Texas. Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 96:1483-1492.

1989

Middle Holocene Droughts on the Southern High
Plains. Quaternary Research 31:74-82.

1992

Flood Alluviation and Entrenchment: Holocene Valley-Floor Development and Transformation in the
British Uplands. Bulletin of the Geological Society
of America 104:631-643.

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick m Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

425

McMahan, C. A., R. G. Frye, and K. L. Brown

Prewitt, E. R.

1984

1981

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of

1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central

The Vegetation Types of Texas (Including Cropland). Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Wildlife Division, Austin.

Meltzer, D. J.
1991 Altithermal Archaeology and Paleoecology at Mustang Springs, on the Southern High Plains of Texas.
American Antiquity 56:236-267.

the Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.

Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological Society 54:201-238.
n.d.

The Rogers Springs Site:

1974 Investigations.

Unpublished manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas
at Austin.

Nobel, P. S.
1994

Remarkable Agaves and Cacti. Oxford University
Press, New York.

Riskind, D. H. and D. D. Diamond
1986

Plant Communities of the Edwards Plateau of Texas:

Nordt, L. C.

An Overview Emphasizing the Balcones Escarp-

1992

ment Zone Between San Antonio and Austin with

Archaeological Geology of the Fort Hood Military
Reservation, Fort Hood, Texas. Research Report

Special Attention to Landscape Contrasts and Natu-

Number 25, Archaeological Resource Management

ral Diversity. In The Balcones Escarpment: Geol-

Series. United States Army, Fort Hood, Texas.

ogy, Hydrology, Ecology and Social Development
in Central Texas, edited by P. L. Abbott and C. M.

Nordt, L. C., T. W. Boutton, C. T. Hallmark, and M. R. Waters

Woodruff, Jr., pp. 1-15. Published Papers of the

Late Quaternary Vegetation and Climate Changes
in Central Texas Based on the Isotopic Composition of Organic Carbon. Quaternary Research
41:109-!20.

Geological Society of America, Annual Meeting,

1994

November 9-14, 1986. Comet Reproduction Service, Santa Fe Springs, California.
Sabloff, J. A. and G. R. Willey

Owen, G. and D. J. Schmidly
1986

1967

The Collapse of Maya Civilization in the Southern

Environmental Variables of Biological Importance

Lowlands: A Consideration of History and Process.

in Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 38:99-119.

Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 23:311-336.

Peter, D., T. R. Hays, and M. A. Demuynck

Spearing, D.

1982

1991

An Evaluation of the "Phase" Concept. In Archaeological Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir

Roads’Me Geology of Texas. Mountain Press Publishing, Missoula, Montana.

Districts, Central Texas, Volume 2, compiled and
edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 21-1 to 21-18. Archaeology Program, Institute of Applied Sciences, North

Stahle, D. W. and M. K. Cleaveland
1988 Texas Drought History Reconstructed and Analyzed

Texas State University, Denton.

Potter,
1995 Past and Present Environments. In Introduction,

from 1698 to 1980. Journal of Climate 1:59-74.
Suhm, D. A.
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of

Conceptual Framework, and Contexts of Archeo-

the Texas Archeological Society 29:63-107.

logical Investigations in Bexar County, South-Central Texas, by D. R. Potter, S. L. Black, and K.

Suhm, D. A., A. B. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks

Jolly, pp. 5-17. Archeology along the Wurzbach

1954

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.

Parkway, Module 1. Studies in Archeology Number

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25

17. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, the

(whole volume).

University of Texas at Austin.
Taylor, W. W.
Potter, D. R. and S. L. Black
1995

1948

A Study of Archaeology. Memoir No. 69. American

Conceptual Framework. In Introduction, Concep-

Anthropologist 50(3), Part 2. Reprinted as A Study

tual Framework, and Contexts" of Archeological In-

of Archaeology, by Center for Archaeologica! In-

vestigations in Bexar County, South-Central Texas,

vestigations, Southern Illinois University at

by D. R. Potter, S. L. Black, and K. Jolly, pp. 19-37.

Carbondale, 1983.

Archeology along the Wurzbach Parkway, Module
1. Studies in Archeology Number 17. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, the University of
Texas at Austin.

Texas Almanac
1994 Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide. A. H.
Belo, Dallas.

426

Texas Archeological Society

Toomey, R. S. III, M. D. Blum, and S. Valastro, Jr.

Weir, F.

1993

1976

Edwards Plateau, Texas. Global and Planetary

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Washing-

Change 7:299-320.

ton State University, Pullman.

Late Quaternary Climates and Environments of the

Toomey, R. S. III

Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips

1993

1958

Late Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal Changes at

Method and Theory in American Archaeology. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Hall’s Cave, Kerr County, Texas. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Wylie, M. A.
1982

Postivism and the New Archaeology. Unpublished

Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester

Ph.D. Dissertation, University Microfilms, Ann

1993

Arbor.

A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Second Edition. Gulf Publishing, Houston.

Van Auken, O. W.
1988

Woody Vegetation of the Southeastern Escarpment
and Plateau. In Edwards Plateau Vegetation, edited
by B. B. Amos and F. R. Gehlbach, pp. 1-15. Baylor
University Press, Waco, Texas.

