Channelled Points From Clear Fork Sites in North Texas

27

CHANNELLED POINTS FROM CLEAR FORK
SITES IN NORTH TEXAS
BY ADOLPH H. WITTE

Channelled or Folsom-like points have been reported from many
places in the Southwest. Recently, Ray, (I) Sellards, (2) and
Hibben (3) have described other types of projectiles that were found
in the same stratified sites in which channelled specimens were
found. Finds from certain stratified, stream terrace sites in North
Texas seem to indicate a similar interesting association of ancient
implements.
A brief discussion concerning some of these sites
follows:
Thaxton Ranch
The site is in an old stream terrace on the south side of Little
Wichita River, in Clay County, Texas. The top of the terrace is
estimated to be at least 40 feet above the present water level and
it does not overflow during flood stages.

The artifacts are found

weathering from near the base of the terrace and rest directly upon
undisturbed Permian clay.

The collection includes several Clear

Fork gouges, one turtleback, one graver, four channelled points, and
two ba~s from projectiles of the Yuma type.

The Clear Fork

artifacts were fashioned from pebbles which occur locally in Pleistocene deposits.

In sharp contrast, two of the channelled points and

the fragments from the Yuma-like items are all from a reddish
brown flint. It is quite doubtful that these could have been quarried in the region.

Similar red cherts outcrop in the Palo Duro

Canyon, which is situated two hundred miles westward.

The two

remaining channelled points are of materials which probably were
obtained within this area.

The next three sites to be discussed in this paper are located in
Montague County. The surface formations are of Lower Permian,
Upper Pennsylvanian and a part of the lower Comanche Series of
the Cretaceous. Dissected stream terraces occur along the larger
streams and at various altitudes above the present high water levels.
These terrace deposits consist of reworked materials from the Paleozoic and Cretaceous outcrops. Recently, a number of fossil bones
have been collected from some of the high terraces. Most of the

28

Texa~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

forms discovered to date, apparently are extinct. The following
fauna has been reported to the writer.
Bison, one skull, a small specimen, probably Bison Bison. Beaver
Creek.
Elephant, one molar, tusk, various limb bones. Braden Branch.
"Elephant, one molar. Dye Creek.
Mastodon, several molars, tusk fragments, etc. Dye Creek.
Mastodon, right ramus with molar. Denton Creek.
Saber tooth cat, several canines, apparently too small for Smilodon. Denton Creek.
Alligator, several teeth, skull fragments, etc. Denton Creek.
Turtle, fragments from several carapaces. Denton Creek.
Garfish, a number of scales. Denton Creek.
Farmer’s Creek Site
This is situated in an old stream terrace on the east side of
Farmer’s Creek in Montague County. The estimated elevation above
the present water level in the creek is 35 feet, and the site does not
overflow. Artifacts were collected on the surface of an almost
completely eroded terrace. The specimens found here include 11
Clear Fork gouges, a number of Clear Fork knives, sidescrapers, two
turtlebacks, etc. The base of one channelled point was found.
Big Sandy Creek Site
The locality is an old stream terrace on the south side of Big
Sandy Creek in Montague County. Apparently the top of the terrace is about 20 feet above the present water level in Big Sandy
Creek and does not overflow. The artifacts came from the surface
and edges of the terrace. They include four Clear Fork gouges, one
graver, several knives, one turtleback. The base of one channelled
point was found in this site.
Briar Creek Site
This site is located on a stream terrace on the east side of Briar
Creek in Montague County. The estimated elevation for the top of
PLATE 6
(Top row, sturting on left end) : Sloth tooth and notched point from
Evans Site. Remaining five are channelled points from various Clear
Fork sites mentioned in paper.
(Bottom Row) : Five recessed base gouges of Clear Fork types from
sites described.

Channelled Points From Clear Fork Si~es in Nor~ Texa~

31

the terrace is 40 feet above the present water level in Briar Creek.
This stream intrenchment is sufficient to prevent the site from over.
flowing. The artifacts were discovered near the base of the terrace.
Clear Fork specimens include twelve gouges, two turtlebacks, several
incomplete knives, points and gravers. Two channelled points were
found (see plate 6, tgp row of artifacts).
Cli][ Evans Site
During April of this year (1942) additional data upon the fauna’l
age of the stream terraces in this region came to hand. A fine long
tooth from one of the Edentates was found on the eroded surface of
a Little Wichita River terrace, two miles west of Henrietta. Several unnamed culture types of artifacts were collected in close association with the sloth tooth. This stratified site does not overflow
and is quite similar in height above the present water level to the
four artifact-bearlng stream terraces described previously. Farther
down-stream, the writer has collected extinct mammoth, horse, bison
and other fossil bones from terraces of similar height. Obviously,
the faunal age of these terraces is some stage of the Pleistocene,
and the Clear Fork, Yuma, Folsom, and other unnamed culture
types of artifacts have been sealed within these terraces since that
time.
Henrietta, Texas.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(1) Ray, Cyrus N., 1941. The Various Types o] the Clear Fork
Gouge.
(2) Sellards, E. H., 1940. Early Man in ~4merica. Index to Localities and selected Bibliography.
(3) Hibben, Frank C., 1941. Evidences o] E~rly Occupation in
Sandia Cave, New Mexico.

