CAVES AND SHELTERS IN DAWSON
AND BORDEN COUNTIES
East of Lamesa and south and southwest of O’Dormell in
Dawson County, on the Dean Ranch which was the C. C.
Slaughter estate, a number of draws converge to form the
head waters of the Colorado River of Texas. The most important of these little streams is locally known as Tobacco
Creek. Until recent years, Tobacco Creek was a running
stream fed by springs emanating from the water sands of
the High Plains. The creek was used as a camping place
for Indians, and later during the cattle epoch, it was an
important watering place for cattle herds being trailed
either westward or northward. Into Tobacco Creek from the
northwest, flows Dry Tobacco, an intermittent stream.
The convergence of these two streams, together with
several smaller, unnamed draws, creates a well-defined
valley some six or seven miles across. The Cap Rock of
the High Plains forms the sides of the U-shaped valley with
the opening to the southeast. That part of the Cap Rock on
the northeast of the valley is a deposit of Comanchean limestone whose thickness is not known, but which is exposed
for fifty or sixty feet along the rim. From the top of the
rim to the bottom of the valley is a vertical distance of approximately two hundred feet. Along this rim for a distance
of eight to ten miles are occasional rock shelters and caves
(Plate 20). Some of these contain evidence of pre-historic
occupation.
These shelters and caves were brought to our attention by
Mr. Ben NIoore of O’Dormell, Texas. Mr. ~¢Ioore is an amateur archaeologist who has lived in that area for about forty
years.
FINGERPRINT CAVES
This site is six miles east and eight miles south of O~Donnell. The two caves are much alike in regard to size and
shape, both containing hand prints~ No artifacts were found

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

in the south cave, and the only evidence of occupation is the
smoked ceiling and the hand prints.

In fact, there is a

greater number of hand prints in this cave than the north
cave in which the excavation was done.
The south cave is eighteen feet from the entrance to the
back. At the widest point, which is a line drawn from the
north side of the entrance to a point to the south of the
center of the back wall, the measurement is nineteen feet
seven inches. The height at the center of the cave is four
feet six inches while the height at the entrance is five feet
four inches. The width at the entrance is ten feet nine inches
(Plate 20). The floor of this cave rises toward the back
with about a fifteen degree slope, which probably accounts
for the fact that almost no fill had accumulated, and the
rock floor is exposed throughout the area of the cave..
The entrance to the north cave is at the same level in the
limestone bluff and fifteen feet to the north. This one
measures sixteen feet between north and south walls and
nineteen feet at the widest point, which is a line drawn
from a point south of the entrance to a point to the north
of center of the back wall. The height at the center is four
feet seven inches, and at the mouth, it is four feet one inch.
The entrance is ten feet six inches wide (Plate 20). The
floor in this instance slopes ~¢ery gradually to the center
from back, front, and sides. To this fact may be attributed
the four to six inches of fill which had accumulated since
the cave was occupied. The fill consisted of a mixture of
very fine wind-blown dust and ashes. The ceilings and
walls in both caves were heavily blackened with smoke. A
ledge extends for about ten feet in front of both entrances.
Small native shrubs, scrub oak, mesquite, and poison oak,
grow at the edge of the ledge and continue down the slope.
The first trip to the location was made on April 11, 1948,
at which time only a preliminary examination was made.
Several good artifacts were uncovered, and it was decided
to return the following week for further excavation. The
second trip was made on April 18. The party consisted of an

Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Borden Counties

117

PLATE 20
Loc~tlorl, floor, a;ad cross section of Fingerprint caves and Moore’s shelter.

118

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

anthropology class, under the direction of Dr. W. C. Holden,
and photographers and others interested in the work. As
the fill was typical of that usually found in dry caves, it was
¯ necessary for members of the party to wear respirators while
working. The crew was divided in two groups,--the shovelers and the sifters. Each spadeful of material was sifted
through quarter-inch wire mesh; the artifacts were removed,
and the residue dumped over the ledge (Plate 21 A).
Artifacts of Fiber
A total of seventy-three pieces of cordage, thirty-three of
which contained square knots, was discovered. They came
almost exclusively from the northeast corner of the north
cave. They varied in size from stringlike pieces about the
diameter of heavy twine to specimens one-fourth of an inch
in diameter. The cords are all of the same type, having two
strands which are twisted in a counter-clockwise direction.
The texture of the cordage varies from a soft, fuzzy material
to a hard, coarse fiber. No complete snares or nets were
unearthed; however a piece of cordage was found which
could easily have been part of a net. It consisted of three
portions of cordage tied together at opposite ends to form a
triangular shaped piece (Plate 22 B).
A small brush, made of a section of yucca stem was
secured. It is about four inches long and three-eighths of
an inch in diameter. It is similar to brushes used to paint
Pueblo pottery.
Pottery
One potsherd was discovered which appears to have had
a hole drilled through it. The fragment was broken so that
the portion of the hole that remains lies along the break on
one side. The sherd is black on one side and reddish-orange
on the other. The piece is so small that it is impossible to
PLATE ."i
A. Looking west from the interior of South Fingerprint cave.
B, and C. Hand imprints on ceiling of South FingerDrint c~ve.

A.
B,

PLATE 22
Flint ~tlfactS from Nor~ Fingerprint cave.
Cordage ~rom North Fingerprint c~ve.

PLATE 22

Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Borden Counties

123

identify which side was the o.utside~ or to, classify it (Plate

22
A small number-of flint artifacts was secured. Among
these were five sc~:apers, one crude, apparently unfinished
knife, one quartzite hammerstone, and one triangular shaped
knife one inch thick and made .of red jasper. (Plate 22 A).
This artifact has been very carefully made. A beautifully
shaped spoke-shave was found, but unfortunately misplaced
before it reached the Museum. In the cave were also several
fragments of a metate and a part of one mano.
Food Materials
Possible food materials found .consisted of acorns, small
wild onions, and grass seed. Among the animals represented
by bones were prairie dog, rabbit, bird, and deer.
Charcoal
There were small pieces of charcoal throughout all the
floor area; however, it is difficult to determine how much
of it may be attributed to the prehistoric inhabitants.
Ma~ed Grass
A layer of matted grass was present throughout most of
the floor area round the walls. The greatest amount was
concentrated in the northwest corner; most of the cordage
also came from this area. There the grass layer averaged
four inches in thickness, while the layer at other places
around the walls varied from just a trace to a thickness of
one inch. None of the grass was found in the center of the
floor nor at a greater distance than two feet from the walls.
Hand Prints
There were twenty hand prints in the south room. They
varied in size from that of a small child to that of an average
size woman. It was the concensus of opinion that the prints
were made by painting around the ha~ad with a light colored
substance on the back of the ceilings and walls, thus forming
negative prints (Plate 21 B, 21 C).

124

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

A nearby group of shelters that have not yet been ex~
cavated contain several hand prints made in the same way,
except that red paint was used instead of white.
MOORE’S ROCK SHELTER
Moore’s Rock Shelter faces southwest and is the largest of
all those located to date. It averages 108 feet in width, while
the mouth has a span of 124 feet. It varies in depth from
twenty to thirty-nine feet, and the height ranges from three
feet at the back and sides to twenty feet at the front
(Plate 20).
The floor in the east and center sections is so steep that
no debris has accumulated. The limestone floor is exposed
in many places, and no artifacts were recovered in this area.
From the fill in the north side, which varied from one to
eighteen inches, numerous artifacts were collected.
Ar~i]acts o] Stone
Four projectile points were discovered, all of which are
of the barbed type. Two are about an inch and a half long,
and the other two are less than one inch in length. All are
made of flint of a light brown color. Nine scrapers and one
graver were al~o identified (Plate 23). Fifteen flint cores
and some 180 flint chips were secured. One large mano was
found about six inches below the surface. It is oval shaped,
measures about eight inches by five inches and shows wear
on both sides.
Cordage
Only one specimen of cordage was discovered. It was
about nine inches long and three-eighths inch in diameter.
It lay six inches below the surface in a layer of leaves and
dark earth.
PLATE 23
~krttfacts from Moore’s Shelter.
PLATE 24
A, Basket from Moore’s Shelter.
B. Skeleton of infant from Moore’s Shelter,

Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Borden Counties

129

Matted Grass
The residue contained a large amount of matted grass
similar to that found in Fingerprint Cave.

It was deposited

in layers two to three inches thick over a fairly wide area
of the floor. It lay at an average depth of eight inches below
the surface.
Charcoal
Charcoal was found throughout the debris, from the surface to the lowest layers.

One hearth containing charcoal

and ashes was eight inches below the surface.

It had been

constructed with five stones all of which showed the effects
of oxidation.

The hearth was ten inches in diameter on the

inside.
Food Materials
Acorns and wild onions made up most of the vegetal food
material, while numerous bones were found, at Ieas~ ninety
percent of which were from small rodents.

Other animals

represented in the collection are lizards, turtle, fish, and
birds. Antelope bones were present and fragments of larger
bones, probably buffalo, were also found.
Basketry
Three baskets were located about eighteen inches from the
north wall of the shelter. They lay superimposed on each
other, the largest on the top and t.he smallest on the bottom.
They were all of the tray type and had been placed on the
floor of the shelter in an inverted position. The diameters
of these baskets were respectively sixteen inches, ten and
one-half inches, and eight and one-half inches.
The weave is apparently a non-interlocking stitch over a
bundle of fibers. They are like the corresponding type of
the Big Bend Basketmaker culture (Plate 24 A). Another
small fragment of a basket was found on the opposite side
of the shelter.

130

Texas Archeotogical and Paleonto~ogical Society

Miscellaneous
A tubular bone bead lay near the surface in a layer of
grass matting about eighteen inches from the baskets.

It

is one inch long and not quite one-half inch in diameter.
Both ends show that they have been smoothed (Plate 23).
A hollow piece of cane, which had been burned on one end,
came from the general area of the baskets.

It seems pos-

sible that this may have been a "Cigar." Twenty-five pieces
of mica and as many shell fragments were recovered.
Burial
The only burial encountered throughout excavation was
that of a young infant. Judging from tooth and skull development, the child may have been from three to six months
old at time of death. The cause of death was not apparent.
The skull contains numerous small depressions resembling
pock marks, but we have formed no opinion as to whether
they were there at time of death, or whether they may be
attributed to some post-mortem action. No burial position
was discernible; the bones were completely jumbled. The
skull lay on a smooth, flat stone about six inches in diameter.
A dark fibrous substance surrounded the bones, but if the
child had been wrapped in matting or any other material at
the time of burial, it had completely disintegrated (Plate
24 B).

Conclusions
It is not our purpose to draw conclusions. Our principal
object is to present what we have found with the hope that
it may furnish for someone better qualified a little piece
of the puzzle that is now prehistoric man in this area.
Due to the shallowness of the fill, it was not possible to
determine whether or not Fingerprint Caves were occupied
in historic or only in prehistoric times. In each sifting we
were as likely to find a piece of newspaper or an empty
cigarette package as we were to find a piece of cordage or
a flint specimen. However, the material was better strati-

Caves and ShelSers in Dawson and Borden Counties

131

fled in Moore’s Shelter, and we saw no evidence of white
contact after the first six inch layer was removed.
Lack of pottery, except for one sherd found near the
surface, would indicate a non-pottery culture, which leads
one to wonder if these people could be contemporary with
more well known pre-pottery cultures. Dr. Charles Kelley
suggests that we may have found a new locus of a regional
aspect. Dr. H. P. Mera is of the opinion that a careful comparison of the basketry and cordage from these caves with
that found in caves to the west and north might reveal cultural connections in those directions. Victor J. Smith saw
some relationship with the Big Bend Culture. A more detailed study of both the fiber and stone artifacts is necessary
before more definite conclusions may be drawn.
There are several similar shelters in the vicinity showing
evidence of occupation. ~When these are excavated and their
materials studied, we shall have a broader view of the
people who lived in them and shall feel better prepared to
make comparisons with seemingly similar cultures in other
areas.

