TWELVE ROOM HOUSE RUIN

Bx~ M_~s. GLEI’,I E. MOORE

The investigations and excavations which furnished the
data for the following report were made by Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn E. Moore of El Paso, Texas, starting January 25, 1941,
and continuing through January, 1942. The discovery of
the ruin ended for the time being a survey of this area, which
began in the spring of 1937. The ruin is located on the old
Tobin Ranch property, and is about eight miles northeast
of the city limits. The work of excavating was limited
principally to Sundays and holidays, hence the length of
time consumed.
The writer wishes to acknowledge, and express gratitude
and appreciation to Mr. Joe Ben Wheat, Department of Anthropology, University of Arizona, for the help and encouragement given throughout the writing of this paper, also to
Mr. W. S. Strain of the Department of Geology, College of
Mines and Metallurgy, E1 Paso, Texas, for his assistance in
classification of materials of various artifacts.
Twelve Room House Ruin is located in the Hueco Bolson,: one of the largest of the inter-montane waste filled
plains of tbe Trans-Pecos region. Together with its northward and southward continuations, it is somewhat over 200
miles in length, about half of it lying each side of the TexasNew Mexico boundary. It varies in width, averaging possibly 25 miles. The greater part of the bolsom has an elevation of approximately 4000 feet, and it is bordered by mountains which rise from 2000 to 5000 feet higher. On the west
are the San Andrea, Organ and Franklin Mountains, and
others in Mexico. On the east are the Sacramento, Hueco,
Finlay, and Quitman ranges.
~ Richardson, G. B., Geologic Alias of U. $., El Paso Folio, p. 166, Washington,
1902.

Twelve Room House Ruin

95

In the E1 Paso Quadrangle, the Hueco Bolsom, which is
known locally as the "~Mesa", is a structural trough, deeply
filled with detritus.= This is a semi-arid region, with an annual rainfall of slightly less than ten inches, and a recorded
range from 2.22 inches to 18 inches. Most of the rains fall
in heavy local showers and more than half of the annual
rainfall comes in July, August, and September. The mean
annual temperature is 63.5 degrees, and the mean monthly
minimum about 31 degrees in January. The temperature is
rarely below 20 degrees.=
The country surrounding and including the ruins, has
been built up largely from matefals which have been washed
down from the I-Iueco and Franklin Mountains and ranges
north. The sand has a maximum thickness of approximately
5000 feet. The material is not consolidated and shifts with
varying winds. It is piled into hummocks which are not
true sand dunes, but which are formed by mesquite and other
vegetation trapping the sand.’ There are numerous depressions in the area, some due to wind scour. Some of these are
quite large, and apparently have held water from surface
runoffs for quite a time.
The vegetation is characteristic of an arid climate. Trees
are rare even on the mountains, but there is a scattered
growth of mesquite and creosote bush (Covillea). Yucca,
lechuguilla, sotol, bear-grass, ocotillo and several species of
cactus are abundant on the slopes.°
While large communal houses apparendy are absent from
this area, there are many small house ruins, varying from one
to twelve known rooms, scattered over a considerable area.
Due to large sand hummocks and heavy mesquite growth
over them, many of the house ruins have not been disturbed.

Ibid.
~Darton, i~l. H., Geologic Survey, Bull¢lin 845, Washington, 1933.
Strain, W. S., to Moore.
a Darton, N. H., Geologic Survey, Butletht 845, Washington, 1933.

96

Texas Archeological and Paleontologioal Society

About twenty miles to the northeast, in the Hueco Mountains, are the Cave Dweller sites.
While there are pottery sherds scattered over the adjoining ground, there was practically no evidence of a dwelling
on the small mound forming the ruin. A small pile of
broken manos and pieces of metates led to the trenching
and discovery of the north wall of Room 1, sixteen inches
below the surface. The !ocation of the site is somewhat
higher than the surrounding country, probably due to the
growth of mesquite in the sand-filled rooms and a slight
general elevation. Test pits applied to a small area about
twelve feet south of the dwelling revealed a large refuse
heap to a depth of three feet. A second refuse heap approximately ten feet to the west is much smaller. The refuse
heaps are of the sheet variety and due to occasionally heavy
rains and frequent sandstorms it is difficult to determine
their exact extent.
There were no indications of doorways in any of the
rooms. Wind and rain have done their work to such an extent that it was impossible to determine how entrance was
effected. If entrance was by doors in the walls, all evidence
of them has been destroyed as the walls were caved in and
eroded too far to show signs of any sill. Floors in several
of the rooms were covered with burnt poles and brush of
the roof, the hard baked adobe showing the impression of the
poles. Roof entrance was an alternative possibility.
The walls were all of adobe, averaging eight inches in
thickness, and extending from six to eight inches below the
floors. Apparently they were not set in trenches. There
had been no attempt to form bricks, or use stone in the walls.
All walls were plastered with a coating of adobe, one-half
to three-fourths of an inch thick. Room 1 had two coats
of plaster.
The floors were of adobe, well packed and smoothed to
the walls. The average thickness of the floors was about
three inches. In Room 1, two floors were encountered, the

T~e~e

Roo~r~ ~ouse R~

97

lower floor about three and a half inches below the first.
No sherds or other artifacts were found between the floors.
This is a rectangular dwelling, oriented northeast by
southeast and containing twelve rooms. The overall measurement is 116 feet and ten inches by twenty-seven feet.
The central part of the house contains seven rooms arranged
in a double row. One large room adjoins the northeast and
on the zouthwest a row of three rooms extends from the approximate mid-section of the central unit. A single room
to the west and north is adjoined to the central unit and the
adjacent wing-room.
Eight rooms had firepits. They were of circular type
and of hard baked adobe. A rim of the inverted saucer type
extended possibly an inch above floor leve! and around the
pit, blending into the floor at the outer edge. Average width
of this encircling collar was six inches. All firepits were
filled with ashes, and in most cases ashes, apparently raked
from them, formed a deposit on the floor. The firepits were
slightly smaller at the bottom. The diameter of these pits
varied from eight to ten inches, and the average depth was
eight inches. They were usually placed midway between
the east and west walls, about twenty-two inches from the
south wall.
Room 1

The dimensions of Room 1 are 16 by 19 feet. The north
wall is 24 inches and the south wall 20 inches in height from
the floor. The east and west walls are approximately the
same height as the south. The north wall showed two coats
of plaster, in very good condition, in spite of having been
badly burned. The other walls were plastered in a like
manner, but were not so badly burned. The floor was of
hardpacked adobe, almost polished in sections and completely, covered with a one and a hal]~ inch layer of charred
roofing material consisting of brush, small poles, and adobe.
The firepit was located midway between east and west
walls and approximately twenty-two inches from the south

98

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

wall. It was slightly smaller at the bottom and had a depth
of seven and a half inches. Ashes filled the pit and formed
a concentration around the pit.
There were three post holes in this room, located twelve
inches in from the api~roximate midpoint of the north, east,
and west walls. No burned posts were found in the room
fill. Room fill consisted of the caved in adobe walls and
sand. On the floor i~i the southeast corner a large trough
type metate and three manos were found. Two manos were
found on the floor in the west side of the room. Two small
pieces of polished turquoise and three small polishing stones
were found in the southwest corner about two feet from
the south wall. Pottery sherds were scattered over the entire
Room 2

The room is 21 ~ by 16 feet, and presents a problem, for
it is divided into four compartments of unequal size. In the
east a compartment four feet wide extends the entire width
of the main room. A wall four feet in and parallel to the
west segment of the north wall provided a north compartment 18 feet long. The remaining section of the main room
was cut by a north-south wall four feet from the west wall
of the east compartment, dividing the space into an inner
compartment 4 by 12 feet and a southwest corner compartment 13 feet 2 inches in length by 11 feet 4 inches in width.
The inner walls were laid on the floor of the main room and
were continuous, with the exception of a distance of about
three feet of the inner north-south compartment. This
either had been left open intentionally or had been broken
down at some previous time. The average height from the
floor of both inner and outer walls is twenty-two inches.
The adobe floor was hard packed and smooth, and was
covered with 2~ inches of burned roofing material. Room
PLATE 8
Plan of Twelve Room House.

~oi

-e

o
--

~o

-+

o

Plate 8

Twelve Room House Ruin

fill above the burned layer consisted of adobe walls and sand.
In the outer north-south compartment there was a much
heavier layer of burned brush and part of a post about a
foot long and having a diameter of 1 ½ inches.
The firepit, having a depth of nine inches and filled with
ashes, was located about the center of the main room. A
large trough type metoote was found about two feet northeast of the firepit. Pottery sherds were found under the
charred roofing material directly under the east wall of the
east-west compartment. On the floor of the main room
lay about half of a thin, flat type metate. No artifacts
were found in the inner north-south compartment. Under
the layer of burned materials in the outer compartment were
the follwing badly broken artifacts:
3 large ollas, broken
8 simple bowls, varying in diameter from 10 to 1 ½ inches, three
not broken
2 jug form vessels, one not broken
3 bowls with ornaments
1 simple bowl of black polished ware
1 small metate, tough type, having yellow ochre (limonite) adhering to grinding surface
1 round mano and several poorly shaped and broken
2 round stone balls
I round stone object, 3 ~ inches in diameter and ½ inch thick
6 large pieces of yellow ochre "
2 pieces of calcium carbonate (travertine)
62 olivella shell beads, spire ground down
34 small discoid beads, shell badly burned
4 turquoise beads, burned
15 alectrion shell beads
1 tubular bead, shell
1 small charred corn cob
Small part of woven basket
A large quantity of gourds, broken and completely charred

Room 3
This room was 22 feet wide by 24 feet long. It contained
very little evidence of value in determining its use. The artifacts found in the other rooms indicated domiciliary oc-

IO0

Texas Archeological ~nd Paleontological Society

cupation and use. The firepit, which was located in .the
usual place, did not show signs of having been used as much
as the others. The floor was rough and showed no signs of
having been packed or polished. The average height of the
walls from the floor was 14 inches.

Room fill was of adobe walls and sand. A few pottery
sherds found on the floor near the west wall were used in restoring the large ornamental bowl shown on Plate 10, i. A
flat rock 10 by 12 inches by three-fourths of an inch and a
piece of crystal were in the southwest corner.
Room 4

Room 4 was a very shallow room, 9 feet wide by 19 feet
long. The floor level was 12 inches above that of the other
rooms. A continuous wall from the south (front of the
dwelling), forming the east wall of the outer compartment
of Room 2 and the east wall of Room 4, extended below
the floor of Room 4, indicating the possibility of a room
beneath the first floor. Trenches, however, revealed that the
wall extended to a depth of only two feet, and that beyond
the usual room fill of ~.and and a few small particles of charcoal there was no evider,ce of another room.
There was no firepit in the room. The adobe floor was
very hard, smooth, and about three inches thick, and was
covered with a layer of burned material on the floor, consisting of brush, small poles, and adobe. On the floor were
a few pottery sherds, the bottom of a jug type vessel, and
a round flat top stone object with a depression in the top
center and a convex bottom. The vessel had been ground
down, edges smooth, and had a lump of iron oxide (hematite) in it.
Room 5
Room 5 measured 1 ! feet in width and 14 feet in length.
The walls were plastered with a coating of adobe, and aver-

Twelve Room House Ruin

10i

aged in height 20 inches from the floor. The floor was in
good condition and the firepit was located in the customary
place.
A large, trough type metate, propped on three stones,
was found about two and one-half feet northeast of the
firepit. The metate was lying at about a 30 degree angle.
The irregular shaped stones which were used to raise the
closed end of the metate apparently had been used as manos.
Two other manos lay near the metate. One of scoria was
oblong in shape., and measured 12 inches in length, four
and one-half inches in width, and one inch in thickness.
With the exception of one flat side, the other was round,
measuring five inches in diameter. A stone measuring 12
inches in length, eight inches in width, and one inch in thickness was incorporated in the south wall of Room 5. Pottery
sherds were scattered over the floor.

Room 6

The dimensions of Room 6 were 10 by 11 feet. The
height of the walls from the floor were 12 inches on the south
side and six inches on the west. The floor was in good condition, and was c~overed with very little burned material.
Two projectile points lay on the floor near the west wall
and to the south. Two rectangular objects of scoria, each
having a longtitudinal groove, were found in the southwest
corner of the room. A few sherds of pottery were scattered
over the floor.
Room 7

Room 7 was 8 feet wide by 14 feet long. The walls,
which were plastered, averaged 22 inches in height from the
floor. The floor was in excellent condition, and there were
no signs of burned roofing material.
In the southwest corner a trough type metate, one small,
round mano, two small pieces of scoria, and a pebble polishing stone were found. Another object of scoria, this one
containing a longitudina! groove, lay about midway of the

102

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

room near the north wall. Sherds of two kinds of pottery,
which is discussed in another part of this report, were scattered over the floor.

Room 8
It was not possible to obtain measurements for Room 8,
since there was no north or west wall standing. However,
there was a good floor covering a distance of about four feet
adjacent to the south wal! and about six feet adjacent to the
west wall.
There was no firepit, and the room fill consisted of adobe
walls, sand, and many pottery sherds. This room was used
for refuse apparently, for many pieces of broken manos and
fragments of broken metates were in the fill. A smal!.stone
maul was recovered from the refuse.
Room 9
Room 9 was 11 feet wide by 11 feet long. The firepit
was in very good condition and filled with ashes. Average
height of walls from the floor was 12 inches. The usual room
fill of adobe walls and sand was present and a small amount
of burned roofing material was scattered over the floor, but
by no means forming a covering. The floor was in fair condition.
Near the east wall, to the south, two broken trough type
metates and two round manos were found. A fan-shaped
rock, found near the west wall, with a slightly outcurving
top, measured nine and one-half inches on two sides, by
eleven and one-half inches in width at the widest part. One
rectangular mano of scoria and part of a stone pestle lay
nearby. A stone pendant was found near the west wall. It
was perforated .;n the widest part and measured one and onehalf inches in length, and one-eighth of an inch in thickness.
It was one inch wide at the top, tapering gently to less than
one-half an inch at the bottom. It was not polished, but
well worked and has .~ dull reddish color. The usual room
fill of adobe walls and sand was present.

Twelve Room House Ruin

103

Room 10

It was impossible to obtain accurate measurements of
Room 10, but there is doubt that the space had been used as
a room. The south and west walls were practically gone and
the north wall measured no more than two inches from the
floor at any point, but the east wall was twelve inches. The
floor was in fairly good condition. There was no firepit. A
number of pottery sherds lay on the floor.
Room 11

Room 11 was 9 feet wide by 19 feet long. The average
height of the walls from the floor was 15 inches. The room
contained a very good firepit, in the usual location, filled
with ashes. The floor was in good condition, showing no
signs of having been blackened by burning roof materials.
One large, trough type metate and two oval stones, each
having a groove, were found lengthwise in the southwest
corner of the room. A few scattered pottery sherds were
on the floor.
Room 12

Room 12, located between rooms 5 and 7, was a rather
narrow room, being only 6 feet in width and 14 feet in
length. The average height of th~ wal!s from tJ~e floor was
14 inches. Walls were plastered .~s were the walls throughout the dwelling. The floor was in good condition, but the
firepit was absent. Room fill was predominantly gravel and
sand, with some adobe.
There were two large, trough type metates in the "room,
one in the northeast co~’ner, the other on the east side of the
room near the south wall. While breaking through the
floor in the extreme southeast corner, the excavator encountered a very soft spot, and at a depth of 12 inches below
the floor found three pottery sherds, each approximately
four by eight or nine inches. They were presumably taken
from the walls of an olla type vessel and used to protect

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

104

and cover a rectangular shaped lump of soft, very light
green substance. Sampies of the substance were identified
through analysis by Mr. W. S. Strain of the Department of
Geology, College of MSnes, E1 Paso, as iron potassium. A
perfectly round pottery sherd about the size of a quarter
with a curved linear design in black on gray background was
found on the west side of the room about three inches above
the floor in the fill. A few scattereed sherds were on the
floor.

Pottery
The largest percentage of the pottery found over an
area of several miles in a north-south and east-west direction
from El Paso and in the Hueco Basin is classified as E1 Paso
Polychrome, and has a possible dating of Pueblo III and early
Pueblo IV.’ Because of certain apparent relationships between the last stages of the great period to the south in Old
Mexico, phase B, Pueblo III may be given the approximate
date of 1100 to 1300 A.D. These dates must not be considered as absolutely accurate, but they are based on evidence
which makes them a fairly close approximation.’ About 90
percent of the sherds found on the floor of the ruin were
E1 Paso Polychrome. Chupedaro Black on White, Chihuahua Polychrome, and an unknown corrugated ware having
a black polished interior made up the rest. There were no
sherds of the E1 Paso Plain Brown Ware, a type used for
culinary purposes.
The jars, or "ollas" as they are known locally, found in
the ruin ranged in size from one and one-half inches to two
feet in depth. Some .~f the moderate size jars with an encrustation of ashes and residue on the exterior possibly had
been used for culinary purposes, while the larger were probably used extensively for storage purposes.

*Hawley, F. M., Bulletin, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, 1936.
Roberts, F. H. H., Bulletht 92, Sralthsonlan Institute, x,Vashington, 1929.

Twelve Room House Ruin

105

The ~ollas" are rounded at the base. They are thinnest
near the middle, tapering gradually in thickness to one-third
of an inch at the base, shoulder, neck, and rim. They vary
in color from brown to reddish brown, and usually have a
red rim with a black band encircling the exterior of the lip.
The decoration, extending about half-way downward from
the neck, cons;sts of ,]ternating lines of black and red,
massed colors, and stepped designs."
The jar, or olla, shown on Plate 9, a, has a globular body
with high shoulder, constricted neck, and a flattened rim.
Irregularities in the rim may have been intentional to facilitate pouring. It is El Paso Polyehrome, having the common decoration consisting of alternating lines of black and
red, with massed colors, but no stepped designs. The depth
of this olla was !4 inches; the diameter at the largest part
of the body, slightly below the shoulder, was fifteen and
one-half inches, at the constricted part of the neck nine
inches, and at the mouth 10 inches.
Plate 9, b, shows a larger olla of E1 Paso Polychrome. Its
depth was seventeen and one-half inches; diameter at widest
part was eighteen and one-ha!~ inches, at the constricted
part o~ the neck eleven 0nd one-half inches, and at the mouth
twelve and one-hal~ inches. The rim was rounded and the
walls were somewhat thicker than usual, having a thickness
of three-sixteenths of an inch. It had been broken when it
was put in the compartment £or the base and about half o~
Plate 9, a, rested in the bottom. There were small discoidal
beads in the bottoms of both ollas, but it was impossible to
determine in which vessel they .had been originally, as both
ollas were badly broken.
A third olla, larger than either of the two described, has
not been completely restored. It, also, is an E1 Paso Polychrome vessel and has the usual black lines and massed color
decoration, but no stepped designs. The background color
SHawley, F. M., Bulletin, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, 1936.

1{}6

Texas A~’cheological and Paleontological Society

is brown, very little red showing over the entire vessel. It
is unusual because of the size and the extreme thinness of
the walls.
The simple bowls represented a second form found.
They have rounded bottoms and usually have a red, flat rim
with black exterior lines of varied widths slightly be!ow or
sometimes touching the rim. The interior is usually decorated with alternating lines of black and red, with some
massed color stepped designs. Plate 9, a, is an El Paso Polychrome simple bowl, ten and three-fourths inches in diameter at the rim and four and one-half inches in depth., with
a slightly flattened rim. The interior decoration consists of
alternating lines of black and red, with massed color designs
on opposite sides of the bowl.
Hate 9, d, e, f, g, and h, are all E1 Paso Polychrome bowls,
ranging in size from eight and seven-eighth inches in diameter at the rim by four and one-half inches in depth (Plate
9, e,) to two and one-fourth inches in diameter at the rim
by three-fourths of an inch in depth (Plate 9, [). Al! of
these bowls have the flattened rim except e which has a
rounded rim. The black exterior line is present on all the
bowls. On Plate 9, d, e, and h, most of the decoration has
been obliterated by fire. Plate 9, g, has an interior black
line one-half inch in width near the top of the bowl, and
another one-eighth of an inch width, near the base. Plate
9, f, has an interior black line around the top one-fourth of
an inch in width, and another in the lower part of the bowl
five-eighths of an inch wide.
The collection contains two simple bowls not in possession of the writer nor pictured in this report. The decoration in the larger is very unusual in E1 Paso Polychrome, and
appears entirely different from any of the others. It measures nine inches in diameter and about four inches in depth.
PLATE 9
Pottery from Twelve Room House.

Plate 9

T~oe~e Roo~ Ho~e R~i~

107

It has a flattened rim, with a narrow black line encircling
the exterior but not reaching the rim. The background
color is black with red designs. An irregular circular-shaped
line of red in the base of the bowl was broken by a very
smal! perpendicular line of black. The break was probably
intentional, for similar breaks occur in the half circles above.
Plate 9, i and ~, are E1 Paso Polychrome bowls with irregular, scalloped rims. Plate 9, i, is seven and seven-eighths
inches in diameter at the rim, and is six ,and five-eighths
inches high. Plate 9, ~, is six and one-half inches in diameter at the rim and is three and three-eighths inches high,
Both bowls have designs of black and red.
The bowl represented by Plate 9,/¢, is much smaller than
either i or ~. It is only four and seven-eighths inches in diameter, three and seven-eighths inches in height, and the
ornaments extend one and one-fourth inches above the
slightly flattened rim. The steps in the ornaments are not
weI! defined, apparently having been made with a stick while
the paste was soft. Although the colors and design have
been obliterated by fire, the bowl is easily recognized as El
Paso Polychrome. There are perforations in the dip of each
step, but only in the top of one ornament.
Plate 9, 1, is a sm~ll bowl with a slightly constricted
mouth. The diameter at the widest part below the rim is
five and th.ree-eighths inches, four and five-eighths inches
at the mouth, and a depth of two and three-eighths inches.
Due to having been badly burned, it has not been classified,
but has an appearance very similar to a black burnished
bowl. It is not El Paso Polychrome, as far as paste and temper are concerned. It is much finer in texture, is not friable,
and the shape is not common to E1 Paso pottery. In thinness and texture it resembles the Chihuahua pottery.
Plate 9, m, is a small unbroken Chupedaro pitcher.’ From
a flat base the walls curve outward to the point of greatest
~Hawley, F. M., Bulletb~, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, 1936.

108

Tea~as Archeologica~ and Pa~eontoIogica~ Society

diameter which is relatively low and is four inches across
the bowl. Above this point the walls slope gently to the
base of the neck where the diameter is one and one-half
inches. The diameter o~" the mouth is one and three-fourths
inches. The depth of ~he vessel is four inches. The rim is
slightly outcurving and irregular as though it had been rubbed down. The handle is formed of two very small coils of
pottery clay, blended together at the rim joint and at the
body joint slightly below the base of the neck. Beginning
one inch below the handle, five black lines, each approximately one-half inch apart, encircle the body of the pitcher.
One black line encircle~ the base of the neck. The lines,
other than the bottom, ~re a dull brownish color due to poor
firing or to the heat from the burning roofing material.
Although the interior does not show the striations usually
found in Chupedaro pottery, it conforms in other ways.
Plate 9, n, is a larger Chupedaro pitcher, with a slightly
flattened base, a globular body, and a flattened top where it
merges with a slightly flaring neck. The height of the neck
is two inches. It is two and one-eighth inches in diameter
at the base, three inches at the mouth, six and five-eighths
inches at the widest point, and has a depth of six and seveneighths inches. Two joined coils of clay are attached to thee
neck slightly below the rim and to the flattened shoulder to
form the handle. The background color is dull gray, and
the decorations are all clear black with the exception of a
section of the back of the pitcher where they had been obliterated by burning.
The neck has three encircling black lines beginning threefourths of an inch below the black rim and extending to the
base of the neck. About one and one-fourth inches below
the base of the neck and on the flattened shoulder is another
black line about one-third of an inch wide, and one-half
inch lower a very narrow black line forms the top of the
encircling band of decoration. One-half inch below the
bottom of the band of decoration is yet another black line

Twelve Room House Ruin

one-third of an inch wide.
roughly striated.

109

The interior of the vessel was

Plate 10, m, is the ground down base of a Chupedaro
pitcher with a diameter of, four and one-half inches. Striations had been worn down by rubbing. The base contained
a lump of iron oxide (hematite), two and one-half inches
long by two inches wide by one and one-half inches thick.
Stone Objects
The objects of stone from this ruin seem to have been
made principally for utilitarian purposes. They consist of
metates, manos, arrow shaft polishers, and one small maul.
In the apparently less useful group are two stone balls, a fan
shaped stone, small pebbles, used probably as polishing stones,
pieces of unworked scoria, two discoidal objects, four disk
beads of turquoise, and one stone pendant. In the chipped
stone class only two projectile points were found.
Metates

Eight metates, fashioned from andesite by the pecking
and grinding method ~nd all of the same general shallow
trough, open end type, were found in the ruin. In shape
they range from slightly ovoid to sub-rectangular. Apparently it was not deemed necessary to do more than roughly
shape the outside and peck out the groove for the milling
surface. The material from which these metates and manos
were made may have been obtained from the Franklin Mountains, a distance of three to five miles from the ruin. They
do not vary greatly in size, ranging from twenty to twentythree inches in length, eleven to fourteen inches in widths,
two and one-half to ~ix inches in thickness, with an average
depth of the milling depression of one and one-half inches.
The milling groove is between nine and eleven inches in
width.

The smallest metate (Plate 10. a) was taken from the
outer north-south compartment in Room 2, with other

110

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

artifacts. It measures fourteen inches in length, nine inches
in width, and the milling depression sloped gently from the
sides to a depth of one inch in the center. The average thickness is two inches.
Plate 10, b, pictures the metate found in situ in Room 5.
It is twenty-one and one-half inches in length, thirteen
inches at the point of greatest width, and three to five
inches in thickness, with the milling depression measuring
two inches in the center and deepest part.
M~os

Fifteen manos were taken from the ruin. Thirteen were
of andesite and were the round, single hand type with one
flat and one convex face. None of them measured more
than five inches in diameter nor one and one-half inches in
thickness. The other two were of scoria and rectangular.
One measured twelve inches in length, four and one-half
inches in width, and one inch in thickness; the other five
by four by one.
Shaft Polishers
Shaft polishers found in the ruin are sub-rectangular
objects made of limestone, andesite, and scoria. They vary
only slightly in size and shape. The polisher depicted in
Plate 10, c, measures three and one-eighth inches in length,
two and three-fourths inches in width, and one and threefourths inches in thickness. It is made from scoria and, in
common with other artifacts of this class, has the longitudinal groove in the approximate center of one face. The groove
is one-fourth inch deep and one-half inch wide.
Plate 10, d, shows a polisher of andesite, three inches in
length, two and one-half inches in width, and one and onePLATE 10
Artifacts from Twelve Room House.

Pla~e 10

Twelve Roo~ Ho~.~e R~i~

111

half inches in thickness. The groove is one-eighth of an inch
in depth, three-eighths cf an inch wide, and retains a polished surface.
Plate 10, e, pictures a polisher fashioned from grayish)
white limestone, measuring three and three-fourths inches
in length, three and seven-eighth inches in width, and one
and one-half inches thick. The groove, which is one-eighth
of an inch in depth and one-half inch wide, is well polished.
Plate 10, f, g, and h, are scoria polishers. F is three and
one-half inches in length, three and one-eighth inches in
width, three-fourths of an inch in thickness. The groove,
which is one-eighth of an inch in depth and nine-sixteenths
of an inch iu width, is coated with a black substance, easily
removable by slight pressure. G is two and seven-eights
inches in length, two and three-fourths inches in width, and
one and three-fourths inches thick. The groove is onefourth of an inch in depth and five:eighths of an inch in
width. H is not as welt made as the others. It is two and
one-half inches in length, two and three-eighths inches in
width, seven-eighths of an inch thick. The groove is very
shallow.
Stone Maul

Plate 10, i, is of a small, andesite maul, slightly squared.
One end is rounded; the other is slightly flattened. This
maul is two and One-ha.If inches in length by one and seveneighths inches in widths. The three-fourths groove is more
shallow on one face than on the other faces. It has a maximum depth of one-sixteenth of an inch and is sevensixteenths of an inch wide)
Plate !0, i, shows a discoidal object of andesite, with a
shallow circular depression in the center of a flat top face.
The base is rounded. The stone measures four and onefourth inches in diameter and is one and three-fourths inches
thick. The diameter of the depression is one and oneeighths inches and it has a depth of three-sixteenths of an
inch.

112

Texas Archeologieal and Paleontological Society

Hate 10, k, pictures a highly polished discoidal object of
black limestone. The f~ces of the stone are flat, and in the
center of one is a conically drilled pit one-eighth of an inch
in depth and one-eighth inch in width. The diameter is
three and five-eighths inches and it is one-half inch thick.
Plate 10, l, shows one of the two ground stone balls recovered from the ruin. Both balls measured two inches in
diameter. One is made of diorite, the other of rhyolite.
Shell Beads
Only a very few shell beads were found in the ruin. They
were in the ollas pictured on Plate 9, a and b. Sixty-two
spire ground Olivella shells, fifteen Alectrion shells, a small
quantity of disk shaped shell beads, fused by heat, interspersed in the dirt and burned roofing material, one tubular bead of shell one-half inch in length and about threeeighths inch in width, and one crinoid stem without perforation were counted. The alectrions are twice the size of
those usually found in this area. The hole for suspension
was ground in the lip.
Miscellaneous
Six pieces of yellow ochre (limonite), two pieces of calcium carbonate (travertine), and a section of a hollow reed
about three-fourths of an inch long and filled with a pale
green material were found in the north-south compartment
of Room 2. There was not enough of the green material to
analyze, but it resembled the large lump of material found
beneath the floor of Room 12. Additional material taken
from this same compartment included a charred portion
of a corn cob about one inch long, without seeds, a very
small section of a woven basket, and a large quantity of
broken and charred gourds scattered on the floor.
In Room 4 one lump of reddish mineral paint (hematite)
was found in the base of a small pottery vessel which had
been broken and the edges rounded. Paint had been rubbed

Twelve Room House Ruin

113

on the jug. A sub-rectangular lump of green, powdery material, covered by large pottery sherds, was found beneath
the floor of Room 12. It had pulverized and reformed into
a cake. One face is slightly concave, the other flat; the
edges of three sides are convex, the other slightly concave.
It measures four and one-half inches in length, three and
one-fourth inches in width, and one and five-eighths inches
in thickness. Samples were identified by Mr. W. S. Strain
of the College of Mines, Department of Geology, as iron
potassium.
Summary and Conclusion

One small fragment of basketry and numerous charred
fragments of gourds were the only surviving perishable material used by the occupants of this dwelling. The articles
of more lasting quality are represented by pottery, stone implements, a few fragments of bone, and a small number of
shell beads.
Most of the pottery is of the class most common to the
area. No vessels, definitely classified as culinary, were present. With one exception all bowls and ollas were decorated.
The size of the ollas indicates that they were used for storage
purposes. The paste of both bowls and ollas is rather coarse,
very friable, has sand for temper, and is porous.

Stone implements which consist of metates, manos, and
arrow shaft polishers, were made by the pecking and grinding method. The open end, shallow trough type being the
only kind found. Seven rooms of the ruins contained merates. None were in bins, and only one was elevated. Two
or three manos usually lay near each metate. One small
maul, three chipped stone implements, two projectile points,
and one knife, completed the list of stone artifacts recovered.
The scarcity of projectile points in the dwelling and the surrounding area may indicate that the inhabitants were inclined to a peaceful, sedentary life.

114

Texas Archeolog~caI and PaleontoIogical Society

Shells obtained from the Gulf of California and the western ocean provided many strings of ornamental beads.
No burials were encountered; consequently, no information on skeleton material or burial customs was obtained.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Richardson, G. B.
1909. Geologic Atlas oJ United Slates, El Paso Folio 166, Washington.

Darton, N. H.
1933. Geologic Survey Bulletin, 84L Washington.
Hawley, F. M.
1936. Field Manuel o.1 Prehistoric Southwestern Pottery Tyl~es.
versity o~ New Mexico.

Bulletin of Uni-

Roberts, F. H. H.
1929. ShabiA’s eshchee Village, A Late Bas~et Maher in the Chaco Canyon,
Mexico, Smithsonian Institute Bulletin, 92, Washington.

