Texas Archeolqgical Society

390

ANTELOPE CREEK FOCUS POTTERY TYPES
BORG~R CORDMAI~KED
(Plates 75, "/6)
PASTE
Method of manufacture:

Undetermined.

Temper: Crushed quartz, sand, mica, and occasionally small
bone chunks; usually two or more of these substances
used in same vessel.
Texture: Usually quite compact and hard, broken edges sharp,
but thicker vessels may be friable to crumbly.
Color: Darker shades of gray and brown most usual, but some
are orange-brown and others nearly black. A light red
wash occasionally occurs on interior. Cores dark gray to
black. Soot and grease stains common.
Surface finish: Interiors poorly to fairly well smoothed but
bumpy; exteriors covered with cordmarking.
FORM
Wall thickness: Extreme range 2 to 12 mm., but many are
quite thin, from 2 to 4 mm., with tendency for vessel to be
thinner toward bottom than at top and in rim zone.
Lip:

Rounded or flat and flush with rim.

Base:

Convex bottoms with no distinguishable base.

Vessel shape and size: Only form yet recognized is that of
jars, but considerable variation in proportions of moutia
and body diameters, and bodies may be from globular
(Plates "/5, A, B, 76, C, D) to rather elongate (Plate 76, B).
Rims generally meet body at definite angle and slope inward or outward slightly, or stand vertical; in some cases,
body and rim merge in gentle curve (Plate 76, A, D) with
mouth considerably smaller in diameter than body. Vessel size is on the whole rather uniform, restored specimens
ranging between 20 and 30 cm. in total height with rims
3 to 6 cm. high; bodies range from 23 to 31 cm. in maximum diameter, mouths ~14 to 22 cm. Lugs and handles
~apparently absent.
D]i~CORATION
Treatment: Cord impressions; rarely, incising and fingernail
punctating.
Designs: Impressions of fine cords cover entire exterior of
vessels, almost always placed vertically on body and rim

PLATE 75

Texas~Archeological Society

392

.....

~ .

alike, but occasionally in grids that tend to cross one another (Plate 75, A, rather definitely, B, C, partially). In
some instances, cordmarking on rim partly smoothed over
and single deeply incised line or ro~v of fingernail punc~
rates encircles vessel at rim-body juncture. Lips may be
deeply notched on outer edge.
CULTUR/kL AFFILIATIONS
An Antelope Creek Focus type, related to Stamper Cordmarked
of Optima Focus in Oklahoma Panhandle (Watson, 1950).
Also bears a general relationship to scores of types of cordmarked pottery in Great Plains and Woodland areas of
United States and Canada. ~,¥hile probably more or less
coeval with Upper Republican culture cordmarked wares,
Borger lacks the specialized rim and lip treatments, incising, etc., which distinguish the former.

DIS~IBUTION
Canadian River drainage system in upper Texas Panhandle
and lower plains along eastern side of Panhandle, probably extending into western Oklahoma; known as far east
as Young County on upper Brazos River,
ESTIMATED AGE
First estimated at 1300-1450 A. D. because of association with
Puebloan trade pottery from Ne~v Mexico; nov,, estimated
at 1100 or 1200 to 1450 A. D.
REFERENCES
Studer, 1934, pp. 92-94, Plate 15, and Krieger, 1946, pp. 44, 5658 describe this pottery without naming it.

PLATE 76

