P~roglyphs of

the

Abilene District

63

PETROGLYPHS OF THE ABILENE DISTRICT
By FO~,RES:r
In addition to the deeply buried campsites, stone lined cist burials,
primitive remains, oval mortar holes, extensive quarries, Indian shelters, and innumerable surface campsites, the Abilene region in Texas
also contains several interesting groups of Indian petroglyphs.
Through the persistent research of Dr. Cyrus N. Ray1 and others,
it has been demonstrated that several cultures of the region, the
Abilene and the Clear Fork in particular, date back to about the
time of Folsom man in America--perhaps to late Pleistocene time.~z
In view of these facts it seems worthwhile to carefully examine the
petroglyphs of the region for indications of age, and if possible to
uncover evidence that might link them with these very old cultures.
Champion Creek Petroglyphs
The first petroglyphs examined in this region are on Champion
Creek in Nolan County located three miles east of the Mitchell
County line. The group consists of about a dozen simple designs
including the picture of a man and a turtle (Plate 10, No. 1). The
outlines apparently were rubbed into the top surface of the sandstone
which outcrops level with the ground on the south side of the creek.
The grooves are about one-eight of an inch in width and, in most
ca~s, very ~allow. One unusual design was found on a similar
sandstone about half a mile down the creek from the main group.
It seems to be a conventionalized man formed by a series of pits
pecked into the stone (Plate 10, No. 1, d). The fig-ure is eighteen
inches high. It does not appear to be very old.
In the same rocks on which the petroglyphs were carved are many
deep mortar holes, chiefly of the boat shaped variety. But since
there are many large groups of similar mortar holes cut in the bedrocks of. sites in the district containing no petroglyphs, the association seems to be accidental. Very good evidence was found that
the rocks into which the mortars were cut had weathered down an
inch or even more since the mortars were made.3 This, of course,
would have destroyed any lightly cut petroglyphs made at the time
1.
2.
3.

Ray, 1930.
Bryan. 1938; Ray and Bryan, 1938,
Ray, 1930, Plate

64

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

of the mortars.

It seems evident then that, although there is no evi-

dence of white contact, these petroglyphs are quite recent.
The Browns[ield Petroglyphs
The site which was next examined is a small shelter on the V. M.
Brownsfield ranch in Nolan County about five miles northeast of
Nolan. Here the petroglyphs were lightly scratched into the smooth
surface of the limestone in the back of the shelter; and, unfortunately, they have since been almost completely obliterated by names,
dates, and scratches made on the rocks by recent vandals. It was
found necessary to consult photographsz~ of the designs made before
they had been mutilated, in order to clearly distinguish the Indian
designs from the recent markings*.
However, an accurate copy
was obtained and the pictures, consisting of four slender, squareshouldered men about eight inches high, and a few indistinct designs,
proved to be exceptionally interesting (Plate 10, No. 2).
Square-Shouldered Men Like Basket-Maker Pictures
The same scratchy technique is found at several sites in South
Texas; but pictures of square-shouldered men like these, resembling
the true Basket-Maker pictures in Arizona5 and the Val Verde Dry
Shelter, or Texas Basket-Maker pictures in Val Verde County,6
have not been reported from any other petroglyph site in Texas.
The similarity between these petroglyphs and file typical anthropomorphic man of the Val Verde Dry Shelter Culture is remarkable
in view of the fact that the one is scratched into the rock while the
other is painted on it, and that 200 miles separate the sites.
Points o] Similarity to Val Verde Dry Sheher Pictures
Let us list the points of similarity:
1.

The four human figures among the Brownsfield petroglyphs

*Note:
At the I~rownsfield site there are severM strata of charcoal.
The deeper
one is separated by a thick sterile rock deposit from the shallower deposits,
Perhaps
the older stratum may date with the pictures or it may not.
13. !q. R.
4.
5.
6.

Ray 1939, Plate 53.
Kidder and Guernsey, 1919, pp. 197-199.
Kirkland, 1939, Plates 11 to 17.

PLATE 10
No. 1. These are the principal designs at the Champion Creek site.
No. 2. These are the scratched designs in the Brownsfield shelter.
There are also, seven ~ed, negative hand prints on the back wall o~
the shelter.

&

Pl~te 10

e

Pe~rogly~hs of the Abilene District

67

are slender and broad-shouldered like the typica! Val Verde Dry
Shelter man found only in Val Verde County.
2. Both hav.e upraised hands; but the arms of the Brownsfield
man are bent at a sharp angle while those of the Dry Shelter men
are either straight or curved upward.
3. The head-dress on Brownsfield man "b" (Plate 10, No. 2, b)
is quite like the head-dress on certain Dry Shelter men.
4. On the right wrist of the same Brownsfield man is an ornament almost identical with ornaments usually worn on the right
wrist of the typical Dry Shelter men.
5. The left hand of this man holds an arrow quite like the one
or more arrows usually held in the left hand of the Dry Shelter men.
Also, Brownsfield man "c" holds a line in his left hand, probably
representing an arrow. The Dry Shelter men frequently hold similar lines.
6.

Crossed in front of Brownsfield man "b" are two staffs, and

to the left of them is another, all of which are almost identical to
staffs held by the Dry Shelter men. Brownsfield man "e" holds a
similar staff in his right hand. All of these staffs, however, point
downward while the Dry Shelter staffs almost always point upward.

7. To the left of Brownsfield man "b" are a slender triangle,
probably all that remains of another square-shouldered figure, and
two fringed objects not unlike many fringed objects among the
Dry Shelter pictures.
8. While we were copying the petroglyphs, one of the party,
W. C. Fields, discovered a coiled basket7 and seven cut straws in
association with a burial in the Brownsfield shelter.8 Since material
of this kind is common in the Dry Shelters of Val Verde County
and has never been found at another site in North-Central Texas,
the similarity of the pictures is emphasized.
Although the similarity between the Brownsfield petroglyphs and
the Val Verde Dry Shelter pictures seems too great to be explained
q.
Ray, 1939, pp. 245-246, Plate 54,
8.
This shelter was partially excavated by E. B. Sayles but not reported on.
lie
stated in a letter to the writer that he fouled nothi,ng in the shelter that resembled
Texas Cave Dweller material.

68

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

away as accidental, it must be admitted that important differences
exist which make it difficult to believe that the petroglyphs were
actually made by Val Verde Cave Dwellers. Chief of these is the
fact that the Val Verde Cave Dwellers are not known to have ever
made petroglyphs, although there are more than fifty sites of their
pictographs in Val Verde County. The detail of the robes on the
Brownsfield figures is unlike any found in the Dry Shelter pictures.
And also, the seven red negative hand prints in the Brownsfield
shelter are a point of difference, since the Dry Shelter people never
made hand prints of any kind. These, however, may not have been
made by the Indians responsible for the petroglyphs.
The limited material at this site hardly justifies more than a suggestion that there nlay be some relationship between this shelter and
the dry shelters in Val Verde County. But until more examples
of the Brownsfield petroglyphs are found this relationship will
probably remain a mystery.
The Fort Chadbourne Petroglyphs

Still another type of petroglyphs in North-Central Texas was
reported by E. B. Sayles9 in the 1930 Annual Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society. At that time Sayles
found two sites of this culture, one in Taylor County and another in
Coke County; but only the larger site in Coke County was described
in the report. This site is on the sandstone walls of a cave on the
bank of a creek near the site of old Fort Chadbourne. In the fall
of 1940 a third and more extensive site containing this same type of
petroglyphs was discovered about two miles west of the town of
Fo~’t Chadbourne by Dr. Cyrus N. Ray. In April, 1941, the writer
and his wife accompanied by Dr. Ray, examined and made accurate
copies of the petroglyphs there (Plate 11; Plate 12, No. 1). Most
of the pictures at the site are under shallow shelters near the top of
a small mesa; three small designs are on boulders at the foot of the
hill.
9.

Sayles, 1930.

PLATE 11
These are the principal design~ west of Fort Chadbourne.
No. 1
represents 13 feet of the shelter wall.
Note %ha% the designs are
almost weathered away on the righ% end which is slightly exposed to
blowing rain.

Plate 11

Petroglyphs of the Abile,~e District

71

The Designs Resemble Abrading Marks
The designs, resembling abrading marks, are deeply rubbed into
the standstone .walls of the shelters, in some cases, to a depth of
about one inch. Most of the grooves are about three-fourths of an
inch wide and exhibit a round bottom; a few are V shaped. They
are clo~ly spaced and most of them are perpendicular to the floor
of the shelter. A few branch out from larger grooves like limbs from
a tree. Three or four were cut across the perpendicular grooves at
right angles. Shallow zig-zag lines were cut between a few of the
larger grooves. Only one small circle and a very few curves were
found among the many straight lines.
Whether these petroglyphs resulted from the sharpening of tools
on the shelter walls or were made for some other purpose cannot be
definitely determined. It is certain, however, that some of the
grooves were added solely for the sake of design, which clearly distinguishes these petroglyphs from so called abrading marks, and
gives them a distinctive character easily distinguished from other
types.
Evidence o] Age
Most of the designs in the cave near old Fort Chadbourne have
been well protected from the elements and although they look old,
they show very little weatheringlO; however, the best protected
designs at the site west of Fort Chadbourne are considerably weathered. About half of the designs are exposed to blowing rains and
are almost entirely weathered away although they must have been
an inch deep originally. The shallow lines added for decoration,
if they ever existed, are completely gone. A few fragments of the
cliff containing the designs have split off and fallen down the talus.
A third site containing Fort Chadbourne type petroglyphs is
located a few miles south of Merkel in Taylor County. This is the
Taylor County site discovered by Sayles. Here the petroglyphs are
located on the back wall of a small shelter near the top of a large
mesa. They consist of only a few short grooves crossed in one
place by a horizontal line, but lacking the shallow decoration lines
found at the other sites (Plate 12, No. 2). Although they are well
protected from the elements, the lines appear to be old and weathered:
10.

Saylea, 1930o Plate 4.

72

T~xas Archeologlcal and Paleontological Societ.y

The cave near old Fort Chadbourne was completely excavated by
E. B. Sayles in 1930, but nothing indicating extreme age was reported. The Taylor County shelter was also excavated by Sayles
hut nothing was found that sheds light on the age of the petroglyphs.11
Ancient Camps Surround the Sites
The site west of Fort Chadbourne has little or no midden in the
shelters; however, there is an extensive surface camp around and
on top of the mesa. This camp has yielded various kinds of Clear
Fork artifacts~ as well as one fragment of a channeled point found
on the north side of the same mountain. Clear Fork material has
also been found on a surface camp on the hill above the cave near
old Fort Chadbourne. And Folsom and Yuma points as well as
Clear Fork artifacts have been found on a camp at the base of
tile mesa just below the shelter 11~ Taylor County.
But no way has yet been found to connect the petroglyphs with
the artifacts made by the same Indians and lost on the adjoining
camps. Whether the Fort Chadbourne petroglyphs are the work of
the Clear Fork people as has been suggested, or a much later cu!ture, remains to be demonstrated.
Petroglyphs by Late lndians
There are, however, a few designs on the ceiling of the deepest
sheher at the site west of Fort Chadbourne which definitely are not
of the Fort Chadbourne type. They consist of three human figures,
m~merous cross marks, and various other simple elements, lightly
scratched or rubbed into the surface of the rock (Plate 12, No. 1,
a and b). They are unquestionably the work of Indians, but appear
almost as recent as certain names and initials on the same rock. They
11.
Letter £rom E. B. Sayles.
12.
The writer is indebted to Dr.
from the surface camps.

Cyrus N.

:Ray

for informal:ion

about material

PLATE 12
No. 1.
These are designs at the site west of Fort Chadbourne.
’%" and "b" a~e on ~he ceiling of the largest shelter and, except for
a ~ew deep grooves, are not Fort Chadbourne type petroglyphs. "d" is
on a rock which fell from the cliff down the steep talus. "c," "e," and
"g" are on boulders at the foot o£ the mountain.
These are the designs in the shelter in western Taylor
No. 2.
County.

e
NO. 1

NO, P_
Plate 12

g

Petroglyphs of the Abilene District

75

resemble other simple carved and painted pictures in various parts
of the state and are probably the work of roving bands of Plains
Indians in early historic time.~*
It is interesting to study the various types of Indian pictures in
different parts of the state and, when possible, to determine their
relationship and age sequence. And they should be described and
illustrated in scientific literature; but the chances of arriving at
an accurate age or proving a definite connection with a particular
type of artifact is indeed very remote, except perhaps, at a very few
sites in the State.
501 Rio Grande National Building,
Dallas, Texas
Re]erences Cited

Bryan, Kirk
1938. Deep Sites Near Abilene, Texas. Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society Bulletin, Volume 10.
Kidder, zll]red Vinsen, and Guernsey, Samuel ].
1919. Archeological Explorations in Northeastern Arizona,
reau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 65.

Bu-

Kirkland, Forrest
1939. Indian Pictures in the Dry Shelters of Val Verde County,
Texas. Texas Archeo!ogical and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Volume 11.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1930. Report on Recent Archeolo~cal Researches in the Abilene
Section. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Volume 2.

¯ Editorial Note:
There is an extensive covered site of the Clear Fork Culture
which is now eroding from gravel and red silt in a large valley floor between the
mountains immediately to the north of this site.
There is a Clear Fork si~e on the
l~orth slope of the mountain which contains the petroglyphs, in which I found a
part of a Folsom blade.
On the shelf at the west side of the mountain is a campsite which probably was occupied by more recent Indians but no signs occur there of
historic occupation.
In the general region of these petrogtyph sites, Clear Fork

gouges, dart herds, spokeshaves, gravers, side scrapers, disks and other components
of that Culture erode from the gravels and dark red silts of deep gullies. More
graver poin~ have been found in such eroded campsites than in any other part of
the Abilene region, and thi~ is also true of Folsom and Yuma blades.---Cyrus :N. Ray.

76

Tea~as Archeologi~al and Paleontological Society

Ray, Cyrus N.
1939. Some Unusual Abilene Region Burials. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Volume 11.
Ray, Cyrus N., and Bryan, Kirk
1938. Folsomoid Point Found in Alluvium Beside A Mamraoth’s
Bones. Science, Volume 88.
Sayles, E. B.
1930. A Rock Shelter in Coke County. Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society Bulletin, Volume 2.

