Texas Archeotogieal a,~ Paleontological Society

92

FURTHER EXCAVATIONS OF THE GAHAGAN
MOUND; CONNECTIONS WITH A
FLORIDA CULTURE

Reporting his mound excavations along Red River in northwestern
Louisiana and southwestern Arkansas, Moore (1) in 1912 noted an
unusual culture in a burial mound at Gahagan, Louisiana, which is
located 40 miles south of Shreveport.

Fine stone work, copper

ornaments and scanty pottery ware contrasted decidedly with the
profuse pottery and shell wares in the burial sites farther up the
river, later identified as Caddom~ (2).

Recent discovery of additional burial pits in this mound affords
further details of this unique and highly developed culture.
The S~te

At Gahagan an old river channel is joined from the west by a
small stream (Plate 20, No. 1). About one-half mile downstream,
in the old Hollingsworth field, is a small mound (A), which is approximately 10 feet high, and 80 feet in diameter. Moore (1) stated
the mound was round-topped when he visited it in 1911. He stated,
"In aboriginal times a considerable population must have inhabited
this place, to judge from the number of remnants of rnounds that
are scattered throughout the fields." Continuous cultivation has
left only two other low mounds (B and C) and numerous circular
sandy areas, presumably representing the remains of house mounds.
Pottery sherds are found in these sandy areas and along the streams,
but artifacts are not found in the fidds elsewhere. These probably
have been covered by overflow deposits.
Previous Excavation

Moore found in Mound A one large central burial pit, 13 by 9
feet 8 inches, extending downward 11 feet from the summit (Burial
Pit 1, Plate 20). With five skeletons were 63 chipped stone blades;
PLATE
No. 1.
No. 2.

20.

Sketch map of Gahagan site.
Mound A, Gahagan, showing location of burial pits.

6/~N

Plate 20

Further Excavations of the Gahagan Mound

95

22 small arrow points; three celts; a boatstone of diabase; many
bone pins; four ornaments of sheet copper, several tubular beads,
a rattle and two ear discs, all of copper-covered wood. There were
one pottery vase and two bottles, decorated with finely incised parallel lines forming circles and diagonal bands, separated by incised
triangles, all containing red pigment; and a human effigy pipe ;f
pottery, which had a tunnel from the pipe bowl to the figurine’s
mouth, suggesting a combination pipe and cloud-blower.
Present Excavatiop.s--B~rial Pit 2
In 1938, while securing sherds for classification, we found fragments of a vessel on the western slope of Mound A. Investigation
showed a white sand layer which was intersected sharply by a charcoal-streaked red clay and sand mixture, the fill of Burial Pit 2
(Plates 20 and 21). The pit, 19a/~ by 15 feet, extended downward
8 feet from the summit, lying under the slope, and had a level floor
covered with white and yellow sand.
Within the pit fill and near the surface, an intrusive burial of an
adolescent was surrounded by an outline of hand-wrought nails,
evidently a white or negro interment of the past century. A second
intrusive burial into the pit fill (Plate 21, Skeleton 7) lay at a
depth of 6 feet from the summit. This was of an adult male, 5 feet
11 inches in length, supine and fully extended, as were all of the
burials described subsequently. At each side of the head was a
large copper-covered stone ear disc (Plate 28, No. 3, 4) and outside
the left knee was a pile of 61 small arrow points (Plate 28, No. 1,
Row 2).
Six skeletons lay on the pit floor (Plates 21 and 22), five placed
in a row down the middle of the pit, parallel to the intrusive burial
mentioned above. The sixth (Skeleton 1), a young adult female,
5 feet in length, lay alongside the northwest edge of the pit. Coppercovered stone ear ornaments (Plate 28, No. 3, 5) lay beside the skull.
Skeleton 2, in the row mentioned above, was that of an adolescent
female, 5 feet 4 inches in length; there were no artifacts with it.
Three teeth were carious. Skeleton 3 was that of a large adult male,
5 feet 7 inches in length, with heavy bones. ]Near the left shoulder
were 15 small points and a long blade of chert (Plate 27, No. 1, 3).

96

Texas Arcb~ological and Paleantologicq.l

Skeleton 4 was that of a young J adult female, 5 feet 8 inches ~in
length, having square ear ornameuts of copper-coated cypress wood
(Plate 28, No. 3, 2). There were no artifacts with either Skeleton 5,
a large male, 6 feet in length, or with Skeleton 6 that of an adolescent, 5 feet in length. All of the skeletal material was in poor condition, and the skulls were badly crushed, which prevented their
being removed for further study.
As noted above, very few artifacts were placed immediately with
the burials. Instead, masses of objects, almost inextricably mixed,
were found on the floor and to a height of 2 feet in the fill along
the northwest pit margin (Plate 21). These facts suggest their
placement as part of a ceremony while the pit was being filled.
Beginning at the western corner of the pit, the first large deposit
contained four groups of small points; sheet copper objects which
included two human effigy faces and hands (Plate 29, No. 2, 1 and
2), several beads, tubes or rolls of copper, and unworked strips;
5 beautiful celts (Plate 27) and two blades; 15 or 16 fragments of
bone pins and an equal number of socketed antler tips; 4 bone and
7 shell ear discs. Nearby was a broken vessel (Plate 26, No. 3, 1)
the separation of several sherds showing that the vessel was broken
when placed with the burials.
A second deposit, situated a few inches farther along the pit margin, included two groups of small points; eight celts, two of which
were spatulate (Plate 27); two discoidals( Plate 26, No. 1); nine
rough stones of varying sizes, one marked from hammering; 13
fragments of broken blades, one reworked into a thin graver; three
blades of chert; a leather covered copper object; three small ear
ornaments; a portion of shell spoon; several masses of unworked
quartz, and a triangular knife of petrified wood. Adjacent to this
deposit was a human effigy pipe (Plate 25). Three small fragments of basketry were found around objects in this deposit, and
here, as in the other deposits, discolored earth suggested decay of
many perishable objects.
Deposit 3 consisted of 11 stone blades and one small cell
PLATE 21.
Plan of burial pit Number 2, Mound

One

Plate 21

Further Ezeava$io~s of ~he Gab~ga¢~ Mound

99

foot farther, an intact pottery vessel (Plate 26, No. 3, 3) lay on the
pit floor. The fourth deposit, just beyond, comprised a square
plaque of sheet copper, centrally perforated and embossed (PIate
28, No. 3, 3); five copper-covered wood pendants which have the
shape of animal claws; several other unrecognizable copper forms;
two masses of galena and a group of 10 small shell beads, oval
shaped. A group of small points was found near each corner of this
northwest margin, but with these exceptions, the other margins of
the pit were devoid of objects.
Brtrial Pit 3
A smaller pit, 12 by 11 feet, was found six feet south of Pit 2,
lying under the southwest slope, cut down to the same depth as Pit 2
and similarly filled with a red clay and sand mixture. It is amazing that a pit of this size was dug for the placement of only three
bodies, all near one end (Plate 23, No. 1). Skeleton 1 was that of
a male, 5 feet 11 inches in length, the skull was in excellent condition (Plate 23, No. 2) and the teeth were free of caries. A group
of four small points lay beside the left shoulder, and a fine blade of
semi-translucent flint beside the left femur (Plate 27, No. 1, 2).
Skeleton 2 was of an adult, 5 feet 9 inches in length, with badly
crushed skull, so that sex determination was difficult. The right
tibia and fibula were fractured, with angulation of the lower fragments. Above the left shoulder were six small points and between
the left humerus and the ribs lay a chert blade and fragments of a
small pottery pipe (Plate 26, No. 2, 1). Skeleton 3 of an adolescent,
4 feet 6 inches in length, was lying between the other two, and had
no artifacts with it.
As with Pit 2, most of the artifacts were found along the corresponding northwest margin. In succession we found a rectangular
hone, two celts, a double-stemmed stone pipe, a large mano of sandstone, a broken water bottle (Plate 26, No. 3, 2), a frog effigy pipe
of sandstone and underneath it, a black discoidal (Plate 26, No. 1,
1. For the next two feet, another deposit of closely laid objects
included eight small rubbing stones; 10 chert blades; 10 markedly
serrated arrow points (Plate 28, No. 1, Row 4); several other
smaller points; three celts; five ear ornaments of bone and stone;
a number of small sandstone hones; many fragments of blades, from

100

Te$a~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

which several were reassembled; small flakes of stone; an ungrooved
plummet; 17 bone pins and four beaver incisor teeth (Plate 28, No.
2) ; a bone tool; a square plaque of sheet copper, perforated and
embossed (Plate 28, No. 3, 6) ; two smaller copper-covered ear ornaments of wood; and in one cornpact mass of several layers, a total
of over 300 beads made from marginella shells (Plate 29, No. 1).
At the opposite side of the pit, a large frog effigy pipe (Plate 24),
intact, sat on the floor and leaning on it was a symtnetrical chert
blade, 9~ inches in length (Plate 27, No. 1, 1).
Sum~ o] Fitutings
A.

Skeletal Material.

Eight skeletons were of adults, one adolescent and one child;
where sex ~ould be determined four were males, three females. Tho
stature is comparatively large; skeletons from late Caddo sites in
this area showing usual lengths of 5 feet 6 to 8 inches for males,
5 feet to 5 feet 4 inches for females. Among the eight adults at
Gahagan, one ~neasured 6 feet, two were 5 feet 11 inches, and only
two were less than 5 feet 6 inches.
The e~xcellent dentition, only two evidencing caries, contrasts
again with the late Caddoes of this area, where caries, pyorrhea,
alveolar abscesses and lost teeth were frequent. No evidence of
bone syphilis was seen.
B. Pottery.
Two of the three vessels found by us have similar decorations to
the three described by Moore (1), with bands of fine parallel lines
incised lightly through a glossy black surface, forming concentric
circles and interlocking scrolls on the sides and concentric lines
around the necks of the water bottles. Incised triangles are also
found. The second bowl from Pit 2 (Plate 26, No. 3, 3) differs
from the other five vessels in its construction of irregularly fired,
light gray pottery, flat-bottomed with outflaring sides, and the decoration of parallel, deeply-incised, "overhanging" lines, a characteristic of Coles Creek pottery as described by Ford (3).
PLATE 22.
Photograph of burial pit Number 2 and intrusive burial, Mound A.

Plate 22

Further. Excavatio~ of the Gahagan Mound

103

C. Pipe~.
Exquisite artistry is manifested in the manufacture of the effigy
pipes from this site. We recall t_he human effigy pipe with the
"cloud-blower" feature illustrated by Moore (1). The human effigy
pipe from pit 2 (Plate 25) represents a kneeling human, the right
hand on the knee, the left hand clasped under the knee. The head
is well forward, the features Asiatic, with heavy curving nose. An
oval line atop the head suggests a headdress.
The first frog effigy (Plate 24), a massive pipe weighing 7½
pounds, is one of the finest examples of aboriginal art from this
area. It depicts in lifelike line a male bullfrog seated on a pedestal,
holding a smaller female frog under his chest with the left forepaw.
With the right forepaw he presses deeply into the female’s lower
abdomen, expressing the eggs from the sac. Both this and the human
effigy are made of red pottery, carved or polished after firing.
The second frog effigy is poorly preserved due to absorption of
much of the limestone from which it was made.
Only a few effigy pipes have been found in Louisiana sites. Moore.
(4, 5) illustrated a frog effigy from the Mayes Mound (a Marksville-Coles Creek site) on Larto Lake and two animal effigy pipes
from Sycamore Landing on Bayou Bartholomew. Mr, Neild (6) of
this city has a beautiful human effigy pipe of stone from Peck Village in Catahoula Parish, also a Marksville-Coles Creek site (7).
Jackson (8) described 5 effigy pipes out of a total of 81 pipes from
East Texas, none of them human effigies. It is Ford’s opinion that
the Gahagan effigy pipes are of the type associated with Coles Creek
sites.
The double-stemmed stone pipe (Plate 26, No. 2, 2) is similar to
one illustrated by Thoburn (9) from Oklahoma and attributed by
him to the southern division (Osage or Quapaw) of the Sioux. This
pipe has stems of equal length, whereas the Gahagan pipe has stems
of unequal length, but both are perforated.
The small pottery pipe (Plate 25, No. 2, 1) is of ~e long-stemmed
type found in abundance in Caddo mounds of southern Arkansas,
also in the pre-Caddo burials described by Lemley at the Crenshaw
site (10).

Tax.as Archeologi~al and Paleontological Society

104

D.

Chipped Stone/lrti]acts.

Thirty-four stone blades were found, varying from 2~/~ to 93~
inches in length (Plate 27, No. 1). They are of two types: squarebased, either symmetrical or curved in knife forms, and made of dull
gray chert; secondly, blades of semi-translucent flint, often with
concave bases and more strongly curved sides.
Arrow points totalling 194 were all of the small or keen type,
varying from one-half to 21,~ inches in length. Flaking was carefully executed and the serrations often exaggerated. Several types
are distinguished (Plate 28) and these often occurred in separate
groups. There were three basal fragments of the triple-notched
white triangular point associated with the Cahokia culture (11).
One shark scale was with a group of points.
E.

Copper.

The southern area is so far from the source of copper that tools
of this material app~r only rarely, as at Moundville. Shetrone
(12) has stated that, in the Gulf area, "the metal was too precious
to bo used for utility purposes and was treasured solely for ornament." Gahagan is the only Louisiana site described to date in
which copper was used to any appreciable extent, even for ornamentation. In the dozens of sites excavated in the state by Moore,
only a few copper beads and copper-covered ear ornaments from
one or two places were mentioned. Thoburn (9) described coppercovered ear plugs from Caddoan sites in Oklahoma, as did Moore
(1) and Harrington (2) in Arkansas.
Of the 29 ear ornaments from Pits 2 and 3 at Gahagan, 15 are
copper-coated and two are made of sheet copper alone. The latter
two are large square plaques (Plate 28, No. 3) of sheet copper, with
concentric circles or squares in repouss6. Three elliptical beads of
wood are each covered with a single sheet of copper. The five
curved pendants of copper-covered wood, found in one group (Plate
29, No. 2, 5), are undoubtedly bear-claw effigies, similar to those of
bone or stone found in some of the Ohio mounds.

No. 1.
No. 2.

PLATE 23.
Plan of burial pit Number 3, Mound A.
Skull of skeleton 1, pit Number 3.

BUI~iAL PIT ~

6~H~N HOUND A.

k(Z)

/

.,

Plate 23

Fur$h,~r Excgvabions of ~h~ G~haga~. Mound

107

Of greatest interest are the copper ceremonial objects, especially
the human effigy masks or faces (Plate 29), each made from two
sheets, one cut to form the oval face, the other to form a long grotesque nose which was inserted through a slit in the face and bradded
with narrow copper strips.

A groove across the forehead with lat-

eral holes allowed for attachment of the mask.
Two copper faces which were identical in appearance and construction to those described above, were found by Moore (13) in
the Grant Mound on St. Johns River, Florida. As tabulated later,
many other similar traits were present.
The two hand effigies of sheet copper, also undoubtedly for ceremonial use, suggest the influence of Moundville, where the hand and
eye concept appeared so often on pottery and ornaments.

F.

Poli,~hed Stone.

Celts constitute the majority of the polished stone artifacts, 19
occurring in the two pits (Plate 27). Some are rough tools, but
many are undoubtedly ceremonial in type, highly finished and unmarred by use. The longest is 14 inches in length, of polished black
slate, flawless in its symmetry and lines. Spatulate celts, such as
the two of greenstone from Pit 2 (Plate 27, No. 3, 1 and 2), do not
appear in any collections or in the reports of any other excavations
from this State, so far as we can.determine. Moorehead (14) illustrates several from Georgia, Kentucky, Alabama, and Florida, the
latter taken from Moore’s report of the St. John’s PAver excavations
(13). The celt illustrated on page 152 of Moorehead’s volume is
almost identical with the notched spatulate from Gahagan. Moore
(16) found in a mound near Chandler Landing on the White River
in Arkansas, a greenstone celt and stone pipes of the double-handled
or "Siouan modified monitor type," which, however, were perforated through only one stem. He called attention to a band of discoloration around the handle of the celt, which he attributed to some
detail of attachment. A similar band appears on all of the long
Gahagan celts.
Other polished stone artifacts include the discoidals (Plate 26,
No. 1). The boatstone found by Moore in Pit 1 increases the pol-

108

Teza~ A~’ch~o~ogi¢~l ~.~.d Pa~eo~tolog~¢o~

ished stone forms from this mound to three -the ceremonial celt,
discoidal, and boatstone.
The list of stone forms is completed by mention of the ear discs,
pulley or spool type, of which nine occur. The largest pair (Plate
28, No. 3, 4) is identical with one of several pairs illustrated by
Thoburn (9), found in a Caddoan earth lodge ruin near Fort Coffee, Oklahoma.
G.

Bone.

There were 20 flat bone pins, 6 to 7~ inches in length, with blunt,
rounded tips and square or bifurcated (fish-tail) bases. Three
have hilt-like carved bases, otherwise no decorations occur.
Seventeen antler tips, one to two inches in length, had sockets in
the base, evidently for use as arrow tips (Plate 28, No. 2, 2). Similar tips are listed by Cole and Deuel in the culture complex of the
Spoon River focus, Mississippi pattern, in Illinois (17).
One blunt tool, four beaver incisors and seven ear ornaments
complete the list of bone artifacts.
H.

Shell.

The shell materials were extremely soft and difficult to preserve.
Appearances of calcium in the soil of the deposits may have represented decayed shell objects. There were seven shell ear ornaments,
the largest an unperforated disc form, 11/~ inches in diameter. Four
have copper bosses on one surface, covering the perforations and
the knot of attaching string (preserved by copper). Ten small
barrel-shaped beads found in one deposit had been carved from the
columella of sea shells (Busycon ?). The most remarkable shell
group is the mass of over 300 beads made from marginella shells
(Plate 29, No. 1). Similar beads, prepared for stringing by grinding a hole in the shoulder, were described by Moore (18) with
Caddo pottery at the Douglas site, on the Arkansas River below Little Rock; also in the Spoon River focus in Illinois by Cole and
Deuel (17).
I.

Other Materials.
PLATE 24

Double frog effigy pipe of red pottery, three views.

Plate

2<1

Further Excavations of ~he Gahagan Mound

11I

Three masses of galena, covered with lead oxide, and several
masses of quartz crystal were found. Fabrics are represented by
four small segments of basketry, which show a 3-over 3-under weave.
Little is known of prehistoric basketry in this region, because it is
seldom preserved. A small charred segment, found with late Caddo
pottery in the Belcher mound, north of Shreveport, showed 4-over
1-under weave.
Discussion
The archaeology of the Red River valley in upper Louisiana and
southwestern Arkansas, the historic center of the Caddo confederation, has been associated with the Caddo culture since the early
excavations of Beyer (19) and Moore (1). The Caddo area has
been extended by Moore to include the Ouachita valley (5) ; by Jackson (20) and Pearce (21) to tim Brazos in Texas; by Thoburn (9)
and others into Oklahoma. The typical Caddo culture was rich in
pottery, decorated with the scroll, the circle and semicircle, the sun
design and the spiral--all curved line designs. Decorative elements
include hatched and cross hatched spaces, spurred lines, impression
of pigment into the lines and engraving after firing. Ornaments
included beads, pendants and large carved gorgets, ear and hair
ornaments made of shell and bone. Grooved and ungrooved celts,
small points made from flakes, the square-stemlned blade and the
pitted pecking stono were widely used. Mounds were raised by the
Caddos for both structures and burials, contrary to the opinion expressed by Walker (22) and others that the Caddos did not build
mounds.
Distinct Caddo subcultures are found by Jackson (20) and Goldschrnidt (23) in east Texas and by us in the stratified Belcher mound
in this parish. Moreover, Ford (3) has outlined a pottery chron.
ology for this general area, with the Marksville type of Southern
IIopewell, the widespread Deasonville, and Coles Creek types, all
antedating the historic cultures. Sherd collections in the Red River
valley of Louisiana show all four types of pottery, with Coles Creek
and Caddo predominating.
In Arkansas, Lemley (10) reports a pre-Caddo culture underlying
Caddo at the Crenshaw mound site, the pottery of which Dickinson
(24) shows to have certain similarities to the Coles Creek complex,

112

Texa~ Arch~ologi~al a~nd Paleo~tological So~i~ty

and decided similarities with vessels found by Moore along the
northwest coast of Florida.
From certain of these northwest Florida coast mounds (25),
Moore described a recurring group of culture elements, including
sheet copper plaques and ornaments, sheets of mica, shell cups and
beads, masses of galena and quartz crystal, pendants of animal teeth
and tooth effigies. In the Crystal River mound (26) and in a group
of over a dozen mounds on the St. John’s River (27), particularly
the Mt. Royal, Shields and Grant mounds, he found highly developed
copper ornamentation, polished stone celts and problematical forms,
with numerous other traits, as shown in Table I, which are identical
with the findings at Gahagan.
TABLE I.
Sim~ Gahagan and Ftorida Traits.

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Mounds in form of truncated cone.
Red sand with burials.
Sheet copper plaques, square, centrally perforated.
Repouss~ designs on copper.
Ellipsoidal wood beads, covered with a single sheet of

copper.

(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(lO)
(11)
(12)

Sheet copper tubes.
Human faces in copper, identical in all details.
Copper artifacts wrapped in fabric.
Copper.covered ear ornaments of shell, stone, bone.
Numerous celts with burials.
Long, slender greenstone celts.
Spatulate celts, both notched and smooth.

(13)

Broken blades and celts with burials.

(14)

Discoidals and boatstone.

(15)

Cahokia type srnall points.

(16)

Sandstone hones.
PLATE 25.

Human effigy pipe of red pottery, three views.

Plate 25

I,’urtl~r Excavations of Sh~ Gahagan Mound

(17)

(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
River).

115

Galena and quartz crystal masses.
Numerous small stones and chert flakes with burials.
Numerous bone pins.
Small shell beads.
Marginella shells, shoulder ground off for stringing.
Animal teeth.
Hand effigy (copper at Gahagan; on pottery at Crystal

Shetrone (28) first called attention to the similarities between
the Crystal River copper and stone artifacts and those of the Ohio
Hopewell culture.

More recently Greenman (29) ’tabulates many

Hopewellian traits from seventeen of the Florida mounds excavated
by Moore, most of them included in the groups mentioned above.
He not only calls attention to the copper work, the ear ornaments,
the animal tooth and claw e[figies, the sheet mica designs and other
features, but also illustrates pots and sherds with Hopewell shapes
and designs from these Florida mounds.
By analogy with Ford’s (3, 7) accurate stratigraphic studies in
central Louisiana, showing a Marksville (Hopewellian)-Coles Creek
sequence in many sites, one might postulate a Florida Hopewellian
culture succeeded by the Coles Creek-like culture typical of the
northwest Florida coast, retaining some of the Hopewell traits, particularly the ceremonial copper forms.
Whatever the Florida sequences, in the Gahagan mound we find
copper plaques, bear claw effigies in copper-covered wood, coppercovered ear ornaments of "various types, copper tubes, the wrapping
of copper ornaments with fabric, the ceremonial breaking of blades
and celts--all listed by Greenman as Hopewe!lian traits---present
with pottery which is entirely dissimilar to the Hopewdlian vessels
of Florida or to the Marksville variant of Ftopewell in Louisiana.
Instead, we have one bowl whose shape and orna~nentation are characteristically Coles Creek, a second whose shape suggests the northwest Florida vessels with incurring rims and suspension holes; we
have large effigy pipes and other Coles Creek traits listed in Table
II.

116

Texas Arch~ological and PaIeon$ologlcal Society

TABLE II.
Coles Creek Traits at Gahagan.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

Pottery bowl shapes.
Parallel "overhanging" incised lines.
Triangular punctates on sherd.
Long.stemmed pottery pipe.
Effigy pipes, large.
Burial in large group.
Small points made from flakes.
Triangular ungrooved celts.

Finally, we have the typical Caddo traits listed in Table III. Surface sherds, while misleading from a temporal standpoint, corroborate these findings in that all which can be identified are Coles
Creek or Caddo.
’FABLE Ill.
Caddo Traits at Gahaga~
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

Bottle form.
Concentric circle design.
Interlocking scroll design.
Pigment impressed into engraved lines.
Highly polished firm pottery, engraved after firing.
Bone hair pins.
Stone ear plugs.
Long-stemmed pottery pipe.
Deep burial pits intrusive into mound.
Burials in extended position.

At only one other site in this area can we find a record of findPLATE 26.
No.
No.
No.
Creek

1. Discoidals of polished s~one.
2. Handled pipes of pottery (1) and stone (2).
Compare Coles
8. Caddoan type bowl (1) and bottle (2).
type bowl (3).

PLATE 27.
No. 1. Stone blades, both pits. Note absence of stems.
No. 2. Celts from both pits. Materials include greenstone, granite,
slate, sandstone.
No. 3. Ceremonial celts of slate and greenstone, l’~ote spatulate
forms.

Plate 26

Plate 27

Fur~hez Ezc~v~,~ of ~h~ Gal~ga~ Mo~d

121

ings similar to those at Gahagan. Harrington (2) described, at the
Mineral Springs site in southwestern Arkansas, large deep pits in
which numerous long blades, small points, long-stemmed pottery
pipes and copper ornaments were found. A fragInent of basketry,
attached to a copper-covered parrot’s head of wood, showed the
same 3-over 3-under weave as found at Gahagan. Three pottery
vessels, illustrated as coming from this site, show non-Caddoan influence--incur~ring rims, incised lines paralleling the rims, one
square.bottomed (Coles Creek elements).
Conclusions
We can surmise that at some early date a considerable native
group left their Florida kindred--probably on the St. Johns River-and traveled across to the ~Mississippi, up it and the Red, finally
reaching the Gahagan site.

We cannot say whether this group orig-

inally established the large site, built the mounds and cut burial
pits through this mound at a later date, or took over a previously
established site, cutting the intrusive pits for burials of personages
of importance, as these must have been.

Although retaining many

of their ceremonial objects and customs, sufficient time had elapsed
since they left the Florida group for different pottery and pipe traits
to be either borrowed or developed, .suggesting that these burials
were made during a period of culture transition.

The e:~cellent condition of the teeth, differing from the advanced
caries of the later maize-eating Caddoes and more like the good dentition of the hunting and fishing tribes, would indicate that they
had not yet developed the rather intensive agriculture of the later
Caddoes.
It is hoped that further excavations and study will throw a better
light on the origin of this unique group and its relationships to the
other cultures of this area.
We wish to acknowledge our appreciation to the Frank Grocery
Company of Shreveport for permission to excavate and to their
manager, Mr. Pullen, for his cooperation. We are indebted to
Messrs. Dak Pellerin and Clayton Dupree, Mesdames Webb and
Pellerin for assistance in excavations and preparation of materials
for this report; to Dr. Walter T. Colquitt for assistance with pho-

122

Texas Arch¢ological and Paleontological Society

tography; to Mr. James Ford for valuable suggestions and references.

Mr. Pellerin made several of the sketches used herewith.

The Children’s Clinic,
Shreveport, Louisiana.
Re]erences
(1)

Moore, C. B., Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River, Journal

of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, pp. 511-522, 1912.

(2) Harrington, M. R., Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas, Indian
Notes and Monographs, Museum of the American Indian, Heye
Foundation, 1920.
(3)

Ford, J. A., Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from

Louisiana and Mississippi, Anthropological Study No. 2, Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, November, 1936.

(4) Moore, C. B., Some Aboriginal Sites in Louisiana and in
Arkansas, Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Second
Series, Volume XVI, p. 22, 1913.
(5) Moore, C. B., Antiquities of the Ouachita Valley, Journal
of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Volume XIV, Part 1, pp. 113115, 1909.
(6)

Neild, E. F., Personal Communication.

(7)

Ford, J. A., Ceramic Decoration Sequence at an Old Indian

Village Site Near Sicily Island, Louisiana.

Anthropological Study

No. 1, Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey,
1935.

(8~ Jackson, A. T., Some Pipes of East Texas, Bulletin of Texas
Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Volume 5, 1933.
PLATE 28.
No. 1. Representative small points. Note the several groups of
identical shapes, usually found together.
:No. 2. Artifacts of bone, including pins (1) and (4), socketed
antler tips (2), beaver teeth (3) and awl of deer bone (5).
No. 3. Ear ornaments; copper plaques (1) and (3), copper-surfaced wood (2) and (6); copper-surfaced stone (4) and (5), stone
and bone (7).

Plate 28

Further Excavations o] Sh~ Gaha,gan Mound

125

(9) Thoburn, J. B., The Prehistoric Cultures of Oklahoma, in
Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley, by W. K. Moore~head,
Yale University Press, 1931.
(10) Lemley, H. J., Discoveries Indicating a Pre-Caddo Culture
on Red River in Arkansas, Bulletin of Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society, Volume 8, 1936.
(11) Moorehead, W. K., Taylor, L. B. and Leighton, M., The
Cahokia Mounds, University of Illinois Bulletin, Volume 26, 1928,
Plate XIV.
(12) Shetrone, H. C., The Mound-Builders, Appleton-Century
Company, New York, 1936, p. 78.
(13) Moore, C. B., Certain River Mounds of Duval County,
Florida, Journal of Academy of Natural Sciences, Second Series,
Volume X, 1896, pp. 486-487.
(14) Moorehead, W. K., Stone Ornaments of the American Indian, The Andover Press, Andover Mass., 1917, p. 142.
(15) Brown, C. S., Archaeology of Mississippi, Mississippi State
Geological Survey, 1926.
(16) Moore, C. B., Antiquities of the St. Francis, White and
Black Rivers, Arkansas, Journal of Academy of Natural Sciences,
Second Series, Volume 14, 1910, pp. 341-348.
(17) Cole, F. C. and Deuel, T., Rediscovering Illinois, The University of Chicago Press, 1937, p. 127.
(18) Moore, C. B., Certain Mounds of Arkansas and of Mississippi, Journal of Academy of Natural Sciences, Volume XIII, Part
4, 1908.
(19) Beyer, G. E., The Mounds of Louisiana, II, Louisiana Historical Society Publications, Volume II, No. 1, 1897.
(20) Jackson, A. T., Types of East Texas Pottery, Texas Archae.
ological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Volume 6, Abilene,
September, 1934.
(21) Pearce, J. E., The Archaeology of East Texas, American
Anthropologist, Volume 34, No. 4, 1932.

126

Texa~ Areheologica2 and Pa!eon~ologi~a~ Society

(22) Walker, W. M., A Caddo Burial Site at Natchitoches,
Louisiana, Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Volume 94, No.
14, Washington, 1935.
(23) Goldschmidt, W. R., A Report on the Archaeology of Titus
County, Bulletin of Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Volume 7, Abilene, 1935, pp. 89-99.
(24) Dickinson, S. D., The Ceramic Relationships of the PreCaddo Pottery from the Crenshaw Site, Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Volume 8, Abilene, 1936, p. 56.
(25) Moore, C. B., Certain Aboriginal Remains of the Northwest
Florida Coast, Journal of Academy of Natural Sciences, Volume
XII, Part 2, Philadelphia, 1902. Alligator Bayou Mound, p. 150;
Anderson Bayou, p. 160; Davis Point, p. 176; Pierce Mounds, p.
217; Huckleberry Landing, p. 234; Tucker Mound, p. 257; Yent
Mound, p. 265.
(26) Moore, C. B., Certain Aboriginal Mounds of the Central
t~lorida West Coast, Journal of Academy of Natural Sciences of
Philadelphia, Volume XII, Part 3, pp. 379-413, 1903.
(27) Descriptions of these mounds by Moore appear in Volume
X of the Journal of Academy of Natural Sciences as follows: Mt.
Royal, pp. 16-35, 130-146; Sand Mound in Pine Woods, pp. 37-42;
Tick Island Mound, pp. 48-63, 148-158; Mound near St. Augustine
Road, p. 186; Grant Mound, pp. 200-204; 473-488; Johnson Mound,
pp. 450-452; Shields Mound, pp. 452-468; Mounds South of Grant
Mound, pp. 488-494; Murphy Island, pp. 503-516; Gilbert Mound,
pp. 468-470; Monroe Mound, pp. 470-472; Reddie Point Mounds,
pp. 497.498.
(28) Shetrone, H. C., op. cir., page 456.
(29) Greenman, E. F., Hopewellian Traits in Florida, American
Antiquity, Volume III, No. 4, 1938, pp. 327-333.
PLATE 29
No. 1. Beads made from marginella shells.
No. 2. Copper objects; human masks (1), hand effigies (2), bead
(3), curved ovals (4), bear claw effigies (5).
No. 3. Copper face or mask.

Plate 29

