NORTH-CENTRAL AREA
Because of mergings with archeological remains in surrounding areas, it is difficult to set definite boundaries for
this part of Texas. In a general way it is marked by pottery
cultures which existed in late pre-E,uropean times, the pottery being characterized as undecorated and heavily tempered with pulverized shell (type Nocona Plain). For present purposes the boundaries are taken as the 100th meridian
on the west, the Caddoan archeological area in East Texas
on the east, marked by Lamar, Delta, and Hopkins Counties,
the Red River on the north, and a part of the upper Brazos
River valley on the south, and the upper Trinity River drainage in Tarrant, Dallas, and Kaufman Counties.
Very similar archeological materials occur in southcentral Oklahoma (Bell and Baerreis, 1951), principally in
the W~shita River valley and the Lake Texoma area. On
the other three sides there are gradual transitions into different cultural remains treated in other sections of this
volume. Trade pottery appears in the eastern part of this
area from the Caddoan archeological area (see Wylie Focus),
and trade pottery and true metates in its western part from
Pueblo Indian culture in the Southwest (see Henrietta
Focus). The native cultures of this area as a whole, however, were definitely of a Plains flavor, so that there are
more similarities with Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska
than there are to the east, west, or south.
As in the other parts of Texas (except Trans-Pecos),
projectile points of types essentially belonging to ~he PaleoAmerican Stage have been found in surface collections,
sometimes mixed with material of later stages. No sites of
the Paleo-American Stage have been excavated, but the
"Lagow Sand Pit Man" provides an interesting case of ancient human remains ~(see below).
The Archaic Stage is represented by the Carrollton
and Elam Foci of Trinity Aspect; and undoubtedly other
complexes are yet to be defined. The Neo-American Stage
is represented by two loci, Henrietta and Wylie; and like-

North-Central Area

75

wise further complexes are to be expected. There are indications that certain remains along the Red River, now
included in Henrietta Focus, may provide a distinct focus
when further field work is done and strict associations can
be defined. The Bryan Focus of south-central Oklahoma
(Bell and Baerre~s, 1951) may be found to have extended
south of the Red River; the ceramics of Henrietta and Bryan
Foci are similar but not identical and other traits should
be worked out in relation to these loci or to others not yet
defined. Our knowledge of the Historic Stage is virtually
confine~l to a single large site, that of Spanish Fort, part of
which is on the Red River bank in Montague County, an~i
part on the Oklahoma bank opposite.
PALEO-AMERICAN STAGE
Witte (1942) has described a few fluted points from
what he has called Clear Fork sites (see Central Texas
Area) in the general .vicinity of the Little Wichita River
and its confluence with the Red. Other fluted points, both
Folsom and Clovis, some very small points apparently of the
Eden type, and numerous P~ainview and Meserve points
have come from surface localities in various counties. The
Plainview type also appears in a number of Carrollton
Focus components (see Archaic Stage). As in the Edwards
Plateau Aspect of Central Texas, there appears to be actual
survival of Paleo-American projectile-point types into
Archaic complexes, as well as accidental association with the
latter when ancient points were picked up by later people.
Lagow Sand Pits, Dallas County
In 1920, human bones were discovered by workmen in
a gravel deposit, with the overlying strata reported to be
undisturbed. The degree of fossilization of the human bones
appeared to be about equal to that of the fauna in the
gravel, which included mammoth, camel~ horse, bison, sabertosth cat, and other Pleistocene species. The skeletal material is so fragmentary that little can be made of the physical characteristics (Shuler, 1923). There was no evidence
of cultural material at the site. From the point of view of
Pleistocene antiquity for human skeletal remains, the Lagow

Texas Archeological Society

76

Sand Pit discovery may be compared with the recent discovery at Midland, Texas (see Panhandle-Plains Area), and
perhaps to the two mineralized skeletons reported by Ray
(1934) from near Buffalo Gap south of Abilene.
ARCHAIC STAGE
Carrollton Focus (Trinity Aspect)

The Carrollton and Elam Foci of Trinity Aspect were
recently defined by Crook and Harris (Crook, 1952; Crook
and Harris, 1952, 1954). The Aspect is known primarily in
the upper Trinity River valley, but it may extend as far
south as the Whitney Reservoir on Brazos River. The
general artifact assemblage appears most closely related to
the East Texas Aspect of the Archaic Stage, but there are
some similarities to the south with the Edwards Plateau
Aspect. All known components in the Trinity River valley
occur within the two uppermost members of the Union
Terminal--Carrollton terrace.
The following list of traits for Carrollton Focus is based
on test trenches, surface collections, and study of local collections, as compiled by Harris and Crook.
COMPONENTS:

Type Components: Wheeler Site near junction of Denton Creek and Elm Fork of Trinity River (Crook,
1952) ; and Dallas Lake Site just below old Lake Dallas Dam (Crook and Harris, 1952).
Other Components: Station 2 on Denton Creek, upstream from Wheeler Site; Station 4, below Backman’s Dam in Dallas; Station 8, near Seagoville in
southeast Dallas County; Station 10, near Trinidad,
Henderson County (Crook and Harris, 1952).
TYPES OF SITES:
Small campsites usually buried in river terrace material near small tributary streams.
HOUSES:
No data.

North-Central Area

LIVELIHOOD:
No direct evidence; hunting and gathering implied.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Absent.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow points: Absent.
Dart points: Carrollton, T~nity, Wheeler, and Dallas
types have been described by Crook and Harris
(1952) but whether they are truly distinctive from
other types described herein is open to question.
Gary points also occur, probably including the "Denton Nub-Stemmed" of Crook and Harris. Examples
of the Clovis and Plainview types have been found
in Carrollton components, and are either survivals
of an earlier cultural stage or of secondary association (picked up by later Indians).
Choppers: Made of quartzite and characterized by
¯ large, crude percussion chipping.
Scrapers: Clear Fork end scrapers, roughly triangular
in outline with steeply beveled bits at the broad end;
¯ some have concave bits but more frequently the bits
are straight. Also flint spalls with fine flaking on
one or more edges; and large, roughly chipped side
scrapers, usually made of reddish quartzite.
Gravers and Spokeshaves:

Present.

Drills: Present, with stems similar to those of the local
dart-point types, or made from broken parts of such
dart points.
Knives: Crude, triangular in shape, chipped on both
faces. Another form in leaf-shaped and usually better made.
Axes: CarroIlton type; crudely made, double bitted with
constriction in middle, or single-bitted with constriction opposite cutting edge.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
"Waco Sinkers", egg-shaped stream pebbles smoothed

Texas Archeological Society

by natural wear, with notch across each end.
Manos of sandstone, one-hand size, rectangular in shape
with rounded corners. Used on either one side or
both.
Milling stones showing rotary motion.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
No data:
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL, BONE, ANTLER:
No data.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
No data.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
No data:

RELATIONS:
Sharing of certain dart-point types with East Texas Aspect to east and Edwards Plateau Aspect to south suggests contemporaneity at least in part of all three.
Carrollton type of chipped axe is similar to that of the
Fourche Maline complex of eastern Oklahoma, an
early pottery culture, suggesting either contemporancity or ancestry of Carrollton type.
ESTIMATED AGE:
2,000 to 1,000 B. C. (Crook and Harris, 1952).
SOURCES:
Crook and Harris, 1952, 1954a, 1954b; Crook, 1952.
Elam Focus (Trinity Aspect)
The Elam Focus, while closely related to the Carrollton,
is differentiated from it by dart points of smaller size, by
an evident absence of the "Waco Sinkers", and by an apparently later position as judged by correlation with stream
terraces.
COMPONENTS:
Type Components: Wood and Milton Sites in Dallas
County (Crook and Harris, 1952).

North-Central Area

79

Other Components: Loving Site near mouth of Prairie
Creek; and below this along Trinity River at least 18
others probably belonging to this focus, all in southeast Dallas County (Crook and Harris, 1952).
TYPES OF SITES:
Open campsites located on terraces above the presentday floodplains of both large and small streams.
HOUSES:
No data:
LIVELIHOOD:
No direct evidence; hunting and gathering of wild plant
foods inferred.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow points: Absent.
Dart Points: Ellis, Yarbrough, .Elam, and Gary. The
"Ensor" and "Darl" points reported by Crook and
Harris appear to belong to the Yarbrough type.
Drills: Slightly expanding stems or butts, shafts usually -beveled.
Knives: Predominantly thick, rough, leaf-shaped; rarely
double-pointed.
Scrapers: Clear Fork type of end scrapers like those of
Carrollton Focus but smaller and less numerous. Also
high-peaked "turtle-back" scrapers; heavy side scrapers; and small scrapers made by retouching one or
more edges of flint spalls.
Choppers:

Made from large quartzite nodules.

ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Manos of sandstone, one-hand size, used on one face
(rare).
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
No data.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL, BONE, ANTLER:
No data.

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

8O

MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Hammerstones of quartzite.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
No data.
ESTIMATED AGE:
500 B. C. to 450 A. D. (Crook and Harris, 1952). While
these authors leave a 500-year gap between the end
of Carrollton Focus and the beginning of Elam, the
two foci must have overlapped in time.
SOURCES:
Crook and Harris, 1952, 1954a.
NEO-AMERICAN STAGE
Henrietta Focus

The Henrietta Focus was first defined by Krieger (1946,
pp. 87-159) on the basis of excavations at the M. D. Harrell
Site in Young County, at the junction of Brazos River and
the Clear Fork. Surface collections in many other counties
in the upper valleys of the Red, Trinity, and Brazos Rivers,
and their tributaries, were added to determine the extent
of the focus. The principal diagnostic trait is a plain pottery heavily tempered with crushed mussel shell, the type
Nocona Plain. Commonly associated with this pottery are
small triangular arrow points with two notches in their
edges, and often a notch in the base as well; and a variety
of bone implements, among them hoe blades made from
bison scapulae and skulls.
Many sites of the Henrietta Focus represent a sedentary
or semi-sedentary population supported by agriculture,
hunting, gathering of wild plants, and fishing. The bone
hoe blades are like those commonly associated with farming
Indians of the Great Plains. The variety of implements
made of bones of bison and other animals also points to the
Plains, as in the case of the Antelope Creek Focus (see
PanhandJe-Plains Area). The shell-tempered 1~ocona Plain
pottery may also be of northern origin, as it occurs in cen-

North-Central Area

81

tral Oklahoma and is quite different from any shell-tempered ware in the Caddoan archeological area to the east.
Relationships to the south are also evident in the apparent
survival of dart-point types of the Edwards Plateau Aspect,
although in the pottery-bearing complexes these darts are
small and poorly made when compared with those of the
Archaic Stage.
Contact with the Puebloan culture of the Southwest is
shown by the common occurrence in Henrietta Focus of true
metates, on which grinding was done with a back-and-forth
motion of the mano, as in the corn grinding of the Puebloans
and Middle American Indians. Occasionally potsherds of
painted Puebloan types appear in Henrietta components,
aiding in establishing their age. In the upper Red River
valley, in the area about Vernon, Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Ray
have found several magnificent polished celts of Ouachita
Sandstone which undoubtedly were made within the Caddoan area in southwest Arkansas or southeast Oklahoma,
and carried as far westward as the Panhandle boundary by
Indian trade (Ray, J. H., 1946, p. 261).
The trait list below is based primarily on the Harrell
Site, the added data collected by Krieger, and Witte (1936).
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: M. D. Harrell Site in Young County,
excavated by University of Texas--WPA crew in 193839 under supervision of George R. Fox and A. T. Jackson (Krieger, 1946).
Other Components: Numerous unnamed sites in Young,
Palo Pinto, Archer, Baylor, Wilbarger, Wichita, Clay,
Montague, Cooke, and perhaps other counties.
TYPES OF SITES:
Open campsites on terraces of large and small streams,
also on upland areas of loose, sandy soil where primi¯ tive agriculture could have been practiced. Size of
sites varies from very small to as much’ as 30 acres
or more.
HOUSES:
No data.

Texas Archeological Society

82
LIVELIHOOD:

Based primarily on maize agriculture and hunting. Direct evidence of maize found in charred cobs and
kernels, but not of other domesticated plants as yet.
Bison and deer bones most numerous, but many small
animals, birds, and fish also represented. Occasional
bone fish-hooks. Mussel shells found in quantity, and
various wild plant foods and nuts probably used.

STORAGE PITS:
Simple pits two or three feet deep, without clay lining,
and of irregular shapes are found in excavated sites
and may have been used for food storage; they contain no skeletal material.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Type:

Nocona Plain.

Temper: Pulverized mussel shell.
Form: Mainly jars with bulging shoulders and rim
bent outward, bases flat in some cases, perhaps convex in others. A few simple bowls, fairly deep, with
convex bottoms. No complete vessels.
Decoration: Usually undecorated, but occasionally
there are rows of small appliqued nodes around the
neck at the base of the rim. Rarely, there are small
rounded punctates on rim or body, or faint striations
on body. No basketry impressions have been observed on the flat bases although this trait occurs
on very similar pottery in southern Oklahoma,
where the noded decoration is more common than
south of the Red River.
Fragments of crude clay figurines, none complete
enough to see form. Beads (?) of clay, roughly barrel-shaped with perforation running length-wise.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Harrell, Fresno, Cliffton, Young, and
Scallorn types common; Alba, Bonham, and Perdiz
also occur.

North-Central Area

Dart Points: Castroville, Pedernales, and Nolan points
were recognized at the Harrell S i t e by Krieger
(1946) but it was not proved conclusively that they
were made by the Henrietta Focus people; they may
have been survivals from an older culture in the vicinity. However, they were very poorly made and
"decadent" when compared with true Archaic specimens from the Edwards Plateau Aspect and may well
have continued into this horizon. Darl points are
common in the ~-Iarrell and related sites in the upper
Brazos valley, with either the stem or the blade beveled in opposite directions; if both the stem and blade
are .beveled, these are done in opposite directions from
one another. Other dart points occur, not yet defined
by type.
Knives: Diamond-shaped with four alternately-beveled
edges, or with two opposed bevels at one end and
rounded at the other. Also leaf-shaped knives with
bases straight, convex, or almost pointed. "Curved
knives" with one edge straight and other convex.
Scrapers: Small snub-nosed form, heel end sometimes
constricted as though for halting. Side scrapers made
¯ by retouching one or more edges of flint spalls very
common. Oval scrapers, occasionally well made. The
Clear Fork end scraper ("gouge") possibly survives,
but if so is very rare.
Flakes with serrated edges, "saws".
Drills: Most commonly made from small flakes, unshaped except for the shaft, which is delicate and
only about 1 inch (2.5 cm.) long. Also larger drills
with base shaped to a narrow T or more or less square.
Spokeshaves and tiny graver points found on flint spalls.
Pick-like objects, crudely chipped, of size to fit in palm
of hand.
Obsidian chips and (rarely) artifacts such as small projectile points.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Metates of sandstone, thin, flat, used over nearly entire

Texas Archeological Society

surface but usually on one side only; often well shaped
by pecking. With extensive use a very shallow basin
may appear, but never as deep as on milling stones.
Back-and-forth grinding can be seen by scratches
running lengthwise.
Manos of rounded-rectangular shape, usually worn down
on both faces but the two faces pecked to different
degrees of roughness, may be linked with the true
metates because they also bear straight scratches
across their faces from back-and-forth rubbing. Most
are of one-hand size, but long, two-hand manos appear occasionally in the upper Red River valley.
Milling stones less common, made from slabs of various
thicknesses of both sandstone and limestone; rotary
motion produced oval basins near the center, usually
on one side, occasionally on both. The sills around
the basin were not used and the whole stone shows
little workmanship other than the ground basin.
Manos, commonly more or less oval stream pebbles of
sandstone, limestone, and quartzite, and which do not
show the crossing scratches of back-and-forth motion,
are presumed to have been used on the milling stones.
(One may suppose that the true metates were used
for corn-grinding, a trait derived from the Pueblo
culture, while the milling stones are representative
of a very widespread implement in North America,
of much greater age than metates, for pulverizing a
variety of wild plant products, including nuts).
Hones of sandstone.

Shaft smoothers or abraders, consisting of poorly shaped
sandstone blocks with a single groove running lengthwise. Possibiy used in pairs clamped over arrow shaft,
but definite pairs have not been recognized in this
complex. More common in components close to Red
R4ver.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Celts, small, highly polished, of hematite.

North-Central Area

Celts, thick, oval in cross-section with tapered poll, of
polished "green-stone" (Ouachita Sandstone). Found
principally close to Red River and probably carried
westward up that valley from Caddoan area.
Pipes, equal-armed, of fine white siltstone or pale greenish-brown sandstone.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Small mussel shells perforated at thickest part near
hinge (so-called "Hoe blades" but too fragile for this
purpose).
Beads of OlivelIa shells with spires removed; probably
a Gulf of Mexico species.
Disk beads cut from mussel (?) shells.
Mussel shells with serrated edges ("saws").
Large unperforated mussel shells, possibly used as receptacles.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
Hoe blades of bison scapula, with and without socket
in proximal end for halting to wooden handle.
Hoe blades cut from top of bison skull, using base of
horn as the halted end.
’"Digging-stick points" of hollowed-out bison metapodial
or cannon bone, with shaft beveled to chisel-like edge
(Red River components).
Knives and/or "draw-shave" scrapers made from bison
scapula and skull-horn sections, with cutting edge
running lengthwise (Red River components).
Awls made from split sections of deer .metapodial or
cannon bone; heads may be unworked (using natural
end bone as butt), the head partly worked down, or
the head entirely removed.
Awls made from splinters of deer and bison bone with
only the tip worked.
Awls of fish bone sharpened at tip.
Awls of bison ribs trimmed to sharp tip
components).

(Red. River

Texas Archeological Society

86

"Rasps" of bison ribs notched along inner edge; occasionally othe~ bones notched along one edge or face.
Fish-hooks of bone, rare.
Long tubes (beads?) of bird-leg bone, either plain or
covered with finely incised geometric designs.
Beads of short, plain sections of bone, from birds or
small animals.
Flaking tools (?) of deer ulna trimmed to chisel-like
points.
Flaking tools (?) of antler tines with bluntly rounded
tips.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Large. flint hammerstone, thick or discoidal in shape.
Small blocks of hematite, faces scraped, then polished.
Pieces of meteorite.
Basketry impressions (coiled) on bases of pots (one
Red River component; trait probably intrusive from
Oklahoma).
BLFRIAL CUSTOMS:
Bodies tightly to loosely flexed, placed singly or in
groups in shallow graves, with limestone slabs carelessly placed around sides of grave or over skeleton.
Burials placed in restricted areas of village site.
Usually without offerings that have been preserved;
personal adornments such as beads left on bodies.
Heads not oriented in any particular, direction. Hands
sometimes ,over face. Multiple interments may be up to
seven individuals; sometimes they were placed parallel with legs placed together, spoon-fashion. Instances
have been found where either skull or mandible, or
both, were entirely missing, and others where these
parts were in the grave but out of their proper place.
RELATIONS:
Celts from southeast Oklahoma or southwest Arkansas
carried westward up Red River valley as far as
vicinity of Vernon (J. H. Ray, 1946).

North-Central Area

Chupadero Black-on-White, "brown ware", and glazepaint sherds from the Puebloan culture appear to be
associated with some components.
Obsidian, probably from New Mexico.
Flat metates with back-and-forth motion, probably
diffused eastward from the Puebloan culture.
Sharing of a few dart point types with Edwards Plateau
Aspect to south, and arrow point types with Central
Texas Aspect to south; type Alba with Gibson Aspect
in East Texas Caddoan area.
Olivella-shell beads by trade with Gulf of Mexico.
ESTIMATED AGE:
Puebloan trade pottery suggests a period of about 14001600 A.D., but the Focus may have been established
earlier, before this trade began. The general pattern
of life was similiar to that of the Wichita Indians of
historic times, but there are some significant differences and no evidence of European contact has been
found with Henrietta Focus components. (Krieger,
1946).
SOURCES:
Krieger, 1946, 1947b, ~949; J. H. Ray, 1946; Witte, 1936.
Wylie Focus
During preliminary analysis, Krieger (1946) included
sites as ~far east as Dallas and Collin Counties in the Henrietta.Focus. Beginning in 1948, the intensive reconnaissance
and excavations of the Smithsonian Institution’s River
Basin Surveys, added to many years of field work by members of the Dallas Archaeological Society, resulted in a
large amount of data which led to the recognition of a
Wylie Focus as a separate cultural unit. Components of this
focusare concentrated along the East Fork of Trinity
River and one of its principal tributaries, Pilot Grove
Creek. The chief components so far known are in Collin
and Rockwall Counties.
Geographically, the Wylie Focus lies

at

the

south-

88

Texas Archeological Society

eastern edge of the Great Plains and just west of the Caddoan archeological area of northeastern Texas. The artifacts reflect this intermediate position, being a blend of
Plains and Caddoan traits, probably with some survivals
from an earlier Archaic Stage. Judging from intrusive pottery types, Wylie Focus was contemporaneous in part with
both the Gibson and Fulton Aspects (see East Texas Area).
Stephenson (1950) placed the Wylie Focus within the Fulton Aspect, but has since withdrawn this in favor of treating Wylie Focus as an amalgamation of traits which can
not easily be placed in any known aspect.
One of the most distinctive and interesting traits of
this focus is the presence of a large, saucer-shaped pit in
nearly every known component. The use of these pits is unknown. They appear too large to be house floors, and although they. haste, definite floors, postholes have not been
found in any prder that would indicate walls. At the Hogge
Bridge Site, where such a pit was excavated carefully, it
was found that the central part had been dug out and the
earth piled around the edges to increase the height of the
rim. Both pit and rim, however, had smooth contours and
gentle slopes. The Hogge Bridge pit measured about 100
feet across the highest parts of the rim and 10 feet deep
in the center; one burial was found in the rim earth but
this hardly explains the purpose of these basin-shaped earthworks (Stephenson, 1952).
Except for the pits, few if any Wylie Focus traits are
distinctive, but the total assemblage is clearly different
from any others. The question has not been settled whether
these people made any pottery of their own, or obtained
it all by trade: the plain, shell-tempered Nocona Plain
probably comes from Henrietta Focus people to the west, and
various engraved, incised, and punctated clay-tempered
wares from Caddoan tribes to the east. Some of the latter
sherds are obviously trade pieces, yet the total pottery is
perhaps too much to be explained as entirely imported.
.Agriculture is indicated by charred corn and bone hoe

Nor~;h-Cent,raI Area

blades; because of this it is probable that some pottery was
made.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: Hogge Bridge Site, Collin County,
excavated in 1950-51 by River Basin Surveys under
direction of Robert L. Stephenson and Edward B.
Jelks (Stephenson, 1952).
Other Components: Farmersville, Branch, Campbell
Hole, Thompson Lake, and Butler Hole Sites, and
Site 41-18D7-5 in Collin County; Upper Rockwall,
Lower Rockwall, Glen Hill, and Gilkey Hill Sites in
RockwalI County (Stephenson, 1949 a, 1949 b, 1952;
Harris, 1942, 1947, 1948 a, 1948 c, 1948 d; Housewright,
et ai., 1947, 1948; Wilson, 1941, 1946; Hanna and
Harris, 1948; Sollberger and Harris, 1949).
TYPES OF SITES:
Occupational areas on lower terraces of major
streams, usually adjacent to or within the normal
floodplain. Village sites range from two to 12 acres,
and often are situated on a low knoll.
HOUSES:
One house floor excavated at Butler Hole Site by
members of Dallas Archeological Society gave evidence of a small, oval structure, entrance probably
through space between wall posts. Floor of hard,
packed clay; central posthole and small cache pits
within house; walls of wattle and daub construction.
EARTHWORKS:
A large, basin-shaped circular pit in most known components, possibly in all. Excavated pit in Hogge
Bridge Site about 100 feet across the surrounding rim
and 10 feet deep in center. Those at other sites range
from somewhat smaller to somewhat larger.
LIVELItIOOD:
Agriculture indicated by fragments of charred corn at
some sites, and hoe blades of bison scapula. Hunting

9O

Texas Archeological Society

and gathering of wild foods and nuts also important.
Fishing indicated by fish bones and occasional bone
fish-hooks.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery not abundant, but small amounts of a wide
variety of types found on Wylie Focus sites. Possibly
all trade ware alth.ough some may have been indigenous. Sherds with shell temper of clay-grit temper
most frequent, although occasionally sherds with
pulverized bone or limestone found.
Types: Nocona Plain (see Henrietta Focus); Sanders
Plain, Sanders Engraved, and Monkstown Fingernail
Punctated (see Sanders Focus); brushed and incised
ware probably from Frankston Focus; and unidentified shell-tempered sherds. Also engraved sherds
from Caddoan area which differ from known types.
Some bone-tempered and limestone-tempered sherds
from Farmersville Site have basketry impressions on
vessel bottoms, a trait more common in southern
and eastern Oklahoma.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow points: Most numerous are Alba, Fresno,
and Harrell types; Bonham and Perdiz also occur.
Dart points:
minor.

Gary points dominant; Ellis points

Scrapers: Small, snub-nosed, triangular in shape;
large, crude scrapers of triangular, oval, and circular form. End scrapers made by chipping a steep bit
across broken blades of projectile points, thus leaving stems which may have been used for hafting.
Knives: Moderately large, both triangular and stemmed
forms.
Drills: Small, unworked bases and expanded, T-shaped
bases.

North-Central Area

91

ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Shaft smoothers or abraders of san~lstone with longitudinal groove.
Millings stones: Limestone slabs with shallow basins
produced by rotary grinding.
Manos: More or less oval pebbles used on one or both
faces.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Boatstones (rare).
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Mussel shells with chipped edges (used as scrapers?).
Mussel shells with large holes cut near hinge (so-called
"hoes").
Disk beads of conch shell.
Conch-shell gorgers, undecorated.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLERS:
Long slender bone pins, proximal end unaltered.
Short pins, proximal end unaltered.
Short pins with grooves around proximal end and
ground to a flat spatulate shape.
Bone fish-hooks (rare).
Tubular bird-bone beads, 1 to 2 inches long.
Bone beaming tools.
Bone atlatl hooks.
Bone awls, splinters smoothed to sharp tips.
Hoe blades of bison scapula.
Flaking tools (?) made from split deer ulna.
Flaking tools (?) made from antler tines with rounded
tips.
MISCELLANEOUS ARTIFACTS:
Hematite pigments.
¯ Hammerstones:
Perforated bear-tooth pendants.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Both single and multiple interments, all flexed and
sometimes located in a definite burial area. Usually

92

Texas Archeological Society

no offerings but in a few instances bone artifacts
have been found in burials.
RELATIONS:
Trade pottery from Sanders Focus of Gibson Aspect
to the east.
Brushed sherds and perhaps others appear to come
from the Frankston Focus of Fulton Aspect to the
east.
Plain shell-tempered Nocona Plain sherds ~either by
trade with Henrietta Focus to the west, or the type
was made by people of both loci.
Sharing of arrow-point types with Gibson Aspect (Alba
points), Central Texas Aspect (Perdiz points), Hen-.
rietta Focus (Alba, Fresno, and Harrell points).
ESTIMATED AGE:
1300 to 1600 A. D. (Stephenson, 1952).
SOURCES:
Hanna and Harris, 1948; Harris, 1942, 1947, 1948a, 1948b,
1948c, 1948d, 1949; Itousewright and Wilson, 1942;
Housewright, et al., 1947; Housewright and Harris,
1948; Krieger, 1946; Lehmer, 1952; Stephenson, 1949a,
1949b, 1952; Bell and Baerreis, 1951.
HISTORIC STAGE
Spanish For~ Site
The so-called Spanish Fort Site is one of the largest
historic sites in the southern Great Plains. Actually, there
are two sites, one on each side of Red River. That on the
Texas side is about one mile northwest of the present
town of Spanish Fort in northern Montague County, on the
eastern side of a big northward bend of Red River. In
Jefferson County, Oklahoma, the historic site is said to be
as large as that on the Texas side.
As a matter of fact, neither of these had. anything to
do with occupation by Spaniards. They were known in the
18th century as the "twin villages" of the Taovayas Indians,
a tribe of the w~Shita group. There is a widespread belief

North-Central Area

that Coronado’s Expedition visited these towns before
going northward to the land of Quivira, in what is now
central Kansas, but there is nothing in the Coronado documents to substantiate this. The two Taovayas villages were
probably first seen by white men not long after the French
had established the post of Natchito.ches in central Louisiana. The French were primarily interested in trade and
rapidly pushed their explorations up the Red River valley,
perhaps reaching the mouth of Little Wichita River (above
Spanish Fort) as early as 1718, The Taovayas villages became
an important trading center, where Comanches from the
west came to meet both the Taovayas and the French who resided among them. This situation must have obtained
until the Louisiana Purchase in 180,3, after which the French
were no longer claimants to this land, but the Taovayas
continued to live there.
The Spanish had only one contact with "Spanish Fort"
--an unsuccessful attack on it in 1759 to punish the Taovayas
and Comanches who had, the year before, come south to
destroy the Spanish mission of San Saba in central Texas.
This mission had been established in 1756 among Apaches
who were the-mortal enemies of the allied Comanches and
Tao~ayas. When Captain Parflla~ commander at San Saba,
led the expedition northward to’ retaliate in 1759, he
astonished to find as many as 6,000 confederated Indians at
the Taovayas "village" (which must have been the one on
the south side of Red River). Moreover, it was fortified
with entrenchments, stockades, and ditches, and over it
flew the French flag. The defending Indians were well
drilled, in military discipline and soon routed the attacking
Spanish, who left all their baggage and six field pieces.
¯ The above notes will make it clear that the objects of Europe.an manufacture which have been found in great amounts
on these sites by many collectors are probably mainly of
French origin. Spanish objects may also exist, either directly from this raid or by some round-about trade from Span°
ish sources in New Mexico and elsewhere. In many cases,
of course, it is impossible to tell whether certain types of

94

Texas Archeological Society

glass beads, iron bit and bridle pieces, parts of guns, locks,
kettles, etc. are of either French or Spanish origin because
they were too much alike. On the other hand, experts
on such objects can often determine the country of origin,_
yet no one has yet undertaken such a study for the rich
collections from Spanish Fort in private hands. That of
Mr. Joe Benton of Nocona, Texas, is probably ~he largest,
while A. H. Witte of Henrietta and others also have valuable
ma.terial.
No excavation has ever been attempted systematically
at either of these sites. The surface collections suggest
that there may have been pre-European occupation here,
but this cannot be proved yet. A number of differences
have been noted in comparison with Henrietta Focus material, which is entirely of prehistoric age, so far as known.
The Henrietta Focus therefore appears to represent aprehistoric agricultural people of unknown tribal affiliation, while Spanish Fort represents the known, historic
Wichita-speaking Indians through the Taovayas tribe. The
chipped-stone artifacts, polished stone elbow pipes, large
grooved pemmican-pounding stones, and perhaps other
traits of Spanish Fort definitely point northward for their
origin. There is documentary material to show that the
various members of the Wichita family probably did not
live in Texas at all before 1700 A. D. The Taovayas may
have been on Red River before~that time, but it is necessary
to explore such sites as Spanish Fort thoroughly to determine how long this site was occupied by the same group.
The more southerly Wichita, such as the Tehuacane (Tawakoni) reached as far south as Waco and the prairie, lands
to the east of it in the late 18th and early 19th century, but
they too seem to have comb south of the Red River only
shortly after 1700 (Krieger, 1946, pp. 144-150, 161-164).
B~lton (1914) has considered the history of the Taovayas villages in some detail, together with the French
activities and Spanish attack. He has, however, located
the twin villages near modern Ringgold, Texas, rather than
at Spanish Fort, Texas. There is no doubt that the same

North-Central Area

95

villages are involved, and since there is no historic site
at Ringgold to fulfill the requirements, it is clear that Bol. ¯
ton erred in placing the Taovayas villages about 30 miles
too far up the Red.
There is a striking similarity between the objects of
European origin at Spanish Fort and at the Stansbury Site
on the Brazos River in Hill County, a large historic site
excavated by the River Basin Surveys in the Whitney
Reservoir basin (R. L. Stephenson, manuscript in preparation). The Stansbury Site is believed to be the location of a Tehuacane (Tawakoni) Indian village in the late
18th and early 19th century. Since these Indians, like the
Taovayas, also belonged to the Wichita family (and have
often been confused with the Taovayas), and both tribes
appear to have migrated southward from Kansas or Okiahoma at about the same time, this similarity in their materials is understandable and instructive.
Until the Spanish Fort collections are analyzed and
published, a brief trait list must suffice to indicate the
range of materials. The list has been compiled from the
short study of the Benton and Witte collections made by
Krieger (1946, pp. 161-164).
LOCATION:
On both sides of Red River, in Montague County, Texas,
and Jefferson County, Oklahomh.
TYPE OF SITE:
Large open villages on flat terrace adjoining a major
river; said to have been fortified with trenches and
stockades in 1759.
HOUSES:
None have been excavated; written descriptions by
18th century writers describe Wichita houses as
circular, shaped like bee-hive, with grass-thatched
roofs and walls.
LIVELIHOOD:
.Agriculture of considerable importance;

hunting of

96

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

bison also important; hunting of deer and smaller
animals; gathering of wild plant products. No evidence for or against fishing, but Wichita may have
had common Plains Indian taboo against fish.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Little pottery; what there is is incised, paddle-marked,
and shell-tempered plain ware of unidenified types.
Trade sherds from historic period in Caddoan area
to east and Puebloan area to west.
Clay figurines, human, animal.
Globular beads.
Elbow pipes, of same form as stone pipes (see below).
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow points: Principally, small triangular Fresno
points or similar thereto; others, not yet defined.
Dart points: Reported but types not yet defined.
Drills: Small, with delicate shafts, bases unshaped.
Scrapers: Snub-nosed form of very small size. Also
retouched flakes.
Knives: Diamond-shaped with edges beveled in alternate directions.
Gun flints, square.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Manos: Unshaped stream pebbles; shaped sandstone
manos with edges parallel and ends rounded. (Not
known whether these were accompanied by milling
stones or true metates with back-and-forth motion).
Shaft smoothers of standstone blocks with longitudinal
groove.
Pemmican pounders: Large pieces of stone with encircling groove ar~l ends rounded, used as large ham~
mers with wooden h~indles by historic Plains Indians.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Elbow pipes: Well made and highly polished pipes
with bowl and stem parts meeting at right angle;
stem end and bowl of about Same size and length or

North-Central Area

97

bowl somewhat longer than stem; often have a spur
projecting beyond bowl, in line with stem.
Catlinite pipes: Various forms traded among historic
Plains Indians. One complete specimen has cylindrical bowl rising out of a rectangular block, stem (of
perishable material) once inserted into hole in side
of block.
Fragments of fine-grained sandstone pipes.
Greenstone celt, thick oval in cr0ss-section, tapered
poll; probably a trade object from farther down Red
River.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Disk beads of thick mussel shell, perforated in center.
Cylindrical beads cut from conch-shell columnellae.
Oliva beads, spires removed (rare).
Unperforated shell disks.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE:
"Digging-stick points" made from bison metapodials
(rare).
Probably other traits present but collectors seldom
.preserve broken bone fragments, and bones tend to
disintegrate on surface of sites.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Arrow points made from gar-fish scales.
Perforated bear-tooth pendants.
Hammerstones.
Fossil crinoid stem sections, used as beads by stringing through natural hole in center, sometimes painted bright colors.
Fossil shell, drilled for suspension as bead or pendant.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Burials reported, but no details available.
ARTIFACTS OF EUROPEAN ORIGIN:
Metal projectile points, small axes, iron knives,

hoe

Texas Archeological SocieSy

98

blades, scissor blades, chisels, and other implements.
Parts of metal locks, keys, brooches, bridle bits and
fastenings, saddle ornaments and fastenings, guns,
crucifixes, kettles, vats, etc.
Copper "tinklers" used to fasten to edges of clothes,
probably also used as arrow tips by pushing cones
over sharpened point.
Bracelets and other ornaments.
Glass bottle fragments.
Glass beads: Various shapes, sizes, and colors reported,
but not yet analyzed.
RELATIONS:
Shell-tempered Natchitoches Engraved pottery from
historic Glendora Focus of Caddoan area to east.
Tewa Polychrome pottery from Puebloan area to west,
made in 17th and 18th centuries.
Clay figurines include horses, similar to those found at

Pecos Pueblo, New Mexico.
Oliva and conch-shell beads show trade from Gulf of
Mexico.
ESTIMATED AGE:
Occupation documented from
into 19th century.

middle

18th

century

SOURCES:
Archeology: Krieger, 1946; Witte, 1938. History: Bolton, 1914.

