NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS
P~es~dent’s Address at the Annual Meeting of the Society,
Lubbock, Texas, October 25, 1947
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society was organized on the evening of October 2, 1928, in the President’s Office
in Abilene, Texas, by a small group of ten Abilene citizens. Six
of the ten then present have subsequently been listed in "Who’s
Who in America", and one of the first year’s members has been
on the Staff of Carnegie Institute for many years.
The Society has issued seventeen volumes of research articles,
which volumes are on file in most of the great University and
Museum libraries in America, and in some foreign countries.
The theory of the ancientness of man in. America, which your
president believed along with only a few others twenty years ago,
is now accepted as a fact by all except a few jealous die-hards
capable of ignoring all of the facts.
The Society owes no debts, and now has on deposit in the
bank the sum of $782.00. In addition, the Society owns six large
modern museum cases, now installed in the Museum of the West
Texas Chamber of Commerce in Abilene, Texas. The cases are
now filled with about three thousand specimens collected by your
president. These specimens, along with about twelve thousand
more, have been transferred to the ownership of The Museum of
Texas Technological College at Lubbock.
There are now on hand 906 back copies of the Society’s Bulletin, all of which can eventually be sold. The Society has thus
far issued five thousand full copies of the Bulletin, and probably
several thousand reprints of individual articles. Only three hundred copies were printed of most bulletin issues, and four hundred
copies are the most issued in any one year. These Bulletin back
copies are still sold for three dollars a copy. Naturally, on account
of the expensive printing and small issues, few copies have been
exchanged. As time goes on, and files become scarce and more desirable, all of these probably can be sold and this will contribute
materially to the Society’s publication funds.
All of the engravings of past issues have been preserved, and
storage furnished for them by your president, except a few which
were loaned to the Society by other institutions and had to be
returned. In the event of making reprints of early issues, these
will be indispensable.

News Notes and Editorials

147

The general policy of the editor has been to publish only original research articles so long as they could be obtained in sufficient numbers to fill the Bulletin. Very few compilations have
been printed; and here perhaps has been one of the secrets of the
success of the publication. In a region such as Texas, abounding
in opportunities on every side for original reseearch, it seems in
general to be a waste of effort to publish the results of the tabulators and the rechewers of the work of others.
The Society has had only three Secretaries, and the first two
served during the first four years; and the last one, Dr. Watts,
has served for the past fifteen years. Dr. Otto O. Watts has been
a faithful and hard-working Secretary for fifteen years, and for
it he has been paid nothing. Dr. Watts has been as careful as any
frugal person who guards his own pocket-book, to keep down expenses, and to build up the Society’s resources, and for this deserves a rising vote of thanks from this Society.
The Society began to function the year before the great depression, and survived both that and World War II, in a solvent
condition.
The work of nineteen years is now ready to be laid on the
shoulders of someone else, and your president needs the time to
complete some writing of his own. Consider carefully the kind of
man you will here choose to further carry on this important work;
he should first be interested in scholarship and research and industrious and energetic enough to do this job without pay as well as
the one he is paid to do. Do not elect a man because he is the
most "popular". Most very popular persons are incompetent and
spend all of their energies trying to please everybody. The scientist is a seeker of truth, and truthful or scientific-minded persons are not generally popular, but usually are efficient.
The
headquarters of the Society should be located in some place where
there is either a large State College, or a University with departments of anthropology, paleontology, and geology to furnish a
background of science professors and students of sufficient size
to form a local group to carry on its functions.
Your president further recommends that in the future the
meetings of this Society be held in the different cultural and educational centers of Texas where sufficient members may be secured.
Cyrus N. Ray
Abilene, Texas

148

Texas A~cheologioal and Paleontological Society
Letter from F,. B. Sayles

Any paper that I might prepare for the Lubbock meeting
would be of so little importance, in comparison with those of active
workers in the Texas field, that I am sure the time available for
the program can best be spent without it. But if time permits,
I would appreciate your reading this letter as I am keenly interested in Texas archaeology and from my present viewpoint realize more than ever before its significance; the importance of Texas
archaeology is generally accepted by others working in the Southwest.
This importance covers two major fields of investigation of
foremost interest, at present, in the Southwest: that of the older,
underlying cultures preceeding the better known and more highly
developed pottery horizons; and, the early stages of the pottery
making cultures themselves. The better to understand both of
these, it has become increasingly urgent to know more of widespread manifestations whether they be comparable pattern and
age, or different in these respects. Texas seems to hold many of
the answers concerning the stone cultures, for it is unique in possessing a greater variety of these, over a wider area, than any
known region of the country.
That pottery is likewise found throughout the state, though
in comparatively late times, is of no less significance.
Concerning the stone cultures, no one can deny Dr. Ray full
credit for his discoveries and persistence in calling attention to
the archaeology of central Texas. This problem, however, is of
far too great magnitude for any one individual to unravel, particularly since the occurrence of certain diagnostic traits found in
central Texas is well known, over a large part of the state, and
not uncommonly in associations of different ages. Such occurrence is expected by most investigators who do not feel that this
invalidates the age of any type when it is found in other associations of established geological context. But such determinations
can only be made by the archaeologist working in cooperation
with others, specializing in different fields.
The work of Kelley and Campbell, and their associates, in the
Big Bend area has shown the nature of the older stone cultures
and their relationships, not only in that area, but in a manner
whereby the knowledge is useful to those working elsewhere. I
am sure every one interested in the problem of man’s antiquity
in America will welcome similar studies from other parts of Texas.
This is especially so here in the Southwest, since the present known

News Notes and Editorials

149

stone cultures, underlying pottery and traceable into these later
horizons, are comparable in many respects to some of those found
in Texas.
While the occurrence of pottery in Texas appears much later
than its first appearance to the west, actually the duration of certain pottery manifestations in Texas may be long. These possibilities have been pointed out in the recent publication by Krieger. There are many workers interested in the questions that
Krieger has raised. The answer to some of them, at least, must
come from the Southwest, rather than Texas. The long time program already started by the University of Arizona, that of the
Chicago Museum in southwestern New Mexico, and that proposed
by Peabody Museum in west central New Mexico, in particular,
may result in much information that will provide more exact information covering this part of the Southwest. More exact tree
ring dates and the definition of pottery types in this region will
be of direct benefit to those Texas archaeologists who, like Krieger, have found that the principal trade between Texas and the
Southwest was in this direction.
I am sure~I express the feelings of most Southwesterners in.
expressing keen interest in the work done in Texas, and hope
that the publication of the work already done by the University
of Texas in particular, will be accomplished as early as possible.
It is also to be hoped that the many investigators who have done
such worthwhile work in the past will continue to carry on.
Best wishes for the meeting and the future of the Society.
Sincerely
E. B. Sayles

West Texas Historical and Scientific Society, Alpine
During World’War II the Museum Building of the West Texas
Historical and Scientific Society, Alpine, greatly condensed its exhibits in order to make possible the use of room areas for the
training of Army WAC units. The director was absent on leave
in order to serve as instructor trainer in the Tank Department,
Fort Knox, Kentucky.
Resumption of the pre-war program and Museum service
has been slowed up due to the influx of Veterans. At this writing,
however, the program has been expanded to include a Geology
workshop’ and the services of a custodian makes it possible for
the building to be open daily to visitors.

150

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Some studies are being made in the field, principally related
to the use of stone walls and fortifications in the Big Bend° Preparations are under way looking forward to the Convention of the
Southwestern Division of the A.A.A.S., which is scheduled to meet
in Alpine during the spring of 1949, the l~IcDonald Observatory
being joint host to the group.
Victor J. Smith
Alpine, Texas
Panhandle-Plains Museum, Canyon

Only limited field work has been done by the PanhandlePlains l~Iuseum since the beginning of the war. Our first field
project will likely be the complete excavation and study of a Rock
Shelter Cave near Canyon, Texas, in the Palo Duro Canyon. Some
one hundred items found on the edges of the cave have been definitely established as Basket Maker material. Our efforts since
the war have been directed toward the completion of Unit III of
the Museum at Canyon and the arrangement of cases in our greatly
added floor space.
Floyd V. Studer
Panhandle-Plains Museum

Canyon, Texas
Paso Archaeological Society
The E1 Paso Archaeological Society was first organized in
1922 and functioned until 1934 when it disbanded. The Society
was re-organized in 1939 and now has a membership of forty.
Our project for the coming year is to survey, map, and excavate
a site near the Texas-New Mexico line known locally as "The
Village."
Mrs. Glen E. Moore
Route 1, Box 284
E1 Paso, Texas
Progress Report of the Division of Vertebrate P~leontology in the
West Texas Museum, Lubbock
Paleontology, being a luxury that may be easily discarded
in time of world crisis, has suffered tremendously during the war
years just past. Even in the United States, unscarred by the ravages of conflict and with its magnificent fossil collections still intact, the science has deferred to the more immediate and pressing

News Notes aml Edit,or~al~

151

pursuits of destruction and mayhem The curtailment of operations has nowhere been more apparent than in the small university museums throughout the land. The West Texas Museum on
~ campus of the Texas Technological College is no exception.
Since 1944 no serious effort has been made toward furthering
the work of the Division of Vertebrate Paleontology. Activity
was greatly curtailed in the early part of that year and all functions of the Division were discontinued in the summer of 1946.
Not until September, 1946, did conditions permit the necessary
reorganSzation of the Division. At the present time the writer
is able to report that this reorganization is nearing completion,
with only the tedious but vital task of cataloguing remaining to
be accomplished.
For purposes of disucssion, the progress of the Division during
the past year may be divided into two general ptmses: acquisitions
and exhibitions. No serious research was undertaken, it being
decided that in reviving the department the greatest possible
emphasis should be concentrated upon stimulating the interest
of the public--interest which doubtless had become indifferent
to the collections which had been occupying the exhibition cases
without change since 1943.
Acqui~tions

Many

new and important specimens have been added to the
collections of the Division of Vertebrate Paleontology during the
past year. The most notable and spectacular of these is the remarkably well preserved skeleton of a large mammoth discovered
on the south bank of Yellow House Canyon, north of Levelland,
Hockley County, Texas. Indeed, so complete is this specimen that
only a few ribs, the tail, the lower jaw, the "dome" of the skull,
and both fore feet will ha~e to be restored when the skeleton is
mounted. The skeleton which is now only partially prepared for
ex~dbition will be kept in storage until such time as the necessary
exhibition space and ceiling clearance can be added to the present
museum building.
A modest, but highly interesting collection of Upper Cretaceous dinosaurs and turtles was made in the Big Bend National
Park area, Brewster County, Texas, during July and August.
Only separate and isolated elements were found~ but at least two
of these occurrences yielded specimens of g~eat scientific importance. In addition to these, bones of both hadrosaurians (duckbill dinosaurs) and ceratopsians (horned dinosaurs) were collected. Due to the tenacious character of the enclosing matrix, preparation of the Big Bend material is proceeding slowly. It is hoped,

152

Texas Archeological and Paleonto~ogica~ Society

however, that at least the most important of the specimens may
be available for study and exhibition within the next few months.
The writer wishes to thank the United States Department of
the Interior and the National Park Service, and the staff of the
Big Bend National Park under the direction of Dr. Ross A. Maxwell--the former for issuance of the permit to collect vertebrate
fossils within the Park area and the latter for their cooperation
while the l~Iuseum party was in the field.
Within the past few weeks the writer has had the good fortune to locate a previously unreported deposit of Triassic vertebrate fossils. A number of bones have been removed from this
location, the majority of which pertain to the rare crocodile-like
l~seudosuchian reptile Typothorax. Although all of the bones
thus far encountered have been dissarticulated, they are in an excellent state of preservation. It appears probable that a number
of individuals representing several genera of both amphibians and
reptiles may have been entombed at this location and the prospects for the development of a veritable fossil "quarry" appear
excellent.
Fragmentary remains of the large crocodile-like phytosaurs,
Buettneria (the largest of all amphibians), and the primitive little
dinosaur Ceolophysis have also been recognized in the same area.
A collecting party sponsored jointly by the West Texas
seum Association and the Department of Geology in Texas Technological College (1937), collected a number of excellent specimens in the Oligocene deposits in the Big Badlands of South Dakota. Most of these specimens were subsequently transferred to
the Carnegie Museum, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Under the terms
of the exchange the Carnegie Museum was to prepare certain of
these specimens and return them to the West Texas Museum. One
of these, the excellently preserved skeleton of a very large oreodont, M~rycoidodon culbertsoni, has been received. It is hoped
that this magnificent specimen can be mounted for exhibition in
the near future.
Exhibitions
The writer, with the gratuitous assistance of a limited number of students, has been able to increase the exhibition materials
in the Museum through the addition of several interesting specimens.
Most spectacular of these is a large block containing a great
mass of fossil bones of the large extinct Bison antiquus figginsi

News Notes and Editorials

153

and an included flint projectile (Plainview) point. The specimen.
was mounted in bold relief, but neither the bones nor the projectile point has been disturbed during the preparation of the
block. This block of bones with its included Plainview point is
one of eight collected by the University of Texas in the vicinity
of Plainview, Texas, in 1945. It was presented to the West Texas Museum through the courtesy of Dr. E. H. Sellards and the
Texas Memorial Museum.
An. excellent skull tentatively referred to the same species
of Bi~or~ has also been placed on exhibit. This specimen was collected from a Pleistocene lake deposit near Weatherly Lake, New
Mexico, and was skillfully prepared by Mrs. William Quinn of
the Museum staff.
Three Odeodont skulls collected by the Museum field expedition to South Dakota in 1937 may now be seen. These skulls, one of
which belongs to the highly aberrant genus Leptauchenia are in
addition to the skeleton mentioned above.
A welcome addition to the collection of Triassic vertebrates
is a series of armor plates and spines of the rare Pseudosuchian
Episcoposau~us (Desmatosuchus).
This beast, some fifteen to
twenty feet in length, presented an appearance similar to that
of the living alligator, although the actual relationship between
the two forms is most remote. In Episcoposaurus the head was
relatively short and a solid but movable mass of bony armor plates
protected the broad upper surface of the back and tail. A series
of backwardly curved spikes, the longest of which were situated
in the shoulder region, projected along either side of the body.
This strange form is best represented by a partial skeleton
from Crosby County, Texas, and now in the University of Michigan Museum of Paleontology, although fragmentary remains can
be seen in various other North American museums. The material
pertaining to Episcoposau~us in the West Texas Museum consists
of a number of disconnected armor plates including several excellently preserved lateral spikes from the shoulder region. The
specimens represent a number of separate "finds" all within
Crosby County, Texas.
A poorly preserved skull and lower jaw of the giant camel,
Gigantocamelus spatula, was prepared by the winter i~ August
and September. This camel, whose remains are found only in
the states of Texas and Nebraska, represents the largest genus
of that group which ever lived. The West Texas Museum is fortunate in possessing a nearly complete, though poorly preserved
skeleton of this animal, from Hartley County, Texas. The camel,

154

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

like the Levelland mammoth, is too large to be completely mounted under the present low ceilings of the Museum building and
consequently, only the skull and jaws together with a few limb
bones, are on exhibit at the present time.
At the present time, the writer is completing work on a mounted cast of the skeleton of the giant Argentinan carnivorous bird,
Mese~nbriornis incertis.
This cast, which will stand approximately five feet high at the head, was obtained several years ago
through an exchange with the Chicago Museum of Natural History.
During the coming year additional exhibition pieces will
doubtless appear in the West Texas Museum, but as the present
building space becomes more crowded, the interest of the staff
must necessarily turn to research problems, some of which, it is
hoped, may ultimately represent important contributions to the
science of vertebrate paleontology.
Warm Langston, Jr.
Texas Technological College
Lubbock, Texas
Houston Anthropological Society
The Houston Anthropological Society was organized in 1947
under the auspices of the Houston Museum of Natural History.
The organization of the society was the result of local interest
aroused by Joe Ben Wheat’s work at the Addicks site. The Society plans to further explore the Addicks region and make a collection of its materials.
Regular meetings are held at which
archeological subjects are discussed by members.
R. B. Worthington
4216 Walker Avenue
Houston 3, Texas
The 1948 Annual Meeting
The annual meeting of the society for 1948 will be held in
Austin, October 29-30. The first session will be a business dinner
at 6:00 P. M., Friday, October 29, at a place to be announced later.
The dinner will be followed with an evening session at 8:00 P. M.
in Rooms 315-316, Union Building on the University campus. The
third session will be at 9:00 A. M., Saturday, October 30, in Rooms
315-316, Union Building. Dr. Tom N. Campbell, Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas, is chairman of a committee

News Notes and Editorials

155

on program and arrangements. Members of the society are invited to communicate with Dr. Campbell in regard to suggestions
relative to the program and for reservations.

The 1948 Bulletin
On account of delay in the printing of this issue of the
Bulletin, due to mechanical difficulties, we are carrying forward
for the 1948 Bulletin two excellent papers: Alex D. Krieger’s "Importance of the ’Gilmore Corridor, in Culture Contacts between
Middle America and the Eastern United States," and Tom N.
Campbell’s "The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Eastern. Texas."
The 1948 Bulletin will be published as soon as possible after
the annual meeting of the Society in Austin, October 29~30, and
will contain in part articles presented at the meeting.

In Regard to the Spelling o] A~’chaeo~ogy
The reader may wonder at the inconsistency in the spelling
of archaeology in this issue of the Bulletin. For this the editor is
to blame and accepts full responsibility. However, he feels that
the reader is entitled to an explanation.
The only way the editor is able to function at all, due to his
numerous other duties, is to utilize the services of other qualified
persons for editing and proof reading. The editor has always
spelled archeology with an a, so it just did not occur to us to call
the attention of our colleagues to the necessity of consistency.
Naturally, each assistant with whom we had "farmed out" articles
for editing, used the method of spelling he was accustomed to use.
It was not until the type was all set and the galley proof read
that we became aware that both spellings had been used. To
get consistency now would mean considerable further delay and
expense,--hence, our decision to let this issue go to press with each
writer spelling archaeology his own way.
We have made some investigation as to what is a general
custom. We find Webster gives both methods with preference
the a. The editorial staffs of American Antiquity and of the
erican Anthropologis~ use the a. The first two Bulletins issued
by this society used the a. Beginning with Volume Three the a
was dropped, and there seems to have been a consistent editorial
policy of omitting the a until this issue. As mentioned above, this
we overlooked until the copy was all in print.

156

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

We suggest that the society adopt an official spelling of archaeology at the next meeting, and in the future we will undertake
to be consistent.

