Cordage of the Caves in the Greater Big Bend

175

CORDAGE OF THE CAVES IN THE GREATER
BIG BEND
BY

VICTOR

There has been much conjecture and some careful investigation
with respect to the place of the Big Bend Cave Culture in the
archaeological setting of the Southwest.

We have believed that "all

Ihe evidence is not yet in" and that detailed studies covering many
angles of the Cave Culture should be made available before satisfactory general conclusions could be reached.
To this end, a part of the program of the Museum at Alpine has
been to publish such contributions from time to time as will make
available to research students materials of value with respect to the
distinguishing characteristics of the ancient peoples.

It is welt also

to make possible certain comparisons with peripheral areas, or
groups at greater distance, which seem to share similar culture traits.
In this article we have turned to a consideration of the cordage
found in the dry caves of the Greater Big Bend in which territory we
include roughly the area from E1 Paso East to Del Rio and from
the Rio Grande Valley North to include the Davis Mountains.

It is

true that bits of string and small rope have, by virtue of their humble
status among more showy specimens, been tossed aside by many
souvenir hunters and sometimes given but scant attention by the
more learned expeditions.

The bibliography following, however,

will indicate an increasing interest in details of information to be
gained by careful observation of the cordage associated with other
materials, as they round out the culture picture in which the real
investigator is most interested.

In this report 3,721 knots and pieces of cordage were studied,
with observations made as to diameter, length, number of strands,
direction of twist, type of fiber, presence of dye, kinds of knots, and
probable use where evidence justified conclusions as to the type of
artifact represented. Throughout this paper it should be kept in
mind that, unless specifically stated, the cordage referred to is
stranded fiber materials, though rough grass used for tying is referred to specifically, especially under the discussion on knots.
A glance at the rather imposing list of uses to which the Cave

176

Texa~ Archeologic~l a~wl Paleontological Society

Dweller put cordage, gives us an increased knowledge as to its
standing as an article of domestic use. It should be remembered,
in looking through this list, that tyro forms of cordage are included:
(1) a rough grass or leaf requiring but scant time or skill in preparation for use, and (2) a carefully prepared material which has been
spun in strands and the strands in turn, t,visted skillfully into serviceable, and neatly assembled cord of considerable strength and uniform diameter.
The use of cordage in basketry (one of its most important uses)
is referred to but not enlarged upon since the subject of cordage in
basketry is the topic of another paper in preparation.
Uses to Which Cordage Was Put
A.

Common throughout the Greater Big Bend:

Used in the assembly of basketry, netting, and cradles.
Binding around sticks, canes, or otherwise for reinforcing strength
of utensils likely to split in use.
Used in th’e assembly and along selvage edge of matting or fiber
mats.

For ties in bundling, carrying, or storing household supplies such
as sage, grasses, sticks, etc.
Thread for sewing gourds, cacti, leaves, and leather.
Sandal ties.
As a base for fur cloth manufacture.
B. Occasionally observed but not universally common in the entire area.
Cord wrapping about shaft (reinforcement).
Cordage assembly of pierced grass sometimes associated with child
burial.
Cord network bag, mesh 3-4 inch to 2 1-2 inches.
Snares.

Repairing baskets.
PLATE 30
i. Typical size range for Big Bend Cordage.
2. Tapered and plaited cordage. The white cord (new) has been
twisted into a "false plait" in order to show a type of cordage frequently found in the Big Bend.

Plate 30

Cordage of Sh~ Ca~es in ~,he Grea$er Big Bend

179

Basket rests.
Use of dyed cordage.
C.

Rare or.observed in peripheral areas only:

Waist string with cords attached.
Attaching feathers to shaft (decorative use) or pIumes.
Head-dress frame assembly.
Apron strings.
Woven cloth (very rare).
Tied or wrapped stones, charms, weights, muller, points, and
figurines.
Binding leather to wood.
Pouch edged with stitching or tied with cord.
Fiber brush wrapping.
Dyed cordage twined with basket assembly to produce a decorative
woven ring.
Raw Materials Used

While the use of sinew, gut, and rawhide for binding, deserve
mention; such use was comparatively infrequent, and this report
deals only with the cordage manufactured from desert plant fiber.
Throughout the entire Big Bend the leaves of the Agave Lechuguilla
formed the most noticeable source of supply. Many other grasses
and larger plants were utilized, such as the yucca (both fiber and
coarse split leaves), sotol leaves, bear grass, and the finer apocynum.
The writer has believed, however, that the apocynum has been one
of the most over-worked words in general use in reports covering
cordage description in the Southwest. The plant is now rare in
parts of West Texas and some of the softer materials once labeled
by this name have been proved to be dried algae which bleaches out
to a dirty white when exposed to the sun and produces a rather
downy material. Nearly every author reporting has noted that,
while the bulk of cordage is made up of rather coarse fiber, there
is always a small per cent of similar product which has a finer,
softer, more compact fiber but which seems to be subject to more
rapid wear. In this observation we concur entirely, and the proportion of this softer cordage will be noted in our tables. Closely associated with the cordage materials are cactus spine pins and the point

180

Texas Archeological tr.nd Paleonto!ogical Society

from the spanish dagger leaf which makes a satisfactory needle for
use since with the sharp point is an attached frayed fiber which may
be twisted into the sewing thread.
From the following tabulation it will be observed that the size
range of twisted cordage in the Big Bend is from .05 (3-(>4") to .325
(21-64") with a diameter of .075" (5-64") predominating. It
should be said, however, that the unusual number of this diameter
may be misleading in that a large number of short fragments were
measured and that it is altogether probable that rodents have chewed
net bags or other artifacts made from longer pieces of this size, resulting in a strong slant in actual count which may, in the original
number of artifacts, represent a misleading size trend.
The following table represents the tabulated diameter measurements of all twisted cordage actually examined in the museum in
Alpine. It is to be noted that no new or arbitrary size designation
has been set up but that the standard basketry reed nomenclature
has been used as indicated in the following:

Size No.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

mm
11A
11~
2
23/..t
3~/~
4~/~
5½
61/~

Decimal
Equivalent

Cordage Size Range
for This Number

.048
.058
.078
.108
.137
.177
.216
.255

.055
.070
.095
.130
.170
.200
.240

to
to
to
to
to
to
to

.05
.065
.090
.1.20
.160
.180
.220
.325

Diameter size range:
Reported

Author and Location

This paper (Big Bend Generally) .... 3-64" to 21-64"
Jackson (Val Verde County) .......... 1-32" to 3-8"

Decimal
Equivalent
.05 to .30
.03 to .376

PLATE 31
1. Typical coarse square knot: the use of cordage for sandal tie;
and cordage net assembly.
2. Assorted uses for cordage: Trigger; as a base for bead necklace; gourd sewing; and wrapping or reinforcement for stick or shaft.

Pb~e 31

Cordage of the. Cave.s in the Grea.ter Big Bend

Kidder and Guernsey (North.
eastern Arizona) .......................... 1-20" to
Coffin (Brewster County) .............. 1-32" to
Ayer (Guadalofipe Mountains,
Texas) ............................................ 1-20" to

183

1-4"
3-8"

.05 to .25
.03 to .376

1-2"

.05 to .5

Depth Range
A check on the tabulated specimen records for a number of dry
rock shelters indicates a depth range for both twisted string and
coarse knotted cordage of from surface to 2’ 9" deep. This depth
does not intend to imply that others have not" discovered cordage
evidence at much greater depth. The plotted depth distribution,
however, reveals a fairly uniform number of specimens from one to
fifteen inches. After fifteen inches, the number drops off sharply
with few specimens found, so that one might argue their number
could be accounted for by cist, burial, pack rat or other burrowing
animal transfer. Jackson (7) reports that he located most of the
cordage from "upper levels" in Val Verde County.
Process oi Manu]acture

While no such conclusive evidence related to the manufacture of
cordage has been available as has been excavated with Basket_maker
artifacts, the Big Bend materials suggest that desert fibres were
gathered in quantities, soaked or boiled in water, and shredded into
a mass of unworked fiber. From this stock, spinning materials were
selected, cleaned, and spun by rolling or hand manipulation. The
quality and uniformity of this product, considering the crude equipments available, is truly astonishing.
Knots, Bends, and Hitches
In all reports studied the square or reef knot is mentioned most
frequently. For West Texas, this type not only occurs in every one
of the twenty-four sites from which specimens were available for
examination, but it far outnumbers other kinds of knots found. The
following tabulation will indicate the results of the examination of
1240 ends, or hitches. Since Mr. A. T. Jackson has included in his
report some interesting and closely related work with respect to his
excavations in Val Verde County, we are, with the permission of Mr.

184

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Jackson, including a column of material from his observations in
the Eastern section of the Big Bend.
Jackson in Val
Verde County
(Eastern .4tea)

The Greater Big Bend

Kind of Knot

Number

Coarse
Grasses

Twisted
Fibers

Co~arse
Grasses

Twisted
Fibers

601

29

Square or reef ...... 780
Single loop (used in
basketry loop) .... 358
Figure eight .......... 44
Larks head (net) .. 19
Overhand ................ 7
Sheet Bend ............ 4
Grommett .............. 4
Granny .................... 6
Slip ........................ 1
Twined .................... 2
Unidentified .......... 15

757

26

......
30
0
3
......
......
6
......
......
7

358
14
19
4
4
4
......
1
2
8

Totals ........ 1240

803

116

............
1
1
25
......
228
15
11
3
............
4].......
1
......
............
............

Big Bend Cordage Compared with Southwest Basketmaker
In any careful comparison between Southwestern Basketmaker
types of basketry and sandals, the trend of discoveries seems to be
in the direction of a closer relationship than earlier observations
have justified. The same seems to be true with respect to cordage
though the writer has always been more interested in the exact differences between the two cultures than in some of the more evident
similarities such as the use of the atlatl, rabbit stick, and the extensive production of fur cloth. It seems worth while here to note
similarities or differences in the field of cordage study as follows:
Both groups made extensive use of cordage.
Both used cordage in a similar manner for:

PLATE 32
1. General uses of coarse and twisted cordage. The cordage and
feather dart is used by courtesy of Joe Ben Wheat and Butch Carson.
2. Trigger; knot, and harness (?) or frame, uses for cordage.

P!a~e 32

Cordage of th~ Caves in the Greater Big Bend

187

Fiber string necklaces, sandal ties, aprons, as a base for fur cloth,
in the manufacture of nets and bags, for thread in sewing other
materials, in cradle assembly, in making brushes, in binding and
reinforcing, in fiasketry and mat production, for mending, for making snares, in making basket rests, for wrapping materials to be
stored or carried, for plume and feather binding, and for human
hair cordage. Both of the last two are rare in Texas.
The bulk of the cordage for each is similar in size, twist, and
materials.
It seems evident that similar methods and materials have resulted
in an almost identical product wherever cordage was used in the
Southwest, from the ancient Basketmaker down to the use of desert
materials for various purposes in northern Mexico today.
In both the San Juan and Texas areas cotton is exceedingly rare
or absent and neither of these cultures used any form of spindle
whorl or loom. In both groups the two-strand counter-clockwise
cordage predominates in a size about 3-32" in diameter. Both areas
have produced evidence indicating the use of three, four, five, and
six-strand cords as well as the more common two-strand variety.
The Big Bend cordage is predominantly counter-clockwise in twist.
A small per cent is clockwise. It is interesting to note that Kidder
and Guernsey (5) report the same counter-clockwise twist in their
Basketmaker studies as well as a small amount of clockwise assembly. Nusbaum’s (6) work in Utah was reported as counter-clockwise. While no fiber neck band work similar to typical Basketmaker has, to my knowledge, been found in Texas, in all other respects, such as sizes has been indicated above, the cordage and its
use is almost identical with those described by the authors named
above. In both areas braiding is found but is not common.
In connection with the identification of direction of twist, it should
be noted that some confusion still exists with respect to the descriptive terms "clockwise" and "counter-clockwise." This, no doubt,
is due to the fact that authority by usual method is difficult of interpretation and dictionary illustrations are somewhat incomplete as
they apply to the question at hand. I have here accepted the identification of Dr. A. V. Kidder with respect to the present paper.
Dr. Kidder has kindly identified the Big Bend cordage as pre-

188

Texa~ Archeologic_al and Pateon~ologica2 Society

dominantly anti-clockwise.

In this connection it is interesting to

note the reports of other writers:
Author--Bibliography Reference No.--Statement Quoted:
.4yer, (2)NMost cordage is of two-strand type, each strand twisted
clockwise, the two together anti-clockwise.
Kidder and Guernsey, (5)--(Describing Cliff House Culture).
The stranded string is two-strand, each strand twisted clockwise, the
two twisted together anti-clockwise. "* ~ ~ Very few two-strand
strings are twisted clockwise.
(Describing Basket-Maker). Twisted cords and threads of Yucca
and apocynum (?). Strings of these fibers do not differ in any
way from those of the Cliff-dwellers "* ~’ "*
Nusbaum, Kidder, and Guernsey, (5)rain twist almost every
piece is counter-clockwise though the component plies of multiple~randed strings are sometimes spun clockwise.
Pearce and ]ackson, (7)--All of the fiber cords were twisted
clockwise, as well as were all of the yucca except four, which were
twisted counter-clockwise.
Author’s Note: Illustrations in this bulletin do not tally with
the "clockwise" description. This is due, no doubt, to reasons
stated above.
Poteet, (8)-" ~’ ~ It was found that of 147 pieces, 122 were
twisted counter-clockwise and that the remaining ten were twisted to
the right or clockwise.
Author’s Note: Webster’s Dictionary shows an illustration definitely clockwise according to Dr. A. V. Kidder and Dr. Volney
Jones but which is indicated as a "left handed twist."
Clockwise is defined by Webster as a "right hand circular motion."
Jackson is in agreement with this but all others, including this report, have held to the opposite view.
Roberts, (9)--Note: Half-tone cuts show counter-clockwise cordage.
Burnett, E. K., Heye Foundation Letter--’* "* ~ About 90 per cent

Cordage of ~he Ctrves in the Crrea$er Big Bend

189

of this cordage (Eagle Canyon, Brewster County) is spiraled upward to the right, which you apparently call counter-clockwise. The
examination of two bundles of perhaps 50 pieces, of skin wrapped
cordage show~ that practically all of it is spiralled upward to the
left, which you identify as clockwise. In this instance both the skin
wrapping and inner cord is spiralled in the same direction.
Author’s Note:
this respect.

My own observations concur with Mr. Burnett in

Where fur cloth evidence is found in Brewster county,

more clockwise cordage is in evidence.

Jones, Volney H., Ethnobotanical Laboratory, Ann Arbor, Mich.,
Letter-* * * Specimens of cordage have been received. A student
who is specializing in fiber studies has examined these and finds
two of them to be Yucca and the other to be Agave. I shall check
these identifications and send you a report soon. The specimens are
all twisted counter-clockwise.
I agree with you that Apocynum identifications on Western specimens are to be viewed with suspicion. If the fiber bundles of the
leaf fibers of Yucca, Agave, etc., are well macerated and broken
down a soft cordage results. This seems to have confused many
persons. Microscopic examination rather than "feel" is necessary
for identification.
Kidder, A. Iz., Carnegie Institution, Letter.--* ~ ~ The sample of
string would be classified under the system Guernsey and I used as
anti-clockwise because, looking at it from either end, the strands
pass about each other from left to right.
I cannot think of any Basket Maker cordage of the false braid
type you mention " ~ * I have been to the Peabody Museum and
neither Mrs. C. B. Cosgrove nor I can find anything in the collection
there which is like the false braid cordage.
Harrington, M. R., Southwest Museum, Letter.--* ** * Looking
over our collections I find that the Basketmakers used both the clockwise and contra-clockwise twist in making cord.

The typical Basket-

maker cradle has the A (contra-clockwise) twist; of two characteristic Basketmaker sandals one shows the contra-clockwise, the other
the clockwise twist; a Basketmaker sifting basket has a clockwise
twist cord attached * ~* ~

190

Texas Arckeological and Paleontological Society

The writer is greatly indebted to Miss Sybil Poteet, West Texas
Museum, Lubbock, for the opportunity to examine her manuscript
report, "A Study of the Cordage and Fibers of Murrah Cave." In
this paper Miss Poteet indicates the results of her study with respect
to cordage found by their field expedition to the Langtry district of
the Big Bend. In order of numbers, Miss Poteet indicates the following knots recovered: square, overhand, half carrick, granny, halfgranny, larkshead, clove hitch, figure of eight, bow, and double
half-hitch.
The master chart upon which all diameters, lengths, knot types,
etc., were recorded, indicates other items of general interest in completing this discussion.
1. The 36 pieces of rawhide fur cloth fragments are 80 per cent
clockwise in twist. In some areas, notably in the Pecos River neighborhood, the inner cord is twisted in the opposite direction from
the rawhide cover. In the Brewster County area, the inner cord and
hide are usually twisted in the same clockwise direction.
2. Forty-nine pieces, at first glance, are four-strand braided assembly. On close examination, however, only six are found to be
true braiding. The others have been called "false plait" because of
the fact that they so closely resemble true plaited cordage. An experiment has developed an explanation as to how this false plait
effect was obtained. If two strands of two-strand cordage are twisted
together tightly and permitted to "spring back," they form a cord
which is not easily detected from true braiding without untwisting
at the end.
3.
ram.

Lengths of cordage occur from the smallest section up to 30
Others have observed single pieces up to eight feet long.

4. A few pieces of cordage taper down to a point.
5.

Ninety pieces of regular cordage were twisted clockwise and
PLATE 33

1. Use of cordage in mat and selvage; the types of softer ~vist;
and use of cordage in the manufacture of "bundles." No~e the flint
point which had been carefully wrapped within the cordage bundle.
2. Mass of cordage which had been used as a base for fur cloth. In
the highlands of West Texas this was an important household neces-.
sity and is generally found throughout the district.

Plate 33

Cordage of the Caves in the Grea~er Big Bend

2,027 were twisted counter-clockwise.

193

This represents a clockwise

group of approximately 4 1-2 per cent which compares closely with
the results tabulated by other cave workers, including those of the
Basketmaker."
6. One hundred ninety-one cordage pieces were made from softer
materials or from fibers which had been broken down or processed
to a fine base material for spinning. 1,826 were made from coarse
fibers.
7. Eighty-two pieces of cordage were dyed a shade of red and
2,035 were undyed. It is believed that the dyed fragments represent
cordage used in the assembly and decoration of small baskets,
chiefly in the Eastern part of the Big Bend, but little is found to the
West of Alpine.
8. Cordage twisted into various strands other than the usual twostrand pieces conunonly found are as follows: one strand (two
only); three-strand (five); and four strand (forty-nine).
9. No cordage made from human hair, as reported by Sayles
(10) were observed from any of the sites studied.
In conclusion, we observe from a considerable number of typical
specimens that the Big Bend Cave Dwellers over the entire area were
skillful in the manufacture of cordage in a variety of sizes and ingenius in the application of this material to daily use, both in mainraining and repairing implements and in the manufacture of new
ones. In this achievement they bear striking resemblance to Basketmaker cultures as well as other Southwestern groups of more recent
origin but with similar necessities and desert plant supplies.
Sul Ross State Teachers College,
Alpine, Texas.
Bibliography
t. Amsden, Charles, "The Ancient Basketmakers," Masterkey,
Vol. XII, No. 6, 1938.
2. Ayer, Mary Y., The .4rcheological and Faunal Material Iron,
Williams Cave, Guadalape Mountains, Texas, Proceedings of the
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. LXXXVIII, 1936.

194

Texas Archeologica! a~d Paleontological Society

3.
Boy Scouts Handbook, Twenty-fourth edition, New York
City, June, 1921.
4. Coffin, Edwin F., "Archaeological Exploration of a Rock
Shelter in Brewster County, Texas," Indian Notes and Monographs,
No. 48, Heye Foundation, New York, 1932.
5. Kidder, A. V., Guernsey, S. J., !1rcheological Exploragons in
Northeastern .4rizona, Bureau of American Ethnology, 1919.
6. Nusbaum, Jesse L., Kidder, A. V. Guernsey, S. J., "/1 BasketMaker Cave in Dane County, Utah," Indian Notes and Monographs,
Heye Foundation, New York, 1922.
7. Pearce, J. E., Jackson, A. T., "A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in
Val Verde County, Texas," The University of Texa,~ Bttlletin, No.
3327, Austin, Texas, 1933.
8. Poteet, Sybil, Cordage and Fibers of Murrah Cave, Unpublished Manuscript, Lubbock Museum, 1939.
9. Roberts, F. H., Recent !1rcheological Developments in the
Vicinity o] El Paso, Texas, Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections,
Vol. 81, No. 7, January 25, 1929.
10. Sayles, E. B., !in/1rchaeological Survey o] Texas, The Medallion, Globe, Arizona, 1935.
11. Setzler, Frank M., "Cave Burials, In Southwestern Texas,"
Explorations and Field-work o] the Smithsonian Institution, 1933;
"Prehistoric Cave Dwellers of Texas," Explorations and Field-Work
o] the Smithsonlan Institution, 1932; "A Prehistoric Cave in Texas,"
Explorations and Field-Work o] the Smithsonian Institution, 1931.
12.

Use]ul Knots, Plymouth Cordage Co., North Plymouth, Mass.

