Texas Archeological Society

236

CADDOAN POTTERY TYPES
AVERY Elff~RAVED
(Plates 1, 2)

PASTE
Temper:

Usually finely pulverized shell (most of vessels

shown). Otherwise fine clay-grit
temper (Plate 2, B, L).

(t>late 1, E, F)

or no

Texture: Fine compact except when shell par.ticles have leached away leaving paste soft and full of fine cavities.
Color: Commonly covered with bright, hard red film made of
~powdered red ochre (most of vessels shown). Otherwise
shades of brown and gray from medium to dark and nearly
black 6Plates 1, B, E; 2, C, E, J, L). Just under red film
-most usual surface color is buff, which shows in design lines
cut through film. Cores gray, brown.
.Surface finish: From poorly to fairly well polished.

FORM
Wall thickness:

3 to 5 ram.

Lip: Rounded and flush with rim or turned outward slightly.
Base: Slightly convex to flat but no thicker than side walls.
Vessel shape and size: Most common is compound bowl with
low, conical bottom, large.rounded shoulder area turned inward, and high rim curving outward (Plate 1, A, C-E, G,
I-I). Mouth diameter generally greater than that at shoulder. Many of these are magnificent vessels, diameters
ranging from 10 to 40 cm. and perhaps more. Compound
bowl with vertical rim (Plate 1, B) unusual. Very deep,
nearly cylindrical bowls with sides slightly convex or with
rims gently curving outward (Plate 2, A, B, D, F, I) are
also common and range from 6 to 20 cm. or more in height.
Bottles (Plate 2, C, E, G, K) also fairly common. Other
forms include small jars (Plate 2, H), squat bowls with
outflaring rims (Plate 2, J), and carinated bowls with convex rim standing vertically (Plates 1, F; 2, L). Small strap
handles may occur rarely (Plate 2, H).
D]~CO~tkTION
Treatment:

Engraving.

Designs: Center around semicircular motifs usually repeated
~our times around vessel. Each unit may consist of several
concentric semicircles, all plain lines, plain lines alternating with ticked lines, narrow bands with large spurs jutting from one edge, cross-hatched bands with spurs, and
various combinations. A common dividing element between these units consists of two vertical lines between
which a reversed S-shaped line is drawn, with short lines

p
PLATE 1

Texas Archeological Society

238

pointing to~vard its ends from the flanking lines (best seen
in Plate 1, I, L). Straight lines and step-frets may be combined with curved lines. Spirals, whorls, scrolls, circles,
and negative disks outlined by cross-hatched areas are all
combined in a wide variety of pleasing designs. Rims of
compound bowls usually bear simple horizontal lines widely spaced but may be plain on the one hand (Plate 1, H) or
more elaborately decorated on the other (Plate 1, A-A’).
Selected examples of shoulder designs on compound bowls
in Plate 1, I-P, ~vith N also including rim decoration of
"eyes" like those of type Bowie Engraved (Plate 8). The
very deep bowls may have rim designs like those described
~(Plate 2, A, B, D) or completely angular motifs repeated
many times around vessel (Plate 2, F, I); these are regarded as a distinct variety within the type. Red pigment
may occasionally appear in lines of dark vessels and in at
least one case, white pigment provides contrast on a redfilmed vessel (Plate 2, B). Usually, however, the red film
provides a strong contrast with the light buff-colored clay
exposed by engraving.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Very common in McCurtain Focus, with many vessels having
both red film and shell temper. Also a Texarkana Focus
type but relatively less frequent there and neither shell
temper nor red film used as much as in McCurtain Focus
components; moreover, some red vessels have clay-grit or
no temper, and some shell-tempered vessels lack red film.
A few vessels occur in Titus Focus components (Plates 1,
E-G; 2, B) where they appear to be trade pieces from either
McCurtain or Texarkana Focus, or both. In one case (Harris, 1953) this type appears to be associated with European
~rade material; otherwise it is pre-European but probably
relatively late within the Fulton Aspect.
D ~tSTRIBUTION
Choctaw and Mc~Eurtain Counties in southeast Oklahoma; Lamar, Red River, and Bowie Counties in northeast Texas;
probably southwest corner of Arkansas along great bend of
Red River. May occur more widely as trade ware.
ESTI.,lVI~TED AGE
1400-1700 A. D., perhaps beginning earlier or surviving later.
REFERENCES
Krieger, 1946, Figure 18.

PLATE 2

Texas Archeo!ogical Society

240

BA~EY ENGRAVED
(Plate 3 )
PASTE
Temper: Fine clay-grit or a little sand, or both. Pulverized
shell in specimens from central Arkansas (A, C).
Texture:

Fine, compact.

Surface may feel slightly sandy.

Color: Surfaces buff, light to dark brown, gray to nearly black.
Cores gray to black. Fire-mottling only on lighter-colored
vessels.
~Surface finish:

Smoothed to well polished.

FORM
Wall thickness: 3 to 5 mm.
Lip:

Rounded, usually turned sharply outward.

Base: Convex or only slightly flattened, no thicker than sides.
"Extended base" or pedestal not infrequent, hollow and
wall about same thickness as body wall (H, K).
Vessel shape and size: Principally small bottles with spouts
varying in shape: vertical, out-flaring, slightly tapered, or
bulging slightly in middle (C, D). A few ollas known with
globular bodies and small mouths (J). Ollas considerably
larger than largest bottles.
DEC(~RATION
Treatment: Engraving, punctating.
Designs: Sets of concentric arcs placed around body in two
ways: upper sets arch upward, lower sets arch downward,
fitting under the upper arches. Arches always repeated
four times around body. The four uppermost lines form a
square around the spout base which is often filled with
small punctates made through the polished surface
J, K). The spaces at the base may also be punctated
Red, and occasionally white, pigments occur in lines.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Infrequent occurrence in any one site but widely spread in
components of Titus, Belcher, Texarkana, and Mid-Ouachita Foci.

DISTRIBUTION
Whole northeast corner of Texas, northwest corner of Louisiana, and southwest Arkansas to vicinity of Hot Springs.
Not reported from southeast Oklahoma but could occur
there.
ESTIMATED AGE
1200-1500 A. D.
REFERENCES

None.

PLATE 3

242

Texas Archeolog~caI Society

B~:R~ ENGRAVED
(Plate 4)
PASTE
Temper: Often none visible; also fine clay-grit or (rarely)
fine white pulverized substance which may be bone.
Textu~’e: Fine and compact to somewhat granular. Well fired,
fairly hard.
Color: Surfaces usually various shades of dark brown and
dark grayish brown, ranging to nearly black. Lighter
shades of brown and gray appear, particularly with mottling due to uneven firing. Cores dark gray to black.
Surface finish: Exterior and interior both well smoothed to
highly polished.
FOI~M
Wall thickness: Extreme range from less than 2 to about 8
mm.; average 5 ram.
Lip: Very thin and rounded; may be turned outward slightly.
Base: On most small bowls the bottoms are shallow and evenly
convex without distinct base; on large carinated bowls the
base is a flat round disk to which the body wall is attached.
Vessel shape and size: Only definitely known shape is that of
carinated bowl, in two varieties: (1) with rim either quite
vertical or inclined outward slightly, 3 to 5 cm. high, and
body consisting of shallow, evenly convex basin of less
height than the rim; (2) larger bowls with straight vertical rim 5 to 7 cm. high, and body shaped like truncated
cone of definitely greater height than the rim (contrast lV~
and Q in Plate 4 with specimens at top). Bottles formerly
included in this type are now considered as Hatchel Engraved (Plate 29).
DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving and (rarely) fingernail punctations between lines.
Designs: Confined to bowl rims. Usually two or three horizontal lines at top, below which is a zone of narrow bands
arranged in rectilinear patterns. Occasionally the patterns
are compromises between rectilinear and curvitinear, ~s in
Figures C, H, I, M, P. The bands may be filled with crosshatching, with short dash lines singly or in pairs, with tiny
punctates made through the polished surface, or with a
row of fingernail punctations as in Figure G. Fine ticking
occurs on some lines. Design units commonly repeated
four times around rim. Many unique combinations made,
as exemplified by the sketches. When pigment present in
lines, it is usually white, but red and green occur.

CULTURA~ AFFILIATIONS
¯ ype apparently belongs exclusively to Texarkana Focus, even
trade pieces being almost unknown in other loci. Relationships apparent in the designs (but not vessel forms) of
Simms Engraved (Plate 62) and Belcher Engraved (Plate
5).
D ISTR]~UTION
~2onfined to a small area about great bend of Red River in
southwest corner of Arkansas and northeast corner of Texas in Bowie and Cass Counties.

ESTIMATED AGE

1200-1600 A. D. or part thereof.
REFERNNCE
Krieger, 1946, p. 230 and Figure 18.

F

P

PLATE 4

Texas Archeological Society
BEL~I-IER ENGRAVED
(Plate 5)
PASTE
Temper: None visible, or occasionally fine shell or tuff particles although these seldom abundant enough to suggest
intentional addition to clay.
Texture: Fine, compact.
Color: Mahogany brown to black but shading off into dark
gray-browns; buff or reddish brown occasionally. Cores
~darker than surface. ~Mottling.
Surface finish: Smoothed to well polished. Bowls same on
exterior and interior; bottles not smoothed at all inside,
polished outside.
Wall thickness: 3 to 6 mm.
Lip: Rounded, direct on most bowls, turned outward on bottles
and some bowls.
Base: Convex on bowls; convex to slightly flattened on bottles.
,%ressel shape and size: Webb and Dodd (1941, pp. 90-96 and
~Plates 15, 16) first described type with 15 "sub-types" more
or less equivalent to a variety of shapes. Most of these not
now regarded as included in this type but assigned to others such as Hodges Engraved, Glassell Engraved, and Taylor Engraved. Plate 5 shows range of forms now placed in
this type: most common are bottles (C, J-M) and small
bowls with rounded bottoms, narrow shoulder bent upward and inward at sharp angle, and rim bent outward
again to about same angle as body below shoulder (B, F-I).
The compound vessel (I~) is of the latter form surmounted
on a globular lower chamber. A third form, less common,
has rounded bottom, high side slanted inward and low rim
bent outward (A, E). Other forms may be added even~ually. Bottles may reach height of 25 cm.; bowls have
diameters of 10 to 28 cmo

DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving, punctating.
~Designs: On narrow shoulder area they are much like Simms
Engraved except that at four points where pattern is repeated there is a small node jutting straight out from edge
of shoulder (not visible in photographs on opposite page).
~In addition the rim is decorated with from one to three
encircling lines and one or two rows of engraved dash lines
Or tiny punctates cut through finished surface. Four tiny
lobes may appear on lip, directly above nodes on shoulder
i(B). Bottle designs also consistently show short dash lines
between concentric circles and flower or star-like elements
in center of each of the four sets of concentric circles (C,
J-M). Both white and red pigments found in designs.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A Belcher Focus type, with trade pieces found in Texarkana
Focus components.
Some vessels made by easternmost
Titus Focus people. The dark colors, good polish, and both
dash Hnes and punctates show affinities with Barkman
graved and Simms Engraved of Texarkana Focus.

DISTRI~BUTION
Red River valley of northwest corner of Louisiana and southwest corner of Arkansas; extreme northeast Texas.
ESTLM.ATED AWE
1200-1500 A. D.
REFERENCES
Webb and Dodd,
Webb, 1948,

1941, pp. 90-96; Krieger,

1946, Figure 18;

PLATE

5

Texas A~cheolo~ica[ Society

246

]~ELC~ER RIDGED
(Plate 6)
PASTE
Temper: Pulverized shell, fine clay-grit, occasionally pulverized bone.
Texture: Compact, brittle; breaks with sharper edges than
most Caddoan area pottery, hardness 3.0 or more.
Color: Surfaces pale yellow, orange-yellow, light brown, light
to dark gray, etc., generally with considerable fire-mottling.
Cores gray to black.
Surface finish: Interiors smoothed but seldom polished; exteriors covered with fine ridges except in rare cases where
smoothed areas alternate with ridged areas (A, B).
Wall thickness: Range 3 to 6 ram., average 4 ram.
Lip: Rounded and turned outward (D, I-I, I, K, L) but more
often considerably thickened and nearly round in crosssection (E, G, J, ~i).
Base: Usually convex and vessels do not stand up well; sometimes partly flattened (A, B, M).
Vessel shape and size: Peculiar drop-shape is typical, widest
part below mid-section, height ranging from 7 to 33 cm.
Jar shape with everted rim (A, B) quite rare, as are
handles. A few examples of globular jars (D, H, L) generally much smaller than drop-shapes.
DECORATION
Treatment: Ridging, incising.
Designs: Incising may be used to make lines under the short
out-turned rim (H, K, L). Otherwise the vessel (with exceptions like A, B) is completely covered with tiny ridges
close together and vertically placed. Presumably the stillplastic clay was grooved with a broad, flat tool; ~f so, it was
skillfully done with ridges very evenly spaced. Possibly
the ridges were sometimes applied to surface, for they
sometimes come loose like applique work and the ridges
may be closer together at the neck than on the middle of
the body (as on
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
’Bossier and Belcher Foci. Minor type or trade ware in Texarkana Focus and most eastern components of Titus Focus.
Apparently had a rather long life without being spread far
from the central area.
D~UTION
Found rather widely in northwest quarter of Louisiana, extending into eastermost counties of northeast Texas, and Miller
and Lafayette Counties in southwesternmost Arkansas.
Crooks site, central Louisiana.

ESTn~L~_~ AGE
1100-1500 A.D. The clay-grit and bone-tempered specimens
of Bossier Focus are earlier than the shell-tempered specimens of Belcher Focus. The latter may be estimated at
1300-1500 A. D. while the Bossier Focus is older, perhaps
tl100-1300 A. D.

~CES
’Webb and Dodd, 1941, pp. 101-102, Plate 17; Krieger, 1946, Figure 18; Webb, 1948, pp. 113-114, Plates 11, 13, 14.

PLATE 6

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

248

BLAKELY ENGRAVED
(Plate 7)
PASTE
Temper: Usually none; otherwise finely pulverized shell or
small amount of sand.
Texture: Fine, compact.
Color: Shades of gray and gray-brown from light to dark and
nearly black. Occasionally olive-gray tone, light to dark.
Better-made vessels (A-G) evenly colored without firemottling; such vessels as H, I, have mottling but typological status uncertain. Cores dark gray to black.
Surface finish: Fair to good polish.
FORM
Wall thickness: 3 to 6 ram.
Lip: Rounded, turned outward.
Base: Usually convex, otherwise somewhat flattened.
Vessel shape and size: Principally or entirely bottles with spouts
either of even diameter or tapered slightly and then expanded at mouth. A marked angle appears in lower body
in some cases (A). Use of three large, hollow legs expanded
at the feet is not uncommon (E, F). The cylindrical vessel
form with small mouth at top and four small lugs perforated vertically is a peculiar development in the Ouachita River valley, usually undecorated (Hodges, 1945); this
specimen possibly of Blakely type because of design.
DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving.
Designs: Very simple but striking, conisting of groups of three
or five parallel lines running down body. When vertical,
these sets are repeated two, three, or four times (A-C, I),
and usually if not always contain three lines. When they
slant across the body they contain five lines and have short
curved spurs of hatched bands and single lines on either
side of the main set (E, F). The two outermost of the five
lines may end or bend outward toward the ends of the
bands (D, G), and there may be border lines encircling the
top of the body (E-G). The five-line sets appear only twice,
on opposite sides of the body, so far as has been determined.
The curved lines on the body of H contain three to a set in
some places, four in others. Vessel I employes three sets
of three lines each. Red pigment sometimes appears in lines.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Mid-Ouachita Focus exclusively. Trade pieces might be expected in adjacent complexes.
DISTRIBUTION
Southwest Arkansas, particularly in Clark, Hot Spring, and
Garland Counties.
ESTIMATED AGE
1200-1500 A. D.
REFERENCES
Dr. and l~rs. T. L. Hodges, 1945, pp. 107-108 and Plate 19, panel
3. The original name of Blakelytown Engrav~ has been
shortened by agreement.

PLATE

250

Texas Archeological Society
BOWIE ENGRAVED

(Plate 8)
PASTE
Temper: Usually none; otherwise finely pulverized shell.
Texture: Fine, compact except when shell particles have leached out, leaving paste soft and filled with tiny cavities.
Color: Dark grays and browns except when covered with red
film made of powdered ochre (H). Cores gray, brown to
nearly black.
Surface finish: Smoothed to fairly well polished.
FORM
Wall thickness: 2 or 3 to 5 mm.
Lip: Rounded and flush with rim or turned outward slightly.
Base: Evenly convex on carinated bowls, flatter but no thicker
than side walls on deep bowls and bottles.
Vessel shape and size: Small carinated bowls with shallow
bottoms and high rims either vertical or slanting outward
~lightly (A, D, F, G)~ small but very deep simple bowls
with rim curving outward slightly from body (H); and
possibly some very large, globular bottles known only
from sherds.

DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving, excising.
Designs: Small units repeated a large number of times around
vessel. Units may be chevrons, triangles, arrow points,
drop-shaped, or elongated with "eye" at end or at center
(C, F’; see also Plate 1, N). From one to four simple horizontal lines lie above these units on rims of carinated
bowls; on the very deep bowls (H) the units are on rim
interior just below lip and border line, if any, is below
them. The very large bottles are almost entirely plain,
having only a series of units similar to the "eyes" around
body just below spout. White and red pigments in lines
of darker vessels.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
McCurtain and Texarkana Foci. The former seems to have
more of the very deep, red-filmed bowls, often with shell
temper, similar to those in type Avery Engraved (Plate 2) ;
Texarkana Focus appears to have more of the shallow carinated bowls with neither red film nor shell temper, similar to those in type Barkman Engraved (Plate 4). The vessels classified as Bowie Engraved might be assigned to the
two other types except that they are linked by the unique
designs. These defintely do not conform to the common
insistence on four-times repetition of Avery, Barkman, and
many other Caddoan types.
DISTRIBUTION
Same as Avery Engraved. Also occurs as trade ware in Titus
Focus (H).
ESTIMATED AGE
Same as Avery Engraved but unknown so far from historic
sites.
REFERENCES
None.

252

Texas Archeological Society
BULLARD BRUSHED

(Plate 9)
PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit; occasionally pulverized bone.
Texture: Coarse but not crumbly.
Color: Surfaces vary from cream to light yellowish brown and
medium to dark brown. Cores gray to dark brown and
black. Much fire mottling.
Surface finish: Poorly smoothed inside, roughened by brushing on outside.
FORM
Wall thickness: 4 to 9 mm.
Lip: Convex and either direct or turned outward.
Base: Round, thick, flat disk to which wall is attached.
Vessel shape and size: Jars with rims that curve gently into
body (A-D, H, G), tapered vessels (E), and jars with rim
meeting body at slight angle (F). Vessel I appears to be a
conical bowl although it may have been refashioned from
the lower part of a broken jar. Size ranges from small vessels like C and E to large jars 35 cm. or more in height
(H). Soot and grease stains indicate cooking function.
DECORATION
Treatment: Brushing, punctating.
Designs: Bodies covered with brushing usually vertical but
may run crosswise or diagonally (I-I, G). Rim may be brushed horizontally or vertically and from two to four horizontal rows of fingernail punctates made through the
brushing (A, B, E, F). Fingernail punctates may be made
end-to-end in rows (C) or in pinched ridges (D). Two opposed strap handles (C) or solid lugs (B, E) sometimes appear on Frankston Focus vessels.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Principally a Frankston Focus type, also occurs in Titus Focus.
Similar in general shape and coarse paste to La Rue Neckbanded (Plate 42) and Maydelle Incised (Plate 46), both of
which are also found in both Frankston and Titus Focus
compi)nents. The three types together constitute the utility
ware of Frankston Focus and part of that of Titus Focus.
Classification of all three types is difficult unless rim
present, for brushed body sherds could belong to any of
them. They also account for the very high incident of
brushed body sherds in Frankston Focus as compared
with pottery of all other Caddoan complexes.
DISTRIBUTION
Principally in drainage areas of Neches and upper Sabine
Rivers. Becomes less frequent eastward in Sulphur River
drainage area where Titus Focus components are found.
Carried westward into central and north-central Texas as
trade ware, as other Frankston Focus types; specimen B
from Coleman County.
F~T~IMATED AGE
1200-1500 A. D.
REFERENCES
Krieger, 1946, Figure 18.

PLATE 9

254

Texas Archeological Society
CANTON INCISED
(Plate 10)

PASTE
Temper: Abundant clay-grit in which pulverized sherds sometimes recognized. Pulverized bone may be added to clay~
grit.
Texture: Coarse but firm.
Color: Shades of brown from light to dark with chocolate
predominating. Some fire-mottling but no strongly contrasting colors. Cores dark.
Surface finish: Both exterior and interior smoothed but rarely
polished. Surfaces retain ripples from use of smoothing
tools.
FORM
Wall thickness: Range about 4 to 9 mm., average about 6 mm.
Lip: Rounded or slightly flattened but not thickened.
Base: Flat, circular disk to which body wall attached.
Vessel shape and size: Cylindrical vessels most characteristic,
ranging in height from 15 to 42 cm. and perhaps more, in
diameter from 12 to 38 cm. and perhaps more (D, E, IrI and
rim sherds F, G). Also carinated bowls, diameter ranging
up to more than 30 cm., rims straight and vertical or sloping inward or outward (A and rim sherds B, C). Small
hemispherical bowls (I). Two suspension holes may occur
in rim of cylindrical vessels.
DECORATION
Treatment: Incising, punctating, fingernail impressions.
Designs: Parallel diagonal lines around rim, all same direction
(B), alternating in direction (A), alternating with intervening spaces filled with small punctates or fingernail marks
(D, E, H), nested together in hachures (F, G), or crossed
in diagonal grid (C). Also small triangles filled with punctates, pendant from horizonal borderline (I). Always confined to rim.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A Sanders Focus type. Similar incised and punctated designs
are known in most other Caddoan foci, widely in southeastern United States, and elsewhere. However, their use
on rims of carinated bowls and cylindrical vessels constitutes a very special trait, limited to Canton type and
Sanders Focus; occurrence of this combination elsewhere
indicative of trade relationship. The type has been reported from Nelson Focus in Choctaw County, Oklahoma
(Bell a.nd Baerreis, 1951, pp. 48-53), but its components are
just across Red River from Sanders Site in Lamar County.
DISTRIBUTION
From southern Choctaw County, Oklahoma, southward to
vicinity of Grand Saline on upper Sabine River in Van
Zandt County, Texas; westward into Fannin County;
eastward to Titus County. Trade sherds recognized as far
west as Dallas area and Lake Whitney on middle Brazos
River.
ESTIMATED AGE
Later part of G~bson Aspect, possibly 1000 A. D. but could be
earlier or later. Cross-dated with Haley Focus by trade
pottery in both directions.
REFERENCES
Krieger, 1946, pp. 185-190, Figure 14, Plate 28; Bell and Baerreis, 1951, pp. 48-5;~.

PLATE lO

Texas Archeological Society

256

CASS APPLIQUED
(Plate 11)
PASTE
Temper: clay-grit.
added.

Occasionally fine shell or bone partiCles

Texture: Fairly fine, compact, well-fired.
Color: Surfaces cream, pale gray, light yellow-brown to medium brown, orange-brown. Some fire mottling. Core about
same as surface.
Surface finish: Interiors smoothed; exteriors nearly covered
with ap.p.lique fillets and marks of tools along their bases
where fillets were welded to vessel surface.
FORM
Wall thickness:
Lip:

Range 4 to 6 mm., average 5 mm.

Rounded, turned outward.

Base: Flat to slightly convex, somewhat thicker than walls.
Vessel shape and size: Small jars only. Bodies squat, globular
(D) to elongate (F); rims turn outward but not sharply.
DECORATION
Treatment:

Applique and punctates; occasionally brushing.

Designs: Principally consist of numerous fillets, 3 to 5 ram.
wide, stuck to body either straight up and down (C-F) or
in hachure patterns (A, A’, B). Fillets cover entire body.
Rims may be plain, brushed horizontally, or have from
one to four horizontal rows of punctates. In one case (D)
punctates of triangular shape are spaced at regular intervals around rim and down body between fillets. Faii~$
brushing may appear running vertically in spaces between
fillets. No rim or body quadration.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A minor element in Titus and Texarkana Foci. District from
Harleton Appliqued of Titus Focus because the latter occurs only in pre-European sites, whereas Cass Appliqued
occurs not only in pre-European components of Titus and
Texarkana Foci, but in the Hunt and Clements sites in
Cass County as well, where some graves contained iron
and glass artifacts. The Harleton and Cass types together
constitute a unique elaboration of the applique technique
which is absent in most Caddoan complexes.
DISTRIBUTION
The few specimens recognized so far are from a small part of
northeast Texas in Morris, Cass, and Bowie Counties.
ESTIMATED AGE
1500-1700 A. D.
REFERENCES
None.

PLATE 1!

Texas Archeological Society

258

CLEMENTS BRUSHED
(Plate 12)
PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit.
Texture:

Coarse but compact, firm.

Color: Buff, light brown, gray-brown with considerable firemottling. Cores gray to dark brown.
Surface finish: Bowls smoothed inside, ollas not smoothed inside; exteriors roughened by decoration.
FORM
Wall thickness: 5 to 9 ram.
Lip: Rounded, rolled outward.
Base: Flat, circular disk or convex and no thicker than side
walls.
Vessel shape and size: Those illustrated are most of the complete vessels on record. All but A are ollas and A perhaps
should not be included; it is a large compound bowl 27 cm.
high and 31 cm. across mouth. B is 23 cm. high and 25 cm.
in diameter, with faintly angular shoulder well below
middle. C-C’ is slightly larger in the body than B but total
height unknown; D-D’ is taller than B but smaller in diameter. Two other specimens are about size of C-C’.

DECORATION
Treatment: Brushing; possibly some incising.
Designs: B-D’ have four brushed areas on body, those on B
and D-D’ arching up from near base over shoulder and
down again, those on C-C’ going in circle. Specimens not
illustrated also brushed in circles. Presumably brushing
done with handful of grass while clay still plastic. Olla
rims rough (B) or scraped and smoothed (D-D’). Large
bowl A brushed horizontally on rim and lower body, has
incised design poorly smoothed over on shoulder, repeated
four times.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Found at Clements and Hunt sites in Cass County near Atlanta.
Both sites have produced consistently similar ceramics and
some graves have had European trade materials. However, most of pottery types of historic Glendora Focus have
not appeared here and the vessels are mixtures of Texarkana and Titus Focus types. Assignment to any of these
loci, or to a new one, awaits more field evidence.
DISTRIBUTION
So far recognized only at Clements and Hunt sites, Cass County.
ESTIMATED AGE
Somewhere between 1500 and 1800 A. D., perhaps historic or
shortly preceding first European contacts,

REFERENCES
Not recognized previously. Dickinson, 1941, describes Clements Site and illustrates some of its finest vessels.

PLATE

Texas Archeological Society

260

COWIqR-DE STA_M~ED
(Plate 13)
P_A;STE
Temper: Usually abundant, finely-pulverized shell; otherwise,
fine clay-grit
Texture: Fine, firm, well-fired, does not break easily.
Color: Dark shades of brown and gray; occasionally tan to
cream. Cores gray to black.
Surface finish: Interiors smoothed to polished; exteriors same
where not roughened by decoration.
FORM
Wall thickness:
2 to 4 mm. (thinnest pottery in Caddoan
region).
Lip: Thin, rounded, turned outward.
Base: Ahvays convex; vessels do not stand up well.
Vessel shape and size:
Two principal forms: (1) globular
bowls 12 to 20 cm. in maximum diameter, with short rims
and mouths considerably smaller than bodies; (2) jars with
very high rims flared outward so mouth diameter equal to
or greater than body (A, D, G, J, L) and height up to 20
cm. or more. Webb collection has triple vessel, three small
globular bowls joined at sides with struts of clay.
DECORATION
Treatment: Dentate stamping (both individual and rocker),
incising, trailing, and punctating.
Designs: Most typical are graceful scroll bands repeated four
times around vessel, the bands filled with longitudinal incised lines (C, E, M) or dentate stamps set close together
across each band (F, H, I). Bodies may also bear simple
arched bands (B) or sets of trailed concentric circles (K).
The short rims of these bowls almost always are covered
with dentate stamps placed vertically as units (E, I, K) or
as rocker lines (B, C, M). Fingernail punctates in vertical
rows on rim may substitute for stamping (F). The highrimmed jars have scroll bands filled with dentate stamping
on rim (G) or both rim and body (D). A few simulations
of these techniques are classified as "Cowhide Stamped."
Thus, A is like D even though the bands are filled with
simple punctates, and L is like G even though the crosslines in the scroll bands are incised, not stamped.

Cl!LTI!RAL ~TIONS
Essentially a Belcher Focus t .ype, but occurs in Texarkana and
Mid-Ouachita Foci as minor element. Specimen L from
Greer site in lower Arkansas River Valley (Moore, 1908)
may prove type extended into European times. In Caddoan
area proper, however, it is entirely pre-European. Shell
temper is far more frequent in it than in other Belcher
Focus types. An affinity with Foster Trailed-Incised (Plate
20) is seen in the shape of the tall-rimmed jars and in the
sets of trailed concentric circles on the body of G; the
Foster type also includes shell temper frequently.
DISTRI~BUTION.
Red River valley from Belcher site in northwest Louisiana to
great bend area, extending into Bowie County, Texas; also
in components of Mid-Ouachita Focus in southwest Arkansas and at Greer site, lower Arkansas River valley.

~TED AGE
1200-1500 A. D. Greer site specimen may date in historic times
in that area.
~CES
$irst named ’~Belcher Stamped" by Webb and Dodd, 1941, pp.
97-98; Krieger, 1946.

PLATE 13

Texas Archeological Society

262

Oq~OCK:ETT CHRVILI2Xl]gAR INCISED
(Plates 14-16)
P4~TE
Temper: Clay-grit; occasionally pulverized bone added.
~Texture: Coarse, lumpy, often crumbly. Temper particles often show on surface.
Color: Light, medium, and dark brown; reddish brown; graybrown; rarely black.
Surface finish: Smoothed to polished.
FORM
Wall thickness: 4 to 10 ram.; usually 5 to 6 mm.
Lip: Usually plain rounded; also flat but unwidened, flat and
widened (Plate 14, K), cambered (two convex edges meeting in ridge), thickened and circular in cross-section (Plate
14, E), and bent outward with scalloped edge (Plate 14, C).
]Base:
Convex and of even curvature and thickness across
bottom.
Vessel shape and size: Most frequent form is carinated bowl,
up to 40 cm. and perhaps more across mouth, rims uprigh~
or slanted outward slightly (Plate 14, C, F, H, I). Next
most frequent are globular bowls with plain, cambered, or
circular lips (Plate 14, E, G). Simple bowls (Plate 14, A,
K) of minor importance but usually have two or four rims
peaks. Cylindrical bowl (Plate 14, D), square bowl with
slightly raised corners (~late 14, B), and vessel with side
wall stepped outward (~Plate 14, J).
DECORATION
Treatment: Incising, punctating.
Designs: Many variations of scroll motif, plus alternating rings
and triangles. A circle or ring is usually the central element, flanked by inclined bands or paired triangles. Flanks
of inclined bands filled with p.unctates or parallel lines;
circles and rings also filled w~th these but punctates and
lines may be used alternately as fillers on same vessels.
Inclined bands may be plain or have bisecting line down
middle to connect bottom of one circle with top of next one.
No ticking or cross-hatching has been noted. Punctates are
]plain, ring-like (made with hollow reed?), or hemiconical
m shape. Design units often repeated four times (Plate 14,
A, B, D, J) but repetitions up to 15 or more also common.
Plates 15, 16 show further variations of designs, with F-~NI
on Plate 16 being "hybrid" or blendings with those of Pennington Punctated-Incised. White and pale blue pigments
found in designs, red ochre rarely.
CULT~ ~LIATIONS
Alto, Haley, and Spiro Foci of Gibson Aspect. Above description applies to Alto Focus; northward into Arkansas and
Oklahoma vessel forms change and four-times repetition
of scroll motif much stronger. Closely related to French
Fork Incised in central Louisiana (Ford, 1951).

DISTRIBD~ON
From central East Texas to southwest Arkansas and eastern
Oklahoma. Westward to middle Brazos River in central
Texas at Chupek site near Waco. Trade sherds occur at
Greenhouse site, central Louisiana (Ford, 1951).

ESTIMATED AGE
More or less entire time span of Gibson Aspect, some part of
500-1000 A. D.

~CES
Krieger, 1946; Figure 19 ("Keoto Curvilinear Incised" now included with Crockett); Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 99101, Figures 35-38; Ford, 1951, pp. 62-67.

PLAT~ 14

F
A

8

K
PLATE 15

I-I

PLATE

266

Texas Archeological Society
DAVIS INCISED
(.Plate 17)

PASTE
Temper: Abundant coarse clay-grit and carbonized particles;
occasionally some pulverized bone.
Texture: From moderately coarse to very coarse, lumpy, and
crumbly.
Color: Various shades of yellowish brown, red (not filmed),
reddish brown; occasionally gray-brown to black. Cores
like surface.
Surface finish: Smoothed but not often polished.
FORM
Wall thickness: 4 to 12 mm,, average 6-7 mm.
Lip: Rounded or flat but not thickened.
Base: Usually convex; sometimes flat and thicker than side
wal! but not a separate disk to which wall was attached.
Vessel shape and size: Most common are carinated and simple
bowls ranging from 15 to 45 cm. across. Simple bowls have
sides from slightly to pronouncedly convex (B, C, G), approaching hemispherical shape (A) ; some have sides slightly concave or recurved (D). Two or four rim peaks occur
rarely (F). Carinated bowl rims slant inward or out~,ard
slightly or stand vertica! (E, I). Bottles fairly common but
known only from sherds (H). Also cylindrical and barrelshaped vessels similar to those in type Dunkin Incised
(Plate 18), and small jars indicated by sherds.
DECORATION
Treatment: Incising with lines almost always smoothed over.
Designs: Horizonal lines encircling vessel rim or upper part of
bottle body, Carinated bowls usually have lines only on
upper half of rim (I), other vesse! forms have them variable distances downward from lip. Lines occasionally
"’overhang", an effect produced by holding the cutting tool
at a downward angle so that line is deepest along its upper
edge.
CULTUR~_L A~FILIATIONS
Associated with Alto and Gahagan Foci of Gibson Aspect. Related to types Coles Creek Incised, Greenhouse Incised, and
Hardy Incised of Coles Creek and Troyville complexes in
Louisiana (described in Ford, 1951), all of which have
simple encircling incised lines and include cylindrical and
barrel-shaped vessels as well as simple and hemispherical
bowls, but lack carinated bowls and bottles. Davis Incised
can also be distinguished from them by considerably greater thickness of vessel walls, much coarser and softer
paste, less polish, lack of thickened rims and incised lines
on top of lip, reddish and reddish-bro~vn colors, etc. Davis
Incised also lacks very shallow bottom line and row of
punctates sometimes found on Coles Creek and Troyville
types. In Caddoan area it is closely related to Hickory Fine
Engraved (Plate 31), the designs differing only in technique, and to East Incised of Haley Focus (Plate 19) as
discussed under that type.
D ISTRFf3UTION
Central East Texas and northwest Louisiana, probably mergin.g
with above-mentioned Coles Creek and Troyville types m
central Louisiana.

ESTIMATED AGE
Some part of span 500-1000 A. D.
REFF_zREN CES
Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 116-118, Figure 45; Ford, 1951,
pp. 76, 88, 126, 128, and charts.

PLATE 17

Texas Archeological Society

268

DUNKIN INCISED
(Plate 18)
PASTE
Temper:
Clay-grit; pulverized bone sometimes added, also
carbon or sand.
Texture: Coarse. ranging from compact to crumbly.
Color: Light yellowish-brown, reddish brown, medium brown
and chocolate. Cores gray, gray-brown, and same color as
surface.
Surface finish: Poorly smoothed to fair polish, except for decorated parts.
FORM
Wall thickness: 4 to 8 ram.
Lip: Rounded, flush with rim, rarely widened and flat.
Base:
Flat on cylindrical and barrel-shaped jars, rarely
square; convex on bowls. Of same thickness as side wall
in both cases.
Vessel shape and size: Primarily cylindrical vessels with sides
straight to slightly convex, approaching barrel shape (A-C,
E, H, K), height from 20 to 30 cm. or perhaps more. Carl’
hated (I, J), simple (D, G), and compound bowls (F) are
minor forms. The few square bases known are on cylindrical vessels (E, H). Handles, applique, unknown.
DECORATION
Treatment: Incising and fingernail punctations.
Designs: Sets of parallel lines in wide variety of straight-line
patterns. Arranged in triangles, diamonds, hachures, simple parallel lines, and grids of crossed diagonals, placed
around upper halves of cylindrical vessels, or over whole
body, around rims of carinated bowls, and around variable
parts of simple bowls. Remainder of body plain or covered
with fingernail pinches or punctations (A, K). Zone just
below lip left plain (C), filled with crossed diagonal lines
(B), or with arched impressions like Weches type (~H).
CULTURAL ~IATIONS
Primarily an Alto Focus type, but extending in form of jars
into Haley Focus components. Above description covers
only most definite inclusions, there being several unsolved
roblems (see Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 110-116 for
iscussion). Vessels originally described as Kiam Incised
by Newell were included in Dunkin by Krieger in above
publication, but are now separate again (Plate 40). Vessels with very closely spaced and crudely made incised
lines and cross-lines, resembling brushing (Newell and
Krieger, Fig. 44, A-E), are still of uncertain status. Dunkin
as now defined closely resembles some vessels of Pease
Brushed-Incised of Bossier Focus (Plate 53) and the latter
may be an outgrowth of Dunkin; however, it lacks cylindrical vessels, carinated and simple bowls; and conversely,
Dunkin lacks any evidence of applique, punctates placed in
rows to divide design panels or in fillets, brushed surfaces
between fillets, rim peaks, and handles. A relationship
with Mazique Incised of lower Mississippi valley (described
in Ford, 1951) may be assumed.
DISTRIBUTION
Principally in central part of East Texas but ~lso in southwest
Arkansas on Red River and in Clark County (East mound) ;
not known if distribution continuous between these areas.

~

ESTIMATED A(3~E
RF_,,~’~m~°f-~,x~r.o span 500-1000 A. D.
Krieger, 1946, Figure 19; Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 110116, Figures 41-44.

270

Texas Archeological Society
EAST INCISED
(Plate 19)

PASTE
~emper: Fine clay-grit or small amount of sand.
Texture: Fine.
Color: Tan, various shades of brown and reddish brown. Red
produced by firing temperatures on mottled surfaces (C,
,F) and surfaces also sometimes red-filmed (A, D, F, J, N).
Cores brown, gray.
~;urface finish: Smoothed but seldom polished.
Wall thickness: 3 to 5 ram.
Lip: Rounded and flush with rim.
Base: Usually convex on bowls, flat on other vessels.
Vessel shape and size: Small vessels, not over 18 or 20 cm. in
greatest height or diameter. Simple bowls have convex,
straight, or slightly recurved sides standing more or less
vertical or sloping slightly inward or outward (A, B, D, G,
H, J, M) ; rims may have two opposed peaks (D, H), four
peaks .(M); two opposed tabs built out on side of lip (J),
and tabs may or may not have small pits sunk in center.
An oval effigy bowl (E) has animal head at one end and
pointed tail at other; the two peaks of bowl H suggest a
conventionalization of this effigy form. Other vessels are
cylindrical (C), barrel-shaped (F, N), barrel-shaped with
broadest part below the middle (K) or above the middle
(L), and deep bowl like truncated cone (I). Two opposed
suspension holes in rim are common on upright vessels (F,
I, K, L, N).
DECORATION
Treatment: Incised lines, partly or entirely smoothed over.
Designs: Horizonta! lines encircling vessel rims, except where
they are interrupted by sets of semicircular lines placed
under rim peaks or effigy features (A, D, E). In at least
one case (iM) the lines are parallel with peaks and dips of
rim. Vessel A was filmed after lines were cut and sm.oothed; vessels D, G, N have lines cut through film as m engraving technique, but both methods included in this type
for convenience. ~ite pigment appears rarely in lines (B).
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Belongs to Haley Focus but probably only to certain components such as the East mound in Clark County, Arkansas
(all vessels in Plate 19 from there except J from Crenshaw
site on Red River in Arkansas). A close relative of Davis
Incised of Alto and Gahagan Foci (Plate 17) and thus related to certain Louisiana types in Coles Creek and Troyville complexes (see Davis Incised). East differs from
Davis in apparent absence of carinated bowls and bottles,
much finer paste and thinner walls, red film, suspension
holes, much smaller size, effigies, rim tabs, dipping of lines
under rim peaks, and perhaps in odd shapes such as K, L.
Both have either two or four rim peaks, simple bowls,
cylindrical and barrel-shaped vessels.
DISTRIBUTION
Southwest Arkansas from middle Ouachita River to great bend
of Red River.
t~SThMATED AGE
Near end of Gibson Aspect time, possibly 1000 A. D.
REFEREN~E:R
Not described as type before. Discussed as northern relative
of Davis Incised in Newell and Krieger, 1949, p. 217, Figures 63, 65.

PLATE 19

Texas Archeological Society

272

FOSTER ~A~LED-INCISED
(Plate 20)
PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit or very abundant finely-pulverized shell
Texture: Compact, fairly fine; rather soft, friable.
Color: Light to dark browns and gray-browns; cores generally
darker than surfaces. Some fire mottling.
Surface finish: Interiors smoothed to almost polished; exteriors
about same in few areas not gouged up by design work.
FORM
Wall thickness: 4 to 7 mm.
Lip: Rounded, turned outward slightly to sharply; outer edge
sometimes notched.
Base: Usually convex so vessel does not stand up well; sometimes flat.
Vessel shape and size: Small jars only, height 7 to 20 cm. One
of outstanding features is height of rim in proportion to
body; occasionally rim and body are same height but
usually rim somewhat less. The globular bowl with short,
out-curving rim (H) is an exception. Rim may be nearly
vertical (D) but usually it flares outward so that mouth
diameter is notably greater than that of body.

D]DCORATION
Treatment: Incising, "trailing" (incising with a broad, roundtipped tool), punctating, and applique.
Designs: Most common designs are those shown in A and ~,
the high rim being divided into from two to seven horizontal panels of incised lines usually running downward to
the left (A, B, C, F, G, L) but occasionally downward to
right or alternating in herringbone fashion. Incised rim
lines usually made completely across rim first, then divided into panels with trailed lines cutting across them.
In some cases there are no trailed lines, but zones of incised diagonals made separately (C, L). Other rim treatments include diagonals made with fingernails instead of
incising (D) and horizontal lines made of fingernail impressions end-to-end (I). Some of handsomest designs include large open scrolls of trailed or incised lines with
punctates in the flanks (J, K). Body designs consist mainly
of concentric circles repeated two, three, or four times
(usually four). An applique node, often split into three
tiny lobes, usually occurs in the center of each set of concentric circles. Other designs consist of sets of curved
lines hooked together (H, L) and concentric semicircles
(G). Plain bodies (C) are rare.

CI/LTURAL i%FFILIATIONS
The trailed body designs bear an obvious affinity with those
of type Keno Trailed (Plate 39), but are simpler and the
vessel shapes are very different. The scrolls on J and K
suggest affinity with those of Cowhide Stamped (Plate
13), Foster Trailed-Incised belongs primarily to ]Belcher
and Texarkana Foci, but occurs in Mld-Ouachita Focus as
well. Foster and Cowhide, oddly, include most of the shelltempered vessels in all three of these foci.

DIST~I~BU~ON
Primarily in Red River valley from great bend downstream to
Belcher site near Shreveport; Bowie County, Texas; Little
River, Hempstead, Miller, Lafayette Counties, Arkansas.

]~STNMA’rED AGE
1200-1600 A. D. or part thereof. Not known in historic sites.
~rebb and Dodd, 1941 pp. 96-97; Krieger, 1946, Figure 18.

PLATE

274

Texas Archeological Society
FRIEN~SH_IP ENGRAftED
(Plate 21)

PASTE
Temper: Usually none; sometimes small amount of fine claygrit or sand.
Texture: Very fine, compact.
Color: Shades of reddish-brown and gray-brown from ligh~
to dark and nearly black. Cores cream to gray (note contrast with dark surface when latter cut away by designs).
Surface finish: Fair to good polish.
,Wall thickness: 3 to 5 ram.
Lip: Rounded and flush with rim or turned outward slightly.
Base: Usually evenly convex on both bowls and bottles, but
some bowls flat (I).
Vessel shape and size: Nearly all bowls and bottles. Carinated
bowls have shallow bottoms and high rims, usually vertical
but may slant inward or outward slightly; vessel F seems
to be this form with rim slanted far inward and body molded into four lobes. Simple conical bowls (I). Small jar with
squat body and rim slanted sharply outward (NI). Peculiar
vessel shaped like canteen is completely closed except for
small opening at one edge (K-K’). One oval, boat-shaped
vessel probably modification of carinated bowl (B). Bottles have vertica! spout and widest part of body below
middle (O-R).

DI~CORATION
Treatment: Engraving, punctating, applique.
Designs: Most typical are rectilinear pane}s of cross-hatched
bands and plain or ticked lines flanking them (A-C). Arcs
or semicircles may be substituted CD, F, G, I, K, M, N).
Negative scrolls outlined by cross-hatched areas may be
horizontal (E), slanting (H), or both (L). Bottles typically
have low, polished applique ridges, single (Q), double
(R), or triple (O), in two, three, or four sets, and on
upper or lower parts of body or both. Bottle designs consist mainly of horizontal lines encircling upper body and
sometimes ticked, plus cross-hatched ~ands runmng vertically (R), arched (O, P), or both (Q). Peculiar knobs
may be molded to rim of carinated bowls (B, D). Bowls
tend to repeat design four times, but two, three, five, six,
and seven are known. Bottles tend to repeat two or three
times, seldom four. Scrolls (E, H, L) may not belong to
type. Red and white pigments occur in lines but contrast
usually sufficient between dark surface and lighter core.

Cl!LTURRAL AFF]~LI,ATIOI~S
Principally a Mid-Ouachita Focus type but occurs also in Texarkana Focus. Use of ticked lines is somewhat like that of
Means Engraved (Plate 47) of Mid-Ouachita Focus; shape
and decoration of carinated bowls bear similarities with
Barkman Engraved of Texarkana Focus (Plate 4).

DISTI~IBUTION
Southwest Arkansas, especially Ouachita River valley, decreasing in frequency toward Red River valley but extending
into Boa~.’ie County, Texas.
ESTIMA~ AGE
1200-1500 A. D.
~RENCES
T. L. and Mrs. Hodges, 1945, p. 103 and Plate 18, No. 1.

PLATE 21

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

276

FULTON ASPECT EFFIGY BOWLS
(Plate 22)
GENERAL NOTES
These bowls may be expected almost throughout the area
covered by the Fulton Aspect in Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Oklahoma; they also occur in other parts of the
Eastern United States. A, I, probably from Texarkana
Focus association; B, C, Titus Focus; D, F, H, J, K, Allen
Focus; E, G, Frankston Focus. Temper, texture, color, and
finish variable, depending upon general features of focus
in which specimen belongs; however, none in Caddoan area
known with shell temper. Form quite similar, in all foci,
consisting entirely of bowls shaped like truncated cone,
varying only in steepness of sides, and bearing two modeled attachments on opposite sides of the mouth. The
crenelated attachments (A, D, F, G, K) are probabl~; highly
conventionalized bird~heads (the point of A is divided like
a .beak). Opposite these crenelated attachments are figurines of animals and human beings, standing or sitting
on smaI1 projecting platforms (A, D, F, H, K), or a simple
projection like a bird tail (G). Effigies plainly of birds
with prominent heads and tails are fairly common (C),
while others are conventionalized and barely recognizable
(E, I). Some bowls have ~tw~o equal attachments, symbolizing creatures whose identity can hardly be guessed (B,
J). Human heads are known on bowls in Arkansas, facing
either inward or outward, but are very rare in Caddoan
archeology. From three to five horizontal incised lines encircle the rim of all bowls of this class; the lines are usually
smoothed over and they may or may not dip below the two
attachments. Red and white pigments sometimes occur in
these lines.
ESTIMATED AGE
1200-1700 A. D.
REFERENCES

None.

Tex~s Arcl~eo!ogical Society

278

FULTON ASPECT EFFIGY VESSELS
(Plate 23)
GENERAL NOTES
These vessels reflect generally more advanced craftsmanship
than the simple effigy bowls of Plate 22, and rather than
being found throughout the Fulton Aspect, they tend to be
associated with the elaborate ceramics of the Texarkana,
Belcher, and Mid-Ouachita Foci. A, D, E, may be assigned to type Hodges Engraved. The full-bodied effigies
B, C, F are actually bottles with hollow bodies and an
opening in top of head about same diameter as those of
ordinary bottles; they are confined to Mid-Ouachita Focus
in Arkansas. A is a superb example of impressionistic
modeling, the spout set at the back of the head rather than
at center, and two sides of face bearing different designs;
the left eye has below it a three-pointed ’%Veeping Eye"
symbol (see also Plate 32, G) while the right eye is encircled .by a ticked scroll line. The effigy J-J’ is also an
elaborated bottle, probably representing a turtle; the top
of the ,body is decorated in the manner of pottery type
Belcher Ridged (Plate 6), and a panel on each side has a
design as on bowls of type Glassell Engraved (Plate 25).
Bowl I is like those of Plate 22 except that two small appendages at the sides represent wings or fins. Both I and
J-J’ are from the Belcher Focus complex at :Belcher mound,
Louisiana.

:H is also a bowl, but globular rather than

conical, and the turtle head is built out on the side rather
than attached to the lip; it belongs to Texarkana or lYlcCurtain Focus. G-G’ is a finely made bottle with walls
vnly 2 ram. thick, entirely covered with red film, found at
the Sanders Site in Lamar County (Krieger, 1946, Figure
16), but as it is shell-tempered and the fragments are from
the surface, it is probably from a later occupation than
that of Sanders Focus. The frog on one side is spread in
normal swimming position for a frog; that on the other side
has the forelegs in "crawl stroke" position. D, E, are redfilmed (Moore, 1909, Plates I, VII) but no other details are
available.
ESTIMATED AGE
1200-1500 A. D.
REFERENCES
None.

See type Means Engraved

(Plate 47) for further ex-

amples of effigies from Mid-Ouachita Focus.

PLATE

Texas Archeological Society

280

FULTON ASPECT RATTLE BOWLS AND NODED BOWLS
(Plate 24)
GENERAL NOTES
Like the effigy bowls and other effigy vessels of Fulton Aspect
(,Plates 22, 23), the principal of a rattle made of pottery
is also very widespread, occurring in nearly every focus
of this Aspect. Four knobs protrude from the sides of
small bowls, either of simple hemispherical shape (F) or
with convex sides, the mouth being smaller than the body
diameter (A-D). These knobs are hollow and each contains one or more small pebbles, producing a harsh rattling
noise when shaken. In the Texarkana and Belcher Foci
some of these bowls have four long legs which rest on a
ring or hollow square of clay (A, C). The bowls themselves are entirely covered with pinched-up ridges of clay
(F), tiny nodes stuck on the surface (B, D), applique fillets (C), or grooves made in the plastic clay (A); whatever the body decoration, it commonly covers the four
knobs as well.
Apparently wherever
vessels are found
the four legs, but
Texarkana Focus,

rattle bowls occur, similar or identical
which have the pinches, nodes, or e,~en
no rattles (E, G-J). In one case, from
the nodes are in panels alternated with

a herringbone incised design (J).
In several instances, squeezed lumps of a dense greenish clay,
or lumps of red ochre, have been found inside rattle bowls
and.simple noded bowls as well. Pro~ably they served a
definite function in ceremonies.
REFERENCES
None.

PLATE 24

282

Texas Archeological Society

OL/~SSEI~

ENGRAVED

(Plate 25)

PASTE
See description of type Belcher Engraved except that shell
temper is very rare in vessels definitely of the GIassell
type. Shell temper is abundant in such vessels as D and N
but these are from the Keno site in northeastern Louisiana
(~:Moore, 1909) and need not belong in this group.
Wall thickness: 3 to 5 ram.
Lip: Usually thickened with a strip of clay attached to outer
edge, which sometimes splits off (K); otherwise, thin,
wedge-like (~M).
Base: Convex on bowls, slightly convex to flat on bottles.
Vessel shape and size: Carinated bowls with rim slightly concave and slanted inward; bottles with globular bodies and
spouts usually long and swelling, n,ea,r, mid,d~le,, bu~t sp,out,s
may also be larger at top than at oo~om
(N) is aberrant. Bowls up to 27 cm. across; bottles up to
20 cm. high.
DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving.
Designs: On bowls such as G, H, J-M the pattern is rectilinear
and repeated four times. A ticked or spurred line runs
horizontally through center of blank space and either ends
against an arc placed vertically, or makes a step up or
down and runs through another such blank space. On
bowls J-M each of the four design units includes five
panels, three in upper part and two in lower, or vice versa,
each bisected by a spurred line. Arched lines placed back
to back vertically provide "dividing elements" between
panels and between the four major units of design. Bottles
have various combinations of curved lines and circles in
which principal diagnostic feature is common use of very
narrow "ladders:’ or paratilel ~s with closely, spaced
y narrow hatched and
cross-lines (A-A, B-B, F, ).
cross-hatched bands are also used (C). Red pigment occurs in designs.

CULTU/~AL A~FILIATIOI~S
Essentially a Belcher Focus type but also occurs in thicker and
less well-made vessels in eastern components of Titus Focus. Possibly survives into Glendora Focus with vessels
like D and N but more research required to determine
range of shapes, designs, and tempering material.
DL~TRIB~TION
Red River valley of northwestern Louisiana, extending westward into Harrison and perhaps other counties in northeast
Texas, and southwestern corner of Arkansas.
ESTIMATED AGE
Same as Belcher Engraved.
Webb and Dodd, 1941, p. 91 and Plate 15, No. 4, considered this
to be "subtype C" of the type Belcher Engraved; Webb and
Kxieger now consider it distinct.

PLATE 25

284

Texas Archeological Society
HALEY ENGRAVED
(Plate 26, A-G)

PASTE
Ten]per: Fine clay-grit, small amount of fine sand, or none.
Texture: Fine, compact.
Color: Shades of brown and gray-brown from medium to
nearly black; cores as dark as or darker than surface.
Surface finish: Well smoothed to highly polished: bottles unsmoothed inside.
FORM
Wall thickness: 3 to 5 mm.
Lip: Rounded or flat and flush with rim.
Base: Flat to slightly convex, same thickness as side wall.
tVessel shape and size:
Bottles predominate; bodies small,
necks cylindrical (A, E) or slightly tapered toward mouth
(B, C, F). One example of vessel with small body and
large cylindrical neck, two vertically-perforated lugs on
rim (G). Also large, high con]pound bowls (inturned
shoulder area and outflaring rim) with two broad handles.
DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving.
Designs: Gracefully arranged scrolls, doubled-back meanders,
or vertical panels, consisting of very fine lines in parallel
sets (A-C, F, G), or more open work with individual lines
and tightly packed sets which appear almost like excising
D, E). Slanting ticks and spurs appear commonly in opposed pairs (on different lines, running close together),
either as the principal element in the scroll (D) or as a
bordering element in any of several ways; ticks also occur
along single lines as bordering elements (G). Design units
repeated two, three, or four times. Red and white pigments occur in lines.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A Haley Focus type, occurring in other units only as trade
ware. Reported from "Late Component" at Spiro Site,
Oklahoma (Orr, 1946, Fig. 32, C) and Sanders Site, Lamar
County (Krieger, 1946, Fig. 15).
DISTRIBUTION
Adjacent corners of Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Oklahoma.
ESTIMATED AGE
Some part of span 800-1200 A. D.
REFI~RENCES
Type name decided by Shreveport Conference, 1950.
HANDY ENGRAVED
(Plate 26, H-M)
Al! data the same as for Haley Engraved, except as follows:
Vessel shape and size: Bottles uncommon (L) ; carinated bowls
with flanged rims (I-]~’) ; low, squat compound bowls with
two wide strap handles (K,K’) ; carinated bowls with high
rim (J); jars with outflaring rims (H); vessel (M) similar to (G).
Decoration Treatment: Engraving, punctating,
Designs: Scrolls of widely spaced lines, running horizontally
(H, J) or slanting (I, K); vertical panels (L); concentric
circles (M). Distinguished from Haley Engraved by use of
row of punctates between two parallel lines as dominant
design element. Units repeated four times; no pigments.
REFEI~ENCES
Type name decided by Shreveport Conference, 1950.

PLATE 26

Texas Archeological Society

286

HALEY COMPLICATED INCISED
(Plate 27)
PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit.
Texture: Usually coarse, somewhat crumbly: occasionally finer
and firmer.
Color: Shades of brown and gray-brown from light to dark;
cores darker than surfaces.
Surface finish: Entirely covered with decoration.
FORM
Wall thickness: 4 to 9 mm.
Lip: Rounded, turned outward slightly.
~Base: Flat disk to which body wall was attached.
Vessel shape and size: Consists entirely of small jars, about
10 to 25 cm. high; some rims outfla,~ing (D, E, G, I), others
high and more or less cylindrical ~ ith two very wide strap
handles (A, B, C, F, H). Rims raised into four prominent
peaks fairly common, either with or without strap handles.

DECORATION
Treatment: Applique, incising, punctating.
Designs: Concentric circles, scrolls, and parallel diagonal lines
set in a wide variety of arrangements. Small areas flanking
main design units may be filled with stick punctates or
parallel lines, or both (B, C, E, H, I); or sets of fine diagonal or spiral lines may be alternated with single rows of
fingernail punctates (A, D). Some vessels have applique
fillets running vertically,’ diagonally, or both (A-D, F, G),
the fillets usually being notched or punctated along the
top. Strap handles are covered with same decoration as on
,body. Some jars with high rims have horizonal row of
punctates about midway., rising into punctate-filled triangles below the four rim peaks (B, C). Lips are often
notched along outer edge (B-E, G, I).
CULTURAL AP~ILIATIONS
A Haley Focus type. Its closest relative is Pease Brushed-Incised of Bossier Focus (Plate 53), which employs the same
techniques, covering the whole vessel body and rim, but
is simpler, lacks handles, and is believed to have been a
somewhat later type. When single rows of fingernail or
stick punctates are found between incised lines, this type
resembles Handy Engraved in design conception (Plate 26,
H-M).
DISTRIBUTION
Adjoining corners of Texas, Arkansas, and Louisiana. centered
around great bend of Red River.

ESTIMATED AGE
Some part of span 800-1200 A. D.
RF~ERENCES
Krieger, 1946, Fig. 19; Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 202-204.
Examples may be seen in Moore, 1912, Plate XXXIX and
Figs. 42, 43, 49, 53-57; Harrington, 1920, Plates XLVII,
A; LXII, A, B; LXIII, B.

PLATE 9.7

Texas Archeological Society

288

HARLETON APFLIQI2ED
(Plate 28)

PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit; occasionally white particles, either bone or
kaolin.
Texture: Compact, fairly coarse.
Color: Surface cream, buff, shades of gray and brown. Considerable fire-mottling with spots dark gray to black.
Cores gray to black.
Surface finish: Interiors poorly smoothed; exteriors same except where fillets applied.
FORM
Wall thickness: 4 to 9 ram.
Lip: Rounded, turned outward.
Base: Usually a thick, flat, round disk to which wall attached;
sometimes convex or slightly flattened and no thicker
than wall.
Vessel shape and size: Jars only, usually small, 10 to 15 cm.
high, but some 25 cm. or more. Rims high in relation to
body, curve outward so mouth diameter usually at least as
great as that of body and sometimes slightly greater. Rim
may meet body at definite angle (D, H) but usually merges
with it gradually. Pulling of rim into four raised peaks is
common; when strap handles are present there are two attached to opposite rim peaks (B); when lugs are present
there are four, one at each rim peak (A, G).
DECORATION
Treatment: Applique, incising, brushing, punctating.
Designs: Scrolls, chevrons, panels of vertical lines, concentric
diamonds, etc., formed with appliqued fillets on body; may
cover whole body or upper part. Design unit always repeated four times and aligned under rim peaks if present.
Fillets often punctated (A, B, E, F). Rims plain (G, D),
punctated in more or less regular rows (E, G), incised
with vertical lines (A, B), or brushed horizonally
Spaces between fillets occasionally brushed (H). Applique
knob may appear in center of design units (~B, E). Handles
and lugs may be molded into ridged ornamental patterns.

CI/LTI!RA!u~ AFT2LIATIONS
Titus Focus exclusively, an elaboration of technique of applique
which is paralleled only in type Cass Appliqued (Plate II).
DISTI~IBUTION
Principally in drainage areas of Sulphur River, Big Cypress
and Little Cypress Creeks, and vicinity of Caddo Lake.
ESTIMATED AGE
1200-1500 A. D.

REFERENCES
Krieger, 1946, Figure 18.

PLATE 28

Texas Archeological Society

290

HJkTC PrEL ENGRA~
(Plate 29)
PASTE
~ee type description for Barkman Engraved.
FORM
~rall thickness: Range 4 to 6 mm., average 5 mm.
Lip: Thin, rounded, may be turned outward slightly.
Base: Some bottoms convex and not distinguishable from side
wall; others slightly convex or flat but of same thickness
as side wall.
Vessel shape and size: Small bottles as shown, height 12 to 25
cm., neck vertical or tapered inward slightly, then expanding again at mouth. Some have angular shoulder near bottom. Other vessel forms may be added to type with further study.
DECORATION
Treatment:

Engraving and applique.

Designs: Body divided into oval or elliptical panels, almost
always four in number. Each panel half usually contains
a set of parallel arcs curved in same direction as sides of
panel, or in opposite direction. Vertical lines separate
panels. Rows of small applique nodes or low fillets sometimes extend part way down body from base of spout;
these are polished like the vessel surface and are difficult
to see (A, B, I). The nodes may be just above the center
of each panel or on the lines separating the panels. In one
case (F) there are two such rows in the center of each
panel. Two or three horizontal lines form an upper margin
to the design but the bottom is usually left open. If the
body is globular the design covers all but the base; where
an angular shoulder is present the design extends only.as
far downward as the shoulder (A, G, I). Red ochre .pigment common in engraved lines; white pigment occasionally seen.

AFFJ~LIATIONS
Like Barkman E,~graved, this type belongs exclusive}y to Texarkana Focus. The relationships in this case, however, are
more with the type Friendship Engraved (Plate 21) of MidOuaehita Focus in Arkansas, which includes bo~t]es with
similar small nodes and ridges just below spout and designs of arched lines in some cases.

CULTURAL

DISTRIBUTION
Apparently confined to same small area as Barkman Engraved.
ESTIMATED AGE
1200-1600 A. D. or part thereof.

I~EF]III%ENC ES
None.

PLATE

29

Texas Archeological Society

292

PIEMPSTEAD ~ENGRAVED
(Plate 30)
PASTE
Temper:
Fine clay-grit,
amount of sand.

finely

pulverized

shell,

or

small

Texture: Fine, compact, some~vhat harder than most Caddoan
pottery.
Color: Light yellowish brown to dark brown and gray. Cores
the same.
Surface finish: Fair to good polish.
FOI~M
Wall thickness:

3 to 5 mm.

Lip: Rounded and flush with rim or turned outward slightly.
Base:

Convex on bowls, more fla~ttened on bottles.

Vessel shape and size: Small carinated bowls with wide shallow bottoms, rims vertical and straight, concave, or convex
(B-D, I). At least one large carinated bowl (J) with deeper bottom and diameter as much as 31 cm. Hemispherical
bowl (~H) is one of an attached pair (note exposed break
on left side). Bottles.

D~ORATION
Treatment: Engraving.
Designs: Principally pairs of hatched or cross-hatched triangles placed around rim of bowls (B, C, I, J) and around
body of bottles (A). One to three horizontal borderlines
above triangles and at least one below. Sketches E, F, G
show additional samples. A series of small righ¢ triangles
appears on D, and of pendant triangles on H. Red pigment.
in lines.
CU*LTURAL AFFILIATION~
Texarkana and Mid-~uachita Foci. As in type Bowie Engraved
(Plate 8) this type shows rejection of common practice of
repeating designs four times and use instead of large number of small identical units.
DISTRIBUTION
,Found rather commonly in Southwest Arkansas and extends
into Texas only in Bowie County in northeast corner, so
~ar as known.

ESTIMATED AGE
1200-1500 A. D. or part thereof.

None. Specimens may be recognized in Harrington, 1920, Pls.
25, B: 26, B; 36, B; 40, A; 58, B.

PLATE 30

Texas Archeological Society

294

HICKORY 3~INE ENC~I~AVED
(Plate 31 )
PASTE
Temper: Fine clay-grit, small amount of sand, or none.
Texture: Fine, compact; sometimes rather coarse, lumpy.
Color: Shades of gray and gray-brown from light to dark;
sometimes reddish-brown. Cores gray, brown, black.
Surface finish: Fair to good polish except bottle interiors unsmoothed.
FORM
Wall thickness: 3 to 7 mm., average about 4 mm.
Lip: Rounded, flush with rim.
Base: Usually convex; may be somewhat flat but no thicker
than side walls.
~Vessel shape and size: Primarily bottles with spout cylindrical
(A, E) to definitely tapered (C, D, I). Four-lobed body in
at least one case (A) and two-chambered in another (~I-I).
Also simple bowls (G) and bowl with swollen midsection
(J). At Davis site, Cherokee County, carinated bowl form
~:ommon, with broad convex bottoms and rims vertical or
slanted outward. Other shapes may be added.
I~ECORATION
[l~reatment: Engraving.
Designs: Primarily a few horizontal lines; bottles have from
four to eight encircling top of body, with spouts either
plain or with three or four lines encircling top of spout;
bowls have from three to eight lines around top of rim.
Bottom line may be heavier than others (I, J) or ticked
(E). At Davis site carinated bowls with grid of crossed
diagonal lines around rim were tentatively included in type
(Newell and Krieger, 1949, Fig. 33, B, C). Red pigment
commonly occurs in lines.

CULT~ ~I/kTIONS
Well established type in Alto, Gahagan, Haley, and Spiro Foci
of Gibson Aspect. Area of greatest frequency remains to
be determined. Closely related to Holly Fine Engraved
(Plates 34, 35) of Alto and Gahagan Foci on the one hand,
and to Spiro Engraved (,Plate 64) on the other; i. e., it occurs in association with both these types but was spread
over a larger area than either of them. The encircling
horizontal lines of Hickory are like those found above the
body designs of both Holly and Spiro Engraved. Specimens
shown in Plate 31 are all from Haley Focus components in
southwest corner of Arkansas and cannot be distinguished
from those of Alto, Haley, and Spiro Foci (except that B
and J are from the two known Spiro Focus compo.n.ents in
northeast Texas, in Franklin and Red River Countms, respectively).
DIST~.IBtY£ION
Almost as extensive as whole Caddoan archeological area in
adjoining sections of Oklahoma, Texas, Arkansas, and
Louisiana.
~T~D AGE
Entire span of Gibson Aspect, some part o~ 500-1000 A. D.

~ENOES
Krieger, 194~, Figure 19; Newe]l and Krieger, 1949, pp. 90-91,
Figures 33, 44.

PLATE 31

Texas Archeologtcal Society

296

I-IOD GES ENGI~AXrED
(Plates 32, 33)

PASTE
Temper: Usually none; sometimes fine clay-grit or small
amount of sand.
Texture: Fine, compact.
Color: Shades of brown, gray, gray-brown, and reddish brown
from light to dark and nearly black. Best vessels uniformly
dark but fire-mottling sometimes has pleasing effect
(Plates 32, F, I-t, N; 33, E, N). Soft red film, probably applied after firing, occurs occasionally on Texas specimens
i(Plate 33, A, L) but unknown so far in other states. Cores
lighter than surface and contrast strongly with it on darker
vessels.
~Surface finish: Fair to good polish.
FORM
Wall thickness: 2 to 5 mm.
Lip: Rounded and turned outward; occasionally flush with rim.
Base: Usually convex; occasionally flat on both bowls and
bottles but no thicker than side walls.
Vessel shape and size: Bottles with spool-shaped spouts, both
~long and short (Plates 32, A, C, D, L, N; 33, I, J, M-4VI’, O) ;
tripod bottles with legs hollow and expanded at feet (Plate
32, B) or long and tapered (Plate 33, F) ; effigy bottle with
spout oH-center and side molded into human face (,Plate
32, G); bottles with lower and upper chambers (Plates 32,
M; 33, K); olla-like vessels with globular to drop-shaped
bodies and small mouths with low necks (Plates 32, E, H;
33, N); simple globular bowls with two vertically-perforated lugs just below lip (Plate 32, F) ; simple conical bowls
(Plate 32, O); carinated bowls with rim slanted inward
(Plates 32, I, J; 33, B, D, G, H) ; small bowl with rim curved
sharply outward (Plate 32, K); globular bowl with short
rim rising vertically, then curved outward, and four small
suspension holes on opposite sides (Plate 33, A) ; vase-like
vessels with small globular bodies and rim either cylindrical (Plate 33, E) or gently curving.outward (Plate 33,
C); deep bowls with rim gently curving outward (Plate
33, L).

DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving, punctating.
Designs: Featured principally by negative meandering sarolls
which double back sharply. The place of doubling back
may be pinched to a narrow neck from which the scroll
swells on either side (Plates 32, A; 33, C, L). The scroll
band may or may not have a ticked line in its center; the
flanks are formed by cross-hatching and blank disks of
various sizes are left within the cross-hatched areas. Large
circles may be used within which is a core filled with fine
~unctates
through
polished
surface;
ticked
or
and may made
lie between
the
punctated
core a
and
outerring
circle

PLATE

32

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

298

(Plates 32, A, H; 33, I).

Single scroll arms may be used

without a continuous meander around vessel (Plates 32, G,
I, O; 33, F, I). Cross-hatched bands may be used as scrolls
themselves, with the spaces between them blank (Plate 32,
D, F). Bottle and jar bodies provide the largest space and
therefore the freest designs. On carinated bowl rims the
same doubled-back scrolls are squeezed into narrow horizontal zones, but with pleasing effect. Designs are almost
always repeated four times, the exceptions being tripod
bottles and effigies. Some carinated bowl rims appear to
bear eight slanting scrolls but these are really four, each
double. Both red and white pigments appear in lines, but
cores contrast without this.
CULTURAL ~IATIONS
Principally a Mid-Ouachita Focus type but also well established in Belcher and Texarkana Foci, and occurs occasionally in Titus Focus either as resident or trade ware.
Probably the handsomest of all Caddoan pottery, some
vessels being among the most striking achievements of any
American Indian potters. Plates 32, 33 show range of form
and workmanship rather than finest pieces; those in Plate
32 from Arkansas, in Plate 33 from Louisiana and Texas.
Some differences in vessel form apparent in these states
but scroll motif follows same essential principals; red film
known so far only in Texas (Plate 33, A, L). Mear~s
Engraved of l~Iid-Ouachita Focus is closely related type
(Plate 47) and some vessels may be difficult to classify in
one type or the other (e. g., Plate 32, D) ; however, Means
not known as resident type outside of Arkansas. Hodges
may at times also be confused with Natchitoches Engraved
of historic Glendora Focus and the doubled-back scrolls
may occasionally be identical (Plate 51, A-C). The scrolls of
Natchitoches are generally more complex, their flanks being filled with smaller scrolls; vessel forms are distinct on
the whole, running more to carinated bowls with flaring
rims; and shell temper is common in it while absent in
Hodges. The scrolls of Ripley Engraved of Titus Focus
(Plates 57-59) are also similar but simpler and cruder and
vessel forms again differ. Both Hodges and Ripley may be
regarded as ancestors of historic Natchitoches Engraved.
The forked-eye symbol (Plate 32, G) is a lingering element
of "Southern Cult" ceremonialism.

DISTRIBUTION
Southwest Arkansas, northwest corner of Louisiana, and northeast Texas as far west as Upshur County. Not definitely
reported from Oklahoma.
F_~STIlVIATED AGE
1200-1500 A. D. Perhaps continuous development into Natch~,$oches Engraved type at about 1600 A. D.

R~~ES

None. Type name agreed upon at Shreveport conference, 1950.

PLATE 33

Texas Archeologica! Society

300

HOLLY FINE ENGRAVED
(Plates 34, 35)
PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit, sometimes with added particles of carbonized material or bone, sometimes with no visible temper or
a little fine sand.
Texture: Usually fine but ranges to fairly coarse and somewhat lumpy.
Color: Usually rich dark brown, reddish brown, and graybrown, ranging to black. Occasionally pale gray or even
cream. Cores dark gray or brown, occasionally with reddish or greenish tinges.
Surface finish: From well smoothed to fair polish except that
interiors of bottles unsmoothed.

Wall thickness: Extreme range 3 to 9 mm., most specimens 4
or 5 mm.
:Lip: Usually rounded and flush with rim, but greatly widened
and flat lips occur on carinated and simple bowls (Plate
34, B, E, I); thick, cambered lips (two convex surfaces
meeting in a sharp ridge) occur on a few bowls, and some
carinated bowls have scalloped flange bent outward at
right angle to rim (Plate 34, G). Diagonal grooves across
thickened lip and into interior of vessel give rope-like
effect (Plate 34, C, D).
Base: Convex on bowls and most bottles; flat on some bottles
and upright vessels (Plate 35, E, F). Always of same
thickness as side walls.
Vessel shape and size: Carinated bowls most common, diameter 15 to 40 cm. or more (Plates 34, A, C, E, G; 35, A, B).
Bottles also common, body being small and globular or
rounded on upper part and sides straight on lower part
(Plate 35, E, G); spouts probably always well tapered.
Bottle bodies may meet spout at sharp angle or merge
gently in long curve (not illustrated). Sherds show other
~ottles with horizontal ledge around base of spout, 2 or 3
cm. wide. Simple bowls up to 40 cm. in diameter (Plate
34, D, I) ; small jars with vertical rim (Plate 34, F) ; deep
bowls with more or less vertical rim (Plates 34, B; 35, C);
and peculiar flat bowl with small mouth (Plate 35, D) constitute other :~orms.

DECORATION
Treatment: Very finely engraved lines set close together; excising; lip notching.
Designs: Bowls and jars usually have design confined to rim
or narrow zone near top equivalent to rim, consisting o~
fine engraved lines in sets running alternately vertically
and diagonally--i, e., parallel with one another and with
one side and hypothenuse, respectively, of right triangles
formed by excising, as shown clearly by specimens in
Plate 34. A few variations may be seen, such as concentric
quarter-circles in place of diagonals, a small pit being ex-

PLATE 34

302

Texas ArcheologicaI Society
cised at their center (Plate 34, F, H); or sets of straight
lines in three directions, parallel to all three sides of small
excised triangles (Plate 34, D). Inclined scrolls with excised cores and longitudinal bisecting lines, similar to those
of Crockett Curvilinear Incised (Plates 14-16) except for
the technique, are tentatively included in Holly type (Plate
35, D). Bottles have a few encircling lines at top of spout,
the lowest line often deeper than others, and other such
lines at top of body; remainder of body covered with very
fine lines in full concentric circles or spirals, and areas between these filled with parallel straight lines running at
different angles. The cores of these sets of circles are excise~, as are the corners of squares made around the outermost circles. Bowl lips greatly widened and flat have zigzags and meanders along top of lip, formed by excising.
Main design units repeated four times on bottles and cups
(Plate 35, E-G), but on bowls any number used that fits
space, from five or six to 15 or more. Red pigment common
in lines and excised areasi no other colors noted.

CULTURAL ~IATIONS
A common Alto Focus type, also occurring in small numbers in
Gahagan Focus, both of Gibson Aspect. Designs closely
resemble those of Spiro Focus in eastern Oklahoma, but
Holly lines closer together, designs generally lack punctated circles in center of design units and spiral common
in Spiro type, and the vessel forms (except for bottles with
tapered spout) are quite distinct in the two types (see
Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 200-201 for discussion). In
intermediate area, as around great bend of Red River, it is
sometimes difficult to classify vessels as Holly or Spiro
Fine Engraved, particularly bottles. Plate 35, A-F, are
from Crenshaw mound excavations of Judge Harry J. Lemley and belong to a component which is primarily Alto
Focus; the small bowl with three molded animal heads on
rim (C) is only instance of effigy work known in Holly
type or in whole Alto Focus complex, and probably is due
to an outside influence. Plate 35, G is from C. B. Moore’s
excavations at Gahagan mound, on Red River in Louisiana
Moore, 1912) and illustrates typical bottle form and decoration in this type. All specimens in Plate 34 from Alto
mound site in Cherokee County, Texas; further illustrations and variations occur in Newell and Krieger, 1949.

DISTRIBIZI’ION
Central part of East Texas is area of concentration, but examples found westward to Chupek site on Brazos River in
central Texas, in northwest Louisiana, and northward to
Red ’River valley in Texas and southwest Arkansas. May
occur more widely as trade ware.
EST]RVIATED AGE
Some part of span 500-1000 A. D.

R~FEREN~CE~
Krieger, 1946, Figure 19; Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 81-90,
Figures 29-32.

PLATE 35

Texas ArcheoIog{cal Society

304

HUDSON
(Plate 36)
PASTE
Temper:

Finely pulverized shell, small amount of sand, or

none,
Texture: Fine. Full of tiny cavities where shell leached out.
Color: Cream, various shades of gray, gray-brown, reddishbrown from light to dark, Cores lighter than or about
same as surface,
Surface finish: Smoothed to poor polish; occasionally well
polished,
FORM
Wall thickness: 2 to 5 mm.
Lip: Rounded and turned sha,,rply outward.
,Base: Convex or nearly flat; extended base" fairly common.
Vessel shape and size: Principally bottles in wide variety of
shapes from globular to squat. Spouts usually spool-shaped
but may be very high like A. Olla-like vessels with small
mouths may have plain convex base (E) or "extended
base" (G, I). Vessel forms like A, F-I are peculiar in Caddoan archeo!ogy and B-D included only tentatively on
basis of design. Range of forms to be revised ~vith further
study.

DECORATION
Treatment: ]Engraving, small amount of incising and puncrating.
Designs: Primarily narrow cross-hatched bands in curvilinear
patterns. The hatching is exceedingly fine in some cases
(A, E, F, H) and may be supplemented by rows of fine punctares as borderlines (E, H). Vessels B-D have scroll bands
which appear to have been incised before firing, then
whole vessel polished afterward. Major units usually repeated four times. Red pigment may occur in lines.
CULTU~RAL A~IATIONS
Most specimens come from historic sites (A, E, F-J) and probably belong to Glendora Focus. Others from prehistoric
sites (D) or association unknown (B, C). The type is tentative and established so far mainly as a counterpart of
Maddox Engraved of Bossier Focus (Plate 44). The content of the latter has been considerably confused and it
now considered to be entirely non-shell-tempered, definitely pre-European in age, and probably belonging to an
early phase of Fulton Aspect. While the finely crosshatched ,bands of Hudson Engraved are much like those of
Maddox, the former is easily distinguished ~y its shell temper and different range of shapes, and it is later in time.
Vessel D has four scroll arms descending from base of neck,
alternating with four areas bending upward which resemble bird heads, with blank disk in body and another in
position of eye. This conventionalized bird is very similar
to the common bird on Marksville pottery but a direct relationship appears impossible; the vessel is heavily shelltempered and the shape completely un-Marksvillian.
DI~T~IBUTION
Mainly northeastern Louisiana and lower Arkansas River valley, so far as known from illustrations of C. B. Moore (190~,
1909). Specimens A-C from Red River and Upshur Counties, northeast Texas and may be trade pieces of Hudson or
some other type not yet recognized.

~TED AGE
1500-1800 A. D. or part thereof.
None.

PLATE 36

Texas Archeotogical Society

306

HUME ENGI~&VED
(Plate 37)
PASTE
Temper:

Fine clay-grit, sand, or both sand and clay-grit.

Texture: Compact, hard, does not break easily; surface may
feel slightly sandy.
Color: Cream and pale buff. Abundant fire-mottling produced
spots from light to dark gray. Cores same as surface.
Surface finish:
on inside.

Poorly smoothed; bottles not smoothed at all

FORM
Wall thickness: 4 to 8 mm.
Lip: Rounded, not turned outward,
Base: Flat to slightly convex on bottles; convex on bowl (F).
Vessel shape and size: Primarily bottles with elongate bodies
and short necks; necks usually distinct from bodies (A~D)
but sometimes merge gently (E). A raised flange may occur around base of neck (A). One bo~vl known, has four
tabs with twin lobes rising from lip (F). Bottles may be
quite large, up to 30 cm. high.

DECORATION
Treatment:

Engraving.

Designs: Bands widely spaced around body and placed vertically, filled with crossing lines (E), cross-hatch (A, C,
D, F), or hachure (B). On bottles, design usually consists of three such bands (A-D). The bowl (F) has six
wide bands alternated with five narrow ones. Small triangles may be pendant from the bottle necks (B, C). Both
white and red pigments occur in lines.

CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Complete specimens from components of historic Allen Focus.
Possibly present in prehistoric Frankston Focus, as shown
by sherds.
DISTRIBUTION
Small area, so far as known, in northwestern Cherokee County
and adjacent sections of Anderson and Henderson Counties, in upper Neches River valley.
ESTIMATED AGE
1600-1750 A. D. May have existed prior to 1600.

None.

PLATE 37

Texas Archeological SocieSy

308

KARNACK BI~UScI-IED - INCISED
(Plate 38)

PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit; occasionally pulverized hone.
Texture: Fine to coarse.
Color: Surfaces cream to shades of gray and brown to nearly
black. Much fire-mottling. Cores like surface or darker.
Surface finish: Interiors poorly smoothed: exteriors roughened
by decoration.
Wall thickness: 4 to 7 ram.
Lip: Rounded, turned outward.
Base: Convex or small flat area; vessels do not stand up well.
Vessel shape and size: Bodies barrel-shaped, rims low and
turned outward sharply (A-C, E) or somewhat higher and
turned outward less sharply (D, F).
DF,CORATION
Treatment: Incising, brushing.
Designs: Incised lines (made individually) or brushed marks
(made with grass?) run vertically or nearly so over whole
body. Rim exterior has incised lines running vertically (B,
D) or diagonally (A, E), or brushed lines (F) horizontally
all the way around. Plain rim (C) unusual.
CULTURA~ AFFILI~.TIONS
Titus Focus, especially components with mixed Titus and
Belcher Focus pottery, but only one vessel (C) from
Belcher site. Closely related to Belcher Ridged (Plate 6)
in vessel form; decoration probably imitation of peculiar
ridging technique in latter. Webb (1948) includes such
vessels in type Maddox Brushed and compares the brushed
lines in irregular, vertical, horizontal, or herringbone patterns, and appliqued nodes and ridges, between Maddox
and Pease Brushed-Incised. It is suggested that such vessels in the Maddox type should simply be included in the
Pease type (Plate 53) and that vessels like those illustrated
in Plate 38 should be assigned to Karnack Brushed-Incised.
These vessels are not merely variations of Belcher Ridged,
for where they occur, the distinctive ridging of the latter
is very rare, and vice versa. Belcher Ridged furthermore
occurs in both Belcher and the earlier Bossier Focus, while
Karnack appears to be confined to the Titus Focus period,
contemporary with Belcher Focus; workmanship is much
cruder and rims show more variety than those of Belcher
Ridged. Webb further notes the peculiar use of brushing
in the much earlier Tchefuncte complex of Louisiana, its
absence in Marksville, Troyville, and Coles Creek, and its
"reappearance" in Bossier Focus, various loci of Fulton
Aspect, and Plaquemine in central Louisiana.

DISTRR IBIFI~ION
Vicinity of Caddo Lake in Harrison and Marion Counties, Texas; along Texas-Louisiana border.

ES~TED AGE
1200-1500 A. D. or part thereof.

R~I~IDP~ENCES
None.

PLATE

Texas Archeotog~cal Society

310

KENO TRAILED
(Plate 39)
PASTE
Temper: Finely pulverized shell, fine sand; or none visible.
Texture: Fine, very compact.
Color: Principally shades of gray from medium to dark; also
shades of gray-brown. Cores the same or lighter.
Surface finish: Exteriors smoothed to polished, over decoration as well. Interiors of bottles (nearly the only form)
not smoothed.
Wall thickness: 2 to 4 mm.
Lip: Rounded, turned outward; may be flush on bowls.
Base: Usually convex, but flat "extended base" fairly common (A, B, E, G, J, K, M).
Vessel shape and size: Primarily bottles, many quite large
with bodies up to 25 cm. in diameter and short necks or
spouts. Spouts usually spool-shaped, swollen in middle,
but may be cylindrical with lip turned sharply outward
(.L, J). Globular bow! with two opposed lugs (F) is only
other form recognized so far.
DECORATION
Treatment: Trailing (incising .broad lines with blunt in~rument), supplemented by a little engraving and applique.
Designs: Endless combinations of straight and curved parallel
lines fitted close together to cover nearly entire body.
Motifs include scrolls, simple or doubled back on one another, spirals, guilloches, meanders,, concentric circles, and
arcs fitted into areas between major units. Effigy faces
created with small applique nodes (K). Major units usually repeated either two or four times.
CUX,TURAL AFFILIATIONS
Occurs in four loci: Historic Glendora; prehistoric Mid-Ouachita, Texarkana, and Titus, being the least frequent in
Titus. A distinct division noted in width of lines, the narrowest and finest coming from northeast Louisiana (A-E).
Those from Greer site in eastern Arkansas have broader
lines and somewhat simpler designs (F-I), which is also
true of those from southwest Arkansas (J-L) and northeast
Texas (M). Shell temper occurs in some specimens from
historic as well as prehistoric sites in both northern Louisiana and southern Arkansas; farther west, shell temper
is absent. Apparently the type flourished both before and
after the earliest European contacts but it needs to be analyzed more in specific associations. The trailing technique
seems to ’be related to that in type Foster Trailed-Inc~sed
(;Plate 20) of the prehistoric Belcher and Texarkana Foci.
DISTRIBIYrlON
Across northern Louisiana to lower Ouaehita River (Glendora
and Keno sites; Moore, 1909); across southern Arkansas to
lower Arkansas River (Douglas and Greer sites; Moore,
1998); and westward into northeast Texas as far as Hopkins County.
E~T]]MATED AGE
1400-1700 A. D. or later.

REI~E~’ENOES

Webb, 1945, pp. 64-67 and Plate 11, Nos. 2, 4. Krieger, 1946,
Figure 18.

PLATE

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

312

KIA~Y! INCISED
(Plate 40)
PASTE
Same as Dunkin Incised (Plate 18).
FOI~M
Wall thickness: 4 to 10 mm., average 6 or 7 mm.
Lip: Rounded. flush with rim.
Base: Flat disk to which body wall attached.
Vessel shape and size: Primarily jars with rims vertical to
everted (A, B, D, E), from only about 10 cm. high to as
much 50 cm. or more; the latter are fairly numerous and
may be regarded as storage jars. Probably some cylindrical
vessels and similar ones with rims gently outcurved (C)
should be included, although these would be distinguished
from Dunkin Incised only on the basis of designs.
DECORATION
Treatment: Incising; fingernail punctating; rarely stick-punctating.
Designs: Horizontal lines encircle the rim area of all vessels;
rather crudely done, lines do not "overhang". Bodies occasionally plain but usually have either vertical incised
lines closely spaced as on the rims (A, D), or fingernail
unctations more or less arranged in horizontal rows (C,
). Rarely, stick punctates cover the body (B), some of
which are angular as though done with the corner of a
square implement. Appendages absent.

~

CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
An Alto Focus type which may also belong to ,Bossier and Haley
Foci. It appears to be one of the few specific types which
survives from the Gibson Aspect into Fulton Aspect. Very
similar to type Hardy Incised of central Louisiana, differing mainly in coarser paste and greater use of body punctating, also jars rather than barrel-shaped vessels.
DISTRIBUTION
Central part of East Texas, also occurring sporadically in northeast part, and at Crenshaw and East mound sites in southwest Arkansas. A close comparison needed to determine
its distribution in Louisiana in relation to Hardy Incised,
Dunkin Incised, and Coles Creek Incised, all of which may
have been mis-identified in some cases in available literature.
ESTIMATED AGE
Some part of span 500-1000 A. D. but probably farther toward
the end of span than most Alto Focus types, and may have
continued to 1200 A. D. or so.
REFE~RENCES
Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 1t0-116, Figs. 42 B, F; 43,
included this material in type Dunkin Inc~sed, but it is here
separated again as in Newell’s original analysis; he distinguished between the pottery with sets of parallel lines
in both diagonal and horizontal arrangements (Dunkin
Incised) and those with only horizontal lines on rims and
vertical lines or punctates on bodies (Kiarn Incised).
Krieger, 1946, Fig. 19 referred to the latter as ".I-Iardy Incised" but this was withdrawn in 1949.

PLATE 40

Texas Archeological Society

314

KILLOUGH PINCHED
(Plate 41)

PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit: occasionally pulverized bone or potsherds.
Texture: Coarse but not crumbly.
Color: Surfaces cream, buff, shades of brown and gray-brown.
Cores somewhat darker than surface. Some fire-mottling.
Surface finish: Interiors poorly smoothed; exteriors completely pinched.
Wall thickness: 5 to 8 ram.
Lip: Rounded to slightly flattened; flush or turned outward
slightly.
Base: Round, flat disk or slightly convex and only slightly
thicker than sides.
Vessel shape and size: Principally small jars with rim vertical
to everted, and set at slight angle to body or merged gen.tly
with it. Several of these have four legs resting on a ring
base and two opposed strap handles (A-C); others have
two strap handles or solid lugs (~-I, J). SimI~le bowls usually have four hollow knobs attached to side, in which
are pebbles which rattle. More elongate jars occur without appendages (F, G), and bottles are known but rare (I).

DECOR~TION
Treatment: Pinching and fingernail impressiorm placed end-toend.
Designs: Spirals and concentric circles in sets repeated four
times (A-C, G, H, J); nodes pinched up at random (D,
E); and pinched ridges running vertically on body (F, I).
Vertical or horizontal ridges appear on rims, legs, and
handles no matter what the body designs are. Entire exterior surface commonly covered except for bottle necks.
CUL~ AFF]~LIATIONS
Primarily a Frankston Focus type but appears occasionally in
Titus Focus components. One example (I) appears in historic Allen Focus, but this bottle is not characteristic of the
type either.
DISTRIBUTION
Principally in drainage areas of Neches and upper Sabine Rivers, but a few specimens as far east as Morris County. Apparently not traded much to tribes west of the Caddoan
region, as compared with other Frankston Focus types.

ESTI~IATED AGE
1200-1500 A. D., with survival as late as 1’/00 A. D. possible.
REFERENCES
Jackson, 1936, Plate 25, Figure 4; Krieger, 1946, Figure 18.

PLATE 41

316

Texas Archeological Society
LA RLFE NECK BANDED
(Plate 42)

PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit; occasionally pulverized bone or potsherds.
Texture: Coarse but not crumbly.
Co!or: Surface varies from cream to light yellowish brown
and medium brown. Considerable fire-mottling. Cores
brown or gray.
Surface finish: Interiors poorly smoothed; exteriors same or
roughened by brushing.
FOI~M
Wall thickness:~ 4 to 9 mm.
Lip: Rounded, bent outward.
Base: Round, thick, flat disk to which body wall is attached.
Vessel shape and size: Jars with prg~i~ept r~ms usp2lly Teeing body at a slight angle, mourn a~ mas~ as wiae as ~oay
and often wider (A, C-F). More globular body with smaller mouth (~B) unusual. Height usually 15 to 30 cm., but
some vessels have capacity of several gallons, height of 40
cm. or more and correspondingly wide mou[hs (E). Largest
vessels perhaps for storage rather than cooking.
DECORA~ON
Treatment: Neck banding (crimping of neck coils), brushing,
applique.
,Designs: Each coil added to neck or rim of vessel was pinched
on to prec~d~g coil at fairly regular intervals and the resulting cramps not smoothed over. Such coils vary from
four to eight in number. Bodies pla~ (E, F), brushed vertically (A, C, D), or pla~ with appliqued fillets in simple
arrangements (~B).
C~~ ~LIATIONS
Frankston and Titus Foci. Very similar to type ~ren Neck
Banded of Alto Focus (not illustrated) but latter never
brushing or applique work, the bodies being plain or
covered with fingernail p~ctations. La Rue is also related
to Nash Neck Banded of Texarkana and M~urta~ Foci
(Plate 50), but the neck crimping is much cruder, ~e vessels much l~ger on the average, and shell tem~r~g
unsown in it. The three types provide a special development within the Caddo~ archeologica! region, for which
an influence from the Puebloan culture of the Southwest
has been postulated (Krieger, 1946, pp. 237-241). ~ the
Caddoan area, crimping of coils is always confined to the
vessel rim.
D~BUTION
Found in drayage systems of Neches, ~gel~a, Sab~e, ~d
Sulphm- River~. Trade pieces occur westw~d into central
Texas, as in the case with other Frankston Focus
One complete vessel (C) comes from Coleman Co~ty m
the upper Colorado River ~ainage.

~~ AGE
12~-1600 A. D.
~~C~
Krieger, 1~6, pp. 206, 238, Plates 33, 34, Figure 18. ~e t~e
"Leesburg Neck Banded" on Figure 18 has been abandoned
and the specimens now are regarded as either N~h Neck
Banded or La Rue Neck Banded.

PLATE 42

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

318

McKINNEY PLAIN
(Plate 43)
PASTE
Teinper:
Clay-grit: rarely, pulverized shell (specimen J).
Pulverized bone particles appear occasionally as additions
to clay-grit.
Texture: Granular, small to medium-sized particles; harder
than most pottery in Caddoan area (about 3.0). Sherds do
not crumble.
Color: Shades of light, medium, and dark brown, and grayish
browns. Core and surface colors frequently same or core
slightly darker.
Surface finish:
Interiors smoothed; body exteriors usually
poorly smoothed but occasionally brought to polish; rim
exteriors purposely roughened.
Wall thickness: Range 4 to 12 mm., average 6 to 8 mm.
Lip: Rounded, may be flush Or bent outward slightly.
~Base: Flat to slightly convex; bumpy; only slightly thicker
than side wall, if at all.
Vessel shape and size: Jars only; rim flares outward and may
be joined to body at rather sharp angle (C, E, F, J), or
very gently merged with it (A, B, D). Mouth diameter
usually at least as great as that of body, often greater. Size
ranges from very small, almost miniature vessels (C) to
jars at least 30 cm. high (I); sherds indicate still larger
vessels and one with a rma over 20 cm. high.

I)]~CORATION
Treatment: Applique, intentional roughening, and (rarely)
punctation.
Designs: Quadration of vessel affected by appliqued nodes on
rim, fillets on body, or by fillets on both rim and body (A,
B, F, H, I). Occasionally lip lifted into four peaks (B). A
row of diagonal punctates or slashes may appear at base of
rim (J). Rims almost always roughened and bumpy and
contrast with bodies when latter are smoothed. Bodies occasionally roughened also, having scoured or faintly brushed appearance (I) although never as complete or regular
as on vessels classified as "brushed".
CU~LTUR.AL A_FFILIArrIONS
A Texarkana Focus type, virtually unknown in other complexes. Might be expected to appear in McCurtain Focus
components nearby but has not been reported as a deftnite trait there.
DISTRIBUTION
Northeast corner of Texas in Red River, Bowie, and Cass Counties. Probably in southwest corner of Arkansas in Red
River valley.
]~F~’~MATED AGE
1200-1500 A~ D. Possibly survives to historic horizon at 16501700 A. D.
Krieger, 1946, Figure 18.

PLATE 43

320

Texas Archeological Society
MADDOX ENGRAVED
(Plate 44)

PASTE
Temper: Usually clay-grit, rarely pulverized bone.
Texture: Fine to somewhat granular; soft, friable.
Color: Surfaces usually cream to pale brown, but dark brown,
reddish bro~vn, dark gray and black also occur. Cores
darker than surface.
Surface finish: Both exterior and interior smoothed but rarely
polished.
Wall thickness: About 3 to 6 mm.
Lip: Flat to rounded. In one case (F) thickened and circular
in cross-section.
Base: On bowls, convex and not distinct from side wall; on
bottles and barrel-shaped vessels, tends to be flatter but
still convex.
Vessel shape and size: Small simple bowls, maximum diameter
15 to 23 cm.; small barrel-shaped vessels, greatest diameter
below midsection; bottles, with tapered spout in some
cases; a human effigy.
DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving only.
Designs: Narrow bands filled with cross-hatching or hachure,
usually in gracefully arranged curvilinear patterns, sometimes with "flags" or pendants attached to main lines; also
similar bands i~ horizontal panels or encircling upper part
of vessel. Lips may be notched.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Within the Caddoan area this is primarily a Bossier Focus type
although it may also belong to the Frankston and Belcher
Foci. In central and eastern Louisiana it may belong to the
Plaquemine complex. Concepts as to what constitutes
"Maddox Band Engraved" or "Maddox Engraved" have
changed several times, the greatest confusion being with
what we now call Hudson Engraved of Glendora Focus
(Plate 36). Despite their common possession of narrow
engraved bands filled with cross-hatching, arranged in
curvilinear and horizontal patterns, the two types can now
be clearly distinguished on the basis of tempe.ring material: Maddox Engraved never has shell tempering, while
Hudson Engraved almost always does, and the vessel
shapes are different as seen in the p.resent illustrations.
The definition of Maddox Engraved still requires more research.
DISTRIBUTION
Princi~)ally in central and norther.n. Louisian..a and ~along
isl~a÷Texas border, occasionally extenamg as iar wes~ as
Fran~ston Focus area in Neches River valley; unknown so
far in Arkansas and Oklahoma.
ESTIMATED AGE
Within Fulton Aspect times in Caddoan area, probably in earlier part, before Belcher Focus flourished.
REFERENCES
Webb, 1948, pp. 108-109, Plates 11, 12. At Webb’s suggestion,
modifications have been made in his original description,
reducing the range of forms and designs. ’~Band" has been
omitted from the name.

PLATE 44

322

Texas Archeological Society
MAXEY NODI~D REDWARE
(.Plate 45)

PASTE
Temper: Fine clay-grit and sand in varying proportions.
Texture: Fine to granular; compact.
Color: Basically light to dark grayish-blue, except for thin
layer of buff on exterior under red film. Evidently firing
the vessels after the red-ochre film was applied not only
~baked the film but produced a buff color on the original
outer surface; since all the vessels are bottles, the interiors
were not exposed to as much heat and remained grayish~lue like the remainder of the core.
Surface finish: From well smoothed to good polish on exterior
with marks of smoothing tool producing a finely rippled
surface in some cases; interiors unsmoothed with original
coiling seams still visible.
FORM
Wall thickness: 3 to 6 mm.
Lip: Rounded to somewhat flattened and flush with side of
neck; rarely turned outward
Base: Convex bottoms, not notably thicker than .body wall.
Vessel shape and size: Bottles the only known form. At Sanders Site these are characteristically somewhat elongated,
with greatest diameter be!ow middle and necks ~cylindrical
to somewhat tapered (A-D); heights about 15 to 24 cm.
From same site there is one complete triple bottle, the
bodies connected with horizontal struts, and part of another such bottle. Those from other sites in Texas and
Arkansas (F-I) have bodies more evenly convex from base
to neck.
DECORATION
Treatment: Applique, punctating; surface always red-filmed.
Designs: At Sanders Site, bottles usually have three sets of
small oval nodes running vertically on body, each set consisting of three rows of nodes; variations include two or
four sets, each with two or four rows. In spaces between
nodes, and in band around top of body, are slits or fingernail
punctates set vertically (B, C), but some bottles have no
punctates (A) and others have punctates but no nodes (D).
One triple bottle (E) and part of another have human
faces modeled in low relief at top of each bottle and below
their common spout; they have no nodes but a horizontal
fillet runs around the outer side of each body, end-to-end
with the struts, and two rows of punctates appear at top
of each body below spout. Bottles from other sites (F-I)
tend to have continuous fillets, one to three in a set, vertically or diagonally on body, rather than nodes.
CULTIFRAL AFFILIATIONS
A Sanders Focus type in Texas, not kn.o.wn in ~other c~o~m.p.lexes;
Only one sherd reported from ~elson ~ocus (Dell ana
Baerreis, 1951), but at least two complete vessels (H, I)
from Adair Site in upper Ouachita valley in Arkansas, a
component of Mid-Ouachita Focus. Vessel from grave at
Haley Place on Red River in Arkansas (Moore, 1912, Fig.
47) definitely a trade piece in Hatey Focus.
DISTRIBUTION
Lamar, Hopkins, Wood, Franklin, and perhaps other counties
in Texas.
ESTIMATED A(:~E
Some part of span 800-1200 A. D.
RF_~FF~ENCES
Krieger, 1946, pp. 185-190, Fig. 14, and Plate 29.

PLATE 45

324

Texas Archeological Society

MAY]bELLE I-NC .IS,ED
(Plate 46)

PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit; occasionally pulverized potsherds or bone,
or (very rarely) limestone particles.
Texture: Coarse and somewhat lumpy.
Color: Surfaces from cream to buff, shades of brown and gray.
Cores light brown, gray, black. Much fire mottling with
spots same color as core.
Surface finish: Interiors poorly smoothed; exteriors bumpy,
roughened by brushing or incising.
FORM
Wall thickness: 5 to lq mm.
Lip: Rounded, bent outward; occasionally somewhat flattened.
Base: Round, thick, flat disk to which side wall is attached.
Vessel shape and size: Exclusively jars with prominent rims
meeting body at slight angle; mouths usually at least as
wide as vessel ,body and often wider (B, C, F, G). Jars up
to 30 cm. high are common and some as high as 50 cm~ indicated by sherds; most, however, between 15 and 25 cm.
high. Very large strap handles (2) and thick, crudely
molded lugs (2 or 4) are fairly common on this type in
Frankston Focus components (not shown) but ap.parently
absent on very similar jars from Titus Focus hke those
~shown. Soot and grease stains show cooking function.
DECOP~TION
Treatment: Incising, punctating, brushing.
Designs: Rims decorated with parallel incised lines, in hachures
’(A, B, F, G), grids of crossed diagonal lines (C, D), or
diagonals pitched in alternate directions with punctates
filling areas between them (E). A row of fingernail or
stick punctates may appear as borderlines along the top
and bottom of rim design (A, G). Bodies may be plain (B,
D), incised with widely spaced vertical or diagonal lines
(A, E), or ,brushed. The brushing is usually vertical (F)
but may be random (G), and in one case consists of narrow
bands of brush strokes crossing one another diagonally (C).

CLrLTIY/b%~ AFFI~LIATIONS
Frankston and Titus Foci. At one time, two types were defined,
one in the Frankston Focus components which sometimes
had strap handles and lugs, and the other in Titus Focus
which appears never to have such appendages. They are
now considered as one type with the handles and lugs a
variable within it. The rim designs c}osely resemble those
of Canton Incised of Sanders Focus (]?late 10) but the
latter type can be distinguished by its cylindrical jars and
carinated bowls, which never occur in Maydelle Inc{sed;
the Canton bodies, moreover, are always plain.
DIST~,IBUTION
Found widely in northeast Texas in drainage systems of Neches,
Angelina, Sabine, and upper Sulphur Rivers. Traded westward into central and northern Texas among non-ceramic
people, much like Poynor Engraved.

ESTI~ AGE
1200-1500 A. D.
REF’E~ENCES
Krieger, 1946, Figure 18.

E

PLATE 46

Texas Archeolog~cal Socie$11

326

M~_,ANS ENGRAVED
(Plate 47)
PASTE
Temper: Fine clay-grit; small amount of sand; or none.
Texture: Fine, compact.
Color: Principally shades of gray and gray-brown from light
to dark and nearly black. Lighter vessels may be firemottled (J, M). Cores cream to gray.
Surface finish: Poorly smoothed to well polished.
FO1EVl
Wall thickness: 3 to 5 ram.
Lip: Rounded and flush with rim or turned out,yard.
Base: Tends to be convex on bottles, flat on bowls. Protruding
or "extended" base occurs on bottles (F).
Vessel shape and size: Effigy bottles (A, K, L); tripod bottles
with legs expanded at feet (M); bottles with thickened
area around top of body (G, I) ; compound bottle with two
distinct shoulder areas (H) ; small carinated bowls (B, J) ;
effigy bowls (D, animal head facing upward on one edge,
tail opposite; E, bird head and tail, two wings at sides);
squash (?) effigy with stem below mouth and small suspension holes (C). Possibly other shapes will be added.
DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving, applique.
Designs: Recognized mainly by extensive use of fine, even
ticking on curved and straight parallel lines. Also plain
lines (A, C), alternating plain and ticked lines (F, H, K,
L), and narrow bands instead of ticked lines (I). Designs
very gracefully executed at times; may be repeated two
times, as on sides of effigy; three times, as on sides of tripod; four times on bottles and bowls; or continuously horizontal without breaks. Bottles sometimes have thickened
area at top of body, divided into four parts by vertical applique fillets (G-I). Tiny applique eyes, nose, lips, ears
form two highly conventionalized faces on opposite sides of
bottle F. VesselA has single applique ridge on back; K has
three rows of nodes on back; and C has four applique ridges
lengthwise on top, bottom, and two sides. Red pigment
common in lines.
~TUR~L A,F~’TLIATIONS
A Mid-Ouachita Focus type not yet known in other complexes.
Affiliation seen with types Friendship Engraved (Plate 21)
and Hodges Engraved (Plate 32) in occasional mixing of
designs on same vessel: vessel H has Friendship design on
upper shoulder, Hodges design on lower shoulder.
DISTRIBUTION
Southwest Arkansas, especially in Ouachita River valley.

]~’TIIVIATED AGE
1200-1500 A. D.

RE~RE~3ES
None. Type name suggested by Mrs. T. L. Hodges.

PLATE 47

328

Texas Archeolog~cal Society
:M~LITARY ROAD INCISED
(~Plate 48)

P2~STE
Temper: Clay-grit, sand, fiber. Shell particles, not necessarily
intentionally added.
Texture: Compact, fine to somewhat coarse¯
Color: Shades of brown and gray-brown or reddish-brown.
Cores about same.
Surface finish: Smoothed to slightly polished.

FORM
Wall thickness: 4 to 7 mm.
Lip: Rounded, turned outward; may be notched on outer edge.
Base: Convex to flat but not much thicker than side wall.
Vessel shape and size: Jars exclusively, from quite small to
very large, height 6 or 7 cm. to more than 40 cm. Rim
usually forms definite angle with body and curves or slants
outward so mouth diameter is more or less equal to that of
body.
DECORATION
Treatment: Incising, punctating.
Designs: Most common are sets of parallel lines around rim or
body, or both, either horizontal or meandering, or both.
Spaces between these sets of lines are filled with slit or
fingernail punctates set ve~rtically or at right angle to meandering lines (A). The punctates are sometimes so close
together as to give an impression of rocker stamping and
perhaps they were sometimes intended to simulate this
technique. Round punctates made with blunt instrument
also used (~). Diagonal lines and single rows of punctates;
herringbone patterns with one or more rows of punctates
(B, H) and various similar combinations (D, F, G, I) may
belong to type although they are not common.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A Mid-Ouachita Focus type, particularly common in Clark and
Hot Spring Counties, Arkansas, where best and most regular designs are found (A, E). The typical meandering
lines do not occur in any other focus but the designs that
grade into diagonal lines and horizontal rows of punctates
occur in Texarkana and perhaps other loci.
DISTRIBUTION
Principally in vicinity of Arkadetphia in Clark and Hot Spring
Counties, Arkansas, extending northward to Garland County, Arkansas, with less regularity of design (:B, C-I), and
southward as far as great bend of Red River where mergings into other utility types occur.
F_~TIMATED AGE
1200-1500 A. D.
T. L. and ]~F~rs. ,~I~o, dges, 1945, pp. 104-107; Plate 18, No. 2, described as ~Iilitary Road ~eander Incised". Although
meander is characteristic, this is dropped from name to
allow for straight-line motifs as alternatives.

PLATE 48

Texas Archeologicat Society

330

MONKSTOW’N FINGt~RN~AIL PU’NCTATED
(Plate 49, A-C)
PASTE
Same as Sanders Plain and Sanders Engraved.
FORM
Wall thickness:
Lip:

5 to 8 mm.

Rounded and flush with rim or turned outward slightly.

Base:

Flat, thick disk to which body wall was attached.

Vessel shape and size: So far as known, includes only jars
about 10 to 20 cm. high, rim joining body at shallow angle
and flaring outward slightly; body and mouth diameter
about the same. These jars usually have two opposed loop
handles, upper end attached to lip and one or two peaks
rising above lip (’B, C), or two opposed small solid lugs
rising slightly above lip (A).

DECORATION
Treatment: Lines made by placing fingernail impressions endto-end, or pinches placed in rows.
Designs:

Parallel lines, usually both straight and curved,

~laced
various
wayssets
around
body
and over
andles in
or sets
lugs. inSome
of these
are well
spaced,
concentric lines or arcs (A); others cover practically the
whole sLirface except the base (B, C). Although the
sampling is small, there appears’to be a tendency for the
smallest jars (B, C) to be completely covered with such
decoration, and the largest (A) to be decorated around the
upper part, the remainder plain.
CULTURA:L AFFILIATIONS
A Sanders Focus type in Texas. The particular jar shape ~vith
loop handles or lugs, and the set of the punctated lines, are
dis{inctive and not duplicated elsewhere, although K~llough
Pinched of Frankston Focus (Plate ,~1) is similar, and most
Caddoan loci have fingernail punctates of some kind.

DISTRIBUTION
Sanders Focus area from Red River valley in northern Lamar
and Fannin Counties southward to upper Sabine River
valley in Van Zandt County. May occur elsewhere as
trade ware, but difficult to distinguish from similarly
decorated pottery of other Caddoan loci unless shape and
presence of handles or lugs can be ascertained.
ESTIMATED AGE
Some part of span 800-1200 A. D.
RF,FERENCES
Krieger, 1946, pp. 185-191, Fig. 14 and Plate 29.

PLATE 49

332

Texas Archeological Society
NASH NECK BANDED

(Plate 50)
PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit or pulverized shell.
Texture: Compact, granular; porous and soft when shell particles have leached out.
Color: Various shades of brown, gray, and gray-brown; some
light yellow-brown. Mottling due to uneven firing is common. Cores generally darker than surface.
Surface finish: Interiors usually rather well smoothed; exteriors about same.
Wall thickness: Range 3 to 10 mm., average 5 or 6 ram.
Lip: Rounded, bent outward slightly.
Base: Convex on small vessels, flatter on large vessels (I-K).
Vessel shape and size: Occurs only in form of jars. Some
bodies are squat, others g!obular or somewhat elongated.
Raising of rim into four peaks is common, either very pronouncedly (A) or with small lobes rising from rim (;B, C,
F-I). Rims bend outward from slightly (F) to sharply
(A) so that mouths are sometimes broader than bodies.
Loop handles (C), strap handles (H), or lugs ((3), all
fairly common, always four in number. Most vessels 10 to
25 cm. high, but range from 5 or 6 cm. to about 60 cm.
DECORATION
Treatment: Crimping of neck coils, applique, incising, fingernail punctates.
Designs: Type recognized chiefly by rather careful, regular

punctations in unsmoothed neck coils (f:, D, H). Vertical
rows of appliqued nodes or fillets usually occur on rim and
upper body of these vessels, dividing each into four segments; those on rim sometimes in line with those on body,
sometimes equidistant between them. Appliqued chevrons
occur on upper bodies (not shown). Incising as on body
of K is unusual.

CULTDZR~ AFFILIATIONS

Common type in both McCurtain and Texarkana Foci. Specimens J, K from Titus Focus components, where shell temper and careful execution of crimping mark them as trade
pieces. Relationship with LaRue Neck Banded (Plate 4.2)
of Titus and Frankston Foci obvious, but latter type includes only large rough (cooking?) vessels, the neck crimps
are carelessly done, and handles, lugs, applique, rim quadration, and shell temper absent.
DISTRIBUTION
Primarily Red River valley above great bend{ in lVicCurtain
and Choctaw Counties, Oklahoma; Lamar, Red River and
Bowie Counties, Texas. No neck banding of any kind
known to be indigenous to Arkansas or Louisiana.
ES~%’TID AGE
1400-1700 A. D. Extends into European contact period at Kaufman site (Harris, 1953).
RF_~RENCES
Krieger, 1946, pp. 238-2-39 and Plate 35; Bell and Baerreis, 19~1,
Plate 10; Harris, 195’3, passim and Plate 7.

PLATE 50

Texas Archeological Society

334

NATCPI]IT~ ENGI~JkV2~D
(Plate 51)
PASTE
Temper:

Almost

always finely

pulverized

shell;

otherwise

none.
Texture: Fine, compact.
Color: Buff, yellowish-brown, gray-brown. Red film fairly
common (B, B’, C) and contrast with lighter surface exposed by lines. Cores buff, gray~
Surface finish: Fair to good polish.
FOI~M
~Tall thickness; 2 to 4 mm.
Lip: Rounded and usually turned outward.
Base: Convex on bowls, somewhat flatter on bottles.
Vessel shape and size: Principally small carinated bowls of
special form, rim being low, slightly concave, and so attached as to make an almost continuous recurve with body
wall; the mouths are thus considerably wider than the
bodies (D, F, I-K). A similar body may occur with a
higher, more vertical but still concave rim (G). Animaleffigy bowl (B-B’) and four-legged effigy bottle (C) are
unusual forms. Bottles with large bodies and short, spoolshaped spout fairly common (A, H). Peculiar platter decorated on inner surface has a hollow conical pedestal base
with several large holes in sides (E).
DECORATION
Principally scroll bands, outlined by cross-hatched areas and
with ticked line bisecting each band down middle; bands
may be single arms running outward and curling at end,
S-shaped elements with curl at each end, meanders which
fold back on one another at intervals, or variations of scroll
motif. Cross-hatched flanking areas include blank disks of
different sizes, usually touching the scroll bands. Most
elaborate designs include scrolls of several sizes cleverly
arranged to fill spaces and maintain perfect balance. Rims
have rectilinear designs, usually two panels in which upright lines alternate with horizontal ticked lines. Major
units repeated three, four, or five times, all well represented. ~Vhite and (rarely) red pigments used in lines.
CULTI~AL AFF~IAT~ONS
Confined to Glendora Focus and important diagnostic type for
historic Caddo. One of few Caddoan types with designs on
botton~s of bowls, a trait noted on a few specimens of
Ripley Engraved of Titus Focus (Plate 58, K-O). The latter are s~mpler, however, and the vessels never shell-tempered. The scrolls of Hodges Engraved (~Plates 32, 33) are
on the whole distinct from those of Natchitoches, as are the
vessel forms, but occasionally it would be difficult to classify a vessel as either Hodges or Natchitoches except
through the presence or absence of shell temper. The
bottle forms (A, H) show afffinity with those of type Ken~
Trailed (Plate 39).

DI~BUTION
From city of Natchitoches in central Louisiana over northern
Louisiana, extending into northeast Texas as far as Lamar
County. May occur in adjacent corners of Arkansas and
Oklahoma but not reported yet.
EST]iMAT~ AGE
1500-1800 A. D. or part thereof.
RF~.EREN~ES
Webb, 1945, pp. 63-64 and Plates 11-14. Krieger, 1946, Figure
18. Both these works were written before Hodges Engraved
was recognized, necessitating changes.

PLATE 51

336

Texas A~’cheological Society
PATTON ENGB_AVED
(Plate 52)

PASTE
Temper: Fine clay-grit or mixed fine sand and grit; occasionally bone particles.
Texture:
Fine, compact to somewhat coarse; surfaces may
feel slightly sandy.
Color: Surfaces cream, buff, gray, and light to dark brown.
Cores same as surfaces or somewhat darker. Fire-mottling.
Surface finish: From poorly smoothed to fairly well polished.
FORM
5N’all thickness: 3 to 6 mm.
Lip: Rounded and usually flush but sometimes turned outward slightly.
Base: Slightly flattened; square bowl (:C) has flat base.
Vessel shape and size: Primarily small squat bowls with rims
vertical or slanted slightly inward or outward (A, B, E-J).
Bodies sometimes pushed out into four l~bes (H). Double
vessel (D) consists of one such bowl built on top of another. Also olla-like vessels with larger, globular bodies
and small mouths (K). Carinated bowls common, with
high rim slightly to pronouncedly convex (L). One small
ladle-like vessel (~M). Lugs present on two sides of square
bowl, perforated horizontally (C).

DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving.
Designs:
Usually ticked horizontal lines around rim, body
plain (E, F, J). Concentric circles and spirals on body,
frequently combined with two horizontal lines at top and
bottom of rim; in these cases, design unit usually repeated
three times (A, D, G, I, K, M), occasionally four times
Carinated bowl rims commonly have two large arms curving toward one another from the upper and lower margins,
each arm consisting of two, three, or four parallel lines
(L). These units likewise usually repeated three times,
separated by two sets of arched lines placed back-to-back.
White pigment occurs commonly in lines and ticks, occasionally red ochre pigment. Bottoms of carinated bowls
commonly have brushing running horizontally (L).
CLrLTU~AL ~LIATIONS
Allen Focus exclusively. The squat ,bowls (A, etc.) are similar
to those of the pre~European Frankston Focus type Poynor
Engraved (Plate 55) but they lack the series of oval panels
around the rims of the latter, and the Poynor type has little
if any ticking. The large carinated bowls with convex rims
are again similar to those in the Poynor type but the designs are easily distinguished. Frankston Focus pottery
does not have the sandy feel of Allen Focus polished ware.
DISTRIBUTION
Small area in upper Neches River drainage system, principally
in Cherokee, Anderson, Henderson, and Smith Counties.
~May occur in Nacogdoches, Rusk, and other counties.
Wherever found, it is a "marker type" for the historical
Hasinai or Tejas tribes of the Caddo family.
ESTIIVIATEI) AGE
1600-1800 A. D. or part thereof.
REFE~R~NC]~S
Krieger, 1946, Figure 18, included this type with Frankston
Focus. A separate Allen Focus for the historic material
was created later.

PLATE 52

338

Texas ArcheologicaI Society
PEASE BR~SI-IED -II~C’ISED
(Plate 53)

PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit; occasionally pulverized bone added.
Texture: Granular with medium-sized particles.
Color: Surface colors shades of buff, light gray, occasionally
dark gray to black; mottling due to uneven firing. Core
usually darker than surface.
Interior smoothed; exterior roughened by
Surface finish:
decoration.
FORM
Wall thickness: Extreme range 4 to 10 mm., average 5 to 7 ram.
Lip: Sharply convex to flat but not widened.
Base: Flat, round disk to which wall was attached.
Vessel shape and size: Jars with rim varying considerably in
height and slightly outflaring. Oral diameter usually less
than that of body. Most known specimens between 12 and
24 cm. high; no very large examples or miniature vessels
have ~been noted.
DECORATION
Treatment:
Incising, brushing, applique, and punctation in
various combinations.
Designs: One of consistent characteristics is that entire exterior, except for base, is decorated. Body divided into
panels with vertical appliqued fillets or rows of punctates,
,or punctates made in appliqued fillets; no consistent number of panels which may vary from six to 20 or more.
Panels filled with brushing or parallel incised lines set
diagonally in alternating directions with "herringbone"
effect. Lines often deeper at one end than other. Rim
decoration similar e~cept brushing or incised lines may
run in different directions from those on body. Almost
always there is at least one row of punctates around rim,
made through the brushed or incised lines; often there are
two or three such rows, one just under the lip, one around
the middle of rim, and perhaps one at base of rim.
CIYLTURAL AFF~ IATIOI~S
Primarily associated with Bossier Focus, but may also occur in
Haley Focus and related components. The type appears to
be closely related to Haley Complicated Inc~sed (Plate 27),
but is simpler and lacks the circles and scrolls of this type.
The panels of diagonally-placed lines are similar to Dunkin
Incised of Alto Focus (Plate 18), but the latter type lacks
brushing, applique, and punctating; and cylindrical veso
sels are unknown in the Pease type. In general arrangement of design it is reminiscent of Sinner Linear Punctated
of Bossier Focus (Plate 63).
DIST~I’BUT,ION
Extreme northeastern edge of Texas and much of northwestern
Louisiana, extending up Red River valley into southwestern corner of Arkansas and possibly farther north.
ESTI2VIATED AGE
Precedes Belcher and Texarkana Foci of Fulton Aspect; may
extend from Haley Focus time approximately to beginning
of Belcher Focus (Webb).
Webb, 1948. Sherds of,this type were previously included i~
"Smithport Incised by Webb and Dodd (1941, Plate 18,
Nos. 4, 6-10, 12, 13).

PLATE 53

Texas Archeological Society

340

PENNINGTON PUNCTATED-INCISED
(Plate 54)
PASTE
Same as Crockett Curvilinear Incised (Plates 14-16) except
that surfaces poorly to fairly well smoothed, but not polished.
FO]%M
Wall thickness: Range 4 to 9 mm., average 6 or 7 ram.
Lip: About equally divided between rounded and flat, some
of latter sloping to exterior. Some carinated bowls have
greatly widened flat lips, up to 21 mm. wide, most of
widening being on inside rather than outside of rim. One
rim circular in cross-section (E).
Base:
On cylindrical vessels (C) they are flat except for
rounding at edge; on all bowls they are convex and not dif~
ferentiated from body.
Vessel shape and size: Variations of large carinated bowls most
common, diameters up to 40 cm. or more, heights up to 12
cm. or more; rims flat to slightly convex on exterior and
vertical to slanting somewhat outward, as reconstructed
from sherds (A, B, E-G, I, J). A few apparently cylindrical
vessels up to 20 cm. or more in height (C). Two small
bowls with wide, shallow, convex bottoms and high, concave rims, one slanted inward (D), and one outward (H).
Appendages absent.
DECORATION
Treatment:
Incising, punctating, both sometimes smoothed
over.

Designs:

Primarily straight-line motifs consisting of slanting

bands, triangles, diamonds, triangl.es within triangles, and
diamonds within diamonds; on r~ms of carinated bowls,
whole sides of other small bowls, and apparently all but
the extreme tops and bottoms of the cylindrical vessels.
Slanting bands and other figures may be filled either with
punctates or short parallel lines, or these may.be alternated with one another and with plain areas ~n various
combinations. The broad, flat lips may be plain or have
spaced punctate-filled triangles, or bear engraved designs
like those of Holly Fine Engraved. Between Crockett and
Pennington an arbitrary line was drawn, the definitely
curvilinear motifs assigned to the former, and the straightline motifs to the latter. However, a few designs consisting
of gently curved meanders, the flanks filled with puncrates or excised (F, G) could not be easily assigned to
either type. Lines and punctates sometimes have traces of
red-ochre, but more often of a white pigment.
CULTIYRAL AFFILIATIONS
An Alto Focus type found on Louisiana as well as Texas components. Occurs as trade ware as far north as Crenshaw
Site in Miller County, Arkansas. Closely affiliated with
Crockett type in Alto Focus, but unlike the latter, does not
extend into Haley and Spiro Focus as a resident type.
Widened lips and some vessel shapes similar to those of
Holly type.
DISTRIBUTION
Alto Focus components in Texas from Chupek Site near Waco
eastward into northwestern and north-central Louisiana.
ESTIMATED AGE
Some part of span 500-1000 A. D.
R~I~FF_,RENC~ES
Krieger, 1946, Fig. 19; Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 104-108
and Figs. 38, 39; Ford, 1951, pp, 83-85.

PLATE 54

Texas Archeo!ogical Society

342

POYNOR ENGRAVED
(Plates 55, 56)
PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit; occasionally a few bone particles.
Texture:

Coarse but compact.

Color: Surfaces center around light yellowish brown and bu~;
range to cream and to dark reddish bro~vn. Fire mottling
produced gray spots possibly done intentionally at times.
Cores gray.
Surface finish:
From poorly smoothed and bumpy to well
smoothed and at times a fair polish. Interiors and exteriors about the same.

FOI~M
Wall thickness: Range 3 to 8 mm., average 4 to 5 mm.
Lip: Plain, rounded, usually flush with sidewall but occasionally turned outward; notching occurs.
Base: Thick, flat disk to which wall was attached.
Vessel shape and size: Most common form is a squat bowl with
rounded body and rim either vertical or somewhat everted
(Plate 55, B, J) and mouth diameters notably smaller than
those of bodies. These bowls are from 12 to 20 cm. in maximum diameter although miniatures occur as small as 5 cm.
across. In one case such a bowl has four long legs joined
by a clay, ring,at their feet, as in Plate 24, A, C, H, except
that the ring is a rounded square. Carinated bowls are
also common, usually with high rims which slant inward
(Plate 55, A, D-I); the rims may be quite flat but are
usually slightly to strongly convex, and the vessel bodies
also present various degrees of flatness and convexity between rim and base. Bowls such as Plate 55, C, with rim
slanted outward and body of considerably less height than
the rim, are very exceptional. Carinated bowls range in
diameter from 18 to as much as 40 cm. in diameter. Bottles
occur in two varieties: elongated, with short necks hardly
distinguishable from the bodies (Plate 56, A-G) ; and globular with long necks (Plate 56, H-J). The former form is
unique for the entire Caddoan archeological area, while
the latter is more in keeping with bottles occurring in many
other types. In both groups, heights range between 20 and
DEC OR.~TION

Treatment: Engraving, punctating.
Designs: On bowl rims the motifs center around a series of
negative ovals made with concentric lines arched back-to,back; these may be spaced somewhat apart and the area
between them filled with other lines (Plate 55, A), crosshatching or scrolls (.Plate 55, C, D). Punctated areas or
small punctated circles may occur within the ovals (Plate

CM.
PLATE 55

Texas Archeological Society

344

55, G, I). The bottles also show a wide variety of motifs
involving negative ovals and circles, but these may run in
vertical panels (Plate 56, A, E, F) instead of horizontally
as on the bowls. Designs are usually poorly executed, with
little contrast between surface colors and the cores exposed by engraving; red ochre pigment appears occasionally in lines.

C ULrr~ AFF ,ILIATIONS
This type belongs to Frankston Focus, of which it is the best
diagnostic trait. It seems never to have spread into other
loci as manufactured ware although numerous sherds have
been found in central and north-central Texas, where they
appear to have been carried as trade pieces among people
who made no pottery of their own. Bowls of shapes and
designs similar to those on Plate 55 have been found in
graves of the historic Allen Focus, showing that the type
survived until European articles reached eastern Texas; but
these are infrequent and bottles such as those on Plate 56
have not yet appeared in Allen Focus association. The design on Plate 56, D, with reversed S-shaped elements in the
panels, shows influence from the type Ripley Engraved of
Titus Focus. Unlike Titus Focus pottery, in which design
units are almost invariably repeated four times, those of
Poyner Engraved may be repeated only twice (Plate 55, C;
Plate 56, C, E, F, H), three times (Plate 56, A), four times
(Plate 55, G; Plate 56, D, J), or any number up to a dozen
or more. In this respect, Poyner Engraved appears to bear
a relationship with several Alto Focus types which existed in the same general area at an earlier time; in that
complex, designs (whether incised or engraved) were also
repeated with whatever frequency best fitted the rim, yet
in design motifs there is hardly any resemblance between
Alto and Frankston Focus.
DISTRIBUTION
Neches River valley in eastern Texas, from headwaters to junction with Angelina River. Carried westward, probably as
trade ware, to Colorado River valley of central Texas and
northwestward to Dallas County or perhaps farther. Some
components known in Smith and Van Zandt Counties in
upper Sabine River valley. Despite relatively poor quality
it appears to have been the most widely traded Caddoan
pottery among tribes living west of the Caddo.

ESTI~CIATED AGE
1200-1600 A. D., surviving infrequently until perhaps 1700 A. D.
REFERENCES
Krieger, 1946, p. 206 and Figure 18.

PLATE 56

Texas Archeological Society

346

I~IPLEY ENGRAVED
(Plates 57-59)
PASTE
Temper: Fine clay-grit: occasionally pulverized white or gray
kaolin.
Texture: Compact and firm in some vessels, grading to coarse
and crumbly in others.
Color: Various shades of buff, tan, medium to dark brown.
Hard, baked red film sometimes occurs (Plates 5’/, A, E, I;
58, I, J; 59, F, H). Cores gray, brown.
Surface finish: From poorly smoothed to fair polish.
FOPAVI
Wall thickness: 4 to 7 mm.
Lip; Rounded and almost ahvays rolled outward.
Base: Round, flat disk thicker than side walls.
Vessel shape and size: Great variety includes carinated bowls
%vith rims usually slanted outward but sometimes vertical
or slanted inward (57, A-C, E, H; 58, A-E, G, I, J); compound bowls with high convex shoulders and everted rims
(57, D, F, G, I); deep, nearly cylindrical bowls (58, F);
simple bowls (58, H) ; small jars with rims curved outward
(59, A, G); bottles of various forms (59, B-D, F, H-J);
ollas (59, K, L); and one instance of square box (59, E).
Four rim peaks occur on compound bowls (57, I) and jars
(59, G); four-lobed bodies on bottles (59, B, F, J) and
small jars (not shown).

DF_~]ORA2~ION
Treatment: Engraving, excising, brushing.
Designs: Slanted scrolls repeated four times on rims of carinated bowls and shoulders of compound bowls (57, A-H;
58, C, D, I; the strips in 57, J-U give further examples).
Flanks of scrolls have graded circles or small excised areas;
a simulation consists of whole excised triangles (57, I).
Scrolls often end in circles in center of which is small
circle, diamond, or cross. Other designs are horizontal
with S-shaped elements formed by excising (58, F, H), or.
diamond- in- circle alternated with diamond-in-diamona
and small excised triangles pointing up and down along
borderlines (58, A, B, J). Four-armed interlocking scrol.ls
occur on the bottoms of five carinated bowls, as shown m
58, K-O (rim design at top of each drawing; body design
in circle below). Carinated bowls occasionally brushed
vertically on body between rim and base (58, A). Bottles,
small jars, otlas, and square box have concentric circles
with ticking or pendant triangles on lines (59, A, B, E, F,
H, J), plain circles with cross in central one (59, K, L), and
scrolls with circle-and-cross in center (59, C, D, I). Various other combinations too numerous to mention. Red and
white pigments in lines.
CU~LTURA~ AF~ILIATIOI~S
Titus Focus. Scrolls on bowl rims sometimes similar to Hodges
Engraved but less well done, lines wider apart, vessel forms
distinct, etc. Scrolls on bowl bottoms (58, K-O) suggest
prototype for Natchitoches Engraved.
DISTPJI)UT~ON
Very common in Titus, Morris, Franklin, Upshur, Camp, and
Hopkins Counties; also occurs northward to Red :River and
southward to Smith, Gregg, and Harrison Counties.

]~STIM_ATED AGE
I~00-1500 A. D.

~ENCES

Krieger, 1946, Figure 18. Type is less inclusive now (see Wilder
Engraved).

PLATE 57

PLATE 58

350

Texas Archeological Society
SAN~DERS PLAIN
(Plate 60; 49, D-G)

PASTE
Temper: Abundantly tempered with clay-grit, sometimes including pulverized potsherds; pulverized bone occasionally
added. Some bottles have sand as well as clay-grit.
Texture: Coarse but quite firm.
Color: Surfaces principally shades of brown from tan to dark;
a rich chocolate is characteristic; gray-browns also occur.
Some fire-mottling, usually resulting in different shades
of brown. Baked red film on perhaps 15 per cent of vessels, primarily bowls (Plate 60, D, E). Cores darker than
surfaces, dark brown or gray to black.
Surface finish: Usually poorly to well smoothed but seldom
well polished; bottle interiors not smoothed. Surfaces
often evenly rippled from marks of smoothing tools.
FORUM
Wall thickness: Range 4 to 10 mm., average 6 or 7 mm.
Lip: Rounded to flat, flush with rim; may be notched along
outer edge or boldly scalloped (Plates 60, H; 49, G).
Base: Flat, thick disk to which side wall was attached~ on
bottles, "goblets", it may be more convex.
Vessel shape and size: More or less conical simple bowls,
ranging up to 42 cm. across and 18 cm. high (Plates 60, D,
H; 49, G). Carinated bowls even larger, up to 50 cm. or
more across and 20 cm. high, with rims 2 to 8 cm. high,
flat on outer face, and vertical or slanted slightly inward
or outward (Plate 60, F). Hemispherical bowls with two
lugs projecting upward and outward from lip on opposite
sides of mouth; other such bowls without lugs (Plate 49,
E, F). Bottles, rather poorly made (Plates 60, I; 49, D);
"goblets" with small bodies and large, cylindrical necks,
sometimes with two opposed suspension holes near top
(Plate 60, C, G); and (rarely) barrel-shaped vessels (Plate
60, A).
DECORATION
None, except for occasional red film, lip scalloping or notching.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Dominant type of Sanders Focus, constituting 60 per cent or
more of the total pottery, a unique situation in Caddoan
archeology, where most foci have very little plain ware.
Reported also in Nelson Focus, a mixture of Sanders and
Spiro Focus traits in southeastern Oklahoma (Bell and
Baerreis, 1951), and in "Late Component" at Spiro Site
(Orr, 1946).
DISTRIBUTION
Sanders Focus area in Texas, from Red River valley in northern Lamar and Fannin Counties, southward to upper Sabine
River valley in Van Zandt County; also in Choctaw County. Oklahoma. Found as trade~ ware in Wylie Focus sites
in Dallas and Collin Counties. in Central Texas Aspect
sites in middle Brazos River valley, and perhaps elsewhere.
ESTI2VIATED AGE
Some part of span 800-1200 A. D.
RE~I~ERENCES
Krieger, 1946, pp. 185-186, Fig. 14, and Plates 24-26, 28, A, B, D.

PLATE

60

352

Texas Archeological Society
SANDERS ENGRAVED
(Plate 61)

PASTE
Same as Sanders Plab~. Red-filmed surfaces likewise occur
(F, G).
FO ~R~I
Wall thickness: Extreme range 4 to 10 mm., average 6 or 7 mm.
Lip: Rounded or slightly flattened and flush with rim.
Base: Flat, thick disk on larger bowls; evenly convex bottom
on smaller bowls and bottles.
Vessel shape and size: Carinated bowls range in diameter
from about 18 to 36 cm., in height about 8 to 12 cm.; rims
2 to 6 cm. high (A, E, G, I). Peculiar deep :bowls also
relatively common, broadest near bottom, slightly convex
sides slanting somewhat inward, two small lugs on oppo~
site sides of mouth jutting upward and outward from rim
(C, D). Large neckless, gourd-shaped bottles, with heights
up to 30 cm. and greatest diameter somewhat below the
middle (H). Engraved sherds also found which suggest
more ordinary bottle forms of Caddoan foci, but none have
been restored. Unusual shapes include a small "goblet"
with cylindrical upper part and small body (~B), and a
globular bowl with sharply outflaring rim (F). The "goblet" (B) and all known examples of the large neckless
.bottles (~H) have two opposed suspension holes not far
beneath the lip.
DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving.
Designs: Only very simple straight-line motifs in a single zone
around rims of carinated bowls, upper parts of deep bowls,
interior of rim of bowl (F), the cylindrical part of the
"goblet" (B), and the uppermost part of the large neckless
bottles,(H). The designs may consist only of parallel lines
pitched in opposite directions at intervals (G), groups of
vertical lines at intervals (rim interior of F), and a continuous series of triangles filled with hatching or crosshatching; such triangles may lie point down (A, B, C, D),
point up (H, I), or in opposed pairs (E). There may be
two or three horizontal border lines above the triangles
(C, D) but usually there are no borders either above or
below. Design motifs repeated whatever number of times
fits vessel best; while four may occur (as on H), this appears to be incidental. Red ochre pigment commonly found
in lines.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
A Sanders Focus type, following Sanders PIain in frequency.
Reported in Nelson :Focus, southeastern Oklahoma (Bell
and Baerries, 1951), and in "Late Component" at Spiro
Site in eastern Oklahoma (Orr, 1946~ Krieger, notes).
DISTRIBUTION
Same as Sanders Plain, both as resident and as trade ware.
ESTIMA,’FtDD AGE
Same as Sanders Plain.
REFEREN)CES
Krieger, 1946, pp. 185-190, Fig. 14, and Plates 27, 28.

PLATE 61

Texas ArcheoIog~cal Society

354

SIMMS

ENGR4kVED

(Plate 62)
PASTE
See type description for Barkman Engraved, except that Simms
Engraved is frequently shell-tempered and occasionally
red-~ilmed. Shell temper and red film rarely occur in the
same vessel, however. The film, of powdered red ochre,
was applied after firing and rubs off.
FORM
Wal! thickness: 4 to 7 mm.
Lip: Thin and rounded, turned sharply upward or outward
from an inward-slanting rim.
Base: Shallow bowls have no distinct base, but broad convex
bottoms. The very deep nearly cylindrica! bowls (see E)
have flat to slightly convex bases of about same thickness
as side walls.
Vessel shape and size: Bowls of a peculiar carinated form in
that the rim is very narrow and bends inward sharply, at
times almost at a right angle (see C, E), and the lip turns
upward or outward at a right angle to the rim. Be principal variation in form is in the depth of the bowls, most
being shallow while occasionally one is as deep as E. Maximum diameters are about 30 cm., maximum height about
20 cm.
DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving.
Designs: Decoration is confined to the very narrow rim zone
and consequently consists of very compressed designs.
Sketches G-~R illustrate some of the patterns, which are
mainly rectilinear. Ticking common and tiny punctates
made through polished surface sometimes occur as in
Bark~nan Engraved
Plate 4). Red ochre pigment found
in lines frequently, white pigment occasionally.

CULT~ AFF~LI~kTIONS
Type belongs primarily to Mc4l~urtain and Texarkana Foei; occurs occasionally in Titus and perhaps Belcher Focus, probably as trade ware. In at least two cases it extends into
association with European trade objects: at the Kaufman
site in Red River County
Harris, 1953), and as trade ware
at the Jim Allen site in Cherokee County, type site for the
historic Allen Focus in central East Texas. It is present
also at the Hunt and Clements sites near Atlanta, Cass
County, where some of the graves had European objects of
iron and glass beads. It is not well known, or even definitely present, in the historic Glendora Focus components
in Louisiana, from which it appears to be primarily a late
prehistoric type in the Fulton Aspect, surviving until the
beginning of European trade contacts, but not much
longer.
DISTRIBLPrION
Primarily close to Red River in Choctaw and McCurtain Counties, Oklahoma; Little River, Lafayette, and Miller Counties, Arkansas; and Red River, Bowie, and Cass Counties,
northeast Texas. Elsewhere probably trade ware. Occurs
seldom, if at all, in Louisiana.

ESTIMATED AGE

1500-1700 A. D.

P~EFERE!TCE

Krieger, 1946, p. 230 and Figure 18.

PLATE 62

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

356

SINtCER I2"NEAR P~ATED
(Plate 63)
PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit; rarely some pulverized bone added.
Texture: Compact, firm.
Color: Surfaces cream, buff, shades of brown and gray to
nearly black in fire-mottled spots. Cores same as surface
or darker.
Surface finish: Interiors smoothed; exteriors nearly covered by
decoration.
Wall thickness: 4 to 6 mm.
Lip: Rounded: usually notched along outer edge.
Base: Flat disk.
Vessel shape and size: Small jars about 10 to 15 cm. high, rims
meeting bodies at slig.ht ang!e and vertical to everted.
Globular bodies with rim varying from low and everted to
high and vertical (B). Webb (1948) includes small "cups".

DI~CORATION
Treatment: Punctating, applique.
Designs: Body and rim almost completely covered with punctations set close together in closely spaced rows, so regular
as to give the suggestion of cord marking. Punctations apparently made individually with round-tipped tool, although possibly they were made in rows with carved stamp
at times (C). Less often they were made with tip of fingernail, small and carefully done in neat rows. The rows
are arranged in parallel sets, pitched at different angles
and either straight (C-E) or slightly curved (A, B). Quadration sometimes affected with four single rows of nodes
running vertically on body (E), or sets of fillets
CULTU~AiL ~A~ILIATtONS
Principally a Bossier Focus type, possibly Haley .Fo,c.us .a.lso.
Use of sets of ~arallel lines pitched in different airec~ions
is somewhat similar to decoration of Pease Brushed-Incised, also of Bossier and possibly of Haley Focus (Plate
53). Webb (1948, p. 117) states that occasionally the decorative techniques of Sinner and Pease are combined, with
regular fields roughened by linear punctations, separated
by nodes, appliqued ridges, or single rows of heavy punctations. Some similarity in design arrangement also apparent with Dunkin Incised of Alto Focus (Plate 18) although the latter completely lacks applique and punctation. Webb also compares Sinner with type Lake Borne
Incised of Tchefuncte period in lower Mississippi valley,
pointing to the "startling similarity of decoration technique
and design arrangement," even though the intervening
complexes of Marksville, Troyville, and Coles Creek lack
these features.

DISTI~IBUrI~ON
Not found in quantity in any known site, but occurs widely in
central and northern Louisiana and southern Arkansas.
Apparently did not reach Bossier or Haley Focus components in eastern Texas.
]~TI I~AT~ AGE
Transitional between Gibson and Fulton Aspects, possibly
1000-1200 A. D. Stratigraphically older than Belcher Focus
at Belcher site in Louisiana.
Webb, 1948, pp. 114-117, Plates 11, 14.

PLATE 63

Texas Archeological Society
SPI!RO ENGRAVED
(Plate 64)
PASTE (data from Orr, 1946, p. 237: see "Spiro 5 Type")
Temper: Fine clay-grit; rarely, bone.
Texture: Very fine, compact, contorted; hardness 2,5 to 4,
average 3.
Color: Darker shades of brown; black; a few red-orange.
Surface finish: Smoothed to polished.
FOI~M (data from Orr, 1946, p. 237: see "Spiro 5 Type")
Wall thickness: 5 to 8 mm., average 7 mm.
Lip: Rounded and "contracting" (slanted inward?).
Base: Disks predominate; convex bottoms rare.
Vessel shape and size: (1) cylindrical jars; (2) jars with short,
straight, and outflaring rims, and inverted pear-shaped
bodies; (3) "suittoon" shape, globular body and tall rim
(one case); (4~) bottles with tall conical necks and spherical bodies; (5) hemispherical bowls; (6) vertical-rimmed
bowls with
rim 1/4 to ~a of vessel height; (7) hemispherical
¯
"
" " ; (8) glo bu bowls with ,, two opposite
open spouts on rim
lar bowls with two opposite tabs on rim. Examples of
bottles in Plate 64 (A, C, D, F-~H) ; bowls with two "open
sl~outs" on rim ,(,B, E); small jar with short, outflaring
rim (I).

DF~CORATION
Treatment: Engraving, incising, punctating.
Designs: Concentric circles with parallel diagonal lines between the sets (A, ~B, E); tight spirals (C); sets of concentric or nested arcs (D, F, H, I); nested squares, with
diagonals ,breaking across them or between different sets
(G); and various similar combinations of striking beauty.
Parallel horizontal lines always occur around the top of
bottle bodies, sometimes at top of spout (G), and rims of
other forms (B, E, I). Designs characteristically engraved
through polished surface, but some may have been incised
in still-plastic clay, then polished over. Fine punctates
appear in circles and corners of designs (B, F, I). Red
ochre pigment used in lines and punctates. Design units
repeated four times most commonly; two, three, five also
used.
AFFH~IATIONS
A ~piro Focus type, closely related to Holly Fine Engraved of
Alto Focus (~lates 34, 35), particularly in bottle form with
tapered spout, and design layout. The Spiro type Iacks
carinated bowls, common in Holly; the lines are bolder and
spaced farther apart; incising may be substituted for engraving; and where Holly type has design corners excised,
Spiro type uses punctating instead. The HoZly type lacks
"open spouts" on bowl rims (B, E); and several of its
special features of rim and lip contour are lacking in the
Spiro type.
DIS~I~IBUr~ION
Eastern Oklahoma; southwest Arkansas to Crenshaw Site on
Red River; Jaggers Site, Franklin County, Texas; Mustang
Creek Site, southern Red River County, Texas; scattered
specimens in private collections mainly from Red River
valley in northeast Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE
Some ~part of span 500-1000 A. D.
REFE!~NCES
Orr, 1946 (’~Spiro 5 Type") ; Krieger, 1946, Fig. 19; Newell and
Krieger, 1949, pp. 199-201 ("Spiro Fine Engraved" in these
references); Bell, 1953.

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

360

TAYLOR ENC~RAV~ED
(Plates 65, 66)
PASTE
Temper: Often none visible; otherwise, fine clay-grit or small
amount of said; rarely, finely pulverized bone or tuff.
Texture:

Fine, compact, usually does not break easily.

Color: Various shades of gray and brown from very light to
very dark and almost black. Some fire-mottling on lightercolored vessels but best ones are evenly dark gray or
brown. Bright red, baked film occurs occasionally (Plate
65, B, D, G, L). Soft, flaky red film (Plate 65, K) may
have been applied after firing. Cores gray to black.
Surface finish: From smoothed to well polished; bottles not
smoothed inside.

Wall thickness: 2 to 5 mm. but most are 4 or 5 mm.
Lip: Rounded, almost always rolled outward.
Base: Round, flat disk on a few vessels (~Plate 65, M-O) ; usually convex or somewhat flattened. Some bottles have
"extended base" (Plate 66, D, E, I, K), probably solid.
Vessel shape and size: Variety of small bottles, bowls, jars.
Some bowls have small bodies and high, outward-flaring
rims (Plate 65, A, C, :I-I) with mouth diameter considerably
greater than body. Very deep bowls with rim gently flaring outward but not distinct from body (:Plate 65, D, G,
Simple bowls (Plate 65, N). Carinated bowls with rim
slanted inward or outward (Plate 65, I, L, O). Small
polished jars with rims low to high and vertical to flaring
outward, but mouth diameter less than that of body (Plate
65, B, E, F, J). Compound bowl (Plate 65, K). Hemispherical bowl (Plate 66, J). Bottles with spouts vertical,
slightly tapered, slightly outflaring, or spool-shaped with
bulge in middle (Plate 66, B, C, E, I). In one case, bottle
mouth covered with node-studded cap except for small
opening (Plate 66, G).

DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving, punctating.
Designs: Featured principally by tight scrolls, lines close together, and spirals which look almost like concentric
circles. Almost invariably the center of the scroll or spiral
shows two arms hooked toward one another but separated
by a short gap (seen most clearly in Plate 66, A). The
scrolls sweep gracefully around vessel, sometLmes very
evenly spaced. Ticks occur on lines (Plate 65, E, F, G, I;
Plate 66, F) and occasionally small triangles are pendant
from the lines (Plate 65, B, J, P). Scrolls adjusted to the
narrow horizontal space available on a carinated bowl
(~Plate 65, I, L, O) are naturally not handled as freely as
those on jar and bottle bodies with more space. In at least

PLATE 65

Texas Archeological Society

362

one case (Plate 66, I) a bottle xvith tight concentric circles
has been included because the appearance is almost like
that of the scrolls on bottles K, L. In Texas and Louisiana
the design is almost invariably repeated four times; specimens from west-central Arkansas (Plate 66, H, J, K) usually repeat the design three times, but two and four are
known. An area around the base of the spout, a square
when seen from above, may be filled with small punctates
(Plate 66, D, E, I). Both white and red pigments appear in
the lines with some frequency.

C ULTLr~AL AFFTLIATIONS
3,Iost commonly associated with Titus and Belcher Foci, less
frequently with Texarkana and Mid-Ouachita. Conceptions of what is to be included in type have altered several
times. Webb and Dodd (1941) considered such vessels to
*be one of the numerous sub-types of Belcher Engrave&
Krieger (1946, Figure 18) labeled some vessels "Taylor
Engraved" in Titus and Belcher Foci which contrasted in
several ways with Ripley Engraved on the one hand, and
Belcher Engraved (as it was then restricted by Web]a) on
the other. Webb (:1948) then labeled some Belcher mound
vessels as "Taylor Engraved but he and the authors have
recently decided that this was too inclusive also as it embraced specimens which we would now call Hodges Engraved (Plates 32, 33) and Glassel! Engraved (Plate 25).
Thus, in Webb, 1948, Plate 11, Nos. 3 and 4 would still be
regarded as Taylor Engraved but No. 5 is clearly Hodges
Engraved; and on Plate 12. Nos. 7-11 the sherds would
probably now be called Glassell Engraved. Future research
will require that a clearer distinction be made between
Taylor Engraved and what we have called Wilder Engraved
of Titus Focus as a new type (Plate 68). The latter does
not occur in Louisiana or Arkansas as a resident type but
it shares with Taylor Engraved some designs with the two
hooked arms in the center of the scrolls. Webb (1948, p.
110) reported that "Taylor Engraved" sherds are found on
the majority of Bossier Focus sites, as well as in Titus and
Belcher Foci, but association of this type with Bossier
should be re-examined.
DISTRIBUTION
Found widely in northeast Texas, northwest Louisiana, and
southwest Arkansas. Occurrence in Oklahoma may be expected, if only as trade ware.
ESTIMATED AGE
1200-1500 A. D. (span allowed for Titus and Belcher Foci). If
in Bossier Focus might be dated somewhat earlier at beginning.

KEFERENOES
V~ebb and Dodd, 1941, pp. 90-95 (see sub-types of "Belcher
Engraved"): Krieger, 1946, pp. 2~0, 232, 236, Figure 18;
~ebb, ]048, pp. 109-110, Plates 11, 12.

PLATE 66

364

Texas Archeolog{cal Society
WECHES FINGERNAIL IMPRESSED
(Plate 67)

PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit; rarely, bone.
Texture: From granular and compact to coarse and crumbly.
Color: Various shades of brown, reddish-brown, and brick red.
Largest and thickest vessels tend toward yellowish-brown
and reddish-brown; smallest toward medium to very dark
brown, ahnost black. Cores darker than surfaces.
Surface finish:
Many vessels covered with design; others
smoothed but not polished over plain areas.
FORM
Wall thickness: Extreme range 3 to 11 mm., average about 6
mm.
Lip: Rounded and flat in about equal numbers, some flat ones
sloping to exterior. Most are same thickness as body and
rim, a few widened to as much as 17 mm., flat and horizontal on top.
Base: Flat disk, 6 to 9 mm. thick, in all cases except one, a
flat square base on cylindrical vessel.
Vessel shape and size: Most common are small jars 7 to 20 cm~
high with more or less globular bodies and short rims from
vertical to slightly outflaring (A, C, D, I). Next most frequent are carinated bowls up to 30 cm. or more across (F),
and cylindrical vessels from 14 to 22 cm. or more in height
(B, G). A few compound bowls indicated by sherds appear
to be as much as 25 cm. in diameter (E, I:I). Appendages
absent.
DECORATION
Treatment: Arched punctures, done with thumbnail in most
cases, with hollow cyhnder pressed in at angle in others;
pinching; incising.
Designs: Type most easily identified by from one to eight or
nine rows of evenly spaced arched impressions around rim
of vessels, except in one case where they are on shoulder
of compound bowl (H); these rows of arches alternated
with horizontal incised lines in most cases but free in others; impressions usually arched upward but occasionally
downward. Vessel bodies plain (D, E, F, H), covered with
vertical incising closely spaced (B, C), pinched impressions running in vertical rows (A, G), fingernail impressions placed end-to-end or overlapping to make spiraling
lines (I), etc~ Spiral designs repeated four times. Other
bodies have grids of diagonal and horizontal lines like those
of Dunkin Inc~sed (Plate 18). Designs not smoothed over.
CULTURAL A~FILIATIONS
Exclusively an Alto Focus type.
DISTRIBUTION
Central parts of East Texas and northwestern Louisiana; extends as far west as Chupek Site near Waco. Occurs as
trade ware in Wylie Focus in Dallas area.
ESTLMATED AGE
Some part of span 500-1000 A. D.

B~FERENCES
Krieger, 1946, Fig. 19; Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 118-120
and Fig. 46.

PLATE

67

Texas Archeological Society

366

:WIELDER ~N~RAV~ED
(Plate 68)
PASTE
Temper: Fine clay-grit; sometimes no visible temper.
Texture: Compact, seldom crumbly.
Color: Various shades of buff, light brown, gray. Some firemottling. Occasionally a bright red film (D, M). Cores
gray to brown.
Surface finish: Poorly smoothed to fairly well smoothed.
FORaM
Wall thickness: 4 to 7 mm.
Lip: :Rounded, rolled outward.
Base: Round, flat disk on ollas; on bottles, flat to convex.
Vessel shape and size: Mainly bottles and small jars. Some
ollas (K).

DECORATION
Treatment: Engraving, excising, punctating.
Designs: Scrolls, repeated four times around vessel. Each
scroll consists of two arms, one beginning at upper margin, other at lower margin. They circle into one another,
sometimes not meeting at center but separated by a gap
(E, F, J, K, M), at other times meeting at opposite sides of
a small circle (D, H, L). This circle may be excised or
cross-hatched or have a cross in it (D). Where the two
scroll arms pass above and below this circle, they are
widened considerably by excising (D, H, L). These swellings may occur even when there is no circle joining the
two scroll arms (A-C, E, I, K). Sometimes the two arms
that hook toward one another are plain single lines
ticked lines (~M), or narrow cross-hatched bands (G, I).
Punctated areas may appear around top of body as in J.
:Red pigment seldom occurs.
CULT D’B~L/~FFILIATIONS
A Titus Focus type. These vessels were originally included in
Ripley Engraved (Krieger, 1946, Figure 18) but have now
been separated because of the peculiar scroll arms and the
much smaller range of vessel forms. The Wilder type requires more research for more precise distinction from both
Ripley Engraved (Plates 57-59) and Taylor Engraved
(Plates 65, 66).
D~I.B~TION
Same as Ripley Engraved. Specimen H from Belcher Site in
Caddo Parish, northwest Louisiana, probably a trade piece
from northeast Texas.
]~TED AGE
1200-1500 A. D.
~CES
None.

PLATE 68

Texas Archeological Society

368

MISCELLANEOUS FULTON ASPF_~T UTILITY POTTERY
(Plate 69)
GENERAL NOTES
Plate 69 attempts to provide a bare indication of the variety of
rough utility pottery which is to be found in northeast
Texas in the foci of Fulton Aspect. Many hundreds of
complete vessels and thousands of sherds collected in this
area have not yet been analyzed by type, ,but others are
described above (see: Belcher Ridged, Plate 6; Bullard
Brushed, Plate 9; Cass Appliqued, Plate 11; Clements
Brushed, Plate 12; Harleton Appliqued, Plate 28; Karnack
Brushed-Incised, Plate 38; Killough Pinched, Plate 41;
LaRue Neck Banded, Plate 42; McKinney Plain, Plate 43;
Maydelle Inc~sed, Plate 46; Military Road Inc~sed, Plate 48;
Nash Neck Ba~ded, Plate 50; Pease Brushed-Inc~sed, Plate
53. Some others, such as Cowhide Stamped and~Fb~ter
Trailed-Inc~sed, Plates 13 and 20, often have soot on the
inside, indicating use for cooking, but are too well made
to .be classed as "rough" cooking ware).
The vessels shown are entirely of clay-grit temper, occasionally
~vith bone added, as is the case with all utility of the
~rankston, Titus, Allen, and Bossier Foci, and nearly all
of that of Texarkana, Belcher, and Mid-Ouachita Foci. The
remaining utility ware of the latter loci, and most of that
of McCurtain and Glendora, is tempered with pulverized
shell (see Plate 70, A-G). The techniques of incising,
pinching, fingernail punctations, stick punctations, applique, and brushing are all found in various combinations,
often two or three on the same vessel, so that classification into types is quite arbitrary--much more so than in
the polished and engraved wares--and will generally depend upon whichever technique covers the greater part of
the vessel surface or provides the dominant part of the design.
The associations are as follows: A, B, Frankston Focus; C, N,
Hunt and ~lements Sites, Cass County (see pages 225-227) ;
D-K, Titus Focus; L, M, Texarkana Focus. These specimens do not, however, provide even a rough indication of
the variety of styles to be found in these loci.

REFERF/qCES
None.

PLATE 69

Texas Archeological Society

370

MISCELLANEOUS FULTON AND GIBSON ASPECT
UTILITY POTTERY
(~Plate 70)
GEN~ERAL NOTES
Specimens A-G illustrate selected utility vessels from MidOuachita Focus, all shell-tempered except B, G, which are
clay-grit tempered. Shell-tempered vessels are infrequent
in this focus, the greater part of the utility ware consisting
of the clay-tempered type Military Road Incised (Plate
48). These vessels are shown for contrast with those in
Plate 69, which see for remarks on Fulton Aspect utility
pottery in general.
Specimens H-N represent a few selected examples of utility
ware from Haley Focus of Gibson Aspec~ which have not
been formally analyzed by type. No shell-tempered pottery is known in this Aspect, it being entirely tempered
with coarse clay-grit, to which pulverized bone was sometimes added. While specimens H-N show some consistency
in being decorated either with punctates or vertical incised lines, not enough vessels are available for establishing new types. For types now recognized in various loci
of Gibson Aspect, see those described above: Canton Incised, Plate 10; Dunkin Incised, Plate 18; Haley Complicated Incised, Plate 27; Kiam Incised, Plate 40; and the
jars, at least, included in Weches Fingernail Impressed,
Plate 67. On the whole, there is much less variety of decorative technique in Gibson Aspect than in Fulton Aspect;
and there is greater tendency to use only one technique on
each ves~sel, so that they are more easily classified.
RF_IFERENCES

None.

PLATE 70

Texas Archeological Society

372

BELCHER PLAIN"
PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit, to which white particles
times added.
Texture:

(tuff?)

some-

Granular but firm, breaks with sharp edges.

Color: Exteriors gray, yellow, buff, orange, brown, and greenish-gray; considerable fire-mottling. Cores black.
Surface finish:

Exteriors and interiors both poorly smoothed.

Wall thickness:

5 to 10 mm., average 7 mm.

Lip:

Rounded, slightly thickened with strip added to outer
edge.

Base:

Convex or slightly flattened; vessels do not stand up

well.
Vessel shape and size: Type name now restricted to a series of
large ollas with globular bodies and small mouths with
vertical rims. Greatest diameter at middle or somewhat
below; there may be a slightly angular turn to the wall at
point of" greatest diameter. The shape of these ollas is the
same as in the decorated types described above, as follows:
Clements Brushed, Plate 12, B; Ripley Engraved, Plate 59,
K, L; Wilder Engraved, Plate 68, K. Complete vessels from
Belcher Site, Louisiana, measure 30 to 40 cm. high and 35
to 40 cm. in maximum diameter. The bodies are usually
deformed in the lower parts, as though the makers were
unable to prevent slumping due to the shape and weight
of the clay before firing.
DECORATION

Treatment: A little incising.
Designs: Bodies completely plain and constitute nearly the
entire vessel surface. A few irregularly incised lines appear on neck of a few specimens. Shades of color produced by fire-mottling attractive and may have been done
intentionally.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Large plain ollas appear to be restricted to Belcher Focus as a
resident type. The only known exception is a small specimen shown by Harrington (1920, Plate XCI, B) from Site
11 at Ozan in Hempstead County, Arkansas. There must

Texas Archeological Society

373

be an intimate connection with the decorated ollas mentioned above in the Titus Focus and Clements Site, where
there are no plain ollas, so far as known, while conversely,
Belcher Focus components have no known decorated ones.
All of these together constitute a unique vessel form in
Caddoan archeology, and they are not found elsewhere in
the entire Eastern United States. The form is very similar
to a common one in the Puebloan culture of the Southwest
United States, which, together with other ceramic parallels
between Caddoan and Puebloan culture, has been discussed
by Krieger (1946, pp. 235-247 and Plate 32). The mouths
are just large enou~i~ to insert a hand; the ollas may have
been for food storage.
DISTRIBUTION
Known as an established type only at Belcher Site, Caddo
Parish, Louisiana, in Belcher Focus component (two upper
levels).
ESTIMATED AGE
1200-1500 A. D. or part thereof.
RE~ERENCES
First described as "subtype C" of "Type 4, Belcher Plain"
(Webb and Dodd, 1941, p. 101 and ~Plate 17, No. 6). At
that time, "Belcher Plain" was considered to include all
plain vessels and sherds from the upper two levels at
Belcher Site. Later, Webb restricted Belcher Plain to
these ollas (Krieger, 1946, Fig. 18).

BOWLES CREEK PLAIN
PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit; occasionally bone particles added.
Texture:
Variable,
compact.

from rather fine to coarse,

lumpy, but

Color: Various shades of brown from light tan to dark, and
reddish.
Surface finish: Bowls well smoothed but not polished; jars
poorly smoothed on exterior, well smoothed on interior.
FORM
Wall thickness:

4 to 8 ram.

Lip: Rounded or somewhat flattened and flush with rim.
Base:

Bowls have convex bottoms, jars flat disk bases.

Vessel shape and size: This type is a cross-section of all pottery at Davis Site, type site for Alto Focus. Proportionately, there was very little completely undecorated pottery

Texas Archeological Society

374

in this site, but many of the decorated types (see Plates
14-18, 31, 34, 35, 40, 54, 67) had designs only on the rims
and upper portions. For this reason no body sherds have
been included in Bowles Creek Plain, because any single
sherd might have come from the lower portions of a vessel
that was decorated higher up. Bowles Creek Plain includes
only those sherds large enough to show that the rim or
upper portion of the vessel was completely plain, so that in
all probability the entire vessel was undecorated. These
sherds indicate the same vessel forms found in all the other
Alto ~Focus types, so the type may best be visualized as
consisting of the whole array of forms, of which only an
occasional vessel, perhaps two or three out of a hundred,
simply was left without any kind of decoration.
CULTURA:L AFFILIATIONS
An Alto Focus Type.
DISTRIBUTION
Central part of East Texas and northwestern Louisiana.
ESTI.MATF_~D AGE
Some part of span 500-1000 A. D.

REFERENCES
Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 126-127 and Fig. 47, B-D.

DU~EN NECK BANDED

~

PASTE
Temper: Clay-grit.
Texture: Very coarse and crumbly or friable; large clay-grit
particles commonly visible on surface.
Color: Yellow-browns, bright red (fire-color only), shades of
medium and reddish browns, often somewhat fire-mottled,
Cores gray to ~black.
Surface finish: Interiors fairly well smoothed; exteriors rough
or covered with fingernaiI punctates; rim coils pinched on
with seams showing.

FOP~M
Wall thickness: 4 to 12 mm., average perhaps 8 mm. Usually
thickest at shoulder and base, thinnest between these
points.
Lip:
Base:

Rounded and turned outward to overhang rim slightly.
Thick, flat disk to which body wall attached.

Vessel shape and size: Jars the only form known, ranging in
height from 14 to over 50 cm., the largest being of several

Texas Archeolog$cal Society

375

gallons capacity. Wide shoulder area, body tapered toward
base rather than globular, rim vertical or slightly outcurving.
DECORATION
Treatment:

Neck banding, fingernail punctating.

Designs: Corrugated effect produced on rims by crimping each
coil down on preceding one, at regular intervals, in same
manner as shown for type LaRue Neck Banded (Plate 42).
This technique never shows on ~body below rim zone, although entire vessels of this and other types were made by
coiling and each coil must have been added in the same
mann.er. By not smoothing over these rim coils and crimps,
and by crimping at regular intervals, a distinctly decorative
effect was reached. Bodies were left entirely plain or were
covered with irregularly spaced fingernail punctations or
pinches. These body treatments provide an easy distinction
between Duren Neck Banded and LaRue Neck Banded, the
latter having bodies covered with vertical brushing in every known case; Duren also lacks handles.
CULTI!RAL !kF~ILIATIONS
An Alto Focus type. Undoubtedly the ancestor of LaRue Neck
Banded, a common type of Frankston Focus (Plate 42),
found in the same part of East Texas. The change from
plain or fingernail-punctated bodies in the Duren type to
brushed bodies in the LaRue type is a general one in the
utility pottery types of Alto and Frankston Focus. The
type Nash Neck Banded of Texarkana and McCurtain Focus
(Plate 50) is related to Duren and LaRue in the basic technique of neck decoration, but the vessels are much smaller,
four rim peaks and shell temper are common in it, and the
crimping is notably better done, with thinner coils and
finer indentations.
DISTIRIBUTION
Found mainly at Davis Site, Cherokee County, with a few
sherds in other Alto Focus components. Unknown in Louisiana compo~aents.
ESTIMATED AGE
Some part of span 500-1000 A. D.

~ERENCES
Krieger, 1946, Fig. 19: Nevcell and Krieg~er, 1949, pp. 120-123
and Figs. 40, 47.

Texas Archeological Society

376

H~DY INCISED
GENERAL NOTES
Some Caddoan pottery from Alto Focus was once classified as
"Hardy Incised", a type long known in eastern Louisiana
(Krieger, 1946, Fig. 19). The same Texas vessels were
later included as possible variants of type Dunkin Incised
as defined at the Davis Site by Newell and Krieger (1949,
Figs. 41-43). They are now classified as a separate type,
Kiam Incised (present Plate 40), as originally intended by
Newell.
While there are some similarities in form and decoration between the Louisiana type Hardy Incised (for definition see
Quimby, 1951, pp. 113-114 and Fig. 14), and the Alto Focus
types Davis Incised and Kiam Incised (present Plates 17,
40), there are enough differences in paste, texture, form,
and design to distinguish them. Hardy can be readily
recognized by its exceedingly soft, fine-textured paste,
which contrasts with the thick, coarse, lumpy, and friable
paste of the two Alto Focus types. While Hardy occurs as
bowls and jars alike, with only the rim or upper part decorated with horizontal lines (sometimes with a row of
punctates below the last line), Kiam occurs only in the
form of jars with rims encircled by parallel, horizontal
lines, and bodies plain, covered with vertical incised lines,
or pinched or punctated with fingernails (Plate 40). Davis
Incised occurs in a wider variety of bowl shapes than does
Hardy, and even includes bottles (Plate 17). Further comparisons are needed.

I~EOTA CURVILIN.EAR INCISF-,D
GENERAL

NOTES

This name was improvised for certain vessels from Spiro and
other sites of Spiro Focus in eastern Oklahoma (Krieger,
1946, Fig. 19). The polished-over incised designs on these
vessels are very similar to those of Crockett C~ilincar
Incised of Alto Focus (present Plates 14-16), and while the
vessel shapes are also similar in some respects, the very
common carinated howl form of Alto Focus is missing in
Oklahoma and western Arkansas.
It may be said that many of the vessels once called "Keota
Curvilinear Incised" in Oklahoma and Arkansas actually
belong to the type Crockett Curvilinear Incised, for they
cannot be distinguished from the latter by design layout,
vessel form, paste, or surface finish. On the other hand,
there may be other vessels which only generally resemble
Crockett but possess enough distinctive features to define
another type (or types). This is a matter for future
search. The name Keota no longer has any meaning and
should be dropped.

Texas A~’cheo~og~ca~ Society

377

SMITHPORT PLAIN

GENERAL NOTES
This type was first defined by Webb and Dodd (1941, pp. 103104 and Plate 17, No. 4) in the two lower levels of the
Belcher Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana. It is now considered a trait of Haley Focus and has been recognized in
collections from the Haley, Crenshaw, East, and other sites
of this focus. It consists primarily of bottles very similar
in shape and size to those included in Haley Engraved
(present Plate 26, .B, C, F), while sherds with similar paste
may indicate other forms. About a dozen of the sherds
originally reported by Webb and Dodd (1941) were coated
with a bright red, soft red film. While the type occurs in
the Red River valley at least as far upstream as the great
bend, it has not been recognized yet in Texas.

WILKINSON
GENERAL

BUIWCTATED

NOTES

This type was first defined by Ford and Willey (1940, pp. 5051 and Fig. 15, D-F) in connection with the Crooks Site in
central Louisiana, where it was believed to represent an
intrusive element from the Caddoan area of northwestern
Louisiana. It consisted of clay-grit tempered sherds on
which were rows of fingernail punctations or pinches.
As the original specimens were body sherds and ~he accompanying rim decoration unknown, the type is no longer
regarded as valid. The same fingernail punctations may
be found on the bodies of utility jars in several Caddoan
types: see Dunktn Incised (Plate 18), Kiam Incised (Plate
40), Weches Fingernail l~npressed (Plate 67), and Du~,en
Neck Banded (not illustrated, but described above). They
also occur on rim or body, or both, of utility vessels in
Fulton Aspect (Plate 69), but less often than in Gibson
Aspect.

