99

News Notes and Editorials

NOTt~S AND I~DITORIALS
HISTORY OF THE SOCIETY
The Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
was founded on the evening of October 2, 1928, in the president’s office in Abilene, Texas, and each year since then he
has been annually elected as its president.

The first publi-

cation chairman appointed was Mr. Frank Grimes of Abilene, Texas, who established the format of the Society’s annual Bulletin, and supervised getting out the first Bulletin.
The Society’s first secretary, E. B. Sayles, arranged the illustrations for the first three volumes. Your president has
edited and given proof reading to all of the text of all of
the preceding seventeen volumes, including this one. Since
1931 he has done all of the art work as well as the previous
editing and two of the four proof readings given ~o each of
the Bulletins. Much of this work has meant the devoting
of countless hours and days to plain drudgery, and that without financial compensation. Each article was critically read
three or more times before being handed to the printer.
Editorial assistance was rendered on Caddoan problems, in
the last few Bulletins, by Dr. C. H. Webb of Shreveport,
Louisiana. Your president now feels that he has done
enough, and that by exercise of a reasonable care of the
Society’s finances, and care in the selection of its officers,
and especially its editor, there is no likelihood that the Society will not continue to carry on under some other person’s management as well or better than in the past.
There never has been any educational institution in Abiiene which has given courses in the subjects studied by the
Society and there is not any large permanently endowed
museum to serve as a background for the Society’s work,
nor is there any one else actively doing such research as an
amateur worker, and the local attendance at the meetings
has been small. Therefore, it is the considered recommendation of your president that the headquarters of the Society
should be removed to some large educational center where

100

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

such research facilities exist, and where a permanent membership background of interested professors and students
can be created which will serve to perpetuate the Society.
The practice of always holding the annual meetings in Abilene probably has been a mistake, due to a misinterpretation
of the governing regulations. Recent study shows that there
is no prohibition of annual meetings in any city in Texas
and the president and directors have therefore voted to
have the 1947 annual meeting sessions in Lubbock, Texas.
Among the president’s duties are the appointment of a
publications chairman or editor for the Society’s Bulletin
and your president has appointed Dr. W. C. Holden of Lub~bock, Texas, to edit and print the 1947 Bulletin of the Society.
In conclusion, your president hopes that the membership
of the Society will elect some one else to succeed him at the
annual meeting to be held during the fall of 1947 at Lubbock,
Texas.

NEW TRUSTEES AND DIRECTOR
By ballot of the Society’s directors two vacancies on the
Board of Trustees and one vacancy on the Board of Directors have been filled. The two trustees elected are Dr. J. G.
McAllister of Austin, Texas, and Judge E. T. Adams of Glen
Rose, Texas- The new director elected is Dr. Ernest Wallace
of Lubbock~ Texas.

A TAILOR MUST HAVE CLOTH
The relatively small size of this Bulletin and of others
within recent years arises from no financial inability to pay
printing and engraving costs, but is entirely due to a shortPLATE

22

No. 1. Entire view of Gibson Site bank where buried midden
levels were inspected" in 1939. Figure on right in black is Dr.
Albert G. Jenks, then head of the Anthropology Department of the
University of Minnesota, who is shown pointing to a hearth.
No, 2. Shows close-up view of Dr, Jenks inspecting man made
flint flake embedded in silt at the Gibson Site.

Plate 22

News Notes and Editorials

age of research articles since World War II.

103

It would seem

that there should have been enough unpublished records
and memories of scientific research of the past to have furnished materials to fill out during the period when such work
ceased, but we have not been able to get them in sufficient
volume ~o get out a Bulletin of the size and quality we
would like. While we have printed about the usual number
of articles, most of them are too briefly told. No matter
what a tailor’s experience may be he cannot make a suit
without sufficient cloth.

OF MANOS, 1VIETATES AND SCRAPERS
Some scientist should write an exhaustive research paper
on the mano and metate and the editor of this Bulletin
would be glad to print a well written article of ten thousand
or more words on that subject. Some research man should
begin in the Lower Clear Fork Silt and trace the mano and
metate up through the thirty to thirty-five feet of river
silts to the recent soil surface hearths which contain the
latest made soap bar shaped grinding tools. There are many
variant form~ of this implement. A study of some of the
early round or bun shaped manos which now lie stratified
below over twenty feet of river silts would be of interest.
This type of mano by reason of a peculiar form of usage was
worn down to a thin edge on one side so that much used
stones became shaped in the form of a wedge of cheese.
Recently the writer found five such round manos embedded
in a ring in the old dark red dense Lower Clear Fork Silt in
a Coke County mountain valley along with Clear Fork Culture artifacts. Three of these were worn down ~o a thin
edge on one side, the wearing down had only begun on one
mano and one had not been used enough to wear the edge
down. Apparently the grinding down to a thin edge on one
side was done in the same manner on both faces and the
edge was gradually worn back until the mano lost its original round form and became an elongated cheese wedge
like shaped stone. However, there were other forrnS of the

104

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

mano stone even as early as the formation of these ancient
silts.
Some person with research ability and technical experience should write an exhaustive paper on all of the multitude of variant forms of the end scraper and the great number of uses of such scrapers and also the placement in time
and space of the different patterns. The editor could use a
ten thousand word article on that subject also. Unfortunately there are very few persons living in any one state with
the background of research and also competent to do justice
to such papers and most of such persons seem to be already
overworked on other projects. There already are on hand
in the laboratories of Texas institutions the many thousands
of specimens necessary for study in preparation of such
papers. Thus far in Texas, as is the case elsewhere, there
has been too much squirrel’like hoarding of stone age specimens and relatively little systematic study given to their
uses and significance in the life of ancient man.
SCIENTISTS INSPECT ANCIENT HEARTS
IN RIVER SILTS
Many leading scholars in the subject of ancient man have
throughout the years made visits to Abilene to inspect the
stratified midden deposits in the stream banks of central
West Texas. In 1929 and again in 1939 Dr. Albert G. Jenks,
then head of the Department of Anthropology of the University of MAnnesota, visited some of the deeply buried sites
of the region in company with the writer and on the last
visit was pictured examining these hearths as is shown on
Plate 22, Nos. 1-2, and Plate 23, No. 1. During the spring
of 1946 Dr. Carl Sauer, head of the Departments of Geology
and Geography of the University of California, spent several

PLATE

23

No. 1. Another close-up view of Dr. Albert G. Senks inspecting
another embedded flint in the Gibson Site.
No. 2. View of creek bank silts in Jones County, smell pick-axe
points to location .of flint knife near bottom of the bank in a layer
of charcoal, grave4 and old Clear Fork silt.
No. 3 Close-up view of same embedded blade shown in bank in
No. 2. Blade is at end of the large blade of the pick-axe.

Plate 23

News Notes and Editorials

107

days with the writer inspecting these deeply buried sites.
In July of 1946, Dr. Kirk Bryan, who is head of Geology and
Geography in Harvard University, came for another inspection of the same sites which he had previously inspected in
1938 and is shown at one of them in Plate 22, No. 2.

One

artifact stratum is just below the men’s shoulders and another midden level lies close to their feet.

On Plate 23,

No. 3, is shown an ancient knife which was found embedded by the writer in Lower Clear Fork Silt down
about one foot above a stratum of Permian limestone on the
bed of a small creek in Jones County in August, 1946.

The

bank above it is shown on Plate 23, No. 2.
Visiting scientists seldom stay more than from three to
five days and never are able to get the complete picture of
an area that the man on the ground has who has examined
a number of sites which exhibit a certain feature while the
casual visitor may only see a few of them.
In this connection a stratum of gravel was pointed out to
one geologist at the Young Site as a remnant of an older
Pleistocene deposit which had been erroneously classified
as belonging to the upper strata of the seven last regularly
deposited river silts, when in reality it probably was at least
one hundred thousand years earlier. His reply was if that
is true where are any others.
(1) Well remnants of the same gravel exist at a place in
the bottom of the stream bank several miles downstream
from the Young Site and just north of the Hodges Site. (2)
Two miles below the Hodges Site on the Roberts farm. (3)
Two miles below the Roberts farm on the Alexander Ranch,
(4) and about five miles downstream from there at the
Lueders dam on the Clear Fork of the Brazos, and at intervals of several miles on down the same stream banks as far
as the writer has examined them. Two pictures of these
are shown in Plate 24, Nos. 2 and 3. The second stratum
from the top contains hearths.
--C. N. R.

108

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

FOLSOM BLADES
During the past years the writer has been frequently
queried by scholars interested in ancient man concerning
the occurrence of Folsom points in Central West Texas.
This type of projectile point seems to have captured the
interest of archaeologists generally more than some other
less beautifully made types which in the writer’s opinion
date back to a far more remote period.
An error first assumed concerning these blades was to the
effect that they predated stemmed and shouldered and
barbed projectile points, but the reverse probably is true.
Whatever led to the making of such a type it was not due to
absence of prior examples of stemmed and shouldered
points. The same old red silts and gravels from which Folsore points erode are also better filled with a great variety
of types of stemmed and shouldered or even barbed projectile points.
In summarizing the results of twenty years of research
in the Central West Texas counties of Jones, Taylor, Callaban, Nolan, Coke, Mitchell, Shackelford, Fisher, Stephens
and Runnels on this subject, only twenty-seven undoubted
Folsom points have been found by the writer, whereas a
great many thousands of f-lint projectile points of many
other types have been found by him in the same area. Of
the twenty-seven all but two were found in the above

PLATE

24

No. 1 View of Gibson Site in August 1946, Dr. Kirk Bryan and
son standing in front of the Upper and Lower Clear Fork Silts
strata. The line at about their shoulders marks the point of contact between the Upper and Lower Clear Fork Silts, and there is a
layer of hearths there, one about midway to the ground, and another
one down near their feet.
No. 2. View shows the Nugent Silts superimposed on a very
anc.ient remnant of Pleistocene gravel at the Roberts Site below
Nugent, Texas. The second zone from the top contains numerous
hearths, flint flakes, and a few artifacts in almost a continuous line.
No. 3. A closer view of the same gravel remnant and Nugent
Silts shown in picture above~

Plate 24

News Notes and Editorials

III

designated area, one of these exceptions was discovered
near Floydada, Texas, and is a long perfect white blade four
and fifteen-sixteenths inches in length and one and oneeighth inches in width, and a section of a pink Folsom point
was found near Amarillo, Texas.
Without exception the Folsom points have eroded from
old Clear Fork silts, and have accumulated on those old
surfaces along with the numerous darts, side scrapers,
gouges, gravers, disks, and hand axes of the ancient Clear
Fork culture.
It is most probable that Clear Fork Culture men lived in
the Central Texas area at the same time as Folsom men
lived further westward along the mountain valleys of New
Mexico and that most of the Texas Folsom points either
represent transitory visits by Folsom men to the domain of
Clear Fork tribes, or represent articles used in prehistoric
trade routes. Of the relatively few Folsom points found,
however, there is a tendency to find them mostly in certain
sites, and hardly at all elsewhere. In one site in southeast
Taylor County eight Folsom blades of the large thick type
were found on the same old surface from which Clear Fork
gouges weathered. In one Clear Fork Culture site of western Taylor County six Folsom points were located and of
these four were of the large so-called generalized thick type,
and two were of as fine workmanship as any found elsewhere and one of the latter type was found almost in contact
with the teeth of a mammoth (see account in Science 1938).
Altogether seventeen Folsom points have been found by
the writer in Taylor County, four in Coke County, two in
Jones County and both of fine type, one in Kent County
and one in Runnels County. Some of the Texas Folsom
blades evidently were quite large, the largest one, a base
fragment, is one and three-fourths inches across, and was
broken off two and one-eighth inches above the base, and
an extension of its symmetrical lines down to the usual
shaped point gives a blade of six inches or more in length
and is something of a size suitable to be used either as a
spear or as a fine knife. The edges were ground down

112

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

smooth or polished up for a space of one and five-eighths
inches from the base, and while it is of large size it is relatively thin, and has a beautiful retouch along the edges.
Another large basal fragment from Taylor County illUstrated in the writer’s article in the 1930 Bulletin is two and
five-eighth inches in length from the base to the fracture
line, and one and one-half inches in width there, and one
and one-eighth inches across the base. This point has polished edges up from the base for a space of one and onefourth inches toward the point, and must have been a blade
of about five inches in length. This blade is thick beyond
the channelling but the workmanship is excellent.
This tabulation has not included five Gibson points, having
the shape but not the channelling, which some assert are
also Folsom types. When one gets into the question of the
various types of blades enumerated as Yuma points these
are much more commonly found. Whether or not many of
these were made by Folsom men one cannot know, but
they are found on the same old eroded silt levels as the
others. If these were to be included the list would be a long
one.
--C. N. R.

OBITUARY
C. W. Han~ey
The members of Texas Archaeological and Paleontological
Society suffered a great loss in the passing on of one of its
most active directors, Mr. C. W. Hanley, late in 1945.
Mr. Hanley not only was a very successful man in business, but was greatly interested in archaeology, paleontology
and history as hobbies, and he personally for many years
donated, and solicited other business men to do so, to a fund
to pay some of the costs of the archaeological excavations
PLATE 25
Mr. C. W. Hanley.

