A Deep Archa~ologicgl Sitv in Travis County, Texans

203

A DSEP ARCHAEOLOGICAL SIT~- IN
TRAVIS COUNTY, TEXAS~
BY A. T.

JACKSON

The deep archaeological site, described below, is located iu Travis
County, Central Texas, and was excavated as a WPA-University of
Texas project.

The site was discovered by Jack Hughes, a student at the University of Texas, who found buffalo bones, mussel shells and a few
flint artifacts, ten feet deep, in the caved-off river terrace.
Deserlption o[ Site
The location is on the south bank of the Colorado River, ten
miles above Austin, in a narrow river valley which is hemmed in on
the south by a range of limestone hills. The elevation in the valley
is about 500 feet, while the nearby hills reach 900 feet above sea
level. The terrace deposits are forty feet above normal low water,
and are being cut into by the river. Just below the junction of the
small branch known as Burnt Hollow, the badly washed terrace
when first visited was strewn with recently exposed camp refuse.
Where there had been no erosion, a two-feet thick deposit of white
sand was on top.
The terrace for one-fourth mile upstream from the branch has
been damaged less by river action. In the exposed vertical faces,
at various depths down to twelve feet, may be seen evidences of man.
Below that point the slope reveals an occasional fragment of burned
stone and mussel shell.
Excavation

Excavation, from December 1, 1938, to March 19, 1939, was confined to that part of the site downstream from the mouth of Burnt
Hollow.
When the work started the ragged crest of the terrace was 45
feet back from the base line, located near the water’s edge. There
*Assistance in the preparation of these materials was furnished by the personnel
of Works Progress Administration Official Project No. 66~v.66-3-77.

204

Texa~ Ar¢h~ologi~al tr~td Pal~trntological Soci~tlt

was a decided slant of all strata from the hill at the rear toward
the edge of the river.
During most of the time the work was under the immediate supervision of Dr. Kalervo Oberg, but for the last few weeks Mr. A. M.
Woolsey had charge of the crew. The writer visited the site on
numerous occasions and watched the work as it progressed.
Because of Federal safety requirements, the excavation was made
by arbitrary five-foot levels or terraces. The terraces were 185 feet
long and had a total depth of 25 feet. In the floor of the deepest
terrace a number of test pits were dug, extending the depth to 34
feet. In a composite cross-section there were at least nine different
types of soil, repeated at various depths until twenty or more separate "layers" were found.
Cultural remains were present in seven of the nine classes of soil.
Only the recent upper sand and the gravels contained no evidence
of Indian life. One level consisted entirely of midden material.
That was the one containing small, angular fragments of burnt
limestone, intermixed with ashes, charcoal," mussel shells, flintwork,
etc. The greatest depth of cultural remains was 32 feet. At that
depth were three flint chips; and at 29 1-2 feet was a well made
projectile point.
Hearths
An outstanding feature of the site was the presence of numerous
hearths. With the hearths were great quantities of splintered buffalo (Bison bison) bones, charcoal and a number of flint flakes. In
some of the hearths were mussel (Unio species) shells.
The hearths, irregular in shape, had an average size of about
60x60 inches. The depths ranged from 6 feet 8 inches to 26 feet.
Sixty-one per cent of them were at depths between 17 and 22 1-2
feet.
The hearths show a marked similarity to others found in sites along
the Colorado River 100 miles upstream; and to some now being
excavated on the Brazos River, at the junction of the Clear Fork, in
Young County, Texas.
PLATE 43.
Composite Cross-section of Deep Site.

DEPTH
FEET
I WHITE,SAND

(STERILE) J

IIII_I

t GRAV~

REDDISH-YELLOW SAND

I 5-

I

~

20-

~" ~

I

’~

I

GRA~STERILE)

~’~"~;

~

~

~IGRAY
~AN~ I: ; ~~

;II~

{,,,,,,,,,BROWN SANDI .....
25-

[]

POTSHERDS

[]

I~

ARTIFACTS

~

BONES~,ANIMAL
BURIAL

~ HEARTHS
DATUM

PLANE

30

Plate 43

INCHES

ABOVE

SURFACE

A Deep Archaeological Site in Travis Co~t~ty, Tez~

207

Burial
One burial was found, the bones of which were in an excellent
state of preservation. The burial was located in dark gray soil 1t6
inches from datum, or 63 inches below the present surface. There
were eleven slabs of limestone over the grave. The burial seemed
to have been made in a shallow grave, deepest at its center and
sloping gradually upward to each end. The body apparently had
been forced into the small grave in such manner as to give it the
appearance of a semi-reclining position. The orientation was 30°
west of north. The legs were semi-flexed with the knees upright,
the feet crossed at the ankles, the right arm extended between the
legs with the right hand on the feet, the left arm slightly bent and
extended along the left leg with the hand near the feet.
Mr. T. N. Campbell who examined the skull reported the following
facts:
Sex: Female.
Age: Young adult (21-35).
Measurement of bones:
Head length, 176 ram.
Head breadth, 131 ram.
Cephalic index, 74.4.
(Dolichocephalic verging on mesocephaly).
Notable features:
Marked post-coronoid depression and parietal bosses.
The only artifact with the burial was an engraved turkey bone
protruding from beneath the skull. The decoration on the bone consisted of a spiral band of cross-hatched lines. The specimen may
have been either a hair ornament, a long bead, or a whistle.

Evidences o! Food
Mussell shells and snail shells were in the occupation levels at
various depths. Some deer bones and many buffalo hones were
with" the hearths. Metates and manos suggest the grinding of acorns,
mesquite beans and possibly corn.

ArtiJacts
The strata yielding the most artifacts were the brown sand and the
burnt-rock’ midden deposit. The midden, with about one-eighth the

208

Texas Archeological a~ut Paleo~$ologizal Society

content, contained almost as many artifacts as the brown sand. The
accompanying composite cross-section shows the relative frequency
of artifacts in the different strata (Plate 43).
Summary o] Arti]acts by Strata
Site No. 1, Miller Lake Basin
Ray Ranch, Travis Co.

o Strata

Avg. Depth
of Strata
Below Datum

Recent Sand ................ 30"- 52"
Dark Humus .............. 53"- 58"
Reddish Yellow I ...... 59"- 80"
Dark Grey I .............. 81"-105"
Burnt Rock ................ 106"-123"
Dark Grey II .............. 124"-150"
I~,cal
Light Grey I ..............
Reddish Yellow II .... 151"-163"
Gravel ........................ 164"-174"
Reddish Yellow lII .... 175"-206"
Local
Reddish Brown Sand..
Dark Grey III ............ 207"-215"
Reddish Yellow IV .... 216"-240"
Dark Grey IV ............ 241"-268"
Brown Sand .............. 269’~-278"
Reddish Yellow V .... 279"-295"
Local
Reddish Yellow VI ......
296"-316"
Gravel ........................
Dark Grey V .............. 317"-322"
Reddish Yellow VII....323"-330"

Pct. of
Cubic
Content
5.99
2.49
1.36
7.59
2.17
6.19
.48
5.35
6.15
5.22
3.39
6.68
2.62
2.32
15.66
7.82
.79
14.24
.64
2.85

Total ........................................ 100.00

Specimens
No.

Pct.

20
13
32
66
47
7
2O

4.62
3.00
7.40
15.24
10.85
1.61
4.62

35
20
46
7
32
75
8

8.08
4.62
10.62
1.61
7.39
17.32
1.84

5

1.15

433*

100.00

~In addition to these specimens, there were twenty-one others
from the surface and fifty-three in caved-off material of uncertain
origin.
Among the numerous manos were several of the edged type, much
like those from the Fall Creek sites in Llano and San Saba Counties.
Two notched stones, or so-called net-sinkers, were found.

One

DEPTH

|

20

22

30

PLATE 44.
Depth Range of P~’ojectite Points.

A Deep Ar~ha~ologizal Site i~ T~’avis County, Texas

was from the surface; the other from a depth of 27 feet.

211

These are

of the same ~ype as the ones found in middens of the Marshall Ford
and Buchanan Lake basins.

A study of 300 of these "sinkers" from

the Marshall Ford basin seems to show that they were not in general use by the first occupants of the burnt-rock middens of the
region.
A total of 88 flint projectile points came from the various levels.
The greatest number was found between 17 1-2 and 22 1-2 feet. The
next largest number came from depths of 7 1-2 feet to 12 1-2 feet.
Most of the projectile points found at depths of from 5 to 10
feet are of the small types popularly called "bird points."

These

commonly are found with potsherds in the Central Texas region.
Nearly half of the large projectile points with indented bases were
in the burnt-rock deposit; while 71 per cent of the wide, expanded
base type occurred below the burnt rock.
Among the blades are a few with the general shape of Folsomlike points.
each side.

They have only a slight suggestion of a channel on
Two corner-tang knives were found at depths of 14 and

15 feet, or at 3 1-2 to 5 feet below the burnt-rock level.
Thirty-one potsherds of Indian manufacture came from depths
not exceeding 63 inches. Two of the sherds have on them a black
substance that appears to be asphalt. These are strikingly like
certain asphalt-covered sberds found on the Texas Coast.
Comparison a] Specimens with Those From Other Central Texas Sites

An interesting comparison can be made between artifacts from
this site and those from the Marshall Ford and Buchanan Lake
basins, which are located at places about 20 to 100 miles up the
river.
Certain seemingly significant comparisons are:
1. There were more manos at this deep site than at two out of
three burnt-rock middens.

BURNT-ROCK

MIDDENS

TRAVIS COUNTY, TEXA~

DEEP RIVER TERRACE

FALL CREEK

SITES

SITE

LLANO AND SAN ~ABA

TRAViS COUNTY~ TEXAS

COUNTIES,TEXAS

UPPER

BURNT-ROCK
LEVELS

BURNT-ROCK
1
MIDDEN

MIDD~’N

~ON-BURNT-ROCK
LOWER
DEPOSITS "

MIDDEN

MIODEN

PLATE 45.
Graphic ]Representation of Possible Chronology.

216

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ So~ty

2. There was a much greater percentage of metates than at any
of the burnt-rock sites.
3. Pestle-like stones were more than three times as plentiful as
at the Travis County burnt-rock middens, but less than at sites in
the Buchanan basin.

4. Hammerstones were more numerous than in the burnt-rock
middens.
5, Flint fist axes were fewer than at most of the burnt-rock sites
in Travis County, but more numerous than in the Buchanan basin.
6.

Side scrapers were fewer than at most other sites.

7. End-scrapers had a much larger percentage than in any of
the burnt-rock middens, but a smaller number than in the Buchanan
basin.
8: There were no flint gouges or "core scrapers" in the deep
site, while they appear in varying numbers at other sites. This type
of specimen is suggestive of the celt in shape, with the cutting edge
heavily bevelled. The entire absence of this implement from the
deep site seems significant.
9. The percentage of projectile points was much less than in the
typical burnt-rock middens; e. g., 18 per cent as compared with 70
per cent, 40 per cent and 48 per cent. But the percentage of projectile points in the deep site compares favorably with those in the
Buchanan basin sites. Outstanding types in the burnt-rock middens1
are points with a bevelled tang, chipped on each side from one edge
only; and points with an indented base and secondary chipping
around the edge. The first of these types did not show up at this
deep site. The second was represented by only a ~few specimens.
10. Potsherds rarely are found in burnt-rock middens.
in the deep site were above the burnt-rock level.
11.

Those

All evidence indicates a closer relation of this deep site to

I. Pearce, $. E., The Pre~ent Status of Texas Archaeology, Texas Archeologlcal
and Paleontological Society, Vol, 4, Abilene, September, 1932. p. 46, PI, I0, No~ 20, 21.

PLATE 46.
(a) Burial in an Unusual Position.
(b) Engraved Bone Found in Burial.

Plate 46

A Deep Archaeological Site in Travis County, Te~a~

219

the large sites in the Buchanan basin than~ to the burnt-rock middens in the Marshall Ford basin. The abundance of manos and
metates and the scarcity of projectile points suggest much food
gathering and little hunting.
Possible Chronology

Definite information on which to base a dependable chronology
of this site is lacking. There are, however, several small clues suggestive of comparative age.
1. Potsherds in the upper levels, in association with a fragment
of European ware, bespeak the historic period for the latest Indian
remains.
2. The burnt-rock midden level appears to be contemporaneous
with the upper levels of the large burnt-rock middens of Central
Texas, and to represent a late prehistoric culture.
3. The human materials removed from the alluvial deposits below the burnt-rock level show a marked similarity to certain discoveries made in 1937 at the Fall Creek Sites2 in Llano and San
Saba Counties, Texas. At those sites the first occupants were the
so-called "burnt-rock people." Their refuse was then covered by
that of a "non-burnt-rock people," who in turn were followed by
more recent burnt-rock users. The intermediate period as repre.
sented at Fall Creek seems to be contemporaneous with the deep
materials at this river terrace site in Travis County.
4. Just what relation may exist between this deep non-burnt-rock
material and the bottom level of the nearby large Central Texas
burnt-rock middens is not clear. The available evidence, however,
suggests that the deep river terrace finds may not be so old as the
bottom burnt-rock midden deposits.
Geological Features o] the Deep Site
The age of the deposits in which the artifacts were found is
largely a geological problem. Dr. E. H. Sellards, Bureau of Economic Geology, the University of Texas, visited the site and spent
some time examining the profile exposed in the excavation. He
Jackson. A. T., The Fall Creek Sites, The Universit~ of Tex~ Publication
Anthropoloz~icnl Pspere~ VoL III. No. I, A~et|n, 19~8, pp. 28, 4~.49.

220

Texas Arch~ological and P~eontological Society

also exa~nined an undisturbed river terrace a few hundred yards
distant where the same conditions prevailed. He later sent an
assistant, Mr. Glen Evans, to sink test cores to determine the depth
of bedrock, both in the excavation and on the opposite side of the
Colorado River. Eight test holes, with a diameter of five inches,
were sunk to bedrock. Four of these were in, or immediately
adjacent to, the excavation on the south side of the river. The
others were on the north side of the stream. Dr. Sellards made a
study of the results of these tests and reports as follows:
Geologic Cor,.ditionz
"The locality at which the excavations were made is on the right
bank of the Colorado River about 10 miles above Austin. The river
in this part of its course is cutting through Cretaceous rocks, chiefly
hard limestone, alternating with marls, and is deeply entrenched.
The river valley at this immediate locality has a width of approximately one-fourth mile while the river itself at medium low water
stage is about 600 feet wide. In the river valley at this locality are
terrace deposits which stand at a~n elevation approximating 40 feet
above medium low water. At many places, such as the one where
these collections were made, the river is now cutting into these
posits. At this particular locality only about 150 feet of the terrace
deposits intervene between the river and the south bluff of the river
valley. On the opposite, left, side of the river is lower land and
younger deposits.
"These terrace deposits consist chiefly of silt and fine sand deposited in successive layers by the river. At times of extremely high
flood these deposits are still submerged, and deposition is thus being
continued to the present time. The thickness of the terrace deposit
is 30 or 35 feet. The basal part of the terrace is, of course, appreciably older than the later deposits at the top, but the rate of building by river silt is unknown.
"Borings made across the river valley indicate that the bed rock

(a)
(b)

PLATE 47.
Crude Projectile Points (22"-27½").
Flint Knives (12"-27").

(a)
(b)

PLATE 48.
Projectile Points (15½"-!8").
Large Projectile Points (20"-21").

Plate 47

®
Plate 48

A Deep A~¢haeological Sit6 i~ Travis County, Texas

225

on which the river flows Mopes toward the present fiver channel
from both the north and the south bluffs. These borings indicate
that the basal deposits in this terrace rest on a limestone shelf
somewhat above the position of bed rock under the younger deposits on the left side of the stream. Elevation in these borings is
recorded from an assumed datum. Using this assumed datum the
elevation on the limestone bench underlying the terrace deposits in
three bore holes is as follows: 53"7", 51’7", 41"; while the elevation
of bed rock close to the left side of the present river channel is
21’10". If it could be shown that the bench underlying the terrace
deposits was actually the bed of the river at the time these terrace
deposits began to accumulate, it would then follow that the fiver
had lowered its bed rock position 20 or 30 feet since the earliest
terrace deposits at this locality were accumulated. However, it
appears from the borings that no conglomerate or sand bar such
as would be expected in the bed of the river is found at the base of
the terrace. It is, therefore, possible that the entire terrace was built
of silt -,virile the fiver was flowing at approximately its present bed
rock level.
"In connection with the excavations, some few animal remains
were obtained, all of which apparently pertain to living species. In
view of the geologic conditions described and the absence of extinct
animals, one can assign to the deposits of this terrace only such age
as is required in building river deposits by normal overflow arid silting processes through an interval of time sufficient to accumulate the
thickness of the deposits found at this place; which, as already stated,
amounts to 30 or 35 feet. While it is impossible to make any close
estimate on the length of time required in this process it must, of
course, include some centuries, possibly some thousands of years."

Conclusions
The archaeological and geological findings seem to agree that the
cultural materials recovered from this deep site are not very ancient.

