PANHANDLE-PLAINS AREA
This includes all of the Llano Estacado in Texas, as well
as lower plains on the eastern side of the Panhandle, and
extends southward where the Llano Estacado gradually descends into the lower plains of the Edwards Plateau. Most
of the evidence of a Paleo-American Stage from excavated
sites in Texas comes from the Llano Estacado. The thousands of playa lakes of that region, where now-extinct Pleistocene fauna watered, contain beds of fossil bones in which
are found dart points and butchering implements of PaleoAmerican hunters. Some of these lake beds no longer hold
water and are undergoing extensive wind and water erosion.
These ancient lake deposits have yielded hundreds--perhaps thousands--of Paleo-American artifacts to collectors
who patiently follow the progress of erosion and watch for
fresh exposures. Surface collections contain a few points
possibly of the two Sandia types, and these must be very
rare (if present at all). Ample numbers of points of the
Clovis, FoIsom, PIainview, Scottsblu]f, Eden, Angostura
(Long), and related forms not yet analyzed typologically
are known in private and institutional collections but cannot be described here. In the section below the excavated
sites of the Pleistocene age are briefly described.
Beyond the sporadic occurrence of a variety of stemmed
dart points in surface collections from sites of this area
which seem not to include pottery, there are no data concerning the Archaic Stage, either on the Llano Estacado or
on the adjoin.ing lower plains. We thus have the peculiar
circumstance of a gap in our knowledge of several thousand
years between the Paleo-American and Neo-American
Stages. The de~finition of cultural remains in this gap is an
important future problem for Texas archeology.

For the Neo-American Stage only one complex, the
Antelope Creek Focus, has been formally defined. The
sites of this focus, which is a blending of Plains agricultural
and hunting economy with masonry of Puebloan derivation,
occur along the Canadian River and its numerous short
tributaries. On the eastern side of the Panhandle, on the

64

Texas Archeological Society

low plains, are a number of small sites which have the same
cordmarked cooking pottery and stone artifacts of the Antelope Creek Focus, but there is no evidence of masonry
architecture.
On the Llano Estacado south of the Canadian River
valley are numerous sites around the larger, permanent
lakes, and on the edges of dune fields where the sand retains rainwater and agriculture can be practiced without
irrigation. Such sites are not closely connected with those
of Antelope Creek Focus. They commonly include potsherds
of many Puebloan types dating from about A. D. 1100 to 1800
or even later. In the spots where farming could have been
practiced, ~some such sites may represent actual occupation
by Puebloan peoples, driven eastward into the plains by
wars or overpopulation (Krieger, 1946, pp. 75-82). On the
other hand, some sites with small amounts of Puebloan pottery must represent temporary camps of Indians who went
on annual bison hunts from the pueblos of the Northern Rio
Grande Valley. Still other camps may be those of indigenous tribes which, like those of Antelope Creek Focus, received Puebloan pottery by trade from the west. Still further material of Puebloan origin, as well as that of indigenous peoples, may be found around lake beds in the extreme
southern part of this area, east and southeast of the southeastern corner of New Mexico. Needless to say, some very
important cultural complexes should be defined when excavations and analyses can be made for this region.
The Historic Stage is represented in the PanhandlePlains principally by bison-hunting nomads, such as those
met by the Coronado expedition in 1541, who followed the
general pattern of life of historic Plains Indians except, of
course, that they had no horses until much later. Puebloan
Indians from north-central New Mexico continued their
bison-hunting expeditions until the bison became extinct in
this area in the 1870’s.
PALEO-AMERICAN STAGE
The sites of this stage in which controlled excavations
have been made are listed below. The reader should con-

Panhandle-P~ains Area

sult the works cited for more details. Most of the speci.mens which we now identify as Clovis points were called
"Folsom," "Folsom-like" "Folsomoid", or "Generalized Folsom" in the original literature, whereas others correctly retain FoIsom as the type name.
Miami Site, Roberts County. Located on C. R. Cowan
ranch, 9 miles northwest of Miami, Texas. Remains of Columbia mammoth found in deposits which filled a former
water-hole or pond. Three Clovis points and a scraper were
in direct association with the mammo~th.. Site first excavated in 1934 by Judge J. A. Mead and others, later by the
University of Texas under direction of Glen L. Evans and
E. H. Sellards (Sellards, 1938, pp, 999-1009; 1952, ppl 18-29).
Lipscomb Site, Lipscomb County. Pleistocene lake bed
site 11 miles southwest of Lipscomb, Texas. Extinct bison
the principal fauna. Eighteen points of Folsom type, two
scrapers, a flake knife, and a channel flake in association
with the bison. Excavated in 1939 by C. Bertrand Schultz
for Nebraska ’State Museum (Schultz, 1943, pp. 242:249;
Wormington, 1949, p. 33; Sellards, 1932, pp. 58-59).
Lubbock Site, Lubbock County. A stratified deposit in
Yellowhouse Draw, within the city limits of Lubbock, was
excavated by the Texas Memorial Museum in 1948, 1950,
and 1951. Of the five strata recognized, the next to oldest
one produced charred bones of extinct bison, four fluted
Folsom points, one side scraper, and flint chips (Sellards,
1952, pp. 52-54, Fig. 24). A radiocarbon age determination
was obtained on this charred bone of 9,883 ÷ -- 350 years,
which is now widely accepted as proving that Folsom artifacts are approximately 10,000 years old.
PIainview Site, Hale County. An extensive fossil bed
cont.aining remains of extinct l~ison (estimated at more
than 100 animals) discovered in a gra~vel quarry within city
limits of Plainview. During excavation by the Texas .~iemorial Museum in. i945, eighteen projectile points of the
Plainview type, and both side and end scrapers, were found
in association with the bison. The bone bed had beencoy-

66

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

ered with elever~ feet of gravel and wind-blown sand. This
is the type site for the PIainview point (Sellards, Evans,
Meade, and Krieger, 1947, pp. 927-954).
Colorado City Site, Mitchell County. A fossil bed containing extinct bison~bones, on the banks of Lone Wolf Creek
near Colorado City, Texas, was excavated by Hay and Cook
in 1924. Three projectile points were found in a block of
matrix containing bison bones. One point was lost and no
adequate description is available. Another is a basal fragment of the Plainview type. The third is complete and
like Plainview except that the base is slightly convex; perhaps this is a Plainview variation (Krieger, in Sellards et al,
1947). The latter specimen may also be of a type found recently in the Portales Complex (Sellards, 1952).
" Scharbauer Site~ .,Midland County. In July, 1953, parts
of a human skull were found exposed by wind erosion in the
bottom of a sand blowout six miles south of Midland, Texas,
by an amateur archeologist, Keith Glasscock. An excavation conducted at the site in February, 1954, revealed the
geology of the sand formations and showed that the skull
may belong to a very ancient deposit. Fluorine analysis of
the human bone showed that it was contemporaneous with
the Pleistocene animals in the same deposit (mainly extinct
species of horse). In a series of five blowouts nearby, artifacts of the Folsom complex were found, in a geological
position much later than that of the human skull. An extensive publication is in press; by Wendorf, Krieger, and
others.
ARCHAIC STAGE
It has been mentioned that, although projectile, points
and probably other artifacts of the Archaic Stage occur
widely in the Panhandle-Plains area, no sites have yet been
located where a definite complex can be defined.
NEO-AMERICAN STAGE
Antelope Creek Focu~
Numerous sites which include ruins of masonry build-

Panhandle-Plains Area

67

ings along the Canadian River and its tributaries have attracted amateur and professional archeologists for years. In
1921 W. K. Moorehead published a map and brief description of some of them, pointing out similarities with architecture of the Puebloan groups of New Mexico. Excavations
conducted by Floyd V. Studer, Steward Johnston, W. C. Holden, and others have revealed much evidence as to the connections of this complex with the Great Plains and the
Southwest alike. An economy based on both hunting and
agriculture, use of bone hoe blades, cordmarked utility
pottery, triangular arrow points with side and base notches,
numerous bone and antler tools, and the absence of most
of the characteristic Puebloan artifacts, indicate that th.e
Antelope Creek Focus people reached the upper Texas Pan5
handle from the central Great Plains. In pushing south-~
ward into this area they eventually came into contact with
the Puebloan Indian culture of northern New l~Iexico, and
acquired a number of Puebloan traits such as multi-roomed
dwellings, stone house construction, and painted pottery
(which fortunately allows us to date this focus with fair
accuracy at A. D. 1300-1450).
A summary of available data on the Antelope Creek
Focus and its relationships with the Southwest, Plains, and
other parts of Texas has been given by Krieger (1946, pp.
41-74). Watson (1950) then published on the closely related Optima Focus in Oklahoma Panhandle, which shows
a somewhat less developed use of stone architecture and
closer relationships with the central Great Plains, as one
would expect. Both loci appear to have been approximately
contemporary with the Upper Republican Aspect of Kansas
and Nebraska. Krieger (1946) established the Antelope
Creek Focus as the only focus in the Panhandle Aspect,
while Watson (1950) added the Optima Focus to this Aspect.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component:

Antelope Creek Ruin in the south-

western corner of Hutchinson County; excavated in
1930 by Texas Tech students under the direction of

68

Texas Archeological Society

W. C. Holden (Holden, 1930; Johnston, 1939; Krieger,
1946).
Principal Excavated CompQnents: Tarbox (Holden,
1930; Studer, 1931a; Moorehead, 1931; Holden, 1933),
Alibates (Moorehead, 1931; Mason, 1929), Ruin 55
(Studer, 1934).
TYPES OF SITES:
Villages usually situated on ridges and promontories
overlooking the Canadian River or its short tributaries; on mesa tops and small terraces with steep banks.
Convenience to fields and water secondary to wide
view and defensive features. Villages consist of multi-roomed, one-story pueblos, also scattered single
rooms. Number of houses in a village varies from
about six to as many as about eighty; no particular
plan apparent.
HOUSES:
Pueblos consist of one-story rooms. Some are rectangular or nearly square, with sides oriented approximately in the cardinal directions; others are
small, odd-shaped rooms, made by: (1) building out
from the walls of large rooms, (2) partitioning large
rooms, and (3) building across odd spaces and corners.
Presumably large rooms were dwellings, while the
smaller ones possibly served as storage bins, sleeping
quarters or workrooms. In addition to, and separate
from, the main block in each village are stone-walled
single rooms. At present it is not known whether or
not the rooms were constructed in pits.
Walls were constructed by placing large slabs vertically
in the ground so as to~ form two parallel rows, then
filling the space between the rows with adobe and
rubble; on top of this other vertically parallel stones
were mounted; each time the rows of vertical slabs
were placed closer together, and again filled with
adobe and rubble. Another method was to construct
the wall of odd-shaped stones, held together by adobe
mortar. On occasion, horizontal masonry was used,

Panhandle-Plains Area

69

particularly in corners; this is usually above an initial
course of vertical slabs. Masonry construction, however, was confined in virtually all cases to the lower
portion of the walls, the upper part of the walls and
roof evidently having been of jacal-like construction.
Usually the larger rooms, which are the best made and
follow a more definite plan, range in size from about
16 by 12 feet to 22 by 24 feet. Interior features of
such rooms include: (1) a sunken central portion
(about 6 to 10 inches deep) dividing the floor into
three nearly equal sections; (2) four central supports;
(3) a circular, plastered, or stone-lined, fire basin in
the centrally depressed middle section; (4) a long (10
to 12 feet) masonry tunnel (ventilator ?), square in
cross-section (18 to 30 inches), beginning slightly inside the room and extending eastward; (5) large slabs
serving as deflectors between the tunnel and the fire
basin; (6) occasionally two small anterooms or bins
flanking the tunnel; and (7) slabs possibly used as
covers for entrance hatches in the roof. Less frequently there are raised square or rectangular clay
banks (altars?) at the west end of the central depression; opposite the tunnel.
Entrance probably
through the roof.
STORAGE PITS:
In house floors and outside within 20 to 30 feet are
found slab-line oval and circular cists; also in floors
are circular and rectangular pits. In some instances
bell-shaped cache pits with interior plastered with
adobe.
LIVELIHOOD:
Dependence on both maize agriculture and huntinggathering. Direct evidence for maize (charred cobs).;
beans and squash inferred. Animals hunted were
mainly bison, antelope, and deer; also various small
animals and birds. Various nuts, berries, and seeds
probably utilized.

7O

Texas Archeological Society

CERAMIC TRAITS:
Type: Borger Cordmarked.
Temper: Crushed quartz, sand, and, less frequently,
bone; shell probably absent.
Forms: Globular, round-bottomed jars with straight
rims placed vertically or flaring slightly outward.
Decoration: Exterior completely covered with cord
impressions, cordmarks sometimes smoothed over
rim zone. Deep notches are fairly common in outer
edge of lip; sometimes a single, deeply incised row
of fingernail impressions around the base of the rim.
Remarks: Very similar to Stamper Cordmarked of
Optima Focus (Watson, 1950) but does not have
cambered rims or incised decoration.
Short, tubular pipes, uncommon.
Occasionally, disc cut from sherds, perforated or unperforated.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:

~

Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Harrell, Fresno, and possibly other
types. Harrell points with and without base notch
both common.
Dart Points (no named types): Broad, thick, 6.5 to
7.5 cm, in length, with broad notches in corners;
stems vary from parallel-sided to expanding; bases
straight to convex. Not so numerous as the arrow
points.
Drills: Delicate shaft, bases unworked, square or Tshaped.
Scrapers: Snub-nosed; side scrapers made from large
flint flakes.
Knives: Most common are the diamond-shaped, with
four alternately beveled edges; also ovate-shaped,
thin, flat, up to 19.5 cm. in length; and a narrow
slightly curved form.
Double-bitted implements with two notches (axes,
hoes?), made from quartzite pebbles, uncommon.

Panhandle-Plains Area

71

Crushing implements: Of quartzite, range from round
to oval in cross-section, sometimes chipped to crude
point.
Almost all of the chipped stone artifacts are of "Alibates
flint", a red-banded, agatized dolomite. Large quarries north of Amarillo on ridges above Alibates Creek;
smaller quarries farther north across the Canadian
River,
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Sandstone milling stones with oval basin, most common.
One troughed metate, open at one end, Iaas been reported.
Manos: Oval to rounded-rectangular in shape, oval in
cross-section with slightly flattened faces. A f~w
wedge-shaped manos, indicating a back-and-forth motion, occur infrequently.
Unshaped sandstone fragments with grooves, possibly
hones for sharpening bone and wooden implements.
Shaft smoothers of brown sandstone, in the form of
small blocks with grooves the length of one face.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Small disc beads and pendants of turquoise.
Elbow pipes of fine-grained sandstone and/or argillaceous limestone; arms barrel-shaped and of about
equal length, but one (the bowl?) may be thicker;
one or both ends have slightly raise¢l flange which
may be incised with simple lines.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Mussel shells with serrated edges.
Pendants of mussel shells with small holes at ends.
Olivella-shell beads with spires removed.
Cylindrical beads, probably of conch-shell columellae.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
Hoe blades of bison scapulae.
Bison metapodials with beveled edges ("digging stick
points").

Texas Archeological Society

72

Rasps of bison rib and deer metatarsal, parallel incisions made across one edge or one face.
Beaming tools of bison metapodial, scapula, and humerus.
Awls: Wholly or partially worked, and unworked;
splinters with only tip worked; some awls square in
cross-section with all four faces smoothed. Mainly
made from deer and antelope leg bones, but also bison
ribs and turkey leg bones. All forms sometimes decorated with incised lines.
Eyed needles, rare.
Flaking tools of bone and antler.
Antler tools with squared ends.
Occasionally bird-bone sections (beads?).
Tortoise-shell rattles, rare.
MISCELLANEOUS:
Plaited, twilled and coiled basketry.
Flint and quartzite hammerstones.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Individual placed flexed or semi-flexed in oval graves;
graves sometimes lined with slabs; occasionally storage pits, both inside and outside the houses, used as
graves. Some burials in ridges near site, but not in
rubbish heaps. Slabs often placed on grave fill. No
grave offerings, except personal adornmentg.
RELATIONS:
Celts of polished greenstone, oval in cross-section with
tapered polls, rare and indicative of trade with Caddo
Indians to the east.
Obsidian flakes or (very rarely) obsidian artifacts, and
turquoise beads and pendants derived from New Mexico.
Puebloan pottery includes: Lincoln Black-on-Red, G~aze
"A" Cieneguilla Glaze-on-Yellow, Aqua Frio Glaze
"A", S~. Johns PoIychrorne.
ESTIMATED AGE:
A. D. 1300-1450

(Krieger, 1946)

for the period with

Panhandle-Plains Area

Puebloan trade material. The agricultural settlements
may have been first established earlier.
SOURCES:
Holden, 1929, 1930, 1932, 1933; Johnston, 1939; Krieger,
1946; Mason, 1929; Moorehead, 1921, 1931; Sayles, 1935;
Studer, 1931a, 1931b, 1934; Watson, 1950; Wedel, 1947.
HISTORIC STAGE
No archeological complexes have been defined for this
stage. The whole Panhandle-Plains is singularly barren of
camp debris which can be assigned to the nomadic tribes
such as Apache, Comanche, Kiowa, and others that are
known to have inhabited it and hunted the bison. Stone
circles or "tipi rings" where stones were used to weight tipi
covers are not uncommon, but it seems to be a general rule
that nomadic hunters have left extremely few artifacts, food
remains, graves, etc., in any one place.
We know from the Coronado documents that tribes
called Querechos and Teyas were met in the present Texas
Panhandle and that they were nomads with portable skin
tipis, following the bison and living entirely from its products. Late in the 17th century the Comanche began to
spread south from eastern Wyoming and Colorado, eventually holding dominion over almost aI1 the western half
of Texas and eastern New Mexico, forcing the earlier
Querechos and Teyas (doubtlessly both Apache tribes) farther south and into Mexico. There are records of occasional
graves found in rock clefts in northwestern Texas which
have ornaments of brass, glass beads, parts of guns, knives,
etc., and it is assumed that these graves are those of the
afore-mentioned tribes. The nomadic peoples appear to
have favored using rock clefts rather than to dig graves for
their dead. Other than that, an occasional steel arrowhead,
b~ass tinkler, or glass bead is about all we have to show for
these bison-hunters for some 400 years of occupation.
No missions were ever established in this section of
Texas.

