88

Texas Archeological ¢~xt Paleontological Society

POTTERY TYPES FROM THE BELCHER
MOUND SITE
BY C. H. WE~B AND MONROE DODD, Jm
Our report1 of last year concerning house types among the Caddo
Indians featured the description of five hou~ floors from the
Belcher mound site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Four of these
were immediately superimposed on separate levels of the stratified
Mound B and, as mentioned in the previous report, a study of the
sherds from the four levels showed distinct differences in the potteries. This evidence of pottery sequence, in addition to a correlation of types among the whole vessels from the burial pits and house
floors, forms the basis of this report on pottery from the Belcher
site.
The existing cla..~ifications of pottery and other culture traits in
the historic Caddo area are admittedly incomplete, occasioned by
the paucity of careful excavations and complete area studies.
Moore’s2 extensive collections from the Red and 0uachita River
valleys, instructive in affording a broad survey of regional artifact
types, give little help in differentiation of these types.

The same

objection obtains for Harrington’sa study in Southwest Arkansas,
since he groups everything in the area as Caddo, although subtypes
of the Caddo material--and probably some non-Caddo--are evident
in the report. V~\alker’s4 report of the Natchitoches site, nseful in
linking the engraved wares with the historic Caddo, was minimized
by the destruction of much of the site before he arrived, leaving
little material for study. Ford’s5 tentative classification of Caddo
~pottery types of Louisiana is based chiefly on surface collections
and, admittedly, must await the results of numerous excavations
before it can be stabilized. Jackson6 considered the pottery of East
Texas, including the areas of the historic Caddo and related Asinai,
as well as prehistoric sites, to be fairly uniform, with some significant differences related geographically to the four principal river
basins.

Goldschmidt7 suggested a chronological sequence of Caddo types
in East Texas, chiefly on the basis of intrusive burial pits. Multiple
pottery placements and the presence of engraved wares characterized
the more recent burials. Lemley and Dickinson’sa report of the

PoStery Types From She Belcher Mound SiSe

89

Crenshaw site is important in definitely establishing a pre-Caddo
(Cole’s Creek) culture, and subsequently9 they pointed out the indications in Southwest Arkansas of an intrusion of engraved Caddo
wares into an’indigenous widespread incised-ware culture. Swantonlo indicates historic evidence for a post-DeSoto migration of a
Caddo people down Red River Valley from Southwest Arkansas
coming into an area already well populated with Caddo tribes.
Current excavations in East Texas and Oklahoma may throw further
light on culture sequences and relationships in this area.
Since our previous report, the four-foot fill separating house floors
V and VI, immediately superimposed on the plateau north of Mound
B, has been almost completely removed. Six burials below floor V
have yielded 62 whole vessels and four other vessels from floor VI
have been reconstructed. The addition of this material to the vessels
from Mound B gives a total of 163 whole vessels from burials and
house floors for our study. Table 2 shows the origin of these vessels.
Table 3 gives the summary of 5100 sherds from the four levels of
Mound B, in addition to which our pottery typing is enhanced by
numerous sherds from floors V and VI and from the surface for a
half-mile downstream. It ~nay be mentioned that the separation of
the pottery-bearing floor levels of Mound B by 2 to 3 feet of almost
sterile sand fill facilitated the sherd collection, and as each floor was
carefully troweled, we believe that comparatively few sherds were
missed.
There may be some objection to a grouping of house floor sherds
and burial vessels for classification, since some tribes made special
funerary wares. At the Belcher site, vessel types from burials without exception have sherd representation from the floor collections
and from the surface of the village site downstream. Furthermore,
many of the vessels from burial pits showed marks of usage, including old breaks from the lips or necks and soot on the culinary
wares, indicating that burial placements were chosen from previously made and used pottery. The relative frequency of ornate
and unusual forms among the burial placements indicates selectivity
in the choice of these vessels, but there is no particular evidence of
a specialized funerary ware.
To date, no Europema trade objects have been found, although the
cultivated surface layer yields comparatively recent objects. Ap-

9O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

l~arently the site was deserted before contact with Natehitoches,
(1717) or other trading centers, was established.
Type 1---Belcher Engraved
Caddo pottery apparently reached its peak in the development of
the engraved wares, with variegated vessel shapes, polished surfaces
and complex curvilinear designs engraved after firing, with pigments impressed into the lines. At the Belcher site, this type flourished during the last two phases of occupation.
The paste is predominantly clay with occasional shell or tufa,
tempered, fine textured, usually having black or brown core and a
smooth surface slip, more frequently black or mahogany, although
buff to reddish brown surfaces appear. Differential firing is frequent. Inner surfaces are smooth, outer surfaces smooth and often
polished.
Fracture patterns indicate coil technique. Hardness
ranges from 2 to 2.5.
Reference to Table 1 shows that a number of decoration techniques and elements were used, engraving, pigment bnpresslon and
spurred lines being the more frequent. Decoration patterns are
varied, usually featuring curvilinear designs, with scrolls, interlocking scrolls, concentric circles, semicircles in festoons and arches,
spirals and meanders all represented. Discs, ovals and bands often
appear in negative relief, outlined by lines, arcs or circles. These
patterns may appear in fields or units and are most frequently
repeated 4 times around the vessel, although division of the vessel
circumference into 3, 5 and 2 units occurs in this order of frequency.
Table 1.
Frequency of decoration techniques in the 13 subtypes of engraved
Belcher pottery.~
Engraved lines .................................................... 13 subtypes
"
White or red pigment in lines ............................ 11
"
11
Spurred lines ......................................................
"
7
Narrow hachured bands ......................................
"
Lip notching ........................................................ 3
"
Engraved punctates ............................................ 3
"
4 Nodes on rim or shoulder .............................. 3
"
Trailed lines on base .......................................... 1
"
Opposed suspension holes ...: .............................. 1
~Compound vessels not considered here as a separate subtype.

Pottery Types Fro~ the Belcher Mound Site

91

Subtype a: Shallow bowls (Plate 15, No, 1), 10 to 28 cm. diameter, with flat bases (all ba~s at this site are circular), angulatecl
shoulders and f.laring rims. Four nodes project from the shoulder,
outlined by two to four diagonal lines, with the intervening shoulder
space bisected by an interrupted horizontal or slightly diagonal line,
The shoulder angle between the nodes is notched. A horizontal
plain or spurred line and a parallel row of triangular punctates encircle the rim. White pigment appears in the lines. Paste is nearly
always hlack or chocolate throughout and is fine textured, with clay
temper in all except one vessel, which is shell teInpered.
Subtype b: Flat bowls (Plate 15, No. 2), tl to 26 can. diameter,
with convex bases, incurving narrow rims and rounded lips from
which four nodes project upward. A narrow band of decoration on
the rim is divided into four fields by vertical arcs below the nodes,
the arcs enclosing an oval in which appear interlocking arcs. Each
larger field contains flattened S figures, sometimes conventionalized
into a zig-zag, in negative relief, outlined above and below by engraved arcs forming small discs. Pigment in lines is white.
Subtype c: Shallow basins (Plate 15, No. 4), 11 to 26.5 cm.
wide, bases usually convex, rims taller than previous forms and
ahnost vertical. Decoration band on outer rim, with horizontal
lines (plain, spurred or narrow hachured bands) combined with
vertical arcs to produce flattened horizontal-L or fish-hook figures.
"Vertical arcs divide the decoration band into 2 or 4 segments. Red
pigment in lines.
Subtype d: Slightly deeper bowls (Plate 15, No. 3), 12.5 to 21
cm. diameter, with convex and almost hemispherical base, strongly
insloping rims and rounded lips. Vessel walls thin, averaging 3.5
ram. Four of the twelve vessels have trailed curvilinear designs
of concentric circles, spirals or interlocking scrolls over the base, in
addition to the rim decoration. The rims have a band of decoration
units, 2 to 4. around the vessel, with a figure similar to the horizontal-S of subtype b, outlined by reticulated fields, closely placed
lines or upright arcs. The flat-S figure sometimes is conjoined in a
series of 2 or 3, at tbnes having a geniculate appearance. It is possible that all of the horizontal-L and S figures are flattened conventionalizations of the interlocking ~roll prevalent in the engraved
wares of Type 1. Red pigment in lines of 2 vessels, white in 1.

92

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Subtype e: Shallow bowls with high vertical rims and direct or
slightly everted lips. Color buff or brown, paste slightly coarser
than previous four subtypes, and no shell tempering is seen. Decorated with curvilinear lines, often cross-hatched bands or spurred
lines, forming semicircles, circles and scrolls. Diagonal rim notching on one sherd. Lines do not contain pigment. Subtype e is the
bowl type for the fourth or deepest occupation level and no whole
vessels were found.
Subtype ]: Semiglobular bowls with widely flaring rims (inverted helmet, Plate 15, No. 5), 9.5 to 15 cm. wide at lip. Bases
convex, lips thinned and, in four instances, notched. Body and rim
decorated over outer surface, the former having interlocking scrolls
outlined by meanders, the rims having semicircles or rounded chevrons, either as concentric festoons from the lip or arches from the
shoulder. One vessel has concentric circles instead of scrolls on
the body. White pigment in lines.
Subtype g: Small bowls (Plate 15, No. 7), with insloping wide
shoulders and flaring narrow rims. Three vessels have 4 equidistant
nodes projecting upward from the lip. Decoration on outer shoulder area of concentric arches formed by spurred lines and punctated
bands, or of inter-l~)cking scrolls encircling the shoulder. One
vessel has two parallel horizontal lines across the shoulder, with
tent-like triangular projections from the lines. Either white or red
pigment. Shell tempering, an addition to the clay, appears in 5 of
9 vessels, tufa in 2.
Subtype h: Conical bowls with flat base, straight side walls and
rounded lips. Decoration on 5 separate fields covering the entire
outer wall, of interlocking scrolls outlined by plain or spurred lines,
the background filled with small circles. Only I whole vessel and
a few sherds of this type were found.
Subtype i: Vase forms (Plate 15, No. 6), with modified globular
bodies and high vertical rims, the total height 13.5 to 16.5 cm. One
vessel has a yellow core revealed by engraved lines through the red
slip (black in areas due to irregular firing). Rims are decorated
Type 1
Subtypes
Subtypes
engraved

PLATE 15
Belchev" Engraved vessels. Nos. 1 to 4 are open bowl Yorms,
~, b, d and e, respectively. Nos. 5 and 7 are small bowls,
f and g. No. 6 is a vase form, Subtype i. Note pigment in
lines o£ he designs.

Plate 15

Pottery Types From the Belcher Mound Site

95

with interlocking scrolls formed by plain and spurred lines and
outlined by fields of engraved circles containing negative discs.
2 to 4 suspensi.on holes are present on each side of the rim near the
lip. One vessel (from 4th floor burial) is thicker, made of coarser
paste, and has parallel lines encircling the rim, with a scroll pattern on the upper body. The other two vessels have undecorated
bodies.
Subtype j: Water bottles (Plate 16, No. 4) 14 to 20 cm. !figh,
with almost globular bodies, small flat base, cylindrical neck and
everted narrow rim. Surface brown to black; red or white pigment
used in lines. The design, four times repeated, consists of concentric circles formed by alternately continuous and interrupted
lines and surrounding a disc with projecting triangles, evidently
the sun symbol. All of these vessels are clay tempered.
Subtype k: Water bottles (Plate 16, No. 1) 15 to 23 cm. high,
with flattened bodies, cylindrical necks curving outward near the
lip and flat bases. Surface is mahogany to black in color and
highly polished. One bottle of this type is shell tempered, all others
clay. Decoration consists of meanders, scrolls or festoons of semicircles, using plain or spurred lines with red pigment insertions.
Two or three parallel lines encircle the shoulder area.
Subtype l: Water bottles (Plate 16, No. 2) with globular bodies,
small flat bases and bulging or biconical necks with flaring rims.
Decoration in four separate fields, of three discs in a vertical row,
separated and surrounded by fields containing concentric arcs, semicircles, interlocking scrolls or interlocking narrow bands. One
highly ornate vessel has stippled discs, hachured fields and spurred
line elements. The decoration includes the neck in this vessel. Another bottle of this type (Plate 16, No. 3) has tripod support. It is
shell tempered, all others clay.
Subtype m: Effigy vessels (Plate 16, Nos. 5, 6, 7), including a
land terrapin and two bird bowl effigies. The terrapin has bands
on each side with design elements like those on rims of Subtype c.
One bird bowl of shell tempered black ware has white pigment impressed into the three lines which encircle the body. The head is
conventionalized. The smaller bird effigy has a hollow head containing small pellets which rattle when shaken.

96

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Sociesy

Subtype n: Compound vessels (Plate 16, Nos. 9, 10), in one instance combining a bowl of Subtype a, atop a globular body; in another instance a pot form made of yellow paste with a red slip
through which the design is engraved. The rim suggests a bowl of
Subtype d, seated on a globular body which has a scroll design.
Four suspension holes are opposed near the shoulder area.
Type 2

Foster Trailed-incised

Apparently coeval with the engraved wares at Belcher is a group
of several vessel forms in which trailed and heavily incised decorations appear consistently. Moore1 ~ illustrates a number of vessels
of this type from the Foster site on Red River in Southwest Arkansas,
and examples appear in numerous other collections from Red River
and Ouachita River sites.
The paste is similar to that of the engraved wares, clay tempered
with occasional tufa or shell; fine to medium fine textured and
usually firm. Hardness 2 to 2.5. Cores are usually brown to black,
occasionally buff; surface buff to brown with frequent differential
firing. Surfaces are smooth but seldom polished, with considerable
erosion in some of the small cup forms.
Decoration, usually over the entire outer surface, is produced by
firm, deep, U-shaped incisions and shallower, wider trailed lines.
Vase forms have secondary decoration of the tall rims with more
lightly incised lines and, in one instance, punctates. Fingernail
punctates occur on the lip of one ve~el and others have shallow lip
notching. Small teat-like nodes in groups of 3 project from the
center of concentric circle designs on some vessels.
Subtype a: Vases (Plate 17, No. 2) 7 to 14, cm. high, with semiglobular bodies, flat circular bases, and tall outcurving rims ending
in unthickened lips. The bodies have concentric circle and semicircle designs formed by deep U-shaped grooves, closely placed. The
central discs in four instances have teat-like nodes. Designs are
repeated 3 times on most vessels, 4 times on one. The rims bear
incised concentric arches, interlocking scrolls or hor{zontal bands
of diagonally incised lines. Punctated triangles appear on one rim.
Subtype b: Conical bowls, 13 cm. wide, who~ entire outer wall
is decorated with interlocking scrolls flanked by parallel meanders,
all formed by trailed lines. Transversely notched lip; flat circular

Pottery Types From the Belcher Mound Site

97

bottom on the outer surface of which appear three concentric trailed
circles.
Subtype c: ~Modified globular pots and cups (Plate 17, No. 3)
9 to 12 cm. wide, with narrow flaring rims and flat bases. The
paste is often soft and eroded badly. Decoration of vertical grooves
from rim to base, trailed or heavily incised, U-shaped and closely
placed to give a ribbed effect. Fingernail punctated arcs are present
on the outer rim surface of one vessel.
Subtype d: Modified jar and bottle forms (Plate 17, No. 1),
10 to 15 cm. high, two of which are elevated on flat cylindrical
pedestals. Pear-shaped bodies are decorated with incised or trailed
lines forming interlocking scrolls, parallel arcs or fishhook-like
parallel scrolls or volutes outlined by meanders. A field of punctates surrounds the shoulder areas. Necks and pedestals have parallel encircling lines. A globular vessel has trailed concentric circles,
a punctated field around the shoulder and a short ridged neck resembling a double pulley.
In addition to these subtypes, it is to be noted that both the engraved vessels of Type 1 and the stamped vessels of Type 3 have
instances of trailed and incised secondary designs.
Type 3

Belcher Stamped

A group of globular bowls (Plate 17, No. 5) found with the engraved and trailed wares in the late period burial pits and house
floors, has a characteristic stamped design on neck, body or both.
The paste is shell tempered, fine textured, hardness 2 to 3 with a
tendency to flake because of shell tempering. The core is gray to
mottled black, the surface predominantly brown, with areas of buff,
orange or black due to differential firing. Surface finish smooth,
sometimes moderately polished. Although found in burial pits,
these vessels were frequently coated with soot.
Decoration on the body wall includes courant spirals (10 instances), concentric circles (4 instances) and concentric diamonds
(1 instance), the designs repeated 4 or 5 times. Spirals are formed
by a band enclosed between trailed lines and roughened by dentate
rocker stamping, or by parallel light trailing. Concentric circles
and diamonds are formed by trailed lines. A neck band between

98

Texa~ Archeologizal and Paleontological Society

trailed lines is roughened by stamping as described above or by
vertical rows of punctates, possibly made with a dentate stamp.
The vessels are 12.5 to 20 cm. in diameter, with walls only 2 to 4
mm. thick. Bases are convex. A narrow flaring rim with thin lip
surmounts the decorated neck. A compound vessel (Plate 16, No.
8) combines three cups, each with stamped neck band and different
body design produced by trailing or roughened bands.
Moore illustrates vessels with stamped designs of this type from
the Friday place on Red River in Arkansas12 and from Old River
Landing on the lower Arkansas River.13
Type 4-~Belcher Plain
Undecorated vessels are comparatively few in number at this site,
only 10 whole vessels and less than half of the sherds (Table 3)
being plain. Although some variations occur, these plain vessels
and sherds can be divided into two general types, one predominating
on the last two occupation levels of Mound B, the other on the two
deepest levels. While undecorated portions of decorated vessels account for some of the characteristic sherds of each type, enough rim
sherds and entire vessels are present, showing the same differences,
to warrant separation of the two.
Type 4 Plain, associated with the engraved, trailed and ridged
wares of floor levels 1 and 2, is thinner, firmer and has smoother
surfaces than the plain sherds of the deeper levels. Coiling technique was used; the paste is usually fine and homogeneous, clay and
occasionally shell tempered with minor percentage of tufa or sand.
Some of the shell tempered sherds have a vacuolated appearance
from leaching of the shell (similar to Type 6). The core is most
often black in color, sometimes buff to brown; the surface is less
often black, many sherds with black core having buff, orange or
tan surfaces. Colored slips (yellow, orange or green) are sometimes seen. Both surfaces are smoothed, the outer sometimes moderately polished. Erosion has changed some of the-black surfaces
PLATE 16
Type 1 Belcher Engraved ve~els. Nos. 1 to 4 are bottle forms,
Subtypes l, k and j, respectively. Nos. 5, 6 and 7, bird and terrapin
effigy forms, Subtype ~. No. 8, compound form, three conjoined cups
of Type 8 Stamped. Nos. 9 and 10, compound forms, Type 1 n.

Pl~t(~ 16

Pottery Types From the Belcher Mound Site

101

to a dingy chocolate color. Vessel shapes are uncertain, except for
the three subtypes described below.
Subtype a:

Black or chocolate colored sherds, with homogeneous

clay tempered core, probably are derived from the undecorated portions of Type 1 a flat bowls. They represent about one-third of
Type 4 sberds on floor 1, the last occupation level.
Subtype b:

Three entire vessels, one each from house floors II

and VI and a mcond level burial, have the shape of Type 1 ] (inverted helmet shape).

They are thin walled (3 to 4, ram.) with

convex bases, semiglobular bodies and straight flaring rims, 10 to 14
cm. wide at the lip. One has shallow transverse notching of the lip,
otherwise they are undecorated. The paste is homogeneous, dark,
clay tempered; the surfaces smooth but not polished.
of this type were found on levels 1 and 2.

A few sherds

Subtype c: Large, heavily fired o!las or jars (Plate 17, No. 6)
appear almost exclusively in the last two occupation levels. Sherds
from the ~cond level are thin for the vessel size, 5 to 6 ram., showing black cores and a firm light-colored coat or slip on each surface. These sherds are firm with hardness of 2 to 2.5, but not
overfired. Three entire vessels found broken on Floor I, and numerous other sherds from this level, are thicker, 5 to 10 ram. The
vessels are globular but often deformed in the lower segment, probably because o:[ the vessel weight before firing.
40 cm., heights 30 to 4,0 cm.

Diameters 35 to

The undecorated body is surmounted

by a comparatively small vertical neck which has a cambered or
slightly flaring rim. The neck may be plain or have a few irregularly incised horizontal lines.
The paste is clay or clay and tufa tempered, with slightly coarse
dark gray to black core.

Hardness ranges from 2 to ¢.

The sur-

face slip is yellow, buff, green, orange or light brown, showing differential firing. Inner surfaces are more frequently yellow or green
in color. The exterior is roughened by high firing temperature
which produced puffiness of the paste and this same high firing
makes the sherds quite hard, so that they emit a metallic sound when
struck.

Some of Type 4 c sherds are similar to Type 8 plain, except

for the overfiring.
Type 5--Belcher Ridged
The predominant type of culinary ware at this site, on all except

102

Texans Archeological a~l Paleontological Society

the oldest stratum, is the ovoid urn with ridged side walls. The
vessels (Plate 17, No. 7) are 16.5 to 33 cm. high, ovoid, with flat
bases. Rims flare outward, are usually narrow and rolled or cambered on first floor vessels, often wider on 2nd and 3rd floor sherds.
Walls may be only 3 to 4 ram. thick.
The paste is coiled; clay and shell are about equally represented
and tufa appears occasionally. The core is brown to black in most
instances, the surface buff to black with differential firing, and
often coated with soot. Hardness ranges from 2 to 3.
The outer surface is roughened by narrow vertical ridges, running from rim to base, spaced from 3 ram. to 1 cm. apart. These are
apparently produced by marking with a notched instrument or by
pushing up the clay on each side of troughs made with a roundtipped instrument. Fordt4 thought the ridges may have been made
by pinching or brushing between the fingers, and called this type
Finger Brushed, but generally the ridges are too closely placed for
fingers and fine regular vertical striations in the troughs indicate a
firmer molding tool with surface irregularities. The outer rim surface may have rough vertical, diagonal or horizontal incised lines.
One small tufa tempered vessel whose side wall is partially ridged,
has triangular flanges on the rim to give a squared orifice, with
small strap handles on two sides. This is the only vessel frora this
site which has handles.
Type 6--Belcher Brushed

Entire vessels of brushed ware are lacking, but numerous sherds
(Plate 18, Nos. 1, 2, 3) were found on the three upper levels, only
one on the fourth (Table 3). The brushed and ridged wares show
many similarities and possibly the ridged ware, found on many
sites in this area, is a local derivation of the more ubiquitous brushed
ware. The reverse may be true in this area, or they may have developed simultaneously.
The paste is shell, clay, tufa and grit tempered, and leaching of
the shell produces vacuoles. Texture is medium to coarse; the core
is usually black, occasionally buff or gray; the surface varies from
gray to black. Hardness 2 to 4, usually 2 to 2.5. Coil or strip
technique was used. The inner surface is smooth, the outer roughened by brushing. The lines vary from fine, closely placed brush-

Po~ery Types Frown ~he Belcher Mound S~e

103

ing to bolder marks approaching the incised. Random marking
occurs, although regular vertical or horizontal fields predominate.
Several sherds have oval nodes, with a suggestion of a row of
nodes separating brushed fields. Rims may be direct and unmodified, or rims similar to Type 5 Ridged ware may be found. Sherd
forms suggest urns, pots and vases. Thickness 4 to 9 ram.
Type 7--Smithport Incised-Punctate

This constitutes the predominant type (Plate 18, Nos. 4 to 17) of
pottery made by the first inhabitants of Mound B, persisting on the
third level and fading out in the upper levels (Table 3).
The sherd fractures suggest coil or strip technique. The paste is
predominantly clay tempered with occasional tufa or grit. Shell
tempering is absent. The texture is usually coarse, as compared
with the later wares, the hardness 2 to 3. The core is gray or buff
to mottled brown or black, the surface usually buff or gray. The
inner surface is smooth, showing tool marks; the outer surface occasionally smooth but often rough, eroded or crumbling.
The decoration consists predominandy of straight line incisions,
usually triangular lines made with a pointed tool, rarely trailed or
U-shaped, and occasionally "overhanging." Punctates were made
with the fingernail or a blunt-tipped instrument held at an angle.
The lines may be vertical, diagonal or horizontal (not curvilinear),
on rim or body. Alternating fields or herringbone patterns occur
(Plate 18, Nos. 8 and 9), sometimes separated by a row of punctates (Plate 18, No. 13). Rims are usually notched, transversely
or diagonally, in contrast to the later pottery in which lip notching
is comparatively infrequent.
Several vessels show fingernail punctation (Plate 18, Nos. 14 and
15), typical of Ford’s15 Wilkinson type fingernail punctate. Sherd
forms for Type 7 suggest open bowls of medium height with direct
rims or vase forms with flaring rims. Sherd thickness 5 to 9 ram.,
average 6 to 7 ram.
Type 8--Smithport Plain

The undecorated sherds from the deepest level (premound) have
much the same paste characteristics as Type 7. Clay tempering predominates, with some tufa and grit. The texture is moderately

104

Texas Archeological a~uZ Paleontological Society

coarse, with numerous small lumps of clay temper. The core is
gray or buff to brown, rarely black; the surface is more frequently
gray or buff--some sherds have a light colored outer surface, moderately smoothed, with a dark brown, mottled inner surface. Erosion
occurs frequently and many sherds are small because of the crumbly
quality of the paste.
Thickness ranges from 5 to 10 ram., the usual sherd being 6 to 8
ram. thick. With exception of Subtype a, vessel shapes and sizes are
uncertain.

Subtype a: Three water bottles (Plate 17, No. 4) from the level
4 burials, with ~veral bottle sherds from Floors II, Ill and IV, have
paste characteristics as described above, clay tempered and medium
textured. The core is tan to brown, the surface gray or light red
with brown or black areas. The surface is smooth but unpolished.
The walls are thicker (6 to 8 mm.) than other bottles in the polished
and engraved series.
Decoration is entirely lacking on two vessels and confined to 4
irregular lines around the shoulder of the third. The bottles are 17
to 18 cm. high, with pear-shaped bodies, flat bases, slightly tapering
necks and unmodified lips.
Subtype b: A dozen sherds from the two deeper levels have paste
characteristics as described above, but have a bright red soft wash
on the outer surface, with a duller red on the inner. The sherds
suggest a straight walled vase or pot and possibly a bottle form.
Thickness 7 to 8 mm.
Provenience o] Pottery

Table 2 shows the origin of the 163 whole vessels, the majority
of which (135) came from the later burials. For the sake of
brevity we have combined the burials from the first and second
levels of Mound B, the six burials which started at or just beneath
House Floor V and the single burial accidentally discovered in the
PLATE 17
Nos. 1 to 3, Type 2 Foster Trailed-Incised. No. 4, bottle of Type
8 e, S~n.ithport Plain. No. 5, Type 3, Belcher Stamped. Note stamp
roughening of band around neck as well as the spiral. No. 6, Type 4 b,
Belcher Plain olla. Note comparative size of vessel. No. 7, Type 5,
Belcher Ridged.

Plate !.7

108

Texa~ Archeological and Paleqntological Society

Table 3

Type 1 a,
Engraved

Sherd Count, Mound B

1st Level

2nd Level

3rc~ Level 4th Level

No.

Pct.

No.

Pct.

No.

Pct.

No.

.... 117

4.1

17

2.67

1

0.08

1

0.3

....

0.13

1

0.15

2

0.15

0

5.54

63

5.0

Total

Pct. No.

Pct.

136

2.7

0.

7

0.1

0

0o

158

3.1

Type 1 b,
Engraved

4

Type 1 c,
.... 60

2.1

35

.... 57

2.0

6

1.0

6

0.5

1

0.3

70

1.4

0.27

0

0.

6

0.5

12

3.5

26

0.5

8.33

10

0.8

5

1.4

161

3.1

Ttl. Engraved 339 11.8011217.70

88

7.04

19

5.5

558 10.9

Engraved
Type 1 d,
¯ Engraved
Type 1 e,

Engraved ....

8

Type I f to n,
Engraved

.... 93

Type 2,
Trailed ........ 127
Type 3,
Stamped ...... 5
Type 4,
Belcher
Plain ........ 1073
Type 5,
Ridged ........ 841
Type 6,
Brushed ...... 268
Type 7,
Incised ........ 17
Type 8,
Smithport
Plain .......... 169
Wilkinson
Punctate ...... 1
Unclassified .... 30

3.2

53

4.4

26

4.0

12

0.96

0

0.

165

3.2

0.17

2

0.3

32

2.5

0

0.

39

0.8

37.5 270 42.4

140 11.2 ’ 11

3.2 1494 29.3

29.3

248 19.8

4

1.1 1187 23.3

1

0.3

327

6.4
9.2

94 14.9

35

2.8

9.3

23

3.6

0.6

19

3.0

287 23.0

148 43.2

471

5,9

84 13.2

397 31.8

155 45.2

805 15.8

0.03
1.0

1
5

0.1
0.8

8
4

0.6
0.3

5
0

1.5
0.

15
39

0.3
0.8

Totals ............ 2870 100.0 636 100.0 1251 100.0 343 100.0 5100 100.0

Table 2--Whole Pottery Vessels
House House
House
1st and 2nd 4th Level
Floor I Floor II Floor VI Level Burials Burials Totals
Belcher
Engraved
Type 1 a .......
Type 1 b ......
Type 1 c ...... 1
Type 1 d ...... I
Type 1 f ......
Type 1 g ......
Type 1 h ......
Type 1 i ......
Type 1 j ......
Type ! k ......
Type 1 1 ......
Type 1 m ....
Type 1 n ......
Ttl. Type 1 .. 2
Foster
Trailed-Incised
Type 2 a ......
Type 2 b ......
Type 2 c ......
Type 2 d ...... 1
Ttl. Type 2 .. 1

2
1
1

I

1
1
2

1

8

2

I
1

Belcher
Stamped
Type 3 .........

22
4
5
11
6
8
1
1
12
6
5
3
2
86

1

1

24
4
8
13
6
9
1
3
15
6
5
3
2
99

9
1
3
3

9
1
4
4

16

18

15

15

Belcher Plain
Type 4 b ......
Type 4 c ...... 3

1

1

1

3
3

Ttl. Type 4 .. 3

1

1

1

6

Belcher Ridged
Type 5 ........ 1

2

1

13

17

1

1

Smithport
Plain
Type 8 ........
Type 8 a
(bottles)
Unclassified
Totals .......... 7

12

4

3

3
1

3
4

135

5

163

Pottery Types Fron~ the Belcher Mound

109

superficial part of Mound A, as the pottery from all of these seems
quite uniform. These burials illustrate the custom among the latter
Caddos of abundant funerary placements, a total of 135 vesselz
in addition to other ornaments and artifacts~accompanying 17
burials. Two of these burials had no pottery accompanying them,
several with infants had only one or two vessels, while four pits
contained 14, 16, 21 and 33 pottery vessels.
In contrast, the two deep pits, originating between the 3rd and
4th levels of Mound B and containing 4 and 5 skeletons, had a total
of only 5 vessels, all placed above the heads. The vessels in the
top level pits were placed all around and on top of the bodies.
The premound surface (Level 4) shows a marked predominance
of Type 7 and 8 sherds, with complete absence of Types 2, 3 and 4 c.
Type I Engraved is represented only by the water bottle and the
open bowl, chiefly Type 1 e.
On level 3, although the incised-punctate wares persist, all other
types except the large olla appear suddenly. Brushed sherds are
infrequent, but Type 5 Ridged is almost as numerous as the earlier
incised type. The thick-walled, undecorated water bottle of Type 8 a
disappears above the 3rd level, being replaced by the thinner, polished and highly ornamented bottles of Type I Engraved. All subtypes of the engraved wares are not represented on the 3rd level,
but many are present, as well as the trailed and stamped.
As levels 2 and 1 are reached, the incised-punctate wares of Type
7 fade out. The ridged culinary vessel, Type 5, becomes the most
abundant, of the decorated sherds with Type 6 Brushed increasingly
frequent. The engraved wares are second in frequency on the surface layer. Surface collections from a number of sites in this area
indicate that engraved sherds and Type 5 Ridged sherds follow similar frequency distributions, although at some sites another type of
ridged ware is frequent, having broader notched vertical ridges with
bruslfing between the ridges.
The engraved subtypes which are more frequent at Belcher--the
open bowls (Type 1 a, c and d) and the water bottles, especially
Type 1 ] with concentric circle design and sun symbo!, are also the
most frequent examples of engraved ware in surface collections from
this entire area.

110

Texas Areheological and Paleontological Society

Discussion
As indicated in Table 4, various sites in the Red River Valley of
Northwest Louisiana show varying proportions of engraved-ridged
and incised-punctate wares. Smithport is in DeSoto Parish and
Wilkinson in Natchitoches Parish 40 and 50 miles south of Shreveport; Indian Hill and Pease Place are hillside sites, Vanceville and
Werner are mound sites in Bossier Parish, across Red River from
Shreveport.
Table 4
Sw~ ]ace Collections o] Decorated Sherds
,Engraved
Ridged
Incised
Punctate
Pct.
No.
Pet.
Pct.
No.
Pct.
No.
Total No.
46 120
4.3 190
29.0
5.5 18
Smithport ......414 23
5.2
138
51
88
33.0
4.4
14
12
Wilkinson ...... 268
70
11.0
29.0
317
50
3.0
i83
Indian Hill .... 630 19
47
9
6.3
7.0
35.0
67
50
Pease Place ..14.2 10
11
13
8.0
31.0
18
VanceviHe .... 138 13
9.4 43
2.6
50.0
5
13
1
26.0 19
Werner .......... 38 10
Although it would be premature to outline definite cultural affinities for the several types of Belcher pottery, some similarities are
evident and suggest future study. The engraved, pigment-inserted,
polished vessels of Type 1, with effigy forms and a certain amount
of shell tempered ware, suggest close relationship to the Middle Mississippi horizon. Some similarities to the Moundville pottery of
Alabama are evident. In the Red and Ouachita River valleys of
this region, vessels of this general type are frequent. The engraved
vessels of the Natclfitoches site 4, and from Keno and Glendora
in the Ouachita basin (2) are similar in paste, general conception
and decoration, although not identical. Similar vessels are also
illustrated by Harrington (3), from the Southwest Arkansas area,
and by Jackson (6), from East Texas.
Vessels which are identical in form and decoration to a number
of the subtypes of Belcher Engraved were found by "Moore2 at the
McClure, Friday and Foster mound sites along the Red River in
PLATE 18
Nos. 1 to 3, Type 6 Belcher B~ushed sherds. Nos. 4 to 17, Type 7
Smithpor.t Incised and punctated zherds. No. 14 is Wilkinson type of
fingernail punctate.

/2-.

/6

Plate 18

Po~,$ery Types From the Belcher Mound Si~

113

Southern Arkansas, and other artifact types indicate cultural identity of these four sites.
It is interesting to speculate on the origin of several decorative
elements in Type 1 Engraved wares. The interlocking scroll with
its variants is probably the most frequent design motif in this type.
Its use seems to be rather widespread on both Southeast and Southwest pottery (Mesa Verde for example), also in Mexican pottery.
The spurred line which appears so often on Belcher Engraved and
engraved wares from other Caddo sites does not appear elsewhere
in the Southweast or Mississippi Valley area, so far as I can ascertain, but does appear early in the Southwest (Mesa Verde, Mimbres)
and again in Central Mexico (Toltec). One is struck, on visiting the
National Museum in Mexico City, by the similarities in form, design
motifs and elements between the potteries of Central Mexico and the
Caddo area of Louisiana and Arkansas. For example, the angulated-shouldered bowl of Subtype 1 a at Belcher, unique in the
United States area, is frequently duplicated in the Mexican potteries, even having the same four nodes projecting from the shoulder
angle. Efforts to demonstrate definite evidence of a direct link between the two areas have so far been futile, but future study may
do so.
Type 2 Trtffled.lnclsed and Type 3 Stamped, also found in one or
more of the above mentioned three sites on Red River, suggest a
carry-over of certain decorative features of the Mid-Louisiana Marksville pottery. The deep U-shaped vertical and concentric circle incised decorations of Type 2 may be compared with the Marksville
Incised (Figs. 35-36) of Ford and Willey’sl 5 report of the Crooks
site. Similarly, the alteration of roughened bands and smooth
fields, and the roughening of bands by rocker stamping with a dentate stamp, indicate a trait inheritance from Marksville Stamped16
(Figs. 28-34, Crooks report) by Belcher Stamped. Vessel shapes,
tempering and other paste characteristics are entirely dissimilar.
The large olla of Type 4 c is an interesting late development at
this site, apparently representing the result of experimentation with
higher firing temperatures. A few sherds of this type and of Type 1
bowls found on level 2 of Mound B show the effect of this high
firing temperature which made them lighter yet firmer, producing
the metallic ring when struck. Puffiness and cracking of the slip

114

Texa~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

resulted and in some instances grotesque twisting of the vessel
occurred. On the top level many more of these sherds were found,
and at least three large ollas of several gallons capacity were suecessfully made. The shape suggests that they were used for grain
storage. Similarly fired vessels, sometimes cracked in the process,
having been found near the Spiro site in Oklahoma.18
Type 6 Belcher Brushed shows some similarities to the ~lnna
Brushed15 of the Mississippi Valley and to Plaquemine Brushed19 of
South Louisiana, but differs in being thinner, shell tempered instead
of clay tempered and having thickened or rolled rims.
The straight line incised-punctate wares of Type 7, found in large
quantities on most sites in this area, but particularly on large hillside sites like Smithport, Wilkinson, Indian Hill and Pease Place
between Shreveport and Natchitoches, seem to bear some relation to
certain components of the widespread Coles Creek horizon described
by Ford.17 Many of these sites afford a minor percentage of
sherds listed as marker types for Coles Creek--overhanging parallel lines encircling the necks of beakers, a line of triangular punttares below the overhanging lines, grooving of the upper surface of
flattened lips and characteristic arrangement of punctated fields.
Type 7 lncised may prove to have several subtypes and shows certain similarities to Manchac Point Incised, Hardy Incised and Rhonebart Punctated of South Louisiana19 which also seem to be derived
from Coles Creek and to extend to historic levels.

The plain water bottles of Type 8 a seem to accompany the earlier
indigenous pottery of this area, often found in burials on sites where
ineised-punctate wares predominate, as at Smithport Landing and
Allen place in Natchitoches Parish. This is in keeping with their
occurrence in the burials originating from the deeper levels of
Mound B at Belcher, where Type 7 lncised wares were prevalent.
Conclusions
The Belcher site appears to be a comparatively late but not historic Caddo site, whose Mound B shows four occupation levels. The
pre-mound inhabitants, who built a rectangular house structure,
made pottery on which incised straight lines and punctations were
the prevalent decorations, with a smaller amount of engraved wares.
After construction of the first small mound, there was a cultural

Types From the Belcher Mound Site

115

invasion suggested by the increasing amount of engraved, ridged
and brushed pottery wares. In the last two habitation periods of
this mound, the invasion was complete, as indicated by the construction of circular lodges, profuse offerings with burials and the
pottery types in place of the incised-punctate wares. A similar intrusion of a later culture into a widespread indigenous incisedpunctate culture is suggested for the Red River Valley in this entire area.
We wish to express our indebtedness to Dr. Jas. B. Griffin, Ceramics Repository, Ann Arbor, Michigan, and to the entire staff of
the Department of Archaeology at Louisiana State University for
their kind assistance and numerous suggestions in the course of
preparing this report.
The Children’s Clinic
Shreveport, Louisiana.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Webb, C. H., and Dodd, M., House Types Among the Caddo
Indians, Bull. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Soc., Vol.
12, 1940.
2. Moore, C. B., Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River, J1. Acad.
Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1912.
Idem, Antiquities o] tire Ouachita Valley, J1. Acad. Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1909.
3. Harrington, M. R., Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas, Indian
Notes and Monographs, The Heye Foundation, New York, N. Y.,
1920.
4. Walker, W. M., .4 Caddo Burial Site at Natchitoches, Louisiana, Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 94, No. 14, 1935.
5. Ford, J. A., Analysis o] Indian Village Site Collections ]rom
Louisiana and Mississippi, Department of Conservation, Louisiana
Geological Survey, New Orleans, La., 1936.
6. Jackson, A. T., Types o[ East Texas Pottery, Bull. Texas
Archaeologica! and Paleontological Society, Vol. 6, 1934.
7. Goldschmidt, W. R., A Report On the Archaeology of Titus
County, Bull. Texas Archeol. and Paleontol. Soc., Vol. 7, 1935.
8.

Lemley, H. J., Discoveries Indicating a Pre-Caddo Culture On

116

Texc~ Archeologlcal and Paleon~ologlcal Society

Red River in Arkansas, Bull. Texas Archeol. and Paleontol. Soc.,
Vol. 8, 1936.
9. Dickinson, S. D., and Lemley, H. J., Evidences o] the Marksville and Coles Creek Complexes at the Kirkham Place, Clark County,
Arkansas, Bull. Texas Archeol. and Paleontological Soc., Vol. lI,
1939, p. 188.
10.

Swanton, John R., Personal Communication, 1939.

11. Moore, C. B., Some Aboriginal Sites On Red River, Jl. Acad.
Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1912, pp. 591-619.
12.

Idem, p. 590.

13. Moore, C. B., Certain MourMs o] Arkansas and o] Mississippi,
J1. Acad. Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1908, p. 521.
14.

Ford, J. A., vide supra, 1936, p. 84.

15. Ford, J. A., and Willey, Gordon, Crooks Site, A Marksville
Period Burial Mound in La Salle Parish, Louisiana, Dept. of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, New Orleans, La., 1940,
p. 50.
16.

Idem. pp. 65-72 and 75-78.

17.

Ford, J. A., vide supra, 1935, pp. 174-190.

18.

Cobb, Rodney, Personal Communication, 1941.

19. Louisiana State University Archaeological Surveys, unpublished data.

