Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas
Michael B. Collins

ABSTRACT
Substantive, theoretical, and methodological accomplishments in the archeology of Central Texas since the
1954 publication of An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology are notable and diverse, but scientific
maturity has not been achieved.

INTRODUCTION
This contribution to the 66th Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society reviews what has been
learned about the prehistory of the Central Texas
archeological region, a task undertaken twice before
in this venue (Suhm, t~ieger, and Jelks 1954; Suhm
1960). In the earlier of these, a formal structure of
archeological inquiry was established for the entire
state, and the diverse data gathered over the first
half of the century were organized and synthesized.
Although successive metamorphoses have rendered the particulars of the 1954 Handbook virtually unrecognizable in current practice, each revision
was built on what had gone before, so that much of
what we know today rests on sturdy foundations
laid 40 years ago. Typologies of ceramics and projectile points published in the Handbook have remained more intact than the other cultural
constructs. In his introduction to the Handbook,
Krieger (Suhm et al. 1954:2-10) also established a
number of the tenets of typology that continue to
underlie some artifact classifications in the state.
The review published in !960 is the first
metamorphosis, beginning by offering a smaller
and less rigidly bounded delineation of "Central
Texas" (Suhm 1960:Figure 1). Among the lasting
contributions of the review are good visual (Suhm
1960:Figures 2 and 3) and descriptive (Suhm
1960:89-103) images of the nature of the Central
Texas archeological data base, particularly its key
sites. Historic Indian groups in Central Texas
received greater treatment, and Suhm’s review also
reflects the beginnings of the preoccupation with
prehistoric chronology-building that overwhelmed
the research effort over the next 25 years and

dominated subsequent reviews and syntheses. At
the time Suhm wrote her review (1958), only one
radiocarbon date was available for a Central Texas
site (Suhm 1960:88), and analyses of stratified site
excavations were too few to use as a basis for
establishing a chronology.
Since 1960, several topically, temporally, or
theoretically focused reviews of Central Texas archeology have been written (e.g., Weir 1976), or
published (e.g., Johnson 1967; McKinney 1981;
Prewitt 1981, 1985; Black 1989; Creel 1991;
Howard 1991; Johnson and Goode 1994; Lintz
1993; Ellis 1994). Some of these have been more
influential than others, but, as the present review
will show, none has adequately considered the nature of the region’s archeological record.
The vast data base that now exists for Central
Texas cannot be adequately synthesized and presented in the space available. This essay attempts
instead to:
o critique the practice of archeology in Central
Texas,
¯ offer a brief summation of what we presently
know, and

opine some ways by which we might know
significantly more, and have greater confidence
in that knowledge, by the time a next review is
written.
It is necessary to critique the manner of our
work because archeology rarely answers questions
that have not been asked, and because the questions
asked and the ways they are addressed in any archeological paradigm largely dictate the nature of
the substantive findings. Over most of the last 40

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

362

Texas Archeological Society

years, archeological efforts in Central Texas have
excessively emphasized questions of chronology,
have failed to identify and sustain a focus on but a
few other issues of substance, and have not adequately understood the nature of the archeological record.
Inexplicably, the preoccupation with chronology prevailed without development of a very effective methodology for its pursuit. Specifically,
although the sondage technique was adopted, the
greatest effort has been expended on precisely the
kinds of sites with the least potential for yielding
good chronological information, while sites with
that potential languished with comparatively little
attention. There have been many data generated,
but not much synthesis of those data.
Belatedly, four trends have emerged in the last
100 months that encourage me to believe that the
prospect is good for significantly improved research
in the archeology of the region (cf. Ellis 1994).
First, we have begun to better recognize the nature
of the archeological record, and how it was formed,
as well as the greater need for data quality over
data quantity. Second, preoccupation with issues
chronological has begun to give way to sustained
concern with several questions of human adaptation. Third, research now reflects an awareness of
great data potential that had long been overlooked,
and the relevance of data to the questions asked is
being scrutinized. Finally, cracks may be appearing
in the wall of provincialism that surrounds us. Great
openings should follow and, in the words of Johnson
(1991:21-22):
The future of archaeological research in the
Edwards Plateau and adjacent areas will be considerably less gloomy if the region can get the
attention it deserves, and if its synthesis is addressed to a national or international audience
that will be critical of any local misadventures.
Lest the wrong impression be implied by the
foregoing, archeology is a historical science;
therefore, constantly improving chronological
control of the past must remain a primary objective,
but only as the framework for ordering more
substantive inquiries and findings. In this vein,
much has been said about the validity and meaning
of various temporal frameworks offered for Central
Texas prehistory. In spite of the use of terms such
as phase, and the discussion of phases in ways
suggesting they have ethnic meaning, the foremost

purpose of such constructs has been temporal
ordering of archeological material culture. These
are based largely on morphological (supposedly
stylistic) trends in artifact forms, and, as such, are
archeological style periods, not unlike style periods
(e.g., Victorian, Greek Revival, or Tudor) used by
architects. Johnson (1987, 1991) has suggested that
some of our archeological style periods be called
patterns, and I (Collins et al. 1990) have proposed
the label, intervals. Either of these is better suited
than phase, to which we both object, but I continue
to prefer interval, first because it emphasizes the
main thrust--time--and, second, because pattern
implies that we know more about the material
cultural composition of some of the time slices than
I believe we do. Whatever we call the segments of
our temporal framework, their function is to order
cultural change, which is the essentia! basis for
understanding cultural processes.

CENTRAL TEXAS AS AN
ARCHEOLOGICAL AREA
Culture areas (Kroeber 1939) and their archeological counterparts (e.g., as used by Willey 1966)
have long served to focus attention on regions of
shared cultural traits. At any single moment in time,
culture area boundaries often can be drawn relatively easily. Some boundaries persist for centuries
or millennia, but others shift and blur over time.
The longer the time period under consideration, the
more arbitrary boundaries become. Much of North
America might be considered a single culture area
during Clovis times, but by A.D. 1000, scores of
areas would be needed to each embrace the same
degree of material-culture sameness as seen in all
of Clovisdom.
Any delineation of the Central Texas archeological area is highly arbitrary. Conversely, to draw
boundaries based on careful considerations of material-cultural sameness would result in a sequence of
perhaps a dozen Central Texas areas of quite different sizes and shapes, an unmanageable array for the
purposes of this essay. So, for the present discussion, Prewitt’s (1981:71 and Figure 2) delineation
of the Central Texas Archeological Area (Figure 1)
has been used as a descriptive framework, but its
boundaries have not been adhered to rigidly as regards certain archeological and geological data that
inform on key issues in the local record. Also, this
delineation is selected with the proviso that, like any

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

Figure 1. The Central Texas archeological area (after
Prewitt 1981).

such arbitrary construct, it is more satisfactory for
some parts of the prehistoric record than for others.
More importantly, as Gamble (1986), Hodder
(1978), Clarke (1977), Ebert (1992) and others have
noted in general, and Ellis (1994:54-56) has discussed specifically for the Central Texas culture
area (see also Ellis et al., this volume), our spatial
concepts can seriously impair our efforts to interpret past human adaptations. In the past 11,000
years, there probably has never been any cultural
group whose key resources, geographic range, or
political sphere conformed even approximately to
what archeologists designate as "Central Texas."
This is an area of roughly 84,300 square kilometers, or 12 percent of the area of the state. As of
January 1995, recorded archeological sites numbered 11,355 for Central Texas, which could be as
low as 10-20 percent of the actual number, judging
from site densities in a few thoroughly surveyed
areas. Documented sites are located in open areas
on various topographic features, along blufflines,
in rockshelters, and in caves; site characteristics
differ greatly, but afford clues as to the function or
functions of any given site, or of a component within
a site (Table 1).
In Central Texas, the most common kind of
site recognized is an accumulation of debris (burned

363

rock, stone chipping residue, pottery sherds) and
diverse utilitarian objects (grinding stones,
hammerstones, unifaces, bifaces), sometimes in
great quantities. Although various more-specific interpretations ("base camps," "extractive sites," etc.)
have been offered, it is probably safest to say that
the vast majority of these represent the residue from
one or more periods of habitation; in simplified
terms, these are camp sites where people stayed for
a time, regardless of their more specific purposes
for being at that location. Camps are found in all
settings (see Table 1; Figure 2): in the open, along
bluffs, in rockshelters, and even a few in caves
such as Scorpion~ and Halls. Features found at
camps include just about all kinds: hearths (Figure
2a), knapping areas, graves, caches, pits, houses,
and many others. One of the more conspicuous
and, therefore, most commonly noted features in
Central Texas, are massive, mounded accumulations of burned rocks or "burned rock middens"
(Figure 3a-c). Because they have played such a
large role in the archeology of Central Texas (cf.
Ellis 1994), burned rock middens are discussed
separately, below.
The elements (artifacts and features) that make
up or accompany camp sites sometimes occur apart

Table 1. Simplified characterization of site
types and settings in Central Texas
SITE TYPES

SITE SETTINGS

Open

Bluffline

Rockshelter

camp

x

x.

x

caches

x

x

x

isolated artifacts

x

x

x

interments

x

x

x

cemeteries

x

x

kill/butchery

x

x

quarry/workshop

x

lithic scatters

x

rock art

x

x

x

~Bibli})graphic references for sites and geologic studies mentioned in the text and Table 2 are in the Appendix.

Cave

364

Texas Archeological Society

b

d
Figure 2. Examples of common kinds of archeological sites in Central Texas: a, open campsite; b, stratified open
campsite; c, rockshelter; d, lithic quarry and workshop.

from camps. These include caches, isolated
artifacts, burials, bedrock mortars, and rock art
(Figure 3d), all of which are known to occur in
various settings (see Table 1). Cemeteries, in and
away from camps, are known in the prehistoric
record of Central Texas, and have been found in
rockshelters (Watt 1936), open localities (Loeve
Fox, Frisch Auf!), and in vertical shaft caves
(Hitzfelder, Mason Burial Cave).

Few animal kill sites have been documented in
Central Texas. The Late Prehistoric bison skeleton
(Feature 66) at Loeve Fox is one possible example
(Prewitt 1982:73-79). Another is inferred from
fossilized bison bones and Folsom points dislodged
by treasure-hunters from the floor of Kincaid
Rockshelter, where it seems a bison died after it
was wounded but not retrieved by Folsom hunters
(Collins 1990b).

Collins m Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

365

b

d
Figure 3. Examples of the very common burned rock middens (a-c) and the uncommon rock art panels (d) of Central
Texas: a, a pristine burned rock midden in Blanco County; b, burned rock midden and hearth in the stratified Wiley
Williams site, Travis County; c, typical structure of a burned rock midden (Sutton County); d, pictographs at Paint Rock
in Concho County.

Chert has been the most important kind of
toolstone throughout the prehistory of Central
Texas, and the area is rich in the quantity and quality
of this raw material (Banks 1990). This is reflected
in numerous sites where chert was acquired
(quarries), acquired and knapped (quarry/workshops
[see Figure 2d]), or just knapped (lithic scatters).
Each of these kinds of sites has its own
characteristic parameters. The diverse kinds of sites
are not equally visible to the archeologist, their
interpretive potential varies greatly, they were never
equally numerous, and they have survived the

vagaries of nature at different rates. Efforts to
interpret and compare patterns of land use over
time, or to estimate such things as relative
population sizes, are heavily burdened with these
sampling issues.
As a natural area, Central Texas is diverse. Its
single most significant feature is a prominent fault
scarp, the Balcones Escarpment, which arcs from
northeast to southwest around the center of Central
Texas, and breaks the area into two contrasting
subareas (Figure 4a). The larger subarea is north
and west of the scarp, on its upside. Most of this is

366

Texas Archeological Society

Icones
carpment
Ecotone

b

d
Figure 4. Geographic aspects of Central Texas: a, physiography; b, major fiver basins; c,
geology; d, soils (A=alfisols; M=mollisols; V=vertisols; f=fluvial valley fills, various
soils).

dissected plateau land of resistant limestone and
thin upland soils, but deeply eroded crystalline
rocks--the Central Texas Mineral Region--are
present as well. The prevailing vegetation is oak
and juniper savanna. Of roughly half the size is the
smaller subarea, south and east of the scarp, on its
downside. This is part of the coastal plain, a region
of relatively soft bedrocks and deep soils. Most of
this subarea is prairie with deep clayey soils, but a
narrow strip along its eastern margin is post oak
forest standing on deep sandy soils.
Along the escarpment lies a great ecotone (see
Figure 4a) where natural conditions are transitional
between the plateau to the west and north and the
prairies to the east and south. More importantly, it

is beneficial for humans to occupy an ecotone
whence they can readily access contrasting resources in the adjacent biomes and capitalize on the
resource diversity of the transitional zone.
Annual precipitation decreases from east to
west across Central Texas from near 100 cm to 55
cm. The primary water resources for preindustrial
peoples are streams and springs. Two river systems, the Brazos and the Colorado, drain approximately 75 percent of the Central Texas area (Figure
4b); the remaining 25 percent is roughly equally
divided into the catchments of the Nueces, San
Antonio, and Guadalupe rivers (see Figure 4b). Generally, drainage is toward the southeast. Of the 281
springs documented for Texas, 139 (49 percent) are

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

in the area, including both of the state’s very large
springs (>100 cubic ft/sec), and 12 of the state’s 17
large (10-100 cubic ft/sec) springs (Brune 1975).
Change, as it is everywhere, is and always has
been unrelenting across the land of Central Texas.
Wind, water, and gravity move earth material from
place to place; lakes, streams, and springs flourish
and fail; caves and rockshelters form, enlarge, degrade, and coliapse. The delicate balances between
soils, climates, plants, and animals are ceaselessly
being adjusted. Terra firma is but an illusion.

LANDSCAPE EVOLUTION FROM
EARTHQUAKES TO
EARTHWORMS
Foremost among deficiencies in the methodology by which most of the Central Texas
archeological record has been built is inadequate
recognition of the dynamic nature of the physical
environment, and the profound implications
landscape evolution has for archeological inquiry.
Issues of !ong-term changes in climate (Bryant and
Shafer 1977; Bryant and Holloway 1985) and biotic
communities (e.g., Dillehay 1974) have received
considerable attention from archeologists, but these

are like words wtihout music when portrayed across
a static terrain. A few examples will illustrate the
importance of integrating archeological inquiry with
an understanding of landscape change--whether
studying a region or a single site.
Most archeological surveys, until recent years,
were conducted without the explicit objective of
discovering buried sites (e.g., Shafer et al. 1964).
Even though awareness of the need for subsurface
reconnaissance has increased (e.g., Saunders et al.
1992), much of our archeological data base was
generated without this awareness and is significantly
biased as a result. Corollary to discovering buried
sites is the recognition that in some areas landscape
change has been sufficient to obliterate sites. The
important point here is that geologic and pedogenic
processes have nonrandomly altered, buried, and
destroyed sites (e.g., Abbott 1994). Examples from
different areas of Central Texas are instructive.

Fluvial Systems
Simplified depictions of site distributions from
archeological surveys in three reservoirs along the
Colorado River clearly illustrate one aspect of this
bias. In two of the three project areas (Figures 5 and
6), virtually no sites were recorded on the inside of

Location Map

0
Key

miles

Absense of
Site=

Figure 5. Site distributions in the basin of Robert Lee Reservoir; note paucity of sites on the
inside of river bends (from Shafer 1967).

367

368

Texas Archeological Society
occurs in the upper reaches of small streams
(Blum and Valastro 1989; Collins et al. 1990).
Skinner (1974) found larger sites typically occurring along the main trunk of the Guadalupe
River, with small sites more characteristic of the
tributaries. He interpreted this to reflect an Archaic settlement pattern with base camps on the
large river linked to extractive sites in the smaller
valleys. However, this conclusion cannot be valid
because the archeological record formed differently along the main trunk and its tributaries.
Exposed Early Archaic sites are extremely infrequent in the main Guadalupe valley, probably
because most of them are deeply buried in Late
Holocene alluvium, whereas in the upper reaches
of tributaries, where little deposition has occurred
since the Early Holocene, components dating
throughout the Archaic are present, often mixed

8 km

[

Key
sites
Ablsence of
Sites

Figure 6. Site distributions in Buchanan Lake Basin; note
paucity of sites on the inside of river bends (from Jackson and
Woolsey 1938).
235

bends in the river (Sharer 1967; Jackson and Woolsey
1938). In the third (Figure 7), only a few sites, "ephemeral and not worthy of excavation," were noted on the
inside of bends (TARL files). Are we to infer that
people chose ahnost never to live on the inside of river
bends? No, I suggest we are to infer instead that the
surveys failed to discover sites buried on the interior of
the river bends. Since streams almost invariably cut on
the outside of their bends and deposit on the inside, a
sequence of prograding deposits forms on the interior
of bends. These are referred to as "pointbars," and are
often the ideal depositional environment for the formation of stratified sites. Such sites, however, are commonly invisible or decidedly meager in appearance at
the surface, exactly the pattern seen in the three surveys.
Another aspect of site distributional data in the
valleys of major streams is that even along a single
stream, different histories of deposition often occurred
in different areas. Almost no Early Holocene fill is
exposed in the larger stream valleys in the central
Edwards Plateau, and almost no Late Holocene fill

i

!
0
I

2

4 km
!

Figure 7. Site distributions in the lower reaches of
Marshall Ford (Lake Travis) basin; note that relatively
few sites were mapped on the inside of river bends;
sites 41TV207, 208,220, 229, and 240 tabulated in
survey report as "ephemeral and not worthy of
excavation" (from records on file, TARL).

Collins w Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

together in multi-component sites on long-stable
surfaces (Collins et al. 1990:13-15).
Finally, recent mapping and dating of a!!ostratigraphic2 units in the valley of the Colorado
River downstream from the Balcones Escarpment
(Blum 1992) has shown that major changes have
taken place in a much shorter time than previously
inferred (e.g., Baker and Penteado-Orellana 1978).
During the culturally-relevant past (ca. 12,000 B.P.
to the present), four periods of Colorado River valley geomorphic history can be recognized, based
on Blum’s (1992) findings, as relevant to the formation of the archeological record in the eastern
part of Central Texas.
At ca. 12,000 years ago, the river had downcut
in its older valley fill and was cutting into bedrock.
High surfaces of the older fill (the Eagle Lake
Alloformation that had built up during the period
between 18,000 and 15,000 B.P.) were exposed as
terraces along the river as possible localities for any
very early sites to form. Significant portions of this
landform were subsequently cut away, but scores
of square kilometers are still present in the Central
Texas stretch of the lower Colorado River valley.
From then until ca. 3500 years ago, the valley floor
aggraded, forming a unit mapped as Member 1 of
the Columbus Bend Alloformation. This unit dates
from ca. 11,000 to 3300 years ago, and often exceeds 10 meters in thickness. Deeply stratified sites
containing Paleoindian to Late Archaic components, such as the Vara Daniel site in Austin’s
Zilker Park (Ricklis et al. 1991), formed in this
unit. This unit was then partly cut by the river.
Member 2 of the same alloformation then aggraded
against, and partly over, Member 1 between about
1600 and 1000 years ago. Member 2 often exceeds
12 meters in thickness and contains Late Archaic
to early Late Prehistoric sites; these, too, were
present at the Vara Daniel site (Takac et al. 1992).
There are a few hundred square kilometers of members 1 and 2 of the Columbus Bend Alloformation
in Central Texas, concealing an untold number of
buried archeological components.
The river downcut again, ca. 1000 years ago,
before depositing its most recent unit, Member 3 of
the Columbus Bend Alloformation, which is inset
against the older members 2 and 1. Blum (1992:193)
noted modern artifacts (e.g., barbed wire) in this

369

member, but radiocarbon ages back to ca. 500 B.P.
(Blum 1992:Table 6.4) indicate that some buried
Late Prehistoric components could be present. Accelerated deposition in the last 100 years (Blum
1992:193), is probably attributable to disruption of
the natural vegetation by grazing and farming, and
this may have buried most late sites.
For the archeologist, the horizontal extent of
fluvial deposits may be as important as their temporal coverage. Deposits of any particular age might
occur only in extremely limited areas favorable for
deposition, might be massive and extensive, or
might be moderately widespread. Knowledge of
these conditions is essential to discovering sites,
and to interpreting their frequencies relative to other
sites and by time periods.

"Eocene" Sand Sheet and the
Big Brushy Formation

Along the eastern margin of the Central Texas
Archeological Area is a narrow strip of deep sandy
land (see Figure 4c), generally mapped as Eocene
on geologic maps (Barnes 1981). As in much of
eastern Texas, prehistoric sites found in this setting
commonly are either buried or exposed by some
kind of land disturbance (cf. Brown 1986; Taylor
1987). Just outside the Central Texas area, but in the
same sand belt, recent geoarcheological work has
defined a Holocene unit (the Big Brushy formation),
a widespread sand mantle of variable thickness which
in places contains buried archeological remains
(Bianchi 1984; Perttula et al. 1986). This work sheds
light on the kinds of formation processes that might
be expected in the Central Texas part of the sand
belt. Basically, in the words of Bousman and Fields
(1988:195) regarding the Big Brushy formation:
sand thickness is viewed as having a direct
bearing on the preservation and interpretability
of the archeological record, with thick sands
having the potential to contain intact, stratified
cultural deposits and thin sands having a greater
likelihood of containing eroded, displaced
cultural materials.

Furthermore, since the Big Brushy formation is
thought to have aeolian and colluvial facies, it has

2A sedimentary unit defined and mappable on the basis of its bounding discontinuities; such a unit itself does not have to
be continuous (North American Commission on Stratigraphic Nomenclature 1983: 865-867).

370

Texas Archeological Society

the potential of reflecting changes in environmental
conditions over time.

Ubiquitous Processes
Minor surface deformation events, as well as
earthquakes with magnitudes up to 5 on the Rich-

Blackland Prairie
That band of the coastal plain just east of the
Balcones Escarpment known as the Black Prairie
or Blackland Prairie is an area of deep soils ultrarich in clay, called "ultraclay soils." Sites formed in
these soils are subject to extreme disruption through
soil processes (pedoturbation). Soil textbooks (e.g.,
Boul et al. 1989) even use Houston Black Clay, the
prevalent soil series in the Blackland Prairie, as
representative of the adverse properties of ultraclay
soils (see Figure 4d). Extreme plasticity when wet,
deep vertical cracking when dry (Duffield 1970),
and a propensity to roll like a slowly boiling thick
liquid (producing soil features called gilgai), are
the factors that threaten site integrity. Gilgai movement in soil is like that in dough as it is kneaded. In
deep Houston Black Clay, the rolling motion typically extends downward about 1.5 to 2 meters and
produces distinctive shear features, called slickensides, between masses of soil that move past each
other. I have seen pieces of modern metal and glass
dragged to the bottom of gilgai (a downward distance of more than 1.5 meter) by this process, showing that the rolling time of gilgai is on the order of
decades. If excavations encounter large slickensides
(often observable in irregular planes 25 to 50 cm or
more across) in a site, that site, in all likelihood, is
badly disturbed.

Bluffs and colluvial slopes
Much of Central Texas is dissected limestone
plateau land, and there are also areas where hills of
granite, sandstone, and other rock types occur. Hillsides and valley walls in all of these are subject to
degradation in the form of slope movement, or
colluviation. At least one site (41ML64 in
McLennan County) has been documented as partially disrupted by a landslide (Collins and Holliday
1985). Where overhangs occur ("rockshelters"),
these, too, degrade and collapse over time (Collins
1991b). Sites on, or at the toe of, slopes are subject
to movement or burial by colluviation. As
rockshelters degrade and collapse, sites within them
are buried in detritus. All of these factors profoundly
shape the archeological record.

ter scale, occur in the area (Osmond 1963; Davis
et al. 1989). The consequences of seismicity and
tectonic activity during the Late Quaternary (cf. E.
Collins 1982; E. Collins et al. 1980) may have influenced human history or the archeological record
of that history in Central Texas. Expectable consequences of earthquakes include: degradation of
rockshelters and blufflines (Collins 1991b), soil
liquefaction or ejection events, and the alteration
of stream courses (Rapp 1986; Schumm 1977;
Talwani and Cox 1985).
Pedoturbation occurs to some extent in all soils.
Common forms include the action of roots of trees,
brush, and herbaceous vegetation; the burrowing of
animals; and the constant action of earth worms.
Dens of the social insects, particularly ants, can
also cause extensive damage to sites.
As the landscape aggrades, soil formation and
the disruptive forces that accompany soils are
lessened proportionally to the rate of aggradation.
Conversely, cessation of aggradation intensifies
disturbance in the soil zone. It also invites the
mixing of archeological evidence from multiple
periods of occupation, called palimpsests (cf.
Fen’ing 1986). It is important to recognize that any
surface upon which archeological materials rest
was stable, at least briefly. If that surface is buried,
aggradation resumed after a time of stability. Not
all buried surfaces are equal, since the time of
stability can vary from days to millennia before
deposition resumes.
Archeologists do not always discriminate the
differences among buried archeological surfaces,
placing too much emphasis on the fact of burial and
not enough on the nature of the interval of stability
(lacuna or hiatus) that preceded burial. Palimpsest
sites can become buried and be just as mixed as
their counterparts at the present surface.
A particular pitfall is that of penecontemporaneity, or burial at the same time. At any
moment, the land surface will be composed of
surfaces that have been exposed for different lengths
of time. If widespread deposition abruptly covers
part of that land surface, the preceding interval of
stability will have been of greater duration in some
areas than in others, but the overlying sediments
will all be of the same age. Any attempt by

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas
archeologists to use the age of a depositional unit to
estimate anything other than the minimum age of
underlying archeological materials is at risk.

CHRONOLOGY AND OTHER
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
It has become fashionable to criticize efforts
to build an archeological chronology for Central
Texas. McKinney (1981), Peter et al. (1982),
Johnson (1987, 1991; Johnson and Goode 1994),
Black (1989), Collins (1994a; Collins et al. 1991),
Ellis (1994), among others, have all found fault
with the leading chronological schemes proposed
by Weir (1976), and by Prewitt (1981, 1985). There
are significant flaws in both, but these are also two
remarkable and significant contributions to the archeology of the region, not so much as chronologies but as attempts to integrate and synthesize
large amounts of archeological data. It is also important to remember that Weir and Prewitt did not
lack for prototypes (notably those of Johnson et al.
[1962] and of Sorrow et al. [1967]).
Johnson, Suhm, and Tunnell (1962) and Sorrow, Shafer, and Ross (1967) proposed local archeological chronologies, each on the basis of a
few sites. The data from the Footbridge, Oblate,
and Wunderlich sites were not robust chronologically, but an effort was made to bring Central
Texas chronological thought into closer agreement
with that being used in the Eastern United States
(Johnson et al. 1962; Johnson and Goode 1994).
The Evoe Terrace and Landslide sites (Sorrow et
al. 1967) afforded better chronological evidence,
especially with the benefit of earlier findings at the
nearby Youngsport site (Shafer 1963). Sequencing
of diagnostic chipped stone tools, especially projectile points, was emphasized in these efforts.
Weir (1976) and Prewitt (1981, 1985)
proceeded beyond chronologizing projectile point
types, sought to find temporal patterning in site
types, features within sites, and assemblages of
artifacts, and offered suggestions to explain some
of the patterns they discerned. Ellis (1994) presents
an insightful critique of Weir’s and Prewitt’s efforts.
It is a credit to Weir’s and Prewitt’s skills in
the art of archeological analysis that such comprehensive schema could be developed, when many of
the data they used were from sites with: (a) mixed
components, (b) poor stratification, (c) unclear as-

371

sociations among artifacts and between artifacts and
features, and (d) weak associations between samples
dated by radiocarbon and the target archeological
manifestations. Weir (1976) relied on only 46 radiocarbon dates, the vast majority of which were
from sites outside of Central Texas; Prewitt (1985)
had 147.
Considerable use has been made of Weir’s and
especially of Prewitt’s chronological schemes and
revisions have been proposed (e.g. Johnson and
Goode 1994; Collins et al. 1991; Ricklis and Collins
1994). The work of verifying and improving the
regional archeological chronology will always remain unfinished. Recent efforts, especially the more
rigorous use of absolute dating (cf. Johnson and
Goode 1994), show promise for substantial improvements. Importantly, the caveat emptor posted
by Johnson (1987) regarding Prewitt’s chronology
must continue to be heeded.
Many sites in Central Texas are deficient or
totally lacking in suitable organic materials for conventional radiocarbon dating. Use of AMS (accelerator mass spectrometry) in radiocarbon dating has
enhanced the capability of the technique and brings
more sites within the scope of radiocarbon dating.
Alternatives to radiocarbon dating and application of radiocarbon techniques to a wider array of
materials are also important developments.
Archeomagnetic (Eighmy 1993), optically-stimulated luminescent (Stokes 1992), thermoluminescent (Collins 1994c:499-501), and in rare cases even
obsidian hydration (Stevenson 1992), procedures
may hold promise for dating certain recalcitrant
sites in the area. Dating of organic constituents of
bone, soil, sediments, snail shells, travertines and
other carbonate rocks using radiocarbon techniques
are becoming more useful as the chemistry of each
becomes better known, and the problems associated
with assaying these materials become less serious.
Burned rock middens, because they are
numerous and conspicuous in Central Texas, have
long received a large share of the archeologists’
attention. After decades of limited success in
understanding what these sites represent in human
behavioral terms, recent efforts employing more
thoughtful research strategies and improved
techniques for gathering and analyzing data have
begun to extract information that promises to answer
some questions and more-clearly frame others.
Perhaps the single most fundamental conceptual
advance in burned rock midden research is

372

Texas Archeological Society

recognition that burned rock middens likely formed
in several different ways. Recovery of detailed data
on the structure, composition, content, and context
of middens in search of data on explicitly defined
material expressions of different aspects of human
behavior is the approach that has long been lacking
in burned rock midden research (Collins 1991a,
1994b; Creel 1991; Goode 1991; Howard 1991;
Prewitt 1991; Hester 1991; Potter et al. 1995; Potter
and Black 1995).
Archeology in Central Texas has also seen
development of sophisticated research into the technology of stone tool manufacture and use. A trend
that began in the late 1960s (e.g., Sorrow 1969) and
has become almost routine (e.g., Ensor and MuellerWille 1988), is to include technological findings in
lithic artifact descriptions. This has included efforts
at sourcing cherts (e.g., Quigg and Peck 1995) and
obsidians (e.g., Hester et al. 1985), along with sustained considerations of how people acquired stone,
worked it, as well as used, maintained, and recycled the resultant objects. What has not occurred
is any regional synthesis of the diverse descriptive
data that have been amassed. Debitage analysis,
properly done on assemblages of high contextual
quality, contributes otherwise unknowable information about prehistoric knapping behavior (cf.
Ensor and Mueller-Wille 1988; Quigg and Peck
1995; Collins 1994a; Ricklis 1994b).
Although ceramics are far less common than
lithic artifacts in Central Texas, concern with
ceramic technology and the cultural implications of
pottery-making behavior has recently emerged (e.g.,
Johnson 1994; Reese-Taylor et al. 1994). This is an
important development that, if sustained, will
produce valuable results concerning the prehistoric
Central Texas archeological record.
Archeologists in Central Texas have increasingly considered the processes of site formation
and incorporated the findings into their interpretations (e.g., Potter and Black 1995). This is not a
research goal in its own right, but it is an essential
element in sound archeological inquiry, and it
should become a routine part of any site investigation. An outstanding early example of the site-formation-process perspective is that of Kelley and
Campbell (1942), which considered the relationship between rates of alluviation and the formation
of burned rock middens. Unfortunately, this perspective did not prevail in the region, and only
recently has it become very common.

Butzer (1982) notes that the archeological
record can be viewed on three contrasting scales-micro, meso, and macro. Research at each scale has
its own set of strengths and weaknesses. Archeological inquiry in Central Texas has heavily emphasized the meso-scale, which usually
encompasses a single site and its immediate setting. Unfortunately, archeological patterns are more
vulnerable to disruption at the meso-scale than at
either the micro-scale or the macro-scale (Collins
et al. 1991a). A few studies at the macro-scale,
where archeological data patterns covering wide
areas are sought, have been concluded which incorporate data from Central Texas (Meltzer 1987, 1989,
see also Meltzer and Bever, this volume; Creel
1991; Howard 1991; Largent and Waters 1990),
but considerable gain could be expected from more
such studies.
Historically, archeological excavations in Central Texas have emphasized the vertical dimension,
a direct outgrowth of the emphasis placed on the
building of an archeological chronology. Growing
interest in recovering evidence of human behavior
has led to increasing use of wide-area excavations
on "living surfaces" (e.g., at the Slab, Loeve Fox,
Higgins, Camp Pearl Wheat, Mustang Branch, Turkey Bend Ranch, Sleeper, and Rush sites, to name a
few). These shifts in emphasis constitute one of the
most positive developments in the regional paradigm, but much is yet to be done to bring this
approach to full fruition. Principally, the first requirement is that any archeological array thought to
be a "living surface" be assessed for length of exposure. The primary aim in excavations of this sort
is to find horizontal patterning within a single component of short duration. Ideally, that is a surface
lived upon by only one cultural group, who left
material clues of the spatial organization of their
activities where those patterns have not been sullied by subsequent occupations of the same surface
(cf. Ferring 1986; Johnson 1987). Rapid burial of
such surfaces is the surest process by which such
conditions are produced, and comprehensive geologic evidence is the best indicator that burial was
swift and sure. Good examples of these conditions
having been met are for Late Prehistoric components at the Rush (Quigg and Peck 1995) and Mustang Branch (Ricklis 1994a, 1994b) sites.
Obviously, "living surfaces" can be reused, as at
the Slab site, where multiple components are clearly
indicated at the same level in the site (Patterson

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas
1987). Difficulty arises when it is unclear how long
a surface remained exposed, and how many episodes of use may be represented by the archeological materials on that surface (Collins 1994a).
A great advantage of horizontal exposures in
archeological sites is the opportunity to fully investigate entire features in their horizontal contexts.
Thoughtful inquiry into the form, function, and content of burned rock features, and the behaviors responsible for their creation (cf. Thorns 1989), is
burgeoning in Central Texas (Johnson 1991; Collins
et al. 1990; Collins 1991a; Potter et al. 1995). Explicit criteria for recognizing ovens, open hearths,
rock disposal heaps, and other behaviorally-significant kinds of burned-rock features are emerging,
although consensus on these interpretations does
not yet exist. The use of geomagnetic evidence to
determine whether or not any given burned rock
has been moved since it was last heated and cooled
is one technique that holds promise in this area of
inquiry (Gose 1994). The greater use of comparative ethnology and ethnographic analogy (Thoms
1989) has also been a major benefit to this line of
inquiry. It is too early to know what the ultimate
potential of investigations in this vein might be.
Wide area excavations have also brought about
more interest in the nature of prehistoric structures
in Central Texas. For example, at the Slab, Turkey
Bend Ranch, Mustang Branch, Currie, Rocky
Branch, and Zatopec sites, possible evidence of
structures has emerged. These suggest the presence
of domiciles or other architecture from Early
Archaic to Late Prehistoric times. The nature and
functions of domestic structures has been one of
the more neglected topics in Central Texas
archeology, but these recent developments should
bring about increased awareness and interest in the
subject. New findings will then follow in due course.
Faunal remains and, less often, floral remains
have long been identified and reported when recovered from archeological sites in Central Texas (Jelks
1962; McDonald 1974; Weir 1979; Sorrow et al.
1967). In the last few years, investigators have emphasized closer scrutiny of faunal taphonomy, and
have made more concerted efforts to recover and
interpret economically important floral remains, including pollen and phytoliths as well as macrofloral
specimens (Jelks 1962; Hester 1973; Black and
McGraw 1985; Holloway 1988; Howard 1991).
Bone breakage is no longer lamented as interfering
with taxonomic classification, but is seen as an

373

eloquent expression of the cultural and natural
forces that have operated on the assemblage
(Masson and Holderby !994). These are essential
views to understanding the human behaviors and
adaptations behind the regional archeological
record, and thus integrate closely with the investigation of living surfaces and burned rock features.
Archeologists in Central Texas have been
mindful of the need to understand the relationship
between cultural history and past climatic conditions (Bryant and Shafer 1977; Bryant and
Holloway 1985; Gunn and Mahula 1977). Integration of the two lines of evidence (cf. Bryant and
Shafer 1977) has not been particularly successful,
however, in part because the better environmental
records have not been found in archeological sites
(Blum 1992), and because neither record has been
consistent and precise.
An almost complete hiatus exists between the
prehistoric and ethnographic records of native
peoples in Central Texas. In the last decade, considerable progress has been made in clarifying this
gap, and in focusing attention on issues which are
perhaps subject to meaningful investigation. No
longer are the Jumanos (Kelley 1947), nor the
Tonkawas (Suhm 1960), considered to be possible
descendants of the authors of Toyah prehistoric
manifestations; no serious scholar still considers
Cabeza de Vaca’s trek to have crossed Central
Texas (Campbell and Campbell 1981). The present
territory of Central Texas was not the long ancestral homeland of any indigenous group for whom
an ethnographic account exists. The ethnographically known Comanche, Apache, Wichita, Kiowa,
and even the Tonkawa arrived in Central Texas just
before or during the early European contact period
(Newcomb 1961, 1993; Campbell 1988). Historic
records document the presence of numerous other
groups during the first decades of European contact but provide rather little information about
them. Concerted ethnohistoric work (Campbell:
multiple listings under Indian group names in
Branda 1976; Campbell 1988; Campbell and
Campbell 1985; Newcomb 1993) has gleaned valuable but incomplete information on these peoples
who mostly vanish from historical view by the
early 18th century. Thus we have an early part of
the Historic period, essentially a protohistoric,
consisting of historic glimpses of indigenous
peoples, and a later Historic subperiod during
which relocated, acculturated remnants of earlier

374

Texas Archeological Society

groups as well as very recently arrived groups are
known from more complete historic records and,
in some cases, later ethnographic studies. These
facts greatly reduce, but do not eliminate, the usefulness of any direct historical approach to the prehistory of Central Texas (Newcomb 1993; Collins
and Ricklis 1994).

THE FRENCH HAVE A
WORD FOR IT
Six features and 35 artifacts recovered in excavation of the Camp Pearl Wheat site in Kerr
County (Collins et al. 1990) tell more about Archaic lifeways than the large burned rock midden
and its 1,282 artifacts documented at the John Ischy
site in Williamson County (Sorrow 1969). The difference is in data quality. At John Ischy, multiple
components were hopelessly mixed as they accumulated in a midden on a long-stable land surface;
at Camp Pearl Wheat, the land surface was stable
for only a brief time during which people occupied
the site on one or a very few occasions, and their
leavings were buried before later cultural materials
could be added. Sorrow could detect patterns in the
distributions of certain artifact classes across the
John Ischy site--for example manos were more
abundant just outside of the midden than within or
farther away from it (Sorrow 1969:50-51 and Figure 27)--but there was no way to know if this
reflects behavior that continued throughout the
3,200 or so years (my estimate) of the site’s use, or
to only some portion of that time.
In contrast, all or part of a single, integrated,
functional artifact assemblage is probably represented at the Camp Pearl Wheat site in an isolable
component. These contribute to an emerging regional pattern of site types and distributions that
reflect subsistence behavior during the Early Archaic (see discussion, below).
Localities where low-energy natural deposition is active during or between episodes of human
occupation afford the optimum conditions for the
isolation of discrete assemblages of material culture remains. Such localities become stratified archeological sites with one or more isolable
archeological components sealed between strata of
natural deposits. When archeological methods of
investigating such sites are integrated with those
from the earth sciences, the results are superior to

any which derive from archeology alone. Prehistorians in the Old World, especially in France, have
long recognized and practiced this integrated approach to site-specific and regional studies (a good
discussion as regards rockshelters appears in Laville
et al. 1980).
A site with stratified archeological and geological layers is referred to in French as a gisement
(plural, gisements [both pronounced "geezemohn,"
the "gee" as in "gee whiz"]). Increasingly over the
last 40 years in Old World prehistory, the methodology for excavating and interpreting gisements has
emphasized the interdisciplinary approach, covering geology, soil science, paleontology, palynology, archeology, and whatever other fields are
appropriate. Had archeologists in Central Texas over
the last 40 years concentrated on the discovery and
comprehensive analysis of gisements, even a small
fraction as much as have their counterparts in the
Old World, the record at hand today would be more
complete; chronology would have been much more
easily controlled; better constrained assemblages
would exist for each time interval; and the regional
archeological sequence would be integrated with a
paleoenvironmental sequence. Data of this improved
quality would have long ago fostered the kinds of
substantive research just now beginning to emerge
in the Central Texas region.
Gisements can form in caves, rockshelters,
dunes, or any area of natural, low-energy
deposition. As a practical matter in Central Texas,
however, most have formed in the alluvium of
stream valleys.

GISEMENTS AND CENTRAL
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

Contrary to an appearance that gisements might
be scarce in Central Texas or that none was known
until recently, the problem has been that most archeologists have simply not appreciated the value of the
ones that have been found and have not rigorously
sought others. Also, it is common for gisements in
Central Texas to have denser cultural deposits in the
upper layers and sparser ones at depth (e.g., Landslide, Wilson-Leonard). I have no doubt that countless times the excavators of such sites stopped
digging either when artifact counts dropped off or
when a sterile deposit was encountered (cf. account
of the previous testing of the Camp Pearl Wheat Site

Collins-- Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

375

[Collins et al. 1990]). In those cases, any deeper
none the less, useful in organizing the archeological
components went undetected.
record. Subdivi-sions of these periods into subperiods
Deep stratified sites, with one, severa!, or many
are also based on adaptive shifts thought to reflect
isolable cultural components, have been docuchanges in subsistence strategies. In this presentamented for at least 60 years (for examples the
tion, the subdivisions of the Archaic follow the
Merrell site, excavated in 1934 and 1935 [Campbell
recent revisions proposed by Johnson and Goode
1948], and Rob Roy, dug in 1938 and 1939 [Jackson
(1994). Early and late subperiods of the Paleoindian
1939]). A few have been important in the
and Late Prehistoric periods are used in this presendevelopment of the local archeological record
tation to reflect distinctive archeo-logical patterns.
(notably Youngsport, Landslide, Kyle, Smith, Loeve
The finer subdivisions, style intervals, are deFox, and Jetta Court). None the less, in spite of
pendent primarily on diagnostic projectile point
archeological work begun at
least by 1918 (Pearce 1932:48),
only about 31 gisements with
one or more securely isolated
archeological components have
been reported in Central Texas
(Table 2 and Figure 8).
I have characterized the
components at these sites as having either very high or moderately high integrity on arbitrary
and somewhat subjective criteria. Components with high integrity (depicted in solid shading in Table 2) show evidence
of rapid burial, lack evidence
for extensive post-depositional
disturbance, and consist of a
relatively homogeneous archeological assemblage (especially
of diagnostic artifact forms).
a
Components of moderately high
b
integrity (stippled in Table 2)
are either slightly deficient in
one or more of these criteria,
the sample is too small for a
high-confidence assessment, or
sufficient information is lacking to fully assess integrity.
Several aspects of the information in Table 2 require
comment. Three main periods,
Paleoindian, Archaic, and Late
Prehistoric are used approximately in the conventional
sense to depict what have long
been inferred to be significant
Figure 8. Representative gisements (deeply stratified layers of cultural and
shifts in adaptations. While natural deposits) in Central Texas: a-b, open gisements in fluvial valley fill
these inferences may not be en- (Wiley Williams and Wilson-Leonard); c, rockshelter gisement in limestone
tirely sound, the periods are, detrital fill (Kyle site).

376

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2. Central Texas Archeological Chronology key Gisements, and Paleoenvironmental Records
(See Appendix for references)

RadioCarbon
Years
B.P.

Archeological
Periods and
Subperiods
HISTORIC

Archeological
Style
Intervals

middle
earl},

1000

late
LATE
PREHISTORIC
early

Perdiz
Scallorn,
Edwards
Dad
Ensor, Frio,
Fairland
Marcos, Montell,
Castroville

2000
late

Lange, Marshall,
Williams

Pedernales,
Kinney
3000

Bulverde
4000
Nolan,
Travis

middle

Taylor

5000
BelI-AndiceCalf Creek

o
t~
<
6000

Martindale,
Uvalde
7000
early

Early Split
Stem

8000
Angostura

St. Mary’s Hall

9000
late

GolondrinaBarber

Wilson
10,000

Z

(Dalton,
San Patrice)
Plainview?)

Folsom
11,000

12,000

early

Clovis

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

Table 2. (Continued)

Bog
Pollen

Hall’s Cave
Microfauna
(tentative)

377

378

Texas Archeological Society
weighted toward the recent end with 19 (31 percent)
of the 61 components assigned to the Late
Prehistoric Period (the last 1000 years, or 8.7
percent, of the local prehistory). The Late
Paleoindian and Middle Archaic subperiods are
represented by the fewest components (4 and 5,
respectively; that means that 6.5 percent of the
components are in the Late Paleoindian subperiod,
which is 10 percent of the sequence, and that 8.2
percent are in the Middle Archaic subperiod--16.5
percent of the sequence).
Twelve geological, palynological, or paleontological records (see Table 2) in and near the Central Texas archeological area reflect a consistent
but generalized environmental sequence (sources
listed in the Appendix). Alternating intervals of
comparatively mesic or xeric conditions have been
inferred by Bousman from the pollen sequences
from bogs in East Central Texas (Collins et al.
1993), and by Toomey from the vertebrate faunal
record of Hall’s Cave (Toomey 1993; Toomey et
al. 1993). The bog-pollen sequence is not well controlled chronologically; however, the available dates
indicate relatively constant rates of sedimentation
from which Bousman interpolated the depicted sequence. Bousman’s interpretation of the reported
pollen data from Weakly and Boriack bogs considered the relative frequency of grass to
arboreal pollens. In doing this, a climatically-sensitive aspect of the pollen record emerges from the complete
:
:
spectrum, which otherwise contains
:
numerous taxa whose abundances are
:
:
more likely to be reflective of local:
ized conditions around the bogs.
"
A deeply-stratified, abundant,

styles ("types") which change for reasons not really
understood at our present level of knowledge. These,
too, follow approximately the scheme offered by
Johnson and Goode (1994), and derive from the
syntheses of Weir (1976) and Prewitt (1981, 1985).
As already observed, some style intervals are better
constrained than others--that called Toyah being
probably the best; and that called Taylor, perhaps
the poorest.
Absolute dating is portrayed in radiocarbon
years before the present on Table 2, the convention
generally followed by geoarcheologists. This convention facilitates use of uncalibrated dates from
the literature of the geological sciences and from
that of earlier archeological projects. It also allows
any calibration to be applied. As a better,
stratigraphically-constrained archeological sequence
emerges, higher-precision radiocarbon procedures
along the lines advocated by Johnson and Goode
(1994) will have greater efficacy.
Sixty-one components of moderately high to
high stratigraphic integrity are reported for the 31
Central Texas gisements presented in Table 2.
Additional components of lesser integrity occur at
a number of these sites, but these are not included.
As seen in a cumulative percentage graph of these
components by subperiod (Figure 9), the record is

lOO

II

o
oO

E
6O

4O

EarLy

I

Late

Paleoindian

Archeological Chronology

Figure 9. Cumulative percentage graph of documented gisements by
archeological time periods in Central Texas.

high-resolution sequence of small animal remains was found in Hall’s Cave.
Toomey excavated 3.7 m into the fill
of Hall’s Cave and recovered thousands of faunal specimens (over
12,000 had been cataloged in 1993,
with many more remaining to be cataloged). Only the upper 2 m of the
Hall’s Cave sequence is considered
here, and the climatic history depicted
is based only on the relative proportions of the least shrew (Cryptotis
[which requires a relatively moist habitat]) to the desert shrew (Notiosorex
[found in more arid habitats]) follow-

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

ing Toomey (1993) and Toomey et al. (1993). The
Hall’s Cave sequence I have used here is controlled
by 4! radiocarbon dates on bone provided by
Stafford (personal communication, 1995) and by
three charcoal dates (Toomey 1993). Because of
the large number of dates, the fact that the dates are
almost perfectly stratigraphically consistent, and
there is generally high internal agreement between
radiocarbon ages determined on different chemical
fractions of the same bone, this sequence can be
considered one of the best-dated and most environmentally sensitive records in North America. Concern expressed by Johnson and Goode (1994:22) in
regard to dates on the earthen fill of Hall’s Cave are
clearly dispelled by the bone-organic chronology.
When it is fully reported, the Hall’s Cave biostratigraphy will be a landmark contribution to Quaternary studies.
These pollen and faunal records both indicate
an early xeric interval ending near 12,000 B.P.
(closely correlative with the "Clovis Drought" noted
by Haynes [1991]), followed by a significant time
of relatively mesic conditions. Each record then
indicates a long Middle Holocene interval of
relatively xeric conditions, that was slightly
ameliorated at roughly its midpoint. That the two
records are not synchronous probably results largely,
if not entirely, from inaccuracy in the ages
interpolated for the bog-pollen sequence. In general
terms, the Middle Holocene xeric interval lasted
approx-imately 5,000 years-close to half of the
local prehistory. The effects of Middle Holocene
aridity are seen widely in Central Texas, often in
the form of stream incision, but precise dating is
often difficult (cf. Abbott 1994).
Late Holocene conditions returned to being
more mesic. The pollen and faunal evidence is inconsistent only in the latest Holocene where a final
swing toward xeric conditions appears in the Hall’s
Cave fauna. Other than relatively small samples of
the species (and, therefore, possible sampling error) on which Toomey based the depicted interpretations, the inconsistency is not readily understood.
It is possible, of course, that contrasting conditions
could exist because the pollen record is from the
eastern-most, while the faunal record is from more
nearly the western-most, edges of the area.
The relative abundance of bison in and near
Central Texas has been inferred from occurrences
in archeological sites (Dillehay 1974; Prewitt 1981,
1985; Collins et al. 1990). There is a general corre-

379

lation between bison occurrences and comparatively
mesic portions of the bog-pollen and Hall’s Cave
faunal records.
The geologic records are based on fluvial sequences where episodes of valley filling alternate
with periods of erosion and/or stability and soil
formation. Geologic sequences portrayed in Table 2
are based on data of varying completeness and precision (particularly as regards dating). Geologists
working with Quaternary-age sequences vary widely
in their application of the concept of soils (some
emphasizing soil-formation and reporting every minor soil, others emphasizing sedimentary process
and reporting only major soils). Local conditions in
each fluvial system differ, and circumstances determining the amount of radio-carbon dating that can
be applied are unequal. Furthermore, investigators
allocate their radiocarbon resources differently, some
targeting soils, others preferring to date sediments.
For these reasons, the depictions in Table 2 must be
viewed only as indicating general trends, and are
not to be taken to represent detailed, precisely-dated
alluvial sequences.
Consistently, the valleys of Central Texas (and
much of North America [Haynes 1991, 1992,
1993]) were downcut and scoured of sediment in
the Late Pleistocene, ca. 15,000 to 12,000 years
ago. Valley filling followed during the ensuing
mesic interval, and it is in these sediments that a
number of the important Early Paleoindian sites
have been found.
Erosion and stability with soil formation are
more characteristic of the Middle Holocene, during
the long xeric interval. This interval was first
recognized in North America on the basis of
extensive evidence for erosion and arroyo-cutting
in the Southwest, and has been called the
Altithermal (Antevs 1955). Whether or not the
interval was significantly warmer, it does seem to
have been drier, and the paleoenvironmental record
of Central Texas was clearly influenced by those
conditions. It is yet to be determined exactly what
the consequences of this xeric interval were in terms
of human ecology. It is abundantly clear that the
archeological record has been significantly and
adversely affected by the Middle Holocene xeric
conditions. Erosion undoubtedly destroyed many
sites and many others formed on stable surfaces,
resulting in palimpsests of long duration. The
approximately 5,000 years of the Middle Holocene
xeric interval--43 percent of the record--are

380

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

represented by only about 17 (22 percent) of the 61
components in Table 2.
Downcutting of valleys occurred widely in the
Middle Holocene, leaving former valley floors
above the reach of most flooding and bringing deposition on these surfaces to a virtual halt. Major soils
that formed on these long stable surfaces are documented over wide areas in the valleys of Central
Texas during the Middle Holocene, and many sites,
especially burned rock middens, reside on those
surfaces. It is from these numerous, highly-visible,
artifact-rich sites that much of the archeological
record for the Middle Holocene has been derived.
Returning for a moment to the poorly-defined
Taylor style interval, the question to be answered
by future research is whether its archeological
scarcity reflects a cultural reality, or results from
gaps in the archeological record brought about by
erosion and reduced deposition during the Middle
Holocene. This poorly-represented "interval" is left
on Table 2 to underscore this aspect of the record,
and to provide a tempting target for sound
archeological dismissal or verification.
Fortunately, all Central Texas streams did not
respond in exactly identical fashion to the Middle
Holocene xeric interval, and neither erosion nor
non-deposition are absolute in any fluvial system-there is always deposition somewhere. Deposits of
Middle Holocene age are present but less abundant
and less conspicuous than those of Early and Late
Holocene ages. Corollary to this, there are sites of
Middle Holocene age in good geologic context to
be found. The search will need to be made using
geomorphological sampling designs (cf. Blum and
Lintz 1993:313; Mandel 1992:79-83; Nordt
1992:68-80).
In the Late Holocene, valley filling prevailed,
but one widespread episode of downcutting occurred
ca. 1000 B.P. (Hall 1990). In part because the evidence is better preserved, the Late Holocene record
includes several less significant interruptions to
deposition (see Table 2).
Some ten years ago, Hall (1986) reviewed an
entirely different set of geologic data and recognized essentially the same aspects of the Quaternary record as revealed by the data summarized
here in Table 2. He presented an insightful synthesis of those data in an effort to inform archeologists
of the nature of the data base with which they were
working. That paper (Hall 1986) has not been published, but the essence of the synoptic graph from

that presentation (Hall, personal communication,
1995) is reproduced here as the far fight column of
Table 2. It is noteworthy that Hall perceived these
patterns in valleys primarily north and northeast of
Central Texas, indicating the geographic extent of
this general sequence.

A BRIEF SYNTHESIS OF
THE PREHISTORY OF
CENTRAL TEXAS
Several lines of evidence are now brought together to offer a generalized cultural history of
Central Texas. Ideally the empirical basis for this
effort would come solely from the 61 isolable components arrayed in Table 2, but two limitations
stand in the way of that approach. First, there are
comparatively few paleoenvironmental data from
those components, and those that are available are
not consistent or systematic. Second, archeological
assemblages recovered from short-term components tend to be small, and sampling error is probably responsible for gaps in the data. We need
many more such components to produce a less rarefied record.
Pre-Clovis
One site in Central Texas--Levi Rockshelter
(Alexander 1983)--has been explicitly interpreted
as containing a component that predates the Clovis
horizon. There is no question that humans made the
purported pre-Clovis artifacts at Levi, but poor
stratigraphy, lack of a coherent assemblage with
several consistent radiocarbon dates, and no unambiguous cultural associations with fauna known to
have become extinct before 11,500 B.P., render
Alexander’s argument for a pre-Clovis age invalid.
A human presence of great antiquity has been discussed to account for selected fractured stones from
Friesenhahn Cave (Krieger 1964), the absence of
caudal vertebrae among mammoth remains at the
Waco Mammoth site (J. Fox et al. 1992), and for a
"presapiens" human form at Hitzfelder Cave (Givens 1968a, 1968b). None of these suggestions has
been sustained with sufficient evidence for general
acceptance. This is not to say that some future find
might not prevail as a pre-Clovis site.
In addition to meeting the widely recognized
criteria of stratigraphic integrity, unambiguous human evidence, and secure dating, two factors must

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

be overcome in any search for sites earlier than
Clovis. The first is geomorphological. Most valleys
in much of North America were scoured to bedrock
during the time immediately before Clovis, meaning that there is little chance of finding components
stratigraphically beneath Clovis in fluvial contexts.
Outside of alluvial valley settings, sites would either be on upland landforms or in rockshelters.
Upland localities rarely produce good stratigraphic
contexts and rockshelters of pre-Clovis age may be
highly degraded (Collins 1991b). The second is
cultural. It is not known what might constitute the
pre-Clovis material culture assemblages, and, lacking these criteria for its recognition, the evidence
will almost certainly have to come from the unlikely context of stratigraphically underlying a
Clovis archeological component.

Paleoindian

Paleoindian sites and isolated artifacts are
fairly common in Central Texas. Concepts of
Paleoindian lifeways in North America generally,
and in Central Texas particularly, are changing
rapidly. The simple cultural sequence of big-game
hunting "cultures"--Clovis, Folsom, Plainview,
and Cody (Krieger 1947; Sellards and Evans 1960;
W0rmington 1957; Suhm et al. 1954)--is no longer
adequate to accommodate the diverse material culture assemblages, projectile point styles, and indicated subsistence behaviors now documented
during what has been traditionally recognized as
the Paleoindian period; that is, the period earlier
than ca. 8800 B.P. It is necessary to draw upon
some data from outside of Central Texas to adequately portray these developments, but this is
warranted because (1) there is an almost frenetic
tempo of Paleoindian research in the Americas at
the moment, (2) there is no cultural manifestation
during Paleoindian times constrained to just Central Texas, and (3) although sites in Central Texas
are contributing evidence to the broader developments, there are important ideas emerging elsewhere with implications for understanding the local
Paleoindian evidence.
In this discussion, because the fundamental
defining criteria of "Paleoindians" (best stated in
Wormington’s [1957] Paleoeastern Tradition) as
nomadic big-game hunters are being challenged,
the Paleoindian period is defined as a temporal
span from ca. 11,500 to 8,800 B.P. This allows the

381

issue of Paleoindian lifeways to be considered
more objectively. As already noted, an Early and a
Late subperiod of the Paleoindian period are proposed for Central Texas (see Table 2).
The Paleoindian period began as the Pleistocene waned, when now-extinct forms of large
animals were among the prey taken by Early
Paleoindian hunters. Projectile points in use during the Early Paleoindian subperiod were primarily, if not exclusively, of lanceolate form and
typically were fluted, Clovis and Folsom being the
defined types.
Clovis is the earliest well-defined cultural horizon in Central Texas, assumed on the basis of
dating at sites elsewhere in North America to have
existed here between approximately 11,200 and
10,900 B.P. (Haynes 1992). Kincaid Rockshelter,
Wilson-Leonard, Gault, Horn Shelter #2, Pavo Real,
and Crockett Gardens are where the principal Clovis
components have been documented in the area, and
surface finds of distinctive Clovis points are reported from a number of other localities (Meltzer
1987; see also Meltzer and Bever, this volume).
Generally, in North America Clovis manifestations
are the most diverse in the Paleoindian period with
types of sites including: kill, quarry/stone-working,
caches, camps, ritual, and burial. The artifact inventory includes chipped stone artifacts produced
using bifacial, flake, and prismatic-blade techniques,
always on high quality and often on exotic stones
(Collins 1990). Engraved stones (Collins et al. 1991;
Collins et al. 1992), bone and ivory points, a bone
shaft straightener, stone bolas, and ochre are reported from Clovis contexts (Collins n.d.b)
Subsistence in Clovis times was based on diverse fauna, including large herbivores such as
mammoth, bison, and horse as well as smaller animals such as water turtles, land tortoises, alligator,
mice, badger, and raccoon. An array of plants presumably also constituted part of Clovis subsistence
(Collins et al. 1989).
A paved floor at Kincaid Rockshelter reflects
a greater investment of labor than nomadic hunters
could afford on a fleeting habitation (enough stones,
totalling more than 2 metric tons, were brought in
from the nearby river bed to cover ten square meters
of the muddy shelter floor [Collins et al. 1989;
Collins 1990]). Caches of Clovis artifacts (in Texas
and elsewhere in North America [Collins n.d.a])
are suggestive of hunting and gathering rounds that
returned groups to the same places more reliably

382

Texas Archeological Society

than is the case with nomadic hunters of big game.
Overall, the data indicate the Clovis lifeway
to have been that of well-adapted, generalized
hunter-gatherers with the technology to hunt big
game but not the need to rely exclusively on it.
Either their travels or their contacts with other
groups enabled them to acquire exotic stone from
great distances. Ironically, more is known of these
earliest Paleoindians than of those who came later.
In contrast to Clovis lifeways, subsistence in
Folsom times seems to have been more reliant upon
specialized hunting of big game, namely bison.
Sites with Folsom-age components in Central
Texas include Horn Shelter 2, Pavo Real, WilsonLeonard, and Kincaid, the latter two of which evidence bison-hunting. Camps, stone-working, and
kill sites are all that have been documented, mostly
in or near grassland habitats. These, along with a
tool kit of Folsom points, end scrapers, and large
ultra-thin bifaces, are the trappings of hunters. Diagnostic artifacts in Folsom times are the large thin
bifaces, fluted Folsom points, and thin unfluted
("Midland") points.
An urgent problem in and beyond Central
Texas regards what constitutes "Plainview," and
where that manifestation fits chronologically. Much
that has been called Plainview--a plethora of
unfluted, lanceolate dart point forms--fails to match
the type-site points in thinness and flaking technology. A serious revisiting of existing typological
and contextual evidence bearing on this problem is
needed as well as new and better archeological
data. I am beginning to suspect that tree Plainviews
(as at the Plainview site and some of the artifacts
from Bone Bed 2 at Bonfire Shelter) are equally as
old as Folsom (i.e., greater than 10,200 B.P. [cf.
Haynes 1993]), and are absent from, or extremely
rare in, Central Texas. "Plainview" points at Horn
Shelter 2 are thicker and have more deeply-concave bases than those at the Plainview site and
come from zones dated ca. 8400 B.P. (Redder 1985).
At Wilson-Leonard, the unfluted lanceolate points
previously identified as Plainview (Weir 1985) are
morphologically distinct from points at the
Plainview type site and date to the interval 95008000 B.P. These points from Wilson-Leonard are
placed in the Late Paleoindian subperiod and are
referred to as Golondrina, Barber, and St. Mary’s
Hall (Masson and Collins 1995).
Also murky in Central Texas and elsewhere
are the temporal position and cultural significance

of the few Dalton and not-so-few San Patrice-like
points (variously called San Patrice, Brazos Fishtail, and Rodgers Side-Hollowed). The latter occur
at Wilson-Leonard and at Kincaid, and both occur
at Horn Shelter 2 in Central Texas. Daltons are
dated in the Middle Mississippi valley as ca. 9500
to 10,500 B.P. (Morse and Morse 1983) and are
close to that age at Horn Shelter 2 (ca. 9500-9980
B.P. [Redder 1985]). San Patrice-like Rex Rodgers
points are associated with a Clovis point and an
unfluted lanceolate point in what appears to be a
single-event bison kill site in the Texas Panhandle
(Willey et al. 1978). They occur in a deposit dated
between 9500 and 9980 B.P. at Horn Shelter 2
(Redder 1985) but remain undated at Kincaid
(Collins 1990b). Everything about the fauna, associated artifacts, and features (including a double
burial) found with San Patrice ("Brazos Fishtail")
and Dalton points at Horn Shelter 2 suggests an
Archaic-like, hunter-gatherer cultural manifestation
(Redder 1985). Tentatively, I have placed this material as transitional between Early and Late
Paleoindian on Table 2; hopefully future work or
new finds will clarify the picture.
Three style intervals, Wilson, GolondrinaBarber, and St. Mary’s Hall, are here proposed for
the late subperiod of the Paleoindian period (see
Table 2). These are moderately well defined at the
Wilson-Leonard site (Masson and Collins 1995).
The Wilson component is the better represented,
and is characterized as having corner-notched,
Archaic-like Wilson dart points (Weir 1985; Masson
and Collins 1995) in association with features, a
burial, artifacts, and faunal remains more Archaic
than Paleoindian in appearance. Dates for this
component are ca. 10,000 to 9650 B. P. (Masson
and Collins 1995).
The Archaic-like character continues for the
Golondrina-Barber and St. Mary’s Hall components, dated between 9500 and 8800 B.P. All three
of these components (Wilson, Golondrina-Barber,
and St. Mary’s Hall) have burned rock features, but
the size of the features and the amounts of rock
present is decidedly less than that in Archaic features of younger ages. The subperiod here called
Late Paleoindian is in many ways archeologically
intermediate (or "transitional") between Early
Paleoindian and the Archaic; the question to be
answered is how accurately this material culturebased impression reflects their respective human
adaptations.

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas
Two burials between 9500 and 10,000 years
old, one at Wilson-Leonard and one at Horn Shelter 2, have produced three of the better-preserved
early human skeletons in North America (Steele
and Powell 1994). Both of these contained objects
of a utilitarian as well as an ornamental nature.

Archaic
Two-thirds of the prehistory of Central Texas
is "Archaic" in character. Archeologists have
viewed the Archaic as a time when hunting and
gathering of local resources was intensified over
that in Late Paleoindian times. Material culture
shows greater diversity--especially in the application of ground stone technology. A hallmark of the
Archaic in Central Texas is extensive use of heated
rocks found archeologically as various forms of
hearths, ovens, middens, scatters, and other features. Multiple tons of heat-altered rocks occur at
many Archaic sites in the region. The full gamut of
uses of these rocks can only be guessed at from
available evidence, but thoughtful inquiry into this
problem is increasingly common.
For more than 7500 years the basic Archaic
mode of life prevailed in Central Texas. There are
distinctive changes to be seen within the Archaic
archeological record, but it is not clear how
significant these really were at the times they
occurred. It is clear, however, that, in the broadest
sense, this long span represents a basic adaptation
that was successful. A priority in the investigation
of the Archaic record is to better understand the
fundamentals of that adaptation, and to determine
the significance of the variations seen over time
and across space. In briefly reviewing the Archaic
of Central Texas, the cultural-chronological
framework recently proposed by Johnson and Goode
(1994) is adopted with minor adjustments.
The early part of the Archaic, from ca. 8800 to
6000 B.P., is here subdivided into the three projectile point style intervals, Angostura, Early Split Stem,
and Martindale-Uvalde (see Table 2). Open campsites (including Loeve, Wilson-Leonard, Richard
Beene, Sleeper, Jetta Court, Youngsport, Camp Pearl
Wheat, and Landslide) as well as a cave (Hall’s
Cave), occupied at the far reach of daylight, contain
noteworthy components of the Early Archaic. Numerous dart points and Guadalupe tools attributable
to the Early Archaic also are present in Kincaid
Rockshelter, but in mixed context.

383

It is unclear if the distributional data are
representative, but a number of authors have noted
a concentration of Early Archaic components near
the eastern and southern margins of the Edwards
Plateau (Johnson 1991; Johnson and Goode 1994;
Ellis 1994; Black 1989; McKinney 1981). Large
and varied burned-rock features (Sleeper, Camp
Pearl Wheat, Wilson-Leonard, Richard Beene),
domestic structures (Turkey Bend Ranch), and
caches (Lindner) are known from the Early Archaic.
Grinding and hammering stones, Clear Fork and
Guadalupe bifaces (both inferred to be specialized
tools, probably for wood-working), along with a
variety of unifacial and bifacial chipped stone
implements, are reported from Early Archaic
components. Subsistence data are sparse for the
subperiod, but hunting of deer, exploitation of
various small animals including fish, and the
cooking of bulbs in earth ovens are indicated.
If the presently-known site distributional data
reflect land use in the Early Archaic, this was a
time when people were living in the better watered
parts of the live-oak savanna habitats on the
Edwards Plateau. Acorns, deer, and turkey are conspicuous among live-oak savanna resources, but
geophytes (e.g., onions, prairie turnip), other nuts
(e.g., pecan, walnut), berries (e.g., agarita, hawthorn), fruits (e.g., grapes, plums, persimmons), and
grass seeds, along with a host of small terrestrial,
amphibious, and aquatic animals round out a diverse and reliable subsistence base.
Pollen and fluvial geologic evidence portrays
an oscillation from mesic through extremely xeric
and back to mildly xeric conditions during the Early
Archaic (see Table 2). Bison (and antelope?) were
evidently scarce or absent. What mix of other foods
constituted the staple diet(s) during the Early
Archaic is unknown at this time.
The appearance during the Early Split Stem
interval (as at Wilson-Leonard) of specialized cooking appliances which use quantities of stone as heating elements reflect a sophisticated technology for
exploiting the oak-savanna resource base. These
features almost certainly represent the technological antecedents of the larger burned rock middens
that become a diacritic of later intervals in the Archaic of Central Texas.
The middle subperiod of the Archaic, from ca.
6000 to 4000 B.P., too, is further subdivided into
three style intervals (Bell-Andice-Calf Creek, Taylor, and Nolan-Travis; see Table 2). The earlier two

384

Texas Archeological Society

of these intervals reflect a shift in lithic technology
from that which had prevailed earlier. Bell-AndiceCalf Creek and Taylor are thin, basically triangular
bifaces with long thinning flakes emanating bifacially from the base; Taylor bifaces remain
unnotched whereas Bell, Andice, and Calf Creek
bifaces are characterized by deep, narrow basal
notches. All of these thin-bladed forms would serve
equally well as knives or as tips of lances, spears,
or darts. Impact fractures common on the BellAndice-Calf Creek forms attest to their use as
weapon tips.
Climate during the earliest interval (BellAndice-Calf Creek) was somewhat mesic. It was a
time when bison were hunted, leading Johnson and
Goode (1994) to surmise, correctly I think (Collins
1994a:94), that these thin bifaces were part of a
specialized bison-hunting weaponry, probably
brought to the region by peoples moving southwesterly from the prairie, prairie margins, and
woodlands west of the Ozarks (see Wyckoff 1995).
A tantalizing hint of functionally-different sites is
seen in this interval, with a greater diversity of tool
forms occurring at the Landslide, than at the Barton,
Bell-Andice components. Notable at Landslide are
more wood- and bone-working kinds of tools and,
especially, milling equipment that is absent from
the Barton site. It seems apparent that more diverse
tasks were undertaken at Landslide than at Barton.
Large burned rock features--hearths as well as rock
ovens--are inferred for the interval, particularly at
the Barton site. In a very subjective sense, components of this interval seem to me to show less intense use than that indicated at earlier-interval
components, particularly those of the Early Split
Stem interval. Perhaps greater mobility associated
with bison hunting is indicated.
By the later Middle Archaic intervals (Taylor
and Nolan-Travis), bison have disappeared from
the record and a more xeric climate has returned-in fact, culminating toward the end of the NolanTravis interval in what appears from the record to
have been the onset of the most xeric conditions
ever experienced by humans in Central Texas. Interestingly, Taylor and Nolan-Travis components
again have the appearance of either long-term or
intensive use, or both. Burned rock middens debut
(best seen at the Wounded Eye site in Kerr County
where Taylor bifaces dominate the assemblage recovered from a small burned rock midden). Another technological shift is seen in the production

and morphology of Nolan and Travis projectile
points, which are comparatively thick and often
have narrow blades (especially on Travis points)
with stems and shoulders; distinctive beveling of
the stems is characteristic of Nolan points.
Johnson and Goode (1994:26) suggest, as
Prewitt (n.d.) had done earlier, that burned rock
middens at this time were more frequently being
used to cook xerophytes such as sotol that may
have thrived in Central Texas as conditions became
drier. This does not necessarily signal an end to
extraction of the more typical oak-savanna floral
and faunal resources, but perhaps a shift in emphasis with concomitant adjustments in subsistence
technology, strategic planning, and scheduling (cf.
Bousman 1993).
The Late Archaic, ca. 4000 to 1200 or 1300
B.P., began as effective moisture was at its lowest
in Central Texas, but gradually the climate became
substantially more mesic (see Table 2). Six style
intervals have been postulated for the Late Archaic
(see Table 2). The Late Archaic is well represented
by investigated sites, including a number with components in good stratified contexts, although wellstratified components are almost completely
unreported for the earliest style interval (Bulverde).
Middle Archaic subsistence technology, and the
burned rock middens resulting from a portion of it,
continue well into the Late Archaic. In fact, during
the second style interval (best known for its
Pedernales points), the growth of burned rock
middens was at its greatest, especially in the easterly parts of the area. It appears, however, that
xeric vegetation and whatever reliance people
placed upon it, gradually disappeared from the easterly parts of Central Texas between 3500 and 2500
B.P. and burned rock midden growth slowed, but
did not cease. The xeric vegetation remained, and
continues to remain, in the western reaches of the
area, where its exploitation continued to include
use of communal earth ovens into Late Prehistoric
times (Goode 1991).
Johnson and Goode (1994) have offered a succinct account of the main cultural aspects of the
Late Archaic on the eastern Edwards Plateau. In so
doing, they distinguished between early ("Late Archaic I") and late ("Late Archaic II") subperiods.
Their provocative ideas need not be repeated here
other than to mention some highlights. Diverse and
comparatively complex archeological manifestations toward the end of the Late Archaic attest to

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

the emergence of kinds of human conduct without
precedent in the area. Among factors that have been
cited as contributing to these developments are increasing population size (Weir 1976; Prewitt 1981)
and stimuli from religious practices in the eastern
part of the continent (Johnson and Goode 1994).
Much remains to be learned about the hunter-gatherers of Central Texas in Late Archaic times, and
the questions prompted by the interpretations of
Johnson and Goode (1994) will require thorough
and comprehensive archeological investigations using data of the highest possible integrity.

Late Prehistoric
Considerable discomfort is evident among
archeologists faced with assessing the magnitude
of material culture change that occurred ca. 1200
B.P. in Central Texas. This is the somewhat arbitrary
break commonly made between the long Archaic
period and its successor, the "Late Prehistoric."
Previously this was referred to as the "NeoAmerican Stage" (Suhm et al. 1954:20) in the
expectation that all three defining traits (pottery,
bow and arrow, and agriculture) would eventually
be recognized in the region. It now appears that
generally for Central Texas, only the bow and arrow
appeared initially, pottery was added later, and
agriculture came last and was of quite minor
importance. Because basic hunting and gathering
subsistence continued, what is here called the Late
Prehistoric has also been labeled the "Neo-Archaic"
(Prewitt 1981) or the "Post-Archaic" (Johnson and
Goode 1994). Two subperiods, early and late (see
Table 2) are here recognized in the Late Prehistoric
(Jelks 1962); these correspond to the Austin and
Toyah "phases" (I will continue to use "interval")
of long-standing in the systematics of the local
prehistory (Prewitt 1981). More than projectilepoint style change distinguishes Austin from Toyah
manifestations, and the subperiod level of
designation is intended to reflect the importance of
these differences. I agree with Johnson and Goode
(1994:39-40) when they note that an equally
satigfactory solution would be to place the break
between the Archaic and the Late Prehistoric at ca.
800 B.P., when Toyah replaces Austin as the
prevailing archeological configuration.
The most apparent change seen at the beginning of the early Late Prehistoric (or Austin interval) is from a prevalence of dart points to that of

385

arrowpoints and, inferentially, from use of the atlatl
and dart to that of the bow and arrow. Evidence is
seen of widespread hostilities in the form of what
are thought to be numerous incidents of arrowwound fatalities (Prewitt 1974). Otherwise, comparatively little change is noted from terminal Late
Archaic patterns, particularly in subsistence behavior. Goode (1991) even finds evidence that in western Central Texas burned rock middens continued
to be produced in what he believes to be the cooking of sotol.
The late subperiod of the Late Prehistoric is
expressed as a single style-interval, designated on
Table 2 by the Perdiz arrow point. However, it has
long been recognized that in Central Texas the
Toyah archeological manifestation consists of a
constellation of traits--notably pottery (both local
and imported from the Caddoan area; see also
Perttula et al., this volume), large thin bifaces, Perdiz
arrowpoints, end scrapers, and prismatic blades-all associated with the hunting of bison as well as
deer and antelope. The occurrence of these
distinctive traits on about the same time line across
a wide area of the state distinguish the Toyah as an
archeological "horizon." A question that arises is
whether such a horizon is the spread of a people
across the landscape, or the spread of ideas and
their adoption by different peoples. Johnson (1994)
and Ricklis (1994b) have recently brought forth
differing views on Toyah lifeways. In keeping with
traditional interpretations, Johnson sees Toyah as
the material leavings of a single ethnic group
("folk"). Ricklis, in contrast, observes that the
cultural materials which define Toyah represent
tools and technologies that can be spread among
different groups rather easily--a techno-complex.
The issue hinges on how similar do lithic and
ceramic objects, and their technologies of
production, have to be to represent the work of a
single ethnic group? In the absence of linguistic
evidence (which is precluded by a pre-contact
truncation of Toyah culture) or more robust
archeological data, the issue will not be resolved
since the answer to the question just posed is too
subjective. No time in the prehistory of Central
Texas is represented by more gisements, and thus
the prospects for discovering more and better Toyah
components are good. The debate framed by Ricklis
and Johnson is the kind of anthropological issue so
rare in the history of Central Texas archeology.
Because it is both intriguing and substantive, such

386

Texas Archeological Society

a debate can be expected to continue, grow, and be
refined--maybe even resolved to a degree with
robust new data in the future.
Historic
Historic archeology differs from prehistoric archeology in that past people, places, and events can
be investigated from the two vantages of written
accounts as well as tangible archeological records.
In the case of Central Texas, the collision of multiple indigenous and European cultures produced
complex and rapidly changing events that are
chronicled spottily in the early documents, and seen
sparingly in the archeological record. With time,
both the written and archeological records become
fuller, but by the middle of the 19th century, little
but the European-derived cultures remained.
This review considers three subperiods in the
Historic period of Central Texas--early, middle,
and late. In the first two, vestiges of both indigenous and European peoples and cultures are represented; in the third, the indigenous peoples have
virtually disappeared.
The early Historic subperiod in Central Texas
begins in the late 17th century with the first documented arrival of Europeans (Bolton 1915;
Newcomb 1961; Berlandier 1969). Although there
are documentary glimpses of the indigenous groups
in and near Central Texas, political consequences
of the arrival of Europeans were already in motion,
most notably the southern advance of mounted
Apaches. For the indigenous peoples, little more
than group names, locations, and limited descriptions exist. Concerted ethnohistorical research
(Campbell: multiple listings under Indian group
names in Branda 1976; Campbell 1988; Hester
1989a, 1989b; Newcomb 1961, 1993) has been used
to piece together important, yet incomplete, accounts which reveal several distinctive features of
native cultures in Central Texas between the late
17th (ca. 1690) and early 18th (ca. 1720) centuries.
In these earliest historical accounts, numerous
displaced groups are found in and near Central
Texas, some having gone northeastward to escape
Spanish oppression, others having fled southeastward ahead of the Apache incursion. Their lifeways
had been affected substantially by the political accommodations to this new propinquity, and possibly by social disruption brought about by the
mortality of European-introduced diseases. French

and Spanish vying for the territory that is now Texas
often manipulated the indigenous groups for their
own political purposes. Also, native patterns of
mobility had been altered by acquisition of horses.
It is obvious that these accounts do not provide
direct analogs to prehistoric patterns. Instead, they
represent a time of drastic cultural change and political conflict to be investigated in its own right.
There may be some indigenous cultural patterns
that prevail through this time and afford insights
into prehistoric lifeways of Central Texas (Collins
and Ricklis 1994). Small band-sized residential
camps are indicated, but so are large, diffuse
encampments composed of peoples with mixed
ethnic affiliations. It is not clear whether the large,
diffuse camps or political amalgamations occurred
prehistorically, but to judge from the apparent ease
and frequency of these occurrences historically, it
is possible that large camps shared by different
ethnic groups had precedents in prehistory.
Hunting, particularly of bison but also of deer
and of antelope, is repeatedly noted in Spanish and
in French documents, as is the extensive use and
exchange of bison products. Much of the mobility
and hunting behavior of peoples was in response to
movements and densities of bison populations.
Although the historically-observed behavior was
affected by use of horses, the same was probably
true to some extent of pedestrian peoples whenever
bison were present in the area.
Of particular interest to our understanding of
Late Prehistoric archeology are the many historic
accounts of Hasinai Caddo traveling into Central
Texas to hunt bison, and at times camping with
indigenous groups (see Foster 1995). The fairly
common presence of Caddoan ceramics, and of
local pottery with Caddoan style decoration, in
Toyah interval sites of Central Texas suggests that
this was a long-standing pattern.
At a very general level, the early Historic
subperiod informs prehistoric archeological inquiry
on two topics. First, indigenous peoples clearly were
more cosmopolitan than most archeologists seem
to think. Second, large and dispersed encampments,
exceeding the usual parameters of "a site," may
have been fairly common.
The middle Historic subperiod, when much of
the record on aboriginal peoples is in reference to
remnants of native groups living in the Spanish
missions, began about 1730 and ended about 1800
as the mission system was failing (Hester 1989a).

Collins m Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

Central Texas lies mostly outside of the Spanish
colonial sphere, and the mission Indian subperiod
is manifest primarily at the missions in Bexar
County (Campbell and Campbell 1985). Interesting continuities from prehistoric times, and new behaviors resulting from acculturation, are reflected
in the material culture of the mission Indians (D.
Fox 1979).
Shoshonian-speaking Comanches, who had
become consummate equestrians by 1800, began to
spread into northwestern Texas from the high plains
toward the end of the middle Historic subperiod
(Wallace and Hoebel 1952). Their presence in Central Texas is documented mostly from the hostile
view of Euroamerican settlers.
The late Historic subperiod, extending into the
20th century, encompasses minor numbers of mission Indians, far flung nomadic native groups (primarily the Comanches) until the late 19th Century,
and a rich archeological record of the Europeanderived cultural presence (D. Fox 1983). As the
Comanche presence in Central Texas waned in the
mid-to late 19th century, the more than 11 millennia of Native American presence in the area came
to an end.

CONCLUSIONS AND COMMENTS
ON FUTURE RESEARCH
Central Texas was occupied by Native American hunter-gatherers more or less continuously for
longer than 11,000 years. During that time the net
change in population was from zero to a precontact
figure that may have been as high as 150,000 (based
on a very approximate hemisphere-wide estimate
of 2.1 persons per km2 [Dobyns 1966]), but was
probably much lower (Ubelaker 1988). Whatever
the actual ending figure, and however nonlinear the
rate of increase, it is an absolute certainty that over
time more and more people lived in and around
Central Texas. Without doubt, population growth
increasingly constrained subsistence and mobility
options and may have fostered political conflict,
but it also led to a cosmopolitan condition where
more knowledge, commodities, words, and mates
could be exchanged.
Exchange in each of these domains of culture
is likely to have comparatively low archeological
visibility except when non-perishable commodities
are exchanged, or knowledge is transmitted that is

387

reflected in durable items of material culture. The
more exchange occurs, no matter its form, the more
likely it is to have archeological visibility.
In the course of Central Texas prehistory, archeological evidence for the exchange of ideas and
exotic commodities becomes more visible in the
latter part of the Late Archaic and reaches its greatest expression in the Toyah interval (assuming that
exotic lithics in Paleoindian times more often represent high mobility). When Late Archaic sites in
Central Texas contain exotic obsidian and marine
shells, and there are interments influenced by
Hopewellian burial ceremonialism, the indigenous
population is not living in isolation. Unseen behind
these tangibles are undoubtedly culture brokers,
travelers, mulfilingual interpreters, and diplomats-prehistoric counterparts of the likes of Juan Sabeata,
Sacagewea, and the Turk.
To have reached sufficient levels for archeological expression in the Late Archaic, when did
distant connections first develop? I doubt the natives of Central Texas were ever isolated---a key
element in my views of the local prehistory which
follow.
Horticulture or agriculture had come to be practiced in all directions (Mesoamefica, the Southwest, Southeast, and Plains) during what in Central
Texas was still the Late Archaic. Early European
settlers found Central Texas optimal for farming
(Fehrenbach 1968), and much of it is farmland today. A shift to horticulture or agriculture by natives
of the region was not precluded by natural conditions of soil or climate. Nor was it precluded out of
ignorance on the part of its inhabitants. These conclusions argue for the alternative interpretation that
efficient technologies for hunting and gathering prevailed, and that the plant and animal resource base
was both rich and diverse. Central Texas was one
of those places in the world where the labors and
limitations of food production could be looked upon
with disdain.
What then are the ingredients of that technology and the characteristics of that resource base?
The axiom that specialization is the path to
extinction seems to be born out by it corollary-11,000 years of successful, generalized exploitations of a diverse resource base in Central Texas.
The adaptability of hunter-gatherer subsistence in
Central Texas is underscored by the swings in
climate (see Table 2): from relatively mesic (ca.
11,500 to 8800 or 8500 B.P.) to xeric (ca. 8800 or

388

Texas Archeological Society

8500 to 2800 or 3000 B.P.), with a brief amelerioration (ca. 6800 to 5500 B.P.), and back to
mesic again (ca. 2800 to 1000 B.P.), then followed
by a brief drying interval near 1000 B.P. Since ca.
1000 B.P., the climate seems to have been rather
moderate compared with the more mesic and more
xeric periods of earlier times.
From the earliest arrival of peoples into the
area, which present evidence places near the middle
of the 12th millennium B.P., until ca. 8800 B.P.,
conditions were relatively mesic; the archeological
record reflects hunter-gatherers of moderately high
mobility. Campsites of these Paleoindians usually
have simple fireplaces with little or no use of rock.
During Folsom times, there may have been a
substantial reliance on bison-hunting, but otherwise
Paleoindian subsistence seems to have been rather
generalized. A small human population and
reasonably abundant plant and animal resources
would seem to best account for the archeological
evidence.
Beginning around 8800 years ago, large
fireplaces with quantities of burned rocks appear
and signal important changes in adaptations,
ushering in what we refer to as the Archaic. It is in
the Archaic that we see the development and
perseverance of archeological patterns distinctive
to Central Texas; a conspicuous element in that
distinctiveness is extensive use of rock in a variety
of fireplaces. It is apparent that these rocks were
used primarily for their heat-storage capacity in
most cases, and that this is basic to the long history
of Archaic adaptations.
There is a clear correlation in Central Texas
between mesic climatic indicators and the archeological occurrence of bison remains. There is a less
clear, but suggestive appearance that burned rock
features (middens and complexes of earth ovens)
grew at faster rates in the more xeric intervals. In
general, large hot-rock cooking appliances are
needed for plant foods requiring long cooking
times, whether baking or steaming. The labor and
fuel required for efforts of this kind are efficient
only if a large volume of food is cooked. It follows
that the existence of the large hot-rock cooking appliances is prima facie evidence of bulk processing of starchy plants, be they sotol bulbs, prairie
turnip roots, cattail roots, acorns, or wild onion
bulbs. But it is important to consider that once the
effort is made to construct and fuel a hot-rock
cooking appliance, it can be used to cook almost

any kind of food, plant or animal--wherein lies the
adaptability of these facilities.
As the abundance of various plant foods change
seasonally or in response to longer-term climatic
shifts, rock ovens can be used to bake or steam, as
appropriate, the most available bulk staple, augmented with anything from river mussels or turtle
meat to hawthorn or persimmon fruits. It would
appear, in this vein, that at those (mesic) times
when bison were more abundant, somewhat less
reliance was placed on the bulk processing of plant
foods, and there was relatively less use of hot-rock
appliances. One of those times was when Calf
Creek, Bell, and Andice bifaces were in vogue,
another (although far less evident) when Marcos,
Montell, and Castroville points prevailed. Johnson
and Goode (1994) offer the suggestion that makers
of Calf Creek and related forms migrated into the
region as bison ranges spread.
Central Texas environments are, and have been,
far from uniform, and the foregoing generalizations
will not apply equally over the region (see Ellis et
al., this volume), and not at all in places. Certainly
such potentially important resources as desert
succulents, bison, acorns, and riverine plants and
animals have varied greatly over time, and
archeological understanding of their importance will
emerge locally, not regionally.
During the late (Toyah) interval of the Late
Prehistoric, when bison-hunting and mobility were
evidently at their highest levels since Folsom times,
the ancient practice of using large hot-rock appliances came to an end. Once again, as in the BellAndice-Calf Creek interval, there is good evidence
that the Toyah interval is the archeological expression of bison hunters that migrated into the area.
These hunters neither depended very much on other
local resources nor adopted the technology for their
exploitation.
Such are a few general interpretations of the
prehistory of Central Texas. Should any of these be
found worthy, they could guide future archeological investigations in a general sense, but as framed
they are too general to be tested directly. Instead,
archeological effort in the area needs to be directed
toward more basic tasks, including accumulating
specific evidence relevant to these generalizations.
First, a very small percentage of the archeological data base of Central Texas derives from
well-stratified contexts. To correct this deficiency,
gisements need to be targeted as widely in space

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

and as fully along the temporal vector as possible.
Artifact assemblages and paleoenvironmental data
of high resolution derived from such contexts can
provide the evidence needed to address most of our
presently-recognized archeological issues.
As assemblages with greater integrity--higher
data quality--are investigated, more comprehensive data-recovery and analytical techniques must
be applied. First, the basics of archeological evidence must be better met, and second, the perspective of comparative ethnology should be used to
structure inquiry.
The basics of archeological inquiry are relatively simple---obtaining well-documented, representative samples of archeological assemblages, and
controlling for the relative and absolute dating of
those assemblages. A start at this task has been
made in Central Texas.
I suggest that a comparative ethnological
perspective is needed because in Central Texas we
have learned relatively little about the human
lifeways that came and went here for nearly 12,000
years. We need to have an organizational framework
for our investigations that defines objectives and
directs effort toward those objectives in the greatest
need of attention. An obvious framework is
comparative ethnology. The elements of culture that
ethnologists compare cannot all be known from
extinct cultural systems, but a subset of those that
realistically can be at least partially reconstructed
out of archeological evidence is useful. A matrix
table with cultural traits across the top and our
archeological intervals arrayed up the left side would
constantly remind us of our major data gaps. Within
each cell of the matrix is a research objective that
must be carefully considered in terms of what
archeological evidence is needed, and how that
evidence would best be obtained. Traits from the
general (e.g., subsistence, settlement pattern,
transhumance) to the specific (e.g., burial practices,
ornaments, wood-working tools) need to be
included. Obviously, the evidence required to satisfy
any specific objective will not be found just because
it is listed in the matrix. What is important is that
research will proceed with that objective in mind,
the essential evidence needed to satisfy the objective
will have been thought out, and in the long run our
efforts will be more productive by being allocated
more appropriately.
A significant element in our lack of progress
to date is redundancy. We keep digging up the

389

same kinds of evidence using the same techniques.
Targeting other aspects of the archeological record
and using a greater array of procedures are priorities.
Another impediment is how we conceive evidence. We see deer bones and dart points and infer
that game was taken with a weaponry that employed darts. We rarely consider alternative or
complementary paraphernalia or strategies--use of
nets, snares, or dogs. We seldom ask, much less try
to answer, questions like: "what was made using
those tools we infer to be adzes or gouges; were
people making canoes, shelter, wooden mortars; if
so, what were they doing with them?"
Explicitly defined research objectives on the
macro-, meso-, and micro-scales of investigation
are starting points. Fuller use needs to be made of
the more sophisticated techniques of dating and
archeometry--techniques that mostly are not warranted unless applied to data from superior contexts. These are suggestions that carry a price. The
costs of doing archeology, even mediocre archeology, continue to rise, and unless substantive new
information is gained on nearly every attempt,
those costs are not justified. Only by eliminating
redundant efforts, and targeting quality data with
explicit research objectives and well-conceived
plans for data recovery and analysis, can we expect
to make those substantive contributions. Because
archeologists working in Central Texas have begun
to evaluate site data for their integrity, to move
beyond single-minded pursuit of chronology-building, to give thought to data and analytical requirements for selected other research objectives, and to
have recognized important kinds of evidence previously ignored, conditions are right for making
real progress in understanding the local prehistory.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Tim Perttula for offering me the opportunity to write this essay, and the following individuals for valuable counsel during its preparation:
Jan Guy Motrick, Susan W. Dial, C. Britt Bousman,
Glenn T. Goode, Anne C. Kerr, Thomas R. Hester,
Stephen L. Black, Marilyn A. Masson, Darrell Creel,
Linda Wootan Ellis, and Charles Frederick. At the

390

Texas Archeological Society

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Lauren
Sullivan assisted with research in the site files,
Pamela J. Headrick drafted the figures, and Elizabeth Andrews printed the photographs. Rickard
Toomey III and Tom Stafford graciously allowed
me to use unpublished radiocarbon dates from Hall’s
Cave, and Glenn T. Goode shared his unpublished
data on the Anthon Site. C. E. (Gene) Mear and
Paul Goldberg granted me access to unpublished
geologic data.
This paper considers the 40 years since I became a member of the Texas Archeological Society, and I sincerely hope that it is not a discredit to
those inspiring teachers--Glen Evans, Tom
Campbell, Dee Ann (Suhm) Story, Alex D. Krieger,
Bill Newcomb, Mott Davis, and Ernest Lundelius-by whom my formative acquaintance with the prehistory of Central Texas was especially enriched
and encouraged. I also thank Elton Prewitt, Harry
Shafer, LeRoy Johnson, Jr., Jerry Epstein, Ed Jelks,
Jim Corbin, Bill Sorrow, Dave Dibble, Tom Hester,
Glenn Goode, Vaughn Bryant, Jr., Frank Weir,
Steve Black and many others for the dialog over
these 40 years that has made the topic exciting, and
for their many shared ideas that are undoubtedly
embedded in this essay. To all of these, I extend my
appreciation without any burden of responsibility
for my errors.

FINIS FROST

Green and Hester 1973

FOOTBRIDGE

Johnson et al. 1962

FRIESENHAHN CAVE

Krieger 1964

FRISCH AUF!

Hester and Collins

GAULT

Collins et al. 1991;

1969
Collins et al. 1992
GIBSON

Ray 1940

HALL’S CAVE

Toomey t993;

HIGGINS

Black et al. 1993

HITZFELDER CAVE

Givens 1968a, 1968b

HORN SHELTER 2

Redder 1985

JETTA COURT

Wesolowsky et al.

JOHN ISCHY

Sorrow 1969

KINCAID

Collins 1990b; Collins

KYLE

Jelks 1962

LANDSLIDE

Sorrow et al. 1967

LEVI ROCKSHELTER

Alexander 1963, 1983

Toomey et al. 1993

1976

et al. 1989

LINDNER

Brown 1985

LOEVE

Prewitt 1982

LOEVE FOX

Prewitt 1974

MASON BURIAL CAVE

Benfer and Benfer

MERRELL

Campbell 1948

MUSTANG BRANCH

Ricklis and Collins

OBLATE

Johnson et al. 1962

PAVO REAL

Henderson and Goode

RICHARD BEENE

Thorns and Mandel

ROB ROY

Jackson 1939

ROCKY BRANCH

Treece et al. 1993

RUSH

Quigg and Peck 1995

SCORPION

Highley et al. 1978

SLAB

Patterson 1987

SLEEPER

Johnson 1991

1981

1994

APPENDIX
ALPHABETICAL LISTING OF
SELECTED CENTRAL TEXAS SITES
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DATA
SETS WITH BIBLIOGRAPHIC
REFERENCES

Sites

ANTHON
BARTON

Goode n.d.
Ricklis and Collins
1994

BULL PEN

Ensor 1988

BUZZARD

Stephenson 1970

CAMP PEARL WHEAT

Collins et al. 1991

CLARK

Watt 1965

CROCKETT GARDENS

McCormick 1982

CURRIE

Treece et al. 1993

EVOE TERRACE

Sorrow et al. 1967

1991
1992

SMITH

Suhm 1957

TURKEY BEND RANCH

Treece et al. 1993

VARA DANIEL

Collins et al. 1990;
Ricklis et al. 1991;
Takac et al. 1992

WACO MAMMOTH

J. Fox et al. 1992

WILEY WILLIAMS

TARL Files

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

APPENDIX (Continued)

WILSON-LEONARD

Collins et al. 1993;
Mear n.d.b; Masson
and Collins 1995

WOUNDED EYE

Luke 1980

WUNDERLICH

Johnson et al. 1962

YOUNGSPORT

Shafer 1963

ZATOPEC

Garber 1987

391

REFERENCES CITED
Abbott, J. T.
1994 Geomorphic Context of the Barton Site (41HY202)
and the Mustang Branch Site (41HY209). InArchaic
and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle
Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A.
Ricklis and M. B. Collins, pp. 353-379. Studies in
Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

UNNAMED SITE IN
BANDERA COUNTY

Beasley 1978

41BC50

TARL Files

41CC1

TARL Files

41GL160

Kelly 1987

41ME19

Hester and Kelly 1976

41ML64

Collins and Holliday

41SU43

TARL Files

Alexander, H. L. Jr.
1963 The Levi Site: A Paleo-Indian campsite in central
Texas. American Antiquity 28:510-528.
1983

The Pre-Clovis and Clovis Occupations at the Levi
Site. In Peopling of the New World, edited by J. E.
Ericson, R. E. Taylor, and R. Berger, pp. 133-145.
Ballena Press, Los Altos.

1985
41TG91

Creel 1990

41TV29

TARL Files

Environmental Data Sets

Antevs, E.
1955 Geologic-Climatic Dating in the West. American
Antiquity 20:317-335.
Baker, V. R. and M. M. Penteado-Orellano
!978 Fluvial Sedimentation Conditioned by Quaternary
Climatic Change in Central Texas. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 48:433-451.

BISON ABUNDANCE

Dillehay 1974

Banks, L. D.

BOG POLLEN

Collins et al. 1993

1990

SABINAL RIVER

Mear n.d.a

view of Lithic Sources in the Trans-Mississippi

PEDERNALES RIVER

Blum and Valastro

South, the Southern Plains, and Adjacent South-

1989
FT. HOOD

Nordt 1992

COLORADO RIVER
AT BASTROP

Blum 1992

COLORADO RIVERIN

From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A Re-

west. Memoir 4. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Norman.

Barnes, V. E.
1981 Austin Sheet. Geologic Atlas of Texas. Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

CONCHO AND
COLEMAN COUNTIES

Blum and Valastro
1992

Beasley, T. S.
1978 A Site with Edwards Points in Bandera County,
Texas. La Tierra 5(4):23-31.

BRAZOSRIVER
AT SOUTH BEND
BRUSHY CREEK

Mandel 1992
Mear n.d.b; Collins et
al. 1993; Masson
and Collins !995

Thoms and Mandel
1992

SOUTHERN PLAINS

Berlandier, J. L.
1969 The Indians of Texas in 1830. Edited by J. C. Ewers. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

MEDINA RIVER AT
APPLEWHITE

Benfer, R. and A. Benfer
1981 The Mason Ranch Burial Cave, Uvalde County,
Texas. La Tierra 8(3):16-26.

Hall 1986

Bianchi, T. H.
1984 The Surficial Stratigraphy of State Highway 16
within the Amite River Valley. In CRMP Level H
Cultural Resource Investigations along Route LA
16 between Watson and Amite, edited by A. F.
Servello, pp. 416-419. Louisiana Department of
Transportation and Development, Baton Rouge.

392

Texas Archeological Society

Black, S. L.
1989

Central Texas Plateau Prairie. In From the Gulf to
the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in Central,
South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R. Hester, S.

Bousman, C. B.
1993 Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations, Economic Risk and
Tool Design. Lithic Technology 18 (Nos. 1 & 2):5986.

L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J.
Reinhard, and L. C. Bement, pp. 17-38. Research

Bousman, C. B. and R. C. Fields

Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological Survey,

1988

Results of the Geoarcheo!ogical Investigations. In
Archeological Survey of the 1989-1993 Permit Area,

Fayetteville.

Jewett Mine Project, Freestone and Leon Counties,
Texas, edited by R. C. Fields, pp. 195-237. Reports

Black, S. L. and A. J. McGraw
1985

The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change

of Investigations 63. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.

and Continuity Within the Upper Salado Creek Wa-

Austin.

tershed, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 100. Center for Archaeological Research,

Branda, E. S. (editor)

The University of Texas at San Antonio.

1976

The Handbook of Texas, Vol. IIl. The Texas State
Historical Association, Austin

Black, S. L., K. Jolly, and D. R. Potter
1993

The Higgins Experiment. Wurzbach Project Work-

Brown, K. M.

ing Papers. Texas Archeological Research Labora-

1985

Three Caches of Guadalupe Tools from South Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56:75-

tory, The University of Texas at Austin.

126.
Blum, M. D.
1992

1986

Archaeological Studies of the CPS Butler Lignite

Modern Depositional Environments and Recent Alluvial History of the Lower Colorado River, Gulf

Prospect, Bastrop and Lee Counties, Texas, 1983.

Coastal Plain of Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. Disser-

chaeological Research, The University of Texas at

tation, Department of Geology, The University of

San Antonio.

Archaeological Survey Report 140. Center for Ar-

Texas at Austin.
Brune, G.
Blum, M. D. and C. Lintz
1993

1975

Late Quaternary Geology in the Reservoir Basin. In

Major and Historical Springs of Texas. Report 189.
Texas Water Development Board, Austin.

Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. lvie
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas, Volume I: Project Introduction, Setting
and Methods, by C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, A. C.

Bryant, V. M. Jr.
1977 A 16,000 Year Pollen Record of Vegetational
Change in Central Texas. Palynology 1:143-156.

Earls, F. M. Oglesby, M. Blum, P. L. O’Neill, J.
Kuhl, R. Holloway, L. Scott-Cummings, and D.
Scurlock, pp. 280-314. Technica! Report No. 346-I.
Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.
Blum, M. D. and S. Valastro, Jr.
1989

Response of the Pedernales River of Central Texas
to Late Holocene Climatic Change. Annals of the

Bryant, V. M., Jr. and R. G. Holloway
!985 A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of
Texas: An Overview of the Pollen Evidence. In
Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited by V. M. Bryant, Jr. and R.
G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists, Dallas.

Association of American Geographers 79(3):435456~
1992

Quaternary Stratigraphy and Geoarchaeology of the

Bryant, V. M., Jr. and H. J. Sharer
1977

Model for the Archeologist. Bulletin of the Texas

Colorado and Concho Rivers, West Texas.
Geoarchaeology 7:419-448.
Bolton, H. E.
1915 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century: Studies in
Spanish Colonial History and Administration. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Boul, S. W., F. D. Hole, and R. J. McCracken
1989

Soil Genesis and Classification. Iowa State University Press, Ames.

The Late Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas: A
Archeological Society 48: t-25.

Butzer K. W.
1982

Archaeology as Human Ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Campbell, T. N.
1948 The Merrell Site: Archeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 19:7-35.

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas
Campbell, T. N. (Continued)
1988 The Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
Department of Anthropology, College of Liberal
Arts, and Institute of Latin American Studies, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Campbell, T. N. and T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indian Groups of the Choke Canyon Reservoir and Surrounding Area, Southern Texas.
Choke Canyon Series, Volume 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.
1985

Indian Groups Associated with Spanish Missions of
the San Antonio Missions National Park. Special
Report 16. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Clarke, D. L.
1977 Spatial Information in Archaeology. In Spatial Archaeology, edited by D. L. Clarke, pp. 1-32. Academic Press, London.
Collins, E. W.
1982 Surface evidence of tectonic activity and erosion
rates, Palestine, KeechL and Oakwood salt domes,
East Texas. Geological Circular 82-3. Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Collins, E. W., D. K. Hobday, and C. W. Kreitler
1980 Quaternary faulting in East Texas. Geological Circular 80-1. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1990a Observations on Clovis Lithic Technology. Current
Research in the Pleistocene 7:73-74.
t990b The Archaeological Sequence at Kincaid
Rockshelter, Uvalde County, Texas. Transactions
of the 25th Regional Archeological Symposium for
Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp.
25-33. Midland Archeological Society, Midland,
Texas.
1991a Thoughts on future investigations of burned rock
middens. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An
Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester,
pp. 1-24. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
1991b Rockshelters and the Early Archaeological Record
in the Americas. In The First Americans: Search
and Research, edited by T. D. Dillehay and D. J.
Meltzer, pp. 157-182. CRC Press, Boca Raton.

393

Collins, M. B. (Continued)
1994a Evidence of Early Archaic Occupation. In Archaic
and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle
Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A.
Ricklis and M. B. Collins, pp. 67-t00. Studies in
Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
1994b Late Archaic Evidence in the Project Area. In Archaic
and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle
Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A.
Ricklis and M. B. Collins, pp. 10t-189. Studies in
Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
1994c Chronometric Investigations. In Archaic and Late
Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion
Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis
and M. B. Collins, pp. 499-505. Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
n.d.a

The Keven Davis Cache (41NV659) and Clovis
Blade Technology in the South Central United
States. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

n.d.b

Taking Stock of Paleoindian Archeology in Texas,
1994. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Collins, M. B. M. D. Blum, R. A. Ricklis, and S. Valastro
1990 Quaternary Geology and Prehistory of the Vera
Daniel Site, Travis County, Texas. Current Research
in the Pleistocene 7:8-10.
Collins, M. B., C. B. Bousman, P. Goldberg, P. R. Takac, J. C.
Guy, J. L. Lanata, T. W. Stafford, and V. T. Holliday
1993 The Paleoindian Sequence at the Wilson-Leonard
Site, Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
10:10-12.
Collins, M. B., C. B. Bousman, and T. K. Perttula
1993 Historic Context: Quaternary Environments and Archeology in Northeastern Texas. In Archeology in
the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K.
Perttula, pp. 49-67. Cultural Resource Management
Report 3. Department of Antiquities Protection,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Collins, M. B., B. Ellis and C. Dodt-Ellis
1990 Excavations at the Camp Pearl Wheat Site
(41KR243): An Early Archaic Campsite on Town
Creek, Kerr County, Texas. Studies in Archeology
6. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

394

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Collins, M. B., G. L. Evans, T. N. Campbell, M. C. Winans,
and C. E. Mear
1989 Clovis Occupation at Kincaid Shelter, Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:3-4.

Ebert, J. I.
1992

Distributional Archaeology. University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Eighmy, J.
Collins, M. B., T. R. Hester, and P. J. Headrick
1992

1993

Engraved Cobbles from the Gault Site, Central

Archaeomagnetic Results. In Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. lvie Reservob; Concho
Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas, Volume IV:

Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 9:3-4.

Data Recovery Results frotn Ceramic Sites, by A.

Collins, M. B., T. R. Hester, D. Olmstead, and P. J. Headrick
1991 Engraved Cobbles from Early Archaeological Contexts in Central Texas. Current Research in the
Pleistocene 8:13-15.

C. Treece, C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg,
and K. A. Miller, pp. K-1 through K-22. Technical
Report 346-IV. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.
Ellis, G. L.

Collins, M. B. and V. T. Holliday
1985 Geoarcheology in the Lower Bosque Basin,
McLennan County, Texas. Report submitted to U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District, Fort
Worth, Texas.

1994

Archeological Overview and Theoretical Perspectives. In Significance Standards for Prehistoric Cultural Resources: A Case Study from Fort Hood,
Texas, by G. L. Ellis, C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler,
and J. M. Jackson, pp. 41-99. Technical Report
CRC-94104. U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, Con-

Collins, M. B. and R. A. Ricklis
1994 Cultural Background. In Archaic and Late Prehis-

struction Engineering Research Laboratories,
Champaign, Illinois.

toric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek
Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and

Ensor, H. B. and C. S. Mueller-Wille

M. B. Collins, pp. 11-26. Studies in Archeology !9.

1988

Texas Archeologica! Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Excavations at the Bull Pen Site 41BP280, Colorado River Drainage, Bastrop County, Texas. Contract Reports in Archaeology, Report Number 3.
Texas State Department of Highways and Public

Creel, O.G.
1990 Excavations at 41TG91, Tom Green County, Texas,
1978. Publications in Archaeology, Report No. 38.
Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.

1991

Assessing the relationship between burned rock

Transportation, Austin

Fehrenbach, T. R.
1968 Lone Star, a History of Texas and the Texans.
Collier, New York

midden distribution and archaic subsistence in west
central Texas. In The Burned Rock Middens of
Texas: An Archeological Symposium, edited by T.
R. Hester, pp. 33-43. Studies in Archeology 13.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Davis, S. D., W. D. Pennington, and S. M. Carlson
1989 A Compendium of Earthquake Activity in Texas.
Geological Circular 89-3. Bureau of Economic
Geeology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Dillehay, T. D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the
Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19(65): 180196.

Ferring, C. R.
1986 Rates of Fluvial Sedimentation: Implications for
Archaeological Variability. Geoarchaeology 1:259274.
Foster, W. C.
1995 Spanish Expeditions into Texas, 1689-1768. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Fox, D.
1979

The Lithic Artifacts of lndians at the Spanish Colonial Missions, San Antonio, Texas. Special Report
3. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

1983

Traces of Texas History: Archeological Evidence of
the Past 450 Years. Corona, San Antonio.

Dobyns, H. F.
1966 Estimating Aboriginal American Population, an
Appraisal of Techniques with a New Hemispheric
Estimate. Current Anthropology 7:395-416
Duffield, L. F.
1970

Vertisols and Their Implications for Archeological
Research. American Anthropologist 72:1055-1062.

Fox, J. W., C. B. Smith, and D. O. Lintz
1992 Herd Bunching at the Waco Mammoth Site: Preliminary Investigations, 1978-1987. In Proboscidean
and Paleoindian Interactions, edited by J. W. Fox,
C. B. Smith, and K. T. Wilkins, pp. 51-73. Baylor
University Press, Waco.

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

Gamble, C.
1986

The Paleolithic Settlement of Europe. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Garber, J. F.
1987 Transitional Archaic Structure and Activity Areas
at the Zatopec Site, San Marcos, Texas. La Tierra
14(2): 19-30.
Givens, R. D.
1968a On the Peopling of America. Current Anthropology
9:219.
1968b A Preliminary Report on Excavations at Hitzfelder
Cave. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
38:47-50.

Goode, G. T.
1991 Late Prehistoric burned rock middens in Central
Texas. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An
Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester,
pp. 71-93. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
n.d.

Report on excavations at the Anthon site, Uvalde
County, Texas. Manuscript on file, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.

Gose, W.
1994 Archeomagnetism. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric
Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley,
Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and M. B.
Collins, pp. 507-537. Studies in Archeology 19.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

1973

L. M., and T. R. Hester
The Finis Frost Site: A Toyah phase occupation in
San Saba County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 44:319-333.

Haynes, C. V., Jr. (Continued)
1992 Contributions of radiocarbon dating to the geochronology of the peopling of the New World. In Radiocarbon after Four Decades, edited by R. E. Taylor,
Ao Long, and R. S. Kra, pp. 355-374. SpringerVerlag, New York.
1993

Texas. Special Report 5. Center for Archaeological

Hall, S.
1986 Late Quaternary Alluvial Chronology of the Southern Plains. Geological Society ofAmerica, Abstracts
with Programs 18:625.
1990

Channel trenching and climatic change in the Southern U.S. Great Plains. Geology 18:342-345.

Haynes, C. V., Jr.
1991 Geoarchaeological and paleohydrological evidence
for a Clovis-age drought in North America and its
bearing on extinction. Quaternary Research 35:438450.

Clovis-Folsom Geochronology and Climatic
Change. In Frotn Kostenki to Clovis, edited by O.
Softer and N. D. Praslov, pp. 219-236. Plenum Press,
New York.

Henderson J. and G. T. Goode
199t Pavo Real: An Early Paleoindian Site in SouthCentral Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
8:26-28.
Hester, T. R.
1973 The Formation of a Burned Rock Midden: A California Example. The Record 30(1):4. Dallas Archeological Society, Dallas.
1989a Texas and Northeastern Mexico: An Overview. In
Columbian Consequences, I/olume 1: Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West, edited by D. H. Thomas, pp. 191-211.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington.
1989b Perspectives on the Material Culture of the Mission
Indians of the Texas-Northeastern Mexico Borderlands. In Columbian Consequences, Volume 1: Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the
Spanish Borderlands West, edited by D. H. Thomas, pp. 213-229. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington.
1990

1991

Plainview Artifacts at the St. Mary’s Hall Site, South
Central Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
7:14-17.
Preface. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An
Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester,
pp. v-vii. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of

Gunn, J. and R. A. Mahula
1977 Hop Hill: Culture and Climatic Change in Central
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

395

Texas at Austin.
Hester, T. R., G. L. Evans, F. Asaro, F. Stross, T. N. Campbell,
and H. Michel
1985

Trace Element Analysis of an Obsidian Paleo-Indian Projectile Point From Kincaid Rockshelter,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
56:143-153.

Hester, T. R. and T. C. Kelly
1976 Archaeological investigations at sites near Natalia,
Medina County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 20. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Highley, L., C. Graves, C. Land, and G. Judson
1978 Archeological investigations at Scorpion Cave
(41ME7), Medina County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 49:139-194.

396

Texas Archeological Society

Hodder, I.

Johnson, L. Jr., D. A. Suhm, and C. D. Tunnell

1978

1962

The Spatial Structure of ’Cultures:’ A Review of

Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The

Some of the Evidence. In The Spatial Organization

Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate Sites. Bulletin

of Culture, edited by I. Hodder, pp. 93-1 l 1. Univer-

5. Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.

sity of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh.
Kelley, J. C.
Holloway, R. G.
1988

1947

The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the

Pollen Analysis of 41M18, Mills County, Texas. Con-

Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of

tribution 4. Laboratory of Quaternary Studies, De-

the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Soci-

partment of Anthropology, Eastern New Mexico

ety 18:115-128.

State University, Portales.
Kelley, J. C. and T. N. Campbell
Howard, M. A.
1991

1942

What are the Burnt Rock Mounds of Texas? American Antiquity 7:319-322.

Burned rock midden excavations, hearths and botanical remains. In The Butwed Rock Middens of
Texas: An Archeological Symposium, edited by T.

Kelly, T. C.

R. Hester, pp. 45-69. Studies in Archeology 13.

1987

Archaeology of the Gamenthaler Valley, Gillespie

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The Uni-

County, Central Texas: A Preliminary Report. La

versity of Texas at Austin.

Tierra 14(1):5-27.

Jackson, A. T.
1939 A Deep Archeological Site in Travis County, Texas.

Krieger, A.D.
1947

Certain Projectile Points of the Early American

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleonto-

Hunters. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and

logical Society ! 1:203-225.

Paleontological Society 18:7-27.
1964

Early Man in the New World. In Prehistoric Man in

Jackson, A. T. and A. M. Woolsey

the New World, edited by J. D. Jennings and E.

1938

The Fall Creek Sites and Additional Buchanan Lake

Norbeck, pp. 23-81. University of Chicago Press,

Sites. Publications 3802. The University of Texas,

Chicago.

Austin
Kroeber, A. L.
Jelks, E. B.
1962

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect

1939

Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North
America. Publications in American Archaeology and

Site in Hill County, Texas. Archaeology Series 5.

Ethnology 38. University of California, Berkeley.

Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Austin.

Largent, F. B. and M. R. Waters
1990

Johnson, L. Jr.
1967

1987

The Distribution of Folsom Points in Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 7:27-28.

Toward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures of Central and Southwestern Texas. Bulletin

Laville, H., J-P. Rigaud, and J. Sackett

12. Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.

1980

Rock Shelters of the Perigord. Academic Press, New
York.

A Plague of Phases:Recent Sociocultural Taxonomy
in Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:1-26.

Lintz, C.
1993

1991

Earl), Archaic Life at the Sleeper Archaeological
Site, 41BC65, of the Texas Hill Country, Blanco
County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Report
39. Texas Department of Transportation. Austin.

1994

Paleoenvironmental Reconstruction. In CulturalResource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie Reservoir,
Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas,
Volume I: Project Introduction, Setting and Method,
by C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, A. C. Earls, F. M.

The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk as Seen

Oglesby, M. Blum, P. L. O’Neill, J. Kuh!, R.

From the Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16

Holloway, L. Scott-Cummings, and D. Scurlock,

of Kimble County, Texas. Office of the State Arche-

pp. 261-280. Technical Report No. 346-I. Mariah

ologist Report 38. Texas Department of Transporta-

Associates, Inc., Austin.

tion and the Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Johnson, L. Jr. and G. T. Goode
1994 A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene
Climates, as well as Archeological Periods, on the
Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:1-51.

Luke, C. J.
1980 Continuing Archaeology on State Highway 16: The
Shep Site (41KR109) and the Wounded Eye Site
(41KR107). Publications in Archaeology 19. State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

Collins ~ For~y Years of Archeology in Central Texas
Mandel, R. D.
1992 Geomorphology. In An Archeological Survey of The
Proposed South Bend Reservoir Area: Young,
Stephens, and Throckmorton Counties, Texas, edited by J. W. Saunders, C. S. Mueller-Wille, and D.
L. Carlson, pp. 53-83. Archeological Surveys No.
6. Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

397

Meltzer, D. J. (Continued)
1989

An Update on the Texas Fluted Point Survey. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:3 !-34.

Morse, D. F. and P. A. Morse
1983 Archaeology of the Central Mississippi Valley. Academic Press, San Diego
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.

Masson, M. A. and M. B. Collins
1995 The Wilson-Leonard Site (41WM235). Cultural
Resource Management News and Views 7( 1):6-10.
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Masson, M. A. and M. W. Holderby
1994 Subsistence Patterns at 41HY209 and 41HY202: An
Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains. In Archaic
and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle
Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A.
Ricklis and M. B. Collins, pp. 353-379. Studies in
Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

1961

The Indians of Texas: Frotn Prehistoric to Modern
Times. University of Texas Press, Austin.

1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 64:1-63.

Nordt, L. C.
1992

Archaeological Geology of the Fort Hood Military
Reservation, Ft. Hood, Texas. Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report 25.
United States Army, Fort Hood, Texas.

North American Commission on Stratigraphic Nomenclature
1983

North American Stratigraphic Code. The American
Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin

McCormick, O.
1982 41WM419 (Crockett Gardens Site). InArchaeological Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, compiled and edited by T. R.
Hays, pp. 12.135-12.166. Archaeology Program, Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State Uni-

67:841-875.

Osmond, J. C., Jr.
1963 Recent Small-Scale Deformations of Limestone
Strata. Guide Book, Publication 61-46. West Texas
Geological Society, Midland.

versity, Denton.

McDonald, J.
1974 Non-human Bones from the Loeve-Fox Site: A Preliminary Analysis. In Archeological Investigations
at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson County, Texas,
by E. R. Prewitt, pp. 132-134. Research Report 49.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
McKinney, W. W.
1981 Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southwestern Texas: The Problem of the PaleoindianArchaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas
A rcheological Society 52:91-120.
Mear, C.E.
n.d.a Quaternary Geology of the Upper Sabinal River
Valley, Uvalde and Bandera Counties, Texas. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
n.d.b

Geomorphology and Quaternary Geology of the Wilson-Leonard site area. Manuscript on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Patterson, P. E.
1987 Archaeological Excavations at 41LL78, the Slab
Site, Llano County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology 34. State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Austin.
Pearce, J. E.
1932 The Present Status of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 4:44-54.
Peter, D. E., D. Prikryl, O. McCormick, and M. A. Demuynck
1982 Site Excavation Reports: Primary Contract. In Archaeological Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Volume 1, edited by
T. R. Hays, pp. 8-1 through 8-156. Archaeology
Program, Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas
State University, Denton.
Perttula, T. K., B. D. Skiles, M. B. Collins, M. C. Trachte, and
F. Valdez, Jr.
1986

"This Everlasting Sand Bed": Cultural Resources
Investigations at the Texas Big Sandy Project, Wood
and Upshur Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 52. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin

Meltzer, D. J.
1987 The Clovis Paleoindian Occupation of Texas: Results of the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:27-68.

398

Texas Archeological Society

Potter D. R. and S. L. Black
1995 Archeology Along the Wurzbach Parkway, Module
2: Initial Testing and Evaluation of Five Prehistoric Sites in the Upper Salado Watershed, Bexar
County, Texas. Studies in Archeology 18. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Potter, D. R., S. L. Black, and K. Jolly
1995

Archeology along the Wurzbach Parkway, Module
1: Introduction, Conceptual Framework, and Contexts of Archeological hzvestigations in Bexar
County, South-Central Texas. Studies in Archeol-

Redder, A. J.
1985 Horn Shelter Number 2: the south end, a preliminary report. Central Texas Archeologist 10:37-65.
Reese-Taylor, K., J. Hageman, and R. A. Ricklis
1994 Preliminary Paste Analyses of Ceramic Samples
from the Mustang Branch Site (41HY209) and
Barton Site (41HY202). In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek
Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and
M. B. Collins, pp. 549-568. Studies in Archeology
19. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

ogy 17. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974

1981

Ricklis, R. A.
1994a Occupation in the Project Area during the Austin
Interval, or Early Part of the Late Prehistoric Pe-

Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson Count),, Texas. Research Report 49.

riod. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecol-

Texas Archeological Survey, The University of

Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and M. B. Collins, pp. 191-

Texas at Austin.

205. Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeologi-

ogy in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County,

cal Research Laboratory, The University of Texas

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of

at Austin.

the Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.
1982

Archaeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox,

1994b Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the
Project Area During the Latter Part of the Late

Loeve, and Tombstone Bluff Sites in the Granger

Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric

Lake District of Central Texas. In Archaeological

Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley,

Investigations in the San Gabriel Reservoir Dis-

Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and M. B.

tricts, Central Texas, Volume 4, edited and compiled by T. R. Hays. Archaeology Program, Institute

Collins, pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology 19.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The Uni-

of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University,

versity of Texas at Austin.

Denton.
1985

From Circlevitle to Toyah: comments on Central

Ricklis, R. A. and M. B. Collins

Texas chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

1994

logical Society 54:201-238.
1991

Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in
the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas.

Burned rock middens: A summary of previous in-

Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeological

vestigations and interpretations. In The Burned Rock

Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at

Middens of Texas: An Archeological Symposium,

Austin.

edited by T. R. Hester, pp. 25-32. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
n.d.

The Rogers Springs Site: 1974 Investigations. Research Report 54. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin. Austin

Quigg, J. M. and J. Peck
1995

The Rush Site (41TG346) A Stratified Late Prehistoric Locale in Tom Green County, Texas. Technical Report 816C. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Rapp, G., Jr.
1986 Assessing Archaeologial Evidence for Seismic
Catastrophics. Geoarchaeology 1:365-379.
Ray, C. N.
1940

The Deeply Buried Gibson Site. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 12:223237.

Ricklis, R. A., M. D. Blum, and M. B. Collins
1991 ArcheoIogical Testing at the Vera Daniel Site
(41TV1364), Zilker Park, Austin, Texas. Studies in
Archeology t2. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Saunders, J. W., C. S. Mueller-Wille, and D. L. Carlson
(editors)
1992 An Archeological Survey of the Proposed South
Bend Reservoir Area: Young, Stephens, and
Throckmorton Counties, Texas. Archeological Surveys 6. Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas
A&M University, College Station.
Schumm, S. A.
1977 The Fluvial System. John Wiley and Sons, New
York.

Collins m Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas
Sellards, E. H. and G. L. Evans
1960 The Paleo-Indian Culture Succession in the Central
High Plains of Texas and New Mexico. In Men and
Cultures: Selected Papers of the 5th International
Congress of Anthropological and Ethnographical
Sciences, 1956.
Shafer, H. J.
1963 Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 34:57-81.
1967

Skinner, S. A.
1974 Prehistoric Settlement of a "Natural Area." Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Sorrow, W. M.
1969 Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site:
A Burnt Rock Midden in Williamson County, Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project
No. 18. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Shafer, and R. E. Ross
1967

Stevenson, C. M.
1992 Obsidian Hydration Summary. In An Archeological
Su~-vey of the Proposed South Bend Reservoir Area:
Young, Stephens, and Throckmorton Counties,
Texas, edited by J. W. Saunders, C. S. MuellerWille, and D. L. Carlson, pp. 539-541. Archeological Surveys 6. Archeological Research Laboratory,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
Stokes, S.
1992

An Archeological Survey of Robert Lee Reservoir,
Coke County, Texas. Survey Report 4. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas
at Austin.

Sharer, H. J., D. A. Suhm, and J. D. Scurlock
1964 An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Belton Reservoir, Bell and Coryell
Counties, Texas: 1962. Miscellaneous Papers 1.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas, Austin.

Excavations at Stillhouse Reservoir. Papers of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project No. 11. Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Steele, D. G. and J. F. Powell
1994 Paleobiological Evidence of the Peopling of the
Americas: A Morphometric View. In Method and
Theory for Investigath~g the Peopling of the Americas, edited by R. Bonnichsen and D. G. Steele, pp.
141-163. Center for the Study of the First American, Oregon State University, Corvallis.
Stephenson, R. L.
1970 Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-286.

399

Optical Dating of Independently Dated Late Quaternary Eolian Deposits from the Southern High
Plains. Current Research in the Pleistocene 9:125129.

Suhm,
1957 Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis
County, Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 9:2658.
1960

A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 29:63-107.

Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25
(whole volume).
Takac, P. R., M. B. Collins, P. Goldberg, and S. Valastro, Jr.
1992 Archeological and Geomorphological Testing Along
The Proposed South Austin Outfall Relief Main,
Phase H Tunnel Alignment: The Vara Daniel Site
(41TV1364), Zilker Park, Austin, Texas. Technical
Series 28. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Talwani, P. and J. Cox
1985 Paleoseismic evidence for recurrence of earthquakes
near Charleston, South Carolina. Science 229:379381.
Taylor, A. J.
1987 Archaeological Survey of the CPS Butler Lignite
Prospect, Bastrop and Lee Counties, Texas, 1984.
Archaeological Survey Report 151. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.
Thomas, G. B.
1978 A survey and assessment of the archeological resources of Fort Hood, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 49:195-240.
Thoms, A. V.
1989 The Northern Roots of Hunter-Gatherer Intensification: Camas and the Pacific Northwest. Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology,
Washington State University, Pullman.

400

Texas Archeological Society

Thoms, A. V., and R. D. Mandel

Wallace, E. and E. A. Hoebel

1992

1952

The Richard Beene Site: A Deeply Stratified

The Comanches, Lords of the South Plains. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

Paleoindian to Late Prehistoric Occupation in SouthCentral Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
9:42-44.

Watt, F. H.
1936

A Prehistoric Rock-Shelter Burial in Bell County,

Toomey, R. S. III

Texas. Bulletin of the Central Texas Archeological

1993

Society 2:5-27.

Late Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal Changes at
Hall’s Cave, Kerr County, Texas. Unpublished Ph.D.

1965

dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.

Notes on the Clark Site, McLennan County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:99110.

Toomey, R. S. III., M. D. Blum, and S. Valastro, Jr.
1993

Late Quaternary Climates and Environments of the

Weir, F. A.

Edwards Plateau, Texas. Global and Planetary

1976

Change 7:299-320.

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Washington State University, Pullman.

Treece, A. C., J. M. Quigg, C. Lintz, and K. Miller
1993

Rocky Branch Site (41RN169). In Cultural Resource

1979

tin of the Texas Archeological Society 50:5-67.

Investigations in the O. H. lvie Reservoir, Concho,
Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas, Volume IV:
Data Recovery from Ceramic Sites, by A. C. Treece,

Greenhaw: An Archaic Site in Central Texas. Bulle-

1985

An Early Holocene Burial at the Wilson-Leonard
Site in Central Texas. Mammoth Trumpet 2(1): t, 3.

C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg, and K. A.
Miller, pp. 3 t-118. Technical Report 346-IV. Mariah
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Wesolowsky, A. B., T. R. Hester, and D. R. Brown
1976

Archeological Investigations at the Jetta Court Site
(41TV151) Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 47:25-87.

Treece, A. C., J. M. Quigg, K. Miller, and C. Lintz
1993

Turkey Bend Ranch Site (41CCl12). In Cultural
Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie Reservoir,
Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas,

Willey, G. R.
1966

An Introduction to American Archaeology, Volume

Volu~ne III: Data Recovery Results from Non-Ce-

1: North America. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,

ramic Sites, by A. C. Treece, C. Lintz, W. N.

New Jersey.

Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg, and K. A. Miller, pp. 67242. Technical Report 346-III. Mariah Associates,
Inc., Austin.

Treece, A. C., J. M. Quigg, K. Miller, and P. L. O’Neill
1993 Currie Site (41CC131). In CulturalResource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie Reservoir, Concho,
Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas, Volume IV:
Data Recovery from Ceramic Sites, by A. C. Treece,
C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg, and K. A.
Miller, pp. 119-306. Technical Report 346-IV.
Mariah Associates, Inc. Austin.
Ubelaker, D.
1988

North American Indian Population Size, A.D. 1500
to 1985. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 77: 289-294.

Willey, P. S., B. R. Harrison, and J. T. Hughes
1978

The Rex Rodgers Site. In Archaeology at MacKenzie
Reservoir, edited by J. T. Hughes and P. S. Willey,
pp. 51-1 !4. Archeological Survey Report 24. Office
of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Wormington, H. M.
1957

Ancient Man in North America. Fourth Edition. The
Denver Museum of Natural History, Denver.

Wyckoff, D. G.
1995

A Summary of the Calf Creek Horizon in Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological
Society 42:179-210.

