108

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS
NOTES ON THE BIG BEND REGION OF TEXAS
During the summer of 1943, the writer was employed by the
U. S. Bureau of Mines, and worked with a field party with headquarters in Terlingua, southern Brewster County, Texas.
areheological

reconnaissance of the contiguous

A brief

area was made

during spare time with special emphasis upon the high stream
terraces along Terlingua Creek and the Rio Grande.
Geological and Climatic Background

The district explored lies deep within the big bend of the Rio
Grande and is adjacent to the newly created Big Bend National
Park. The rainfall is scant: the soil thin and stony with ocotillo,
creosote bush, lechuguilla, sotol, cacti, and other harsh semi-desert
flora dominating the mesas and valleys. Evergreen forests of pine,
spruce, fir, and cedar are found high up in the Chisos Mountains.
Both Upper and Lower Cretaceous formations are exposed as well as
a large number of different types of igneous rocks, trachyte, andesite
basalts, etc. The country rock is in many places displaced, distorted
and covered by great faults, intruding sills, dykes, lava flows, etc.
Despite the present dry climate and geologic background, the evidence shows that primitive man apparently liked the region and
occupied it for a long period of time.
Rio Grande and TerIingua Creek Gravels

Old stream terraces on the Rio Grande near the Mexican town
of Lajitas and lower down the river from the St. Helena Canyon
outlet to the village of Castolon, were studied in so~ne detail. Terlingua Creek which drains into the Rio Grande, was examined.
Mesa-like gravel capped hills are especially well developed near the
crossing of the Study Butte road. No Indian middens were discovered but the chipper’s debris in some workshops might be fairly
recent. Thick, crude axes, scrapers, blades, and gravers were noted
in some abundance in various places along the terrace summits
and .slopes. The interesting thing about many of these stone tools
was that they were well patinated and resembled artifacts from the
Brazos, the Trinity, Red River and other river drainage areas in

News Notes and Editorials

109

Texas. The stone materials utilized ~nclude chert, quartzite, agate,
jasper, silicified wood, etc. Probably all of these various toolmaker’s materials were collected by the Indians in the nearby
gravel deposits. Chert nodules occur in the Devils River limestone, the massive escarpment forming the rock along Long Draw,
St. Helena Canyon, etc. Semi-translucent logs of chalcedony and
jasper in contact with Cretaceous dinosaur remains are found weathering from the Aguji formations along Terlingua Creek. These
beautiful stones were much utilized by the Indians. Colorful agates,
moss, banded and other types used by the Indians were observed
weathering from amygdaloidal boulders along washes on the flanks
of the Chisos Mountains.
Adolph H. Witte,
Henrietta, Texas.
SHOULD WAR STOP CULTURAL AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
In times of public clamor, such as war entails, there is always a
thoughtless minority who seek to stop all cultural and scientific
research not directly connected with war making. Perhaps they
inherently dislike culture and ignorantly fear scientific research at
all times, and war gives them an excuse to vent their dislikes in
moves of suppression.
Such persons, if they should give thought to the matter would
know that even during war all the people cannot make war directly,
and that the majority have to carry on their usual civilian activities to enable them to pay the heavy income taxes and to buy the
bonds necessary to pay f6r the munitions and support the operations
of war.
When you have once destroyed a people’s culture and its science
you have little left on which to rebuild a nation, and the notion that
when institutions are allowed to decay it is easy to rebuild them,
after some emergency has passed, is erroneous.
Into most flourishing scientific and cultural institutions some one
has put a vast amount of labor, thought and care to bring them to
their present productive phase. Someone has nursed them like
a little child through their formative years until now when they
seem to run without much effort, the painful toils of their founders
are forgotten.

110

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

There are those who believe that the activities of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society should cease and that
The Society would be easy to resurrect after the war is over, but
your officers do not share that view. The Society never has been
in better financial condition. We have on hand enough cash to
print a much larger Bulletin than this one. The reason the Bulletin
is not so large this year is because five persons wh~ promised to
write articles for it did not do so for various reasons.
There are enough men above military age who have done anthropological research in the past and who have accumulated enough
materials for scientific articles to keep the Bulletin going during
the war years. Your Editor’s time is fully taken up during his daytime hours wifll essential civilian activities and if he cho6ses to
devote his recreational periods to scientific and cultural activities
rather than to mass spectator entertainments, it is his own business, and this course will be continued.
This Bulletin will go on so long as go6d articles can be obtained,
and the writer continues to be its editor.
C. N. R.
HUMAN BURIAL COVERED BY TWENTY-ONE FEET OF SILT
Late in June 1943 while a boy was swimming below an almost
vertical Brazos River bank he noticed some human skull bones projecting from the bank eleven feet above the water. The boy, James
Putnam, and a companion dug out the skull with pocket knives and
PLATE 17

No. 1. This shows skul! mold hole, above handkerchief, and footholds cut into steep bank below, preparatory to doing excavation.
No. 2. This shows the partly excavated long bones in place in the
bank. No. 3. Beside the excavation is the finder, James Putnam,
and below is J. C. Putnam, who brought the skull to Abilene.

PLATE 18
No. 1. In the center of the picture is the skull mold and dimly
in it may be seen portions of arm bones. No. 2. Boy stands beside
excavation. The sloping apparent top of bank shown here is not
the real one which is much higher up. Dr. Frank H. H. Roberts,
Jr., stands below on a pile of excavated earth. No. 3. This shows a
general view of the 32 feet high bank, to the far left Dr. Roberts
is shown standing in the excavation from which the skeleton was
removed.

Plate 18

News Notes and Editorials

115

the finder’s uncle, Mr. J. C. Putnam, brought the bones to the writer
in Abilene.
The location of the site is sixty miles northeast of Abilene and
near where the writer found two peculiar skeletons buried about
6½ feet deep in 19291 and another skeleton buried below nine feet
deep, which was also excavated with Mr. J. C. Putnam’s assistance
irr 19392.
The 1943 discovery is the deepest buried human remains thus far
found in the Abilene region of Texas,3 although much deeper buried
camp debris deposits have been found in the same region.4
The site was visited with Mr. H. H. Adams, a local geologist,
on June 27, 1943, and the remainder of the skeleton was removed
with the assistance of the boy finder’s father, James P. Putnam,
and his uncle, J. C. Putnam, and H. H. Adams. The skeleton had
been buried in flexed position lying on the left side.
There were no artifacts, shells, or stones with the burial; but the
bones were surrounded by considerable amounts of ashes and charcoal.

The bones and skull resembled some of the long headed types
previously found by the writer in the Abilene region.
Several anthropologists were notified of the find and invited to
see.the site before more high water could cave the bank off again.
The skull had originally been exposed by a bank cave-off due to
a high rise of the Brazos River. Dr. Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr., of
The Smithsonian Institution came on July 7th and remained fo’r
five days studying the site and a number of other deeply buried
stream bank sites on three different water courts of the Abilene
region.

The skeleton was sent to Dr. Roberts so that it could be examined
by physical anthropologists working with The Smithsonian Institution. When the bones have been carefully studied a complete report
will be issued on the findings.
The burial evidently had originally not been made very deep but
since the body was buried the whole valley floor has filled to a
depth of twenty-one feet.

The river bank silt was banded horizort-

116

Texas Archeologica~ and Paleontological Society

tally and unbroken from a short distance above the bones up
twenty-one feet to the present soil surface. Eight feet below the
burial is a band of ashes and charcoal which is only three feet
above the ordinary water level.
The total height of the nearly vertical river bank at the burial
locality above low water level is thirty-two feet.
Cyrus N. Ray.
(1) Cyrus N. Ray, New Evidences o] ztncient Man in .4merica,
Sci.entific American, May 1929.
(2) Cyrus N. Ray, Plate 52, Vol. 11, 1943, Bulletin of Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society.
(3) Cyrus N. Ray, A Texas Skeleton, Science, p. 344, October 15,
1943.
(4) Cyrus N. Ray, The Deeply Buried Gibson Site, Vol. 12, 1940,
Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society.

