Triangular Points of Red River County

169

TRIANGULAR POINTS OF RED RIVER
COUNTY
BY

GEORGE T. W~HT

In the 1935 issue of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society’s Bulletin, an article by Walter R. Goldschmidt entitled
"A Report on the Archeo!ogy of Titus County in East Texas," says
in part:
"In East Texas, in Titus, Camp, Morris, Upshur and Harrison
Counties, there is found in graves a peculiar type of arrow
point, which is seldom if ever found on the surface. They are
finely chipped chert points of triangular form with keen edges,
smooth surfaces and no tang."
Although this article is five years old, it is probable that many
collectors are unacquainted with these little artifacts in all their
various forms. Their occurrence as surface finds in the northern
part of East Texas, adjacent to Titus County, as well as a full description of them, should prove of interest.
While, occasionally, beautiful specimens of triangular arrowheads are found in graves in Red River County, others just as fine
occur as surface finds. These surface finds are by no means rare
in this County, although their occurrence in any numbers seems to be
confined to a very few localities along Red River. There, particularly in the campsites that lie along the terrace, that divides the
first bottom from the second, they may be found more or less frequently from one side of the County to the other. The creeks and
bayous of the interior, as well as Sulphur River on the south, contribute a small share which do not show such great variety in form
as those found along Red River.
One campsite in particular, situated between two Indian mounds
about 300 yards apart, has yielded almost nothing else in the way
of arrowheads but small points; and, of these, some 75 per cent were
of the triangular form. Other surface finds in this campsite show
n6 marked difference from those found elsewhere along Red River.
Here also have been found four graves, at the depth of a spade
blade, one of which had five perfectly made triangular points

170

Texas Archeological and Pa!.eontological Society

buried with the skeleton; also two isolated clay pots with which so
far as could be determined, were no skeletal remains.
Various kinds of rock were used, the only essential seems to have
been that such stone flaked well. However, a slight preference
seems to have been shown a shiny-looking, dark gray, imported
flint which may be either translucent or opaque. When finished,
these small projectile points were well made, quite thin, and usually
had sharp points and edges and often decided barbs. Sometimes, as
in all small points, one face was perfectly finished and the reverse
chipped but slightly; but, as a rule, both faces were equally well
worked. As one goes south from Red River he finds little rock that
would work well into artifacts. Here the Indians used dark, coarsegrained pebbles, which they found on the hillsides, for much of their
lithic needs. From these they fashioned a few triangular arrowheads, but in these the flaking technique sometimes differed from
that in general use in that the chips removed were often broad and
flat and few in number. This left the edges of the finished piece
scalloped or jagged and the face with low, wide ridges on it. This
form of chipping occurs all over the County but not to a marked
degree except in the central and southern parts.
At a glance, all these points would seem to have been chipped
from the same pattern; but on closer examination, many different
forms, or types, were found. Their only similarity is the triangular
shape.

The base is usually concave and very thin, which gives the

point a good seat for shafting.

Ninety per cent of all points ex-

amined have this ineurving base, which may lack little of being a
straight line or may be nearly a semi-circle.

Rarely one is found

with the "fish-tail" form of base. The ideal form was that of an
isosceles triangle, in which the base or the edges may have been made
either square or curved.

It is in the edges where the greatest differences occur. By far
the most common form is convex, although these lines may be
straight, concave or a combination of the convex:concave ideas,
thereby giving them a wavy, or reverse-curve shape in which the
expanded base makes definite barbs. Usually, the edge is sharp
PLATE 29
Triangular points of Red River County, Texas.

Plate 29

Triangular Poin~ of Red River County

173

and an unbroken line; but it may have fine or coarse serrations, few
in number or as many as the side will hold.
Symmetry was not always preserved. This makes for a mixing
of the types; in fact, true types are scarce. From a detailed study
of over 600 specimens, all from this county, the small triangular
points may be classified into thirteen distinct kinds, as follows:
Type 1. Square base, square edges. (Plate 29, Fig. 1). (Editor’s
Note: All other plate numbers given in this article refer to those in
Plate 29).
Type 2. Square base, convex edges. The edge may be shaped
like a lens, widest at the base (Fig. 2), or widest above the base line
(Figs. 3 and 4), or a straight line which bends abruptly as it nears
the tip (Fig. 5).
Type 3.

Square base, concave edges.

(Fig. 6).

Type 4.

Square base, wavy edges.

Type 5.

Concave base, square edges.

(Fig. 7).
(Figs. 8, 9, 10).

Type 6. Concave base, convex edges. The common type. The
edge may be like one face of a lens, widest at the base (Fig. 11), or
widest above the line of the base (Fig. 13), or square, or nearly so,
drawn in as it approaches the blunt tip (Fig. 12), or drawn in as it
approaches the base (Fig. 14).
Sub-type: One edge longer than the other. It may terminate in
a protruding barb (Figs. 15 and 16), or not (Fig. 17).
Type 7. Concave base, concave edges. (Figs. 18, 19 and 20).
Some of these have bIunt points which gives the piece somewhat the
appearance of having wavy edges.
Type 8. Concave base, wavy edges. (Figs. 21, 22 and 23). These
are the finest and most delicately made of all types. The reverse
curve is very noticeable in the illustrations.
Type 9.
Type 10.

Convex base, square edges.

(Fig. 24).

Convex base, convex edges.

(Fig. 25).

Type 11. Convex base, concave edges.

(Fig. 26).

Type 12.

Convex base, wavy edges.

(Fig. 27).

174

Texaz Archeological and Paleontological Society

Type 13. This type embraces all symmetrical points whose edges
do not match. (Figs. 33 and 34).
It is doubtful if Types 9, 10, 13[ and 12 should be considered as
these may not have been made primarily for arrowheads. But’they
are included on account of their similarity to the others. All four
types are very rare.
One noticeable fact about these little artifacts is the high percentage of whole points found. While some broken points were dropped
when found, all those that had enough left to show their original
shape were kept. Sixty-five per cent were in the same condition as
when first made. This is considerably above the average for other
unbroken artifacts found and is remarkable considering how fragile
they are.
Some of the types range up to several inches in length but since
some of these were unquestionably knives, scrapers and even spearheads, we consider only those that are light and thin and whose
sizes are most common to all types. Size varies with the type, but
these points may be said to range from 3-8 inch to 1 3-4 inches in
length; and in width usually around a half-inch.
Certain specimens have points and edges deeply worn and perfectly smooth, showing use as drills for hard materials. Others
show all or part of the base worn smooth from use as a scraper.
It may be that in securing these points to the shaft the.y wcre held
in place simply by gum hardened and dried. For better securin~
them, a small number (slightly less than 2 per cent) were carefully
notched in the edges, perpendicular to the long axis o.f the piece.
These notches may be near the base or as much as half way up the
.~ides, and occur only in the square and convex.edged types. They
are found most frequently in the interior. These notches are generally deep and well worked but, in some cases, a slight nick in the
edges suffices; some are quite narrow, others broad. Those with
coarsely serrated edges may also have side notches.
Triangular bird points with a notched base are not found in Red
River County.
190 Bonham Street,
Paris, Texas.

