THE OPTIMA FOCUS OF THE PANHANDLE
ASPECT: DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS
VIRGINIA

WATSON

In a recent publication, Alex Krieger, has focused considerable attention on what is known of the prehistory of the
Texas Panhandle. The present paper is supplementary to
the forementioned work as it will deal with a related
archaeological manifestation in the Oklahoma Panhandle as
known through excavations carried on at the Stamper2 site.
Three things will be attempted herein: (1) a description
of theStamper site; (2) a comparison of this site with some
other archaeological manifestations with which it is related;
and (3) a discussion of its temporal and spatial location in
American prehistory.
The site in question has been mentioned in the literature~
but no complete discussion has appeared. Excavation of the
site, which is located two and one-half miles south of the
town of Optima on the south bank of the North Canadian
River in Texas County, Oklahoma, was undertaken in 1933
and 1934. The project was a cooperative undertaking by
the Department of Anthropology of the University of Oklahoma and the F. E. R. A., under the general direction of
Forrest E. Clements. The late C. Stuart Johnston, then a
graduate student at the University of Oklahoma, supervised
the major part of the excavations; and the present report
is based almost entirely on his field notes and the materials
which he excavated4. Johnston worked at the site in the
1.

l~rieger, 1946.

:L The destguatiou of this site employed in the University of Oklahoma
survey is TxSt I. It includes: county symbol, site landowner symbol, and
number of the particular site on that land. Thus: Tx--Texas County;
Stamper; I--first site, In this paper the name of the landowner, Stamper,
xvill be used to facilitate matters.
3.
Johnston, 19.39; Clements, ]945; Griffin. 1946; Krieger, 1946, 1947; "iVede!,
]947.

4. All of the original notebooks but one are in the files of the Department
of Anthropology, University of Oklahoma, as well as a typewritten copy
of the missing field notebook. Unfortunately, however, the diagrams from
the original notebook were not copied in the typescript and the very serious
lacunae this makes in our dat~ will be particularly apparent in the discussion
of stratigral)hy and architecture.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

summers of 1933 and 1934. In December of 1934 a small
portion of the site was excavated under the supervision of
Fred Carder Jr.~
Ambient
The three counties which constitute the Oklahoma Panhandle lie in the Great Plains physiographic province. The
area in general is a featureless plain drained by the Cimarron
and North Canadian Rivers and their tributaries. The chief
stream of Texas County is the North Canadian River (also
known as Beaver Creek) which flows in an easterly direction across the central part of the county. "The stream
contains water throughout the year but exhibits the great
variability common to streams of semi-arid regions. During dry periods the stream may dwindle until it is represented by a succession of shallow pools connected by the
merest threads of water. During periods of more abundant
rainfall, the stream may fill its channel from bank to bank,
covering in some instances, a distance of several hundred
yards.’’~ Large amounts of sand are deposited on the flood
plain of the North Canadian at certain times of the year,
and because of the prevailing southwesterly winds much
of this material is later transported to the north side. of
the river where sand dunes are formed. According to
Gould and Lonsdale, the valley bottom on the south side
o~ the river contains silt-like materials which are excellent for agricultural purposes while the north side of the
valley is usually less fertile.~ During certain periods of the
5.
It might be said the present project is in the nature of s. salvage prG
gram. Johnston’s notes had been on file at the University of Oklahoma since
the time of the excavations, with no attempt, so far as the writer is aware,
at a complete analysis. A small portion of the material had been catalogued
by D. A. Baerreis in 1940.
In 1946, twelve years after excavations were
closed at the site, the remainder of the material was catalogued by D. J.
Wenner, Jr., and in 1947 the writer undertook to analyze the whole.
It has
not been an easy task and many questions will remain unanswered,
It was
felt, however, that in spite of the number of problems remaining, the addition to existing knowledge would be sufficient to warrant at least summary
publication of the material in the form of the present paper.
Grateful
ack~lowledgment is d~e the following individuals of the University of Oklahoma: ]Robert E. Bell, for a critical reading of the manuscript; J. Willis
Stovall,l for first reporting the site and for assistance in bone identification; and Ralph B. Shead. for the drawings which accompany this paper.
Gould and Lonsdale, 1926, p. 9.
7.

Ibid., p. 11.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

year uncultivated portions of the valley bottom are richly
covered with grass; and a few trees, such as cottonwoods
and willows, also are included in valley bottom flora. Yucca
and sage are typical flora in non-valley lands.
At the present time, the climatic conditions in Texas
County are "typical of the greater part of the High Plains
region. During the summer months maximum temperatures of above 100 degrees Fahrenheit are experienced, but
because of relatively high altitude and low humidity the
nights are usually cool, and the heat of the days not excessively oppressive .... the maximum temperature for winter months is about 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Killing frosts
in the area may be expected fairly late in the spring and
fairly early in the fall. The average growing season is 199
days. The average rainfall is 20.30 inches, 23% of which
falls during the growing season.’’e
The geological details of the area need not concern us
here with the exception of one formation, caliche, an impure limestone which varies in color from pure, chalky
white to buff or gray. This material was used in dwelling
construction at the Stamper site. "Overlying the Tertiary
deposits and widely distributed throughout this portion of
the Great Plains [Texas County] are caliche deposits. This
caliche varies from one to twenty feet in thickness and
occasionally one observes two or more accumulations, one
above the other. It is the same as the ’cap rock’ of the Texas
Panhandle .... -9
The Stamper site itself is situated on the first terrace of the North Canadian River.,o The site overlooks the
river valley which is about one mile wide at that point. The
first terrace, roughly fifteen feet above the valley floor, is
approximately two hundred to three hundred yards wide.
S.

~bid., p. ]0.

9.

Six, 1930, p. 18.

Johnston reported nine other sites within a five-mile radius of
10.
Stamper, which he indicated, in general, as being similar to it.
Scanty surface material from three of these sites, examined by the writer, hears this
out. Although the majority of these sites appeared to be composed of single
ur~it dwellings as is Stamper, one of them was reported as a multiple unit
dwelling, composed of several rooms.

10

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The second terrace is less distinct than the first and is backed
by a series of low hills. Several continuous flowing springs
at the foot of the first terrace, the clear view of the surrounding country, ~and the fertile soil of the river valley,
combine to make the location a strategic one.
Approximately one-half mile southeast of the village is
a large outcrop of caliche which bears evidence of quarrying; very likely the caliche slabs used in some of the rooms
at Stamper were obtained from this place.
The next
closest caliche quarry is about two miles from the village.
Before excavation was begun the surface of the site was
covered with numerous low ridges and knolls which later
proved to be remains of rooms. The soil in between each
had been eroded somewhat while the soil in the rooms remained to form the hummoCks. Eighteen rooms and anterooms were indicated by the tops of caliche slabs which
protruded above the level of the ground. Plate 1, A, gives
some idea of the physiographic setting of the site with a
corner of the site in the foreground and in the background
the view, looking north, out into the valley:
Techniques o] Excavation
The caliche slabs protruding from the ground at the
Stamper site may have suggested the excavation procedure
for the first season. Room interiors (all of 1, one-half of 2
and most of 3) were first cleared of top soil and then excavated to the level of the first floor. Details of techniques
are not mentioned, but in general surface soil was first removed, and then the dirt down to the floor was taken out
with a trowel and screened. In all rooms the artifacts which
came from the floor level were kept separate from those in
the fill. Positions of features and artifacts on the floors of
room 1 and room 2 were recorded in terms of the distance
from the house walls; room 3 was divided into one-foot
squares and the materials located in these squares. The
horizontal position of fill materials was usually recorded
in terms of distance from the wall and vertical position in
terms of depth from surface.

The Optima Focus of the P~nhandle Aspect:

11

In 1934 initial digging consisted of the excavation of two
trenches, one at right angles to the other.

Stratigraphy was

noted and thickness of various levels (sterile and artifact
bearing)

was recorded.

Surface depth only was noted.

Four other smaller trenches were also excavated.
Excavation inside of the rooms in 1934 was basically
similar to that of the preceding year with the principal exception that plural floors were sought and often found.
Rooms 2 and 3 were completed and in addition, 4, 5, 6, and
7 were excavated.
Stratigraphy
Excavations at the Stamper site indicate occupation (s) by
a culturally homogeneous population. Where it has been
possible to check, there is no change in material
from level to level or from one floor to another in the same
room, and in the notes Johnston mentions this fact several
times. The same types of artifacts were found from top
to bottom; apparently percentages from one level to another varied insignificantly when at all.
Multiple floor levels existed in several rooms. In some
cases, there has been found an abundance of charcoal, charred wood, and burned clay, suggesting that the room
burned and that soon afterwards a new structure was
erected on the same spot with perhaps a layer of earth
spread over the old floor. In other cases inter-floor soil
may represent temporary abandonment of the room site
with re-occupation at a later date. In connection with
several rooms, notably 3, there is indication that test
trenches outside of the room produced stratigraphic sections which corresponded to those within the room. In other
words, sterile and artifact bearing layers and soil types corresponded in depth and thickness. This would seem to
indicate that there was temporary simultaneous abandonment of both the room and surrounding territory of that
particular section of the village (or possibly the whole
village).

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

12

Subsistence
Evidences for both agriculture and hunting as means of
subsistence were found at the Stamper site.

Both inside

and outside of the various rooms charred corn cobs and
charred corn grains were found in abundance, with at least
one excavated cob still containing corn grains.
tend

to

be

rather

small,

the

fragmentary

The cobs
specimens

measured by the writer averaging 3A,, in diameter and 1~" in
length. Charred corn stalks were also found in the central
firepit of room 3.

No actual evidence of other plants such

as beans and squash was ~ound.
Animal bones were numerous, and several types were
found.

The food animals, in order of abundance of bones,

are: bison, antelope, deer, jack rabbit, cotton tail rabbit,
turtle, ground hog, prairie dog, duck and peccary.

There

were no evidences of fish remains. Mussel shells were present in such small numbers that it is unlikely they represent a very important source of food, if indeed, they were
used for alimentary purposes at all.
Available evidence suggests a fairly even balance between hunting and agriculture so far as their importance
in the subsistence economy is concerned.

One hundred and

ten projectile points were excavated in contrast to only 5
bison scapula hoes and 19 bison tibia digging tools. When
we take into consideration such factors as (1) ease of
manufacture of the two classes of artifacts--hunting and
farming, (2) the considerably higher loss of projectile points
through use than implements in the same manner, and (3)
the necessity of several projectile points per hunter as
opposed to one digging stick or hoe per one or more farmers,
the preponderance of projectile points over agricultura! implements does not seem excessive or indicative of the predominance of hunting over agriculture as might at first
glance seem to be the case.

The Optima Focus o$ the Panhandle Aspect:

13

Architecture and Associated Features12
In general the Structures at the Stamper site are single
unit dwellings as opposed to the compound dwellings of
several related sites in the Texas Panhandle. That is, each
unit, herein called a room or house, is completely separated
spatially from all other such units. Room size varies, with
six of the seven units ranging from eight by ten feet to sixteen by twenty-one feet. Room 2, measuring 32 feet by
38 feet, is considerably larger than the others and differs
further in containing several sub-floor burials and relatively
few artifacts, as well as in the type of wall-base construction.~3 The rooms are rectangular to squhre in shape, and
both square and rounded corners are present. Adjacent to
rooms 1, 2, 3, and 5 are anterooms, usually small, which will
be referred to as such or by the number of the room to
which they are joined plus a letter. Thus room 3a is the
anteroom at the northwest corner of room 3; room 3b the
anteroom at the northeast corner of room 3; 2a the anteroom to the west of room 2;~4 and 5a the anteroom to the
south of room 5.
Wall bases. Two main kinds of wall base materials were
used at Stamper, caliche slabs and adobe. By far the most
common type of stone wall remains consists of. irregularly
shaped slabs of caliche placed on end and edge to edge,
forming but a single row on each of the four sides of the
room. These blocks average 5 inches in thickness, one and a
half feet in width and thirty inches in height, and are set in
a shallow trench. The spaces between the slabs were sometimes filled with a mixture of dirt and pieces of caliche,
sometimes with adobe. In some cases too, the slabs were

12, The description of architecture and associated features ts ba~ed prio
marily upon excavations of Rooms lqos. 1, 2, 2ao 3 and their anterooms, because the notes are most complete for these units. Data from Rooms
4: $, 6, and ? are used when they are available. Rooms Nos. 9, 10, 110 and
12 were excavated later Out no notes from this work have been incorporated
herein.
18. Dimensions of the rooms are as follows: No. 1, 8’x10’; No. 2, 82’x,~8";
No. 3, 16’x21’; /~o. 4, 4’-9"x14’-9" (?); :No. 5, 6’-4"x17’-3"; ~qo. 6, ?’-6"x14’-4"’;
No. 7, 9’-9"x19’.
14. Although the exact dimensions of No. 2a are not available, it is
rectangular in shape and indications are that it was considerably larger
than the other anterooms and, as will be discussed later, probably a room
in its own right.

14

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

reinforced near the base on the ontside with adobe, giving
a thickness of ten to fifteen inches.

All or the majority

of the wall bases of rooms 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 are of this
type. A view of room 3 is shown in Plate 1, B.
The north, south, and east wall bases of room 2 (the largest structure) have two parallel rows of slabs with similar
orientation.

These bases average 14 inches in thickness,

the space between the two rows of slabs being filled either
with dirt alone or dirt mixed with caliche fragments, this
latter mixture often being exceedingly hard.

There is no

indication that this type of wall base was ever reinforced
at the bottom with adobe.

The fact that this kind of base

is found only in room 2 suggests that perhaps there was
some connection between the size of the structure and the
need for more substantial walls.
Small sections of the wall bases of several rooms and the
greater part of the bases of three anterooms have no stone
in their construction. Its place is taken by adobe, either in
block form or solid masses. The west wall base of room 2,
the wall bases of 2a, and all but the south base of 3b are
made of solid adobe. No adobe blocks or stone were used.
The adobe was covered with a layer of clay plaster, from
one-fourth to one-half inches in thickness, which was apparently mixed with grass and then applied by hand,
fingerprints still being apparent. The plaster curved to the
floor and the corners of the wall base were rounded.
The wall bases of 3a and the south base of 3b are made
of rectangular adobe blocks. There is some variation in the
size of the bricks, some measuring approximately eight by
ten by twelve inches, others approximately eight by six by
twenty inches. Light yellow in color, the blocks were set

Io

PLATE 1
Stamper site before excf~va, tion, looking north ",with site in foreground

and Canadian River Valley in baokgrozlnd.
IL iqoom 3 after excavation to first floor level.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspec$:

17

in a dark grey clay matrix (about three to four inches
apart), the dark clay covering them on all faces.

There is

no mention of more than one course of these blocks having
been found.

Although Johnston’s notes give tantalizing

suggestions of relative periods of use of wall base types,
the exact relationships are not clear and we must await further excavations for detailed data on the point.
Walls proper.

Taking into consideration the evidence

both positive and negative, which there is for the wall
structure at Stamper, what seems to be the most probable
architectural type?

From the negative side of the question

let it be stated that it seems unlikely that the wall type
characteristics of the Antelope Creek Focus sites in the
Texas Panhandle, i. e. caliche slabs set horizontally in mortar, could have been characteristic of any of the Stamper
rooms with the possible exception of room 2.
least three reasons for this belief.

There are at

In the first place, there

is a general absence at the site of horizontally oriented
slabs superimposed on the vertically placed basal slabs.
Actually, there was one specific section of wall (excluding
room 2) where this condition existed, but evidently the horizontally placed slabs did not reach any great height. Secondly, there is a general absence of caliche slabs either just
inside or outside of the rooms. One would expect to find
a considerable number of them had they been used in wall
construction. To be sure, some caliche slabs were found
in the fill, but in very small numbers. In the third place,
would it not be architecturally impossible to erect this
type of room wall on a single row of end set slabs, some
of which were but five inches in thickness?
From the evidence at hand, what type of wall is indicated
for the majority of rooms. Although detailed data on post
holes are lacking, it is mentioned that in most of the rooms
post holes are "numerous and arranged in rows." The locations of these rows are not given but that they may have

18

Texas Archeologica~ and Paleontologica~ Society

been located at the room edges is not impossible.’7 Again,
although the notes are not clear, there is evidence that
four center posts were used. The general use of four center posts in room construction can be inferred, albeit timidly. This being the case, a wall of pole supports covered
with some type of material seems likely. Thatch, skins,
and clay are three possibilities which immediately come to
mind. The first two materials may have been used although
there is no proof of it in the archaeological record. The
third material, mud plaster, is most likely, as numerous
fragments of hard clay, both charred and uncharred, and
bearing pole imprints have been found. The pole imprints
in the specimens examined by the writer average one and
one-half inches in diameter. Admitting that the data are
not complete the wall type characteristic, or most common
at the Stamper site, seems to have consisted of a framework
of small poles set at the edges of the rooms and covered with
mud plaster. Around (?) the base of the wall were set
a single row of caliche slabs. Probably four centrally
located posts, somewhat larger in diameter than the wall
posts, served as a supporting grid for the framework. It
is likely, on purely structural grounds, that the walls sloped
in at the top forming also the "roof".
A possible exception to a pole-mud type of wall construction is room 2. It will be remembered that this is considerably larger than the other rooms and that the bases of
the north, south, and east walls consist of a double row of
17. The question of just how the wail poles were set in relation to the
caliche slabs cannot be answered definitely at this time. The exact location

of the "numerous rows" of post holes is not mentioned in the notes. There
are at least three possibilities, of course, l~irst, that the poles could have
been set outside of the slabs. This seems unlikely bece~use: a) many of
the slabs are reinforced on the outside with adobe and no mention is made
of pole imprints in the latter; and b) in the Norman photograph the situation is not pictured that way. Secondly, that the poles were set Into the
matrix between the caliche slabs, in other words, anchored in the foundation. The main argument against this placement of poles in the bases at
Sta.mper is the fact that because of the single-slab-base construction it
"would probably be hnpossible to accommodate numerous small poles in said
base--only a few being admissible between the slabs.
The third possibility, that the poles were placed inside of the slab row
seems most likely at the present time although the evidence is scanty.
Although there is probably little avail in trying to suggest reasons for this,
s. plausible one comes to mind. The slabs might not only have served as a
reinforcement for the wall poles but they might also have a~fforded some
protection from water during the heavy rains to which, no doubt, the area
wss subjected periodically.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

19

caliche slabs, the space between them having been filled
with dirt and caliche fragments.

This base construction is

strikingly similar to that found in most of the rooms which
have been described from Antelope Creek Focus sites and
structurally could serve as the base for caliche slabs placed
horizontally in an adobe matrix. In fact, in a section of
room 2 ca]iche slabs were found placed horizontally above
the base slabs; to what height, whether in a matrix of
adobe, or how many courses were laid, is not known.
Serai-subterranean? The question of whether or not the
rooms are semi-subterranean cannot be conclusively answered at this time, although it seems unlikely that most
room floors were much, if any, distance below the surrounding land. The base slabs in wall construction were
usually set in a shallow trench, but there is no direct
indication that pits were dug prior to making the wall
trenches, although as suggested it is very probable that the
floor level of the rooms, in a few cases, was slightly below
the level of the earth outside.
Two further considerations suggest that the rooms were
built on the earth’s surface or only very slightly below it.
The entryways do not slope as they most certainly would
in a semi-subterranean structure in which there is no vertical approach at the outside end. Secondly, it must be remembered that many of the base slabs used in wall construction were reinforced on the outside (italics mine) with
clay, sometimes to a thickness of 10 inches. Would this not
be superfluous, if not impossible in a semi-subterranean
structure?
Floors.
The floors in general consist of a rather hard
layer of yellow sandy clay which is relatively level and
smooth. At least several of the rooms have plural floors
which may be separated one from the other by from one
to six inches. The floor levels within the rooms, according
to the notes, correspond to occupation levels of the area
surrounding them. For example, the three floor levels in
room 3 correspond with levels which were found in sev-

2O

Texas Archeolo~cal and Paleontological Society

eral trenches dug outside of that room.

It might be noted

here that cultural material found on the different floor
levels is basically the same.
One interesting feature in room 2 is suggestive of the
"altar" found in some of the rooms of the Antelope Creek
Focus.of the Texas Panhandle.’8 In this room (the largest
of all) along the west wall, opposite the entrance, is a raised
platform of hard yellow earth. It is six feet long, and seven
feet wide, and protrudes above the surrounding floor level.
There are fire pits about it. This platform is considerably
lower than those in Texas, but its location in the house is
similar.
Whereas in the Antelope Creek Focus rooms a depression
of the floor usually extends from the "altar" to the entrance,
there is no evidence of this in room 2 at Stamper. However,
in 2a, which adjoins room 2 on the west (just back of the
"altar") there was a depression evidently similar in form to
those in Texas. The depression runs the full east-west
length of the room. It is 40 inches wide and 10 inches deep
and appears to have been plastered. Its rims are raised above
floor level.
Johnston, although he calls this feature a fire pit, makes
no mention of ash or other contents. In view of this fact,
the unusual shape of the depression, plus its similarity to
depressions in certain Antelope Creek Focus rooms which
are not firepits, it seems best to reserve final judgement on
its use until further excavations which might shed light
on the problem, are made.
It is, of course, possible that the "altar" and depression
were structurally related as they seem to be in Antelope
Creek Focus rooms. Disregarding for the moment that they
seem to have been located in adjacent rooms, it may be
pointed out that although we do not know from the notes if
the depression and altar were in line with one another, it
is very probable that they were; and in any case, it is
]8,

l~:rieger.

194(~. p. 33.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

21

evident from the relative size and position of room 2 and
2a that they could not have been greatly separated axially.
If the two were related it is interesting to note that the depression at Stamper is to the west of the altar whereas in
Antelope Creek Focus rooms it is (always) to the east. It
is not at all unlikely that in the case of rooms 2 and 2a we
have a stratigraphic problem in which successive groups
of occupants may* have engaged, not only in re-use of
previously built structures, but also in rebuilding and remodeling of same. In other words, at one time the depression and altar may have been parts of the same structure,
with a wall later being put in front of the altar to form a
new room, thus separating the depression from it. This
seems quite possible as Johnston ren~larks that the depression continues under the west wall of room 2.
Pits. Firepits are present both inside and outside of the
rooms.,9 In rooms 1, 2, and 3 the larger of the firepits tend
to be centrally located, while the smaller ones are at various other places, often fairly near the house corners. With
the exception of one, the pits are basin shaped and there is
no indication that any of these was clay lined. One pit,
with vertical instead of sloping sides had a clay lining, and
in two of the firepits the rims were raised above the surrounding floor level. There were no stone lined firepits.
Also for the rooms, other pits, evidently not used for fire,
are mentioned. These tend to be somewhat smaller-than
firepits although in shape they are similar. Some of them
contain cultural material. No other details are known.
Outside of the rooms, pits were found, possibly used for
storage, but no detailed description is available. Apparently
no bel!-shaped cists or caches were encountered at the site.
19.

Firepit dime~siol~s (3 rooms) are as follows:
Room
Depth
Diameter
1
2
2
2
2
3
a
;;

14"
5"
5"
6"

12" inside; 22" outside
2]"
(raised rim)
?
25’o

8"

28"

12"
4"
4’"

30"
14½"
~ 7°°

(cla),

lined)

22

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

Just north of room 3 were two irregularly shaped pits
of yellowish, sandy clay which contrasted with the dark
grey, more compact earth around them.

In each of these

there were several smaller holes which contained no artifacts with the exception of the hole nearest the northeast
corner of room 3 which contained "a number of scrapers
and knives."

The two pits themselves were excavated, one

to a depth of 13 inches and the other to a depth of 27 inches,
at which depths undisturbed earth was encountered.
In
the first pit a fragment of stone pipe and several bone and
pottery fragments were found.
All the pottery was
Stamper cordmarked. In the second pit numerous large
buffalo bones (mostly leg and scapula) were found.

From

the photographs these pits seem to be fairly straight sided
with a tendency to a flat bottom.

To what use they may

have been put is conjectural. It is conceivable that they
were used for storage (note bison leg and scapula bone, commonly used as implements, in one), or, as Johnston has
suggested, they may have been dug for building material
and later filled in by natural agencies (note use of yellow
clay in house floors and adobe in walls).

Posthole pattern.
Unfortunately very little is known
about posthole patterns as the diagrams on which they
were pictured are missing and nowhere in the verbal
notes is their arrangement specifically mentioned. Postholes are absent in the anterooms but "in the larger buildings they are numerous and arranged in rows."
Tunnels. At least rooms 1, 2, and 6 each had a "tunnel"
extending to the east (or south?). Evidence for these consist of two parallel rows of vertically placed slabs extending
from each room. In rooms 1 and 2 the south row of slabs
is shorter than the north row, and in room 1 the east end
was blocked by several slabs, suggesting either that the opening was on the south side of the passage or these slabs
served as means for closing the opening. The floor level
of the "tunnel" in each case was the same as that in the
room. In room 2 a double row of slabs (evidently a continuation of the room walls) extended across the tunnel at

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

the base (back).

23

These slabs were one and one-half feet

lower than the slabs of the room wall proper, which they
joined.

No such tunnels are mentioned for the other rooms,

and it is
room 3.~o

explicitly

stated

that

none

was

found

in

Orientation of the tunnel in room 6 is not certain. On a
small map in the notes it is facing west, but elsewhere
Johnston makes the statement that the tunnels never face
west, only east and south. Tunnels for rooms I and 2 face
east, so perhaps room 6 is the southerly tunnel. This point
must remain obscure.
Whether the tunnels served as entryways or ventilators
is a moot question. There is some opinion that the latter
function was the correct one, at least in Antelope Creek
Focus houses.~ However, in the Stamper rooms there are
reasons to believe that the tunnel may have been used as an
entrance. In the first place, there is an architectural consideration: namely that with ’a pole and adobe wall structure it would be impractical if not impossible to have a roof
entryway. Furthermore, with the base construction of the
tunnels being identical in form to that of room walls proper
it is not difficult to suppose that a certain amount of height
could be attained in the tunnel ~or human thoroughfare.
Whether entrance would have been made in an erect,
stooped, or creeping position is not known. Although the
two tunnels for which we have measurements are narrow
(seventeen inches and two feet) it would not be humanly
impossible to move through them.
Anterooms. Adjoining several of the rooms were small
"anterooms" which were circular with the exception of one
that was rectangular. Usually measuring six to seven feet
in diameter, the anterooms were located along the west, east,
or south wall of a room. Rooms 1 and 5 had one anteroom
20.

21.

:[)imensions of three tunnels are as follows:
Roon~ 1: North wall, 3’; south wal! lacking; w’tdth. 2’.
Room 2: North wall. 6’; south wall, 3’; width, ?.
Room 6: Both walls are 2" long; tunnel Is 17" wide.
Krieger, 1946. p. 34.

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

adjoining them; two anterooms adjoined room 3. As has
been mentioned both caliche slabs and adobe were used in
anteroom wall construction. In anterooms 3a and 3b the
depth corresponded to that in the adjoining room. In la and
5a(?) the anterooms were deeper than the room floor.
Excavations brought to light no evidence of a connecting
door between room and anteroom, although it is not impossible, of course, that there may have been one above
the base slabs or adobe. As a matter of fact there were no
~ndications whatsoever of breaks which might have been
used for entryways in the anteroom wall bases.
Presumably the anterooms were used contemporaneously
with the rooms they adjoined. Possible exceptions to this
statement are 3a and 3b which may have originally been
built at some time prior to the building of room 3. A one
inch thick layer of ash and soil underlay the walls of room
3 and a considerable area around it. At least one wall
(maybe more or all, but this is not clear) of 3a was not
underlain by the ash bed; so presumably it was built at a
time prior to room 3. Also in the same room a section of the
east wall was built against the adobe wall in 3b and extended
over it suggesting again that at least one wall of the anteroom had been constructed prior to the time when room 3
was built. There are no indications mentioned as to the
degree of antecedence of 3a and 3b over No. 3o That is,
were they sections of older rooms re-used, were anterooms
regularly built before the rooms, or was something else
indicated?
Several possible uses to which these anterooms may have
been put come to mind. One thinks first of a pantry-like
storage room. The possibility that they may have been used
PLATE 2

I. Artifacts of bone and antler from Stamper site. A-B, bison scapula
hoes; C-]D, bison metapodial digging sticks; E-F, "spatulate" objects;
awls, deer ulna, proximal end removed; J-K, awls, deer ulna, distal end
removed L-R, awls of bone splinter; ~£-P, bone "awls" rectangular in cross
section; Q, fragmentary "awl" of bison rib; S-T, "’rasps" of bison rib
notched bone; ~, bird bone awl; W and Y, antler tapping tools (?).
II. Artifacts of pottery and shell. A-K, rim sherds; L-M clay spindle
whorls; IN[, O||vella shells; O-P, mvssel shell pendants; Q-R, ~otnted mussel
shells.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

27

either for sleeping or as work rooms should likewise not be
overlooked.
Burials
Within the rooms the skeletal remains of seven individuals,
two adults and five children, (none of which has been examined by the writer) were found, all of them in subfloor
pits. Of these, five were in room 2, one in room 1, and one in
room 5. In addition, the skeleton of an adult male was reported to have been taken from la before the University of
Oklahoma personnel initiated excavation. Three of the
burials were flexed, the positions of the others not being
mentioned. In five cases the head was oriented to the east
Grave goods were rare, consisting only of one elbow pipe,
seven mussel shells and several (number?) shell beads.
There is no indication that the burial pits were lined with
either clay or stone. No burials are reported from outside
of the houses.
Sub-floor burials are, of course, not uncommon in Panhandle Aspect sites. It is interesting to note, however, that
data from several sites indicate a tendency to concentrate
sub-floor burials in but one structure of the site. At the
Stamper site five burials were made in room 2, but one
each in other rooms; at Alibates22 all were in one room; at
Antelope Creek23 all but one were in a single room; no
burials are as yet reported from Ruin 55. The occurrence
of the burials at Antelope Creek in a single large room is
interesting in view of the fact that at Stamper, room 2 is
considerably larger than the other rooms.
Although the relatively few burials found at the various
sites can by no means constitute the total dead of the respective communities during their period (s) of occupancy,
the occurrence of the majority of those found at three different sites in a single room may prove to be of significance
in a number of ways. These burials may be representative

22.

I~Iobbs, 1941, p. 125.

2,3.

Johnston, 1939, D. 198.

28

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

of a particular time period in the occupation span--the
burials from other periods being made elsewhere. A further possible interpretation would be that the burials in a
single structure might be representative of a selected number of individuals over a longer period of time.
Artifacts~
Agricultural implements. Five hoes made of bison scapulae (Plate 2, I, A and B) were found at the site. All are in
fragmentary condition with the proximal end wholly or partially missing so that hafting details, if any, are unknown.
One fragmentary ~leer scapula may also have been used as
a hoe although there is no certainty of this.
Digging tools (Plate 2, I, C and D) of bison tibia were
common, 17 specimens having been catalogued although only
eight were examined by the writer. The proximal end of
the bones was removed, and the distal end was very likely
either used for a handle, or, as in most cases, perforated,
probably for hafting. One was found which contained a
piece of wood still in place in the bone. The six complete (or nearly so) digging tools examined by the writer
varied from five and one-fourth to nine and three-fourths
inches in length. The anterior part of the bone had been
removed. The sides and bottom were smoothed and in
many cases had a polish, which may have resulted from use.
Two other artifacts are probably unfinished bison tibia
digging tools. They are twelve and one-half and fourteen
inches in length. In both cases the proximal end of the
tibia has been removed; the distal end is not perforated;
the anterior portion of the bone has been removed but the
edges and end are not yet smoothd, and give the appearance
of successive gougings.
Grinding implements: Johnston makes the statement that
metates are of two types: circular and elliptical on the
grinding surface. He also mentions that fragmentary me24. To facilitate comparison, the organizational scheme used by Krieger,
1946, has been used.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

29

tates suggest that there was a third type "similar to the
Pueblo metate in which the motion of grinding was back
and forth and not in a circle or ellipse.’’~5
Six metates are mentioned in ~the notes. Three of these
were in room 2: one (broken) had been used in the construction of the wall base as a slab; one was on the first
floor level in the middle of the room; and one was standing
vertically against the north wall of the house. Two metates
were found in room 5, one on top of another with a "mano"
in the upper one. Johnston mentions specifically-that the
grinding surface of both of these was shallow and saucershaped and a. circular motion had been used in grinding.
These two metates each measured eight inches in diameter,
five and one-half inches in diameter of grinding surface, and
one inch depth of grinding surface. A sixth metate was
found on the outside of room 3 against the east wall. The
impression is given that the metates found in and against
the north wall of room 2 were somewhat larger than the
two found in room 5. The material of which the metates are
made is not mentioned but a fragment of one seen by the
writer is of a medium-grained sandstone.
Manos are nowhere described in the notes. Two have
been observed by the writer, as well as one muller. One of
the manos is of a fine-grained sandstone, rectangular with
rounded corners, (Plate 3, I, A) and has been used on one
side only. It measures five and one-half inches long, by
three and three-fourths inches wide, and one and one-half
inches thick at its maximum. The other is of a coarser sandstone, smoothed on one side only, and it is ovoid in shape.
Its dimensions are four and one-half inches long by three
and three-fourths inches wide by one inch thick at its maximum. Both manos are of the one-handed variety. The
muller (Plate 3, I, B) is made of quartzite, circular in shape
with a diameter of two and one-half inches and a maximum
thickness of one and one-half inches. A fragment is missing
on the top side so that the maximum thickness might actu-

25,

Unless otherwise indicated,

all quotations

are from Johnston’s notes.

3O

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

ally have been greater, and whether or not the upper side
was completely smoothed remains doubtful.
Pottery. A total of 1831 sherds have been examined by. the
writer. Of these, four are types of Pueblo pottery to be
discussed later. The remaining 1827, of which 138 are
rim sherds, are of one ceramic type which it is proposed
be called Stamper Cordmarked. The paste is fine to medium. The aplastic consists of sand and angular particles,
occasionally rather coarse, with mica being used frequently.
Bone may have been used as an aplastic; no evidence of
vegetable, clay or shell aplastic was found. In thickness
sherds vary from three mm. to ten ram. with the majority
being from five mm. to six ram. The hardness range is 2.5
to 3.5 with 3.0 the most common.
The interiors of the sherds are usualiy imperfectly
smoothed; a few are grass wiped. The exteriors of the
sherds are cordmarked with the exception of 6 rim sherds.
The cords used vary in size, and in many sherds some
smoothing after cordmarking is evident.
Cordmarking,
where apparent, is perpendicular to the rim although crisscross marking is often present near the vessel bases. Colors
range from tan to black with soot blackening occurring on
some sherds. Although no complete vessels were found,
shapes seem to be confined to globular, round .bottomed
jars, usually with straight rims placed vertically or flaring
outward slightly. Exceptions are eight rim sherds in which
the rim curves inward at the top (Plate 2, II: I and J).
There are no evidences of lugs or handles. The rims vary
in height from one-half to one and three-fourths inches,
and although they tend to meet the body at a gentle angle
(Plate 2, II: A and C) there are some instances of a
rather sharply angled juncture (Plate 2, II, B). The lip
form in the majority (eighty-four) of cases is flat with
thirty-seven instances of outward bevelling. Thirty lips
are rounded. Lip decoration consists of cordmarks (thirty-’
seven sherds), diagonal punctates (twelve sherds) (Plate
4, I and J) and circular punctates (two sherds) (Plate 4,
H); the majority (seventy-nine) are undecorated. Non-

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

31

cordmarked decoration occurs, although infrequently. It
is confined to the neck and lip, and in these cases the neck
is poorly smoothed (sometimes showing striations suggesting grass wiping), and the cordmarking begins at the
rim-body juncture. Rim decoration consists of: a single
row of depressions made by some blunt tool, parallel to the
lip and about three-eighths to five-eighths inches below it
(four sherds) (Plate 2, II, D and E; Plate 4, D); a single
row of depressions (blunt tooled) around the top of the
rim (seven sherds) (Plate 2, II, K; Plate 4, G); a thickening of the rim about one-fourth below the lip across which
are made diagonal incisions (four sherds) (Plate , II, F and
C, and Plate 4, F), or circular or rectangular punctates (one
sherd) (Plate 4, H and E).
Four Pueblo sherds are mentioned in the notes for 1934~
One piece of black-on-white pottery was found seven inches
beneath the surface at a distance of 17 feet north of the
northeast corner of room 3. It was found while removing
the surface sod preparatory to deeper excavation. It was
not within a house. Unfortunately, identification of this
sherd is not certain.
Three black’on-white sherds were found at a. depth of
22 inches below the surface, 4 feet from the east wall and
7~/2 feet from the north wall on the outside of room 3. At
three different places in the notes these sherds are assigned
to the area outside of room 3; at no place are they assigned to a room interior so that there is no possible confusion here. This point has been stressed because mention
has been made in the literature of black-on-white sherds
having come from the floor of room 2.26 There is no mention in the notes of any black-on-white sherds having been
found within a room. It should be noted again, however,
that the general levels about room 3 correspond to those
within the room and therefore that 22 inches beneath the
surface outside of room 3 would be roughly equivalent
to 22 inches below the surface within the room. Also the
26.

Clements, ~945, p. 68; Wedel, ]947, p.

150.

32

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

layer of gray ash and. dirt with bone and artifacts from
21~ inches to 223~ inches belo~w the surface in which the
three black-on-white sherds in question were found, "corresponds to the second level in house 3." The three sherds
in question have been identified by Dr. H. P. Mera as Rowe
Black-on-white.
Cutting, scraping, gouging and skin preparation. Most of
the chipped stone implements from Stamper site are made of
the so-called Alibates flint, a silicified dolomite, which may
be banded or plain and varies considerably in color. ~Iost
of the Stamper specimens are maroon and/or gray, both
solid colors and banded, but bluish and whitish pieces also
occur. This material is found at several quarries in a limited
area northeast of Amarillo, Texas; quarries which are approximately 100 miles south of Stamper.
Alternate bevel knives (Plate 3, I: F, G, and H) are indicated by both fragments and complete specimens. Twentyeight fragments, apparent~ly of 28 different knives, have
alternate bevelled edges. Because of their fragmentary
nature it is impossible to tell if the knives were bevelled on
four sides or not; on two fragments there is evidence of this.
Eight complete knives exhibit a bevel on four sides, are
diamond shaped, and tend to be pointed at both ends. In
dimensions they vary from 4~/4 inches long by 1~ inches
maximum width to 53/8 inches long by 13/s inches wide. The
widest specimen is 4~ inches long and 1% inches wide. One
specimen, (Plate 3I: I) 3~/4 inches in length, is pointed at
one end and round at the other, the bevel on the pointed end
being more steep than on the rounded end.
A unique kind of knife is pictured in Plate 3, I: J. It is
very well worked with flaking completely over both
surfaces. Two fragments may be of a knife similar to this
one. One knife is elliptical in shape, and 7% inches long,
(Plate 4, A) and as mentioned in a letter from Johnston to
Forrest Clements~7 "the flaking goes straight across .... "
From the diagram of the knife it appears to be different
27.

September 5, 1934.

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

33

from all other knives. The writer has not seen this artifact
as well as one other knife (Plate 4, C) which is well described in the catalogue. It is 51/~ inches in length and the
maximum width of 1% inches occurs about three-fourths of
the distance between the top and bottom of the knife as
opposed to the usual diamond shaped alternate bevelled
knives where the maximum width occurs roughly midway
between the two ends. According to the catalogue the "edge
of body outline is bevelled"--evidently not alternately, however. Johnston mentions a third unique type of knife
which is ovate in shape (Plate 4, B). Its dimensions are
roughly 4~A inches in length by 3 inches maximum width,
although due to the fragmentary nature of the specimen the
maximum width may be nearer the base and larger than
herein stated.
Very common are knives or scrapers made of large spa!Is
in which retouching is usually confined to the edges. In
general there are three categories into which these objects
can be divided. There are the long specimens with roughly
parallel straight or curving sides (Plate 3, I. M and N).
There are approximately 45 of this kind. Plate 3, I: O
shows a variant of this kind in which one end is worked
to a point with flaking on both surfaces of the pointed end.
Four specimens with one straight and one convex side are
exemplified in Plate 3, I: P and O. On two specimens
(Plate 3, I: P) one end is worked to a definite point with
alternate bevel. The third category includes twelve smaller
knives of varying shape which tend to be thinner than the
first subgroup (Plate 3, I: K, L, and R).
Forty complete and five fragmentary snub nosed or pianoconvex scrapers were found. There is a very fine gradation
of these artifacts from specimen to specimen. On the basis
of size and quality of workmanship, two groups can be indicated. One includes the small, very wel! worked scrapers
of which there are seven (average maximum dimensions
are ll/s inches wide by 1% inches long) and the other
thirty-three, the larger more crudely worked scrapers (average maximum dimensions are 1~ inches wide by 2½ inches

34

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

long). Three of the former have sharp cornered bits and
the body is tapered (Plate 3, II: C). Flaking is fine except
on the upper surface where longitudinal well controlled,
flakes have been removed. Two of the small scrapers have
a rounded bit and the body is not tapered (Plate 3, II: B).
The upper surface of these have smaller flakes taken from
them. In the larger snub-nosed scrapers flaking tends to
be cruder,, and there is more variation in body form
(Plate 3, II: A). One scraper is constricted in the middle,
the two notches having been made by chipping (Plate 3,
II: D). This might possibly have had some connection with
halting.
A unique specimen, made of alibates flint, is pictured in
Plate 3, II: W. One end is notched for halting. The two
sides and the other end are straight. Large thin flakes
have been removed from the top and the edges are finely
worked. One side shows more evidence of use than either
the other side or the working end. Plate 3, I: X shows a
unique corner tanged "knife" of alibates flint.
Small, roughly triangular, artifacts may have been projectile points but seem more likely to have been small knives
or scrapers (Plate 3, I: T, U, and V). In general flaking
is confined to the edges, and they are crudely worked and
tend to be uneven in all planes. There are 12 of this kind.
Sixty pieces of worked flint were undoubtedly used as
knives or scrapers, but they vary greatly in size and shape,
and are generally irregular--usually just worked flint
chips.
Sewing and punching.

Fragments and complete speciPLATE

I. Artifacts of stone. A, mane; B, muller; C, awl sharpener; D-E, arrowshaft polishers; F-I, alternate bevel diamond shaped knives; J-S, knives;
T-V, scrapers W-X, unique objects Y, greenstone "celt."
H. Artifacts of stone.
A-D, plane-convex scrapers; E, large triangular
unnotched
projectile
points;
F,
small
triangular
unnotched
proJeotlle
points ;
G,
triangular
side
notcl*ed
projectile
points,
concave base; H, triangular side notched projectile points, straight base;
triangular projectile points with side notches and base notch; J, triangular
projectile points with one notch (incomplete?); E:-L, unique pointsheavy dart points (~); O-:R, drills, S-U, reamers; ~r, fragmentary d,:ill;
double drill; X, elliptical drill; Y, fragments of mlcrocline.

A

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

37

mens of 18 flint drills were found. The shafts in general
are well worked and take one of two forms. Either the
shaft is roughly the same width for its entire length (Plate
3, II: O, P, Q, and R) or it narrows perceptibly toward
the point (Plate 3, II: S and T). A difference of use is
suggested here, the former being used primarily as drills,
the latter a combination of drill and reamer. Of the 10
specimens with head and shaft intact 4 are of the drillreamer shape. The drill heads or bases seem to take three
forms. One drill is definitely T-shaped in that the head
is narrow and crosses the shaft at right angles (Plate 3, II:
O). Three drills would seem to have chipped square or
rectangular heads, although the heads are not complete
(Plate 3, II: P and R). These bases of three drills seem
not to have been worked at all or in any definite shape
(Plate 3, II: S). On 10 drills it is impossible to determine
base form. A unique specimen is a double drill with a
shaft coming out of opposite sides of the "base" (Plate
3, II: W). One fusi-elliptical "drill" without base was
found (Plate 3, II: X). Fragments of two or three drills
(?) with very large bases are pictured in Plate 3, II: U and
V.
Bone awls made of longitudinally split deer metapodial
are common. In eight of these the proximal end of the bone
is present and slightly smoothed (Plate 2, II: G, H, and I).
In nine, the distal end is present and smoothed (Plate 2, II:
J and K). Awls of bone splinters (Plate 2, I: L and R)
were also found; usually but one end is worked. One bird
bone awl (Plate 2, I: V) was found.
Another kind of bone tool which we shall include in the
description of awls for want of a more precise name, consists of bone sections, rectangular or square in cross section, with all four sides usually well smoothed. In a few of
the specimens the underside includes some cancellous tissue which makes for roughness. Seven complete and five
fragmentary specimens were examined by the writer. Differences among them are based primarily on length and
a sharp or blunt point. Of the complete specimens three

38

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

were sharply pointed (Plate 2, I: P) and four had blunt
points (Plate 2, I: M, N, and O). The non-pointed end
was smoothed and tended to be rounded in all cases. Two
of the three pointed ones were the shortest, measuring
2% inches and 2% inches in length. The others ranged from
2v/s inches to 4~/4 inches in length. The foregoing figures
pertain only to the seven complete specimens. Both deer
and bison metapodials were used for making this kind of
awl.~e No eyed bone needles were present in the Stamper
The ten hones, or bone tool sharpeners, are made of coarse
(Plate 3, I: C) and fine grained sandstone suggesting either
use with large and small tools or possibly a graduated set
of sharpeners for tools in general. The coarse grained
blocks are unshaped with a groove on one surface in three
cases and on two opposing surfaces in the fourth. The
grooves tend to be deeper at the center of the stone than
toward the edges. Two of the fine grained sandstone
specimens are triangular in cross section, or roughly so, with
a groove on one surface. The grooves in these hones are
shallower than on the coarser stones. A third fine grained
sandstone specimen is rectangular in cross section with
grooves on three sides. One of the grooves might possibly
have been used for arrow shaft smoothing.
Woven artifacts. One large and several small fragments
of charred coiled basketry as well as charred yucca fibres
were present at the Stamper site.
Chipping impZements. Two hammerstones are mentioned, although not described, in the field notes and the
writer has seen neither. Seven antler tine tips may have
been used for flaking, or tapping, (Plate 2, I: W, X, and
Y). Four of them show definite signs of wear and polish.
One of the specimens may have had a squared working
end, although it is fragmentary.
28. One fragmentary specimen was triangular in cross section at its broken
end. although flattlsh at the other (rounded) end. Another specimen which
was with the Stamper material, but which bore no field number and which
is not specifically mentioned in the notes, was also triangular in cross section.
Although we cannot rightly claim this triangular cross sectioned variety as
typical of Stamper. its presence there is Indicated. To the east. in central
Oklahoma, at sites tn Custer and Garvin Counties° triangular cross sectioned
awls occur with g,-eater frequency.

The Optima Focus o:f the Panhandle Aspect:

39

Weapons. Small, finely worked projectile points are of
three main types: 43 triangular, unnotched points with
straight (predominant) or slightly concave base (Plate 3,
II: F) ; 48 triangular side notched points with concave (predominant) (Plate 3, II: G) and straight (Plate 3, II: H)
bases; 4 triangular side notched points with one base notch
(Plate 3, II: I). Two other points were possibly in process
of manufacture. These points are well worked and basic:
ally triangular with one notch in one side of each point
(Plate 3, II, J). All of the foregoing range from 3/4 inch to
1~ inches in length and are finely flaked on both sides.
Distinct from the small points are thirteen triangular
unnotched points which are somewhat larger (Plate 3, II:
E) and less finely worked. .They range from 1 inch to 1~
inches in length. Two corner notched points (Alibates
flint also) are considerably larger than the small points
(Plate 3, II: M and N) and may have been used as dart
points. Two other very small unique points are pictured
in Plate 3, II: K and L. One (K) is a crude side notched
point similar to many found in surface collections from
certain sites in central Oklahoma including Allcorn site
on the South Canadian River. ten miles north of Purcell.
The other (L) is a small corner-notched point with contracting stem.
Two fragments of arrow shaft smoothers were found
(Plate 3, I: D and E). Both are of fine grained sandstone,
rectangular in shape, with a longitudinal groove across the
top. On the broken end of one there is a small groove vertical and at right angles to the top groove. No shaft
wrenches were found.
Ornaments. The most common type of ornament found
were beads of Olivella shells with spire removed of which
there were ten (Plate 2, II: N). Five disc beads, four of
them with burial 1 were found. They appear to be made
of fresh water mussel (one seen by the writer). Also
with burial 1 were three cylindrical beads (none seen by
the writer). One of them has slightly convex sides, the
other two have straight sides.

,4O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Fragments of two pendants of shell, apparently of fresh
water mussel were found. One is pointed and may or
may not have been perforated (Plate 2, II: O); the other
is rectangular with a hole near the top (Plate 2, II: P).~
Stone ornaments consist of two worked fragments of
microcline~9 (Amazonstone variety) both of which are unperforated (Plate 3, II: Y).
Ceremonial objects. One complete and three fragments
of pipes were found. Only two small fragments have been
examined by the writer. According to the catalogue the
complete pipe, found under the left hand of burial I was
"white, fine-grained pipestone. Polished. Bowl meets stem
at slightly less than a right angle. Bowl is nearly uniform
in diameter while stem exPands slightly toward opening."
In the field notes the same pipe is referred to as "a small
L shaped clay pipe .... " Later in a summary report of
field notes it is referred to as "an elbow pipe" not mentioning the material from which it was made. The large
fragment of a pipe bowl is described in the catalogue as
"pipe bowl of red catlinite. Stem missing. Bowl is vase
shaped with constricted neck and slightly flaring rim. Polished.’’3o A fragment of polished black pipe of slate-like
material is not large enough to permit a knowledge of the
details of pipe form other than that there is a slight bulge
in the middle. The third fragment is of a fine grained
sandstone (siltstone) and composes one side of the pipe
bowl. It has a bulging side, constricted neck, with no
incision on the resulting flange. The two arms meet at right
angles. The stone is not polished although it is well
smoothed.
Bone "rasps" include one fragment of bison rib notched
along the inner edge (Plate 2, I: S) and one fragment of
29. Identified by C. A. ]Yferritt, mineralogist at the University of Oklahoma.
This mineral occurs in the granite at Pike’s Peak and l~lorlssant, Teller
County, Colorado. The mineral is a feldspar, tricllnlc and has the composition KAlSi3Og. In appearance the material ts similar to turquoise and could
be confused easily with it by the non-specialist.
30. This identification of the stone as catllnite may be open to question.
Pipes of fine grained reddish sandstone have been found at Antelope Creek
l~ocus sites in the Texas Panhandle and one has been found at Stamper.
It ts possible that this one was also of the same material.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

41

bison rib notched on the inner edge with a continuation of
the notches (although less deep) along the side of the rib
(Plate 2, I: T).

A fragment of deer metapodial with one-

half of the head removed has an incised line encircling it.
It is doubtful that it was intended as a "rasp" however.

A

second fragment of deer metapodial (Plate 2, I: U) has
three incisions encircling it, one of which is 2 inches below
the other two.
Miscellaneous.
Fragments of hematite pigment were
found as well as some worked fragments. One is an unshaped piece with a crude longitudinal groove in the upper
surface.
One piece of sandstone has been used as a stone on which
red pigments were ground. The stone is generally unshaped and the upper surface is smooth and thoroughly
covered with red pigment.
One large piece of mica (roughly 2~ inches by 2½ inches
by 21~ inches) was found. It is unworked and may have
been intended for use as tempering material for pottery.
Eight mussel shells were worked to a point at one end.
(Plate 2, II: Q and R). Other shells of this type, showing
signs of possible working at the posterior end, number 14.
They are not worked to a point, however. A notch near
the hinge on three of the pointed specimens seems not to
have been accidental (Plate 2, II: R).
Discs (Plate 2, II: L and M), all made of Stamper Cordmarked pottery, are represented by three fragments and
one complete specimen. The fragments are all perforated
centrally while in the complete specimen a central perforation was begun but not completed. These disc~s vary from
1~/4~ inches to 2 inches in diameter.
The edges are
smoothed.
An unperforated clay disc, or pellet, ~A inch in diameter
may have been a gaming device. It is undecorated and no
aplastic is visible. The edges are rounded.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

42

A very small, (11/~ inches high) apparently hand molded,
piece of clay (evidently not mentioned in the notes) is reminiscent of a vessel but certainly too small for such an object.

One side is cordmarked on the exterior surface.

parently no aplastic was used.

Ap-

The piece is tan in color.

Small "vessels" hand molded and with no aplastic have been
reported for the Henrietta Focus in north central Texas3,
end from the Bryan and Grant sites in south central Oklahoma, but it should be noted that these are scored, not cordmarked.
A piece of bison rib, split longitudinally, has been worn
at one end and forms a spatulate shaped object (Plate 2, I:
F).

The other end is broken.

!k fragmentary artifact may

also be of this kind, but both ends are broken. It is also
narrower than the first and polished on the back. A third
spatulate shaped object of bison scapula is shown in Plate
2, I: E.

The unbroken edges are bevelled.

One artifact, not seen by the writer, is a rectangular section of "large animal rib." According to the catalogue card
there is a perforation %inch in diameter and %inch from
one end of the object. The spongy tissue inside the bone
had been removed. The use of this object is not known
although it may possibly have been a pendant or a handle of
some sort.
One greenstone celt ground and polished on three sides
and pecked on the fourth, shows signs of considerable wear
(Plate 3, I: Y). The working edge is blunt with uneven
surface and there is some evidence of red pigment on it
suggesting its use in crushing hematite. It is not unlikely
that this artifact came to Stamper from the east through
trade. Here, we may have a case of diffusion of form of
an object but not of meaning, use, or function. In other
words, the object in question has the appearance of objects
31.

FLrieger, 1946, p. 110.

The Op!~ima Focus oy the Panhandle A~pect:

43

which, in the Lower Mississippi Valley and other areas

they are commonly found, are called celts. Presumably the use to which these celts was put was one of
chopping. The specimen at the Stamper site differs from
where

a bona ~ide celt in that the working adge has not been
kept sharp but rather is very blunt and rough.

Also the

red pigment in the roughened area suggests its use, not as
a chopping tool, but rather as a grinding tool: it was used
more or less as a pestle.
Dating o~ the Stamper Site
Assigning terminal dates to the occupation of Stamper is
fraught with some difficulty although we are fortunate
to have several kinds of utilizable data.
Three sherds of obvious Pueblo provenience, identified
by Mera as Rowe Black-on-white, were found at the site
just outside of room 3.

In that area of the village the oc-

cupation levels corresponded to those within room 3, and
the level in which the sherds were found corresponds to
the second occupation level inside room 3.

Furthermore,

underlying the north portion of that room and a considerable area surround it, was an ash layer measuring i inch
in thickness. Although no cultural material was found in
the excavated portions of the ash layer, it indicates occupation of the site prior to the time when room 3 was
built. That it represents an occupation by culturally similar
people (in spite of the absence of artifacts) is suggested by
the fact that part of the wall (which?) of room 3 was not
underlain by the ash bed but rather penetrated to an equal
depth. This suggests the wall’s contemporaneity with or
possibly antecedence over the ash layer. Suffice it to say,
that there is evidence of the occupation of the site at at
least two different times before the occupation during which
the Rowe Black-on-white sherds were laid down. If the
sherds had been found within a room, however, greater
surety could be had in using them as aids in dating the site.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Rowe Black-on-white dates from the late thirteenth century.3,A If the sherds arrived at Stamper at about that
period, and the site was occupied at two periods prior to
the time of their arrival, it is possible that initial occupation
dates from the thirteenth century, possibly the early or
middle years, although this cannot now be established with
certainty.
With regard to the final occupation date of Stamper and
possible reasons for abandonment, little can be said. Some
points which Krieger32 has discussed for Antelope Creek
Focus sites will bear repeating here. By 1541, the date of
Coronado’s entrada, the region of the Oklahoma Panhandle
as well as that of the Texas Panhandle was populated by
roving bands of bison hunters; there are no mentions in
Coronado’s account~3 of the villages, either occupied or deserted, now classified in the l~anhandle Aspect. We do not
know, to be sure, just how close to the sites Coronado’s
party passed.
His mention that the general area was populated by nomadic hunters suggests that one possibility for the abandonment of the Panhandle Aspect villages (including Stamper)
was attacks from hostile (and probably more warlike) tribes.
A second factor operative in the abandonment of the Panhandle Aspect villages is one which may have worked independently or in conjunction with the foregoing suggested
possibility. According to Weak]eye, with the exception of
the years 1454-1459, the period 1439-1468 was one of almost
continual drought in the Panhandles region. The effect
which such a drought would have on a people whose
economy was based on agriculture and hunting and who
31a. According to !~era (letter November 4, 1948) Rowe Black-on-~vVhite
was a ’rather minor, highly localized and short lived form found in only
a few of the upper Pecos Valley ruins."
The type dates from the late
thirteenth century, as mentioned by Wedel, 1947, and now reaffirmed by
]~Iera.
Regarding the dating, ~era says (letter, :November 13, 1948) "It is
unfortunate that no tree ring dates have been available for uncomplicated
Rowe sites.
Thus, deductions have had to be made based on intrusive
sherds associated with the Rowe type for which tree ring dates are known.
Dates obtained in this matter must be viewed as approx|mations with some
leeway allowed one way or the other."
32.
Ibid,
33.
Ibid.
34 ~v~eakly, 1943.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

C

A
D

6

~

1

Specimens of stone objects and of pot sherds,

j
l~edu(ted to half size.

45

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleon$olog~cal Society

Rim

sherd profiles.

FIGURE ]
The exteriors are to the right.

Reduced

to

half size.

inhabited an area which, at best, was not one of abundant
rainfall, is obvious. Either the drought or the hostile attacks
might well have been sufficient cause for a removal of the
Panhandle Aspect people to other areas; it is impossible
to believe that a combination of the two would have been
anything but disastrous.
Tentative terminal dates for the occupation of the Stamper
site then would be 1250-1450. It must be repeated that the
evidence is not conclusive, and that either date may have
to be revised in the light of evidence not yet available.

]~IGURE 2
Diamo~d-sh~ped k~ives with alternate bevels,

l~e~uced twenty 1}ercent.

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

47

Description of the Optima Focus
Although the Stamper materials have been unanalyzed
until the present time, they have been mentioned in the
literature in at least three classificatory contexts.
In 1939 Antle3~ proposed a scheme of classification for all
the archaeological manifestations in Oklahoma known at
that time. He listed the Stamper materials as constituting
the Beaver Creek Component, unnamed Focus, Canadian
Valley Aspect, Plains Phase, Woodland Pattern. In 1945
Clements36 referred to Stamper as an Upper Republican
Site. Finally, in 1946, Griffin3~ following either F. E. Clements or D. A. Baerreis or both, refers to the Stamper materials as belonging to the Cimarron Focus with no mention
of other taxonomic groupings or of companion materials
in the focus.
Because we now have a more complete picture of the
manifestation than previously and because a new Aspect,
the Panhandle, has been tentatively defined by Krieger in
a publication which succeeds the three foregoing in time,
it is suggested herein that terminology more in accord with
the present state of knowledge of the Stamper site be
adopted.
The reader who has followed the discussion must have
noted the marked similarities of the Stamper material to
both the Upper Republican Aspect as described by Strong,
Wedel, Champe, and others and the Antelope Creek Focus
of the Panhandle Aspect as described by Krieger. Table
I presents a visual impression of the similarities. The
closest relationships of Stamper, both quantitatively and
qualitatively, are to the Antelope Creek Focus. The differences between Stamper and Antelope Creek Focus are
considered to be of sufficient import so that we may define
a new focus, for which the name Optima is suggested.
Therefore, we may speak of the Stamper Component, Optima
35.
36.
37.

Antle, 1939, p. 350.
Clemen~s, 1945, p, 68.
Griffin, 1946, p. 85.

48

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Focus, Panhandle Aspect. Focal definition will, for the time
being be couched primarily in terms of the one site, Stamper,
but other sites in the same vicinity give indications of being
focally similar and it is expected that when they are~ excavated this will be born out in more detail.
There follows a list of traits of the Optima Focus which
actually forms a summary of the descriptive part of this
paper. This list, in form, follows that used by Krieger, not
only to facilitate comparison, but also because it is felt that
a prose listing, because it is more inclusive, is superior to a
simple trait list for many purposes. Summary tabulation
of traits is presented in Table I. It should be remarked that
the Optima Focus traits here mentioned have been found
in single association.
Type site:

The Stamper site, located on the first terrace

of the south bank of the North Canadian River (Beaver
Creek) two and one half miles south of the town of Optima
in Texas County, Oklahoma.
Other components: Probably several unnamed sites within a radius of five miles of Stamper. Possibly others as yet
unreported.
Economy:
Joint dependence on maize agriculture and
hunting-gathering. Charred corn cobs (11/~ inches length;
¯~/4inches diameter) are evidence for maize. No direct evidence of other food plants, of irrigation, or of fish remains.
Animals hunted were principally: bison, antelope, deer,
rabbit. Other small animals and birds also hunted. No evidence of seeds, nuts or berries although they may have been
used.
Village:
Situated on first terrace of North Canadian
River in defensible position close to agricultural lands and
fresh water supply. Twelve single unit single storied houses
in village with no observable planned arrangement.
Architecture:
Rooms, spatially separated from each
other, are square to rectangular in shape with square or
rounded corners. Walls tend to be oriented with sides in

The Optima Focus oj the Panhandle Aspect:

49

cardinal directions. Adjoining several rooms are small
circular or rectangular rooms which may have been used
for storage, sleeping or work space. These rooms are built
on to a larger dwelling room.
Wall construction consists primarily of a single base row
of vertically placed caliche slabs often set in a shallow
trench and with adobe reinforcements on the outside at the
base. Solid masses of adobe and large adobe blocks set in
dark clay also occurred as wall bases. Indications are that
the height of the wall and roof was attained by a clay
covered pole framework.
Rooms were constructed at ground level or slightly below.
Floors consisted of hard packed yellow clay. A central
unlined firepit ~vas usual. An entryway extended from
the center of one wall; seems not to have been consistently
oriented but away from prevailing winds.
Agricultural implements:
Bison scapula hoes with hafting details unknown. Digging sticks of bevelled bison tibia
with distal end usually perforated, probably for a handle.
Food storage:
Bell shaped caches are unknown. Circular pits or cists inside and outside of houses probably used
for storage. No stonelined cists reported.
Food preparation:
Grinding implements consists of merates with circular and oval basins in which rotary grinding
motion was used. Manos (all known are one-handed) are
rectangular with rounded corners or ovoid in shape.
Crudely shaped hammerstones of quartzitic material present.
Pottery exclusively utilitarian and all, excepting trade
ware, of one type called Stamper Cordmarked. Paste: fine
to medium. Aplastic: grit (including mica and sand) occasionally coarse, with possible use of bone. No shel!,
vegetable or clay. Thickness: 3-10 mm. with the majority
5-6 ram. Hardness: 2.5-3.5. Interior usually imperfectly
smoothed, exterior cordmarked. Colors: tan to black. No
complete specimens found but globular, round bottomed jars
usually with straight rims placed vertically or flaring out-

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

5O

ward slightly; rare are incurving rims. Lugs and handles absent. Rims tend to meet body at gentle angle although sharp
junctures occur.

Lip decoration: undecorated, cordmarks,

diagonal punctates, and circular puntates. Non-cordmarked
decoration occurs infrequently; usually collfined to area of
neck and lip; single row of blunt tool depressions, thicl~ening of rim across which are diagonal incisions.
Cutting, scraping, skin preparation, etc.:
Various1y
shaped chipped knives, almost all of Alibates flint, including: diamond shape with alternative bevel; ovate; narrow
and slightly curved forms.

Piano-convex scrapers common

including small, well worked specimens and larger more
crudely worked scrapers.
ent.

Small triangular scrapers pres-

Crudely shaped flints probably used as knives or

scrapers.

Mussel shells with serrated edges and fleshing

tools of bison humerus absent.
Sewing, punching implements:
Chipped flint awls or
drills with unworked and worked bases, the latter including
square or "T" shaped varieties. Shafts tend to be of two
types--one with parallel sides, the other with sides w~hich
converge from base to point of shaft. One elliptical stone
drill present. Bone awls are of several kinds: common
are those of longitudinally split deer metapodial with either
the distal or proximal end present and usually smoothed;
awls of bone splinters present; one bird bone awl. A type
of awl consisting of a section of long bone, rectangular or
square in cross section with all four sides smoothed and the
working end sharp or blunt. Possible occurrence of similar
awl but triangular in cross section. No eyed bone needles
present.
Hones of both coarse and fine-grained sandstone. The
former are unshaped, the latter are triangular in cross
section.
Woven arti]acts:
Charred fragments of coiled basketry;
also charred yucca fibre.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

Chipping implements:

51

Antler tine tips for flaking and

tapping. Possibly hammerstones.
Weapons:

Use of bow and arrow indicated by numerous

small, thin, well worked triangular projectile points.

The

side notched type is present in slightly (possibly insignificant) numbers over the unnotched variety.
and concave bases in both types.
single base notch also present.

Both straight

Side notched points with
Distinctive are larger

triangular unnotched projectile points somewhat less finely
worked.

Two points were possibly used for darts.

Arrow shaft smoothers of fine grained sandstone rectangular in shape with longitudinal grooves across the top
present. Shaft wrenches absent.
Ornaments:
Shell beads: Olivella with spire removed;
disc and cylindrical. Pendants of fresh water mussel (one
perforated) and microcline (neither perforated).
Ceremonial objects: Elbow pipes of several fine grained
sandstone and slate-like materials. In color reddish, tan and
black. Bulging sided arms with or without flange. Tubular
or clay pipes absent. Bone rasps of bison rib with scorings
on one edge or edge and side. Also scored or notched
fragments of deer metapodial.
Burials:
Flexed and semi-flexed (?) burials in unlined
pits, usually sub-floor. Grave goods include personal ornaments (beads) and pipe.
Miscellaneous:
Worked and unworked hematite fragments. Coarse sandstone block for grinding pigment. Mussle shells worked to a blunt point at one end. Discs, perforated and unperforated, of Stamper Cordmarked pottery fragments probably used as spindle whorls. Small unperforated clay disc possibly used as gaming device. Diminutive hand molded "vessel" cordmarked on one side and
with no aplastic. "Spatula" of longtitudinally split bison
rib. "Handle" of split animal (bison) rib. Greenstone "celt"
ground and polished on three sides with blunted working

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

52

end, probably came to Stamper from east.
sherds.

Pueblo trade

Two fragments of troughed metates.
Archaeological A]filiations

The whole subject of the relationships of the Optima
Focus to other cultural horizons in the central and southern
Plains and the Southwest is one which, when studied in
detail, should augment considerably the present knowledge
of the culture history of these areas as well as to clarify
specific archaeological problems now recognized. It is felt
that such a study can profitably be made after more detailed
data are available not only for the Optima Focus but also
the Antelope Creek Focus, as well as other (?) as yet unknown loci of the Panhandle Aspect. For .the present, we
shall briefly discuss the affiliations of Optima Focus with
Antelope Creek Focus, Upper Republican Aspect and the
Southwest, including therein suggestions and problems for
future investigation.
Relationship to Antelope Creek Focus
Table 1 gives in summary form the similarities of the
Optima Focus to the Antelope Creek Focus. To the reader
already familiar with Antelope Creek Focus materials the
similarities are ver~ obvious. The differences, although few
in number, are worthy of mention here. Excepting architecture, the ten Antelope Creek Focus traits which are
absent at Stamper are:
Large number of rooms in single village,
Stone-lined graves,
Tubular clay pipe,
Beamers,
Bird bone beads,
Mussel shells with serrated edges,
Awls of metapodial--head unworked,
Eyed bone needles,
Antler tapping tools with squared end,
Cylindrical conch columnela beads.

The Optima Focus o~. the Panhandle Aspect:

53

Ten Optima Focus traits not reported from Antelope
Creek Focus are38
Large triangular unnotched projectile points,
Pottery,
Flattened shoulder,
Thickened rim,
Cordmarks on lip,
Circular punctates on rim and lip,
Large blunt impressions on rim,
Yucca fibre,
Disc beads of mussel shell,
Bulging arm elbow pipes without flange,
Cylindrical shell beads.
Probably-the outstanding difference between the Antelope Creek and the Optima Foci of the Panhandle Aspect
is in the realm of architecture. Although dwelling units
at all reported sites set this Aspect apart from otherwise
similar Plains manifestations in that caliche slabs were
often used in house construction, there are differences
within the aspect itself--differences, which, it must be
mentioned, cannot be fully interpreted at this time.
Krieger has already emphasiked the occurrence at Antelope Creek Focus sites of multiple unit dwellings, "Multiple
roomed pueblos of one story found at excavated sites which
also contain scattered single rooms." These may vary not
only in number of rooms but also in room size. In at least
one instance too, Antelope Creek, both Holden (1930) and
Johnston (1939) have remarked on the uneven quality of
workmanship from room to room, the quality improving
as one progresses from north to south.
At Stamper all rooms are of the single unit type.3~ This
situation is likewise reported from other sites in the immediate vicinity of Stamper as well as for Handley’s ruin

3g. Some of these traits may actually be duplicated in the two units and
may. with the publication of a complete descriptive analysis of one or more
of the Antelope Creek Focus sites, be shown.
39. !~ros. 2 and 2a may have shared a common wall In at least one period
of occupancy.

54

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

on Wolf Creek in the Texas Panhandle. (It is interesting
to note that Wolf Creek is a tributary of the North Canadian
River entering it in Woodward County, Oklahoma, approximately 125 miles below Stamper and considerably out-side
of the area from which Panhandle Aspect sites have been
reported.)
In Antelope Creek Focus sites then, both single and
multiple unit dwellings occur while at sites tentatively
placed in the Optima Focus no multiple roomed dwellings
are reported.
A further, and possibly more important, distinction which
can be made, although its lines are not coexistent with the
division between single and multiple unit dwellings, is that
between the occurrence of a single or a double row of wall
base slabs. This difference, if the interpretation of single row
wall bases presented herein is correct, would be of utmost
significance as it would indicate two quite different types
of wall structurally speaking: walls of stone and mortar in
the case of the double row slab bases and walls of a pole
framework, probably covered with clay, associated with
the single row slab bases. Several (most?) Panhandle
Aspect sites from which requisite data are available seem
to have neither exclusively single or double row wall bases
although one or the other predominates. For example,
Hobbs mentions one "pole framework" room at Antelope
Creek and at Optima room 2 has a double row slab base
although all others are single. From Alibates, Mason4o
reports one room which differed from most (all?) of the
others in that it did not have the double row slab base.
The underground walls were of adobe or mud but
were solid and not built of adobe bricks as in the modern
Mexican style. Most of them were blackened by smoke.
.... In this room no stones were set into the tops of the
walls as was the usual practice ..... At four points at equal
distances from the fireplace where holes in the floor, which
details showed plainly represent the posts which upheld the

40.

~loorehead,

1931.

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

roof.

55

Above most of the floors were found charred beams

turned to charcoal, clay burned .... "

At Handley’s ruin,

although the dwellings are of the single unit type as at
Stamper, the wall bases are predominantly, if not com-~
pletely, of the double row slab type.4,
Several other important differences between at least som~
of the Antelope Creek Focus rooms as described by Kriege~
and Optima Focus are the absence at the latter of 1) two
bins at either side of the entryway or ventilator; 2) the
"altar" at one end of the room; and 3) the depression in the
central section of the floor extending from the "altar" to
the opposite wall or entryway. There is no evidence fo~
the first of these traits at Stamper; a raised section, suggestive of the Antelope Creek Focus "altars" was found
at the west end of room 2, and a depression, similar to those
of Antelope Creek Focus was found in 2a. The relationship between the "altar" and depression (one occurrence
of each) at Stamper is not clear, although the rooms in
which they occurred evidently shared a common wall at
some time in the occupation of the site and may (?) at
another time have comprised, a single room in which th~
"altar" and depression could have been associated. Their
relative orientation, if the association did in fact exist,
was the opposite of that found in Texas: the depression
lies to the west of the "altar."
Although two distinct types of wall seem to have been
known both at Antelope Creek and Optima foci sites, the
predominant type at each differs rather markedly. For
Antelope Creek Focus sites, the predominant wall type is
described by Krieger42 "large slabs were placed vertically
in parallel rows, then the space filled with adobe and rubble, and other slabs mounted on them in the offset system

41. Whereas double-row-slab-bases were used in single unit dwellings, so
far as is known there are no instances of single-row-slab-bases (t. e. covei’edpole-framework .walls) for multiple unit .dwellings. This is not surprising, for
would it not be impossible to nave multiple dwellings with the covered-poleframework walls? Or stated in another way, would not one possible Important
reason for multiple roomed dwellings. I. e. one wall to serve for two rooms,
be absent where the covered-pole-framework wall was used?
42. Krteger, 1946~ p. 43.
’"

56

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

described by Holden43 .... Many walls were built simply of
unshaped stones held together with liberal amounts of
adobe mortar." At Stamper, if the evidence has been interpreted correctly herein, the walls consisted of a pole
frmmework covered with some perishable or semi-perishable material, probably clay. One room of the latter type
has been mentioned for Antelope Creek Focus and one
room at Stamper may have had the stone wall type charactertistic of Antelope Creek Focus sites.4~
The artifactual inventories of the two loci, are, with the
few exceptions listed, very similar and it would not be surprising to find that the lists diminish in size as future
excavation is undertaken.
Relationship to Upper Republican Aspect
Table I presents in summary form not only the traits
shared by the Optima Focus and Upper Republican Aspect
but also those which one has to the exclusion of the other.
It must be remembered too that in Table I Optima Focus
is represented by only one site whereas the Upper Republican Aspect list is compounded from a number of sites;
it is possible that the differences would be fewer if a larger
number of Optima Focus sites had been excavated.
Exclusive of architecture, seventeen Upper Republican
Aspect traits not found in the Optima Focus are:
Beans and squash,
Notched bison scapula hoe blades,
Bell shaped cache pits,
Hachure or grid on rim of pottery,
Triangular chipped knives,
Beamers,
Eyed bone needles,
Antler tapping tools with squared ends,
Shaft wrenches,
43. Holden,
44. It would
handle Aspect
what effect, if

]930, fig. 2.
be interesting to know the m~xinaum distance st which Panvillages were located from caliche quarries. In other words,
any. did quarry locale have on village location?

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

57

Bird bone beads,
Bone bracelets,
Antler bracelets,
Bone pendants,
Pierced deer phalanges,
Bone gambling pieces,
Secondary burials,
Bone fishhooks,
Nineteen Optima Focus traits not reported from Upper
Republican Aspect sites:
Villages in defensive positions,
Bison metapodial digging sticks,
Metates,
Manos,
Pottery,
Circular punctates on rim and lip,
Large blunt impressions on rim,
Narrow curved chipped flint knives,
Flint drills, unworked head,
Flint drills, square head,
Bird bone awls,
Bone awls, rectangular in cross section,
Coiled basketry,
Yucca fibre,
Small triangular projectile points, unnotched,
Perforated mussel shell pendants,
Microcline pendants,
Pipes, elbow, bulging arm with flange,
Bison rib rasps,
Sub-floor burial.
Optima Focus architecture, compared strictly from the
point of view of quantitiative trait listing, would appear
to vary considerably from that of the Upper Republican
Aspect. However, there are nine important similarities:
Relatively small number of rooms per village,
Single unit dwellings,
Dwellings rectangular in shape,

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Four central support posts,
Central unlined firepit,
Lateral entryway,
Walls of poles,
Poles covered with some other material,
Roofs dome shaped.
Four significant differences between the architecture of
the Optima Focus and the Upper Republican Aspect houses
are:

Upper Republican houses are semi-subterranean;
Optima Focus probably not (certainly not as much so
in any case).
Wall poles in both cases are covered, but the material
probably differs; grass or earth for Upper Republican
Aspect houses and clay for those of Optima Focus.
The caliche slabs at base of wall in Optima Focus rooms
are completely lacking in Upper Republican Aspect
houses, as well as use of solid adobe and adobe blocks in
wall bases.
Small storage rooms adjoining some Optima Focus
rooms absent in Upper Republican Aspect houses.
Both the Optima Focus and the Upper Republican Aspect
peoples are seen as having been maize agriculturalists and
hunters, possibly an approximately fifty-fifty division of
time between the two types of activities in either group.
Settlement was in relatively few single unit dwellings located on stream terraces. Houses were rectangular with
four center posts and covered pole framework, giving a low
dome shaped appearance. The use of stone and adobe in the
wall bases of the Optima Focus houses and not in Upper
Republican Aspect houses represents a significant difference between the two. So far as artifactual content is concerned, similarities far outweigh differences and the latter
are oftentimes minimal. Those indicating dietary differences,
i. e. fishhooks present in Upper Republican Aspect sites

The Optima Focus o] the Panhandle A~pect:

59

and absent in Optima Focus, and those indicating trade relationships, are probably among the most important.
The problem of genetic or ethnic relationship between Upper Republican Aspect and Optima Focus is one which will
not be dealt with to any extent in the present paper. The
writer is in agreement with Krieger in the belief "that the
peoples of this focus [,amtelope Creek] were Plains agriculturalists who pushed southward from one valley to another as far as eastern New lYIexico.",~ This statement
could not be expanded to include peoples of the Panhandle
Aspect, including both the Antelope Creek and Optima Foci.
Furthermore, the following observations might be made at
the present time:
1. The traits of the Panhandle Aspect are more similar
to those of the Upper Republican Aspect than to any
other recognized Plains manifestation.
2. A larger number of Optima Focus traits than Antelope Creek Focus traits are similar to those of the
Upper Republican Aspect.
3. The greatest differences (quantitatively and qualitatively) between Antelope Creek Focus and Optima
Focus are in the realm of architecture.
4. The architecture of Antelope Creek Focus reflects
greater Pueblo influence than does that of Optima
Focus.
Relationships to the Southwest
There is little of a general nature that the present writer
is able to add to Krieger’s discussion regarding the relationship between Panhandle Aspect and the Southwest so far
as artifacts are concerned except to suggest that the possible
sites from which "Plains" elements could have diffused to
Pecos should be enlarged to include Optima Focus sites.
As to architecture, it is clear that much of the Pueblo influence found in Antelope Creek Focus houses is not pres45.

I~rleger. 1946. p. ~3.

6O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

ent in Optima Focus houses. In fact, one of the most important differential characteristics may be the presence or
absence (absolute or relative )of Pueblo architectural influence in Panhandle Aspect sites. It has already been suggested, albeit cautiously, that a time difference as well as
culture change may be reflected in architectural types.,6
So far as artifacts are concerned the relationship between
Antelope Creek Focus and the Southwest and Optima Focus
and the Southwest seem very similar. In the realm of architecture Antelope Creek Focus has more similarities to the
Southwest than does Optima Focus.
Final Remarks
The following statements are offered in the nature of
hypotheses which may serve as the basis for problems for
future research. Clearly, much more excavation in the
Texas and Oklahoma Panhandles is needed to clarify many
of the points which still remain cloudy. It should be emphasized that these statements are not offered as conclusively proved facts. It is suggested:
That Panhandle Aspect peoples were Plains agriculturalists, with a culture identical or closely allied to
that which is now referred to as the Upper Republican Aspect, who pushed southward.
2. At some time after their arrival in the valley of the
North Canadian River (and tributaries?) a natural
resource of the region, caliche, was discovered.
This natural resource, heretofore unusued by (possibly unknown to) these people, was used in house
building, at first merely in a supplementary way.
Caliche slabs were used as a reinforcement or protection at the base of the house walls; none were
used in the walls proper.
46. At first glance the photographs and description of several of the
Optima Focus rooms are reminiscent of those of many Basketmaker HI houses
(Cf. l~oberts, 1929, p. 11 and Fig. 2).
Upon closer examination, however,
numerious differences are seen, and the problem of ~vhat. if any. Influence
of Basketmaker architecture there was on Optima Focus architecture,
mains for future investigation.

The Optima Focus o~ the Panhandle Aspect:

61

Some of these people continued to push southward
into the area now known as the Texas Panhandle.
At some time, presumably through contact with
Pueblo peoples of the Southwest~ the caliche became
a basic architectural component i. e. it was used
in actual construction of house walls.
o

The influence of Pueblo architecture on that of the
Panhandle Aspect peoples was probably first manifested in the area now known as the Texas Panhandle (possibly the South Canadian River Valley)
and the resulting architectural type evidently
reached its highest development and greatest use
there.
The influence of Pueblo architectural practices was
evidently felt at least as far north as the valley of
the North Canadian River although it probably was
never as important or widely used there as it was
to the south.

Other interpretations should not be ruled out, of course.
It is also conceivable that use of caliche was first made in
the area where it seems to have reached its highest development, the valley of the South Canadian River, and that its
use in the North Canadian valley represents but faint reflections of borrowing and diffusion from the south.

No

definite answer is now available.
Finally, it is worthy of note that the whole problem of
culture change and acculturation in the area of the Texas
and Oklahoma Panhandles at the time with which we are
dealing here, is not a simple one.

Krieger has pointed to the

matter of selective borrowing.’~

The diffusion of ideas or

traits from one group of Panhandle Aspect people to another
and the changes which took place in the culture of the var47.

Krieger,

1946,

p.

73.

62

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

ious groups of the Panhandle Aspect over a period of time
are subjects, investigation of which would prove interesting
and rewarding.
Washington University
Saint Louis
TABLE I
Presence-Absence Trait List For Optima Focus, Antelope
Creek Focus And Upper Republican Aspect*

TRAIT

ECONOMY3
Maize agriculture
Hunting-gathering
Evidence of fish use
Evidence of beans and squash
VILLAGES
Defensive positions
Relatively small number of houses
Relatively large number of houses
Located on stream terraces
HOUSES
Semi-subterranean
Rectangular to square
Four central support posts
Entryway lateral
Entrance through roof
Ventilator lateral
Plastered floor

~g

~-~°~
"~

x

x

x

x

X

X
X
X

x
x
x

X

N

x

x

x

X

X

x

?

?

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

-

x

x

x

-

* X ~ present; -- ~ absent; ? ~ incomplete evidence, presence suggested.
1. From Krteger, 1946.
2. From Krleger, 1946 and Wedel, 1940.
~. Two facts should be mentioned at the outset: a) that the writer has
not examined materials of either the Antelope Creek Focus nor Upper Republican ~_spect firsthand; and b) the list is as detailed as published data
and Optima Focus material will allow.

The Opti~na Focus o] the Panhandle Aspect:

Central unlined firepit
Central clay lined firepit
Roof flat
Roof low dome-shaped
Walls of poles
Poles covered with brush and earth
Poles covered with clay
Single row base slabs
Double row base slabs
Base of solid adobe or adobe blocks
Wall of stone set in clay
Small adjoining rooms
Storage bins at entryway
"Altar"
Depressed central portion of room
Single unit dwellings
Multiple unit dwellings
AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS
Bison metapodial digging stick points
Bison scapula hoe blades
FOOD STORAGE
Bell-shaped cache pits
Cists in floors
Cists outside houses
FOOD PREPARATION
Metates
NIanos
I-tammerstones
Pottery
Aplastic grit
Aplastic bone
Color commonly grey or brown
Paste
Soot blackening common
Globular
Round bottomed
Straight rim, vertical or flaring

63

X

-

X

X

-

X

X

-

X

-

X

X

-

X

-

X

-

X

-

X

X

-

X

X

X

-

x

x
x

-

?

X

X

x

X

X

x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x

64

Texas Archeological c~nd Paleontological Society

Rounded shoulder

O.F.
x

Flattened shoulder

x

,~.C.F.
x

x

-

x

Handles absent

x

x

x

Exteriors cordmarked

x

x

x

Thickened rim

x

-

x

Incised notches on rim

x

x

x

-

-

x

Incised hachure or grid on rim
Incised lines on lip
Cordmarks on lip

x

x

x

x

-

x

Circular punctates on rim and lip

x

-

Large blunt impressions on rim

x

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

CUTTING, SCRAPING, SKIN
PREPARATION, ETC.
Knives
Diamond shaped with alternate bevel
Ovate
Narrow curved
Triangular
Snub-nosed (piano-convex) scrapers
Oval sidescrapers
Mussel shells with serrated edges
Beamers of bison metapodial, scapula,
and humerus

x
x
x
x
x
x

x

x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x

x

x

x

Bone awls rectangular in cross section x

x

Eyed bone needles

x

x

x

x

SEWING, PUNCHING IMPLEMENTS
Flint
Flint
Flint
Bone
Bone
Bone

dri!ls with T-shaped head
drills with unworked head
drills with square head
awls of metapodial, head worked
awls unworked
awls of splinters

Bone awls of bird bone

Sandstone hones

x

x
x

The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

65

A.C.F.

U.R.A.

WOVEN MATERIALS
Coiled basketry
Plaited and twined basketry
Yucca fibre

X
X

CHIPPING IMPLEMENTS
Bone and antler flaking tools with
rounded ends
x
Antler tapping tools with squared ends x

x

X

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

-

X

X

-

X

X

-

X

X

X

X

-

X

X

-

X

WEAPONS
Small, triangular, unnotched projectile
points, chipped on both faces, bases
straight to concave
Small, triangular projectile points,
chipped on both faces, two side
notches, bases straight to concave
Small, triangular projectile points,
chipped on both faces, two side
notches, one base notch
Larger, triangular, unnotched
projectile points
Larger dart points
Shaft smoothers, sandstone, longitudinal groove
Shaft wrenches of antler and bison rib

x

x
-

ORNAMENTS
Beads of bone
Beads of Olivella with spire removed
Beads, disc, cut from mussel shell
Beads, cylindrical, cut from
mussel shell
~Beads, cylindrical, cut from
conch columnella
Bone pendants
Pendants, mussel shell, perforated
Pendants, turquoise (?), microcline
Pendants, clawlike, of shell

x
x
x

x
x

X

X

66

Texas Archeologica! and Paleontological Society

CEREMONIAL OBJECTS
Stone pipes, elbow, bulging arm
Tubular clay pipes
Rasps, deer leg bone
Rasps, notched bison rib
Pierced deer phalanges
Gambling pieces of bone

x
x
-

X

x
X

X

BURIALS
Primary, flexed and semi-flexed
x
Secondary, in ossuary
Stone lined graves
x
Subfloor burial
No grave goods except personal effects x
MISCELLANEOUS
Pottery discs cut from sherds
Bone fishhooks
Obsidian
Steatite
Hematite

x
x
x
x

x
-

x
X

x
x
x

x
x

x
78

81

X

x
x
x
x
x
71

ANALYSIS OF TABLE I
Of a total of 114 traits:
Optima Focus has 78, or 68.4% of the total.
Antelope Creek Focus has 81, or 71% of the total.
Upper Republican Aspect has 71, or 62.2% of the total.
Of the 114 traits, 41, or 35.9%, are shared by all three:
41 universals are 52.5% of the 78 Optima Focus traits.
41 universals are 50.6% of the 81 Antelope Creek Focus
traits.
41 universals are 57.7% of the 71 Upper Republican Aspect
traits.
Of the 114 traits:
10, or 8.7%/occur only in the Optima Focus.
16, or 14%, occur only in the Antelope Creek Focus.
14, or 12.2%, occur only in the Upper Republican Aspect.

The Op~ma Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:

Of the 114 traits:
17, or 14.9%, occur only in Optima Focus and Antelope
Creek Focus.
10, or 8.7%, occur only in Optima Focus and Upper Republican Aspect.
6, or 5.2%, occur only in Antelope Creek Focus and Upper
Republican Aspect.
On the basis of 73 non-universal traits, these percentages become respectively 23.2, 13.6, and 8.2.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Antle, H. R.
1939 "A proposed nomenclature for Oklahoma archaeology," American Antiquity, Vol. IV, No. 4 (April).
Clements, Forrest
1945 "Historical sketch of the Spiro Mound," Contributions from the Museum o~ the American Indian, Heye
Foundation, Vol. 14 (New York), pp. 48-68.
Gould, Charles N. and John T. Lonsdale
1926 "Geology of Texas County, Oklahoma," Oklahoma
Geological Survey Bulletin, No. 37.
Griffin, James
1946 "Culture change and continuity in Eastern United
States archaeology," Man in Northeastern North
America. Papers of the Robert S. Peabody Foundation
for Archaeology, ed. Frederick Johnson (Andover), pp.
37-95.
Hobbs, Hulda R.
1941 "Two Texas Pan_handle ruins," El Palacio, Vol.
¯ XLVIII, No. 6 (June), pp. 121-129.
Holden, W. C.
1930 "The Canadian Valley expedition of March, 1930,"
Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, (Abilene), pp. 21-32.

68

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Johnston, C. S.
1939 "A report on the Antelope Creek Ruin," Ibid., Vol.
11, pp. 190-202.
Krieger, Alex
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas, The University of Texas Publication, No. 4640
(Austin).
1947 "The eastward extension of Puebloan datings toward cultures of the Mississippi Valley," American Antiquity, Vol. XII, No. 3 (January), pp. 141-148.
Moorehead, W. K.
1931 Archaeology o] the Arkansas River Valley, (New
Haven).
Roberts, F. H. H. Jr.
1929 Shabik’eshchee Village: a Late Basketmaker Site
in the Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, Bureau of American
Ethnology Bulletin 92 (Washington).
Six, Ray L.
1930 "Beaver, Texas, and Cimarron Counties," Oklahoma Geological Survey Bulletin, No. 40-VV.
Weakly, H. E.
1943 "A tree ring record of precipitation in Western
Nebraska," Journal of Forestry, Vol. 41, No. 11.
Wedel, Waldo
1940 "Culture sequence in the Central Great Plains,"
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 100 (Washington), pp. 291-352.
1947 "Culture chronology in the Central Great Plains,"
American Antiquity, Vol. XII, No. 3 (January),
pp. 148-155.

