190

T~x~az Archeological and Paleontological Society

A RI~PORT ON THt~ ANTI~LOPl~
CREEK RUIN
BY C. STUART JoHr~sol~"
Introduction

The first excavations on theAntelope Creek site north of Amarillo,
Texas, seem to have been done by Eyerly (1907). Later, Dr. W. C.
Holden (1930) carried on additional work at this location and by
means of trenches and the excavation of several rooms was able to
determine something of the size and general characteristics of the
ruin, which he stated was: "One of the largest and best preserved
in the Texas Panhandle." There are numerous sites of the type
here described located in the Panhandle of Texas, and others are
known in Beaver County, Oklahoma. Moorehead (1931) pointed
out the archaeological importance of these locations, and Studer
(1934) has given us a good picture of this culture as described from
Ruin Number 55, which may be taken as typical. In the summer
of 1934 Dr. Forrest E. Clements directed the excavation of a ruin
of this type two miles south of Optima, Oklahoma, through the
cooperation of the Federal Relief Administration. It was the writer’s
privilege to have supervised this work under the direction of Dr.
Clements. Lowery (1932) worked several weeks at the Antelope
Creek Ruin, and mentions having found several pieces of Pueblo
pottery which Dr. Mera of Santa Fe, New Mexico, correlated with
Little Colorado Glaze 1. In a survey by Studer (1931), attention
was called to numerous sites of archaeological interest in northwest
Texas, and the importance of these sites was well brought out by
Moorehead (1933).
In referring to ruins of the type described in this paper various
terms have been used by several writers. They have been designated
as "Slab-House Ruins," "Pueblo Ruins," and "Panhandle Culture
Ruins." This confusion in terminology seems to reflect to a certain
degree a confusion in cultural relationships. Panhandle Culture is
perhaps a better term because it carries no implication of other
cultures that may be involved, and does have a definite geographic
significance. On the margin of the Plains and Pueblo areas one
"We learned of the death of Mr. Johnston not long after receivlnlr this artle,l~Ed.

A Repor$ on ~he AnSelope Creel~ Ruin

191

would expect to find and does find an admixture of culture traits
from both regions.

It is the writer’s purpose here to present a

concise picture of Panhandle Culture as determined from excavations at the Antelope Creek Ruin and to decide as nearly as possible in our present state of knowledge the taxonomic position of the
culture with respect to those of adjacent regions.
The work of excavating completely the Antelope Creek Ruin and
restoring a replica of it in the Panhandle Plains Historical Museum
at Canyon, Texas, was sponsored by the West Texas State College
and made possible through the cooperation of the Works Progress
Administration. Mr. Ele Baker at the present time is supervising the
continuation of field work at a new location under the direction of
Mr. Floyd V. Studer.
Description o] tlte Ruin
Location: The Antelope Creek Ruin is located in the southwest
corner of HutcMnson County, Texas, three miles east and one
mile north of Fritch on the Johnson Ranch, on the west bank of
Antelope Creek.
Geographic en~onrnent: Antelope Creek is a permanent stream
occupying a narrow valley in the High Plains Region of the Texas
Panhandle. The strea~n flows northward through Carson County
and joins the Canadian River several miles beyond the low hill
below the cap-rock on which the ruins are situated. The climate is
semi-arid with an average rainfall of approximately twenty inches
per year. There is little vegetation except that which is typical of
the open plains, such as buffalo grass, sage brush, mesquite, yucca,
and a few cottonwood and willow trees along the stream. Although
the weather is subject to sudden fluctuations in temperature the
summers are not unbearably hot, and the winters are relatively mild.
General Features o] the Ruin: This ruin, like others of the same
type, was first noticed because of surface outcroppings of stone
slabs, generally arranged in rectangular patterns. These surface
indications, which are sometimes joined, but often scattered, represent the foundation outlines of houses, the upper parts of which
have long sinc~ completely disintegrated. Mounds are not present,
and the usually flat surface gives no indication of the depth of the

192

T~za~ Ar¢lwologivcd wnd Pa~eon~ologlcal Society

walls and floor-levels which may be buffed under several feet of
wind-blown dust.
There are twenty-three rooms in the main part of the village,
all of which adjoin each other and extend roughly in a north-south
direction. None of the houses are more than one story in height.
The entrances are all low, averaging about three feet in height, and
all are located on the east sides of the houses. The evidence in this
location does not indicate that the houses were of the semi-subterranean type. Each of the larger houses was provided with two
small rooms which were possibly used for storage, between which
was the entrance-way leading into the main room.
Synopsis of Culture

ztrzhltecture: With a few exceptions the houses are approximately
rectangular in ground plan. The walls are vertical and devoid of
openings except for a small entrance located in the center of the
east side. There seems to have been no prearranged plan in constructing the village. Additional rooms were added as occasion
required.
The walls were constructed by laying a foundation of two rows
of vertically placed rock slabs, which were filled in with adobe
mortar. Above this it seems evident that the slabs were placed horizontally in adobe to reach the required height. The inner snrface of
the walls was neatly plastered with a buff colored mud. Post holes
have been found in seveial of the rooms, indicating the position of
roof supports. Whether or not the roof was flat or sloping toward
the walls is problematical. However, from the charred remains of
roofing material it is certain that the houses were roofed over with
small logs, brush, and clay. Holden’s suggestion** that these
houses were thatched with bear-grass, or roofed with buffalo hides
laid on in the manner of shingles is contrary to present evidence.
Room number seventeen seems to have been the oldest. It was
not as well built as the others, and may have been a temporary

PLATE 41.
Fig. ~, Entrance to one of the rooms in Antelope Creek Ruin.
Fig. 2, Showing wallsof adjoining rooms, and in the upper left of
the picture the inner ~structure of an ,entrance way ,to a room.

Plate 41

A Report on the Antelop~ Cre~I~ Ruin

195

structure for use while the first unit of the main ruin was in the
process of construction. It was noted that the outside wails are
thicker and are constructed of double rows of slabs, while the inner
or transverse wails are relatively thin and only one row of slabs
was used in their construction. This would seem to indicate three
units of construction, beginning at the north and continuing southward. This supposition is also supported by the fact that the
accumulation of debris beneath the ruin under the floors deepens
in a southward direction. If this is true, then the first unit is made
up of rooms 11, 9, 14~ 12, 13, and circular room No. L The second
unit to be added includes room 3, ~ 5, 10, 15, 18, and 19. The
third unit consisted of the larger rooms (2, 6, 7, 8), and the smaller
rooms (20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, and 1). Rooms 18 to 26, inclusive, and part of No. 8 had already been partly excavated when
the present work was started.
Circular room No. 1 may have been used for ceremonial purposes,
but for this there is no definite evidence. It was so badly damaged
by erosion and by partial excavation of an earlier date that only
the wall construction and ground plan could be determined. Nothing was found that would definitely identify it as a kiva.
Fire pits, however, were found in the centers of several rooms,
and it is probable that t_hey existed in the others. The small rooms
on the east side of the ruin that adjoin the larger rooms do not seem
to have been as high as the large rooms, and entrance to them was
probably attained through the roof. Although their purpose is
uncertain, it appears likely that they were used as storage chambers,
as were also tthe circular, rock-lined cists in front of the ruin at the
southeast end.
The floors of the larger roo~ns are unusual in construction, though
characteristic of many of the Panhandle Culture Ruins of both Texas
¯ and Oklahoma. Against the west wall there is an adobe platform,
the purpose of which is unkno~m. This platform is about sixteen
inches in height, and five feet square. From the platform toward
the entrance the floor is flat but depressed several inches, and in
its center is the basin-shaped fire pit. Bordering this depressed
portion of the floor on both sides are ridges several inches high by
about six inches wide, which separate the depressed portion of the
floor f~rom the flat elevated portions that extend to the north and

196

Texas Archeologieal and P~eontologieal Society

south walls.

Over the entire surface the floors are hard and smooth

with a thin pavement of sandy, buff colored clay.

It should be noted also that the small vestibule (Plate 41, Fig. 2)
which constitutes the entrance way into the large rooms is continued
beyond the wall into the room itself. Thus a sort of buttress effect
is produced at the inner entrance of the passage way. Although air
would circulate directly toward the central fire, nothing in the nature
of a deflector has been found in the Antelope Creek Ruin. At the
outer end of tile entrances to rooms 6 and 8 the walls were extended inward several inches to produce a sort of flange. Rock
slabs may have been placed against these flanges to close the entrances.
Pottery: Only one type of pottery has been identified with this
culture. So far as known these were all round.bottomed and globular in shape. There was some slight variation in size, but in general it may be said that they were small as compared to pottery of
the Pueblo Area. None of the pots were provided with handles,
and the only variation in construction appears to have been confined
to the rim which was either vertical in position or inclined outward
at a slight angle. No paint or slip of any kind was applied to these
pots, and the color is black or dark gray probably from use over
the fire as cooking utensils. The surface texture is rough, and the
hardness as defined by March (1934) is about 3.5. In thickness
the sherds average approximately 7 mm. The paste was generally
tcmpered with coarse sand. The inner surface of this pottery is
always smooth, but not polished, and the outer surface is always
decorated with cord impressions. These were stamped into the
plastic clay with either a paddle or a roller wrapped with cord.
The impressions are often at angles to each other, and bear no resemblance to basket-weave. Several pieces of glazed pottery were
found, which evidently came in as trade articles from the west and
thus serve to establish the Antelope Creek Ruin as Early Pueblo IV
of the Southwest. Pottery of this type is not mentioned by Hawley
(1936) among the pottery types of the Southwest. However, the
cord-marked pottery described by Strong (1935) from Nebraska
seems to be indistinguishable from that of the Texas Panhandle, as
does that described by Collins (1932) from Mississippi.
Basketry:

No basketry was found in the Antelope Creek Ruin,

A Report on ~h~ Antelope C~’eek Ruin

197

but in the collections of the Panhandle Plains Historical Society
Museum there are specimens of coiled basketry collected by Studer
from other ruins of this type in the Texas Panhandle. Also the
writer collected for Dr. Forrest E. Clements of the Anthropology
Department of the University of Oklahoma several specimens of
coiled basketry from the Optima site in Beaver County, Oklahoma.
These specimens were, of course, all in a charred, fragmentary
condition.
Arrow Points: The points typical of the Antelope Creek Ruin are
the small side-notched points (Plate 42, Fig. 1). These are always
neatly made, and while they are similar to points found at Pecos as
described by Kidder (1923) they may also be identified with those
described and figured by Strong (op. cir.) from Nebraska. Hence
these points have but little, if any, significance in distinguishing
these ruins from either the Plains or Pueblo Areas as far as culture
is concerned. Knives of several types are shown in Plate 42, Fig. 1,
but the most typical of the culture seems to be the diamond-shaped,
four-edged knife. Hide scrapers and drills, typical forms of which
are shown in Plate 42, Fig. 2 are also found in abundance.
Bone implements: Bone was extensively used in the manufacture of several types of implements, among which awls are found in
greatest numbers. Hoes were made from bison scapulae, and
although the proximal articular ends are often missing, the indication from complete specimens is that they were hafted. The digging edge of the scapula hoe was sharpened with a distinct bevel
in the same manner as the modern hoe. Digging implements were
made from the limb bones of the bison and sharpened to a chisellike point. Some of these were used in the hand while others were
halted by inserting a stick into a hole drilled in the proximal end.
Deer antlers were often used in making handles for various tools,
and as an effective material from which flaking tools could be made.
Also a typical instrument found in this culture is the so-called sounding-rasp.
Pipes: No complete pipes were found in this ruin. However, a
number of fragments were found at Antelope Creek (Plate 42,
Fig. 2) which indicate that the prevailing type was the elbow pipe,
and this is also indicated by similar specimens found in other
Panhandle Culture Ruins. The material of which they were made

198

Te~a~ Areheologlcal and Paleontolog~al So~ty

is usually a fine-grained red, or gray argillaceous sandstone that in
texture, at least, somewhat resembles catlinite.
Ornaments: Ornaments are not abundant in these ruins. A few
small bone beads have been found. Olivella shells were also used
as beads. Shells of the fresh water clam were often found, and were
sometimes carved into pendent-like ornaments as shown in Plate 42,
Fig. 2.
Agriculture: The frequent finding of charred grains of corn,
and charred corn cobs indicates definitely that agriculture was
practiced. It is probable that beans and squash were likewise cultivated, since they seem to be an inseparable part of the maize-beanssquash agricultural complex so widespread in aboriginal America.
The metates on which the corn was ground are elliptical in shape,
and usually made of a coarse-grained sandstone. The oval depression indicates that the grinding motion did not move straight back
and forth but in an elliptical path.
Hunting: The refuse heaps are rich in the remains of numerous
animals upon which these people partly subsisted. No bones of
extinct animals have been found. The collections indicate a faunal
assemblage that did not differ from that of historic times in the
l=Iigh Plains Region. The most abundant bones are those of the
bison and antelope. The larger bison bones are generally broken,
apparently to obtain the marrow. Remains of deer are not unco~nmon. Rabbit, turtle, and occasional bird bones are also found.
Burials: Several burials were found, one of which was in the
southwest corner of room No. 10. The others were all in the single
large room located dowu the hill about a hundred yards from the
main ruin. All were either in a semi-flexed or in a tightly flexed
position with heads pointing to the north and faces to the east. The
individuals ranged in age from about two months to forty-five years.
A knife, a drill, and single arrow point were the only artifacts found
associated with these burials. One burial was uncovered in the east
wall of the house, but the others were in the corners and close to the
PLATE 42.
Fig. 1, Knives and arrow Points typical of the Antelope Creek Ruin.
Fig. 2, Fragments of elbow pipes 1-3; Hide scrapers 4-6; Shell
ornaments 7-8; Drills 9-11; Bone awls 12-22.

Plate 42

A Repor~ on the Antelope Creek Ruin

201

centers of the rooms in cists which were cut down into the floor.
The cists were oval in ground plan with vertical sides. The bodies
were covered with about six inches of earth, and above this a layer
of rock slabs was placed. In all cases the skulls had been more or
less broken or crushed, but not beyond the possibility of restoration.
Osteological studies relating to the physical type of these people
have not yet been completed. However, it may be stated that the
cephalic index was not high, and that there was no artificial deformation of the skull.
Retazionship
Aside from the fact that stone and adobe were used in the construction of houses there appears to be but little, if any, cultural
influence from the Pueblo Area. In ground plan the houses are
more suggestive of those described by Wedel (193~1~A) from Nebraska. Other than a few sherds, probably representing trade
pieces, Pueblo pottery is completely absent from the Antelope
Creek Ruin. While the circular room described above may have
had some ceremonial significance, it certainly can not be called a
kiva. The work of Bell (1936) on the archaeology of Nebraska
has gone far toward clarifying certain aspects of Plains archaeology.
Pottery, bone and stone implements, as well as the general structure
of the houses are indicative of the Plains rather than the Pueblo
Culture. The affinities and relationships of the Pamhandle Culture
seem to be definitely correlated ~th the Upper Republican Culture
of Nebraska as indicated by Wedel (1934-B) in his preliminary
classification.
It is not likely that the ruins of the Texas Panhandle will ever
be as accurately dated as those of the Pueblo Area. Nevertheless,
a close correlation of the Texas ruins with those of New Mexico by
means of associated pottery gives the approximate date of 1300 A. D.
Furthermore, there is no indication that any of these ruins thus far
excavated were inhabited subsequent to 1540.
Re]ererwes Cited
Alexander, Hubert G., 1935. Report on the Excavation o] ]emez
Cave, New Mexico, Monograph University, New Mexico, Vol. 1, No.
3, pp. 38-39.
Bell, Earl H., 1936. Chapters in Nebraska Archaeology, Univ.
Neb. Press, Lincoln, Neb.

202

Texas ArcheoIogizal avxl Paleontological Society

Collins, Henry B., 1932. Excavation at a Prehistoric Indian Village Site in Mississippi, Proc. U. S. N. Mus. No. 2898, Vol. 79, Art.
32, pp. 1-22.
Eyerly, T. L., 1907. Archaeological Work in the Texas Panhandle,
Bulletin, Canadian Academy.
Hawley, Florence M., 1936. Field Manual o] Prehistoric Southw~stern Pottery Types, Univ. N. M. Press, Anthro. Ser., Vol. 1, No.
4, pp. 1-109.
Holden, W. C., 1930. The Canadian Valley Expedition o] Research, 1930, Bulletin Tex. Arch. and Paleo. Soc., Vol. II, pp. 21-32.
Kidder, Alfred Vincent, 1923.
Yale University Press.

The Arti]acts o] Pecos, Publication

Lowery, Ernest J., 1932. The Archaeology o] the Antelope Creek
Ruin, Thesis for Master’s Degree, Library Texas Technological College, Lubbock, Texas.
March, Benjamin, 1934.
Mich. Press, pp. 1-55.

Standards o] Pottery Description, Univ.

Moorehead, Warren King, 1931. Archaeology o] the Arkansas
Valley, Univ. Press, Phillips Academy, Andover, Mass.
Moorehead, Warren King, 1933. The Importance o[ Texas as an
Archaeological Field, Bull. Tex. Arch. and Paleo. Sot., Vol. V, pp.
9-13.
Strong, William D., 1935. An Introduction to Nebrc~ska Archaeology, Smith Misc. Coll., Vol. 93, No. 10, Pub. No. 3303, pp. 1-323.
Studer, Floyd V., 1931. Archaeological Survey o] the North
Pan~le o[ Texas, Bull. Tex. Arch. and Paleo. Soc., Vol. III, pp.
70-75.
Studer, Floyd V., 1934. Texas Panltandle Culture Ruin No. 55,
Bull. Tex. Arch. and Paleo. Soc., Vol. VI, pp. 30-96.
Wedel, Waldo R., 1934-A. Contributions to the Archaeology o]
the Upper Republican Valley, Nebraska, Nebraska History Magazine, Vol. XV, No. 3, p. 133.
Wedel, Waldo IL, 1934-B. Preliminary Classification [or Nebraska and Kansas Cultures, Ibid. p. 251.
C. Stuart Johnston,
Department of Anthropology
West Texas State College
Canyon, Texas.

