Certain Vessel~ F.rom the Cl~men~s Pla~e

117

CERTAIN VESSELS FROM THE CLEMENTS
PLACE, AN HISTORIC CADDO SITE
B~ S. D. DICKINSON
Hundreds of vessels belonging to the complex which Harrington
called Caddo1 have been taken from graves in southwest Arkansas,
but none, insofar as I know, have ever been found in association
with European trade material. Even along the Caddo Trace, that
at certain points can be located with a fair degree of accuracy,~ not
one site has ever been identified as historic. In view of known contacts between European and Caddoes during the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries this seems strange.
Certainly, the highly polished and elaborately engraved ware belongs to the last horizon in this area. At both the Crenshaws and
Kirkham4 sites it occurred above Coles Creek material; and in the
Arkansas River Valley it is sometimes associated with an historic
ceramic complex characterized by painting, modeling, and champleve.5 Moieover, somewhat similar pottery has been recovered
from historic sites in adjacent states.
At the Fish Hatchery site near Natchitoches, Louisiana, Walker
observed material, apparently belonging to the Natchitoches tribe,
which though related, differed somewhat from southwest Arkansas
pottery. The latter exhibits greater variety in form and decoration,
which as Walker explains, would be expected, "’if we are here dealing with the Grand Caddo tribe, the leader of the confederation of
which the Natchitoches and the Ouachita were more outlying members." He adds that further work in eastern Texas will probably
reveal additional Subtypes of the Caddo complex.6
About fifty years ago Mr. Will Scott of Atlanta, Texas, accidentally found an aboriginal cemetery on his farm between Black
Bayou and Murray Branch, two and one-half miles west of Atlanta,
in the northeast part of Cass County. From the burial ground he
obtained a large collection of artifacts, which he sold and gave to
various people. His sister, Mrs. C. A. Smith, received six of the
finest pieces of pottery and also a shell pendant and a bead. On the
death of Mrs. Smith, these specimens were inherited by her daughter,

118

Texa~ Archeological and t’aleontolog~cal Society

Mrs. J. B. Hesterly, of Prescott, Arkansas, who in turn gave them
to me.
In June and July, 1932, the Anthropology Department of the
University of Texas excavated what remained of this site which
was then known as the Clements Brothers place.

According to Mr.

A. T. Jackson, who was in charge of the excavation, twenty-two
graves were discovered. Although they had been badly disturbed
by previous diggers, parts of skeletons and some funerary offerings
still remained. One burial was flexed; the others were extended on
the back. In five of the graves there were blue glass trade beads
in association with pottery.7

Although no study has been made of these beads to determine
their origin and period, and thereby date the pottery, it seems
highly probable that they belong to the eighteenth century when
European traders were especially active in this section of the Red
River Valley. In the contract which Juan Piseros made with
Athanase de Mezieres at Natchitoches, February 3, 1770, the former agreed to supply the Village of the Great Caddo with "Sixty
pounds of small glass beads, sky blue, white and black," among
other things.8 Inasmuch as the Clements place was not a great distance from the Cadodachos settlements which Bolton locates in the
vicinity of Texarkana,9 one would expect the pottery to be representative of the historic ware of the Great Caddo.
In describing the ware from the Clements place, Jackson says:
"The prevailing types of pottery from this historic site greatly
resemble tho~ ~rom prehistoric burials in Cass, Upshur, Harrison,
Titus and Morris Counties. A few vessels have rounded bottoms
and delicately incised lines like those from R. L. Jaggers farm,
Franklin County, where a cremated burial--but no evidence of European contact~was found. Apparenty red slips were not common
here. No whole specimens bearing such slips were present; and
only a few sherds showed evidence of slips. Very few bottles were
found here; but their position, at or near the head, was the same as
in most prehistoric sites of the region. A small, crude bowl illusPLATE !9
No. 1. An Engraved water bottle having a pattern in which the
scroll motif predominates.
No. 2. A diminutive bottle having an engraved design based on the
scroll.

Certain Vessels F~’om the Glements Pla¢~

121

trates the method of forming a vessel from a single lump of clay,
rather than by the usual coil method."
"The designs include sun symbols, interlocking scrolls, one swastika, raised lines, fingernail imprints and incised triangular designs.
The workmanship shows a fair degree of excellence. Certain desigaas show a marked similarity to some from Louisiana and Arkansas, as pictured by Moore.’’10
Obviously, my collection from the Clements place cannot be considered typical of all the pottery from this region, because Mr. Scott,
who Judge Harry J. Lemley and I interviewed several years ago,
said that his sister had chosen the finest pieces from among those he
found; and the high degree of workmanship shown by the specimens
themselves attest to the truth of his statement. Nevertheless, they
are closely related to the pieces which the University of Texas excavated. Likewise, they have a number of features in common with
pottery found in the valleys of the Red and Ouachita rivers of
Arkansas and Louisiana.
Though it is now the fashion in some archaeological circles to
minimize the scientific value of a beautiful specimen, the fine piece
is still important in cultural studies. It may be atypical, but it represents a note in the gamut of human activity. And among primitives, where art was not divorced from industry, beautiful examples
of craftsmanship, whether common or rare, were the highest form
of human expression.
A detailed description of my Clements collection is presented in
this paper to point out specific similarities to pottery from Caddo
sites in Arkansas where no evidence of contact with whites have been
found; and to show that the principles of historic Caddo decoration,
unchanged from the pre-Columbian period, fulfilled all that a good
designer would ask.
The bottle illustrated in Plate 19, No. 1, is made of compact paste,
Benzo Brown11 in color, and is tempered with sand. Its hardness
is 4. It is 13.3 cm. high and has a maximum body diameter of 12
cm. The color of the highly polished exterior surface is Clove
Brown.12 The short bulbous neck, rounded body wails and small
flat base are rather common features of bottles from Caddo sites in
the Red River area.13 Similar forms occur along the Ouachita

122

Texa~ ArcheologlcaI and Pa2eontologicul Society

River from Glendora Plantation,~ a Louisiana, to the Ouachita Mountains in Arkansas; and are also occasionally found in the Lower
Arkansas Valley. ~ 5
Its engraved decoration, which had been rubbed with red ochre,
is likewise common. Four spirals, placed equidistantly about the
base of the neck form a swastika when viewed from above. Below
and balancing these spirals which are arranged on a vertical axis is
a continuous pattern of four volutes placed on a horizontal axis.
Movement in the upper scrolls is to the left; that of the lower to the
right. All are bisected longitudinally by a dentated line. Interspaces are filled with hatched lines arranged in groups at an angle
to each other, and with discs placed near the inflection of the
volutes.
In the design on this bottle one sees the basic principles* followed
by Caddo potters in decorating.their highly polished ware. From
the standpoint of pure design it is an excellent example of unity
and balance obtained by compact arrangement and. complete integration of motifs. As on almost all Caddo bottles, the decoration
is confined to the body with which the plain neck and base surfaces pleasantly contrast. Such restriction eliminates any possibility of flamboyancy, and at the same time emphasizes the largest
surface. To give movement to the static vessel shape, the potter
chose an asymmetric motif,~6 the scroll, to dominate the design.
The pattern, however, was evenly divided according to horizontal
and vertical axes, and as a result, there is movement in opposite
directions, further intensified by the volutes and spirals which go
to the right and to the left. Moreover, movement in two directions
coordinates all surfaces, both plain and decorated. On looking at
the design, one’s eyes follow the upper scrolls to the neck and the
lower continuous volutes to the base. As a minor motif, the hatched
lines in the background echo the diversification of movement. And
the discs, acting as accents for the change in curvature of the motifs,
also serve as intermediaries between foreground and background.
*Caddo pottery includes two general types : Caddo Domestic and Caddo Burnished.
The former is heavy, smoothed but not ofte~ polished, and has in~sed and applique
decorations. The latter is thinner, much better made, and is usually highly polished.
It has engraved, applique, or well executed incised patterns.

PLATE 20
No. 1. Pot having an angular design done in applique.
No. 2. A small bowl having an all-over pattern in applique.

1~I~ te 20

Certain Vessels F~’om She Cle~enSs Place

125

A variation of this design occurs on the small engraved bottle
shown in Plate 19, No. 2. It has, however, five spirals radiating
from the base of the neck and a similar number of connected volutes
below them. Design elements grouped in twos, threes and fours
are common among the Caddo,17 but a grouping of five is unusual.
The upper motifs go to the right and the lower to the left. The
background is crosshatched and does not have discs.
The neck of this bottle is shaped somewhat like an hour-glass.
A more bulbous form is a common feature of bottles from Red
River. The small base is concave--an unusual feature in southwestern Arkansas. Vessel dimensions are: height, 9.2 cm.; maximum body diameter, 8.2 cm. ; basal diameter, 2.4 cm. ; oral diameter,
3.2 cm. Its hardness is 3.5; and its color is Deep Mouse Gray.18
There is no slip. A somewhat similar diminutive bottle from Lafayette County, Arkansas, is in the collection of U. S. Judge Harry J.
Lemley of Hope, Arkansas.
The eccentric bottle illustrated in Plate 21, No. 1, is a very rare
form in Arkansas. .ludge Lemley has two of this shape from the
Arkansas River Valley. They were found in Perry and Yell counties. Both vessels are of yellow ware and are engraved.19 Bottles
having a pointed body are occasionally found in the Middle Mississippi complex,zo but they are not analogous inasmuch as the
body curves upward in crescent fashion.
The color of the paste core of this bottle is Deep Mouse Gray.zl
Its highly polished exterior surface is Fuscous-Black. 2a The paste
is compact and is tempered with sand. Dimensions are: height, 11.
cm.; basal diameter, 3.1 cm.; body length (from point to point),
18.3 cm.; maximum body width, 10.2 cm.; oral diameter, 1.4 cm.
Its hardness is 4.
In keeping with the greatest dimension of the vessel, the decoration is arranged according to the horizontal axis. Movement along
the horizonal plane begins at the concave base, around which a
series of concentric circles are engraved, and progresses laterally
and upward to the plain conical-shaped neck. Four connected
scrolls going to the left occupy the greatest space in the pattern.
These are bisected by hatched bands. In contrast to the basal circle
and scrolls, parallel lines engraved around the two ends of the body
convey the idea of upward movement. Intervening curvilinear lines,

126

Texas Archeological and Pcd~on~ological Society

however, act as intermediary elements between them and the scrolls.
Small plain hexagons and short bars fill the remaining spaces between the principal motifs.
The engraving is rather deep and more roughly done thart much
of the carving found on Arkansas Caddo ware. As usual, red ochre
had been rubbed into the design. Though filling intaglio designs
with pigment could easily have been developed anywhere, the practice vaguely suggests the technique used in cloisonne ware of Teotihuacan.
The graceful jar figured in Plate 21, No. 2, is shaped somewhat
like a much larger vessel from a mound on the Webster Medley
place, near Bayou Macon in Cbicot County, Arkansas.z3 The latter
specimen, now owned by Judge Lemley, has an incised design of
scrolls, and is of buff colored porous paste characteristic of the
historic horizon in southeast Arkansas.

Measurements of the Clements jar are: height, 14.6 cm.; basal
diameter, 4.5 cm.; maximum body diameter, 5.6 cm.; and oral
diameter, 3.9 cm. The color of the paste core is Dark Mouse
Gray,2z~ and that of the exterior surface, Fuscous-Black.z5 The
paste is silicious and compact. Its hardness is 4.
Like other vessels already described, the jar has an engraved
design which was once rubbed with red paint. Two interlocking
scrolls with the usual discs dominate the pattern. Above and below
there are horizontal lines encircling the v~sel. Though the movement is lateral, division of wall space into panels of varying width
creates horizontal rhythm well suited to this shape.
The vessel illustrated in Plate 21, No. 3, is unlike any Arkansas
Caddo form which I have seen. If it did not have the small flaring
neck it would rese~nble the so-called neckless bottles found in the
Upper Ouachita Valley.26
The dimensions of this specimen are: height, 16.8 cm.; basal
diameter, 6.2 cm.; maximum body diameter, 8.3 cm.; and oral

diameter, 4. cm. Vessel hardness is 4. The paste cbre is colored
Iron Gray;27 and the predominating color of the exterior surface,

No. 1.
No. 2.
No. 3.

PLATE 21
Eccent~’ic form with engraved scroll design.
Jar with an engraved pattern of ~vo interlocking scrolls.
Ve~el having engraved and applique decoration.

Vessels From the Clemen~s Plac~

129

which is clouded, is Drab.z8 The texture of the paste is lumpy.
Temper could not be determined. The jar was smoothed but not
polished.
Four vertical appliqued bands divide the body into an equal
number of zones. Each zone is divided vertically by a panel of
engraved crosshatching and two engraved, vertical dentated lines.
Both the rim and the appliqued bands are notched, a trait sometimes
found on Caddo pottery from Arkansas. An Asinai bottle having
incised vertical panels and triangles, from Henderson County, Texas,
is illustrated by Jackson.29
The dinmnsions of the vessel shown in Plate 20, No. 1, are:
height, 23.8 cm.; basal diameter, 5.9 cln.; maximum body diameter,
24.5 cm. It is tempered with sand. The paste core is Dark Mouse
Gray;3O and the mottled exterior surface is Orange-Cinnamon31
and Black.3~ Hardness is 4.
Although the pot or urn shape is common in southwest Arkansas,
rarely is such a well made vessel found. Evidently the Arkansas
specimens were used in cooking, but this piece is too well done to
have been a part of a woman’s culinary equipment.
Decoration on the body is done in bands of applique, placed in
angular fashion. Six zones, outlined by angles with the apex to
the left are filled with concentric angles, the apices of which point
to the right, and parallel lines. This arrangement creates an impression of opposing movements along the horizontal axis, but the
eyes of any one looking at the vessel are led by the diagonal linem
upward to the rim where there are three horizontal rows of incisions
made with a spatulate-shaped tool.
The s~nall bowl in Plate 20, No. 2, is rather similar in composition and treatment. Its dimensions are: height, 6.9 cm.; basal
diameter, 5. era.; ~naximum body diameter, 8.8 cm.; oral diameter,
7.5 cm. The color of the paste core is Dark Mouse Gray3~ and
that of the outer surface, Wood Brown.3~ Sand was used for tempering. Vessel hardness is 4.
The applique decoration covering the entire exterior is divided
by vertical lines into four panels, which in turn are bisected diagonally. Each section of the panels is filled wilh bands.
Applique decoration, as previously stated, is soznetimes found on

130

Tcxa,u Archeological and Paleon, tological Society

Arkansas engraved ware, but it is much more conunon on culinary
vessels. This technique ~ems to have be~n much less popular
among the potters along the Ouachita than among those living in
Red River Valley. However, in southwest Arkansas, applique ell
masse, as on the two piec~ just described, is not common.
In ornalnenting their vessels the potters at the Clements Site and
elsewhere in the region occupied by dm Great Caddoes tended to:
Contrast plain with decorated surfaces.

2.

Use asymmetric or dynamic motifs.

3.

Arrange the motifs in opposition to one another.

4.

Integrate the motifs.

5. Balance the entire pattern according to the symmetrical form
of the vessel.
6.

Subordinate decoration to vessel function.

Similarities between file historic Clements pottery and vessels
from graves in southwestern Arkansas, where no ol,jccts of European
manufacture have been fonnd, point toward an uninterrupted ceramic
industry among the Upper Caddoes until the eighteenth century.

University Station, Box 63
Fayetteville, Arkansas.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Harrington, M. R., "Certain Caddo Sites in drkan~s~," Indian
Notes and Monographs, Hcye Foundation (1920).
2.

Rowland, Mrs. Dunbar, "Li]e, Letters and Papers of William

Dunbar," Mississippi Historical Soeiety Press (1930),
3.

Lemley, H. J., "’Discoveries lmticating A Pre-Ccutdo Culture

On Red River in Arkansas"; Dickinson, S. D., "Ceramic Relationships o] the Pre.Caddo Pottery Front the Crenshaw Site," Bulletin,
Texas Archcological

and

Paleontological

Society, VIII

(1936),

25-68.
4.

Dickinson, S. D., and Lemley, H. J., "Evidences o] the Marks-

ville and Coles Creek Complexes at the Kirkham Place, Clark County,

Certain Vessels From ~he Cle~aents pla~

131

Arkansas," Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Socity, XI (1939), 139-189.
5. Dickinson, S. D., and Dellinger, S. C., ".4 Survey o] the His.
toric Earthenware o] the Lower A~rkansas River Valley," Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, XII (1940),
76-96.
6. Walker, W. M., "A Caddo Burial Site at Natchitoches, Louisiana," Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, XCIV (1935), 14.
7.

Jackson, A. T., Personal Correspondence (June, 1941).

8. Bolton, H. E., "’Athanase De Mezleres and the Loulsiana-Texas
Frontier," Arthur H. Clark Co., 1 (1914), 143-144.
9. Bolton, H. E., "Texas in the Eighteenth Century," University
of California Publications in History, 111 (1915), 2.
10. Jackson, A. T., "Types o] Eazt Texas Pottery," Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, VI (1934), 53-54.
11. Rid~ay, R., "Color Standards and Color Nomenclature,"
(1912), P1. XLVI.
12.

Ridgway, op. cir., PI. XL.

13. Moore, C. B., "Some ~tboriginal Sites On Red River," Journal, Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences, XIV (1912), figs,
58, 59.
14. Moore, C. B., "Antiquities o[ the Ouachita Valley," Journal,
Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences, XIV (1909), 27-80.
15. Dickinson, S. D., and Dellinger, S. C., "A Survey o[ tJte His.
toric Earthenware o[ the Lower Arkansaz River Valley," Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, XII (1940), 80.
t6. Douglas, F. H, and D’Hamoncourt, R., "’Indian Art o] the
Uni~d States," Mu~um of Modern Art (1941), 13.
17. Pearce, J. E., "The Archaeology o] East Texas," American
Anthropologist, XXXIV (1932), 683-684.
18.

Ridgway, op. cir., P1. 11.

19.

Lemley, H. J., Personal Correspondence (August, 1941).

132

Texas Archeological and Palaon~ological So~ieSy

20. Moore, C. B., "Anti,titles o] the St. Franc~, White, and
Black Rivers, Arkansas," Journal, Philadelphia Academy of Natural
Sciences, XIV (1910), fig. 17.
21.

Ridgway, loc. cir.

22.

Ridgway, op. eft., Pl. XLVI.

23. Lemley, H. J., and Dickinson, S. D., "Archaeological Investigations On Bayou Macon in Arkansas," Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, IX (1937), PI. 3, Fig. 4.
24.

Ridgway, op. cir., PI. LI.

25.

Ridgway, op. cir., PI. XLVI.

26.

Harrington, op. cir., PI. XCII.

27.

Ridgway, op. cit., PI. LI.

28.

Ridg~’ay, op. cir., PI. XIVI.

29.

Jackson, op. cit., P1. 6, Fig. 23.

30.

Ridgway, op. cir., PI. LI.

31. Ridgway, op. cir., Pi. XXIX.
32.

Ridgway, op. cit., P1. LIII.

33.

Ridgway, op. ch., P1. LI.

34.

Ridgway, op. cit., P1. XL.

