The Chtct~nian Flake Techniqu~ in ~he Western S~ates

129

THE CLACTONIAN FLAKE TECHNIQUE
IN THE WESTERN STATES
BY E. B.

REN/~UD

Flaking was the principal and by far the most general and ancient
method of making stone implements. Pecked and polished artihcts
were rather limited in number and are found only in more advanced
and relatively recent cultures. They were unknown before the Neolithic Age, whereas flaked tools and weapons existed through the
enormously long period of the Old Stone Age, they continued during
the Middle Stone Age and survived side by side with the polished
implements of the New Stone Age and even in the early Metal Ages.
The pressure method came late and was reserved for the finishing
of the finer pieces. But flaking by percussion was the first, and remained to the end the universal method of producing flakes and
shaping ordinary artifacts.
Besides the more elaborate bi-Iace implements, flakes everywhere
were most useful to men of the Stone Age whether they lived during
the glacial epoch of the Old World or in pre-Columbian America.
At first, man, even before being a tool-maker, must have made use
of flakes just as they were found in nature whether produced by the
concussion of pebbles in a river bed, land slides on the slopes of
hills, compression in earth movements, or by any other cause.

Such

ready made flakes could be used as cutting or scraping edges.,
Later, when fashioning his biface implements, man struck off flakes,
which, without retouching, could be utilized for cutting or scraping,
two essential needs of primitive man.

The Acheulean culture was

already well on its way and clearly defined when the so-called
Levallois industry reached Western Europe.

It manufactured flakes

for direct use or to be shaped into artifacts.

The process was com-

plex and specialized and we shall not consider it here since, so far,
nowhere in our Western States in a dozen years of survey have I
found a single flake displaying the characteristic appearance of the
Levalloisian flakes of the Old World.

Much simpler and earlier was the Clactonian technique, which
appeared in Europe in Cbellean times. Without special chipping

130

Texas Archeologlcal a~wl Paleontological Society

preparation a flake was struck off a core.

Its main feature was a

smooth, unfaceted platfor~n, forming a high angle, approxi~nating
120°, with the axis of the flake.

It showed a prominent bulb of

percussion or, better defined, what is technically known as a "semi.
cone." These flakes, of a variety of shapes and sizes, could be
utilized the same as the others for scraping and cutting, or in the
making of tools. This simple method continued through the Early
Palaeolithic, or first phase of the Old Stone Age, paralleling the
development of the typical Chelleo-Acheulean biface artifacts. It
even survived later, being one of the constituting factors recognizable
in many Mousterian tools, side-scrapers and points, whereas others
followed the Levallois tradition.
Several years ago I recognized the Clactonian technique in the
Black’s Fork Culture of Southwestern Wyoming. But it was only
in the Spring of 1938 that, picking up some chips at a site in New
Mexico, I noticed with astonishment their general appearance of
Clactonian flakes. During the Summer of the same year many
more flakes and artifacts were collected at Pueblo sites of the upper
Rio Grande Basin. During the Winter my assistants went through
our ver~ extensive collection of stone artifacts collected over the
High Western Plains in the past twelve years and sorted out all
flakes of Clactonian appearance. I personally examined and measured the angle of all the specimens used for statistical purpose in
order to insure the same technique. This is the first time that such
an investigation has been conducted for so extensive a territory and
representing three distinct cultures.
Our survey comprises 2,179 flakes from 493 sites of the Camp
Culture of the High Western Plains, of which 685 specimens come
from 126 sites in Eastern Wyoming, 1,078 pieces from 273 sites in
Eastern and Southern Colorado, and 416 flakes from 94 sites in
Northeastern New Mexico. To this were added 441 specimens of
the Basket Maker.Pueblo Cultures coming from 39 sites mostly in
Northcentral New Mexico, three cave sites in Western Oklahoma,
and two locations from Southwestern Colorado; also 551 flakes and
artifacts from 53 sites of the Black’s Fork Culture of Southwestern
Wyoming, principally from river terraces. Our sample is quite
large, it is varied as to origin and culture, it has been collected by

The Cla~oni~n Fl~ake Technique in $he W~stern States

131

myself and several different assistants in the course of many years
and before the thought of making a survey of Clactonian flakes came
to our mind. It should, therefore, be considered as a satisfactory
sample allowing significant conclusions. These were formulated
after plotting the graphs of distribution of the m~gles of all the
flakes for each one of the five series above mentioned.
First, the range of fluctuations of the angles for the 3,171 specimens from 590 sites, plotted for each group, is from 100 and 133
degrees, with a few cases of 135 and 136 degrees, that is to say
essentially the same range for the three states.
The lower limit of 100 degrees is due to the fact that flakes with
a smaller angle were not measured since we knew that they could
not qualify. Besides, these were very few and, with one exception,
our graph begins with only three to six pieces with an angle of 100
degrees, so that we really are very near the actual lower end of the
CUll’e,

The maximum angle com~non to all groups is 133 degrees, with
a very low frequency. Only a few flakes measure 135 or 136 degrees
and must be considered aberrant. This might even be said for angles
above 130 degrees on account of their scarcity.
The maximum ]requency for the High Western Plains is 110 degrees. It is also a high point, but not the true maximum, for Sohthwestern Wyoming, and the nearest, 109 degrees, is well represented
for the Pueblo culture, next to its maximum. An angle of 110 degrees
may, therefore, be considered as relatively characteristic of the
re, on.

The angle of the true Clactonian ]lakes of the Old World approximates 120 degrees. Allowing a margin of five degrees we may
establish a division comprising all flakes showing an angle inferior
to 115 degrees, and another for those displaying a wider angle.
The first class will naturally be called "Sub-Clactonian" and the
second group "Clactonian.like." This would mean that the specimens’considered here have been produced by the Clactonian technique, but those of the latter type are more closely similar to the
true Clactonian flakes of Europe and Africa. They are the American counterpart of these Early Palaeolithic flakes of the Old World.

132

Texas Archeological and Paleon$ologi~al So~i¢~y

The question of age or relative antiquity is not implied nor even
suggested here, only the resemblance of technique of their manufacture by the Western Indians, prehistoric or more recent.
Let us now consider the distribution of angles for the High Igestern Plains. The lowest percentage of Clactonian-like flakes was
found on the sites of eastern and southern Colorado, only 32.46 per
cent of a total of 1,078 specimens. Next we see Eastern Wyoming
and Northeastern New Mexico giving an identical proportion of
Clactonian-like flakes, 37.08 per cent and 37.01 per cent respectively
out of 685 specimens from the northern state and 416 from the
southern state. Together, tben, out of 2,179 flakes from the High
Western Plains, 758 or 34.78 per cent are truly Clactonian-like, that
is to say slightly over one-third of the total, whereas 65.21 per cent
are only sub.Clactonian because their angles are inferior to 115
degrees, for the rest the technique being similar.
We may now compare the Camp Culture with the Pueblo Culture
of New Mexico. Out of 441 specimens from 44 sites, 46.93 per cent
qualify as Clactonian-like, that is to say 9.92 per cent higher than
for the camp sites of Northeastern New Mexico, to the east of the
Pueblo region, or 12.15 per cent superior to the general average for
the High Western Plains. In view of the similarity of the percentages over that vast territory, it may well be that the difference,
marked by a greater proportion of Clactonian-like flakes of Pueblo
mantifacture, is due to a cultural reason. That is to say that this
would be the result of a difference in culture, since the Indians of
the Western Plains were nomadic~ hunters until a couple of generations ago whereas the Pueblos have been sedentary agriculturists for
over a millenium.
The sites of the Black’s Fork Culture of Southwestern Wyoming
have furnished .56.80 per cent of their 551 specimens as Clactonianlike flakes. This is the maximum proportion for the five geographic
districts compared here and the only one with a greater ratio of
Clactonian-like flakes than of sub-Clactonian, as is the case everywhere else. It is almost 10 per cent higher than for the Pueblo

PLATE 30.
Graph showing distribution of Clactonian-like flakes by region, influence of culture, and of material.

Plate 30

Th~ Cla,c$onian Flak~ Techniqu~ in ~he Western S~ates

135

sites, nearly 20 per cent above the percentage of Eastern Wyoming
and Northeastern New Mexico, and it exceeds Eastern Colorado by
24.34 per cent.

This seems due to a difference in culture for the

examination of the lithic industry of the Black’s Fork region shows
it to be palaeolithie-like in typology and technique. Here the Clactonian flakes come with coup-de-poing-like biface artifacts, the same
as in Western Europe. On the other hand the Clactonian-like and
sub-Clactonian flakes of the Camp Cultures of the Plains are associated with implements and weapons of obviously more recent types
and times. We may, therefore, accept tentatively that the marked
difference in percentage of Clactonian flakes found on the sites of
the Camp Culture of the High Western Plains, the Pueblo sites, and
those of the terraces of the Black’s Fork Creek of Southwestern
Wyoming is affected by a cultural difference. Further investigation
in that line would be necessary to prove this point more conclusively.
There is another aspect to the question of percentage of the Clactonian-like flakes: it is that of the material of which the specimens
are made. All through the area surveyed, the two kinds of stone
most frequently used and employed by the five groups examined are
quartzite and chert. These two terms are taken here in their generic
rneaning without any attempt at more specific distinctions such as
an expert petrologist could make. Other stones were sometimes
fairly abundant but only in one group or another. For instance,
moss-agate and obsidian were used for Pueblo flakes, petrified wood
is found in Eastern Colorado, chalcedony and jasper in Eastern
Wyoming. Keeping only quartzite and chert for comparison, we
have the following percentages for Clactonian-like flakes made of
quartzite: Eastern Colorado, 34.56; Northeastern New Mexico,
37.43; Eastern Wyoming, 42.95; Pueblo sites 43.24 and Southwest
Wyoming 63.34. Here again we have the same grouping, although
the three camp culture districts are not quite as close together as
before. The Pueblo flakes of Clactonian-like type are still proportionately more numerous than those of the Plains, but by a narrower
margin. The Black’s Fork Culture remains in the lead and is 20
per cent ahead of the Pueblo culture.
Let us now consider chert for percentages of Clactonian-like
flakes: Eastern Colorado, 29.62; Eastern Wyoming, 31.79; North-

136

Texa~ Archeological ~nd Paleon$ologica~ Society

eastern New Mexico, 35.55, less than 6 per cent difference between
the three states, whereas there was 8 per cent for quartzite, which is
not very significant.

The only change is the fact that Southwestern

Wyoming with 47.42 per cent is a little inferior to the Pueblo group
with 49 per cent.

The Black’s Fork Culture is nearly 16 per cent

above the camp sites of Eastern Wyoming, but for the first time
lower than one of the districts.
If we now compare quartzite and chert in the same order for the
same territorial divisions we see: Eastern Colorado: 34.56 per cent
and 29.62 per cent; Northeastern New Mexico: 37.43 per cent and
35.55 per cent; Eastern. Wyoming 42.95 per cent and 31.79 per cent.
In the three cases the proportion of Clactonian-like flakes ~nade of~
quartzite was superior to that of chert, from 2 to 11 per cent. The
Black’s Fork Culture with 63.34 per cent and 47.4.2 per cent shows
nearly 16 per cent in favor of quartzite. The specimens from the
Pueblo sites constitute the exception with 43.24 and 49 per cent, the
only case showing more Clactonian flakes made of chert than of
quartzite for the same region and culture. However, it must not be
forgotten that the Pueblo culture represents here only ~14 sites against
546 of the other groups, and 4.~1 flakes against 2,730 specimens
from elsewhere. This divergence may not outweigh the cvidence
furnished by the rest of the field. Otherwi~, in four groups out of
five, quartzite has a superiority in high angle flakes. It may be a
sufficient basis for recognizing tentatively an influence of the material on the production of Clactonian-like flakes.
A few words for the other materials will suffice. In Eastern Colorado petrified wood was extensively used in some districts. Out of
163 specimens measured only 45 or 27.60 per cent gave Clactonianlike flakes, or 2 per cent less than chert for the same state. Moss.
agate from Pueblo sites produced a much better percentage, 51.92,
or nearly 2 per cent above chert for the same culture, and even much
higher than chert for all groups considered, and quartzite also,
except from Southwestern Wyoming. Obsidian, naturally found in
a country of old volcanic activity such as the Rio Grande basin, and
utilized because producing sharp edges, gave the very high ratio of
59.45 per cent of Clactonian-like flakes of Pueblo make. This is

The Clactonian Flak~ Techniqu~ i~ the Western St~.~

137

superior to all percentages for that class, except again that of quartzite of the Black’s Fork Culture of Southwestern Wyoming with
63.34.

However, it must be remembered

that the figures for

moss-agate and obsidian are based on a small sampling, respectively
52 and 37 flakes, and therefore, it may not be entirely dependable
and accurately comparable to quartzite and chert which are very
much more abundant.

As for chalcedony and jasper represented

by only a few flakes in each group, and rhyolite from Southern
Colorado, these materials are too rare in our collection to allow a
significant percentage.
¯ In conclusion it may be said that this is the first time that the
Clactonian technique is proved to exist extensively in America.

It

had already been stated in two of my reports on the Black’s Fork
Culture of Southwestern Wyoming, but it had never been studied in
detail nor extended to the Camp Culture of the High Western Plains
and the Pueblo sites of New Mexico.
This being entirely pioneer work it will explain why the two following conclusions, although based on specific results, are given as
only tentative and subject to further considerations: 1. There seems
to be a cultural element (using the term in its broadest sense) indicated in the ratio of "sub-Clactonian" and "Clactonian-like" flakes,
when the five series considered here are compared. The close approximation of the percentages for Eastern Wyoming, Colorado and
New Mexico is one more proof of their being local parts of the stone
Camp Culture. The differences noted in the proportions of Clactonian-like flakes of Pueblo make and those from the Black’s Fork
culture of Southwestern Wyoming between themselves and in regard
to the High Western Plains, clearly suggests a cultural factor at
least partly responsible for such variation. 2. It also seems that the
material used in the manufacture of the flakes may be another factor
influencing the relative proportion of low and high angle flakes
for the various districts or groups compared here. Quartzite, almost
everywhere produces more flakes with a relatively larger angle
than chert.
It would seem desirable to have this first systematic study of the

138

T¢~o~ Archeolog~al a~w~ Pa~eo~ologlcal So~y

Clactonian technique in the production of flakes extended to other
parts of America and to a variety of Indian cultures.

It might

furnish interesting facts concerning the making of flaked stone
implements in the New World.
Professor of Anthropology,
University of Denver, Denver, Colorado.
May, 1939.

