THE LEHMANN ROCK SHELTER: A STRATIFIED
SITE OF THE TOYAH, UVALDE, AND
ROUND ROCK FOCI*

BY J.

CHARLES KELLEY

Introduction

The Lehmann Rock Shelter, located in the Llano River
drainage, near Doss, Gi~lespie County, Texas, was excavated
in January, 1936, by the Department of Anthropology of
The University of Texas. Excavations were supervised by
A. M. Woolsey, who likewise prepared the field notes used
in writing this report.

Since completion of the excavations, the artifacts and
field notes have remained on file at the Anthropology Museum in Austin. The present study of the artifacts and
analysis of the stratigraphy of the site was made as part of
a coi,tinuing program which has as its aim the publishing
of r~ ports on many such almost forgotten excavations of
former years. Although the Lehmann Rock Shelter provides little new archaeological information, it does furnish
verifi cation of previous concepts of the sequence and composition of Texas cultures.
I. The Shelter

The shelter is located on the Charlie Lehmann’ ranch
about three miles northeast of Doss, Texas. It lies in the
bluffs along the north side of Onion Creek, just above its
* Much of the material in this paper, including the illustrations, is being used as
part of a thesis offered in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Ph.D. degree
in Anthro~logy at Harvard University.
~ At this late date, the author wishes to express the gratitude of the Department
of Anthropology for the generosity of Mr. Charlie Lehmann in permitting the excavation of the site, and for the assistance he gave the excavating crew.

116

Texas A~cheological and Paleontological Society

junction with Threadgill Creek. (]Plate 11,A). The shelter
is open to the southwest but is well protected by nearby
hillsides. The surrounding region is rough hilly terrain,
covered with a thick growth of juniper, post-oak, liveoak, mesquite, and other vegetation, including stands of
lush grass in the clearings. Many pools of water stand
against the tilted strata that form the floor of Onion and
Threadgill Creeks, and the flow of these small streams is seldom interrupted. Deer and turkey are still abundant in
the region. Many burned rock middens and camp sites,
largely attributable to the Round Rock and Uvalde
occur in the vicinity.
The rock shelter itself is roughly crescentic in form
(]plate 12; A), measuring approximately 240 feet in length
and ranging in depth from four feet to 60 feet. Most of the
area beneath the overhang, however, is covered by a heavy
rock fall, leaving an area about 145 feet long and nine to
20 feet wide along the back wall which contains alluvial
and cultural deposits. The over-hanging roof averages about
eight to 12 feet in height (]plate 11, B), and the surface of
the deposits lies about ten feet above normal stream level,
sloping some seven feet from western to eastern end (]Plate
12, B). The maximum depth of deposits in the excavated
area was 85 inches.
Along 138 feet of the rear wall and ceiling (Plate 11, B),
pictographs are visible. These include conventionalized human figures, deer, bird:.’., parallel lines, circles, circles with
~The Round Rock Focus was first described by Sayles (1935, p. $3, Plate XIV,
and Table 4) and a revised account was given by Kelley (1947). The Uvalde Focus
was first described, though not under that name, by Huskey (1935, p. 108, Plate 14,
161-162, "upper .... middle level", "Mound A" culture), and apparently is the complex termed *’Late Edwards Plateau" culture by Sayles (1935, Plate XII). Revised descriptions of the focus are now under preparation by the present author.

PLATE 11
The Lehmann Rock Shelter.
A, view of shelter from the Southwest; B, interior
of shelter, showing deposits, rear wall at left, and fallen "table rocks" at right.

Plate 11

The Lehmann Rock Shelter

117

dots, long wavy or zigzag lines, dot designs (Plate 11, C),
and design elements resembling the stacked rain cloud designs of the Southwest. Most of the pictographs are in red,
although black and white are represented.’
Shallow circular mortar holes are present in the fallen
~’table rocks" at the front of the occupied area of the shelter. (Hate 12, A). At the southeastern end of the shelter,
Onion Creek runs beneath the overhanging roof, thus providing a readily available and protected source of water.
II. Exc,~vations
Excavations were made between December 31, 1935,
and January 15, 1936, by a small crew of laborers under
the supervision of A. M. Woolsey. Work was begun at the
southeastern edge of the deposits (Plate 12, A, [c] ) and
progressed toward the northwest . Where possible, a vertical exposure of the deposits was maintained across the entire width of the excavated area. Toward the close of the
investigations work shifted to the northwestern edge of the
deposits, and a second crew worked eastward to meet the
first crew. All alluvial deposits of promise were excavated
and the dump pile was leveled to the satisfaction of the
owners.

A contour map of the site with a one foot interval was
made prior to excavation. The provenience of all artifacts
was recorded by (a) depth from surface, (b) the day o£
work on which the specimen was discovered, and hence the
approximate horizontal location (Plate 16, A and B), and
(c) very rarely by the strata in which they were found.
Single-point cross-sections of the stratigraphy were made at
irregular intervals, but no effort was made to relate these
~jackson (1938, pp. 254-259, Plates CXC, CXCI, CXCII, and Fig. 218) has described the pictographs of the Lehmann Rock Shelter ("Site 140, Gillespie County"),
and illustrated several of the paintings. An earlier paper by Julia Estill likewise deals
with this site and reproduces most of the pictographs.
(Estill, 1925, pp. 103-114,
Plates I- VII).
The account itself, unfortunately, is fanciful, rather than factual;
the postulated Comanche authorship of the pictographs is without foundation in fact.

118

Texas Archeological and Paleon~ologioal Society

isolated cross-sections to each other or to the general stratigraphy of the shelter. Nevertheless, a fairly clear picture
of the stratigraphy of the site emerges from a close inspection
of the isolated cross-sections, the general field notes and the
numerous photographs. A reconstruction of this stratigraphy is presented in Plates 12, B; 15 and 16.
A total of 395 specimens was brought in from the field
but stratigraphic data of any sort were available on only
261 o1~ these artifacts, full data on even fewer. Many flint
chips, and many fragments of animal bone, "apparently
those o/~ the buffalo", were recovered in addition to the
specimens listed, and one human burial was excavated. (Plate
11, D).
Outline drawings of projectile points and some other
artifacts were made in the field notes at the time of discovery, and pertinent data were entered on these drawings.
Depths were also recorded, in the field, in pencil on most
of the specimens. In the laboratory, a new system of specimen numbers was empIoyed, and as the specimens were
cata!ogued the new numbers were placed on them and appropriate information entered ":n the catalogue. In some
instances the information in the field catalogue does not
agree with that given in the laboratory, catalogue and on
the specimens. In such instances the spectmen has been compared with the appropriate outline drawing in the field notes
and the corresponding data as to provenience used. It was
necessary to discard some specimens as a result of conflicting
data, always in cases where outline drawings were not avai!ab!e in the field notes.
IlL Stratigraphy
Three maior stratigraphic units were apparent in the
alluvial devosirs of the shelter, as well as many minor strata, ¯
some of them localized and paper-thin. (Plate I2, B).
PLATE 12
~k, plan of sbelter~ B, composite profile o~ stratigraphy; C, cultural composition of
the Toyah Focus and the Edwards Plateau Aspect.

21

I0

S

I

2’

l

2

S

6

4

13

6

I0

,~

Pla~e 12

7

2

I

7

7"

3

2

I

2

2

2

The Lehmcznn Rock Shel$er

119

The uppermost of these stratigraphic units (III) consisted of loose sand containing much of the dung of modern
domesticated animals. No artifacts were found in this stratum. The second stratigraphic unit (II), lying directly
below the first, was a composite stratum of stratified sands,
silts, and gravels containing much ash and charcoal, flint
chips, artifacts, and broken animal bone. The human burial
was found in the upper part of this stratum toward the
northwestern edge of the deposits (Plate 12, A) and Plate
16, A). A concentration of cultural debris, apparently representing the last aboriginal occupation of the site, here attributed primarily to the Toyah Focus, was noted at the
very surface of this stratum. Lying directly on the bedrock floor of the shelter was the oldest stratigraphic unit (I),
comprising strata of red sand "~nd gravel with beds of silt
represented locally. No artifacts or other indications of
human occupation, with the possible exceotion of a few
fragments of charcoal, were found in this stratum. Maximum and minimum depths of the various strata are indicated diagramatically in Plate 15, and a reconstruction of
the stratigraphic profiile along section A-B-C-D (Plate 12,
A) is presented in Plate 12 B.

IV.

C,dtural Composition and Stratigraphy

Two of the artifacts recovered were pOtsherds, five were
made of bone, and all others were of stone, principally flint
or chert. Out of the total of 261 artifacts studied, 93 were
classed as projectile po.i~ts. Large rather roughly chipped
projectile points, here called "da~t points" comprised 46 of
the total, while the remaining 47 specimens were small thin
points, often delicately chipped, made from thin flint flakes.
These specimens are termed "arrow points". Because of
their numbers and variability, and with dl~e re~ard to the
fact that most of the specimens in quest;on be!onged to
"types" or sty!es identified in previous work in Texas, projectile ooints were used as "index fossils" in ,~.nalv.~ing the
cultura! composition and cultura! stratigraphy of the Si~e.

120

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

The methodological procedure was as follows:
a. All artifacts were divided into broad classes or categories, based on materials, and on general form and assumed
function (i. e., projectile points, scrapers, blades, metates,
pottery, etc.).
b. In each class of specimens, where sufficient numbers
were available, a further subdivision into stylistic groups or
"types" was made.’
c. A composite profile of the shelter deposits was constructed and on it the location of all specimens in each
stylistic group was plotted. Depth and approximate horizontal position, together with available stratigraphic data,
were used in plotting specimen location. Certain conclusions were at once evident:
(1) All arrow points, with one exception, occurred in
the upper part of Stratum II at depths of less than 20 inches,
and only five of the 47 specimens were found below 12
inches in depth (Plate 15). Most of them appeared to
cluster about the surface of Stratum II, primarily in the
northwestern portion of the excavated area (Plate 16, A),
a conclusion borne out by such stratigraphic notes as are
available.
(2) Conversely, dart points were more evenly distributed throughout the upper two thirds of Stratum II (Plate
15 and Plate 16, B) and occurred at absolutely greater
depths than the arrow points.

~ Mast of the projectile points in this site fell into easily recognizable types identified in previous work. Space and time do not permit detailed descriptions of artifact
classes or types in this paper. The method followed in establishL~g the projectile point
types here used was essentially that described by Krieger (1944).

PLATE 13
Artifacts from the Lehmann Rock Shelter attributed to the Toyah Focns.

Plate 1 3

The Lehmann Rock Shelter

121

(3) The stratigraphic position of the human burial indicated that it probably belonged with the late camp marked
by the concentration of arrow points (Plate 16, A).

(4) Apparently, at least two cultural complexes were
represented; a dart point complex present throughout the
occupation of the site, and an arrow point complex present
only during the more recent period of occupation. There
was apparently, but not indisputably, an overlap in the
occupation of the cave by peoples possessing the two complexes. People using arrow points first appeared in the shelter while others using dart points still inhabited the site or
the region, or at best very little time separated the two occupations.

These tentative conclusions indicated further methodological procedure.
d. Inasmuch as arrow points were restricted to the upper
12 to 18 inches of the deposits, other artifact types found
only in this stratigraphic position would probably represent
additional elements of the arrow point complex. Such artifacts were segregated, and to them were added artifacts of
types found almost entirely in the ~ame stratigraphic position
and typologically slm,_’lar to specimens of the first group.
The combination of types thus represented was immediately recognizable as a wide spread cultural complex attributed to the Jumano Indians of the late prehistoric and early
historic period, the Toyah Focus. In those instances where
the stratigraphic position of artifacts of this complex was
given in the notes, the specimens were found to occur in the
upper few inches of Stratum II or at its surface, confirming
the position of the Toyah Focus in the deposits.

e. Conversely, artifact types found throughout the occupational strata would probably represent other elements
in the dart point complex. Artifacts of these types therefore were grouped into ~ second complex, one recognizable
as the Edwards Plateau Aspect of the Balcones Phase, an

122

Texa~ A¢cheologica~ and Paleon~ologica~ Society

archaic food gathering culture widely distributed in Texas.’
Diagnostic artifacts, principally dart point types, of two
complexes of this culture, the Round Rock and the Uvalde
Foci, previously noted, were present in some numbers, and
three artifacts of type~ attributed to the Clear Fork Focus
of the aspect were noted. Still other types present cannot
as yet be referred to any focus with certainty.
V. The Toyah Focus

Artifacts attributable to the Toyah Focus in the Lehmann Rock Shelter (Plate 13) include arrow points of the
types Perdiz Pointed Stem (a), Clinton Contracting Stem
(b), "Form 63" (c), and Fresno Triangular Blade (g).
Other arrow point types represented are Scallorn Stemmed
(j~) of the Austin Focus, thought to represent the archaeological remnant of Tonkawa Indian culture bf the late prehistoric period,’ and Piedras Triple Notched (d) and Saucia
Split Base (e) of the Bravo Valley Aspect, the prehistoric
and historic culture of the Patarabueye Indians of the Rio
Grande area to the west’ Other arrow point types, such as
those shown in Plate 13, h and g are of uncertain cultural
provenience.
Additional artifacts of the Toyah Focus in the Lehmann
Shelter (Plate 13), and represented in other Toyah Focus
collections, are snubnose scrapers (j,/¢, I), small flake awls
or drills with discoidaI bases (m), small flake side scrapers
~ Kelley, 1947.
Described briefly in Krieger, 1946, pp. 16~-Ig8.
’ The Jumano Indians are known to have spent their winter months, at least in
part, in the Patarabueye settlements on the Rio Grande, near modern Presidio, Texas.
Discovery o~ paint types attributed to the Patarabueye in the Lehmann Rock Shdter,
therefore, merely provides substantiation for the identification o~ the Toyah Focus
with the Jumano Indians.

PLATE 14
Artifacts ~rom the Lehmann Rock Shelter attributed to the Edwards Plateau
Aspect.

Plate 14

The Leh~nann Rock Shelter

123

or knives (o), double pointed blades, or knives, with a suggestion of the alternating bevelled edges of the common fouredged, double pointed knives of common occurrence in the
late Texas cultures, especially those of Plains attiliations (r),
many lanceolate, squat-and elongated- triangular, and small
triangular blades, usually well chipped (ib, q, and s-u), and
tubular bone beads (n). Other elements of the complex
(not illustrated) are thin potsherds with sand and bone
temper, and a red washed semi-polished surface (~Doss Red
Ware"), large crudely chipped choppers, hammerstones,
*’spokeshaves" (side scrapers with small crescentic concave
scraping edges), and bone awls, together with one eyeless
needle, apparently made of fish bone. In Plate 12, C, "Toyah
Focus", the numbers of each specimen type listed are shown
diagramatically and their actual frequency is indicated.
The stratigraphic position of the human burial indicates
that it probably belongs with the Toyah Focus occupation
of the site (Plate 16, A). The skeleton itself did not survive
removal intact and no significant data are available regarding the physical type. According to the field notes the
skeleton was that of a young adult female. The body had
been placed in the grave in a loosely flexed position, lying
on the right side with head supported by a small boulder,
knees drawn up and flexed, arms folded loosely ~n the chest,
and the face turned to the north. The axis of the body extended in a general ease-west direction with the head placed
at the east. The tubular bone bead shown in Plate 13, n,
lay on the left foot or ankle. No other mortuary furniture
was discovered.

The floor of the grave in the upper part of Stratum II
was 30 inches beneath the surface. Large stones had been
placed on edge around the head and at the feet of the burial,
in the grave. A large stone slab lay over the body, and over
this were tilted two other large slabs. The upper ends of
these ,labs must have projected from the top of Stratum II,
although there are no substantiating drawings or photographs.

124

Texas A~’cheological and PaIeontologica~ Society

It is indeed unfortu-_ate that no data as to the physical
type of the individual could be obtained from this burial.
No other burials identifiable as of Toyah Focus origin have
been located and the Jumano physical type is unknown.
The custom of flexed burial in or near the camp site with
little or no mortuary furniture and with a protective covering of stone slabs is also characteristic of the earlier Edwards Plateau Aspect, and of the Austin Focus and other
late arrow point complexes as well.
VI. The Edwards Plateau Aspect
Dart points from Stratum II belong to types thought
to be diagnostic of at least three complexes of the Edwards
Plateau Aspect, the Round Rock, Uvalde, and Clear Fork
loci. Other dart points perhaps belong with one or more
of these loci, but cannot be definitely placed at the present
time. The latter types include Yarbrough Stemmed, Bluffton Barbed, and Bulverde Barbed (Plate 14, b, i~ j), and unidentified types not shown. One fragmentary specimen is
classed as either Bracken Broad Base, assigned to the Morhiss
Focus of the lower Guadalupe River region, or Juno Broad
Base of the Pecos River Focus.
Round Rock. Focus. Dart points characteristic of the
Round Rock Focus include Pedernales Indented Base, Strawn
Stemmed, Fairland Flared Stem (Plate 14, a, e, c, respectively), and Castroville Convex Base (not shown). No other
artifacts especially diagnostic of the focus were found.
Uvalde Focus. Dart points characteristic of the Uvalde
Focus include Smithwick Small Stem, Frio Flared Stem, and
Montell Split Stem (Hate 14, b, d, and f, respectively). No
other diagnostic artifacts of the Uvalde Focus were discovered.

PLATE 1 ~
Frequency distribution of arrow and dart points by one-inch levels below surface
in the Lehmann Rock Shelter.

~

Plate 15

Uvo/de Focus

Type=

The Lehmann Rock Shel$er

Clear Fort~ Focus." Two specimens of Nolan Beveled
Stem dart point, and one example of a "Clear Fork gouge"
were discovered (Plate 14, g, and l-m--obverse-reverse views
of gouge).
Edwards Plateau Aspect. Artifacts associated with the
dart points are characteristic of the Edwards Plateau Aspect
in general (Plate 14). These include large and irregularly
shaped blades with crude chipping (o), crudely chipped
spike-like blades (1~), fairly well chipped triangular blades
(n), heavy flaked side scrapers, (q), sma!l percussion-chipped choppers made from cores (ranging into rejects and
modified nodules) (s), and one-hand unshaped manos, either
single or double faced (t). One specimen best described as
a "chipped celt" (r) was found, aild other specimens belonging to this complex but not here illustrated include fragments of oval bowl metntes, or seed slabs, large flakes with
small drill points or "gravers," heavy pick-like blades,
crudely chipped from nodules, and one large stemmed knife.
The numbers of each of the classes of specimens listed
above for the Edwards Plateau Aspect, and its £oci, found
in the Lehmann Shelter are shown diagramatically in Plate
12, C, together with the actual £requency of specimens of
each class. The approximate distribution in the shelter deposits o~ specimens attributed to the Edwards Plateau Aspect
is shown in Plate 16, B.

VII.

Chronology

As to the relative chronology of the Toyah Focus and the
Edwards Plateau Aspect in the Lehmann Shelter there can
be no doubt. As previously indicated the Edwards Plateau
Aspect was present throughout the upper two-thirds of
Stratum II, while the Toyah Focus appeared in the shelter
S The basic description of the Clear Fork Focus is that given by Ray, its discoverer.
(Ray, 1938). For a review of the evidence regarding the cultural a~liations
and chronological positiou of the Clear Fork Focus, see Kelley, I947. The ~ ocus is
an early an~! long lived archaic gathering complex centering along the Brazos and Colorado Rivers, especially in the Abilene region.

126

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

only at the very close of the same deposition. If the one:
Perdiz Pointed Stem point recorded at a depth of 32 inches
actually came from that depth, there may have been contact
with the Toyah Focus at 2 much earlier period in the shelter’s
occupation. In view of the inadequate stratigraphic data
given for individual specimens it does not seem wise to place
too much emphasis on the evidence of one artifact.
There was apparently an overlap between the late Toyah
Focus and the earlier Edward Plateau Aspect occupations,
as shown in Plate 15. However, much of the apparent overlap probably results from lack of sufficient stratigraphic
data. It is known that the surface of Stratum II varied
greatly in depth from front to back of the shelter, yet with
rare exceptions the ~trarigraphic sections are given for the
center of the exposures only. This accounts for apparent
locatio nor specimens in Stratum III, where as a matter of
fact none were found. It may also account for the overlap,
but there is no way of verifying or disproving this supposition.
Dart point types of the various loci of the aspect are represented in such small numbers that it is impossible to speak
with assurance of their relative positions in the strata. Such
evidence as is available indicates that the Clear Fork, Uvalde,
and Round Rock loci are all of approximately the same age
in this site. It is known from previous work that the Round
Rock Focus and the Clear Fork Focus existed side by side
in the Colorado River drainage over a very long span of time.
It is also known that in the Nueces River region to the south
and west there was an early occupation by the Round Rock
Focus followed by the Uvalde Focus occupation. While the
Round Rock Focus gave way to the Uvalde Focus in the
west, it survived until late prehistoric times in the Colorado
River drainage. This chronological picture is apparently rePLATE 16
Approximate horizontal and vertical distribution of artifacts in the Lehman Rock
Shelter. A, artifacts attributed to the Toyah focus; B, artifacts attributed to the
Edwards Plateau Aspect.

A

Plate 16

T~e Lehmann Rock Shelter

’127

flected in the Edwards Plateau Aspect levels of the Lehmann
Shelter, which is located in a geographically intermediate
position between the Colorado and Nueces River drainages.
The presence of Uvalde Focus artifacts in the lower occupation levels at this site indicates that the older occupation itself is comparatively recent. The site itself provides
no basis for actual dating. There is archeological evidence
elsewhere for assigning a minimum data of circa 1500 A. D.
for the appearance of ~the Toyah Focus in central Texas.
Certainly, by the time Cabeza de Vaca travelled through
southern and western Texas in the early 1530’s all tribes
mentioned appear to have been using the bow and arrow.’
If A. D. 1500 is accepted as the earliest probable date for
the Toyah Focus occupation of the shelter at the top of
Stratum II, then the underlying Edwards Hateau occupation
probably took place during the 14th and 15th centuries, perhaps somewhat earlier. Tbfis would fit fairly well with other
evidence, which cannot be cited here, for the date of the
Uvalde Focus, and of the latter period of the Round Rock
Focus occupation of central Texas.

As a final point, it might be noted that the deposition of
alluvium in the Lehmann Shelter therefore probably took
place largely in the 13th, 14th, and 15th centuries. This
was likewise a time wher~ the streams of western and central
Teaxs in general were aggrading their beds. During this period the Kokernot Formation was deposited in the Big Bend
region, the 20 foot terrace of the Colorado River was formed
in central Texas, and probably similar formations developed
along other Texas streams)° Indirectly this confirms the
dates suggested above.
Department of Anthropology
The University of Texas
Austin, November, 1947
~Bandetier, !905; Hodge, 1907.
~°See Albrltton and Bryan,
1947.

1939; Kelley, campbell and Lehrner, 1940; Kelley,

128

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Albritton, Claude C., Jr., and Kirk Bryan.
1939. "Quaternary Stratigraphy in the Davis Mountains, Trans-Pecos Texas." Bulletin of the Geological Society o/ America, Vo!. $0, pp. 1423- 1474. New
York.
Bandelier, Fanny (translator and editor).
1905. The Journal of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca.

New York.

Estill, Julia.
’~Indian Pictographs Near Lange’s Mill, Gillespie Couuty, Texas."
1925
tions of the Texas Folk-Lore Society, Vot. IV, pp. 103-114.

Austin.

/-lodge, Frederick Webb (editor).
1907. ’~The Narrative of Ah.’ar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca" in Sibanisb Ex#lorers in the
Southern Uni/ed Stales, 1528-1543. pp. 3-126.
New York.
Huskey,
1935.

Vane.
"An Archaeological Survey of the Nueces Canyon of Texas."
Bulletin of
the Texas Arcbeologlcal and Paleontological Society, Vol. 7, pp. !05- !14.
Abilene.

Jackson, A. T.
1938. "Picture-Writing o~ Texas
No.

Indians,"

The University of

3809, Antbro~o!ogica~ Patters, Vol. II.

Texas Publication,

Austin.

Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer.
1940. "The Association ox¢ Archaeological Materials With Geological Deposits in the
Big Bend Region o~ Texas," Sul Ross Slate Teachers College Bulletin, Vol. XXI.
No. 3 West Texas Historical and Scientific Society Publication Number Ten.
Alpine.
Kelley, J, Charles.
1947. "The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork Focus," American Antiquity, Vol. XIII, No. 2, pp. 97-109.
Krieger, Alex D.
1944. *’The Typological Concept," American Antiquity, Vol. IX, No. 3, pp. 271288.
1946. "Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas," The University
o~ Texas Publication, No. 4640. Austin.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1938, "The Clear Fork Culture Complex," Bulletin of /be Texas Archeo!ogical and
Paleontological Society, Vol.

10, pp.

193- 207.

Abilene.

Sayles, E. B.
193L "An Archaeological Survey of Texas," Medallion Pa~ers, No. XVII.

Globe.

