THE LEE SITE, Gv3, OF GARVIN
COUNTY, OKLAHOMA1
KAI~L SCHMIT’f

Introduction
The following is a preliminary report on the Lee site,
which was reported to the Department of Anthropology of
the University of Oklahoma by Messrs. Frank and Phil Newkumet of Norman, OMahoma, in 1948.

Permission to ex-

cavate was graciously given by Mrs. Eva Lee, the owner,
and Mr. Carl Bowen, the leasee, who are to be commended
for not allowing unauthorized persons to excavate.

Be-

cause of their alertness, an important aboriginal site has
been preserved for scientific investigation and has not,
as has happened so often in the past, been destroyed by
indiscriminate digging. Mrs. Lee, in addition, has presented the University Museum with an excellent surface
collection of artifacts from the same site. The Newkumet
brothers have also loaned items from their collections which
were found on the surface of the Lee site. The present
paper considers these surface finds along with those made
by the Department of Anthropology.
Thanks are due to Professor J. Willis StovalI, Director
of the Museum, for identification of the animal bones from
the refuse; to Professor R. E. Bell, Chairman of the Department of Anthropology, for identification of the flint
specimens from the quarries of Kay County, Oklahoma,
and ~Potter County, Texas; and especially to Mr. Alex
Krieger of the University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, who examined a selected series of potsherds,
identified "trade" sherds, commented on the general characteristics of the local wares, and edited the manuscript.
I.

Since the completion of this report, an area of intensive occupation

llas been discovered on the C. E. Lace), Farm, which overlooks the Gv3 site.
Approximately seventy-five cache or refuse pits, a few burials, charred
corn, and several possible house sites were removed by bull dozer activity
in construction of a slush pit for an oil well. A large number of artifacts
were salvaged and appear to represent a slm|lar series to those reported
herein.

70

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The site is located on the wooded, north bank of the
Washita River in Garvin County, Oklahoma, approximately
three and one-half miles east of the town of Lindsay, and
is referred to as Gv3 in the museum files. The occupation
appears to have been confined to the first terrace, or T1 of
the geologists. Surface evidence consisted of concentrations
of gray ashes, charcoal, broken animal bones, flint chips,
broken stones, .and occasional artifacts.
A trial L-shaped trench with twenty-five foot arms was
oriented to cross two areas of concentration of surface material; this orientation deviated slightly from north-south,
east-west axes. When the plow-disturbed soil was removed, a sub-soil of a red, sandy loam was exposed; against
this background the pit outlines showed as dark areas conraining flecks of charcoal, burned earth, and bone fragments. As this was a preliminary test it was decided
to excavate by six inch levels; howevqr, the levels are of
little significance since they cross-cut the sloping stratigraphy which developed in the pits discovered. An attempt
was made to keep all the material found in the excavation,
but perfection was not obtained. Some irregular sandstone and limestone fragments, water-worn pebbles, and
shells were inadvertently discarded by students, and a number of grinding-stone fragments and hammerstones were
presumably lost.
Traits o] the Gv3 Site
To facilitate comparison with other sites in the southern
Plains area, as well as to give an indication of the type of
life led by the former inhabitants of the site, the traits~ will
be presented in a summary fashion as Krieger, has done for
the various archaeological manifestations of northern Texas.
Because of the nature of this approach, some inferences have
to. be included with the basic data.
Economy: A major portion of the subsistence was gained
by hunting, gathering, and fishing. On the basis of bone
1. Alex I¢:rieger, Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas.
The "University of Texas Publication i~o. 4640 Austin, 1946.

The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County, Oklahoma

71

refuse, it can be said that the chief animal hunted was the
deer, but jack rabbits, tortoises, and wild turkey were also
important food items. Bison bones were present but not
plentiful. Freshwater mussels of several species, turtles,
and catfish were obtained from the river. There is no direct
evidence of agriculture, but there is a very strong possibility
that it played an important part in the subsistence pattern. The large number of mano, grinding-stone, and bone
hoe fragments, and the pits, are strong circumstantial evidence for the presence of agriculture.
Village: The distribution of surface material, which occurs in five or more oval areas of ten to thirty feet in
diameter each, indicates that there was some concentration of population. Sporadic evidence of occupation exists
in many nearby areas and other concentrations of material occur on the Edna Frankenburg farm, a mile to
the west of the Gv3 site. It is possible that these two areas
were inhabited contemporaneously.
Architecture: There are meager data for this phase of
life. A few post molds indicate that house patterns may be
found with more extensive excavation. Pieces of firehardened clay containing grass impressions strongly suggest the former presence of houses which were daubed with
mud and grass.
Agriculture ImpZements: A fragmentary portion of a
bison scapula hoe (Plate 9, Fig. 7) was found near the surface over pit 1. A spine from a bison scapula, which exhibits extensive battering marks where it joined the main
portion of the scapula, is almost certainly refuse from the
manufacture of a hoe, Blade fragments of another scapula
hoe and a bison skull hoe were surface finds.
Food Storage: Portions of three large pits, which the Indians had dug and used, were excavated by the field party.
Since these were filled with refuse, their use as food storage
pits is only inferential. 1Viany historic tribes of the low
Plains area used similar pits in which to store agricultural
products for portions of the year and often filled them with
refuse after the original contents were removed.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Pit 1 was found in squares OR2, OR3, NIR2, N1R3 and
undoubtedly extends into N2R2 and N2R3 (see Plate 5).
The portion of this pit in squares OR2 and OR3 was completely excavated; the bottom was essentially flat wiih a
depth of forty inches below the surface on the east and
west and thirty-eight inches at the center.

The east wall

was slightly undercut while the west wall was undercut
~six inches suggesting a bell-shaped pit. The portion of this
pit in squares N1R2 and N1R3 was excavated only to a
depth of eighteen inches. The shape of the pit appeared
to be irregularly oval with diameters of thirteen and ten
feet.
Pit 2 was found in the south portion of squares OR2 and
OR3 where it intersected pit 1. The bottom of this pit
was fifty inches below the surface. This feature appears
to have antedated pit 1 since the ashy fill of the latter extended to and over pit 2.
Pit 3 was located in squares N3R1 and N4R1 and extended
into the adjoining unexcavated squares to the north and
west. Pit walls were straight in the north profile and
sloping in the west profile; the bottom was fiat with a
maximum depth of forty inches below the surface.
All the pits were filled with refuse including ash lenses,
fire-cracked rocks, broken bones, flint chips, potsherds, and
many pieces of limestone and sandstone. A sterile reddish
layer in p~it 1 may indicate reuse of the pit for storage
after some use for trash disposal. It should be pointed out
that there appears to have been extensive erosion of this
site and that contour plowing was subsequently employed
as a conservation measure. The soil remaining around two
trees near the excavation indicates that two to four feet
have been eroded away and that the pit depths were
greater originally.
Food Preparation: No hearths were found. The large
number of fire-cracked rocks and the ash lenses in the
refuse indicate, however, that hearths were present else-

The Lee Site, Gv3, o] Garvin County, Oklahoma

~~~~ . . . . . . , ,~ ~
Reddish
~R OFILE

PIT

Groutad plcan o~:,excava~[o_.r3_
PLATE 5
l~[ap and ground plan of exeavatlon of Gv3 site.

73

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

74

Temper

Limestone ..................
Limestone-Shell ......
Linestone-Shell-Bone
Bone ............................
Sandstone

102
1~.1
17
,!,
65

Sandstone-Shell "__.....~
Coarse Sand ..............
Clay .........................

4
60

Shell ...............................
Fine Sand .....................
Total

55

where in the vicinity.

428

1
1
1

1
9

1
8
8

1

2
2

103
121
17
4
65
5
68
1
58
11
453

Pottery from this site indicates

use over a fire since many sherds exhibit blackened areas.
There were 453 pottery sherds, of which 306 are from
the surface or plow-disturbed zone. From a technical standpoint they are extremely difficult to classify.

The sherds

are, in general, thick and poorly manufactured from an
aesthetic viewpoint. Large coils, poorly welded together,
and an excessive amount of coarse tempering material are
outstanding characteristics of the series. Surface finish
of the great majority of the specimens was produced by
careless smoothing so that many striations are visible. Other
sherds were cord-roughened and then partially smoothed,
fabric-impressed, or polished. A detailed classification of
the tempering material and surface finish is given above.
The limestone and sandstone temper occurs as unusually
large pieces, some measuring as much as 6 ram. in diameter;
the shell is usually finely ground, though some large particles occur; the coarse sand is visible to the unaided eye as
rounded grains of quartz; the fine sand is detected by a
slight roughness to touch; and the bone occurs as large
particles exhibiting cancellous areas.

It should be stated

that the above temper classification is not strictly accurate:

The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County, Oklaho~na

75

a sherd with predominate limestone-shell temper may have
an occasional fragment of sandstone or bone visible. It is
also possible that finely ground bone may have been occasionally confused with fine shell particles.
Several pottery traditions, in addition to some exotic
pieces, are represented. About 373 plain sherds (those in
column 1, except for those tempered only with shell) are
tentatively called "Lindsay Plain" and appear to be locally
made varia~uts of one type. It is possible that further
knowledge of the pottery in this area will require a
subdivision of this type on the basis of tempering material.. However, in the Lee site at least, the plain sherds
tempered with lin~estone, limestone-shell (Plate 6, Fig. 12),
limestone-shell-bone, crushed sandstone, sandstone-shell,
coarse sand (Plate 6, Fig. 4), and bone are alike except in
the choice of aplastic. The surfaces are poorly smoothed
and bear many striations caused by brushing and scraping.
Vesse! shapes are not completely known; large jars with
straight or flaring rims, thinned and rounded lips, expanded
bodies, and thick flat bases protruding downward are indicated.
A second tradition is represented by the sand-tempered
and cord-roughened group (Plate 6, Fig 8). These sherds
seem most closely related to specimens from the group of
sites known as the Antelope Creek Focus, in the Panhandle
of Oklahoma and Texas, but similar pottery may also be
rather widspread in the southern Great Plains as far south
as the Red River.
Most of the plain, shell-tempered sherds are relatively
thin and are ~ a third tradition. Krieger has identified
these as belonging to the Nocona Plain pottery type (Plate
6: Fig. 1, 2, 7) which is the characteristic undecorated ware
of the Henrietta Focus of North Texas.2 Three rims of this
type from the Lee site are everted and have thickened and
flattened lips. One body sherd of this group possesses a

1.

Ibid. p.

2,

Ibid. pp. 109-10.

44.

76

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

small raised node (Plate 6, Fig. 2).

One specimen (Plate

6, Fig. 7) of this variety appears to be a portion of a pottery
disc.
Five or less of the plain, shell-tempered group seem to
represent a fourth tradition. These are extremely thick
and have an excessive amount of tempering material consisting of large shell flakes. One found on the surface exhibits a raised circular appendage with a depressed center
(Plate 6, Fig. 3). This fragment, from a survey of the literature, is most like sherds from the Norris Basin in Tennessee,2
but presumably has counterparts in the Arkansas area:
Six gray polished sherds are probably from one bottleshaped vessel since the interiors were not smoothed. These,
and a red-slipped sherd, are considered by Krieger to be
definitely like Sanders Plain~ in their paste and feel. Two
engraved sherds (Plate 6, Fig. 5 and 6) indicate contact
with Sanders Focus of North Texas and the Spiro Focus of
Eastern Oklahoma..
Most of the unusual sherds were found on the surface, but
some were found in undisturbed association with those of the
Lindsay Plain type. One shell-tempered, cord-roughened
rim sherd (Plate 6, Fig. 10); one sand-tempered, cordroughened body sherd; and one cord-roughened body sherd
tempered with sandstone and shell were from pit I. One
polished sherd, referable to Spiro pottery, came from the
fourth level of pit 3.
Grinding-stone and mano fragments indicate preparation
of food, presumably corn, but possibly wild seeds. Seven
pieces of such stones were found on the surface and seven
from undisturbed levels in the pits. Flat, fine-grained sandstone slabs from one to two and one-half inches in thickness with roughly shaped edges predominate. Grinding
on most was over the entire surface and usually on one
surface only. One specimen possessed a raised sill, while
2.
William S. Wehb, An Archaeological Survey of the Norris Baein
Eastern Tennessee, B. A. :t~. Bulletin 118. Washington, 1938. Plate 79b.
3.
Krieger, Op, CIt, pp, 188.

in

The Lee Site, Gv3, oS Garv~n County, Oklahon~a

79

two others showed pecked and ground depressions, the
latter indicating grinding by a rotary motion.

Four mano

fragments of one-hand size were recovered, two from the
surface and three from undisturbed portions of the pits.
One sandstone specimen is roughly rectangular with rounded
corners, is wedge-shaped, and has well-worn grinding surfaces. Another is of sandstone, roughly oval, wedge-shaped,
and has two pecked and slightly worn grinding surfaces.
The other two manos are loaf-shaped and exhibit one flattened grinding surface.
Sixteen hammerstones of water-worn quartz, quartzite,
and chert pebbles were recognized. Twelve were from the
surface or plough-disturbed zone and four from the pits.
These were originally rounded pebbles and measured from
one and one-half to four inches in length and one to
three inches in thickness. Flakes had been struck from
them, perhaps accidentally, and the edges were battered.
In addition to their use as flint flaking tools, these hammerstones were probably used to crush animal bones. Among
the large number of such bones recovered there were no
whole long bones of deer or buffalo. The many bone splinters and joints which indicate gouging of the cancellous bone
suggest that the former inhabitants crushed and boiled the
bones in order to obtain the marrow or grease, as did many
historic tribes of the area.
The bones also indicate something of butchering techniques. A number of proximal and distal ends of long
bones have parallel scratches apparently made in the process
of severing the joints. Some ribs, vertebrae, two deer mandibles, and one pelvis have similar incisions, indicating
the use of stone knives.
. Cutting, Scraping, Skin Preparation: Two knives of approximate diamond-shape were found on the surface.
These are beveled but not on opposing sides. One specimen
(Plate 9, Fig 15) is made of flint from Kay County, Oklahoma; the other (Plate 9, Fig. 16) may be of Amarillo
"flint."

Texas A~cheolo~ical and Paleontological Societ~

Eighteen snub-nosed scrapers, one of which was from an
undisturbed level, were recovered. All but one of these
were manufactured from flakes so that the concave flake
scar remains, and the chipping occurs on the other surfaces
(Plate 9, Figs. 12, 18). One well-made specimen (Plate 9,
Fig. 19) appears to have been reworked from a diamondshaped knife and has two opposing beveled sides meeting
in a point and a steep bit.
Side-scrapers (Plate 9, Fig. 13) numbered five or more.
It is rather difficult typologically to separate side scrapers
from a large series of flakes with retouched edges. Eightysix of the latter were collected and ranged from those with
intentional, well-chipped edges (Plate 9, Fig. 14) to those
with ragged edges, probably accidentally produced in the
process of scraping bone.
Two scrapers have two large concentric flake scars indicating they may have been struck from a core. The edges
were beveled by fine retouching. One of these (Plate 9,
Fig. 20) is of Kay County flint.
Five flint flakes were found with worn or polished
edges indicating intensive use for scraping. One former
projectile point (Plate 9, Fig. 17) has all the edges worn
smooth in a similar fashion. Nine blades of basically triangular shape also may have been scraping implements or
may represent steps in the manufacture of other implements. One spall (Plate 9, Fig. 10) has a small chipped
"graving" point.
The chisel-like implements of bone were probably skinworking tools. Two of these were manufactured from the
flattened portion of the shaft of a bison tibia (Plate 8, Fig 2).
Two other chisel-like specimens appear to have been reworked from a broken tool Of a class often known as "digging stick tips," (Plate 8, Fig 1). They were manufactured
from bison tibia and presumably possessed holes in the
proximal ends before they were broken and reused.
Three abrading implements of red sandstone wi~h flattened sides and shallow striations were found and were

The Lee Site, Gv3, ol Garvin County, Oklahoma

81

9

~0

21

24
PLATE 7
Type shapes of flint artifacts from Gv3 site.

22

25

82

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

probably used to sharpen such bone tools. Eighteen fragments of small, flat sandstone slabs also appear to have
been used as abrading implements.
A piece of a bone beamer or drawshave (Plate 8, Fig. 5)
was made from a deer cannon bone and presumably was
used in dressing skins.
Sewing and Punching: Three flint awls or drills were
found on the surface. One was relatively crudely chipped and possessed side notches (Plate 7, Fig. 22); another
was definitely T-shaped (Plate 7, F’:g. 21); the last specimen had a straight base, slight side notches, and a beveled
point (Plate 7, Fig. 20).
Bone awls were common. Eleven were manufactured
from splinters (Plate 9, Fig 3); some were made merely by
grinding a point on a rough splinter; others were completely smoothed. Two well-made awls. were of split and
highly polished deer cannon bones (Plate 9, Fig. 2). Another
was made from the cannon bone of an immature deer and
the end was ground off so that the billowed symphyseal
surface served as a natural serrated decoration (Plate 9,
Fig. 1). A crude specimen was made from a deer cannon
bone. Two awl fragments were manufactured from sections of animal ribs. One awl was made from a large fish
spine (Plate 9, Fig 4).
Sandstone hones were used to sharpen pointed implements. Three pieces of medium-grained red sandstone
bear sharp grooves; two specimens of coarse sandstone, apparently cemented by an iron compound, have grooves
which tend to run the length of the stone (Plate 8, Fig. 10).
One small faceted hone could have been used to sharpen
awls in the same way as the sandstone hone mentioned
above.
Chipping or Flaking Tools: Two complete specimens of
deer ulnae or olecranon bones with the tip worked may
have been flakers (Plate 8, Figs. 3 and 4). A tip of a
PLATE 8
l]~t~e and stone at-t|i’acts I’t’o~,l Gv3 site.

!
2

6

Bone and stone artifacts

The Lee Site, Gv3, oS Garv~n County, Oklahoma

85

similar specimen was also found, and three ulnae with
fractured tips possess high use-polish and may be broken
specimens.

A portion of a deer antler with a large, blunt

end (Plate 9, Fig. 6) and a fragment of a thin antler cylinder
(Plate 9, Fig. 8) could have served similar purposes.
Weapons: Arrowpoints are small, of a variety of shapes,
and almost entirely surface finds. Plate 7, Figs. 1-19, 23-25,
indicate the outline shapes present and the number of
specimens of each type. In addition, forty-seven fragments of projectile points were unclassified.
The above points were largely manufactured from flakes
struck from flint or dense-grained, gray quartzite pebbles. The debris of manufacture indicates that pebbles of
wide variety were collected. The technique appears to
have been to strike successive flakes running the length of
the pebble and then to specialize suitable flakes into points.
A number of flint cores with one small water-worn surface
indicate this technique. The larger specimens of projectile
points might be called dart points. In view of the predominance of small points and the wide variety of flint collected, it is very possible that these larger more atypical
specimens were collected by the former inhabitants as possible manufacturing material.
One fragment of a well-made sandstone shaft smbother
(Plate 8, Fig 8) came from an undisturbed portion of pit
1. A second specimen of very friable sandstone was similar but with a very shallow groove. A third well-made
specimen of sandstone (Plate 8, Fig. 9) may have been a
shaft smoother in the process of manufacture; it is broken
along the groove, which is too angular to have been used
for smoothing cylindrical arrows.
Three fragments of "shaft-wrenches" made from deer
radii were found on the surface (Plate 8, Fig. 6). Two
show that the distal end was cut off and two exhitit the
hole cut through the shaft near the proximal end. One
has a worn groove about the diameter of a modern arrow
shaft to one side of the hole. All have high use polish.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Weaving:

A single shell-tempered sherd bears the im-

pression of a small gauge, square-meshed net and indicates
the use of fabrics.
Ornaments:

A small bead cut from a section of bird or

rabbit bone (Plate 9, Fig. 9) and a rough section of a mammalian long bone, apparently representing a step in the
manufacture of a bead, were found on the surface.
bone pendant

(Plate 9, Fig. 5)

A

of a polished and per-

forated mammaliar~ rib was also found on the surface.
Ceremonial Objects:

A fragment of a pottery pipe bowl

may represent such an object.

The crudely incised and

punctated design is indicated in Plate 6, Fig. 11.
Burials:

No evidence was present.

Evidence o] Trade:

One large celt of greenish igneous

material with oval cross section and tapered poll (Plate
8, Fig. 7) was found by Mrs. Lee.
locally.

This stone is not found

The poll of a similar celt, a smaller specimen of a

tan material, and a small rectanguloid celt with a blunted
bit were also found by Mrs. Lee.

All these specimens have

a roughened area on the poll.
Trade in flint is indicated by five artifacts manufactured
from banded, Kay County, Oklahoma flint, which contains
fusulinid fossils, and three artifacts and one flake of redbanded agatized dolomite from the vicinity of Amarillo,
Texas. Trading connections may be indicated by the minority pottery wares; the thinner, shell-tempered sherds were
.identified by Alex Krieger as Nocona Plain, predominate
type of the Henrietta Focus of North Texas; the sherds
with a polished exterior were identified by Krieger as
from the Caddoan archaeological area, and most probably from sites of the Sanders and Spiro Foci; and finally,
the sandy tempered, cord-roughened sherds are closely
related to those from sites of the Antelope Creek Focus of
the Oldahoma-Texas Panhandle.

I0

12

The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garv~n County, Oklahoma

89

Conclusion
The evidence from the Lee site indicates the former inhabitants relied on a dual economy of hunting-agriculture of
the general type found in late prehistoric archaeological
horizons of the Low Plains and adjoining portions of the
High Plains from Northern Texas to ~orth Dakota. This
way of life .was also followed by many historic tribes, such
as the western Caddo, Wichita, Omaha, Mandan, and
Hidatsa. An actual date for the occupation of the Lee site
is not known at this time; the lack of European or Colonial
trade material, except for one possible gun flint (Plate 9,
Fig. I1) from the surface, indicates that it was pre-1600 A.
D. The presence of the Nocona Plain pottery type, which
is characteristic of the Henrietta Focus, also suggests the
same time period since Krieger assigns 1600 as the terminal
date for the Henrietta Focus. The sherds attributable, or
closely related to the Sanders and Antelope Creek Foci
indicate that the occupation may extend back to 1300 or
1400 A. D. Correlation with any historic tribe is not possible at this time.
Department of Anthropology
University of Oklahoma
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Krieger, Alex D., Culture Cor~plexes and Chronology
in Northern Texas, University of Texas Publication No.
4640, Austin, 1946.
2. Webb, William S., An Archaeological Survey of the
Norris Basin in Eastern Tennessee, B. A. E. Bulletin
118, Washington, 1938.

