THE MERRELL SITE:
ARCHAEOLOGICAL REMAINS ASSOCIATED
WITH ALLUVIAL TERRACE DEPOSITS
IN CENTRAL TEXAS
T. N. CAI’~IPBELL
Introduction
This brief report is placed on record because the Merrell
site has attracted attention, chiefly through preliminary
notices,2 in connection with the problem of early man in
America,3 and also because it shows both natural and cultural stratigraphy--a situation not too commonly reported
in the archeology of central Texas. Although the evidence
as outlined in this paper does not support any claims of
special antiquity, the stratigraphic data furnished by the
MerrelI site have a direct bearing on the interpretation of
prehistoric cultural developments in the central Texas area.
The Merrell site~ consists of midden materials included in
alluvial terrace deposits on the north side of Brushy Creek,
one quarter mile northeast of the town of Round Rock, Williamson County, Texas. This locality is 18 miles north of
Austin. Brushy Creek is a small spring-fed stream which
heads.in the low hills of the eroded Balcones Escarpment~
just west of Round Rock and flows in a northeasterly direction, its water eventually reaching the Brazos River in Milam
County by way of the San Gabriel and Little Rivers.
Prior to excavation by archeologists, the Brushy Creek
terrace deposits were commercially excavated for gravel
over a period of years, and it was because of these operations
that the site was discovered in 1934 by A. M. Wilson of Austin.
1 This article in the revised ~nd expanded version

of a paper ~rc~ented

before

the Texas Arch~logi~l and PathOlogical ~ciety at i~ ~elfth Annu~ Mee~ng
in Abilene, Oc~b~ 26, 1940.
2 Anonymo~, 1935~d.
3 B~an, 1935, p. 7, 1936b, p. 1363 ; Kelley, Campbell and Lehmer, 1940, p, 133 ;
~fgh~n 1936, p. vii ; Mason, 1936, p. 56 ; Sell~ds, 1936, 1940, p. 404.
4 The si~ ts nam~ for J. ~ Merrell, lando~er at the time of ~vation
by the Unlv~i~ of Tex~
5 The B~n~ ~meni ~o~s the eas~ and ~u~ern bm~nda~, of the
Edwards Pla~au.

Texas ArcheoIo.q~cal and Paleontological Society

Wilson reported the site to the late J. E. Pearce of the University of Texas, who made arrangements for excavation by
the University. The field work was directed by Jack To
Laughlin, an anthropology student, under the personal .supervision of Pearce. Since student labor was used,6 excavation was confined to week-ends. This work began on
October 18, 1934, and ended on January 13, 1935. Additional
testing, with results largely of a negative nature, was done
in June, 1940, by J. Charles Kelley with a small crew of
laborers supplied by the Works Progress Administration.
Pearce was impressed by the fact that flint artifacts and
flakes were exposed in a vertical bank of the terrace at
depths ranging from the surface to eighteen feet below, and
he believed that the site might throw light on the problem of
the antiquity of man in America. Since the problem was
essentially a geological problem, Pearce persuaded Dr. E. H.
Sellards, Director of the Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas, to study the geology of the Merrell locality.
The results of their joint activities were summarized and
issued through Science Service in January and Februa.ry,
1935.7
Geology of the Site~
The alluvial deposits of Brushy Creek rest on Cretaceous
limestones and shales. The hills on either side of the stream
(Plate 1, A) are of Buda limestone. Immediately below the
Buda limestone in the Merrell locality lies the Del Rio clay
formation, and it is upon this shale formation that the
Brushy Creek alluvial deposits rest. The Georgetown limestone, a formation which normally underlies the Del Rio
clay, appears west of a fault that crosses Brushy Creek just
below the dam shown in Plate 1, A. The fault trends northeast and is downthrown to the southeast, bringing the
Georgetown limestone and the Del Rio clay into vertical

6 This labor was provided by the Federal Emergenc~, Relief Administrution.
7 The four notices, given in footnote 2 above, were all derived from the original
report submitted to Science Service.
8 The geologlcal aspects of the Merrell slte have been discussed by Sel]ar~ls
(1936).
Plate 1, A, and the details given in thls section are drawn from his
report.
Inasmuch as Setlards gives views of the locality where excavation took
place (his Fig. 2 and Fig. 3), similar illustrations are omltt¢~l from this paper.

The Merrell Site

contact in the stream bed. A part of the Balcones fault
system, this local fault has caused the formation of springs
in the stream bed and thus provides a locally abundant water
supply.
The terraces are easily recognized in Brushy Creek valley
(Plate 1, A). The lower and younger terrace covers the
southern half of the valley. It lies 10 to 13 feet above the
pres~iat stream level and is covered during flood stage. The
second and older terrace covers the northern half of the
valley and is approximately twice the height of the lower
terrace, rising to 20 or 25 feet above stream level. The deposits of this older terrace extend across the fault described
above. A large part of this terrace has been removed for
gravel, leaving a peninsula of terrace deposits in whose
vertical south bank artifacts and midden materials were
observed by Wilson. This peninsula is some 400 feet from
the stream and at the present time is being removed for its
gravel content.
Stratigraphy
The strata of the second terrace, observable for several
hundred yards downstream, are fairly uniform. At the
s~erie of archeological excavation the strata are easily distinguished, and the two localities where digging took place
(see Plate 1, A, Localities 1 and 2) can be correlated.
A complete cross section was obtained at Locality 1, where
the strata appear as follows:
Approximate
thickness
in feet
Burnt rock midden ..................................................... 3/4
Heavy rock and gravel, hearth at base ..................... 6
Silt, some gravel ............................................................ 7
Clean, stream-laid gravel ............................................ 4
Det Rio clay (bedrock)
Essentially the same sequence appears at Locality 2, except that here a complete section was not obtained. Excavation was carried down only to the top of the silt stratum; the

10

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

deposit below was obscured by talus materials.
at Locality 2 is given below:

The column

Approximate
thickness
in feet
Burnt rock midden
2
Gravel, some silt .......................................................... 4½
Burnt rock midden ....................................................... 2
Silt (penetrated to depth of 2 feet)
A correlation of these two localities is not difficult (Plate
1, B). The sequences are almost identical and only 60 feet
separates the two columns. The upper layers can be traced
from one locality to the other. An additional element at
Locality 2, the lower burnt rock midden, seems to correlate
with the hearth at the top of the silt layer at Locality 1.
Excavation

Excavation at the Merrell site was conducted in the two
localities referred to above. These are situated on the
southern edge of the older terrace remnant. Much less
excavation was done at Locality 1 than at Locality 2.
At Locality 1 a trench 14 feet wide was begun at the bas~
of the talus slope and was carried downward until bedrock
:(Del Rio clay) was reached at a depth of 18 feet below the
surface of the terrace. The trench was then carried forward
into the bank until a perpendicular face was attained. For
this reason the trench was very short, its north-south length
being approximately 5 feet. Since the bluff sloped backWard Considerably, very little material was removed from
the upper strata, most of it being from the silt and lower
gravel layers. The artifacts taken from this locality were
very meager in quantity, the series numbering only 18
specimens.
At Locality 2 excavation was more extensive.

Instead of

PLATE 1
]~Iap showing vicinity of hlerrell site.
Localities where excavation took
place may be seen at 1 and 2.
Chart illustrating correlation of Localities 1 and 2 at Merrell site.

MIDDEN

HIDDEN

GRAVEL

GRAVEL

MIDDEN

SILT

SILT

CORRELATION

OF LOCALITIES

MERRELL

GRAVEL

BEDROCK

l~]ate 1

SITE

AT

The M~rreIl Si~e

13

working inward from the face of the bluff, as at Locality 1,
excavation began at the surface and was carried downward.
At this locality a small neck of terrace deposit connected two
larger remnants (see Plate 1, A) o

At the top this neck was

10 feet in width, but since each side sloped outward toward
the base, the width of the excavated area increased to some
20 feet before work was terminated. The area excavated
was approximately 50 feet in length, bat in only One spot~ was
it carried down into the silt stratum.

Here a small test pit

penetrated the silt stratum to a depth of 2 feet, giving a
column of11 fee~t that was sampled.
from Locality 2 totaled 197.

The specimens taken

The strata and their associated artifacts will be considered
in the following sections.

Beginning at the bottom of the

terrace deposit and proceeding upward, the following designations will be used (see Plate I, B) : Lower Gravel Stratum
(no artifacts), Merrell 1 (Silt Stratum), Merrell 2 (Lower
Midden), MerrelI 3 (Upper Gravel), and Merrell 4 (Upper
Midden).
Lower Gravel Stratum
This layer was exposed at Locality 1 (see Plate 1, B),
where it appears as a 4-foot stratum of coarse gravel lying
upon Del Rio clay (bedrock). This clean gravel was evidently deposited by a c]edr running stream. According. to
the early notices, artifacts were taken from this stratum;
and the field notes refer to "crude scrapers, fist axes, and
spokeshaves." In the writer’s opinion,, none of the specimens
collected from this stratum c.an .be identified as artifacts.
Instead they appear to be ~tream-rolled flint fragments derived from flint nodules in the old stream bed. Some fragments may .be primary flakes detached by human hand, but
this is questionable. The secondary chipping on these frag¯ merits is irregular and haphazard, which is precisely what
might be expected in stream-rolled flints. Since the evidence is inconclusSve, no emphasis is here placed on the
"artifacts~’ obtained from the lower gravel stratum. This

14

Texas Archeologfcal and Paleontological Society

makes it necessary to revise the earlier statements9 that
artifacts were found to depths of 18 feet below the terrace
surface. The maximum depth at which definite artifacts
were found is approximately 14 feet. While this correction
has no particular significance, it is made in order to set the
record straight.
Merrell 1 (Silt Stratum)

Lying above the coarse gravel at Locality 1 is a thick layer
(7 to 71/~ feet) of light brown silt which includes small
amounts of gravel. The evidence from this layer clearly
indicates that Brushy Creek valley was occupied by man
during the period when this silt was being, deposited. One
small hearth, some 3 feet in diameter and 2 to 3 inches thick,
was noted in the lower part of the layer. This hearth was
made up of charcoal, ashes, and numerous snail shells. In
addition, snail shells, bits of charcoal (occasionally forming
lenses), 14 artifacts, and numerous flint flakes were distributed throughout the block of silt excavated.
Representative artifacts~o from the silt stratum at Locality
1 are shown in Plate 2, A. Only one projectile point came
from this layer (Plate 2, A, 1) ; this form persisted through
the various layers above and became one of the dominant
forms in Merrell 4. Four knives, representing at least two
different types, were found. One type (Plate 2, A, 2), represented by a single basal fragment, is long and slender and
has a straight base; the other (Plate 2, A, 4), represented by
the three remaining specimens, is broadly triangular in outline and has a base which varies from straight to broadly
convex. Similar in outline to this second type of knife are
two thick, crudely made blades.11 Five side-scrapers are
made from flakes that are retouched along one edge, some9 Anonymous, 19~Sa-d.
I0 Mo~t of the artifacts from the Merrell site are made of flint.
In the
artifact descriptions which follow, it is to be understood that flint is the material
used unless some other material is specifically mentioned. Flint is very abundant
in central Texas, occurring as lenses or nodules in certain limestone formations
of the Edwards Plateau. and it has been widely distributed in pebble form by
the streams which £1ow southeastward from this plateau. The central Texas flint
is usually gray in color, ranging from very light gray to black, and mue.h of it
i~ of high quality.
11 The thinner, well-chipped specimens are designated ~s knives; the thicker°
heavier, more crudely fashioned ones are called blades.

The Merrell Site

15

times along two parallel edges (Plate 2, A, 5), and there is
one very crude end-scraper. One graver appears in this
series (Plate 2, A, 3); it is made from a small but rather
thick flake and has two beak-like points on one edge. Between the two points is a steeply retouched concavity.
At Locality 2 only four artifacts were obtained from the
silt stratum. These include a projectile point, a gouge, a
handstone fragment, and a heavy blade fragment. The
projectile point is similar to the point illustrated in Plate 3,
A, 8. The gouge belongs to the type that has been described
as the Clear Fork planer-gouge.,~ It is piano-convex in cross
section, only the convex face exhibiting flake scars, and it is
similar in outline to the gouge illustrated in Plate 3, B, 3,
from Merrell 3. The handstone fragment is made of granite
and shows flat grinding facets on both surfaces; its original
outline cannot be determined. Because of its fragmentary
nature, little can be said about the blade.
Merrell 2 (Lower Midden)
This layer is represented .only at Locality 2, where it
consists of some 2 feet of burnt rock midden deposit resting
on the silt stratum. The densely packed hearthstone fragments (burnt rock) in this layer may be seen in Plate 2, B, 1
(between feet and knees of man). The soil filling the interstices between the stones is not so dark in color as that in
the upper .midden, probably because of a greater amount of
leaching.
The artifacts from the lower midden are few in number:,
three projectile points, a thick oval blade, and two sidescrapers. The two forms of projectile points represented are
shown in Plate 2, B. The form shown at 3 is represented by
two specimens, that shown at 2 by one specimen. The latter
may well be a drill fashioned from a discarded projectile
point.
At Locality 1 the hearth lying between the silt stratum
and the upper gravel has been correlated with the lower

12 ]Ray,

1938, p.

198 and Plate 24, Fig.

2.

16

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

midden at Locality 2.

This hearth, composed principally of

fire-cracked limestone, was about 6 inches thick and had a
diameter of approximately 2 feet. The correlation of this
hearth with the lower midden at Locality 2 is based on identical stratigraphic positions in duplicating series. No artifacts
accompanied the hearth.
Merrell 3 (Upper Gravel)
Above the silt stratum at Locality 1, and above the lower
midden at Locality 2, lies a clearly marked layer of gravel
(see Plate 2, B, 1). The uppermost part of this layer contains
numerous limestone slabs which appear to have been deposited by strong fluvial action. The remainder of the layer
at both localities consists of gravel with some silt and traces
of ash. At Locality 2, which is farther downstream, ash and
bits of charcoal were well distributed throughout the layer.
Artifacts and animal bones, chiefly deer and bison, occurred
in this layer at both localities; but because of the small
amount of excavation in the layer at Locality t only a few
artifacts were found there. It is apparent that much of the
cultural material in this layer has been washed into place.
Judging from the presence of ash, charcoal, and the number
of artifacts in the stratum at Locality 2, the source of the
cultural material could not have been very far away. This
source was not located.
From the upper gravel at Locality 1 came only four artifacts: a projectile point, two knives, and one drill. The projectile point (Plate 3, A, 10) is quite unlike any other point
"from the Merrell site. It i~ somewhat leaf-shaped, the base
is concave, and there are two additional features worthy of
special comment: oblique flake scars and ground edges near
the base. The outline, chipping, and ground edges near the
base place it within the range of the type ~ormerly desigPI.~TE 2
Artifacts from silt stratum, Locality !, Merretl site. 1, projectile point;
2. 4, knives; 3, graver; 4, sidescraper.
Vie~v at Locality 2 and artifacts from the lower midden, Locality 2,
}.~[errell site,
1, view of terrace deposit at Locality 2, showing silt
stratum, lower midden, upper gravel, and upper midden; 9-3, projectile
points from lower midden, Locality 2,

Plate 2

19

The MerreIl Site

nated as Oblique Yuma.

The two knives are quite dissim-

ilar; one is oval in outline, and the other is triangular with
a concave base. The drill (Plate 3, B, 5) has a flaring, slightly concave base.
The series of artifacts from the gravel stratum at Locality
2 is comparatively large, totaling 80 specimens, all made of
stone except one, which is of mussel shell. These are described under special headings below.
Projectile Points. Representative projectile points are illustrated in Plate 3. The series is made up of 40 points, and
it is immediately apparent that a variety of types is present.
The dominant forms are shown in Plate 3, A, 1-2, 7-9. The
forms illustrated at 1 and 2 occur eight times each; ~hose at
7 and 9 five times each. The form at 8, which is probably
related to that at 9, occurs twice. Another fairly common
type is that illustrated in Plate 3, B, 4 and 6, which has
recently been named Taylor Thinned Base.,3 Five of thes~
are present, four having alternately beveled lateral edges.
The remainder of the projectile point forms occur with
lower frequency. The square-based forms at Plate 3, B, 4
and 5, are represented by three and two examples respectively. They appear to be variations of the same type, one
having a blade that is notably broad. The projectile point
forms shown in Plate 3, A, 3 and 6, are represented by one
example each. The former (3) is probably a variant of the
Pedernales Indented Base type.’,
Knives. From Merrell 3 came 20 artifacts which are placed
in this category. They vary considerably in size, shape, and
technique of manufacture. Three forms are discernible.
Thirteen are triangular with straight or slightly convex
bases, the lateral edges showing varying degrees of convexity (Plate 3, B, 7). Five are ovokl or leaf-shaped, with
strongly convex bases (Plate 3, B, 8), and two are lanceolate,
being pointed at both ends.

13 Kelley, 1947, p. 97 and Plate X, b.
This has been referred
as Clear Fork Dart 4 (Ray, 1938, pp. 199-200 and Plate 2~5, Fig. 1).
14 Kelley,

1947,

p.

99

and

Plate

X,

c.

to

by

Ray

20

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Blades. Seven crude blades are included in this series.
These tend to be roughly oval or triangular in outline and
differ from the larger knives only in thickness and crudeness of flaking.
Scrapers. Only four scrapers are present here. Three of
these are side-scrapers made from flakes and are retouched
along one edge; the fourth is a small piano-convex endscraper (Plate 3, B, 9).
Gouges. Five gouges are associated with this stratum at
Locality 2. ,a!l are of the Clear Fork planer-gouge type,
having piano-convex cross sections (Plate 3, B, 1 and 3).
Handstones. One handstone fragment, made of conglomerate, indicates the presence of a broadly oval form of handstone, the edges shaped by pecking and both surfaces showing wear.
Pitted Stones. One object, made of granite (Plate 3, B,
10), superficially resembles a handstone, but no grinding
facets are discernible. Each flat face bears one small circular
depression or pit.
Pendants. One specimen consists of approximately half of
a freshwater mussel shell that has been perforated near the
margin, presumably for suspension.
Drills. The objectillustrated at Plate 3, B, 2, is the only
perforating tool in the series. This stemmed drill looks like
a reworked projectile point.
MerrelI 4 (Upper Midden)
At Locality 2 no excavation was done in the very thin
midden deposit at the top of the column. All of the artifacts
described below are from the upper midden at Locality 2.
This midden layer ranged from 11/z to 2 feet in thickness and
is a good example of the typical burnt rock surface midden
of central Texas.~ The matrix consists of dark, greasy soil
which includes numerous angular fragments of limestone, all
showing unmistakable evidences of having been in the fire
15

Kelley

and Campbell, 1942.

The Merrell Site

(hearthstone fragments).

21

Also included are deer and bison

bones, 107 stone artifacts, and many flint flakes.

The areal

extent of this midden could not be ascertained because commercial excavation had removed so much of the terrace
deposit. Assuming that the upper midden deposit of Localities I and 2 were at one time continuous, as seems quite
likely, it may be conjectured that the midden once had a
minimum east-west diameter of 90 feet. The midden deposit
showed no internal stratigraphic color variations. In all
probability it represents either a continuous or closely intermittent occupation over a comparatively short span of time.
Projectile Points. A total of 56 projectile points appears
in the series of artifacts from Merrell 4. The points shown in
Pla~e 4, A, 1-5, seem to be variants of one square-stemmed
type, for the only notable differences are in shoulder treatment. This is the dominant type in the upper midden. The
form at 1 occurs eight .times, that at 2 eleven times, that at 3
four times, that at 4 eight times, and that at 5 two times,.
making a total of thirty-three projectile points in this group.
The point at 6, represented by three specimens, may also be
another variant, but it differs by having a slightly flaring
stem. The point at 7 is an example of the Nolan Beveled
Stem type,16 and five examples of this type are present. The
points at 8 and 11 are variants of the Pedernales Indented
Base type; four examples of this type are present. The large,
stemmed form at !0, which may be a stemmed knife, appears
four times in the series. At 9 is a long slender point that is
unique at the site and probably represents an intrusion from
some adjacent area. Two examples of the Baird Beveled
Blade type~7 occur, and there are two points with indented
bases like that shown in Plate 3, A, 9. Two additional forms,
represented by one specimen each, are not illustrated, but
similar forms may be seen at Plate 3, A, 1 and 7.
Knives. The 17 knives from this stratum may be divided
into two groups on the basis of their outlines. Ten are tri16 Kelley, 1947, p. 99 and Plate X, d.
This is Ray’s Clear Fork Dart 2 (Ray,
1938, P. 199 and Plate 25, Fig. 1).
17 Kelley, 1947, p. 97 and Plate X, a.
Ray h~ refe~ to ~is ~ Clear Fork
Da~ 3 (~y, 1938, p. 199 and Plate 25, Fig.

22

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

angular, having straight bases and lateral edges that are
only slightly convex (Plate 4, B, 1). The remaining seven
are more or less ovoid and have strongly convex bases
(Plate 4, B, 2). There is considerable variation in these
knives with respect to size, thickness, and quality of chipping.
Blades. Nine chipped stone objects are classified as blades.
These are very roughly chipped by percussion flaking and
are ovoid in outline.
Picks. Two long, narrow chipped stone objects are called
picks. One has a length of 13.9 centimeters; it is triangular
in cross section, one face being flatly convex, the other rising
to a high keel. One end of this tool is pointed, but the other
is truncated.
Gouges. Three gouges occur, two being Clear Fork planergouges, but the third is quadrangular in outline and shows
chipping on both faces (Plate 4, B, 3).
Gravers. Two gravers appear in Merrell 4 and are shown
in Plate 4, B, 5 and 6. Both are made from flakes which have
been retouched on one face only. The graver shown at 5
has a definite beak-like point; that shown at 6 has a chisellike point. Both gravers have edges suitable for scraping
and cutting purposes and are evidently tools which were
used for more than one purpose.
Drills. One drill (Plate 4, B, 4) is present. This has a circular base that is well chipped on both faces; the tip of the
pointed end is missing.
Scrapers. Eight scrapers occur in the series from this
upper midden layer at Locality 2. One is an elongated flake
with three well-chipped concavities on its margins. The
remaining specimens in this category are side-scrapers that
PLATE

3

A. Projectile points from the upper gravel layer, Localities 1 and
Merrell site.
B. Artifacts from the upper gravel layer, Localities 1 and 2, ~[errel! site.
1, 3, Clear Fork planer-gouges; 2, 5, drills; 4, 6, projectile poin.ts; 7-8,
knives, end-scraper; !0, pitted stone.

Plate 3

The MerrelI Site

25.

have been fashioned from fairly large oval flakes. Most of
these have only one retouched edge (Plate 4, B, 7).
Hand Axes. Only one artifact belongs to this class (Plate
4, B, 8).

It is made from a large, rather thick primary flake,

with a portion of the margin neatly chipped to a broad,
rounded cutting edge.

The butt is formed by the striking

platform of the original primary flake.
Choppers. Five objects have been placed in this category.
In general shape they resemble the hand axe described
above, but they are very roughly finished.
Handstones. Two handstones were found, one of which is
shown in Plate 4, B, 9. This is made of rather soft sandstone;
it has been pecked into shape and both faces are quite flat
from heavy wear. The second specimen is an oval quartzite
stream-bed cobble which shows abrasion on two faces.
Pigment. A small rectangular piece of hematite contains
an oval depression on one flat surface. On this surface, both
in the depression and surrounding it, are numerous striations
indicating use as a source of pigment.
Surface Collection

From the Merrell site a total of 195 artifacts and artifact
fragments were collected from the surface. These include
essentially the same categories of artifacts that were taken
from the two excavated localities. The series consists of 36
projectile points, 65 knives, 20 blades, 3 gouges, 1 graver,
20 scrapers, 1 hand axe, 1 pick, 2 hammerstones, 4 handstones, 1 small abrading stone, and numerous reject pieces.
The projectile points number 36, but sixteen of these are
too fragmentary for purposes of classification. The forms
duplicate those obtained from the excavation. They include
one Taylor Thinned Base, two Nolan Beveled Stem, four
Pedernales Indented Base, four points similar to the points
shown in Plate 4, A, 4 and 5, two almost identical with that
shown at Plate 3, A, 2, one like that at Plate 3, A, 1, and one
similar to that at Plate 3, A, 8.

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

26

Of the 65 knives and knife fragments it is possible to
classify fourteen as triangular, five as oval, one as lanceolate,
four as stemmed (broad, square base and poorly defined
shoulders), and three as flake knives. Similar forms appear
in the 20 blades. Eight of these are triangular with a straight
base, nine are ovoid, and one is lanceolate. The remainder of
the knives and blades are too fragmentary for classification.
The gouges include one Clear Fork gouge,~ with a biconvex cross section and two Clear Fork planer-gouges. The
graver consists of a thick flake with one small beak-like
point.
The scrapers include three concave-scrapers, one very
large piano-convex end-scraper, and sixteen side-scrapers.
The hand axe is heavy, with a narrow, thick butt and a
pointed blade; the choppers have broad, roughly chipped
cutting edges. The pick is similar to those described from
Merrell 4. The hammerstones include one flint core and one
quartzite pebble, both specimens showing heavy battering.
Among the handstones, one quartzite specimen has a broadly
oval outline and pecked edges, and there are two rectanguloid quartzite pebbles showing grinding facets. All of these
handstones exhibit only one abraded face.
The single abrading stone is made from a small, thin piece
of black schist, each face showing a shallow basi~ formed
by wear.
Cultural Identi]ication o! MerrelI Site
It is clear that the artifacts from each of the strata at the
Merrell site belong to the same basic culture. The same
categories of artifacts appear in each of the layers, the most
notable differences consisting of variations in projectile
points. The trait list for the site as a whole indicates a
nomadic hunting and food-gathering people with a predominantly lithic industry. This list includes the following
general traits: stone-lined hearths, the discarded fragments
of fire-cracked stone leading to the development of burnt
18 Ray,

1938, pp. 197-198 and Plate 2,1,

Fig. 2.

The Merrell Site

27

rock middens; a variety of dart points; triangular, ovoid, and
lanceolate knives and blades; Clear Fork types of gouges;
side-, end-, and concave-scrapers; hand axes, crude choppers,
and pick-like tools; gravers and drills; handstones and grinding slabs, the latter by implication only; pitted stones; mussel shell pendants; and the use of red pigment.
The absence of certain associations places the Merrell site
in a definite horizon in the known archeology of the surrounding area. The absence of fossil mammals and demonstrably early types of projectile points,9 makes it possible to
exclude this site from the early American hunting horizon.
Likewise, the absence of pottery and arrowpoints eliminates
the possibility of placement in the late protohistoric and
historic horizon, represented by the Austin2o and Toyah2,
loci in this area, The culture represented may thus be
placed in an intermediate horizon. The traits listed above
permit its placement in the Balcones phase which Kelley22
has defined as including the archaic (pre-ceramic) cultures
of central, southern, and southwestern Texas and the adjoining portions of northeastern Mexico. Furthermore it can be
placed in the Edwards Plateau aspect23 of the Balcones
phase, but the question as to whether it can be classified as
a component of the Clear Fork, the Round Rock, or some
other unnamed focus of this aspect cannot be answered on
the basis of data available at present. Distinctive traits of
both the Clear Fork and the Round Rock loci--shown by
Kelley to be contemporaneous in the Colorado River valley
near Austin--are present in the Merrell site. For example,
in Merrell 1 one Clear Fork planer-gouge occurs; in Merrell
3 Taylor Thinned Base projectile points and Clear Fork
planer-gouges occur along with a variant of the Pedernales
19 One exception to this statement will doubtless be noted, namely the presence

of what formerly would have been called an Oblique Yuma type of l~oint in :Merre]l
3. It is difficult to explain the presence of this type at the Merrell site. A common
explanation for similar occurrences is that occasionally points from an earlier
horizon were picked up and used by later people. This could be true here, but
it is also possible that the people who left archaeological materials in Merrell 3
were contemporaneous with a group who still made "Oblique Yuma" points. A
question is raised here which cannot be settled at present~
20 Kelley, 1947, p. 103;
21 Kelley. 1947, p. 103.
22 Ibid., pp, 99, 194.

Krieger.

25 Ibid., p. 99 and Fig.

9, A.

1946.

pp.

165-168.

28

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Indented Base projectile rmint; and in Merrell 4 Nolan Beveled Stem points, Baird Beveled Blade points, and Clear Fork
gouges are associated with Pedernales Indented Base points.
Kelley has stated that "pure" components of Clear Fork and
Round Rock loci are rare in a large part of central Texas and
that traits of the two loci are commonly mixed in the same
site.24 The precise taxonomic position of the Merrell site
cannot be determined until a number of detailed site reports
are published from the central Texas area. For the present
it is sufficient to assign the Merrell site to the Edwards
Plateau aspect of the widespread Baicones phase of culture.
~ In view of the fact that my colleague, J. Charles Kelley, is
now making a comparative study of central Texas archeology, no attempt will be made here to discuss the relationship
of the Merrell site to other published sites of the Edwards
Plateau aspect. Excavated sites of this aspect have been
reported by Jackson2~ and Woolsey.~
Age of the Merrell Site
The preliminary notices suggest a relatively early date
for the Merrell site. They include such statements as the
following:
The recent discovery at Round Rock by Mr. Pearce
and similar discoveries elsewhere are tending to
place the time of the appearance of man on this
continent from 10,000 to 20,000 years earlier.~
It is probable that all the deposits were laid down
after the Pleistocene (Ice Age), or in early geologically Recent times .... On the other hand, they
may go back into late Pleistocene.2s

24
25
26
27
28

Ibid., p. 109.
Jackson, 1938, 1939.
Woolsey, 1938.
Anonymous, 1935a.
Anonymous, 1935b,

PLATE 4
A. Projectile points from upper midden, .Locality I, l%~[errell site.
1-2, knives; 3,
B. Artifacts from upper midden, Locality 1, Merrell site.
gouge; 4 drill; 5-6 gravers; 7, side scraper;’8, hand axe; 9, handstone.

The Merrell Site

31

The basis for this dating, according to the notices, is the
presence of archeological materials in the older of the two
terraces in Brushy Creek valley. This proves that man
was living in the valley during a period when the stream
was first filling its previously cut valley. To indicate that
this p~riod must be early, it is stated that elephant and mastodon bones have been found in Texas "in terraces of similar
position and height above stream level as this terrace at
Round Rock."~g
~
Later, in his report on the geology of the Merrell site and
its environs, Sellards~o does not claim any great age for the
upper terrace deposit. He points out that no vertebrate fossils were found and that the included snails and clams were
of no aid in determining the age of the terrace. However,
he stresses the fact that a considerable p.eriod of time is
represented by the upper terrace deposits, and he suggests
that these dePOsits reflect a set of conditions which must have
been present in other stream valleys Of Texas. The low
position of the terrace, in his view, indicates a relatively late
date, but he concludes with the statement that the age of
the deposit is undetermined.
Today the best approach to the dating of the Merrell site
is through a comparison with similar sites in the Colorado
River valley which have been reported by Jackson~ and
and Kelley.~ In the Colorado River valley just northwest
of Austin archeological materials assignable to the Edwards
Plateau aspect have been found in situ in both the 20- and
40-foot terraces. Neither terrace has yielded vertebrate fossils in association with archeological materials. These are
the two lowest terraces present in that valley, and they
occupy the same relative positions as the !0- and 20-foot terraces of Brushy Creek. On the basis of identical physiographic positions and the inclusion of archeological remains
referable to the same culture, it is suggested that the 20-foot
29 Anonymous,

1935b.

30 Sellards0 1936.
31 Jackson,

1939.

100-103.
See
~2 KelleY, 1947, pp.
section of the Colorado River valley.

Kelley

and

Campbell,

1942,

for

cross

32

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

terrace of Brushy Creek and the 40-foot terrace of the Colorado River are of the same age.3~
Kelley34 has presented evidence which indicates that the
Clear Fork and Round Rock loci of the Edwards Plateau
aspect were in existence in the Austin area shortly after
4,000 or 2,000 B. C. and lasted until about 1500 A.D. A period
of 3,000 to 5,000 years does not seem excessive for the formation of the two lowest terraces of the Colorado River and
the two corresponding terraces of Brushy Creek. This confirms Sellards’ view that the 20-foot terrace of Brushy Creek
is relatively recent in date, but that a considerable span of
time is necessary to account for its deposition, the subsequent channeling of the valley fill, and the formation of the
10-foot terrace.
The archeological materials of Merrell 1, 2, and 3 are incorporated in the deposits of the 20-foot terrace, but 1YferrelI
4, the upper midden, rests on the terrace surface and could
have been laid down at any time following the building of
the terrace. The notable differences in projectile point
forms between Merre]l 3 and 4 suggest that an appreciable
time interval may separate the two occupations. The inclusion of Merrell 1, 2, and 3 in the deposits of the 20-foot
terrace places those occupations early in the time period
indicated for the Edwards Plateau aspect. Merrell 4 is
probably much later, but certainly not later than 1500 A. D.
Conclusions

The Merrell site has yielded archeological materials which
indicate intermittent occupation over a long period of time
by a relatively early nomadic and food-gathering population.
The culture represented is a facies of the Edwards Plateau
aspect of the Balcones phase and includes elements of both
Clear Fork and Round Rock loci. Three of the four culturebearing strata are included in the 20-foot terrace of Brushy
33 Brushy Creek, it may be recall~I, is a part of the Brazos River drainage
~ystem. I~ terrace~ of the Colorado River can be correlated with terraces of
Brazos River, it should be POssible to give broad period dates to tertian archaeological sites rePOrted in the Wv~ o axea. See Bryan, 1935, p. 7, 1936a, 1936b,
IB6:1-I~66; MaCho 1936, 1937.
34 Kelley, 1947. pp. 105-106.

The Merrell Site

33

Creek, and this terrace is correlated with the 40-foot terrace
of the Colorado River, which also includes archeological
materials referable to the Clear Fork and Round Rock loci.
These two loci are thought to fall within the period of 4,000
or 2,000 B. C.-1,500 A. D. The three strata included in the 20foot terrace at the Merrell site are interpreted as belonging
to the first part of this period, but the fourth stratum rests on
the terrace surface and is probably much later in date. Occupation of the Merrell site ceased sometime prior to
1500 A. D.
BibIiography

Anonymous
1935a. Clues to ancient man in America found eighteen
feet underground in Texas. Science Service Mail
Report, January 18, 1935.
1935b. Important archeological discovery made by J. E.
Pearce near Austin, Texas. Science Service Research Aid Announcement, no. 284, January 24, 1935.
1935c. Ancient man in Texas. Science, n. s., Supplement,
vol. 81, no. 209, January 25, 1935, p. 6.
1935d. Texas river terrace yields clues to ancient Americans. Science News Letter, vo!. 27, no. 721, February 2, 1935, p. 67.
Bryan, Frank
1935. A resume of the prehistoric cultural remains so far
discovered in central Texas. Central Texas Archeological Society, Bulletin, vol. 1, pp. 5-9.
1936a. Geological sketch of Moffat-Whitehall-Pendleton
area. Central Texas ArcheoIogicaI Society, Bulletin,
no. 2, pp. 28-29.
1936b. Evidence of recent movements along faults of Balcones system in central Texas. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, vol. 20, no.
10, pp. 1357-1371.

34

Texas Archeo~og~caI and Paleontological Society

Jackson, A. T.

1938. The Fall Creek sites. The University oS Texas, Anthropological Papers, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 11-118.
1939. A deep archeological site in Travis County, Texas.
Texas Archeoloftical and Paleontological Society,
Bulletin, vol. 11, pp. 203-225.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947. The cultural affiliations and chronological position
of the Clear Fork focus. American Antiquity, vol.
13, no. 2, pp. 97-109.
Kelley, J. Charles, and Campbell, T. N.
1942. What are thd burnt rock mounds of Texas? American Antiquity, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 319-322.
Kelley, J. Charles; Campbell, T. N.; and Lehmer, Donald J.
1940. The association of archeological materials with geological deposits in the Big Bend region of Texas.
West Texas Historical and ScientiSic Society, Publication no. 12 (Sul Ross State Teachers College,
Bulletin, vol. 21, no. 3).
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture complexes and chronology in northern Texas. The University oS Texas Publication, no. 4640.
Leighton, M. M.
1936.

Geological aspects of the finding of primitive man,
near Abilene, Texas. Preliminary report. Medallion Papers, no. 24, Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.

Mason, J. K.
1936. Buried midden on the Brazos. Central Texas Archeological Society, Bulletin, no. 2, pp. 52-58.

The Merrell ~te

35

I937. Supplementary notes on buried midden on the
Brazos. Central Texas Archeologist, no. 3, pp. 68-69.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1938. The Clear Fork culture complex. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, BulIet~n, vol. 10,
pp. 193-207.
Sellards, E. H.
1936. Recent studies of early man in the southwestern
part of the United States. The American NaturaIi~,
vol. 70, pp. 361-369.
1940. Early man in America: index to localities and selected bibliography. Geological Society o~ America,
Bulletin, vol. 51, pp. 373-432.
Woolsey, Arthur M.
1938. Additional Buchanan Lake sites. The University of
Texas, Anthropological Papers, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 119145.
December, 1947.

