97

Ground Sandstone Balls of Upper Elm Creek Bed Grave~

GROUND SANDSTONE BALLS OF UPPER
ELM CREEK BED GRAVEL
B~ CYRus N. R~Y
At a place in the Henry Sayles Ranch situated on Elm Creek
twenty-five miles southwest of Abilene and at a distance of about
two miles west of Highway No. 158 The Hamlin Sand and Gravel
Company is engaged in removing great quantities of gravel for
commercial purposes from the bed of Elm Creek. At this place
there is considerable water flow under and through the gravel bed.
The gravel mainly consists of broken up cretaceous limestone
pebbles which have washed into the stream from the surrounding
small mountains.
The immediate banks of the creek here are
composed of rather compact sandstone which contains many very
much harder nodules which are of an almost quartzite hardness.
These sandstone beds also extend for some distance up the hillsides,
which erosive forces have worn down and gullied considerably.

The hard nodules of these standstone beds take various peculiar
forms which persons with good imaginations often take to be fossils.
In their natural state many nodules are of oval or almond shapes,
some are shaped roughly like turnips, and carrots and various
Other natural features. Some occur in rounded pairs joined.
Some are quite large and roughly resemble fossil tree trunks.
Many of the nodules while embedded in the matrix have a
rounded outline in one diameter, but most of these are flattened
in the other. The writer does not recall seeing any round bails
embedded in the sandstone matrix, although they may occur.
During the removal and the processing of the gravel from the
stream bed the gravel is taken out from below the water level by
drag-line and then carried in trucks to a screening machine which
sorts it for various sizes.

As the gravel is carried over a conveyor

belt to the moving screens a man is stationed to remove the oversized stones which wilt not pass through the rock crusher.

This

man has seen and removed a great number of quite round and very
hard sandstone bails from the conveyor belt.

During the summer

of 1943 the superintendent of the wozk, Mr. Otto Deats, brought

98

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

three of the bails to me for an opinion as to their origin.

(See

Plate 15).

¯ These balls, vary in size considerably and as I write, there are
nineteen of them spread out before me. The largest is 5½ inches
in diameter. The next largest is 41/~ inches in diameter, one is 4
inches, one is 3 11/16 and one 3 9/16 inches in diameter. Seven
range from 2 13/16 to 2 9/16 inches in diameter. Seven others
range from 2 3/16 to 1 13/16 inches in diameter.
While the bails are more rounded than natural objects usually
are, they are not perfectly so, and the diameters vary more in some
than in others. There are indications in some that their rounded
forms may have been derived from the grinding down of apple
shaped, oval and almond shaped nodules. None of the stones are
polished, but most have a ground down appearance.
Some balls are pitted all over as though they were once subjected to percussion all around in a conscious effort to round their
surfaces down. The balls are of far harder stone than the great bulk
of the gravel in which they lie; which consists mostly of limestone. ’Nearly all of the balls have whiter spots on them which
appear to be marks where something struck them fairly hard
blows.
Occasionally a similar shaped sandstone ball of about baseball
size has been found in surface Indian campsites, but the writer has
not thought this to be of much significance because Indians brought
unusual colored or shaped stones into their camps much as we do
today. The first time the writer’s attention was directed to the
balls was in 1927 when Mr. J. F. Cunningham who owned a ranch
two or three miles west of this site brought one to the writer and
PLATE 15
Collection of
gravel bed.

seventeen ground down balls from

Elm

Creek

PLATE 16
No. 1. Largest ball 9 by 10 inches in diameter. Note three holes
in it. The two upper holes are almond shaped with the large ends
to center.
No. 2. Side view of the largest ball.
No. 3. Collection of seventeen ground down balls from Elm Creek
bed gravel.

Plate 15

Plate 16

Ground Sandstone Balls of Upper Elm Creek Bed Gravel

stated that such balls occured in the bed of Elm Creek.

103

The one

he brought in seemed to be of limestone and was of the size and
shape of a croquet ball.

Mr. Dears stated that there probably had

been several hundreds of the balls found in the gravel he had
screened and that most visitors had carried some away.

A tre-

mendous amount of gravel has been screened however, from which
these were picked. In a visit to the portion of river bed graveIs
situated above water level, I was unable to find any of the balls.
In addition to the rounded ground off balls there were many of
both large and small sandstone nodules which had been little if
any affected by the grinding action noted on the round balls. Most
of the ground off balls were of sizes which a man could conveniently throw in a game, or use as war missles. The banks are
high and vertical for a considerable distance above the gravel
beds, and a permanent spring flow and pools of water always
existed there. It might have been possible for expert throwers to
use these balls as missiles to kill game or as war weapons. Above
the creek bed at this place is a high vertical sandstone bank and on
top of the bank is a large flat area which was covered by an old
Indian campsite.
On the opposite side of the valley in the gullies of the high eroded
sandstone slopes of the hills artifacts of the ancient Clear Fork
Culture are found.
A puzzling feature is that there is an occasional quite large stone
which seems to have been subjected to the same type of grinding.
One of the latter which measures roughly 9 by 10 inches in
diameter is also rounded off by some agency and there are three
indentations in it, one round one at the bottom, and two oval ones
opposite each other higher up. Any rough resemblance which it
may have to human features probably is purely fortuitous I believe.
(See Plate 16, Nos. ]. and 3). There are no discernable tool marks on
the openings. It seems that the stone balls have been found in the
stream bed and present valley floor of upper Elm Creek for at
least a distance of five or six miles.
The son of the ranch owner, Mr. C. M. Sayles, stated to the
writer that he had noticed the stone bails in Elm Creek gravel

104

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

during a period of years. He also stated that the same kind of
stone balls had been found in gravel test pits off to the sides of
the valley floor, as well as in the present stream bed where those
described above were found. Mr. Saylcs did not know whether or
not this type of ground ball could be found in the older high
stream terraces. It would be interesting to determine in how old
terraces they may occur.
If the ground down, and in some instances, pecked surfaces, were
formed by stream action, the present current of Elm Creek would
seldom reach a violence sufficient for such water action; ar,d if
natural agencies caused the rounding off, this must have been under
other conditions than exist at present. The abundance Of the bails
and large area covered by their distribution would suggest a natural
causitive agent. On the other hand the same region has been
inhabited into a rather remote period by primitive man.
What caused the action the writer does not know, and local
geologists are of no assistance as they claim no such natural action
exists. It is hoped that this paper will stimulate diseussion of the
probable cause.
Box 62, Abilene, Texas.

