ARCHAEOLOGICAL NOTES ON "rxy¢o
EXCAVATED HOUSE STRUCTURES
IN WESTERN TEXAS
,~. CHARLES KELLEY
In the summer of 1948 an archaeological reconnaissance of
the Texas side of the Rio Grande valley between Redford
and Fabens, Texas was made by the writer. This reconnaissance was financed by a grant from the Institute
of Latin American Studies of The University of Texas
and was sponsored by the Department of Anthropology o~
that institution., In the course of the reconnaissance, 58
archaeological sites were visited and recorded. Of these
sites, 49 were not previously known. Surface collections
were made from 46 sites and excavations were completed at
four sites. Some 5,996 specimens, including 5,689 potsherds,
301 stone artifacts, and six miscellaneous artifacts, were
recovered.
A final report on the reconnaissance and on the laboratory
studies of the artifacts obtained is now in preparation. Since
this report may not be published for some time, it is thought
wise to place on record the information obtained from excavation of two house structures in regions where little information as to house type has previously been available.
One of the two houses here described (House No. 2, Site
57D2-3) was located near the bank of the Rio Grande at
the edge of Redford, Texas. It was excavated in July, 1948.
The second house structure described (House No. !, Site
31C9-5) was located near old Fort Quitman on the Rio
Grande below Esperanza. It was excavated in August, 1948.
Specimens found in both sites are on file at the Anthropology
Museum of The University of Texas, Austin, Texas.
i I wish to express my appreciation for this grant to the Institute of
Latin American Studies, and in particular to Dr. C. ~Ar. H~ckett, Director
of the Institute. Thanks are also extended to Dr. T. 1~. Campbell, Chairman
of the Department of Anthropology of the University of Texas, for his
generous and painstaking support and encouragement in inaugurating and
completlng the reconnaissance. I am also indebted to Mr. Herbert C. Taylor
and ~,ir. Niyrrl !%IcBrtde for assistance for short periods of time, and to i%IYs.
Herbert C. Taylor for expediting correspondence from my office in Austin to
the field camp In its varied locations, l%Irs. Kelley accompanied me throughout the reconnaissance and the work described here Is hers as well as mine.

9O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Site 57D2-3
On the eastern bank of the Rio Grande at the site of the
old town of Polvo, at the Vado Rojo, about one mile southwest of the schoolhouse at the modern village of Redford,
Texas, there is an extensive accumulation of fire-cracked
stone and ash. This midden covers several acres of ground
between the elbow of an arroyo and the river. It is bounded
on the southeast by the road running south from Redford
and by a high gravel terrace. At one spot on the site there
are several large refuse heaps rising a meter or more above
the general level of the midden and containing much artifact material, principally potsherds of the historic period,
some quite recent.

Among the mesquite thickets of the

northern part of the site are depressed areas surrounded by
low mounds of fire-cracked stone, apparently the sites of
pithouses of the historic or late prehistoric period. In the
arroyo to the northeast of the site, lines of charcoal, pit outlines, etc., can be seen in the present cut-bank. Ruins of
recent Mexican houses are visible on the site, and there are
several houses now Occupied.
The site occupies the upper strata of an alluvial terrace,
the surface of which lies about 5 meters above normal~low
water level of the Rio Grande. It lies directly opposite the
mouth of the Arroyo Bayo Nuevo which has a considerable
drainage area in Chihuahua to the west and has a steady but
meagre flow of water. The site lies at the southern edge of
an extensive stretch of alluvial farm land on the eastern,
or Texas, bank of the Rio Grande. Even more extensive
farm lands are formed by the lowlands on the Mexican side
of the river and along both sides of the Bayo Nuevo for
some distance up that arroyo. Besides Site 57D2-3, other
archaeological sites are reported in the farm lands to the
north, and several are known in the rough gravel terrace
country to the south. There are undoubtedly many sites
as yet unreported on the Mexican side of the Rio Grande at
this point, and there is a large modern Mexican farm popu-

Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House S~ructures

91

lation with a concentration in the village of Mulatto, several miles down the river.
Settlement of the modern towns of Redford (formerly
Polvo) and Mulatto is said to date back to the building of
the local community diversion dams and ditches about 1872
by groups of migrants from Ojinaga, at the mouth of the
Rio Conchos, and from Julimes farther up that river. Since
there are extensive historic deposits at this site it may have
been occupied throughout most of the historic period. In
1746 the Spaniard Joseph de Ydoiaga led a military expedition to La Junta and explored the general region thereabouts,
including the Redford valley. Ydoiaga noted that Pulicos
Pueblo, which still exists as a modern Mexican hamlet located on the Mexican side of the river about two miles above
the mouth of Alamito Creek, was made up of three Indian
nations or rancherias; the Puliques, the Cibolas and the
Pescados.
Ydoiaga stated that: "These Pescados lived not long ago
on the lower river, moving their rancherias, according to
their wish m~d convenience, from place to place along the
moist lowlands formed by the river, in order to make their
small fields of corn and squash. For fear of the Apache,
seeing themselves too few for defense, they came together
to live at Puliques and are found now at this pueblo."~
The expedition continued down the Mexican side of the
Rio Grande to the entrance to Canon Colorado below Redford. The Redford valley was described and Ydoiaga noted:
"In the middle of this valley, on the edge of the river on the
northern bank, is seen the ancient pueblo called that of
Tapacolmes, the sole vestiges of which are some large
adobe walls which remain standing, those of the church or
chapel. In its environs lived settled in huts the Pescados
(Indians), making their plantations of corn and squash in
2 "Quaderno quee comienz~L con la Carta Orden del Exmo. Senor ~rirrey,
Gouernador y Capitan General de estos Reynos, de resulta de rni Consulta y
DiIigenclas - - - en la Junta de los Rios del Norte y Conchos, y sus Contornos" -_ - - pot el Capn Comandante y Comissarfo dn Joseph de :~rdoiaga~
Archlvo r~eneral de Indias, Audioncia de Mexico, 89-2-3; Dunn TransdrIDts,
1746-1747, A.rc}]ives :Room, The University of Texas. pp. 44-27.

92

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the moist river lowlands. Because of the Apache, since they
are too few to resist them, they went up to the pueblo of
the Puliques, where they maintain themselves as a group,
as has been said." On the Mexican side of the river, on an
arroyo that came down from the Sierra de la Mula, and
about one league away from the river they found the
jacales of an Apache family. This Apache, called Alonzo
the Baptized, lived there with his family while hunting deer
in the hills, but his actual home was at Pulicos Pueblo where
he lived in peace with the other Indians.
Thus, in 1746 the only occupants of the Redford valley
were the members of one Apache family. The Pescados Indians had abandoned it some time before, and their main
settlement had been that called Tapacolmes on the northern bank of the river, where an adobe church had once
existed. The Tapacolmes Pueblo may be identifiable with
site 57D2-3, since the general location is correct and this is
the only site known to the writer in this vicinity which has
extensive historical deposits.
Site 57D2-3 was first reported to the writer by Mr. V. J.
Shiner, then of Presidio, Texas, and was later visited by
Mr. Victor J. Smith of Alpine, Texas, and by Mr. Donald
J. Lehmer, who was at that time supervising the excavations of the First La Junta Expedition of the School of
American Research and the Sul Ross College at Shafter 7: 1,
the lYlillington Site, near Presidio, Texas. The present site
is located on land owned by Mr. Teofilo Carrasco and Mr.
Julian Carrasco of Redford, Texas, both of whom have
generously granted permission to excavate on their property.
Surface Collections
Surface collections from this made during the 1948 reconnaissance include the following artifacts:
Stone
Chipped Stone: (28 specimens)
Small to medfum flake side
Scrapers or knives.....
9
2
Small end and sfde scrapers ...............

Plate 18, A,B.C.
Plate 18, D.

Arehaeologica~ Notes on Two Excavated House Structures

Finger-shaped scraper.
Thumb-nail end and side scraper
with graver point___
Small leaf blade, fragmentary...........
Utilized flake........
Small to medium cores or rejects ......
Dartpoint, Langtry stemmed_..............

1

Not shown.

1
1
1
6
1

Not shown.
Not shown.
Not shown.
Plate 18, K.
Plate 19, A.

Arrowpoints:
Perdiz Stemme~
Side notched with concave base........
Side notched with notched base_......
Triangular, serrate edges,
concave base ............
Triangular blade, with very short
broad stem
Pecked and Ground Stone: (10 specimens)
Manos one-hand, usage both
faces, shaped_....................... 2
End-notched pebbles ("sinkers").._ 5
Pebble hammerstone, showing usage
at both ends ................................ 1
Discoidal hammerstone, reused scraper................................ 1
Pebble of volcanic tuff with hole
pecked in one surface..................... 1
Pottery

Indian Wares: (4 sherds)
E1 Paso Polychrome_..................... 3
Polished Red ................................ i
Indian-Mexican Wares: (85 sherds)
Conchos Plain............................. 78
C0nchos Red-on-Brown .................. 5
Capote Plain (?)
2
European and Modern Wares: (25 sherds)
Black and Green on Yellow
Crockery (glazed) .......................... 12

Plate 19, B, C.
Plate 19, G.
Plate 19, F.
Plate 19, D.
Plate 19 E.

Plate 18, I.
Plate 18, J.
Plate 18, H.
Not shown.
Not shown.

93

94

. ¯

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Green Crockery (glazed) ............
Brown Crockery (glazed)
Red Crockery (glazed)
Cream Crockery (glazed)
White "China"
........................
Blue-On-White "China"
Green-On-white "China"_ .............
Red-On-white "China" ........................
Brown Glass .........................................

1
3
1
1
2
2
1
1
1

Total Pottery: ................................ 114
Excavations at Site 57D2-3
when Donald J. Lehmer and the writer examined this
site in 1938, dipping bands of charcoal, burned roof clay, and
other evidences of eroding house structures were noted in
the bank of the steep-sided arroyo channel on the northeastern edge of the site. During the present reconnaissance this
spot was again inspected, and three or more structures were
at once discovered in the bank. The arroyo channel at this
point is some 3.5 meters deep, becoming much shallower
toward the southeastern edge of the site, where one branch
of it originates. The material exposed in cross-section in
its bank is almost entirely of alluvial and aeolian origin,
consisting largely of sands, silts, and occasional beds or
PI~ATE 16
Site 57D2-3 PIouse :No. 2
A. Plan. The northern edge of the house had been destroyed by a
modern arroyo channel. Presumably a second pair of large support posts
had been set in the northern end of the floor and a ridge pole had rested
upon the two sets of support poles.
B. Cross sectlon along edge of arroyo. ~I’he house pit had apparently
been cut from the old surface shown. The age of the refuse overlying this
surface and filling most of the pit was not determined. The floor of the pit
had been lined with adobe clay. Burning of the house had hardened and
preserved the floor as well as the pit wails up to the level of the old surface.
C. Longitudinal section. The northern end of the pit, destroyed by
the modern arroyo channel has been reconstructed in dotted lines, l~/ote
relation of floor of old pit to that of present house.
1-). View of the south-east quadrant of house pit. ~2he fire-hardened
adobe floor, the small wail postholes, and the two large support postholes
are shqwn. The lrre~gular .hole ~at the southeast corner is apparently" a
rodent burrow. The Durnea roo~: and part of the walls lay on the floors
together with segments of burned adobe clay bearing the imprint of the
jacai walls at the inside corners.
~.. East side of house pit, showing profile of elder house pit intersected
but not totally destroyed by present pit. The age of the older house was
not determined.
(:Note: The placement ,of the directional arrow is only approximately
correct).

SITE 57 D2-3
House No. 2

SECTION

0
N

0
0

0

0
0
0

0
o

O

VIEW~

SOUTH EAST

OUAORANT

E

EAST SIOE, PROFILE

OF OLOEF~

Archaeological Notes on Two E:ccavated House Structures

97

lenses of gravel. There is considerable charcoal in the upper
50 centimeters of the fill, which in part at this level must
be described as refuse. Toward the southeast, this refuse
dips into an old arroyo cross-section and drops to a depth
of about 1.5 meters. Thus, there must have been an erosional epicycle during or immediately following the occupation of the site.
The first feature excavated was House No. 1 (not shown).
This structure appeared as an irregalarly rectangular pit
cross section in the bank with a clearly marked burned clay
floor about a meter below the surface, and with a dipping
band of burned roof or wall debris containing incidentally
inclusions of burned clay showing the marks of a jacal wall
structure. This burned roof debris in places lay directly on
the floor and in places on an ashy fill. Only about twenty
centimeters of the southern ~nd of the structure remained,
most of it having been destroyed by erosion. The parts that
did remain compared in size and general features with the
southern end of House No, 2,~ which lay parallel to it some
6 meters to the east with its missing northern wall probably
in alignment with the southern wall of House No. 1. The
large central post holes of House No. 2 were not present
in House 1, however, but were replaced by larger holes at
the corner. No specimens were found in House No. 1.
Some 4 meters east of House:No: 2,’~he Cross-section of a
pit about 1 meter wide dnd i meter deep was exposed in the
bank. This did not appear to.have been a house but rather
a storage pit similar to one found at Shafter 7:3 near Presidio. As inthe case of the Shafter 7:3 pit this structure was
filled with boulders 10 centimeters or more in diameter. It
was not excavated.
House No. 2 (Plate 16)
Apparently only the northern end of House No. 2 had
been destroyed by erosion, judging by its size and proportions in relation to similar houses excavated earlier at Shafter 7:1 and Shafter 7:3. This house is a rectangular structure built in a pit and floored with adobe clay. Its present

98

Texas ArcheoIog~cal and Paleontological Society

size is about 2.2 by 2.0 meters; its original size must have
been about 2.5 by 2.2 meters. The pit appeared to have been
cut down some 55 centimeters from an old surface which
lies about 35 centimeters below the present surface. It had
been cut into sandy adobe or silt showing no cultural inclusions at this point, but the material overlying the old
surface and filling the upper part of the pit contained much
charcoal, ash, flint chips, and other indications of human
occupation. The pit of House No. 2 had been cut into the
northern end of an older pit of greater width, but somewhat shallower. The older pit too had an adobe floor and
had been refilled with sandy refuse (Plate 16, C & E) but
no data as to its characteristics, age, or cultural associations were obtained.
House No. 2 had been oriented with its long exit extending approximately north-northeast and south-southwest. It
had been burned and debris from the burned roof and part
of the walls lay on the floor. A line of small postholes, averaging 4 centimeters in diameter and set about 15 centimeters
into the floor was uncovered along the edges of the prepared
adobe floor a few centimeters in from the pit walls. Along
the length of the pit these posts, which were not directly
in line, were spaced about 25 centimeters apart. Almost
midway along the south wall, and set in some 32 centimeters
to the north, was a large posthole about 14 centimeters in
diameter, an estimated 45 centimeters in depth, and Containing the charred butt of a post. About 35 centimeters east
of this hole, and set close to the south wall, was a second
posthole similar in dimensions, and likewise containing a
charred post butt. Presumably, a second set of two large
support posts had been present at the other end of the house
but had been destroyed together with the northern pit wall.
Combining the evidence o~ the postholes, the charred
roof and wall debris, and pieces of burned clay from the
interior of the roof and walls, the house superstrucfure may
be tentatively reconstructed as follows. The walls were
thin and flimsy, supported as they were by small and widely
spaced wall poles. They were probably constructed by tying

Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House Structures

99

saplings horizontally across the wall poles and other small
vertical poles, ocotilla stalks, etc. across these to form flimsy
wall panels, which in turn were lightly plastered with adobe
clay. The two large posts at each end (?) of the house
probably supported a longitudinal ridge pole. From this
stringer, beams probably extended to small saplings lying
horizontally across the top (in forks?) of the wall posts.
Over these, criss-crossed saplings covered with leaves, grass
twigs, and possibly river cane or corn stalks formed a fairly
thick roof which was then covered with loose silt and sand,
rather than adobe clay. The resulting roof was thus nearly
flat but with a slight pitch, probably in four directions. A
somewhat similar construction is used in making modern
jacal structures in this vicinity,3 but the modern construction is more substantial, the pits are larger but shallower,
if not totally lacking, and often several abutting rooms are
constructed. No evidence of an entrance was found, but a
roof entry seems most probable. Notably, in neither House
No. 2, nor House No. 1, was there any trace of the rectangular plastered blocks of adobe, termed "altars," which occurred midway of the southern end of many of the houses
of similar type excavated in the Presidio vicinity.
In the upper fill of House NO. 2 one sherd of Chupadero
Black-on-W’hite pottery was found, and at a depth of 30 centimeters above the floor a sherd of E1 Paso Polychrome was
recovered. A second sherd of E1 Paso Polychrome was found
on the floor, and in addition the following articles were recovered or noted in place on the floor.
Stone Artifacts: (3 specimens)
Flake side scraper........................ 1
Pestle, with yellow pigment and
scratch marks on one flat
surface (31.Sx10.5x7.5 cm.) ............. 1
"Fetish" (concretion with knobby
protuberances and high polish;
15.Sxll,x9 cm.) .................................. 1

(Plate 18, N)

(Plate 18, P)

(Plate 18, M)

3 See I)onald J’. Lehmer, "Modern Jacales of Presidio," El Pala¢io. Vol.
XLVI, NO. 8, pp. 183-186.

Sant~, Fe, 1939.

Texas Archeologicat and Paleontological Society

100

Other Artifacts: (5 specimens)
Bone awls (made from half of
tibia (?) of small animal, polished;
butt ends missing) .................. :........ 2

Not shown

Antler "tool handle" (portion of
butt of antler, smoothed, distal end
cut evenly and hollowed; might
have served as handle
1
for bone awl)

(Plate 18, O)

Gourd vessel (fragmentary, burned,
no data as to shape but lip
of opening smoothed)

1

Not shown

Textile (charred’ fragmentary,
appeared to be a tassel of
fiber cords)

1

Not shown

Total Specimens from House Floor: 9
It should be noted that the bone awls, the antler handle,
the fragment of textile, the flake side scraper, and the
fragments of gourd came from a small area in the northeastern quadrant of the house, suggesting that the former may
originally have been in the gourd container.
PLATE 17
Site 31C9-5 House 1~o. 1
A~ Plan. The dimensions and outlines of the house pit and the poet
supports are shown approximately correct but the Irregularity of the
eroded floor and the position of the gully is only indicated. The northwestern corner of the pit had been eroded to the level of the floor and
the actual walls could not he located. The dashed line indicates the edge
of the floor and the approximate location of the wall.
B. Cross section. The origlna~. surface level was not determined but a
surface level preserved locally in bush clumps probably approximates it,
as shown.

C. ~lew. The straight line cutting across the foreground is the edge
of the present road cut. The eroding flat, almost denuded of vegetation,
surrounding the house was littered with potsherds.
D. Post support~ No trace of postholes was found in the house floor
or adjoining the pit. Two main, support posts had apparently been set
upright with their butt ends flush with the floor. ~round the bases wet
adobe clay had been plastered, producing the feature shown.
4 Kelley, pp. 31-38, in J. Charles Kelley, T. N. Campbell,~ and Donald
J. Lehmer, "The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological
Deposits in the Big Bend Region of Texas," West Texas Historical and
Scientific Society Publication, No. 10.
(Su! Ross State Teachers College
Bulletin, VoL ~, ~To. 3), .~.]ptne, Te~u~, 1940,

SITE

31¢9-5

House No.I

PLATE

ArchaeoZog~cal Notes on Two Excavated House Structures

103

Site 57D2-3: Conclusions
The artifacts from the surface of the site contain such
diagnostics of the Bravo Valley Aspect, as end-notched pebbles snub-nose, flake side, and thumb-nail scrapers, fingershaped scrapers, shaped two-faced one-hand manos, Pe~diz
Stemmed, side-and base-notched, and triangular arrowpoints; and the pottery types Conchos Plain, Conchos Redon-Brown, Capote Plain, Polished Red, and El Paso Poly:
chrome. From fill and floor of House No. 2, the stor~e pestle,
bone awls, and Chupadero Black-on-White are likewise traits
occurring in Bravo Valley Aspect components. Houses No.
1 and 2 .represent a type commonly. found in sites of the
aspect. The Langtry Stemmed point belongs with an older
cultural horizon and is probably instrusive at this site.
House No. 2 (and probably No. 1 also) beldng typologi,
cally to the La Junta Focus of the Bravo Valley Aspect, and
the pottery types found in the fill and on the floor confirm
this identification. The lack of an "altar" is interesting but
sufficiently common in such La Junta Focus houses to be
without especial significance. The longitudinal ridge pole
superstructure, if the interpretation given here is correct,
has not been specifically noted in other La Junta houses but
may have occurred. The presence of one sherd of Chupadero
Black-on-White in the fill, the presence of an older house,
presumably of the La Junta Focus likewise since cultures
with permanent houses older than this focus are not known
from the region, and the lack of an altar together suggest
that House No. 2 belongs to the latter part of the La Junta
Focus and that it was probably occupied between about 1300
and 1400 A. D., if not slightly later.
The remainder of the surface artifacts, in particular the
large number of wares of European. wares of late date, together with the lack of early European intrusives such as
Spanish or Mexican Maiolica and native wares such as Chinati Plain and Capote Red-on-Brown suggest a very late
historic occupation for the site, perhaps very late Conchos
Focus (dated tentatively at 1700-1800 A. D.) or even early
modern (Alamitos Focus). Since many of the historic wares

104

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

are modern, since a ware nearly if not actually identical
with Conchos Plain is still used and/or made locally, and
since the original site of Polvo is said to have been located
here, all of the artifacts not strictly attributable to the. La
Junta Focus and perhaps also the large refuse heaps near
the center of the site may be assigned to the early modern
occupation, probably beginning about 1870. There are thus
no artifacts attributable to the late prehistoric and early historic Concepcion Focus (dated at circa 1400, to 1700 A.D.)
nor any that can certainly be referred to the Conchos Focus
(circa 1700-1800 A.D.) However, the large pithouses visible
at the surface in the northern part of the site are characteristic Concepcion or Conchos Focus types, and Concepcion
Focus components, at least, are notoriously lacking in surface pottery. The point must be settled by future excavation.
Site 31 C9-5
This site is located just northeast of the county Rio Grande
Valley road about 8 miles down the river from Esperanza
in Hudspeth County, Texas. It was discovered in August,
1948 during the Rio Grande reconnaissance. Specimens and
field notes are on file at the Anthropology Museum of The
University of Texas at Austin.
The site consists of potsherds, occasional fire-cracked
stones, and rare traces of dwellings scattered over an eroding alluvial flat. The flat represents the floor of a shallow
draw which rises in the Quitman Mountains, five or more
miles to the northeast, and disappears in the lowlands of
the Rio Grande Valley about 50 meters below the site. At
this point the draw is 50 meters or more in width and is
bounded by low gravel terrace remnants on either side. It
is now traversed by several gullies, one or more meters in
depth, and much of the flat has been reduced by wind and
water erosion to a bad-lands topography. A few bushes of
mesquite and greasewood and occasional cacti scattered
over the eroding flat constitute the entire vegetative cover;
much of the area is barren of any sort of vegetation. Occasional clumps of mesquite shelter residual alluvial deposits

Archaeological’Note son Two Excavated House Structures

105

with an old surface level visible at about 50 to 80 centimeters above the present average leveI of the fiat. Scattered
sherds and occasional hearth-stones visible on the eroded
surface appear to have been dropped from a higher level
and traces of the burned floors of two houses occupied
slight elevations in the present flat, although they probably
were constructed in pits.
The Rio Grande alluvial valley laud below the site is
now covered entirely by irrigated farms. No data are available but it is probable that extensive farming in this section
and at a distance of about a mile from the river has developed only after installation of the Elephant Butte irrigation system. Prehistoric farming was probably dependent
on river flood irrigation, and in the vicinity of Site 31C9-5
temporal fields at the mouth of the draw may have been
used.
Surface Collections
Surface collections made at Site 31C9-5 during the 1948
reconnaissance include the following specimens:
Stone Artifacts: (5 specimens)
Mano, one-hand, unshaped,
one-faced ....................................................... !

(Plate 18, L)

Hammerstone, discoidal .............................

1

(Plate 18, G)

Cores or rejects ....................................

2

(Plate 18, E, F)

Projectile point, fragmentary (type?) ...... 1
Potsherds:

(367 specimens)

E1 Paso Polychrome ...................................... 27
E1 Paso plain ware (plain sherds
of El Paso Brown or Polychrome,
undifferentiated) ..................................... 135
a~finis Three Rivers Red-onTerra Cotta ................................................. 1
Plain terra cotta ware, as above ................ 70
Brown ware with red painted lip .......... 1
Brown ware, unidentified_ ......................... 16

Not shown

106

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

Banded-incised ware (Mimbres ?) ........ 3
Banded-corrugated ware (Mimbres ?) .... 11
(Playas ?) Corrugated ware................. 3
Deep-corrugated ware.............................. 67
23
Smeared-ribbed ware__ ....
Brushed ware.......................................... 5
Unidentified plain sherds.............. 4
Potsherde disc, smeared-ribbed ware ...... 1
Total specimens from
surface collections

(Plate 19, N) .
(Plate 19, J)
(Plate 19, L,M)
(Plate 19, I)
(Plate 19, K)

372

House No. 1 (Plate17)
A local accumulation of charcoal and pieces of burned
clay showing the imprint of an jacal wall or roof was the
only surface indication of the presence of this house. On
excavation it appeared that only the floor of the structure
and a small section of the lower part of the pit walls on the
southeastern and southwestern sides remained, together with
the contents of the shallow pit thus preserved.
The house itself was an almost square structure, averaging about 4.3 meters on a side, with diagonals extending
almost due north and south. Erosion of the flat had destroyed part of the floor at the northern corner and one
shallow gully cut across the house as well as several minor
erosional troughs or pits, not shown on the house sketch.
The walls of the southern corner of the pit had slumped
but the edge of the floor outlined clearly their former location. It was impossible to determine the original depth of
the pit but it can not have been great since there is no surviving evidence that the flat ever stood more than 80 centiPLATE 18
Artifacts from Site 57D2-3 and Site 31C9-6.
A, B, C,--Flake side scrapers or knives, surface, Site 57 D2-3; D--Small
end and side scraper, surface, Site 57 D2-3; E-F--4~ores or rejects, Site
31 C9-6, surface; G~Discotdal hammerstone, surface, Site 31 C9-5; H, I,
K--Surface. Site 57D2-3; I:[--Pebble hammerstone, I,--Two-faced, shaped,
mane one-hand, J--End-notched pebble (sinker?), K--Core or reject
Unshaped mane, one faced, one hand, Site 31 C9-5, surface; :M:. N, O--Site
31 C9-6, floor of House 3: M----Concretion, indications of handling--fetish?,
N--Flake side scraper, O--Antler section, with shaped butt, hollowed endtool handle?, P--Pestle, with considerable wear in cone shaped area at right
end, also peck-marks and yellow pigment on lower forward face as shown.

Archaeologica~ Notes on Two.Excavated House Structures

J

H

PLATE

18

107

108

Te.~:as Archeologi.cal and .Paleontological Society

meters higher than at present, and the pit may have been
dug from a considerably lower level. The greatest depth of
the pit as now preserved was found to be about 10 centimeters.
The floor and lower walls of the original pit had been
covered with a layer of adobe not greatly different in
texture or color from that of the surrounding flat. No postholes were found in the floor, but roughly in line parallel
to the southeastern pit wall, the butt ends of two posts, 11
and 12 centimeters in diameter,, respectively, had been placed
on the floor and held in position by plastering against them
masses of wet adobe clay, averaging 36 centimeters in diameter and 10.5 centimeters high (Plate 17, D). Careful
troweling of the western half of the house and of the flat
just outside the pit revealed no evidence of any other vertiCal post support or post-hole. The type of super-structure
therefore is unknown, although from the burned remains on
the floor it is known that the roof was made of criss-crossed
small saplings covered with a layer of adobe clay 3 to 7
centimeters in thickness. It is difficult to visualize a superstructure capable of supporting such a relatively firm roof
based on only two major supports and placed in such a
shallow pit. Perhaps posts were set upright in other parts
of the pit without holes or adobe supports. At any rate the
structure seems to have been of remarkably flimsy construction and was probably intended for only temporary, perhaps
seasonal, usage. Interestingly enough, one of the two other
poorly preserved house floors noted at this site also contained an adobe cast of a post butt set squarely on the floor,
indicating that the structure type was not sheerly the
result of individual eccentricity on the part of one Indian.
On the floor near the northeastern corner of the pit there
were many charred beans of the ~ornillo or screwbean tree
(Prosopis pubescens), and fragments of a charred and
crushed coiled basket. Examination of a few relatively
intact fragments indicated that the basket was probably an
example of two-rod-and-bundle, split-stitch construction,
although no further details were ascertainable. A large

Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House Structures

109

quartz crystal (Plate 19, H) also lay on the floor and several
potsherds, as listed below, were found either on the floor or
in the mass of burned roof debris lying directly upon it.
Pottery From Floor o~ House No. I
E1 Paso Brown (or a very early phase of
E1 Paso Polychrome, since one direct rim
sherd had a black line on rim)
...
a]finis Three Rivers Red-on-Terra Cotta
Plain Red-Brown, polished.....
Plain Brown
Deep-corrugated ..................................................
Total sherds.

5
1
1
1
1
9

Site 3IC9-5: Conclusions
The cultural affiliations and chronological position of this
site are not clear. The stone artifacts offer no clues either
as to age or affiliations. Split-stitch coiled basketry is a trait
of the Chisos Focus of the Big Bend Aspect~ and of the
Hueco Phase.s The specific house type has not, as far as the
writer knows, been reported elsewhere. The quantity of
pottery and the specific types suggests definite Southwestern
affiliations, and specific relationships with the Jornada
Branch of the Mogollon culture.~
Since the evidence favors a very short period of occupation, the pottery from the house may be lumped with that
of the surface collection for further comparison. Nevertheless, it should be remembered that all of the definite E1
Paso Brown ware sherds came from the house, and that
none of the later E1 Paso Polychrome sherds were found
there, though a number of them were found on the surface.
5 I~elley, pp. 28-30, in Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, op clt., 1940: E. B.
Sayles, "An ~rchaeological Survey of Texas," Medallion Papers, I~To. XVII,
Globe, 1935, Chart 8; Victor J. Smith, "The Split-Stitch B~ket~A Big Bend
Culture ~" Bullotln of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological
Society, ~ol. % pp. 1~-10~, ~btlene, 1935.
6 Co~ve illustrates ~n example of two-~-~d-bundle spilt-stitch
b~ke~ from C~e 1 In ~ ~ueco ~ount~lns. assi~ed to the ~ueco
ke~aker (~eco ~hase). C. B. Cosine, "C~ves of the Upper
~ueco ~r~s ~ ~ew ~exI~ ~d ~exas," Pape~ of the Pea~dy Museum
~f Amerl~ A~haeology and Ethnology, ~ U~lve~lt~, ~oL XX~,
~o. 2. C~mDrldge, 194~. ~lg. 96 a.
7 Don~d J. ~hmer, "~e JopPa Branch of ~o ~llon," Unive~ity
of Arizona Bulletin, Vol. ~X, No. 2. Tucson, 1948.

110

Texas Archeotogical and Paleontological Society

It is probable that many of the plain E1 Paso sherds in the
surface collection are actually specimens of E1 Paso Brown;
lacking rim sherds this cannot be definitely determined. At
any rate, the following points should be noted:
(1). E1 Paso wares represent the dominant types and the
only definitely identified painted types. E1 Paso Brown, an
early form of E1 Paso Polychrome, and classic E! Paso Polychrome are represented. The E1 Paso Polychrome apparently is represented in greater quantity than the E1 Paso
Brown.
(2). Wares related to Three Rivers Red-on-Terra Cotta
but not definitely assignable to that ware are well represented.
(3). Textured wares, including banded-incised, bandedcorrugated, deep-corrugated, smeared-ribbed, and brushed
wares are present in quantity. Some of them seem to be
identifiable as Mimbres Corrugated wares; others as Playas
Corrugated wares of the Chihuahua Culture; others are of
unknown affiliations.
(4). Plain or polished brown wares, including one sherd
with a red painted lip, of unknown affiliation are represented.
(5). Notably lacking are important ceramic types common in nearby Jornada Branch components, such as Chupadero Black-on-White, Mimbres Black-on-White, true
Three Rivers Red-on-Terra Cotta, and the various Chihuahua
Polychromes and Playas incised wares.
A general consideration of all these points suggests that
the culture represented is a local variant of the Jornada
Branch, probably approximating most closely the transition
between the Mesilla Phase and Dona Ana Phase. The
amount of E1 Paso Polychrome present, the large quantity
of corrugated sherds, and the lack of Mimbres Black-onWhite probably means that the site dates later than the
Mesilla Phase. The presence of both early and developed
E1 Paso Polychrome, E1 Paso Brown, Mimbres (?) Corru-

Notes on Two Excavated Howe St~ct~es

111

E

H
G

F

I

J

K

PLATE 19
/~rtl~acts from Site 57D2-3 and Site 31C9-5.
A--Langtry Stemmed dart. point, surface, Site 57 D2-~; B-G,--Arrow~ints from suttee of Site 57 D2-3; ~ C (?)~Perdlz Stemmed; ~oncav~
~e, wl~gu~r point; ~m~l point ~th br~ sho~ s~ght b~ed stem;
~lde notched and b~e no~h~ point; ~ide no~h~ ~Int wt~ ~ncave
b~e; H~u~ c~ys~ f~m floor of House 1, Site 31 C9-5; I-N--Po~he~s
f~m su~e of Site 81 C9-5: I~e~ed-rlbbed utiil~ w~e; J-Bandedco~t~ u~llty ~MImbres Co~te~7; .K--B~shed ~re;
Deep-co~ugated utility ware; N--Banaed-inc]sea u~tlity w~Mim~res?

112

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

gated, and a ware related to Three Rivers Red-on-Terra
Cotta suggests that the early part of the Dona Ana Phase is
represented. The lack of Chupadero Black-on-White and St.
Johns Polychrome suggests that the full Dona Ana Phase
had not yet developed, and the further lack of any of the
Rio Grande glaze wares, Lincoln Black-on-Red, and the
Chihuahua polychrome wares indicates that the E1 Paso
Phase is not represented. The latter inferences are supported by the fact that sites containing these wares in quantity, but notably lacking in E1 Paso Brown, were found only
a few miles away in both directions. The age of the site
probably falls, therefore, at about circa 1100-1150 A. D., following Lehmer’s datings.o The settlement probably represents a temporary seasonal farming camp which utilized
run-off of the draw for the irrigation of temporal fields, or
perhaps this was a camp established for the purpose of collecting $ornillo beans. At any rate there appears to have
been very little occupation of the region before this time, and
Sitd 31C9-5 may well have been a pioneer settlement, which
might account for its aberrance in detail from the cultures
with which it affiliates.
General Conclusions
Since the full results of the 1948 reconnaissance are not
included here, it is impossible to draw general conclusions
without bringing data into the discussion which have not
been presented in the preceding pages. In order to place
the two sites described into a general cultural framework,
however, it may be noted that there appears to have been a
general expansion of farming communities, derived culturally from the Jornada Branch, down the Rio Grande
valley either through diffusion or migration or both, beginning around 1000 A. D., and culminating in areal expansion
at about 1300-1400 A.D. Following the period of greatest
expansion there was a more or less simultaneous disappearance of all of these farming communities above the Presidio
80p, c|t., pp. 75-89. A full discussion of the various ceramic complexes,
their serlatlon, and their chro~ology, as followed above, is contained In the
page~ cited.

Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House Structures

113

Valley, probably around 1400-1450 A.D. Around the mouth
of the Rio Conchos in its own valley and the nearby valley of
the Rio Grande and downstream in the Redford Valley,
agricultural colonies survived the general disappearance
and continued in existence in modified form until quite
recent times.
In part at least, it seems that the swift spread of a farmLug economy down the Rio Grande took place, was caused
by, and occurred during a period of somewhat improved
climatic conditions (from the standpoint of primitive
farmers). Similarly, there is some evidence that the sudden
and nearly universal extinction of these same farming settlements along the Rio Grande above the Presidio Valley
is to be attributed to the passing of these favorable climatic
conditions, rather than by the pressu.r_e of nomadic tribes
such as the Apache in the region. Accordingly, the survival
of the farming settlements near and below the mouth of
the Rio Conchos is attributable to the much greater and
more dependable water supply for available flood irrigation
contributed by the Rio Conchos.
The two sites discussed fall into their respective places
in this framework. S~te 31C9-5 is a relatively early colony
established as part of the general movement down the Rio
Grande. Site 57D2-3 is a site first established at the height
and near the close of this period of colonization, but one
which may have survived the period of destruction and
continued in occupation into modern times, or else was
abandoned and later reoccupied.
J. CHARLES KELLEY,

DEPARTIVIENT OF ANTHROPOLOGY,
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS.
Manuscripts Cited
Ydoiaga, Joseph de
1746. "Quaderno que comienza con la Carta Orden del
Exmo. Senor Virrey, Gouernador y Capitan General
de estos Reynos, de resulta de mi Consulta y Diligencias . . . en La Junta de los Rios del Norte y

114

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Conchos,~y sus

Contornos"...

por el Cap" Coman-

dante y Comisario dn Joseph de Ydoiaga. Archivo
General de Indias, Audiencia de Mexico, 89-2-3;
Dunn Transcripts, 1746-1747, Archives Room, The
University of Texas. pp. 44/27--52/32.
Re]erences Cited

Cosgrove, C. B.
1947. "Caves of the Upper Gila and Hueco Areas in New
Mexico and Texas," Papers o] the Peabody Museum
of American Archaeology and Ethnology. Harvard
University, Vol. XXIV, No. 2. Cambridge.
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer
1940. "The Association of Archaeological Materials With
Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of
Texas," West Texas Historical and Scientqic Society
Publication No.: Ten, Sul Ross State Teachers College
Bulletin, Vol. XXI, No. 3..Alpine.
Lehmer, Donald ~[
19--. "Modern Jacales of Presidio," El Palacio, Vol. XLVI,
No. 8, pp. 183-186. Santa Fe.
1948. "The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon," University
of Arizona Bulletin, Vol. XIV, No. 2. Tucson.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. "An Archaeological Survey of Texas, " Medallion
Papers, No. XVII. Globe.
Smith, Victor J.
1935. "The Split-Stitch Basket--A Big Bend Culture
Trait," Bulletin o] the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 7, pp. 100-104, Abilene.

