58

Texas Archeological a~l Paleontalogical Society

A GREENSTONE HEAD FROM TRAVIS
COUNTY, TEXAS
CARL C i~I ELF

In 1939 while searching for campsites in the Colorado river valley
in Travis County, Texas, the writer found a small greenstone head
similar to some of those found in southern Mexico. Had this object
been brought to the museum, no importance would have been attached to its finding because one could be relatively sure that some
tourist had obtained it in Mexico. However, the archaeology of the
camp will show that its occurrence is hardly more rare than other
objects that have been found in similar sites.
For a time it appeared as if this site would be flooded by impounded water of Marshall Ford dam before it could be excavated,
but fortunately, the Department of Anthropology of The University
of Texas, in cooperation with the Work Progress Administration,
was able to work the area thoroughly. An additional greenstone
object was found during the course of excavation. The complete
results of their work is to be published soon.
The campsite contains two burnt-rock mounds composed of fistsized pebbles of Cretaceous limestone, occasional bone, flint, and
other typical refuse. These mounds as de~ribed by Pearce1 and
Saylese cover the entire Edwards Plateau of Texas. Evidence points
to several phases and early and late stages of occupancy. Essentially all phases and stages of the burnt-rock mound cultures are
characterized by the lack of pottery, the occurrence of large projectile points, and non-existence of keel-back scrapers.
However, a few burnt-rock mounds, by virtue of their proximity
to permanent water, probably were occupied later by a group using
1.
2.

J.E. Pearce and A. T. Jackson, Univ. of T~xas Bull. 3327.
E. B, Sayles, Medallion Papers No. XVII, 1935.

PLATE 9
ARTIFACTS FROM

No. i.
No. 2.

No. 3.
No. 4.
No. 5.
No. 6.
No. 7.

No. 8.
No. 9.

GREENSTONE ~EAD

SITI9

Triangular projectile point made of flake.
Notched triangular point made of flake.
Typical projectile from Burnt-Rock mound area.
Stemmed projectile made of flake.
Greenstone head.
Large pTojectile.
Broken bevelled knife.
Side view of scraper.
Large projectile.

f\

/

I

\

\

/
t

P] .~te 9

A Greenstone Head From T~’avis County, Texas

61

pottery. The area covered by the pottery using groups has been
defined by Sayles~ as Wichita. This region, larger than the mound
area itself, extegds over a large belt roughly two hundred miles
wide across Texas from the Caddoan speaking region to the Rio
Grande and probably into Mexico.

Whether a hiatus of magnitude exists between the upper burntrock mound stages and the Wichita is not known from present data,
but dateable pottery has been found in these sites,z~ Patination is
considered to be of importance to some, and, as such, a hiatus
could be postulated on such grounds. Wichita groups often reworked flints of burnt-rock mound cultures. The reworked pieces
frequently show that ~nuch alteration had taken place before the
artifact was retouched. No studies have been made on the rate of
patination of Edwards flints in different regions of Texas so this
cannot be seriously considered as proof of a definite break between
non-pottery and pottery using groups. The Inost obvious differences are reflected in the entirely different complex of artifacts.
The Wichita is characterized by bevelled, double-pointed knives,
small triangular and stemmed projectiles, a thin buff pottery, occasional sherds of typical Caddoan area wares, and probably Texas
Coast pottery. Obsidian chips, but rarely artifacts, are found. This
material was certainly obtaiued from the westernmost portion of
Texas or New Mexico. A few marine shells from the Pacific Coast
have also been found, but they are rare. It is with this assemblage
of material traits that the greenstone head is believed to belong
rather than to the nompottery burnt-rock mounds at this site. This
is assumed to be true, but the material has been badly mixed dow’n
to plow depth. The Texas Memorial Museum collection from this
site is represented by surface finds alone.
The material of which the greenstone head is made is a dark green
porphyry. The occasional phenocrysts are lighter than the fine
groundmass. It is not a native Texas stone. According to Dr.
George Vaillant~ and Dr. J. Alden Mason,6 the material resembles
porphyries used in the states of Puebla and Vera Cruz. They are
also of the opinion that the appearance of the specimen suggests a
southern Mexican origin, possibly Guerrero. Dr. Vaillant points
8,
4.
5.
6.

Loc. cir.
Dr. Cyrus iW. Pay, communication of April 26. 1939.
Dr. George Vaillant, communication to Mason, July 11, 1939.
:Dr. J. Alden Mason, communication June 10, 1939.

62

Texaz Archeological a~ Paleontological Society

out the resemblance to a poor or preliminary stage in the making
of a tiger-face mask. Both agree that it is a piece which does not
speak readily for itselL Their opinions support the contention that
it is definitely from Mexico. The specimen is not fraudulent, and
is surely not of recent origin.
The low relief of the face is hardly recognizable in ordinary light.
The eyes and mouth are left as raised prominences similar to peckedpebble heads from New Mexico and Chihuahua. Of interest are the
rather prominent ridges left on each side of the face, covering the
cheek and jaw areas. If these were intended to repre~nt the cheeks
alone, it appears that they would have extended only over the cheek
areas. Another feature is a shallow conical hole made by a drill
in the forehead region. This might possibly have been a later attempt to drill the head for suspension, but it was never completed.
This object is one of several sKowing a Mexican origin or influence
which have been found in Texas in recent years, but little attention
has been given to any of them.
Texas Memorial Museum,
Austin, Texas.

