EAST TEXAS
East Texas is herein defined as all of the State lying
east of the middle course of Trinity River, southward to
the Coastal Area, and northward to Red River. It isa
uniform natural geographic province, quite distinct from
the rest of Texas, and contains extensive forests of hardwoods and pines. Before the white man destroyed much of
the forest for agriculture, it was even more extensive. With
its subhumid climate and vegetation it is a natural part of
the f~orested Eastern United States in general. Several species of oak, elm, ash, hickory, gum, pine, etc. are the dominant trees. Toward the west and northwest this part of
Texas becomes increasingly open prairie.
No part of East Texas rises more than a few hundred
feet above sea level, hence it is technically within the
Coastal Plain physiographic province. The actual coastal
strip of flat, sandy ground extends inland some 60 to 8{}
miles and is within the Coastal Area as we have defined
it in that section. Farther inland, in East Texas proper, the
country is rolling to hilly with numerous shallow alluvial
valleys and many streams. This part of Texas also conforms
to a distinctive archeological province, namely, the "Caddoan
Area". This extends beyond the boundaries of East Texas,
embracing large portions of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Oklahoma in addition.
Almost all of the historic native tribes of the "Caddoan
Area" spoke dialects of the Caddoan linguistic stock and
possessed a generally similar culture. They were skillful
farmers and lived in permanent villages of well-made
houses; the walls were of poles set upright and covered with
wattle which was then plastered with clay. Their ceramic
arts were among the finest of the New World, not only in
variety of vessel forms, but in techniques of decoration and
an almost limitless variety of patterns (see Plates 1 to 70).
Archeological material in East Texas which precedes
the Caddoan in the pre-ceramic Archaic Stage is also notably
distinctive from the rest of Texas; it shows affiliations with

East Texas

145

the Archaic Stage of Louisiana, Arkansas, eastern Oklahoma,
and the rest of the Eastern States, whereas to the west there
is a sharp difference with the Archaic of Central Texas.
Thus a strong break in artifact types and cultural development seems to have existed for a long time--probably for
two or three thousand years or more--in the lands to the
east and west of Trinity River. This may have been due to
the strongly different natural environment in these two
sections, but if so, this environmental difference was much
less effective in glacial and early post-glacial time, for in
the Paleo-American Stage, East Texas shows nothing very
distinctive from the remainder of the State.
PALEO-AMERICAN STAGE
Only one excavated site may possibly be associated with
this stage, the Malakoff Site in Henderson County, where
three large stones have been found, carved into crude but
definite semblances of human heads (Sellards, 1930, 1941).
This remarkable discovery has not received due attention
from students of ancient man in America, and has been
ignored in practically all compilations of "Early Man" culture traits. In !929, the first of these carved heads was
found by a gravel contractor at the bottom of a pit in a
terrace overlooking Cedar Creek, a tributary of Trinity
River in Henderson County; it was briefly described by
Sellards (1930).
In 1935 a second head was found by another gravel contractor, and in 1939 the third one was found during an excavation for recovery of Pleistocene fossils by a project
conducted by the Texas Memorial Museum and WPA. The
third pit was close to the first one of 1929, but the second
was about 1,000 feet from them. In all three cases the heads
rested on bedrock at the base of Terrace C of Cedar Creek
and nearby Trinity River. The circumstances of discovery
were open to question and it seemed possible that the heads
had been carved and buried by modern people as a fraud
or joke. However, the details of the heads themselves, and
the circumstances of discovery, and the integrity of the per-

!46

Texas Archeological Society

sons involved were carefully investigated by Evans and SeN
lards, and the case appears to be conclusive that these heads
were carved by human beings well within the Pleistocene
period. The first and second are sandstone concretions
weighing 98% and 63~/4 pounds, respectively; the third is a
sandstone boulder weighing 135 pounds. Pleistocene vertebrate fossils lay above the carved heads in each case, in
finely laminated gravel and sand which was in primary
deposition. Significantly, these gravels are all quite fine,
with few stones more than fist-size, none anywhere near approaching the size of the heads. In Pit 1 were remains of
the Columbian mammoth, extinct horse (Equus compli~catus), and a sloth of unknown species. In Pit 2 the same
species of mammoth and horse were found, and sloth of
genus MegaIonyx. Pit 3 produced a fossil tapir. A fourth
pit, dug through the same terrace to bedrock some distance away, produced mammoth, mastodon, horse, camel,
llama, bison, beaver, sloth, peccary., and wolf--all of Pleistocene species now extinct--as well as other species which
have survived to modern times. While the lack of evidence
of human occupation or other artifacts is a distinct handicap
in this case, the heads unquestionably were carved to represent human beings, although very crudely. The eyes,
nose, mouth, and ears are shown and still fairly well preserved. Sellards (1941) illustrates two of them. The conclusion seems inescapable that the three heads, lying below undisturbed terrace deposits containing the fauna listed
above, must date well before the end of Pleistocene times.
East Texas reveals scattered occurrences of the usual
Paleo-American projectile-point types, but in contrast to
the rest of Texas, the Scottsblu]] type is most common. At
least 50 are known in private collections and doubtlessly
many more would be revealed in a thorough survey. The
Scottsblu]] type is also relatively common in northern Louisiana, particularly from sites in sandy upland country; quite
probably they have become buried by sedimentation in the
big valleys and, although present, practically impossible to
find. Most collectors, while unable to supply details, feel

East Texas

147

that ScottsbluIf points are of different origin from the general Archaic material, perhaps because they are often heavily patinated while the Archaic artifacts are not. Some
specimens have been found on sites mainly Archaic, others
are isolated finds. One has appeared in a grave in an Arkansas Caddoan site (Harrington, 1920, P1. CIX, d), probably having been picked up by later people.
The same lack of specific information applies to finds
of other types. The Plainview and Meserve types (very
similar except that the latter has beveled blade edges)
lumped together about equal the Sco~tsbluff points in frequency, so far as the writers have been able to determine.
These types likewise sometimes are found on sites of Archaic material, sometimes in isolated places. The Eden type
of the High Plains is never seen this far east. A few possible examples of Angostura points have been noted.
Fluted points are very rare in East Texas. True Folsom
points are unknown and the Clovis type is represented by
only seven or eight specimens in our present incomplete
records. Curiously, Clovis points are much better represented farther east, in northern Louisiana, where they come
from sandy upland locations (some fine ones are displayed
in the Louisiana Exhibit Building in Shreveport,. together
with Scottsbluff and PIainview points). A fragment of
fluted point was found in mound fill at the Davis Site
(Alto Focus) in Cherokee County (Newell and Krieger,
1949, Fig. 57 v); and two bases of Clovis points were found
during excavation of the Yarbrough Site near Grand Saline
in Van Zandt County by the University of Texas and WPA.
The Yarbrough Site had purely Archaic material in its lower
levels and potsherds from several Neo-American comPlexes
in its upper levels. The two Clovis fragments were not in
positions that would connect them definitely with either of
th~se divisions; as so often in Texas, the conditions of discovery do not permit a decision on whether the early types
actually continued to be manufactured into much later periods, or were picked up as curios by later people, taken to
their villages, and perhaps even used over again.

148

Texas Archeological Society

ARCHAIC STAGE
East Texas Aspect

Nothing on this Stage in East Texas has ever been published. It is unquestionably present, however, wherever
collecting has been done by amateurs and formal surveys
have been made by professional archeologists. As this includes virtually every county in this part of Texas, this
Stage constitutes a very important chapter in the State as
a whole, covering a large amount of material and at least
two or three thousand years’ time. A major publication on
it is urgently needed.
It is commonly said by amateur collectors in East Texas
that they find more sites without pottery than with pottery,
which is saying a great deal if one considers the hundreds
of sites which do have pottery. The most common class of
artifacts is that of dart points of many types, other artifacts
being rare in comparison. The most common dart-point
types are not found in any quantity in other parts of Texas
west of the Trinity River valley, but some extend southward to the eastern end of the Coastal Area. Conversely,
some of the projectile-point types found very commonly in
Central Texas fade out rapidly east of the Brazos and Trinity
Rivers, constituting a very minor quantity in East Texas, if
present at all. Most of the Central Texas projectile-point
types do not occur and there are sharp distinctions in other
categories of material culture as well. This appears quite
strange in view of the probability that Archaic peoples lived
much the same life, in general, from one end of Texas to
the other. That is, they must all have existed by hunting,
fishing, and collecting wild plant foods; have lived in small
family or band units which roamed over a small area around
a more or less stationary village site; possessed only a simple
social organization; and had a much wider range of weapons,
implements, and utensils than their predecessors in the
Paleo-American Stage.
If, as we suspect, these Archaic peoples lived from perhaps 3000 B. C. to 500 or 1000 A. D. in Texas, why was this

East Texas

149

strong distinction in material culture between the East and
Central areas maintained so long? While we cannot answer
this question, it is certain that the East Texas Archaic material connects with the Eastern United States in general
(and with Louisiana, Arkansas, and eastern Oklahoma in
particular) more closely than with the rest of Texas. We
thus use the term "East Texas Aspect" in contrast to "Central Texas Aspect" of the Archaic Stage or pattern. A detailed comparison of types and frequencies from surface collections might well reveal sufficient distinctions for the definition of two or more loci, but as in the case of Central Texas
Aspect, more profound differences than shifting frequencies
of a few projectile-point types will be needed to establish
distinct loci.
There are also notable distinctions from the Archaic
remains east of the Mississippi River in that polished-stone
artifacts are comparatively rare. Beautifully shaped and
polished boatstones and bannerstones, stone pendants and
beads, plummet stones, etc., occur westward in impressive
quantity to the Red River valley in southwest Arkansas, but
as soon as one enters Texas they become very rare. For this
and other reasons, the East Texas Aspect would appear to
be distinct from Archaic complexes east of the Mississippi.
Whether or not it is also distinct from manifestations of this
Stage in Louisiana and Arkansas is difficult to say. The material described by Webb (1946, 1948 b) from northern Louisiana provides general similarities, as does that described
by Harrington (1920, pp. 103-110) frdm the Gulpha Site in
Arkansas. Too much is involved, however, for any sound
conclusions to be made as yet.
A provisional trait list of artifacts is given below. Nothing is known about dwellings or burial practices; no study
has been made of the size of villages. Artificially constructed mounds are in all probability absent. Shell middens--so prominent a trait for the Archaic people farther
east--are entirely missing in East Texas, so far as the authors are aware. Shell fish were consumed, for their shells

150

Texas Archeological Society

are found in these sites, but not in notable accumulations.
There is no indication of agriculture, but numerous sites
which lack pottery do have small arrow points on them,
of the Alba and perhaps other types. The bow and arrow
thus seem to have entered this area somewhat in advance
of pottery and agriculture, but arrow points do not become
frequent until the Neo-American Stage.
Dart Points: Gary type most frequent in all parts. Yarbrough, Wells, Kent most common; Morrill, Trinity,
C~rrollton, Elam, Edgewood, Ellis, Darl, PalmilIas less
so. Some types common in Central Texas Aspect, such
as Bulverde, Williams, Uvalde, I,ange, Lerma, and
Ensor, occur occasionally and decrease in frequency
toward the east; some may be intrusive but others are
made of local flints and cherts. Tortugas. points extend
into East Texas at the Davis Site in Cherokee County,
made of local flints. Most of the resident types are m~de
of either reddish-brown chert or gray and yellow flints
in varying proportions, but Ellis, Edgewood, and Bulverde are nearly always of flint. San Patrice points, described in Lousiana (Webb, 1946) occur rarely.
Spear Points: The Pogo type appears to be much too large
and heavy for use with the atlatl, and-is the only type
of this size in Texas. Many of them are of n0vaculite,
obtained from western Arkansas or eastern Oklahoma;
others are flint, chert, and ferruginous sandstone of local
occurrence.
Arrow Points: Alba and perhaps other types.
Drills or awls of chipped flint, usually with T-shaped base,
those re-chipped from broken projectile points being
almost unknown.
Tiny fist axes, chipped to sharp point.
Heavy end scrapers, piano-convex, with concave bit at one
end (so-called "gouges"), usually of brown ferruginous
sandstone.
Small piano-convex snub-nosed end scrapers with convex
bit; of flint; very rare.

East Texas

151

Small end-scrapers, bi-convex, made by chipping across the
broken blade of projectile points. They are thus of
whatever material the original point was made, and retain the stem for use as a handle. Very rare.
Albany type of scraper, assymetrical, with stem (described
by Webb, 1948) ; rare.
Full-grooved axes of fine-grained pale yellow sandstone and
quartzite, hard materials which made the axes useful
for chopping.
Full-grooved axes of hematite, often well polished but too
fragile for use in chopping. It may be suggested they
served as a medium of exchange.
Slabs of ferruginous sandstone with small hemispherical
pits; for cracking nuts?
Small milling stones of ferruginous sandstone, sometimes
with similar small pits around sill or on under side.
Small manos, generally unshaped, of ferruginous sandstone
and quartzite, sometimes with a small pit in center of
the grinding surface.
Tubular beads, of ferruginous sandstone and perhaps other
materials; rare.
Boatstones; very rare; probably imported.
Bannerstones; very rare; probably imported.
Pigments of hematite and limonite.
NEO-AMERICAN STAGE
By far the richest archeological remains in East Texas
are those of the Neo-American and Historic Stages. In this
area these terms are practically synonymous with the material culture of the prehistoric and historic Caddoan-speaking Indians. The earliest investigators, such as Clarence B.
Moor~ 1908, 1909, 1912), and Harrington (1920), who published their findings, worked in northwest Louisiana and
southwest Arkansas, doing a great amount of digging in
mounds and burial grounds. Besides recovering valuable
data on the size, shape, and method of constructing mounds,~

152

Texas Archeological Society

and mapping mounds in relation to village areas, these investigators obtained huge amounts of fine pottery and other
burial offerings. While Moore usually carefully noted those
objects which came from individual graves, he selected 0nly
a few of the best vessels and other artifacts for illustration.
For many graves he merely noted that "great masses of
broken pottery were piled in the corners" or a similar generality; an analysis of his collections provides a fine research
project which no one has yet attempted. Harrington illustrated numerous vessels but did not give grave data on
any of it.
,
Due to this lack of specific analysis, despite the amounts
of material recovered, the idea was perpetuated for many
years that all "Caddoan" culture constituted a single unit
occupying a short period of time, either on the historic level
or very close to it. This supposed unity was continued in
the work of Ford (1936) in charting the cultural remains of
Louisiana. As recently as 1951 and 1952, Ford’s publications
continued to insist on the placement of all Caddoan remains
at the top of the chronological column for Louisiana.
The term "Caddoan" has been used in al! four states of
Louisiana, Arkansas, Oklahoma, and Texas wherever elaborate pottery has been found which contrasts with that of
surrounding regions in its range of vessel forms and decorative techniques. The most striking of these techniques,
if not always the most frequently seen, is that of "engraving". Whereas incised designs were made in still-plastic
clay before drying and firing, engraved designs were cut
through the finished, polished surface. The lines were made
to contrast more strongly with the background by rubbing
~ed ochre into them; the ochre has nearly or completely disappeared from many vessels, but in others may be found
nearly intact. White pigment was used quite often in some
foci, never in others. Pale blue pigment, and rarely green,
were also .used in a few loci.
tn embracing large parts of these four states, Caddoan
archeology may. be fairly compared with that of the Pueb-

East Texas

153

loan culture pattern in the Southwest United States, in area
and time depth if not in complexity. On the other hand,
controlled excavations in the Caddoan Area do not equal
one one-thousandth part of what has been accomplished in
the Southwest; and whereas the Southwest has been systematically explored for many years by scores of professional
workers and hundreds of assistants as a full-time occupation,
the analytical work in Caddoan archeology has all been done
by not more than six persons, each devoting but part of his
time to it. A single "amateur", Dr. Clarence H. Webb, has
done nearly all of this in northern Louisiana and aided
greatly in evaluating work in the other states.
Caddoan remains form a part of the great Mississippi
culture pattern, which ,once covered most of the Southeastern United States and much of the Middle West. Among
other traits, this pattern was featured by an intensive development of agriculture, considerable population density,
town life and complex social structure with priest and warrior castes, some large ceremonial centers, and the building of "temple mounds". These moun~ds were very numerous
in some areas and occasionally reached enormous size, reflecting control over considerable labor forces. Unlike those
of Middle America, these mounds Were never Constructed
with stone. They were erected entirely of clay carried by
basket-loads, usually but not always from large excavations
termed "borrow pits": As a general rule they are square or
rectangular in shape, with flat tops, steep sides, and once had
stairways on .at least one side, made of hardened clay or logs.
There are, however, many different forms of temple mounds,
some with one or more platforms on their sides, others with
small "super-structure" mounds erected on their flat tops,
and their shapes may be more like a T or L in some cases
than square. If there is a single trait generally diagnostic
of the Mississippi Pattern, it is the clay temple mound. In
spite of this, no study of these mounds, variations in size
and shape, or comparisons with the thousands known in
Middle America, has ever been undertaken. Their function,
like that of Middle American mounds and pyramids, is

154

Texas Archeological Society

presumed to have been that of a raised stage on which
important ceremonial events, prayers, rituals, dances, and
the like were performed.
In East Texas, true temple mounds are of rare occurrence, not more than 15 being known to the writers. They
are also rare in eastern Oklahoma but become more common in Arkansas and Louisiana, and still more common in
the Mississippi and other eastern valleys. The majority of
East Texas Caddoan- speaking tribes, throughout several
centuries of their history, therefore got along without
mounds. However, in their general material culture, large
and substantial houses, elaborate ceramics, burial of the dead
with copious offerings, stone and pottery pipes, ornaments
of shell, effigy pipes and vessels, and many other traits, their
culture plainly belongs to the MissisSippi Pattern. The trait
lists of various loci which follow will give the reader a fair
view of the level of culture attained by these people.
In 1941, after WPA excavation crews had been exploring Caddoan archeological sites for several years in Texas,
Oklahoma, and Arkansas, comparative analysis was begun
by Krieger, who examined sites in these states and Louisiana,
the WPA reports and many others made previously, as well
as the published papers. Dr. Webb was a constant collaborator with his wide knowledge of Caddoan archeology. In
1943 the first results were briefly reported at the Third
Round Table Conference in Mexico City (Krieger, 1944 b).
Twelve foci were outlined, with more anticipated. These
were grouped into two aspects, each forming a distinct general time period: the Gibson and Fulton Aspects. Foci of
the Fulton Aspect were found in all four states to occupy a
later time period than the Gibson, in stratigraphic position
in a few sites, and otherwise linke.d together by common
possession of certain traits as well as by trade pottery.
Any discussion of Caddoan archeology in East Texas
must be’considered in relation to the whole four-state area,
or one lacks perspective on how these cultural units acted
upon one another. The Gibson Aspect included five loci:

East Texas

155

Alto in Texas and Louisiana; Gahagan in Louisiana; Haley
in the adjacent corners of Arkansas, Texas, and Louisiana;
Spiro in eastern Oklahoma plus one site in Arkansas and
two in Texas; and Sanders in Texas and Oklahoma on both
sides of Red River. The Fulton Aspect included.seven loci
at first: Titus, Frankston, and Shelby in Texasi Belcher in
northwest Louisiana and the adjacent corner of Arkansas;
Texarkana in the adjacent corners of Texas and Arkansas;
McCurtain (defined by Baerreis) in southeast Oklahoma and
adjacent Red River valley in Texas; and Glendora in Texas,
northern Louisiana, and a small part of eastern Arkansas.
Of these, only the Glendora was recognized as belonging
to the historic period, associated with European .trade goods;
and it was the most widespread of all twelve.
The original concept of Gibson Aspect has borne up
fairly well~ to the present day. New work in eastern Oklahoma by Bell, however, has revealed some material which
belongs to the Aspect but is difficult to assign to any of the
five loci, so that one or more new ones may be indicated.
In some sites, however, the material may simply constitute
mixtures of traits, as inevitably happens. Bell and Baerreis
(1951, pp. 48-53) outlined a Nelson Focus on the basis of two
excavated sites in Choctaw County, Oklahoma, north of the
Sanders Site in Lamar County, Texas, type site for Sanders
Focus. They state than only six pottery vessels were found
in three graves; that most of these vessels and the sherds
from the village area are of Sanders Focus types; and that
the Nelson Focus may actually be primarily a Sanders Focus
occupation with admixtures of Spiro Focus pottery and other
traits. Since all these loci are known to have shared some
traits (which is the reason they are grouped into "aspects"),
it appears doubtful that the Nelson Focus is a distinct complex. The two sites, so near those of Sanders Focus components in Texas, may simply belong to Sanders Focus, with
a somewhat greater Spiro admixture due to their position
closer to Spiro Focus components in Oklahoma, as one would
expect.
A general comparison of the Gibson Aspect loci, their

156

Texas Archeological Society

similarities and differences, affiliations with other cultural
units in the Eastern United States, and certain lines of evidence pointing to an origin of Mississippi culture elements
in southern Mexico (or even in Guatemala), have been discussed by Newell and Krieger (1949, pp. 193-219).
The Fulton Aspect has undergone several changes. The
"Shelby Focus" was dropped or rather incorporated into
Webb’s Bossier Focus, components of which occur widely
in northern Louisiana but less so in extreme eastern Texas.
A ceramic complex in the Ouachita River valley of southwest Arkansas, described by Dr. and Mrs. T. L. Hodges
(1943, 1944-45), became the basis for a Mid-Ouachita Focus
at the suggestion of Dr. Webb. A Fort Coffee Focus was
added in eastern Oklahoma by Orr (1946). Lehmer (1952)
added a Turkey Bluff Focus in the same general area.
Whereas Krieger (1944 b; 1946) had considered Frankston
Focus in the central part of East Texas as primarily prehistoric but extending into historic times, it was later decided to establish an Allen Focus for the historic material
(Newelt and Krieger, 1949, p. 191). Frankston is now considered entirely pre-European.
Thus two of the 11 Fulton Aspect loci are now considered to represent the historic Caddo tribes: Allen Focus for
the Tejas (Hasinai) Caddoan-speaking tribes; and Glendora
Focus for the Cadohadacho and their neighbors in the Red
River valley and lands farther east. Most of the Fulton
Aspect prehistoric loci reveal traits which unquestionably
developed directly into those of the historic Caddo. Two
sites .in Cass County known as the Hunt and Clements
Places also have produced a few objects of iron and glass
beads in graves with highly developed pottery. Their particular pottery types and other artifacts do not agree well
with either Glendora or Allen Focus, so that an additional
Hunt Focus may eventually be defined. At .present, however, we consider the two sites to provide a transition between Titus and Texarkana Foci on the one hand, and historic Glendora on the other.

East Texas

157

The list for both Aspects now stands:
Gibson Aspect
Foci:

Alto
Gahagan
Haley
Sanders
Spiro
(Nelson)

Fulton Aspect
Allen*
Belcher
Bossier
Fort Coffee
Frankston
Glendora*

(Hunt) *
McCurtain
Mid-Ouachita
Texark~na
Titus
Turkey Bluff

* Historic period, 1650 A. D. and later.
No further mention of the Nelson, Fort Coffee~, and
Turkey Bluff Foci will be made herein, as none are directly
involved in East Texas archeology, and the available information on them appears in the references cited above. The
others either are represented by components in Texas or
are instructive in determining the closest relationship of the
Texas units.
It is still very difficult to arrive at reasonably accurate
datings for Caddoan archeology. The first estimates (Krieger, 1944 b) are now considered naive, for they were made
simply to conform with the estimates then current in the
Southeast and Middle West. In the past five years, Carbon
14 age determinations and more serious considerations of the
whole scale of development of native culture in the Eastern
United States have brought about a general lengthening of
the previous overly conservative estimates. For example,
the Hopewellian culture in the Middle West was once confidently "dated" at 1000 to 1200 A. D. and the entire Mississippi culture "dated" at 1200 to 1500 A. D. or even from 1400
to 1700 A. D. Carbon 14 dates have now been obtained on
several Hopewellian sites which consistently fall between
300 B. C. and the time of Christ. While still open to argument, there has lately been a strong tendency to accept this
date: If Hopewellian can be set back by 1300 years, one
naturally expects that Mi~sissippian culture also must be set
back; but no two persons will yet agree on how much. A
backward extension of Mississippian dates certainly allows a

158

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

great deal more freedom for the development of its many
locally specialized manifestations, the tremendous spread of
temple-mound construction and agriculture depending on
advanced races of maize, the many distinctive ceramic complexes within the Mississippian tradition, and so on.
The question of dating Gibson and Fulton Aspect loci
thus is not a local problem, but one and the same with that
of gaining better perspective on the whole Mississippian
pattern. In East Texas there are no evidences of Woodland
or Hopewellian culture intervening between the Archaic
and Mississippian remains, which means that the Archaic
Stage must have lasted longer in East Texas than it did east
of the Mississippi valley. Thus the Archaic dates in other
areas which indicate occupancy from about 3500 to 500 B. C.,
if directly applied to East Texas, would mean thit Mississippian culture appeared as early as 500 B. C. because there
is no real break between the two. Many Archaic traits in
East Texas, particularly the same projectile-point types,
continued in use among peoples of the Gibson and even the
Fulton Aspect, so we cannot postulate a long period of depopulation between them.
An initial date of 500 B. C. for the beginning of Mississippian culture in East Texas (the Gibson Aspect in this
case) would, on the other hand, be very hard to. believe.
One Carbon 14 determination has been obtained on the Alto
Focus, which we regard as the earliest Caddoan unit. This
is approximately 400 A. D. ÷ -- 175 years (Krieger, 1951 a),
obtained on charred corn from a house floor under the Davis
Site mound. There is some reason for accepting this as the
approximate beginning date of the Neo-American Stage in
East Texas, because the Davis Site also revealed evidence of
trade in the form of potsherds derived from the pre-Mississippian Marksville complex in Louisiana, and because of
certain traits held in common by some Gibson Aspect loci
and late Hopewellian culture (of which Marksville forms
a part).
Others, such as Ford and Griffin (in Phillips, Ford, and

East Texas

159

Griffin, 1951; and Ford, 1951, 1952) argue that these relationships and trade pottery are irrelevant and the Mississippian culture must be dated much later. Griffin would correlate Alto Focus with the Coles Creek complex in Louisiana at perhaps 900 A. D.; Ford prefers a correlation with
the Plaquemine complex at about 1200 A. D. although no
one else would now insist on such a late dating. What is
needed is not more guesswork but better analysis of the
whole Mississippi Pattern in its early and late phases everywhere, and many more Carbon 14 dates.1 For the present,
an "estimated age" on each of the following trait lists can
only be regarded as a reasoned guess. The pre-European
Fulton Aspect loci have, for the raost part, been allotted a
span of about 1200 to 1500 A. D. In each case the focus may
have come into existence somewhat earlier or somewhat
later than 1200 A. D., or it may have lasted until perhaps
1600. After about 1600, however, we have to allow for the
possible appearance of European material among the Caddo
tribes through a purely native trade network from New
Mexico or. northern Mexico (see Historic Stage, below). We
should also point out that if 1200 A. D. seems too early a
beginning date for Fulton Aspect units, there are three
known cases of Coles Creek trade sherds: one from the A.
P. Williams Site, a pure Titus Focus component in Titus
County, and two from the Texarkana Focus component of
the Hatche! Site in Bowie County.
For Gibson Aspect loci, we have entered estimates like

1. As this goes to press we note the announcement of four Carbon 14 age determinations on wood from the central tomb of the
Craig mound at Spiro, Oklahoma, type component for Spiro Focus
(Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Newsle*iez, Vol. 4,’No. 1, April
1955). These were determined in the University of Michigan laboratory. Three runs on Sample 14 gave 2400, 1800, and 203~+--500
years, which in our calendar would be about 450 B. C., 150 A. D.,
and 100 B.C., respectively. One run on Sample 54 gave 640+--250
years or about 13’00+--250 A. D. While the first three dates are not
extremely divergent and come rather close to those now accepted
for Hopewellian culture in the Middle West (there are several traits
in common between Spiro and Hopewell), the fourth makes the true
date of Spiro even more puzzling. Further determinations will be
needed for a decision.

160

Texas Archeological Society

"500 to 1000 A. D. or part thereof" to indicate that we do
not know the dates any more exactly. Each focus is not
supposed to have lasted anything like 500 years, but to have
existed during some part of this span. The Haley, Sanders,
and Bossier Foci provide transitions for which even these
estimates are difficult to apply; we have said "about 100(~
to 1200 A. D." for want of more definite information.
In the type descriptions of Caddoan pottery (Plates 170) two items have been omitted in order to fit the pages.
Under "Paste" the first item should in each case be "Method
of Manufacture: Coiled". All Caddoan pottery was made by
a coiling method--that is, by adding rolls of clay in a continuous spiral from the base upward to the lip. Hardness
has been omitted as well, for it ranges between 1.5 and 2.5,
and averages 2.0, for nearly all Caddoan pottery. A few exceptions have been noted in the description.
A conference on pottery typology was held at the home
of Dr. Clarence H. Webb in Shreveport in August, 1950, attended by Webb, W. G. Haag, J. L. Cotter, L. E. Howard, R.
L. Stephenson, and A. D. Krieger. Many Caddoan types
were reviewed with specimens and photographs, most of
those previously established by Webb and Krieger being
accepted with little modification. Several new ones were
defined which, if not published until now, bear a notation under "References" that they were established at the Shreveport Conference in 1950. One type, Wilkinson Punctated, was
considered invalid because it consists mainly of fingernailpunctated jar-body sherds from vessels which bore other
decorations on their rims, and are thus now classified under
other types.
In the trait lists below, we present only the barest outlines of the complex ceramics and other features of culture.
Many minor groups of pottery have been omitted, and the
utility pottery of most foci remains to be analyzed more
thoroughly. Most Caddoan loci are most readily recognized
through their engraved types and others of special n.ature.
The general absence of plain types herein is due to the fact

East Texas

161

that, with one exception, Caddoan loci simply do n.ot have
much completely undecorated pottery; the proportion is
geperally less than five per cent, and sometimes only two
or three per cent. Plain vessels, when they do occur, reveal
practically all the forms present in the focus as a whole.
The notable exception is Sanders Focus, in which about 60
per cent of the total is plain and included in one type: Sanders Plain. The type McKinney Plain of Texarkana Focus
is also described and illustrated here because its form differs from other types in this focus. Tracing the history of
developments within this framework must await another
publication; this study will only provide some orientation
for the student.
Alto Focus (Gibson Aspect)
The definition of this focus is based primarily on excavations made by the UniVersity of Texas and WPA in 19391941 at the George C. Davis Site in western Cherokee County.
An extensive monograph has been published (Newell and
Krieger, 1949), to which the reader is referred for details
on all the cultural material as well as on the relationships
of Alto Focus with other loci of Gibson Aspect, the southeastern United States, and cultures of southern Mexico and
Guatemala.
The Davis Site is located on a large alluvial terrace called Mound Prairie, about one mile east of the Neches River
bridge on State Highway 21. It contains three mounds surrounded by: extensive village areas, and like many Gibson
Aspect Sit~s, appears to have been an important economic
a.~d ceren~nial center. Only the largest of the three mounds,
an L-shaped, flat-topped structure, and the village area adjacent to it; on the south side of the highway, were excavated. Despite the extent of these excavations, no evidence
of graves was encountered.- No evidence of cremation was
found either, hence it is certain that the dead were disposed
of in the vicinity in some way yet to be discovered. This
lack of data on burial method and the nature of mortuary
offerings, which were quite elaborate in other Gibson Aspect

162

Texas Archeological Society

foci, poses a considerable handicap in comparing Alto Focus
with them. The graves of Gahagan Focus in northwest
Louisiana contained few pottery vessels, but all of these are
of types common in Alto Focus; therefore it is possible .that
the burial complex described herein for Gahagan Focus was
more or less paralleled at the Davis Site.
Components of Alto Focus have been found over a very
wide area reaching as far west as the Brazos River at the
Chupek Site above Waco (Watt, 1941) and as far east as
north-central Louisiana. However, such sites are exceedingly few in number for the extent of the area in which they
occur. Most include at least one mound definitely of artificial
construction, but west of the Neches River valley no true
mounds are known to us.
The Davis Site occupation was divided into three phases,
with certain changes in the comparative popularity of certain pottery types, the house patterns, and miscellaneous
artifact types (Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 186-192 and
Tables 1-19). The traits below are lumped for the entire
occupation.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: George C. Davis Site, 6 miles west of
Alto, Cherokee County.
Other Components: McDonald Site, Anderson County;
Keith and Hale Sites, Titus County; Chupek Site, McLennan County (Watt, 1941) ; Site 9 in survey of David
Wilson, Brazos County; Mound Plantation, Smithport
Landing, Wilkinson, Allen, Colbert, and Greer Sites in
northwest Louisiana (Webb, 1948). Most of these are
briefly discussed in Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 196197. The Greer Site in Louisiana is not the same as
the historic Greer Site in lower Arkansas River valley
(Moore, 1908). The Allen Site in Louisiana is not the
same as the type site for Allen Focus in Cherokee
County, Texas.
TYPES OF SITES:
Large village areas around mounds.

In some cases, both

East Texas

163

temple mounds and burial mounds present; in others,
only a single temple mound. From Neches River valley westward to middle Brazos River are a few small
sites with village refuse but no mounds; none has
been excavated.
HOUSES:
Floor plans round, oval, and square with diagonal corners at Davis Site, found in village area and at different levels inside the mound. Features include centerpost (evidence that house was constructed in some
cases around living tree as centerpost, then tree cut
down and house stood without central support); fire
basin more or less in center of house, sometimes claylined; scattered posts or props; shallow cache pits,
oval and with step at one end, lined with hard clay;
entrance gained through any of several gaps in walls;
entranceway passage in a few cases indicated by parallel trenches; wattle and plaster walls; and (presumably) thatched grass roofs. Houses probably very
substantial and ranged in diameter from 21 to 50 feet.
EARTHWORKS:
One flat-topped temple mound at Davis Site, roughly Lshaped, constructed of clay from edge of terrace and
from village area, containing numerous potsherds (no
borrow pit in terrace itself). Also a conical mound on
opposite side of terrace to north, and third mound
which may have been flat-topped and rectangular
originally but is now plowed down and more rounded
in outline (neither has been excavated). Other components have one small flat-topped mound, one flat
and one conical mound, etc.

LIVELIHOOD:
Agriculture indicated by numerous fragments of charred corn cobs, but no other domesticated plants noted.
Economy supplemented with wild nuts, berries, seeds,
fruit; by hunting (primarily deer); and shell-fish
gathering.

164

Texas Archeological Society

CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery types: Holly Fine Engraved, Hickory Fine Engraved, Crockett Curvilinear Incised, Pennington
Punctated-Incised, Davis Incised, Dunkin Incised,
Kiam Incised, Weches Fingernail Impressed, Duren
Neck Banded, and Bowles Creek Plain.
Temper: Coarse clay-grit, carbonized particles, pulverized bone, and a small amount of sand, or combinations thereof, depending on type.
Features: Shell temper and red filming absent from
complex. Handles, lugs, applique, modeling, and effigies (with one known exception) absent from complex. Utility ware featured by jars and cylindrical to
barrel-shaped vessels decorated on rim and upper
body, remainder of body plain or punctated with fingernails; brushing absent. Type Bowles Creek Plain
is a cross-section of nearly all vessel forms in complex
only a few of which were left completely undecorated.
Long-stemmed pottery pipes with tiny bowls.
Clay earspools, mainly of "napkin ring" form, but one
solid.
Clay figurines, crudely modeled human and animal
forms.
Flattened, egg-shaped clay beads, perforated lengthwise.
Centrally perforated clay disks.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Proj ectile Points:
Arrow Points: Alba.
Dart Points: Major types: Gary, Ellis, Wells, Morrill;
minor types: Yarbrough, Bulverde, Tortugas. Tortugas points include those previously classified as
"Baird Beveled Blade" and "Taylor Thinned Base"
after Kelley (Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 168-170).
Knives: Copena type; leaf-shaped knives, usually poorly
made; thin, poorly chipped knives of petrified wood,
long, narrow, asymmetrical.

East; Texas

165

Scrapers: Side scrapers; end scrapers of two kinds: (1)
thick body and long, steep bit, flat or concave in crosssection; (2) small, "snub-nosed" with steep bit at one
end.
Axes or heavy blades:
line.

Triangular to leaf-shape in out-

"Picks": Crudely chipped cores with ends pointed.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Milling stones, unshaped, used with rotary grinding
motion.
Stone slabs with small round pits in surface, so-called
"nut-stones".
Stone bowls (2 fragments), of schist or steatite imported
from elsewhere.
Stone "tablet" fragment, edges beveled by grinding.
Hones of Catahoula Sandstone, white stone imported
from south.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Adze blades (flat "celts").
Petaloid celts of Ouachita Sandstone, claystone, green
¯ porphyry, and schists.
Earspools of sandstone, pulley-shaped, outer face grooved with concentric circles.
ARTIFACTS OF COPPER:
Bits of cold-hammered copper found, but no recognizable
artifacts.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Hammerstones.

Large quartz crystals, unmodified.
Pigments of hematite, limonite, gray and white kaolin,
cut and scraped.
Small carved human head of kaolin bearing "ForkedEye" symbol of Southern Cult and red ochre pressed
into lines.

Texas Archeological Society

166

Apparently intentional breaking or "killing" of celts and
clay figurines.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
No data.
RELATIONS:
Arrow points of Hayes type and some engraved sherds
as minor elements or trade objects derived from Haley
Focus.
Trade (?) sherds from Sanders and Spiro Foci.
Marksville Stamped sherds, and Troyville or Chevalier
Stamped sherds indicate trade with Lower Mississippi
Valley. Sandy-paste or sand-tempered pottery indicates trade from same direction.
Celts of Ouachita Sandstone, porphyry, and schist indicate trade from the central mineral region of Arkansas or Ouachita Mrs. in Arkansas or Oklahoma.
Stone bowl sherds of talc schist indicate trade from
Arkansas or Appalachian Mrs. region.
Stone earspools of same shape and decoration as those
of Spiro and Gahagan ~0ci.
Quartz crystals indicate trade from central Arkansas.
Catahoula Sandstone indicates trade from direction of
Gulf of Mexico or western Louisiana.
Bulverde and Tortugas dart points show affiliation with
Edwards Plateau Aspect of central Texas although
apparently made of local flints.
Evidence of derivation of some ceramic forms and decorations from Middle America (see discussion in Newell
and Krieger, 1949, pp. 224-237), and of race of corn
originating in same direction (Appendix by Volney H.
Jones in same publication).
ESTIMATED AGE:
Some part of span 500-1000 A. D.
SOURCES:
Krieger, 1946; Webb, 1948; Harris, 1948; Newell and

East Texas

167

Krieger, 1949; Phillips, Ford, and Griffin, 1951; Ford;
1951; Krieger, 1951a, 1952.
Gahagan Focus (Gibson Aspect)
This focus has been established on the basis of excavations in a single site, at the flagstop of Gahagan on the west
bank of Red River in De Soto Parish, Louisiana. This is
about 40 miles downstream from Shreveport. The Gahagan
Site and Focus are of interest to Texas archeology because
they supply clues to what the burial customs of Alto Focus
may have been.
Only three graves have been excavated at Gahagan, but
they were extremely large and contained a wealth of offerings. Pottery was scarce compared with other artifacts, but
the few vessels are all of types common in Alto Focus:
Holly Fine Engraved, Hickory Fine Engraved, and Davis Incised. The last-mentioned type applies to a vessel called
"Coles Creek Incised" by Webb and Dodd (1939) before the
Davis Incised type was known.
Clarence B. Moore was the first to explore Gahagan,
noting "many mounds" there in 1912. In the largest of these,
Mound A, he discovered one large grave with five skeletons
and rich offerings. Since then, rapid erosion of the Red
River west bank has gradually cut back the site, destroying
most of the mounds. In 1938 Webb and Dodd found only
three remaining but one of them was Moore’s Mound A.
They excavated it more widely and deeply, finding two more
very large graves with multiple burials and numerous offerings (Webb and Dodd, 1939). The site has now disappeared
for all practical purposes, but by observing the bank from
time to time as it was cut back, Webb has been able to trace
the original village surface beneath the present ~loodplain
surfac.e. This village was at least one-half mile across, indicating a very large site. It has since been buried under about
18 inches of fine sediments. Except for the mounds and
graves, there is an almost complete dearth of artifacts and
refuse, suggesting that the ground around the mounds may
once have been swept clean--a trait also noted in Adena

168

Texas Archeological Society

sites in the Middle West and in Middle American sites.
The size of Gahagan graves is of great interest, as they
reflect an unusual amount of work in connection with burying the dead. Moore’s grave was 13 feet 9 inches by 9 feet 8
inches a~d its floor 11 feet below the mound surface from
which it had been dug; it contained five skeletons extended
on their backs, four of them parallel with the four walls of
the pit, the fifth more or less in the center on the long axis.
Webb and Dodd’s first grave was also rectangular, 19 feet
6 inches by 15 feet, and 8 feet deep: it contained seven
skeletons, six in a row parallel to one another, and one at
right angles to the others. Their second grave was 12" by 11
feet, 8 feet deep, and contained three parallel skeletons in
a row. Personal adornments had been left on the bodies as
worn in life, but the quantities of other offerings had been
placed in piles along the pit walls and in the corners, well
away from the bodies.
As Moore (1912) and Webb and Dodd (1939) give
ground plans of these graves and illustrate many of the
finest artifacts, these are not repeated here. A discussion
of the similarities and differences between Gahagan, Alto,
and other Gibson Aspect foci, and comparisons between
Gahagan burial customs and those of Midwestern Hopewellian culture, will be found in Newell and Krieger (1949).
To judge by the black color and fine polish of its engraved
pottery, Gahagan may be cross-dated with Phase 1 of the
Alto Focus at the Davis Site in Texas.
Besides the three pottery types already mentioned,’ other
artifact types in common between Gahagan and Alto Focus
at the Davis Site are: long-stemmed pottery pipes with tiny
bowls near one end, Copena type knives with recurred
edges, flint end scrapers, Alba type arrow points, manos,
petaloid celts of greenish stones, adze blades ("flat celts"),
hones of white Catahoula Sandstone, hammerstones ("pecking stones"), unworked quartz crystals, pulley-~haped stone
e.arspools with concentric circles grooved on outer face, and
the probably intentional breaking or "killing" of artifacts.

East Texas

169

Gahagan has, on the other hand, produced a number of
artifact types, most of them supposedly of ceremonial function, not so far found in Alto Focus. The rich and widespread ceremonial complex known as the "Southern Cult"
is not present at Gahagan if this Cult is chiefly identified
by carved and incised conch shells and gorgets, human figures embossed in thin copper plates, and monolithic axes,
none of which have appeared there. Gahagan does, however, share in a number of "ceremonial" traits of an early
Mississippian culture stage which are much more widespread than the specialized "Southern Cult" complex. These
traits include spatulate celts, copper-covered stone and wood
earspoo!s, human and animal effigy pipes of stone and pottery, discoidal stones, shell beads, copper-covered wooden
beads, etc. (see full list in Webb and Dodd, 1939).
In summary, it might be argued that the Davis and
Gahagan Sites actually constitute only one focus (Alto
Focus components are found in northwest Louisiana as well
as Texas), Davis revealing more of the everyday material
side of life, Gahagan more of the religious side with its
treatment of the dead. On the other hand, no known component of Alto Focus has yet revealed anything like the
great Gahagan graves or the majority of its "ceremonial"
artifact types. It is to be hoped that somewhere in East
Texas or northern Louisiana there is a site which will combine these complexes.
SOURCES:
Moore, 1912; Webb and Dodd, 1939; Krieger, 1946, pp.
157, 213-216; 254, etc.; Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp.
197-199, 219-224.
Haley Focus (Gibson Aspect)
This focus occupies a relatively small area in southwest Arkansas and adjacent corners of Texas and Louisiana.
Although trade vessels are known in Oklahoma, no components have been reported there. The type site is a burial
mound at the Haley Place on the west bank of Red River in
Miller County, Arkansas, a few miles east of the Texas

170

Texas Archeological Society

border. The mound was excavated by Moore, who described the graves in detail and illustrated some of the
finest specimens (Moore, 1912). The mound was later destroyed by levee construction.
Among the many mounds and burial grounds excavated
in Hempstead County, Arkansas, by Harrington (1920), at
least two sites, Washington and Ozan No. 1, produced artifacts closely similar to those from Haley. Using these three
sites as a nucleus, Krieger (1946, pp. 213-218) defined a
Haley Focus. It was then possible to recognize several other
components: at the Crenshaw mounds on Red River above
Haley Place, also excavated by Moore (1912) and later by
Judge Lemley, Glenn Martin, and M. P. Miroir; the lower
component of Hatchel mound in Bowie County, Texas (see
Texarkana Focus for notes on this site); the Handy Site, a
cemetery area near Battle mound in Lafayette County, Arkansas (Moore, 1912, describes this mound and illustrates
vessels which belong to its later component); a lower component of Battle mound itself, revealed by excavations in
1948 by Krieger and Lynn Howard; the lowest level (IV)
of Belcher mound in Caddo Parish, Louisiana (Webb and
Dodd, 1941; Webb, 1948); and East mound in Clark County,
Arkansas, excavated by Dr. Robert Proctor of Arkadelphia
and the Huddlestons. Newell and Krieger (1949, Figs. 63-65),
illustrate East mound vessels, and describe the divergences
of this site from others of Haley Focus.
In at least three of the above cases (Hatchel, Battle, and
Belcher mounds), the initial occupation and mound construction was by Haley Focus people. In each case there was
then a rather abrupt change in culture but the mounds continued to be increased in height and dimensions by the later
occupants. This later occupation was by Texarkana Focus
people at Hatchel, by Belcher Focus people at Belcher, and
by a mixture of the two loci at Battle. Some of this mound
increase was probably inciden.~tal to building and rebuilding
houses, the outlines of which were found in the excavations;
but some of it was also probably intentional.

East Texas

17!

As occupation was probably continuous from Haley Focus times into the later Fulton Aspect horizon, Haley Focus
in the heart of the Caddoan Area is of unusual importance. It marks the appearance of such ceramic features
as the use of handles (wide strap handles on polished bowls
as well as cooking jars), applique fillets and nodes, brushing
of jar surfaces as an alternative to incising, fairly extensive
use of red filming, and effigy vessels, all of which are completely absent (or nearly so) in Spiro, Gahagan, and Alto.
Sanders Focus is divergent from the others, but Sanders and
Haley are believed to have been approximately contemporaneous from trade vessels appearing in them in both directions.
Elsewhere in the Caddoan Area, the changes from Gibson to Fulton Aspect units are on ~he whole quite radical,
indicating not only a break in continuity but perhaps a
period of depopulation. Thus the continuities from one
Aspect to the other appear to have been centered about the
great bend of Red River in the Haley Focus, and after a time
of lapse in the surrounding areas, new influences emanated
from this center, establishing the Fulton Aspect units in the
four states.
A satisfactory trait list for Haley Focus is difficult to
make, as the large collections of Moore and Harrington have
been in storage for many years and the authors have been
able to judge them only by the few published illustrations.
Combining these with many other collections actually examined, the main outlines presented below should be reliable; eventually they should be amplified.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: Haley Place, Miller County, Arkansas (Moore, 1912).
¯ Other Excavated Components: Washington and Ozan
1 Sites, Hempstead County, Arkansas; one component
of Crenshaw Site, Miller County, Arkansas; lower
component of Hatchel mound, Bowie County, Texas;
Handy Site cemetery and Battle mound, Lafayette

Texas Archeological Society

172

County, Arkansas; 1 o w e r component of Belcher
mound, Caddo Parish, Louisiana; East mound, Clark
County, Arkansas.
TYPES OF SITES:
One or more mounds (temple mound, burial mound, or
both) and adjacent village area, located in all known
cases on floodplain of important streams, or on upland margin immediately adjacent to floodplain.
Known sites are many miles apart, suggesting that
each dominated a large area.
HOUSES:
Circular in floor plan, diameters ranging from 18 feet
at Ozan 1 Site to 55 feet for floor discovered under
Hatchel mound. Some have central firebasin which
may be surrounded by raised sill and lined with prepared clay. No defihite entranceway other than spaces
between wall posts. No interior posts except scattered
props.
EARTHWORKS:
Variable. Haley Place had three mounds, at least one a
rectangular temple mound and one a circular, flattopped burial mound. At Hatchel Site, one small
temple mound (covered over by later occupation) but
no burial mound; at Battle a similar situation and
burial ground found nearby. See Newell and Krieger
for general description of other sites (1949, pp. 202-.
214). Usually a borrow pit in each Site.
LIVELIHOOD:
Little direct information. Agriculture based primarily
on maize inferred, probably supplemented by hunting,
fishing, and shell-fish gathering.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery Types: HaIey Engraved, Handy Engraved, and
Haley Complicated Incised most characteristic. Also
Crockett Curvilinear Incised, Dunkin Incised, East In-

Eas$ Texas

173

cised, and Hickory Fine Engraved. Pease ~BrushedIncised, Sinner Linear Punctated, Kiam Incised may
occur as minor types.
Temper: Clay-grit predominates (coarse in incised
types, fine in engraved types). Pulverized bone occasionally added. Shell temper absent.
Features: See type descriptions for vessel forms and
decorations. Both jars and bowls often have rims
raised into four peaks, and wide strap handles occur
both on jars and bowls. Applique common on type
Haley Complicated Incised, which also has brushing
substituted for or added to incising. Red film occurs
on type East Incised. Highly conventionalized effigy
bowls and other effigy vessels.
~Long-stemmed pottery pipes, but stems thicker and
bowls larger than on pipes of Alto, Gahagan, and
Spiro Foci (see Harrington, 1920, Plate 102, B, C
from Washington Site as contrasted with A, D, E
from Spiro Focus Mineral Springs Site).
Elbow pipes in some components (Harrington, 1920,
Plates 103, 104, specimens from Ozan 1 and Wash" ington Sites).
Modeled effigy pipes (Harrington, 1920, Plate 105).
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Hayes Barbed.
Dart Points: No data.
Small drills.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Abrading stones (hones) of sandstone.
Small milling stones and manos.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Adzes with fiat sides and sharp, polished bits; shaped
by chipping, then ground and polished at bit end.
(Includes "chisels" of Moore?).

Texas Archeological Society

174

Spatulate celts.
Petaloid celts.
Earspools, pulley-shaped (uncommon).
Human-effigy pipe of limestone (Moore, 1912, Figs. 34-

36).
Bannerstones (uncommon).
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
Long, thin pins of polished bone, some with eye in one
end.
Antler tines (flaking tools?).
Turtle-shell rattles containing pebbles.

ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Pendants of various shapes.
Barrel-shaped beads made from conch-shell columnellae.
Disk-shaped and tubular beads cut from conch-shell
columnellae.
Pins with rounded heads (ear ornaments?) cut from
conch-shell columnellae.
Oblong and triangular pieces of conch shell, unperforated and sometimes having asphaltum on one side,
suggesting use as inlays in wooden objects.
Conch-shell dippers or "cups", undecorated, made by removing columnellae.
Earspools, with thin copper cover on one side.
Imitation carnivore tooth, copper-covered.
Beads of perforated Olivella shells from sea (Gulf of
Mexico?).
Ornaments of perforated fresh-water Unio shells.
ARTIFACTS OF COPPER:
Thin sheeting used to cover parts of earspools, diskshaped beads, imitation carnivore tooth, etc. No artifacts entirely of copper reported.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Pigments of limonite, hematite, clays.
Pearl beads, from fresh-water mussels.

Eas$ Texas

175

Quartz crystals, unworked (amulets?).
Masses of galena, sometimes in graves.
Hammerstones.
Smearing of artifacts with green pigment.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Most interments contain single skeleton, extended on
back, in large rectangular grave with burial offerings
piled against walls. Personal adornments left on body
as worn in life. Occasionally two or three skeletons
in one grave.
RELATIONS:
HicKory, Crockett, and Dunkin pottery types shared
with Alto Focus.
Hayes arrow points and possible Haley trade ~herds
found at Davis Site.
Trade vessels of Maxey Noded Redware of Sanders
Focus found at Haley Place (Moore, 1912, Figs. 49,
4i, 44, Plate XL).
Trade vessel of Haley Engraved found at Sanders Site
(Krieger, 1946, Fig. 15).
.Circular house floors ranging from 18 to 55 feet in diameter, entrance through spaces between posts, very
similar to those of Alto Focus at Davis Site, very
different, from those of Spiro Focus.
Burial in large, deep rectangular graves with personal
adornments left on body, and offerings of pottery,
pipes, celts, arrows, ~tc., piled along walls, very similar
to those of Gahagan Site (see Gahagan Focus) except
that Haley graves usually contain only one skeleton
and are therefore not as large.
ESTIMATED AGE:
Some part of span 800-1200 A. D.

SOURCES:
Moore, 1912; Harrington, 1920; Lemley, 1936;
1946; Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 202-218.

Krieger,

176

Texas Archeological Society

Sanders Focus (Gibson Aspect)
Sanders is the most divergent of all Caddoan loci. Its
pottery is characterized by simple straight-line designs and
a much higher proportion of entirely plain pottery than in
any other complex in the region. The usual Caddoan decorative techniques of engraving, incising, and punctating are
well represented; there is considerable red-filming; and the
variety of vessel forms is comparable to that of other foci.
Participation in the Southern Cult ceremonialism is expressed in carved and incised conch-shell gorgets and dippers, although hammered copper plates and most other Cult
traits are absent, so far ~as known.
The focus is based on data recovered from the T. M.
Sanders Site in the northwest corner of Lamar~ County near
the right bank of Bois D’Arc Creek, about one-half mile
south of the Red River. Other components for the most part
lie to the north, in southern Oklahoma, and to the south, as
far as the Yarbrough and Joslin Sites in the vicinity of
Grand Saline on the Sulphur River in Van Zandt County.
No components are known very far east or west of this belt,
which is essentially a prairie rather than forest. The culture
of Sanders Focus clearly reflects this frontier position between eastern forests and the Great Plains. Bison bones are
plentiful in the middens, and artifacts such as hoe blades
were fashioned from bison bones; the four-edged beveled
knives and stone elbow pipes are other Plains traits, not
found in Caddoan loci except those in Oklahoma in a similar
frontier position.
The Sanders Site has been described and its artifacts
and graves analyzed (Krieger, 1946, pp. 171-203 and Plates
16-29; Newell and Krieger, 1949, p. 218). Due to conditions
described in the first publication, only the artifact types
present in graves containing typical Sanders pottery have
been definitely included in the focus. The site was occupied by different cultural groups after the close of Sanders
Focus itself, probably by various Caddoans passing this way
on bison hunts.

East Texas

177

A correction should be made in the publications cited,
which state that the Sanders "mounds" probably were natural knolls on which the Indians had lived and buried their
dead, and that the site is farther west than those on which
true mounds are found. Visiting the site in 1952, Krieger and
Jelks were convinced that Mound 1 was a true burial mound,
and Mound 2 originally a rectangular temple mound with
a flat, rectangular top. Both are now considerably reduced
and rounded by many years of plowing. Furthermore, they
visited another artificial mound on the Morgan Place about
10 miles farther west in Fannin County; this lies on a second
terrace a short distance south of Red River, is larger in
lateral dimensions than Sanders Mound 2, and has a large
flat, rectangular top. While only 6 or 7 feet high, the Morgan
mound is doubtlessly artificial also. No cultura! material
has yet been found in or on it, but R. K. Harris informs us
he has collected Sanders Focus sherds in the fields nearby.
The trait list below is based primarily on the graves
excavated in Sanders Mound 1. Other components are
recognized through typical pottery.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component:

T. M. Sanders Site, Lamar County,

excavated by University of Texas in 1931, under direction of A. T. Jackson and B. B. Gardner.
Other Components: Part of remains excavated in 1940
by University of Texas and WPA on Fred Yarbrough
and T. M. Joslin farms near Grand Saline, Van Zandt
County; surface collections on small sites in Lamar,
Fannin, Wood, and Hopkins Counties. Morgan mound
in northeast corner of Fannin County probably belongs. Nelson Focus in Choctaw County, Oklahoma,
across Red River, contains sites with Sanders Focus
material (Bell and Baerreis, 1951).
TYPES OF SITES:
Some sites (Sanders, Morgan, Yarbrough) are large,
with one or more mounds, situated on terraces adjacent to large streams; others probably quite small,

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

178

without mounds, and on small tributary streams.
HOUSES:
One house at Sanders Site is reported to have been .rectangular, about 10 by 12 feet, with wall posts set vertically on three sides, fourth side left open. Burned
clay with stick and reed impressions indicate walls
constructed of wattle covered with clay; roof construction unknown. No information on fireplace or
entranceway; association of this house with focus
uncertain.
EARTHWORKS:
In 1931, after they had been plowed down for many
years, the Sanders site mounds were measured by
A. T. Jackson, as follows: Mound 1, which contained
the 21 burials he excavated, plus scores more plowed
up and dug by looters, was 175 feet long northeast by
southwest, 70 feet wide, and 4 feet high; Mound 2, a
temple mound at one end of which the house described
above was found, was 230 feet long north-south, 90
feet wide, and about 8 feet high with more or less
rectangular flat top. Both mounds were on the edge
of an upper terrace and the sides facing Bois D’Arc
Creek drop sharply downward to a lower terrace; they
have probably been partly dissected by eros{on. Morgan mound estimated to have been rectangular originally, about 220 feet long north-south and 150 feet
wide; flat top about 110 feet !ong north-south and 90
feet wide, rising 6 or 7 feet above terrace level. Yarbrough site contains a single small eminence, ~either a
.natural knoll or a~small..artificial structure, containing camp refuse but few burials.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery Types: Sanders Plain, Sanders Engra,~e~, Canton Incised, Maxey Noded Redware, and Monkstow~
Fingernail Punctated.
Temper: Coarse clay-grit, sometimes, including pulver-

East Texas

179

ized bone or potsherds, and small amount of sand.
Shell temper ~absent.
Features: Red film occurs frequently in Sanders Plain,
Sanders Engraved, and Maxey types. Small lugs or
strap handles appear on jars of Monkstown type; appliq.ue on Maxey type. Where decoration covers upper parts of vessels, lower parts are completely plain,
never brushed or fingernail punctated. This absence
of brushing is important distinction from Fulton Aspect pottery.
Long-stemmed pipes with small bowls, but somewhat
larger and thicker %han those in other Gibson Aspect
loci except Haley (see Haley Focus).
Disks with central hole, usually made from disk bases
of broken pottery vessels, sometimes from side walls;
usually believed to have been spindle whorls.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Proj ectile Points:
Arrow Points: Bonham type.
Dart Points: Present at Sanders and other components, but association of specific types with focus uncertain.
Knives: Diamond-shaped, four-edged, with steep bevels
on all edges, resembling common Plains type but very
narrow in proportion to length. Most have edges polished as though from continued use.
Unshaped flint-spa!l scrapers with edge retouch.
Small snub-nosed flint scrapers.
Thick single-bitted and double-bitted axes, two wide
notches for halting (association uncertain).
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Milling stones, small with round or oval basin, may have
small round pits in sill around basin.
Manos, any suitable pebbles, used with rotary motion,
may have pitsin face.
Hones of sandstone.

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

180

ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Petaloid celts of hematite

and

pale

green

Ouachita

Sandstone.
Adzes with flat faces and sharp bits.
Elbow pipes of Ouachita Sandstone.
Spatulate celt of steatite, long, thin, narrow (association
uncertain).

ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Conch-shell dippers made by removing columnellae,
both plain and incised.
Conch-shell gorgets, decorated by incising and cutting
out sections (for designs see Krieger, 1946, Figs. 11-13).
Conch-shell gorgets, plain disks with suspension holes
and scalloped edges.
Tubular and barrel-shaped beads of conch-shell columnellae.
Disk beads of conch shell.
Small whole conch shells with suspension hole at small
end, used as pendants.
Various small, geometric forms cut from conch-shell
walls, probably inlays for wooden objects.
Pearl beads, from fresh-water mussels.
Olivella beads with spires removed (West Indian and
Gulf of Mexico species).
Large perforated mussel shells, so-called "hoe blades"
(association uncertain).
ARTIFACTS OF BONE:
Hoe blades of bison scapulae with socket in proximal
end.
Splinter awls of deer leg bone.
Fishhooks (?).
Shaft straighteners (?) of deer vertebrae with channels
smoothed.
"Sinew stretchers" made from deer jaw with diastrema
polished.
Turkey-leg bones with small holes punched in broad
end (game pieces?).

East Texas

181

Deer calvaria with antler stubs, possibly strapped to
head as hunting disguise or ceremonial headdress
(association uncertain).
ARTIFACTS OF COPPER:
Thin sheeting used for earspool covering.
Contact with copper indicated by green stains on scapula
hoe blades and conch-shell artifacts.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Red ochre and green clay pigments.
Beads of small perforated Lithospernum seeds.
Pronounced frontal and occipital head deformation, both
sexes, on all but one of 60 skulls from Sanders Site.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Both single and multiple interments. As many as eight
individuals in one grave, but closely packed together
as graves not enlarged proportionately. Skeletons extended on back or side with heads usually to east;
grave pits rectangular. Pottery placed about head and
shoulders of individuals, sometimes along sides and
between legs. Personal adornments left where worn
in life. In at least one grave, offering of vessels was
away from sl~eleton, against grave wall, the method
described for Gahagan Focus in Louisiana.
RELATIONS:
Southern Cult traits connect with Spiro Focus.
Bonham points closely similar to Alba points of Alto,
Gahagan, and Spiro Foci; also to Hayes points of Haley
Focus.
Bottle of Haley Engraved type at Sanders as trade ware;
bottles of Maxey Noded Redware at Haley Place as
trade ware.
Sanders sherds as trade ware in Phase 2 of Alto Focus
(Spiro trade sherds in same position there).
A negative-painted bottle indicates trade or influence
from eastern Oklahoma or southern Missouri.
Hones of white Catahoula Sandstone obtained from

Texas Archeological Society

182

southeastern Texas or southwestern Louisiana.
Ouachita Sandstone (celt material) obtained from southeastern Oklahoma or southwestern Arkansas.
Sanders pottery types recognized as trade ware in sites
of Wiley Focus in north-central Texas and Central
Texas Aspect. in central Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE:
Some part of span 800-1200 A. D. Sanders and Haley
Foci believed to be the latest in Gibson’ Aspect, but
partly overlapping Spiro, Gahagan, and Alto.
SOURCES:
Jackson, 1935; Pearce, 1935; Krieger, 1946, pp. 171-218
and Plates 16-29; Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 193219 passim.
Spiro Focus (Gibson Aspect)
The famous site near Spiro, on the south bank of Arkansas River at the eastern edge of Oklahoma, has been the
principal basis for defining a Spiro Focus. The University
of Oklahoma and WPA conducted .~x..~ensive excavations in
the Craig,. Brown, and other mounds at this site in 19381941 (Orr, 1939), as well as in other components of this focus.
A Spiro Focus was later defined (Krieg~r, 1944 b, 1946; Orr,
1946, 1952; Bell and Baerreis, 1951), but there ~as been considerable controversy over the number of loci present at
the Spiro Site itself. The Fort Coffee Focus (Orr, 1946, 1952)
was created to embrace remains in the same vicinity which
are clearly of later date than the great ceremonial complex
seen in the Craig and Brown mounds. Orr (1946) defined
Early, Middle, and Late Spiro components for this ceremonial material, but failed to make clear whether all were
included in the same focus. Krieger (1953) has criticized
this division, claiming that only Orr’s Middle Spiro component should be considered equivalent to a Spiro Focus,
the Early component belonging to a preceding occupation,
and the Late component more akin to Haley Focus.

Eas~ Texas

183

The fabulously rich Craig mound at this site was senselessly dynamited by commercial "relic hunters" before the
WPA excavations were conducted, thus spoiling forever
much valuable evidence. Through the interest and hard
W~rk of a few individuals, a great deal of the looted material subsequently reached the safety of museums. An
attractive book is now available, illustrating the wealth and
diversity of these artifacts (Hamilton, 1952).
Recent researches by Beli in eastern Oklahoma have
shown that the definition of Spiro Focus is very complicated.
Since a strict definition has yet to be made, a trait list is
not feasible atpresent. However, it may be said that the
richest m~terial, particularly that belonging to the ’~Southern Cult", provides the central core for a Spiro Focus which
is not only distinct from others in the Caddoan Area, but an
integral part of the Gibson Aspect (Newell and Krieger,
1949, pp. 199-202). Bell and Baerreis (1951) present a concise summary.
The Sa~nders Focus in northeast Texas provides a close
relative of Spiro, partly in ceramics and partly in ceremonial
elements such as carved and incised conch shells and gorgers.
Sanders is believed to date somewhat later than the climax
of Spiro Focus, as the shell work is sparse and poorly done
by comparison, some typical Sanders Plain and Sanders
Engraved vessels appear to belong to Orr’s Late component,
and not a sign of typical Spiro pottery has been found at
the Sanders Site. On the other hand, two sites with typical
Spiro Focus pottery (Spiro Engraved and Hickory Fine Engraved) are known in Texas, but do not have Sanders pottery, so far as known. These are the Jaggers Site in Franklin County, and Mustang Creek burial mound in southern
Red River .County.
A-mong the traits shared by Spiro and Sanders Foci are:
erection of mounds, probably both temple and burial mounds,
extended burials with copious offerings, rectangular house
floors, conch-shell gorgets and whole conch shells made into
cups or dippers ~by removing the columnellae, spatulate

Texas Archeological Society

184

celts, copper coating on pulley-shaped stone earspools, and
stone pipes.
We illustrate only one Spiro Focus pottery type herein,
Spiro Engraved (Plate 64). Although similar to Holly Fine
Engraved of Alto Focus (Plates 34, 35), the lines are generally heavier and farther apart, small areas in the designs are
sometimes finely punctated (absent in Holly), the design
units are almost always repeated four times (true of bottles
in Holly type, but not bowls), and these designs often consist of a tight spiral filling each Of the four panels (rare in
Holly). While these differences are clear enough at the
Spiro and Davis Sites, about the great bend of Red River
in southwest Arkansas (notably at the Crenshaw mounds)
they tend to fuse so that classification is sometimes difficult.
Pottery types Crockett Curvilinear Incised and Hickory
Fine Engraved are held in common by Spiro and Alto Focus
(as well as Haley), as are arrow points of type Alba, Copena
knives with recurred edges, delicate long-stemmed pottery
pipes, and pulley-shaped stone earspools with grooved designs on the outer face. Thus, when such traits are found in
northeast Texas, it is hard to assign them to Spiro or Alto
Focus unless appropriate pottery types accompany them.
They would, at any rate, indicate the presence of a Gibson
Aspect unit of some kind rather than Fulton Aspect.
SOURCES:
Orr, 1939, 1941, 1946, 1952; Krieger, 1946, pp. 213-218;
Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 194-218; Bell and Baerreis, 1951, pp. 33-43; Hamilton, 1952; Krieger, 1953.
Frankston Focus (Fulton Aspect)
Components of this focus are centered in the upper
drainage system of Neches River, in eastern Anderson and
Henderson Counties; in Cherokee County except for the
southern end; in southern Smith County; and southeastern
Van Zandt County. The town of Frankston marks the approximate center of this "home area". Other components
are found more widely, but not in such concentration. One

East Texas

185

component is known at the Lane Mitchell Place 12 miles
southwest of Marshall in Harrison County, about 60 miles
northeast of the main area.
Frankston Focus is a late prehistoric complex, directly
ancestral to the historic Caddoan-speaking Tejas tribes,
while the historic Allen Focus represents, the Tejas tribes
themselves (also called Hasinai by the Spanish and Cenis
by the French). Several common types of Frankston Focus
pottery are found as trade ware in Wylie Focus in the Dallas
area (see North-Central Texas) and in components of the
Central Texas Aspect (see Central Texas) in the Brazos
and Colorado River drainages, occasionally even farther
west..The only projectile-point type positively associated
with this focus is the small, thin Perdiz type of arrow point
with barbs and a long, pointed stem. The Perdiz t~ype occurs
very widely over Texas west and south of the Neches River
valley, but only rarely to the east. Because of its position
on the southwestern periphery of the Caddoan Area during
Fulton Aspect times, Frankston Focus plainly reveals more
contact with the non-Caddoan people to the west than any
other Caddoan loci.
While l~rankston Focus lies in approximately the same
area as Alto Focus components in the upper NeChes valley,
its pottery and other artifacts are very distinct from the
latter, with almost no continuities. This indicates that there
was probably a period of depopulation in this area after Alto
Focus ended. Not only are the Frankston Focus vessels different in shape and design, but the common use of da~:k gray
and black pottery in Alto Focus was replaced by pottery of
yellow, tan, buff, and light brown colors in Frankston Focus.
Whereas Alto Focus contains no brushed vessel surfaces,
applique, effigies, or handles, all these traits are common
in Frankston Focus. Although it was contemporaneous with
Texarkana, Belcher, and McCurtain Focus, which made use
of shell temper and red film, neither of these traits ever
appears in Frankston Focus, so far as known. The diffusion
of shell temper and red filming simply never reached this

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

186

far westward in East Texas; they are not present in the preceding Alto Focus, nor in the succeeding Allen Focus on
the historic level.
The A. C. Saunders Site in Anderson County, a pure
Frankston component, was excavated in 1931 and 1935
(Jackson, 1936). It produced not only a very large, circular
house floor and a great ashy midden, but several thousand
potsherds. In Cherokee County near Jacksonville, the Omer
and Otis Hood Site was excavated in 1936 by the University
of Texas, producing nearly 200 vessels from gr~aves. During
the same year, several other components were excavated to
a less extent, with many graves and pottery vessels as well
as pipes and stone artifacts. The following trait list is based
principally on the Saunders and Hood Sites, with supplementary material from the others and from surface c01lections.
COMPONENTS:
Type Components: A. C. Saunders Site, Anderson
County, and Omer and Otis Hood Site, Cherokee
County.
Other Components:

J. M. Cook, R. E. Daly, Rose Dan-

iels, Isabel Donne~l, E. W. Ellis, Pace McDonald, F.
Murphy, Quate Place, J. D. Reagan, Royal Place, J. C.
Slaughter; and Mrs. Joe Watkins Sites in Anderson
County; De Rossett, L. B. Miller; and T. W. Thrasher
Sites in Henderson County; Mrs. J. W. Blackburn, G.
Ellis, P. Johnson, and J. M. Snow Sites in Cherokee
County; Yarbrough Site (part) in Van Zandt County;
numerous surface collections made in eastern Van
Zandt and Smith Counties by Jack T. Hughes; and
Lane Mitchell Site in Harrison County.
TYPES OF SITES:
Small communities near virtually every stream in area
as well as on sandy uplands; probably each had a
cemetery area in or next to the village.

East Texas~

¯ 18.7

HOUSES:
Only one excavated, at Saumders Site, was circular and
approximately 46 feet across; any of several gaps between wall posts could have been entranceways. Interior features included support posts in. irregular
positions and a firebasin (Jackson, 1936).
LIVELIHOOD:
Agriculture inferred (probably maize, beads, .and
squashes), as recorded for historic Tejas in l~e 17th
century, supplemented by hunting, gathering of wild
foods, and both fish and shellfish.
EARTHWORKS:
Mounds unknown except in one or two cases where
Frankston people used a small mound erected by Alto
Focus people (e. g., Pace McDonald Site).
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery Types:

Poynor Engraved, BuIlard Brushed,

Maydelle Incised, LaRue Neck Banded, and KiIlough
Pinched all common; also effigy bowls with bird and
animal heads and tails on opposite sides of rim;
rattle bowls with four hollow knobs containing pebbles.
Temper:

Usually very coarse clay-grit, occasionally

mixed with pulverized bone or potsherds; rarely,
crushed limestone.
Features: Shell temper and red filming absent; brushed
surfaces common, on jars and on underside of bowls
with polished and engraved rims. Some small jars
and rattle bowls have four legs resting on a ring base.
Engraved designs simple" and consist mainly of arcs
set back-to-back to form ovals around rim; also "ladders" and simple triangles. Some ticking occurs but
rare compared, with Allen Focus.
Flat disks (spindle whorls?) made¯ by boring hole in
center of thick base of discarded jar, Occasionally in
a body sherd.

Texas Archeological Society

188

Pipes of elbow form, stem and bowl meeting at acute
angle; bowls are conical, widely flaring; both bowl
and stem may be decorated by engraving, punctating,
and may have red or white pigment in design as in
pottery type.Poynor Engraved.
Beads of baked clay, large, tubular.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Perdiz type, found commonly in graves
as well as midden.
Dart Points: Many types of Archaic Stage found on
these pottery sites but not in graves so association
doubtful. Those found most often are Gary, YarbrOugh, Palmillas, Elam, Ellis.
Scrapers: Small snub-nosed end scrapers rare; unshaped
spalls common.
Drills: Small, bases unshaped or T-shaped; rare.
Knives: Large, usually triangular with edges straight
to convex.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Small milling stones of ferruginous sandstone, some with
pits in sill.
Manos of unshaped stream pebbles.
Hones of ferruginous sandstone.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Celts; small, thick, petaloid form, of fine-grained sandstones.

ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Mussel-shell "spoons" (whole shells beveled toward
smaller end).
Perforated mussel shells (pendants?).
Small pendants of conch shell.
Cylindrical beads made from conch-shell columnellae.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
Flaking tools of deer ulnae.

East Texas

189

Flaking tools of antler tines, tips blunt and round.
Awls of unshaped animal-bone splinters.
Beads made of sections of bird-leg bones.
Sections of antler with socket in one end (knife or drill
handles?).
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Interments single, extended on back, with most ceramic
offerings placed around head and shoulders, occasiona!ly along legs or at feet. Offerings of pipes, arrow
points, beads, etc., in various positions.
RELATIONS:
Utility pottery types Bullard Brushed, Maydelle Incised,
and LaRue Neck Banded shared with Titus Focus.
Sherds of RipIey Engraved occur rarely as trade ware
in Frankston Focus. No trade relationships known so
far with other Caddoan foci.
FrankstOn Focus sherds are found widely to the west,
in Wiley Focus .and Central Texas Aspect, as trade
ware. Sherds have been noted as far west as Abilene
and San Antonio.
Arrow-point type Perdiz shared with late prehistoric
units of Coastal, Southwest, Central, and North-Central Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE:
1200-1600 A. D. or greater part thereof.
SOURCES:
Jackson, 1936; Krieger, 1946, pp. 206-212, 237-241, 266268; Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 191-192.
Titus Focus (Fulton Aspect)
Components of this focus are found entirely within
northeast Texas, principally in the valleys of the upper
Sulphur and Sabine Rivers and the numerous small valleys
between them, such as the Big and Little Cypress Creeks.
The heart of the area lies in Titus, Franklin, Morris, Camp,
and Upshur Counties, with a great many sites represented

190

Texas Archeological Society

by surface collections, looted graves, and a dozen or so small
excavations. Other counties in¯ which numerous sites are
known are: Hopkins and Wbod on the west, southern Lamar
and Red River on the north, western Bowie and Cass, Marion, Harrison, Gregg, and northern Smith on the south.
While the pottery of Titus Focus is poorly made when
compared with that of Texarkana, McCurtain, lYiid-Ouachita, and Belcher Focus (not to mention that of the whole
Gibson Aspect), it presents a very large array of vessel
forms and decorative patterns in such endless combinations
that it is probably the most difficult of all to classify.. The
University of Texas collections alone contain over 2,000 vessels belonging to this focus. The richest known site is that
on the H. R. Taylor-~farm in Harrison County, where more
than 550 vessels were found with 64 burials, one of which
contained 35 vessels and other artifacts. The Russell Site
in Titus County, Cash Site in Camp County, and Riley Site
in Upshur County, were nearly as rich although fewer graves
were found.
Titus Focus ceramics are featured by much lighter colors
than those of other Fulton Aspect loci except those farther
west, Frankston and Allen. The paste is usually light gray,
buff, tan, and cream and the cores slate gray. Red film is
not uncommon and when designs were cut through it, the
light colored paste underneath provided good contras~ with
the red--much more so than in the dark ware of other loci.
The engraved designs were executed with bold, forceful
lines usually of careless draftsmanship, although some may
be ~laSsed as excellent. The material culture of Titus Focus
appears to have been centered on producing large amounts
of pottery; it is otherwise poor, featured mainly by clay
pipes and numerous finely made triangular arrow points
of the Talco type. There was no mound building and as yet
there~is no data on house patterns.
Contact with the Puebloan culture during a Pueblo IV
period has been suggested in the appearance of ollas in
Titus and Belcher Foci, the sharing of carinated and sharp-.

East Texas

191

shouldered bowls in Titus, Texarkana, and McCurtain loci
as well as in the Southwest at this time, and the neck band~ng of utility jars in Titus, Frankston, Texarkana, and McCurtain Foci (Krieger, 1946, pp. 221-247 and Plates 30-35).
Titus Focus appears to have been involved in all these comparisons, more than the other loci, and it is the only one in
which actual trade sherds have been recognized from the
Puebloan culturel Sherds of Nocona Plain suggest trade
contact with either Wylie or Henrietta Focus in north-central Texas; and although Titus Focus sherds are found as
trade ware in the adjacent Caddoan loci on all sides, they
are not as numerous as one would expect.
The’ trait list below is compiled from the components
listed; at least 100 others are known but have not produced
any additional traits.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: None designated.
Principal Excavated Components: Taylor Site, Harrison
County; Cash Site, Camp County; Riley .Site, Upshur
County; Cason, Justiss, Watson Sites, Morris County;
Atkins0n, Galt, Gandy Sites, Franklin County; Reese
Site, Wood County; Culpepper Site, Hopkins County;
Russell, Ford, Farrar, Caldwell, Williams Sites, Titus
County; and later component at Hale and Keith Sites,
Titus County. Titus County excavations briefly described in Goldschmitt (1935).
TYPES OF SITES:
Hardly any data, as collecting and excavation have been
done almost entirely in burial areas. Villages probably not extensive in any case, at most a few hundred
feet across, and located near both large and small
streams as well as in sandy uplands.
HOUSES:
No data.. One. large circular .floor partly excavated at
Keith Site,. Titus County (Goldschmitt, 1935) probably
belongs to an earlier component related to Alto Focus

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

192

(Newell and Krieger, 1949, p. 196).
EARTHWORKS:
No mounds constructed. A few mounds in area constructed by earlier people were lived on and
creased slightly in height, as shown by typical Titus
Focus sherds in their uppermost parts.
LIVELIHOOD:
Agriculture inferred, supplemented by hunting, fishing,
food gathering.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery Types: Most characteristic are RipIey Engraved,
Taylor Engraved, Bailey Engraved, Wilder Engraved,
and Harleton Appliqued. Glassell Engraved, Belcher
Ridged, and Belcher Engraved of Belcher Focus occur
in easternmost components, particularly at Taylor
Site, Harrison County. Karnack Brushed-Incised apparently a special development in these eastern components. Former type Leesburg Neck Banded now incorporated in LaRue Neck Banded and shared with
Frankston Focus. Former type Winfield Brushed now
incorporated in Bullard Brushed and shared with
Frankston Focus. Types Killough Pinched and Maydelle Incised of Frankston Focus occur occasionally.
Temper: Clay-grit, usually coarse, with pulverized bone
or kaolin occasionally added, in polished and utility
vessels alike. Shell temper absent in resident pottery
but occurs in some trade vessels from Texarkana o5
McCurtain Foci.
Features: Red film occurs on only two types: rather
commonly on Ripley Engraved, rarely on Taylor Engraved. An outstanding feature of all Titus potterF
is the strong insistence on repeating design units four
times, ~whether engraved, appliqued, or incised; there
are few exceptions. Utility vessels have every combination of incising, brushing, fingernail and stick

East Texas

193

punctating, and applique fillets and nodes, on bodies,
rims, or both in different combinations. Strap handles
and lugs, two or four in number, occur rarely on jar
rims. Quadration of jars in four raised peaks on rims;
of bottles in four...bo~ly lobes. Miniature vessels especially common, usually placed with child burials.
Effigy bowls with head and tail of birds and animals
on opposite sides of bowls, rattle bowls with four
hollow knobs containing pebbles, and small simple
bowls cover.ed with applique nodes also fairly common°
Elbow pipes, bowl and stem ends of about equal size;
sometimes engraved.
Perforsted disks made of potsherds (spindle whorls?).
Nose or lip plugs.
Squeezed lumps of clay, baked like pottery, and smoothed or polished.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Types Talco and Bassett found commonly in graves, Maud rarely.
Dart Points: Gary and Ellis frequently collected on
these sites.but never in graves; association not proved.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Small milling stones, unshaped slabs of ferruginous
sandstone.
Manos, of ferruginous sandstone, unshaped or roughly
rectangular.
Pitted stones ("nut stones") ; also pits in faces of manos
and sills of milling stones.
.Hones, of ferruginous sandstone.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Petaloid celts common, usually shaped entirely by pecking, then bit end ground to high polish; made of pale
green Ouachita Sandstone.

Texas Archeological Society

194

Petaloid celts, ground and polished all over, less common.
Flat, rectangular adzes, ground and polished all over,
made of flint and other hard stones, uncommon.
Adzes, apparently made of selected flat stream pebbles,
unshaped except for highly polished bit; body may
or may not be polished.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Cylindrical beads of conch-shell columnellae, rare.
Effigy pendants (insects?) of conch or thick mussel
shell.
Thin mussel shells with hole in edge (used as beads?).
ARTIFACTS OF BONE:
Awls of split deer-leg bone.
Antler tines, possibly flaking tools.
Deer-ulna flaking tools.

BURIAL CUSTOMS:
So far as known, the hundreds of burials excavated contained a single individual, extended on back, with
pottery vessels around head and shoulders, occasionally at feet or sides or between legs. Graves small,
all offerings close to body; child burials often accompanied by miniature vessels 5 to 10 cm. high. In this
area, peculiar soil conditions appear to be responsible
for complete disappearance of bones (except teeth or
tooth enamel) in some sites, so that only evidence of
grave is position of pottery, soft earth fill, and impressions of bones in ground.
RELATIONS:
Pottery types shared with Belcher and Frankston Foci
as mentioned above.
Pottery types Hodges Engraved, Simms Engraved, Avery
Engraved, Keno Trailed, and Nash Neck Banded appear occasionally, probably as trade ware from foci
to north and northeast.

East Texas

195

One sherd of Coles Creek Incised appears in A. P. Williams Site, Titus County, which is pure Titus Focus
component without other foreign elements.
Trade sherds of Chupadero Black-on-White and upper
Gila brown ware found on other Titus Focus sites
(Krieger, 1946, pp. 207-208).
Sharing of certain vessel forms and neck banding with
Puebloan culture in Pueblo IV period (Krieger, 1946,
pp. 221-247 and Plates 30-35). Some of these may be
due to suggestion from trade ware, others to actual
movement of people in both directions.
Trade sherds of type Nocona Plain from Henrietta or
Wylie Focus of north central Texas.
ESTIMATED AGE:
1200-1500 A. D., possibly lasting until 1600 A. D.
SOURCES:
Krieger, 1946, pp. 205-247 passim, Figure 18, and Plates
30-35.
Bossier Focus (Fulton Aspect)
Components of this focus occur principally .in northwestern Louisiana, where it was recognized by Clarence H.
Webb on the basis of his site surveys and excavations (Webb,
1948). A few components have been recognized in northeast
Texas (Krieger, 1946; Stephenson, 1950). Typical vessels
have also appeared in private collections made in southwest
Arkansas, where they may be of trade origin.
The Bossier Focus has been particularly difficult to define, since all its known sites also contain material belonging
to other loci. By careful cross-checking of traits, however,
Webb has succeeded in drawing up a tentative outline on
which the trait list below is based. We agree that such a
complex exists, and that it was partly derived from both the
Haley and Alto Foci of Gibson Aspect; as such, it appears
to be an introductory phase of the Fulton Aspect, leading
to the Belcher, Titus, and perhaps other loci.

Texas Archeological Society

196

COMPONENTS:
Type Component: None designated.
Other Components: Harrison Bayou Site, Harrison
County (Webb, 1948); several in McGee Bend Reservoir basin in Jasper, Sabine, San Augustine, Angelina,
and Nacogdoches Counties (River Basin Surveys report by R. L. Stephenson, 1950) ; fifteen sites in Caddo,
Red River, DeSoto, and Natchitoches Parishes, Louisiana (Webb, 1948).
TYPES OF SITES:
Small, compact communities located on upland slopes
near minor streams, lakes, and springs, or on slopes
fronting toward large alluvial valleys; rarely on floors.
of largest valleys themselves.
HOUSES:
Apparently roughly oval structures with projecting entranceway. Interior features vary, may include multiple fire places not in prepared basin, cist-like cachepits, scattered interior posts or props.
EARTHWORKS:
Mounds rare; occasionally a small sand mound in hilltop site overlooking valley. At Belcher Site, Caddo
Parish, a Bossier complex appears to mark one stage
of mound construction (above a Haley Focus stage
and beneath two stages with Belcher Focus); Belcher
Site is on west side of Red River on a broad alluvial
plain.
LIVELIHOOD:
Agriculture, supplemented by hunting, fishing, gath~
ering of wild foods.

CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery Types: Pease Brushed-Incised and Sinner Linear Punc~ated are best diagnostic types. Maddox Engraved (Maddox Band Engraved), Maddox Brushed,

East Texas

197

and Belcher Ridged also diagnostic; types Dunkin Incised and Kiam Incised from late phase of Alt0" Focus.
Some Haley Focus types possibly occur as survivals,
especially in north of area. Taylor Engraved reported
as present (Webb, 1948) but this type now revised.
Temper: Principally clay-grit; occasionally pulverized
bone and tufa. Shell temper absent or extremely rare.
Features: Red filming unknown. Some quadration of
vessels and designs. Lugs and handles occasionally
present. Effigies absent or extremely rare. Incising,
punctating, brushing, and applique all present, but
work generally inferior to that of other Caddoan units.
Engraved designs consist mainly of "ladders" placed
vertically or diagonally on body or rim, less often of
cross-hatched bands in curvilinear patterns.
Elbow pipes, plain or engraved.

"

Pipes in form of rectangular block with incised decoration.
Perforated disks made from potsherds (spindle whorls?).
Beads made from potsherds.
Pottery trowels (?).
Fragments of human figurines.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points:
ciation.

Alba type; others of uncertain asso-

Dart Points: Gary, Ellis, San Patrice; possibly others.
Scrapers: Small, oval or triangular in shape.
Drills: Small flakes with expanded but unworked bases;
others with bases shaped more or less into rectangle
(association uncertain).
Spokeshaves: Albany type (see Webb, 1946, for description; association uncertain).
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Small, rough sandstone milling stones.
Oval manos.

Texas Archeological Society

198

Pitted stones ("nut stones").
Hones of brown sandstone.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Rectangular adzes or celts with squared bases and mildly recurved edges.
Small, triangular "celts", less frequent.
Full-grooved axes (association uncertain).
Two-hole gorgets (association uncertain).
Beads of tubular and pendant shape (association uncertain).
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL AND COPPER:
No data.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE:
Beads made from sections of bird-leg bone (association
uncertain).
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Hammerstones.
Unworked quartz crystals.
Pendant of quartz crystal (association uncertain).
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Single interments, skeleton extended on back in shallow
grave in village area. Burial offerings sparse, usually
consisting of pottery vessels behind or near head, and
(rarely) pipes.
RELATIONS:
Presence of Dunkin Incised and Kiam Incised may mean
contemporaneity with phase 3 of Alto Focus, but probably these types lasted after most of Alto Focus traits
had disappeared. Pease Brushed-Incised probably occurs in Haley Focus and presence in Bossier probably
means survival. Presence of Belcher Ridged anticipates Belcher Focus complex. On the whole, Bossier
Focus appears to bridge time between disappearance
of Gibson Aspect and beginning of Fulton Aspect, but

East Texas

199

this needs to be determined more accurately with excavations. At Belcher Site, Level IV appears to be
Haley Focus, Level III, Bossier Focus, Levels II and I,
Belcher Focus (Levels but not foci discussed in Webb
and Dodd, 1941; foci discussed in Webb, 1948).
SOURCES:
Webb and Dodd, 1941;Krieger, 1946;Webb, 1948; Stephenson, 1950.
Belcher Focus (Fulton Aspect)
The Belcher Site on the west bank of Red River in
Caddo Parish, Louisiana, has provided the basis for this
focus (Webb, 1940; Webb and Dodd, 1941; Krieger, 1946).
The excavations of Clarence B. Moore (Moore, 1912) provide additional components at the McClure Place in Miller
County, and the Friday, Foster, Moore, and Battle Places in
Lafayette County, Arkansas, all on the alluvial valley of
Red River. Close relationships with Texarkana Focus are
evident in pottery and house types, with Mid-Ouachita Focus
in some pottery types, and with Titus Focus in northeast
Texas, particularly the Taylor Site in Harrison County.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: Two upper levels at Belcher mound,
Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Other Components: McClure Site, Miller County, and
Friday, Foster, Moore, and Battle Sites in LaFayette
County, Arkansas; Gum Springs mound, Hot Springs
County, Arkansas; last occupation at Crenshaw Site,
Miller County, Arkansas; last occupation at Mound
Plantation, Caddo Parish, Louisiana; part of material
from Taylor Site, Harrison County, Texas, and other
sites in Bowie, Cass, and Marion Counties, Texas, with
mixed materials.
TYPES OF SITES:
Large villages on alluvial plain of Red River; smaller
sites on tributary streams of other river systems.

Texa~ Archeological Society

2OO

HOUSES:
At Belcher Site, round, 30 to 42 feet in diameter, some
having extended entranceway. Interior features include: central firebasin, and small posts or props
where needed. Walls probably of woven cane and
grass with clay covering; roofs constructed of poles,
probably with grass thatch (Webb, 1940).
EARTHWORKS:
Most sites have no mounds; ~doubtful that Belcher people
built any mounds entirely. At Belcher Site, mound
erected by earlier people increased in height by covering over abandoned or burned houses with clean
sand, then building new ones over them. At Battle
Site, a very large platform had been erected by an
earlier (Haley Focus?) people and was greatly increased in height with a superstructure and ramp,
probably by Belcher Focus people, as shown by excavations in 1948 by Krieger and Howard (Moore,
1912, found evidence only of Belcher Focus at Battle).
LIVELIHOOD:
Agriculture based on maize, beans, squash presumed,
supplemented by hunting of deer, small game, and
birds; wild plant foods; some shellfish.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery Types: Belcher Engraved, Glassell Engraved,
Belcher Plain, most diagnostic. Hodges Engraved,
Taylor Engraved, Cowhide Stamped, Belcher Ridged,
Foster Trailed-Incised well represented. Bailey Engraved minor type.
Temper: Many of the best vessels have no visible temper; otherwise, small amount of sand, clay-grit, or
pulverized shell and tufa. Shell temper occurs frequently in Belcher Ridged, Cowhide Stamped, and
Foster Trai~ed-Incised, seldom if ever in other types.
Features: Red filming occurs occasionally in Hodges
Engraved, possibly in Taylor Engraved, but is absent

East Texas

201

in other types. Strap handles occur rarely. Applique
work uncommon. Effigy bowls with head and tail of
bird or animal attached to rim; four-legged effigy
vessel of turtle; rattle bowls; rattle bowl~ with four
vertical legs resting on ring base; noded bowls. Dentate stamping on type Cowhide Stamped.
Elbow pipes, equal-armed.
Perforated disks made from potsherds (spindle whorls?).
Ornaments, such as small nose or lip plugs.
Figurines, human and bird, perforated for use as pendants or for attachment to vessels (?).
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Bassett type; less frequently, Maud and
small variant of Perdiz type.
Dart Points: None definitely associated.
Snub-nosed scrapers, small, thin, triangular.
Spall scrapers with edge retouching.
Drills, small, thick.
Knives, long, oval to ~double-pointed, uncommon.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Milling stones and manos (?).
Pitted stones ("nut stones").
Hones of brown sandstone.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Petaloid celts.
Zoomorphic pendants of slate and limestone (rare).
Earspools, limestone, copper-covered (Foster Place).
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Conch-shell dippers, plain and incised (one from Belcher
has rattlesnake-eagle design).
Circular conch-shell gorgers with swastika and cross
designs.
Long pins, some with knob at head, of conch shell.

2O2

Texas Archeological Society

Small disks, rectangles of conch shell, probably inlays
for wooden objects.
Conch-shell beads: disk-shaped and cylindrical.
Conch-shell pendants in zoomorphic shapes.
Perforated mussel shells (so-called "hoe blades").
Mussel-shell spoons found in burial vessels.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
Bone and antler projectile points with hollow bases.
Bone labrets and ear ornaments.
Polished, tapered bone pins.
Polished, double-pointed, thin awls.
Flaking tools (?) of deer ulna.
Awls, of bone splinters with only tip polished.

ARTIFACTS OF COPPER:
Thin sheeting used rarely to cover faces of stone and
wooden artifacts.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Fragments of twilled basketry, 4-over, 1-under weave of
split-cane elements (found charred at Belcher mound).
Quartz crystals, unworked (charms?).
Bear-tooth beads, perforated at one end.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Interments usually single, but some multiple, containing
up to seven individuals. Extended, usually on back.
Offerings profuse, include pottery vessels placed all
around skeleton, ornaments left where worn in life,
and various weapons and utensils. Cemetery areas
near village, but dead also put in graves dug through
house floors and into previously built mound.
RELATIONS:
Pottery types Cowhide Stamped, Foster Trailed-Incised
shared with Texarkana and Mid-Ouachita Foci.
Belcher Ridged, Belcher Engraved, and Belcher Plain
found in Hatchel Site, Texarkana Focus, as minor
types or trade ware.

Eas$ Texas

203

Avery Engraved of Texarkana occurs as trade ware in
Belcher mound.
Ripley Engraved of Titus Focus occurs as trade ware in
Belcher mound.
Belcher Engraved and Belcher Ridged occur in Taylor
Site of Titus Focus,oprobably made there rather than
traded.
Taylor Engraved shared with Titus Focus; Bailey Engraved and Hodges Engraved with Titus, Texarkana,
and Mid-Ouachita.
Bassett and Maud arrow-point types shared with Texarkana Focus.
ESTIMATED AGE:
1200-1500 A. D. or part thereof.
SOURCES:
Webb, 1940, 1945, 1948; Webb and Dodd, 1941; Krieger,
1946, pp. 210-212, 235-237. Webb’s complete report on
Belcher excavations and relationships is being prepared for publication.
Texarkana Focus (Fulton Aspect)
This focus is principally defined on the basis of excavations in three sites 10 to 12 miles northwest of Texarkana,
in Bowie County and on or near the flood plain of Red River.
The E. H. Moores Place is reported to have a plowed-down
mound about 50 feet in diameter and four feet high, containing midden refuse, and a cemetery area nearby. The
Paul Mitchell Place has a large cemetery and two midden
areas nearby. The A. J’. ttatchel Place has a mound over
25 feet high (also known as the Janes Mound) and a cemetery area about 200 feet to the northeast of it. The Moores
graves were excavated by the University of Texas in 1932,
and in 1938-1939 the University of Texas and WPA made
large-scale excavations in the Hatchel mound and cemetery,
as well as in the Mitchell cemetery. In addition, a number
of other sites in Bowie and Cass Counties have yielded collections closely agreeing with these, and several of the sites

Texas Archeological Society

2O4

explored b~y Clarence B. Moore along the Red River in Arkansas (Moore, 1912) may be said to include artifacts of
both Belcher and Texarkana Foci.
Components of Texarkana Focus lie at the heart ofthe
Caddoan archeological region, as do those of the earlier
Haley Focus. The initial construction of the Hatchel mound
was, in fact, by Haley Focus people, those of the later complex adding to its height by the construction of numerous
houses and accumulation of midden refuse. Certain continuities, particularly in pottery shapes and designs, are
apparent between Haley and Texarkana Foci. Both produced a high frequency of well-fired, dark, highly polished
vessels with beautifully executed engraved designs. The
Belcher, Mid-Ouachita, and McCurtain Foci are all also closely related to Texarkana and Haley in the excellence of their
pottery, but whereas Haley Focus lacks shell tempering, the
foci of Fulton Aspect used it in varying amounts. Shell
temper appears much more frequently in McCurtain Focus
pottery than in the others; in Mid-Ouachita, Texarkana,
and Belcher it appears with fair frequency in some types,
rarely in others, and not at all in still others. The historic
Glendora Focus probably derived its ceramics in part from
each of these prehistoric foci, with its shell temper being
as common as in the McCurtain Focus, if not more so.
A preliminary analysis of the Hatchel and Mitchell
collections was made in 1942 by Krieger, but this rich complex has yet to be described in detail. The trait list below
is based on the preliminary analysis, with pottery types
brought up to date.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: Upper levels of the Hatchel mound
and adjacent cemetery, Bowie County (Krieger, 1946,
p. 207).
Other Components: Cemetery ~nd midden areas at the
Mitchell and Moores Sites, Bowie County; smaller collections in Red River, Bowie, and Cass Counties; part
of material from Battle, Foster, Friday, and McClure

East Texas

205

Sites on Red River in Arkansas (Moore, 1912); part
of material from Ozanil and Ozan 15 Sites, and probably others in Hempstead County, Arkansas (Harrington, 1920).

TYPES OF SITES:
Chief known components are large villages close to Red
River, on or near the floodplain and subject to periodic
overflow. Overflow has caused village site material to
be buried in sediments, except for mounds, middens,
and cemetery areas in slightly raised knolls. Sites
near smaller rivers generally small.
HOUSES:
Sixteen excavated at Hatchel Site were at different
levels in upper part of mound, circular, 15 to 25 feet
in diameter, extended entranceway pointing east or
southeast. Small interior supports present, but central firebasin and large interior posts rare or absent.
EARTHWORKS:
People of this focus started few, if any, mounds. At the
Hatchel Site and perhaps elsewhere, they added considerably to a mound erected by an earlier people. At
Moores Site, it has not been proved that the "mound"
was an intentional construction, as it consists mainly
of midden. More data needed.
LIVELIHOOD:
Charred corn and beans provide direct evidence of agriculture at Hatchel Site; intensive agriculture inferred
for other sites. Crops supplemented by hunting, fishing, gathering of wild food products and shell fish
(charred pecans found at Moores Site).
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery Types: An unusually large number of types
found here because of central position and sharing of
types with neighboring complexes. Most common are
Barkman Engraved, Avery Engraved, Simms Engrav-

Texas Archeological Society

206

ed, McKinney Plain, Nash Neck Banded, and Foster
Trailed-Incised. Minor types are Hatchel Engraved,
Hempstead Engraved, Hodges Engraved, Taylor Engraved, Bailey Engraved, Bowie Engraved, Keno Trailed, Cass Appliqued, and Cowhide Stamped. Belcher
Engraved, Belcher Ridged, and Belcher Plain found in
minor amounts and may be trade ware from Belcher
Focus; Friendship Engraved of Mid-Ouachita Focus
occupies same position. Ripley Engraved of Titus Focus clearly trade ware.
Temper: Utility pottery generally has clay-grit temper,
with pulverized shell added o~casi~onally as in type
McKinney Plain. Polished pottery generally has no
temper, a small amount of fine sand, or pulverized
shell. Nash Neck Banded, Simms Engraved, Avery
Engraved, Foster Trailed-Incised, and Cowhide Stamped are those most frequently shell-tempered; Keno
Trailed and Bowie Engraved occasionally have this
feature; the remaining type.s do not.
Features:

Red film occurs frequently on Avery En-

graved although not always in conjunction with shell
temper; it is rare on Bowie Engraved and absent or
nearly so on all other types. Designs are frequently
repeated four times on all engraved and trailed-incised types. McKinney Plain jars are quadrated with
single appliqued fillets or nodes on rim or body, or
both; McKinney jars sometimes have four slight peaks
on rim. Nash Neck Banded vessels frequently have
rim pulled up into four high peaks so that mouth
looks square from above. Two or four small strap
handles may .be present on jars. Dentate stamp used
to decorate jars of Cowhide type. Rattle bowls; noded
bowls; effigies.
Elbow pipes, with spur projecting beyond bowl or folded
against bowl.
Perforated disks made from potsherds (spindle whorls?).

East Texas

207

ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Proj ectile Points:
Arrow Points: Bassett and Maud types.
Dart Points: A few found on these sites, but association indefinite.
Drills: Small, with expanded base (rare).
Scrapers: Spalls, generally unshaped except for retouched edges.
Knives: No data.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Small, unshaped milling stones.
Manos, unshaped pebbles.
Pitted stones ("nut stones").
Hones of brown sandstone.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Small, flat, rectangular adzes.
Petaloid celts of green Ouachita Sandstone.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Carved conch-shell pendants.
Short; cylindrical conch-shell beads.
Pin with knobbed head, carved from conch-shell columnella.
Perforated mussel shells (so-called "hoes").
ARTIFACTS OF BONE:
Projectile points, stemmed, cut from bone.
Polished bone pins, tapered with spatulate heads; heads
decorated with lines, notches, and may have hole for
threading.
Polished labrets.
Tubular beads.
Flaking tools of deer ulna and split cannon bone.
Rattles made of turtle shells containing pebbles.
Bear and dog teeth, perforated at root end for suspension on necklace.
Deer jaws with polished diastrema.
Deer calvarium, section trimmed out with stubs of ant-

Texas Archeological Society

208

lers, probably strapped on head for stalking deer or
dance costume.
Awls of deer ulna.
ARTIFACTS OF COPPER:
Small strips of hammered copper sheeting, small holes
at end as though for suspension.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Burial of dogs.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Interment in extended position, usually on back, with
ceramic offerings around head and shoulders; less frequently, at sides or feet. Single interments the rule
although from two to four in a grave are known.
RELATIONS:
Various pottery types shared with Belcher, Mid-Ouachita, and McCurtain Foci.
Trade pottery from same loci and from Titus Focus.
One sherd of Coles Creek Incised from upper component
of Hatchel mound.
One sherd of Chase Incised from Hatchel Site village
area.
NovacuHte imported from Arkansas, used for some projectile points.
Turquoise bead indicates trade with Rio Grande Puebloans.
Certain vessel forms (sharp-shouldered bowls and carinated bowls) appear to have been borrowed from
Texarkana Focus by Puebloan Indians of north-central New Mexico through trade contact or intermarriages in the 15th or 16th century (Krieger, 1946, pp.
221-235).
With Titus and McCurtain Foci, Texarkana shares trait
of neck-banding, which may have been borrowed from
Puebloan culture in early Pueblo IV times, 14th or
15th Century (Krieger, 1946, pp. 237-241).

East Texas

209

ESTIMATED AGE:
From 1200 or 1300 A. D. to 1500 or 1600 A. D.
SOURCES:
Krieger, 1946, pp. 205-214, 230-247, Plates 30, 35.
Mid-Ouachita Focus (Fulton Aspect)
As the known components of this focus occur entirely
within southwest Arkansas, we are not directly concerned
with it except that it shares a number of traits with Texarkana, Titus, and Belcher Focus. /k number of extensive
excavations were made by the University of Arkansas and
WPA in i938-1941, none of which has been published, although Krieger has examined and photographed much of the
pottery stored in Fayetteville. Data on house floors, graves,
and other artifacts is not available to us at present. No
mound building has been reported, whereas amateur collectors have obtained huge amounts of fine pottery from
village and cemetery sites.
This focus appears to have been centered in the upper
drainage system of Ouachita River, from the area west of
Hot Springs downstream to well below Arkadelphia. Components also occur between the Ouachita and Red Rivers,
as. seen in much of the pottery from Hempstead County
illustrated by Harrington (1920). Dr. and Mrs. T. L. Hodges
of Bismarck, Arkansas, published some of their data and
illustrated typical vessels from the Vc-atermelon Island Site,
located on an island in Ouachita River a few miles above
Arkadelphia (Hodges and Hodges, 1943). Subsequently the
same. authors published a theory that this or similar sites
were the archeological representatives of the Cahinnio Caddoan-speaking tribe encountered by De Soto in crossing from
the Arkansas to Red River in 1541-1542 (Hodges and Hodges,
1944:45). Although it is strange to report, no European contact material has ever been found in any southwest Arkansas
si.tes, despite diligent search by the Hodges and other amateur archeologists. On the other hand, the De Soto expedition was not equipped to trade with the Indians and there

210

Texas Archeological Society

is little if any chance that objects referrable to it will be
found. It is therefore quite possible that the Cahinnio Caddo
did live in the Arkadelphia vicinity and that they were seen
by De Soto, but had disappeared by the time that Henri De
Tonti and other French explored this area nearly 150 years
later.
Amateur archeologists report that all, or nearly all,
graves which contain typical pottery of this focus, are single
interments, ex~ended on the back, with vessels around the
head and shoulders, sometimes along the legs and close to
the feet. This method is the common one of most Fulton
Aspect loci.
The pottery types Friendship Engraved, Means Engraved, Blakely Engraved, and Military-Road Incised are the
common diagnostic ones for this focus and do not, apparently, occur elsewhere in the Caddoan Area. Hodges Engraved is shared with Belcher Focus and to a less extent
with Texarkana and Titus Focus of Texas. Hempstead Engraved is shared with Texarkana Focus; Bailey Engraved
with Texarkana, Titus, and Belcher; Taylor Engraved with
Belcher and Titus; Keno Trailed with Texarkana, Belcher,
and Titus; Foster Trailed-Incised with Belcher and Texarkana; and Cowhide Stamped with Belcher and Texarkana.
There is a particularly close relationship between ~¢Iid-Ouachita, Texarkana, and Belcher Focus not only in these specific types but in the general tradition of producing a great
deal of dark pottery--gray, brown, gray-brown, and black-whereas Titus Focus pottery is not only of lower quality but
of much lighter colors.
Mid-Ouachita Focus may be said to reveal the finest of
all Caddoan potteries although other loci in the area of the
great bend of Red River would not be far behind, or the
Spiro Focus in eastern Oklahoma. The present plates illustrating the types named above will reveal this high quality.
Mid-Ouachita also contains more effigy ware than any other
Caddoan loci, bottles in particular being modeled after both
human beings and animals (Plate 23, A-C, F). Furthermore,

East Texas

211

these vessels are often complete effigies (although highly
conventionalized), whereas those of other Caddoan foci
consist mainly of bowls with heads and tails attached to the
rims; the latter may also at times have conventionalized
limbs, wings, or fins attached at the sides (Plates 22, 23).
This effigy work featuring complete forms may have been
the result of influence from the St. Francis Focus of eastern
Arkansas, where these are even more spectacular and more
numerous. In the latter case, however, they are usually
done with light buff-colored pottery and painted white and
red. Trade vessels of typical St. Francis ware have been
found in several Mid-Ouachita components, supporting their
contemporaneity.
Oddly, all surrounding loci of the Fulton Aspect reveal
some red filming, while Mid-Ouachita pottery does not, so
far as we are aware. Shell temper occurs frequently in such
types as Foster Trailed-Incised and Cowhide Stamped, only
occasionally in Military Road Incised, and rarely if at all in
the other types. Rattle bowls, common in other Fulton
Aspect loci, appear to be absent, as do the four legs standing
on a ring base, reported from Belcher, Texarkana, and
Frankston Focus.
One very special trait of Mid-Ouachita is the peculiar
"seed jar", a fat, high vessel with convex sides, the top covered over except for a small round aperture, and often with
vertically-perforated lugs in opposed pairs, near the base
and top. We illustrate one of these in Plate 7, H, but its
shape is more cylindrical than most, and its design unique.
Hodges and Hodges (1943, Plate 11; 1944-45, Plate 19 center
row) illustrate more typical ones. Glen L. Evans once suggested that these would serve perfectly as tobacco humidors,
which if true would constitute a unique Indian invention.
Our estimated age for this focus is approximately 1200
to 1600 A. D. or the greater part thereof.
McCurtain Focus (Fulton Aspect)
A McCurtain Focus was first defined by Baerreis (un-

Texas Archeological Society

212

published manuscript, 1943) on the basis of two components
excavated by the University of Oklahoma and WPA in McCurtain County in the southeast corner of Oklahoma. These
are the Clement and McDonald Sites, the general features
of which are described by Bell and Baerreis (1951). Other
components were recognized in a survey of McCurtain County, and several are known in Red River County, Texas, although detailed information is available only from the Sam
Kaufman Site (Harris, 1953).
The Clement Site (not to be confused with Clements
Site in Cass County, Texas) contained three mounds, all
apparently flat-topped temple mounds. In one of them a
large grave was found, containing ten skeletons. Although
such graves are generally associated with the Gahagan.and
Spiro Foci, the grave offerings of pottery vessels and ornaments in this case leave no doubt that it belongs to McCurtain Focus.
COMPONENTS:
Type Components: Clement and McDonald Sites, McCurtain County, Oklahoma.
Other Components: Kaufman, Buchanan, Hooks Ferry,
Atkinson, and Norris Sites, Red River County, Texas;
probably others in northwestern Bowie and northeastern Lamar Counties. In Oklahoma, probably others in McCurtain and Choctaw Counties. All sites
appear to be within 25 miles of this section of Red
River valley.
TYPES OF SITES:
Villages on terraces of Red River or tributary valleys
close to it; cemeteries in refuse areas, but burials
placed in temple mounds as well.
HOUSES:
Most of those excavated at Clement Site were square
to rectangular, 17 to 25 feet long. Extended entranceway marked by two parallel trenches (in which posts
were placed ?), roofs supported by either two or four

East Texas

213

large central posts. At McDonald Site, a circular
house found, diameter 18 feet, no centerposts, entranceway indicated by two parallel trenches (Bell
and Baerreis, 1951, Fig. 2).
LIVELIHOOD:
Agriculture, supplemented by hunting, fishing, and gathering of wild plant foods.
EARTHWORKS:
Three flat-topped temple mounds at Clement Site, one
of which was also used as a burial tumulus. No other
components are known to have mounds of any kind.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery Types: Avery Engraved and Nash Neck Banded
recognized by Bell and Baerreis (1951) a~ Clement
and McDonald Sites; same types and Simms Engraved
recognized by Harris (1953) at Kaufman Site. New
types Hatchel Engraved and Bowie Engraved also occur in some of these sites. Other types remain to be
defined, especially in utility ware.
Temper: Abundant pulverized shell common, especially
in polished vessels; clay-grit or shell in utility vessels.
Features: Red film common, often combined with shell
temper, in type Avery Engraved; also occurs in Bowie
Engraved. Utility vessels often have neck-banding,
four rim peaks, two or four small strap handles, and
applique features, including small nodes in place of
handles.
Bi-conical elbow pipes (diameter increases both at the
bowl and toward the stem end).
Long-stemmed pipes (association uncertain).
Perforated disks made from potsherds (spindle whorls?).
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: No type names designated yet, but described as having stems with side or corner notch-

Texas Archeological Society

ing, and triangular with edges of blades recurved
and serrated.
Dart Points: More frequent than arrow points; include types Gary and Ellis, probably others not yet
defined.
Knives: Ovate and asymmetrical forms found infrequently.
Scrapers: Ovate, found infrequently.
Hoe Blades: Pear-shaped outline, roughly chipped,
found infrequently.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Milling stones.
Manos, usually of fine-grained sandstone.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Celts, shaped by chipping, only one end ground to cutting edge.
.. Celts, petaloid, shaped all over by grinding and polishing.
Pair of earspools, each with concave face covered with
copper sheeting; inner flange divided into two sections by broad transverse groove (from burial in
temple mound at Clement Site).
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
No data.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Small beads of shell and Lithos~ernum seeds.
Pearl beads (from fresh-water mussels).
Disk-shaped beads.
One incised gorget with voluted-circle or swastika motif
in center (from burial in temple mound at Clement
Site) (Bell and Baerreis, 1951, P1. 10, No.
ARTIFACTS OF COPPER:
Thin sheeting on earspools.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Pitted hammerstones.

East Texas

215

Quartz crystals, tips consistently showing marks of
abrasion.
Spherical balls, shaped by pecking.
Lumps of green pigment, found in pottery vessels in
burials.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
As a general rule, interments were single, extended on
back, with pottery placed around head and shoulders.
The large grave in the Clements Site temple mound
was exceptional in several ways and indicates a survival of practices from Gibson Aspect: it was apparently started at the mound surface and dug all the
way through to its base; there were cedar posts near
the four pit corners and approximately ten skeletons
(three extended, two fully flexed, the others frag.mentary and indeterminate); and the offerings were
not only on and between skeletons, but placed against
the pit walls. Offerings included 24 pottery vessels,
21 arrow points, three pottery pipes, the earspools and
shell gorget mentioned above, one celt, green pigment
in two vessels, pear! beads, Lithospernum seed beads,
and disk-shaped shell beads.
RELATIONS:
Sharing of pottery types Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved, Nash Neck Banded, Hatchel Engraved, and
Bowie Engraved with Texarkana Focus (other types
listed for Texarkana are absent or rare).
Keno Trailed occurs as trade ware, perhaps from MidOuachita Focus.
Square and rectangular houses with two or four large
centerposts and extended entranceways are closely
allied to those of Spiro Focus.
One round house without central posts but with extended entranceway (at McDonald Site) is closely
allied to those of Texarkana Focus at Hatchel Site
and to Belcher Focus at Belcher Site, Louisiana.

216

Texas Archeological Society

Shell gorget with voluted-circle motif is similar to one
at Hatchel Site, and both are similar to gorgers from
Tennessee and adjacent states, commonly assigned to
Southern Cult complex; however, they are unlike the
motifs on shells and gorgets from Spiro Focus and
probably belong to a later phase of the Southern Cult.
Sharing of certain bowl shapes and neck banding of
utility pottery with Puebloan IV culture is like that
described for Texarkana Focus.
A somewhat later chronological position than that of
Texarkana Focus is suggested by greater proliferance
of shell temper, absence of some Texarkana pottery
types, and presence of trade beads in Kaufman Site
(Harris, 1953). Historic Glendora Focus traits not
present.
ESTIMATED AGE:
1400-1700 A. D.
SOURCES:
Baerreis, manuscript; Bell and Baerreis, 1951, pp. 53-61,
Plate 10, and Figure 2; Harris, 1953.
HISTORIC STAGE
It is difficult to set a definite date-line for the beginning
of historic times in East Texas, as well as other parts of
Texas. The first contact between Indian and European
would automatically mark this event, were it not that there
is usually a great deal of uncertainty about which tribes
were met, where they were located at the time, and how
much they may have moved before being again recorded in
later centuries. Furthermore, the first explorers were seldom equipped to carry on trade (that is, with glass beads,
ir0r~ knives, copper bracelets, etc., which they intended to
give the Indians in reward for services and information).
With the establishment of trading posts and missions, the
chances improve tremendously that an archeological site
can be definitely identified in time and tribal affiliation.
In East Texas the first Europeans who almost undoubt-

East Texas

217

edly entered the area of Caddoan-speaking Indians were the
survivors of the De Soto expedition, who, with Luis de
Moscoso in command, attempted to reach present Mexico
overland from the Mississippi River in 1542. They are believed to have crossed Red River not far from its great bend,
and continued southwestward until they reached a river,
beyond which they dared not continue because of what their
guides told them about the "wild" Indians beyond. Swanton
(1942, pp. 31-32) has identified this as Trinity River, which
appears reasonable because at that point Moscoso must
certainly have passed out of the peaceful agricultural Caddoar~ Indians and faced the "wild" or nomadic, non-agricultural Indians of central Texas.
About 145 years later, in 1686-1687, La Salle and some
of his followers visited the same general area in which
Moscoso had found Caddoan villages, even some of the
tribal names being easily recognized in the later account.
His route from Lavaca Bay toward the Illinois country would
naturally have taken him through Caddoan territory. Approaching this from the southwest, he would first have met
those tribes which the French called Cenis and the Spanish
Tejas. The Spanish knew them by the name Hasinai as well
although this term applied to a confederacy of. tribes in a
small area.
In 1690, the first Spanish mission was established among
the Nabadache and Neches tribes, members of the Hasinai
confederacy; and from then onward there were numerous
contacts between the East Texas Indians and both Spanish
and French traders, missionaries, and diplomats. In 1714
Fort Natchitoches was established at present Natchitoches
in central Louisiana, but the French had explored far up
Red River well before that, meeting the tribes which belonged to another confederacy, that of the Cadohadacho,
from which the English word Caddo is derived. As a general rule, we can say that extensive trade and missionary
contacts between the Tejas and Cadohadacho tribes, and
both Spanish and French, were well under way by 1700 A. D.

218

Texas Archeological Society

On the other hand, a different side of the picture has
usually been neglected. Soon after 1600 A. D., the Spanish
began to colonize present New Mexico seriously and had
carried an abundance of trade goods northward from present
central Mexico. In northeastern Mexico (in the states of
Coahuila and Nuevo Leon) no less than eight important settlements had been established between 1555 and 1596. Furthermore, we know from the account of Moscoso that the
Tejas Caddo had already built up a trade relationship with
the Pueblo Indians o5 New Mexico be]ore 1542, because the
Tejas had cotton blankets and turquoises which they obtained from people far to the west, to whom they carried
bois d’arc and salt in exchange. Not only this, but comparative archeological studies have shown that this trade
contact was in existence for at least 100 years before Moscoso (Krieger, 1946, pp. 207-210).
If the trade mechanism for carrying objects back and
forth between East Texas and central New Mexico had been
going on for a century or two at least, before the Spanish
colonized northern Mexico and present New Mexico, then
it is easily possible that objects of Spanish manufacture were
carried eastward to the Tejas and other Caddo shortly after
1600. We must even allow for the possibility that such materials were carried from Coahuila or Nuevo Leon beSore
1600. It is perhaps not mere accident that the European objects found in early historic sites are almost entirely colored
glass beads and rusted fragments of iron knife blades, objects which would have had great appeal and been easy to
carry great distances.
Allowing thus for an Indian trade far in advance of
actual white settlement, we find it necessary to be rather
vague about an opening date for the Historic Stage in East
Texas. This certainly began by 1700 A. D. and could have
begun as early as 1600 A. D. if not even earlier.
Two historic foci have been defined, Allen for the
Tejas, and Glendora for the Cadohadacho and their allies
along Red River and farther east. Glendora may have

East Texas

219

begun somewhat later than Allen. Certain other sites cannot be placed in either of these as yet and will be discussed
separately.
Allen Focus (Fulton Aspect)
The components of this focus, so far as known at present,
occur in northwestern Cherokee County, eastern Anderson
County, northeastern Houston County, southeastern Henderson County, and western Nacogdoches County. The main
concentration is between the towns of Frankston. and Jacksonville. There is no doubt that Frankston Focus is the
pre-historic ancestor of Allen Focus, for several pottery
types continue into it. New pottery types were added, as
well as new types of chipped-stone artifacts. The Perdiz
type of arrow point was replaced by two others: Cuney and
Turney. Individual site reports will clarify these distinctions in more detail.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: Jim Allen Site, Cherokee County,
excavated in 1935 by University of Texas.
Other Components: Patton, Jowell, Owens, Cecil, and
Freeman Sites in Anderson County; King Site in
Nacogdoches County; small surface collections in Henderson and Houston Counties, E. W. Hackney Site,
Cherokee County.
TYPES OF SITES:
Small villages situated along minor streams, most if not
all having a cemetery area in or adjacent to village
refuse.
HOUSES:
No data.
EARTHWORKS:
None.
LIVELIHOOD:
Agriculture, supplemented by hunting, fishing, gathering of wild foods.

220

Texas Archeological Society

CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery Types: Patton Engraved the principal type;
Hume Engraved minor; Killough Pinched, Maydelle
Incised continued from Frankston Focus in small
amounts; most of utility pottery not yet defined by
type. Bowls with effigy attachments and rattle bowls
continued from Frankston.
Temper: Predominantly fine sand or mixed fine claygrit and sand.
Features: Patton Engraved characterized by extensive
use of ticking (short spurs or tiny triangles attached
to lines at right angles) whether design consists of
parallel lines around rim, groups of lines arching toward one another on rim, spirals, or concentric circles
on body (Plate 52). This ticking easily distinguishes
Allen Focus pottery from Frankston.
Elbow pipes: Decorated with engraving or punctating,
red and white pigments rubbed into design; others
plain and less well made than Frankston.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Cuney, Turney types diagnostic; Talco,
Fresno, and Alba also occur; Perdiz rare.
Dart Points:

No definite associations.

Knives: Jowell type, a unique form with long, slender
blade pointed or slightly rounded at both ends, very
finely chipped over both faces; oval in cross-section;
all known specimens rubbed smooth on both edges
and faces alike. Anderson type, another unique
form, very broad but widest part near one end
where two nearly straight edges meet in a blunt
point, opposite end tapered and rounded at tip.
Diamond-shaped knives alternately beveled on all
four edges, or on the two edges of one end and
opposite end rounded.
Scrapers: Small snub-nosed form, and finely chipped spalls.

East Texas

221

ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
No data.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Small petaloid celts of fine-grained sandstone.
A fine-grained blue stone adze blade with flat faces.
A splendid cylindrical ~club head of steatite, encircled
by a broad groove.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Small barrel-shaped beads and double-pointed pins, of
conch columnellae.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
No definite associations.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Single interments, extended on back, vessels around
head and shoulders.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Hollowed-out tablets
slate.

(paint palettes?)

of blue-gray

RELATIONS:
European items include glass beads, iron knife fragments, small cone of sheet brass. Trade vessels of
Avery Engraved and Simms Engraved (see Hunt,
Clements, and Kaufman Sites, below, for probable
source area and time period).
ESTIMATED AGE:
1600-1800 A. D.
SOURCES:
Krieger (1946) extended Frankston Focus into historic
times, but Allen Focus was later defined for the historic material.
Glendora Focus (Fulton Aspect)
This focus represents historic Caddoan-speaking tribes

222

Texas Archeological Society

in extreme northeast Texas, much of northern Louisiana,
and a small part of eastern Arkansas. A number of tribes
must be represented along Red River from well above its
great bend downstream as far as present Natchitocheg in
central Louisiana, although few such tribes have yet been
identified definitely with particular sites. Walker (1935)
identified the Fish Hatchery Site at Natchitoches with the
tribe of the same name living there when the French established Fort Natchitoches in 1714. Moore (1909) excavated
many graves in the Keno and Glendora Sites in the Ouachita
River valley of northeastern Louisiana, identifying them
with the Ouachita Indians after whom the French named
this river. Although, like the above-mentioned sites, the
Douglas and Greer places in the lower Arkansas River
valley revealed European articles of glass, brass, and iron
in the graves with typical Glendora Focus pottery, Moore
(1908) was unable to determine which Caddoan groups
lived in that part of Arkansas.
The Womack Site near Red River in northern Lamar
County, Texas, likewise has produced European trade goods
and should represent one of the Caddoan groups, although
it is probably too far upstream for the Cadohadacho--a
tribe mentioned frequently in French and Spanish accounts
as the leading up-river group, in contrast to the Natchitoches farther down and the Tejas (Hasinai, Cenis~ villages
to the southwest in Texas.
The ceramics of these and similar sites are remarkably
uniform in their complex engraved designs, usually applied
to the bottoms of carinated bowls which have an outflaring
rim (Plate 51), and in the great abundance of shell temper.
McCurtain is the only other focus with shell temper in comparable amounts. Glendora Focus utility ware remains to
be analyzed and described, so has not been included here.
Webb (1945, pp. 67-70) ha~ listed a number of sites with
"typical" vessels and sherds of the type Natchitoches Engraved, and thus included these sites (or parts of them) in
Glendora Focus. These are: Clements Site in Cass County,
Texas, as described by Dickinson (1941); some material at

East Texas

223

Battle mound in Lafayette County, Arkansas, as reported by
Moore (1912), with further excavations by M. P. Miroir;
Watermelon Island Site near Arkadelphia, Arkansas
(Hodges and Hodges, 1943); Belcher Site in Caddo Parish,
Louisiana (Webb and Dodd, 1941); and Hatchel Site in
Bowie County, Texas (information provided Webb by E:rieger in 1944). It must be stressed that at the time of Webb’s
writing, the type Hodges Engraved (Plates 32, 33) had not
been recognized and that in all the cases just mentioned the
vessels once classed as "Natchitoches Engraved" must now
be classified as Hodges Engraved. In other words, these
sites (except Clements) are not historic and contain no
Glendora Focus material; they are listed herein under
Belcher, Texarkana, and Mid-Ouachita Focus, all without
sign of European contact.
On the other hand, the non-shell-tempered Hodges Engraved type almost certainly was a late pre-historic ancestor
of Natchitoches Engraved, a change in vessel forms, use of
shell temper, and a greater complexity of scroll designs
being the principal changes that took place with the beginning of historic times. Other types probably also shared
in the ancestry of Natchitoches Engraved, such as Ripley
Engraved of Titus Focus, which in rare cases also has designs of engraved and punctated scrolls on the bottoms of
carinated bowls (Plate 58, K-O); and Taylor Engraved
(Plates 65, 66).
COMPONENTS:
Type Components: Fish Hatchery Site (Walker, 1935)
and Lawton Site (Webb, 1945), both on Cane River, a
slough of Red River near Natchitoches, central Louisiana.
Other Components: Excavations at Glendora and Keno
Sites in Ouachita River valley, northeast Louisiana
(Moore, 1909); Douglas and Greer Sites in lower
Arkansas River valley (Moore, 1908); Allen Plantation and Wilkinson Place in hills northwest of Natchitoches, Louisiana, where J. A. Ford found European

Texas Archeological Society

224

trade goods in some graves (Webb, 1945); Womack
Site, Lamar County, Texas (University of Texas collections). Also graves excavated by M. P. Miroir and
J. T. Hughes in northeast Texas. All of the abo~elisted sites yielded European trade goods in graves
with Natchitoches Engraved pottery. Four or five
sites in northeast Texas have this pottery but no
trade goods; however, they have not been properly explored. No components yet reported from Oklahoma
or southwest Arkansas.
TYPES OF SITES:
Rather small villages located on or near major rivers
in broad, fertile valleys; cemetery areas in or adjacent to villages.
HOUSES:
No data.
EARTHWORKS:
None.
LIVELIHOOD:
Agriculture, supplemented by hunting, fishing, and food
gathering (known from early historical documents).
CER~AVIIC TRAITS:
Pottery Types: Natchitoches Engraved most characteristic and diagnostic type. Hudson Engraved. another
diagnostic type, shell-tempered. Keno Trailed continued from pre-historic foci; Cowhide Stamped, and
Glassell Engraved possibly continued in small
amounts. Utility pottery not yet analyzed by type.
Temper: Shell common, probably few exceptions.
Features: Red filming oc~casionally used in Natchitoches
Engraved but not other types; quadration of design
in all types the rule, but Natchitoches Engraved sometimes has three or five units; handles or lugs, applique
not reported. Some four-legged animal effigy vessels.
Rattle bowls not reported.
Simple elbow pipes, crudely made, without decoration.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile points, both arrow and dart, reported but not

East Texas

225

analyzed by type. Most are in private collections,
grave association uncertain.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
No data.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Petaloid celts.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL, BONE, AND ANTLER:
No specific data.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Single interments, extended on back, with pottery
around head and near body. Walker (1935) reported
two horse skeletons buried at Fish Hatchery Site,
each with a large, thick, pottery bowl near head.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Very pronounced fronto-occipital head deformation reported by Walker (1935).
RELATIONS:
Trade with Europeans shown principally by glass beads
and iron knife fragments; probably other metal artifacts as well in some sites.
Trade with historic Natchez Indians shown by intrusive
vessels of Fatherland Incised.
ESTIMATED AGE:
1650-1750 A. D., perhaps beginning earlier or lasting
later.
SOURCES:
Moore, 1908, 1909; Walker, 1935; Dickinson, 1941; Webb,
1945; Krieger, 1946.
Hunt and Clements Sites (Fulton Aspect)

In 1932, A. T. Jackson of the University of Texas recovered numerous pottery vessels and other artifacts from
the Clyde and Jay Clements farm 2V2 miles west of Atlanta,
Cass County. These were from 22 graves which had been
b~dly torn up by treasure hunters, but Jackson found some
materials remaining intact in most of them. Five of the 22

226

Texas Archeological Society

graves had glass trade beads in them. Mr. S. C. Dickinson
was given a collection of pottery from this site by Mr. Will
Scott, on which he has published a brief paper (Dickinson,
1941). Dr. D. A. Baerreis located still other fine vessels in
the American Museum of Natural History during the war,
sending sketches and notes to Krieger.
Also in 1932, Jackson excavated 17 graves on the Goode
Hunt farm 8 miles west of Atlanta, recovering 81 vessels
and many other artifacts. In this case, no glass beads were
found in any grave, and a piece of iron from one of them was
believed by Jackson to have fallen into the pit during excavation (field notes). For this reason, Jackson believed
that the Hunt Site was slightly older than Clements--that
is, it just preceded European contact.
The pottery vessels and other artifacts from these two
sites are closely similar, some vessels being virtually identical. They would appear to date in the earliest contact
times, somewhere between the prehistoric Texarkana and
Titus Foci on the one hand, and historic Glendora Focus on
the other. They perhaps indicate a separate focus.
Shell temper is very infrequent in these sites, most of
it appearing in the type Simms Engraved, which is also
shell-tempered in pre-European. Texarkana and McCurtain
Foci. Instead, there is no temper in some of the f~nest vessels, fine-clay grit in others, and fine to coarse pulveri.zed
bone in still others. The type Hodges Engraved is definitely
present in both large and miniature bottles, while Natchitoches Engraved has not been noted. The types Barkman
Engraped, Avery Engraved, Foster Trailed-Incised, and Cowhide Stamped, all common in the pre-historic Belcher and
Texarkana Foci, have not been noted in either the Hunt or
Clements Sites; however, both McKinney Plain and Nash
Neck Banded of Texarkana Focus are present but rare. Two
types not noted elsewhere are also present: Cass Appliqued
and Clements Brushed (Plates 11, 12). Some vessels appear
to be like the large compound bowls of Titus Focus, but with
Somewhat different designs consisting of long oval panels

East Texas

227

bisected by a horizontal line. Three vessels are like Hudson
Engraved of Glendora Focus in having finely cross-hatched
bands set horizontally and in arcs (Plate 36), but have fine
clay-grit temper instead of shell. Some utility jars have rows
of fingernail punctations of diagonal incised lines around
the rims, somewhat like those of Titus Focus, and are either
clay-grit or bone tempered.
Other traits noted by Jackson include lumps of green
and gray pigment (some inside of grave vessels), red ochre
pigment in one grave, red and white pigments in engraved
designs, conch-shell pendants shaped like insect effigies,
mussel shells pierced for halting (so-called "hoe blades"),
one dog burial with a vessel enclosed, manos, and pitted
stones. Projectile points are very small, with pointed stems
somewhat like the Perdiz type, and pottery pipes are of the
elbow form, simple and poorly made as in Glendora Focus.
In summary, these two sites appear to belong to a short
transition period with survivals of some Texarkana and
Titus Focus traits, but preceding the appearance of Natchitoches Engraved and other Glendora Focus traits. The
graves, as in most Fulton Aspect units, were single interments with bodies extended on the back with vessels about
the head, shoulders, and legs. It. is supposed that they date
between 1600 and 1700 A. D.,.allowing for the possible appearance of European goods in advance of colonizing activities and missions.
KauSman Site (Fulton Aspect)
This site in northern Red River County has been explored to some extent by R. E:. Harris and assigned to McCurtain Focus on the basis of such pottery types as Avery
Engraved, Simms Engraved, and Nash Neck Banded (Harris,
1953). It is the only McCurtain Focus component so far
known which includes European trade goods in the graves,
and is of interest in indicating that this complex extended
into a time of early contact. As in the case of the Hunt and
Clements Sites, its date would seem to be somewhere between 1600 and 1700 A. D.

ZZ

0

FULTON ASPECT

o o,,

GIBSON ASPECT

8~

o~

~ ~8=°~

W
Z

TRINITY ASPECT

o
’o

BRAVO VALLEY
(-/’)

Or,

JORNADA
BRANCH

o,.,~,
oo
_,g,9 ~ ~=~~. "-~

BIG BEND
ASPECT

,,o >-~o"

g ~ "°-~.~oo
g3 dg~ _n
Z

0

w

n

o

FIGURE 3
Location of excavated si~es of %he Paleo-American S%age in
Texas.

EAST

HUECO
PHASE
PLATEAU
ASPECT

FOCUS

ARANSAS
FOCUS
FALCON
FOCUS,
MIER
FOCUS

!~pproximate extent of known culture complexes in the Archaic
Stage in Texas. While archeological material is found in quantity
in the areas marked "undefined", research has not progressed far
enough to define complexes; excavation and stratigraphic control
of material are especially needed.

ANTELOPE CREEK
FOCUS

SANDERS
WYLIE

FOCUS

FOCUS

M~CURTAIN
FOCUS

PUEBLOAN

HENRIETTA
FOC!

INTRUSIVES

FOCUS

JORNADA

CENTRAL
ASPECT

BRAVO
VALLEY
~.AY FOCUS

~KPORT
FOCUS

FIGURE 5
Approximate extent of known culture complexes in the NeoAmerican Stage in Texas. While large parts of the State have not
yet been properly analyzed for this stage, it is absent in the Southycest section.

~ ~MAN SITE
CUSI
~

~:

URY SI

BRAVO VALLE~Y
ASPECT
~

)CKPORT
FOCUS

FIGURE 6
[Principal complexes and sites of the Historic Stage in Texas.
The Bravo Valley Aspect in the west, and Rockport Focus on the
coast, extended from the Neo-American Stage into historic times.
The Allen Focus is the early historic outgrowth of the prehistoric
Frankston Focus. Glendora Focus components are found principally in northern Louisiana and .Arkansas. Kaufman is the only
known component of 1V~cCurtain Focus to extend into early historic
times. The Spanish Fort archeological site is found on both sides of
Red River. Many Spanish mission sites in Texas are also archeological sites, but are not shown for lack of specific analysis.

MENTS
SITE

