66

Texas Archeologica[ and Paleontological Society

THE WATERMELON ISLAND SITE IN
ARKANSAS
BY DR. AND MRS. T. L. HODGES
The Mid-Ouachital region of Arkansas, situated on the edge of
the Ouachita Mountain Range and contiguous to the Coastal Plain,
offered the prehistoric inhabitant many of the lures which draw the
admiring tourist to it today.

The Ouachita River, after its moun-

tain meanderings, is broad, clear and banked by rich alluvial bottoms.

Beyond these rise the picturesque, timbered, rocky hills.

A perfect setting for a relatively permanent Indian inhabitation.
Settled on the fertile banks in communities, he could pursue agriculture to supply vegetable wants, look to the wooded hills for protection and as an infinite storehouse of animal food, clothing, mineral
and timber necessities. An abundance of everything was here, as
wel! as a mild climate and natural beauty.
We thus are not surprised to find numerous Indian sites along
the Ouachita River in Arkansas. Until recently few archaeologists
of national repute ’had focused their attention on this theatre of
prehistoric Indian cultures.

Harrington and Moore recorded the

findings of their work, which represent the best archaeological efforts of their time. Recently Arkansas archaeologists, mostly amateurs, stimulated by out-of-the state trained experts and prodded
into scientific activity by the destruction of irreplaceable data by
flood, plow, and the commercial dealer, finally became aware of
Arkansas’ many valuable evidences of aboriginal cultures. This
state presents many prehistoric horizons especially of the potterymaking Indians.

Least clarified as yet is the Mid-Ouachita com-

plex, which is intricate and indicative of many ages and influences.
As an example of this melting-pot, we chose Watermelon Island of
Hot Spring County, Arkansas, as a site representing many variant
forms of aboriginal cultures.

This eleven hundred acre alluvial bottom-land island is formed
by the Ouachita River on the east, and a bayou on the west. It
1. This nomenclature was first assigned by Phillip Phillips in a Special Relaort, to
the National Park Service on behalf of the Central ~Iississippi Valley Archaeological
Survey, on "Menard Site on the Lower Arkansas River."

The Watermelon Island Site in Arkansas

67

lies at the base of a sandstone bluff fronting the Midway Community in Hot Spring County. Its sandy soil is rich in loam but also
mixed with considerable clay, resulting in a hard compactness which
the planters term tight soil. The whole island is subject to at least
six inches of overflow every spring, but soon drains and dries.
Overlooking it from the old Military Road skirting the one hundred
fifty feet high bluff, the island appears as a vast plain merging
into two successive plateaus on which are located Indian mounds.
Indian village sites abound everywhere.
On the island are two mounds. One is on the eastern higher
plateau and near the present river channel; this rises about twenty
feet above the surrounding sand and is oblong in shape. The
second Indian mound is on the west side of the island on a second
terrace from the present boundary-bayou; this is about six feet
high and badly eroded by overflows. It crowns a fertile black
section of land commonly referred to as Dutchman’s Garden because
of an early pioneer’s cultivation of fruits and vegetables on this
portion.~ This elevation, rich in artificats, middens, and burial
plots probably fronted the main Ouachita River channel in prehistoric times, for the river has changed2 beds since 1804 when
Dunbar and Hunter3 traveling upstream recorded the "Isle de
Mellon" as sighted on their right! A slough-bed ten feet below
this plateau is reminiscent of ancient shore-lines. Regardless of the
shift in channel, the island was the home for a long period of a
group of prehistoric agricultural communities of unusual resources.
Salt licks prevailed on the neighboring mainland; mussels and fish
abounded in the river; deposits of finest pottery clay were convenient nearby; upstream, within easy distance were the healing
vaporous waters and also the novaculite quarries of today’s Hot
Springs district.
A surface observation of the island’s middens reveals signs of
a conglomeration of chronological material to which can be added
a weahh of excavated evidence.

Square-bottomed grit tempered

sherds suggest Marksvillian occupancy.

A six foot square trial

* Today all this land belongs to Judge Henry Means of lM[alvern, who so kindly
granted permission for investigation, not only to us, but also to the Arkansas State
Archaeological Survey of 1939.
2. ttodges, Dr. T. L. and Mrs., "Watermelon Island," Anniversary Edition of
Malvern Daily Record (1941).
Ik Dunbar, William,
The Exploration of the Red, Black and Washit~ Rivers.

Texas Archeologica~ and Paleontological Society

68

pit was carefully excavated to a depth of six feet4 in 1939. The
location was near the base of Dutchman’s Garden mound. Findings
confirmed the belief in Marksvillian occupancy of Watermelon
Island, but no associated burials were found. About forty feet
from this spot there had been found on the surface a hard, miniature jar identified as Yokena Incised of the Marksville complex.
Overflow had exposed it in the midden debris of these early people,
but its unusual hardness and two and a half inch size were fortuitous
factors in its perfect survival. The pot is urn shaped, of buff
grit-tempered paste, very smooth and hard, possessing a squared,
thickened rim below which is a band of Yokena Incised motif of
Ford’s marker-type. This site fronting the Dutchman’s Garden
mound and on the brink of a slough-bed had been badly eroded by
plow and overflow, and the top soil containing aboriginal refuse
washed into the slough.
The intermediate stage of Coles Creek complex is merely suggested by the plain ceramic sherd-types which are easily confused
with the undecorated Marksville potsherds in this state. The c!ose
resemblance renders diagnostic chronology ineffective.
To date
Coles Creek evidences have not been found on the ishmd. However,
the artifacts found indicate two Caddo horizons--the late Caddo
and an earlier, thus far unclassified complex.
No trade-material of white man’s contact was ever found on the
surface

or in burlals.5

The

eastern slope

of dae Dutchman’s

Garden mound yielded a lodge with a fire-place and several burials
in which were typical Caddo-ware. Adjacent to the south were
found

great

numbers

of

plain

abundant in square bottoms.
of four feet.

sherds,

which

were

especially

Finds were at an approximate depth

After the State Survey completed

excavating its

partial site, our private investigation found a burial, spot about
a hundred yards southwest on the flat-land.

Fifteen burials were

exhumed., a!l were furnished with pottery but lacking in skeletal
remains except an occasional lime-line. The human remains are
usually completely disintegrated because of either the acidity of
soil, or general moisture of earth. Interments are located at an
average depth of two and a half feet.
4. Arkansas

Stat~

Archaeological

Survey:

/L ~rkansaz State Archaeological Survey :

The original depth can only

1989.
1989.

The Watermelon Island Site in Arkansas

69

be conjectured for the surface is subject to change by overflow
yearly, sometimes losing inches of top-soil and often gaining a
new layer. The top foot of earth is sandy and friable, but changes
to a tightly packed, half-clay consistency at the level of grave
offerings.
Seven ceramic vessels constitute an average votive offering to the
dead. The pottery was commonly grouped in a curve following
the top of the head and arms; at times specimens were atso at the feet
and by the hips. Placement of artifacts and discoloration of graveearth indicated extended burials but in no symmetrical arrangement
with respect to the rising and setting sun. When the pottery was very
numerous it was often stacked. Much of it was broken in the
grave and surfaces were badly leached. The contour of burial
placements outlined by about one hundred and fifty exhumations
followed a diagonal curve across the lesser plateau paralleling the
old slough bed at its base. Within this peripheral curve were scattered groups of burials and large middens of refuse-earth well
filled with mussel shells.
The findings in individual graves were consistently patterned;
a water-bottle, collared jars, several cazuelas, often a seed-jar and
in unusual cases, an effigy vessel. Pipes were rarely found. Shel!
beads and bone implements had decomposed in the soil.

Singu-

larly few stone implements and orna~nents were with the mortuary
furniture.
observed.

No bundle burials and not a sign of cremation were
Grave-earth is filled with red pigment lumps.
One

burial contained a small bow1 from whose original contents a green
coloring had diffused into the surrounding earth.

White chalky

pigment, occuring as filler in ceratnie decorations, was absent in
interments.
Often caches of pretty water-washed pebbles were
with ceramic offerings.

Thus the variations add interest to the

commoa pattern.

The most common vessel found is the cazuela, more often of
the sand-tempered red Bayware than the shel!-tempered Caddo
brown drab. Rarely the intricate Caddo-type rim motif is whitepaint filled; only one vessel suggests red-paint filler. This bowl
is very comtnor, in the Caddoan Red River complex. On Watermelon Island the howl types run the gamut of sizes and designs
from minatures four inches in diameter to capacious cazuelas twelve

7O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

inches across. Even a salt-pan was found which was huge, thick
and flat, but almost crushed. Semi-conical bowls with narrow
brims neatly engraved in curvilinear motif sometimes reinforced
with symmetrical appliqued notches, represent the Natchitoches
interpretation of Caddo design. An interesting specimen is a rollbrimmed globular bowl with body decoration of interlocking bands
of solid confluent curvilinear lines and neck banded in an imitation roulette. Spearing replaces Caddo cross-hatching on a few
specimens. All bowls are highly polished inside and out. The
general design conforms to Caddo origination.
The muhiplicity of water-bottles, so often found in an upright
position with a cazuela, are either plain or engraved.

Never have

we seen them topped by either a pebble or a pottery disk in situ.
The broken-line engraving is the most repeated motif. Engraved
bottles trend to red-paint filling. The original high polish of the
drab brown to black, shell-tempered paste is frequently badly
leached. Necks vary with designs, which are many. Represented
are broad bands of cross-hatching emphasizing ovals, all-over curvilinears, appliqued notched strips, appliqued vertical bands, annular decoration at base of neck, four lobed stars, and others which
are hard to adequately describe. Bases are round and flat. The
all-over engraved bottles fall into the Natchitoches standardization
Glendora bottles of graceful design and well executc,~l combed
geometric motifs are included.
Two unusual forms occur: the
compound and the tripod forms.

One plain compound form has

an eight-holed partitional disk inside the constriction between compartments, similar

to

a modern dripolator!

One

three-legged

(tripod) bottle is enormous. Each rounded leg is two inches in
diameter and the vessel is eleven inches high. It was found associated with typical Caddo grave offerings.

Carinated bases are

not unusual. One neckless water-bottle of Glendora origin has a
capacity of about three gallons. An engraved loop-bottle is another
unique specimen.

However, of greatest surprise and unusual inter-

est, was a cameo bottle of concentric, red painted broad circles on
PLATE 10
No. 1. Marksville miniature jar with Yokena-incised motif.
Height 2~/~ inches, width 2¼ inches.
No. 2 Caddoan pottery pendant-container with engraved motif
white-paint filled. Diameter 4 inches, depth 2 inches.

Plate 10

The Watermelon Island Site in Arkansas

buff background.

73

This specimen belongs to Eastern Arkansas, but

it was found in a Caddo grave with Caddo associations.

A middle

Mississippi bottle in a late Caddo grave!
Jars offer variants of the Caddo pattern.

One roll-brimmed

heavy vase has a broad band of body decoration of heavy interlocking curved lines with a seemingly rouletted solid background!

It

presents features of the Caddo and Marksville complexes.
Collared jars are numerous, of similar silhouette, varying in
size, but the combination of incised motif on collar and body of
urn is seldom alike. On a twelve inch high and eleven inches
broad vessel, the design is the common deeply incised meander
alternating with finger-nail decorated bands. The better specimens
are of reddish paste and are of all-over meander motif. These
are very attractive and heavy. These reddish vessels are not
washed ware. The firing-temperature alone produced the color
of the outside surfaces. An exceptional vessel of this type is a
lavenderish shaded one, which is sooty inside, as if it might have
been used as a flare-torch. The surface is badly leached and the
outside collar and body decoration is brush-marked. The soil
taken from the body of the pot was very slimy; we have not yet
subjected it to chemical assay. In this collared class occur most
of the soot-stained cooking vessels. We like to imagine that the
largest twelve inch high collared jars, which are not carbon-stained,
might have been used for storage purposes. Applique and threenoded decorations sometimes reinforce the meander or concentric
circle motif. Bottoms are always flat.
Effigies are well represented on this island. Human effigy
water-bottles have been found in Caddoan shell-tempered ware.
One is a Glendora bottle, very nicely fashioned of a conventionalized
human-head design. Two turtle effigies represent the hard and
soft-shelled varieties. A bear-effigy bottle commands interest. A
gondola-shaped boat-effigy banded by Caddoan engraving is handsome. Among the effigy-rim decorative class were found likenesses of fish, fox, deer, tortoise, quail, frog, and rattles. Also
in this class are the three sided and four sided boat bowls. Many
Eastern Arkansas animal effigies seem to have been duplicated in
Caddo ware.

Texas Archeo~ogical and Paleontological Society

74

The most specialized and unique ceramic type in our locality
should have a scientific name and classification.

On Watermelon

Island, this type of specimen is well represented. This kind of
Mid-Ouachita ceramic art is the seed-jar or seed-urn. Its distribution seems limited to four or five counties centering in Hot Spring
County. To date on Watermelon Island there have been found the
greatest number of these interesting receptacles. A complete census
would require extensive excavations but a surface-sherd survey might
solve the problem of the restricted locale of the seed-jar.

From

personal observation only, the seed jars have been found in the
Ouachita River valley, as far north as Buckville and south in the
vicinity of Ozan.

It is odd that a vessel of such utilitarian design

and artistic balance should have been manufactured in such a
limited area. The criteria of a seed-jar are: (1) the completed,
circular, small orifice measuring from l:t~ inches to 1~ inches
on top of the vessel; (2) the semi-cylindrical, cylindrical, or
spherical body. These pots occur in two types; plain and engraved.
The plain seed-jars are consistently shaped like a beehive, flatbottomed, and the upper portion of the body tapering to an arch
and topped by the typical small opening.

The appellation, neck-

less bottle is a misnomer, air.hough the image is suggested
that term.

by

In the graves, the seed-jars are associated with Cad-

doan pottery and with exhumations usually of two to three feet
depth.

One exceptional cache of four seed-jars was found four

feet below the top-soil.

Plain seed jars are polished, thick walled~ and range in color
from cinnamon to drab black. They have no lugs (perforated earlike handles) except one unusual find. They vary in height from
six to ten inches; in body-diameter the squatty ones average eight
inches, although some tall, slim and very tapering seed-jars are
only four inches across.
The finest examples are the artistically engraved seed-jars, most
of which are round-bottomed and four-lugged. Two of these

PLATE 11
No. !. Caddoan engraved seed-jar.
Height 10 inches, width 6
inches, round bottomed.
No. 2 Caddoan plain seed-jar. Height 7 inches, width 5~ inches,
round-bottomed.

Plate 11

The Watermelon Island Site in Arkansas

77

handles are near the upper rim and two near the lower margin,
dividing the body of the vessel into halves.

The decoration pre-

dominates on the cylindrical body but is gracefully complemented
on the inverted-saucer like top portion of the vessel.

The resulting

silhouette is a cylinder enclosed .by arching planes.

The curve of

the upper surface is peaked by the typical circular orifice of small
size.
The decorations of the seed-jar are not highly diversified.
lug handles all have a perforation for a thong.
engraving is usually neat, though not perfect.

The

Workmanship in

Parallel lines waver

and equal angles vary, but the general effect is pleasing.

The

most common engraving encloses the body in chevron-like parallel
triangular lines. Motif is invariably included between marginal
lines parallel to the rim and is symmetrically divided into hemispheres created by the paired lugs.

Nested diamonds is a pleasing

variation in decoration.

Concentric horse-shoe shaped festoons

beautify several seed-jars.

A beautiful brown-drab specimen eight

inches high and a matching five inch ~niniature with notched bevelled
rims are engraved pleasingly in a double-lined and interlocking
curvilinear vertical decoration. One spherical seed-jar and three
vertical appliqued bands and heavy interlockin~ circular lines.
We wonder if the so-called plain gourd-effigy wh’[ch is so similar
to the plain seed-jar but which has the orifice slant-wise on top
might not be included in seed-jar types, The most unique engraved
seed-~ar from this island is a pinkish-red flat-bottomed and concave topped and sand-tempered four-lugged container. A most
rare receptacle, an off-shoot of this category, is a reticule-like round
vessel with an inch long orifice near the rim on the engraved face
and two perforations in line on the opposite wall. It resembles
two facing saucers, which are glued together at the rims with openings left. The engraved side is in typical Caddoan combination of
cross-hatching and circular lines. Thongs could have been threaded
through the perforations and the pocket become a convenient dufflebag for the shaman or the chief to hold his precious and mysterious
amulets. The faces of this old receptacle resemble the top and
bottom circular portions of the engraved seed-jar, The object

78

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

appears to be a pottery replica of the modern Caddo’s beaded skin
charm bag.6
A rock or a pottery disc carefully fitted over the orifice of a
seed-jar would exclude damage to the contents by rodents or weevils.
Logically, seed must have been stored in covered, dry jars until
needed for planting. These seed-jars certainly are a perfect answer
to that need. However, neither a rock nor a disc cover has ever
been found for the orifice in any exhumation. Seed was precious to
these agricultural Indians. The seed-jars do artistic justice to the
valued contents. Suggested by an authority has been a similarity
of these Mid-Ouachita seed-receptacles to those of Ancient Peru.
We, however, are only describing this interesting Mid-Ouachita
manifestation and hope for a future clarification of its interpretation in the ceramic art of our prehistoric peoples.
Ceramic surface finds include two semi and one completely perforated plain discs; one Caddo loop-ended pipe; two pottery
trowels; rim and animal effigy-heads. Sherds are plentiful.
Some surface finds include many projectiles of all types and
sizes (novaculite is the usual material); double-bitted sandstone
axes; celts of every form; Caddoan perforated breast gorgets (some
notched); boatstones, discoidals, hammer stones, smoothing rocks,
chipping stones; a few stone beads; net-sinkers; charm-stones;
paint-pots. A stone tubular pipe augments the confusion of the
prehistoric picture.
On Watermelon Island the Caddoan complex predominates in
both the ceramic and stone artifacts. The pottery on this island
alone would bear out Swanton’s statement that the Caddoan ceramic
art had no superior short of the Pueblo country. But more significant is the correlative material of continuous occupancy of the
early peoples of the Mid-Ouachita Basin, and the suggestion particularly in the Caddoan period, of peripheral cultural admixtures
of alien influences.. According to Swanton,7 in this region lived
the historical Cahinnio Caddo (region about Hot Springs), the
6. Swanton, John R.: Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo
Indians. (1942) (Bull. 132, ]8, of Am. Ethnology).
7. Swanton. J. R. : Source ]Material on History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indian~,
(BZllL 132, B. of Am. Ethn,) (1942).
Soutel, Henry: Journal of La Salle’s Last

Voyage

(1684-1687).

The Watermelon Island Site in Arkansas

7~

most remote tribe of the Caddoan Confederacy. The common
Caddo heritage is obvious, but intermingled are evidences of extensive cultural exchange. In the Caddo variants are possible factors
of the horizon of the tentatively called Early Caddo, the predecessor
of the historic Caddo. Watermelon Island has also served to
extend the horizon of the Marksville culture to the north and east,
as Ford had predicted,8 linking the South’s Marksville to the North’s
Hopewellian culture. Watermelon Island, as a typical unit of the
Mid-Ouachita archaeological region has the earmarks of an important link in the ethnological chain of the Arkansas aborigines.
Bismarck, Arkansas.

8. Ford, games A. : Analysis of Site Collections from Louisiana and :Mississippi,
Anthropological Study :No. 2, (1936).

