36

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

SURVEY OF TWENTY COKE
COUNTY SITES
CYRUS N. RAY
At some period of the past the river and creek valleys of
Central West Texas were scoured out to depths much greater
than exist today, and at a subsequent period all of these
valleys were filled to a considerable depth with a thick
stratum of coarse gravel which contained many water worn
stones of larger size. These stones are of various sizes and
kinds, conglomerates and hard quartzites of several colors
are common, but small rounded limestones seem to be the
most numerous variety, and these are often mixed with
quartz sand. In many localities rising moisture has left
soluble !ime salts in the form of caliche cement which has
converted the beds of gravel and sand into beds of conglomerate and soft sandstone, but in other cases they remain only
as compact gravel. At most localities these deposits are
devoid of the fossils by means of which one might determine
the period of their deposition, but in some sites scattered
throughout the whole region fossil bones and teeth of the
Columbian Mammoth have been found imbedded in these
gravel beds, and this would seem to indicate that this deposition occurred during the Pleistocene. Evidently the present
highland area between the drainages of the Clear Fork of the
Brazos, and of the Colorado River, situated in Taylor, Nolan
and Coke Counties, had a much greater altitude then than
at present, and the valleys below were filled with the products of its erosion. In the time subsequent to the deposition
of this uniform sheet of gravel over all the valleys on both
sides of the central plateau, a different thing seems to have
happened to this thick gravel sheet in the valleys of the north
and northeast slopes in Taylor, Nolan, Fisher and Jones
Counties from what happened in the valleys of the south to
southwest mountain slopes in Runnels and Coke Counties.
For many miles on the north side of the mountains, and up
to and including the mountain valleys and ravines opening

Survey o:f Twenty Coke County Sites

37

out on their northern slopes comparatively few remnants~of
this gravel sheet remain, but occasiona!ly one sees small
areas of consolidated remnants Of this gravel in the form of
conglomerate beds. These Hawley gravel and conglomerate
beds only oc.casionally occur on the north side of the mountains, and then usually are down near the bottoms of the
high river banks.’ In places these sites occur along the
course of the Clear Fork of the Brazos River, but throughout
most of the area the gravel has been entirely removed by
erosion and the same space in the river valleys has subsequently been entirely filled with seven regularly deposited
Nugent and Clear Fork silts to a depth of thirty or more
feet.~
On the southwest side of the highlands only a comparatively small area of mountain valleys in northeast Coke
County, and on the extreme northern edge of Runnels
County, contain deposits of Nugent and Clear Fork silts like
those to be found in the valleys on the north side of the
mountains. In Coke County the Pleistocene gravel deposits
which fill the valley of the Colorado River and the valleys of
its larger tributaries on both sides seem to have remained in
almost undisturbed thickness at most of the places examined by the writer. In a few stream banks where the gravel
does not exist, or possibly where the gravel has been eroded
away, the river banks are filled in with a deposit which
evidently is quite recent and probably is comparable with
if not identical with the Fort Griffin silt. In a general survey
of the high banks of the streams of Coke County the writer
has found little evidence of very ancient inhabitation except
i~ a small area in the northeast corner of the county where
Clear Fork sites occur in the same type of formation that
they do north of the mountains. In Coke County no sites
buried as much as a foot in depth were found more than two
miles west and the same distance south of the Kickapoo
Mountains, which lie a few miles to the southwest of Fort
Chadbourne Station. From the region of old Fort Chad-

! Ray, Cyrus lq., Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Re,on. Bulletin of The
Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Vol. I6, 1944.,15.
2 Ray. Cyrus N.
The Facts Concerning The Clear Fork Culture. American
Antiquity Vol. 13, No. 4, April 1948.

38

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

bourne west to new Fort Chadbourne Station, and for a mile
north of there, and for a distance of three or four miles southwest of that railroad Station, the mountain valleys have been
filled with the Nugent and Clear Fork silts, and the Clear
Fork silts there contain the same types of Clear Fork, Yuma,
and Folsom artifacts, as are to be found in the same formao
tions on the north side of the mountains. A site situated
about a mile across the valley west of Nipple Peak, which
is one of the Kickapoo mountains, is the farthest west
location of any definite Clear Fork site found in Coke
County. One Clear Fork gouge was found in a red deposit
about one mile west of that site at the base of a mountain,
but in all the rest of the county west and south of there
nothing resembling either a Clear Fork, a Folsom or a Yuma
dart head was found, nor was there any evidence of the
Clear Fork silts in the stream banks, and nothing which
could be classed as Nugent silts except at one Kickapoo
Creek bank situated a short distance east of Bronte where
the bank was topped by two bands of silt similar in color to
Nugent Silts 4 and 5, but there were no evidences of middens
or hearth stones in them. Evidently, the dryer climate, and
perhaps the uncertainty of a good water supply farther
west, caused early man to choose sites farther east.

zi e (I)
Site (I) is a rock shelter in the east bank of Oak Creek
situated near the Highway 158 bridge over that creek. A
panel of pecular criss-cross rock carvings extends across the
roof of this rock shelter. This site was discovered and
described in the 1930 Bulletin of The Society by Mr. E. B.
Sayles, and he then stated that "four strata of charcoal3
and other evidences of occupation were encountered, each
separated by a stratum of sterile silt and clay." Part of the
site had been disturbed by treasure hunters prior to the excavation by Sayles and his findings of artifacts in place in the
cave were too few on which to make a determination of the
stone cultures. This rock shelter or shallow cave is now
3 Sayles, F~ B.
Archaeological
4, ~, and 6.

and

A Rock Shelter in Coke County, Bulletin of the Texas
Paleontological

Society.

VoL

2,

1930,

pp.

33-40,

Plates

Survey o~ Twenty Coke County Sites

39

devoid of any earth filling and the site has been worked over
for twenty years by treasure hunters attracted by the ruins
of Fort Chadbourne, which lie a short distance to the south
of it. A historic Indian’s grave formerly was on the top of
a small hillock a short distance to the north of the shelter,
and blue and white glass beads are still occasionally found
there. The form of criss-cross petroglyph decoration of rock
shelter wall panels shown there has only been found at two
other sites, one in a cave shelter on the north slope of Blowout Mountain in Taylor County, and the other on the south
face of the cap rock of Turner Mountain, situated about two
miles southwest of Fort Chadbourne Station in Coke County."
Site (2)
Site (2) is situated about a mile north of new Fort Chadbourne Station, here a lane follows the Santa Fe railroad
north on its west side, and the site lies west of the lane where
a small dry branch of Oak Creek crosses the road. Here a
gentle slope down toward the south is covered with a gravel
layer, and old hearths are eroding from gullies in this gravel,
and also from the underlying red silt, and from gravel
hillocks nearer to the creek. Farther northwest and up the
creek’s course the small now dry creek bed is bounded by
higher banks where it goes through higher ground, and the
tops of these banks are composed of a shallow deposit of tan
colored silt which is underlaid with several feet of dark red
Lower Clear Fork silt and gravel, and hearths are eroding
from these old red deposits on the sides of the creek banks.
This site was found about ten years ago, and has been inspected at intervals since then, and in it all of the early
types of implements of the Clear Fork culture have been
found such as flint gouges, spokeshaves, side scrapers, disks,
gravers, abrading stones, recessed based knives, punches or
awls, and some round manos of the type which have one
edge worn down thin, while the opposite edge remains thick.
The darts were of Clear Fork classes one and two which
probably are the oldest dart head forms of that culture, as
4 K~rkland, Forrest, Petrogly~hs of the Abilene District.
Bulletin of the Texaz
Archeological and Paleontological Society.
Vo]. 13, 1941.
Plates 11 and 12.

4O

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

these types occur buried in old red silt in the lower lying
river and creek valley’s high creek banks, at depths below
the present soil surface of twenty-four feet.~ A few ancient
end scrapers of large size were found in this site, and Mr.
Joe Ben Wheat, while on a visit to the site in 1940, found a
crystal quartz scraper. Also the writer has found in this
site several fine recessed based, but not channelled blades
which could be classified as Yuma points. Most of the different types of Clear Fork gouges were found there also.
On a somewhat higher shelf just west of the creek branch is
a considerable area of land covered with very large, highly
polished conglomerate boulders.6 A number of ancient sites
have been found in that region which were located adjacent
to such accumulations of polished boulders, and such boulders seem to have held an attraction for men of the Clear
Fork culture period especially, and perhaps so for some
others. The small branch of Oak Creek which winds through
this site is now dry, except immediately after rains, but it
must have held water when the site was occupied, as there
is no other apparent source in that locality.
Site (3)

Site (3) is located about one and one-half miles south
and one and one-half miles west of Fort Chadbourne
Station and on the north side of a small lane. The site
covers a large area around, and north and east of a
steep rocky escarpment, which lies in an east and west
direction close beside the road, On the north side of the
escarpment is a high nearly level shelf, which was once
occupied, and hearths are eroding from shallow gullies in
its rocky surface, and from this area a low rocky ridge winds
off to the northeast to a high rocky conical shaped mountain,
and the land on the north sides of these elevations slopes
gradually off to the northeast toward a small dry creek
which traverses a narrow valley, which opens out between
the mountains still farther north. This creek branch drains
5 P~ty. Cyrus ~.. The Clear Fork Culture Complex. Bulleti~ of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, 1938, Plates 24 and 25.
6 P~y, Cyrus N., Permian Polished Boulders of Texas, BuIletin of Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vo!. 17, 1946.
Plates 14, 16, and 17.

Survey of Twenty Coke County Sites

41

southeastward into the middle fork of Kickapoo Creek.
Gullies on the mesquite filled north slope of the ridge
between the two mountains are filled with hearth debris.
The banks of the small dry creek branch were occupied for
a distance of more than a mile to the north during Clear Fork
time, and the old hearths are eroding from Lower Clear
Fork red silt and gravel at depths of two to three feet
beneath the present soil surface all along its course back
into the mountain valley. All of the components of the Clear
Fork Culture have been found there. In one place five
round mano stones were found embedded in a circle in
ancient red Lower Clear Fork Silt, and these manos were in
various stages of being ground down in the manner which
wears down one edge thin and leaves the opposite edge
with almost if not quite its original thickness. It is evident
such a worn mano was held by one edge and the implement
rotated in such manner as to wear it away only on one edge.
The only whole metate found was large, round, and thick,
and had two relatively small, round holes worn down in it
close to the middle, this type has been found also in a Clear
Fork site in Taylor County north of the Edwards Plateau.
One rare gouge with curved cutting edges at both ends was
found, and portions of two different Folsom points were
found on the high terrace on the north side of the roadside
escarpment. The largest concentration of hearths is more
than a mile north of the roadside escarpment, and situated
above two earthen water reservoirs. Here Clear Fork darts
1, 2, and 3, fish tail darts, and many other ancient types of
darts were found, as wel! as most of the types of gouges.
Near the east base of the roadside escarpment and also on
the flat between that and the conical mountain to the northeast are a number of half embedded large boulders of San
Angelo conglomerate, which have a glass-like polish over
most of their surfaces. Ancient artifacts erode from the
roadside ditches, and also from a dry gully which runs south
just east of the polished boulders. There artifacts are buried
two or three feet deep in dark red silt.
On the top of the roadside escarpment is a cap-rock about
twenty feet in thickness, which faces the south and over-

42

Texas ArcheoIog~cal. and Paleontologica~ Society

hangs for a considerable distance in an east to west direction,
and on this sheltered hard sandstone ledge is the largest
number of the peculiar criss-cross petroglyphs ever found.
These carvings seem to be in good condition except where
they have been blasted off by ignorant treasure hunters or at
the east end where rain has gotten to them and has eroded
the hard sandstone away to a considerable depth. There also
are a few petroglyphs on a group of large boulders down
near the base of the escarpment near its west end. At an
estimated distance of about one-fourth mile northeast of the
roadside escarpment lies a round mountain which stands out
away from the others and at the southwest base of this is a
rocky shelf, and below this there are two rock shelter overhangs, which probably were occupied in ancient times, as
much broken flint lies below them. The shelter to the south
has a panel of eroded criss-cross petroglyphs on its walls
inside the cave, and another panel is down near the floor,
and some more higher up, and there are several more on the
edge of a large boulder which lies just outside the cave and
north of the overhang. The stone inside the shelter here does
not seem to be as hard as that on the roadside escarpment,
and. has flaked off to some extent, and the carvings are not
preserved in as good condition as on the mountain to the
southwest. The gullies which erode the north side of this
round mountain contain artifacts which erode from dark
red silt and gravel, and a gravel strewn slope above a small
earthen water reservoir also contains hearths and artifacts.
The hummocks of valley gravel deposit above the creek
branch northeast of the water reservoir have been much
eroded, and show about fifteen inches of tan sandy Nugent
silts on top, with twelve or fifteen inches of dark Clear Fork
silts beneath them, and the latter lies on top of a layer of
gravel. The numerous hearths and artifacts are eroding
from the bottom of the dark red silt layer and the gravel
under it. Of the three sites found which contain the peculiar
criss-cross petroglyphs two were surrounded by very large
Clear Fork Culture campsites, and people of that culture had
lived near to all three, but there also were some indications
of later occupations of all of these sites, so one cannot

Survey o~f Twenty Coke CountN Sites

43

identify the petroglyphs as the work of any particular culture type of man. A small elevated sandy shelf just west of
the fnain escarpment was covered with unpatinated flints,
end scrapers and other signs of a small later encampment.
Severe! hundred yards west of the roadside escarpment a
dry branch from the north crosses the road, and this has cut
down through the silts of the fiat valley floor to a depth of
about twenty feet, and in the bottom has cut across a gravel
deposit which contains several forms of large patinated dart
heads.

At a distance of about three miles south of Fort Chadbourne Station, on a lane which parallels the Santa Fe railroad, a small dry branch of the middle section of Kickapoo
Creek runs south between the lane and the railroad, and on
the east side of this creek two or three feet of its silt banks
have been eroded into gullies down to a hard caliche base.
Here a few hearths were embedded in the silt at different
depths but most seemed to be of intermediate age. There were
eight large partly patinated end scrapers, mostly roughly finished except on the cutting edges, two partly patinated side
scrapers, one knife, one graver, and one long stemmed and
barbed dart head of intermediate age were four~d~ One
handaxe, two gravers, two side scrapers, and a two-edged
pointed side scraper, of patinated older types were found,
which perhaps may be of Clear Fork culture.

Zite (5)
Site (5) is located one mile south of the north section of a
lane which makes a circuit around the Kickapoo mountains
and is about three and one-half miles southwest of Site (3)
and one and one-fourth miles southwest of Nipple Peak.
Just north of this site is a small rocky escarpment and there
is an earthen water reservoir near its base. A short distance
below the face of the escarpment north and west dry
branches of West Kickapoo Creek join to form that creek,
and around this juncture is a considerable area of gravel
deposit, and also of Lower Clear Fork Silt. Most of the later

44

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

deposits have been removed by erosion from above the Clear
Fork deposits here.
In these gravel and dark red silt deposits numerous old
hearths are embedded for a considerable distance both South
and north of the juncture of the creek branches. Most of
the artifacts found are of the Clear Fork culture, are heavily
patinated and are definitely eroding from the old red silts
and gravel altmg with the hearths around which they lie.
Apparently this site had been searched rather completely
for dart and spear heads, and with the exception of one No. 2
Clear Fork dart head and one rough leaf shaped blade the
others found were broken, of these three bases of the broad
fish tail shaped dart head were found. This type of heavily
patinated fish tail shaped dart head, is often found in Clear
Fork sites, and it is probable that the ancient fish tail type
may also be a component of that culture. Darts with divided
bases of many types were used throughout a long period of
time, and there are several different types of bifurcated
based dart heads which flare outward at the ends, and these
should not be mistaken for the broad and more crudely made
outward flared bases of a late unpatinated type of dart of the
same region. The type from Clear Fork sites is thick, broad
and always heavily patinated, it is wide in the middle,
barbed and sharply recessed in the middle of the base from
which point the base ends flare outward in the shape of the
tai! of a fish. These points have been found in greater or
lesser numbers in all Clear Fork sites. Two plain shouldered
and recessed thick dart bases were found, two broken drills,
and one whole one, and each was of a different shape, one
had a chisel shaped base and two had flat flake bases, one
broken No. 2 Clear Fork dart head was found. Seven complete heavy knives or picks, four hand axes, ten gouges,
fourteen side scrapers, seven large thick end scrapers, and
nine large knife fragments were found. Five of the knife
bases were of the recessed type. Three Clear Fork triangular
flake points, one graver and one spokeshave were found. In
addition to the above list some unpatinated artifacts were
also found in a gully in a later silt deposit near the southeast
end of the site.

Survey of Twenty Coke County Sites

45

Site (6)
Site (6) is located about one-half mile southeast of Site
(5) and on the same west branch of Kickapoo Creek where
it flows southward closely past the base of a conical mountain which stands out in the middle of the flat valley, about
one and one-half miles from the Kickapoo Mountains which
lie northeast of it, and farther away from the mountains to
the northwest. At the north foot of the mountain is an
eroded slope in dark red silt which contains many hearths
and quantities of broken up flint which is mostly unpatinated.
Above the camp deposit is the debris of a white man’s house
of about thirty years ago. Someone has completely removed
the artifacts from the Indian site, and the house also is gone.
Considerable flaked flint occurs on the lower lying terrace
above the creek ~t the west base of the mountain, but the
principal occupation of the site was at the south base of the
mountain on a red gravelly stream terrace, and here are
many hearths and piles of flint flakes of two different periods
of occupation. The older flints were mostly patinated, and
of these there were ten side scrapers, five rough rounded
scrapers, two spokeshaves, and two triangular flake points
of Clear Fork type. In addition there were seven unpatinated end scrapers, one oval mano, and two late small dart
heads, and one large barbed spear head with ends broken.
In addition were two large square based barbed dart bases.
On the plain near the creek are scattered recent hearths,
surrounded by unpatinated end scrapers, and these occur in
groups at intervals on the flood plain, all the way north up
the creek from Site (6) to the south edge of Site (5), and
probably are remains of a rather late occupation. Site (6)
probably was occupied at ~east three or more different times,
judging from the accumulation of artifacts of at least three
different stages of patination and types of workmanship. It
is probable that Clear Fork men, men of the intermediate
ages, and then men who used the very latest unpatinated
forms of end scrapers and oval manos inhabited the site.
The writer knows of no instance where a conical shaped
mountain which sets off at some distance in a valley or plain,
separated from the other mountains of a region, where there

Texas ArcheologicaI and PaleontologicaI Society

are any signs of even a dry stream or a weak spring ever
having been nearby that does not have a camp site near its
base.

Apparently the round mountains which stand off

away from the others served as outlook places where Indians
could survey activities in large areas of surrounding lowlands and also as landmarks by means of which one could
locate the villages at their bases from distances of many
miles across the plains.

In many cases the bed rock stones

on the summits are still reddened from ancient signal fires.

Site (7) is located on East Kickapoo Creek one mile north
and one mile east of the town of Bronte, here the creek
crosses an east and west lane, and the site is south of both
the road and the creek. A steep lone mountain rises not far
south of the lane, on top of which is a monument of the U. S.
Geodetic Survey.

A large area near the stream is covered

with hearths and piles of unpatinated flint flakes and fragments, which probably were left by the latest stone age
occupants of the site. The vertical creek banks here show no
signs of other than surface, or near surface hearths. A roammoth’s tooth had eroded from the grhvel stratum at the bottom of the bank here, but this was far below any signs of
human activity. South of the main creek some deep gullies
cut into a gravel covered slope which is studded with large
rounded off, and polished, San Angelo conglomerate boulders. There are many hearths embedded in the top of the
gravel there and these hearths are surrounded by much man
fractured and flaked flint, which is mostly patinated. This
site is large in area but it evidently has been so thoroughly
searched for artifacts by successive generations of boys from
the nearby town that one now is unable to get enough fragments of implements with which to identify the culture
types used there. A ’few unpatinated end scrapers were
found in the latest occupied portion of the site, a small area
close to the creek on the west end. The polished conglomerate boulders here had the shining appearance of being sleet

Survey o] Twenty Coke County Sites

47

t

I

Plate 5
Location

of

twenty

archeological

sites

in

Coke

County.

48

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

covered when the writer first saw them on a cold day.. The
flint debris and hearths on the slope below these polished
boulders have some appearance of age in their white patina°
tion, but it would be necessary to excavate to be able to. find
enough artifacts to make any estimates relating to the flint
cultures. It would seem that these shining boulders were an
attraction to stone age man wherever they occurred, as in
every place where they have been found a camp site either
surrounds them, or is very close to them.

Site (8) is located three miles southwest of Bronte where
a high rocky escarpment known as Cedar Mountain rises
close beside the Colorado River, on its north bank. A small
dry creek cuts into the south base of Cedar Mountain as the
creek enters the Colorado River and a small camp is located
on a shelf at the southwest base of the mountain and on the
east bank of the creek. Here are piles of broken flint and
many burnt rock hearths, which are embedded either in the
surface or just beneath it. Several unpatinated end and side
scrapers and half of a shallow rounded metate were found.
This metate shows the fine peck marks of the sharpening of
its shallow basin, and of the rounding off of its edges by the
same peck method. Here also the nearness to a town probably explains the absence of projectile points. This small
site was thickly covered with the recent burnt rock mound
deposits of the Colorado River region, which evidently are
of no great age, and have no cultural or time connections
with the ancient burnt rock deposits associated with the
Clear Fork Culture. Only in two sites were any artifacts
found which resemble Clear Fork Culture types in Coke
County outside of the mountain valleys on the head waters
of Kickapoo Creek in the northeast corner of Coke County.
No sites which contained Clear Fork darts and gouges were
found in the rest of Coke County.

Site (9) is located on Mountain Creek at a distance of
about one mile northeast of the town of Robert Lee. Mou~atain Creek is a large creek which flows in from the north

Survey oS Twenty Coke County Si~es

49

through Robert Lee to there join the Colorado River. Here
there are numerous surface hearths of large rounded stones
on top of the high east side creek banks and much hearth
debris is also on a flood plain at a much lower level on the
west side in an old cultivated field. The site is located where
a natural sandstone dyke crosses the stream from east to
west. The rounded stone hearths on top of the bluff on the
east side were surrounded by much broken flint and an
unpatinated hand axe made similarly to those of the ancient
Clear Fork Culture, a large oval mano stone and some unpatinated end scrapers were found. This mano had been
worn down into wedge shape, but despite this form of wear,
which seems to have been an ancient method of use, the
writer does not think that this surface site is a very old one.
In the flood plain field on the east side two large oval mano
stones and another unpatinated hand axe were found but
the site had been almost completely denuded of projectile
points, probably by boys from the nearby town. One thick
barbed and stemmed point with a recessed base was found.

site (lo)
Site (10) is located about one and one-half miles south of
Highway 158 as it nears the town of Robert Lee and is a
small site in a cultivated field about one-half mile southwest
of the air beacon which is east of Robert Lee. Here there
is an area covered with considerable burnt rock debris and
flint and in it were found one square ended oval mano stone,
two flint ball hammerstones, two square based flint knives,
one unpatinated dart head had an expanded convex base,
and was stemmed and shouldered, and another dart head
must have been of an earlier type picked up and brought into
the site as it was patinated and had a bifurcated base of long
mammalate shape similar to the Folsom types. There also
were two side scrapers. Most of the flint was unpatinated,
one hammerstone was patinated and the other not.
Site (11)
Site (11) is located on Cow Creek, which crosses Highway
158 between Bronte and Robert Lee. On the north side of
the road a small creek branch enters Cow Creek from the

5O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

northwest and hearths project from the soil surface along
both banks of Cow Creek for a considerable distance north,
and also between it and the small creek branch.

On the

south side of the highway hearths are scattered along both
creek banks for about one-half mile south, to where ruins
of an old bridge cross Cow Creek. On the south side a large,
thick and round mano stone was exposed on the creek bank
margin by recent erosion where it had been covered about
six inches in depth. Six unpatinated end scrapers were
found around hearths, and four patinated side scrapers similar to the diverse forms and thick shapes found most often
in Clear Fork sites. Also one of the flake points of the type
where two widely separated flaked edges come to a point,
these also usually are found most frequently in Clear Fork
Culture sites, however neither darts, nor gouges of that culture were found. A square based knife and a long fish tail
shaped dart of gray patination were found there. The hearths
in this site are embedded in unbroken sod and have the appearance of recentness, although some of the artifacts from
a gravelly slope do not. It is evident that several occupations
must have occurred, and the older artifacts have been eroded
out onto the later occupation levels. A hearth showed an
almost round ring of rounded stones with earth in the center,
forty inches in diameter. On digging out the earth filled
center, a flat rock lined round basin was revealed, and the
reddened stones and traces of charcoal showed that it had
been used as a fire pit. In this area some sandstone boulders
and ledges in the creek have produced water holes behind
them, and it is evident that the area has been occupied at
several different times, but most of the camp debris seems to
be not more than half covered with soil. Considering that so
large an area was covered with surface hearths there were
relatively few artifacts to be found.
Site (12)
Site (12) is located on Highway 208 about seven miles
northwest of the town of Robert Lee, and on the west side of
the road. After crossing Yellow Wolf Creek a clump of very
tall pecan trees may be seen several hundred yards north-

Survey o~ Twenty Coke County Sites

west of the bridge, the site is north of the grove on a small
rise of land above a bend in the creek.

Here is a group of

the tallest and largest pecan trees the writer ever saw, the
largest was four feet and seven inches in diameter and about
one hundred feet tall, and was one of four large trees in
three quarters of a ring, as though these giant trees had
sprouted around the stump of a much larger tree. Evidently
this site had been located because of the pecan grove in a
region where there are very few large trees. The site is composed of surface hearth rings of large rounded stones which
project halfway out of the soil, like most other Coke County
sites. Here several unpatinated end scrapers were found.
Across south from the pecan grove is a vertical creek bank
about forty or fifty feet high, and which extends for a considerable distance around a creek bend, and the length of this
was examind from the dry creek bed below, and there were
no signs of middens or hearths anywhere. This high bank
seems to be of the gravel and rounded boulder composition,
probably pleistocene, which is so characteristic of Coke
County valleys, and this formation occupies the space up
from the original Permian nearly to the present soil surface.
On examination of the top of this high bank a few hearth
rings were seen embedded in the unbroken soil surface grass
roots.
Site (20)
Site (20) is located several hundred yards from the road
up Yellow Wolf Creek, but on the east side of the highway,
northeast of the same creek bridge and about opposite to
Site (12). Here a very long high bank on the north side of
the creek is visible from the road. An examination of this
bank from the dry creek bed below showed about the same
construction as on the west side of the highway downstream
and there was no visible evidence of human occupation in
this long section of high bank. Return to the road was made
along the bluff tops until a draw was crossed which opened
into the creek from the north. Here the creek bank is not
so high as farther east but was thirty or more feet high and
vertical in most places. On the west side of the draw a gen-

52

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

tle slope draws down from the hill above to the bluff edge.
In this space were a number of hearths embedded in the
grass and these were composed of small rings of large water
rounded stones from the stream bed. Here no scrapers were
found, but two unpatinated dart heads were, one was plain
leaf shaped and one had the latest used form of bifurcated
dart base found in Texas. The end of the base of such a
point is recessed and the forked processes are spreading,
rather than dependent as most of the early forms are, with
the exception of the ancient spreading fish-tail type. Two
side scrapers and the base of a large rough knife were found.
The side scrapers were the only. patinated artifacts and may
belong to an earlier occupation of the site. A portion of the
site was on an eroded slope, but most of the hearths of the
area were half embedded in grass roots, and did not have
any appearance of age. Half of a rounded edged oval mano
stone, which had been used on both faces was found beside
one of the hearths. The hearths were scattered for some
distance back up the slope from above the edge of the creek
bank, and on down to the very edge of the top of the vertical
creek bank, and some of the hearth stones hung loosely out
of the edges of the hearths so that when dislodged they fell
straight down into the creek bed. Such hearths must have
been some distance back of the brink when used, and this
shows that several feet of very firm bank underlaid about
half the way up by a sandstone ledge must have caved off
since the hearths were made, and yet the hearths farther
back up the slope stuck half way out of the grass roots.
Site (13)
Site (13) is on the main western branch of Kickapoo
Creek down stream below sites (5) and (6), and this site
lies over two miles northwest of the town of Bronte, and
almost south of the Kickapoo Mountains’. At this place on
the creek below a corner in a country lane a natural conglomerate stone dyke crosses the creek and impounds a hole
of water above it. The creek banks along both sides were
strewn with hearths which had diameters of three or four
fe~t, and were composed of the usual water rounded hearth

Survey oS Twenty Coke County Sites

53

stones of Coke County which are larger than those so used
farther east. There were many man made flint flakes scattered around but very few formed artifacts were found.
One late form, unpatinated, spreading bifurcated based, dart
head was found, and no scrapers. The absence of scrapers
seems strange as most sites in the Abilene region have been
picked rather clean of dart heads and knives, but one usually
can still find from two to three to a dozen or more end scrapers in even the smaller late sites of that region, but this is
not true of Coke County sites and this leads one to wonder
if scrapers ever were found there in any considerable numbers, and if not so why not, since the area must have been
well within the range of the bison where usually large unpatinated end scrapers are abundant. Some of these hearths
with no surrounding artifacts might have been used by the
historic Kickapoo Indians who are said to have hunted over
the region about the time Fort Chadbourne was built, and
to have camped on aid given the creek its name.
Site (!4)
Site (14) is situated on Valley View Creek about six miles
south of the town of Robert Lee. Here the creek crosses
Highway 208 from the west, and there are collections of
hearths on the eroded edges of the tops of the banks on both
sides of the road. The hearths on the south side contained no
artifacts except one late type bifurcated dart head, but a collection of hearths on the north side, located farther from
the road, were surrounded by much flint and a few artifacts
which seemed older than most of those usually found in the
region, as all but two of eight found were patinated. These
were one large rough oval shaped blade, one large end and
side scraper, one long side scraper similar to a Clear Fork
type, two oval rough knives, one heavy end scraper, a section of a large twisted shaft knife, and one complete unpatinated blade of long triangular shape, which has widely
bevelled edges and a nearly square base, and is nearly sixeighths of an inch in thickness in the center, although well
made.

54

Texas Archeo~ogica~ and Pa~eo~toZog~ca~ Societ, y

Sites (15) and (I6)
In the northwest portion of Coke County a country lane
makes a large oval circuit from the highway at Silver,
around the Jameson Oil Field over to the high banks of the
Colorado River, and then back to the highway farther north.
At the end farthest from the paved highway the lane winds
around northward on top of the highest terrace above the
Colorado River.

In making the circuit south from Silver

the debris of an Indian camp site is seen in the road when
one first makes a near approach to the river banks, and as the
road winds around the circuit and starts to turn northward
again at a place above a bend in the Colorado many hearths
and much debris of a site may be seen in and beside the
lane, and in the eroded hillsides below the lane at this place.
On both visits approaching thunder storms drove the writer
back to the paved road before a complete search could be
made, but no artifacts were found in either of these areas
although there was much broken flint.

(is)
This site is located on the eroded east ter~race of a branch
of Oak Creek which flows south about one-half mile east of
old Fort Chadbourne on the Wylie Ranch and is definitely a
Clear Fork Culture site. A number of Clear Fork gouges
were found there on the first examination of the site about
four years ago, and on a recent visit the artifacts found were
three gouges, one flint punch, one round thick scraper, one
spokeshave, one large flake base-grave~, one combination
side and end scraper, and two dart heads. One dart head
was of broad fish tail type and one was shouldered and
stemmed, and also the base of a square based knife. A Pinto
Point was also found in this site.
Site (19)
Site (19) is on the west side of Highway 70 just north of
the Colorado River bridge south of the town of Bronte. On

Survey o~ Twenty Coke County Sites

55

the high river terrace several hundred yards west of the
bridge the hearth debris of an Indian camp site is scattered
o~ver an eroded area.

Much broken flint and mussel shells,

and fire reddened hearth stones are exposed there, but the
artifacts have been removed. One long narrow flake scraper
was all that was found, this was made by flaking a long
narrow sliver off of a rounded flint nodule and then running
a minute retouch along one edge and up around one end to
a point.

The original crust was left all over the rest except

for the flat face left when the flake was made.
Conclusions
Nearly all of the sites in Coke County with the exception
of those in the northeast corner of the County have an appearance of having been made not very long ago, a few
hundreds of years at most, but surprisingly no arrowheads
of the small late pottery types were found with the exception
of a very few found in the older occupied region near Fort
Chadbourne, and none was found in the plains region where
the large stones of the hearths protrude from the grass roots
as though placed there quite recently.

Also

not one

potsherd was found in any campsite in Coke County,
although potsherds have been reported from both east and
west of Coke County. The great scarcity of both the large
and small forms of end scrapers is also surprising in that
the area evidently was within the bison range.
Whenever high vertical banks of either creeks, or of the
Colorado River were seen, an examination was made of them
from below by walking down the dry beds of the streams,
and this was made uncommonly easy by a nearly rainless
season.

In all of the area no hearths were to be seen below

grass roots depth except in the mountain valleys of the Clear
Fork Culture area in the northeast corner of Coke County.

56

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

REFERENCES

(1) Ray, Cyrus N., Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region,
Bulletin of The Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society. Vol. 16, 1944-45.

(2)

Ray, Cyrus N., The Facts Concerning The Clear Fork
Culture. American Antiquity. Vol. 13, No. 4, April 1948.

(3)

Sayles, E. B., A Rock Shelter in Coke County, Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society.
Vol. 2, 1930, pp. 33-40, Plates 4, 5, and 6.

(4) Ray, Cyrus N., The Clear Fork Culture Complex, Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Vol. 10, 1938, Plates 24 and 25.
(5) Ray, Cyrus N., Permian Polished Boulders of Texas,
Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Vol. 17, 1946, Plates 14, 16, and 17.

(6)

Kirkland, Forrest, Petroglyphs of the Abilene District,
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society. Vol. 13, 1941, Plates 11 and 12.

