Archaeological Survey o] McGee Bend Reservoir

57

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF McGEE BEND

RESERVOIR: A .PRELIMINARY REPORT’
ROBERT L.

STEPHENSOIq

Introduction
Preliminary plans having been completed, a large dam
and reservoir is proposed for construction on the Angelina
River in East Texas. This dam, known as McGee Bend Dam
and Reservoir, will be a concrete and earth fill structure
130 feet high with 1,000 feet of concrete fill and 10,920 feet
of earth fill. The normal pool level will be 173 feet above
sea level and the maximum flood pool will be 187.4 feet above
sea level. This dam is to be constructed primarily as a power
plant and secondarily as a flood control and water conservation measure.
The dam itself is located on the Angelina River in northern
Jasper County 25 miles upstream from the junction of the
Angelina and Neches Rivers. The reservoir will flood some
90 river miles up the Angelina, as well as 45 miles up the
Attoyac River, 45 miles up Ayish Bayou and 20 miles up Bear
Creek. The latter are all tributaries of the Angelina River.
Along the Angelina River the maximum width of the reservoir will be nearly 9 miles. This will form one of the largesi’
reservoirs in Texas, and will extend from Jasper County into
Sabine, San Augustine, Angelina and Nacogdoches Counties.
The Angelini River, a tributary of the Neches River, flows
southeast through the central part of East Texas. Several
major tributaries enter the Angelina from the north; none
from the south. This area lies in the physiographic province
of the coastal plains and is known as the eastern timbers
area of that province.~ The dam is located at the southern
edge .of a geographic rise in the general terrain. South of
Thls report is preliminary and based on surface findings only. When recomm,.~ded excavation of selected sites in this area is completed, a final report wilr_
Data based on E~in Raiz
W}~lt~.e Atw~d, Giun & Co., 1939.

Map

of

the

Landforms

of

the

Unit~

S~tes.

58

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the dam the average elevation above sea level is around 85
feet to 100 feet. North of the dam the terrain is considerably
more hilly and the average elevation is about 150 feet higher,
rising and becoming more hilly to the north.

The soil

throughout the area is extremely sandy with many deposits
of a very red clay. This red clay becomes more dominant
toward the northern end of the reservoir. Ferruginous
sandstones, brown and tan sandstones, chert, jasper, hematite, limonite and petrified woods (mostly hardwoods and
palms) are the common native rocks.
The rivers in this area have shallow basins with only one
terrace in evidence in most sections. The present floodplains
are wide and become inundated by periodic floods every
third year.~ These floods are often quite severe and the
Angelina has been known .to rise as much as 10 feet over
night. The climate is very humid with 60 inches of average
annual rainfall. Consequently, the river bottoms are covered with a dense, swampy vegetation of hardwoods,
palmettoes and other temperate zone mesophytic jungle
flora. The areas away from the river bottoms are covered
with a heavy growth of pine forests.4 Wild game is extremely abundant over most of the area at the present time.
Archaeological Survey
Under the direction of Dr. Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr., Director of the River Basin Surveys, the author made an archaeological survey of the areas to be flooded by this reservoir.
This project is a part of the River Basin Surveys, a cooperative program of archaeological salvage between the Corps
of Engineers, Dept. of the U. S. Army, and the National Park
Service, and is under the direction and supervision of the
Smithsonian Institution.~
In the winter of 1939-40, The University of Texas-W.P.A.
program undertook a similar survey of this section of East
3 Data £rorn Hydrographs--Dara "B," U. $. Engineer Office, Galveston, Texas,
1938.
4 Parks, H. B., Corey. V. L., et al., 1938.
5 The permission of the Smithsonian Institution for publication of this article
has been kindly granted the author by Dr. Frank tL H. Roberts, Jr.

Archaeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir

59

Texas. Field work was accomplished by Mr. Gus E. Arnold,
and over 200 sites were located in 15 counties.

Of these

sites, 23 are located in the area covered by the present survey. Arnold’s unpublished report was used as a base from
which to start the present survey and proved to be very
accurate and informative. The artifacts collected by Arnold
from the 23 sites in this area were re-examined and included
in the study of the artifacts from the present survey.~
The McGee Bend survey was begun in early January,
1948, and carried to completion on April 10, 1948. The 23
sites reported by Arnold were revisited and an additional 57
sites were located, making a total of 80 sites in all. Of these,
one is an artificial mound with a large accompanying village;
one is probably a small, artificial mound; and two others are
possibly very large, artificial mounds. The nature of the
latter three is not yet definitely known. Extensive test
trenching will be required to determine this point. The
remaining 76 sites are all open, occupational areas of varying
sizes and intensities of occupation. Many of these are small,
temporary camp sites from which little information can be
gained. Others appear to have been large villages and extensive excavation has been recommended at these sites.
Acknowledgments
To the Corps of Engineers, Dept. of the U. S. Army, and to
the National Park Service is due sincere gratitude for providing funds to make this survey possible. During the course
of the survey, the District Office of the Corps of Engineers in
Galveston, under the direction of Col. B. L. Robinson, was
very cooperative and helpful as were the Resident Engineer,
Mr. Fred Johnson, and his assistant, Mr. Tom Porter, at the
Jasper Field Office. Sincere thanks is expressed to the many
informants and landowners throughout the reservoir area
-who provided much valuable information in locating sites.
Also, during and subsequent to the survey, the Dept. of Anthropology of The University of Texas, under the chairman6 Information and materla| from Arnold’s survey
Anthropology, University o£ Texas, Austin, Texas.

is

on

file

at

the

Dept.

6O

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

ship of Dr. T. N. Campbell, extended its complete facilities
to the survey. The Dept. provided file information and laboratory and storage space.

Dr. Campbell and Mr. Alex

Krieger of that department gave unstintingly of their time
and valuable technical advice and criticisrm

Mr. Krieger

was especially helpful in the classification of pottery types.
Grateful acknowledgment is made to all these people.
Site Analysis~
41-42D6-10" is a large, Alto Focus village site located on
Bear Creek. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of
Dunkin Incised and Pennington Punctate Incised types.~ An
arrow point, an abrader and several Bosque Stemmed dart
points were also found.
41-42D6-9~ is a small, artificial (?) mound on Bear Creek
near the above site. It is 41& feet high and 30 feet in diameter. No artifacts were found here.
41-43C4-6" is a large, village site on Bear Creek near the
above two sites. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and
of Dunkin Incised, Pease Brushed-Incised, plain, Davis Incised, Pennington Punctate-Incised, and Belcher Ridged
types. Perdiz Pointed Stemmed arrowpoints, metates, and
flake scrapers were also found. The site shows Alto Focus
occupation with a secondary occupation in Bossier Focus
times.
41-43C4-3 is a small, Alto Focus campsite on Bear Creek.
Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of Dunkin Incised.
Pennington Punctate-Incised and plain types.
41-43C4-1" is a large, Alto Focus village site on Bear Creek.
Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of Dunkin Incised,
plain, and Belcher Ridged types. Two sherds of iYIarksville
Incised and one each of Poynor Engraved and Patton Engraved also occurred. Other artifacts found are: pitted
7 Those sites indicated by an asterisk have be~ recommended for further
excavation.
8 In all eases the pottery types are listed in order of their dominance in the
site.

Archaeological Survey o5 McGee Bend Reservoir

61

manos, a scraper, a hammerstone and a Perdiz Pointed Stemmed arrowpoint.
41-43C7-1 is a small, Alto Focus campsite on a tributary
of Bear Creek. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and
the few identifiable sherds are Davis Incised type.
41o43C7-5 is a small campsite on a tributary of Bear Creek.
No artifacts were found here.
41-43C7-2 is a small campsite on a tributary of Bear Creek.
Pottery is all plain, sand tempered. An abrader and a
projectile point were also found.
41-42D9-1 is a smal!, Alto Focus campsite on a tributary
of Bear Creek. Pottery is dominantly plain, sand tern-’
pered, but Dunkin Incised and Davis Incised wares also
occurred. Other artifacts found are an abrader, a scraper
and two arrowpoints.
41-42D9-2" is a large, Alto Focus village site on Bear
Creek. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of plain,
and Dunkin Incised types. A scraper and two Bosque
Stemmed dart points were also found.
41-42D9-3 is a small campsite on Bear Creek. Pottery is
dominantly sand tempered but the only identifiable sherd
is Taylor Engraved.
41-42D9-4 is a small campsite of indeterminate cultural
affiliation, located on Bear Creek.
41-42D9-6 is reported to be an old Indian cemetery, but
no graves nor artifacts were found here.
41-42D9-7" is a small, Alto Focus campsite on Ayish
Bayou. The few pot-sherds recovered are dominantly bone
tempered and of Dunkin Incised type.
41-42D9-8 is a small campsite overlooking Ayish Bayou
near the above site. No artifacts were recovered here.
41-42D9-9 is a natural salt lick around which artifacts
are reputed to have been found. Possibly this was an
aboriginal salt supply.

Texas Archeo~og~cal and Paleontological Society

62

41-42D6-11 is a small campsite on Ayish Bayou.

No arti-

facts were recovered here.
41-42D6-12 is a small, non-pottery campsite on Ayish
Bayou.

Several scrapers, two Ellis Stemmed dart~ points

and one triangular dart point were found here.
41-42D6-1" is a large village site on the east bank of Ayish
Bayou. Alto Focus occupation is dominant here with a
later occupation by Frankston Focus and/or Bossier Focus
people. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered with Dunkin
Incised, Pennington Punctate-Incised, Davis Incised, plain,
Hickory Fine Engraved, Weches Fingernail Impressed, Holly
Fine Engraved and Harrison Bayou Incised types occurring.
Killough Pinched and Belcher Ridged types were found in
relatively small percentages. All projectile points were
indeterminate in type.
41-42D6-2" is a large village site on the west bank of
Ayish Bayou. In all respects it is very similar to the above
site and possibly is a part of it.
41-42D9-5" is an artificial mound site with a large occompanying village. It is located 5n the Angelina River in the
southern corner of San Augustine County. The mound is
100 feet in diameter, circular, truncated, with top diameter
of 50 feet. It is now about 12 feet high, but has been higher
in the past. The fill is composed of yellow and gray sand
with some pockets of yellow clay. The village area is ten
or more acres in area, and occupation extends to a depth
of over two feet. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered
and of Dunkin Incised and plain types. An abrader, several
scrapers, a chopper, a small drill, and two arrow points
were also found. Alto Focus occupation is implied. This
is the most important site in the area for further excavation
due to its similarity and probable relationship to the Davis
Mound Site.~
41-42D9-11 is a small campsite on the south side of the
9 Newell, H. P. and Krieger, A. D., The
County, :East Texas, manuscript in preparation.

Georg~ C.

Davis

Site,

Cherokee

Archaeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoi~

63

Angelina River opposite the above site. Very little material
was found here and the cultural affiliation is unknown.
41-42D9-10 is a small, Alto Focus campsite on the Angelina
River. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered with Dunkin
Incised and Pennington Punctate-Incised sherds occurring.
Two scrapers and an arrow point were also found.
41-42D8-1 is a campsite on the Angelina River. No material was collected here, but a private collection from the site
was observed. All projectile points are of the large, dart
point type and the owner stated that no pottery had .ever
been found here. Apparently this is a non-pottery site.
41-42D8-2,3,4, and 5 are small, indeterminate campsites on
the Angelina River.
41-42D8-6" is a small village site 2 miles south of the
Angelina River. All sherds are sand tempered and the landowner reports a boatstone having been found here some
years ago.
41-42D8-7 and 41-42D5-12 are small, indeterminate campsites on the Angelina River.
41-42D5-10" and 11 are small, Bossier Focus village sites
on the Angelina River. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of Pease Brushed-Incised type.
41-42D5-6, 7, and 18 are small, indeterminate campsites
on the Angelina River.
41-42D4-6 is a small, Alto Focus campsite on the Angelina
River. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of Dunkin
Incised type.
41-42D4-5 is a small, non-pottery campsite on the Angelina
River, Scrapers and Sterrett Stemmed dart points were
found here.
41-42D4-4" is a small, Bossier Focus village site 2 miles
west of the Angelina River. Pease Brushed Incised ware
is dominant here.

64

Texas Archeotogical and Paleontological ~ociety

41-42D4-7 is reputed to be the historic camp of a group of
Indians led by "Chief Popher."

No material was recovered

here.
41-42D5-13 is a small, indeterminate campsite on the
Angelina River.
41-42D5-9~ is a large village site of Alto Focus occupation
with a later occupation by Bossier Focus people. Pottery
is dordinantly clay tempered and of Dunkin Incised, Maddox
Band Engraved and plain types. Scrapers, a large blade,
two Alba Barbell arrow points and one Cuney Stemmed
arrow point were also found.
41-42D5-8~ is a small village site on Harvey Creek, a
small tributary of the Angelina River. Alto Focus and
Frankston Focus occupation both seem to be indicated, The
pottery is dominantly both clay and sand tempered. The
few identifiable sherds are plain ware and Maydelle Incised.
A pitted mano, several scrapers, a triangular dart point and
two abraders were also found. This site, the above site,
and the following six sites, all on or near Harvey Creek,
represent a relative]y small area with a heavy concentration
of aboriginal population. Apparently this concentration of
sites took place over a long period of time from early prepottery times to the historic period.
41-42D5-1~ is a large village site on Harvey Creek. Alto
and Bossier Foci are both represented here in Dunkin In~cised, Pennington Punctate-Incised, Weches Fingernail Impressed and Pease Brushed-Incised wares. Four sherds of
Patton Engraved ware may indicate historic Allen Focus
influence. Alba Barbed arrow points, Ellis Stemmed dart
points, several scrapers, a polished celt, an abrader, a metate
and several pitted manos were also found here. There is
some indication here of a sectional differentiation of artifacts
within the site.
41-42D5-4" and 5* are two nearly adjoining sites on Harvey
Creek, each representing a large non-pottery village. The
potsherds are almost entirely sand tempered and are very
rare. On the other hand, large, heavy projectile points

ArchaeoIog~.caI Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir

65

(Ellis Stemmed, Bosque Stemmed and Sterrett Stemmed)
manos, metates, scrapers, etc., recovered are almost all of
early types. Apparently a pre-pottery culture is represented here, or at least a very early pottery culture.
41-42D5-2" and 3~ are two related sites on Harvey Creek
representing large, Alto Focus villages with later Bossier
Focus occupation. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered
and of Pease Brushed-Incised, Maddox Band Engr.aved,
Dunkin Incised, Pennington Punctate-Incised, Harrison
Bayou Incised types. Frankston Focus is also represented
in a minor way here by Poynor Engraved, Bullard Brushed,
Maydelle Incised, and Killough Pinched sherds. The landowner reports that during a heavy flood here some years
ago 25 or 30 whole vessels were washed out of this site. A
metate, an abrader, several scrapers, and several Perdiz
Pointed Stemmed arrow points were also found here.
41-42D5-14 is a small, indeterminate campsite on Harvey
Creek. Bone tempered sherds were found.

Plate 6
Sites

of

the

Me’Gee

Ben

Reser\,oir

~.rea.

66

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

41-42D4-1 and 11 are small, indeterminate campsites on the
south side of the Angelina River.

Probably Alto Focus is

represented here.
41-42D4-3 is a small, Frankston Focus campsite on the
Angelina River.

Clay tempered sherds of Bullard Brushed

ware were found here.
41-42D4-2,9,10, and 12 are small, in~teterminate campsites
on the Angelina River.
41-42D4-13" and 14" may be large, artificial mound sites
within the floodplain of the north side of the Angelina River.
Here, on otherwise level terrain and separated from the
foothills, are two large, elliptical knolls or "mounds." Each
is around 70 feet high and 500 feet in diameter with a terrace about half way up the sides of each.
reported from here, but none were found.

Artifacts are
Only extensive

test trenching will determine whether or not these are artificial mounds.
41-42D1-4 is a small, Frankston Focus village site on the
Angelina River. Pottery is dominantly bone tempered and
of Bu!lard Brushed type.
41-42D1-2" and 3 are non-pottery village sites on the north
side of the Angelina River. Artifacts recovered here are
Gary Stemmed, Ellis Stemmed, Bosque Stemmed, and Sterrett Stemmed dart points, scrapers, a pitted stone, and a
drill.
41-42D1-1 is a small, non-pottery site on the west side of
the Attoyac River. Artifacts found were crude and indeterminate in type.
41-42D2-2" is a small, Bossier Focus campsite on the upper
Attoyac River. Pottery is dominantly sand tempered yet
Pease Brushed-Incised and Maddox Band Engraved sherds
were identified. Also 3 Marksville Incised sherds were
found here.

Archaeological Survey oS McGee Bend Reservoir

67

41-42D2-1~ is a small, historic, Allen Focus site on the
upper Attoyac River. Bone tempered pottery is dominant
here and Patton Engraved sherds were identified.
41-42D2-3 is a small, Alto Focus village site on the upper
Attoyac River. A later Bossier Focus occupation .is apparent. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of Pease
Brushed-Incised, Maddox Band Engraved, Dunkin Incised
and Davis Incised wares.
41-42D2-4,6,7,13,14, and 15~ are small, indeterminate campsites on the Attoyac River.
41-42D2-12" is a large, Alto Focus village site on Attoyac
River. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and of plain,
Dunkin Incised, Pennington Punctate-Incised and Weches
Fingernail Impressed types. Trade sherds are of Harrison
Bayou Incised type. Scrapers, large blades, Ellis Stemmed,
Bosque Stemmed dart points, pitted and unpitted manos
and an abrader were also found. A short, broad, fluted
point was also found here that is not identifiable with any
of the "early man types" but may be similar to the San
Patrice point of northern Louisiana.,°
41-42D2-10" and 11~ are two components of a single, large,
Alto and Bossier Focus village site near the Attoyac River.
The former is the occupationa! area; the latter is probably
the agricultural area. Evidence of pre-white field clearing
is apparent here. In the occupational area, pottery is dominantly clay tempered, and Dunkin Incised, Harrison Bayou
Incised, Pease Brushed-Incised and a plain ware were identified.
41-42D2-8 and 9 are small, Alto Focus campsites on the
Attoyac River. The few identifiable sherds are of Dunkin
Incised type.
41-42D5-17" is a large, Alto and Bossier Focus village site
on the Attoyac River. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and Dunkin Incised, Pease Brushed-Incised, Harrison
Bayou Incised, plain, Maddox Band Engraved, Pennington

10 Webb.

C.

H.,

1946.

68

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Punctate-Incised, Crockett Curvilinear-Incised and Taylor
Engraved wares were identified. Pitted and unpitted manos,
scrapers, Ellis Stemmed, Bosque Stemmed and Sterrett
Stemmed triangular dart points, a polished celt and a hammerstone were also found.
41-42D5-15~ is a large, Alto Focus village site on the Attoyac River. Very little material was present on the surface,
but a large amount of material was recovered from a test
pit. Pottery is dominantly clay tempered and Pennington
Punctate-Incised, Davis Incised and plain wares were identified. Scrapers and an abrader were also found.
41-42D5-16 is a small, indeterminate campsite on the
Attoyac River.
41-42D4-8" is a large village site on the east bank of the
Attoyac River 3 miles north of the junction of that river
with the Angelina. Informants state that an "old Indian
trail" from Louisiana to central Texas crossed the Attoyac
near this site, and it is very possible that this was the crossing used by the Spanish under Moscoso in 1542." Pottery
is dominantly clay tempered and Dunkin Incised, plain, Harrison Bayou Incised, Maddox Band Engraved, and Pease
Brushed-Incised wares were identified. Unpitted manos,
scrapers, large blades and several dart points were also
found. Alto Focus occupation is represented here with a
later occupation by Bossier Focus peoples.
Summary and Conclusions
The present archaeological survey of McGee Bend Reservoir has provided only a tantalizing glimpse of what is to
be found in this area by further work and intensive excavation at selected sites. This excavation has been recommended and plans are now under way for securing the
means of accomplishing it. In summary several interesting
points may be made.
The historic Indian cultures of this region are a part of
the Southeastern Culture Province and are largely ascribed
I1 Swanton, J, R.,

1946, pp.

57-59.

Archaeological Survey o~. McGee Bend Reservoir

69

to the Hasinai groups. The Eyish, Nacogdoches, Nacau,
Nasoni, Anadarko, Nacachau, Naconish, Hainai, Nacono,
Nechaui, and Nabedachi tribes are reported to have inhabited the area circa 1650. Most of these groups were located
just slightly to the north and west of the McGee Bend area
but still within the general vicinity. The Eyish were reportedly living within the reservoir area from 1542 to 1801,
and concentrated on the Ayish Bayou. Early records state
that they differed considerably from the other Hasinai tribes.
The Cherokee are reported to have been in the area from
1828-1839.12
The archaeological results of this survey show occupation
of this area by at least five separate cultural groups. There
is indication of a non-l~ottery (if not a truly pre-pottery)
focus in at least 8 sites. The Gibson Aspect of early pottery
cultures is represented in 34 sites of Alto Focus affiliation.
In these sites Dunkin Incised, Pennington Punctate-Incised,
Davis Incised, Weches Fingernail Impressed, Holly FineEngraved, Hickory Fine-Engraved and Crockett CurvilinearIncised wares occurred. The Fulton Aspect of later pottery
cultures is represented in 22 sites of Bossier and Frankston
Foci affiliation. The Bossier Focus is indicated in 15 of
these by Pease Brushed-Incised, Maddox Band Engraved,
Belcher Ridged, and Taylor Engraved wares. Frankston
Focus is indicated in !0 sites by Bullard Brushed, Ki!lough
Pinched, Poynor Engraved, and Maydelle Incised wares.
The historic Allen Focus is represented by Patton Engraved
ware in 3 sites, only one of which provided more than one
sherd. None of these loci are cor~centrated in any particular geographic section of the McGee Bend Reservoir area.
Combinations of the above loci occurred in at least 12
sites. Alto and Bossier Foci are indicated in the same site
in 9 instances; Alto and Frankston Foci in 1; Alto, Bossier
and Frankston Foci in 2; Alto Focus alone in 17; Bossier
Focus alone in 4; Frankston Focus alone in 2; Allen Focus
alone in 1. Eight appear to be non-pottery sites, and 36 are
of indeterminate cultural affiliation. Trade sherds of Har12 Swantono

~’.

R.,

1946.

70

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

rlson Bayou Incised, Bowles Creek Plain, Wilkinson Punctate and Marksvi!le Incised wares occurred in 12 of the above
sites.

Five of these are of Alto Focus; 3 are of Alto-Bossier

Foci; 2 are of Alto-Frankston Foci; and 2 are of Alto BossierFrankston Foci. The sites in which Frankston Focus and
Allen Focus materials are represented produced only a small
number of definitive sherds. They probably do not represent
occupations by these people, but rather indicate trade with
them.
The cultural affiliations implied are largely determinable
on the basis of potsherd types. In the entire survey no artifacts of bone, shell or other materials than stone and pottery
were recovered. No influence from the Gulf Coast was
found but extensive influence from the pottery cultures of
Louisiana, including Marksville, appeared. Some influence
from Central Texas was found in the lithic artifacts made
of gray flint from that area. The dominant pottery type,
both in absolute numbers and in representation in numbers
of sites is Dunkin Incised ware. Thig and other Alto Focu~
wares comprise over half of all identifiable sherds. Bossier
Focus wares are second in quantitative significance. Other
wares are only present in very minor percentages. A plain
type of pottery is found in a large number of sites and is
here called "sand tempered." It is actually composed almost
entirely of sand with only enough clay included to hold the
sand together. This is considered to be a very old type of
pottery and at the Davis Site (Alto Mound) was found only
in the very earliest levels:,3 This type also occurs in some
of the earliest pottery sites throughout the southeast. It is
not presumed that this implies influence from any specific
areas of the southeast, but rather is a widespread type of
very early pottery and is included in this western extremity
of the Southeastern Culture Province.
The cultural sequences, as shown by this survey, indicate
that the area of the McGee Bend Reservoir was occupied at
some time or times by a non-pottery people; that the major
13 Newell, If. P. and Krieger, A. D., The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County,
East Texas. Manuscript in preparation.

Archaeological Survey o$ McGee Bend Reservoir

occupation of the area was by Alto Focus peoples between
the llth and 14th centuries A. D.; and that later some of
these same villages, as well as some new ones, were occupied
by Bossier Focus peoples between the 14th and 16th centuries A.D. The latter were in contact with the Frankston
Focus people and also, to a minor extent, with other group~
to the east. This latter contact to the east. may have existed
also in Alto Focus times. Whether Alto Focus developed
into Bossier Focus or was replaced by it is a matter for
speculation. At least it can be said that a very’large number
of Alto Focus sites also show Bossier Focus occupation and
there is certainly some implication of gradual development
from the one to the other.
REFERENCES CITED
Cory, V. L.; Parks, H. B., et al.
1937. Catalogue of the Flora of the State of Texas. Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, Bulletin 550.
Ford, J. A. and Willey, Gordon R.
1941. An Interpretation of the Prehistory of the Eastern
United States. American Anthropologist, Vol. 43.
Ford, J. A. and Willey, Gordon.
1945. The Tchefuncte Culture, on Early Occupation of the
Lower Mississippi Valley. Memoirs of the Society
for American Archaeology, No. 2.
Krieger, A. D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas. University of Texas Publication, No. 4640.
Martin, P. S., Quimby, G. I., Collier, D.
1947. Indians Before Columbus.
Press, Chicago, Illinois.

University of Chicago

Newe]l, H. P., and Krieger, A. D.
N. D. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, East
Texas. Manuscript in preparation.

72

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Parks, H. B., Cory, V. L., et al.
1938. Biological Survey o] the East Texas Big Thicket
Area. Huntsville, Texas.
Pearce, J. E.
1932. The Arch.aeoIogy o~ East Texas.
pologist, N. S., Vol. 34.

American Anthro-

Quimby, Geo. I., Jr.
1942. The Natchezan Culture Type. American Antiquity,
Vol. 7, No. 3.
Raiz, Erwin.
1939. Map o~ the Land]orms of the United States. Wallace,
Atwood, Ginn & Co.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers, No. 17, Globe, Arizona.
Smith, Victor J.
1936. The Pottery Horizons o] Texas. Bulletin, T.A.P.S.,
Vol. 8.
Stephenson, R.L.
1947. Archaeological Survey o~ Whitney Basin. Bulletin
of T.A.P.S., Vol. 18.
Swanton, John R.
1946. The Indians o] ~he Southeastern United S$ates. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 137.
Walker, W.M.
1935. A Caddo Burial Site at Natchitoches, La. SmithsonJan Misc. Co!lections, Vol. 94, No. 14.
Walker, Winslow M.
1936. The Troyville Mounds, Catahoula Parish, La. B.A.E.
Bulletin 113.

Archaeological Survey o] McGee Bend Reservoir

73

Webb, C. H. and Monroe, Dodd, Jr.
1938. Further Excavation oS the Gahagan Mound; Connections with a Florida Culture. Bulletin, T.A.P.S.,
Vol. 11.
Webb, C. H.
1941. Pottery Types from the Belcher Mound Site. Bulletin, T.A.P.S., Vol. 13.
Webb, C. H.
1944. Stone Vessels ]rom a Northeast Louisiana Site.
American Antiquity, Vol. IX, No. 4.
Webb, C. H.
1945. A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, La.
Bulletin, T.A.P.S., Vol. 16.
Webb,
1946.

C. H.
Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone Artifacts ]rom
Northwest Louisiana. Bulletin, T.A.P.S., Vol. 17.

Webb, C. H.
1948. Evidences o] Pre-Pottery Cultures in Louisian~.
American Antiquity, Vol. XIII, No. 3.
White, T. E.
N. D. Summary Report o] the Paleontological Resources
o~ the Texas Region. Unpublished report of the
River Basin Surveys.

