Pictographs of Indian Masks at~ Hueco Tanks

PICTOGRAPHS OF INDIAN MASKS AT
HUECO TANKS
By FORREST KIRKLAND
During the summer of 1939, the writer and his wife spent ten
days at the historic Hueco Tanks, located about thirty-five miles
northeast of El Paso, copying and studying the many interesting pictographs painted on the rocks near the water holes. The location
consists of several huge masses of bare igneous rocks which rise
out of a desert plain to a height of over 400 feet. The formation,
which is very irregular, covers roughly about one square mile.
There are crevices and depressions at a number of places near the
base of the rocks that collect and ho!d rain water, like large cisterns, from one rain until the next; hence the name Hueco Tanks.
This supply of good water must have been a great attraction to
the Indian, as it was to the "forty-niners" and other early travelers
whose names are mingled with the Indian pictures on the wails of
the shelters at the base of the rocks. During our investigation, we
examined more than 60 shelters which had smoke covered walls and
ceilings and 37 of these contained pictographs. We also found pictographs under 13 overhanging cliffs and in 23 niches and crevices
too small to have been used as living quarters. The picture sites
are distributed over all of the rugged parts of the formation, but
the shelters near the l~rge water holes contain the greatest number
and variety of pictures.
Little Damage So Far by Vandalism

In view of the fact that the site was a favorite camping place
during pioneer days and a picnic ground in recent years for the
people of El Paso, it seems remarkable that the pictographs have
suffered so little from vandalism. Many of the designs are dim
from natural weathering, particularly blowing sand, but few have
been .seriously injured by the thousands of names and dates carved
and written on the rocks.
Juan Escontrias, who lives at the place and whose family has
owned the site for many years, shows a keen appreciation for its
historic value and is to be commended for his intelligent supervision

Texas Archeologiccd and Paleontological Society

10

of the site as a private park.

We are deeply indebted to him and

his wife for the many courtesies shown us while we were there.
As might be expected at such a well used watering place, there
are many kinds and ages of pictographs at Hueco Tanks.

Some are

undoubtedly very old, many are late prehistoric, and others are so
recent that they show men wearing European clothes.

Indeed one

group showing cavalrymen painted apparently with Indian colors,
overlaps a name and date of 1849. These pictures were classified
as the work of the white man, but it is quite possible that they were
made by an Indian who visited the site later than 13¢9.
Three Distinct Types o! Pictographs

A careful study of this great jumble of crude, overlapping, and
faded pictures reveals at least three easily recognized types:
Type One--Quite large, crude drawings of horses and men in
modern dress, painted chiefly in chalky white; but some are in
black, red, and yellow; and a few in gray clay, or mud. This type
contains several interesting dancing groups and a number of obscene
figures. It seems to be entirely historic and is perhaps the work
of the late Apaches. It is found only on the northeast side of the
site near the principal water tanks.
Type Two--Smaller and much more skillfully drawn pictures,
including mountain sheep, deer, serpents, birds, kachina-like figures,
masked heads, blanket-like designs, and other objects too highly conventionalized to be easily identified.

These pictures are in a wide

range of colors--red, black, white, yellow, brown, gray, blue, and
green.

They are found in large numbers at all parts of the site and

show no evidence of European contact.
Type Three--Many tong zigzag lines, check marks, circles, and
other geometrical forms accompanied by a few small, crude, and
conventionalized human and animal figures.

Most of these designs

are painted in red; but a few are in white, yellow, and gray.

None

PLATE 1
Elaborate polychrome mask paintings. Colors: black and red, 1, 3,
5, 10; black, red, and white, 9; red and green, 2; red and blue, 4, 7, 8;
red, 6.

Plat~ 1

Masks at Hullo Tanks

13

of the geometrical forms are in black. They are found chiefly along
the north side of the site, but in small numbers in most other sections.
There is no doubt that Types One and Two were produced by entirely diff~ent and unrelated people, and that some time elapsed
between the two periods; but the evidence is not so clear as to who
produced Type Three--and when. Similar geometrical forms are
found to some extent among the pictu.res of almost all cultures; however, certain Indians seem to have limited "their artistic efforts exclusively to geometrical figures.1 My opinion, based on a study
of both the colors and desgins, is that a few of the Type Three
designs may belong to Type One; a large number belong to Type
Two; but the greater part, especially the designs on the north side
of the site, belong to a late prehistoric people who followed the
Type Two culture and preceded Type One.
There are two or three other types of pictographs at the site but
in too small numbers to justify description here.
Mask Paintings Suitable ]or Detailed Study

Certainly the most interesting designs at Hueco Tanks are among
the Type Two pictures; and the mdsked heads which are the subject of this paper, offer the best material for a detailed study. The
ease with which such highly specialized designs can be recognized
among cruder and commoner forms, makes them especially valuable
for study. Their highly individual features can be positively identified and definitely related to similar features in pottery designs,
drawings, or other kinds of Indian art. Such pictographs, although
seldom found, afford the best possible opportunity for profitable
investigation.
I was, therefore, keenly interested in finding so many fine mask
drawings at Hueco Tanks. The discovery was somewhat of a surprise; too; because, although a few examples of the masks were
among the illustrations, they were barely mentioned by Crimmins2
and Jackson3 in their reports on the pictog.raphs at the site.
1.
2.
3.

Kirkland, 1937, pp. 113, 114.
Crirnrnins, 1931.
Jackson, 1938, pp. 10-21.

14

T~zas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Robertsz~ recognized similar mask drawings among the pictographs
in the nearby Hueco Mountain caves, and devoted some space to
their description in his report. He found fragments in one cave of
what, he thought, might have been a mask like those painted on the
wall.
Type o] Mask Paintings
There are 89 of these masks on our complete copies of the pictographs at Hueco Tanks. They are of two distinct types: 51 are
drawn in outline in the conventional manner (Plate 2) ; 38 are built
up of solid masses of color as if made with a stencil (Plate 3).
These two types, which for convenience we shall call outline masks
and solid masks, are found together in many of the shelters. They.
vary in size from 4 to 12 inches wide.
The workmanship of the outline masks is generally much cruder
thar~ that of the solid type, The paint in most cases is thicker and
less expertly appl~ied and the designs are less artistic. Nearly all of
the solid masks were painted with thin liquid color that seemed to
have soaked into the rock like dye. Each individual block in the
masks is sharp and distinct; and the designs themselves reflect considerable artistic ability.
Colors Used

Forty-six of the outline masks are painted either in red or black
or a combination of the two; three are in gray; one in white; and
one in gray and white. Most of the stlid masks are either red, black
or white; three are in brown; two are in red and yellow; three in
red and blue; and one in red and green--the only green we have
found, so far, in Texas. Thus, the outline masks appear in only
four colors while the solid masks are in eight.
4.

l~ober~, 1929, I~P. 2-5.

PL~ATE

2

Outline mask paintings. Colors: black, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 13, 15,
16, 17; red, 8, 9, 10; black and red, 14.
PLATE 8
Solid mask paintings. Colors: brown, 1, 2, 11 ; red, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10; red and pink, S; yellow, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

0

3°~

6"

II
iO

16
Plate 2

Plate 3

Piztograph~ of Indian Masks at Hueco Tanks

19

Conventionalizatiora

Some of the outline masks are quite .realistic, showing eyes, ears,
nose, and mouth. Some have amusing expressions, reminding one
of comic strip faces. Others are conventionalized or incomplete;
but in all but a very few~ cases (Plate 5, No. 6, 7, 11) the features
of the face can easily be recognized. The solid masks, on the other
hand, are highly conventionalized at best. Many of them barely
retain the features of the face; more than 15 are lacking such features, and can only be classified as masks because of their general
resemblance to the more realistic examples (Plate 3, No. 13-17).
Location o] the Mask Paintings

The location of most of the mask paintings is interesting if not
significant. We usually find pictographs on the wails and ceilings
of open shelters or under overhanging cliffs; but 70 of these 89
masks were found in smal~ niches, crevices or shelters too small or
otherwise unsuited for habitation; but adjoining or near very large
well used shelters. Some of the mask paintings were reached with
difficulty, and were copied while lying flat on the back, there being
hardly room enough to sit erect under the .Tocks on which they- were
painted. Others were in small recesses, difficult to reach, immediately above the main shelter in plain view of the living quarters.
Kachina-L~ke Figures
Associated with and closely related to the mask paintings are
about 20 drawings of kachina-like figures (Plate 6, No. 1-7).

A

majority of these figures present a profile view, and in several cases
it appears that they wear a mask.

Five of the figures presenting

a front view wear masks similar to the mask paintings.

One figure5

in white has large horns and an elaborate face in the solid mask
style.

The two figures shown at the top of Plate 5, are painted in

solid gray and outlined in white.

They are chiefly of interest be-

cause their head dress represents highly conventionalized animal
heads.

Two of the kaehina-like figures are phallic and one shows

the female organ (Plate 6, No. 1)--a representation extremely rare
among Texas pictographs.
5.

Jackson,

1938, p.

13, Plate

2O

Texa~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

"Blanket" Designs
Another style of design belonging to the Type Two pictures at
Hueco Tanks is found in considerable numbers at all parts of the
site. It consists of united series of geometrical patterns similar to
certain textile designs,6 usually in a rectangular shape. When
the pattern is inclosed by a border, as it sometimes is, the design
resembles an Indian blanket. An interesting detail is added at the
top of a number of these "blanket" designs in the form of a square,
circle or other shape, placed in the position of a head on square
shoulders (Plate 6, No. 8-12). In fact, in a few cases facial features are suggested, and in two or three cases there can be no doubt
that a head was intended. These "blanket" .designs like the mask
paintings were frequently found under low hanging rocks or outof-the-way places. One notable, exception was a large well smoked
shelter containing twelve such designs in white on its black ceiling.
Although these designs have little resemblance to the kachinalike figures, th~ colors used and the meticulous manner of painting
leaves little doubt that they were made by the same artists. This
is likewise true of a variety of small designs and animal and bird
pictures. Many serpent pictures also belong to Type Two; but the
very conspicuous serpent pictures on the ceilings of caves near the
principal water tanks are in the style and colors of the late historic
pictures---Type One.
In]ormation Lacking on New Mexico Pictographs
We have found mask paintings at no other site in Texas, and so
far as I know, they have never been reported by any one else outside of E1 Paso County. It would be interesting to know, therefore,
how far they extend north and west into New Mexico. Unfortunately,
little information is available about the pictographs in this district;
consequently, we must await further investigation for more knowledge of their distribution. However, since Renaud7 reports similar
Jackson, 1988, p. 18, Plate
Renaud, 1938, Plate 5.

PLATE 4
l~[ask paintings containing white. Colors: white, 1, 5; white and
black, 2, 3, 4; white, black, and red, 6.

Plate 4

Pictographs of Indian Masks at Hueco Tanks

23

mask drawings among the carved pictures of North Central New
Mexico, it appears that we may be describing a type of art which
centers somewhere in New Mexico and of which Hueco Tanks is
only an outpost.
Lacking material on pietographs in New Mexico with which to
compare the mask drawings, we turn to the modern Indian masks
themselves. For this comparison we have numerous reports8 containing detailed information and excellent reproductions of the
masks. Among these ,reports is J. W. Fewkes’ "Hopi Kachinas"
with more than 200 color drawings of kaehinas by native artists,
which has proven most valuable for this study.
Mask Paintings Resemble Kachina Masks
Only a brief examination of this literature is necessary to conclude that the Hueco Tanks mask paintings have only the most
general resemblance to the masks of the Eskimos, the Indians of
the Northwest, and those of Mexico and Central America; but with
the Pueblo kachina masks it is different. Although no single mask
painting is identical with a pa.rticular kachina mask, a general similarity is at once apparent.
Like the mask paintings, there a~e two types of kachina masks-more or less realistic faces and highly conventionalized faces. Some
of the kachina masks totally lack facial features, like many of the
mask paintings. There is a general similarity of the decorations
on the face--the lines on the cheeks, around the mouth, and on the
chin. Although most of the mask paintings show only the face, a
few have horns or other decorations on the head resembling many ~f
the kachina masks. Both the masks and paintings show examples
of pendants hanging from the ears.
Pueblo Emblems on Mask Paintings
One mask at Hueco Tanks (Plate 6, No. 7) and two in a near by
cave9 feature the terraced plaque, a common Pueblo symbol of the
rain cloud, used on fifteen of the kachina pictures by Fewkes, Five
8.
Fewkes, 1897, 1903, 1924 ; Gann, 1918 ; Nelson, 1899 ; l~tiblack,
1928.
9.
P~oberts, 1929, Fig’. 1.

1888 ; Spinden,

24

Tezas Archeologizal and Paleontological Society

other terrace designs not connected with masks were found at Hueco
Tanks. The crescent .rain symbol, another favorite emblem on Hopi
kachina masks, is found at Hueco Tanks but not as a part of a mask
painting. Several examples of the Pueblo star emblem also w~re
found at Hueco Tanks, two of which form the eyes of the well known
green and red mask (Plate 1, No. 2). This star emblem appears on
eight of the Fewkes kachina masks and in one case as the eyes.
In addition, to the similarity of the design elements on the paintings and the Pueblo masks, two of the colors---blue and green--used
on the paintings are extremely rare in Texas and are said to be common in the Pueblo district.
Pueblo Potsherds at Hueco Tanks

Still another connection between the mask paintings at Hueco
Tanks and the Pueblo Indians is the presence of Pueblo type potsherds1 o in large numbers at every part of the site. It must be admitted that there is no direct evidence that this pottery was made and
used by the Indians who painted the masks; but the distribution of
the potsherds is general over the entire square mile as are also the
Type Two pictographs, whereas the other picture types are confined
to certain limited districts. This fact certainly suggests the relationship.
Probable Purpose o] the Mask Paintings
A clue to the purpose of the mask paintings was furnished by
Fewkes11 in his description of Pueblo shrines in small caves and
shallow depressions. These shrines, usually close by the village
or house, contained pictures, dolls, idols, prayer sticks, and other
sacred objects. The mask paintings at Hueco Tanks, in their small
elevated or secret niches, may well be all that remains of ancient
shrines similar to those of the Pueblos.
10.

Smith, 1936.

11.

Fewkes, 1924, pp. 378, 379, 882.

PLA’PE 5
Kachina-like figures and conventionalized mask paintings. Colors:
gray outlined with white, I, 2; black, 3, 7; red, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11; gray,
10, 12.

c:~ O

Plate 5

Pictograph8 of Indian Masks at Hueco Tanks

27

Lacking stratigraphie evidence from the middens at Hueco Tanks,
and finding too few cases of over painted pictographs to work out
a time sequence of the cultures by that method, it would be unwise
to venture more than the general order of the main types as suggested above, this suggestion being based almost entirely on the
absence or presence of European objects among the pictures. But
there can be little doubt that the Type Two pictures were produced
by a culture c!osely related to or identical with the great Pueblos
of New Mexico. And the great number and wide distribution of
these pictures at the site indicates that it was occupied by this culture over a long period of time.
There is little doubt, also, that the great majority of the mask
paintings were made by this culture prior to historic time. But
certain of the more realistic outline masks are cruder than the average Type Two picture and may be the work of later Indians who
undertook to imitate the old mask paintings.
It must be admitted, in conclusion, that although these highly
specialized mask paintings have furnished an unusual opportunity
to compare pictographs with another form of Indian art, the kachina
masks of the Pueblos, we have at most only been able to show a
general relationship between the two. And judging from this study,
it sesms that we should not expect too much from such comparisons.
501 Rio Grande National Building,
Dallas, Texas.
Re]erences Cited
Crimmins, Colonel M. L.
1931. The Pictographs at the Hueco Tanks. Texas Archeological
and Paleontologica| Society Bulletin, Vol. 3.
Fewkes, ]. W.
1897. The Group of Tusayan Ceremonials called Kachinas, Bureau of American Ethnology, 15th Annual Report.
1903. Hopi Kachinas.
nual Report.

Bureau of American Ethnology, 21st An-

1924. The Use of Idols in Hopi Worship.
the Smithsonian Institution, 1922.

Annual Report of

28

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Gann, Thomas W. F.
1918. The Maya Indians of South Yucatan and Northern British
Honduras. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 64.
Jackson, A. T.
1938. Picture Writing of Texas Indians.
pers, Vol. II. The University of Texas.

Anthropological Pa-

Kirkland, Forrest
1937. A study of Indian Pictures in Texas. Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 9.
Nelson, E. W.
1899. The Eskimo about Bering Strait.
Ethnology, 18th Annual Report.

Bureau of American

Niblack, Albert P.
1888. Indians of the Northwest Coast, Report of the U. S. National Museum, 1888.
Renaud, E. B.
1938. Petroglyphs of North Central New Mexico. Archeological
Survey Series, Eleventh Report, University of Denver.
Roberts, Frank H. H., Jr.
1929. Recent Archeological Developments in the Vicinity of El
Paso, Texas. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 80,
No. 7.
Smith, Victor 1.
1936. The Pottery Horizons of Texas. Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 9.
Spinden, Herbert J.
1928. Ancient Civilizations of Mexico and Central America,
American Museum of Natural History.

PLATE 6
Kachina-like figures and "blanket" designs. Colors: black, 1, 5;
red, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12; black and red, 4; yellow, 2, 3; black and yellow, 8.

Pla~e ~

