8O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

SOME ARCHAEOLOGICAL MATERIAL IN THE
MUSEUM OF THE AGRICULTURAL AND
MECHANICAL COLLEGE OF TEXAS
By CURTIS J. HESSE

In the development of any Museum some unexpected acquisitions
of material occur. The Museum at A. & M. does not have extensive
collections of archaeological material, nor are such collections
planned as part of its future development. Nevertheless, some
such material has been obtained through both gifts and collecting.
The following three items seemed to be worth recording since
they are unusual enough not to be found in ordinary collecting
nor to be seen commonly in the smaller Museums in this area.
1. A cache of unusual lithic artifacts.
The collection of large artifacts described here was obtained
from the discoverer by the late Dr. Mark Francis, a few days
after they had been found. The collection was found in 1931
while Mr. C. W. Manning was breaking some newly cleared land
when his plow struck the cache. The site is on the farm of Mrs.
Emory, situated four miles northeast of Bryan, Brazos County,
Texas. The large artifacts were in a conical pile, and the plow
struck the topmost stones. Mr. Manning stopped at once and
began to gather the implements which he exposed by digging with
his hands; in a foot or so of the loosened soil he collected 13
large artifacts. These were carried home and two given away
before the rest of the collection (eleven pieces) was turned over
to Dr. Francis.
The site of the find is in an area drained by Wickson Creek,
but lies about a quarter of a mile from the creek itself. The field
slopes to the north toward the western branch of the creek, and up
until 1930 the south, or upper end of the field, was covered with a
growth of post oak (Q~ercus stellata). It was a small hill or knoll,
a part of which was cleared for a field. Neither Mr. Manning,
nor those farming the ground at present, have found any other
material in this spot. A half to three-fourths of a mile away in
the Wickson creek bottom are camp sites. It would seem that these

Some Archaeolog~ca! Material in A. & M. College M~se~m
artifacts were buried or cached in this spot and
on a former camping ground.

not

81

abandoned

Often one finds such accumulations in and around springs or
other places where offerings were left by the Indians, but at this
locality there is nothing to indicate that such was the case. The
knoll is topographically a local high, and there are no signs that
a spring ever existed there. Since these were the only artifacts
found, the cache idea seems to be the most sound explanation of
their location; perhaps the owner died or for some other reason
was unable to return for his possessions.
Description o] the Collection:

The eleven artifacts in the collection are made of gray (probably
Edwards) chert. Two of the series are slightly lighter in color
than the rest, suggesting that they probably were made from
weathered fragments. The remaining specimens are dark and
very fresh, with no signs of patination. It seems very unlikely
that these implements were made of materials picked up locally.
Chert pebbles do occur in the gravels on the Brazos River and
throughout the county, but none are large enough for the manufacture of such large implements. This coupled with the freshness
of the chert itself strongly suggests that it was obtained and
probably fashioned at the outcrop of the formation. It is likely
that this location is in Falls County, 75 miles to the north,, where
chert horizons occur in the late Cretaceous.
Group 1
The largest of the implements (see plate A) T. A. M. C. Museum
No. 2507, pl. 12 No. 1, is 288 mm. long and 174 ram. wide. It
averages 35-40 ram. in thickness throughout, except at the trimmed
edgbs, and weighs 2172 grams. Over most of the surface the
shaping was done by the removal of large flakes, some as large as
100 mm. by 90 ram. and was apparently accomplished with few
blows and considerable skill. The edges were then trimmed by
the removal of smaller flakes and finally sharpened by working
the edge. This final shaping seems to preclude the idea that these
were blanks to be broken up and used later in the manufacture of
smaller points. On the back of this blade is an area of wellcemented, weathered, gray sand, much lighter in color than the

Texas~Archeological and Paleontological Society

82

main body of the artifact, showing that it was made from a fragment at the surface of a chert mass. In outline this artifact is
very symmetrical and well balanced; it shows no trace of any use
or wear. It is more than twice as heavy as any of the rest of the
specimens.
T. A. M. C. Museum No. 2509, pl. 12 No. 3, is 188 mm. long and
140 ram. wide at its base. It is made of a chert somewhat lighter
in color, but of the same excellent grade. This blade also has
been shaped by removal of a few large flakes and then working of
the edge, although this last has been less carefully done.. It
weighs 896 grams, and it is of a true leaf shape with a wide,
though sharpened, base.
T. A. M. C. Museum No. 2508, pl. 12 No. 4, is made of somewhat impure chert, apparently also from the surface of a chert
mass.

It is 173 ram. long by 128 ram. wide weighing 855 grams,

edge not carefully sharpened.
T. A. M. C. Museum No. 2510, pl. 12 No. 5, is somewhat more
celt-like in shape.

It is 180 ram. long by 110 mm. wide and weighs

only 640 grams.
T. A. M. C. Mu~um No. 2577, pl. 12 No. 2, is sinfilar to the
above in shape but is a thinner blade. It is 220 ram. long and
116 mm. wide, with a somewhat elongate leaf shape.

Group H
This group is also made up of five blades, all of the same
material and workmanship as the above but with a distinctive and
characteristic shape.
T. A. M. C. Museum No. 2512, pl. 12 No. 8, is 195 mm. wide
and weighs 853 grams. It has been sharpened around the entire
edge.
This and the following blades are peculiar in that one
side of the long axis is nearly straight and the other convex. Each
apex is pointed to a degree, but the entire implement is distinctly
one sided.

A careful inspection of the large flakes shows that this

PLATE

12

Groups (1) and (2) are of large flints found in a cache near Bryan,
Texas. Groups A. and Bo are of microliths.

Plate !2

Some Archaeological Material in A. & M. College Museum

85

was an intentional shaping which is also borne out by the appearance of the other four artifacts in this group.
T. A. M. C. Museum No. 2515, pl. 12 No. 9, deserves~ special
mention since the back or straight side has not been sharpened, nor
has one of the flat sides been worked at all.

It is made of very

dark chert, almost an agate, and was evidently a thin weathered
flake that was picked up. It is 180 ram. long, 90 ram. wide and
weighs 718 grams.
T. A. M. C. Museum No.’s 2511, pl. 12 No. 7; 2513, pl. 12 No. 6;
and 2514, pl. 12 No. 10 are all similar in shape to 2512 and need
no special comment.
Classi]ication and Use

Large lithic artifacts such as those described above have been
known for many years from the eastern United States. They have
been classified by various authors as of different uses, although
the real purposes of such implements is somewhat doubtful. The
largest artifact of all (2507) would be called an agricultural implement or hoe. These large, fiat blades were hafted or used
in the hands to break small areas of ground such as a corn hill.
Often these blades have a high polish at one end from the abrasion
of the soil.
The next two of Group I, 2509 and 2508, might also be classed as
hoes or possibly, as a cutting tool such as an adze. (See Renaud,
1938, p. 62).* They seem small for use in breaking ground and
yet too large for anything else.
2577 and 2510 must certainly fall into the celt or adze grouping
of Renaud. Their leaf shape and blade-like outline strongly suggests such is the case.
Group II is less easy to identify, they do not fall readily into
any of the better known classes. They resemble, in many ways,
scrapers, yet their size would seem to make them unhandy. No.
2515, with its flat back could readily be used as a chopper (Renaud,
p. 61). The other four, since they are sharpened entirely around
*"Renaud, E. B.
The Typology
Sock, Vol. 10, pp. 41-76, 1938.’"

of

Lithic

Artifacts,

Bull.

Texas

Arch.

Paleo.

85

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the edge, would not be so easy to use and it seems more likely
that they were scrapers.
None of these artifacts bear the slightest trace of use, which forces
the consideration of still another classification of them. Sometimes large partly roughed-out pieces such as these have been
regarded as blanks, or materials of convenient size for carrying,
to be broken up later and worked into smaller points, scrapers, etc.
This may have been done in areas where good flint or chert was
not available but there seems little reason for it in this part of
Texas~ It is true that no local formations carry suitable stone for
manufacture of flint implements yet pebbles and even cobble
stones of chert are abundant along the streams. Such mate~rials
were used extensively by the Indians as local coIlections prove,
but such large flints as those described above are rare. It seems
very unlikely that these would have been so carefully shaped and
chipped if they were to be broken up at a later time.
Part H

An Arrow Point in the Skull oJ Bison bison

Since the North American Indians were notable hunters, and
their cultures rich in weapons of the’ chase, it is strange that we
find so few existing evidences of the power of those weapons. It
would seem that injuries to both animals and man would be commonly found in both burials and in camp sites. Yet such is not
the case; evidences of wounds, either fatal or healed, are so rare
as to excite interest whenever they are found.
The specimen figured and described here was brought to the Museum by Mr. G. C. Everett for the owner, Mr. Sam S. Hanover, Jr.,
of Stephenville, Erath County, Texas. The skull was found about
three years ago, two miles east of De Leon just off highway 67. It
was found by Mr. J. A. Owens who stated that it was exposed in a
field after a heavy rain. It had, according to information furnished,
been buried beneath about three feet of soil. The discoverers
were unable to say whether any of the rest of the skeleton was
there, or if other Indian artifacts were found in the immediate
vicinity.
PLATE 13
Shows a bison skull which has been pierced by a flint projectile
point.

Plate 13

Some Archaeological Material in A. & M. College Museum

89

The skull (T. A. M. C. Museum No. 2880) pl. 13 is that of a
recent bison, probably of a bull.

The maxillaries, nasals, etc.,

are all missing, the basicranium, as is usual, being all that is
preserved. The skull is that of an adult, the sutures are almost
obliterated and all parts preserved are well ossified. The bone
is well preserved but bears no trace of fossilizations nor were the
circumstances of its discovery indicative of any great antiquity.

The arrow point is of gray chert somewhat roughly chipped
and is a stemmed point. It was discharged from the left side of
the animal and from slightly above the position in which the head
was carried. This strongly suggests that the attacker rode a horse,
which would give him approximately this position. The point
pierced the left parietal just behind and slightly below the frontal
expansJ.on of the base of the left horncore. The point is imbedded
firmly in the bone’ for over one half its length, about 18 ram. is
left above the bone surface and approximately 25 nun. is buried
in the cranial roof. The tip of the point did not penetrate the
brain cavity due to the great thickness of the bone at this point.
It could in no sense be regarded as causing a fatal wound. Nevertheless, there are no signs of healing at the edges of the bone,
and it seems probable that the animal was killed within a short
time after this point was driven into the skull. This may have
been the result of another arrow discharged at the same time,
the hunter being unable to remove this point from the skull.
The point itself is somewhat smaller than one would expect to
see used against bison. It is 25 ram. across the base, 16 ram.
across the stem and 6 mm. thick on the exposed part. It is
definitely not on’e of the Iarger, heavy kind so often called hunting points. While the roof of the skull here is over an inch and
a half thick it was not solid bone, l~ut is made up of large air cells
which lighten it considerably. However, living bone is said to be
comparable to green oak or ac_h in strength and resiliency so the
arrow must have been driven with great force from the bow.
Judging from the power of the bows in use by archers today,
the arrow must have been fired at close range from at least a
50 pound bow.
If the surmise that the hunter was on a horse is correct, then
the arrow, must have been discharged sometime after 1520, the

90

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

date of the reintroduction of horses.

It is also likely that it was

discharged prior to 1850, for by that time the bison had become
very rare in this area, and firearms had largely replaced the bow.
Part HI

An Unusual Collection o] Micralhhs

In the summer of 1939, Mr. J. E. Crabtree brought a collection
of interesting points to the Museum. These had been picked up
during the "dust bowl" days in Dallam, Hartley, and Sherman
Counties in the Texas panhandle. Mr. Crabtree said that the
points were easily found in the "blowouts" which were common
in that area a few years ago, and during the course of his
regular duties as County Agricultural Agent, he had picked up
the entire collection.
The poims were made of a considerable variety of flint and
chert, probably from the pebbles so common in the gravels of the
Ogallala formation widely exposed in that area. They are of a
superior type of workmanship, possibly due to the excellence
of the materials from which they are made, the flaking is fine
and even and the collection contained many beautiful examples
of the small points often found in this region.
With this material, was a series of points so small and delicate
that they were most outstanding (Plate 12, B). In size they
were as small or sraaller than any other points on record. Their
size and perfection was enough to excite curiosity and suspicion,
but a hasty check of their surface markings, etc., failed to disclose
any of the markings usually seen in spurious flint work.
Mr. Crabtree left three of the small points at this museum and
at a later date his entire collection was loaned to us for further
study. At this time Mr. Crabtree informed us that the small
artifacts were made by a boy in Dalhart, Texas.
A careful examination and comparison of these points with
authentic material (see Plate 12, A) from the collection discloses
the following criteria upon which they may be distinguished.
1. Smallness of size.
2. Perfection of shape.
3. Freshness of appearance.

Some Archaeological Material in A. & M. College Museum

91

4. Unusual or nontypical shapes.
5. Metal marks or a few.
6. Suspicious looking fiat surfaces on some.**
Should one or two such points become mixed with the smaller
points from this area they would readily pass for authentic specimens. Unfortunately, such spurious work is not uncommon in
Texas but most of it is so crude that it is readily recognized.
Often points, etc., are made merely as a test of skill by someone, and the result tried out on some local collector. Many
amateur collectors are not difficult to fool, and often buy such
material from the maker. Thus, without intending to do more
than try one’s hand at flint chipping, the picture changes to the
perpetration of a fraud.
True microliths are found within this area, but are not common.
These small points are often called "bird-points" and were possibly
used in blow guns. While the true points might exhibit one or
more of the above six criteria, it is unlikely that they would be
characterized by all.
Spurious work has caused considerable trouble within our state,
and was one of the immediate causes of the passage of legislation
in the spring of 1939 to cover such cases. The act passed by
the 46th Legislature makes it unlawful to reproduce or forge any
archaeological or other object, representing same to be original,
selling, or exchanging the same, etc.
The writer
enough to try
the public or
so is the sale
can be fooled

in no way wishes to discourage those interested
their hand at flint chipping, but the idea of fooling
the collector is one to be discouraged. Still more
of such material as authentic, for only the amateur
indefinitely.

Curator of the Museum,
The Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas,
College Station, Texas.

**Editorial note:
A flat surface on one face is a common development of the
small plne-tree shaped and of the side notched triangular arrow points of the Abilene
region’s Valley Creek or Pottery Culture.
The side notched triangular points shown
are of Abilene region types.
C. N. R.

