Permian Polished Boulders in Texas

63

PERMIAN POLISHED BOULDERS IN TEXAS~
By CYRUS N. RAY

The north facing escarpment of the Edwards Plateau may
be seen in the distance to the south of Highway 80 as it
crosses Taylor and Nolan Counties of Texas, at distances of
twelve to fifteen miles. This elevated area extends for
twenty or more miles to the south where its border is broken
off by a south facing escarpment.
The limestone caprock of this plateau is of Cretaceous age
while the red formations which slope away on the south to
the Colorado River, and on the north to the Clear Fork of
the Brazos River, belong to the red beds of the Permian.
At a distance of twelve miles south of the village of Trent,
Texas, is a hill which rises not far south of an east and west
road and a mile east of the Butman school-house. Glistening
objects on this hil! may be seen from the road which on
closer inspection are found to be boulders of extremely hard
quartzite which occur in colors of tan, brown and red brown.
On one portion of this hill also is an outcrop of brown sandstone which is not so hard and is not polished. Most of the
rather large hill is covered with the hard quartzite boulders
which have had the ang!es rounded off and then polished.
Some of the former angles of the stones have a glassy polish
and all of the surfaces of the boulders usually have enough
polish on them to shine brightly when one looks toward the
sun across a hill covered with them. On the east side the
hill rises highest into two rounded hillocks which are almost
entirely covered with broken-up fist sized quartzite stones
and thousands of flint flakes. Evidently these uniform sized
broken stones were produced by the .heat of one of the ancient ceremonial burnt rock mound fires which for some
reason were maintained by ancient man on top of outstanding landmarks. This hill stands out in an otherwise nearly
level basin about one and one-half rniles north of the high
*This paper was read at the 1946 annual session of the Texas Archeological and I;aleontologic~l Society, held in .&bilene, Texas, on Nov. 2, 1946.

64

Texas Archeological and Paleontologiva~ Society

Edwards Plateau and is almost encircled to the west, north
and east by a ring of mountains at a distance of about five
miles in each direction and all of the nearly level land of the
basin surrounding the hill over to the encircling mountains
miles away lies in full view of any one on top of the hill. So
the primitive inhabitants of the whole basin below also
would be able to see the fires. The two round hillocks on
the hill top where the fires were kept stand out above the
lower land like church pulpits.
At the present time there is no spring nor any permanent
water hole within several miles of the hill. An old resident
of the region when questioned about a water supply, said
that he has also been puzzled by that, as when he came to
the region fifty years ago one could have picked up a tub full
of arrow heads on the hill.
All around the west and south bases of the hill are the
numerous broken-up quartzite stones of an~ent hearths.
Today few whole artifacts may be found but such as have
been are of the ancient Clear Fork Culture and a perfect
Clear Fork gouge was found by the writer where it had
weathered out of a gully in Clear Fork silt, which ran
through a field near the base of the hill. Evidently the formation in which the polished boulders lie runs across under
the Edwards Plateau, which lies to the south of the Butman
site, because the same sort of polished quartzite boulders
are to be found below the base of its southern facing escarpment situated twenty miles or more south of the Butman
site. South of the southern escarpment of the mountain
mass there are a number of large aggregations of these polished boulders extending on southwestward from the vicinPLATE 14
1. One of the smaller polished boulders situated two miles
northeast of Church Peak.

2. Large polished boulders north of Ft. Chadbourne Station
in Coke County. Taken in summer. White areas are polished
stone surfaces reflecting bright sunlight.
3. Showing size of some of polished boulders north of Ft.
Chadbourne Station.

PLATE 15
Nos. 1-2-3 show some of smaller polished boulders in site north
of Ft. Chadbourne Station.

Plate 14

Plate 15

Permian Polished Boulders in Texas

69

ity of the village of Hylton in Nolan County, on through
Coke County to a locality near Bronte in that county. The
various aggregations of polished boulders so far studied
cover an area from north to south of thirty-five to forty
miles.
Near to Highway 158 and close to the corners of Runnels,
Nolan, Taylor and Coke Counties, is a high conical peak
known as Church Mountain, which stands off a considerable
distance southward from the southern escarpment of the
plateau. This peak rises on the north side of the highway
and is visible for many miles. Within a radius of two miles
of Church Mountain are several aggregations of polished
boulders. The polished stone of the Church Mountain aggregations is composed of the same kind of brown to reddish quartzite as that of t!ae Butman site situated on the
north side of the mountain mass. Near the southeast foot
of this mountain an aggregation of polished boulders lie
embedded in gravel. To the northeast of Church Mountain
for a distance of about two miles are a series of lower lying
gently sloping elevations. These ridges are composed of yellowish stained gravel and are covered with oak trees, and
the higher portions are studded with large rounded and
polished boulders.
These polished boulders occur only on the tops of the
gravelly ridges and are not found on the much higher escarpments above them, nor in the lower lying areas below them.
Some of the best polished boulders in that section are to be
seen close beside an eastward bend of a country road a mile
south of Hylton, Texas. The stones there vary in size from
that of a grand piano to stones larger than an automobile,
and are embedded in a layer of yellowish gravel near the
foot of a hill. None of the stones on the hill above them are
polished, but all of the boulders on the gravelly ridge which
stands off several hundred yards below the foot of the hill
have been rounded off on all surfaces and then polished.
This polish is glass-like on some surfaces, and usually is
much greater where the stone’s former corners and fracture
angles have been ground away. On these the stone is highly
polished as though some powerful moving force had broken

7O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the boulders off from bed-rock and, then rolled them out on
an ice or a water deposited gravel ridge and then moved
between and around them in such manner as to shear off
the angles into rounded corners or surfaces, and then gave
the whole exposed surfaces a glassy polish. At the site south
of Hylton the polished stones evidently attracted the attention of ancient Clear Fork men, because these men built a
large hearth accumulation between the boulders and left
some of their artifacts there. About twelve miles southwest
of Church Mountain is Ft. Chadbourne Station in Coke
County,~ and about one and one-half.miles north of this place
there is a high escarpment which lies in a north and south
direction on the west side of the railroad. In front of the
mountain is a depression three hundred or more yards wide,
and paralleling that and the mountain is a long low elevation
composed of yellowish gravel in which hundreds of very
large polished conglomerate boulders lie partly embedded.
Some of these boulders are as large as an average house
room, and some are larger, and they range in size down to
stones no larger than a grand piano.
Here also are s]l of~the evidences of a force sufficient to
tear away huge boulders from their original settings, grind
down all of their original fracture angles into rounded surfaces and then polish them into a glassy slickness.
Here again ancient Clear Fork Culture man’s artifacts
¯ and hearths are found in the red Clear Fork silts along the
banks of a small, now dry creek branch, which courses beside and immediately below the slickened boulders.
Southwest of Ft. Chadbourne Station, at a distance of two
miles, the country road turns westward and close beside
the road and on the north side of it a steep escarpment rises
PLATE 16
Nos. 1-2-3 are of some o~ the very large sizes of polished boulders
north of Ft. Chadbourne Station which were taken in winter at a
time near sunset. Some of these show the polish better than those
taken in summer.
PLATE 17
Nos. 1-2-3 Show some of the larger sizes of polished boulders
north of Ft. Chadbourne Station.

Plate 16

Plate 17

Permian Polished BouZders in Texas

which runs east and west. Near the southeast foot of this
mountain and for a distance of several hundred yards on
the east foot, where the escarpment turns to the north, lie
many large polished boulders embedded in yellowish gravel.
All around this mountain to the south and east and in the
mountain valleys north of it Clear Fork Culture man lived
and left his hearths and artifacts in the lower Clear Fork
silts and gravels.l At this site also none of the conglomerates
of the escarpment above show the slightest evidence of
either the grinding off or the polish shown by the boulders
embedded in the grave! at the foot of the hill.
About ten miles south of this site and located about one
and one-half miles northeast of the town of Bronte, Coke
County, Texas, a high isolated hill rises south of a country
road, and at its foot is a wide depression and beyond that a
low parallel ridge of yellow gravel in which are embedded
hundreds of ground down and polished rounded boulders.
These polished boulders are of S.an Angelo conglomerate,
a stone composed of rounded quartz pebbles of all colors,
which are firmly joined by a dark red or iron colored
cementing material. The conglomerate pebbles are cemented
so firmly that when the stone is fractured the fracture line
goes straight through the rounded quartz pebbles and not
around any of them.
Below the polished boulders a usually dry stream’s
branches have eroded down into the ancient hearths and
artifacts of a campsite of considerable size. On a fall day,
when the temperature was at about 50°, the writer was
startled on looking up, at seeing the whole low ridge between him and the sun filled with sleet covered boulders
glittering in the sunlight. On closer inspection the glitter
was found to be due to polished stones instead of ice. Pictures are difficult to obtain because the polish shows best
when lool~ing toward the sun.
That the primitive human inhabitants had anything to do
with the production of the polish on the thousands of large
boulders, the writer does not believe, but thinks rather that
their unusual appearance attracted ancient man’s attention.

76

Texas Archeological, and Paleontological Society

From such observation as the writer has been able to make
of boulders buried in the gravel and recently exposed by
gullies, the rounding off and polishing exists equally on all
faces and bears no relation to their nearness to nor their
distance from any escarpments near by, such as Dr. Kirk
Bryan described from farther west.2
That the polished boulders only occur on one surface level,
and that neither below nor above that level is any evidence
shown of such action,-would indicate that some powerful
force, acting only during that phase of the Permian, first
tore them loose from their bedding, rolled them around and
wore off their angles and ~hen left them embedded atop a
long low gravel elevation and then moved around, over and
between them, in such manner as to produce the polished
surfaces.
Most geologists believe that polished boulders were created by a natural wind sand-blast cutting the stone down
but if this were the explanation of the Abilene region polish¯ ing, one wonders why the same sand did not polish any of
the similar stones above and below the particular plane on
which the polished boulders lie. The writer has seen no evidence to support any such theory unless the action occurred
during a Permian cold period.
The lines of stratification in the boulders show that they
lie in various positions, such as upside down, on end, and on
the sides, horizontally and at all angles of tilting, in a helter
skelter arrangement, as though some powerful force had
carried them there and dumped them out onto the gravel at
irregular intervals. Close examination of hundreds of these
boulders has shown no signs of glacial grooves, nor any
striations on their surfaces.
In reference to the cause of the polish of the boulders the
writer is inclined to suggest the possibility that the region
of their distribution might once have been an area of Per-

PLATE

18

This plate shows three views of .the polished boulders near
Bronte, Texas.

Plate 18

Permian Polished Boulders in Texas

~79

mian glaciation; and that strong glacia! winds, using a blast
of sand and hard driven snow, may have polished them
down after moving ice first sheared off their angles, but the
ice was not thick enough over them to produce grooves.3
In between the polished boulders at the site south of Hylton, Texas, is a hearth accumulation containing art£facts of
Clear Fork man and the gullies cut into the mountain side
close by and to the side of the yellow gravel deposit containing the polished boulders are cut through a red silty
material which was deposited in Clear Fork time, and this
occurred at about the close of the Pleistocene Period. This
red Clear Fork deposit covers the mountain valley floors of
the region to a depth of several feet, in two zones, the upper
a red sandy deposit, contains Clear Fork Culture artifacts
and the Lower, a dense darker red zone, contains Abilene
Leaf shaped, and occasional Folsom like points. The Clear
Fork Culture artifacts occur on top of the Lower darker red
zone at the Gibson site on Elm Creek valley at twenty-four
feet below the present valley floor soil surface.4 The lower
darker red zone of Clear Fork silts also contains mammoth
bones at both the Gibson and the McLean sites. At the
McLean site Folsom Points occur in the Lower zone of the
deposit. At the polished boulder site located southwest of
Ft. Chadbourne Station the gullies around and near by the
polished boulders are cut through the zones of ~pper and
lower Clear Fork silts and many artifacts of the Clear Fork
Culture are found there and the writer has found portions of
two Folsom Points in the same gullies. The pelished boulders themselves are always embedded in older yellowish
stained gravel remnants, but the later deposited Clear Fork
silts have in places flowed around and filled up hollows behind and around them. This filling up occurred at about the
close of the Pleistocene and the extinction of the mammoth.
The Clear Fork Culture hearth deposit around and between
the boulders at the ttylton site and the ancient silt accumulation at the site southwest of Ft. Chadbourne Station indicates that these polished boulders were even more. exposed
toward the close of the Pleistocene than now. The middle
section of a finely made large Folsom point was found by

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the writer where it had washed from the same red silt about
one mile north of the Hylton polished boulder site. The polished boulders probably remained covered up until the
floods at the close of the Pleistocene exposed them. The area
of their distribution does not now contain either sand dunes
nor areas of sandy land sufficient to furnish a sand-blast to
wear down such hard stone and the soil is now cove~ed with
grass, shrubs and trees. The theory that animals produced
the polish by rubbing against the stones is untenable. Some
of the best polished specimens are too large for even a mammoth to scratch on.
All of the evidences of human occupation are ancient in
typhology, and while the campsite debris is extensive around
some of the stones, there’ is not any water supply near them
at the present time. That these aggregations of polished
boulders, all apparently in the same stratification plane/are
isolated remnants of some polishing force which operated
over an area of considerable size is evident and it may be that
erosion has removed the polish in the intervening spaces.**
Deeply guttered and polished grooves in Permian limestone have previously been observed in the bed of Paint
Creek, a branch of the Clear Fork of the Brazos River, situated in Shackelford County, Texas. This locality is about
one hundred miles northeast of the most northern aggregation of polish boulders near Butman schoolhouse, and in an
area of much lower altitude.
In addition there are several different localities in the
Edwards Plateau region of Taylor County lying to the east
of the aggregations of large polished boulders where highly
polished small quartzite stones have been found in considerable numbers in ancient gravel accumulations. These
**:t~vidences of Permian glaciation hav~ been found in all of the other
major land musses of the earth und the writer does not think it logical to
assume that North America escuped this world-wide condition.

PLATE 19
This view shows an unusually large polished boulder taken in
winter at about sunset.

Plate 19

Permian Polished Boulders in Texas

83

stones usually are from three to four inches in long diameters and an inch or more in thickness, and usually are rather
flat or curved in shape with all angularities smoothed off
and finely polished. In the polished surfaces-of many of
these stones are fine cuts or scratches as though the polished
stone had been firmly held and some one had scratched it
with a harder stone. Persons who have examined glacial
scratched stones on examination of these note the resemblance.
P. O. Box .62,
Abilene, Texas.
REFERENCES
1. Cyrus N. Ray, "The Clear Fork Culture Complex,"
Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, 1938.
2. Kirk Bryan and Claude C. Albritton, Jr., "WindPolished Rocks in the Trans-Pecos Region," Texas and New
Mexico Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, Vol.
53, pp. 1403-1416, Plate 1, Fig. 1.
3. Cyrus N. Ray, "What Caused These Permian Grooves,"
Bulletin of Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 14, 1942, pp. 147-148, Plate 37.
4. Cyrus N. Ray, "Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region," Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and PaleontologicaI Society, Vol. 16, 1945.

