REVIEWS

Disease and Demography in the Americas, edited by John W. Verano and Douglas H. Ubelaker.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C., 1992. x + 294 pp., figures and plates.
Reviewed by Maynard B. Cliff, Geo-Marine, Inc.
The papers in this volume were originally
presented in 1989 at one of a series of scholarly
symposia held as a prelude to the Seeds of Change
exhibition at the National Museum of Natural
History, Smithsonian Institution. The exhibition, a
commemoration of the Columbus Quincentenary,
was intended to examine "the processes of encounter
and exchange set in motion by the Columbus
voyages of discovery" (Herman Viola, volume
Foreword). The symposium itself was entitled
"Disease and Demography in the Americas,
Changing Patterns Before and After 1492." The
editors state in the introduction to this volume that
the symposium was designed to stimulate discussion
and communication among researchers in skeletal
biology or paleopathology and demography since,
as they put it:
Much of the demographic literature depicts preEuropean contact America as a "disease-free
paradise," while the literature in physical anthropology and paleopathology regularly documents a variety of disease conditions in ancient
America. Conversely, demographic reconstructions from ancient samples seem at odds with
standard interpretations from ethnohistory and
demography. What is fact and what is theory?
(p. 1).

According to the editors, the symposium, and
the papers in this volume that resulted from it, was
designed to stimulate discussion between the different disciplines with the hope of clarifying the
issues involved. If by this is meant a better understanding of the complexity and variability inherent
in questions of Native American health and population demography, then these goals have been
achieved. However, if one is looking for consensus
of interpretation, or a reconciliation of competing

views, it will not be found here, a fact which the
editors readily admit (cf. Becker 1994). The first
day of the symposium dealt with questions of precontact health conditions, while on the second day
the symposium shifted to the important question of
population size and related demographic issues. The
organization of the symposium is loosely reflected
in the organization of the book, with Part 1 dealing
with "Disease before and after Contact" and Part 2
with "Population Size before and after Contact."
The papers in Part 1 are based largely on
bioarcheological and paleopathological studies of
Late Prehistoric and Early Historic skeletal populations from archeological contexts. As an introduction to these studies, Donald Ortner ("Skeletal
Paleopathology: Probabilities, Possibilities, and
Impossibilities") presents an overview of the nature
of paleopathological studies, together with a discussion of their strengths and limitations. He points
out that while skeletal remains can provide data on
chronic bacterial disease conditions, acute diseases,
such as the great epidemics of the post-contact period, leave at best nonspecific and indirect evidence in a skeletal sample. In particular, he notes
that "viral diseases such as smallpox and measles
had a particularly devastating effect on Native
American populations subsequent to A.D. 1500 but
there is no clear evidence of either disease in archeological skeletal samples" (p. 5). He does note,
however, that new techniques for extracting human
immuno.globulins and even viral DNA from archeological skeletal samples may change this situation
in the near future.
The rest of the papers in this section include
reviews of data from South America, southeastern
North America, northeastern North America, the
Midwest, the Great Plains, the Southwest, and
California. As Arthur Aufderheide states in his

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

564

Texas Archeological Society

summary to this section ("Summary on Disease
before and after Contact"), all of these papers
"clearly document the presence of malnutrition,
anemia, and a variety of tuberculoid, treponematoid,
and other infections as well as trauma and
degenerative conditions" (p. 165) in the New World
prior to the arrival of Europeans. Nevertheless, the
data suggest that most Native Americans had
developed a certain level of immunity to some of
these infections, such as tuberculosis and
treponematosis, with the result that they had become
chronic illnesses or even childhood diseases (such
as smallpox had become to the Europeans of this
time). On this basis, it is clear that the "concept of
a pristine, disease-free, pre-Columbian New World
environment is no longer credible" (p. 165).
However, the radical, and even catastrophic, nature
of the change in Native American health conditions
cannot be downplayed, even in regard to conditions
which may have been chronic prior to the contact
period (for example, the resurgence of tuberculosis
among nineteenth century Native Americans on
reservations is probably related to changes in
disease environment, rather than the introduction
of new strains).
Beyond this, however, the studies in Part 1
also highlight the great degree of variability in the
health conditions of Native American populations
prior to contact, and the differences in their response to the changes brought about by the Europeans during and after contact. In some areas, such as
Andean South America, the Southeast, the Northeast, and the Plains, population morbidity (i.e., the
rate of disease in a population) was increasing during the pre-Columbian period, presumably as a result of cultural changes, such as agricultural
intensification and dietary shifts, increasing population, and increasing sedentism, with accompanying side effects. Conditions such as these would
only have been made worse by the new, contactrelated changes. Stodder and Martin ("Health and
Disease in the Southwest before and after Contact") show that in other areas, such as the Southwest, isolated populations either postponed, or
escaped entirely, the infectious epidemics suffered
by their less fortunate neighbors. In his study of
several contemporary populations, Milner ("Disease and Sociopolitical Systems in Late Prehistoric
Illinois") shows that substantial differences in aboriginal health conditions enabled certain groups in
the Midwest to cope with new infections better

than others. Larsen and his colleagues ("Population
Decline and Extinction in La Florida") document
the rather rapid extinction of aboriginal social
groups in the Southeast. Owsley’s data
("Demography of Prehistoric and Early Historic
Northern Plains Populations") for the Northern
Plains indicates at least two waves of high mortality during the e~ly contact period, with some groups
(such as the Arikara) surviving to prosper, and succumbing to infectious disease and social disruption
only later. In Aufderheide’s words, all of these studies "clearly demonstrate the peril of extrapolating
isolated observations of disease-related demographic changes to the population of an entire region or even a continent" (pp. 165-166).
The papers in Part 2 rely largely on
ethnohistofical and historical data to examine the
question of how and why Native American population sizes changed as a result of European contact.
Ubelaker ("North American Indian Population Size:
Changing Perspectives") opens this section with a
review of previous attempts to estimate the aboriginal population of the New World prior to 1500,
along with a discussion of the methodologies used
by various researchers. In the summary to this section, Alfred W. Crosby ("Summary on Population
Size before and after Contact") notes that such estimates have ranged from a low of 8.4 million for the
total population of this hemisphere in 1492 (Kroeber
t939) to a high of 90-112 million (Dobyns 1983).
Ubelaker observes that his own most recent estimate for North America, based on figures prepared
for the Handbook of North American Indians
(Sturtevant 1978-), more than doubles Kroeber’s
estinaate but falls far short of Dobyns’.
Most of the rest of the papers in this part are
"case studies" which focus on aspects of the
demographic histories of specific areas, including:
lowland South America, highland South America,
the Caribbean, northern Mexico, southeastern North
America, northeastern North America, the Great
Plains, the Southwest, and the Northwest Coast of
North America. Once again, as was found in the
first set of papers, the view that emerges from all of
these regional studies is that although Native
American populations declined everywhere after
contact (sometimes catasrophically), the details of
decline differed enormously across space and
through time. As Crosby puts it, "there is no doubt
that the Euro- and Afro-Americans carried diseases
deadly to Indians, but said diseases did not rain

Reviews

down uniformly and all at once on all the original
peoples of the New World" (p. 278).
In the case of Amazonia, Meggers ("Prehistoric Population Density in the Amazon Basin")
compares archeological and ethnohistorical data and
concludes that early eyewitness estimates of high
population density are unreliable, and that the postcontact population decline which occurred there
(while severe) was less than has been previously
suggested. In other areas, where the natural and
cultural environment did allow large and dense precontact populations (such as Andean South
America, the Southwest, and the Caribbean), postcontact losses were far more severe and catastrophic.
The studies by Ubelaker, Snow ("Disease and Population Decline in the Northeast"), Trimble ("The
1832 Inoculation Program on the Missouri River"),
and Thornton ("Depopulation in the Southeast after
1492") show that even within limited regions, population histories were not uniform.
Disease-waves and their accompanying demographic declines occurred unevenly, at different
times to different groups, and affected groups differently. Boyd’s ("Population Decline from Two
Epidemics on the Northwest Coast") study of two
epidemic cases on the Northwest Coast show this
clearly. He contrasts the catastrophic Native
American population decline (approximately 87
percent) in the Lower Columbia drainage due to the
apparent presence of malaria after 1830, with the
effect of the 1862-1863 smallpox epidemic on the
Queen Charlotte Islands Haida (a nearly 60 percent
decline). In the former case, he notes that "socially,
after 1841, most Chinookan and Kalapuyan populations [of the Lower Columbia area] were approaching extinction as viable and ethnically
distinct entities" (p. 251). In contrast, the Haida
"regrouped and persisted in a few, fair-sized settlements" (p. 252), and have steadily recovered during the present century. Boyd concludes from these
cases that the effect which a newly introduced disease may have on a "virgin population" (i.e., one
not previously exposed to that infection and which
has no immunity to it) is strongly related to the type
of disease (whether its effects are deliberate and
cumulative, or sudden and discrete), and to cultural
practices (such as indigenous health care systems
and the ability of social systems to readjust after
severe perturbations).
In addition to the regional studies, Dobyns
("Native American Trade Centers as Contagious

565

Foci") contributes a pan-regional overview of the
potential role that trading centers played as loci for
the introduction and spread of new infectious diseases. Drawing on examples from the Great Plains
(the Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara), the Southwest
(Pecos, the Northern Panya, and Pueblo de los
Jumanos), the Southeast (the Eno and the
Ocaneechi), and the Northeast (the Wenro, Neutral,
and Huron), Dobyns argues that Native Americans
who were involved in trade, or resident at such
trading centers, were exposed to imported diseases
earlier and probably suffered more severe effects
from such diseases. The severity of these effects,
Dobyns feels, is reflected in the fact that in all cases
Native American "merchants abandoned hitherto
prosperous trading centers a year or so after a final
demoralizing epidemic disease episode" (p. 220).
Despite the lack of a single theoretical theme
or viewpoint to this book, as well as the fact that a
true consensus has yet to emerge regarding
questions of disease and demography raised by
these papers, the volume offers valuable insights
to anyone interested in the problems of Native
American disease and population decline. It is truly
interdisciplinary in that the papers draw on data
from archeology, paleopathology, ethnohistory,
and history. Although the focus is generally on
North America, it does provide some comparative
data regarding the population history of South
America, Mexico, and the Caribbean. All of the
individual papers are relatively short and can be
read or reread rapidly and, except for the
introduction and summaries by Ubelaker, Verano,
Aufderheide, and Crosby, each paper stands alone.
In addition, each paper is accompanied by its own
bibliography which allows the interested researcher
to seek out other references on particular topics or
areas without a great deal of effort. Likewise, the
book has an eight page index which also increases
its utility as a research tool. This volume will
certainly stand as an important resource for both
the interested lay-reader and the professional alike
for a long time to come.

REFERENCES
Becker, M. J.
1994

Review of Disease and Demography in the Americas, edited by J. W. Verano and D. H. Ubelaker.
American Antiquity 59(2):383-384.

566

Texas Archeological Society

Dobyns, H. F.

Sturtevant, W. C. (editor)

1983

1978- Handbook of North American Indians. 20 Vols.

Their" Number Became Thinned: Native American
Population Dynamics in Eastern North America.
University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville.

Kroeber, A. L.
1939

Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North
America. Publications in American Archaeology and
Ethnology 38:1-242. University of California, Berkeley.

Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

