Texas Archeological Society

529

GLOSSARY
Abrading stone: A stone, either shaped or unshaped, used
for smoothing other objects by abrasion. Thus, arrow
shafts, knife handles, shell and stone beads, pendants,
etc., may have been ground into shape by rubbing
against a coarse-grained abrader. The tips of bone awls
were commonly sharpened by rubbing in grooves made
in rock slabs or bedrock.
Acculturation: The process of interaction between two or
more cultures by which the .behavior patterns of one
or all of them are modified in a greater degree than in
the case of simple diffusion or borrowing of traits.
Adze: A relatively fiat and thin cutting implement of stone
or shell mounted or hafted at right angles to the handle.
Applique: A technique of pottery decoration in which
pieces or strips of moist clay are pressed on to the
vessel wall before firing, producing a relief ornamentation.
Arrow point: A small, thin, and light point hafted to the
end of an arrow shaft. Although popularly known as
"bird points" there was no particular connection between such arrows and the hunting of birds; they were
also used for all game, large and small, and for warfare.
In general, the weight of such points is only a fraction
of that of dart points although in dimensions there is
considerable overlap.
Arti]act: Any object fashioned through human workmanship. In practice, it is usually confined to objects found
by archeologists.
AtlatI: A word of Aztec origin, commonly used for the
spear-thrower.
Awl: A pointed implement, usually of bone or shell, suitable
for making small holes in skins or for sewing coiled
basketry by penetrating the foundation.

PARTS OF PROJECTILE POINTS

BLADE SHAPES

LANCEOLATt

PARALLEL
TRIANGULAR

STEM SHAPES
/

!

\

/--i r-k

PO! NTED

CONTRACTING

EXPANDING

STRAIGHT

\

STEM BASES
/

#

\

CONCAVE

\

INDENTED

CONVEX

ROUNDED

STRAIGHT

NOTCHES
!

SiDE

;

BASAL

I

’,

BASAL

I

’,

CORNER
(HARROW)

FIGURE "/:
Chart showing names of projectile-point parts

/

\

CORNER

Texas A~cheologica~ ~oc~ety

Ax, Axe: A large, thick, bifacially-chipped stone artifact
suitable for chopping. It may vary in shape from oval
to roughly rectangular or triangular and may or may
not have notches chipped into the edges for hatting.
Such objects are sometimes referred to as "heavy
blades". See also celts and grooved axes.
Bi-convex: Any artifact, the faces of which are both convex
in cross-section.
Bi-face tool: Any stone artifact modified on both faces by
chipping.
Bit: The cutting edge of an axe, celt, chisel, or scraper.
Blade: The main body of a knife or projectile point, as distinct from the hatted portion or stem. Old World archeologists generally use the term for long, thin, more
or less parallel-edged spalls or prisms struck from cores;
New World archeologists generally term these "flakes"
or "lamellar fl~es".
Bladelet: A small "blade" in the Old World usage cited
above.
Boatstone: A polished-stone artifact shaped more or less like
a canoe with rounded or squared ends, usually hollowed
out in various ways from the upper or flat side. Probably used as weights tied to underside of atlatls (spearthrowers) to increase centrifugal force through throwing arc; experiments prove that such weights actually
give added force and snap to the throw.
Brushing: A technique of finishing the surface of pottery
vessels by rubbing with grass or perhaps twigs, leaving
the surface covered with striations. As this was usually
done on the exteriors only, the interiors being smoothed,
and the striations sometimes run in crude patterns, it
was probably decorative.
Burnish: To rub a pottery-vessel surface to a high polish
with satiny feel.

532

Texas Archeologica! Society

Burnt-rock midden: A concentrated refuse deposit consisting largely of broken and discarded chunks of hearthstones (usually limestone), together with soil, ash, animal-bone fragments, artifacts, flint scrap, etc. They are
very common in Central Texas and range in height from
a few inches to 8 feet or more; in extent they may range
from 25 feet across to several acres and are usually
roughly circular or oval in shape except when found
in caves. They have often been referred to as "rock
mounds", but since they are merely unintentional accumulations, are more suitably termed middens.
Cambered rim or lip: A vessel lip with convex outer surface
meeting the inner surface in a ridge or gable.
Campsite: A place occupied for only a short time.
Celt: An ungrooved polished-stone axe. ustmlly round or
oval in cross-section at middle, one end converging to
a bit, the other a blunt poll (petaloid celt). Also refers
to a flatter object with the cutting edge flaring out
wider than the body (spatulate celt). While the term
is often applied to flat, thin, more or less rectangular
polished axes with sharp bits, these are termed adzes
herein.
Checker or checkerboard weave: A technique of weaving
baskets in which the two elements pass one-over and
one-under, producing a checkerboard pattern.
Chopper: A heavy, very crudely chipped stone implement
with a broad, jagged cutting edge at one end. The other
end is usually unchipped and retains the original outer
surface or "crust" of the pebble or flint nodule from
which the chopper was made; this original surface often
fits conveniently into the palm, hence the alternative
terms "fist axe" and "hand axe". The term "axe" in
this connection usually indicates a thinner and bettermade blade at the cutting end; however, all three terms
may be used interchangeably.
Cist: A dug pit which may be oval, circular, or irregular in
shape, and may or may not be lined with plaster or

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

533

stones. Primarily for food storage but sometimes used
secondarily for graves.
Coiled basketry: Basketry in which a round foundation element of grass stems, twigs, or slats (split twigs) is built
up in a continuous spiral. Each circuit is held in place
by passing a looping strand over it and binding it to
the one below in any of several ways.
Coiled pottery: Pottery constructed in much the same way
as coiled basketry, and perhaps invented by simulating
the latter. From a starting core or disk, rolls of clay are
added in a continuous spiral or series of circuits, each
one pressed down and pinched on to the preceding one.
The seams are then smoothed over with a stone tool or a
paddle-and-anvil. If not smoothed over, the pinching of
one coil down on another produces a "corrugated" effect.
Complex: Any group of cultural traits found together so as
to indicate they existed at the same time. Also, groups
of traits pertaining to certain kinds of activity, such as
hunting complex, burial complex, architectural complex, etc.
Cordmarking: A technique of impressing cords into the surface of pottery vessels for decorative effect. The cords
probably were wrapped tightly around wooden paddles
and thus pressed into the clay in groups rather than
singly, although the latter was practiced as well.
Core, core tool: A stone, usually flint or obsidian, from
which flakes have been removed. When the core has
been fashioned into a tool, such as a hand axe, by the
orderly removal of flakes, it becomes a "core tool" or
"core artifact".
Corner-tang: A term applied to knives and drills which
have a "tang" or stem at one corner rather than in the
usual position in the center of the base. The stem may
also be merely off-center enough so that any handle
halted to it would lie at an angle to the medial line of
the artifact. The purpose is unknown but an angular
handle on certain cutting or drilling implements may

f~34

Texas Archeological Society

provide a mechanical advantage over a straight handle
for some functions.
Corrugated pottery: Coiled pottery in which one coil has
been pinched on to the preceding one with regular
crimps, but the seams and crimps have not been
smoothed over in the usual manner, being left as decoration. The entire vessel may be corrugated (as by the
Puebloan Indians), or the body may be smoothed and
only the neck coils left corrugated. The latter technique
is called neck-banding and occurs in the Puebloan, Caddoan, and northern Andean regions.
Dart point: A point attached to the shaft of a "dart" used
with the spear-thrower. Because of the size of these
"darts", from 4~/2 to 6 feet long, and the power of the
throwing stick, these points are considerably heavier
than those for arrows, although no exact criteria have
been established.
Dentate stamping: A decorative technique on pottery, done
by pressing the notched edge of a mussel or sea shell (or
possibly a finely notched wooden or bone implement)
into the still-plastic clay. The fine rows of punctates
thus produced will appear similar in cast. The edge of
the implement may have .been rocked back and forth,
producing a dentated rocker stamping.
Di]]usion: The spread of culture traits through their being
borrowed by one group from another.
Digging Stick: A wooden staff, usually pointed and sometimes fire-hardened, for uprooting plants, bulbs, etc.
Distal: The end farthest away from one, when used in reference to something held in the hand. When used in
reference to parts of bones (especially limb bones), the
distal end is that farthest from the body, as opposed to
the proximal end.
Drill: An implement of chipped stone with a long, slender
shaft suitable for making holes in wood, stone, bone,
leather, etc.

Tezas A~cheolog~c~ Societ~

539

other workshop debris, etc., and may vary in thickness
from a few inches to several feet. See also burnt-rock
midden and shell midden.
Milling stone: A stone slab on which a mano was used to
grind food. In contrast to a metate, the grinding motion
on a milling stone was rotary rather than back-andforth, which produced an oval basin rather than a
trough. Much more widespread in America than the
metate and associated with pre-agricultural people for
several thousand years, then used by some agricultural
people as well. Probably used for grinding nuts, roots,
berries and other wild foods.
Mortar: A deep, cup-shaped vessel of stone or wood in which
seeds, grain, corn, etc., were pulverized with a pestle
used with downward force. Bedrock mortars are those
made in large non-portable boulders or rock outcrops.
Neck-banding: See corrugation.

Negative design: A design in which the background or undecorated area appears to be the chief design element.
Negative painting: A technique of pottery decoration in
which the parts of the desired design are covered with
wax, grease, clay, or other substance, and the rest of
the surface painted. When the covering substance is removed, the design appears in the unpainted areas.
Occipital deformation: A form of head deformation in which
the back of the skull is pressed flat, thus widening it.
May be caused accidentally by pressure from cradleboard to which infant’s head is bound.
Ochre: An earthy, often impure, ore of iron, usually called
hematite when red and limonite when yellow or light
brown. Used by Indians for paint.
Olla: A globular-bodied vessel with a small neck and mouth.
When used for water storage, the small mouth reduces
evaporation.

540

Texas Archeolog~cal Society

Overhanging lines: Horizontal lines cut into the plastic clay
of a pottery vessel, with the tool held at a downward
angle; the incisions are deepest along their upper sides.
Oxidizing atmosphere: Applies to the firing of pottery in
such a way that air is permitted to circulate around the
vessels. This provides an excess of oxygen and produces shades of red, brown, or yellow pottery, depending in part on the minerals present in the clay, and in
part on the temperatures.
Paddle-and-anvil: A technique of shaping pottery walls by
beating the clay into the desired shape, holding a solid
object (the "anvil") against the inner surface and striking the exterior with a small wooden paddle. Also used
in some areas as a finishing technique to obliterate the
seams of coiled pottery.
Palette: A thin tablet of various shapes, with one or more
shallow basins in which to hold or mix paints.
Paste: The mixture of clay and tempering material with
whi~ch pottery is made.
Patina: A discoloration of stone, obsidian, glass, or metal
as the result of exposure to the elements or to chemical
actions in the surrounding soil. As different materials
patinate at different rates under the same conditions,
and some never patinate under any conditions, the
amount of patination seen on an artifact cannot be
used to measure its age unless the kind of material,
local soil conditions, sub-surface drainage, temperatures,
etc., are all taken into consideration. However, no such
scales have been worked out.
Pecking: A technique of shaping an artifact by removing
tiny bits with a hard, pointed stone directed against it.
The surface will be finely pitted as a result, and may
then sometimes be ground or polished, more or less obliterating the peck-marks.
Pendant: An ornament perforated for suspension so as to
hang lengthwise.

Texas Archeological Society

Percussion chipping:
mering.

541

Chipping or flaking stone by ham-

Pestle: An implement of stone or wood, basically cylindrical
in shape, used to pulverize food matter in a mortar. It
may be tapered, provided with a flanged handle, or
otherwise modified from the cylindrical shape.
Pick: A roughly chipped stone tool brought to a point rather
than to a cutting edge.
Piano-convex: Pertains to an artifact with one face more
or less flat and the other convex, particularly to flint
artifacts on which the original concoidal fracture plane
is left smooth and unworked while the humped or convex face is shaped by chipping.
Pleistocene: The glacial epoch or Ice Age, during which
vast continental glaciers advanced and retreated a number of times. Estimates of its duration range from 500,000 to 1,000,000 years. The last major retreat appears
to have occurred about 11,000 years ago in different
parts of the world.
Polished-stone artifacts: In contrast to ground-stone arti]acts, which become smoothed through use rather than
intent, polished-stone arti$acts are those intentionally
shaped by abrading and polishing their surfaces. In
some cases, these artifacts were first roughly shaped by
percussion or pecking, then finished by abrading.
Polychrome ware: Pottery painted with two or more colors
in addition to the background color. Thus, any combination of three or more colors.
Prayer stick: A piece of wood to which may be tied a variety of other objects such as feathers, string, fur, pieces
of bone, etc. Used in ceremonies by Puebloan Indians
of Southwest; sometimes found archeologically in caves.
Pre,. sure flaking: Removal of flakes by applying pressure
against the face or edge of a stone artifact with a small
flaking tool. This was the usual method of finishing
such objects as projectile points, knives, drills, etc., after

542

Texas Archeolo~cal Society

they had been roughly shaped by percussion chipping.
Pressure permitted more control over direction and
amount of fracturing.
Projectile point: A pointed artifact of stone, shell, bone,
wood, metal, or bony scales of garfish, hafted to the tip
of an arrow, atlatl dart, spear, or lance shaft to facilitate
penetration.
Proximal: The reverse of distal; that is, the end nearest one
when used in reference to something held in the hand.
When used in reference to parts of bones (especially
limb bones), the proximal end is that nearest the body.
Punctates: In pottery decoration this refers to indentations
made in the plastic clay with a sharp stick, the hollow
end of a reed, a blunt tool, or a fingernail. Punctates
may also be made in shell and bone artifacts with a
sharply pointed implement, such as a graver.

Rabbit stick: A flat stick or club, curved or recurved in
various degrees, 60 cm. (2 feet) or more in length, found
widely in dry caves of the Southwest and Mexico, and
still used by Hopi Indians to kill rabbits. Also referred
to as a type of boomerang (non-returning), "fending
stick" (to deflect weapons or spears in warfare), "curved
stick", or "curved club". Commonly has sets of parallel
incised lines running lengthwise but discontinuously on
flat faces.
Rasp, rasping stick: An implement notched along edge or
face which, when rubbed with a stick, produces a harsh
rasping noise. May be made of large animal rib or of
wood.
Recent: Often used to embrace the post-Pleistocene or postglacial period, but not an ideal term because in most
other languages, "recent" and "modern" are equivalent.
Reducing atmosphere: Applies to the firing of pottery in
such a way that air is prevented from circulating around
the vessels. This results in a reduction of oxygen and
tends to produce shades of black and gray pottery. See
oxidizing atmosphere.

Texas Archeological Society

543

I~epousse: A pattern in relief produced by hammering or
pressing the reverse side into a mold.
Rocker stamping: A technique of pottery decoration in
which a sharp-edged or toothed implement is moved
back and forth across the plastic clay, each segment
offset from the preceding one, producing a zig-zag line.
Scraper: A piano-convex artifact, usually of stone, with the
under side unworked and the upper side chipped into
one or more cutting edges. Usually named according to
the position of the cutting edge or bit, such as "side
scraper", "end scraper", or "oval scraper". A scraper
which is very thick near one end may be called "snubnosed" or "duck-billed", while one which has a high
ridge along the centerline may be called "turtle-backed".
Scrapers may also be made of potsherds ground to a
cutting edge.
Shaft smoother: See abrading stone. The shaft smoother is
usually a block of coarse-grained stone with a longitudinal groove suitable for fitting part way around an
arrow~ or atlatl-dart shaft.
Shaft straightener: A stone block shaped like a shaft smoother. Sometimes found in pairs which, if clamped over
an arrow, dart, or spear shaft, could be used to bend the
shaft into a straight line. Also applies to bone artifacts
with a hole through which a shaft could be thrust and
the bone used as a wrench to straighten it.
Shell midden: An accumulation of refuse including a large
amount of discarded sea shells (oyster, clam, conch,
etc.) or fresh-water mussels.
Sherd, potsherd: A fragment of a broken vessel.
Site: Any spot producing evidence of human occupation,
directly or indirectly. Thus isolated graves, pictographs,
bed-rock mortar holes, etc., are evidence of human occupation in the vicinity even when no camp refuse is
found.
Slip: Potter’s clay in a very liquid state, used for giving a
fine-grained surface to the vessel, suitable for polishing.

Texas Archeological Society

544

Spall: See flake.

Spatulate: Spoon-shaped or spade-shaped. Used in reference
to celts which spread laterally toward the cutting end.
Spear point: A heavy projectile point, usually more than 10
cm. (4 inches)
point, although
distinguish the
heavy shafts of

long and usually thicker than a dart
there is no accepted scale by which to
two classes. Presumably hafted to the
spears or lances.

Spear-thrower or atlatl: A flat, thin, wooden implement
usually between 45 and 75 cm. (18 and 30 inches) long
and several centimeters wide, having a handle or finger
holds at one end and a spur at the other. The spur may
be carved from the same piece or may be a pointed
piece of bone or antler attached in any of various ways;
it fits into the butt of the missile to be thrown. The
thrower is used with a wide overhead swing and acts as
an extension of the arm, adding great power to the
thrust. The missiles are commonly called "darts", an
unfortunate term for actually they are raore like light
spears or javelins. The "darts" are very similar to
arrows, but much heavier, being 1.5 to 2 meters (5 to 6.5
feet) long, and two or three times as thick as arrows;
they have attached points and are equipped with feathers to stabilize them in flight. The spear-thrower is now
known in only a few parts of the world but at one time
was probably universal. Archeological data show it to
have been in use for many thousands of years before
the bow-and-arrow was invented.
Spindle whorl: An object, usually of clay, shaped like a
disk or a truncated cone, with a hole through its center.
It is fitted on the shaft of a spindle and acts as a stabilizer to reduce wobble. In American archeology, spindle
whorls occur in some areas which are made from potsherds, drilled through the center and trimmed around
the edges to make round disks.
Spokeshave: A form of scraper, usually piano-convex, with
at least one deeply concave edge of suitable size for
scraping down wooden shafts or handles.

Texas Archeological Society

545

Stamping: A technique of pottery decoration in which the
same object is pressed repeatedly into the plastic clay,
leaving a series of identical impressions.
Step-Jret: A decorative pattern characterized by right-angular lines, bars, or figures, interlocked in various ways
in a continuous belt; particularly, interlocking L-shaped
elements.
Stratigraphy: The arrangement of strata (layers, beds, deposits) as to position and order of deposition. Ordinarily, the bottom stratum in a series is the oldest and
the top stratum the youngest, although special conditions may at times alter or even reverse this order. The
strata may be geological (deposited by natural forces),
cultural (due to human occupation), or both. Stratigraphy is an invaluable aid in detern-iining the relative
age of cultural material.
Temper: An aplastic material added to pottery clay to reduce its stickiness and to allow steam to escape through
the walls when the vessel is fired. If steam cannot escape uniformly, the walls crack or bend. The commonest aplastics in Indian pottery are sand and the
following pulverized materials: hard clay, stone (especially limestone and quartz), shell, bone, volcanic ash,
sherds from other vessels, etc.
Tinkler: A small metal cone, usually brass, for attachment
to clothing, saddles, etc., for ornamentation. A favorite
Indian trade item in historic times.
Trailed lines: Broad, shallow incised lines made with a
round-nosed tool.
Twilling: A technique of basketry plaiting in which a diagonal pattern is achieved in any of several ways: overtwo-and-under-two, over-two-and-under-one, over-threeand-under-one, etc.
Twining: A technique of making basketry in which the weft
elements are applied in pairs over the warps. The two
weft elements are usually passed on each side of a warp,

Texas Archeological Society

546

then given a half twist to cross the next warp in reversed position. Slight variations may be made to produce simple patterns.
Type: A grouping of artifacts or other culture traits (e.g.,
details of house construction, burial method, etc.) which
represents a pattern distinctive from other such patterns. This specific combination of features should .be
of some demonstrable historical significance. That is,
it should be more than a random grouping of things that
look more or less alike, and it should have a particular
meaning in terms of origin, development, function, and
distribution in time and space in contrast to other such
combinations. The criteria by which types are established are variable and discovered by analysis, comparison, and plotting in time and space. Ideally, a type
in archeology should have a meaning comparable to that
of a species in biology.
Typology:
types.

A system of analyzing cultural material into

Uni]ace: An artifact with intentional workmanship on only
one face. See piano-convex.
Village site: A relatively permanent occupational area, in
contrast to a campsite.

Warp: A passive element in weaving and basket-making,
usually of stouter material than the active elements or
weirs. In plaiting, both sets of elements are active and
the warps and wefts indistinguishable.
Wash: A thin or watery coat of color applied to pottery; to
tint lightly and thinly.
Weir: An active element in weaving, as opposed to the
warps or passive elements.
Woo]: A synonym for weir, now generally obsolete.

