Indian Picturos in Dry Sh~It~r~ of Val V~rd~ County

47

INDIAN PICTURI~S IN TI-I~ DRY SI-I~LT~RS
OF VAL Vt~RD~ COUNTY, T~.XAS
By FOm’~EST

KIRKLAND

Bordering the Rio Grande, and extending roughly about 25 ~niles
east and west of the mouth of the Pecos River and up the stream
about 40 miles, is a semi-desert area, deeply scarred by precipitous
canyons containing innumerable rock shelters and o-,~rhanging
cliffs, which at some time in the past have been occupied by aboriginal man. In many of these dry shelters are still to be found deep
middens; and in front of the flooded shelters and overhanging
cliffs, hearths and burnt rock mounds are often found. Round mortars are found at almost every site. The smooth surface of the rock
walls served as an ideal background for pictures, which are found
in great variety throughout the area.
This region not only surpasses other similar areas of the state
in the number of its picture sites, and the amount of wall space
covered, but also in the great variety of picture types. One tyIm
which is easily recognized, and which represents a very high order
of pictographic art, makes up the greater part of the pictures.
This paper will be limited to a discussion of this predominant type
in the area outlined above, all of which is in Val Verde County,
Texas,
During the last three summers we have examined many shelter~
and other locations in the district, and have made scale copies of the
pictures stilI legible at forty-one sites. Still our work is by no
means finished in the district, because we know of pictures at a halfdozen or more sites which we have not yet visited; and it is more
than likely that other sites will be discovered as the work progresses.
However, the material already at hand should be quite enough to
give us the essential featur~ of the culture.
The writer proposed Val Verde Dry Shelter Culture as a name
for this particular culture, because nearly all of its pictures are on
the walls of dry shelters within the bounds of Val Verde County.
Relationship Between Pictures and Middens
Twenty-nine of the forty-one sites studied in the district contain

48

Teza~ A~’¢h~ologi~al and Paleon~ologica.l Society

pictures of this predominant type.

Twenty-six of these twenty-nine

are dry shelters; one is a flooded shelter; and two are overhanging
cliffs.

Twenty-three of these dry shelters contain middens on their

floors varying in depth from one to more tban ten feet, which points
to a long period of occupation. Pictures are not found in every dry
shelter. Whenever pictures do occur in Shelters containing middens, in this district, we have found them to be with only one exception, of the Val Verde Dry Shelter type. These pictures are found
exclusively in twenty-one mSdden bearing shelters, and, although
there are many pictures of other types in the district, they are associated with the Dry Shelter pictures in only two of the twenty-three
midden bearing shelters. These facts disclose a very close connection between the Dry Shelter pictures and the middens, and seem to
indicate that the pictures were produced by the same inhabitants that
built up the middens.
This view is substantiated by the additional fact that in several
cases the pictures are partly or completely covered by the deposit.
In one case we were able to copy a large d~gn that had been
uncovered by a deep trench against the wall. In many shelters the
midden extends up to the very bottoln of the pictures, although it
appears most likely that the pictures were painted when they were
at a convenient height above the floor level. In these cases, almost
all of the lower pictures have been dmnaged or destroyed by close
contact of the inhabitants during the years necessary for the midden
to reach its final level.
Type o] Material in the Middens
We have made no attempt to dig at any of the sites, but have observed a similarity of material around the holes left by amateur
collectors in many of the middens. Straw, dried leaves, quids of
vegetable matter, fragments of basketry, pieces of twine, and knotted
grass are corot-non. Two of the shelters containing only pictures of
the Val Verde Dry Shelter Culture have been partly excavated and
reported upon. One in the Seminole Canyon was explored by the
PLATE 11.
Pictures from Panther Cave at the mouth of the Seminole Canyon.

Plate

Indian Pictures in Dry Shelters of Val Verde County

55

painted over solid red to get a polka dot effect. Another interest.
ing use of polka dots~ was on the robes of two figures in a nearby
canyon. Tbe dots were small outline circles of black on a yellow
background.
Typical ~lnthropomorphic Figure

As individual and highly developed as the polychrome painting
of this culture was, it does not equal the uniqueness of its designs
and human representations. The outstanding example of these is
the typical anthropomorphic figure, which is found in various forms
at almost every site. There are hundreds of these figures in sizes
from a few inches in height to more than eight feet, and frequently
in two or three colors.
The commonest form is an extremely elongated figure, sometimes
with sides parallel, but usually broader at the shoulders, with arms
on opposite sides of the body, extended at right angles or slightly
raised; the legs, if present, extending downward in line with the
outside edge of the body (Plates 11, 12). The fingers and tt,~s
are indicated with from three to five parallel lines extending straight
out from t.he ends of the arms and legs. Sometimes the feet are plctured more realistically at right angles to the legs, or like tracks
underneath the legs. The head is never realistically pictured. It
may be anything from a deer head mask to an oval, a square, a
series of dots or lines; or it may be omitted altogether (Plate 12).
Feathers, or plumes sometimes extend upward from the head. Various kinds of fringes, banners or decorations are usually suspended
from one or both arms; while one or both wrists may be decorated
with an ornate wristband. One hand, usually the left, holds a staff,.
while the other grasps what resembles a broken flowering plant
(Plates 11, 12).
The color and decoration of the robe worn by the figure seems
to have depended on the individual taste of the artist. However, a
few features that are often found may be worthy of note. A fringe,
sometimes in alternating colors, may extend partly or completely
around the robe; a simple or elaborate panel often appears on the
5.

Kirkland, 195~a: Plate I.

56

T~ras A~’¢h¢ologlcal and Paleontological Society

front of the garment; infrequently a muhiple sash (Plate 12, No. 3)
extends from the robe at low waist line.
In numerous instances, a cape, or wing-like extension of the robe
projects some distance beyond the shoulders. In this case the hands
of the figure project upward from the shoulders. In extre~ne cases
of conventionalization the figure resembles a tri-motor airplane.6
This robe is evidently a part of a special ceremonial costume, because it is usually elaborately decorated, and sometimes worn with a
deershead mask.
While the figure is usually shown facing forward with arms on
opposite sides of the body, it may appear in profile with both arms
extending from the same side (Plate 12, No. 1, 2). !n which case,
the usual arm and wrist decorations are seen and the hands may
grasp either the staff or the broken flower.
Another form occasionally found is identical from the waist up
with the first described; but the lower part of the body is entirely
omitted (Plate 13, No. 2). The fringe, if present, extends entirely
around the body at the waist like a fringe on the bottom of a coat.
The typical anthropomorphic figure is subject to so many modifications and conventionalizations that it sometimes loses its human
aspect and becomes merely a desig~n (Plate 16; No. 3, 4, 5) ; but
there will always be prbsent an extended staff, recognizable arms or
legs, arm decorations or some other common attribute that definitely
links it with the typical anthropomorphic idea.
Other Human Representations
While this figure is outstanding and unique to the culture, it is
¯ by no means the only human representation. Another very common
figure is usually small, seldom painted with more than one color,
and lacking such details as feet, fingers, and shaped head (Plate 13;
6.

Kirkland, 1938 ; pp. 20-23 (Plate 2, Nos. I~5).

PLATE 13.
Pictures from two shelters on the Pecos River. No. l~Part of a
damaged group in a shelter one mile below the high bridge. No. 2,
3--Continuous on the wall of a shelter almost under the west end of
the high bridge.

Plate 13

Indigen Pictures in Dry Shelters of Val Verde County

59

No. 2, 3). The body is usually short with parallel sides and square
bottom. A curved top generally serves for a head. The legs extend
straight downward from the sides of the body or may flair outward.
The arms are straight marks on each side of the body, sometimes
at right angles, but frequently extending downward.
An interesting variation of this figure has a slightly bulging body
with two appendages at the top resembling rabbit ears.7 These
figures have been referred to as rabbitsS; but, in view of the frequent use of similar appendages on the anthropomorphic figure, it
seems more likely that they were also intended to represent men.
Perhaps the most unusual figure in the culture is one that appears to represent a man in an anilnal mask. Its body is almost
round. It has hands and feet and sometimes the usual arm decorations. The head is never very well defined; but it possesses two,
usually fringed, tail-like appendages between, or on each side of the
legs (Plate 12; No. 2, 3). Individual variations of this figure are
very marked; but the fact that they represent the same being is
unmistakable.
Other less distinctive human representations are generally related
to one of the above forms.
Phallic Representations
We have found no phallic representations of any kind in the
culture. Phallic figures are present at only two sites, and they
unquestionably belong to other cultures. No sex distinctions are
recognizable in any of the pictures.
Handprints
Handprints are found at only three Val Verde Dry Shelter sites.
At one they are with the pictures of a more recent culture. The
other two sites, containing only a few handprints, are located very
near a large flooded shelter site of a different culture, which contains many handprints. We believe, therefore, that these were intrusions and that handprints were not made by the Val Verde Dry Shelter Culture. There is, however, a common design among their pic7.
8.

K|rkland, 1938 : Plate 7, No. 2.
Pierce and Jackson, 1933 ; pp. 24-27.

6O

tures, painted with a brush, which resembles a handprint (Plate 12;
No. 2). It probably represents an animal track.
Pictures o] the Puma
Unlike the highly conventionalized human figure of the culture,
many of the animal pictures are exceptionally realistic. This is
especially true of the puma, or Mexican lion, which seems to have
held an important place in the culture. One life sized picture9 of
this animal is remarkable for its graceful pose and realism. The
average picture, however, is fairly crude (Plates 11, 13) with long
body, graceful, erect or arching tail; but with stiff straight legs.
The mouth is usually open, ears erect, and bristles raised. Claws
are usually present; but the eye is seldom expressed. Some conventionalizations are found in which only the general form remains.
At several sites, these puma pictures occupy the most prominent
part of the shelter and are grouped with an anthropomorphic figure
as if to illustrate a myth (Plate 13, No. 1). In these cases the length
of the animal may exceed 16 feet from nose to tip of tail.
Pictures o! Deer
As in many other Indian cultures, the deer played an important
part in the thoughts of the Val Verde Dry Shelter people, if we may
judge by the number of deer pictures on their shelter walls. These
pictures are small, seldom more than two feet long, and much less
conspicious than those of the puma, but more numerous. The body
is usually an oval; the legs straight lines placed so as to express
action; the toes are pictured, as are also horns, ears, and tail. The
animals are generally represented in droves extending across the
shelter wall (Plate 11, No. 2). It is interesting to note that many
of the deer are shown pierced with a long spear, while the puma and
other animals seldom are. Deer horns are also an important feature
in several elaborate designs.lO
Serpents, Birds, and Fish
Realistic serpent pictures are found at many sites, and doubtless
9.
Kirkland, 1938; Plate S. No. 8.
10.
Kirkland, 1938 ; Plate 6.

PLATE 14.
Pictures in two tones of red, in a shelter on the Rio Grande three
miies below the mouth of the Pecos Rive~.

Plate 1,1

Indian Pictures in Dry Sh¢l~rs of Val Verd¢ County

63

point to the meaning of the wavy, or serpentine lines which are found
in great numbers. In many ca~s, these lines consist of two or three
tangent, parallel lines of different colors. They may appear alone
(Plate 13; No. 3), extending fifteen or twenty feet across the wall;
or they may be combined with other elements in simple or very intricate designs.11 Besides the typical anthropomorphic figure, these
serpentine lines ~are, perhaps, the easiest means of recognizing the
culture.
Pictures of nondescript birds in flight are sometimes found (Plate
16; No. 2). They are usually small and in groups.
We have found no recognizable pictures of fish; although fish
bones are very common, and cactus spine fish hooks have been
found12 in the middens. One site, however, in the Seminole Canyon contains a small picture of two men fishing (Plate 17). One
has definitely hooked a turtle; the end of the other line has unfortunately been flaked away. Other pictures in the shelters resemble
turtles.
EebL~ke zlnimals
We have recognized another animal representation which is
unique, and may illustrate a mythological idea. Its typical form is
an extremely elongated animal, usually accompanied by three or
more much smaller animals. In its most realistic form the larger
animal, which may measure fifteen feet in length, resembles an eel,
somewhat, with open mouth, fins at each side of the head, and a fishlike tail. Any one of these features may be absent, however, or
highly conventionalized; and there may be more than one of the
large animals, side by side (Plate 15, No. 2). The small animals,
never more than a few inches long, have oblong bodies, four legs;
but very rarely a head. In their most realistic form they resemble a
frog, but ordinarily they are so highly conventionalized that they
loose entirely their animal aspect. In one instance, the long animal
has legs with toes, as do, also, the small animals; and all have feather
decorations at the head (Plate 16, No. 2).
Except for a few unimportant, nondescript, animal pictures,
11.
12.

Kirkland, 1938; Plate I.
Martin, 1985; pp. 116, 117.

64

Texas Archeological and Paleon$ologica~ Soaie$y

there remain only the so-called insect pictures, which are occasionally found. This classification covers many odd designs po.~essing
some animalistic feature such as feet, head, antenna or tail; but
which are wholly unlike any existing animal or insect. In view of
the many bizarre forms of the anthropomorphic figure, and the general tendency toward conventionalization in the culture, it seems
more likely that these "insect" pictures are only extremel~ fantastic
representations of comanon animals.
Feather-like objects are of frequent occurrence (Plate 13, No. 3),
usually rather large, from one to three feet in length. They consist
of a central stem surrounded by fine parallel lines often of alternating colors. They are the chief element in several very large intricate designs, and are commonly used as head decorations. They
are sometimes associated with the serpent, and, in one case, form a
distinct plume at the serpent’s head. In some instances they 1nay
as likely represent plant forms.
Plant Representations
Plant representations are common, but are usually so highly conventionalized that the exact plant cannot be identified. The most
conspicuous form is flue staff held by the anthropomorphic figure.
The stem, almost always a double line, has no leaves but bears a
large plume, or blossom at its extreme end. The body of this blossom is usually oval in shape, but varies so in its decorations that no
two are exactly alike. Occasionally this blossom and stem are found
alone, in which case, the stem may have leaves. It is also the chief
element in several large designs,la
The broken plant, usually held opposite the staff, has a single
line for its stem, bent at right angles near its center. The leaf may
be either a realistic leaf, a simple line, a series of lines; or it may
be absent. The flower, when present, is always an elongateM oval
crossed lengthwise by the stem, near its extreme end. This same
simple device serves as the blossom in the picture of a complet~e
13.
14.

Pierce and Jackson, 1933 ; pp, 20-24.
Kirkland, 1938; Plate 7.

PLATE 15.
Designs from three shelters in Val Verde County.

Plate 15

Indian Pictures in Dry Shelters o] Val ]Z~rd~ County

67

plant, resembling the lechiquilla, at one site (Plate 17) ; and is frequently found at the end of a staff extending from a circle, or disc,
sometimes surrounded by a heavy fringe (Plate 16, No. 1). These
unique objects resembling certain desert plants are generally found
in groups and in combinations with other elements of design. They
may represent the flowering sotol, a plant of great importance to the
inhabitants of the shelters.
Various other plant-like designs are found which resemble grass,
cactus, ferns, clover, etc.; but they are of too little importance to
warrant more than a mere mention here.
Pictures o] Spears

Only a few tools and other objects of manufacture other than
clothing, which has already been discussed, are recognizable among
the pictures of the Dry Shelter culture. Chief among these is the
spear, which is seen protruding from the bodies of many of the deer,
and of human figures, and is frequently pictured alone (Plate 11,
No. 2). The head of the spear is always shown, and, occasionally,
the feathered shank is pictured in some detail.~5 In most cases,
the spear head is drawn exactly like the simple flower described
above--an elongated oval, crossed lengthwise by the shaft near
end. This makes it impossible to determine in ruany cases whether
the picture was intended to represent a spear or a flowering stalk.
However, in the case of the hundreds of spear-like objects which are
shown falling in showers across shelter walls (Plate 12, No. 3),
and are incorporated in many different kinds of designs, it seems
most likely that they represent spears, or darts of some kind.
Th~ Bow and the ¢ltlatl
It is interesting to note that the bow is pictured at only one of the
Val Verde Dry Shelter sites, and there it unquestionably belongs
to the work of a later culture which overlaps the Dry Shelter pictures.]~ This agrees with the evidence from the middens that the
bow and arrow were not used by these people, but, instead, the
atlatl and spear were their chief weapon. We have, however, found
no pictures that can positively be identified as an atlatl and spear
Ktrkland, 1938 ; Plat~ 6.
Jackson, 19~8 ; p. 225’ ; frontispiece.

68

Texas Arch~ologlcal and Paleon~o~ogica~ Society

in use. Some observers have thought that the staff, or broken plant
held by the anthropomorphic figure might be an atlatll 7; but the
great similarity of these objects to plant forms, when they are shown
in detail, seems to discredit this idea. There are, however, several
pictures at different sites closely resembling £nodern swords with
blades, hilts, and guards (Plate 13, No. 3; Plate 15, No. 3). These
pictures conform just as well to the general outlines of the atlatl,
and may very likely represent that weapon without the spear.
There are no historical motifs among the pictures of this culture.
Decorative, or Geometrical Forms
In addition to the naturalistic pictures, there are several purely
decorative, or geometrical forms that had an important place in the
designs of the culture. One of these consists of a line six or eight
inches long crossed at equal intervals by from three to five shorter
lines of the same color. This device is used on scores of designs
and figures in many ways, but chiefly as a fringe or decoration on
garments (Plate 12, No. 2).
Stipples are often used on designs. Long lines of red stipples
that look as if the color had been slung from a brush, are found at
many sites. And, no doubt, the color was slung from the brush in
most cases; but in several instances the length of the line and the
curve it makes, seems to indicate that it could only have been accomplished by hand stippling. Occasionally, these red stipples extend
from spears or wounds,18 and very likely represent blood.
Fine parallel lines, frequently in alternating colors, are a distinguishing feature. They are found in one form or another at nearly
every site and in almost every important design.
Wavy lines, so common in the culture, have already been discussed under serpents.
Solid squares or triangles, more or less evenly spaced along a
lq.

,Taekaon. 1938 : pp, 184. 389. 391,

18.

Kirkland,

1938 : Plate 6.

PLATE 16.
Designs from four different shelters.
ters reported on by Pierce and Jackson.

No. 1, 2 are from the shel-

Pla~e 16

Indian P~ctu~’es in Dry Shel~ers of Val Verd~ County

71

line or the edge of a solid body, are a common element of design
used in many of the compositions (Plate 14). Individual squares
or triangles, however, are seldom found.
Dots and circles were frequently used as decorations and as parts
of designs, but are seldom found alone; and never in the forms
termed "sun emblems" commonly found among the pictures of
other cultures.
The outstanding artistic achievement of the Val Verde Dry Shelter Culture, is not its individual figures and forms; but the skillful
way these elements have been combined into elaborate, beautifully
balanced designs and compositions.19 These compositions vary
in size from a few feet, to as much as twenty feet long, and half as
high.
No two designs are alike, yet many of them seem to follow some
fixed pattern, like, for example, t_he so called "map" pictures.2O
Another pattern mentioned above is the eel-like animal group.
There is also the arch shaped design, consisting of a circle, square
or other element at the top, with wavy lines descending on each side
to form the arch. Suspended underneath the arch is usually some
animalistic figure21; in one case the eel-like animal groups. The
suspended object may be absent.
Pictures Hlu~trating Myths
Some of the designs seem to be purely decorative while others,
containing animal or human forms, appear to illustrate mythological ideas. This is especially true of the anthropomorphic figure
which is often shown, either with animals over its head like a halo22
or at its feet. It is sometimes pictured between a group of puma
as if it were their trainer (Plate 13, No. 1).
We can never hope to know the exact interpretation of these mythological conceptions; but the fact that they represent deep seated
traditions of the people instead of individual ideas of the artist, is
proven by the fact that each conception is repeated over and again
in different forms throughout the district.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Kirkland,
Kirkland,
Kirkland,
Kirkland,

1938 ;
1938; D- 19.
1937b
1937b; Plate 15;

72

Te~xa~ A~’ch~ologi~d a~d Pa~eo~olog~ca~ Society

The Question o] the Cultures Origin
These firmly fixed mythological ideas and the highly conventionalized forms with which they are illustrated, along with the extremely individual style of painting, seem to point to a very long
period of development. The question naturally arises: was this
culture with its elaborate paintings slowly evolved in the district
around the mouth of the Pecos, or was it evolved elsewhere and
brought in fully developed?
There is some evidence that the first pictures painted at the sites
were simple, solid, light red figures lacking the detail and individuality of the later work (Plate 14). But if the very elaborate polychrome pictures evolved from these, we have been unable to trace
the development. The highly evolved figures appear to be as often
buried or badly weathered as the simpler forms that should have
preceded them; and the more realistic figures from which the conventional ones should have evolved, are not found at all. The
present evidence, therefore, although by no means conclusive, points
to an outside development.
If the culture was brought to the district already well developed,
there should be similar, though simpler, pictures from whence it
canle, which we should be able to recognize readily with the materim we now have at hand. The midden material points to the Basket Makers as the source of the culture and there seems to be a
similarity between the square shouldered man of the Basket Makers
and the typical figure of the Val Verde Dry Shelter culture; but a
great deal more material will have to be gathered on the Basket
Maker pictures before a solution of this problem is possible.
\Ve made a preliminary survey of sites in Brewster County, Texas,
where a basket-maker-like culture is found, but no pictures sinfilar
to the Val Verde Dry Shelter pictures were found. One shelter
which we studied in Bee Cave Canyon had been scientifically excavatedz3 and a culture similar to that in the lower Pecos region
23.

Coffin,

1932.

PLATE 17.
A twenty-foot section from a large group in the Seminole Canyon
shelter excavated and reported on by Pierce and Jackson.

Plate 17

I~dian Pictures in Dry Shelters of Val Verde County

75

reported, but the pictures in the shelter were in no way similar to
those here described.
If it is found that no relation exists between these and the Basket
Maker pictures and if similar but more primitive pictures are not
discovered elsewhere, we must accept the theory that the culture
evolved in the district, or else believe it originated down the Rio
Grande, as has already been suggested from a study of the skeletal
material,~4 or in some other district where rock cliffs were not
available. In that case we would conclude that the highly developed
art evolved on perishable materials which were destroyed long ago.
The difficult thing to explain in that case will be why no objects in
the middens contain pictures similar to those on the shelter wails.
Conclusion

In view of the evidence cited above, it see~ns reasonable to believe: (1) that the very dim, highly conventionalized pictures in the
dry shelters in Val Verde County are the work of a basket-makerlike people who inhabited the shelters over a long period before historic time; (2) that the pictures represent a very high standard of
pictographic art; (3) that many of the designs illustrate well estab.
lished mythological ideas; (4) that the style of work as well as the
type of figures is so unique that the culture can readily be recognized wherever it is found; (5) that the origin of the culture presents a problem that deserves a great deal more study.
Re]erences Ci~d
Co]fin, Edwin F.
1932. Archaeological Exploration of a Rock Shelter in Brewster
County, Texas. Indian Notes and Monographs, No. 48. Museum
of the American Indian, New York.
Holden, ~. C.
1937. Excavation of Murrah Cave. Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society Bulletin, Volume 9.
Jackson, zI. T.
1938. Picture-Writing of Texas Indians.
Anthropological
Papers, Volume II. The University of Texas, Austin.
24.

Woodbury, 1937 ; pp. 9-16.

76

Te~a~ Areh~ologi~al and Paleontological So~i~$y

Kirkland, Forrest
1937 a. A Comparison of Texas Indian Pictographs with ~Paleolithic Paintings in Europe. Central Texas Archeologist No. 3.
1937 b. A Study of Indian Pictures in Texas. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 9.
1938. A Description of Texas Pictographs. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. !0.
Martin, George C.
1933. Archeological Exploration of Shumla
Basket Maker Papers, No. 3. Witte Memorial
tonio.
1935. Report on Four Shumla Cave Packets.
ical and PMeontological Society Bulletin, Vol.

Caves. Big Bend
Museum, San AnTexas Archeolog7.

Pierce, J. E. and Jackson, ,4. T.
1933. A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde County, Texas.
Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No. 3. The University of Texas,
Austin.
8e~ler, F. M.
1933. Prehistoric Cave Dwellers of Texas. Explorations and
Field-work of the Smlthsonian Institution in 1932.
Woodbury, George
1937. Notes on Some Skeletal Remains of Texas. Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No. 5. The University of Texas, Austin.

