Wind Blown Oil Sands

105

WIND BLOWN OIL SANDS
BY H. H. ADAMS
.The term oil sand originated in Pennsylvania where petroleum
oil was first produced commercially from .wells. The oil was
found in a fine grained brownish sand that resembled brown sugar.
Thus brownish sand became the pattern that was used as oil sand
for many years, and is still looked upon by the old school of operators as the true oil sand. Oil sand was considered the source of oil
as well as the reservoir for it. This theory has long since been
dropped and it is known now that oil is produced from shales, or
any carbonaceous material that is broken down by heat and pressure.
Oil was found in shales in Colorado, in and around the town
of Florence. One well in this pool produced over a million dollars
worth of oil. This was the first oil to be produced commercially
from shales.
The states of Texas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Kansas, Illinois,
Indiana, Ohio and many other places have produced oil from limestone.
In Montague County, Texas, and in South Central Texas oil is
produced from a metamorphic formation known as serpentine and
volcanic ash.
Oil is also found at the southern end of the Green Horn Mountains in Colorado in an igneous dyke that cuts through the Pierre
shale which is a very carbonaceous formation. Oil is not produced
commercially from this dyke but the oil is of high grade and is free.
Oil may be found anywhere.
it accumulates.

But a trap is necessary in which

These traps are known as anticlines, sealed faults,

and lenticular sand.
It appears that oil formation has in some way been connected
with salt water or sea water.
with fresh water.

Oil is very rarely found associated

This theory has the support of most geologists.

The purpose of this paper is to discuss wind blown oil sands,

106

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

and the above paragraphs are written as a background for the
reader unfamiliar with petroleum geology.
In West Texas, New Mexico and Oklaho~na there is a geological
formation known as the White Horse Sandstone.

This is a series of

sands, redbeds, anhydrites and other salts of the evaporite type.
This formation is a part of the Guadalupe group of Permian
age. This entire series was deposited under desert condiLions, that
is, the sea in which these formations were laid down was surrounded by very dry barren country.
Just before the deposition of the White Horse series in Central
West Texas, the area known as the West Texas Central basin
opened out to the southwest into the ocean. This is established
by the fact that marine life existed there as shown by the fossils.
Then at the beginning of the White Horse period a barrier reef of
some kind cut this area off from the ocean and formed a great
landlocked sea. Evaporation was rapid and beds of the evaporate
type were deposited, except that a great amount of sand was also
deposited. This sand came from some source either from the
southwest or the north, according to the opinion of many geologists.
The land surrounding this great inland sea was low, and the water
that came from the surrounding areas and evaporated undoubtedly
carried in a great amount of this sand. There is also another
theory and that is that this sand was blown into the area from the
surrounding hills. The formations in the-Marathon area are of
a type that would furnish this kind of sand. The important fact
about this sand is that it was subjected to wind erosion.
In the Libyan desert and in many other parts of Africa and
western Asia sands are carried for as much as one hundred and
fifty miles as sand dunes. The grains of these sands, particularly in
the Libyan desert are rounded and polished. These sands come from
a plateau in which much of the material is limestone and shale,
but the sand dunes in their present condition carry no limestone
or shale. This material has been completely ground into dust and
blown away. Possibly the grinding of this material assisted in the
polishing of the sand grains. The wind in its act of transportation
and erosion, has graded or assorted the sand with relation to size.
These sands in the Libyan desert have never been subjected to water

Wind Blown Oil Sands

107

erosion, and they are all equally well polished. Many of the sand
grains are perfectly spherical and vary from very fine small grains
to as large as three or four millimeters in diameter.
In examining the cuttings from wells in the West Texas basin,
it is observed that there are two kinds of sand grains; one highly
polished and the other frosted.
A study of these sands reveals the fact that the larger grains are
frosted, and the smaller ones are highly polished. Another observation is that the fine or smaller grains of sand are on top of the
sand strata, and the larger in the bottom. It appears that at the
end of the White Horse period an invasion or encroachment of
water reworked the sands that had been brought in and polished
them as found in the Libyan desert today, and they were left in the
position we find them now.
The interesting thing is that the small grains are polished and
the large ones are frosted. It is a fact that sand grains less
than one-tenth of one millimeter in diameter take on by surface
tension a film of water that protects them against attrition or
wearing. If there is any movement whatsoever in the water, these
smaller grains of sand are held in suspension. While the sand
grains larger than one-tenth of one millimeter in diameter have no
water film to protect them and carry them, thus they hit each other
in any movement that might occur, and by attrition become frosted.
In the Somo field in Crockett County both oil and gas are found
in the White Horse sandstone, the sand described above. This
sand is undoubtedly not the source of the oil, but by migration or
contact with shale bodies in the same section derives its supply.
285 Amarillo Street,
Abilene, Texas.

