Tub~lar P~pes and Other Tubes in Texas

99

TUBULAR PIPES AND OTHER TUBES
IN TEXAS~
By A. T. JACKSON
Stone tubes that seem to have been used as pipes are scarce, but
distributed ovee a wide area in Texas.

There are other stone tubes

the use of which is uncertain.

Pottery tubes, some definitely pipes, have been found in restricted
areas. Reed tubes that appear to have been smoked are confined
to certain cave areas. A few antler tubes, suggesting use as pipes,
have been found in burnt-rock middens.
Tubular Stone Pipes
Stone tubes of the pipe type have been found in twenty-one Texas
counties, ranging from Brownsville to Texarkana and from Texarkana to E1 Paso. In all this vast area only fifty-eight specimens are
reported. Their wide distribution suggests a somewhat general
culture trait; but the rarity with which they occur bespeaks a li~nited use, confined to small numbers.
This type of specimen is most abundant in South Texas, along the
coast.

About fourteen per cent of the tubes come from Nueces

County, and thirty-three per cent from Cameron County, with only
five per cent from all Central Texas.

West Texas has less than half

as many specimens as South Texas; East Texas almost doubles Central Texas.

North Texas--exclusive of the Panhandle, where most

of the tubes are made of pottery---has been so scantily worked as
to not give a fair picture for that area.

Terminology Used
The long, large cavity in a tube is here referred to as the bowl;
the short, small portion is called the stem. Where a short bone tube
is present it is referred to as a mouthpiece.
Shapes o] Tubes
The shapes of the tubes are fairly uniform in the various areas.
~Assistancc in the preparation of this paper was furnished by the personnel of
Work Projecta Administration, Official Project No.

65-1-66,-2594.

100

Teza~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

The prevailing shape has the greatest diameter of the exterior near
the center, tapering gradually from that point to each end. In some
cases the bowl end is only slightly larger than the stem; while in
others the end of the bowl is about twice the diameter of the stem.
The next most common shape of the exterior is with the diameter
gradually increasing from stem to bowl ends, resulting in roughly
conical shape.

In most cases the interior has a double-conical or hourglass-shaped
bore. Some tubes have cylindrical bores for bowl and stem with
a union forming rounded shoulders. A few have a cylindrical bore
for the entire length.
South Texas Specimens
South Texas counties in which stone tubes have been reported
include Aransas, Atascosa, Cameron, Kleberg, Nueces, San Patricio~
Webb and Zapata.
An outstanding specimen was found by L. C. Benedict, March,
1940, in a shell midden within the city limits of Portland, San Patricio County. The tube is quite similar to one reported by Reed (1),
and by Pearce (2, 3, 4), from Kleberg County. It was found on high
land, formerly known as Indian Point, very near the bluffs overlooking Corpus Christi Bay and Nueces Bay. The site is part of
an extensive Indian village.
Benedict (5) reports finding "small triangular projectile points, a
few potsherds in the grass roots and one conch core chisel within
ten feet of the location of the pipe."
Protruding slightly from the stem end was a fragment of the
bone mouthpiece. Inside the stem about an inch was discovered
a hard, cement-like substance holding an unbroken section of the
bone in place. (See Plate 20).
The diameter of the stem hole was 7-8 inch; that of the bone was
only 1-2 inch. The cement held the bone away from the stone wall
PLAT,E 20
Large tubular pipe from shell midden, L. C. Benedict collection, San
Patricio County, Texas.
1. Complete specimen, length 7½ inches~
2. ~wo end views. Note remains of mouthpiece.

Tubular Pipes and Other Tubes in Texas

103

at all points. About one inch of the bone mouthpiece was imbedded
in cement. The bone, apparently from the leg of a turkey, originally
may have been three inches long.
From the inner extremity of the bone mouthpiece to the bowl end
of the tube, the cavity gradually increases to a maximum diameter of
1 1-4 inches. The interior--like many specimens of this type--has
striations, with small ridges between. The lines are not symmetrical,
but appear to have resulted from gouging the comparatively soft
sandstone with a flint or other sharp implement.
The length of the specimen is 7 1-2 inches, and the maximum
diameter 3 1-2 inches.
Another sandstone tube, of the same type, is owned by AIbert
Nowotny of New Braunfets. He reports that two tubes, almost identical, were found about a foot deep in a midden deposit in Nueces
County. The outer surface of the one he secured is smooth, but not
polished; the interior shows parallel gouge marks 3 1-2 to 5 inches
long and about 1-8 inch apart. The dimensions are: length, 7
inches; diameter of bowl, 1 1-4 inches; stem opening, 3-5 inch. No
bone mouthpiece was in the tube.
On the exterior, near the stem end, are traces of asphah.
tends less than half way round the tube.

It ex-

A longitudinal section, less than half, of a standstone tube was
found by J. L. Johnston at the mouth of Oso Creek, Nueces County.
There is a shallow groove around the exterior near the original center. This is the only specimen with such groove. It may have been
for attachment of a thong. Two other tubes, one complete, came
from this site.
In the collection of J. T. Patterson is a sandstone tube, found by
Arthur Turner in a grave southwest of Campbellton, Atascosa
County.

Turner (6) reports as follows:

"There was no skeleton; the clay was almost white with decayed
bones. The only evidence was some teeth, quite a number of arrowheads, one spearhead or knife--about six inches long--and the pipe.
The pipe, the spearhead and a number of arrowheads were together.
No beads or metal of any kind."

Te~az Archeologi~al and Paleontological Society

The length of the tube is five inches; the diameter at the bowl
end, 2 1-4 inches; at the stem end, 1 1-8 inches.

(See Plate 22,

Fig. 4).
R. W. Aldrich found a stone tube protruding from a caved-off
bank on the Rio Grande, at the mouth of San Lorenzo Creek, Webb
County. The material is a fairly soft ironstone, and the ends have
been ground into shape. One side is smoothed, the other in a rough
state.
The tube is 4 15-16 inches long; diameter at bowl end, 1 1-4
inches; at stem end, 3-4 inch. The hole seems to have been gouged.
There is no mouthpiece. (See Plate 21, Figs. 1 and 2).
Another stone tube, with the cavity not complete, was found by
Roy Kaylor irt the northwest corner of Zapata County. The length
of the tube is three inches. The holes, started from each ~nd, lack
about one-half inch of meeting. The bowl cavity is conical and has
a smooth surface, appearing to have been reamed out. (See Plate 25,
Fig. 1). One side of the exterior is covered with remains of asphalt.
A. E. Anderson (7) of Brownsville has in his collection two tubes
made of pumice stone, found in an eroded bank in Cameron County.
One is four inches long and has a diameter of ! 1-2 inches at the
bowl end. The other is 3 3-8 inches long with a bowl diameter of
1 1-4 inches. One "is nothing more than a roughly excavated natural
waverounded chunk of pumice." The other "is well designed and
nicely finished both inside and out." There was no bone mouthpiece in either specimen. Anderson, who has fragments of eighteen
other stone tubes, states:
"In shape the local pipes are more nearly oval or conical. They
are tubular only in the sense that the stem hole is always in alignment with the bowl cavity. Several specimens show asphalt blackening around stem holes. Most specimens show a burnt darkening
of bowl cavity--not asphaltic."
PLATE

21

Other tubular pipes from South Texas. Nos. 1-2. From caved off
bank of Rio Grande, Webb County, Capt. R. W. Aldrich collection.
Length 4 15/16 inche~. Nos. 3-4. From a grave in Nueces County,
John B. Dunn collection. Length 3~ inches.

Plate 21

Tubular Pipes and O~her Tubes in Tewas

107

From all South Texas tubes in condition to permit of accurate
measurements, the average dimensions, in inches, are as follows:
Length of tube ..................................................
Bowl, outside .................................................... 2
Bowl, inside ......................................................
Stem, outside ......................................................
Stem, inside ........................................................
C~ntral Texas Specimens
The Central Texas specimens are much like some from South
Texas.

The earliest Texas discovery, of which the writer knows, is that
made by J. J. Corm in 1891, when he plowed up in Llano County a
large steatite tube. It was decorated with incised designs and contained a bone mouthpiece.
The site where the specimen was found is an ideal location, very
near a spring and a small rock shelter. There are pictographs on
the shelter wall.
The tube, brought to Austin in 1912, was in the possession of several individuals, finding a permanent resting place in the Texas
State Library. In the course of these changes the bone mouthpiece
was lost.
The following is from a previous description (8) of the specimen:
"The pipe.., has a length of 6 7-8 inches and a maximum diameter of 1 7-8 inches .... An intricate group of carved designs decorate
the entire outer surface .... Carved in the steatite, to an average
depth of about 1-16 inch, are a rayed sun-disc, four possible projectiles, three so-called pole-ladder and several triangular elements.
The projectiles are remarkably like certain designs on painted pebbles from Val Verde County. The sun symbol is almost identical
with some incised designs on pottery in the University of Texas
Anthropology Museum, from Titus, Wood, and other East Texas
Counties." (Plate 22, Figs. 1-2).
The interior of the bowl section shows longitudinal gouge marks
with a width and depth of about 3-16 inch. Deep gouging was
possible in the soft stone.

108

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Albert Nowotny reports the finding of a sandstone tube in the
northern part of Comal County. The specimen was about two feet
deep, in a midden deposit, some twenty feet from the edge of a
small burnt-rock mound.
The exterior of the tube is conical with the interior "jug-shaped."
With a len~h of 4 1-4 inches, the exterior is smooth. The interior
shows longitudinal gouge marks to within one inch of the stem end.
One edge of the bowl shows small breaks; the unshattered edge is
beveled to a thickness of about 1-I6 inch.
A broken limestone tube was found in the Marshall Ford basin,
Travis County, in 1938 by a WPA-University of Texas crew excavating a burnt-rock midden, soon to be inundated. A. M. Woolsey (9), in charge of the excavation, reported:
"About twelve inches from the western edge of the mound was
found a broken pipe or ’cloud-blower.’ It was in two parts, but
the pieces fit perfectly .... It was at a depth of fourteen inches.
"It is made from a hard white limestone,.., and in cross-section
is more oval than round .... It was broken along the longer axis into
two almost equal parts.
"The exterior shows fine striations, probably resulting from abrading with fine-grained sandstone to smooth the surface."

Attention is directed to Plate 23, Fig. 2, showing the hourglass
shape of the cavity and the longitudinal gouge, or chisel, marks on
the interior of the bowl. These features are typical of many specimens from a wide area.
An old break across the bowl end of the tube has been ground or
worn down to a considerable extent; indicating that it occurred
before the lengthwise split, and that the tube continued in use until
the time of the latter break.
A potsherd was found in the same midden and at a greater depth
than the stone tube. The sherd probably belongs ~o the late prehistoric or early historic period, and suggests that the nearby tube
has no great age.
The midden mound had a diameter of fifty feet, a central depth
of five feet, and sloped gradually to a thin edge. Among the angu-

Tubular Pipes and Other Tubes in Texas

109

lar, fire-cracked pieces of limestone was black midden soil, made
up largely of charcoal. The bottom level contained a large ash
content.
The writer knows of no other specimens having been found in
Central Texas. In response to an inquiry, Frank H..Watt (10) of
Waco replied, "All my search of Central Texas has been entirely
and decidedly negative."
West Texas Specimens
West Texas ranks second in the number of specimens reported.
A number of stone tubes have been found in caves along the Rio
Grande in Val Verde County. Several of these have been described
by Martin (1!) and by Davenport (12).
These cave specimens were made of limestone and sandstone, with
the exteriors shaped by scraping and the interiors by gouging. The
sizes, on the average, are smaller than the South Texas tubes.
Through the cooperation of Mrs. Ellen Schulz Quillin and J. Walker Davenport, the tubular specimens in the Witte Museum were
examined. Among those not previously described were the following.
An unfinished specimen of red sandstone, found near Langtry by
a local collector, was abandoned after the bowl hole reached a diameter of one inch and a depth of 3-4 inch. It appears that a drilled
hole about 1-4 inch in diameter was used as a starting point for the
gouged cavity. The other end contains only a small pit. The stone,
4 7-8 inches long with a central diameter of 2 3-4 inches, is roughly
shaped on the exterior.
A small fragment, apparently from the stem end, has a smooth,
reamed-out, conical cavity one inch in diameter.

It came from the

second level from the top in Eagle Cave.

Victor Friedrichs and G. S. Meyer report the finding, in August,
1937, of a limestone tube in a cave of the Pecos Canyon, Val Verde
County. The exterior is decorated with criss-cross incised lines.
Meyer (13) states that in the cave also were found a painted pebble, a bone awl, sandals, fragments of basketry, etc.

110

Texas Arch~ologicctl and Paleontological Society

Ray (14) reports a standstone tube from Jones County and adds:
"The student who showed me one, which he said he found in a grave
in Jones County, is not here now and I cannot give data except
from memory." As he recalls, the tube was about three inches long,
was ground but not polished, and contained no bone mouthpiece.
Coffin (15) reports "two fragments of tubular smoking pipes,
or ’cloud-blowers,’ made of limestone," in a rock shelter in Bee Cave
Canyon, Brewster County. He does not illustrate nor give further
details concerning them.
Victor J. Smith (16) states he has found only one tube pipe in
Brewster County--"a surface specimen from Sunny Glen, and near
a stone hatchet. Both are evidently late. The polished stone artifact was a surface specimen from the same general neighborhood.
No similar article has been found during my observation here. The
hatchet blades associated with cave materials are quite different in
form and materials." The tube is scarcely two inches in length.
Kelley (17) reports as follows concerning the finding of stone
tubes (Plate 23, Fig. 3) in Presidio County:
"Two tubular stone pipes were found by the Peabody MuseumSul Ross College Big Bend expedition, on Alamito Creek some five
miles south of Casa Piedra, Texas, in 1938.
Both are of the fat
conical shape known in the Southwest as the ’cloud-blower’ type.
One measures 2 1-4 inches in length and is 1 3-4 inches in greatest
diameter at the bowl end; the other is 2 7-8 inches by 17-8 inches.
Both are of a red stone, probably of igneous origin. The bowI in
both specimens extends most of the length of the pipe. The orifice
for the attachment of a mouthpiece was bored separately, and from
the opposite end.
"Both specimens were found on the floor of a rectangular pithouse with adobe lined floor and wails. The pipes lay directly on
the house floor, and were covered by the burned roof debris of the
house. One specimen was broken by heat.
PLATE 22
Nos. 1-2.
Steatite tube showing incised designs, Llano County.
Length 6~ inches. No. 3. Reed tubes from caves, Val Verde and
Culberson Counties. No. 4. Sandstone tube from a grave Atascosa
County. Length 5 inches.

Plate 22

Tubular Pipes and Other Tubes in Texa~

1!3

"Other specimens from the house, and from the same cultural
layer at the site, included small finely made arrowpoints with long,
carefully worked tangs and barbs; modeled pieces of red pigment
in nipple-like "forms; large tanged knives, barbed and unbarbed;
snub-nose and side scrapers; carefully shaped rectangular manos,
with rounded corners and two slightly convex working faces; olivella
shell beads; E1 Paso Polychrome, Chihuahua Polychrome (type unidentified), and plain brown and grooved brown wares of the Chihuahua ceramic complex.
"’In addition to the architectural complex mentioned, houses were
set in rows, side by side, and apparently were entered from the roof.
Flexed infant burials, beneath the house floors, was another associated trait. This complex of traits classified the site as a component
of the La Junta focus of the Bravo Valley aspect.
"The associated E1 Paso and Chihuahua ceramics date the site,
and the tubular pipes, between 1200 and 1400 A.D. In addition, the
site was included in the Kokernot formation--overlying deeply
buried cultural levels, classified as components of the Pecos River
locus of the Big Bend cave aspect, in the Calamity formation.
"Stone pipes have not been reported from other sites of the focus,
although a fragment of a third specimen was reported from refuse
of the same site.
"The similarity of the specimens to the Southwestern ’cloudblower’ type of tubular pipe, together with the presence of numerous intrusive Southwestern traits at the site, suggests that they represent Southwestern influence, perhaps even trade."
Strain (18) says tubular stone specimens are found in the E1 Paso
region, but that most of them "are from adjoining portions of New
Mexico."
East Texas Specimens
In the East Texas region, only five stone tubes that may be classed
as pipes have been reported. One of these was mentioned in a
former article (19). Most of the tubes are not large, and have an
average length of four inches.
A small tubular stone pipe from the surface of a campsite, Bowie

114

Texa~ Archeological and Palm.ontological Society

County, has the remains of red pigment on the exterior.

It is notice-

able around each end for 1-2 to 3-4, inch, and flakes of red are
present elsewhere. (Plate 24, Fig. 3). This calls to mind the practice of applying a red slip to certain earthenware vessels.
In the collection of I. B. Price, Jr., is a tubular stone pipe 2 3-8
inches long from a surface site in Cass County.
section and the stem has a flattened hole.
out.

It is oval in cross-

The bowl cavity is gouged

(Plate 24, Fig. 2).

Price (20) reports a larger tube from another collection in Cass
County.

It is of sandstone, five inches long, and has a polished

exterior.
H. L. Cro~ has a polished hematite tube from a campsite in Titus
County. It is cone-shaped, with double-conical cavity, and reported
to have "some type of dressing--clay or grease--smeared over the
exterior."

In Nacogdoches County, B. J. Langford found a large pear-shaped
concretion worked into a tubular specimen. This was done by enlarging the natural cavity for the bowl, and by drilling a small stem
hole to connect with the bowl. The maximum diameter of the tube
is four inches. (Plate 24, Fig. 1).
North Texas Specimens
A. H. Witte (21) reports fragments of two "small plain tube
pipes" from a midden in Clay County. One was of local sandstone,
at a depth of eighteen inches; the other of red sandstone, from a
depth of sixteen inches. They "were about one inch in diameter
and resembled the cloud-blower type."
Number o] Specimens by Regions
Region
South Texas
Central Texas
West Texas
East Texas
North Texas
Toml

Number Specimens
Whole Broken or Incomplete Total
10
24
34
2
1
3
6
8
14
5
-5
2
2
-23

35

58

Per
Cent
59
5
24
9
3
100

Tubular Pipes a~d Other T~tbes in Texas

]15

High Percentage o] Breakage
It seems significant that 50 per cent of all the stone tubes are in
a fragmentary or incomplete condition.

Their shape, and the fact

that most of them are of fairly hard stone, would seem to safeguard
their preservation.
What is the explanation of this high percentage of breakage?

A

careful examination of many fragments shed no light on the problem.
Some of the specimens probably were broken in the final process of
reaming, or gouging, to enlarge the cavity.

Others show signs of

battering and rough usage that might account for their breakage.

Three of the four tubes containing bone mouthpieces bear evidence
of battering, as if they occasionally were used for light hammering.
One of the battered specimens, made of steatite, is from Central
Texas; the others, of sandstone, are from the Texas Coast. It is
possible that, in certain cases, the pits resulted from the original
roughing out of the stone to the desired shapes. But this could
hardly account for all the "bruises." An incised design on one
tube was damaged by subsequent battering.
A few tubes may have been broken in recent years by erosion,
agricultural operations, trampling of livestock, etc.
Contents o[ Stone~ Tubes

Most of the stone tubes furnish no clue as to the kind of material
used in the bowl. A notable exception is a specimen found in a
grave in Kleberg County and reported by both Reed (22) and
Pearce (23, 24, 25). From Reed we learn that:
"One of the tools contained about 250 c.c. of coarse bitumen and
ashes. The ashes were in the bottom and fl~e unburned bitumen was
on top, indicating that the fire was fed from the large open end.
The bottom has a hole through it into which was inserted a short
shaft of hollow bone about five centimeters long.

The bone was

highly polished and browned from heat .... "

Another case, related by Albert Nowotny, is d~at of the stone tube
from Comal County. It contained a small amount of carbonized
vegetal material in the bowl. He thinks it was charred tobacco or
other crushed leaves.

116

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

A third instance is cited by Martin (26) who found, in one of
the Shumla caves, Val Verde County, "a lengthwise section with
mouthpiece, the inside of which is sooted, and part of the fire cavity
which is deeply discolored from use."
Regional Similarities
The hourglass-shaped cavity is a feature common to most of the
stone tubes from the various parts of Texas.
The average length of the tubes seems to be fairly constant in
certain regional groups. One group includes South and Central
Texas; the other suggests a relation between the West and East
Texas regions.
]tverage Lengths

Length--Inches

Region

5½

South Texas
Central Texas
West Texas
East Texas

3
4

Of the four bone mouthpieces reported, three are from South
Texas and one from Central Texas.
Of two specimens with notches around the bowl end, one is from
Souttr Texas and the other from Central Texas.
Stone tubes have been found in graves in Atascosa, Kleberg and
Nueces Counties, all in South Texas. The only other specimen reported from a grave was in Jones County, West Texas.
The decoration on the Llano County tube suggests a possible connection between Central Texas and the East Texas pottery designs;
and design elements on painted pebbles from West Texas.
PLATE 23
Stone pipes from Central and West Texas.
tube, Travis County, Length 4½ inches. 2.
showing striations and shape of bowl and stem
on floor of house ruin, Presidio County, dates
tesy J. Charles Kelley.)

1. Restored limestone
In~erior of same tube,
holes. 3. Tubes found
12-1400 A.D.
(Cour-

P|ate 23

Tubular Pipes and O$her Tubes in Texas

119

~tges of Stone Tubes
In most cases it is difficult to determine the possible age of the
stone tubes.

Cross finds of Southwestern pottery dated the associated tubes in
Presidio County as between 1200 and 1400 A. D.
There are suggestions that some of the other tubes are comparatively recent. In Central Texas a tube was associated with a potsherd that may belong to the Spanish mission period. In South
Texas one seemed to be associated with a polished boatstone; and in
West Texas one was on the surface near a polished stone hatchet of
the celt type.
A number of years ago John B. Dunn uncovered a grave at the
mouth of Oso Creek, Nueces County; and states that with the burial
were a tubular stone pipe and a silver sword hilt.
In discussing these finds Martin (27) expresses the opinion that
the sword is of Mexican manufacture. Dunn states that several
museums in the North have examined the sword hilt and are unable
to determine in what nation the weapon was made.
Subsequent to Dunn’s finds at Oso, the Anthropology Department,
University of Texas, exhumed 93 skeletons from the same cemetery,
found no evidence of historic contacts and no stone tubes.
Most of the stone tubes from caves do not seem to have any great
age, being confined largely to the upper levels of the camp refuse.
These tentative conclusions are at variance with certain statements
of McGuire (28) and West (29), who consider tubular pipes in
general as quite old. West, however, adds: "It is quite certain
that the use of the tube . . . was not abandoned in favor of the
elbow type."
Comparison. With Other States
The stone tubes in Texas are not unlike certain ones from adjacent, and even far-removed, states.
In his chapter on "general pipe areas," West (30) includes Texas,
Oklahoma, Arkansas, and northern Louisiana--along with Arizona,

120

Texas ArcheoIogicaI and Paleontological Society

New Mexico, Colorado, Kansas, Nevada, and Utah--in the Southwest area.

Harrington (31) reports a small "bluffdweller pipe" from a rock
shelter near Eureka Springs, Arkansas, that is almost identical to
several found in various parts of Texas.
Lemley (32) and Dickinson (33) also report eighteen comparable
tubular stone pipes from the western one-third of Arkansas.

Lem-

ley’s stone tubes are surface finds.

In the Dallas Historical Society (34) collection is a large tubular
stone pipe, with engraved designs, from Missouri. It is suggestive
of the large decorated tube found in Llano County, Texas.
West (35) pictures a large conical stone tube, with incised
geometric decoration, from southern Missouri. Its shape is similar
to some Texas specimens.
Jones (36) describes a massive tubular pipe from a mound in
Burke County, Georgia. The specimen has an hourglass-shaped
cavity with longitudinal scars, like many of the Texas tubes, showing that the work was done by gouging.
West (37) mentions stone tube pipes from Arizona that have
double conical boring and circular exteriors that taper toward the
mouthpiece. He illustrates a tube from Graham County, Arizona,
that is very much like some from the Texas coast.
West (38) also describes and illustrates tubular stone specimens,
containing bone mouthpieces, from California. Two of these have
the general shape, and comparable size, of certain tubes from South
and Central Texas.
Kidder and Guernsey (39) describe two tubular stone pipes, from
a cave in Utah, that are very similar in shape to certain Texas
specimens.

Martin (40) states that in 1939, he "secured a ~mall specimen
from the Nahuatlan province of Nyarit in Mexico. It is of greenish granite, spherical in shape, deeply drilled from one side, less
deeply from the other. It apparently was used without a bone
mouthpiece, the larger cavity stained by smoke or fire." The hour-

Tubular Pipes and O~he~r Tubes i~. Te~cas

121

glass-shaped cavity, with the two cones not in perfect alignment,
suggest the interior shapes of certain West Texas tubes.
Anderson states: "Only four of the twenty-seven specimens are
from northern TamauIipas, where most of my archeo!ogical materials were collected. Twenty-three are from Cameron County. This
indicates that such pipes were not so generally used south of the
Rio Grande as north."
Possible Uses o/Stone Tubes
The uses to which the stone tubes were placed often is uncertain.
Tubes of different sizes and shapes may have been used by the same
tribe for different purposes; tubes of the same kind may have been
used by different tribes for other purposes.
There are various ideas as to the use of stone tubes:

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Pipes
Ceremonial "cloud-blowers"
Medicine tubes
Fire carriers
Shaft straighteners
Enema syringes

Some of the tubes were ordinary pipes.
small ones wer~ so used.

Perhaps most of the

Cloud Blowers
It aIso seems likely that certain Texas tubes may have been "cloudblowers," used as stated in the Handbook of American Indians (41") :
’~13ae cloud-blower of the Pueblos is a straight tubular pipe, vary.
ing from a few inches to a foot in length. Those of small size
are usually made of clay in the same manner as pottery. Large
cloud-blowers are usually made of stone and do not differ in form,
decoration or use from those of clay. This form of pipe is used
solely for ceremonial purposes, the smoke being blown to the cardinal directions by~ medicine men."
Medicine Tubes
Possible use of some specimens as "medicine tubes" should receive consideration. This use was suggested by Jones, West and

122

Texans Archeological and Paleontological Society

other writers, based on statements made by Cabeza de Vaca, Jacob
Baegert and Michael Venegas with regard to practices of Indians in
Florida, possibly on the Texas Coast, and in California.

The reference of Cabeza de Vaca (42) to the use of a stone tube
is not specific. He says:
"On the island I have spoken of... an Indian told me that...
he, with a heated stone, placing it on the stomach, could cure and
take away pain .... Their manner of curing is as follows: When one
is ill they call in a medicine man .... All the medicine man does is
to make a few cuts where the pain is located and then suck the skin
around the incisions. They cauterize with fire, thinking it very effective.... Then they breathe on the spot where the pain is and believe that with this the disease goes away."
West (43) states: "Schoolcraft informs us that the Dakota Indians
used a horn tube in the treatment of disease by bleeding. They
placed one end of the tube over the cut and sucked the other end."
Bourke (44), in writing of Apache medicine men, states: "When
a pain has become localized and deep ~ated, the medicine men
resort to suction of the part affected, and raise blisters in that
way .... "

While he does not say that Apache medicine men used a tube for
suction, Bourke refers to the account of Venegas---quoted below-and infers that the practices of the various bands of Apache are
similar.
Bourke adds: "Dr. Fordyce Grinnel, . . . for some years attached
to the Wichita agency as resident physician .... in a monograph
entitled ’The Healing Art as Practiced by the Indians of the Plains,’
¯ .. says:
" ’Wet cupping is resorted to quite frequently. The surface is
scarified by a sharp stone or knife, and a buffalo horn is used as
PLATE 24
Stone pipes from East Texas campsites. No. 1. B. G. Langford
collection, Nacogdoches County, maximum diameter 4 inches. No. 2.
I. B. Price collection, Gass County. Length 2½ inches. No. 3. Anthropology Department, University of Texas, Bowie County. Length
3¾ inches.

Plate 24

Tubular Pipes and O~her Tubes in Texas

the cupping glass.

125

Cauterizing with red-hot irons is not infrequently

employed.’"
In discussing medical practices of Indians in lower California,
Jacob Baegert (45), a Jesuit missionary, declares:

"In treating a sick person, these jugglers employ a small tube
which they use for sucking or blowing the patient for a while, making also various grimaces and muttering something . . . until, finally, after such hard breathing and panting, they show the patient a
flint, or some other object previously hidden about their persons,
pretending to have at last removed the real cause of the disorder."
Venegas (46) sheds additional light on the subject:
"They applied to the suffering part of the patient’s body . . . a
tube formed out of a very hard black stone; and through this they
sometimes sucked, and other times blew, but both as hard as they
were able, supposing that thus the disease was either exhaled or dispersed.
"Sometimes the tube was filled with ciraarron or wild tobacco
lighted, and here they either sucked in or blew down the smoke,
according to the physician’s direction: and this powerful caustick
sometimes, without any other remedy, has been known entirely to
remove the disorder."
Speaking of the Hidatsa, Dorsey (47) states:

"When any person had a painfu! or diseased place, this.., man
put his pipe upon it and smoked .... He did not swallow the smoke,
but he affirmed he could extract the disease by his smoking; and he
pretended to seize it in his hand and to throw into the fire."
Careal (48) states that in Florida when Indians are sick:

’°Fhey call for.., their priests and physicians. These suck that
part. of the body which causes the patient most pain; and they do it
either with the mouth or with a kind of shepherd’s flute . . . having
first made a small incision near some vein."
Jones (49) sums up the facts in support of the medicine tube:
’°the small hole in the center of the bore facilitated both the

126

Texa~ Archeolog~cal a~! Paleontological Society

blowing and the sucking process. By the circular opening at the
larger end, the seat of pain could have been conveniently covered.
The weight of the instrument enhanced its efficiency and rendered
more facile its preservation in the desired position ....
"Suppose the cavity next to the flattened end filled with punk,
dried tobacco leaves or some combustible material; the other end of
the tube being firmly applied to the part affected, which had been
previously scarified; we will perceive, when the contained substance
was ignited, how readily this tube would have answered the purposes
either of cauterization or cupping.
"In the one case, the particles of burning matter dropping through
the central opening would have blistered and burnt the diseased
spot; while, in the other, the active fire kindled in the upper portion
of the tube--the ashes by a simple contrivance being prevented
from falling through the narrow portion of the bore below--would
have created and maintained during its existence a vacuum in the
lower part of the tube, thus causing the blood to flow freely from
the incision mad~ in the flesh."

Fire Carriers
So far as determined, the first published reference to the possible
use of a stone tube as a fire carrier was by Pearce (50) in 1932.
At that time ther~ were six known specimens in Texas; but the one
found in 1927 by Reed (51) and his coworkers, in a grave in
Kleberg County, was the type specimen on which the classification
was based, Martin (52) states, "I think I originally suggested to
Dr. Pearce the use of the ’cloud-blowers’ as fire-carriers."
In discussing the Kleberg County find, Reed states:
"The ashes were in the bottom and the unburned bitumen was on
top, indicating that the fire was fed from the large open end ....
These ’furnace’ torches were apparently means of transporting an
effective source of intense heat.

They were not connected in any

way with ceremonials; but rather with the very practical business
of keeping the fire of the tribal colony burning."
Pearce comments thus on the use of the tube:

"The speci~nen when found contained crushed asphalt and vege-

Tubular Pipes and Other Tubes in Texas

table matter which had probably been packed over llve coals.

127

A

smouldering fire could probably be carried in this apparatus for
days."
Pearce (53i was doubtful as to [he general use of the tubes when
he wrote: "They are so rare that I am doubtful of their having served
extensively for fire keeping and fire making."

Anderson declares: "I would think that the fume of hot pitch or
asphalt would not be wanted in a smoking pipe. Dr. Pearce’s idea
that these pipes were used as fire carriers or lighters seems the most
tenable."
Sha]t Stra.~ghteners (?)
A type of stone tube, rare in Texas, sometimes is referred to as a
"shaft straightener." In discussing tubes from the plains area, West
(54) mentions "a curious tube . . . through which a cavity of the
same diameter throughout has been drilled .... It appears to be a
shaft straightener."
Specimens of this type, of highly polished quartz and quartzite,
have been found in several East Texas counties. The cylindrical
holes are comparatively small. It is not known what purpose they
served. Possibly they were atlatl weights.
Enerrm Syringes
As mentioned by Heizer (55), "Nordenskiold has suggested that
the simple enema tube is related to the sucking tube used by the
medicine man who extracts disease from the sick by either sucking or
blowing."

It seems possible that certain of the stone tubes might have been
employed as enema syringes, by attaching a small bladder to the
bowl end and inserting a short bone or reed tube in the stem end.
Tubular Pottery Pipes
Studer (56) describes clay tubular pipes from a ruin "located
thirty-eight miles north of Amarillo, Potter County, Texas.... on
the south side of a tributary to the Canadian River.
"Several fired clay tubular pipes or cloud-blowers were found.
An unusually fine specimen came from Room T. It measures 2 1-2

128

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

inches in length and one inch in diameter at the mouth of the bowl.
The bowl has a depth of one inch. The decorations consist of three
groups of dots and a cross. Each group of dots contains six small
holes or indentures.
"Several isolated slab-houses are adjacent to the main communal
house. These circular rooms were slightly subterranean .... The
superstructure was probably brush built up in the shape of a cone.
The debris from these rooms was scarce, although flint knives and
tubular pipes were found in slab house F .... The types of knives
occurring most frequently were the well beveled four-edged knives.
"Out of forty-eight pipes found in our Texas Panhandle Culture
ruins we seem to have only four tubular pipes. Two of them are
of the ’cloud blower’ type. I do not have these pipes before me;
but, as I recall them, two of the tubes are pottery and the other two
stone; and two have flattened stems and two have roun~t stems."
A few pottery tubes from midden deposits in East Texas (57)
b.ave been found, but are very different from the Panhandle tube
pipes. They are more nearly cylindrical than conical.
Anderson (58) reports a conical pottery tube pipe, three inches
long, reconstructed from sherds; and fragments of seven other earthenware tubes from Cameron County, Texas, and Tamaulipas, Mexico. He adds:
"One pottery pipe appears to have been moulded around a core
of sticks or reeds which upon burning left the cavity. Another
pottery pipe appears to have been moulded inside of a wickerwork
form. Pottery pipes, though not crude, are not decorated nor colored, and are of inferior ware as compared to the best local pottery
vessels."
UrdquePot~ryTube

In a badly eroded village site, along the bluff of Corpus Christi
Bay near Portland, San Patricio County, a unique pottery tube was
found partly exposed. The discovery was made by L. C. Benedict
on December 5, 1937. A few days later he, W. Armstrong Price
and the writer visited the site.
The sausage-shape earthenware tube (Plate 25, Fig. 3) was in the

Tubular Pipes and Other Tubes in Texa~

129

Beaumont clay twenty-three inches below the level of the nearby uneroded surface.

Benedict states the tube was broken into two sec-

tions, and there was a small area of soft soll surrounding it. Immediately belo,,~ was a loose spot, six inches in diameter, that contained black midden soil.

Apparently this was the bottom of the

small hole originally dug to receive the specimen.

The tube, cylindrical with closed and rounded ends, has a maximum diameter of 2 7-8 inches and a length of 6 3-4 inches. The
thickness of the ware ranges from 3-8 inch at the two end perfora.tions to 1-8 inch at the thinnest part of the wall. The exterior,
though not well polished, has a red slip or wash, eroded away in
spots. The paste, a dense black from firing, is tempered with sand
and shell. The ware has a hardness of 2.5.
Points of cleavage encircling the tube suggest that it was made
by the coil method, and that the coils were from 1-4 to 1-2 inch in
diameter. The ends appear to have been shaped from lumps of
clay, with the thickest point at the center.
The end holes are slightly off-center, appear to have been punched
through the plastic clay, are 3-8 and 5-16 inch in diameter.
The interior has a striated and crosshatched surface, suggesting
that the soft paste was applied over netting; perhaps over a filled
fiber-cord pouch or bag. In firing the pottery, the bag was consumed. Careful cleaning of the broken tube revealed several
charred fragments of small four-strand fiber cords. Their diameter
agrees with the size of the imprints in the clay.
The material of
the cords has not been identified.
The crosshatch imprints formed small squares, about 1-16 inch
across, indicating a bag with mesh that size. (Plate 25, Fig. 4).
Where the tube begins to taper to the rounded ends, the crosshatch
ceases and the cord imprints converge at the hole. The end cords
may have protruded from the perforations.
For what purpose was this unique pottery object made?
If one end had a large opening, the specimen possibly might be
classed with tubular pipes. But a small hole at each end, and a cord
pouch inside, discredit the pipe theory. Neither does it seem likely
that it was used as a rattle.

130

Texms Archeological and Paleontological Society

Could this have been a "sacred bundle" that was encased in pottery and fired? Was the specimen, after firing, cached in the
ground; and did the present content filter in through the small hole?
Or does this pottery tube represent a small burial vessel, containing the remains of a cremated infant? Might the holcs in the ends
of the tube indicate ceremonial "killing" of the vessel? If a cremated burial, it seems likely that the ashy content would have been
wrapped with a skin, or other covering, before inserted in the pouch.
There was present no evidence of such wrapping. Some ash, a few
flakes of charcoal and a small quantity of clay were intermixed
with the sandy soil. No charred bone was in the tube.
Information concerning comparable finds, or any data shedding
light on the problem, will be appreciated.
Reed Tubes

Reed tubes, some of which appear to have been used as pipes, are
reported from West Texas caves. Coffin (59) refers to some in
Brewster County as follows:
"Pipes were found made from two sections of the stem of a reed.
One end is cut off close to, and the other at a distance from, the
joint; the dividing partition between the sections is punctured. The
short ends served as mouth pieces, while the long ends served as
bowls, these being in many cases badly charred and shortened
through use. A few of the bowls still contained the dottle, one of
which was of cedar sprays."
Martin (60) reports similar reed pipes from Val Verde County.
Cedar foliage also was found in some of the tubes.
In a cave in Culberson County, the writer found a section of reed
tube, with charred end, that seems to have been used for smoking;
or possibly as a medicine tube, such as described by Jones (61) :
"Beverly states that the Virginia Indians sometimes made use of
PLATE 25
Unusual pottery and stone tubes.
No. 1.
Sandstone tube, with
unfinished cavity, Zapata County. No. 2. Limestone tube, with incised decoration, Val Verde County. No. 3. Restored pottery tube,
San Patricio County. Length 6¾ inches. No. 4. Interior of section
of pottery tube. Note cord imprints.

Tubular Pipes and Other Tubes in Texas

133

reeds for cauterizing, which they heated over the fire until they were
on the eve of ignition, and then applied, upon a piece of thin wet
leather~ to the. part affected."
Four reed tubes (Plate 22, Fig. 3), bound with thongs into groups
of two each, were found by A. M. Woolsey in a child’s grave in a
cave in Val Verde County.’ The ends are smooth but show no evidence of fire. These may have been drinking reeds, which often
bad thongs attached.
Antler Tubes

Huskey (62) reports the finding of "two pieces of deer horn
which may have been used as tubular pipes." . . . There was "a
small hole drilled through the end, while the hollow end was
charred .... "
In 1934 the writer found an antler tube at a depth of about four
feet in a burnt-rock midden, Travis County. The specimen, one inch
in diameter, 3 1-4 inches long, and in a decayed condition, appears
to have gouged-out openings at each end, connected by a small hole.
No evidence of fire is present, and it probably was not a pipe.
Department of Anthropology,
University of Texas,
Austin, Texas.
LIST OF REFERENCES
1. Reed, Clyde T., A Carankawa Fire Implement, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 9, Abilene, Sept., 1937,
pp. 218, 221.
2. Pearce, J. E., The Present Status of Texas Archeology, Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, Abilene, Sept.,
1932, p. 50.
3. Pearce, J. E., The Archeology of East Texas, American Anthropologist, Vol. 34, No. 4, Oct.-Dec., 1932, p. 672.
4. Pearce, J. E., Geographic Influence and Civilization with
Especial Reference to Indian Texas, The Texas Geographic Magazine, Vol. II, No. 1, Dallas, 1938, p. 9.
5.

Benedict, L. C., personal communication, March 30, 1940.

134

Texas Areheological and Paleontological Society

6.

Turner, Arthur, personal communication, April 7, 1940.

7.

Anderson, A. E., Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region,

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, 1932~ p.
29; and personal communication, May 18, 1940.
8.

Jackson, A. T., Picture-Writing of Texas Indians, University

of Texas Publication No. 3809, Anthropological Papers Vol. II, Austin, 1938, pp. 330, 331, 33¢.
9.

Woolsey, A. M., Field notes Percy Hancock Place, Anthro-

pology Museum, University of Texas, Austin, March, 1938, p. 167.
10.

Watt, Frank H., personal communication, May 9, 1940.

11. Martin, George C., Archeological Exploration of the Shumla
Caves, Big Bend Basket Maker Papers No. 3, Witte Memorial
Museum, San Antonio, 1933, pp. 62, 6~.
12.

Davenport, J. Walker, Archeological Exploration of Eagle

Cave, Langtry, Texas, Big Bend Basket Maker Papers No. 4, Witte
Memorial Museum, San Antonio, 1938, pp. 11-12.
13.

Meyer, G. S.,. personal communication, September 25, 1937.

14.

Ray, Cyrus N., personal communication, May 2, 194,0.

15.

Coffin, E. F., Archeological Exploration of a Rock Shelter in

Brewster County Texas, Indian Notes and Monographs No. 48, Museum of American Indian, Heye Foundation, New York, 1932, p. 24.
16.

Smith, Victor J., personaI cormnunication, May 4, 1940.

17.

Kelley, J. Charles, personal communication, May 6, 1940.

18.

Strain, W. S., personal communication, April 29, 1940.

19.

Jackson, A. T., Indian Pipes of East Texas, Texas Archeolog-

ical and Paleontological" Society, Vol. 5, Abilene, 1933, pp. 83-84.
20.

Price, I. B., personal communication, August 19, 1936.

21.

Witte, A. H., Kitchen Middens of the Upper Red River

Drainage, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 8,
1936, p. 82; and personal communication, May 17, 1940.
22.

Reed, Clyde T., op. cit., pp. 218, 221.

T~bula~" Pipes and Other Tubes in Texa~

185

23. Pearce, J. E., The Present Status of Texas Archeology, op.
cit., p. 50.
24.

Pearce,~J. E., The Archeology of East Texas, op. cit., p. 672.

25. Pearce, J. E., Geographic Influence and Civilization With
Especial Reference to Indian Texas, op. cir., p. 9.
26. Martin, George C., Archeological Exploration of the Shumla
Caves, op. cir., pp. 62, 64.
27. Martin, George C., Notes on Some Texas Coast Campsites
and Other Remains, Tex. A & P Soc. Vol. 1, 1929, p. 51; and Two
Sites on the CalIo del Oso, Nueces County, Texas A & P Soc. Vol. 2,

1930, p. 11.
28. McGuire, Joseph, Pipes and Smoking Customs of the American Aborigines Based on Material in the U. S. National Museum,
Annual Report, U. S. Nat. Mus., 1897, Pt. I, p. 626.
29.

West, George A., Tobacco, Pipes and Smoking Customs of

the American Indians, Bulletin Milwaukee Public Museum, Vol.
XVII, Pt. I, 1934, p. 137.
30.

West, George A., op. cit., p. 125.

31. Harrington, M. 1%, A Bluffdweller Pipe, Indian Notes, Vol.
I, No. 1, Museum of American Indian, Heye Foundation, New York,
Jan., 1924, pp. 38-39.
32.

Lemley, Harry J., personal communication, May 24, 1940.

33.

Dickinson, S. D., personal communication, May 11, 1940.

34.

Harris, R. K., personal communication, May, 1940.

35.

West, George A., op. cit., PI. 38, Fig. 3.

36. Jones, C. C., Antiquities of the Southern Indians, Particularly of the Georgia Tribes, D. Appleton & Co., New York, 1873, pp.
359, 360.
37.

West, George A., op. cit., p. 139 and P1. 24, Fig. 3.

38.

West, George A., op. cir., p. 506, P1. 13, Fig. 9, P1. 19, Fig. 2.

39.

Nusbaum, J. L., A Basket-Maker Cave in Kane County,

136

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Utah, With Notes on the Artifacts by A. V. Kidder and S. J. Guernsey, Museum of American Indian, Heye Foundation, New York,
1922, pp. 132-137.
40.

Martin, George C., personal communication, May 10, 1940.

41. Hodge, F. W. (Editor), Handbook of American Indians
North of Mexico, B. A. E. Bulletin 30, Washington, 1910, Part II,
p. 257.
42. Journey of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca aud His Companions from Florida to the Pacific, 1528-1536, translated from his"
own narrative by Fanny Bandelier, Allerton Book Co., New York,
1922, pp. 68-70.
43. West, George A., op. eft., p. 147, referring to Schooleraft,
H. 1L, 1868, Vol. I, p. 253.
44. Bourke, John G., The Medicine-Men of the Apache, Ninth
Annual Report, B. A. E., 1887-88, Washington~ 1892, pp. 471-473.
45. Rau, Charles, An Account of the Aboriginal Inhabitants of
the California Peninsula, as Given by Jacob Baegert, Ann. Rept.
Smithsonian Institution for 1864, Washington, 1865, p. 386.
46. Jones, C. C., op. cit., pp. 363, 364, quoting Natural and
Civil History of California, London, 1759, Vol. I, p. 97.
Dorsey, J. O., A Study of Siouan Cults, Eleventh Ann. Rept.
B.A. E., 1889-90, Washington, 1894, p. 511.
48. Jones, C. C., op. cit., quoting Voyages Aux Indes Occidentales, Amsterdam, 1722, tome i, p. 39.
¢9.

Jones, C. C., op. cit., pp. 361-365.

50. Pearce, J. E., The Present Status of Texas Archeology, op.
cit., p. 50.
51.

Reed, Clyde T., op. cit., pp. 218, 221.

52.

Martin, George C., personal communication, May 10, 1940.

53.

Pearce, J. E., Letter to B. B. Gardner, January 19, 1932.

54.

West, George A., op. cir., p. 146.

Tubular Pipes and O$her Tubes in Te~a~

137

55. Heizer, Robert F., The Bulbed Enema Syringe and Enema
Tube in the New World, Primitive Man, Vol. XII, No. 4, Washington, 1939, p. 89.
56. Studer, Floyd V., Texas Panhandle Culture Ruin No. 55,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 6, 1934, pp.
84, 85, 92, 94.
57. Jackson, A. T., A "Perpetual Fire" Site, Texas ArcheologicaI
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 8, 1936, P1. 25, Fig. 2.
58.

Anderson, A. E., personal communication, May 18, 1940.

59.

Coffin, E. F., op. cir., pp. 15, 32.

60. Martin, George C., Archeological Exploration of the Shumla
Caves, op. cir., pp. 62-63.
61.

Jones, C. C., op. cir., pp. 361-365.

Huskey, Vane, An Areheologieal Survey of the Nueces CanTexas, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
1935,
pp. 106-107.
Vol. 7,
62.

yon of

