92

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

A PUI~BLO POT BOUND Nt~AR
PARIS, Tl~XAS
BY GI~oRc~ T. WR~CHT

A few miles south of Paris, Lamar County, Texas, lies Aud’s
Creek. It flows into Sulphur River across interlocking fingers
of gray and black land toward the broader prairies farther south.
Here the buffalo once roamed and our nomadic Indians followed
them. Westward, toward New Mexico, stretch hundreds of miles
of other buffalo range; other wild Indians hunted there. Although
artifacts, inclt~ding potsherds abound in the neighborhood, no
whole specimens of clay pottery had been found nearby until the
spring of 1937.
In that year, a small group of boys, were crossing a field near
Aud’s Creek.. Down the middle of the eroded surface of this field
a rather shallow ditch had washed. In crossing the ditch, one of
the boys noticed a peculiar object in the bottom of it, half buried
in earth, which proved to be an Indian pot. This was secured
by the writer who, at the request of Mr. A. T. Jackson, sent
it to the University of Texas for study and photographing. Since
it was evident that the pot belonged with the western Indians,
pictures of it were sent to Dr. H. P. Mera of the University of
New Mexico by Mr. Jackson, asking for information as to its
origin and a possible explanation of how it happened to be
found in east Texas. Extracts from Dr. Mera’s letters to Mr.
Jackson and myself follow:
June 13, 1939.
The very interesting prints and color sketch of the vessel from
Lamar County arrived yesterday. If this specimen is from the
County named, which I have no reason to doubt, it is a most
surprising occurrence.
One is apt to hesitate in definitely naming a pottery type without
first examining the physical properties, such as paste, slip and
paint but aside from this lack I feel reasonably sure that your
PLATE 14
Nos. 1, 2. are two views of a pueblo pot found near Paris, Texas.

Platte 14

A P~eblo Pot Fou~i Ne~" pa~i~, Tezas

jar is of Zuni manufacture. Its decorative style is representative
of a fashion in use circa the middle of the 19th century.
Your photographs are so clear that the dark granular core in
the light grayish paste seen in a cross.section of the vessel’s
walls appears to be typical.
June 21, 1939.
Thank you very much for permission to keep the prints and
also for copies of the letters from Mr. Wright. The latter appear
to clear up the circumstances surrounding the discovery in a
satisfactory manner.
The vessel’s occurrence so far east may well be accounted for
by trade through several hands. It is unlikely that raiders from
the eastern plains could have reached as far west as Zuni and,
unless it had previously reached the Rio Grande, such an idea
seems untenable.
The period in which the pot was produced was one of considerable unrest in the plains area and hence there would be little
chance of tracing its course. I fear we are going to have to leave
the matter to our individual imaginations.
June 23, 1939.
Many thanks for the offer to send the pot for examination,
but I feel that as there is no hope of identifying the tribe that
had it last, thus perhaps helping to trace a trade route, not
enough would be gained to take the chance of shipping.
There are only two possible sources of origin, the Pueblo of
Zuni or the Pueblo of Acoma, both in the same cultural area.
Although I hesitated to make an exact identification I feel certain
that the former village is where it was made. Either way it
is a very interesting circumstance to find an example of Pueblo
pottery as far from home without having been broken in transit.
(Signed)

H.P. Mera.

While, as stated above, the artifact in question was not found
by the present owner, there is no reason to doubt the story of the

96

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

boy, which was well substantiated. A trip to the site of the find,
personally conducted by the discoverer, showed things "as he
had described them. However, this was over a year after the
find. In the interim, the old field had been made into a pasture
and vegetation covered not only all the fieId but the ditch itself
and hid whatever evidence there might have been that could have
thrown light on the strange occurrence of a Pueblo pot in Caddo
lands. There is no house closer than a half-mile to the spot and
no sign of there ever having been one near,
The, pot measures 51/~ inches high by 51/~ inches at its widest
diameter and is painted white, both inside and out. Four black
bands, ~ inch wide, divide the outer surface into equal segments.
Between these the spaces are taken up by connected stairs which
are alternately red and black. The painted decoration covers the
whole side of the vessel and overflows for 1~ inch into the interior.
See Plate 14 Nos. 1-2.
Apparently, it had been near grass roots and was washed up by
spring rains. It is still in fairly good condition despite the fact
that it must have been carried from its place of origin a thousand
miles away.
190 Bonham St.,
Paris, Texas.

