POPULATION SHIFTS IN THE

PRE-SPANISH SOUTHWEST
ERIK K. REED
For a thousand years, from at least 200 A. D. to about
1200 A. D., the entire Southwest was occupied largely by
Indians of a general "Pueblo" type of culture.

During the

period a rapid but steady development of Pueblo civilization and an evident general increase of human population
throughout the Southwest may be observed. Few definite
movements of groups of people are specifically traceable.
Here the term "Southwest" includes New Mexico, Arizona,
southwestern-most Colorado, southern Utah, and the Virgin
River-Moapa Valley section of southern Nevada. The term
"Pueblo culture" refers to a-distinctive way of life, characterized by primary dependence on intensive agriculture;
large compact villages, with undeveloped political organization; rich and complex ceremonialism; highly advanced arts
and crafts, such as the weaving of cotton and the manufacture of painted pottery; various tools of stone and of wild
animal bones (no metals and no livestock before the coming
of the Spaniards). Rather different archaeological materials are found in the deserts of southern and western
Arizona--the "Hohokam culture" of the Gila-Salt area, and
the "Patayan" archaeological remains representing the ancestors of the historic Yuma-speaking tribes of western
Arizona.
Among the population shifts recognizable before 1200 are
those in the Flagstaff district following the eruption about
1066 A. D. of Sunset Crater. A colony of Hohokam (the
non-Puebloan Indians of southern Arizona) moved up from
the Verde Valley to the Flagstaff district around 1070 A. D.;
and other small groups from still farther west seem to have
come into the area of the Sunset Crater ash fall.
About fifty years later the Sinagua Pueblo group of the
Flagstaff district, having absorbed the Hohokam and other
foreign colonists, spread southwest and superseded the Ho-

Population Shi]ts in the Pre-Spanish Southwest

91

hokam in the Verde Valley. Probably this was largely
a process of absorption or "cultural conquest" rather than
actual displacement. In another generation or so, around
1150 A. D., the Sinagua (or converted I-Iohoikam) of the
Verde evidently spread down into the Salt River Valley,
profoundly modifying the Hohokam culture there. As has
been pointed out by A. H. Schroeder, the modern Pima Indians probably derive essentially from this basic SinaguaHohokam combination of 800 years ago.
But these movements, and others less visible or even
~totally unrecognized, did not entail total ab.andonment of
any portion of the Southwest. Many individual sites were
deserted, but the inhabitants merely moved to other locations in the same general vicinity. The entire region evidently was occupied into and through the ll00’s.
Toward 1200 A. D., or soon after, the peak appears to
have been passed in certain parts of the Southwest. Decline
of population and even actual abandonment of areas began;
and in the last quarter of the thirteenth century, the drought
period of 1276-99, more extensive tracts were permanently
deserted.
These effects are seen especially in the northern Southwest--the plateau area of San Juan Anasazi culture. The
distinctive Anasazi culture found before 1300 A. D. in the
upper Rio Grande, the San Juan drainage, and the northern
drainage of the Little Colorado is characterized by gray
pottery (black:on-white, rough plain, corrugated), fullgrooved stone axes, typical rather standardized circular
kivas (ceremonial chambers, frequently semi-subterranean),
predominance of flexed (contracted) burial, and the lambdoid type of artificial cranial deformation (cradle-board
flattening of the back of the head).
The peripheral extension of Pueblo culture of San Juan
Anasazi affiliation west of the Colorado River--across the
Kaibab Plateau north of the Grand Canyon to the Virgin
River drainage in southwestern Utah, and down that stream
to the Moapa Valley in southern NevadaMseems to drop

92

Texas A~cheological and Paleontological Society

out of the picture, or at any rate to lose touch with the main
parent group

(east of the Colorado River, between the

Little Colorado and the San Juan) by 1200 A. D. or earlier.
The people of Chaco Canyon in northwestern New Mexico,
one of the great early centers~of Anasazi development, may
have cut down too many trees in building their immense
houses and so brought about the channeling of the prehistoric arroyo. For some reason, at any rate, the population
declined and the Chaco Canyon pueblos were abandoned,
probably late in the ll00’s or early in the 1200’s. There
seems to have been a rapid dwindling of Chaco population
after a high peak reached comparatively early, apparently
by 1100 A.D. The people who left Chaco Canyon between
1130 and 1200 undoubtedly m~ved for the most part eastward to the upper Rio Grande.
By 1300 A. D., all the rest of the San Juan was abandoned.
In the period 1250-75 the Anasazi congregated into cliff
houses and large defensible open pueblos. Fairly extensive
tracts seem to have been left unoccupied in many districts, in contrast to the earlier pattern of scattered small
villages in almost every livable spot.
It appears that there must have been a general decline
of total population, and also a definite threat from enemy
peoples such as Utes or Apaches. But the final abandonment came right at the time of the drought period of 127699. The last tree-ring dates from Anasazi sites in the San
Juan drainage are 1284 and 1286. Presumably the Anasazi
abandonment of the San Juan was forced by arroyo-cutting brought on by the drought. Very possibly the diminishing and weakening of the Anasazi by the destruction of
their farm land and the lowering of the water table, made
them vulnerable to attack by nomad enemies; yet there is
no positive evidence to show that either Utes (including
Paiutes) or Apaches (including the Navajo) were in the
region. The rather numerous defensive structures and the
occasional indications of violence could quite possibly mean
interpueblo strife over declining water supply and other

Population Shifts in the Pre-Spanish Southwest

basic resources.

93

Whatever the explanation, the Anasazi had

left the entire San Juan drainage by 1300 A. D.; and they
never came back to the Four Corners region. At just the
same time the very peculiar group in the Largo-Gallina
area also disappeared.

In the great dispersal of the San

Juan Anasazi, the Kayenta pe.ople of the Tsegi unquestionably went into the Hopi country when they left Betatakin, Kietsiel, and other localities; very possibly--as one
of the Hopi’ migration traditions states--by way of Wukoki
("Wupatki"). The rest of the San Juan Anasazi, from the
Chinle. eastward to the Rio Puerco~ plus those of southeastern Utah as well as southwestern Colorado, were all of the
Mesa Verde cultural phase in the 1200’s.

Those of the Can-

yon de Chelly district in northeastern Arizona probably
joined the Hopi. What became of those in southeastern Utah
is not known. Those of northwestern New Mexico and of the
Mesa Verde district proper, in southwestern Colorado, came
over to the Rio Grande, particularly into the Galisteo Basin
area south of Santa Fe. The characteristic Galisteo Blackon-White pottery of around 1300 is actually indistinguishable
from Mesa Verde Black-on-White of the preceding century.
To the south, primarily in the forested mountain zone of
the Mogol!on Rim country from the Flagstaff district southward and eastward to southwestern New Mexico, during
this period, the other Pueblo groups, which may be referred to as cultures of Mogollon affiliation, generally increased and advanced, except in southwestern New
Mexico. These--the Pueblo groups of Mogollon derivation
--are distinguished from the San Juan Anasazi by polished
brownware (plain, red-slipped, polished corrugated, blacksmudged interior, black-on-white and various types of
painted pottery, well-made ~ grooved polished stone axes,
rectangular kivas or no recognizable kivas, vertical occipital cradle-board deformation of the skull, and in many
groups the practice of extended inhumation (burial at full
length on the back).

94

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

In southwestern New Mexico the unique Mimbres culture
disappeared--whither is uncertain---during the 1200’s; and
occupation of the Mimbres Valley area in the fourteenth
cenutry was very sparse.

A little to the north and west,

the Upper Gila-Tularosa area was permanently abandoned
toward 1300 A. D.
But the major Pueblo area of central and east-central
Arizona--the entire Salt River drainage and adjacent districts--reached its height as the San Juan and Mimbres
were being abandoned. Not only attaining a climax of
population and richness of culture within its central area,
this "Western Pueblo" complex expanded territorially as
the San Juan Anasazi group shrank. ~As exemplified at
such great pueblos as Tuzigoot and Kinishba and those .of
Point of Pines, this group is Characterized by polished redware or brownware (including notably glaze-paint polychrome redware), polished ~/4 grooved stone axes, rectangular kivas, vertical occipital cranial deformation, and universally extended burials.
Except for the last trait, these supersede the corresponding (contrasting) San Juan Anasazi diagnostics in both the
Hopi country and the Zuni district about 1300 A.D. A still
further extension of "Western Pueblo" cultural influence--presumably by actual migration of a small group of.people
--brought Acoma into close relation with Zuni. The movement extended eastward to .the Rio Grande around 1325
A. D., bringing glaze-paint redware and possibly other
western traits such as square kivas.
In the 1300’s, then, Pueblo population had concentrated
already on the upper Rio Grande and in the Zuni and Hopi
areas, and the San Juan lay abandoned; but all of central
and southern Arizona, from the Agua Fria drainage to the
vicinity of the modern New Mexico State line, and from
Prescott to the Petrified Forest, from Winslow to Douglas,
was still occupied, and so was much of ~southern New Mexico
mrather scatteringly west of the Rio Grande, rather heavily to the east in the E1 Paso-Alamogordo area.

Population Shi]ts in the Pre-Spanish Southwest

95

Finally, about 1400 A. D. or soon after, these extensive
areas in Arizona south of the Hopi country and in southern New Mexico away from the Rio Grande valley were
abandoned also.

What the reason was we cannot be sure;

Apache pressure seems a likely possibility.

This left only

the historic pueblo areas, as found by the Spaniards in the
sixteenth century: the Hopi group, the Zuni group, the isolated pueblo of Acoma on its great peno!, and the Rio
Grande area from Taos to San Marcial.
There were, however, a few more Hopi pueblos in the
1400’s .than the five of the early-historic period between
1540 and 1680 (Awatovi, Walpi, Shongopovi, Mishongnovi;
Oraibi) ; and occupation of the Zuni country or "Cibola" was
heavier in the 1400’s than the six towns of 1540-1680 (Hawikuh, Kyanawa, Kwakina, Halona approximately at modern Zuni pueblo, Kyakima, Matsaki). In the Rio Grande
numerous pueblos of the fifteenth century, notably in the
lower Chama River area and the Pajarito Plateau, had been
abandoned before the arrival of the conquistadores.
The people of eastern central Arizona no doubt joined
their congeners in the Zuni country; and evidently so also
did a group from much farther south in Arizona, bringing
with them the Hohokam practice of cremation of the dead.
Unquestionably the Homolovi people of the Winslow vicinity
and the Sinagua of Chaves Pass and the Verde Valley moved
in to Hopi. What became of the separate group around
Prescott is not certain.
The inhabitants of areas in southern New Mexico abandoned after 1400 but before 1540 presumably went to swell
the Pueblo population of the Rio Grande Valley; the "tBiscuitware" people of the Chama-Pajarito district undoubtedly joined their "kindred in the Tewa district just north of
Santa Fe. The fate of the Mogollon Pueblo people of Chihuahua, who disappeared about this time, is not known.
Other later population shifts are historically documented:
the disappearance of the Piro pueblos (on the Rio Grande

96

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

below Isleta, around Socorro, and in the hills south of
NIountainair); the congregation of the Jemez into a single
settlement by the missionaries; the departure of the Tano
or Southern Tewa from the Galisteo Basin, and the founding of modern "Tewa" or "Hano" (Los Tanos) in the Hopi
country by a part of them about 1700; the destruction of
Awatovi in 1700-01; the reoccupation of only a single location by the Zuni after the period of rebellion and reconquest
(1680-1706); the founding of Laguna in 1696-99; the decrease of the Tiwa pueblos after 1540, abandonment of the
Bernalillo vicinity in 1680 and refounding of Sandia alone,
with refugees persuaded to return from Hopi, in the 1740’s;
the eighteenth-century decline and 1838 abandonment of the
great pueblo of Pecos.
But the basic continuities of Pueblo culture and population can be traced from the earliest known periods into
modern times, with two major traditions carrying through
--the northern or San Juan Anasazi archaeological division very probably correlating with the Tanoan-speaking
pueblos of the upper Rio Grande; and the Mogollon or
"southern brownware" tradition connecting up broadly or
essentially with the later Western Pueblos of the Hopi, Zuni,
and Acoma, as suggested by brownware (i. e., red, orange, or
yellow, as against the gray pottery typical of San Juan
Anasazi) and rectangular kivas.
The people who today still live as Pueblo Indians within
seventy-five miles north and south of Santa Fe and at Laguna, Acoma, Zuni, and the Hopi villages in northeastern
Arizona subsume the biological and cultural heritage (to
which still other additions have been made) of the rich and
varied civilization of the native Southwest which, a thousand
years ago, extended from the Pecos River to Nevada, from
Moab to Chihuahua, and which has in basic essentials survived the repeated blows of drought and arroyo channeling,
Apache incursions, Spanish Catholic controls and influence,
and the impact of modern technological civilization.

