Texas Archeological Society

389

NORTH-CE’NTRAL TEXAS POTTERY TYPES
NOCONA PLAIN
PASTE
Method of manufacture: Probably coiled but does not break
regularly in horizontal direction.
Temper: Usually abundantly tempered with crushed mussel
shells; in rare cases, no temper visible.
Texture: Fairly compact to crumbly; shell particles occasionally leached out, leaving porous paste.
Color: Mainly shades of brown, gray-brown, reddish-brown,
orange-brown, etc., but ranging from dark cream to nearly
black. Not much fire-mottling; cores about same as surface or darker.
Surface finish: Poorly smoo.thed and uneven, suggesting possibly use of paddle-and-anvi!, but some exterior surfaces
fairly smooth, satiny.
FOP~M
Wall thickness: 4 to 8 mm.
Lip: Usually rounded and flush with rim or turned outward
slightly; may also be a quite sharp edge, and in rare cases,
flat (Krieger, 1946, Fig. 5, shows rim profiles).
Base: Rounded bottoms, merging with side walls and same
thickness.
Vessel shape and size: Almost exclusively jars, so far as can
be determined from sherds; more or less hemispherical
bowls also suggested. Jar rims may meet body at definite
angle or merge gradually; rims 1 to 4 cm. high, bodies unknown; mouth diameters probably more or less equal to
maximum body diameters.
DECORATION
Treatment:
Usually none, but small amount of applique,
punctating, incising may occur.
Designs: A row of small applique nodes may occur around
vessel at rim-body junction; rarely, scattered fingernail
punctates or striations appear on body or rim; in a few
cases, shallow depressions made with a very blunt tool.
CULTURAL A~FFILIATIONS
A Henrietta Focus type, also occurring in Wylie Focus farther
east, but difficult to determine whether made by Wylie
Focus people or obtained by trade (Caddoan pottery from
East Texas also occurs in Wylie Focus, where it is rather
clearly all trade ware). Similar pottery occurs in southcentral Oklahoma in the Bryan Focus (Bell and Baerreis,
1951), where applique nodes and fillets, as well as handles,
are more commonly found.
DISTRIBUTION
North-central Texas, extending from near the junction of Red
River with the Panhandle boundary eastward down the
Red River valley to Fannin and perhaps Lamar County,
and southward into the upper drainage systems of the
Brazos and Trinity Rivers.
ESTIMATED AGE
1200-1500 A. D.
REFERENCES
Krieger, 1946, pp. 109-111, Fig. 5 and Plates 4, 5.

