BOOK REVIEW
The Comanches, Lords of the South Plain&
E. Adamson Hoebel.
1952.

By Ernest Wallace and

University of Oklahoma Press, Norman,

Pp. 381, map, photographs, bibliography, index.

$5.00.

This book is number 34 in the Civilization of the American
Indian Series of the University of Oklahoma Press and attains the
same high level of attractive printing and authentic scholardhip of
previous volumes. The Comanches have always held a special
appeal for students of Southwestern history because these superb
horsemen, warriors, and buffalo hunters ranged over enormous
areas, sometimes hunting, sometimes raiding frontier settlements of
the Spanish and later the Americans, but always defending their
homelands against the advancing white man with unmatched
brav
ery-,,~ and shrewdness. Although most famous for their warfare, this tribe was also a powerful political factor in Southwestern
history for over 150 years, entering into successful trade relationships with the Spanish and American settlers, and various alliances
with both whites and other Indians. Only when they were outnumbered by 50 to one, decimated by war and smallpox, and
brought to the verge of starvation through the destruction of the
buffalo, did they finally surrender to life on a reservation in southwestern Oklahoma, in 1875. From a peak population of perhaps
20,000 in 1845, they were reduced to 1,171 in 1910. The number of
pure-bloods has continued to decrease, but there are now many
mixed-blood Comanches who still continue some of the ancient
customs.
Ernest Wallace is Professor of History at Texas Tech College
and has spent many years iu the study of Comanche history in
relation to the general history of the Southwest. Professor Hoebel
is chairman of the Department of Anthropology, University of
Utah, and is an outstanding authority on the legal codes, mores,
and other customs of the Comanches. Both authors are eminently
qualified to write the present book and have succeeded in producing a perfectly fascinating account, every page packed with information, and touching virtually every aspect of life of these
people. The professional anthropologist will find it the first general
source on the Comanches, weaving together information found in
scores of special papers. The historian will find much on the
movements, treaties, and wars of these people which affected the
course of history in New Mexico, Texas, and northern Mexico from
1705 to 1875 and even afterward. And, to those many persons who
simply wish to learn more about Indimu_s, it will prove an endless
source of interest; they can also expect to have many of their popular ideas about the Comanches uprooted.
It is difficult to choose any particular parts of the book for
special consideration in a review. Contrary to my well-known
habits, I could not find anything to criticize, and can only extend
my sincere recommendation to all to obtain a copy and read it
thoroughly. One thing did that strike me forcibly is that a way
should be found to encourage public-school teachers in Texas and
elsewhere to utilize such books in the teaching of history. While
we in the United States boast unceasingly of knowing and teaching the truth, the biased and false information given out on the

312

Texas Archeologfcal and Paleontological Society

American Indians is hardly less than criminal. While quick to
praise any modern people for resisting aggression against their
nations, we pass off the Indians as unfortunate collections of cruel
and murderous savages who had to be exterminated as quickly
and thoroughly as possible. Wallace and Hoebel do not, to be sure,
even suggest that the Comanches are to be excused for many of
their raids for plunder, but they do manage to show with great
fairness that both sides had terrible problems of survival. The
white man was determined to take the Indians’ land and the Indian was just as determined to keep it. Treaties were made and
broken by both sides, but in the matter of sincerity the Indian was
clearly superior; both sides had men of integrity and honor who
were respected by the other. In a sense the wars of the Comanche
were one of the irrevocable conflicts of history: they had to happen.
The least we can expect in modern history courses is a balanced
treatment of events, causes, and blames. For this reason alone
The Comanches should receive wide reading.
The authors also present valuable data on one of the neglected
aspects of Comanche history, namely that the period of open warfare with Texans was preceded by a long period of relatively peaceful relations and trade. The Comanches established a flourishing
business of raiding Mexican settlements for horses, mules, and
occasionally children, which they sold or bartered to early American and German settlers in Texas. who were only too glad to get
them. But it was the greed for more and more land, and a
declaration of war against all Indians by the young State of Texas
which finally forced the Comanches into the most desperate
measures to retain at least part of their hunting grounds---and then
the white man proceeded to slaughter the great buffalo herds.
What could be expected of any people with pride and fighting
ability?
But history is only part of the present book. There are cha~.ters dealing with "Comancheria," the vast range of the tribe in its
several division, and its geographical features; on ’~ne People,"
a study of their physical appearance, language, family and band
organization," tribal" divisions" and territories,,,, and population figuries; on ’The Horse and the Buffalo, including a brief history
of the acquisition of horses by Plains Indians, the revolutions
brought about by the horse in their economic life, the great herds
owned by the Comanches, treatment of the animals and their
hunting techniques; on "Food, Clothing, and Dwellings"; "At Work
and at Play"; "From Cradle to Grave"; ’~ne Search for Power";
"Cosmogony and Folk Beliefs"; "Government and Law"; "Warfare"; "The Lords of the South Plains"; and "On the Reservation."
All of these subjects are written with consummate skill and
ample documentation. A particularly interesting addition is that
of photographs of several of the famed Comanche chiefs, and of
drawings made in the early 19th century.
ALEX KRIEGER,
University of Texas.

