Evidences of tJte M~rksville and Coles Creek Comple~es

139

EVIDENCES OF THE MARKSVILLE AND
COLES CREEK COMPLEXES AT THE
KIRKHAM PLACE, CLARK
COUNTY, ARKANSAS
BY S. D. DICKINSON AND HARRY J. LEMLEY

The archaeology of southern Arkansas is no longer a two dimensional study. Although sufficient stratigraphic evidence is still
lacking for a complete understanding of the relationships of the
prehistoric ceramic complexes with their affiliated cultures, enough
data have been obtained for the establishment of a tenable chronologic system, which is consistent not only within Arkansas itself but
also with what has been observed in Louisiana and Mississippi.
The discovery of the pre-Caddo pottery at the Crenshaw Site in
Southwest Arkansas1 and the demonstration of its relationship to
the Coles Creek complex of Louisiana and Mississippi:’ afforded
both a confirmation of previous investigations done in those states
and a basis for future researches in the sequence of Arkansas’ prehistoric cultures. The presence of Deasonville ware with lesser quantities of Marksville and Coles Creek along Bayou Macon in Southeast Arkansasz aided still further in correlating the archaeological
remains of this state with ceramic sequences established to the eastward and southward through the efforts of Ford, Setzler, Collins
and Chambers.
Logically, the next point of attack was the Ouachita River Valley,
lying between Red River and Bayou Macon. In order to ascertain
the possible presence of pre-Caddo horizons in this intervening area,
the writers in the fall of 1938, began an investigation of a mound
near the Little Missouri River, a tributary of the Ouachita, where
the senior author had previously found crude sherds which it was
thought belonged to the Coles Creek complex. These sherds had
L Lemley, Harry J., "Diseoveriea Indicating a Pre-Caddo Culture on Red River in
Arkansas,,’ Bulletin of the Texas Archeolol~ical and Paleontological Society. VoL
1936, Abilene,
9_. D|ekln~on. iS. D., ’*Ceramic Rela~ionshil~s of the Pre-Caddo Pottor~, from the
Crenshaw Site," Bulletin of the Texs.s Archeological and Paleontological Soelety, Vol.
8, 1936, Abilene,
~8,
and Dieki~n~on,
D., "Areheological
Inve~tigatlons
on Bayou
aeonLemley,.Harr~
in Arttansas."$, Bulletin
of the S~
Texas
Archeological and
l~aleontological
eiety, VUl. 9, 1937, AbLlene, Texas.

140

occurred in a midden several feet below the remains of a wattle and
daub lodge in which a broken Caddoan vessel had been found.~
The purpose of this paper is to present the data obtained in this
investigation.
The site in question is located in Section 21, Township 9 South,
Range 22 West, Clark County, Arkansas, upon what is known locally
as the Kirkham Place. The present owner is Mr. J. Bert Wingfield,
of Okolona, Arkansas, who kindly consented to our excavation.
The Little Missouri River, the present bed of which is approximately one mile west of the site, heads in the Ouachita Mountains
in western Arkansas and flows in a southeasterly direction across the
Athens Plateau and the upper extremity of the Gulf Coastal Plain
before emptying into the Ouachita. After leaving the highlands
about 20 miles above the Kirkham Place, the river meanders through
an extensive flood plain that is bounded on the northeast by a low
ridge of badly eroded hills in which Upper Cretaceous strata of
limestone, chalk and marl are exposed. The valley, cut by the
present and numerous former channels of the Little Missouri, is very
fertile because of the alluvial deposits that it receives. In prehistoric times it must have been capable of supporting a comparatively dense sedentary population. This is evidenced by the large
number of mounds and camp sites in the locality.
Considerable debris of animal bones, mussel shells and stone
rejects litter the Kirkham Site. The chief feature of archaeological
interest, however, is the mound, consisting of a basal midden of black
soil on top of which a lighter colored earth had been added to form
the foundation for the aforementioned wattle and daub house. This
mound, which is situated in a bend of a former channel of the river,
is roughly elliptical, easterly and westerly. It is approximately 85
yards long and 50 yards broad at the widest point, and has a maximum height of about 12 feet. Both the present shape and dimen4. Dickinson, S. D., "Ceramic Relationshiva of the Pre-Caddo Potter,/ from the
Crenshaw Site," Bulletin of the Texas Aroheologieal and Paleontological Society, Vol.
8, 1~. 61 ; 1936, Ahilene, Texas.

PLATE 31.
Chipped flint artifacts from the Kirkham Site; all from the midden
except g and j, which were found on the surface.

Plate 31

sions, however, have little significance, as a former owner of the
property reports that some years ago he removed seven feet of earth
from the top of the mound and distributed the same on its slopes.
Moreover, both the mound and surrounding field have been in cultivation for at least twenty-five years.

Disturbed Caddo burials were discovered by us on the northern
side of the mound but our investigation was concentrated on the
west end where plowing had exposed sherds belonging to the Marksville and Coles Creek complexes. Under our supervision, a crew of
men spent 152 working hours in excavating an area which had been
staked for a space of fifteen feet inward from the western extremity
of the mound. In each staked section the digging was carried down
to the base of the midden above referred to. Thus, the excavation,
which at the outer extremity was only a few inches deep, was continued inward until a maximum midden depth of 1/~ feet was
attained. As no evidence of the Caddo was found in this midden
area, a trench was extended farther inward in order that that part
of the midden directly below the Caddo superstructure could be
examined.

No evidences of vertical stratigraphy were apparent in the midden. However, Coles Creek sherds predominated at the outer extremity of the excavation, and decreased somewhat as the digging
was continued inward. As our work was confined to the slope and
we did not reach the center of the mound, it is possible that well
defined ceramic sequences may be determind in the future investiga.
tion which we expect to make at this site.
Large quantifies of mussel shells, some land snail shells, deer,
bear and bird bones abounded throughout the midden area excavated. Although mussel shells are frequently found in middens in
Arkansas, we have never before observed such an abundance as we
noted here. Incidentally, this species of pelecypoda thrives in the
neighboring stream, which in recent times has supported a minor
pearl fishing industry.
The only human remains found in the midden were a fragment
of the frontal bone of a skull and a part of a lower mandible. They
both belonged to an adult, but were found at different depths and
in different cuts.

Texas Archeologizal and Paleontological Society

144

In order to establish more conclusively through typological means
the relationship between the Kirkham Site and others which have
yielded evidence of the Marksville and Coles Creek complexes, the
collections gathered here by us are discussed according to the division of primitive industry to which they specifically belong.
Projectile Points

Large projectile points were found at all levels in the midden
down to tim base, a total of 47. Of these 41 are of the lozenge
shaped type, or slight variants therefrom (Plate 31, d, n, o, p, q, r,
s, t, u). Harrington5 described this type "as having the form of
two acute triangles, one of them truncated, placed base to base."
In the case of the variants, frequently the stem, which is slightly
constricted where it joins the blade, flares at the base; in several
cases, the specimens have barbs (Plate 31, e). The remaining points
from the midden consist of one with a single shoulder, or wing
(Plate 31, m), one with a slightly concave base (Plate 31, h), and
three deeply notched. The length of the points is from 3.6 cm. to
8 cm. No small points were found in the midden.
A surface collection of 80 large projectile points and three small
ones (Plate 31, j), was obtained on the site. This is directly contrasted by the finds both in graves and on the surface at the Crenshaw Place, where numerous small points have been found but
only one large arrowhead has been observed, and it from the surface. Seventy of the specimens from the surface are of Harrington’s lozenge shaped type (supra). One is also serrated. A triangular point is included in the surface collection. This form,
rare in the Red and Little Missouri areas, is plentifully distributed
in smaller specimens along the Mississippi and St. Francis Rivers
in Northeast Arkansas, and occurs in the larger point in the vicinity
of Hot Springs, as Harringtons has reported. Harrington also
illustrates large projectile points with concave bases taken by him
from the deep deposits at Site I, Hot Springs.7
The absence of small points in the midden seems significant.
~.

Harrington, M. R., "Certain Caddo Sites in Arhansav," Indian Notes and MonoHeye Foundation, 1920 ; p. 1~.
Idem. p. 202.

g’r~ph$,

6.
7.

Idem. Plates CXV, CXVL

Evidences of the Marksville aawI Coles Creek Complezes

145

Harrington has observed that they predoxninatc in Caddo graves,
although large ones are sometimes present, and that both types occur
on the surfaces. It has been suggested that the Caddo people may
have picked up the larger points which had been used by their predecessors and placed them in their graves as talismen. This theory,
however, leaves unexplained the fact that large points are frequently found in numbers on the surface of sites showing sherds
of the Caddo, but none of the Pre-Caddo complexes. It is possible
that some of the large points found in this area may have been used
by a non-ceramic group. Harrington found the large lozenge or
diamond shaped form in the lower layers of the Ozark Bluff shelters of Northwest Arkansas.9 Further research may throw additional light on the problem. A related form of projectile point is
represented in collections from Marksvillelo and also from the
Troyville Mounds.l 1
The great majority of the points obtained both in the excavation
and on the surface were made of novaculite, the remainder of chert.
Both materials occur in nodular form in gravel bars along the
neighboring river. However, the aboriginal quarries of novaculite
around Hot Springs may have been the source of some of this stone.
Other Chipped/trtl/acts
Two types of knives were foun~l in the midden: triangular (Plate
31, a, b, e), and oval or leabshaped (Plate 31, c); length 4.5 cm.
to 11 cm.; likewise a few scrapers made from flakes (Plate 31, k) ;
also a crude pointed implement, triangular in cross section (Plate
31, i) ; one broken T-shaped drill was found on the surface.
It has been impossible to classify two unusual shaped objects of
black chert illustrated in Plate 31, f and g; "f’" came from the
midden and "g" from the surface. A similar specimen is illustrated
by Harrington.I ~
8. Harrington, I~L 11~, "Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas," Indian Notes and ~onographs, Mus~um of the Ameri~n Indlan, H~e Foun~on, 1920 : ~. I~6.
9. HarHn~n,
~ri~. Vol. 26, ~o. I,
I0. ~ler, F. ~, "Pot~ of ~ Ho~well ~e t~m ~uisiana." P~ings,
U. ~ ~ational Munro, Yol. 82,
~, ~ 118, 1936; Pl. 16, 2.
12. Harring~n, ~ ~, "Ce~tn Caddo Si~ in Ar~/’ Indian No~ ~d Mon~
g~phs, Mu~m of the American Indian, H~e Foundation, 19~0 ; ~. 20, b, page 2~.

146

Texas Arck~ologi~al and Paleontological So~q~ty

One celt (Plate 32, g) and two fragments of others were discovered in the ~nidden.

Green stone, probably quartzite, was the

material utilized.

The perfect specimen is 10.5 cm. long with a

blade 6 cm. wide.

This celt is somewhat different from those taken

from Caddo graves in Clark County, which are usually longer in
proportion to the width of the blade. It is of the rounded type, as
described by Harrington.13 Celts reminiscent of this one have
been found at the Troyville Mounds, Louisiana,in at the Renner
Site, Mi~ouri15 and also at the Turner Group, Ohio.16 At the
last mentioned place but few celts and no grooved axes were
found. 17
Careful examination of both surface and midden material failed
to yield any evidence of the use of grooved axes. Their absence
is paralleled at the Crenshaw Place and at sites in the Bayou Macon
area of Arkansas. In this connection, it is interesting to note that
grooved axes have not been reported from Marksville. According
to Shetrone they are not associated with the Hopewell culture.~8
Wedel, however, reports them from the Missouri Hopewellian
site. 19
A portion of a chipped double bitted and notched axe was found
in the midden. This specimen is of black quartzite. Such axes occur
throughout Southwest Arkansas and are also found in Oklahoma,
13. Harrington, H. tL, "Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas," Indian Notes and
Monographs, Museum ot the American Indian, Heye Foundation, 1920 : p. 206.
- 14. Walker, ~’. M., "The Troyville Mounds, Catahoula Pariah, La.," Report of the
Bureau of American Ethnology No. 113, I936 ; PL 16, "b".
16. Wedel, W, R., "Hopewellian Remains Near Kansas City~ Missouri," Procee~
inga of the United Statca National Museum, VoL 36, No~ 3045, 1938 ;
16. Willoughby. C. C., ’"Turner Group of Earthworks, Hamilton Co., Ohio," Faper~
of the Peabody Museum of American Archeology and EthnologT, Harvard University,
VoL VIII, No. 3, Cambridge, Mass., 1922 : Fig. 45, p. 89.
17. Idem. 1). 89.
18. Shetrone, H. C., "Exploration ot the Hopewell Group of Prehistoric Earthworks," Ohio State Archeological and Historical Quarterly, 35. :No. 1. 1926 ; p. 119.
19. Wedel. W. It.. "Hopewellian Remains ~ear Kansas City, Mia~ouri," Proceedings of the United States National Museum, VoL 86, No. 3045, 1938; p. IO3.

PLATE 32.
Ground stone objects from the Kirkham Site: a and b, fragments
of boatstones, and e, a boatstone, all from the midden; f, a boatstone
from the surface; c, fragment of stone bowl from midden; d, gorget
from midden; g, celt from midden; l, notched ax from surface.

Plate

Evidences of th~ Marksvill¢ and Coles Creek Camplexes

149

where Thoburn has classified them as hoes.2o Harrington found
no notched axes in Caddo graves in Arkansas,zl nor have we discovered any, although they are found on campsites which apparently
are of that culture.
A polished axe of this type (Plate 32, h) was found in the field
just east of the midden in 1933.
sures 8.4 cm. by 5 cm.

It is of brown quarLzite, and mea-

Such specimens are of infrequent occur-

renee in this area.

Stone Vessel
In cut 5, section 2, a fragment of the wall of a pecked but unpolished limestone bowl (Plate 32, c) was found. The vessel apparently had walls less curved than the semi-spherical stone bowls
Shetrone illustrates from the Hopewell earthworks.22 The prehistoric peoples of this area rarely used stone vessels. Harrington,
however, figures a broken limestone bowl from Ozan, ~empstead
County, Arkansas,23 and several years ago a complete steatite vessel was plowed up on the J..S. Briggs Place, on Black Bois d’Arc
Creek, about nine miles south of Ozan. Steatite was used in the
manufacture of bowls in the Bayou Macon district near Floyd,
Louisiana. Moore found several fragments of soapstone pots at
Poverty Point,2~ and a number of others to our knowledge have
l~en obtained from that site.
Problematical and Ornamen~d Stone ,4rti/act~
The midden refuse explored by us contained a broken gorget and
fragments of two boatstones. The gorget (Plate 32, d), triangular
in shape, is of slate and has a perforation which had been drilled
from both sides. It is 7 cm. by 4.8 cm. This is not an unusual
form for Arkansas.
One of the boatstones (Plate 32, a) is of syenite while the other
20. Moorehcad. W. K., "Archeology of the Arkansas River Valley," Yale Unive~ity
Prt~¢, 1981 ; p. 7o.
21. Harrington, M. IL, "Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas," Indian Notes and
graphs, Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, 1920 ; p. 208.
22. Shetrone, H. C., "Exploration of the Hopewell Group of Prehistoric EarUrworks,’~ Ohio State Archeologlcal and Historical Quarterly, 88, No. 1, 1926, Figs.
and 57, p. 130.
23. Harrington, M. R., "Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas," :Indian Notes and
Monographs, Museum of the American indian, Heye Foundation, 1920 ; I~L CXXVI, d.
24. Moore, Clarence B., "Some Aboriginal Sites in Louisiafia and Arkanstts," Jour~
nal of the Academy of Natural Sciencea, Phlla., Vol. XVI, p. 70.

150

Texas Areheologica$ a~xl Paleon~ologioa.l Society

(Plate 32, b) is of breccia. The latter is too fragmentary for de[inite determination as to shape but its hollow base and polished
convex surface suggest Patterson’s Variety IX.z5 The former apparently belongs to Variety XXVIII.26 It is 6.5 cm. high, and has
a cavity 1 cm. deep. The walls are rather thick and the sides
slightly convex." The keel is 5 mm. in width.
A boatstone (Plate 32, f) of this same variety was found on the
surface of this midden, in 1906. It is also illustrated by Patterson.27 Its base is 8 cm. long and 3 cm. wide; the sides are convex,
and the keel is 6 ram. in width. It is 3.8 cm. high and is of brown,
bedded quartzitic sandstone.
In 1932, a boatstone of Patterson’s Variety XXVI120 was dis.
covered while a shallow trench was being dug in the northwestern
slope of the midden (Plate 32, e). This specimen is unusually well
made and has a deep basal cavity. The walls are thin, and am
polished on both exterior and interior. The base is 9.2 cm. long with
a maximum width of 3 cm. The keel is 1.2 cm. wide. The stone
is 4.3 cm. high, and appears to have been made of quartzite.
Boatstones have been reported from Marksville,29 trom Coles
Creek Burials at the Crenshaw Place,30 and from the surface of a
Deasonville-Marksville-Coles Creek site in the Arkansas Bayou Macon area,31 but [he number found at the Kirkham site is surprising
when the general rarity of this type of artifact is considered.
2~. Patterson, J. T., "Boat Shaped Artifaeta of the Gulf Southwest States," Ano
thropolo~clcal Papers, VoL 1, No. 2, Bureau of Research in the Social Scienec~0 Study
No. 24, UniversiW of Texas, Auguat 22, 1937, p. 20,
26. Idem. p. 33.
27. Idem. p. 106, Fig. 108.
28. Patterson, J. T., ’~Boat Shaped ~Artitaets of the Gulf Southwest States," Anthropological Papers, VoL 1, No. 2, Bureau of ~rch in the Social Sotenves, Study
No. 24, University ot Texas, August 22, 1937 ; p. 33.
29. Ford. J. A., "Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
~Misaissippi," Anthropological Study No. 2, Department of Conservation, Louisiana
~lo~i~ Su~-¢ey; p, 229, New Orleaus, 1936.
30. Lemle~, Harry J., "Discoverie~ Indicating a Pre-Caddo Cultur~ on Red River
in Arkansas." Bulletin. Te~s Arsheologieal and Paleontological Society, VoL 8, pp.
~4 and 39 ; Abilene. Texas. September, 1936.
31. L~rnley, Harry Jo, and Dickinson, S. D., "Archcolo~ical Investigation on Bayou
Macon in Arkansas," Bulletin of the Texas Archcologisal and Paleontological SocietT,
Vol. 9, p. 30 : Abilene, Texas, 1937.

PLATE 33.
Bone and horn implements and a shell ornament (H) from the
Kirkham Site, all from the midden except H which was found on the
surface.

Plate 33

Evidence~ o[ $he Mwrksville and Col~s Creek Complexes

153

Bone mrd Horn Implements
In the midden also were four socketed projectile points of deer
antler; 10 antler tines; one deer ulna (Plate 33, k), presumably
used in flaking; one cylinder of antler; and seven bone awls. The
projectile points (Plate 33, i, 1), the first to he reported from
Southwest Arkansas, are similar to specimens from Marksville,32
but differ somewhat from those obtained at the Renner Site, which
have a single basal tang.33 However, two of the antler fines (Plate
33, b) do have the single triangular basal tang, which the tines from
the Missouri Hopewellian site lack.3’~ The cylinder (Plate 33, e)
is also comparable to one illustrated by Wedel.35 One end of the
specimen has been rounded slightly and polished. It was found at
a depth of 3 feet in Gut 7, Section 2. The awls (Plate 33, c, d, f, g,
m), which range in length from 4 to 13 cm., occurred at depths of
from 2 to 4 feet.
Shell /lrti]act
When the abundance of shells in the refuse is considered, it is surprising that no artifacts of shell were found. However, a perforated
shell ornament (Plate 33, h), made from the whorl of a large marine
shell, was found on the surface of this midden by one of the writers
in 1923.
P~pe$

Fragments of platform pipgs of clay with large stems, made of
brown paste were found both on the surface and within the midden
(Plate 34, e, t, g). These differ somewhat from those from Marksville by having a rounded instead of an elliptical base. In that t~:cy
are rounded, they are similar to the long stemmed pipes found by
Harrington36 and Moore~7 in tim Red River Valley and also to
those discovered both in the Caddo and Pre-Caddo burials at the
Crenshaw Place.38
32. Setzler, F. M., ’Tottery of the Hopewell Type from Louisiana," Proceedings
U. S. National Museum, VoL 82, Art. 22. 1933 : PL 6.
33. Wedel, W. R~, "Hopewellian 11emains Near Kansas City, Mo.," Proceedings
U, S. National Museum, Vol. 86, No~ 3045. 1938 ; "D", PL 4.
34. Idem. "G"o PI. 4.
35. Idem. "F", PL 4.
~6. Hatting,ton, M. 1L, "Certain Caddo Sites in Arkanaas," Indian lq’ote~ and Monographs, Heye Foundation, 1920, PL CL
37. Moore, C. B., "Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River," Journal of the Academy
of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1912, p. $49.
38. Lemley, Harry J., "Discoveries Indicating a Pro-Caddo Culture on Red River
in Arkansa~," Bulletin, Texas Archeologtcal and Paleontological Society, Vol. 8, September, 1936, Abile’ne, Texas; pp. 35, 46, 50, 53, 54, 55.

154

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Pottery
Large numbers of sherds were obtained from the midden. All
were from pots and bowls and none from bottles, as was the case in
the Pre-Caddo levels on the Crenshaw Place. Beakers, jars and
bowls were represented. We have segregated for intensive study
those sherds possessing special significance such as rims, bases and
decorations. As the decorative motives have previously been used
as the prime distinguishing features of the Marksville and Coles
Creek ceramic complexes, we further divided the significant sherds
into two groups, consisting of the plain and decorated ones, which
are discussed under their respective headings:
UNDECORATED

WARE

Rims
No attempt has been made to distinguish between the Marksville
and Coles Creek wares represented by 197 plain rim sherds, for they
form, as a whole, a rather homogeneous group. The sherds vary
from 4 ram. to 1 cm. in thickness. The color of the paste ranges
from black, brown, and gray to buff and red. This last color is
probably a local variation due to environmental resources, for red
pastes, with one exception, were not noted in the Pre-Caddo ware
from the Crenshaw Site and they have not been reported from the
Marksville and Coles Creek sites in Louisiana and Mississippi.
Slips are rarely present. Two sherds with red washes were found
on the surface of the midden, but they could be Caddoan. Reference
is made elsewhere in this paper to the intentional application of a
red slip to decorated ware.
In order that the temper could be determined 26 undecorated
sherds were sent to the Ceramic Repository for the Eastern United
States, where Frederick R. Matson, Jr., kindly examined them. According to Matson, 23 of the specimens contained appreciable quantifies of white temper, but the others had little aplastic. Three
sherds, typical of the group of 23, were selected for microscopic
examination. Of them, Matson reports:.
PLATE 84.
Ceramics from the Kirkham Site: a and b, decorated sherds from
vessel bases, and c, d and h, rim sherds, all from the midden; e, f,
and g, pipe stems; e and f from the midden, g from the surface.

Plate 34

Ev~dence~ of $he Marksville and Coles Cre~ Camplexe~

157

"The white aplastic is tuff or volcanic glass. In many fragments
the bubbles are elongated and the flow structure is apparent. Some
pieces are slightly devitrified, particularly the bubble areas. The
tuff is pale brown in color when viewed in transmitted light."
"The tuff varies in size from minute particles to pieces 3 ram. in
length. Few fragments are less than 0.05 mm. long."
"Quartz; clear and angular, is the dominant ~nineral in the thin
sections. It has a maximum length of 0.15 ram., with an average
length of about 0.11 ram. This indicates that the clay is sandy in
texture, but due to the fineness of the quartz particles, the clay might
not feel very gritty when it was worked. Due to the large amount
of quartz present, it hardly seems likely that it was necessary to
add the tuff to the paste as an aplastic to reduce drying shrinkage
or make the clay less sticky when it was worked. It would seem
probable that the tuff was added for some traditionaI reason."
Tuff occurs at the diamond mines near Murfreesboro, Pike Co.,
Arkansas, which is approximately 35 miles north of the Kirkham
Site. The Little Missouri River flows by these volcanic deposits,
consequently there is the possibility that the tuff had been transported downstream and was deposited on river bars where the
potters might have found it.
A microscopic study was also made of one of the sherds which
did not contain tuff. l:t had quartz, which seemed to be native to
the clay. The same clay appeared to have been used in both groups
of sherds, although it varied in texture. In the case of the sandy
clay no aplastic was needed. Tuff, however, was added to the finer
grained kaolin.39
There are no indications that the pottery was manufactured by
other than the coiled process. Traces of the clay ropes can still be
seen on the inner walls of some sherds where the smoothing was
incomplete. In one instance, a sherd, which had broken along the
lines of the original coil, shows the width of the rope. It is 9 mm.
thick and 1.2 cm. high. The bottom of the old coil is concave
while the top is flat.
39. Frederick l~ Matron, Jr., Personal Correspondence, July 28, 1939 : The ~mic
R~ist~ for the ~ Uni~ S~t~, Unive~i~ Mu~ms Building, Ann Ar~r,
Michi~n.

158

Texas Archeologi~al and Pat~on~ologica~ So~i~y

Most of the sherds have been more carefully smoothed on the
exterior than on the inner wall. Comparatively few, however, have
any indications of the polish that is present on some of the decorated specimens. Generally, the ware is compact, but can be
scratched with the finger nail. Eight sherds were perforated. In
each instance the holes were drilled after the vessel had been fired.
At a depth of one foot in Cut 6, Section 2, we discovered a sherd
of a small, flat bottomed bowl, the dimensions and curvature of
which enabled us to complete the vessel for~n in plaster. The bowl,
as reconstructed, is 8 cm. high and has a basal diameter of 6 cm.
and an oral one of 13.5 cm. (Fig. b, Plate 35). (These dimensions,
which are based on the extension of the sherd curvatures, are open
to question). The paste is gray in color, and the rim, which has a
rounded lip, slopes outward slightly. Two centimeters below the
rim there is a horizontal groove, semi-circular in cross section and
approximately" 2 cm. wide, that encircles the vessel. It is paralleled
on the interior wall of the bowl by a corresponding convex ridge.
This groove is reminiscent of a somewhat similar one below the rim
of a jar from Marksville,’~O and also of the plain, constricted necks
of three vessels from the Renner site.’~I
We have classified the rim sherds as follows:
Rims with incurved walls: (Plate 36, a, b, c). These evidently
belonged to bowls. Ninety-seven of tho seventy-seven that comprise
this group have rounded lips; the remaining twenty are flattened.
In some instances the lips have ragged edges which extend beyond
the rim walls as if the potter, while smoothing the rim, had pressed
the clay, causing it to spread. These projections usually are from
1 to 2 mm_ wide. Six of the rounded rims have an inward projection of the lip and eight have an exterior one; three of the flat rims
possess the exterior extension and one, the inner projection.
Rims having a straight ext~rlor wall: (Plate 36, d, e, f, g, h).
40. Setzler, F. M.0 "Pottery of the Hopewell Type from Louisiana," Proceedings
U. S. National Museum, Vol. 82, Art. 22, PL 1 : 1933.
41. Wedel, W. R., "Hopewellian Remains Near Kansas City, Missouri," Procee~
ing~, U. S. National Museum, VoL 86, Noo 3045 ; 1938.

PLATE 35.
Reconstructed vessels from the midden on the Kirkham Site.

Plate 35

Evidences of the Marksville and Coles Greek Gomple~es

161

Many of these sherds also have a straight inner wall while there
are others which have slightly curving ones. In the latter group the
sherd wall attains its greatest thickness at the point of inflection,
from which it then decreases before terminating with the round or
flat lip. Although Ford has described a Coles Creek rim type which
has this same profile, we hesitate to place these sherds in a classification separate from those which have both straight outer and inner
wails, because the curvature of the sherds that we have studied is
extremely slight, and we have had no specimens from Louisiana with
which to compare them. Furthermore, the inflection generally
occurs about 2 cm. below the rim lip of the Kirkham sherds, while
those discussed by Ford are thickest approximately I inch from the
lip.’~2 This type, as described in Ford’s ,4nalysis o/Indian Village
Site Collections /rom Louisiana and Mississippi, also has flat but
not rounded lips, and no reference is made to the presence of lip
projections such as so~netimes occur on both rounded and flat rims
from the Kirkham midden. Our collection of rims with straight
exterior walls includes fifty-three with rounde& lips and forty-seven
with flat ones. Of the former group, six have exterior projections
and three have interior extensions. Three of the flat lips possess
the interior projections and ten have the exterior projections, while
two lips are slightly extended over both the inner and exterior walls
of the sherds. These rims probably belonged to beakers and jars.
The size of the sherds indicates both large and small vessels. One
large sherd appears to be quite similar to two from Mound 4 at
Marksville.’~3
Flared rims: Twelve of the twenty discovered had flat lips (Plate
36, i), the remaining eight were rounded (Plate 36, j). One of the
latter has an external projection while three of the former group
have exterior extensions, and one has an inner projection. These
rims belonged to bowls and jars. Some of the rims broke at the
point of juncture with the body. The height of the rims from this
juncture to the lip varies from 1 to 5.8 cm. One rim (Plate 36, k)
especially merits attention because of its compound flare which is
more pronounced on the interior than on the exterior wall.
42. Ford, J. A,, "Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
Mississippi," Anthropological Study 1~o. 2, Department of Conservation, Louisiana
Geological Survey, p. 178 ; New Orleans, 1936.
48° Setzler, F. M., "’Pottery of the Hopewell Type from Louisiana," Preceeding~
Uo S~ National Museum, Vol. 82, Art. 22. PI. 4, h ; 1933.

162

Texas Arch~ologizal a~nd Paleontological Society

Thickened rims: Only two of this type were discovered.

One was

a common Coles Creek rim (Plate 36, L) which had been thickened
by the addition of a strap of clay to the exterior walt. Its lip was
rounded.

The other specimen (Plate 36, m) is unique in the col-

lection from the midden and unlike any figured by Ford. The incurving rim narrows 8 rnm. below the flattened top. From this
constriction the outer wall rises to form a right angle with the lip,
while the interior wall curves even farther inward and upward to
meet the lip.
Vessel Bases

As square and round bases are common both to Marksville and
Coles Creek wares they are treated here as a unit. Of 184, found
in the midden, 137 were round and 47 were square. Four of the
latter had rudimentary feet while 40 of the round ones had basal
constrictions. Although reference has been madein various publications to the rudimentary feet of certain Marksville and Coles Creek
vessels, basal constrictions have not been reported, insofar as the
writers have observed. This constriction seems to have been formed
by first coiling the base and then beginning the body walls within
rather than on top of the outermost coil of the vessel bottom. Occasionally this outside coil is thicker than the remaining part of the
base, thereby forming a sort of rudimentary pedestal. The majority
of the round bases, however, are flat on the lower side and slightly
concave on the upper. Only two have a convex upper surface.
The round and square bases vary in thickness frown 8 ram. to 2.5 cm.
Although we are at this point concerned with the undecorated
ware, we do not deem it inappropriate to refer to the extremely elementary decorations on three round bases. One of these has a single
curving incised line on its lower surface (Plate 34, b), another has
two parallel curving lines on the lower side, while the third has a
line incised on both lower and upper surfaces (Plate 34, a).
Decorated Ware

Among the sherds found in the midden, the decorated pieces, as
PLy. TE 36.
Profiles of rim sherds from the Kirkham Site.
that of the exterior of the vessel).

(The right wall is

-J

-3

<:

Plate 36

Evld~.~es of the Marksvill~ and Coles C~’~ek Complexes

165

one would expect, constitute the minor but more significant group.
In order to establish more clearly the relationship between the pottery of the Kirkham midden and that of other lower Mississippi
sites that have yielded Marksville and Coles Creek wares, we have
deemed it advisable to utilize the same typology that Ford has devised for his classification of the decorations of these ceramic complexes,’~’~ and in this connection are using his numerical formulas
followed by type names which he informs us he is using in connection with a revision of his typology into broader ceramic groups.’~5
Marksville Complex
Type

31;23;2
(Marker type)u"Churupa Punctated." These
73
sherds have broad, curving bands filled with punctations and are
separated from plain smoothed ones by wide, deeply incised lines.
The punctations were made either with a hollow reed held at an
angle of fifteen or twenty degrees or else with a pointed tool which
was gouged slightly into the clay, creating an elliptical incision. In
instances where a hollow instrument was used, tiny clay projections
remain in the deep end of the punetation.
At depths from 1½ to 2 feet in Cut 4, Section 2, a number of
decorated sherds of this type were discovered. They all apparently
belonged to the same vessel as the traits of manufacture and decoration were similar. Furthermore, it was possible to cement some of
the sherds together in order to form three larger pieces (Plate 37,
b, d, e). It was, however, impossible to reconstruct the jar. The
vessel walls sloped outward and upward to a shoulder where they
curved inward and up to form a straight rim with rounded lip. The
rim was not thickened as were some of the specimens of this type
collected by Ford.’~ts The paste is brown. The interior wall has
been blackened by contact with fire, whereas the exterior wall ranges
in color from burnt sienna to deep umber. The punctated bands are
arranged across the body of the vessel and meet the rim at certain
points. Unfortunately, no portion of the base of the jar was dis44. Ford, $. A., "Anslysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
Mississippi," Anthropological Stud~’ l~Io. 2. Department of Conservation, Louisiana
Geologlca] Survey, New Orleans, 19~6.
41;. Ford, J. A., Personal correspondence, Febroar~’-March, i939.
46.
Ford, $. A., "Analysis of Indian Vii|age Site Collections from Louisiana snd
Mississippi," Anthropological Study l~Io. 2, Dept, of Conservation, La.0 Geological Survey, p. 221, Hew Orleans, 1936.

166

Texa~ Arch~ologi~ and Pal¢ontologi~a~l Society

covered so it is impossible to determine if it was decorated also, as
some of the vessels of this type described by Ford were.z~7 One of
the punctated bands (Plate 37, d), begins at the rim lip and extends
downward to the vessel shoulder where it curves back and terminates before reaching the rim again. This is rather reminiscent of
a roughened hook-shaped figure which occurs on a bowl excavated
by Squier and Davis in a Hopewell mound in Ohio.~8 The design
on the latter specimen, however, is suspended from a horizontal band
just below a row of punctations that encircle the vessel orifice.
Ford considers the plain areas on this type of Marksville ware as
the background, and the punctated bands as the decoration.49 While
we hesitate to differ on any point with one who is an authority on
the Hopewellian manifestations in the Lower Mississippi Yalley, we
wish to point out the fact that the bird on the Hopewell vessels is
plain while the subordinate areas are roughened. If the plain bands
on much of the decorated Marksville ware are conventionalizations
of the bird, as a sherd to be discussed under Type 45;23;6 would
indicate, then the roughened areas are still the background.
In contrast to the carefully executed lines of the type treated by
Ford, the sherds of this vessel show incisions with ragged edges.
The entire execution of the design gives an impression of bald work
done quickly and carelessly. In two instances the potter has placed
additional clusters of punctations within the bands which are predominantly smooth.
One rim sherd (Plate 37, o), which occurred at a depth of three
feet in Cut 8, Section 2, has a horizontal band of small elliptical
punctations. The roughened area is separated from the plain bands
by smooth incised lines that are semi-circular in cross section, but
are not as wide as those customarily found on Marksville ware. The
outer wall of the sherd is straight while the interior wall curves
47. Idem.
48. Squier and Davis, ’,Ancient ]tlountaius of the Misst~ippi Vallr~y," from Smith~nian Contributions, No. I, PL XLVI, Facv P. 189 ; Bartlett and Welford, :New York ;
1848.
49. Ford, J. A., "Analysl~ of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
~is~itmippi," Anthrol~ologtcal Study :No. 2, Dept. of Conservation, La., Geologicttl
Survey, p. 220.

PLATE 37.
Sherds of the ~Iarksville complex from the Kirkham Site.

Plate 37

Evidences o] th~ M~rksville and Coles Creek Complexes

169

slightly inward, creating a slightly thickened rim which has a flat
lip.

The lip is notched.

This sherd is evidently a variant, for Ford

states that rims of Type

31;23;2
that are straight and not thick’
73
ened, occasionally are notched.SO Both walls of this sherd arc
nicely finished. The paste is gray.

Type 45;23;6 (Marker type)--"Yokena Incised"; there are
thirty.one of these sherds. The decoration consists of bands formed
by deeply incised, wide lines that have been smoothed. Like the
Louisiana and Mississippi type, the lines are curvilinear in the
majority of cases. Only seven, in fact, have designs involving
angles. But these lines, in contrast to those described by Ford, are
widely spaced. Only four of these sherds have bands which are
narrower than the bordering lines. The width between the incisions
ranges from 3 ram. to 1.4 era.
Mr. F. M. Setzler, to whom was sent a sherd (Plate 38, g) having
angular panels separated by deeply incised lines, states that it may
represent the closely spaced incised line technique, but that the
spaces between the grooves are too wide for typical Marksville.Sl
Although no rim sherds of this type were found the body decoration seems to have been separated from the rim by horizontal parallel
lines (possibly two). The body sherds indicate both large and
small straight sided vessels, the former predominating. The smaller
pieces may have belonged to beakers, but the slight curvature of the
large sherds suggests that they belonged either to rectangular pots
or else to vessels having a rather large diameter. The paste is gray
or buff or reddish brown in color. The majority of these sherds,
which are from 5 to 8 ram. thick, have smooth but Unpolished surfaces.
Only two sherds have designs suggestive of the birds that face
each other on Hopewell ware. The better example (Plate 37, a) was
found at a depth of 2 feet in Cut 4, Section 2, where the decorated
Marksville sherds predominated. It is quite hard in texture and has
50. Ford, J. A., "Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
Mississippi," Anthropological Study No. 2, Department of Conservation, Louisiana
Ge~Ioglcal Survey, po 221.
61. Setzler, F. M., Personal correspondence, December, 19S8.

170

Texa~ Archeological and Paleon~ologica2 So~ie~y

a design beautifully executed.
In this conventionalization the
smooth bands, which fornl the bodies and heads of the birds, have
been merged with the vertical panel that usually separates them, as
is seen on a Hopewell vessel from the Mound City group, of
Ohio.52 The other sherd (Plate 38, i) has an incised design, composed of concentric triangles, which decoration is similar to that
on the lower part of a composite globular vessel from the Harness
mound group of Ohio.s3 A Marksville sherd, having the same
pattern but much better executed, was found by us on Bayou Macon
in Southeast Arkansas.5z~ By comparing these designs with the bird
motives (which Moore calls serpents) on a Marksville vessel from
Saline Point, Louisiana,S5 it would seem that the concentric triangles are a highly schematized version of the wings of the Hopewell
bird. The decoration on the sherd from the Kirkham midden is also
reminiscent of the grooved triangular areas in the decoration of a
bowl from the Marksville site.56 Ford illustrates a Louisiana sherd
having a design somewhat similar to ours but his specimen has a
punctation within the center of the innermost triangle.n7
In the trench hereinbefore referred to a thin sherd (Plate 38, h) of
gray paste was discovered at a depth of 21/~ feet. It bears a design
composed of concentric bands scparated by deep, smoothed grooves.
This is the only motif made up of concentric circles that was discovered in our excavations, although a number of other sherds,
placed in this group, have curving bands (Plate 38, f) which may
52. Setzler, F. M., "’Pottery of the Hopewell Type from Louisiana," U. S. National
Museum Proceedings, VoL 82, Art. 22, Fig. "A", Plate 7 ; 1933.
~3. Greenman, E. F,, "Hopewcllian Tralt~ in Florida," American Antiquity, VoL
111, No. 4, left drawing bottom row, Fig. 19, p. 328 ; April, 1938.
54. Lemley, Harry J,, and Dickinson, S. D.. "Archeological Investigations on
Bayou Maeon in Arkansas," ~econd sherd from left, second row from bottom, No. 2
Pl. 4, Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, VoL 9 ; September, 1937.
55. Mooro, C. B,, "Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River,*’ Journal Academy Natural
Sciences, Philadelvhia, Second Series, VoL XIV, Part 4, Fig. 6, P. 499 ; 1912.
56. Setzler, F, M.0 ’°A Phase of Hovewel! Mound Builders in Louisiana," Exploration and Field Work of the Srnithsonian Institution in 1933, Publication 3235, Washington, 1934 ; center of Fig. 46, p. 39.
57. Ford, J. A., "Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
Mississippi," Anthropological Study No. 2, Dept. of Conservation, Geological Survey,
New Orleans, La., Nov. 1, 1936; Sketch "N", Fig. 39. p. 211.

PLATE

38.

Sherds of the Marksville complex from the Kirkham Site, with the
exception of e, which is a sherd having ]~farksville characteristics
from ~he Jones Place, Terre Rouge Creek, Hempstead County, Arkansas.

Plate 38

Evidences of the Marksville and Coles Creek Ctrmple~es

173

or may not have been parts of circular designs. However, these,
like one figured by Ford,58 may have been parts of a very highly
schematized bird motif in which the body has been elongated and
convoluted somewhat like those in the decoration of a vessel found
by Moore at the Mayer Place, Louisiana.59
The collection from the Kirkham midden also includes one sherd
having a deeply incised spiral (Plate 38, j) which is very similar
to a Marksville sherd from the midden on the Peck Village site in
Louisiana.6o
Ford states that perforations are absent in Marksville ware.61
However, one perforated sherd (Plate 38, e), which was discovered
on the surface at the Kirkham site, has been classified as Marksvillian because of its decoration, which consists of plain bands separated by grooves. With reference to the perforations, it is interesting to note that two Hopewell v~ls from Ohio have holes through
the rims.62
23
Type 31; 101/102

; 1-2 (Marker type)--"Troyville Stamped":

Of these there are 8 body sherds and 1 rim. The decorative pattern
is made up of broad roughened bands separated from plain ones
by wide and deep incised lines. The roughening on 4 of the sherds
was done with a roulette (Plate 38, L), whereas a notched rocker
was used on the remainder. On both of these sub-types the roughening was executed after the vessels had dried sufficiently for the
impressions to be clear cut. Where the rocker was used (Plate 38,
b, c, k), the plain bands are as wide or slightly wider than the roughened ones; but on all the sherds which have rouletting the plain
bands and roughened panels are of the same width. The roughening on these potsherds, as in the case of the Louisiana sherds, is
close together, and covers the entire surface of the band, with one
58. Idem. "E", Fig. 42, p. 229.
59. Moore, C. B., "SOme Aboriginal Stte~ on Red Ri~’er," Journal Academy Natural
Sciences, Philadelphia, Second Series, VoL XIV, Part 4, Fig. 9, ~. 503.
60. Ford, J. A.o "Ceramic Decoration Setmcnce at an Old Indian Village Site near
Sicily Island, Louisiana," Anthropological Study No. 1o Department of Conservation,
La., Geo!ogical Survey, New Orleans, Au~., 1935 : T~rpe 12 a, extreme right, bottom,
PI. II, p. 35.
61. Ford, J. A., "Ceramic Decoration Sequence at an Old Indian Village Site Near
Sicily Island, Louisiana," Anthropological Study No. 1, Dept. of Conservation,
Geological Survey, New Orleans, La, ; Aug., 1935 : p. 25.
62. Setzler, F. M., °’Pottery of the Hol~ewell Type from Louisiana," Proceedings
U. S. Nat. Museum, Vol. 82, Art. 22, 1933 ; PL 7, B and D.

174

Texas A~’¢hvologlcal and Paleontological Society

exception. In that instance (Plate 33, a), irregularly spaced puncrations begin where the rocker work stops. Unfortunately, it has
been impossible to determine the shape of the vessels to which the
body sherds belonged. The potsherds vary in thickness from 5 to
7 ram. The paste is gray and brown while the exterior surface is
buff, reddish brown and gray in color. Three of the sherds of this
group were found on the surface; the others occurred at depths of
2 and 2 1-2 feet in Cuts 4 and 7, Section 2.
The finest specimen of this type (Plate 37, c) is the rim of a
beaker. The outer rim wall is straight while the inner one curves
slightly, like those previously discussed under the heading of undecorated ware. The design of plain bands and delicately rouletted
panels apparently covered the entire exterior surface of the vessel.
"Ilae smooth portion of the decoration is composed of convolutions
of double parallel bands instead of the single curvilinear panels
which usually occur. These plain bands are separated from each
other, as well as from the roughened areas, by the customary wide,
polished grooves. The double panels, which are plain, have their
counterpart in the decoration of a Hopewell vessel from LaPorte
County, Indiana.63 The unroughened parall,el panels on the latter
specimen, however, form part of a more elaborate decoration, which
is arranged differently. Although our sherd gives only an imperfect
conception of the complete decoration of the original vessel, the
convoluted plain bands were possibly arranged in perpendicular
rows. To the right of the curved parallel bands, just below the
rim and separated from it by the rouletted area, there is a part of an
elongated figure with square ends and concave sides, also composed
of smooth bands outlined by grooves. This figure is somewhat
reminiscent of the straight band that usually separates the birds in
the decoration of Hopewell vessels. Throughout the roughened
panels the rouletting is arranged parallel with the axis of the
panel.
Marksville variant: Two sherds having cross.hatched rims have
been placed under this heading, (Plate 38, m, n). They are related
84;28;9 , but lack the row of hemi-conical puntto Ford’s Type
73
tates below the cross-hatched areas.

Instead, there are two deeply

$3. Lilly, Eli, "Prehistoric Antiquities of India~,’° Indians Historical
Indianapolis, 1957 ~ p. 93.

Evidemces of the Ma~ksv~lle ¢nd Coles Creek Complexes

incised lines parallel with the rim lip.

175

The cross-hatching in both

cases is rather fine, and was done at an angle of forty-five degrees
from the rim lip, both traits of which are characteristic of Ford’s
type. Each rim is straight and has a slightly rounded lip. The rim
walls are 5 and 6 nm~. thick and are .smoothed but not polished.
The paste of one is gray and the other reddish brown. The limited
quantity of shards bearing this type of decoration at the Kirkham
Site is in keeping with Ford’s statement that it is "the least common
of the Marksville types.’’6’*
Coles Creek Complex

Type 61;24; 6 (Marker Type)---"Coles Creek Incised": The 3
rim sherds discovered, of whid~ 2 are illustrated (Plate 39, a, e,),
belonged to bowls with flattened ri~ns. The decoration consists of
closely spaced overhanging incised lines that begin just below the
lip. Two of the specimens have 6 lines and the other has 4. The
sherds with the greater number of lines have slightly incurring
walls, while the wails of the third are straight. The paste is gray.
Their thickness varies from 5 ram. to 1.1 cm. One of these sherds
came from a depth of 2 feet in Cut 4, Section 2, while the remaining 2 were found in Cuts 5 and 7 in Section 1.
61;24;6; "Coles
Creek Incised": But one sherd of this
Type
81;21 -type was found (Plate 39, d). Apparently this rim sherd was part
of a jar. Two incised overhanging lines are close together near the
rim lip, which they parallel. Within the lip there are two incised
encircling lines. The exterior wall of the rim is straight but slopes
inward, while the interior one, which is thickened, forms a right
angle with the rim lip. This rim attains a maximum thickness of
1.5 cm. The potsherd, which was especially well finished, has a
brown paste and darker surfaces.
Type 61;24/21;8 (Marker Type)--"Coles Creek Incised": There
are 2l rims of bowls and beakers (Plate 39, b, m, p). One specimen
has curved walls, while, some of the others have straight exterior and
interior walls, and the remainder have straight exterior but curving
interior walls. The rims range in thickness from 5 mm to 1
Ford, J. A~. "Analysis ot Indian Village Site Collection8 from Louls|ana and
Mi~luippi," An~logi~l S~ No. 2, ~pL of ~n~a~on, ~u~ia~ ~logSu~. N~ Orl~s, ~, Nov. 1, 19$6 ; p. ~,

Texas Arch~ological and Pa~ontologic~ Society

176

Only 2 are thickened. The paste is buff, gray and brown, and
tempered with both shell and grit. Both overhanging lines and
those incised with a pointed instrument were used as the decoration. Although Ford includes only specimens having 1 or 2 lines
in this decorative type,t~5 we take the liberty to extend this same
classification to include our specimens that have more than 2 lines.
Some of them in fact have 5 lines, all of which are parallel with
the rounded rim. The incisions in some cases are close together,
while in others they are comparatively far apart. Because of their
mediocre finish and poorly done motives, these potsherds seem to
be more similar to those Coles Creek sherds found on Deasonville
sites, which Ford states were carelessly executed, irregularly spaced
and often executed with a point.66
Type

61;24;8
; "Coles Creek Incised": Five of the fifteen
81;21
sherds of this type (Plate 39, c) have two overhanging lines; the
remaining number have but one. All of these lines were incised
parallel with the riln. The lines on the five sherds first mentioned
are from i to 1.8 cm. apart. In this connection, Ford states that
the lines of this decorative type "are either closely spac~d or are
more than a quarter of an inch apart.’’67 These sherds also have
either one, two, or three encircling lines incised in the rim lip.
Sherd thickness ranges from 5 to 9 mm. The paste is gray, buff
and brown in color. Some have polished surfaces. Most of these
rims belonged to shallow wide-mouthed bowls. One (Plate 39, k),
however, was probably part of a beaker similar to Vessel V-1401
from Pit 9, Mound B. Crenshaw Place.6~
Type 81; 21/25: These fifteen sherds have a flattened rim lip
in which an encircling line has been incised with a pointed tool.
One rim only has been thickened; and there is no indication of
65.
Ford, J. A., "’Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
Mi~sisslppi." Anthrovological Study No. 2, Dept. of Conservation, Louisiana Geological
Survey, New Orleans, L~. Nov. 1, 1936 ; p. 181.
66.
Ford, J. A., "Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections.from Louisiana and
Mississippi," Anthropological Study ]No. 2. Dept. of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Sorvey, New Orleans, La., Nov. I, 1936, p. 181.
67.

Idern. p.

182.

68.
Lemley, Harry J., "Discoveries Indicating a Pre-Caddo Culture on Red River
in Arkansas," lh~lletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. VoL 8,
Abilene, Texas, 1936 ; Plate 8, No. 2.

PLATE 39.
Sherds of the Coles Creek complex from the Kirkham Site.

Plate 39

Evidences of $he Mark~vi~le and Coles Creek Com, pl~xes

179

the use of punctates, nor lugs, such as Ford mentions in connection
with this type69.

The walls of twelve of the sherds rise straight

to the lip, while those of two others curve; the latter belonged to
bowls.

The remaining rim (Plate 39, g) may have belonged to a

pot having a slightly constricted neck, such as vessel V-1440 from
Mound D, Crenshaw Site.7o The sherds are from 5 to 8 nun. thick
and have buff and bro,.~ colored paste.
Coles Creek Variants: A group of 31 incised body sherds has
been placed under this heading, because the motives are insufficient
for the determination of the specific type of Coles Creek ware to
which they belong. Each potsherd is decorated with a series of
parallel straight lines. The number of lines on each piece ranges
from 1 to 8, although this means comparatively little as the decorated fragment is only a part of a larger pattern. Eleven of the
sherds have overhanging lines, while the incisions on the remainder
were done wi~h a pointed tool. ~The lines are both fine and large,
and both neatly and carelessly executed. Spaces betwcen the lines
vary from 5 ram. to 1 cm. The paste is buff, gray and brown. The
sherds are from I ram. to 2.3 cm. thick.
From a depth of 1 foot in Cut 5, Section 1, we removed portions
of a globular shaped bowl (Plate 35, a), which has been reconstructed by the addition of plaster. Its paste is gray. The tempering, unfortunately, could not be positively determined. Both the
exterior and interior surfaces of the vessel had been smoothed; the
exterior, darker in color than the interior, was finished more carefully. The rim lip had been rounded. The vessel, as restored is
11 cm. high, has a basal diameter of 10 cm. and an oral diameter
of 17 cm. Four mm. below the rim and parallel with it, are 2
deeply incised lines 2 cm. apart. Suspended at irregular intervals
from the lower line are groups of slightly curving lines that were
poorly incised. These vary from 2 to 4 cm. in length.
The only decorated sherd having a red slip was discovered in Cut
5, Section 1 (Plate 40, a). It evidently belonged to a bowl, the
69. Ford, ,l. A., "Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana Bnd
Mississippi," Anthropological Study No. 2, Dept. of Conservation, Louisiana Geological
Survey, New Or]cans, La. l’¢ov. I, 1936 : p. 188.
"/0. Lemley, Harry g.. "Discoverle~ Indicating a Pro-Caddo Culture on Red River
in Arkansas," Bulletin of the Texas Areheologlcal and Paleontological Society, ~o~ S,
Abilene, Texas, 19~6 ; p. 43.

180

Texas Archeologlcal and Paleontological Society

inner wall of which curved up to a flat rim lip; the lip has the
usual incised encircling line.
larly spaced notches.

The outer edge of the rim has regu-

Eight m~n. below the rim lip there is a shal-

low channel or constriction that encircled the original vessel. The
34;21;1-2
sherd’s paste, like Type 111/28 in central Louisiana,71 is slatyblue in color.
Unclassi]ied Decorated Ware

Three body sherds, the exterior surfaces of which had been
brushed with some fibrous material, correspond to Type 11;41 of
Ford’s "Unrelated pottery’’7a grouping. They have a brown compact paste tempered with grit, and were roughly finished. Each
sherd is 6 ram. thick. The type of vessel to which they belonged
could not be determined, but the Caddo brush decorated vessels are
chiefly pot forms. A carbonized deposit, which remains on both the
exterior and interior walls of one of the sherds, points toward the
use of this type of vessel for culinary purposes.
One rim sherd of a semi-spherical bowl (Plate 40, b) has a design which is suggestive of the meanders on some Coles Creek vessels. The sherd, however, is not sufficiently large for definite determination since but two parallel arcs with additional lines, diagonally incised at each side, remain. The curving bands are outlined
by incised lines. The inflection of the upper curve is 1 cm. below
the rim lip, which is flat and Levelled inward. The sherd is 7 mm.
thick. Its paste is gray, as is the interior wall, while the exterior
wall is buff mottled with black. This specimen was found at a
depth of 2 feet in Cut 4, Section 2.
Another rim sherd of a bowl (Plate 40, c) has a design somewhat
similar to the one last described, although the curves are more contracted and the diagonal lines are missing. This buff colored sherd
has a flat rim lip, and is 5 mm. thick.
One sberd (Plate 40, d), having an incomplete decoration of corn71, Ford, J. A., "Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
Mississippi," Anthropological Study No. 2, Department of Conservation, Louisiar,a
Geological Survey, New Orleans, La., ~qov. 1, 1936 p.
72. Those ceramic types that are not of diagontstie character. Ford, g. A.,
alysis o! Village Site Collections from Louisiana and lttississtppi,°’ Anthropological
Study No. 2, Dept. of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, New Orleans,
Nov., 19360 p. 242.

Evidences of $he M~rksville a.nd Coles Creek Cample~e~

181

pressed and interlocked scrolls, was discovered in Cut 2, Section 1.
The deep lines, incised with a pointed instrument, have ragged
edges. Possibly this decoration is a variation of the compressed
meander of some of the Coles Creek types, but there is no indication of cross-hatching or punctates.
A flared rim of brown paste (Plate 40, e) has a motif that is
slightly suggestive of stamped work. Unfortunately, our photograph
is not sharp enough to show this design. Just below the flattened
and slightly extended rim lip there is a row of diagonal panels
raised a little above the intervening spaces. These panels are approximately 5 mm. wide and 1 era. long. Vessels having stamped
motives have never been reported from Arkansas, although earthenware tablets, that may have been used in stamping pottery, were
found by us in the Bayou Macon area of Arkansas.73
In Cut 7, Section 2 at depths of 2 1-2 and 3 feet two sherds, having
a decoration of lines and punctates, were discovered (Plate 40, f).
Apparently they belonged to the same vessel for they both were of
buff paste and 7 ram. thick. It was, however, impossible to fit them
together. In Cut 6, Section 2, we had found another fragment having
a break corresponding to that of one of these pieces. A few other
sherds were found under similar conditions throughout the exacavation, and it is possible that the material present in the slope of this
midden had been deposited as talus or else the aborigines had scattered the broken vessels at random over an irregular surface. Although it cannot be positively determined, the decoration of the
sherds under consideration seems to have consisted of nested isosceles
triangles alternately inverted below a notched rim. Every other
triangle was filled with large punctations made by holding an instrument at an oblique angle. The intervening ones were filled
with straight lines parallel with one of the sides of its triangle.
These sherds seem to be related to Type:

51;21;11 of Ford’s
71
unrelated pottery group74, although their punctations, in contrast
to those discussed by him, are arranged in regular rows, and the
73. Lemley, Harry J., and Dickinson, S. D., "Areheological Investigations on Bayou
Macon in Arkansas," Bulletin of Texas Areheologieal and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 9, Abilene, Texas. Sept., 1937. p. 38.
74. Ford. J. A.. "Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
Mississippi." Anthrol~ological Study No. 2, Dept. of Conservation, La. Geological Survey. New Orleans, La., Nov. 1, 1936 : p. 245,

Texa,~ Archeological a~d Pal¢ontologic~d Society

entire decoration was carefully, executed. The incised lines are
semicircular in cross section and suggestive of Marksville technique.
Another decoration related to Type

51;21;11
appears on a
71
flared rim 7 cm. high (Plate 40, g). Alternately inverted isosceles
triangles are also present here but they are separated from each
other by a series of lines, carelessly incised, parallel to the sides of
the opposing triangles. Punctations, triangular in shape and crudely
done, fill the space within each triangle. The sherd is of brown
paste and is 7 ram. thick. A carbonized deposit remains on the
interior of the rim.
Three sherds of light brown paste (Plate 40, h) have incomplete
designs composed of two groups of straight lines.

Each series of

lines was carelessly incised at an angle to the other, and suggests
that the original pattern was a chain of nested triangles. The sherds
are from 5 ram. to 1 em. thick

A straight rim sherd (Plate 40, i) with slightly rounded lip has a
pattern of roughened and smoothed areas suggestive of the Marksville complex. The entire decoration of the original vessel cannot
be determined, of course, but the incomplete design indicates a rectangle outlined and divided diagonally by wide grooves. The upper
triangular half of the rectangle contains three perpendicular rows
of rocker work side by side, while the lower half is smooth. The
rectangle itself is separated from other motives by a broad plain
panel. This sherd, which has a brown paste was found in two
pieces, in separate sections of different cuts.
Two other sherds (Plate 40, j) have designs that are also reminiscent of the patterns on Marksville ware. Their plain and decorated
bands are separated from each other by grooves, but the plain panels
have transverse incisions spaced from 3 to 7 mm. apart. These
sherds are buff colored and 5 mm. thick.
At the base of the midden, 4 1-2 feet from the surface thereof, two
sherds (Plate 40, k) occurred. They are 5 mm. thick and are composed of brownish gray paste. Although the potsherds have closely
PLATE 40.
Unclassified sherds from the Kirkham Site.

Plate 40

Evidences o] the Marksville a~wl Colee Creek Complexes

185

spaced rectilinear and eurvilinear incisions, the exact type of decoration cannot be determined because of their fragmentary condition.
At a depth of 4 feet in Cut 7 Section 2 of the midden, a thick
sherd (Plate 40, L) suggestive of the Caddo complex was found.
Its decoration consists of incised lines and a series of impressions
made with a blunt tool which was slightly concave and thinly
notched. It is of gray paste.
Comparison with Pre-Caddo Arti]acts From the Crenshaw Site
As the Crenshaw Place may be considered the type site for the
study of the Pre-Caddo in Southern Arkansas, we present the following table in order to show more clearly t_he significant cultural
relationships between it and the Kirkham Place.75
Crenshaw Place
Boatstones
Stone gorget
Bannerstone (surface)
Celts of rounded type
Celts of flat type, or chisels
No grooved axes
Ornaments of shell
Bone awls
Large number of diminutive arrowheads, from both graves
and surface
1 large lozenge-shaped projectile point, (from surface)
Platform pipes (large stems)
Beakers, bowls, jars
Perforated vessels
Square bottoms, occasionally
having rudimentary feet

Kirkbarm Place
Boatstones
Stone gorget
Celts of rounded type
Notched axes
No grooved axes
Ornament of shell
Stone vessel
Bone awls
Projectile points of antler
3 diminutive arrowheads, all
¯from surface
Many large projectile points,
lozenge shaped predominant
Platform pipes (small stems)
Beakers, bowls, jars
Perforated vessels
Square bottoms, occasionally
having redimentary feet

75. Note: It should be borne in mind that the artifacts from the Crenshaw Place
were found in mounds, graves and on the surface whereas those from the Kirkham
site are from a mlddcn and from the surface.

186

Texas Arch~oIogical and Pal¢on$olog~ca$

Round bottoms, sometimes constricted

Round bottoms, sometimes constricted

Decorated bases
Thickened rims, sometimes by
application of strap to exterior of vessel

Decorated bases

Grit temper predominate, one
vessel tempered with shell

Tuff aplastic

Thickened rims, sometimes by
application of strap to exterior of vessel

(?)
Rare use of red slip
Motifs and Panels in low relief
Overhanging lines
Lines incised with pointed instrument
Incised line in rim lip
Triangular punctates
Medial and terminal punctates

No cord marked ware

Rare use of red slip
Motif in low relief
Overhanging lines
Lines incised with pointed instrument
Incised line in rim lip
Triagular punctates
Bird motif
Roulette and rocker work
Curvilinear panels outlined by
incised lines and filled with
punctates
Broad bands separated by
smoothed grooves semicircular in cross section
No cord marked ware

The last mentioned trait, although a negative one, seems important in yiew of the fact that Deasonville cord marked ware predominates in the Southeast Arkansas Bayou Macon district. Apparently
it did not manifest itself in the Red and Little Missouri River valleys, in Southwest Arkansas. Its westermost limit still remains to
be determined.
With regard t~o the other complexes, there is clearly a relationship
between the Kirkham Place and sites in Southeast Arkansas. The
Marksville rouletted and incised wares are common to both. They
were however, less abundant on the Bayou Macon. This is also
true of the Coles Creek, although additional research has led us to

Evider~es of the Marksville ~nd Coles Creek Complexes

18"/

believe that this complex may have manifested itself more strongly
in southeast Arkansas than we had heretofore thought.
While the Coles Creek is, as yet, the only Pre-Caddo complex to
be found in the Red River valley in Arkansas, there is some evidence
for believing that the Marksville was also’ present in that area.
Setzler has pointed out that certain vessels from the Foster Place and
from sites near Ozan and Washington, in Hempstead County, Arkansas, have Marksvillian characteristics,76 and attention has heretofore
been called to a four lobed jar from the Battle Place in the Red
River Valley, Arkansas, that is quite reminiscent of the Marksville
ware.77

A sherd (Plate 38, d) having a decoration consisting of a punerated panel between incised grooves was recently found by us on
the surface of the Jones Place, which is also in Hempstead County.
The punctations were made by holding a hollow reed or ease at an
oblique angle, forming irregular bisected cones. Mr. F. M. Setzler,
who examined this specimen, has informed us that a few sherds from
Marksville were roughened in this fashion. He further adds that
"the bisected cones are also reminiscent of the customary line of
indentations separating the rim decoration from the neek."T8. This
sherd is thick, tempered with shell and has a gray paste with a brown
exterior color. The Jones Place, as evidenced by four mounds and
much debris throughout the neighboring fields, was extensively occupied during aboriginal times. Burials in the only mound that has
been excavated yielded Caddo pottery. The sherd described above
is the only indication of Marksville so far found there. The Jones
Place is situated on Terre Rouge Creek, one of the principal tribuvaries of the Little Missouri River.
Certain Caddo vessels from Clark County also exhibit some relationship to Marksvillian decoration. Three urns, or cooking pots,
discovered in a mound ten miles from the Kirkham Place have designs
consisting of plain curvilinear bands outlined by wide incised lines
7~.
Setzler, F. I~L, "Pottery of the Hopewell Type from
U’ S. NaU Museum, pp. 18, 20, 1983.

Louisiana," Proeeodings

77. Dickinson, S. D., "Ceramic Relationship of the Pre-Caddo Pottery from the
Crenshaw Site," Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, VoL
Abilene, 1936, p.
Setzlero F. M., Personal corresponde~ace, December, 1938.
78.

188

Texa~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

that have been polished.

Two of the specimens also have a back-

ground roughened with a pointed instrument. This mound, as well,
as numerous other Caddo sites in the Ouachita and Red River valleys,
has yielded culinary vessels with patterns that had been incised with
a spatulate tool.
Ford has pointed out the possibility of an evolution of Caddo
design motives from the Marksville.79.

While space forbids a de-

tailed discussion of this in the present paper, his observations afford
a possible solution to the puzzling presence of both incised ve~_~ls
(frequently of inferior quality) and well-made engraved bowls and
bottles in the same Caddo graves.

It is possible that the Caddo

ceramic industry was the result of a fusion of an indigenous pottery
co~nplex with an intrusive one. The former type, represented by pots
having incised designs of scrolls meanders and punctates, may have
survived as culinary ware, whereas the intrusive engraved technique
may have been used in the decoration of vessels for ceremonial purposes. This hypothesis is further suggested by the rarity of incised
designs on Caddo bottles and the absence of engraving on cooking
vessels. Furthermore, in the Muskhogean area of northeast Arkansas
when the engraving technique occurs it appears to have been used
in the depiction of designs having symbolic significance. Generally,
these designs represent the plumed serpent, birds, arm bones and the
swastika. It is also possible that certain motives in the decoration
of the indigenous ware may have been readapted by the Caddo to
the engraved technique, as Ford has suggested,so
The Kirkham Site affords sufficient data for definite establishment of the Marksville complex in Southwest Arkansas, and extends its range both northward and westward to a very considerable
extent in this region. It also extends northward the range of the
Coles Creek complex,el
79.
Ford, J. A., ’,Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
Mississippi. Anthrovologlcal Study No. 2, Dept. of Conaervation. Louisiana Geological
Survey, New Orleans, 1936 ; pp. 262-265.
80°
Ford, J. A, ’"Review of S~ D. Dickinson’s Ceramic l~e|atlollshlps of Pre-Caddo
Pottery from Crenshaw Site," American Antiquity, Vol. III, No. 2, Oct. 1937, p. 195.
81.
Note:
In connection with the extension of the range of the Coles Creek complex, ~ince this paper w~ ~’ritten we h~ve found sherds of tl~t complex on the surface on a village site on the :Ford Johnson P|ace, on Sandy Bots d’Arc Creek, in the
Southwest Quarter of Section 28, Townshtl) 11 South, Range 26 West, Hempstead
County, Arkansas.

Ev~es of the Marksvillo c~nd Coles Creek Complexes

We

189

wish to express our appreciation to Mr. Frank M. Setzler, of

the Smithsonian Institution, for the classification of ~ertain sherds;
to the Anthropological Museum of the University of Texas for the
photographing of our material used in this paper; and to Mr. Frederick R. Matson,, Jr., of the Ceramic Repository For the Eastern
United States, for the determination of the aplastic used in sherds submitred to him.

Prescott, Arkansas.
200 First National Bank Bulding,
Hope, Arkansas.
April 1, 1939.

