Evidence of the Folsom Culture in Sand Dunes

217

EVIDENCE OF THE FOLSOM CULTURE IN
THE SAND DUNES OF WESTERN TEXAS
BY W. C.

FmTzl

AND BERNICE FRITZ2

The writers have been collecting artifacts in this area for about
ten years, mostly from surface camp sites in the sand dune belts.
Some observations have been made in this time that suggest that
these sand dune belts are the remnants of an old drainage system.
This may have a pertinent connection with the finding from time to
time of Folsom artifacts in these sand dune sites.
The point shown in Plate 39, Fig. 1, represents the most perfect
type found to date. This point was found in a shallow sand dune
blowout in northwestern Gaines County and almost on the GainesYoakum County line. Very little evidence was found to indicate a
permanent or even a semi-permanent camp, either in this blowout,
or in the adjacent area. A few pieces of burnt caliche were found
in this site as well as in some of the adjacent blowouts, but were of
such slight concentration, that it would not appear that this site was
in use for any length of time. Also a very few flint chips were
observed in the area. In the site in which this point was found was
one small point which is considered to belong to a much later
culture. It would appear from this association that the point probably was one which had been utilized by a later culture, and had
been transported to the place where found by men using this culture,
rather than by the original owner.
The point shown in Plate 39, Fig. ! is slightly less than 2 1-2
inches in length, and slightly over 1-2 inch in width. The material
from which this point was made is a dark grey flint which appears
to be of a kind suitable for very fine flaking. The long characteristic
central flake extends from the base three-fourths of the length toward the point. This central flake is slightly off center and is not
so well balanced as those in some other points. On the reverse side
the central flake extends approximately one-third the length toward
the point. The flaking on the edges is of typically fine workmanship.
I.
2.

G~,ologist, Skel]y Oil Co., Midland, Texas.
Mrs. W. C. Fritz, Midland, Texas.

218

Texas Archzological and Paleontological Soziety

The point shown in Plate 39, Fig. 2 was found in a deep sand duneblow-out in the large sand dunes of eastern Winkler County. The~
dunes have a distinct south to north trend. This had the appearance
of being a permanent camp site with an abundance of burnt caliche,
flint chips, and numerous artifacts, including various types of points
of a presumed much later culture. It is to be considered that Plate
39, Fig. 2 was also utilized by a later culture and was not found in
its exact original area. Plate 39, Fig. 2 is just under 2 inches in
length and slightly over 1-2 inch in width. The material of this
point is a slightly mottled white flint that does not appear as suitable
to fine flaking as the one shown in Plate 39, Fig. 1. The central
flake on Plate 39, Fig. 2 is well balanced on both sides and extends
from the ba~ one-half the distance to the point on one side while
on the reverse side it extends from the base one-fourth the distance
to the point. The flaking on the edges is fine, although not so good
as that of the workmanship of the one shown on Plate 39, Fig. 1.
The re-worked point, Plate 39, Fig. 3, was found by Mrs. Fritz
nine years ago in a deep sand dune blowout camp site in the large
sand dunes of eastern Winkler County, and about four miles south
of where Plate 39, Fig. 2 was found, but in the same trend of dunes.
As with Plate 39, Fig. 2, the point represented by Plate 39, Fig. 3
had associated with it an abundance of evidence of a permanent camp
site. Piles of burnt caliche, numerous artifacts including points of
a presumed later culture, and sherds of Black on White Chupadero
Pueblo pottery were found in this area and site. Plate 39, Fig. 3
has been reworked into a drill, and it is difficult to estimate the
original length of this point. However, the present width is 1 inch,
and it was probably at least 3 1-2 inches long in the original form.
The material of the point shown on Plate 39, Fig. 3 is a light grey
flint which appears to be well suited to fine flaking. The central
flake is the same len~h from the base on both sides, and extends
well toward the point, although the flake is slightly deeper on one
side.
Plate 39, Fig. 4 represents a fragment of a point which was found
in a very large sand dune blowout which had a surface exposure af
PLATE 39
Channelled points found in West Texas sand-dune blow-outs.

Plate 39

Evidence of the Folsom C.ul~ure in Sand Dunes

221

caliche, which formed the bottom. The blowout is located in southern Andrews County. The trend of the dunes in this area is eastwest as contrasted to the north-south trending dunes of Winkler
County and’vicinity. This is an unusually large blow-out or series
of blow-outs more or less connected, and shows numerous large and
smaller piles of burnt caliche. An average amount of flint chips
and a very few points of a presumed later culture have been found
here, but not in the quantity to be expected from a camp site of this
size. Also, because of the absence of pottery sherds usually associated with later points in a site of this size, and because of the
presence of several different fragments of points of shape and size
similar to Folsom points, but without the central flake, which are
sometimes referred to as Yuma culture points, together with the
presence of three other Folsom type point fragments would indicate
that this may have been an original Folsom site. Plate 39, Fig. 4
represents the fragment of a point just under 1 inch in width, and
with an estimated length of 3 1-2 inches. While this fragment consists of 1 1-2 inches of the point portion, it does show the central
Jlake to be extremely well balanced, and to extend to within onefourth inch of the point on one side and to within 1-2 inch of the
point on the reverse side, where the perfection of the central flake
is interrupted by a natural flaw in the flint. The material of this
point is a light tan flint of even texture and appears well suited to
fine flaking. The edges show the typica! fine workmanship.
The fragment represented by Plate 39, Fig. 5 was also found in
the same site as Plate 39, Fig. 4, and consists of the base part. This
fragment of the base is 1 1-4 inches long and slightly less than 1 inch
in width. The central flake extends the full length of the fragment
on one side, while the reverse side has only 1-4 inch of central flaking. The central flaking on both sides is well balanced. The
material of this fragment in a dark brown translucent flint, with
slight mottling.
.Plate 39, Fig. 6 represents the fragment of a point also found in
the same site as Plate 39, Figs. 4 and 5. This fragment of the point
portion is 1 inch in length and almost I inch in width, and could be
the point portion of Plate 39, Fig. 5, as it is unquestionably of the
same slightly mottled dark brown translucent flint as Plate 39, Fig.
5, and was from the same site. However, since this fragment shows

222

Texas Archeologieal and P~Ieon$ologieal Society

the central flake on both sides to within one-fourth inch of the point,
while Plate 39, Fig. 5 appeared not to have the central flake that
long on one side, I believe that this is the fragment of a distinctly
different point. The central flake of this specimen is well balanced,
but does not show very fine workmanship along the edges.
Plate 39, Fig. 7 represents a fragment of a point also found in
the same site with Figs. 4, 5 and 6 of the same plate.

This fragment

is slightly less than 1 inch in length and less than 1 inch wide of the
base portion of the point.

This base more closely resembles the base

of those similarly shaped points which were referred to as Yuma
points, both in outline and in thickness at the base, than it does to
the typical Folsom point. However, it definitely has the central
flake on both sides of the fragment throughout its entire length.
The central flake is well balanced, but because of the thiekamss of
the base portion the flaking along the edges does not exhibit the
usual fine workmanship. The material of this fragment is a dense
white flint that does not appear as well suited to flaking as most of
the other fragments.

It is suggested that due to the association of

these Yuma types mentioned as being found together with the Folsom
types, that Plate 39, Fig. 7 could represent a transition stage between the Folsom and Yuma points, since it bears a distinct resemblance to both types.3

3.
Editor’s :Note:
]~r. :Fritz found a burial containing u skull which has some
unusual anatomical features.
See Notes and Editorials of this issue of the Bulletin.

