Preliminary Repor~ on the Excavation of the Hodges Sitz

195

PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE
EXCAVATION OF THE
HODGES SITE~
BY JOE BEN

WI~EAT

On January 8, 1940, the Texas Technological College sponsored
W. P. A. Archeological project began excavation in Jones County,
Texas. For a number of years this region has been of growing interest to the archeologist, professional and amateur alike. This interest
has arisen chiefly due to the researches of Dr. Cyrus N. Ray of
Abilene, Texas. In the Bulletins of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society and in other scientific publications a number of articles (9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18) concerning the
deeply buried sites of the region have been published. Other contributors to the archeological literature of the area include Dr. J.
Alden Mason (23, 24) of the University of Pennsylvania, Dr. Kirk
Bryan (1, 2, 19) of Harvard University, and Mr. E. B. Sayles (21,
22) and Harold S. Gladwin (4) of Gila Pueblo.
From this bulk of material has arisen the problem now confronting us. Dr. Ray first found and described the deeply buried Abilene
region archeological sites as early as 1929 (9, 10, 11). In the years
of 1929 and 1930, Dr. Ray did some excavating but since that time,
his researches have mainly consisted of periodical examination of the
edges of the midden strata for any embedded artifacts which might
be exposed in place by natural erosion of the banks. A number of
such artifacts have been found in sites and have been described by
him from time to time (15, 18, 19). Owing largely to the lack of time
and funds for extensive excavation there existed a need for more
complete examination of these buried sites. As Dr. Ray has said, "The
solution of many of the archeological problems of the Abilene district await the attention of some individual or institution having
sufficient funds and interest in pure science to excavate camp sites
buried from eight to twenty-four to twenty-seven feet deep (!3)."
Regional excavation on a large scale offers the solution to the
problems confronting us. The two main objectives are:
of

¯ "Assistance in the l~rel~aration of these materials was furnished by the personnel
Official Project No. 13543,"

Work Projects Administration

196

Texas Archeologica! a~d Paleontological Society

First, since the researches of several persons and institutions have
established the existence of numerous cultures in. the region it becomes necessary to know their sequence and their cultural content.
Second, once the cultural complexes and their sequence have been
established it is necessary to fit them into the frame of other cultures and to define their relationship to such cultures both spatially
and temporally.
With these ideas in mind, after consultation with Drs. Holden
and Ray and others it was decided to begin excavation on a deeply
buried site on the ranch of Mr. S. L. Hodges in the east central
portion of Jones County, Texas. This site was discovered by Dr.
Ray in 1936 (17), and offers one of the best sites in the region insofar as stratigraphic archeology is concerned.
II.
The Hodges site lies on the east bank of the Clear Fork of the
Brazos River about midway between the village of Nugent,
County, Texas, and the confluence of Elm Creek with the Clear
Fork. The site itself consists of five superimposed archeological
horizons at depths varying from five and one-half feet to a maximum of twenty-two feet. The river flows in from a general southwesterly direction, makes a sharp meander to the west and then
~’esumes its gentle northeasterly course. The east bank of the river
rises here thirty feet above the normal river level and in the region
of the meander curve is an abrupt, almost vertical escarpment. Just
beyond the site down stream is a natural shelf of low lying ground
covered with a fine grove of native pecan trees. Immediately across
the river from the site is a low flood plain, covered with grass,
scattered willow and cottonwood trees, which is subject to inundation by occasional rises of the river. Behind this to the west lie the
sand dunes which are covered with post oak and other vegetation.
This area is locally termed the "sbSnnery."
To the east of the site, running in a northerly direction, is an old
slough channel which occasionally holds a pond of rain water.
Beyond this the ground rises to the east where the valley floor
PLATE 34
Sketch map of the Hodges Site.

Cultivated
field

Regional location of S~

Pit A

Low flood plain
grassy with a few
scattered Cottonwood
and Willow ~rees

~
.......
~
Scale

fence
~rail
road
i"=-

SKETCH MAP OF ~ HODGES SITE

Plate 34

Preliminary Repor~ o~ the Excavation of the Hodges Site

199

merges with a ridge of low, limestone capped hills which form the
boundary of the valley of the Clear Fork.

At various points along

this ridge of.~hills Dr. Ray has found skeletal remains, which on a
morphological basis have been ascribed to one of the earlier strata of
oecupatlon by Dr. E. A. Hooten of Harvard University (5).
The site, then, lies on and in the highest ground between the "shinnery" on the west and the limestone hills to the east. This situation
should have been ideal from the native point of view, because of the
abundance of water, wood, and food. Both river and land fauna
were probably abundant. The stream must have wandered between
the valley confines, building up the valley floor by slack water
flooding. Aeolian deposition also contributed its part to the valley
filling.
The area chosen for excavation lies in this high ground immediately adjacent to the river which parallels the site to the west. Our
primary operation was to establish a field camp and to map and
dear off the scattered mesquite trees and grass which formed the
vegetal cover.
A primary datum was established (Datum A) and base lines running east and west and north and south through this datum were
staked out. A pit twenty-five feet square (Pit A) was blocked off,
the northwest corner being Datum A. This pit was later lengthened
to the west to open out on the river.
Pit B was established as a stratigraphic pit primarily to ascertain
whether the strata revealed in Pit A were constant.
Pit C was begun for the excavation of a large hearth but enlarged
an order to excavate as much as possible of the lower levels without
the tremendous task of removing all the over-burden of the top
series of soil strata.
Supplementary data points were established for each of the pits
and all measurements, both vertical and horizontal were made from
these points.
All material where possible was screened. Where this was not
possible, the excavated earth was turned over several times to get
ail possible cultural content.

2O0

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

IlL
Because of the nature of these deeply buried sites stratigraphical
relationships and analysis assume a very large part of the interpretation of the cultures found in excavation.
At the Hodges site a twenty-six foot deep Pit A. revealed five
definite archeological levels and several different types of soil.
Sterile top soil forms the first five and one-half feet of deposit.
This soil is loose, friable, slightly sandy, and represents the fina!
deposition before the present time. Erosion is going on now though
very slowly. In color the soil is brownish with considerable humic
discoloration. The surface is held by grasses, mesquite trees and
several species of cacti, mostly of the prickly-pear type.
Level No. I (Archaeological) is a sparse midden deposit 1.6 inches
thick showing loose sandy soil with a heavy admixture of charcoal
and other organic material of a habitational nature.
Underlying level No. 1 is 14 inches of soil, sterile of cultural
remains, which is undergoing cementation by the infiltration of silt
from below.
Level No. 2 is a level approximately 8 inches thick composed of
silty soil which has been discolored by both humate and habitational
concentration.
Below level No. 2 lie light red silts, laminated and well compacted to a depth of 22 feet 4 inches. These silts are indurated and
must have been deposited in slack water floods. They must have remained in a static condition at various time intervals as there are
two archaeological levels (No. 3 and No. 4) embedded in the silts.
These levels have the nature of surface camps rather than that of
sites of long habitational duration.
Level No. 3 is at a depth of 15 feet in this silt profile and is a
buried surface camp.
Level No. ¢ is a level in the silt series but occupation must have
been for a somewhat longer period than in level No. 3.

More camp

debris as well as artifacts are evidence leading one to this belief.
Level No. 5 lies on the contact line between the silts above described and the heavier, dark red silts below.

There is no apparent

PLATE 35
Close view of the main excavation at the Hodges Site.

P~elimin~ry Report o~ $he Exc~va$ion of the Hodges Si~e

unconformity between this series and the overlying silts.
is in the nature of a surface camp.

203

This level

There are three feet eight inches of the heavy red silts interposed
between level No. 5 and the gravel immediately on the bedrock of
permian limestone.
Dr. Leighton of the Illinois State Geological Survey has in his
work on the region (7), assigned the upper series of silts to the "Elm
Creek," which he places at the end of the Pleistocene. The lower
dark red silts he tentatively concludes to be the Durst belonging to
the Sangamon Interglacial of some 70,000 years ago. These identifications are interesting in the implication of antiquity but should
not be accepted as absolute until much more work has been done.
,On a localized area on top of the gravel were the scattered traces
of a bed of charcoal. That this indicates occupation is conjectural
because no artifacts or other camp debris were found.

IV.
The yield of artifacts per cubic foot of soil removed was extremely low. Too few were found for the isolation of culture complexe.s although two levels yielded enough for a tentative placement.
Of the five levels uncovered three~ yielded specimens other than
hearths.
The paucity of artifacts seems to be characteristic of the area so
far as the buried camp sites are concerned. On the other hand the
artifactual yield of the late surface sites is good though not abundant. This discrepancy between the respective yields of buried and
surface camp sites may be best explained by a consideration of the
fact that in excavation of a buried site one is restricted to search the
area exposed by digging while the collector from a surface site suffers from no such restriction.
Level 1: The artifacts of this level are generally well worked
and represent typical specimens of a hunting-food gathering complex. Included are grinding implements as well as projectile points
and other hunting paraphernalia.
Projectile points: Two projectile points were found at this level.
One, (No. 3, P1.37a) is a small, stemmed piece of medium propor-

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

204

tions. The stem flares
blade is beveled to the
hated on one face from
23 mm wide and 5 mm

very slightly and has a convex base. The
right on opposite sides. It is slightly patia grayish tan to a white. It is 38 mm long,
thick.

The second specimen (No. 4, PI. 37a) is a small roughly made
triangular point of medium proportions. The cutting edge~ are
irregular and it is probable that the piece was not finished. The
color is light tan. It is 3 mm long, 26 mm wide and 4 mm thick.
Perforator: This is a small beautifully made specimen of gray
flint showing slight patination on one side and a white incrustation
on the opposite side. Its length is 49 ram, width across the shoulder
14 mm and thickness 4 ram. (No. 2, P1. 37a).
Astrangulated blade:

This is an unusual specimen (No. 1, P1.

37a) of gray flint with spotty white patination.
a leaf-shaped knife.

It was originally

Two concave sections have been chipped out o[

the edges and beveled to the right to form two concave scraping
edges.

Its length 72 mm, width 22 ram, and thickness 5 ram.

Miscellaneous:

Three fragmentary blades.

One (No. 5, P1. 37a~

is the basal fragment of a large knife with concave base and parallel
edges.

A

second specimen (No. 6,

the distal end.

It is of gray flint.

P1.

37a) is a knife lacking only

The third piece (No. 7, P1.37a)

is a flake that has been roughly flaked on opposite edges to form
beveled scraping edges.

Ground Stone: Two whole manos and one broken specimen
fal! in this classification. One (No. 1, PI. 37b) is a large flat wel!shaped piece of fine grained sandstone. It is 143xl17x29 ram. The
second specimen (No. 2, PI. 37b) is a dark red quartzite pebble
slightly abraded on one face. It has been used also as a hammer
stone. It is 87x72x56 mm. The third piece (No. 3, PI. 37b) is a
fragment of a thick well made highly polished mano of white
quartzite.
Hearths: Three hearths were found in this level. -The average
size is 25 inches in diameter. The hearths are slightly basin shaped
and are composed of more or less flat stones about four to six inches
in diameter.
Level 2:

In this level no artifacts have been found.

In Pit A a

PLATE 36
View showing two excavations at Hodges Site.

Preliminary Repor$ on the E~cav~$ian of $h~ Hodges Si~e

207

few scattered pieces of flint, burnt rocks, et cetera show, however,
that habitation was present. In Pit B a hearth was uncovered at this
level. It was 23 inches in diameter and composed of angular fragments of burn~ stones averaging 2 to 3 inches square.
Level 3: No artifacts mark this level although flint chips, scattered hearth stones and similar debris show habitation.
Level 4: This level, one of the most interesting of the five, has
yielded several artifacts.
Projectile point: The one specimen (No. 1, P1. 37c) is a well
made piece of blue-gray flint which is patinated. The point is
stemmed with a bifurcated base and has asymmetrical edges. One
edge is convex; the other is straight for one-third its length and
concave the rest. It could very well have been used for a small
halted knife rather than a projectile point. Its length is 45 ram,
width 18 ram, thickness 7 ram.
Graver: This is a small specimen (No. 2, P1. 37c) of white flint.
It differs from the Folsom graver (20) type in being larger, but falls
instead into the smaller ones listed by Dr. Ray for the Clear Fork
Culture Complex. The specimen is 25x15x8 mm. The graver projection or beak is 4 mm wide at the base and is 3 mm long from
base to tip.
Side Scraper: This specimen (No. 3, P1. 37c) is of coarse grained
white flint with light tan specks. It is not patinated and its lengah
is 53 ram.
Mise: A fragmentary knife (No. 4, P1. 37c) roughly worked
from a large flake is of blue gray flint with a light tan patination.
Hearth: One of the most important finds of the level was the
very large hearth. This feature was about 15 feet in diameter and
was 11 inches thick at the thickest point. ~: was composed of small
(2 to 3 inch) angular burnt rock fragments which formed nearly
50 per cent of the bulk; charcoal, mussel shells, and burnt earth
comprised the remainder.
Level 5: The lowest definite level occurred at a depth of 22 feet,
four inches. Two artifacts only have come from this level. Neither
are diagnostic and could have been made and used by men of any
culture.

208

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Scraper: This specimen (No. 1, P1. 37d) is a large turtle-back
scraper made of one large flake struck from a flint river boulder.
It is retouched only on one edge although the opposite edge could
have been used without retouching. Its length is 88 ram, width
57 mm and thickness 28 ram. The length of scraping edge is 98 ram.
The second specimen (No. 2, P1. 37d) is a small flake and
scraper made from a single flake struck off a core. The retouching
is extremely fine (22 flakes to a cm) and extends completely across
the end of the specimen. The artifact is of gray flint with light tan
patination. Its length is 44 ram, width 32 ram, and thickness 8 ram.
The length of the scraping edge is 38 ram.
At a depth of 26 feet, lying directly on the gravel, was a concentration of charcoal which might have been the remnants of a hearth.
However, the evidence is not conclusive, so this is disregarded for
the present.

It would be premature to attempt any broad and general conclusions from the data presented by the excavation of the Hodges
Site at the present time. To do so would be to ascribe too much
importance to the site and to the information derived therefrom.
There are, however, some interesting conjectures that may be inferred.
The aspect presented by the artifacts from the top level of occupation is certainly that of a hunting-gathering economy. The stone
work shows a decidedly local tendency in the beveling of the projectile point and the beveled edges of the astrangulated blade. Beveling appears to be a local emphasis applied to numerous objects
and as such is similar to the emphasis placed on beveling in the
Kentucky-Tennessee area although no influence is inferred. These
artifacts are found locally in a number of surface camps and unPLATE 37
Panel A :

Chipped stone artifacts of level 1.

Panel B :

Ground stone artifacts of level 1.

Panel C :
Panel D :

Artifacts of level 4.
Artifacts of level 5.

Length of No. 1, 72
Length of No. 1, 143

Length of No. 1, 45 mm.
Length of No. 1, 88 ram.

Plate 37

Preliminary Repor~ o] $he E~cava$ion of $h~ Hodges Si~e

211

doubtedly are pre.white and pre-Comanche in this area. The ground
stone again evidences the localization of this culture.

The manos

are all typical of the surface camp sites and therefore, have comparatively little diagnostic value.
Since level 2 presents only one hearth and no artifacts nothing
can be deduced as to its provenience or relationship to the other
regional cultures.
Level 3 likewise does not yet yield data, and more work must be
done before this gap can be filled in.
The material from the fourth level gives us one of our most
interesting clues as to the migration of culture. This Complex has
a South Central Texas appearance. The projectile point might well
fit into the series of points from the region around Austin. The
large burnt rock hearth seems to be an embryonic burnt rock midden typical of those of the Austin area. The graver falls into the
Clear Fork Complex. A second component of this culture, the
Clear Fork gouge of Dr. Ray (core scraper, Sayles) has been found
in some of the deep mounds of the South Central Texas area. The
number of similarities exhibited by this 4th level culture to the cultures of South Central Texas is str0ngly suggestive of the southern
provenience of the culture (6, 8), though the evidence cannot be accepted as conclusive. (Editorial Note’).
The position of level 5 is a most interesting feature of this site,
lying as it does on the contact surface between the dark red silts
below and the lighter red silts above gives it a position datable
geologically. If the darker silts are the Durst as suggested by
Dr. Leighton occupying the contact zone, then the culture of the Elm
Creek and Durst silts is subject to the lowest date applicable to the
Elm Creek Silts. However, this dating is only tentative and must
await further work before any definite results may be given.
Texas Technological College,
Lubbock, Texas.
(*Editsorial Note) : The Editor does no/5 believe that Mr. Wheat is
justified in identifying the artifacts from this level as of Clear Fork
Culture because of the finding of one graver. There is much to indicate that gravers were components of several later cultures in the

212

Te~a~ Archeologica~ and Paleontological Society

Abilene region. Neither does the Editor agree with the implication
involved in the above statement that because Clear Fork gouges have
been found by Texas University archeologists in the deeper levels of
the Burnt Rock Mounds that therefore the Culture originated there.
It is true that Clear Fork gouges have been found by the Editor
also in some of the very old, thin, Burnt Rock Mounds of the Abilene
Region. Never~hele~ the great majority of Clear Fork Culture sites
here are totally devoid of signs of Burnt Rock Mounds. The most
characteristic hearth in the older Clear Fork sites is relatively quite
small, usually about three feet in diameter. These hearths are usually
embedded either in hard dark red silt, or in gravel upon the eroded
high terrace levels along small creek branches or gullies which are
now usually dry. Where found along the Brazos they are high up on
the old terraces. If a typical Clear Fo~k gouge has ever been found
at any level in the alluvial deposits in which Mr. Wheat is digging,
the writer never has heard of it.
The artifacts of the older small hearth phase of the Clear Fork
Culture have an early European paleolithic aspect and were definitely
made by a crude percussion technique.
It is this older technically crude phase of the Clear Fork Culture
which is found on old eroded terrace gully surfaces with Folsom and
Yuma points.
The fact that the Burnt Rock Mounds are thin and
not common in the Abilene region, and thick and common in the south
indicates that they lasted longer there. But if the Clear Fork Culture
arose in the south and spread north, it evidently arose in a far older
time period than that represented by the lower Burnt Rock Mound’s
levels. If the culture originated in the south, then the gouge type artifacts probably Would be more abundant there and be found in older
levels, whel~as their place of greatest abundance is located in a region
in and surrounding the mountain mass centering in Taylor, Coke,
Nolan and Mitchell Counties. Here also this culture is often found in
sites unmixed with any other.
While the Editor has previously found one hand axe similar to
the Clear Fork type embedded at a depth of 19 1-2 feet in the Hodges
Site, the fac~ that he has searched the exposed strata of all of the
local deeply buried Brazos river bank stratified sites of this type for
the past twelve years without finding any Clear Fork gouges, planergouges or any projectile points distinctive of this Culture embedded
in them, and that in Mr. Wheat’s extensive excavations none have
been found would indicate that they probably do not belong in that
series of sites.
Definite Clear Fork gouges have been found sparingly in the region
in which Mr. Wheat’s work has been done, but these were either found
on terraces high above the river terraces in which Mr. Wheat is excavating, or on the clay below the sands, in the Sand Dune regions of
Jones County.

PLATE 38
Stratigraphic Cross-section of The Hodges Site.

STPATIG.~IC CWOSS-SFCTION
OF THE HODGF~ SITE

Sterile top aoll

Midden deooslt

Level I

Loose silty soil
Sparse midden deposit

Level 2

Light red silts

Level 3
Light red silts

Level 4

Light red silts

level 5

Dar~ red silts

Gravel

3’

Scsle

Permisn limestone
Plate 38

i"---- 3’

Prelimi~u~ry Report of the Excavation of the Hodges Site

215

Bibliography
1. Albritton, Claude C., Jr., and Bryan Kirk, 1939. Quarternary
Stratigraphy in the Davis Mountains, Trans Pecos, Texas. Bulletin
of the Geological Society of America, Vol. 50, pp. 1423-1474.
2. Bryan, Kirk, 1938. Deep Sites Near Abilene, Texas. Bulletin
of The Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10.
3. Bryan, Kirk, and Ray, Louis L., 1940. Geologic Antiquity o]
the Lindenmier Site in Colorado. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 99, Number 2.
4. Gladwin, H. S., 1937. Excavations at Snaketown H.
Pueblo Medallion Paper XXVI.

Gila

5. Hooten, E. A., 1933. Notes On Five Texas Crania. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 5.

6. Jackson, A. T., 1938. Annual Report o] ~. P. A. and
University of Texas Archeological Research, Lake Buchanan, 19361937. Anthropological Papers, Vol. III, Number 1.
7.

Leighton, M. M., 1936.

Geological Aspects of the Findings

o.f Primitive Man Near Abilene, Texas.
Paper XXIV.

Gila Pueblo, Medallion

8. Pearce, J. E., 1932. The Present Status of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 4.
9. Ray, Cyrus N., 1929a. New Evidences of Ancient Man in
America. Scientific American, May, pp. 430-31.
10. 1929b. Traces of Ancient Man Reported.
ter, Dec. 21.

Science News Let-

11. 1929c. .4 Differentiation o] the Prehistarlc Cultures o] the
Abilene Section. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 1.
12. 1930. Report On Some Recent Archeological Researches in
the Abilene Section. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2.
13. 1932. Archeologlcal Research in Central West Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4.

216

Te~ca~ A~’cheological a,wI Pa,leo~ologica,l Society

14. 1933. Multiple Burials in Stone Cist Mounds o] tb~ Abilene
Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 5.
15. 1934. Flint Cultures o] Arwlent Man in Texas. Bulletin of
Texas Archeological and Paleontolo~cal Society, Vol. 6.
16. 1937a. May Show Ancient American Type.
Report, March 4.

Science Service

17. 1937b. More Evidence Concerning Abilene Man. Bulletin
7, the Texas Archeologieal and Paleontological Society, Vol. 9.
18. 1940. Was the American Mano and Metate an Invention
Made During Pleistoc.ene Time? Science, Feb. 23.
19. Ray, Cyrus N., and Bryan, Kirk. 1938. Folsomoid Point
Found in Alluvium Beside Mammoth’s Bones. Science n. s., Vol. 88.
20. Roberts, Frank H. H., Jr., 1935. A Folsom Complex, Pre.
llminary Report on Investigation o] the Lindenmier Site in Northern
Colorado. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 94, No. 4.
21. Sayles, E. B., 1929. Some Types o] Archeological Sites Near
Abi.lene, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeologieal and Paleontological Society, ¥ol. 1.
22. 1935. An ,4rcheological Survey of Texas.
Medallian Paper XVII.

Gila Pueblo,

23. Mason, J. Alden, 1929. The Texas Expedition. The Museum
Journal, University of Pennsylvania, Sept.-Dec.
24. 1930. Ircheologlcal Report. American Anthropologist, n. s.
Vol. 32, No. 2.

