AN ARCHEOLOGICAL CACHE FROM THE

HUECO BASIN, TEXAS
M~s. GLENN

E. Moo~E

and
M~s..TOE BEN WHEAT
In January, 1937, a cache of pottery and associated artifacts was found on the old Tobin Ranch 11~ miles northeast of El Paso, Texas. The discovery was made in the
course of survey work initiated by Mr. and Mrs. Glen E.
Moore in the summer of 1936 and work has continued intermittently to the present time.
Before proceeding wi~h a discussion of the material recovered from this cache, we should like to acknowledge
valuable assistance given by the following persons: for
classification of pottery types, Dr. Emil W. Haury of the
University of Arizona, Mr. E. B. Sayles of the Arizona
State Museum, and Mr. Stanley Stubbs of the Laboratory
of Anthropology, Santa Fe, Mexico; for classification of
stone and shell specimens, Mr. W. S. Strain of Texas Western College; for photography and editing, Mr. Joe Ben
Wheat of the University of Arizona. We wish to express
special gratitude to Mr. Moore for his careful and tireless
efforts in excavating this material.
The site is located in the northern part of the Hueco
Basin, approximately in the center of the area defined by
Lehmer (1948) as the Jornada Branch of the Mogollon Culture. In this area the alluvial fill of the Hueco Basin consists of bolson deposits which rise to meet the foothills of
the Hueco Mountains on the east and the Franklin Mountains on the west. These deposits slope away gently to the
south where they are intersected by the channel of the
Rio Grande River. The local landscape is comprised of
stabilized dunes, termed "bondocks" by the ranchers of the
vicinity, with interver~’ing small drainageways which, terminating in shallow depressions, probably formed the primary source of water for the aboriginal inhabitants. There

An Archeological Cache ~rom ~he Hueco Basin, Texas

145

is little vegetation in the area other than mesquite, creosote
bush, and other forms of the Lower Sonoran Desert fh,ra.
Archeo!ogically, the area has been investigated from time
to time, but little intensive work has been done. Many of
the sites have suffered disturbance from the hands of pothunters. Published work includes papers by Stallings,
1932; Carey, 1931; Bradfield, 1929; Roberts, 1929; the Cosgroves, 1947; Sayles, 1935, 1936a, 1936b; Stubbs, 1930; Moore,
1947; Lehmer, 1948; Alves, 1930 et seq.; and Kidder and Cosgrove, 1949.

Many of these investigations have been concerned with
the Cave Dweller sites rather than the small pueblo sites
of the Basin area. Pottery bearing sites of the Basin include pithouses, small house structures, rubbish heaps, and
occasional sherd areas. Non-ceramic sites are sometimes
found in blowouts among the sand dunes.
The cache herein described was concentrated in an area
1.50 m. wide by 2.00 m. long and about 0.75 m. deep, and
contained the following artifacts:
Pottery vessels: 17
1 whole
13 restorable
3 unrestorable
Stone artifacts: 12
3 large round stones flattened on two opposing faces
3 stone balls
3 rectangular tabular objects
1 leaf-shaped sandstone object
2 stone beads
Turquoise
21
55
14
15

whole pendants
beads
nodules
fragments, worked and unworked

Te~ ArchaeoI~gica~ a~d P~leo~tolog~ca~ ~ociet~

Shell
1,431 olivella shell beads (2 incised)
6,029 flat discoidal white shell beads
1 vermetus tube bead
1 pink shell bead
4 geometric nacreous shell pendants
1 zoomorphic nacreous shell pendant
10 marginally perforated pelecypod shells
1 fragmentary glycymeris shell bracelet
Miscellaneous
8 polished pebbles
3 chalcedony concretions
When the cache was discovered, the rims of 5 ollas were
weathering from the sand matrix. All of these had roug!~ly circular breaks in their bottoms, perhaps indicating intentional "killing" of the vessels in the Mimbres tradition.
These ollas had been placed upright in a group over the
other artifacts. Immediately beneath them, and extending to a depth of approx’.h:nately 0.60 m. below the surface,
were the remains of 12 other vessels, only one of which was
whole, the other 11 apparently having been intentionally
smashed.
The single whole vessel was a small E1 Paso Polychrome
olla which contained the following artifacts:
500
55
21
2
1
1
1
10

flat disc shell beads
turquoise beads
turquoise pendants
spire ground olivella shells with incised decoration
pink shell bead
gray stone bead
green stone bead
small pelecypod shell pendants perforated at the
hinge
4 cut shell pendants
14 pieces of turquoise, 7 of which were polished. Four
of these 7 pieces were pendant-shaped but were
not perforated; 1 was round, and 2 were roughly
rectangular.

An Archeological Cache ~rom the Hueco Basin, Texas

147

Also within the group of. artifacts resting beneath the
5 ollas was a container formed of 2 large sherds placed
together in a manner resembling a bivalve, and enclosing
200 spire ground olivella shell beads.
PoPery
Four distinct wares are represented by the 17 pottery
vessels recovered from the cache. Three of these wares,
Chihuahua, E1 Paso Polychrome, and Chupadero, are indi~
genous to the area, while the fourth, Tucson Polychrome.
is instrusive from the west. Chihuahua wares comprise 76%
of the entire collection and include the following types:
l~amos Polychrome1, 7 vessels; Ramos Incised~, i vessel;
Villa Ahumada,1 2 vessels. Three jars were identified as
Chihuahua ware~ but were not definitely classifiable as tO
type. E1 Paso Polychrome, 2 vessels (12%), Chupadero, 1
vessel (6%), and Tucson Polychrome, 1 vessel (6%) make
up remainder of the collection.
CHIHUAHUA WARES, Painted
Rarnos Polychrome Human Effigy of hooded type, Plate
20. a.
Height: front, 18.5 cm.; back, 13.0 cm.
Diameter at widest part: 14.0 cm.
Human facial features modeled in relief and outlined
in paint on upward extension of rim which covers approximately half of normal rim circumference and drops
vertically behind each ear to meet the normal rim; eye and
mouth openings represented by straight, narrow slits; circular hole 1.5 cm. in diameter behind each ear.
Decoration is applied with red and black paints on a
buff colored background. Body decoration, beginning about
1.5 cm. below the normal rim, consists of red and black
lines, tapering triangles, opposed stepped keys in balanced
colors, and interlocking bent lines. The panelled band of
design elements extends well down toward the full rounded

1.

Stubbso personal conference, 1948.

2.

Sayles, Medallion Papers XXI, 1936.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

148

bottom and is terminated by a heavy black line.
(?) in bottom.

Kill hole

Ramos Polychrome Jar, Plate 20 b.
Height: 15.5 cm.
Diameter: rim, slightly out-curved, 10.5 cm.; body, 22.5 cm.
The neck of this jar rests on the flattened upper portion
of the body which forms a shoulder, or bench, 2.5 cm. wide;
from this the fully rounded, globular body slopes to a
rounded bottom.
Decoration with red and black paints on a warm tan background consists of the following design elements: interlocking steps, tapering triangles, and the club element. A single
pattern contains a bird done in red and black, and has
small rectangles filled with black brush dots. Heavy black
banding lines enclose the decoration which starts just
above the flat shoulder and covers approximately two-thirds
of the jar. Tt~ere is no panelling of designs. Kill hole
(?) in bottom.
Ramos Polychrome Jar, Plate 20 c.
Height: 20.5 cm.
Diameter: rim, slightly out-curved, 11.5 cm.; body, 24.2
em.

Red and black paints on light tan background; designs,
well executed in balanced colors, consist of the club element, triangles, and elongated steps. The colors are very
bright and clear, and the highly polished surface shows no
sand blasting or other deterioration from weathering. The
decoration, framed by narrow black lines, is a two-panel
band covering the upper two-thirds of the vessel. Full
rounded bottom with kill (?) hole.
Ramos Polychrome Jar, Plate 20, d.
Height: 24.2 cm.
Diameter: rim, 14.0 cm.; body, 27.0 cm.
Red and black paints on light cream background; colors
very faded, the red showing a distinct orange hue. Decoration consists of a two-panel design, each panel having club

PLATE 20
Chihuahua Pottery.
a-v Ramos Polychrome.
f-g Villa Ahumada Polychrome.
h-i Unidentified types.

An Archeological Cache ~rorn $he Hueco Basin, Texas

151

elements in triangles and attached to hatched triangles; a
checker-board with black squares opposing the cream colored background; and a simple coil with a black dot in
the center. The decoration covers the upper two-thirds of
the jar but does not have the continuous black framing
lines above and below, as do the other Ramos Polychromes.
Full rounded bottom with kill (?) hole.
Ramos PoIychrome Jar, Plate 20, e.
Height: 23.0 cm.
Diameter: rim, 11.5 cm.; body, 25.5 cm.
Red and black two-panel design on light tan background.
Due to the complexity of this design, the two panels will
be described separately. These panels are divided by black
pendant triangles arranged in two opposing rows with a red
line between. The serpent pattern (shown in photograph)
has a black head and a red body with black framing lines
which continue beyond the red body to form a tail (?) composed of 163 small rectangles, each having a black dot in the
center. The frame enclosing this panel is composed of red
and black opposed tapering triangles, black hatched triangles, and solid red and black triangles ending in an
interlocking scroll with balanced colors. The other panel
shows a large red spiral with black framing lines which converge to form a single line connecting two solid black
triangles at opposite sides of the spiral. One corner of the
panel shows a hatched triangle in red, with a similar pattern done in black in the opposite corner. The other two
corners are filled in with pendant triangles in black and
red. The entire design, which covers only the upper half
of the jar, is framed above and below by two continuous
lines, one black and one red. Full rounded bottom with
kill (?) hole.
Ramos Polychrome: Two unrestorable vessels not shown.
Villa Ahumada PoIychrome Jar, Plate 20, f.
Height: 21.5 cm.
Diameter: rim, 13.0 cm., body, 23.5 cm.
Vivid red and black panelled design on a warm, reddish
tan background.

Due to missing sherds and obliteration

152

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

of~ much of the design, it is not possible to give a full or
accurate description of this vessel. The design elements include tapering triangles in solid colors, opposed black and
red pendant triangles, and heavy lines in black and red.
There are no continuous independent ~aming lines either
above or below the zone of decoration which covers the
upper two-thirds of the vessel. The bottom part of the jar~
below the zone of decoration, shows a highly polished brown
slip noticeably darker than the upper part of the vessel.
Full rounded bottom with kill (?) hole.
Villa Ahumada Polychrome Jar, Plate 20. g.
Height: 21.0 cm.
Diameter: rim, slightly flared, 12.0 cm.; body, 23.5 cm.
Dense black and red designs on light tan background.
Design elements include solid black and red triangles, opposed black and red tapering triangles enclosed by red
bands 1.5 cm. wide and outlined by a narrow black band,
and the club element with a "suggestion of animation in
the use of an ovoid (my word) enclosing a dot."’ The dec:
oration, covering approximately two-thirds of the jar, is in
three panels with continuous independent black framing
lines above and below. The vessel has a full rounded bottom with a very small kill (?) hole.
Chihuahua Wares unidentified as to type
PoIychrome Jar, Plate 20, i.
Height: 21.6 cm.
Diameter: rim, 12.5 cm.; body, 23.0 cm.
Symmetrical two-panel design in black and a very little
red over a polished light tan slip. Zone of decoration covers
upper half of jar and has continuous double framing lines
in black above and below. Design elements consist of heavy
black hatched and solid black pendant triangles, tapering
triangles of solid black and heavy hatching, negative interlocking keys, and the "club" element. Red appears only in
a series of small triangles outlined in black and abutting a
: 1.

Sayles, Medal]ion Papers XXI.

1936

An Archeological Cache ~rorn the Hueco Basin, Texas

153

rectangular design of solid black and black hatched pendant
triangles. Much of the decoration on this jar has been obliterated and it is thus impossible to give a complete and accurate description of design elements. The vessel has a globular shape and a full rounded bottom with a large kill (?)
hole.
Black-on-tan Jar, Plate 20, h.
Height: 22.5 cm.
Diameter: rim, 11.5 cm.; body, 30.0 cm.
Intricate geometric two-panel design in black on a light
tan background. Design elements consist of solid black
pendant triangles opposing black hatched pendant triangles,
hatched and solid black tapering triangles, opposed step designs in both hatch work and solid black, and black fine
line spirals. The zone of decoration, beginning at the neck,
extends slightly below the middle of the body and is
framed above and below with two continuous black lines.
The surface of "this vessel has a high polish. The extremely
fine and intricate line work on this jar is not approximated
on any of the other vessels in this collection. The kill (?)
hole is roughly circular and measures 7.0 cm. in diameter.
Black-on-white Jar, Plate 20, j.
Height: 15.0 cm.
Diameter: rim, 11.0 cm.; body, 19.0 cm.
Black designs on a chalky white slip which completely
Covers outside surface of jar. The design area, framed by
heavy black lines above and below, ~ontains two rows of
black finely hatched triangles complemented by solid black
tapering triangles. This vessel has a slightly flaring .r~m, a
constricted neck, and a fu~lr0unc~ed bottom with one, and
possibly two, small kill (?) holes.
EL PASO POLYCHROME
Miniature olla, Plate 21, a.
HeigHt: 4.5 cm.
Diameter: rim, 3.5 ~m.; body, ~4.5 cm.
Crudely shaped and finished miniature jar with three
broad black encircling bands over a fugitive red wash

154

Texas Archeolog~cal and paleontological Society

which covers the upper half of the body. Full rounded
bottom undecorated. This small vessel contained a tota~l of
609 stone and shell artifacts, listed previously in this article.
Double Jar connected by hollow tube and arched handle,
Plate 21, b.
Height: jars, 11.5 cm.; arched handle, 14.5 cm.
Diameter: jar rims, 9.5 cm.; bodies, 13.0 cm.
Width: handle, 5.25 cm.; tube, 5.5 cm.
Length, overall: 27.0 cm.
Two olla type units with constricted necks and flaring
rims, connected by a hollow tube and a broad arching
handle. Decoration consists of thin black splotches applied over fugitive red wash which covers upper half of
body and top side of handle; black band around interior of
rims, extending into "V"-shaped pattern on handle; narrow
black band on outside of rim; under side of handle and top
of connecting tube are black; broad black framing line below zone of decoration; lower half of vessel is undecorated.
TUSCON POLYCHROME1
Bowl, Plate 21, c.
Heigh: 15.0 cm.
Diameter: rim, 27.0 cm.; body, 28.0 cm.
Very slightly recurred rim; heavy red slip over entire
vessel, highly polished; no interior decoration. Exterior
decoration consists of five identical interlocking units formed
by broad angular lines of black outlined in white, and
cross-hatching in small rectangular areas, also outlined in
white. Zone of decoration, beginning at rim and covering
upper two-thirds of vessel, is framed above and below by
broad black lines outlined in white.
CHUPADERO
Black-on-white WaGer lug, Plates 21, d and e.
Height: Indeterminate.
Diameter: rim, 9.0 cm.; neck, 6.4 cm.
So little of this vessel was recovered that complete di-

1.

Identified by Haury.

An Archeological Cache ~rom the Hueco Basin, Texas

157

mensions cannot be determined. Decoration consists of
opposed solid black and hatched elements separated by
framed but unpainted rectangles, alternating black and
white bands separating panel units and framing decoration
above and below; two broad black bands around neck.
Double coiled handle joins neck and shoulder; black neck
bands do not extend over handles.
CHIHUAHUA WARE, Textured
Ramos Incised (?) Plate 21, f.
Height: 22.3 cm.
Diameter: rim, 19.5 cm.; neck, 16.5 era.; body, 80.0 cm.
Incised redware with globular body, constricted neck,
and slightly flaring rim. Approximately 2.0 cm. below
the rim is a band of indentations 3.4 cm. wide. This
blends into the upper edge of the incised design which is
composed of alternating hatched and open triangles. The
bottom half of the jar is undecorated. The paste of this
vessel is very dark and friable, and closely resembles E1
Paso Polychrome paste. Missing sherds make it impossible
to determine whether or not this jar had been "killed."
Stone Art~facts
Discoidal Stones, Plate 22, a-c.
Three well shaped, polished, discoidal stones were found
among the broken pottery vessels about 30 cm. below the
surface. While these stones are somewhat various as to
size and shape, their over-all similarity suggests a common cultural function. Basically, they are of cylindrical
shape’ with convex sides. Each is flattened on top and
bottom, the upper surfaces having in the center a small
circular depression 15 mm. in diameter and 2 mra. in depth.
Plate 22, a: Limestone, incised design on body.
Height: 17.0 cm.
Diameter: top, 16.0 cm.; widest part, 18.0 cm.; bottom,
12.5 cm.
1. Diameters taken from different points o~ the circumference may vary as
much as 2cm. All diameters given here are ~aken at the widest l)Oint.

158

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

This stone has three design units spaced irregularly around
the body. Two of these are the conventional "altar" or step
design. The third is a half circle beginning and ending near
the base of the stone, the highest point reaching approximately to the middle. This element extends almost to the
base of one of the "altars" and is separated from the other
by a wide space with two parallel oblique lines, Figure 6,
a-d.
Plate 22, b: Dolomitic limestone, no decoration.
Height: 15.5 cm.
Diameter: top, 14.5 cm.; widest part, 19.5 cm.; bottom,
10.0 cm.
Plate 22, c: Do!omitic limestone, no decoration.
Height: 12.1 cm.
Diameter: top, 11.8 cm.; widest part, 15.2 cm.; bottom,
10.0 cm.
SCone Bal~s, Plate 22, d-f.
Three roughly spherical stone balls were found with the
pottery and discoidal stones described above. Specimens
d and f are of limestone, well rounded and polished; e is
crudely shaped of red rhyolite.
Diameters:" d, 7.0 cm.; e, 7.0 cm.; f, 5.0 cm.
Rectangular Tabular Stones, Plate 22, g-i.
Three tabular stone objects accompanied the artifacts described above. These are basically rectangular in shape and
are carefully worked, the edges being smoothed. The faces
show no abrasion. Specimen g is made of sandy shale; b_
and i are of dolomitic limestone.
Specimen g: length, 10.0: cm.; .width, 6.0 cm.; thickness,
8.0 mm.
Specimen h: length, 9.0 cm.; width, 5.0 to 7.25 cm.; thickness, 1.0 cm.
Specimen i: length, 8.0 cm.; width, 6.5 cm.; thickness,
8.0 mm.

PLATE 22
ObjecLs of s~)ne and shell.

See text for measurernenLs and description.

An Archdological Cache~rom the Hueco Basin, Texa~

161

.Legal-shaped Sandstone Object (not illustrated.)
Both faces well smoothed three contiguous rough breaks
around wide end, all other edges worked smooth.

Length,

17.5 cm.; width, 12.5 cm.; thickness, 6.0 ram.
Stone Beads, plate 22, m and n.
Specimen m: Green stone, unidentifiable.
Diameter of bead, 5.0 mm.; perforation, 0.5 ram.

T~ckness, i.0
Specimen n: Gray stone, unidentifiable.
Diameter Of b~ad, 3.0 ram.; perforation, 0.5 ram.
Thickness, 0.5 mm.
Turquoise:
Pendants, Plate 22, j. These range in shape from trape
zoidal through rectangular to oval. One specimen is triang~la~ With the perforation at the base r~ther than at the
apex ~f the triangle. Twenty-one are complete, the remaining 15 fragmentary. Most are of good color and are well
polished. Sizes range from 7.0 mm. to 18.0 mm. in length;
5.0 ram. to 10.5 ram. in width; and 1.5 ram. to 4.0 mm. in
thickness.
Disc Beads, Plate 22, 1. These are all approximately 7.0
mm. in diameter and 2.0 mm. in thickness. The cen~er
perforation averages 2.0 mm. in diameter.
Unpolished Nodules, Plate 22, k.
which show little or no work.

Angular fragments

Shell Ar~iSacts
Shell ornaments recovered .from the cache and the surroun~ding sand matrix total 7,477.
Beads
OlivelIa: 1,431 spire ground shell beads (Plate 22, o.),
a~era~ing 14,0 mm. in length and 8.0 mm~in diameter. Two
of these, incised with simple geometric: designs (Plate 22,

162

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

~

c

f

FIGURE 6
a-d.

Det~i]~ of design elernent~ on discoidal stone.

(See also Plate 22, a. p, and ~t.)

p and q; also Figure 6, f and g) were fou~nd in the small E1
Paso Polychrome olla; 200 were in the sherd container described previously; the others were recovered from the surface and from the sand in and around the cache.
Disc Beads: 6,029 fiat discoidal white shell beads (Plate
22, r) vary from 3.0 mm. to 5.0 mm. in diameter and from
0.5 mm. to 2.0 mm. in thickness. Five hundred of these, and
the one pink disc bead (Plate 22, s), were contained in the
small olla; the others were on the surface and scattered
throughout the sand around the cache.
Vermetus Tube Bead, Plate 22, t.
Pendants: Five nacreous shell pendants were recovered
from the cache. Four of these (Plate 22, u and v) were
in the small olla. The two shown at u are of triangular
shape with the perforation at the rounded apex. These
measure 20.0 ram. in basal width and 22.0 mm. in length.
The other two, shown at v, are of ovoid shape, marginally
perforated at the center of the long axis. These measure
25.0 mm. in length and 15.0 ram. in width. One zoomorphic
nacreous shell pendant (Plate 22, w) was found loose in the
sand. This ornament is marginally perforated near the center of the long axis. It measures 5.0 cm. in length and 2.0
cm. at the widest point, and is slightly convex in cross
section.
Ten Pelecypod shell pendants (Plate 22, x) were contained in the small olla. These measure approximately 16.0
ram. in length and the same in width; perforated at the

An Archeolog~caI Cache f~rom ~he Hueco Basin, Texas

hinge.

163

These shells are of a fluted variety but have been

worn practically smooth.
Bracelet, Plate 22, y.

One incomplete Glycyrneris shell

bracelet was recovered frem the loose sand fill.
Miscellaneous Artifacts
Eight polished pebbles of various size, shape, and color,
and three bluish-white chalcedony concretions were found
in the loose fill of the cache. The pebbles are naturally
shaped but display all-over polishing. They are smaller
than the usual pottery polishing stones.
SUMMARY
The cache herein described yielded a total of 7,625 artifacts including utility items, ornaments, and perhaps ceremonial objects. In a review of the literature on the E1 Paso
area, and in personal discussions with numerous archeologists and collectors, no account of a similar concentration
of artifacts in this area has been found.
Pottery is predominantly of the Chihuahua wares, and
all types represented are known to occur in the late Pueblo
III-Pueblo IV sequence. All types of beads recovered from
the cache are commonly found in this area, usually on the
surface or in refuse heaps, but not in large numbers. Shell
pendants occur less .frequently on the surface; further excavation may or may not prove them to be a common element in the prehistoric culture of this region.
The stone artifacts from this cache present a more ponderous problem. Both professional and amateur archeologists have examined this collection, but as yet, no familiarity with these types of artifacts has been revealed.
The cache was located in an open area sloping gently
to the southwest. Excavation was continued to sterile clay,
and the surrounding area was trenched to the north, east,
south, and west, to a distance of approximately 2 m. No
evidence of dwelling or burial was found.

