Decoration and Form o] Arkansas Caddo Pottery

9

NOTES ON THE DECORATION AND FORM
OF ARKANSAS GADDO POTTERY
BY S. D. DICKINSON
The urge to decorate their pottery was strong among the Caddoes
of southwestern Arkansas.’ The majority of the vessels they made
bear considerable decoration.

But they always held in check their

desire for ornamentation, never forgetting that decoration is secondary and shape is primary in good design.

Their standard of taste,

I assume, was largely determined by utility like that of primitive
potters the world over.

Usage naturally controlled the shapes or at

least was responsible for the original forms which might have been
continued through the years partly because of tradition.
In ceramic decoration one might expect more freedom--~nore in
the choice of motifs and their combination into patterns than in the
techniques.
to flourish.

Here individuality should have had its greatest chance
Using only a fear motifs, the potters could have

achieved innumerable combinations. The Caddoes did work out
a wide variety of distinctive patterns which is not at all surprising.
Yet, in some instances they appear to have been guided by group
feeling in the choice of certain designs for certain shapes. How far
this went is at present debatable. That would require an extensive
count of shapes, patterns and techniques represented in a number of
widely scattered public and private collections of Caddoan material.
Only then could one be absolutely sure of his ground. Lacking sufficient statistics, I wish to point out only suggestions of artistic conventions which dictated the type of decoration for specific shapes.
My observations are based on illustrations in the works of Clarence
13. Moore and M. R. Harrin~on, and specimens in the collection of
Federal Judge Harry J. Lemley, Hope, Arkansas, and in my own
collection.
Caddo forms are functional. The vessels are light and easy to
handle. Even the cooking pots are usually less heavy than pieces
of approximate size made by Middle Mississippi potters in northeastern Arkansas. Although varied in shape, Caddo pottery shows

10

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

economy in design. Harringt~m’s classification of shapes1 includes:
Bowls---Conical form, Semiglobular :[orm, Cazuela form, Intermediate form.
Pots--Urn form, Globular form, Semiglobular form, Vase.like
form, Cylindrical form.

Bottles (Sub-classification based chiefly on decoration rather
than shape)mWith necks, Neckless.
E]]igy an~ Eccentric Forms

These shapes are essentially spherical, conical and cylindrical in
contrast to some Coles Creek pieces which follow a rectangular
pattern,z Their function as containers seems to have been foremost
in the potter’s mind. Mass was reduced to minimum requirements.
Structural features which might have impeded use of the vessel were
avoided.
Proportions were refined.

This is more evident in the vessel sil-

houette thart in its dimensions, because placement of the maximum
and minimmn curvatures has much to do with the appearance and
determines the measures or rhythm of the component parts of the
vessel mass.

Take the urns, for example, whe.re the oral diameter

approximately equals the height. Here the potter created an optical
illusion of different proportions by constricting the v~l at a point
customarily about two-thirds from the base.
been lowered
obvious.

Had this constriction

to a point midway, monotony

would have been

Curves are subtle, less abrupt than Middle Mississippi silhouettes.
When there is a decided change in curvature as in the eazuelas each
half of the silhouette frequently :forms an "in:finite curw~’~ as Ruskin
defiaes it.3 The same holds true fro" many long necked bottles.
One plane flows into another, a feature structurally desirable as well
as more pleasing to the eye.
Eccentric shapes are rare.

Compound’~ and zoomorphic vessels

*Excluding many bottles having short bulbous necks which Moore
thought represented "a cup placed upon the body of the bottle--a
compound form.’’z~ Some may be. However, it is difficult to determine where conventionalization stopped.

Decoration and Form o:~ Arkansas Caddo Pottery

11

constitute a minor percentage of Caddo pottery. Rarely were attempts made to model entire vessels realistically in the shapes of
animals and humans. Fish (Plate I) and quadrupeds (chiefly
turtles and bears), and quail done fairly realistically are occasionally seen in collections of Caddo pottery. A few bottles modeled
with human features are known. Their rarity and style suggest
influence from the Middle Mississippi. Usually when potters wished
to give vessels zoomorphic ornament they were content to model a
head of a bird, bear or rabbit on one side and a tail on the opposite.
Conical and semiglobular bowls were the forms generally chosen
for such decoration. Bottles with zoomorphic ornament on the neck
have rather globular bodies. Effigy forms are more common in
the Ouachita than in the Red River Valley. Occassionally the Caddoes modeled handles in the form of quadrupeds or placed small
figures on the side of bowls and bottles. M0deling was more subordinated to conform to vessel shape than it was in the Middle Mississippi ceramic complex.
The grotesque element which figures so prominently in the design
of much Middle Mississippi pottery is ahnost if not entirely absent
in Caddo.

There is no macabre spirit evident.

Apparently the

Caddoes were especially conscious of Iine. Possibly this accounts
for them directing their attention to refinement of shape and to
linear decoration rather than to flamboyancy in form and boldness
in painted and relief designs.
A minor percentage of bottles and bowis are plain. Undecorated
bottles may be of any of the Caddo forms. The bowls most fiequently unadorned are. the conical ones.

Some of them, however,

have ~alloped ri~ns. ,’\lso, a few highly polished and engraved ones
having all-over patterns have been found in the Ouachita Valley. Undecorated urns and absolutely plain cooking pots of the g!obular,
semiglobular, vase and cylindric.a] forms are decidedly uncommon.
Decoratio~t of the neckless bottle--a cylindrical or conical jar
having a small aperture in the top of the vessel--shows regional
variation.

The form is most common in the Ouachita drainage and

rare in the Red. Those found in the vicinity of Friendship, Hot
Spring County, near the Ouachita ]~iver itself are frequently decorated with engraved scrolls.5

Upstream above Hot Springs in Gar-

land County the jars are more often plain.

Along the Little Mis-

12

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

souri, coming into the Ouachita from the west, in Clark County, the
jars I have seen are absolutely plain.
Harrington illustrates one from Ozan, Hempstead County, which
has parallel lines incised below the orifice.6

This may not be

Caddoan. A Coles Creek prototype of the Caddoan neckless bottle
or jar, found by Judge Harry J. Lemley at the Crenshaw Site, Miller
County, bears art incised pattern of scrolls and punctations.7
Ceramic decoration is of two types: (A) Integral which is structurally part of the vessel, conceived as a part of the form and if removed
would alter the shape.

(B) Applied which could be removed with-

out affecting the basic shape, having been added after the vessel
form was completed. It in turn may be subdivided into (1) Painting or Slipping; (2) Relief; (3) Intaglio. The last consists of
brushing, punctating, stamping, possibly combing, incising and engraving.

The most common type of integral decoratior~ is the vertically
scalloped rim, occuring in most cases on conical bowls. Some urns
have a four-scalloped rim. A few semiglobular bowls and a good
many cazuelas have an everted rim scalloped horizontally. Four is
the usual number of scallops on the everted rims of cazuelas. The
lip may be notched also. Certain vessel appendages might be considered as integral decoration, though they had a functional origin.
The bulbous legs of tripod bottles from the Ouachita and the upturned pointed sides of handles on Red River pots are quite pleasing
to the eye as well as serviceable.
Absence of pottery with painted

designs is sufficiently note-

worthy to be considered a negative trait of the Cadd~ ceramic complex. Vessels are found having a red slip which was certainly added
for decorative effect. However, the painting is a mass and not a
pattern; motifs are not present.

Pottery first given a red film and

later engraved is patterned, of course, in two colors because the
underlying paste has been exposed.

Enough of the film sometimes

was removed to leave slightly raised designs in red, more or less
isolated on the background which is normally buff co!ored. But
this properly belongs to the engraving technique instead of to paintPLATE 1
Engraved fish effigy bowl from Clark County, Arkansas.

Decoration and Form o~ Arkansas Caddo Pottery

15

ing, as does rubbing red and white pigment into engraving. Semiglobular bowls and intermediate forms were sometimes filmed with
red and then engraved. Neither filming alone nor with engraving
seems to have been favored by Arkansas Caddoes when decorating
cazuelas. Both methods were used on bottles. Pots and urns do not
often have a red slip. I am not familiar with a single neckless
bottle or cylindrical jar of the Caddoan complex that was painted
or painted and then engraved.
Applique consists chiefly of nodes and fillets.

They were used

either together or alone, and frequently with intaglio designs. Nodes
applied en mass occur on walls of conical bowls, occasionally on
semiglobular ones and less frequently on rims of cazuelas that slope
inward.

In the decoration of urns, bands of nodes were applied

to form ciretes or meanders or they fill the center of incised concentric circles.

Isolated nodes were combined with incising or en-

graving on bowls of intermediate form.

In the Upper Ouachita

drainage one occassionally sees red filmed bottles decorated Mth
nodes just belm~r the juncture of the tall neck.
Long and short fillets are most co~mnon on urns and cooking pots.
They were plain or crenulated possibly in imitation of cordage.
Pots having long fillets or long series of short ones are more typical of the Red than the Ouachita Valley. Bands were placed up
and down the vessel body, dividing it into panels or were arranged
in simple geometric figures.

They were also put on handles, as were

nodes, though pot rims were not a favorite place for such ornament.

Bottles decorated with fillets are rarely found in the Red River
Valley in Arkansas, but in the Ouachita Valley fillets were much
more popular for bottle decoration. Long necked, flat bottomed,
red filmed bottles having double bands in low relief swirling from
the neck down the body are characteristic of sites in the vicinity of
Hot Springs.
The fluted bottle occurs throughout the Ouachita area in Arkansas,
apparently being most abundant in Clark County. Its body is rather
conical, sloping to a straight neck which has a flat or an ovate lip.
The base is usually rounded. All exterior surfaces were polished.
Below the nebk and equidistant are three groups of fillets, each
group being composed of three strands of clay placed side by side

16

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

and smoothed together forming one fluted surface.

Near the base

there are similar groups either right under the others to balance
them or else to the side for the sake of contrast. (Plate II, Fig. a)
Thus, two horizontal zones were created on the body, further
divided into three each by the groups of fillets.

Spaces beLween the

upper groups have wide, engraved, horizontal lines; those below ¯
are filled with alternating plain and engraved crosshatched bands
running vertically or laterally. When they are lateral the bands
accentuate the conical silhouette of the bottle body.

Variations of this pattern--still confined to the same shape--are
found less frequently in the same area. The upper horizontal zone
for decoratior~ on the body is raised (an integral feature) and instead of flutes there are four parallel, incised vertical lines. (Plate
II, Fig. b) The remaining decoration may be similar to that on the
regular fluted bottle or else the engraved crosshatching in the bands
of the lower zone is broken by plain discs. Then, too, these bands
form arcs over the simulated flutes.
Simple designs--zigzags, herringbone, and meanders--done with
a fiber brush on a moist surface appear to be confined to pot forms.
Often there is no design, merely slight disconnected marks that
cover the body. Some of this work is what Harrington calls comb:ing.s A comb, though, should give more regular lines. Brushing
was used alone or with punctating, nodes and incising.
Punctations--"indentations done one at a time with the point of
a tool"9--run the gamut in Caddo decoration, forming complex as
well as elementa! patterns. Blunt and pointed twigs, reeds and
canes appear to have been the instruments used. It is difficult if
not impossible to determine whether some of the punctations were
done with a piece of cane or with the thumb nail. Moreover, the
punctation technique is responsible for a type of pseudo relief work,
done not by applique but by pushing or pinching the damp surface
into nodes, sometimes seen on conical bowls.
Although not confined to them, punctations are most common in
the decoration of pot forms. Some of the patterns are very distincPLATE 2
A. and B. Fluted and engraved water bottles from Clark County,
Arkansas.

Decoration and Form of Arkansas Caddo Pottery

19

tive of these shapes, being composed of delicate indentations arranged linearly to form all-over designs--nested trinagles, alternate
right and left oblique-hatched triangles, diagonal cribbing, concentric arcs and pendant concentric half-ovals.~°

Many are so finely

done that at a glance they might be mistaken for fabric impressions.
Vessels decorated in this fashion are especially characteristic of
Western Clark County. (Plate III, Fig. b).
Lunar shaped punctations which appear to have been done with
half a cane and straight punctations done ~6th a spatulate shaped tool
are likewise typical of urns and pots. They are more common on the
Ouachita, Caddo and Little Missouri rivers than they are on the
Red. And the vessels from the Ouachita bearing this decoration are
usually much larger. The punctations may be the sole element,
repeated many times in the rim pattern; but more frequently they
are combined with incised meanders and diagonal hatching. (Plate
III, Fig. a). The same motifs may or may not be repeated on the
vessel body. Scrolls may take the place of meanders, or else the
diagonal hatching is increased, forming all-over, compact, rectilinear figures. The punctations are either arranged in parallel
rows or done at random to fill the spaces between other elements
when they are present. Occasionally they are the dominant motif,
closely spaced impressions being arranged in eurvilinear bands.
On some yes, Is the punctations form depressed meanders, the indentations having been deeply impressed in the clay below the other
motifs.
Moore illustrates three urns from the Foster Place, Lafayette
¯ County, which have designs cmnpo~d of plain scrolls separated
by incised U-shaped lines.11 These, as have been noted, somewhat
resemble certain Marksville patterns.12

In lny collection there are

three similar vessels from Clark County.~°

One has closely spaced

punctations.
The other two have indentations which were done
with a spatulate shaped tool, notched to make several indentations
whenever it was pressed into th.e clay. Webb and Dodd call this
technique Belcher Stamping.33

At the Belcher Mound, Caddo Par-

fish, La., they found bowls bearing spirals consisting of stamping
outlined by trailed lines.

As they point out, Moore illustrates a

*Found in graves with engraved polished Caddo vessels.

2O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

pot from the Friday Place, Lafayette County, Arkansas, which has
a stamped band around the rim.~ z~ The decoration on the body is
brushed spirals. On Caddo vessels from Arkansas it is unusual to
find stamped motifs. Stamping was used to fill the background.
Stamping, insofar as I have observed on Caddo vessels from Arkansas, is confined to pots and urns.
Incising varies considerably. Some incised lines are fine enough
to be confused with engraving, whereas others are fairly wide
grooves polished somewhat like those of the Marksville.15 Incising was a common tectmique for decorating all shapes except the
neckless bottle. Most of the motifs which were executed in other
techniques were also incised. Generally, the rectilinear designs
occur more often on pot shapes while the scroll, meander and circle
are more abundant on bottles and bowls.
The most complex treatment of. the incised scroll is in the allover patterns where the scrolls are continuous or are connected by
curving lines. From Glendora, La.,16 northward to the headwaters
of the Ouachita, and in the Red River Valley, these patterns are
present on bottles that have a short bulbous neck. Whether or not
the elaborate incised scroll combinations were done with a comb
remains to be determined by measuring the grooves on the bottles.
Engraving was used principally on bottles and bowls and eccentric forms, most of which were highly polished. An engraved pot
is rare indeed. 17 The absence of engraving here cannot be explained
entirely on the grounds that it required too much labor to devote
to culinary vessels, for some of the previously discussed punctated
patterns would have been as difficult to do as engraving and would
have taken as much time.
Engraving enabled the potters to achieve certain effects which
could not be produced as easily by incising. Finer lines could be
made and the edges would be smoother. Crosshatching--difficult
to incise minutely- might have received stimulus from the
engraving.
Many engraved lines have spurs projecting from them.
PLATE 3
Incised punctate urn ~rom Clark County, Arkansas.
Linear punctate urn from Clark County, Arkansas.

Incised

Plate 3

Decoration and Form of Arkansas Caddo Pottery

lines do not have.

23

Webb and Dodd state: "The spurred line which

appears so often on Belcher Engraved and engraved wares from
other Caddo sites does not appear elsewhere in the Southeast or
Mississippi Valley area, so far as I can ascertain, but does appear
early in the Southwest (Mesa Verde, Mim~res) and again in Central
Mexico (Toltec)."18" Spurred lines were also painted on some Casas
Grandes vessels.19 Granting that spurred lines might have been
imported into the Caddo area, there is still a possibility that this
simple motif could have originated independently.

It is the sort

of element which a potter might develop while learning to engrave.
Incising is a freer process than engraving.

Soft clay naturally

yields more easily and quickly to an instrument than does clay at
the leather-hard stage and after it is baked. So a greater area could
be covered at one stroke and the resulting line would be more flowing. A skilled potter could easily incise a scroll or a meander at
one stroke without having to stop at the inflection and begin anew
in another direction.

Engraving a hard surface, on the other hand,

is often a piecemeal procedure, particularly when the design has
curves.

The graver may slip or thb surface may flake.

Working

under such difficulties, a Caddo potter might have decided to incorporate the ragged edges of lines into the design, and thus have
started a trait that was later used chiefly for its decorative effect.

Spurs were not limited to scrolls. They were used with circles
and rectangular motifs and are present on cazuelas and bottles of
various types. However, spurred scrolls and rectangles frequently
occur together with plain line engraving on a peculiar bottle shaped
somewhat like a pear, having a flat base, an elongated body and a
truncated conical neck. (Plate IV, Fig. b).
Engraved continuous scrolls, discs and hatching or crosshatching
are found in combination on semiglobular bowls (especially in the
Red River Valley) on cazuelas, intermediate form bowls and on
bottles. In most cases which I have observed, when they are all
present in bottle decorations the vessel has a globular body, a
rounded base and a bulbous neck.
The majority of the cazuelas were engraved. Others were incised,
or incised and punctated incised and engraved, or punctated and
engraved. To some extent, especially where the engraving technique
was used, the designs vary according to the shape of the bowls. There

24

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

are two main types of cazuelas: (1) A bowl having a rounded base
indistinguishable from the body and an inward sloping rim which
ends in a rounded or slightly flared lip. The height of the body is
usually greater than tile height of the rim. (2) A rather flat bowl with
less pronounced rounded body and a vertical or slightly concave rim
ending in a rounded or a decided flaring lip. The height of the body
is equal to or less than that of thc rim.
The first type, as has already been mentioned, sometimes has
nodes applied en mass to the rim. Incised designs appear to have
been more frequently used on this form also. Engraved designs
were not always confined to the rim, the base being covered with
an all-over pattern usually composed of motifs similar to those on
the rim.
Engraved scrolls, continuous or broken, with discs and hatching
or crosshatching filling the interspaces, are customary motifs on the
rim. On the base four continuous scrolls are commonly arranged
around a circle engraved on the very bottom of the vessel, and the
background is treated in the same fashion as on the rim.
In Arkan~s the second type of cazuela ordinarily lacks basal
decoration as is found on vessels at GIendora, La.2° Scrolls and
spirals again occur on the rim. Motifs, likewise common, are a keyshaped figure which might have been derived by conventionalizing
the spiral, and a motif resembling a link composed of two parallel
bands separated by a line. When the latter is used all the background is generalIy cro~hatched. These two motifs appear to be
confined to cazuelas.
Scrolls, spirals, or keys occur with concentric circles--all having
a common horizontal axis---on rims of cazuelas, an arrangement
which appears to have been avoided in the decoration of bottles.
Confinement of the pattern to the narrow rim band might well be the
explanation. Certainly the scrolls and spirals, keys and links are
elongated in pa~terns on the rim.
Necessity may have been responsible in the first place.

Yet, there

PLATE 4
A. Engraved cazuela from Clark County, Arkansas.
B. Bottle from Nevada County, Arkansas, having engraved spurred lines combined with fine line engraving.

Plate 3

Decoration and Form of Arkansas Caddo Pottery

is evidence of a definite artistic convention at work.

27

On cazuelas

of the first type which have a narrow rim the principal motifs
extend from the shoulder to the lip.

But on the second type, which

has the wider rim, the space occupied by the dominant motifs is further narrowed by the addition of one or more lines parallel and
just below the lip.

(Plate IV, Fig. a).

Two art styles are evident in Caddo pottery, represented at their
extremes by the smoothed, incised pots bearing rectilinear motifs
and punctations, and the polished bulbous necked bottles and cazuelas having engraved scroll designs with crosshatching and discs.
Tradition is always an important force in art both as a negative and
as a positive factor. On one hand it sets standards for the conservative artist to meet while on the other hand it pricks the rebel to
develop a new style. In civilized art circles these two aspects carry
on a continuous tug of war. In a primitive society where art was
not divorced from industry and religion one might expect a more
intense struggle between the old and the new. Age and habit would
nip novelty’s heels. The new would be shadowed by the old. That
is what happened in the Caddo country.
Judge Harry J. Lemley and I suggested in 1939 that the engraved
pottery represented an intrusion into the indigenous incised ware
area.Z l Webb and Dodd proved it in 1941 by making a stratigraphic
study of pottery and house types at thd Belcher Mound, La.ZZ
They found incised straight line and punctated wares followed by
steadily increasing engraved, brushed and ridged wares. The
Srnithport Inclsed-Punctate which predominated on the first level
bears some resemblance to the decoration of pot forms from the
Ouachita area of Arkansas. Many of the latter, however, have curvilinear motifs combined "with punctations and rectilinear motifs.
Foster Trailed-Incised and Belcher Stamped, the decorative types
most closely ~-esembling Marksville, were coeval with Belcher
Engraved. In other words, these two types had sufficient tradition
back of them to survive despite the growing popularity of engraving: The patterns were stitl associated with an old form.
Even a brief examination of Caddo pottery.reveals designs associated with specific shapes. Evidently artistic conventions recognized by the group and backed by tradition governed individual potters when choosing designs and techniques. When a detailed statis-

28

Texas ATcheo!ogical and Paleontological Society

tical study of motifs, techniques and shapes has been completed
then it will be possible to formulate the Caddo esthetic creed.
I wish to thank Judge. Harry J. Lemley of Hope, Arkansas, and
Dr. James B. Griffin of the Ceramic Repository, University ~of
Michigan, for reading my manuscript and making helpful suggestions.
Prescott, Arkansas.
July 15, 194,3.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Harrington, M. R., Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas, Indian
Notes and Monographs, The Heye Foundation, New York, N. Y.,
1920, pp. 174-194.
2. Lemley, H. J., Discoveries Indicating a Pre.Caddo Culture On
Red River in Arkansas, Bult. Texas Archaeol. and Palaeontol. Sot.,
V~ol. 8, Abilene, Texas, 1936, PI. 7, Figs. 2 and 3.

3. Ruskin, John, Modern Painters, Vol. IV of Works edited by
E. T. Cook and Alexander Wedderburn, London, 1903, p. 88.
4. Moore, C. B., Antiquities Of The Ouachita Valley, Jour. Acad.
Nat. Sciences, Philadelphia, Pa., 1912, p. 32.
5. Personal communication from Dr. and Mrs. T. L. t[odges, Bismarck, Arkansas, Jmm, 1943.
6. Harrington, M. R., Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas, Indian
Notes and Monographs, The Heye Foundation, New York, N. Y.,
1920, Pi. XCII, Fig. a.
7. Lemley, H. J., Discoveries Indicating a Pre.Caddo Culture On
Red River in Arkansas, Bull. Texas Archaeol. and Palaeontol. Soc.,
Vol. 8, A.bilene, Texas, 1936, PI. 7, Fig. 1.
8. Harrington, M. R., Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas, Indian
Notes and Monographs, The Heye Foundation, New York, N. Y.,
1920, p. 165.
9. Report Of The Con]erence On Southeastertr Pottery Typology,
The Ceramic Repository for the Eastern United States, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, 1938.
10. Marriott, A. L., F~rther Studies In Design Element Terrain.

Decoration and Form o] Arkansas Caddo Pottery

29

ology, News-letter No. 4d,, Clearing House For Southwestern Museums, Denver Art Museum, Denver, Colorado, 1942, p. 150.
11. Moore, C. B., Some Aboriginal Sites Or~ Red River, Journ.
Acad. Nat Science, Philadelphia, Pa., 1912, Figs. 117-119.

12. Setzler, F. M., Pottery 0] The Hopewell Type From Louisiana,
Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., Washington, D. C-, p. 20.
13. Webb, C. H., and Dodd, Monroe, Pottery Types From The
Belcher Mouml, Bull. Texas Archaeol. and Palaeontol. Soc., Abilene, Texas, 1941, pp. 97-98.
!4. Moore, C. B., Some Aboriginal Sites On Red River, Journ.
Acad. Nat. Sciences, Philadelphia, Pa., 1912, Fig. 81.
!5. Setzler, F. M., Pottery 0] The HopeweIl Type From Louisiana,
Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., Washington, D. C. p. 20.
16. Moore, C. B., Antiquities Of The Ouachita Valley, Journ. Acad.
Nat. Sciences, Philadelphia, Pa., !912, pp. 27-81.
17. Harrington, M. R., Certain Caddo Sites In Arkansas, Indian
Notes and Monographs, The Heye Foundation, New York, N. Y.,
1920, p. 183.
18. Webb, C. H. and Dodd, Monroe, Pottery Types From Ttve
Belcher Mound, Bull. Texas Archaeol. and Palaeontol. Soc., Abilene,
Texas, 1941 p. 113.
19. Marquina, Ignacio, Estudio ,4rquitectonico Comparative De
Los Monumentos Arqueologicos De Mexico, Secretaria De Educacion
Publica, Mexico, D. F., 1928, p. 31.
20. Moore, C. B., _/lntiquities Of The Ouachita Valley, Journ.
Acad. Nat. Sciences, Philadelphia, Pa., 1912, Figs. 31-35.

21. Dickinson, S. D., and Lemley, H. J., Evidences Of The Marksrifle And Coles Creek Complexes At The Kirkkam Place, Clark
Count)’, .4rkansas, Bull. Texas Archaeol. and Palaeonto!. Society,
Abilene, Texas, 1939, p. 188.
22. Webb, C. H. and Dodd, Monroe, Vide Sttpra.

