3O

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

SOME EXPERIMENTS IN THE USE
OF THE ATLATL
BY

J. WALKER DAVENPORT

It was my good fortune to be a member of the Witte Memorial
Museum’s expedition of June, 1933, to the West Texas area. It was
on this expedition that I first learned of the weapon known as the
atlatl. We then found several handle and distal ends of atlatls, but
unfortunately did not find any complete specimens. My questions
regarding this weapon and its use went unanswered, so, for the
time I dropped the subject.
While making the drawings for the Museum’s Bulletin I was again
reminded of it and decided then to make an atlatl at the first available opportunity and try it out.

Sometime later when the opportun-

ity arrived the only piece of wood available was one of yellow pine
and this was used. The distal end of the atlatl was patterned after
the portion deseribed in the Witte Museum Bulletin No. 2.

The

handle was shaped somewhat along the lines of one found in the
Shumla Caves.

Having no idea as to what the length of the atlatl

should be and as the piece of wood was twenty-four inches long I
made it of that length.

There was a groove in the face of the

original atlad and ahhough its purpo~ was a mystery, I included
it in my model. Talks with a number of archaeologists regarding
this groove brought no explanation as most of them seemed to have
given it very little thought.
The completed atlatl and a commercial twenty-eight arrow were
taken out into the patio for a trial.

Having had no instruction in the

use of this weapon, a good bit of experimenting had to be done to
find the proper handgrip. A grip was found that seemed to answer
the purpose and a trial throw was made. Plate 5, figures 1 and 2.
The shaft went straight up in the air af~d at the same time turned end
for end.

Different holds and releases were tried with little success.

The shaft still turned end for end.

Unable to control the flight of

this arrow and believing it to be due to the short length, a search
PLATE 5
Illustrating method of gripping the atlatl.

Plate 5

Some Experiments in the Use of the Atlatl
started for a longer one.

33

A light javelin in the possession of Mr.

A. K. Boyles, the Museum taxidermist, seemed to suit the requirements.

The first try with this produced astonishing results. The flight
was true and the shaft struck with terrific force. In a very short time
I was hitting within a three-feet circle at a distance of about eighty
paces.
It was at this time that a reason for the groove suggested itself.
It is rather difficult, when in a hurry, to hold the atlatl in one hand
with about eighteen inches protrudging, and the arrow in the other
with an equal distance or more protruding and try to fit the hock to
the hook. By using the first and second fingers of the atlatl hand
as a guide, Plate 5, figure 3, the nock end of the shaft can be. quickly
dropped into the grove and slid up to the hook, where it automatically
and properly hocks itself. Plate 5, figure 4. My use of this groove
may or may not have been the original reason for its being there but
it fuIfills this purpose beautifully.
Several years of odd-time experimentation have revealed the following facts:
1. The shaft projected with the atlatl does not have the speed
and snap of one driven by the bow, but the heavier weight of the
shaft more than makes up for what it lacks in speed. I completely
ruined the bark on the side of a hackberry tree at eighty paces using
a bunt point.
2. For best results the shaft should be at least forty and not over
~venty-two inches long.
3. A rather heavy point seems to add to, rather than subtract
from the shaft’s ability to hold a true flight.
4. When properly balanced, feathering is not essential, but
cleaner flights can be had if three feathers about six inches in
length are used.
5. The weight is not so important, as long as it stays within limits
of a rather wide range. This range would vary somewhat with individuals. The greater the weight, the greater the shocking power
but, after a certain point in weight the shorter the flight. My

34

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

experiments have as yet, been too limited to ascertain if standard
rules could be worked out for this, but I believe that they can.
I have experimented with shafts of the following weight. 1½ oz.,
length 49 inches; flight fair, distance average 75 yards. 31,~ oz.,
length 60~ inches; flight excellent; distance average 148 yards. I
have not yet had the opportunity of trying this shaft in real open
spaces so am unable to say at this time what the final distance
may be. 9½ oz., length 71½ inches; flight excellent; distance 110
yards. There is no doubt but that practice to develop the proper
throwing arm would increase these distances, still, I am inclined to
believe the relation between t-hem would remain about the same.
6. The length of the atlatl again allows some variation. I have
tried atlatls with over-all lengths as follows: 16½, 24, 30, and 36
inches. Of these the 24 inch model seemed to give the best results.
The 36 inch model seemed too long for accurate throwing and
with the heavier shafts offered too much resistance. The strain
on the hand and fingers being much too great for consistent practice.
The 16½ inch model on the other hand, offered so little resistance
that the feel of the shaft was lost, resulting in loss of accuracy.
This was more pronounced when throwing the light shafts. If
however, the shaft .weight was a pound or more, then the short
model would give better results than the longer ones. Thus the
weight of the shaft governs the length of the atlatl.
The atlatl took many forms among the aborigines of what is now
the North American Continent.

The groove is more or less present

on them all. The hook assumed many shapes as each individual
made his revisions and improvements. The handles suffered somewhat the same fate.

On many, two finger holes were carefully

carved in the handle, on others one finger hole and a thumb groove.
Some types consisted simply of two finger grooves while others
included loops of rawhide for the finger grip. Two shallow hocks
for the first and second fingers are all that are necessary.

Objects

bound to the atlatl which served as fetishes, balance weights or
both have been reported by several writers. I have experimented
with balance stones of varying weights at various positions on the
PLATE 6
Illustrating method of throwing with atlatl.

Plate 6

Some Experiments in the Use o] the Atlatl

37

atlatl but was unable to detect any advantage or any special disadvantage.

It is possible that balance weights were used only in

special cases with specific types of shafts and as I have not run
the entire gauntlet of shaft types and weights my findings are not
concIusive.
In use, the atlatl is held in the throwing hand with the first and
second fingers inserted through the fingernocks-or loops and the
third and fourth fingers holding the handle butt firmly against the
palm of the hand. Plate 5, figures 1 and 2. Held in this manner
a straight hinge movement of the wrist is possible. The shaft is
then hocked to the hook and the first finger is pressed firmly against
the face of the atlatl and the shaft lowered across the top of this
finger. The thumb and second fingers are then brought up to a
firm grip on the shaft. Plate 5, figures 5 and 6. This completes
the hand grip. The throw takes the form of a straight overhand lob,
with a snap wrist action at the end of the movement. The arm is
carried over and back with the shaft projecting past the ear and
approximately parallel to the ground. Plate 6, figure 1. As the
throw starts pressure of the thumb and second finger against the
shaft is released. The exact point of the release varies with the
distance of the target etc., however, after a few throws this release
is accomplished at the correct point with no conscious thought and
effort on the part of the thrower. Just before the end of the forward arm movement, the wrist which has been steadily bending back
to keep the shaft in line, Plate 6, figure !, 2 and 3, is brought forward with a snap, adding many yards and much power to the throw.
Plate 6, figure 4, and 5. The other arm is used as a balance, held
out in front of the body at the beginning of the throw and carried
around to the rear as the throwing arm moves forward. In this
way balance is maintained on long, hard throws. It is of some use
even on short, easy throws
Aiming is accomplished simply by looking at the target.

It is

absolutely necessary to concentrate on the object to be hit, because
if the eye wanders, so does the shaft.

Curator of Archaeology,
Witte Memorial Museum,
San Antonio, Texas.

