84

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontologica~ Society

FOSSIL CYCADS IN TEXAS WITH A
DESCRIPTION OF A NEW
SPECIMEN
The Trinity age rocks that outcrop in Texas are all of
epicontinental origin and consist of near-ocean or marginal
sediments and of offshore sediments. The marginal sediments consist of sandstone, sandy shales and conglomerates.
The offshore sediments are largely composed of limestone
and marl. The marginal facies is of particular interest because of its widespread distribution, presence of fossil wood,
cycads, dinosaur bones, and fish bones and teeth. The offshore beds contain fossils of equal interest in the form of
ripple marks, raindrop imprints, mud cracks, dinosaur tracks
and coral reefs as well as a variety of minerals such as anhydrite, gypsum, sulphur, celestite, and mineral salts.
The Trinity outcrop in Texas is a broad belt of thirty or
more miles in width along the.inner margih of the Balcones
Fault region and extends for a distance of 300 or more miles
from Red River Valley across Wise, Palo Pinto, Erath,
Comanche, and other counties south-southwesterly to Fred-"
ericksburg in Gillespie County, west to the Rio Grande. The
presence of the beds is most evident to those with but little
acquaintance of the geology of Texas by the great quantities
of petrified or silicified wood that weathers from the siliceous sands. Central Texans know the beds as thick sandstones and sandy soils that form the base of many of the
Cretaceous limestone outliers such as the Santa Anna Mountains of Coleman County; the Callahan Divide with its numerous remnants of a once-continuous sheet of sandstone as
represented in the mountains at Buffalo Gap, Ovalo, Cedar
Gap, Clyde, and numerous other areas.

PLATE

20

la. " Sidle view of specimen of cycad found in ~Iontague, County.
lb. Basal view of Montague County cycad showing relative
thicknesses of distinctive layers.
lc. Enlarged view of a portion of cycad trunk showing numerous
bract areoles, a partially exposed strobulus and a natural cross
section of a fruit.

Plate 20

Fossil Cycad$ in Texas With Description ~] New Specimen

87

The preservation of the petrified wood is not of the best
but the wood is attractive and fairly large quantities are
used in building filling stations, houses, yard fences, and
rock gardens. The town of Glen Rose is a good example of
an area where it is commonplace to see it used for all the
purposes that stone is generally used. A study of the trunks
of these conifers indicates that they were rarely over two
feet in diameter. Many pieces were decayed and cracked
when they were replaced by silica in percolating waters.
Some pieces are also pierced with irregular holes which
represent the bore holes of "worms."
Associated with the conifers are the fossilized cycad stems
or trunks. Although much rarer than the silicified wood,
they occur in such numbers that G. R. Wieland, perhaps the
foremost authority on cycads, both living and fossil, has
classified the Trinity of Texas as one of the five great cycadbearing regions of North America. The other areas being
the Arundel of Maryland, the Lakota of the Black Hills
region, the Como of the Black and Freeze Out Hills, and the
Mesa Verde of the Chuska Mountain region of New Mexico
and Arizona.
Specimens have been found in the following counties in
Texas: Bell, Callahan, Comanche, Erath, Gillespie, Hood,
Maverick, and Montague. A single specimen was reported
by Professor Winton at a locality in Bell County but no
record of its present location is known. The Maverick County trunk was found by Udden and described by Wieland.
It is the only recorded specimen from the Upper Cretaceous
of Texas. The foremost collectors of cycads in Texas are
Ross Wolfe 6f Stephenville (Erath County) and Joe Benton
of Nocona, Texas. The bulk of Texas specimens is now
owned by the above named individuals, Yale University, the
University of Texas, and Texas Memorial Museum.
The Cretaceous of the world might be called an age of
dinosaurs and cycads. It is true, of course, that there were
many other great groups of plants and animals flourishing
equally as well during this period of the earth’s history but
cycads, by their abundance and beauty: were outstanding

88

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

plants. The number of cycads, both living and fossiI~ is not
large but the plants are important because of their primitive
nature and ornamental character. In general, the plants
have tuberous stems usually covered with an armor of petiole
bases. The stem terminates in a crown of large stiff pinnate
leaves. The plants are dioecious, the male and female organs being borne by different individuals as is common
with most of the higher animals. The "hotel palm" so popular many years ago is a living cycad. The fossil distribution of cyca-ds is very different from the present geographic
range of the surviving forms. Today they are confined to
the tropical and subtropical regions of both the eastern and
western hemispheres. The genus Zamia extends from Florida to Chile. Cycas ranges from Japan to Australia. One
genus, Microzamia, is peculiar to Australia. Mexico also
has two genera, Dioon and Ceratozamia, confined to its
southern region. Many of the forms are "palm-like" while
others closely resemble the tree ferns. Smaller species have
been confused with true ferns. Almost all of the living
forms are notable for their longevity. They grow very
slowly and some forms are believed to reach an age of a
thousand years or more. Fertilization in the many forms is
exceedingly interesting but such detailed studies can only
be appreciated by the few who are well acquainted with
specialized plant physiology. The largest sperms known to
the animal or plant world a.re those of the Cycads. Some are
of such size (1/4 millimeter) that they can be seen in ordinary light while still living with the unaided or naked eye.
The following species have been described by Wieland.
Some descriptions are still in manuscript:
Cycadeoidea
C.
C.
C.
Co
C.
C.
C.

bart-johnsoni Wieland
boesiana Wieland
sp.
uddeni Wielandbarti Wieland
wolfei Wieland
dyeri Wieland
johnstoni Wieland

CallahanCounty
Wise County
Gillespie County
Maverick County
Comanche County
Erath County
Erath & Hood Counties
Erath County

Additional Archeological Data From North Texas

89

The new specimen described in this paper was obtained
by 1Vlr. Glen Evans from Joe Benton of Nocona.

It was

donated to the Texas ]YIemorial Museum at Austin.

The

trunk is from Montague County and closely resembles C.
johnstoni Wieland more than any other described type from
Texas but the exact specific determination must be made
by a study of its characters by the few individuals in North
America who have made close studies of the fossil cycads.
The specimen is a large, complete, well-preserved trunk,
ellipsoid or conoid in shape. The total height is 16~/s inches.
The greatest circumference is 44~/8 inches. Axes cutting the
trunk transversely at the greatest circumference measure
15s~ inches and 13s~ inches in diameter, giving a maximum
flattening of 2 inches.

The distortion due to flattening

probably took place before the trunk was replaced with
silica.

The elliptical cross section of the trunk is further

shown in the basal view of the trunk. The lack of preservation of the roots and adjacent portions of the trunk has left
a basal cavity which clearly .shows the armor, cortex, and
other inner structural layers.

The entire trunk, and par°

ticularly the region approaching the apex, is studded with
numerous fructifications.

The bract areoles surrounding

the fruits are very distinct and some are broken away so
deeply as to show the ovulate stroboli.

Several stroboli are

broken and these show natural cross sections.

The fructifi-

cations are ~o numerous that they have disrupted the regular s~iral symmetry displayed so frequently in cycads. An
elliptically shaped cavity in the side of the trunk is similar
to that of a specimen of Cycadeoidea marshiana figured by
Wieland (Yale specimen number 3).

The condition of the

Yale trunk is described by Wieland as having been caused
by the breaking away or non-conservation of a small branch.
The cavity in the Texas trunk is 4½ inches in depth and

90

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

cuts through the armor and passes into other trunk layers
to the inner medullary portion.
Trunk dimensions of the Montague County specimen are
as follows:
Height

16~/8 inches

Circumference (greatest)

44~/8 inches

Diameter (average at circumference)

14~ inches

Armour thickness

2~ inches

Cortex thickness

1

Diameter of Phloem, Xylem, Medulla

63~ inches

inch

(In recent months ~fr. Benton has given his large collection of cycads
to Texas ~Iemo~’lal ~,Iuseum.
]~Its collection, like all really valuabl~ collections, ca~Tles correct inform~tlo~ on the localities where eacl~ specimen
was found.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sellards, E. H., "Fossil Cycad Localities in Texas," PanAm Geologist, 1928.
VCieland, G. R., "American Fossil Cycads," Carnegie Institute, publication 34, v. 2, 1~16.
Wieland, G. R., "Two New-North American Cycadeoids,"
Canada Geological Survey, 1921.
Wieland, G. R., "Land Types of the Trinity Beds," Science
n. s., 1931.

