BOOK REVIE\VS
EDITOR’S NOTE: Two rev|ews of the s~me item seem justiiled by
the fact that Dr. Erlk K. Reed’s treatment is general and objective, while
that of Dr, Cyrus N. Ray is a critical reaction to only one aspect of Fir.
Krieger’s treatise.

Culture Complexes in Northern Texas. By Alex D. Krieger.
Austin (University of Texas) Press, 1946. Pp. 366. Illustrations.

$2.50.
Mr. Krieger’s book is an outstanding piece of work and a major contribution to North American archeology. I should say it
is the equivalent of at least two doctorial dissertations. A thorough
and detailed analysis and bold synthesis of past findings and present knowledge of archeological materials in northern Texas, it
will be basic to all future work in that area.
In order to approach his objective of establishing cultural
connections and time relationships between northern Texas and
the Pueblo Southwest on the one hand and the Caddoan area of
the Mississippi on the other, Krieger first reviews the known material of northwestern, north-central and northeastern Texas in
considerable detail, analyzing and reinterpreting findings with
particular attention to resemblances and relationships to Puebloan
and Caddoan groups and to problems of dating.
The pueblo-!~ke villages of the Canadian Valley, the "Panhandle Culture," are taken up first, under the more specific designation of "Antelope Creek focus." Data and objects obtained
through the excavations of Mr. Studer, Dr. Holden, and others
are reviewed in detail and brought together into the first systematic description of the complex. The time of occupation, indicated by Pueblo pottery to fall between 1300 and 1450 A. D., is
discussed. That the abar~donment of these sites and disappearance of the culture was due to both droughts between 1440 and
1470 and attacks by the "Queechos" and "Teyas" (who were
Plains Apaches) is suggested, reasonably enough.
Related materials in adjacent areas and affiliations with the
Upper Republican culture of Kansas and Nebraska and with the
Pueblo dulture of New Mexico are discussed. Connections with
the Southwest involve both exchange of specific artifacts--glazepaint pottery and obsidian and turquoise from the Pueblos in the
Panhandle sites, instruments of Alibates dolomite and of antler
and bison-bone found at Pecos~-and spread of ideas, particularly

158

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

shown in Panhandle architecture.
Krieger points out that the
"Antelope Creek focus" cannot be considered a peripl~eral Puebloan development, but instead is basically Plains with much
Pueblo influence, especially in architectm’e.
Instead of stopping there and being satisfied with the phrase
"Pueblo influence" or "Pueblo contacts," he goes on to wonder
just how it worked, and why, for example, there is so little Pueblo
pottery when there is so much Pueblo influence manifested in
architecture.
The suggestion, which is credited to J. Charles
I4elley~ that the explanation might be occasional intermarriage
with Pueblo women, who are the house-owners in many pueblos,
is penetrating but unacceptable: if there is any one activity primarily associated with women, other than childbirth, it is potterymaking.
The fact that, as pointed out by Krieger and Kelley, the Plains
traits found adopted at Pecos are ideas connected with men’s activities such as hunting, leads to the opposite conclusion--that
parties of men from the Panhandle visited Pecos to trade, and
did not bring back any Pueblo wives. Instead, they were greatly
impressed by Pueblo architecture and on their return started
building stone houses, with specific Southwestern features, while
their women kept on making the same kind of cord-marked
"Plains" pottery as before; the men not having been especially
interested in cermatic types.
Pueblo pottery and metates in the Llano Estacado, discussed
next, are thought by Krieger to represent Puebloan occupation-at least by seasonal bison-hunting parties--rather than merely
"influence," as far east as the Break of the Plains. The interesting point is brought out that "primitive" man would have been
unable ~.o farm in the short-grass plains, unable to break the sod
without machinery, but could have raised corn successfully in the
sand dune areas of the Llano. The Pueblo pottery of this area
includes types which can be dated in the fourteenth through sixteenth centuries. That the spread of Pueblo pottery in TransPecos Texas occurred mainly between 1300 and 1450 is pointed
out. The halting of this activity by about I500, evidently, may
have been due to the arrival of Lipanan Apaches.
Next, the materials associated with and including pottery in
north-central Texas are taken up, under the designation "Henrietta focus."
The discussion is based primarily on the Harre~
site in Young County as a type and a controlled excavation. Data
and artifacts from other sources are then compared to the Hartell site findings, and the Henrietta focus is defined in a tentative

Book Reviews

159

or preliminary manner by a list of traits which are consistently
found together, with plain shell-tempered pottery as a guide or
a sort of "index fossil." Other major features of the complex include--subsistence on both hunting of bison and other animals
and on corn-raising, with considerable fishing; no remains of
houses; snub-nosed scrapers and side-scrapers, flint drills and
knives, bone awls, small triangular arrowpoints; sandstone elbow
pipes; flexed burials with stone slaps. This culture is found in
the middle Red River-Wichita River and in upper drainages Of
the Trinity and Brazos; within the area between Abilene and Dallas and the Red River. How far it may extend into Oklahoma is
unknown.
As to the date of the "Henrietta focus," a period between 1400
or 1450 and as late as 1600 is suggesteed by the few fragments
of Puebloan pottery which have been found, mainly of the longlived type, Chupadero Black-on-White, and by other considerations. That the people of thisculture cannot have been Wichita~
Krieger demonstrates by careful comparison with ethnological
data on the Wichita and to archeological data from the Paint Creek
sites in Kansas, which are identified with the protohistoric Wichita
(Quivira). There is a very general resemblance, and Henriett~
materials are to be classified broadly as Plains.
That the historic site at Spanish Fort is, however, Wichita,
and in fact is specifically the Taovaya village of the 18th c~ntury, as previously pointed out by Adolph Wire, is agreed to by
Krieger. The southward movement of the Wichita into northern
Texas evidently did not occur until the historic period.
Another archeological complex pertinent to this whole problem is that of the late horizon in central Texas, which Krieger,
following Kelley, refers to as the Austin focus and identifies with
the historic Tonkawa.
Characteristics of this cultural division
include small, light, barbed arrowpoints; beveled knives and snubnosed scrapers; plain smooth bone-tempered pottery; ~exed burials in stone lined pits; shell ornaments and European glass trade
beads. Trade pottery from the Hasinai (Tejas) of the Neches
Valley appears. There are a few similarities between this Austin
focus and the earlier Henrietta focus to the north, and in the Abilene-Upper Brazos region are found mixtures of Austin and Henrietta types.
Finally, the Caddoan area is reached in northeastern
and the focus represented at, and named for, the Sanders
Lamar County is exhaustively reviewed and is found to
in the general period between 1300 and 1450, and to be

Texas,
site in
belong
related

160

Texas ArcheoIogieal and Paleontological Society

to the famous Spiro mound site in eastern Oklahoma and to the
Crenshaw site in southwestern Arkansas.
After thus establishing a series of foci, or archeological complexes, clear across northern Texas for the late, pottery-producing
horizons, Krieger takes up the problem of direct and indirect contacts between the Caddoans on the east and the New Mexico
Pueblos to the west, and of relationships between those two advanced cultures.
The suggestion is made, new and at first startling but wellsupported and reasonable, that certain bowl-forms of late glazes
at Pecos represent a Caddoan influence from northeastern Texas.
Conversely, certain shapes and also the technique of neck-banding in sixteenth-century material in northeastern TexaS, ~f Caddoan affiliation, are thought to be of possible Southwestern derivation.
Krieger then summarizes the evidences of cultural contact
across north Texas between the Pueblo Southwest and Caddoan
East Texas, and brings out the untenability, already widely recognized, of the concept of a "Caddoan Root" in the Southwest,
which was advanced by certain workers several years ago and
has since been dropped.
In concluding sections, the cultural units which have been
discussed are reviewed in relation to one another and correlations
between them established,
Krieger has done a very fine job on a most important line.
The thorough presentation and analysis of data and the clear and
significant interpretation of them has only been hinted at .in this
review. Of special Value to "outsiders" is the fact that the extensive and very important findings of archeologists in north Texas, which~have not been widely enough L~own, are here brought
together in a readily accessible and understandable form.
Erik K. Reed
Santa Fe, N.

Culture Complexes in Northern Texas. By Alex D. Krieger.
Austin (University of Texas) Press, 1946. Pp. 366. Illustrations.
$2.50.
The Harrell Site
This work describes some of the later pottery sites of northern
Texas, and seems to be an attempt to separate the pottery culture

