THE AGE OF THE MELBOURNE INTERVAL
I~vn,rG Rous~
In a recently published monograph on the archaeology of
the Indian River region in eastern Florida (Rouse, 1951,
21-34), the writer had occasion to define the following
sequence of ecological periods:
i. Anaslasia Interw_L The sea covered the Indian River area,
causing the accumulation of a layer of sea shells known as the
Anastasia Formation.
2. Anastasia-Melbourne IntervaL The sea fell and erosion took
place, producing an unconformity at the top of the Anastasia Formation.
3. Melbourne Interval The sea again rose, although not to such
an extent as to cover the Indian River area, and a second cycle of
deposition ensued. Authorities diHer as to the setting: ~resh water
marshes and/or areas partially intmdated by the sea. In any case,
various land mammals became trapped in the deposits to such an
extent that it is now known as the Melbourne bone bed.
4. Melbourne-Van Valkenburg Interval Another fall in the sea
level led to a second period of erosion and to an unconformity on
top of the Melbourne Formation.

5. Van Valkenburg Interval Most recently, the sea and, inland,
the water table have been rising; both salt- and fresh-water marshes
have formed; and deposition is once more taking place in them.
It is generally agreed that the first two of these intervals
are interglacial and glacial respectively and the last two,
postglacial. On the other hand, the intervening Melbourne
Interval is the subject of much controversy, some authors
believing that it, too, was interglacial; others, that it dates
from a recession during the last glacial period; and still
others, that it may be postglacial (cf. I-Iay, 1923, pp. 381-3;
Gross, 1951, p. 116; and Rouse, 1951, pp. 31, 33). Simpson
(1929, p. 262) perhaps best stated the case when he Said that
its age is "very dubious."
*Contribution from the Caribbean Anthrol)ological Program of the Yale Peabody
Museum, The support of this program by the Wenner-Gren Foundation for
thro~ological Research, Inc. is acknowledged, and I also wish to express my
~)r~ciation to Alex D. Krieger for his advice and for suggesting that I writ~
article.

294

Texas Archeologlcal and Paleontological Society

Since our monograph was primarily concerned with archaeology and none of the archaeological material then
known seemed to date back as far as the Melbourne Interval, l we devoted relatively little space to the controversy
concerning the age of that interval. However, new material
has since been obtained which indicates that man may
actually have been present when the Melbourne Formation
was laid down,Z and therefore it will perhaps be worthwhile
to review the various possible hypotheses concerning its age.
The di~t’iculty in dating the Melbourne Interval arises
from the fact that there are two main lines of approach to
the problem, each of which leads to a different solution. One
approach is based upon the nature of the mammalian fauna,
which includes such characteristically interglacial animals
as the Columbian elephant, mastadon, horse, and sloth. The
presence of these mammals led Hay (1923, pp. 381-3), for~
example, to place the Melbourne Formation in the Second
Interglacial (Yarmouth).
The other approach is based upon the nature of the sealevel changes. These happen to be particularly well recorded
in the stratigraphy of the Indian River area because the
region is low and flat, so that its drainage was affected to a
maximum extent by each rise and fall in the level of the sea.
Geologists (e.g., Parker, 1945, p. 21) have concluded that the
level of the land in the area has not changed since midglacial time. Hence, the rise in the level of the sea during the
Melbourne Interval must have been purely eustatic, and its
level can be compared with that in other areas of purely
eustatic change, such as southern England, where it has been
possible to date the various levels of the sea. Applying the
dates for southern England to the Indian River succession
of levels, we have come to the conclusion that the Melbourne
Interval must have been in existence during Early and

I. In the wrlter’a opinion, the remains of the ~o-called Vere and Melbourno
Mar~, which have been found in th~ Melbourne Formation. are intrtmlve.
2. William E. Edward~, of Columbia University and the Florida Geologlea]
Survey, has discovered a new type of material which may well be contemporaneous
with the Melbourne Formation.
Edwards’ material is unpublished, and therefor~
ean not be di~useed here.

The Age o] the Melbourne Interval

295

Middle Postglacial times, i.e., during the Anathermal and
Aititl~ermal (postglacial optimum), to use Antevs’ terms
(Rouse, 1951, p. 31; Antevs, 1948, pp. 7-15).
We have, then, a marked discrepancy. The vertebrate
fauna indicates an interglacial date, whereas the level of
the sea points to postglacial time. No other fruitful line of
approach has yet been found. The flora and invertebrate
fauna are not diagnostic, and we have too little evidence on
the climate and human associations to be able to draw any
conclusions from them (Rouse, 1951, pp. 31-2). We are only
able, therefore, to suggest possible solutions to this problem.
One solution would be to modify the sea-level chronology.
This was the approach followed by Gross (1951, p. 116) when
he wrote in the last issue of this Bulletin, without giving
reasons, that the level of the sea during the Melbourne Interval "argues . . . in favor of a temperate Wisconsin interstadial . . . (most probably Peorian)." Gross failed, however, to take it into consideration that glacial geologists in
this countm] have generally abandoned the theory of a
Peorian recession marked enough to have raised the sea
to its level during the Melbourne inter~alwpresumably e
little higher than at present (e.g., Antevs, 1948, pp. 2-5;
Flint, 1947, pp. 267-76). As we have pointed out (Rouse,
1951, p. 31), there is no reason to believe that the sea, in
rising from its Wisconsin low, reached the level of the
Melbourne Interval before the Altithermal or postglacial
optimum.
An alternative possibility is that the bones of the Melbourne fauna have intruded into their present position from
an earlier formation. Cooke (19~5, p. 305) made this sug-.
gestion with respect to the Vero site, but Sellards (1947, pp.
962-4), who is perhaps the leading authority on the Mel-bourne Formation, has argued against it and we see no
reason to doubt his arguments.
A third possible solution would be to assume that the
glacial fauna survived longer on the Florida peninsula than

296

Te~r~zs Archeological and Paleontoloflica~ SocietN

elsewhere, owing, perhaps, to its peripheral position relative to the North American land mass. This has been our
preferred solution. Gross (op. cir.), on the other hand, has
rejected it, apparently because he finds it inconceivable that
such a survival could have taken place, although to us it
seems not incomparable with the known survival of the
sloth in Cuba and Hispaniola until proto-historic time (e.g.~
Aguayo, 1950).
This third solution could perhaps be made more palatable
if we were to suppose that the bones were laid down in the
Melbourne bed only while the sea was rising to its Altitherreal peak, and not after it had begun to fall from that peak,
as Gross (op. cir.) assumed when he stated that the theory
of survival requires the Melbourne fauna to have persisted
"up to about 1800 B. C." (or rather, 2000 B. C.; Gross cited
our preliminary estimate instead of our final date: Rouse,
1951, p. 262). Indeed, if it is true that the animals became
mired in marshes, their extinction may well have been due
to the growth of the marshes as the result of the rise in sea
level during the first half of the Melbourne Interval.
In other words, the age of the Melbourne Formation, as
indicated by its extinct fauna, may not have coincided with
that of the Melbourne Interval, defined in terms of sea-level
changes. This seems to us to be the most plausible means of
reconciling the discrepancy between the paleontological and
sea-level Chronologies. If the Melbourne fauna did survive
only during the first part of the Melbourne Interval, i.e.,
during the Anathermal and the beginning of the Altitherreal, we might suggest a date of about 4000 B. C. for its
extinction, using Antevs’ latest estimate as to the age of the
Altithermal (Antevs, 1952, Chart 1).
The Melbourne Interval would then be somewhat later.
In this connection, it is perhaps worth citing several radiocarbon dates which have appeared since our monograph was
published and which give some idea of both the beginn!n"g
and the end of the Melbourne Interval. One is the date for
the Mankato substage in the Wisconsin glaciation, which

The A~e o~ the Melbourne l~terva!

297

Flint and Deevey (1951, pp. 261-9) give as ca. 9000 B. C.
Since the Mankato should correlate with our AnastasiaMelbourne Interval, this provides an upper limit for the
succeeding Melbourne Interval. As for the lower limit, we
may cite a series of radiocarbon determinations for the
Archaic cultural horizon in the eastern United States, which
cluster around 3000 B. C. (Libby, 1952, pp. 77-8). Since the
Archaic horizon is correlated in the Indian River area with
the Melbourne-Van Valkenburg Interval, following the Melbourne, it would appear that the latter ended about 3000 B. C.
This dosing date is somewhat earlier than our previous
estimate of 2000 B. C. and it similarly fails to agree with
Antevs’ latest estimate of 2000 B. C. for the end of the Altithermal (Antevs, 1952, Chart 1). In addition, we might note
that Flint, after surveying the Pleistocene radiocarbon dates,
has arrived at a tentative estimate of 1500 to 2000 B. C. for
the Cochrane substage of the Wisconsin glaciation in the
Great Lakes area, following the postglacial optimum.s Since
the Cochrane stage should have been contemporaneous with
the low sea level of the Melbourne-Van Valkenburg Interval, Flint’s estimate, too, may be taken to indicate a somewhat later closing time for the Melbourne Interval than is
suggested by the radiocarbon dates for the Archaic horizon.
As a result, we are inclined to retain our original estimate
of 2000 B. C. for the end of the Melbourne Interval.
To summarize, we have suggested that the Melbourne
Formation may have been laid down only during the first
part of the Melbourne Interval, i.e., during the Anathermal
and first half of the Altithermal or postglacial optimum. If
this is so, the Melbourne fauna probably became extinct
about 4000 B. C. The Melbourne Interval, on the contrary,
probably lasted through both the Anathermal and Altitherreal, i.e., from about 9000 to 2000 B. C. It should be stressed
that these dates are largely hypothetical and that much
~. Flint, personal communication. Se~ also Kenneth P. Oakley in Tax, E|sele~’,
Rouse, and Voegelin, 1952, Chapt. 2, Sec. 4. Antevs (op. c|t.), on the contrary,
plae~ the Coehrane befor~ the po~t-glacial optimum.

298

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

work needs to be done before they can be safely accepted.
The most that can be said for them is that they seem to provide the best means of reconciling the discrepancy between
the chronologies based upon fauna and sea-level changes.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aguayo, C. Guillermo.
1950. "Observaciones sobre algunos mamlferos cubanos
extinguidos." Bolet~n de Historia Natural de la Sociedad
"FeIipe Poey," No. 3, pp. 121-34. Habana.
Antevs, Ernst.
1948. "The Great Basin, with Emphasis on Glacial and
Postglacial Times." University o] Utah Bulletin, Vol. 38,
No. 20, pp. 168-91. Salt Lake City.
1952. "Climatic History and the Antiquity of Man in
California." In "Symposium on the Antiquity of Man
in California," Reports o~ the University o~ California
Archaeological Survey, No. 16, pp. 23-9. Berkeley.

Cooke, C. Wythe.
1945. "Geology of Florida." Florida Geological Survey,
No. 29. Tallahassee.
Flint, Richard Foster.
1947. "Glacial Geology and the Pleistocene Epoch. New
York.
Flint, Richard Foster, and Edward S. Deevey, Jr.
1951. "Radiocarbon Dating of Late Pleistocene Events."
American Journal o] Science, Vol. 249, pp. 257-300. New
Haven.
Gross, Hugo.
1951. "Mastodon, Mammoth, and Man in America."
Bulletin of Texas ArcheologicaZ and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 101-31. Lubbock.
Hay, Oliver P.
1923. "The Pleistocene of North America and its Vet-

The A~e o~ the Me~bo~e

299

tebrated Animals from the States East of the Mississippi
River and from the Canadian Provinces East of Longitude 950.’’ Publications o~ the Carnegie Institution o~
Washington, No. 322. Washingto~L
Libby, Willard F.
1952.

Radiocarbon Dating. Chicago.

Parker, Gerald G.
1945. "The Effect of the Pleistocene Epoch on the Geology and Ground Water of Southern Florida." Quarterly
Journal, Florida Academy of Science, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp.
119-43. Gainesville.
Rouse, Irving.
1951. "A Survey of Indian River Archaeology, Florida."
Yale University Publications in Anthropology, No. 44_
New Haven.
Sellards, E. H.
1947. "Early Man in America: Index to Localities and
Selected Bibliography, 1940-1945." Bulletin o~ the Geological Society o~ America, Vol. 58, pp. 955-78. New York.

Simpson, George Gaylord.
1929. "The Extinct Land Mammals of Florida." Annual
Report o~ the Florida Geological Survey, No. 20, pp. 22980. Tallahassee.
Tax, Sol; Loren C. Eisely; Irving Rouse; and Carl F. Voegelin (editors).
1952. An Apprai~aI o:~ Anthropology Today. Chicago.

