CHEMICAL ALTERATION OF SILICATE ARTIFACTS
B. C’wvs N. RAY
Flint Patination

When one studies a collection of stone artifacts from a
region which has been occupied throughout a long period
of time, he soon notices a great color variation in such flint
tools, and also that specimens recently dug out of the flint
mines of the same region do not show all of the same types
of color variations.*
The natural unaltered colors of Central West Texas
flints are of translucent gray-blue, pink, and beeswax tan;
there is one which is almost transparent, and one of opaque
glossy black. Technical minerologlsts probably have different names for all of these, but they all seem to be alike in
being easily subjected to smooth conchoidal fracture. When
either percussion or localized pressure was applied to their
edges tools were easily fashioned, and they were recognized
by the primitive inhabitants as materials of similar characteristics. The manos, and some of the heavy hand axes,
disks, and gouges, and a ]~ew blades, and early dart heads,
were made of quartzite which varied in color as follows:
brown, tan, gray and black.
The favorite color of flint used was one of a blue-gray,
which seems identical in color and texture with that of English flint. This blue flint was extensively mined and used
during several periods of the past; the mines were located
on top of the Edwards Plateau, in Nolan and Taylor Counties of Texas. The pink flint, which seems identical in color
and texture with that used in many of the original Folsom
points found near Folsom, New Mexico, was mined on top
of a single mountain in western Taylor County, and it is
This paper was done as part of a research problem for Texas Technological College.

Chemical Alteration o~ Silicate Artifacts

29

interesting to observe that ancient Clear Fork campsites,
containing more Folsom points than were found elsewhere
in the region, are located in the vicinity. The glossy black"
flint was mined on top of the mountain mass which is located
east of Cedar Gap in Taylor County.
It seems that if an ordinary blue blade of unpatinated
flint is held between one and a strong light that some light
will be transmitted through it, but that after a film of patination has formed over its surface it ceases to transmit light.
When a patinated flint is broken, the center is found to
be of different color from that of the surface. After a flint
blade has lain in or on the surface of the earth for an undetermined period of time the chemicals of the air and wa~:er,
and the heat and light rays of the sun, begin to affect its
surface color by chemical alteration of its texture, so that it
eventually loses its translucence. Certain conditions sometimes exist which serve to postpone this action indefinitely.
An artifact may have been deposited in a dark cave soon
after being made, and in such a location, as to be permanently protected from any corrosive chemical solutions and
light rays, and has remained in the same condition and color
throughout many thousands of Years of time. In correspondence with a visitor to French caves this reliable scientist reported that he had seen unaltered flint artifacts in a
French cave which were estimated to have been placed there
fifty thousand years ago. The writer also has found some
unaltered flint tools and flakes in the deeper levels of the
Lower Clear Fork silt of the Gibson and McLean sites, which
were deposited while the mammoth still lived in the region.
However nearly all of the other artifacts of those ancient
middet~ deposits were heavily patinated. Based on this fact,
which is well known to students of archeology, there has
grown up an erroneous idea that patination means nothing
as an age indicator of stone artifacts. To be effective, patination, like any other type of evidence, requires much study
of the exceptions, and the reasons for their occurence. The

30

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

main value in a study of patination and other forms of surface alteration, such as caliche incrustation covering man
fractured flint surfaces, is obtained by a tabulation of the
frequency of occurrence of either or both forms Of alteration in an accumulation of several thousands of artifacts,
of different culture types, collected in the same region.
When these are spread out on tables and separated as to degree of, or absense of patination, then what the jurists term
the weight of the evidence then begins to point inevitably
to those classes which have attained ancientness of days.

A table full of Clear Fork disks, gouges, knives, darts, and
side scrapers will show very few unpatinated flints, and also
a considerable number will be found to have caliche incrustations on them. A similar condition is found concerning
Folsom points, but unpatinated flints have been noted more
frequently among Folsom blades than is the case with Clear
Fork Culture dart heads, however, the twenty-seven specimens of Folsom blades found by the writer are too smal! in
number to draw many conclusions from. A much greater
number of the Yuma types of blades have been found, and
these also seem to show a larger proportionate number which
are heavily patinated than the Folsom blades do.
If one table is filled only with Late Phase Valley Creek
Culture components, and another table with all of the Clear
Fork Culture flint components, the sum total of the age evidence is very striking at a single glance.

If one fills a table with flints of the latest culture phase
Of the region, the Late Phase Valley Creek, and another one
with the next or Early Phase Valley Creek artifacts, he can
easily see what the progress in patination has been during
those comparitively late culture phases. The flints of the
Early Phase of the Valley Creek culture are found buried
about four feet beneath the soil surface in Nugent Silt 5 of
the silts of the Brazos River banks. About half of these artifacts are either white or gray patinated and half not patinated or very slightly so.

Chemical Alteration of Silicate Artifacts

31

If one estimates that it took one thousand years to deposit a t~oot of river silt in regular sequence, then this culture would be four thousand years old. The Latest Phase
Valley Creek culture is plowed up in river and creek bottom
fields from just beneath the soil surface, and many bones
and shells are found in these sites along with some Rio Grande
sherds, and obsidian. The Pueblo sherds would indicate that
a trade route with the New Mexico Pueblos was open from
three to six hundred years ago. However, the site could
have been used a couple of thousand years before the New
Mexico trade route was opened and still not be covered very
deeply. Some Roman house foundations in England are so
thinly covered today that they can be seen from an airplane.
In any event, most of the hundreds of scrapers found
there are of nearly unaltered blue-gray flint. Some scrapers
have gray opaque spots of beginning patination on them,
some are half patinated, and a few have an all gray patination.
Patination of blue flint begins by the formation of spots
on the surface, which turn gray while the remainder apparently is unaltered in color, in some cases one whole face of
a blade has turned gray while the other still remains entirely
blue. Whether this has been due tO the action of sunshine
on an upper face lying in the sun, or is the result of soil
chemicals acting on the lower face of an artifact lying for
considerable time on the surface, one cannot know. Ancient
flint knives have been found occasionally by the writer
which had acquired a heavy white shel! of patina all over
the ancient fractured surface, and then some later occupant
of the site had found the knife and retouched the edge to
make it sharper, and then his work in turn had been done
so long ago that a lighter gray haze of patina had covered
it also In some instances there has been no alteration since
a tater occupant of a site cut a spokeshave edge into an old
white patinated scraper and exposed its blue central core.
Patination of flint begins either as a gray haze all over
the tranh~cent flint or as patches here and there scattered

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

over its surface. The translucence of the artifact decreases
with the thickness of the chemical alteration, until complete
opacity occurs, when it becomes white in color. Complete
patination is always white, and is due to a softening or
chemical change which in very advanced cases may cause
solution of portions of an artifact and erode deep pits into
its surface, or produce a chalky cracking off of portions of
the surface. A certain proportion of Clear Fork gouges
have strong horn shaped borers made at one or both ends of
the cutting edge. In one case the corner on the right and
about one third of the edge had been dissolved and the blade
was deeply pitted all over its surface.
After flint artifacts have become white and porous from
chemical alteration of their surfaces they will take on various colors from the earth minerals in which they lie. In
the Clear Fork silts they are often colored red, tan and dull
brown, in sandy terraces of Jones County very old flints
sometimes take on a bright butter yellow color. In very
limey soils the flints seem to retain their white color, even
where extra thick patination has occurred. Very heavy
shells of patina occur in the Abilene region in all colors.
Measurement of the thickness of patination of enough specimens of flints out of a series of flint cultures should be an interesting research project for some person with the requisite
knowledge, and facilities to do the job thoroughly.
Whether or not patination of similar flint in northern
regions progresses more slowly than in Texas, or otherwise,
one cannot know, but an English writer, Reginald A. Smith
of the British Museum, in discussing patination says that,
"It may be laid down as a rule (to which some Bronze Ag.e
arrowheads are exceptions) that if a human flint is patlnated, it is certainly old (at least 4000 years, if metal was
introduced here about 2000 B. C.) but if it is not patinated,
it may have been chipped at any time; and most of the series from one of the French caves chipped during the Ice Age
many thousands of years ago, have no patination whatever."
In the same booklet concerning flints he states, ~many are

Chemical Alteration of Silicate Arti~acts

33

now smooth and lustrous with surfaces of many colors,
sometimes of great beauty; and some idea of the time required for these changes may be obtained by examining the
flint-walling of East Anglian churches, which still show
black surfaces with little lustre, and sharp edges, after exposure to the weather for about six hundred years.’’~
Many ancient heavily patinated flints of Texas show
worn down dull fracture edges ,as though they had been
rolled around by water enough to wear them off:, and some
of these have been found too high above present day streams
to have acquired the wear within recent times. Some flints
from gravel beds not only have a thick patina, but in addition a greenish polish over the patina. Frost pitted fracture
has been seen also in a few ancient patinated flints from old
gravel beds, but it is not very common. This probably has
been produced by intense cold freezing the water absorbed
by patinated, porous flints, and it produces shallow cup
shaped depressions in the flint faces.

The writer has questioned very old men who came to
this region as children, eighty years ago, and none ever saw
an Indian use a flint arrowhead. If artifacts from authentic association of flints and glass beads could be studied
enough one might determine whether or not flints will patihate within a few hundreds of years in Texas.
Glass Patination
Most of the glass beads found in Indian graves in Texas
are covered with white coatings of pearl shell like patina,
which scales off to some extent when the beads are handled.
These graves usually were made back in caves, in overhanging rock shelters, or in wide crevices between thick rock
layers. The rock crevice burials were nearly always made
in north facing limestone escarpments where direct sunshine
REFERENCE
~ Smith, Reginald A., "Flints, An Illustrated Manual of the Stone Age ~or Beginners, The British Museum, 1928, pp. 19 to 21, Figures 14 and 15. Price sixpence.
P. O. Box 62
Abitene, Texas

84

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

was excluded. A few historic Indian burials in Jones County
were made in sand dune fields north of the Brazos River,
and had no stone coverings over them.

The amount of patination varies to some extent even in
beads of the same type from different graves, and this may
indicate some age differences or it may only be evidence of
different chemical conditions at different sites. The very
small glass beads which most Indians were accustomed to
sew in patterns on their clothing in the past are found in
graves with metal artifacts and the common colors are of
blue and white, but occasionally one finds red and other
colors. There are some graves where ova! glass beads of about
the size of a navy bean, and of different colors, are found.
Beads of all colors have been found covered with white
patina. Some of the bean sized variously colored beads from
a large hole in a north facing boulder near Colorado, Texas,
were so heavily patinated white that the true color was only
dimly seen where some of the pearly patina had scaled off.
The least patinated glass bead specimens found were from
two open graves in the sand dunes of Jones County, and
some from a rock crevice on a creek bank in Calla/ban
County.
Study of the old glass sherds which are so abundant
around the chain of forts built across the Texas frontier
eighty to ninety years ago shows that nearly all of these are
heavily coated with a white iridescent coating of patina.
Some of these thick wine bottles are so heavily coated
inside and out, and so opaque, that one can only see the real
color by wetting the glass and holding it against a light.
What the agency is that produces patina in silicate materials is a difficult problem to determine, but that it acts
slowly on flint and quartzite artifacts, and in a comparatively short time on man-made glass is evident.
Most of the flint scrapers found in late Valley Creek
sites are still unpatinated, but no metal or other artifacts

Chemical Alteration of Silicate Artifacts

35

are found in these sites to show any contact with white men,
and such flints must have been made at least hundreds of
years ago.
Apparently most glass patinates within a comparatively
short time in Texas. Most of the glass objects to be found
around the ruins of the o!d forts of the region are covered
with white patina. However, some glass resisted this action,
a Venetian blue glass bead said to be three hundred years
old, is still bright blue in color and unaltered. Most of the
very small beads, made much later, have deteriorated badly.
A heavy glass pickle jar of six sided Gothic design, which
held over a gallon, was found under the shade of a clump
of oaks across the Brazos River from old Ft. Phantom Hill,
and probably dates from its occupation. This type of pickle
jar was last seen in grocery stores about the year 1889. The
body of this glass has a light bluish cast, and the surface has
a thin iridescent patina on it, but one still can easily see
through it. This thick glass resisted patination far better
than the wine bottles of that period.
The writer has an old iron roofed barn at his home, the
loft of which has long been used as a storeroom, and during
World War I some glass fruit jars used then were stored in
the loft along with a box of various other glass objects. When
this store room was cleaned out recently, it was found that
many of the stored glass objects had distinctly visible, thin,
and irremovable films of iridescent patina over the surfaces,
and in addition most of the fruit jars had acquired an attractive light blue tinting of the body of the glass.
There are thirteen quart-sized jars and all but two of
these have changed from their original clear state to various
color tints; one is tinted green, one is lavender colored, three
are blue-green, and six are light blue. Five of these jars have,
in addition to the tinting or change in color of the body of
the glass, a surface coating or irremovable patination of iridescent type, both inside and out. Two of these are marked
Bail Mason, one Ball and one Drey Perfect Mason; all of

36

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

these are light blue in tint, one has no makers’ name and is
of a light lavender color. The two clear jars are marked
as "Drey Perfect Mason Jars" like one of the patinated and
tinted jars.
There are three pint jars, and of these one has a faint
leaden tint--a "Kerr Mason" jar, and this one probably is
not so old as the others. Two jars are marked "Mason" and
are blue green tinted, and one of these has a heavy iridescent
patina; this one is marked "Mason’s Patent No. 30th, 1858".
A ’~Quick Seal" jar is dark blue green in color, but its glass
disk top is still clear and unchanged. Three fourteen ounce
empty druggists nitric acid bottles with ground glass stoppers have turned a beautiful sea green color in thirty year’s
time, and one has a strongly developed patination, both inside and outside, and that on the outside, if any difference,
is the thickest. In January, 1930, the writer placed two
samples of dry soil in half gal!on sealed glass jars in the
same iron roofed barn loft, and one of these now has an irremovable thin film on the inside which covers two-thirds
of its surface.
Until these observations were made, the writer had
thought that the brilliant sunshine and intense summer heat
of the earth in Texas, together with soil alkalies, were responsible for patination of silicate materials; but the finding
of patinated glass beads beneath north facing sunless ledges,
and the patination of glass fruit jars in thirty years in a
windowless barn loft where the only direct sun came
through narrow cracks between the boards in early morning
and late afternoon would seem to indicate that visible light
rays may not be altogether responsible, and that heat and
other invisible rays capable of going through the iron probably did most of the patination.
Some of the alteration of beads in Indian graves in caves
may be due to chemical effects of body decomposition.
Window glass installed in 1908 in the wooden-roofed house
on the same lot with the barn has not been perceptibly altered. Window glass in the soil around all old house sites is

Chemical Alteration o] Silicate Artifacts

37

heavily patinated. Some factor in bright sunshine tints
glass within an even shorter period in Texas when placed
outside. Mrs. Glenn E. Dugan of Abilene tied a number of
clear glass objects on a fence and left them for three years;
and at the end of that period all had turned quite dark colored. One of these, before me as I write, formerly was a
clear jelly glass, and now is of a dark amethyst color. This
is a color tinting of the body of the glass and not patination
or surface alteration.
Whether or not glass patination usually progresses so far
in thirty years when not under a metal roof the writer does
not know, nor whether at an altitude of above 1700 feet
cosmic rays might have done it. Data on glass stored under
other conditions should show whether or not it usually patihates at that rapid rate.
Quartzite Patination
It is evident that quartzite does eventually patinate, because patination is found on quartzite which has at some
time been subjected to natural fracture, but it is equally evident that this is a very slow process, and proceeds at a far
slower rate than flint patination, which also forms at a much
slower rate than that of glass. The men of the stone age culture who most used quartzite for cutting and piercing implements in the Abilene region were the Clear Fork men, one of
the older culture sequences of the region. Hand-axes, gouges,
and occasional darts, knives and drills were made of this materia!, although the preponderance of all types of artifacts
of the same types of artifacts, of the same culture, made of
flint artifacts are thickly coated with patina while nearly all
of the same types of artifacs, of the same culture, made of
quartzite are either not patinated or are only slightly so; Very
few humanly fractured quartzite implements have ever been
found which are completely patinated. One quartzite Yuma
blade of beautiful workmanship was found in Jones County
which had a heavy coating of light gray patina over a coal
black quartzite matrix, which was exposed by two recently

38

Te~,as Archeological and Paleontological Society

made nicks in the blades’ edge. This material is refractory
and usually the best of the implements made of it seem rough
in comparison with flint tools, but this beautiful specimen
seemed to have had the fracture scars all over both faces
ground down either by the maker, or by subsequent stream
rolling, for they had been almost obliterated. A beautiful
flint Yuma blade of similar shape was found which evidently
had been ground down over the whole surface of both faces
to remove fracture marks.
Caliche Incrustation

Caliche incrustation is only found on the flints of the
oldest cultures of the region, and is to be seen on Clear Fork,
Yuma, Abilene, anad Folsom artifacts, but it has never been
found by the writer on flints of much later cultures. Caliche incrustation is characteristic of a certain proportion of
the artifacts from the Lower Clear Fork silt, and to a lesser
degree from those of the Upper Clear Fork silt. Caliche incrustation of artifacts is a much more reliable indication of
great age than patination. Some Folsom and Clear Fork
artifacts are entirely free from patinatlon, but close examination will frequently show some signs o~f spots of incrustation on them. In some extreme cases from one fourth to
one half of an artifact’s fractured surface has been plastered
over with mineral incrustation, and in others only small dots
and patches occur. Incrustation occurs in flints lying in
old river bank gravels and silts for a long period of time.
The increased deposit is usually thin, and of tan to pinkish
color, and usually is thought to be silt until the artifact is
scrubbed, when it is seen to be tightly adherent to the flint.
The incrustation has a color and texture similar to cave staligmitic dep.sit, and small patches of it can be removed
from a flint artifact with a few drops of hydrochloric acid,
which indicates calciurri composition.
Generally the finding of mineral incrustation of the type
of caliche or desert limestone on man fractured flints of the
Abilene region means that they belong among the oldest

Chemical Alteration o~ Silicate A~tifacts

39

flint cultures of the region. Flint patination is found to
some extent in deeper levels of the top stratum or Nugent
Silt 5, and increasingly so £rom there on downward, but
mineral incrustation over man fractured flint surfaces is
commonly found only in the lower two strata of the river
bank silts of the region.

