152

Texa~ Ar~heological and Paleontological Society

THE VARIOUS TYPES OF THE CLEAR
FORK GOUGE
BY CYRUS N. RAY

The first specimens of the Clear Fork gouge on record were
found on the banks of the Clear Fork of the Brazos River early
in 1928.
By the end of that year fourteen specimens had been accumulated,
which were studied and compared with illustrations of flints in
texts to determine whether the artifacts had been previously described and pictured. At that time no reference to them was found.
I then decided that it was a type of Texas artifact not previously
described or classified in scientific texts.
At the meeting when the Texas Archeologieal and Paleontological
Society was formed, which was held in my office at 125 1-2 Pine
Street, Abilene, Texas, in October, 1928, I read a paper entitled
"A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene Section." This was the first time that the Texas Clear Fork gouge was
described in scientific literature so far as the writer knows. This
article with illustrations was later printed as the first paper in Vol.
1, 1929, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Clear Fork gouges were described on page 18, Plate 1, lower
panel, Nos. 8-9-10-11. In the next year’s Bulletin, on Page 46, under "Limestone Incrusted Artifacts," Vol. 2, 1930, Plate 10, No. 2,
another specimen of the Clear Fork gouge was shown and described.
In an article entitled "Flint Cultures of Ancient Man in Texas," in
Vol. 6, 1934, I named the Clear Fork gouges as part of the Clear
Fork Culture. The name was taken from the place where the gouges
were first found, as mentioned in the first description of them in
Vol. 1, 1929 issue of the Society’s Bulletin. Six more Clear Fork
gouges were shown in the 1934 article on Plate 18, Nos. 99-101-102104-109-110.111. This article also described many other components of the Clear Fork Culture.
In 1935 E. B. Sayles illustrated the same type of gouge in "An
Archeological Survey of Texas," Plate X, under the name of "Abilene core scraper." On Plate IX of the same Survey, Sayles also
showed a page of points which he listed as "Abilene points," of a
type which I listed as "Clear Fork darts (1) and (2)".in "The
Clear Fork Culture Complex," Vol. 10, 1938, Bulletin of the So-

The Various Types of the Clear Fork Gouge

153

ciety. Fourteen Clear Fork gouges were also shown in the latter
article in Plate 24, No. 2, two top rows.
In Vol. 7, 1935, of the Society’s Bulletin, my report entitled
"Folsom Sites," Plate 17, showed two Clear Fork gouges, Nos. 209
and 233. This plate also pictured other components of that culture.
Clear Fork Gouge (1)
The type of Clear Fork gouge found most frequently in the Abilene
region is a triangular to ovoid blade, which has been chipped to a
curved or scoop like cutting edge at the large end, and to either a
point or a chisel edge at the small end. The flaking was done by
.percussion on both faces, which left a sinous edged thick blade, convex on both faces. Some retouch was done from both faces of the
curved cutting edge. (See Plate 27, Nos. 1-2-6-11-12-13-14-15).
The gouge (1) type artifacts are usually from 3 to 31/~ inches in
length to from 2 to 2¼ inches in width at the cutting end. The
deep bevel was cut back into one face of the blade from the broad
end. The broad end of the other face was then chipped so that a
curved or scoop like cutting edge was made. The depth of the
scooped out chipped space varies greatly in different specimens
from a few larger ones which are chipped back from the edge as
much as 1~ inches to a similar number which are only one-half an
inch in depth. The scooped out portions of the majority are bevelled back from the cutting edges to depths of between one-half and
three-quarters of an inch.
While the majority of the blades are rather uniform in size, there
are many much smaller than the figures given above. The smallest
of these is 1~/.~ inches wide, and 17/s inches I~ng. The largest specimen of gouge (1) is 45~ inches in length, by 23/~ inches in width.
There are however only t.wo of such large size, and the other one
is slightly smaller. There are 39 of Gouge (1) which are of sizes
below 21~ inches in length. The total number of Gouge (1) type
is 206. These vary much in thickness, and in the shape of the
scooped ends. Some are broad and relatively thin, and the cutting
end more resembles a bevelled edge, except that no matter how narrow the cutting edge may be, it is always curved.
In some specimens one end of the cutting edge has been finished
off into a point for boring. There are twelve of these which are
definitely so, eleven points were made on the left hand, and one on
the right hand. One had points on each end of the cutting edge.

154

Texax Arch¢ological and Paleon$ologlcal Society

Nearly all of Gouge (1) are heavily patinated in shades of white or
tan. Only one, the largest one, is not patinated but another one of
nearly the same size has a thick brown patina. Only 22 of the 206
have even a gray patina, all the others have progressed into shades
which thoroughly hide the original blue-gray flint color. Some were
heavily incrusted with lime or caliche; there were 15 of Gouge (1)
lime incrusted in some degree.
Many of these tools show deep chemical alteration of the texture
of the stone, indicated by a chalky appearance of the patinated
cortex as seen in recently fractured surfaces. In several cases chemical alteration has proceeded to a pitted stage caused by considerable chemical remova! of the flint. In one case the left half of
the cutting edge has been entirely dissolved and the remainder shows
pits of disintegration on the edge and over the blade. This form of
gouge is frequently found eroding from the same old beds of red
gravel along mountain branches, from which Folsom points, mammoth bones and other ancient types of flints also erode.
Clear Fork Gouge (2) or Planer Gouge
This is the second most numerous class of gouges and there are
175 specimens of Clear Fork Gouge (2) in the collection. (See
Plate 27, Nos. 3-4-5-7-8-9-10).
The principal difference between specimens of Gouge (2) and
those of Gouge (1) is that all of Gouge (2) have a flat face oppoPLATE 27
No. 1, the largest Clear Fork Gouge (1) is 4% in. long by 2% in.
wide and % of an in. thick. Number 2 is one of the smallest of Clear
Fork Gouge (1) and is 2~ inches long, 1% inches wide and 7/16 of
an in. thick. Numbers 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 are various types of Clear
Fork Gouge 2. Number 8 has two small spokeshave notches at the
smaller end opposite to the cutting edge, Number 10 has three notches
cut into the front or cutting edge. Numbers 1, 2, 6, 11, 12, 13, 14 and
15 are of CIear Fork Gouge (1) type. Number 6 has sharp points at
each end of its curved cutting edge. Number 13 has the left end of the
cutting edge worked into a short borer. Number 14 is spongy from
chemical alteration, and heavily incrusted with lime. Number 15 is a
beautiful specimen of iron cemented quartzite from P. H. Walser’s
collection at Bryan, Texas. A large area of this gouge, near the cutting edge on the reverse side, is polished from use. Numbers 2 and 9
have large patches of caliche incrustation over portions of their chippod surfaces. All of the gouges shown on this plate have their cutting edges turned toward the bottom of the page. Numbers 6 and 13
are of about the usual size of Clear Fork Gouge (1). Number 6 is
2~ inches broad at the cutting edge and 3~ inches long and ~ of
inch thick. Number 13 is 2 inches broad at the cutting edge,
inches long and 9/16 of an inch thick.

Plate 27

The Var~om~ Types of the Clewr Fork Gouge

157

site to the one out of which the scoop or gouge has been chipped.
It seems that a large flake with one flat surface was used in making
them. The upper surface was flaked off convex and only enough
flaking was done along the flat surface to finish off any rough
spots on the edges of the blade. Clear Fork Gouge (2) may be
divided into those having a curved cutting edge, of which there are
88, and those having a straight or approximately straight cutting
edge, of which there are 87 specimens. The specimens of Gouge
(2) show the same signs of patination or chemical deterioration that
those of Gouge (1) do.

Lime incrustation shows on 18 of Gouge (2).

Eight of Gouge (2) had corners of the cutting edges finished off
as borers. Three were on the left, two on the right, and three
on both ends of the cutting edges. Ten of Gouge (2) contained
small notches or spokeshaves which probably were provided for the
sharpening of bone awl points. Six had them on the cutting edge,
one was at the end opposite to the cutting edge and three were on
the sides. ~Iqaere were 20 of these tools not made of flint. Twelve
were of a hard gray dense refractory material of about the hardness
of jasper. Six were of quartzite, one of fossil wood, one of hematite, and 155 were of flint.
Clear Fork Gouge (,3)
There are 33 of Gouge (3) in the collection.
1-2-3-4-6).

(See Plate 28. Nos.

The specimens of Clear Fork Gouge (3) are long and

relatively narrow. The blades have a tendency to be either nearly
the same width from the cutting edge to near the other end, or to
gradually increase in width from the cutting end to about the middle
and then to become slightly narrower toward the other end.

Both

faces are convex like those of Gouge (1), but the shape is long and
relatively narrow, instead of being triangular. Three specimens are
incrusted with ealiehe, two very thickly.

All are patinated.

Three

have a gray patina, and all of the others are either white or some
shade of tan or red brown, which are the colors which indicate the
thickest coats of chemical alteration. While Gouges (1) and (2)
are also found in the same sites with this Gouge (3) type, there are
some indications that Gouge (3) may have been used at an earlier
period than the others.
Clear Fork Gouge (4)
There are only 11 of Gouge (4).

(See Plate 28, Nos. 7 and 10).

The distinguishing feature of Gouge (4) is that it has curved cut-

158

Texas Archeological and Paleontolog~al Soc;~ty

ting edges at both ends instead of at only one, such as those previously de~.rilxwl. In shape, eight of Gouge (4) are of about the
same width from end to end.

Three are of triangular shape similar

in form to those of Gouge (1). In seven of Gouge (4) both gouge
bevels are made at opposite ends in the ~me face of the implement.
In four specimens there is one bevelled edge on each face, in opposite ends of the i~nplements.
Clear Fork Gouge (,5)
There are 9 of Clear Fork Gouge (5).

(See Plate 28, Nos. 5 and

11). The implements of this type are long oval, thick blades, which
have a very narrow curved cutting edge on the small end and gradually become larger toward the other end, which may be finished
off into a roun&xl or squarish ended knife or a celt edge. The
curved cutting edges of these usually vary from one-fourth inch to
one-half inch across, which is an exceedingly small cutting edge
compared to those of the other types of gouges.
Clear Fork Gouge (6)
There are only 7 of Clear Fork Gouge (6).

The distinguishing

PLATE 28
Numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 are of the Clear Fork Gouge (3) in its
various forms. Numbers 2 and 6 are heavily incrusted with caliche,
and No. 1 is incrusted to some extent. Numbers 7 and 10 are typical
double bitted gouges of Clear Fork (4) type; it will be noted that a
small spokeshave notch has been cut into the lower left hand corner
of the bottom cutting edge of each. as arranged in this plate. Numbers 5 and 11 are typical specimens of Clear Fork Gouge (5). This
is a heavy, long, thick blade with a relatively small bit or curved cutring edge. The curved cutting edge of No. 5 is ½ inch across. The
blade is finished off into a flat chisel edge at the broad upper end
which is 1.% inches wide, and the tool is 5% inches long, and 1%
inches broad in the central portion, and is .~. of an inch thick. The
curved cutting edge of No. 11 is ~6 of an inch across. The upper end
o£ this gouge is al~o a flat celt or chisel edge, which is 1~ inches
across, and the too! is 4 inches long, and ½ an inch thick.
These
are the t~vo largest artifact~ of the Gouge (5) class; the usual curved
cutting edge is from one-fourth to one-half an inch across. Numbers
1, 2 and 3 are also unusually long and large specimens of the Clear
Fork Gouge (3) class. Number 1 is 5 inches long, 1~ inches across
the curved cutting edge, 2~ inches wide at the middle and ~ of an
inch thick. Number 3 is 1½ in. across the curved cutting edge, 5~A
in. long, 1% in. across in the middle, and ~ of an in. thick. Number
7, an example of Clear Fork Gouge (4) is 3 in. long, 1~ in. broad,
and ~ of an in. thick. Number 10, of the same gouge (4) class, is
3 in. long, 1~& in. across, and 7/16 of an inch thick. Number 8, of
Gouge (6) class, is 2~ in. long, 1~. in. broad and 9/16 of an in. thick.
The curved cutting edges of Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 11 are turned toward the bottom of the page. The curved cutting edges of Nos. 8 and
9 are turned upward. It is difficu!~ to photograph these gouges so as
to adequately represent them, as the curves often show flat in pictures.

Plate 2S

The Various Types of ~he Clear Fork Gouge

feature of Clear Fork Gouge (6) is that there is a curved cutting
edge of Clear Fork shape on one end of the implement and a heavy
drill point on the other end. There are two subtypes of these. One
kind is nearly flat on the face opposite to the bevelled one, and the
edges of the sides run straight to a point from the ends of the cutting edge. The other subtype flares out in the central portion before
the drill portion begins. Both types are shown in Plate 28, Nos. 8
and 9. Of No. 8 there are four, and of No. 7 three specimens.
The Clear Fork Gouge An/tncient Implement
All of the Clear Fork gouges described above have been found
where they were eroding out of gullies in either ancient red silts,
caliche, or red gravel deposits of considerable age. In some of the
same types of deposits Folsom and Yuma points and the other
components of the Clear Fork Culture have also been found. Their
use probably extended back into the Pleistocene to a date comparable with that of the Folsom and Yuma cultures, and also up
into the bottom of the lower Burnt Rock Mound Middens. How
many thousands of years this type of tool was used yet remains to
be determined. It is probable that the long relatively narrow Clear
Fork Gouge (3) may be the earliest type, and the smaller specimens
of Clear Fork Gouge (1) the latest type. Types (1) and (2) however seem to have had a vogue throughout a tremendous lapse of
time.
Probable Uses
It has been my belief since finding the first specimens, that it was
not a specialized form of scraper, as some contend, but an entirely
different tool which had its own specialized uses. The same Clear
Fork people made great numbers of side scrapers, of many shapes,
for such uses. The Clear Fork Gouge would be an efficient tool for
digging tubers, bulbs or fleshy roots, which probably formed an
important part of ancient man’s economy. The triangular types such
as Gouges (1) and (2) probably were hafted in wooden handles
and used like we do garden trowels. Those of type (3) are long
enough, and fit the hand well enough to have been used without
handles. The cutting edges of most of these tools show marks of
use, as though they had been forcibly shoved across some substance
of sufficient hardness to slightly break off the edges. This suggests that they may have been used in making atlatls and dart shafts.
They may have served to gouge out wooden bowls, or other utensils.

162

Tew~s Areheological ~nd Paleontolagical Society

These people had no pottery but that does not signify that they may
not have had an extensive industry in perishable wooden implements.
It is possible that they could have been used in hollowing burnt
out logs for boats. These tools would also make efficient removers
of tree bark which may have been used for food. Of course there
is the possibility that the gouges were fitted with handles and used
in fleshing hides.
The idea that these tools, and especially those having one flat
face--Gouge (2), were used somewhat like a modern carpenter’s
steel planer and pushed across a surface, is one I have long held.
Several years ago the collection was shown to Mr. P. H. Walser of
Bryan, Texas, and he remarked that he also had many of the same
types of tools, made of materials other than flint. On Mr. Walser’s
return home he sent me three specimens, two of which were of Clear
Fork Gouge (2), and one of Clear Fork Gouge (1).

All three were

of a brown quartzite appearing stone, which contained considerable
iron. The flat faces of both of Gouge (2) had smoothly polished
zones of surface near the cutting edges. The Gouge (1), a beautiful
specimen, had the largest and smoothest polished zone, also located
near the curved cutting edge, where wear would be most active if the
tool were shoved across a surface as a planer.

(See Plate 27,

No. 15).
Long before this evidence was observed, I had searched for just
such signs of wear with no success.

Evidently the hard nature of

the ~lint used in the Abilene region prevented the development of
polish, such as that which showed so plainly on the three specimens
from Bryan, Texas.
My collection now contains a total of ,t-41 of the six types of
Clear Fork gouges.
Each type as described above could be sub-divlded into other
divisions if one were to consider it necessary.

There is a great di-

versity of form, especially within the first three divisions.

Theie

has been only an attempt to begin classification in a previously
uncharted study. The only reason for here describing those types
of which few specimens have been found, is that such types may be
intrusive in the Abilene region and abundant elsewhere. At any
rate their divergences from type are interesting.
P. O. Box 52
Abilene, Texas.

