Repo~s and Editorials

163

REPORTS AND EDITORIALS
(1) Some Texas Cave Dweller Artifacts

The halted flints, Plate 29, Nos. 1, 2, 3, are instructive in showing
various methods of fastening stone points to wood. No. 1 is art
atlatl foreshaft, showing the more common method used.2 No. 2
shows an unusual method of halting.3 In historical times a similar
implement to that illustrated in No. 2 but with a metal blade, was
used by the Apache in gathering sotol.4 No. 3 may be described
as a knife, although the stone blade fastened in the short handle
probably was used to cut by a sawing-action. This method of
halting unnotched stone blades was probably more widespread than
that indicated by No. 2. Bitumen was commonly used in fastening
the blade where this material was obtainable, as evidenced along
the West Coast. The use of resin, shown by this inxplement, indicates that this material may have had a similar use.s
The painted pebbles shown in Plate 29, Nos. 4, 5, 6, are characteristic of the Pecos Cave Dweller, where they are normally found,
and were probably intrusive in adjoining, contemporaneous eultures.6 The three specimens illustrated appear to be attempts at
showing human faces, or probably represent masks.7 At most,
these human (?) forms are suggestive of those represented by certain "symbolical" pictographs found in the same area, and even
more so of the more highly conventionalized petroglyphs.8 Other
1.

Collections of Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona. described with the permission of [;he

director.

The cultural designations in this article are those established by various

complexes of traits listed in Sayles, E. B., 1935.
These have been confirmed, in their
principal components, by Kelley, J, C., Campbell, T. N., and Lehmer, D. J., 1940.
These investigators have retained the designation of Pecos Cave Dweller proposed by

the present writer and have proposed MarvHlas Cave Dweller for Big Bend Cave
Dweller, the latter term being used by them to designate the Texas Cave Dweller
Complex as a whole; their investigations did not cover ~!ueeo Cave Dweller sites.
2,
Similar foreshafts from western Texas have been deserlbed by : Aloes, E,
1940, pl). 64-68 ; that illustrated in this paper is shown in PI. 19, 2 in the article
referred to; Coffin, E. F., 1932, p. 31; ~lera, I-I. P., 1938, PI. 11, 2; Smith, V.
1932, p. 58 ; PL 12, Fig. 26.
3.
Excavated for Gila Pueblo and described by Smith, V. J., 1938, p. 224.
somewhat similar hefting is described by Martin, G. C., 1933, p. 80 ; P1. XXXIII.
4.
Informati,on supplied by the late Grenville Goodwin.
5.
A similar haftlng of a projectile point in a wooden foreshaft is described by
~dartin, G. C., 1933, Pl. ]X, 3 and p. 28, the cement being identified as juagilla gum.
6.
Their occurrence in western Texas has been reported by investigators in that
area and described by: Coffin, E. F., 1932, p. 24, PL IX; Jackson, A. T., 1938,
824-328 ; bIartin, G. C., 1933, pp. 74-78 ; Pls. XXV-XXVIII ; Martin, G. C., and Woolford, S., 1932, pp. 20-24 ; Pearce, J. E., and Jackson, A. T., 1933, pp. 79-87 ; see also
Kell¢*y, J. C., Campbell, T. N., and Lehmer, D. J., 1940; Sayles, E. B., 1935. p. 63
Table 6.
7.

A s~milar rendition is shown in Figs. 267, 268, 269, Jackson, A. T., 1938.

8.

Jackson, A. T., 1938, gives a ftLl! description of Texa~ pictegraphs.

164

Texas A~’cheological and Pa~trn~ological SocieSy

painted pebbles from sites correlated with the Pecos River Cave
Dweller are not analogous to any ottmr American artifacts, of which
we have any knowledge.
The purpose of the painted pebbles is unknown, but with the
knowledge of these attempts at human representation it might be
surmised that they were fashioned to serve the same use as various
fetishes, and particularly human figurines.
The highly developed figurine "cult" of Mexico, and an analogous
one of the Hohokam in the Southwest, have been interpreted as sigPLATE 29
SOUTH TEXAS CAVE DW~R ARTIFACTS

(1)
Wooden foreshaft fashioned from a twig; rubbed smooth;
pointed end scored.
The stone point is fitted into a notch in the end of the shaft and is
bound with sinew. The point is a light buff-colored chert, with deep
lateral notches, and a slightly expanding base. Length, 19.75 cm.
From Hueco Cave Dweller site ("Ceremonial" Cave) about 20 miles
northeast of E1 Paso. Gift to Gila Pueblo by Mr. R. B. Alves.
(2)
Thin blade of grey chert, finely chipped and retouched along
the edge; set in a section of an oak limb, which had been cut by a
crude encircling groove, the central part broken. The slot, in which
the blade is firmly held by strips of yucca stalk, had been cut from
each side. Length, 31.5 cm.
l~aravillas Cave Dweller (originally designated as Big Bend Cave
Dweller) site, Sunny Glen Can~gon, near Alpine. Excavated for Gila
Pueblo by Victor J. Smith.
(.3) Bevelled blade of mottled red chert set in wooden handle with
ream. Each side of the wooden handle is scored with several parallel
lines; end next to the blade being rounded, the other flattened. Length,
14.25 cm.
l~Iaravillas Cave Dweller site, about 30 miles northeast of Presidio.
(4)
Painted pebble; flat, crudely shaped pebble; the side shown
apparently represents a human face with eyes, mouth and hair delineated; also a series of parallel lines, similar ones appearing on the
reverse in an irregular pattern.
(5)
Natural pebble decorated with what appears to be eyes and
(6)
Similar to (4) except the eyes are lacking; the reverse conslats of a series of lines crossing near the center of the stone. Red
pigment, in addition to the black decoration, covers a portion of the
surface.
All of the pebbles are decorated with a very thin, black pigment
which easily rubs off. Length of 5, 7.5 cm.; from site one mile southwest of Shumla; others, from site 2 miles west of Langtry. All Pecos
River Cave Dweller.
(7) Fish Hook: the hook is a portion of a thorn from a "’fish hook"
cactus; bound to a twisted fiber with a wrapping of similar material;
the cord consists of two parts, each composed of two twisted fibers,
resembling sinew, and is heavily knotted at the end.
The pebble sinker is held in place by a single knot. Length of hook,
1.75 cm.
Pecos Cave Dweller site, one mile southwest of Shumla.

5
Pl~te 2.~)

Reports c~nd Edi$aria~

nificant traits of these cultures.

167

A similar interpretation is sug-

gested for the Texas painted pebbles.

Although the time relation-

ships between these various manifestations are not known, there is a
suggestion of some connection between the Texas Cave Dwellers and
the Hohokam, in the finding by Coffin of two complete and 24 fragmentary clay figurines in the Bee Cave, Brewster County. The painting of facial features in black pigments on the clay figures, described
by Coffin,9 is highly suggestive of those represented by Plate 29,
No. 5. These Texas clay types are somewhat anal’~gous to those
identified with the Pioneer Period of the Hohokam.10

The fishing tackle Plate 29, No. 7, is likewise identified with
the Pecos River Cave Dweller. Fishing was an important economy
of this culture, as shown by the great quantity of fish bones found
in their sites. The rigged hook, line and sinker is interesting in
throwing light upon the development of this pursuitA ~
E. B. Sayles,
Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
REFERENCES
Aires, E. E., 1930. Shelter Caves o[ the El Pazo District. Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. II, pp. 64-68.
Abilene.
Coffin, E. F., 1932. Archaeological Exploration o[ a Rock Shelter
in Brewster County, Texas. Indian Notes and Monographs, No. 48.
Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation. New York.
Haury, E. W., (Gladwin, H. S., Haury, E. W., Sayles, E. B., and
Gladwin, N.), 1937. Excavazions at Snaketowrr: Material Culture.
Medallion Papers, No. XXV. Gila Pueblo. Globe.
Jackson, A. T., 1938. Picture-Writing o[ Texas Indians. University of Texas Publication No. 3809. Anthropological Papers, Vol.
II. Austin.
Kelley, J. C., Campbell, T. N., and Lehmer, D. J., 1940. The
.sociation o] ,4rchaeologlcal Materials with Geological Deposits in tire
9.
Coffin, E. F., t932. p. 58 ; :Fig. 17.
Martin. G. C,, 1933, pp. ~7-78, reports the
finding of powered manganese in the Shumla Cave: this material may have been the
l)igment used in painting the black decorations on the pebbles; oxide of iron probably served for ghe red pigment.
!0.

Haury. E. W., 1937, pp. 236-237 ; Pls. CCII, CCVII.

11.
Other artifacts, from the same area, composed of cactus hooks may like,vise
be fishing gear; these have been described by: Martin, G. C., 1935, l). 116; Figs. 173,
175; Coffin, E. F., 1932, p. 53 ; Martin, G. C., 1933, p. 59 ; Pl. XIII. de~cribes other
fishing gear, including cactus thorns used as hooks.

168

T~as A~-cheological a~d Paleontological Society

Big Bend Region o[ Texas. West Texas Historical and Scientific Society, Publication No. 10 (Sul Ross State Teachers College, Bulletin
No. 3, Vol. XXI). Alpine.
Martin, G. C., 1933. Archaeological Exploration o] the Shumla
Caves. Big Bend Basket Maker Papers No. 3. Southwest Texas
Archaeological Society, Witte Memorial Museum, Bulletin 3. San
Antonio.
1935. Report on Four Shumla Cave Packets. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. VII, pp. 115-117. Abilene.
Martin, G. C., and Woolford, S., 1932. Painted Pebbles o] the
Texas Big Bend. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. IV, pp. 20-24. Abilene.
Mera, H. P., 1938. Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeastern New Mexico. Memoirs of the American Anthropological
Association, No. 51. Menasha.
Pearce, J. E., and Jackson, A. T., !933. ~/Prehistoric Rock Shelter
in Val Verde County, Texas. University of Texas Bulletin No. 3327,
Anthropological Papers, Vol. I, No. 3. Austin.
Sayles, E. B., 1935. An ~lrchaeolo~’cal Survey o] Texas.
lion Papers, No. XVII. Gila Pueblo. Globe.

Medal-

Smith, V. J., 1932. The Relation o] the Southwestern Basket
Maker to the Dry Shelter Culture o[ the Big Bend. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. IV, pp. 55-62. Abilene.
1938. Carved Rock Shelter. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. X, pp. 222-233. Abilene.
(2) A Texas Sandia Polntl

In the May 6, 1940, issue of "Time Magazine" the writer read an
article reporting on the preliminary work done on an older culture,
by Frank Cummings Hibben, curator of the Museum of Anthropology, at the University of Ne~¢ Mexico at Albuquerque, New
Mexico.
~t.
2.
3.
1.

PLATE 30
Side view of skull found by W. C. Fritz.
Occipital region of the same skull.
A Texas point which resembles a Sandia point.
Preliminary report "American Antiquity," April, 1937, by Frank C. Hibben.

Repor~ az~d Edi$o~4.als

171

This article indicated that in a cave in the Sandia Mountains,
near Albuquerque, New Mexico, a definitely stratified sequence of
deposits was found as follows: The surface of the cave floor was
covered with the droppings of bats and rats.

Underneath this was

a layer of stalagmite due to the limestone Irom the roof of the cave
being dissolved out by water seepages and being re-deposited on the
old floor of the cave.

Beneath this stalagmite deposit was found a

typical Folsom Culture stratum, containing Folsom projectile points,
charcoal, bones of sloths, and cat llke carnivores. Below the Folsom
deposit was found an undisturbed layer of sterile yellow ochre.
Directly underneath the sterile layer of yellow ochre, was another
deposit containing the bones of elephant, horse, camel, sloth, bison,
and the projectile points of a culture very different from the Folsom
or Yuma Cultures.
The descriptions and illustrations of the projectile points utilized
by this culture and assigned the name of Sandia seemed familiar.
I was convinced that I had seen these points somewhere before.

I

immediately began a search through my collection of artifacts to
determine if I had this peculiar point.

Almost immediately I dis-

covered the point shown on Plate 30.

This resembles the illustra-

tions of the Sandia points, as found and reported by Hibben. It is
41/~ centimeters in length, 1% centimeters in width at the shoulder,
and almost a,~ e~ntimeter in thickness at the thickest place, which
is at the shoulder. This projectile has the characteristic point at
both extremities, and the still more characteristic indentation or
"shoulder," where normally would be found the tangs of later cultures.

The point is rather crudely flaked when compared with the

workmanship found on the Yuma or Folsom Cultures.

The flaking

was apparently effected by pressure with a rather large flaking tool,
as the flakes are fairly large?* The material used in the shaping of
this point is a fragment, apparently found on the surface a~ it shows
some weathering, of brownish yellow, highly altered limestone. This
fragment of metamorphosed limestone is composed of approximately 80 per cent secondary chert, as revealed by examination
under a high power binocular microscope,
point nowhere compares with the very
found in the Yuma or Folsom artifacts.

The flaking of this

excellent craftsmanship

It is to be regretted that the exact time this point was found cannot
*]~dtorial No~e : Possibly by l~¢¢ussiono

Texas Archeolagical and Paleontological Society

be definitely reported. It is, however, fortunate that the locality
where the point was found, was noted on the point by the symbol
"A". This symbol indicated that the point was found in Andrews
County, Texas. This gave me a very fair clue as to the time it was
found, since my most intensive searching in this region occurred
some seven years ago, and was confined to a rather limited sand
dune area, which was located on the easteru end of a major sand
dune trend. At the time of the finding of this point, I am sure that
I considered it to be a "sport" or a crude and imperfect projectile,
because most of the points found in the area were Pueblo in type.
Published in the September, 1940, Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society was a report by this writer, and
Mrs. Fritz, of the fin’ding of several fragments and two perfect
Folsom type points in the West Texas area. In this article it was
observed that in one area in Andrews County, Texas, were found
the greatest number of Folsom points or fragments, as well as the
greatest number of Yuma type points or fragments. It is interesting
to note that this Sandia type point also was found in this rather
limited area.

Possibly it is coincidence, but a skull that presented

some unusual development which was commented on by Dr. Ray
in the September, 19’-10, Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, was also found in the same area.

In this area is a trend of sand dunes extending in au east to
west direction in southern Andrews County. This is, so far as
I have been able to determine, the only east-west trending series
of sand dunes in the West Texas-Southeastern New Mexico area.
This may be the explanation as to the selection of this area by
man as a living site. Most of the camp sites arc found on the
south flanks of the major sand dune trend, and would receive
protection from winter winds from the north. The eastern extremity
of this trend is only a few miles west of the Odessa-Andrews paved
highway. The western extremity of this series of sand dunes is a
few miles east of the New Mexico-Texas state line, and intersects
the North-South trending scries of sand dunes, which appear as far
south as Pecos County, Texas. The most prolific area, yet determined, of the Folsom, Yuma, and Sandia type points occur in the
most eastern portion of the East-West trend, in an area covering
approximately six miles long and some three miles wide. Game was

R~ports and

173

probably abundant in this region at the time of occupation as even
now one occasionally will see native antelope in the general area.
Also edible dwarf oak acorns still grow in abundance. Water probably was also available as numerous thickets and growths of willow
trees still exist, indicating a near surface source of water. It is suspected that all of these sand dune trends are the remnants of old
drainage systems which have long past reached geologic "old age."
In a few places numerous fragments of weathered bone, and a
distinct change in the color of the stratified soil, suggests that fossil
deposits are present.

Proper excavation might reveal Folsom, Yuma,

or Sandia points associated with these suspected fossil deposits.
This suggestion is based chiefly upon surface finds of these cultures
in the vicinity of, and w~thin the same sand dune blowout, as that
containing the weathered bone fragments. A few years ago I directed a representative of the University of Texas to a similar site
of weathered bone, and changed soil color in the sand dunes of
Eastern Winkler County, Texas, and not so very far south of the
site under study. It was reported to me, by oral communication,
that preliminary excavation in this site had shown fossil deposits of
camel, bison, and horse.

I wish to advance the thought that this

area offers possibilities in bringing to light more information on
"Ancient Man."
W. C. Fritz,
1910 West College St.,
Midland, Texas.

(3) .4 Typographical Error
In an article in the Vol. 12, 1940, Bulletin, entitled "Triangular
Points of Red River County," by George T. Wright, there occurs a
typographical error, on the first line of page 174, which reads, "This
type embraces all symmetrical points . . ." It should read asymmetricaL--C. N. R.

(4) Two Mistakes Made By the Editor
The "Iron Button"

In an article entitled "Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found
Near Colorado, Texas," printed in Volume Eight, 1936, of this Bul-

174

Texa~ Arckeological and Paleontological Society

tetin series the writer suggested an erroneous deduction based on
the finding of what then seemed to be a rusted iron trousers button
in the cave deposit with four serrated arrow heads, and some long
headed skeletons.
The object erroneously identified by the writer as a trousers button has the exact size and shape of a common type of metal trousers button, it also has a hole in the center, and in every respect
superficially resembles a much rusted iron button of the type used
on a workman’s overalls. To the naked eye it has the typical brown
rough rusted texture of an old button. It was so self evident that it
was a button that the writer and his assistant who helped excavate it,
and every one else to whom it was shown, until Dr. A. E. Jenks saw
it in 1937, accepted it as such without question.
In December, 1937, Dr. A. E. Jenks made his second visit to
Abilene (1) and among many things was shown this object, and he
immediately questioned the identification as a button, and applied
a geologist’s len~ to it with the result that it was found not to be a
button but composed of a substance having a crystalline structure
which probably is crystalline iron similar to many larger brown
iron crystals to be found in this region.
Evidently the exact size and form of a button assumed by this
crystal structure was purely accidental.
The writer has intended to make this correction each year since
then but in the rush of editing and getting out the Bulletins has
previously overlooked the matter until after the books were issued.
On the same page is mentioned the occurrence of a Venetian blue
glass bead on the surface of the bottom of a sand dune blowout with
serrated points, and the later finding of a long headed burial at the
same spot when the wind had blown the surface down deeper. While
the facts concerning the finding of the glass bead are unquestionably
true it should also be mentioned that the blowout is in a plowed field,
and the bead could have been dropped by some one at a later date.
We Regret Printing It
There are very few editors who remain active during a long period
1. Dr, A. E, Jenks visited Abilene sites with the writer in August, 1929, and again
in December, 1937.

Reports and Editorials

175

who have not printed articles or pictures which at the time were
thought to be significant but which later evidence indicated were
rmt. We now regret having published an article entitled "A Prehistoric Cremated Burial of the Abilene Region," Voh VIII, 1936,
Bulletin of the Society. At the present time we believe that the
only scientific significance in the article is in the extracts from correspondence with Mr. Vane Huskey and the associated comments
concerning Nueces Canyon scored stones.--C. N. R.

(5) An Agreement On Abilene Region Terminology
Most of the research in the Abilene region thus far has been done
by the undersigned. We have to a large extent used different terms
for the same artifacts and cultures. This has resulted in some confusion as to the identity of various types mentioned.
To end this confusion, the following chart is published showing
the old designations in the middle column, and the new ones to the
left. On the right are short lists of type artifacts of each culture, it
being understood that these are not complete lists of the components
of any of the cultures listed. This chart is only concerned with a
brief listing of some of the common marker culture types and their
probable placement in time.
Finer differentiations can await the accumulation of more specific
knowledge.
The mano and metate are found in the whole series.
CYRUS N. RAY,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Abilene, Texas
E. B. SAYLES,
Gila Pueblo,
Globe, Arizona

** (~n~In~) n~’~[d ~pa~p~)

Reports and Editorla~

177

(6) ¢tnother Type o[ Gibson Site Point

Early in June, 1941, the writer again visited the Gibson Site following a heavy creek rise; and finding the cold water had receded
enough to permit examination, sent his assistant, John Allen, across
to examine the bank. He soon located a point embedded just below
the gravel stratum at a depth below the soil surface of 24 feet, 3
inches.
Despite the writer’s recovery from illness, a short time previously,
he then plunged in to verify the depth and nature of the find, and
fortunately with no bad results.
The point is two and three-eighths inches long and three-fourths
of an inch broad.
This flint has the size and the twisted blade characteristic of one
of the Clear Fork Culture dart heads. The base is bevelled to the
right on the right edge, but the left edge of the base is straight. If
this point were bevelled to the right on both edges of the base, it
would carry the characteristics of both of the first twrr types of Clear
Fork Culture dart heads described, combined in one point.1 A
point having only the right edge bevelled is something not previously
noticed. Last year a Clear Fork point bevelled to the right on both
edges of the base was found in the loose gravel of the stream bed
below the Gibson stratified deposits where it could have washed out
of the site. Previously a long narrow Clear Fork gouge was found
in the same loose gravel below the midden strata. There are some,
at present indistinct indications, that the genesis of the Clear Fork
Culture may lie somewhere deep in the Durst Silt deposits.--C. N. R.

(7) The Society Acquires A New Museum Case

Several years ago the University of Texas excavated a mastodon
skeleton from a Taylor County site which I showed them. The
tusks were beautifully prepared in Austin and returned to Abilene
to be shown in the Museum of "The Society," which is housed in
the West Texas Resource and Mu~um Institute of the West Texas
Chamber of Commerce. No museum case then installed in the
I. The Clear Fork Culture Complex, Vol. 10, 1938, Plate 25, No. 1, top four rows
of dart heads.

178

Texa~ Archeological and Paleontologi~ Society

Institute was large enough to receive the tusks and they remained in
storage in the musem’s vault for a period of two years. During
the spring of 1941 permission was obtained for the installation of
a new double case of sufficient size to hold die tusks, and in addition a collection of other bones of prehistoric animals. In a space
of somewhat over three hours time I saw thirty persons, and raised
the sum of $175.50 in cash from twenty-seven of thera, with which
to build the case. This case is three feet, eight inches wide, eight
feet long, and seven feet tall. The case has a floor deck and four
plate glass exhibition shelves. It is one of six fine museum cases
owned by Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society which
are installed in the West Texas Resource and Museum Institute in
Abilene, Texas. Four of these are single cases which are glassed
on the front and ends only and made to stand against the walls. Two
of them are double sized cases, plate glassed on both sides, and the
ends. The six cases, which are entirely paid for, cost the sum of
$775.50.--C. N. R.

