42

~Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

GROOVt~D CLUBS FROM A Pt~AT BOG IN
MILAM COUNTY, Tt~XAS
By CAm~ CHEnF
In 1942 a complete grooved club or rabbit stick and parts
of several others were found by Mr. Ben Atkinson of Austin,
Texas in a peat bog which he was engaged in mining in
Milam County, Texas.* All of the Texas bogs are similar
in character and not unlike bogs in other parts of North
America.
The literature on Texas shows that true peat bogs have
been recognized by some botanists for many years and the
principal plants have been described. Bogs in~ Texas were
described from a geological point of view by F. B. Plummet
of the University of Texas after Mr. Atkinson called atten-tion to their interesting formational character and commercial possibilities.

His discovery of perishable artifacts

further showed his keen power of observation and called
the attention of archaeologists to a new and potentially rich
field of research in Texas. There are no less than thirty bogs
known at present and many of these are in suitable camp
locations.
Plant life of the bogs is very distinctive and a person who
is o.nly remotely interested in them cannot fail to be mildly
excited by the profusion of unusual types. Plants most common to the Texas bogs include several orchids, sphagnum
¯ Specimens were given to the Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.
I-I. Sellards, Director, kindly gave permission to describe them. The objects
were photographed and treated by Dr. A. J. Sawtn and Glen Evans of the
Bureau of Economic Geology, the University of Texas,
Mr. Atklnson
would kindly permit some worthy institution the opportunity of excavating
this 1 to 2 acre locality.

PLATE 8
Views of five grooved clubs ~ound buried in a peat bog in Niilarn
County, Texas.

Plate 8

Grooved Clubs From a Peat Bog in Milam County

45

moss, sedges, a great v~ariety of beautiful grasses, ferns such
as the giant cinnamon fern, pitcher plants, iris, arrowleaf,
mallow, yaupon, sun-dew plants, cat-tail and many others.
Some of the named plants require an acid soil or water environment.

The pH of bog waters and peat is normally on

the acid side. Indeed, many of these plants are literally
starved by being transplanted to alkaline waters or soils.
Milam County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain of
Texas in a belt of comparatively heavy precipitation,, and
like other parts of Texas, perishable objects of wood or fiber
could not be preserved except for unusual conditions such
as the protective environment of bogs or, in the case of the
Trans-Pecos area, in dry shelters.
Five specimens are figured, one is broken but is otherwise
complete. The discoverer reported that pieces of other sticks
were found in the bog but they disintegrated and cracked
upon drying.

The figured specimens were taken from the

bog, placed in water and brought to the laboratory for treatment.

At the suggestion of Dr. Sawin he demonstrated a

method of preservation whereby the water in the woody tissue is first replaced by an organic chemical, dioxane.
dioxane is then replaced by paraffin.

The

In the final state the

object is sufficiently hardened to be studied and appears to
be vermin proof.
The longitudinal grooves on the complete specimen are
rather unusual and the lines are unbroken.

For part of the

distance on one side there are three grooves, and for the
remainder there~ are four.
tinuous grooves.

The opposite side has five con-

The carved handle is another unusual fea-

ture, and a few tiny holes on the handle appear to have bits
of sinew in them. The specirnen shown in Figure 2 has four
grooves on each side and one side shows that the lines were

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

46

broken.

Figure 3 appears to be the mid-portion of a stick

and four grooves are on each side of it. The lines are broken
like those shown in Figure 2 and the breaks are in essentially the same position on each side.

The specimen shown

as Figure 4 has three grooves on each side, extra notches,
three to each side of the. original three, have been added
from the prominent notch to the end.

The specimen shown

in Figure 5 appears to be the end of a stick, it bears three
grooves on each side.
Nvthing is known of the length of the complete sticks from
which these pieces came but the width and thickness corresponds rather closely with other sticks from Texas.

The

complete specimen is 29 inches long, 1~/8 to 1~ inches wide,
about one-half inch thick and is only slightly curved.
The distribution of sticks fitting the general description of
grooved clubs or rabbit sticks, theix decoration, probable
use, and other characteristics, have been described recently
by Robert Heizer.’ He showed that breaking set~ .?f lines
into discontinuous groups is a common practice, the breaks
appearing where a sinew seizing has been attached to prevent splitting. The deeply incised groove located at one end
on many of the sticks is believed to have served as the seat
for the attachment of a cord or thong, perhaps in the form
of a loop for the wrist. Heizer’s tabulation of characteristic
elements shows that three grooves have appeared only on
the Texas specimens.

The New Mexico, Arizona, and Utah

sticks have four grooves only. The bulk of Texas specimens
described have three grooves.
The present known distribution of grooved clubs is in the
Southwest and Texas.

They have been found in Nevada,

Utah, New Mexico, and Texas.

This new discovery in-

creases the known distribution in Texas more than three
hundred miles eastward and suggests the probability of find-

Grooved Clubs From a Peat Bog in Mila~n County

47

ing other types of perishable specimens in conjunction with
stone artifacts.
The Milano bog should by all means be excavated after
war conditions abate and this should be done in the most
careful manner possible.** The discovery of perishable
artifacts in an area in which they had never before been
suspected can by no means be considered unimportant.
3208 HemphiH Pk.,
Austin, Texas.
*JThis paper wa~ submitted for publication early in January, 1946.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Heizer, Robert F., i942. "Ancient Grooved Clubs and
Modern Rabbit Sticks," American Antiquity, Vol. VIII, No. 1.
Jackson, A. T., 1937. "Exploration of Certain Sites in Culo
berson County, Texas," Bulletin of Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 9.
Martin, G. C., 1933. Archaeological Exploration of Shumla
Caves, Big Bend Basket Maker Papers No. 3, Southwest
Texas ArchaeologicaI Society, Witte Memorial Museum, San
Antonio, Texas.
Sayles, E. B., 1935. An Archaeological Survey of Texas,
Medallion Papers, Vo!. 17, Globe, Arizona.

