PREHISTORIC PAINTINGS COVERED WITH
STALIGMITIC DEPOSIT
BY Da. CYRus N. RAY
In recent years much has been published concerning prehistoric
American cave and rock shelter paintings and some similarities to
European Paleolithic cave art have been noted. Most of these rock
paintings were made in dry portions of the caves where there was
no subsequent alteration from dripping water. However in March
1941 the writer examined a Texas cave shelter where considerable
surface change had occurred after the paintings were made. This
rock shelter, located ten miles northeast of Moran in Stephens
County, Texas, contained thirteen red paintings and of these four
had become covered with transparent staligmitic deposit since the
paintings were made¯
In the numerous writings about American rock paintings the
writer does not recall seeing in the literature any previous mention of staligmitic deposit covering American rock paintings. The
deposit in this shelter is so transparent that it evidently was overlooked by previous visitors.
The site is located on a hill immediately above the east bank of
a creek where it flows approximately north and south. The limestone capped hill parallels the stream and rises to a height of about
150 feet above the creek. Near the top of the south end of the escarpment a lhnestone ledge faces west and the paintings are on the
vertical wall beneath this overhanging ledge.
Beginning on the north end of the wall and describing the paintings in order from there to the south, we have the following:
The first one is of an exceptionally slender standing human figure.
The head is broad and flat on top and is roughly heart-shaped. The
right arm is bent at the elbow and points down. The left elbow is
also b~nt and the arm points upward. The legs are widely spread
and the phallus is shown. See Plate 13, No. 1.
This painting is of a round ball and from it a line sweeps upward
with a tuft on its end. See Plate 12, No. 3.
The next one shows a small human figure with an irregular halo

5O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

or feather head dress above the head and a flattened E like marking
joining its lower border on the right. Plate 12, No. 6.
This painting is of a forked drawing shaped somewhat like a slingshot fork. Plate 12, No. 5.
The next one has a superficial resemblance to the letters G V. The
drawings described above .are all small except the first one.
The next painting is one of a skirted human figure which seems
to be dancing; it is holding the arms extended at full length, the
right held higher than the left, as though whirling in a dance. The
head is round and decorated with three feathers. Beneath the left
arm is a circular object which is represented as in the air and may
be a ball. See Plate 14, Nos. 1 and 2. There is no staligmitic deposit on any of the paintings thus far described.
The ’following described figure is of a man whose head is broad
and flat on top; and it shows the ears, which is unusual. The arms
are extended and slightly bent at the elbows. The right fist is shown
shut and the left open. The legs are widely spread and the feet are
indicated, and also the phallus is shown. This figure is partly
covered with clear staligmitic deposit. This one is 3 feet tall and
14 inches from hand to hand. See Plate 13, No. 2.
This painting is of a round headed man whose arms are half
raised and extended as though in a dance. The legs are widely
spread and the phallus is shown. There is a quite thick deposit of
clear staligmitic deposit over this figure. Plate 13, No~ 3.
The next figure is long, slender, and skirted. The head is broad,
rounded and flat on top. The right arm is extended with what seems
to be the open hand although no fingers show. The left arm is
bent upward at the elbow and something, evidently a fringe, hangs
down from the point of the elbow. This painting is 3 feet, five
PLATE II
No. 1. View of rock shelter containing paintings covered with staligmitic deposit.
1~o. 2.
Close up picture of paintings which show
dimly in photographs. The areas which show light be’low the shadows
are paintings.
PLATE 12
No. 1. Horizontal nude male figure. No. 2. Unknown object between left leg and arm. No. 3. Ball with string and tassel. Nos. 4
and 5. Drawings of alphabetic appearance.
No. 6.
Small human
figure with head-dress.

Plate 11

Pretv~stori¢ Paintings Covered with Staligmi~ic Deposit

55

inches tall, and eleven inches across from hand to hand. To the
left of the feet an oval object shaped like one of the local Texas
~nanos is shown. See Plate 13, Nos. 4 and 5. This figure has the
greatest thickness of staligmite of any except the next one to be
described.
This painting is so thickly covered with staligmitic deposit that
it cannot be copied. It seems however to have represented another
long slender skirted human figure.
This one shows a thick bodied male which has a broad, flat topped head showing horns. The arms are extended and turned
slightly downward and the right fist is clenched. The legs are
wide spread showing knobs for feet and the phallus is shown. The
figure is 17 inches tall and 12 inches from hand to hand. There
is no staligmitic deposit on this picture, and none on the two following described ones. See Plate 14, No. 3.
All of the previously described figures have been shown standing vertical. The next painting is of a male in horizontal position.
The head lies to the south and is broad and flat on top. The arms
are extended downward. The legs are widely spread, m~d show feel,
and the phallus is shown. Between the upward turned arm and leg
is a peculair four armed object of undetermined type. See Plate 12,
Nos. 1. and 2. This man’s figure is 30 inches long and 17 inches
across from lmnd to hand.
The next painting is of a skirted figure. The head is flattened
on top but narrower than those of the definite males. The right
hand holds a long handled racquet like object higher than the head
and this is fifteen inches long. The human figure otherwise is
twenty-five inches tall and seventeen inches from hand to hand. The
left band and arm arc extended and four fingers may be counted.
See Plate 14, No. 4.
This hill top site is dry except during rains when some water
drains down from the top and falls over the ledge above the paintings. The area on top of the hill is small and ~hether enough lime
gets into solution during these brief rainy periods under pre~nt
conditions to have produced the staligmitic deposit seems rather
doubtful to the writer. If so, it must have required a very long

66

Texas Ar.~heological and Paleontological So~ieSy

period of time to form the staligmitie deposit; which is now about
the thickness of a table knife blade.
Apparently no previous visitor had noticed the deposit until the
writer unwittingly called attention to it in the hearing of a collector of artifacts. At that time little damage had been done to the
paintings. On another visit to the same site about fifteen months
later he found that vandals had chipped off large portions of the
staligmitic deposit and ruined many parts of the underlying paintings.
Whether or not the smaller drawings belong in age with those
representing the human figures would be hard to determine. The
same kind of red paint was used in all the paintings. There is one
feature common to nearly all of this site’s pictures of human beings
which is quite unusual and worthy of note, and that is the extreme
relative breadth of the heads and the unusual flatness of the tops
of the heads. Nearly all of the human figures show a flatness of
the vertex which the writer believes was neither accidental nor coincidental. The sense of motion and other artistic values conveyed
by the human figures would lead one to wonder if the prehistoric
artist did not execute true depictions of some extinct ancient Texas
race which carried an unusual skull flatness.
Box 62
Abilene, Texas.

PLATE

13

Nos. 1-2-3 are paintings of three flat headed figures showing phallus. Nos. 4 and 5, paintings of fla~ headed skirted figurh, and an oval
object.
PLATE 14
Nos. 1 and 2 are of skirted dancing figure with feathers on head,
and ball beneath arm. No. 3 is of flat headed male with horns. No.
4 is of a skirted female holding racquet like object.

Plate 13

