Stream Bank Si~ts ol the Abilene Region

117

STREAM BANK SILTS OF THE ABILENE
REGION
Bx" C~’r~us N. RAY
Early in the fall of 1927 the writer began a systematic search of
the vertical eared off banks of all of the streams of the Abilene
region for evidences of ancient man’s occupation and has continued
this research as a scientific hobby throughout the intervening eighteen
years. Prior to that time no archeologieal research had been done
in the immediate vicinity of Abilene, and with the exception of
Harold Cook’s excavation of bison bones and flints at Colorado,
Texas, situated seventy-five miles west of Abilene, none had been
done previously in a region several hundred miles in diameter.
The early reports were published on these sites in 1929 and 1930.
(1), (2), (a), (4), (5), (6), (7).
Various persons have assisted the writer during brief periods in
small excavations in the sites, but with the exception of those done
by Mr. Joe Ben Wheat in 1940, on W. P. A. funds, for Texas Technological

College of Lubbock, no large excavations have been

made.
(8)
Mr. Wheat was called into the.Army a short time
after he finished this work and no report has yet been published
on a large part of it. In 1934 Mr. E. B. Sayles wrote a report on
some of the writer’s sites, which was printed by Gila Pueblo, Globe,
Arizona. This was done after spending most of the summer of 1934,
in Abilene. (9)
Mr. Sayles previously had lived in Abilene up
to the year 1931 and had then assisted the writer in some small
excavations in the sites. Also during the summer of 1934 Gila
Pueblo sent Dr. Ernst Antevs and Dr. M. M. Leighton to examine
the sites for a few days with Mr. E, B. Sayles. Then Dr. Leighton
later issued a report based on their brief period of inspection of
the sites. (10)
In the Leighton report were some er.roneous conclusions and inferences which could have been avoided had he
spent more. time in examining the geology of the sites, and then
in some first hand consultation about the fossil fauna and artifacts
which had previously been dug out of the various sites during a
long period of years. Then on very insufficient data, and no right
of priority t~ name the formations, Dr. Leighton applied the general
term "Elm Creek Silts" to the whole top twenty-four feet of the

118

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

local stream bank silts. These are the silts situated above the dark
red deposit at the Gibson Site, which site the writer found in
January, 1930, and has studied ever since. The dark red deposits
beneath the so-called Elm Creek Silts at the Gibson She Mr. Leighton
then termed the "Durst Silts" after the name of an old real estate
survey of the Abilene Region. The writer had collected, and had
published reports in the Society’s Bulletins on, Abitene Points and
other flint artifact types which he had dug out of the dark red
deepest layer of silt at the Gibson site at intervals since 1930. It
then would naturally be expected that he would reserve ~he right
to name his own discoveries. At no time has excavation of any
consequence been done in the upper or so-called Elm Creek Silts
on Elm Creek, and there seem to be relatively few hearths and
artifacts at those levels situated in the banks of Elm Creek.
All of the early discoveries of midden levels in the upper series
of stream bank silts in the Abilene region were made by the writer
on the banks of the Clear Fork of the Brazos River in 1929 and
1930, and the early excavations in them were made near Nugent,
Texas, in the fall of 1929. In these excavations, made on the Will
Myatt place, the writer was assisted in excavation by Dr. Otto’ O.
Watts and E. B. Sayles.
The upper section of river bank silts varies in total thickness in
different sites from twenty to twenty-five feet and varies in color
and texture as one goes up or down its five distinct zones of deposition. To lump the whole upper silt section which required many
thousands of years to form simply as "Elm Creek Silts" seems to’
be very indefinite terminology. To locate a hmnan skeleton or an
artifact by use of such indefinite terminology one would be compelled to resort to measurements down from the present soil surface
to any object described, and much previous experience in doing so

PLATE 20
Composite or idealized drawing showing all of the seven Clear
Fork and Nugent Silts in their relative placement if all were to be
found intact in one site.
PLATE 21
Gibson Site dra~ving, showing the lower and upper Clear Fork
Silts, and the five Nugent Silts, and the hearths found in the different levels.

Plate 20

Plate 21

Stream Bank S$lSs o5 the Abilene Region

123

has taught the writer that such a method is likely to be very inaccurate.

While it is true that there was a rather uniform deposition

of silts along all of the streams of the region, and that the different
zoned deposits hold their relative positions everywhere, the counteracting geological forces which aggrade and those which degrade
sedimentary deposits have in different sections of the same stream
operated to produce some differences in the relative thickness of
the same aged deposits in different sites. While in one site a silt
layer might be relatively thin, and the next one below it thick, in
another site the reverse might be true. Despite all of these conditions which are likely to trap the unwary there yet remains over
the whole region a general uniformity of color and texture and
relative placement, in each of the zones of silts, which enables an
experienced observer to outline them. In a few sites there are
older remnants of solidified Pleistocene gravels which remained in
place during a period of the late Pleistocene when most of the stream
beds of the region were scoured out down to Permian bed rock.
At a time near to the close of the Pleistocene the low lands along
the banks of the streams began to aggrade or fill up with stream
deposited silts and as these gradually built up apparently certain
levels remained stationary, or nearly so, during long enough time for
men to move onto them and live through periods sufficient to create
layers of ashes, burnt rocks, mussel shells, bones, and flints and
also’ to somewhat darken the old soil surfaces. These old darker
soil levels mark the upper surfaces of the different layers of silts at
the places where the changes took place into silts different in color
and in texture from those below. Hearths usually are more numerous
in the darker areas at the tops of silt layers.
It would seem ~at each time during the stationary period while
the upper surface of a silt stratum was being lived on that something happened to the region’s climate, its wind movements, its rainfall, or scarcity of it, sufficient to change the texture and color of
the next zone of silt deposited above it, so that the difference can
be seen from across the stream. There usually is some darkening
of the upper surface of each silt stratum, but this is very marked
on the top surface of the second one beneath the present soil surface.
To get the real evaluation of the color changes of the different
silts it is necessary to view a bank from across the stream, standing

124

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

on the bank opposite, for in a close up view the line of demarcation
often is not apparent.
In most sites the older Hawley gravels have been removed down
to bed rock, and since then seven different layers of silts have been
deposited to a total depth of between thirty and thirty-five feet above
bed rock.

These seven silts will herewith be named and described

from the bottom or first formed, upward to the present soil surface
the stream bank. On the present soil surface above these buried
sites are stone age hearths, which contain no indications of contact
with white men. In Plate 20 we see a composite or idealized drawing
showing the placement of the seven silts if all were intact in the
same site.
The Lower Clear Fork Silt

This is a dark red colored, dense clayey silt which contains some
gravel and caliche nodules of. medium size. In most places along
the larger streams of the region this silt has been either entirely
eroded away or is represented by a thin remnant located donna on the
bed rock. At the Gibson Site on Elm Creek however there is a
stratum of Lower Clear Fork Silt six feet thick, (See Plate (21),
lowest stratum). In this stratum are several zones of hearths which
contain quantities of charcoal, burnt rocks, ashes, thin man made
flint flakes, and artifacts. Down near the water line at about thirty
feet below the soil surface of the stream bank a very crude flint
dart head which the writer designated as a Jones Point was found
in 1939 while Dr. Clifford Jones, former president of Texas Technological College, and Dr. W. C. Holden of the same institution
were present. Crudely percussion made, thick leaf shaped Abilene
Points, were found in this dark red silt in the 24 1-2 feet deep level
in 1930 and subsequently. (11).
In 1940 a Gibson Point, which has a bevelled ’point and a base
somewhat like a crudely made Folsom Point, was found embedded
at a depth beneath the soil surface of twenty-five feet in this silt. (12)
Near the top of this deposit and just under an eight inch thick layer
PLATE 22
Hodges Site drawing, showing the Clear Fork and Nugent Silt
strata, and the artifacts founds in them.

Plate 22

Stream Bank Silts of the Abitene Region

127

of gravel a Clear Fork Type (2) dart head was found embedded.
Nine hundred and sixty-seven feet up the creek bank in similar formation a proboscidian leg bone was found embedded in 1938. (13),
(14) Als6 a mano stone was found embedded in Lower Clear
Fork Silt at theGibson Site in 1940. (15), (16)
At the Hodges Site on the Brazos River near Nugent, Texas, this
silt has been removed by erosion, and the series begins on top of a
layer of gravel, which probably is the basal gravel layer of the next
silt stratum above or Upper Clear Fork Silt. There is a hearth
there on top of the gravel, and in this hearth the writer found a
Clear Fork Gouge embedded.
level of the Brazos.

This hearth lies very near low water

Several different types of flint cultures were used during the
forming of Lower Clear Fork Silt; and the time period of its deposition was a long one. The best preserved beds of this deposit
occur in the bottoms of dry mountain valleys west and south o~
Abilene, where the deposit is often ~from four to six feet in thickness. The men of the Clear Fork culture began using those types
of implements toward the close of deposition of Lower Clear Fork
Silt and used them throughout i.}le period of deposition of Upper
Clear Fork Silt, and this flint culture probably evolved out of the
Abilene Point type of the Lower Clear Fork Silt. The Lower Clear
Fork Silt is the silt termed Durst by M. M. Leighton. At two
different sites, the McLean and the Gibson, mammoths bones were
found in Lower Clear Fork Silt, in the McLean site with a Folsom
point, and at the Gibson site on a level with a mano, hearths and a
Jones Point.
The Upper Clear Fork Silt

This silt is red, but is not so dark, nor so dense in texture, as
Lower Clear Fork Silt and it has more sand and less gravel in it and
there are many small caliche nodules in Upper Clear Fork Silt.
At the Gibson site this silt is represented by an eight inch basal
layer of gravel and a thin layer of red silt adhering to its upper
surface (See Plate 2~). At the Hodges site this silt deposit is about
eight feet thick, and has a large hearth outcrop at its line of juncture
with the next silt above, Nugent Silt (]-). There is another row of
hearths at some distance below, and a third row of hearths do~m
near the bottom of the deposit. A mano and metate and a Clear

128

Texas Archeological and PaleontolOgical Society

Fork culture hand axe were found in the upper line of hearths.
There is some doubt in the writer’s mind as to whether the lowest
hearth shown in this drawing (see Plate 21) which lies in and on
a bed of gravel in a thin remnant of dark red silt is a remnant of an
otherwise eroded Lower Clear Fork Silt or is a hearth in the basal
gravel deposit of the stratum of Upper Clear Fork Silt which lies
above it.
A Clear Fork culture gouge was found embedded in the hearth,
but men began to use that culture before the close of the deposition
of the Lower Clear Fork Silt. In 1938 while accompanied by Dr.
Kirk Bryan and Samuel Vaughan the writer found a crude knife
embedded near the bottom of the Upper Clear Fork Silt ~t~a~um at
the Hodges site. This somewhat resembled the Abilene blades found
in the Lower Clear Fork Silt at the Gibson site.
Nugent Silt (1)
At the Hodges Site on the Brazos River, Nugent Silt (1) contains.
hearths at two levels, one at the line of juncture with the next silt
above and another ~ries at about its middle. Other thaa burnt rocks
and man made flint flakes no artifacts were found in the hearths.
At the Hodges Site this stratum is about 5 1-2 feet thick and at the
Gibson Site about 4 1-2 feet thick. The Nugent Silt (1) is pink
colored clayey silt of lighter color than the Upper Clear Fork Slit.
There are no discernable hearths in Nugent Silt (i) at the Gibson
site, but it is difficult to examine closely on account of the almost
vertical bank.
Nttgent Silt (2)

This silt is of a reddish brown color and clayey in texture, and
the thickness of Nugent Silt (2) is 8 feet in the Gibson Site and
2 1-2 feet in the Hodgcs Site. There are no discernable hearths
in this silt stratum either at the Gibson or Hodges sites. The deepest
buried human skeleton yet found in the re, on was excavated from
the top level of Nugent Silt (2) on the Putnara Ranch at depth of
21 feet below the present soil surface. (17)
PLATE 23
Young Site drawing, showing the three old Pleistocene strata, the
extinct fauna found in them, the line of unconformity, and the latest
Nugent Silt 5 stratum above them.

:Plate 23

Stream Bank Si~ts oS the Ab~ene Region

131

Nugent Sih (3)
This silt is a light pink colored clayey silt which has a thickness
of 3 feet at the Hodges Site and of 2 1-2 feet at the Gibson Site, and
at the latter site there are ~ve narrow bandings in which darker
zones alternate with lighter pinkish zones. There are no hearths
visible at either site.
Nugent Silt (4)
Nugent Silt (4) has a distinctive broad dark humus stained zone
at its top which is always darker than that in any other stratum.
This dark zone is darkest at the line of demarcation between it and
the bottom ~of Nugent Silt (5) and shades out downward into one
of the characteristic light pinkish tan shades of the upper Nugent
Silt series. Nugent Silt (4) probably has more hearths exposed in it
than any other silt of the region. Evidently this level either remained
stationary longer than any of the others, or it represents a, period
when there was a much more abundant rainfal! which produced more
vegetation and heavier staining of the old ground level. Hearths
are abundant along the old surface level and all through the black
stained zone. The two first Matthews Ranch burials found in 1929
were at between 6 1-2 feet and seven feet deep in Nugent Silt (4)
as also was the burial found in 1939 (18) at below nine feet deep
on the same Ranch and situated about two miles south of the others.
The latter burial was actually buried at 10 feet below~ the surface,
but the earth had been disturbed up to below 9 feet in depth. The
latter burial had been made from below the black zone, which at
that site was about two feet thick, and the burial was done evidently
before the zone was formed. The black zone above the buria! at
the Matthews Ranch was thickly studded with burnt hearth rocks,
mussel shells and flint flakes.
Nugent Silt (5)

This silt varies considerably in thickness in tile different sites,
and is a rather uniform light pinkish’ tan in color and in texture
is rather sandy. Nugent Silt (5) has a thickness of four feet at
the Gibson Site and five feet at the Hodges Site, but farther down
the Brazos on the Myatt, Matthews and Putnam ranches, and at
many other sites, the usual thickness of the silt varies between six
and eight feet. There are a few scattered hearths at various depths

132

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

in this silt and these are more commonly found at a depth of about
four feet below the surface. There also are many hearths embedded
in the top soil surface which contain flint scrapers, arro~g heads,
manos and metates and hammerstones, but there are no artifacts
showing any trade relations with white men.~
Lower Clear Fork Silt Pleistocene in Age
The writer has evidence from three sites in the form of remains
of mammoths that the Lower Clear Fork Silt was laid down at about
the close of the Pleistocene Period, and it perhaps is twenty-five
or thirty thousand years old. The Upper Clear Fork Silt ~nay be
Pleistocene in age, but no definite evidence of it has been found,
and it is probable that the silt was formed immediately after the
extinction of the Pleistocene fauna. In eighteen years of examina.
tion of the stream banks of the Abilene region the writer never has
seen any reliable evidence that the mammoth or any other Pleistocene animal’s bones have ever been found in the so-called Elm
Creek silts, or in more definite terminology, in any of the five
Nugent Silts. One occasionally sees in print the statement that tim
"Elm Creek Silts are Pleistocene in age" and evidently this idea
was derived from an erroneous evaluation of the age of the deposits
in a site which the writer found in 1928 and has studied ever since.
This is a site on the Brazos River a few miles east of the village
of Hawley, Texas, in Jones County, on the farm of Mr. R. G. Young.
In this site during past years many teeth, bones and several tusks
of mammoths, have been found.
In 1934 Gila Pueblo sent Dr. M. M. Leighton, Chief of the State
Geological Survey of Illinois, to Abitene to examine the deeply
buried sites of the Abilene region, and he and others examined
these sites without the writer’s preserice or knowledge o~ it until

PLATE 24
This picture of the Gibson Site and those of Plates 25 and 26 were
made to record the facts by an Abilene photographer in January,
1930, shortly after the writer found the Gibson site. The writer is
pointing at the hearth level just below the eight inch thick gravel
stratum. Below the gravel layer is the Lower Clear Fork Silt. The
gravel stratum is the base of, and is a narrow remnant of, the
Upper Clear Fork Silt, which in this site has been nearly all re-~
moved by ancient erosive forces; above the gravel are the five
Nugent Silts, This picture was previously published in the Volume
II, 1930, issue of this Bulletin.

Plate

Stream Bank Silts of the AbiIene Region

135

afterward, and then did not ask him for any opinions he might have
had about his sites, nor about the results of his researches in them,
extending over a period of many years. In 1936 Dr. Leighton issued
a report on his visit of a few days to these sites, and apparently he
had not read any of the many previously published reports on them
in various national scientific publications, and in the annual Bulletins of The Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society from
the year~ 1929 and ]930 onward, or at any rate he failed to mention
them in his bibliography.
This report was entitled Geological .Aspects of the Findings of
Primitive Man, Near AMlene, Texas. Medallion Papers No. XXIV
Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona. On page ]5 of that report there is
shown Plate V which has two panels, and the top panel (a) is a
picture of the R. G. Young site and this shows the writer pointing
to the highest level of those from which he had excavated mammoth
bones. Here there evidently was a whole mammoth skeleton originally, as two tusks, two teeth, a (houlder blade, and a complete
leg bone were excavated. The formation even that high up on the
bank has the same color of light gray, spotted with rust colored
zones, which is found not in the latest Pleistocene deposits, but in
far older deposits. On a line just above the writer’s head in Plate V
(a) of Leighton’s Report may be seen a line of unconformity below
which the picture shows a wide band of humt~s stained earth. On the
page opposite to Plate V of Dr. Leighton’s Report we find a reader
under (a) as follows "Ehn Creek Silts along Clear Fork of Brazo’s
River at Station 12. Three mammoth teeth were found by Dr. Ray,
of Abilene, the discoverer of this site, at about where the man is
shown in the picture; also a bone of equus in the lower gravel,
which may correlate with tire Durst Silts."
In reference to the above statement, at least ten mammoths teeth
of several different sizes of mammoths, including some small ones,
and many bones of marmnoths have been found there. The bone
referred to as "equus" was later definitely identified as a bison
leg bone. In the lower panel of Plate V of Dr. Leighton’s Report,
Panel (b), is shown a site located about three miles lower down
the Brazos River beside the Delk country road, a short distance
north of tire bridge across Mulberry Creek and near its mouth.
Panel (b) carries the following title under it "Elm Creek and Durst
(?) Silts" and the reader on the opposite page (14) is as follows

136

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

"Elm Creek Silts along Clear Fork of Brazos River at Station 14,
near the base of these silts, at the top of what appears to be Durst
Silts, on the same level as the man is standing, were-found hearths,
charcoal, and flint chips. The bluff is approximately thirty feet
high."
This writer has seen no evidence that the site shown as Panel
(b) in Dr. Leighton’s report is anything more ancient than the
five Nugent Silts which contain a recent fauna, and it is doubtful that either of the Clear Fork Silts are to be found there. The
stream probably began to deposit this bank in Nugent Silt (1)
time, and as such it is all of recent deposition down to the waters
edge. The writer has examined the site many times and has found
some groups of naturally embedded water laid stones, but no hearths,
although the formation should contain them.
On page 27 of Dr. Leighton’s Report he stated as follows concerning "Station 13 on the Clear Fork of the Brazos River, These
silts differ strikingly from those at Station 12 in having no caliche
and also in being finer with sparse small pebbles; yet the prominent
humus band is at the same horizon." In this and other comment
on the heavy humus stained zones of local sites Dr. Leighton several
times compared the recent humus stained zone at the top of Nugent
Silt (4) in the regular deposited silts along the banks of Elm Creek
and the Brazos River, with the ancient Pleistocene deposits in the
Young Site, which also have a broad hmnas stained zone at the top
of the Pleistocene deposit. Th!s zone is less than four feet beneath
the present soil surface.
Much study of the
Report, indicates that
cene time and not a
man ever visited it.

Young Site, or Station 12 of Dr. Leighton’s
the deposit was formed far back in Pleisto.
fragment of evidence has been found that
The writer would estimate the age of all of
PLATE

25

This is a close up view of the gravel stratum, and the Lower
Clear Fork Silt belo~v it, at’the Gibson Site. Taken in January,
1930.
PLATE 26

This picture shows the Gibson Site silts and a flint artifact embedded in gravel at the oase of a bank situated about a thousand
feet south of the bank shown in Plate 24. This picture was made
in 1930.

Plate

25

Plate 26

Stream Bank Si~ts o 5 the Abilene Region

141

the Young Site deposits below the unconformity as undoubtedly
many thousands of years older than the lowest level of the Lower
Clear Fork Silt, or the "Durst" according to Dr. Leighton’s terminology.
The writer has prepared a sketch of the Young Site, or the one
shown in Dr. Leighton’s Station 12, panel (a) to illustrate his own
findings in that site.

(See Plate (23) of this article.

In describing the Young Site we will begin at the bottom of the
site at tow water level. Stratum (1) is of dark red color and of
undisturbed Permian age, and is full of large red claystones, and
is 2 1-2 feet in thickness.
Stratum (2) is composed of 5 Ieet of Pleistocene conglomerate
stone and this contains Pleistocene forms of mussels and gastropods
and many mammoths bones and teeth.
Stratum (3) is composed of 6 feet of old Pleistocene gray sandy
clay, and rust colored zones. In the rust colored zones are many
mammoths bones and teeth.

Stratum (4) is composed of 10 feet of pinkish tan colored, hard
and caliche filled deposit. There are streaks of light gray sand and
gravel in this layer also. The top portion of this stratum which extends up to withiu less than four feet of the present soil snrfacc is
stained black with hunms,
Stratum {5) Separated by a slightly lighter line is a narrow band
of very dark silt just above Stratum ,1., and then there is a complete
break with the silt almve; which has the light pinkish tan color of the
top or last deposited stream silt of the Abilene Region or Nugent
Silt (5).
Evidently the true explanation of this site is that at a time while
the Pleistocene fauna was still very abundant, all of the three strata
of Pleistocene deposits np to within less than four feet of the present
soil surface were laid down, and that their heavy infiltration with
caliche so hardened them that they remained as an earlier Pleistocene remnant long after the time when most other such deposits
were removed by stream erosion, and that this bank so remained
intact, and its upper portion as a top soil surface, until about the
close of Nugent Silt (4) time, when its top took on the dark humus
coloration of Nugent Silt (4). Then unconformably over this was
deposited the late~ formed silt of the Abilene region, Nugent Silt

Stream Bank Silts o S the Abilene Region

142

(5), to a depth of 3 1-2 feet on up to the present soil surface. The
evidence would indicate that both the Upper and Lower Clear Fork
Silts and Nugent Silts 1, 2, 3 and 4, never had a chance to form
because of the persistence into recent time in this bank of over
twenty feet of ancient Pleistocene deposits, llSee Plate (23)). *See
Plates 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28 for photographic evidence concerning
these deeply buried sites.
P. O. Box 62, Abilene, Texas.
*The last two years of this research, including this report, and the
four site drawings with it, were done with the aid of research funds
of the Anthropology Department of Texas Technological College,
Lubbock, Texas.~Cyrus N. Ray.

Bibliography

1. Cyrus N. Ray, New Evidences of Ancient Man in America,
Scientific American, New York, May, 1929.
2. J. Alden Mason, The Texas Expedition, The Mu~um Journal,
September-December, 1929. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

3. Cyrus N. Ray, Traces of Ancient Man Reported from Texas,
Science News-Letter, D~ember 21, 1929.
PLATE 27
This shows the Matthews Ranch Site where two skeleton~- were
removed from the hole shown at the top, early in the winter of 1929.
(See Scientific American, May, 1929). Members of Dr. J. Alden
Mason’s, University of Pennsylvania Expedition of July, 1929, are
shown in the foreground.
PLATE 28
No. 1. The hearth under the man’s pick axe contained a square
based flint knife at a de~)th of eight feet below the soil surface, in
the black stained zone ~f Nugent Silt 4. This is the first found
site at a depth of eight feet, situated on the Will Myatt place. The
silt above the dark line is Nugent Silt 5. Date, October, 1929.
No. 2. This is a picture of the writer’s 1930 excavation in the
Gibson Site. The gravel layer below the pick axe is the base of
the upper Clear Fork Silt. The deposit below where the trowel
lies is the Lower Clear Fork Silt. This picture was first printed in
the writer’s article in the 1930 issue of this Bulletin, (Plate 11,
No. 4), and again in 1934 in Gila Pueblo’s Survey of Texas, (Plate
~v~II, B.).
No. 3. This is a picture of the Gibson Site showing an Abilene
Point projecting just below the gravel stratum in Lower Clear
Fork Silt.

Plate 27

Plate 28

Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region

4.

147

Cyrus N. Ray, Report on Some Recent Archeologieal R~-

searches in the Abilene Section, Vol. 2, 1930, Bulletin of Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Abilene, Texas.
5. J.E. Pearce, Reports p. 481, American Anthropologist, July~eptember, 1931.
6. Walter Hough, Archeological Reports, Texas, American
thropologist, p. 368, April, 1930.
7. Cyrus N. Ray, Archeological Reports, American Anthropologist, pp. 368-369, April, 1930.
8. Joe Ben Wheat, Preli~ninary Report on Excavation of the
Hodges Site, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 12, 1940, Abilene, Texas.
9. F_. B. Sayles, An Ar&mological Survey of Texas, Medallion
Papers No. XVII, Gila Pueblo, Globe Arizona, May, 1935.
1~. M.M. Leighton, Geological Aspects af the Findings d Primitive Man, Near Abilene, Texas, Medallion Papers X.XIV, August,
1936, Gila Pueblo, Glol~, Arizona.
11. Cyrus iN. Ray, The Deeply Buried Gibson Site, Bulletin of
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 12, 1940, p.
228, Plate 41, Nos. 2 and 3.
12. Kirk Bryan, Deep Sites Near Abilene, Texas, Reports and
Editorials, Bulletin of Texas Archeologieal and Paleontological
ciety, Vol. 10, 1938, Plate 37.
13. Cyrus N. Ray, New Evidences of Ancient Man in Texas,
Reports, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Pateontolagieal Society, Vol. 10, 1938, p. 269, Plate 37, No. 1.
14. Cyrus N. Ray and Kirk Bryan, Folsomoid Point Found in
Alluvium Beside a Mammoth’s Bones, Science, Sept. 16, 1938, Vol.
88, No. 2281.
15. Cyrus N. Ray, Was the American Mano and Metate an Invention Made during Pleistocene Time? Science, Feb. 23, 19.40, New
Series, Vo!. 91, No. 2356.
16. Kirk Bryan and Cyrus N. Ray, Long Channelled Point Found
in Alluvinm Bt~ide Bones of Elephas Columbi, Bulletin of Texa.~
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, 1938, Plate 35.
17. Cyrus N. Ray, A Texas Skeleton, Science, October 15, 1943,
Vol. 98, No. 25,16.
18. Cyrus N. Ray, Some Unusual Abilene Region Burials, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 3/ol. 11,
1939, pp. 237-241, Plate 52.

