THE OLMEC PHASE IN EASTERN MEXICO
ROBERT E.

GREENCo

Introduction
It is proposed here to survey cultural manifestations on
the Gulf coast of southern Mexico. These range from the
Rio Papaloapan drainage in southern Veracruz to that of
the Rio Tonala in Tabasco. The area extends about 30 miles
inland from the coast up the Rio Coatzacoalcos system. The
whole area has a tropical rain-forest climate.
We will employ the cultural terminology suggested by
Dr. A. V. Kidder in a seminar on Meso-America given at
the University of California in the spring of 1951. He recognizes six main periods or stages: Early Man, Emergent Agricultural-Ceramic, Pre-Classic, Classic, Post-Classic, and Proto-Historic. It should be realized that there are several other
"systems" of cultural designation for Meso-America, which
cannot be discussed at this time. The stages postulated by
Dr. Kidder may be subdivided on the basis of site-to-site
differences, as well as differences within stratified sites.
Such subdivisions are called phases as defined by Kidder,
Jem,Angs, and Shook (1946, p. 9) : "A cultural complex possessing traits sufficiently characteristic to distinguish it, for
purposes of preliminary archaeological classification, from
earlier and later manifestations of the cultural development
of which it formed a part, and from other, contemporaneous
complexes."
The Pre-Classic Stage
We will be concerned primarily with the Pre-Classic stage
in this study, which appears to be the earliest at a number
of Meso-American sites on the east coast. This is characterized by well-developed complexes of pottery, maize agriculture, and hand-made clay figurines which bespeak a pattern of living similar in most essentials to that of the Indians
living in the same rural districts today. These characteristics
of the Pre-Classic are the few general ones on which archaeologists have attained a measure of agreement. Certainly,

The O~ec Pha~e I~ Eo~ter~ Me~ico

261

another trait of this stage was that of constructing mounds
of earth and rubble for ceremonial purposes. Beyond this,
however, the special details which set off Pre-Classic mounds
and (or) pyramids from those of the following Classic period
are not clear. Until quite recently the criteria of bar-and-dot
dates, hieroglyphic inscriptions, and fine stone carving have
been considered Classic traits. Evidence is now accumulating
that the concept of the Classic stage can no longer be so
simply stated, and that regional variations, rather than time,
may be responsible for the presence or absence of such
traits. Wauchope (1950, pp. 212-214, 218) has stressed the
differences between Pre-Classic sites which appear to be on
the same general time level.
Since the main purpose of this paper is to present some
of the data which bear on the definitions of Pre-Classic and
Classic, we will withhold further comment for the present.
The OImec Problem
The word "Olmec" signifies "inhabitants of the rubber
region," as it derives from a Nahua (?) word olman, "where
there is rubber", or olli mani, "where rubber is gathered"
(Jimenez Moreno, 1942 b, p. 119).
Sahagun (translation, 1830, Vol. 3, Book X, Chap. XXXIX,
pp. 136-137), writing shortly after the Conquest, gives a good
account of a people called the Olmec who lived toward the
east (of ]~¢Iexico City) on the Gulf Coast. He n-ientions that
they had elaborate clothes, gold, rubber (including rubber
sandals) and jade as well as an abundant supply of Quetzal
feathers. They were said to have spoken a barbaric language, although some also spoke Nahua.
Beginning with such information from the Chronicles,
much controversy has arisen over the identity of these rubber people, what language they spoke and what their culture was like. Quite distinct from the question of the identity of the pro~o,h~s~oric Olmec through the literature,
knowledge of this area can be said to have been approached
from the opposite angle, through strange and supposedly

Texas Archeologic~ ~nd Pa~eo~o~ogic~ Societ~

very old archaeological finds. From the late nineteenth centuxy to the present, discussion has revolved around the antiquity and origin of bar and dot glyphs of apparently 7th
and 8th Baktun dates, as well as of beautiful jade carving
of humanized jaguar faces, crying babies, combinations of
both and other features to be discussed below. Though not
the first such find, the controversy was touched off in 1907
when Holmes published an illustration of a curious little
jade figure, the now famous Tuxtla Statuette from near
San Andres Tuxtla in southern Veracruz. Most remarkably
this object has inscribed on its surface a series of bars and
dots which may possibly represent an 8th cycle date of the
Maya Initial Series. Such a date is controversial because
(1) this is supposedly a non-Maya region; (2) the bars and
dots do not have accompanying glyphs (as do most Maya
date inscriptions) ; and (3) the date appears to be much too
early for the Maya long count. The gist of these objections
is that Maya-type Initial Series dates have been confined to
the Classic Maya area and have not preceded the 9th cycle.
To understand how the Tuxtla Statuette with its 8th Baktun
date ties in with the Olmec problem we must first discuss
another find.
At an archaeological site called Tres Zapotes, about 15
miles from the locale in which the Tuxtla Statuette was
found, are groups of earth mounds. In the front of the
second largest mound at the site (C, 1), a fragment of a
stela (Stela C) was unearthed standing on end next to a
fiat circular stone which may have been an altar. This stela
fragment measuring approximately 88 cm. wide and 50 cm.
high was apparently broken from a larger piece. One side
of the stela contains a bar and dot inscription which, if it
represents the Initial Series, bears a date of the 7th Baktun,
the earliest date yet found. On the other side of the stela is
a very weather-worn carving of a conventionalized feline
face in low relief. The supposed history of the stone involves:
first, use of the stone as a larger monument which fell, date
side down; considerable time then elapsed in order for the
feline carving side to weather (the material is very hard);

The Olmee Phase Ir~ Eas~er~ Me:~ico

263

secondly, the large original stela was found and broken, this
fragment being set on end near the stone altar in front o£
mound C, 1.
Due to the facts that the dates on Stela C and on the
Tuxtla Statuette are executed in a very similar manner,
that they were found in the same general region and that
they are both supposed to be quite early, there is good reason
to believe that there-may be a close cultural connection between the two. As we shall see below, the "tiger" mask on
Stela C is of an artistic tradition which apparently centers
in that same area. This tradition hhs a number of aspects
which connect it quite certainly with the Pre-Classic horizon
(as defined above), some of which seem to have persisted in
and influenced the later, Classic art styles. On the other
hand there are also found here several categories of rather
unique objects whose cultural connections apparently do
not extend beyond the southern Veracruz-Tabasco Gulf

The initial step toward identifying this mysterious artistic
tradition was made by Saville (1929) in his study of "Votive.
Axes." He found at least two types of representations, the.
"tiger face" and the "baby face" which sometimes appeared
separately while at other times features of the two were,
merged. He also found that they were encountered in two
different media, on votive axes and in relief sculptures.~
However, it was not until 1932 that Vaiilant, in publishing"
an illustration of a beautiful jade "jaguar-baby" figurine¯
from Puebla, suggested the name "Ohnec" for this artistictradition. He pointed out that people in an area often build.
up semi-mythical legends about those who have gone before..
Examples of the art of the Toltecs, the early Zapotecs and
even the early Totonacs who appear in Nahua legends hav~
been partially extricated from mere legendary existence via
the medium of archaeology. One such half-legendary people,
the Olmec, is described as having lived as far north a~,
Tlaxcala, but were later dispersed to southern Veracruz,
Chiapas, southern Puebla and eastern Oaxaca. They wer~

264

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

well known for their jade work and their utilization of
rubber. Therefore, because the area from which the "tiger
face" and "baby face" representations come was roughly
the same as that which the legendary Olmec were supposed
to have occupied. Vaillant suggested that the unique art was
the product of the Olmec, although he admitted no other
material culture could be assigned to them.
While no one knew very much about this artistic complex
and almost nothing culturally about the people who practiced it, at least now it had a name as well as a sort of working hypothesis with which to probe deeper into the problem.
Almost all of the objects which could be called Olmec had
become known under unscientific circumstances. There still
~emainec~ the problem of finding and excavating an "Olmec"
site.
As a matter of fact, two sites of this nature were already
recorded in the literature. As early as 1869 Melgar had mentioned the colossal head of Tres Zapotes and in 1871 published a paper on it. From time to time others mentioned
either pottery material from the area or the colossal head
(e. g., Seler-Sachs, 1922). Wyerstall in 1932 published a
paper which gave more than an inkling of the nature of
the archaeology of southern Veracruz. Finally, during the
dry seasons of 1938-1939 Stifling commenced excavation at
Tres Zapotes (Stirling, 1939).
The other Olmec site which had been mentioned in the
literature was that of La Venta, on the Tonala River in
Tabasco not far from the Veracruz border. The first notice
of this site was recorded by Charnay in 1887. Blom and
La Farge visited the site in 1925 and published several photographs of La Venta’s stone monuments (as well as of two
statues from there, which had been removed to the city of
Villahermosa). They also drew a rude sketch map of the
site. Joyce (1931) wrote a brief notice accompanied by several photographs of the La Venta site. Excavation was initiated there in 1940 by Stifling (1940) for a period of 10 days,
while more extensive work was done in 1942.

The Olmec Phgse I~ Eo~te~n Mexico

265

Tres Zapotes
Before launching into a resume of the material manifestations of this and other sites it might be well to state the
major categories of evidence with which we are to deal:
architecture, stone monuments, pottery and figurines, and
jade work.
Architectural remains at Tres Zapotes consist of mounds
of earth, arranged in irregular groups. The only pattern apparent is that of building "a relatively high steep mound,
often ch-cular but sometimes four-sided in plan, adjacent to
a long narrow mound. Smaller mounds, usually rather low
domes, were built as flankers, often in pairs, to complete the
group." This pattern is significant because it recurs in other
sites in the region (Stirling, 1943 a, pp. 10-11).
The two highest mounds are about 40 feet high and some
150 feet square at the baselines. Perhaps the largest mound
is a long one (425 feet), 57 feet wide and 25 feet high. There
are also very small mounds 6 to 8 feet high and 40 to 50 feet
across. None were stone faced and, in fact, the only stone
used was in a small stone platform and on two short sandstone treaded stairways. (Stifling, 1943a, p. 11; pl. 2b, 3;
Drucker, 1943a, pl. 2-4). Stifling (1943a, p. 11) in generalizLug about the stone monuments of Tres Zapotes states that
they occur "singly and are widely scattered over the large
site (2 miles long in the floor and on the slopes of an arroyo). Most of them are carved from basalt, a rock which is
abundant in the region, especially around the base of nearby
Tuxtla Mountain. All of the monuments have suffered intentional mutilation in greater or less degree, suggesting the
work of an invading people. Likewise, it is probable that
many of them had been moved from their original locations."
We have already discussed Stela C. Another and certainly
the most spectacular stone monument is the colossal head,
measuring about 6 feet high and eighteen feet in circumference. It is made of gray basalt which matches that of
some large blocks 10 miles distant. The facial features are

266

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

sensitively carved to represent an individual with large
eyes, low wide nose and thick lips, with a headdress, perhaps
somewhat conventionalized or difficult to represent in stone,
that looks like a football helmet. Ears are represented by an
open "S" design, and the back of the head is flat with parallel
vertical incisions probably representing hair (Stirling, 1943a,
p. 16, pl. 4; 1939, p. 185). Other monuments at Tres Zapotes
of especial significance are Stela A which has a center portion missing, yet measures 17 feet 7 inches long. On it is
carved a mask quite similar to that on Stela C (Stifling,
1943a, pp. 11-14, fig. 3, and pl. 12). Steta D (ibid., pp. 14-16,
fig. 4 and pl. 14a, b) represents a conventionalized openmouthed animal, probably a jaguar, on which the back of the
mouth is flat with low relief figures. Another figure is
carved into the roof of the mouth. The stela is 58 inches high.
Another most significant type of stone monument are two
large stone boxes, Monuments B and C. They both have a
maximum length of about 5 feet and a maximum width of
around 3 feet, with sides 5 to 8 inches thick and bottoms 12
to 16 inches thick. Monument C has elaborate curvilinear
designs and human figures carved on the 4 outer sides. (ibid.,
pp. 17-21, pl. 5, 7a, 17a, b, 18a, b).
Monument E (ibid., pp. 22-23, fig. 5) consists of a rectangular slab 5x6 feet and 10 inches high carved in the living
rock in the Arroyo de Hueyapan. On this slab are carved a
dot and two bar numerals. This monument is now under 4
feet of water in the dry season. Its significance lies in its
connection with the earliest stratified deposits at the site
(Drucker, 1943, p. 34).
Monument M is quite interesting because it resembles
more closely than most others at this site particularly characteristic features of Olmec artmdrooping mouth, flat nose,
rectangular shaped ears, high head, flat in the back with a
turban-like headdress (ibid., p. 24, pl. 11 b-d).
Although two reports have appeared on the pottery of
Tres Zapotes (Drucker, 1943; Weiant, 1943) only Drucker’s

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

267

was based on careful stratigraphic excavation, which makes
it, for our purposes, the more important of the two. He found
three ceramic levels, Lower, Middle and Upper Tres Zapotes.
These levels agree with similar stratigraphic differences in
figurine types.
Lower Tres Zapotes
The lower level is characterized almost exclusively by
coarse or medium coarse paste Brown and Black monochrome wares, "which emphasize vessel form as a field for
esthetic elaboration.., the net effect is that of a pure and
self-contained pottery complex" (Drucker, 1943 a, p. 115).
Features of this pottery indicate that ceramic techniques
were well advanced in the earliest deposits at this site:
"Well-made Brown and Black ware vessels with their sophisticated composite shapes and numerous subtypes, flaring-side bowls with simple to wide fiat averted rim; incurved-side bowls with tapered averted rims; composite silhouette bowls, spouted (unsupported) vessels," and others. (ibid.).
,
Human figurine types are especially important at Tres
Zapotes, not only because of Stratigraphic differences, but
also because we have in them a possible stylistic clue to the
origin of the motifs of the colossal heads. In the Lower level
the closely related figurine subtypes A and C were found.
Subtype A has characteristically elaborate turbans which
vary a great deal, wide heavy-jowled, slightly prognathic
faces with punctated eyes, nostrils and mouth. The back of
the head is flat or slightly concave, while ears may or may
not to be represented though large circular ear-plugs are
always present. Some masculine heads appear in this type
with a short beard. (ibid., p. 78).
Many of the figurines have somewhat flattened body
forms representing females more or less impressionistically
treated with wasp waists, small breasts and the navels often
indicated by a punctation. Dress is sometimes indicated by
applique representing necklaces, short skirts, and breech

268

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

clouts. Legs may be simply tapered stems or stubby with
heavy modeled thighs and reduced lower legs with feet
indicated by a few vertical striations sometimes with a deep
notch at the bottom. The arms are in various postures and
are usually stubby in form, while the figures themselves
may be standing or seated.
One figurine head form is that called "Subtype E" or
"Baby-face" variety, of which only one example was found
in the Lower phase. These are modelled realistically, eso
pecially in the eyes and cheek contours. Some of them have
drooping mouths or an appearance of crying (Drucker, 1943a,
pl. 26 e, 270, 38 a, b; Weiant, 1943 pls. 18, 19). This figurine
type is considered to be a basic trait of the Otmec phase.
There is reason to believe that in its realism and simplicity
it may be a proto-type of the beautifully executed colossal
heads ~vhich form another basic trait of this phase.
Middle Tres Zapotes
In Drucker’s words (1943 a, p. 115) this level is characterized as, "a period of elaboration and development," the
Lower level wares continuing to be predominant. However,
"Polychrome ware, whose roots might possibly lie in the
Lower Complex, or more likely at the base of the Middle,
occurs in modest, although constantly increasing, quantity."
Unfortunately poor preservation ruled out intensive study of
the design elements on Polychrome ware.
A diagnostic trait of the Polychrome ware is, "finely divided, compact clay, with no visible temper." Characteristically the color is bright orange, frequently with a gray
core. This ware is quite hard and the vessel walls, even of
large pots, "tend to be thinner than those of other wares"
with thickness ranging from 5/32 to ¥4 inch. (ibid., pp. 3637). Slips include cream, white, buff, gray, orange, and
smoked-black shades.
While vessel forms vary, "the significant characteristic of
the group is that composite silhouettes definitely never occur." On the other hand this form is a moderate constant

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

269

among the Brown and Black wares. Polychrome shapes include flat base, flaring side, curving to flat everted rims,
bowls and dishes some with slab or cascabel feet, while
many were legless. Also found were unsupported spouted
vessels, and ollas with distinctive rims which rise sharply
from the body, usually vertically or slightly flaring (ibid.,
pp. 37-44).
Middle Tres Zapotes figurines give evidence of "manipulation of fundamental patterns," with grotesque subtype B
and subtype F probably being derived from A and C forms
in Lower Tres Zapotes. Another subtype, D, may be extraneous but the punctation technique of the Lower period
is apparent in many specimens.
The Middle period subtype E or "baby face" heads are
more elaborate than the Lower period specimens, many with
forelocks deriving from subtype C.
"It is in the Middle too, that the infrequent bearded forms,
and those with what looks like a muffler about their chins
occur, and the more variant types of bodies, the angular
wide-crotched forked-foot type, and those with tripods, and
socket-like whistles occur" (ibid., p. 115).
Upper Tres Zapotes
Cultural continuum from the lower strata is represented in
this level by a number of persistencies including all the
wares present in the Middle period. Polychrome becomes increasingly abundant at the expense of the monochrome
wares, while Tres Zapotes hand-made figurine types persist
much as before. InnOvations apparently made by the potters
at the end of the Middle period are incensarios and coinages.
However, the most important manifestation of the Upper
period is the "influx of new traits which have no discernible
local antecedents." (ibid., p. 116). Much of this new material
is found in the mounds, the building of which must have
been accelerated at this time.

270

Te~a~ Archeologica~ and Pa~eonto~og~ca! So¢iet1~

While jade carving is a characteristic Olmec trait elsewhere, it is all but absent at Tres Zapotes. Drucker mentions
a jade bead and a pendant, while Weiant (I943, pp. 120-121;
pls. 74-75) devotes a short section and a few photographs to
some small jade beads and ornaments.
We have gone into some detail in discussing the site of
Tres Zapotes because with the stratigraphic sequence established by Drucker (1943), we are able to correlate it temporally with other sites to see how it fits into the Pre-Classic
stage. This can only be done in a general way, for many details are lacking or are too obscure to make more than tentative broad scale correlations. (e. g. Wauchope, 1950).
La Venta
This site is situated on a sandy island between the Tonala
river and its tributary, the Blasillo, somewhat over ten miles
from the ocean and about 90 miles east and somewhat south
of Tres Zapotes. Excavation was carried out by Drucker in
1942 (Stirling and Stirling, 1942), and Stirling and Wedel in
1943 (Stirling, 1943 b).
The largest feature of an architectural nature is a truncated pyramidal mound, on a platform, approximately I00
yards square and 105 feet high (Stirling, 1943 a, p. 48). There
are at least eight other mounds of good size. Covarrubias
(1946 b, p. 92) gives a sketch map of the La Venta site showhug the arrangement of the mounds that could be seen. His
description of the site is the best published thus far; "The
entire complex runs directly in a north-south direction, with
all sorts of mounds--large and small, round and long--neatly
aligned to form extensive plazas." While mounds of the same
general shape may contain vastly different kinds of material, it is of interest to note the existence of long narrow
mounds here and at Tres Zapotes.
A very unique feature at La Venta is to be found north of
the large pyramid. This is a rectangular enclosure measuring 54 by 68 yards surrounded by pillars of columnar basalt
10 feet high arranged side by side, resting on a foundation

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

271

of clay. A sunken court was thus formed, the floor of which
is still undetermined. At the south end of this court is a
gate formed by two smaller rectangular enclosures measuring 21 by 27 feet also made of basalt columns. The easternmost of the small enclosures was found to be filled with
rubble and adobe bricks to a considerable depth. Under this
fill was a cache of 37 serpentine axes arranged in the form
of a cross. Below the axes to a depth of 23 feet the filling was
of earth, while at the bottom was a floor representing a
highly conventionalized jaguar mask. It was made of well
shaped, close fitting blocks of green serpentine set in asphalt
on a base of crushed stone. In the words of Covarrubias,
"The open spaces within the mosaic that stood for the
jaguar’s eyes, eyebrows, nose, and mouth were filled with
blue clay, while a border of yellow ochre framed the green
mosaic, setting it off against the reddish soil of La Venta."
(Covarrubias, 1946 b, pp. 92-93). Another mosaic floor lay
in front of the pyramid.
There are 19 stone monuments known from this site including the two now in Vfllahermosa..Four of these monuments are classified as stelae by Stirling (1943 a). These
range in height from 5 feet to 14 feet. Stela 1 at La Venta
(ibid., p. 50, pl. 33a) bears a close resembiance to Stela A and
D at Tres Zapotes (ibid., pp. 11-16 and pls. 12, 14a). All seem
to represent figures standing in the open mouths of jaguars
or have conventionalized jaguar masks above the figures.
Stela 2 is remarkable in that its half-relief figure wears a
headdress almost as tall as himself. He carries a sort of baton
or mace and is surrounded by six human figures who seem
to have snarling jaguar mouths, and who also carry clublike instruments (for illustration of this see Covarrubias,
1946 b, plate 3 and Stirling, 1943 b, p. 24). Perhaps the most
interesting stela is the largest, Stela 3, which shows in low
relief two figures facing one another. One of these personages has a long beaked nose and a beard, while the face
of the other is mutilated beyond recognition. The second
person wears a very tall headdress and carries a club. These
two personages seem to be surrounded by six figures, one

272

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

of which has a snarling jaguar-like face while two of the
others appear to be wearing helmet-like headdresses. Long
nosed personages are represented on Monument C at Tres
Zapotes which bear a certain resemblance to those on Stela 3
at La Venta. (Cf. Stifling, 1943 a, pl. 18 and Covarrubias,
1946 b, pl. 4).
Six monuments are called altars by Stirling. They are
rectangular in shape, about five feet high with the top foot
or so overhanging the lower portion as a sort of table-top.
All of these are badly battered as if some attempt was made
to destroy them. These monuments are particularly important because in their decorative motifs they embody almost
an of the traits which are here considered as diagnostic of
the Olmec phase. Among these are, jaguar m~sks, representations of nude babies with "V" notch in the head, drooping
mouth, figures emerging from the mouth, and simple realistic representations (see Stirling, 1943 a, pp. 52-56, and pls.

ac 41).
Perhaps the most striking class of stone monuments at La
Venta are the colossal heads. There are 4 of them ranging
in height from 6 feet to 8 feet 5 inches. They all appear to
have a definite oriefitation with relation to the great mound.
Monument 1 is erected facing south on a north-south line
near the south base of the large mound. It measures 8 feet
high and nearly 21 feet in circumference. Of the four, this
head most nearly resembles that at Tres Zapotes, with a
sensitively realistic likeness to a person of the physical type
with !arge eyes, broad flat nose, thick lips, and relatively
short face. The curve of the mouth forms an arc with the
ends lower than the center, though it is not "drooping". It
appears to be wearing a helmet-like headdress, another feature which it shares with the specimen at Tres Zapotes. Also
as with the other three here, the back of the head is flat. On
top of the head are a number of rather haphazardly arranged
grooves which may be the result of vandalism. Large ear
plugs are shown decorated with a cross. That the heads may
have been painted is shown by a fragment of this head with

The Obnec Phase I~ East, ern Mexico

273

a smooth-surfaced, dark purplish-red paint coating it. About
200 yards north of the great mound and of the columnar
stone enclosures lay the other three heads arranged in a row
from east to ,;vest. The westernmost of these is Monument 4,
the largest at the site (8 feet 5 inches high, 21 feet 7 inches
in circumference). In common with Monument 1 and the one
at Tres Zapotes it appears to be carved in a life-like manner.
The personage is again wearing a helmet-like headdress, but
the main distinction of this head is to be found in the mouth.
The lips are again full and thick, though parted with the
four upper incisor teeth represented, also a feature of Monument 2 a few yards to the east. Besides the "buck-tooth"
effect, the corners of the mouth appear to be drawn up in a
smile, quite unlike the serious or even dour aspect of the
other heads.
The easternmost of the three heads north of the great
mound is said to be flatter (only 2 feet 9 inches thick) than
the other heads and of a somewhat different style. Much of
its relative crudity may have been due to erosion but even so
there are a number of distinct features about it. Stirling says
that the eyes are large and deep set, but the photograph
(1943 a, pl. 42 b) seems to show two gouges for each eye:
The mouth appears to be unfinished (or else badly eroded)
with the lips slightly parted and the upper incisors vaguely
represented. This head appears not to wear a helmet, the
head having an angular outline from the front. There are
many striated grooves on the back which may be a crude
conventionalization of hair. Circular ear disks are shown
with holes in the center.
A stone carving which Stirling considers the "most typically ’Olmec’" of any at La Venta is that of a human figure
somewhat over four feet high with a "baby-face" complete
with drooping mouth. It is kneeling holding a rectangular
bowl in its hands. Representations of kneeling or squatting
figures holding bowls are to be found at Tres Zapotes in
Monuments I, J, and K (cf. Stifling, 1943 a, pl. 45 a and pl. 9).

274

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Monument 6 at La Venta is a stone sarcophagus, one end
of which is carved in low relief to represent a conventionalized jaguar. It was covered with a slab of stone 10 feet long
by 31/~ feet wide which overlapped the sarcophagus slightly
on al! sides. Burial furniture found in Monument 6 consisted
of two thin circular jade ear plugs to which had been attached a,jade jaguar-claw representation; a serpentine figurine of a nude male with slanting eyes, flat nose and narrow head; and an awl-like implement of jade.
Near the sarcophagus was a tomb constructed of columns
of columnar basalt, called Monument 7. The columns were
set vertically to form a rectangular enclosure on three sides.
’The roof was formed by similar columns laid parallel, while
-the fourth side was formed of columns resting at an angle
:against the last roof column. Three burials were on a platform of clay one foot high, cevered with limestone slabs
which were coated with a thin layer of blue clay. Above this
was an irregular six-inch layer of cinnabar which may have
originally been in wrapped bundles. Among ~he ornaments
were a seated green jade figurine; a standing blue one; a
reproduction of a fresh water clam shell under which was a
seated female jade figurine with a circular mirror of crystalline hematite over the chest; a jade frog; flowers; leaves;
rectangular ear ornaments; jade beads carved like sections
of bamboo; a necklace of sting-ray tails inset with hematite
crystals (one of the sting-ray tails was a jade reproduction) ;
another standing jade figurine; and some jade beads.
The only paper on La Venta pottery is Drucker’s preliminary report (1947). He points out that the pottery is rather
plain, although this may be due partly to poor preservation.
Painting seems to be all but absent. Other decorative techniques are limited to modeling, pre-firing incising, heavy
pre-firing grooving, punctation and rocker stamping, but
these are also infrequent. Paste seems to be very much like
that cf Tres Zapotes pottery with coarse grayish colors, and
a finely divided clay with no temper, fired from orange to
buff as well as black and gray. Drucker prefers to call this

The O~ec Phase

275

ware "Fine Paste" rather than "Polychrome" as he did in
the Tres Zapotes report. He believes that La Venta (and Tres
Zapotes) Fine Paste ware was ancestral to the well known
Fine Orange of central and southern Mexico. It occurs in
the lower La Venta levels (in deposits 9 feet in depth) but
is more frequent near the top.
Vessel shapes compare quite closely with dominant Tres
Zapotes forms. Flat-bottomed low bowls or dishes are common in all wares, while "composite silhouette" bowls occur
but infrequently. With these, as at Tres Zapotes, is associated an elongated "S" design. Footed vessels seem to be
rare or absent at La Venta but annular bases are quite common. These also occur at Tres Zapotes. Drucker states that
the over-all La Venta ceramic pattern is close to that at Tres
Zapotes and specifically to that of the Middle Period.
La Venta figurines are all hand made, usually solid with
applique and incised features. The types are in the main like
those in Middle Tres Zapotes, corroborating the pottery relationships of these two sites.
Because Fine Paste ware occurs rather frequently at the
bottom of the La Venta deposits but not in great abundance
until the Upper period at Tres Zapotes where a number of
Teotihuacan traits are evident, Drucker feels that "the zone
of development of the Fine Paste ceramics must have been
in or near the La Venta region, and that they or at least the
increased emphasis on them, diffused in a westerly direction; that is, to Tres Zapotes, affecting the latter site at the
same time as a series of new influences, presumably from
the Highland, made themselves felt" (1947, p. 6).
The relationship between these two sites is close, but that
one is not merely an adjunct of the other is shown by a
fairly long list of differences. One such dissimilarity is the
presence of a coarse buff ware at La Venta in all strata
which does not occur at Tres Zapotes, nor at any other
known site.

276

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Drucker mentions another Olmec site, that of San Miguel,
not far up the Rio Blasillo from La Venta, but says only
that it, "was presumably an occupation center tributary to
the ritual focus" (ibid., p. 7).
Apropos of occupation sites versus ceremonial centers,
there is reason to believe that more and deeper occupation
deposits will be found at La Venta itself. Such deposits are
extremely hard to find in the jungle, and in fact, all of the
finds now known at La Venta are the results of digging near
monuments which obtrude above ground. Their relationships can be summarized as "well-rooted local manifestations, which, though descended from common ancestral patterns, and though influencing each other throughout their
history, nonetheless were sufficiently well established to
have developed local specialties to which they clung" (ibid.,
p. 6).
San Lorenzo TenochtitIan
The newest and the most spectacular Olmec phase site in
Veracruz was discovered by Stirling in 1946 (Stirling, 1947).
Tenochtitlan is a small village established only about 14
years ago. It is situated on the Rio Chiquito, an affluent of
the Coatzacoalcos. In a direct line the site is 30 miles south
of the Gulf coast, some 60 miles southwest of La Venta, and
70 miles southeast of Tres Zapotes. This village is on two
parallel ridges which run north and south, and four miles
south of it on the same formation but apparently at a somewhat higher elevation are the mounds of San Lorenzo. Stirling speaks interchangeably of these mounds and another
mound group across the river from the village. Apparently
we are dealing with either a very large site or with two very
similar and intimately connected sites. San Lorenzo seems
to be the main one, and it is here that more colossal heads
are found.
The modern village itself is built on archaeological remains,
for Stifling says (p. 157) that the ridge nearest the river is
covered with a series of small mounds which are pre-historic.

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

277

On the ridge 400 yards west is a series of very large mounds,
"including a rectangular court flanked on either side by a
long, high embankment, and at each end by a tall pyramidal
mound--these mounds command a fine view of the spacious
plain below."
At San Lorenzo Stifling mentions that they mapped
mounds, courts and plazas (p. 170), and that there was
a central mound group consisting of a central mound with
a court in front of it containing earthworks (p. 159). There
must, ho~vever, be several courts, since Stirling says that
they excavated in the "principal" court (pp. 160, 170). Stratigraphic trenches were dug at various places at San Lorenzo
and along the river bank below Tenochtitlan. From the excavations were recovered large quantities of pottery, clay
figures, "and other artifacts of the ancient inhabitants and
we were able to trace the changes in style and form with the
passage of time as revealed in our trenches."
Stirling continues: "In our big stratigraphic trenches by
the river we found an early occupation site of the monument
carvers, buried under 20 feet of soft. Above this and 10 feet
beneath the surface was another occupation level with a different style of pottery and different clay figures, showing
that after the site had been abandoned by its original builders another people had arrived and occupied it" (p. 171).
One of the most remarkable features of the Olmec phase
is the apparent distances that they transported huge blocks
of basalt. The only place where outcroppings occur of the
materials from which the stone monuments were carved is in
the Tuxtla mountains in the vicinity of San Andres Tuxtla,
Veracruz. This is only about 15 miles from Tres Zapotes by
air line, but La Venta is 80 miles in a direct line from this
source and probably well over 100 miles by the water routes
they must have taken. San Lorenzo is 60 miles in a direct
line, but a water route from the Gulf and up the Rio Coatzacoalcos would be closer to 100 miles. The argument that they
transported these stones great distances by water is based
on both the swampy nature of the terrain around La Venta

278

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

and the hilly terrain at San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan. Log rafts
could have been made to float the stones.
It is the stone monuments of San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan
that are described in greatest detail by Stirling. These may
be grouped as fol!ows: statuary figures such as colossal
human heads; human figures; animal figures; human and
animal combined; altars; and others including long stone
columns, an aqueduct, and a spherical stone.
By far the most spectacular are the colossal human heads
of the same type of basalt as found in the La Venta monuments. There were five of them, better made and better preserved than any found at La Venta. Two heads are about 9
feet tall, but measurements of the others are not given. They
all wear "football" helmets as do those at La Venta. In the
pictures of one of the heads which is said to be the finest and
largest of all in the "La Venta Culture" the same "Negroid"
physical type is represented in the delicately modeled leatares.
Human figures other than the colossal heads are two small
four-legged rectangular stone vessels each carved with an
Olmec style face, the front legs of the vessels in the form of
recumbent bent elbows. In the jungle on the plain below
San Lorenzo was a well-fashioned Olmec style head, 3 feet
4 inches high. It is made of pitted basalt and wears a headdress or hat consisting of a rounded crown with a thick upturned brim and appears to be not unlike several of the hats
or headdresses depicted on Altars 4 and 5 at La Venta (Stirling, 1943 a, pls. 37, 40, 41), but it is perhaps most similar to
those represented in petroglyph.s at Chalchuapa, E1 Salvador
(Boggs, 1950, fig. 1, d, p. 92). On the site of San Lorenzo is a
statue representing the seated figure of a woman holding a
chubby infant, while another figure of a woman, also seated,
holds a cylindrical bar in her hands. Both of these have their
heads missing.
The figure holding the cylindrical bar may be similar to
a stone monument on the rim of the crater of the San Martin

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

279

Pajapan volcano in central Veracruz. Blom (1926) published
a photograph of this monument and Covarrubias (1946 b, po
80) made a drawing from the photo. This figure is shown
on its knees leaning forward. Its features are pure Olmec
including, drooping mouth, broad nose, and large ear plugs.
The height of the statue is over four feet, one and one-half
feet being taken up with an elaborate headdress, part of
which is a face or mask representation as large as the face
of the personage wearing the headdress.
Most of the animal carvings at San Lorenzo mentioned by
Stifling represent jaguars. One is 3 feet long and depicts a
crouching, snarling jaguar. A similar aspect was found in a
gracefully carved elongated jaguar figure. A four foot high
seated "jaguar god" figure was located in the bottom of ~
ravine at San Lorenzo. One of the animal-human figures i$
described as being in its original position and consisted of,
"a large stone figure-of an anthropomorphic jaguar seated
on a human figure lying on its back with crossed legs"
(Stifling, 1947, p. 158). A better made and larger one wag
discovered at San Lorenzo. The only other human and animal representation was found at Potrero Nuevo about ~:
miles east of San Lorenzo which was "in the form of a heroic
sized human figure holding up a large serpent gracefully
draped over the lap" (p. 171). The author does not say that.
the human figure is of an Olmec type, but the notation oc-curs in context with discussion of finds which are (or were)
Olmec. This point is significant in that it can be said that
negative trait of the Olmec phase is the absence or scarcity
of serpent representations in contra-distinction to a later’
Mexican period wherein serpents became a fundamental
motif. In this connection it is of interest to note the jadeite
figurine from Coatepeque, Guatemala, published by Kidder
(1942, p. 37, fig. 40 d) which depicts an Olmec-looking hu-~
man figure inside the coils of a snake. Appearing especially
Olmec in the front view are the eyes, the shape of the head,
nose and the rounded rectangular ears. But the side view
shows that the head shape is due to hair piled up on top of
the head, and the nose is typically Mayan.

280

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Another animal represented is the duck which occurs in
the form of a stone fount. The swimming bird has the back
hollowed out with sides carved in the form of wings, "and
between them was a series of water glyphs" (Stirling, 1947,
p. 160). On the breast carved in low relief is a small duck
figure with open beak, extended wings and projecting web
feet as if in an attitude of landing.
The monument which ties in most closely with the site of
La Venta is a table-top altar of the same pitted basalt as the
two large altars at the Tabasco site. Not only is the San
Lorenzo altar similar in appearance but it is almost the same
size as the largest one at La Venta (11 feet 4 inches long by
5 feet wide across the top and 6 feet high). The most striking
resemblance is in the front of the altar which bears a human
figure sitting in an arched niche holding what may be a baby
in its lap. There are other carvings on the sides of this altar
in a manner similar to that on the La Venta examples. Quite
different from anything at other Olmec sites is a table-top
altar at San Lorenzo, the top of which appears to be supported by figures in front holding their hands above their
heads. Judging from the workmen standing around the altar
in the photograph, the total height must be about 3 feet,
while supporting figures would be about two feet high.
These figures, carved half-round are remarkable not only
for their "Atlantean" posture but also because of their close
resemblance to some of the handsome clay figurines at Tres
Zapotes and La Venta. They appear to be males wearing
breech clouts and helmet-like head coverings. On the front
side of the top of the altar are four rectangular designs which
may be parts of conventionalized representations of jaguar
eyes (ibid., p. 171 and plate xii).
Another object which may have been an altar or part of
one is a large rectangular stone slab found in a ravine at San
Lorenzo. On one side a shallow depression was carved, leaving a frame-like border around the sides. The flat surface of
the enclosed portion contained six symmetrically-placed depressions in the form of stone celts (votive axes?).

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

281

Stifling found what may have been an aqueduct at San
Lorenzo. He describes a mass of hollowed-out, tile-shaped
stones each measuring about 32 inches long, 15 inches wide
and 10 inches high. With them were a number of flat stones
of the same length and width, which he thinks were used to
cover the others. Since concentrations of these stones appear at three localities stretching over a distance of half a
mile he suggests that they were used to convey water, even
bridging a ravine to do so (ibid., pp. 159-160 and pl. xiii).
Two other types of monuments were found. One was a
spherical stone in circumference about 36.6 inches in diameter reminiscent of h~[onument 3 at Cerro de las Mesas (Stirling, 1943 a, p. 45, pl. 30 d), and one of those recently discovered in Costa Rica. In the deepest level of the river bank
excavations near Tenochtitlan were two granite columns 14
feet long and 2 feet in diameter. This is the first mention of
granite columns in this area.
From stratigraphic evidence there appear to have been at
least two distinct cultural manifestations at the large site
of San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan. This view is corroborated by
the fact that all but one (the jaguar on the human figure in
Tenochtitlan) were removed from their original positions,
usually rolled down into ravines and battered. These ravines
had apparently cut through the site after it had begun to be
occupied. None of the monuments stood in relation to
mounds or mound groups as they did at La Venta and
Tres Zapotes. Another feature that all three sites have in
common is an iconoclastic mutilation of the stone monuments. This does not necessarily mean that the iconoclasts
were all the same people nor that they lived at the sites after
they had done their vandalism. La Venta seems to have been
occupied only once for a period long enough to accumulate 9
feet of debris, yet the monuments there are all battered. In
Upper Tres Zapotes an influx of new traits appear pointing
to the valley of Mexico Teotihuacan III Culture. This could
mean that the people at Tres Zapotes were overrun and
mingled with their conquerors who destroyed their captives’

282

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

works of religious (?) art. Even though the evidence indicates that La Venta was probably no longer occupied at this
time, the supposed conquerors may have gone down there
and wreaked havoc on the abandoned site.
It is not, however, necessary to postulate invasion from
outside peoples. In the first place we do not know when the
monuments were battered. Secondly, internal revolt among
the inhabitants could be postulated. That would make it
somewhat easier to explain why La Venta monuments were
mutilated also. An argument against the internal revolt
theory is that we know that strong new influences did come
in at Tres Zapotes. San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan was probably
contemporary with La Venta and therefore with Middle
Tres Zapotes, as evidenced by the colossal heads, the stone
altar and perhaps the stone columns.
Cerro de las Mesas is another site which shows some
Olmec influences. Drucker does not consider it an Olmec
site. It is affiliated with Tres Zapotes in that they have i~
common certain widespread Pre-Classic ceramic traits. He
indicates that the bulk of Cerro de las Mesas culture -pottery, figurines, jade-carvings and stelae, "represent transplantations of Highland patterns" (1947, p. 7).
Extent of Olmec Traits
Much has been written on the Olmec problem, especially
since the round table conference in 1942 (see: Mayas y
Olmecas, 1942). This was held for the express purpose of
examining the archaeology, physica! anthropology, linguistics, ethnography, and history of the region. The meeting
was held while stratigraphic excavation was still being cartied on at La Venta.
Since at that time La Venta was believed to represent the
purest manifestation of "Olmec" culture, the conference decided that the name should be changed to "La Venta Culture". Apparently not all were in accord, for Covarrubias,
the most prolific writer on the Olmec and their art, prefers
to continue the use of "Olmec culture". Drucker states that

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

283

"Olmec", with its "shadowy ethnic connotations", is perhaps
not the best choice, but "La Venta Culture" is even worse
because it "should more properly be restricted to the particular component or horizon of Olmec culture represented
there" (1947, p. 1). Stirling entitled his last (1947) publication on this area "On the Trail of La Venta Man," yet often
refers to the Olmecs or to "Olmec Art."
A long list of "La Venta Culture" traits was given at the
conference to which Stifling added a number which had
not been encountered anywhere but at La Venta. It is not
necessary to list all these traits here, since most of them
have been given in the site discussions above, while others
are not acceptable on the grounds that they are too widespread to be diagnostic of the Olmec phase (e. g., use of
jade, clay figurines in Tres Zapotes style, and various types
of ear plugs).
Jirnenez-lYIoreno presented to the assemblage an all-inclusive scheme to account for the Olmecs from Pre-historic
times to the historic period. The scheme is based on linguistic, historic and legendary evidence and was published in
full later the same year (1942 a; 1942 b). He postulates five
Olmec periods consisting of Pr~e-, Proto-, Paleo-, Neo- and
Post-Olmec, grouping known and unknown peoples under
these various categories.
However, Covarrubias (1946, pp. 122-124) goes even farther than does Jimenez-Moreno in attributing almost all
Mexican and Central American prehistory to one or another
Olmec stage. While there are in the Jimenez-Moreno and
Covarrubias schemes a few points which may be acceptable
and eventually verified, for the most part the hypothesis
has not been borne out by known facts. In attributing most
of. Meso-American Pre-Classic and Classic cultures to an
Olmec root and stem, the term Olmec is rendered almost
meaningless. We are left with a vague regional delineation,
not a concise workable concept.
Krickeberg (1950) uses Jimenez-Moreno’s framework, but

284

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society ....................

interprets the known data somewhat more cautiously than
the above authors. His use of the. term Old Olmec corresponds roughly to what is here called the "Olmec Phase,"
and his evaluation of the role of the "Old Olmec" in Mesoo
American pre-history appears to be essentially tenable.
Covarrubias is the unsurpassed expert on Olrnec art and
many of his interpretations of it can be accepted, but an
art style is not synonymous with a culture or a way of life.
Several aspects of the problem brought out by him are quite
important. One is what he calls perhaps the most characteristic Olmec trait, the drooping mouth. This trait apparently
originated at our postulated culture center of Tres ZapotesLa Venta. However, it was one of the traits which persisted
longest in Meso-America, probably in conjunction with a
jaguar cult which may also have had its beginnings at the
culture center in southern Veracruz and Tabasco.
Another suggestion by Covarrubias is that the Olmec
phase can possibly be divided into sub-periods which may
correspond to the three periods at Tres Zapotes. When we
know more about San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan, we can work
it into the scheme. Certainly part of the occupation of that
site corresponds to the La Venta-Middle Tres Zapotes period.
With regard to contemporary relationships outside our
area there are first of all certain relationships with the
early periods of Uaxactun, Guatemala. In comparing ceramics of Lower Tres Zapotes to Mamom, Drucker (1943, p.
118) finds parallels in punctate faces on olla necks and
small whistles in the form of birds with loops on the back
of the heads for suspension. In figurines he points out certain
resemblances to some at Uaxactun and even to Kaminaljuyu
in the Highlands of Guatemala, from which came "figurines
similar in form to Tres Zapotes B and E subtypes" (p. 119).
It is interesting to note that punctated nipples and navels are
among the figurine body features from La Venta (Drucker,
1947, pl. 6 d, e, f) a feature of some Uaxactun figurines
(Ricketson and Ricketson, 1937, pl. 70, a-c, e, g-w). Drucker
says that "it can scarcely be doubted that we are dealing

The Olmec Phase In Eastern Mexico

285

with a single monochrome handmade figurine complex that
extended from the Peten to (at least) southern Veracruz."
There are some resemblances between Lower Tres Zapotes
and the Tampico-Panuco area in that they both show some
relations to Mamom-Chicanel pottery. From Tampico-Panuco
comes a ware called E1 Prisco Black (Ekholm, 1944) which
is somewhat similar to Chicanel redware, while according
to Robert Smith, the early Tres Zapotes monochrome pottery is even more closely related to Chicanel than is E1
Prisco Black. Ekholm makes Lower Tres Zapotes equivalent
to his Period I at the Pavon site of Panuco on the basis of
pottery, while in figurine types there is closer correlation
of his Period II with Lower Tres Zapotes. This is because of
the great similarity of Panuco type A to Tres Zapotes type
A figurines (.ibid., pp. 445-446). Later contact between the
two sites is not indicated for the respective figurine types
diverge greatly.
Quite significant is the fact that Vaillant’s type D figurine
bodies (bulbous thighs, stubby arms) occur prominently at
Tlatilco in the Valley of Mexico, and in Period II at the
Pavon site at Panuco. There are also certain similarities
between Tlatilco and the Olmec sites. Two figurines found
at Tlatilco tie this site in with the Olmec phase (Covarrubias, 1943, p. 43).
As for the La Venta-Middle Tres Zapotes periods, Drucker
suggests that because there are no Highland influences at
La Venta perhaps that period lasted somewhat longer at the
latter site than it did at Tres Zapotes. He speaks of a rough
equation of this period with the Tzakol (early Classic)
period in the Lowland Maya region of Guatemala. Kidder
(1948, p. 343) agreed with Drucker, but he admits now
(personal communication) that in view of radiocarbon
dates at Tlatilco, the estimates of the age of La Venta and
Middle Tres Zapotes may have to be revised downward.
Olmec traits which have been neglected so far in this
paper are the carved jade figurines of crying babies, bold
nude humans, dwarfs and deformed people. Their wide dis-

Tep~as Archeologicgl g~d Paleontological Societ~l

tribution points, I believe, not to a farflung Olmec culture, but rather to the fact that these beautiful little statuettes would have an esthetic value to almost anyone. Therefore their presence in later sites does not appear to be particularly significant. A polished stone figurine probably of
an Olmec type has been found as far north as Baffin Bay on
the Texas Coast (personal communication, Alex D. Krieger).
Another comes from as far south as Guanacaste, Costa Rica
(Lines, 1942; Covarrubias, 1946a, fig. 18). Since at least 10
handsome examples occur at La Venta (Stirling, 1942, ph 1;
1943 b, pl. IV) they can truly be considered as Olmec. This
is also true of votive axes which often bear conventionalized
jaguar features (Stirling, 1943 b, pls. I, IV). As for jade
working, Kidder (1946, pp. 104 if) has shown that this art
was widespread throughout Meso-America at a fairly early
date.
Drucker’s comments on diagnostic Olmec traits (1947,
pp. 6-7) are important. He points out that "attempts have
been made to delimit the Olmec area on the basis of the
distribution of finds of Olmec figurines, particularly those
of jade, but objects so portable are less trustworthy markers
of culture than such things as stone monuments in the
characteristic art style, ceramic complexes and patterns of
mound construction."

Fairly certain evidence of the presence of Olmec phase
people in an area are stone carvings which are on native
rock or stones too large to be readily moved. We have such
an example in the Highlands of Central Mexico in the state
of Morelos where the site of Chalcacingo has a series of basreliefs with pronounced Olmec features (Covarrubias, 1946
a, p. 171 drawing; Drucker, 1947, p. 8 notation). A petroglyph
carving apparently executed by an Olmec artist has been
found on a boulder at San Isidro Piedra Parada, Quetzaltenango, Guatemala (Thompson, 1943, p. 104, llla, photo;
Covarrubias, 1946 a, drawing). Olmec artisans apparently
got down as far as Chalchuapa, E1 Salvador, where, in the
Las Victorias group, are a series of petroglyphs also on large

The Olmec Phase In Easter~ Mexico

287

immovable rocks in good Olmec style (Boggs, 1950). All of
these probably represent wanderings, -visits or trading *~rips
by Olmec people, since it has not been established that there
is a true Olmec site outside of the southern VeracruzTabasco area.

Using the criteria of architecture, stone monuments, ceramics, figurines, and to some extent jade carvings, we can
state that there existed at three sites in the PapaloapanCoatzacoalcos-Tonala drainages of southern Veracruz and
Tabasco a well integrated culture complex which we call
the Olmec phase. These three components, Tres Zapotes, La
Venta and San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan suggest a fairly long
history within the Pre-Classic stage, which lasted perhaps
into the Classic. There are apparently three subdivisions of
the Olmec phase, based on the ceramic stratigraphy at Tres
Zapotes. The two earliest developed on a Pre-Classic base
with little or no outside influence, but the third period shows
indications of strong influences from the Classic culture of
Teotihuacan and may equate in time also to the Tzakol or
Classic Maya period.
Knowledge of the area under consideration is too scant
to postulate any reasons for the presence, rise or decline of
the Olmec phase culture. A number of Olmec traits persisted
into much later periods. Among these were large earth
mounds, monumental stone carving, drooping-mouth-jaguar
motif and perhaps some skill in jade carving. Traits which
they developed but which did not pass out of their area
were: realistic carving of colossal stone heads, use of columnar basalt for enclosures and tombs, and serpentine mosaic floors. Apparently developed by the Olmec and persisting for some time afterward but probably not into late
Classic times, was the manufacture of small human figurines
representing crying-babies, jaguars, dwarfs and deformed
people. Also in this category are the small votive axes.
The carriers of the Olmec phase culture were a dynamic,

288

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

resourceful and technically capable people who for a time
excelled their immediate neighbors, and left very significant influences on the cultures which followed.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abbreviations
AAmAmerican Anthropologist.
BAE-B--Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin.
CA--Cuadernos Americanos.
CIPmCarnegie Institution of Washington, Publications.
NGM--National Geographic Magazine.
SAA-M--Society for American Archaeology, Memoirs.
Armillas, P.
1948. A sequence of cultural development in MesoAmerica. SAA-M, No. 4. American Antiquity, Vol. 13,
part 2, Menasha, pp. 105-111; 116.
Blom, F. and Oliver La Farge.
1926. Tribes and Temples: a record of the expedition
to Middle America conducted by the Tulane University
of Louisiana in 1925. Vol. 1. New Orleans.
Boggs, S. H.
1950. Pictographs in Las Victorias Group, Chalchuapa
Archaeological Zone, E1 Salvador. Carnegie Institution
of Washington, Notes on Middle American Archaeology
and Ethnology, No. 99.
Charnay, Desire.
1887. The ancient cities of the New World, being travels
and explorations in Mexico and Central America from
1857 to 1882. London.
Covarrubias, M.
1943a. La Venta. Colossal heads and jaguar gods. Dyn.
%rol. 1, No. 6, pp. 24-33. Mexico.
1943b. Tlatilco, archaic Mexican art and culture. Dyn.

The Olmec Phase In Easter~ Me~’~co

289

Vol. 1, No. 4-5, pp. 40-46. Mexico.
1946a. El arte "Olmeca" o de La Venta. CA, Vol. 28,
No. 4, pp. 153-179. Mexico.
1946b. Mexico south. The Isthmus of Tehuantepec. New
York.
1950. Tlatilco; El arte y la cultura Preclasica del Va~e
de Mexico. CA, Vol. 51, No. 3, pp. 149o162. Mexico.
Drucker, P.
1943a. Ceramic sequences at Tres Zapotes, Veracruz,
Mexico, BAE-B 140.
1943b. Ceramic stratigraphy at Cerro de las Mesas,
Veracruz, Mexico. BAE-B 141.
1947. Some implications of the ceramic complex of La
Venta. Smithsonian Institution, Misc. Collections, Vol.
107, No. 8. Washington
Ekholm, G. F.
1944. Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca, Mexico. Amer. Mus. o5 Nat. Hist., Anthro. Papers,
Vol. 38, part V, pp. 319-512. New York.
Holmes, W. H.
1907. On a nephrite statuette from San Andres Tuxtla,
Veracruz, Mexico. A.A, n.s., Vol. 9, pp. 691-701. Lancaster.
Jimenez-Moreno, W.
1942a. Relacion entre los olmecas, los toltecas y los
mayas, segun las tradiciones. In, Mayas y Olmecas, pp.
19-23.
1942b. E1 enigma de los olmecas. CA, Vol. 5, pp. 113145. Mexico.
Joyce, T. A. and H. A. Knox.
1931. Sculptured figures from Vera Cruz State, Mexico.
Man, Vol. 31, No. 19, p. 17.
Kidder, A. V.
1942.

Archaeological

specimens

from

Yucatan

and

290

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Guatemala. Carnegie Inst. of Washington, Div. ol Hist.
Research, Notes on Mid. Amer. Arch. and Ethnol. Vol. 1,
No. 9, pp. 35-40. Washington.
1948. Review of, Mexico South, by M. Covarrubias.
American Antiquity, Vot. 13, No. 4, part 1, pp. 342-343.
Menasha.
Kidder, A. V., J. D. Jennings, and E. M. Shook.
1946.
ton.

Excavations at Kaminaljuyu. CIP 561. Washing-

Krickeberg, Walter.
1950. Olmeken und Tolteken. Nach den :[ungsten Ergebnissen der mexikanischen Archaologie. Zeitschrift fur
Ethnologie, Band 75, pp. 13-35.
Lines, J. A.
1942. Un "baby face, en Costa Rica. In, Mayas y Olmeo
cas, p. 54.
Mayas y Olmecas.
1942. Segunda reunion de mesa redonda sobre problemas, anthropologicos de Mexico y Centro America.
Soc. Mex. de Antrop. Mexico.
Melgar, J. M.
1869. Antiguedades Mexicans. Bol. Soc. Mex. Geogr.
y Estad., 2nd ep; tome I, pp. 292-297. Mexico.
1871. Estudio sobre la antiguedad y el origen de la
Cabeza Colosal de tipo etiopico que existe en Hueyapam.
Bol. Soc. Mex. Geogr. y Estad., 2nd, ep., tome 3, pp. 104109. Mexico.
Morley, S. G.
1946. The Ancient Maya. Stanford University, Calif.
Ricketson, O. G., Jr., and E. B. Ricketson.
1937. Uaxactun, Guatemala Group E--1926-1931. CIP
477. Washington.
de Sahagun, B.
1830. Historia general de la cosas de Nueva Espana.
Vols. 1-3. (Bustamente Edition).

The O~ec P~a~e I~ Eoate~ Me~co

291

Saville, M. H.
1929. Votive axes from ancient Mexico. Mus. of the
Amer. Ind. Heye Foundation, Indian Notes, Vol. 6, No.
3, pp. 266-269, 335-342. New York.
Seler-Sachs, C.
1922. Altertumer des kanton Tuxtla im staate Vera
Cruz. Festschrift Eduard Seler, pp. 543-556. Stuttgart.
Steward, J. H.
1948. A functional-developmental classification of American high cultures. SAA-M, No. 4, American Antiquity,
Vol. 13, No. 4, part 2, pp. 103-104. Menasha.
1949. Cultural causality and law: a trial formulation
of the development of early civilizations. AA n.s., Vol.
51, No. 1, pp. 1-27. Menasha.
Stirling, Marion.
1941. Jungle housekeeping for a geographic expedition.
NGM, Vol. 80, No. 3, pp. 303-327. Washington.
Stirling, Matthew W.
1939. Discovering the New World’s oldest dated work
of man. NGM, Vol. 76, No. 2, pp. 183-218. Washington.
1940a. An initial series from T~es Zapotes, Vera Cruz,
Mexico. Natl. Geogr. Soc., Contrib. Tech, Papers, Mex.
Arch. Set., Vol. 1, No. 1. Washington.
1940b. Great stone faces of the Mexican jungle. NGM,
Vol. 78, No. 3, pp. 309-334. Washington.
1941. Expedition unearths buried masterpieces of carved jade. NGM, Vol. 80, No. 3, pp. 277-302. Washington.
1942a. Recientes hallazgos en La Venta. In, Maya y
Olmecas, pp. 56-58.
1943a. Stone monuments of southern Mexico. BAE-B
138. Washington.
1943b. La Venta’s green stone tigers. NGM, Vol. 84, No.
3, pp. 321-332. Washington.
1947. On the trail of La Venta Man. NGM, Vol. 91, No.
2, pp. 137-172. Washington.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

292

Stifling, Matthew W., and Marion Stirling.
1942. Finding jewels of jade in a Mexican swamp.
NGM, Vol. 82, No. 5, pp. 635-661. Washington.
Thompson, J. E. S.
1941. Dating of certain inscriptions of non Maya origin. Carnegie Inst. o~ Washington, Div. o~ Hist. Research,
Theoretical Approaches to Problems, No. 1. Wash.
1943. Some sculptures from southeastern Quetzaltenango, Guatemala. Carnegie Inst. o] Washington, Div. o]
His~. Research, Notes on Mid. Arner. Arch. and Ethnol.,
Vol. 1, No. 17, pp. 100-112. Washington.

V~illant,
1930. Excavations at Zacatenco. Amer. Mus. of Nat.
Hist., Anthro. Pap., Vol. 32, part 1, pp. 1-197. New York.
1931. A bearded mystery. Natural History, Vol. 31, No.
3, pp. 241-252. New York.
1932. A pre-Columbian jade. Natural History, Vol. 32,
No. 6, pp. 512-520, 557-558. New York.
1941. Aztecs of Mexico. Garden City.
Vaillant, G. C. and Suzannah B. Vaillant.
1934. Excavations at Gualapita. Amer. Mus. o] Nat,.
Hist,., Anthro. Pap., Vol. 35, part 1, pp. 1-135. New York.
Wauchope, R.
1950. A tentative sequence of pre-classic ceramics in
Middle America. Mid. Amer. Research Rec., Mid. Amer.
Res. Inst., Tulane Univ., Vol. 1, No 14, pp. 211-250. New
Orleans.
Wyerstall, A.
1932. Some observations on Indian mounds, idols and
pottery in the lower Papaloapan basin, State of Vera
Cruz, Mexico. Mid. Amer. Research Series, Vol. 4, pp.
23-69.
Vol. 4, pp. 23-69. New Orleans.

