Somv Unuswal Baskets and Bags From the Big B~d

133

SOME UNUSUAL BASKETRY AND BAGS
FROM THE BIG BEND CAVF.S
By VICTOR J. SMITH

The study of culture traits in the analysis of what seems to be a
distinct group of primitive people such as has been observed in the
area of the Trans-Pecos in Texas must be made from a multitude of
angles before the obscure picture clears. Among such angles of study
that of basketry tedmiques must be ranged as an important element
which should shed considerable light upon the whole problem. The
art of basketmaking assmnes an important place in archaeological
studies becau~ of its relation to both early and present aboriginal
peoples.
The reconstruction of the culture picture in many archaeological
areas has been frequently limited to the examination of stone, bone,
clay, and impressions of artifacts and construction upon mud or
baked materials. The Greater Big Bend of Texas," however has
shared with a few other fortunate areas in that deposits are available
for interpretation which contain culture evidence preserved for considerable periods of ti~ne in deposits of dry ash and dust, sometimes
further protected by rock falls and usually within shallow rock
shelters or overhanging cliffs. At one site fragile specimens were,
to my surprise, unearthed well out in the open area in front of a
small shelter, normally exposed to rainfall. At this time a heavy
shower falling almost vertically indicated that the cliff overhead
protected the talus slope for at ltu~st thirty feet in front of the bluff.
U’ndcr the conditions described frag~ncnts of basketry and hags tell
the story of these utensils as used by the Indian groups.
Concerning the basketry of the Big Bend there has been much
discussion and so~ne material published indicating interesting and
valuable information related to the variety of techniques employed.
It is at. once evident that the wide variety of use and the weaving
¯ The term Greatest Big Bend is here used to distinguish from the small °’bend" including only Brewster and par~ of adjoining coonties, The W~t Tex~us Cave Dweller
tivtM in an area ~ughly defined on the W~t by the El P~ Cav~ ; on the East by
the Paces Valley; and ~uth into Mexico where Mr. WaiSt Taylor is now working.
The~ are indications that there was an even g~atcr spread of this culture than ~
~n ~dicat~l here.
There arc. of coupe, accep~ble divishms of the ar~ sugg~t~
such as P~a River, Davis Mountains, etc., ~ch having charac~riati~ of i~ o~
but reasonably ~ntinuing the basic cuttu~ trai~ ot the Cave P~p]e.

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

and sewing skills displayed deserve careful analysis and permanent
r~cord.

A general description of the widely distributed split stitch type of
basket, which has been found generally daroughout the area, thinning
out to the East, West, and North and extending an unknown distance into Old Mexico, and which seems to be a basic utensil for all
of the Greater Big Bend Cave Dweller groups, is a basin-shaped
container averaging about 7" in depth and 14" in diameter. The
largest ones to my knowledge are about 9" deep by 21" in diameter.
The work surface is on the inner concave side of the basket and the
coils are ~wed in a counter-clockwise direction to the left of the
worker. Stitches for this type are non-interlocking and the coiling
is formed from a bundle of grasses or coarser desert plants.

Coiling

is usually 5 to the inch and stitches 4 to the inch. For the sake of
brevity and quick comparison, the general description of this and
other basketry herein described has bt~n thrown into chart form.
Variation From Split Stitch Basketry
Tlm small split stitch basket shown in Plate 22, No. 1, contains
assembly technique basically similar to the larger artifacts but also
indicates evidences of a distinct and interesting departure from the
usual form of split stitch basket in that the size is much smaller, the
stitches coarser, the work surface is outside, and the introduction of
an interrupted black band near the rim on the inner side adds m~
element of decoration. For such a small utensil it is quite natural
that the start should be on the bottom (good side) since the nearer
finish would then turn up the outside exposed areas of the basket.
It will be noted that the start of the coil compares with the standard
split stitch basket but that, once the rim is turned the worker continues the coils but is necessarily working clockwi~ rather than
counter-clockwise and on the convex (near) surface rather than on
the concave (far inside) surface. Work continues in both cases to
the left of the worker. In the bottom of this small basket a slightly
raised inner rim occurs just before the edge is turned. This sugPLATE 22
No. 1. Small split-stitch basket. Note the interrupted black ring
near the inner top edge of the utensil, also raised ring around bottom.
For the exterior of this basket see the 1935 is.sue of this
Bulletin.
No. 2. Plain twined basket with red cordage decorations.
Note
interrupted lines.

138

Texaz Archeo!ogical a~td Paleontological Society

gests, if not an accidental selection of extra-coarse weaver, that
some game might be connected to the use of the object such as
children frequently use in rolling shot or marbles in place upon a
partly depressed background. At any rate, the raised circle of
coiling is rather too uniform to suggest accident and occurs but once
fully around, indicating intention rather than accident.
Twined Basketry

Plain Twined
The small plain twined bowl- or cap-shaped basket illustrated in
Plate 23, No. 2, is the only one of its type known to the author.
It is further described in the tabulations of the chart, becomes more
interesting in view of the use of No. 3 (8) red cord twined decorations. Four rows of these red cords are woven in at intervals of
inches. Each red band is interrupted in a fashion to exclude any
thought other than definite intention.
In calling attention to the twined work of Lovelock Cave it is not
to be assumed that direct relationships are claimed, but rather mentioned in order to suggest a variety of widely separated parallels
from which is excluded any definite conclusions as to kinship or
migrations. The parallel of plain twining, stick warp, and the use
of red cordage in basketry, however, is interesting and suggests again
the usual "this topic bears further study." While twining was practically unknown to Southwestern Basketmaker, in the Big Bend,
Setzler (7) identified additional twining in the Pecos River area.
Cross Warp Twined

The container illustrated in Plate 23, No. 1, is of unusual modified cross warp assembly of spokes with a plain twined spiral weave
of half-inch pitch wo~’en from the outside in a counter-clockwise
direction. The shape again suggests that the worker held the basket
with the bottom up to start in a clockwise direction to the right until
about half the basket was completed, then turning the object over,
worked on the near (convex) side in a counter-clockwise direction
PLATE 28
No. 1. Modified cross warp with plain twining. For an illustration o~ the lattice twined or T-type of basketry see the 1935 issue of
this Bulletin.
No. 2. Plain twined sifter type basket.

Pl~att.

Unusual Baskets t~nd Bags F~orn the Big Bend

14!

to the right until the article reached the stage of completeness indicated by the cut referred to. The size of this container is 3½
inches in diameter by 101/~ inches high. The maximum number of
warp units is-107 which is increased or decreased by adding or dropping the number of warp elements by using a bent warp to make two
added spokes.
Twined Lid Si]ter
This article (Plate 23, No. 2), which appears to be either a sifter
or basket lid rather than a storage or carrying utensil, is 2 inches
high by 8 inches in diameter. The weaving starts with 23 spokes,
which is increased to 99 at the rim by dropping in additional single
unbent units as the diameter increased. The initial twining is spirally in a clockwise coil of one-fourth inch pitch to the right. As
the object became larger we again assume that the article was turned
and worked from the outside convex surface, resulting in a counterclockwise direction to the right of the worker. The Heye Foundation report (1) for Brewster County indicated the finding of sifters
with 1/16 inch and % inch mesh. This mesh averages less than
1/8 inch if used for sifting purposes.
Cross Warp, Wrapped Twining

This interesting type was excavated by the writer from a dry
shelter near Alpine (three specimens). It has been unknown, however, in West Texas generally but was reported by F. M. Setzler
from caves along the lower Pecos to the East. Harrington (2) also
mentions this type of basketry technique in his description of the
Gypsum Cave deposits but is not positive of the associations due to
the presence of rodent nests. This type of basketry in Texas was
evidently used for the construction of some sort of cone-shaped container. Horizontal rods are on the outer convex surface and the
vertical rods are bound to each other by non-interlocklng twining.
Mr. L. S. Cressman in a personal letter throws some interesting
light upon this unusual technique:
No. 103, the Dead Cow Gave specimen is interesting. It is of course
wrapped twining and as a devic~ or process is used ~oday in much of
the basketry of the Puget Sound region in Washington. It also occurs
in the Plateau but chiefly as a decorative device to apply an overlay
element upon the twined foundation. This decorative use occurs in
our Oregon caves and in f~he lowest level of Lovelock Cave. I exam-

142

Texas AraheologicaI and Paleontological Society

ined a specimen at the Heye Foundation last fall. The Klamath also
use it to apply porcupine quill overlay on their women’s hats and perhaps some baskets. Mason figures it as a functional, like yours, etc.,
that is twining and not decorative, device for Ute water jars. Thig
last I have not seen nor have I run across the reference anywher6
else. This apparent widespread use of the technique in a roughly
continuous area, and its use in part as a definite twining device only,
raises some interesting questions. It is unfortunate that the Gypsum
Cave specimen is not referable to any stratigraphic horizon.
A cut illustrating one of the Dead Cow Cave finds will be found
in Bulletin No. 7 of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, 1935, accompanying my short article on the split stitch
basket.
Coiled Bag
The coil and loop assembly bag, without foundation, illustrated
in Plate 24, No. 1, because of the nature of the find and contents
attracts more interest than most of the materials herein listed. This
bag was discovered in the extreme far end of a rock shelter of moderate size. With the single exception of a small circular area of
about 20" the entire floor of the shelter was solid rock.

Evidence

on the talus and pictographs near, however, indicated the.usual use
for such shelters by the Big Bend Indians. Excavation of the pocket
yielded a single specimen only, a folded bag, wrapped and tied in
a shape suggesting a lady’s hand purse. The tie was coarse cordage;
untwisted yucca cord with square knot (9). It was evident that from
the weight of the object that the contents were of some heavy materials, wrapped and hidden away.

The object, however, was taken

to the Museum at Alpine, photographed, and opened after preliminary cleaning. The contents, somewhat disappointing, but nevertheless interesting in that it indicated what type of tools were valued
and used, appeared to be a tool kit composed of 13 blades or knives
and two pebbles of coarse texture with little shaping to suggest use
other than abrasive. The flaked work (Plate 24, No. 2), was
coarsely chipped from poor materials and is not unlike the rather
poor grade of work sparsely found in other dry rock shelters. With
attention focused upon the bag itself, however, more. pleasing results accrue.

Once cleaned and protected by preservatives, the bag

PLATE 24
No. 1. Bag tied with rough cordage in bundle form.
No. 2. Conten~s of bag, evidently a tool kit of crude workmanship.
The two upper left pebbles are small porous stones.

S~ne Unusual Baskets a~wl B~gs From the Big Bend

145

assumed a globular shape 8" in diameter and 68~" high. There are
eight coils and five stitches per inch. Fiber string of uniform
twisted No. 2 cord (9) was used throughout. The bottom of the
bag was woven counter-clockwise to the left of the worker on the
outside surface with the upper part also to the left but clockwise on
the convex side. The top opening was worn and it was difficult to
determine the exact type of finishing, it was 3½" in diameter. A
small hole (Plate 25, No. 1), stuffed with shreds of fiber for mending
reminds us that Coffin (1) found similar repairs at Eagle Canyon in
the Big Bend. A satisfactory attempt at decoration was the inclusion of three coils of red cord near the large diameter of the bag.
Red cordage fragments form 4 per cent of the total twisted string
collected by the writer in West Texas (9).
The Heye Foundation Expedition also reported a "cap" woven
in 10 coils and 6 loops per inch with a second article of 5 coils and
7 loops per inch. The shape of the bag illustrated here suggests the
cap shape reported is a similar form of incomplete bag. Kidder
and Guernsey report (4) from their Arizona Cliff House studies a
weave technique of almost identical type with coils ranging from 4
to 9 per inch and loops 5 and 6 per inch. They identify this assembly of cordage as used for making bags, leggins, cap, and sandals.
Netting

Two pieces of open mesh work in circular, cone-shaped form
(Plate 25, No. 2), suggest other uses for the identical weave technique used in the c!osed bag assembly, the only difference being the
increased coarseness of the mesh to 1/~ inch and 3~ inch respectively. Pearce and Jackson (6) found that this type of mesh was
most interestingly used to enclose a stone mano. They reported six
other bags of similar type with mesh size range ~o inch and 1 inch.
Checker Basket

With quantities of checker matting extending throughout West
Texas, it is strange to observe that limited use was made of this
easily assembled type of container. Nevertheless, barring some
larger bags, the specimen illustrated (Plate 26), is the only such
article observed by the writer in the form of a small container. This
cube-shaped basket is four inches square by four and one-half
inches high. The top selvedge is formed over a No. 4 twisted cord

146

T~as

Araheological and Paleontological Society

(9). The cord handle itself is the usual counterclockwise twist of
cord which is tied around the selvedge cord at one end by a figure
eight knot. On the other side a loop is inserted to the third warp
element and the handle cord is tied to this loop. The plaited elements are 1½ to the inch. According to F. G. Speck, the checker
basket suggests a strong Eastern influence. A similar basket was
found at Bee Canyon by the Heye Foundation (1) which measured
41~x4½x5 inches save that the plaiting was diagonal rather than
checker weave.
Conclusion

The student interested in other types of basketry from West Texas
should consult Coffin (1) and Pearce and Jackson (6) for additional illustrations. Sevaral museums have unusual assortments of
basketry from the area which have not been described and tabulated from the standpoint of weave direction and other techniques.
Future studies should be concerned with indications of motor habit
as a possible criterion indicating group differences. With such
accumulated studies in a wide variety of topics the puzzle of the
West Texas Cave People will reach a more satisfactory solution.
While no such early date as has been assigned to Basketmaker
may be safely allocated to the basketry described herein, it seems
reasonable to believe that much of the cave deposit material represents a pre-Columbian period.
In assigning ten "Basketry Areas of North America," Weltfish
(11) has mapped the continent excluding West Texas from District
8. It is believed that this excellent report, if revised today, should
include the Big Bend district either as a part of the Southwest or, if
research seems to justify, a distinct area of its own.
This paper, originally anticipating the establishment of certain
closer relationships with neighboring areas rather tended to estabPLATE 25
No. 1. Net bag after preservative permitted shaping to original
form. The weave is cordage loop without foundatiom Note indication of red stripes and mending by stuffing hole with mass of fiber.
No. 2. Additional loop cordage b~ forms identical in technique as
the closely woven bag but with open mesh assembly.
PLATE 26
Square checker weave basket.

l’late 25

Plate 26

Some Unusual Basl~ets qnd Bags From ~he Big Bend

151

lish the fact of a complex and unsolved problem. In general, however, the whole area tends to relationships with the West and Northwest.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Coffin, Edwin F., "Archaeological Exploration o/ a Rock
Shelter in Brewster County, Texas," Indian Notes and Monographs,
No. 4~, Heye Foundation, New York, 1932.
2. Harrington, M. R., "Gypsum Cave, Nevada," Southwest Museum Papers, No. 8, Los Angeles, 1933.
3. Hodge, Frederick Webb, "’Handbook o] American Indians
North o] Mexico," Part 1, Bulletin 30, Bureau of American Ethnolog-y, Washington, 1912.
4. Kidder, Alfred Vincent, and Samuel J. Guernsey, "Archeological Explorations in Northeastern Arizona," Bulletin 65, Bureau
of American Ethnology, Washington, 1919.
5. Nusbaum, Jesse L., "A Basket-Maker Cave in Kane County,
Utah," Indian Notes and Monographs, Museum of the American
Indian, Heye Foundation, 1922, New York.
6. Pearce, J. E., and A. T. Jackson, "A Prehistoric Rock Shelter
in Val Verde County, Texas," The University of Texas, Bulletin
No. 3327, !933, Austin.
7. Setzter, Frank M., "A Prehistoric Cave Culture in Southwestern
Texas," American Anthropologist, Vol. 37, No. 1, 1935.
8. Smith, Victor J., "The Split-Stitch Basket," Bulletin 7, Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, 1935, Abilene.
9. Smith, Victor J., "Cordaga of the Big Bend Caves," Bulletin
12, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 1940.
10. Weltfish, Gene, "Preliminary Classification of Prehiztdric
Southwestern Basketry," Smithsonian Institution, Vol. 87, No. 7,
July 12, 1932, Washington.
11. Weltfish, Gene, "Prehistoric North American Basketry Techniques and Modern D~stributions," American Anthropologist, Vol.
32, No. 3, Part I, September, 1930.
12. Weltfish, Gene, "Problems in the Study o] Ancient and Modern Basket.Makers," American Anthropologist, Vol. 32, No. 1, 1932.

