J. C. Harrington Medal
Historical Archaeology:
Kathleen Kirk Gilmore, 1995
Edward B. Jelks

ABSTRACT
In January 1995 at the annual meeting of the Society for Historical Archaeology, held in Washington,
D.C., former Texas Archeological Society president Kathleen Gilmore was awarded the J. C. Harrington
Medal for Significant Contributions to Historical Archaeology, the Society for Historical Archaeology’s
most prestigious award. The presentation of the Harrington Medal was made by Edward B. Jelks, also a
former Texas Archeological Society president and a Harrington Medalist.
Ed’s presentation contained some vignettes that deserved being recorded in the annals of Texas
archeology, but which were deleted from the published version of the award that appeared in the Society
for Historical Archaeology’s journal, Historical Archaeology. So the entire presentation is printed here,
with the permission of the Society for Historical Archaeology.

June 1962 was unusually hot and stifling, even
for Texas, in the densely wooded valley of the
upper Sabine River, where I was directing excavations at the Gilbert site, an eighteenth century village of the Tawakoni, one of the southern Wichita
tribes. Labor for the project was contributed voluntarily by members of the Texas Archeologica! Society, who received training in field methods and
techniques in exchange for providing the muscle to
excavate an important site.
One morning a Cadillac about a block long
came weaving through the trees, stopped at the
edge of the site, and disgorged three women of
youngish middle-age appearance, all togged out in
what looked like Neiman-Marcus field garb.
"Heaven protect me," I thought. "A bunch of bored
Dallas socialites out to get their hands dirty in the
name of science." They introduced themselves as
Kathleen Gilmore, Norma Hoffrichter, and
Dessamae Lorrain, and said that they all were interested in archeology and had come out to help on
our dig. I assigned each of them to one of the crews
that were working on various features.
It was not more than 15 minutes before
Kathleen appeared with her very first find: a beautifully engraved brass butt plate from a French
trade gun. She asked me what it was. I replied in a
matter-of-fact tone of voice that it was a butt plate.
I could see the wheels turning in Kathleen’s
head as, transparently, she was weighing the

possibility that it really was a butt plate (whatever
that might be) against the possibility that I was
pulling her leg with the archeological equivalent of
sending a novice on a snipe hunt. Skepticism won
the day, and with flashing eyes she retoi~ed, "Like
hell it is," with heavy accent on the "hell."
I did not know it then, but I was fated to hear
her utter the same expression many times in the
future. I then described what a trade gun !ooked
like, with the brass plate at the butt end of its stock.
But she still was not convinced until she had confirmed that the thing really was a butt plate by
showing it to R. King Harris, the other person on
the site familiar with trade gun hardware.
The fierce skepticism that Kathleen showed in
the butt plate incident is one of the qualities that
has served her well over the years. It underlies her
refusal to make premature judgments without sufficient data in hand--a hallmark of her research.
Kathleen Kirk Gilmore was born in Altus,
Oklahoma, moved to Tulsa as a child, and graduated from high school there. She got her first job
while a junior in high schoo! as switchboard operator at the Tulsa Bone and Joint Clinic, where she
received the munificent salary, by Great Depression standards, of 25 cents an hour. Saving her
money for a couple of years, she was barely able to
finance her freshman year at the University of Tulsa.
But she needed to find a part-time job if she
was going to continue at the university after that

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

vi

Texas Archeological Society

first year, and all the campus jobs at that time
normally went to male students. Never one to be
intimidated by protocol, Kathleen showed her
feminist tendencies for the first time--but by no
means for the last time--when she badgered the
university library into giving her a job.
She had had a long-standing interest in archeology, sparked by reading about the "lost cities of
the Maya" at the age of 13; when she discovered a
collection of ethnographic artifacts on the library’s
fourth floor she was strongly tempted to major in
archeology. However, upon reflection, she decided
that such a course was impractical because the cost
was beyond her means. Besides, her main interest
was American prehistory, and the only brand of
archeology available at most universities at the time
was classical. Furthermore, most jobs for female
archeologists were in museums and Kathleen
wanted to get out and DIG.
So she followed a more practical course. With
a $250 loan from the Tulsa Town Club she transferred to the University of Oklahoma where she
earned a B.S. degree in the university’s prestigious
geology department.
But who would hire a female geologist with a
B.S. degree when all the jobs for geologists were in
the field, prospecting for likely formations, drilling
wells, and the like? This was considered man’s
work where women would be out of place, and
superstitious oilworkers considered it very bad luck
for a female even to step on a derrick floor.
Stifling her feminist resentment, Kathleen
learned to type and take shorthand, after which she
landed a job in Tulsa with a small independent oil
operator. There she got to do a bit of geology, drew
maps, plotted welt togs, and even was permitted to
visit a drilling rig or two.
But her employer soon went broke, after which
Kathleen found a job with the American Association of Petroleum Geologists as editorial assistant
for their Bulletin. This was too tame for her, however, so she quit her job and moved to Houston-center of the oil business--to seek something better.
After a month or so of pounding the pavement, she
got several offers, mainly because she could type,
the degree in geology being only of incidental importance. Still, it was nice to have options to choose
from, so she decided to accept an offer from the
Superior Oil Company of California to type field
reports in their Corpus Christi office.
After nine months in Corpus Christi, she was
offered, and took, a job back in Houston with the

Standard Oil Company of Kansas. In 1940 she
married Bob Gilmore, a former classmate at the
University of Tulsa, and a year later they moved to
Dallas where Bob was hired as a petroleum engineer
with DeGoyler and MacNaughton.
During World War II there was a demand for
women to replace male geologists who were called
to the war effort, so Kathleen went to work for
Atlantic Oil Company, doing well log analysis and
running the sample lab. With the end of the war, and
the birth of the first of four girls, she quit her job and
devoted her energies to raising her daughters.
When I joined the faculty at Southern Methodist University (SMU) in 1965, guess who showed
up in my seminar in historical archeology?:
Kathleen, Norma, and Dessamae. When an archeology curriculum had been initiated at SMU the
previous year, they were first in line to register.
I could not have been more wrong in my first
impression of this dynamic trio: they all worked
like Trojans at the Gilbert site, and all three went
on to earn graduate degrees in archeology and to
make substantial contributions to the field. Kathleen
stayed on at SMU to earn her doctorate in anthropology in 1973.
A major field project of my historical archeology seminar at SMU in 1967 was an effort to locate
the sites of the three San Xavier missions, established and operated for a few years in the mideighteenth century by Spanish missionaries in East
Central Texas. After abandonment, their exact locations had become lost to memory, but surviving
documents indicated with virtual certainty that they
were located a short distance from one another along
the modern-day San Gabriel River.
After putting together a model of what we
should expect to find at the mission sites (eighteenth century Hispanic ceramics, etc.), we sallied
forth to the San Gabriel and broke up into teams,
each of which was assigned to examine likely
places. When the teams regrouped several hours
later, Kathleen produced a sack of sherds her team
had found in a vegetable garden behind a farmhouse. Most of the sherds were recent, but among
them were several good eighteenth century Puebla
Blue-on-white majolica sherds--precisely the kind
of indicators we were looking for.
Thinking that I would test her to see how well
she had learned the ceramic types we had examined in class, I said as matter-of-factly as I could,
"This is just a bunch of recent Woolworth stuff."
Kathleen picked the majolica out of the lot and

J.C. Harrington Medal in Historical Archaeology ~ Edward B. Jelks

replied, "But what about these?" I said they were
modern too. But she knew better this time and retorted indignantly, "Like HELL they are."
In 1969, with funding from the Texas State
Historical Commission (now the Texas Historical
Commission), she got down to serious fieldwork
and returned to the San Xavier missions. There she
found archeological evidence to verify the locations of all three missions and the associated military garrison. This project became the topic of her
M.A. thesis.
San Xavier was representative of an abiding
passion that Kathleen pursued over the years: establishing the locations of "lost" historic sites by
discovering their archeological remains. In addition to the San Xavier complex, she has worked
with colleagues in their successful search for the
Santa Cruz de San Sabfi mission. Other Spanish
Colonial sites in Texas where she has conducted
fieldwork include Rosario Mission, Nasoni Mission, Amarillas Presidio, and Loreto Presidio, the
latter built on the ruins of La Satle’s ill-fated Fort
St. Louis of 1685.
Talk about your late bloomers! It would be
hard to find anyone who has blossomed more spectacularly than Kathleen. In 1974, she became a research archeologist and adjunct professor in the
Institute of Applied Sciences at the University of
North Texas in Denton, Texas, embarked on two
decades of research and teaching, and earned national recognition as an authority on Spanish Colonial archeology, as well as a leading light in
Texas archeology, both historical and prehistorical.
During her 16 years at the University of North
Texas (she took early retirement in 1990), Kathleen
trained a generation of students, both in the classroom and in the field. Her feminist instincts bore
fruit during this time and she became a greatly
admired role model to her female students, a number of whom were inspired to follow her example
to successful careers in archeology.
Kathleen has published extensively on her
Spanish Colonial fieldwork and documentary research, including site reports on the San Xavier,
Rosario, Santa Cruz de San Sabfi, and Dolores de
los Ais missions; also on the Presidio San Luis de
las Amarillas and Fort St. Leon. Her synthetic publications on French-Spanish-Indian interactions,
and on Caddoan prehistory, are widely recognized
as major contributions to the discipline.
In addition to her research and teaching,
Kathleen has made substantial contributions to her

vii

profession through service to archeological and historical associations. She has been president of the
Society for Historical Archaeology (SHA), president of the Texas Archeological Society, and president of the Council of Texas Archeologists. She has
served on the Texas Board of Review (which reviews and recommends nominations to the National
Register of Historic Places), and on the board of
directors of the Texas Historical Foundation. She
has been on too many committees to mention here.
Kathleen played an important role in the birth
of the SHA. This happened in January 1967, when
Arnold Pilling and I organized a meeting of 15
people we considered to be among the leading historical archeologists to consider the possibility of
establishing a society devoted to historical archeology. SMU sponsored the meeting, and Kathleen, a
graduate student at the time, made most of the local
arrangements for the meeting, as well as for a concurrent conference at which two days of formal
papers on historical archeol6gy were presented. It
was at this conference that the SHA was founded.
Especially memorable was a party that she and Bob
hosted at a private club atop a Dallas skyscraper.
After retirement, Kathleen and Bob have divided their time between their homes in Dallas and
Santa Fe, and in traveling the world. Kathleen also
finds time to continue her research interests in Spanish Colonial archeology.
An incident that captures the essence of
Kathleen’s more charming qualities took place one
evening about 20 years ago at a Caddoan Conference in Natchitoches, Louisiana. A small group in
someone’s hotel room were engaged in fierce debate about matters archeological--and prudently
refueling their wits from time to time by imbibing
invigorating stimulants.
About 2:00 a.m., during a brief pause in the
interminable arguments, Kathleen captured
everyone’s attention by announcing, "De M~zi~res
died in Natchitoches." After we had puzzled over
this startling news for a moment, someone asked,
"So what? .... Well," replied Kathleen, "if he died
here he must be buried here; so let’s go out to the
cemetery, find his grave, and pay him our respects."
All agreed that this was a capital idea, so without
further ado we climbed into Kathleen’s car and
headed for the cemetery. (In case someone doesn’t
know, Athanase De M~zi~res was an eighteenth
century French explorer and French and Spanish
government officia! whose records Kathleen and
colleagues had frequently used in trying to locate

viii

Texas Archeological Society

the sites of early Spanish and French settlements
and Indian villages in Texas.)
We found the cemetery, and Kathleen fished a
flashlight out of the glove compartment. We were
in the middle of a systematic search for De
M~zi~res’ gravestone when, without warning, we
suddenly were caught in the beam of a searchlight.
Peering against the glare, we saw that the searchlight was mounted on a police car, from which two
huge policemen emerged.
Approaching and playing their flashlights over
our faces, they asked suspiciously what we were
doing. Without hesitation, Kathleen explained, "We
are looking for De M~zi~res’ grave."
The policemen looked at each other and
shrugged their shoulders. One said, "We never heard
of him. Anyway, don’t you know there is a curfew
on, and no one is supposed to be on the streets after
11:00 p.m.?"
Kathleen turned on her sweetest smile and replied in a dulcet Texas drawl, "We are from out of

town and didn’t know about the curfew. But if you
will let us keep looking for another 30 minutes, we
promise to go back to our hotel and stay there until
daylight."
The policemen whispered together for a while,
looking at us out of the corners of their eyes from
time to time, while Kathleen kept smiling and the
rest of us shuffled from one foot to the other, hoping we would not have to take sobriety tests or be
arrested. Finally, one of the policemen decided:
"Well if De Mezi --what’s his name?-- was a
friend of yours, we guess it’s O.K., but be sure to
be off the streets in half an hour." Then they left,
shaking their heads.
It is altogether fitting that the signal honor of
being the first woman to receive the prestigious
Harrington Medal falls to an outstanding researcher, teacher, and mentor, a staunch supporter
of feminine rights, truly a lady and a scholar: Dr.
Kathleen Gilmore.

