COASTAL AREA
The coastal area of Texas is a flat plain which includes
a series of very large bays and lagoons, as well as long offshore islands, and extends inland variable distances, usually
40 to 60 miles, to where rock outcrops and slightly hilly
country begin. Toward the southern end, the vegetation is
primarily tall grass and there are hundreds of ponds as
well as large fields of sand dunes. The central part is mixed
grassland and forest with motts of oaks and other hardwoods
dotting the plains, and dense corridor forests along the
streams. The eastern part grows increasingly more forestcovered, containing large stands of southern pine on open
ground, jungle-like tangles of hardwoods and vines along
the rivers, and open grassy plains near the ocean. Most of
the rivers broaden and become sluggish on nearing the coast
or the bays into which they empty. Most of the known
archaeological sites are along the shores of the bays, islands,
and lagoons; the few sites known farther inland appear to
be similar to those near the shores.
The Pateo-American Stage is represented by but a few
artifacts, most of which are Clovis fluted points, and there

are many reports of late Pleistocene fossils, often of mammoth. The coast is thus a very promising field of research
for this stage, but only one site has been extensively excavated (see below).
Material of the Archaic Stage occurs widely in this area
but only one complex is as yet well defined. This isthe
Aransas Focus in the central portion, particularly around
the shores of Aransas and San Antonio Bays (see below).
The Oso Phase of Sayles (1935) was defined from material
found near Oso Creek on the south side of Corpus Christi
Bay, but his data are insufficient for close comparisons with
the Aransas Focus or later complexes in the Neo-American
Stage. In the Addicks Reservoir area west of Houston,
Wheat (1953) found considerable pre-ceramic material underlying that of the Galveston Bay Focus (Neo-American
Stage), but this has not yet been defined as a distinct complex. Dart point types in the Addicks area indicate rela-

Coastal Area

119

tionships with the East Texas and Edwards Plateau Aspects
of the Archaic Stage, as well as with the pottery-bearing
Tchefuncte complex of Louisiana. Undoubtedly other Archaic manifestations will be defined.
In the Neo-American Stage three complexes have been
defined, but none in detail in published form. These are the
Galveston Bay Focus on the east, Rockport Focus in the
center, and Brownsville Focus extending from the south
tip of Texas into the coastal plain of Tamaulipas, Mexico.
The first two are much alike in their stone artifacts but
their potteries are quite distinct and unique (the origin of
neither pottery tradition has been determined). The Brownsville Focus, on the other hand, contains great numbers of
shell artifacts lacking (for the most part) in the other two,
and pottery which can definitely be traced to an origin in
the Huastecan area on the east coast of Mexico. There are
considerable numbers of potsherds and a few whole vessels
in:the Rio Grande delta area which must have come there
by trade from the south, although it is possible that the
actual manufacture of such pottery gradually diffused northward up the coastal fringe as far as Arroyo Colorado in
Cameron County. The gaps between these three loci are
poorly known and should be explored.
In Orange County, just west of the Louisiana border,,
there are sites with potsherds of the Marksville c6rnplex.
These sites must represent either a small extension of the
Marksvirle complex into Texas, or people who received
more of this particular ware by trade than any others in
Texas.
The Historic Stage is represented by such articles as
arrow points and scrapers chipped from glass, glazed pottery and chinaware, iron, glass beads, etc. In the central
p~rtion the Rockport Focus appears to contain such objects
and tI~erefore continued into this stage, although ~this applies
to veiy few of its components. Glass arrow points have
been found on the surface of Brownsville Focus sites, but
since none of thesehave been excavated, it is uncertain
whether this is fortuitou~ or the Brownsville Focus actually

120

Texas Archeological Society

lasted into European times. In this area the first important
contact with Europeans was in 1747, when Jos~ de Escandon
explored what is now Tamaulipas. At the other extreme,
none of the Galveston Bay Focus components are known to
show any European materials. However, there are Spanish
mission sites in both the central and eastern portions of the
coastal belt which should produce valuable clues to the connections, if any, between the above-mentioned culture complexes and the Indian tribes who gathered about the missions.
PALEO-AMERICAN STAGE
Buckner Ranch Site, Bee County:
A WPA-University of Texas excavation sponsored by
the Bureau of Economic Geology was carried out at this
site, 12 miles east of Beeville, in 1938-39 to collect Pleistocene fossils. In the lower levels of the stream terrace, below
the remains of mammoth, mastodon, extinct horse, bison,
and glyptodon, were found a few projectile points. Viewed
in our present knowledge of late Pleistocene artifacts, these
points would seem not to have been in direct association,
because farther north, in the Great Plains, they fall into
two or three distinct time levels and usually ~appear with
different species of extinct fauna. The possibility, that the
Buckn~r Ranch a~tifacts and the overlying fossils were in
secondary deposition, was carefully examined in the field,
and while no absolute conclusion was made, the association
appeared to be a primary one (Sellards, 1940). The artifacts
were not water-worn and there were hearth stones in place
in the silt higher up. Referring to Sellards’ Plate I, the
artifacts can be identified in current terminology as follows:
No. 4, Angostura point; No. 5, Scottsblu]] point, tip and most
of stem missing; No. 6, a corner-notched dart point of a style
not otherwise reported from a Pleistocene site, but found in
the Edwards Plateau Aspect; No. 7, a very thin, flat, and
finely chipped fragment of what must be included in the
Folsom type but was simply too thin to flute; and No. 8, the
base of a fluted Clovis point. No. 9, said to be in the lower
stratum, was included by error and came from another site.

Coastal Area

121

The sixth specimen from the lower level is almost exactly
like No. 6, the corner-notched dart point. Nos. 1 to 3 on this
plate came from a h~gher level, above the fossils (No. 1 is a
Pedernales point).
Another explanation for this curious mixture is that
types stratigraphically distinct in the Great Plains, and
such animals as the mammoth, mastodon, horse, and large
Pleistocene bison, actually survived longer close to the Gulf
coast (now a sub-tropical zone) than they did in the Great
Plains. This requires that all the afore-mentioned types
would have been manufactured at a’bout the same time, and
that the several animals mentioned lived here until something like 6,000 years ago, or until artifacts of the Archaic
Stage were already appearing.
tion from more sites.

As usual, we need informa-

Other ]inds:
Clovis points have been reported from surface collections almost throughout the coastal belt. Three or four
come from heavily-wooded Harris County in the vicinity of
Houston, while the base of a Clovis point was found by A. E.
Anderson close to the Rio Grande mouth in 1933. W.A.
Price, visiting the site of the latter specimen some years
later, found~ mammoth bones weathering from the clay
nearby. A fine, long Clovis point of black flint comes from
Calhoun County, and others from Aransas and San Patricio
Counties. Plainview points have been found in fair numbers in the Morhiss site in Victoria County and another was
found within a few feet of weathered mammoth bones on the
south shore of False Oso Creek, south of Corpus Christi, in
January 1954 by F. Berlet. A broken specimen, apparently a
PIainview, was found recently near Houston by Elwyn
Simons.
ARCHAIC STAGE
Aransas Focus
The Aransas Focus is an Archaic complex lmown from
shell middens concentrated in the vicinity of Aransas and
San Antonio Bays. Some dart points from these middens

Texas Archeological Society

122

are of Edwards Plateau Aspect types. However, the extensive use of shell, particularly conch, for the making of tools
and utensils sets the Aransas Focus apart from the other
known Archaic complexes in Texas. Shell artifacts similar
to those found at Aransas sites occur along the northern
and northwestern coast of the Gulf of Mexico, Florida, the
southern Atlantic coast, and in the Caribbean Islands. The
distribution of these shell artifacts may be the result of a
widespread Eastern Archaic pattern; or they may be merely
a reflection of a similar widespread adaptation to available
local materials provided by the environment. Data at
present are too inadequate for the confirmation of either
of these interpretations.
Aransas Focus sites were first recorded by George C.
Martin and Wendell H. Potter during their survey of the
Texas coast in 1927-1929. In the 1930’s The University of
Texas excavated several Aransas sites. Definition of the
focus, however, is primarily the work of T. N. Campbell
(1947 and 1952), and is based largely upon three excavated
sites.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: The Johnson site, located on the
west side of Live Oak Peninsula, in Aransas County;
excavated sometime during 1927-1929 by George C.
Martin and Wendell H. Potter. In 1930 A. M.Wilson
did some testing for The University of Texas; final
excavations by The University of Texas-WPA in 194041 under the supervision of William A. Duffen (Campbell, 1947, p. 43).
Other Excavated Components:

Kent-Crane and Live

Oak Point Sites both on Live Oak Peninsula, Aransas
County (Campbell, 1947, p. 63).
TYPES OF SITES:
Shell middens located on shores of coastal bays and
lagoons.
HOUSES:
No data.

Coastal Area

123

UVELIHOOD:
Extensive use of shellfish, principally oyster, clam, and
conch; also utilized for food to a considerable extent
were various large animals (bison and deer), and
small game such as peccary, raccoon, rabbits, and
various aquatic birds. Fish, and to a lesser extent,
wild plant products were also used. No evidence of
agriculture.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Absent.
ARTIFACTSOF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Absent.
Dart Points: Types Ensor, Marcos, Lange, Kent, and
Travis most c o m m o n ; Tortugas, Matamoros,
Ca$dn, Abasolo, and PalmiIlas also occur. CastrovilIe, Desmuke, BuIverde, Ellis, FairIand, Kinney,
Nolan, and Morhiss appear rarely.
Remarks: "Dart" points along the whole coastal margin are generally much smaller than in the interior,
probably due to the~carcity of stone of any kind
and the Indians’ need to utilize the smallest pieces.
Drills: Small, made from flint flakes.
Scrapers: Plano-convex end-scrapers; flakes with retouching on one or more edges.
Gravers: Made from small flint flakes, not common.
Knives: Triangular form, lateral edges slightly convex and bases vary from straight to convex.
Axes: Percussion chipped, thick in cross-section, and
more or less oval in outline.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
No data.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Limestone and sandstone .abraders.
Milling stones: Sandstone, shallow basin.
Manos: Sandstone, oval in outline, and evidence of use

124

Texas Archeological Society

on only one face. Grinding implements are uncomLarge tubular sandstone pipe with stem made from the
long bone of a bird.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
Tubular beads of bird bone, less frequently of long
bones of mammals; both plain and decorated. Decorations consist of simple geometric designs, both incised and "dotted" (lines of tiny drilled holes).
Awls: Usually made of deer ulna; also from split bone,
sometimes decorated in a manner similar to the beads;
and splinter awls with only ,the tip smoothed.
Pin-like objects, pointed at one or both ends, either
plain or incised.
Antler occasionally used for awls and flint-knapping
tools.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Adzes or Axes: Made from conch-shell whorl (wall),
rectangular, beveled on one edge or on opposite edges.
Gouges: From conch columella with anterior of columella fashioned into chisel-like cutting edge.
Small disc-shaped objects cut from the whorl of conchshell.
Scrapers: Made from the lip portion of the conch bodywhorl.
Centrally perforated oyster shells.
Clam-shell knives or scrapers with chipping along one
edge.
Awls: Made by sharpening the tips of conch-shell
columellae.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Twined basketry indicated by impressions preserved in
asphalt; also matting, but technique uncertain.
Miscellaneous lumps of asphalt.
Hammerstones: Oval, stream-worn pebbles or flint
nodules.
Various soft stones probably used as source of pigment.

Coastal Area

125

BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Placed either flexed or extended in shell middens; unaccompanied by offerings of a durable nature.
RELATIONS:
Presence of flint (not occurring naturally on coast) indicates trade with inland groups or trips inland to
the sources of flint.
Most of dart-point types named above shared with Edwards Piateau Aspect.
ESTIMATED AGE:
No objective basis for dates at present; more or less contemporaneous with other Archaic complexes such as
Edwards Plateau Aspect.
SOURCES:
Campbell, 1947, 1952; Martin, n.d.
NEO-AMERICAN STAGE
Rockport Focus
This complex in the central portion of the Texas coast
was first defined as the Rockport Phase by E. B. Sayles
(1935), who organized and enlarged upon the previous work
of George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter. Sayles’ trait
list, however, includes material now attributed to the Galveston Bay Focus of the eastern portion of the Texas coast.
The Rockport and Galveston Bay Foci share arrow point
types Perdiz, Fresno, Scallorn, and Cliff, on and probably
other traits, but are differentiated by their distinctive pottery.
Rockport components frequently overlie those of the
earlier Aransas Focus. Further evidence of a late chronological position for the Rockport Focus consists of an occasional arrow point made from glass and the intrusion of
European items, indicating its continuation into the Historic
Stage.
It seems probable that Rockport Focus represents archeological remains of the "Karankawa" Indians (a term

Texas Archeological Society

126

applied collectively to a number of tribes living around the
bays of this coast).
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: None designated.
Excavated Components: Mustang Lake and Live Oak
Point Sites, Aransas County; Webb Island Site, Nueces
County.
Other Components: Numerous pottery-bearing sites on
coastal plain from Matagorda Bay to Baffin Bay.
TYPE OF SITE:
Small campsites and shell middens located near island
and mainland beaches, and inland on the coastal plain.

HOUSES:
No data.
LIVELIHOOD:
Fish and shellfish; large and small animals; birds; roots,
berries, and water plants.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery types: Rockport Plain, Rockport Incised, and
Rockport Black-on-g~ay.
Paste is gritty, hard and compact with tiny white in~clusions of bone and shell (?) frequently showing on
surfacer
Forms: Bowls, bottles, possibly jars; in some instances
the bases appear to be conical.
Decorations: Asphaltum used to make broad lines,
squiggles, dots, etc., on upper parts of vessels; incised
lines occasionally occur.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Perdiz, Scallorn, Cli~on, Fresno.
Dart Points: Matamoros and Cat’an types appear to
survive.
Small handaxes: R~oughly chipped stream pebbles.
Kr~ives: Small, leaf-shaped.

Coastal Area

Scrapers: Small flakes,
scrapers.

and rounded,

127

snub- nosed

Small drills, made from flakes.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Pendants.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Grooved sandstone.
Small river pebbles, probably used as abrading stones.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Freshwater and.marine-shell pendants.
Sea-shell beads.
Triangular arrow points.
Conch and oyster-shell axes with perforation for halting.
Scrapers: Cut from section of conch shell with bevel
along cutting edge.
~¢eedles or awls.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
No data.
MISCELLANEOUS:
Perforated animal teeth.
Hammerstones of pebbles, including flint nodules.
Lumps of asphaltum, obtained on nearby beaches.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
No data.
RELATIONS:
Projectile points made from glass show complex continued into European times.
Other items of European origin include clay pipe and
artifacts of metal.
Sharing of arrowpoint types with the Central Texas
Aspect and Galveston Bay Focus.
ESTIMATED AGE:
From sometime after 1000 A. D., lasting until 1800 or
1850.

Texas Archeological Society

128

SOURCES:
Campbell, 1947; Martin, n. d.; Potter, 1930; Sayles, 1935.
Galveston Bay Focus
Along the eastern portion of the Texas coast and extending inland for an unknown distance, are campsites and
shell middens of the Galveston Bay Focus. This focus is
known from three partially excavated sites in the Addicks
Reservoir area (Wheat, 1953) and from numerous unexcavated sites along the coast and on the shores of inland bays.
A detailed inventory of the artifact complex is not possible at this time but two pottery types, Goose Creek Plain
and Goose Creek Incised--identical in vessel shape and paste
--are considered to be diagnostic traits of the Galveston Bay
Focus. Arrow points associated with components at Addicks
include types Alba, Perdiz, Scatlorn, Fresno, and CliS~ton.
Alba has a very broad distribution northward and eastward
from Addicks, occurring in many complexes of the Caddoan
area and eastward into the Lower Mississippi Valley. The
other four arrow-point types are shared with the Rockport
Focus, the Central Texas Aspect, and other complexes.
A non-ceramic complex containing dart points of the
East Texas Aspect and, to a lesser degree, the Edwards
Plateau Aspect, underlay the Galveston Bay components at
Addicks, and there is evidence that some of these Archaic
dart point types may have survived into the Galveston Bay
Focus.
The following trait list is based e~itirely .on the Addicks
Reservoir sites west of Houston (Wheat, 1953). Whether or
not the same traits all o~cur in sites along the bay shores
and Gulf cannot be determined until some of them have
been excavated.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: None designated.
Excavated Components: Doering, Kobs, and Grisbee
sites, and site 66A6-4 in the Addicks Reservoir basin,
Harris County (Wheat, 1953).

Coastal Area

!29

TYPES OF SITES:
Campsites, often indicated by midden deposits and shellheaps..
LIVELIHOOD:
Hunting of deer, bison, antelope and small game; collecting of shellfish; and fishing.
HOUSES:
No data.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Types: Goose Creek Plain, and Goose Creek Incised.
Temper: Sand mainly, pulverized sherd .and calcium
phosphate of minor importance and possibly late in
complex.
Forms: Most characteristic are deep cylindri~.al jars
with slightly out-curving rims, and deep, wide-mouthed simple bowls; bases usually round or conical.
Decoration: Confined to upper portion of vessel and
includes lip notching, fine incising and punctating on
rims. Occasionally red wash applied to exterior of
vessel.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Perdiz, Cli]fton, ScaIlorn, Fresno, Alba.
Dart Points: Gary and possibly other Archaic types
survived (See Wheat, 1953, for analysis).
Scrapers: Side, end, and flake.
Choppers: Present.
Knives: Leaf-shaped, triangular, double-pointed, and
diamond-shaped with .alternately beveled edges.
Drills: Small,. expanding base.
Gravers: Present.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
"Boat-shaped stones" or atlatl weights, possibly associated.

ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Sandstone abraders.

130

Texas Archeological Society

Milling stones with oval depressions.
Manos.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
Awls.
¯ Flaking tools of deer ulna.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Possibly pendants.
MISCELLANEOUS:
Pigments of yellow and red ochre.
Hammerstones.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Flexed, with few or no offerings of a durable nature.
RELATIONS:
Sharing of arrow point types Perdiz, Cli]fton, ScaIlorn,
and Fresno with the Central Texas Aspect and Rockport Focus; A2ba points shared with loci of Gibson
Aspect in Caddoan area to north.
Occurrence of Goose Creek ware in Rockport components (T. N. Campbell, personal communication); and
Rockport Black-on-gray from one Addicks Basin site.
Tche]uncte Stamped sherd intrusive from Tchefuncte
complex in the Lower Mississippi Valley (See Wheat,
1953, P1. 33, K).
ESTIMATED AGE:
Some evidence that this focus lasted a long time with
little change. If the Tchefuncte trade sherd is acceptable for dating, the focus probably began before
500 A. D. The Addicks sites have no European material and must have been abandoned before 1700; the
question of survival into historic horizon elsewhere
remains to be answered.
SOURCES:
Wheat, 1953.
Brownsville Focus
Components of the Brownsville Focus are located in the

Coastal Area

extreme southern tip of Texas, on the Rio Grande delta and
along the coastal margin about to the San Fernando River
in northern Tamaulipas. The artifact complex is known
principally from the large surface collections of A. E. Anderson, who first recognized the focus, although Sayles
(1935) named and more fully described it as the Brownsville
Phase. The most striking feature is the great number of
shell artifacts, especially ornaments. Although this abundant working of shell is a very distinct industry, the suggested association of artifact types below needs verification
by controlled excavations.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: None designated.
Excavated components: Ayala Site, Hidalgo County
(Campbell and Frizzell, 1949).
Other Components: A. E. Anderson located over 100
sites in Cameron County and made surface collections;
he also found scores of sites in northeast Tamaulipas,
many of which were relocated by McNeish (1947).
TYPES OF SITES:
Small campsites, usually situated on rises along streams
or arroyos; characterized by hearth areas with an
abundance of broken shell.
HOUSES:
No data.
LIVELIHOOD:
Use of various sea foods, game animals and wild plant
products. No evidence of agriculture.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
All the pottery appears to be intrusive mainly from the
Huasteca area (Periods V and VI) on the east coast
of Mexico, and to a lesser extent from the Rockport
Focus.
Pipes.
Disks.

132

Texas Archeological Society

ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Start and perhaps Fresno types (stone
is rare near coast; chipped artifacts are diminutive
and difficult to classify). See also shell artifacts.
Dart Points: Matamoros and Catdn types.
Scrapers: Small, round, humpbacked; and flakes.
Drills: Pointed at one or both ends, vary from 1 to 2
inches in length.
Knives.
Chipped nodules (blades?).
OTHER ARTIFACTS OF STONE:
Abrading stones of pumice.
Sandstone abrading and rubbing stones.
Fragments of rubbed coral.
Large tubular pipes of pumice.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
No data.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
Bone awls.
Pin-like ornaments of bone.
Bone gorgets.
Tubular bone beads, sometimes incised with geometric
designs.
Flaking tools of bone and antler.
Notched pieces of bone.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Mussel-shell scrapers.
Fishhooks, rare.
Carved pendants of both mollusca and conch shell, with
or without decoration. Decorations, when present,
consist of geometric designs. Conch shell pendants
vary from triangular to square, oval, or unaltered.
Tinklers of Oliva beads.
Disc beads from freshwater shells.
Cylindrical conch-shell beads.
Awls.

Coastal Area

133

Conch-shell gouges.
Conch-shell adzes.
Projectile points from conch columella, round in crosssection, polished to long tapering point and polished
and beveled square base.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Soft materials probably used as source of pigment.
Hammerstones.
Perforated animal teeth.
Rarely, arrow points made of bottle glass, similar to
those of flint.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Usually flexed, with or without burial offerings. Offer-~
ings, when present, usually consist of beads, pendants,
and/or pottery.
RELATIONS:
Huasteca pottery types: Huasteca Black-on-White, Tancol Polychrome, Tancol Brown-on-Bull (all from Period VI); Las Flores Red-on-Buff and Los Flores Re. lief Ware (all Period V); possibly Zaquil Red from
Period IV. All probably trade ware from southern
Tamaulipas. Ekholm (1944) defines types and periods.
Obsidian suggests trade to the south, in Mexico.
Two jade objects: a spherical bead and celt-like object
one inch long, from the south, probably Huasteca
region.
Rockport Black-on-Gray (?)
of Texas.

from Central Gulf coast

ESTIMATED AGE:
Beginning date probably sometime after A. D. 1000;
extends into early historic times (MacNeish, 1947).
SOURCES:
Anderson, 1932; Campbell and Frizzell, 1949; Ekholm
1944; MacNeish, 1947; Mason, 1935; Sayles, 1935.

