CERTAIN PROJECTILE POINTS OF THE
EARLY AMERICAN HUNTERS

A_~x D. ILRm¢~R
There is tremendous popular interest in the earliest inhabitants of America, their weapons and implements, mode
of life, the great animals now extinct that they hunted, and,
finally, ~what happened to them". Many learned articles
and popular books have appeared in recent years, especially
since the famous discovery at Folsom, New Mexico, in 1926.
Archaeologists are constantly being asked what they think
about the time of appearance of man in America; about
the ~type" of various artifacts found in circumstances suggesting age; whether the chipped stone points were used
on arrows or spears, and so on.
It is difficult to think clearly about these matters until
the number and variety of stone projectile points used by
early hunters on this continent is well understood. W’e are
still far from understanding this situation fully, for lack
of data, but many of the projectile point types are becoming
clear in their main features. It is amazing that many professional archaeologists are still badly confused over the several distinct types which they loosely call "Folsom points"
and "Yuma points". The amateurs, even. more confused,
cannot be blamed for continuing to use obsolete and incorrect names if the ~rofessionals to whom they look for help
know no better. Even the most recent literature reflects
careless use of type names no lon~er regarded as valid.
The conference held at Santa Fe, New Mexico, in September 1941,’ for the express purpose of straightening out
a Reported by Edgar B. Howard in **The Finley Site", American Antiquity, vol.
VIII, No. 3, 1943, pp. 227-234. The new terminology has been used by H. M. Wormington in Ancient Man i~t North America, The Colorado Museum of Natural History,
Popular Series No. 4 (revised, 1944), pp. 11 if.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

such matters, produced an extremely sensible and workable
terminology which is still largely ignored. This conference
did not establish type names for all ’~early man" projectile
points for the excellent reason that those present admitted
they did not know enough about the circumstances under
which the artifacts had been discovered. It was, however,
established that formal names would be given to projectile
points of consistent character if and when they were ;ound
in lblaae by competent observers. Wisely, the Santa Fe conference made it expressly understood that only the types
with consistent features and sufficient field information
would be given "official" names, while all those specimens
which did not satisfy these requirements would be removed
from the field of ]¢nown types, awaiting further discoveries. For this reason large numbers of artifacts from alt
parts of North America became of un/enown type after the
conference, whereas before it they had been called almost
everything possible. "Folsom-like", "Unfluted Folsom",
’*Yuma-like", "Generalized Folsom", "Generalized Yuma",
even such prize terms as "the well-known Folsom-Yuma
type", and so on.
It cannot be stated too o~ten or too strongly that the
Santa Fe conference paved the way for a clear understanding of the projectile point types of early American
hunters. Only a fraction of the points excavated and found
in private collections were now admitted to be of ]~nown
types. In other words, those who had been obsessed with the
idea that most ’*early" points were either "Folsom" or
"Yuma" (or hopelessly confused with them) should have
revised their whole attitude toward the problem. This has
not happened, except in the case of less than a dozen archaeologists that come to mind. The rest, while recognizing
the famous Sandia points’ as clearly distinct from the ]~luted
forms, continue the habit of calling all projectile points
= Frank C. Hibben, "Evidences of Early Occupation in Sandia Cave, New Mexico,
and Other Sites in the Sandla-Manzano Region", Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections,
Vol. 99, No. 23, 1941.

Certain Projectile Points of ~he Early American Hun$ers

with
term
most
faces

9

a longitudinal groove or flute "Folsom points". The
"Yuma" or ~’Yuma like" continues to be used for alany long, slim artiI~act with fine flaking across the
or meeting along a central ridge.

Despite the confusions that have occurred, it is really
comparatively easy to recognize the present l~nown types,
and, conversely, to recognize a specimen not of a
type. My purpose is to present a few hints on how the projectile points, known and unknown, can be recognized by
anyone interested, whether or not he has much knowledge
of the literature. I do not expect all professional archaeologists to agree with what is set forth. If a defense is needed
it can be put briefly: (1) One who doubts the validity of
certain types should attempt, if possible, to handle them
personally; (2) One cannot procrastinate forever about individual specimens, for humans, being what they are, no
two of them with primitive tools can ever turn out identical
products, and normally, even though they bear in mind the
same pattern, their results will be good, fair, and poor; and
(3) no one can ever determine the "type" o£ every specimen, but this does not detract from the reality of a typology
which works well for the great majority of artifacts.’
To repeat, there is nothing particularly original in the
remarks below about the Fluted and Yuma types, for this
was worked out in 1941 at Santa Fe. I merely wish to make
these results easy to understand and therefore attain more
general use among professional and amateur workers alike.
The Plainview point type, however, is a new one, and had
it been known in 1941 it would have been a great aid then
in formulating types. Finally, this is not an attempt to discuss all projectile points for which claims of antiquity have
been made. The interest is primarily on the "Folsom-Yuma"
situation.
~ My opinions on the purposes of a typology and means oil determining valid types
with historical meaning have been expressed in "The Typologica! Concept", American
Antiquity, Vol. IX, No. 3, I944, pp. 271-288.

10

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Fluted Points

The Santa Fe conference recognized three types of fluted
points: Folsom Fluted (or Classic Folsom), Clovis fluted,
and Ohio Fluted. This appears to account for most, if not
all, fluted points so far found in North America. Specimens with flutes may turn up now and then which cannot
easily be placed within any of the three types, but this is
often considered to mean that their ranges of variation are
still imperfectly known. Still, the Folsom and Clovis Fluted
types are generally of quite definite form. Unlike the other
types, "Ohio Fluted" points show many variations and have
not so far been reported in association with extinct animal
skeletons. Clovis Fluted points also occur in the eastern
United States, usually clearly distinct in form from Ohio
Fluted, and agreeing with specimens from the High Plains.
It is absolutely necessary that Clovis Fluted be distinguished from Folsom Fluted, for not only is the form
easily recognized, but so far the few direct associations with
extinct animals show that Clovis Fluted is generally found
with mammoth remains. Folsom Fluted, on the other hand,
has so far been found directly associated only with large
extinct’ bison. Of course I realize that numerous publications have mentioned "Folsom" or "Folsom-like" points discovered with mammoth remains in North America, but
these names were used either before~ the Santa Fe confer4The term "extinct" can be taken literally for the mammoth, camel, American
horses, and many other Late Pleistocene animals which had no living descendants wherz
Europeans reached America. This may nor be the case for the bison, however, for the
modern anima!, B. bison, is said to be the direct descendant of the Late Pleistocene B.
o¢cidentalis, the chief difference being in the somewhat sma!ler over-all size of the body
and horns of modern bison. B. antiquus, which co-existed in part with B. occidentalis
in the Late Pleistocene, left no modern descendants. S~e: Morris F. Skinner and Ore
Kaisen, "The Fossil Bison o:~ Alaska and Preliminary Revision of The Genus",
American Museum Of National History, Vol. 89, Article 3, 1947, esp. pp. 171, 242, 244.
The authors regard B. taylori, often identified as a "species" associated with artifacts, as
inclusive in B. occidentalis.

PLATE 1
Type forms of some early projectile points.

b
UNNAMED
UNNAMED

UNNAMED" "OBLIQUE

YUMAN

EDEN

¯
YUMA

f
SCOTTSBLUFF
YUMA

FOLSOM FLUTED

FOLSOM FLUTED

GLOVIS FLUTED
BROWNS VALLEY

o
CLOVIS

FLUTED

PLAINVIEW

q

p

"OHIO FLUTED~

Plate 1

r
SANDIA

s
I

SANDIA

2

Certain Projectile Points of the Early American Hunters

ence made Clovis Fluted an %fficially’" accepted type, or
afterwards in disregard for the conference agreement. Obviously, if Clovis Fluted is not only distinct from Folsom
Fluted in form, but is also the type to be found with the
mammoth while Folsom is not, it is important for all of us
to become accustomed to using the right names for these
types. One interpretation is that the mammoth disappeared
first, while the camel, horses, sloth, Bison occidentalis, and
perhaps other animals fingered in favorable areas for some
thousands of years longer. In this case Clovis Fluted would
be the oldest fluted point on the continent, and, with the
0ossible exception of the Sandia types, the oldest of any
known tyoe in America. Another interpretation is that the
Clovis type, notably the largest and heaviest fluted point,
was used for the largest game, the mammoth:, by the same
people who made lighter points for other game. Thirdly,
many regard Clovis Fluted .as nothing more than crudely
made variations of ~Folsom points". However, I believe the.
differences in form, size, and occurrence amply demon-~
strate that they are distinct types, and it is ~erhat~s more
likely th:at Folsom Fluted is a somewhat late[ and°soeeiaIized type of fluted projectile point which developed from
the widespread Clovis type.
The accompanying plate presents a few examples of
these types which may be taken as ideals. The best Folsom
Fluted points are usually rather small, 2 to 2 ½ inches long,
and two to three times as long as wide. The broadest part
is characteristically well forward, as much as three-quarters
of the distance toward the tip. Less often, the edges are
quite parallel instead of expanded, then rounded into the
tip. While the part of greatest width and the straigh.tness
or convexity of the edges may vary somewhat, true Folsom
Fluted points are readily recognized by the full fluting and
deeply concave base. The fluting technique reached perfection in this type, a long flake being skilfully removed
from each face from the base forward at least half waym
sometimes nearly all the waymto the tip. The basal con-

12

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

cavity is characteristically quite deep and U-shaped, sometimes squared across the bottom. A tiny point may often
be seen in the center of the basal concavity and is thought
to have served as a pressure platform from wMch the long
central flake was pried off. The deep base resulted in two
long, sharp tips or ’tears" at the corners, sometimes of extreme delicacy. From the base to the point of greatest width,
the edges are almost always smooth. It is believed that these
edges were purposely ground down to prevent their cutting
~he sin.ews or thongs which bound the point to its shaft.
With this combination of featuresmparallel edges or
widest part well forward of the midsection, full fluting,
deep base, !ong ~ears" at the corners, and tiny protusion
in the base center--there is no need to confuse the Folsom
Fluted type with any other projectile point whatever. These
features are unmistakable, separately and in combination.
Naturally, when the workmanship is not of the best, some
doubt begins to enter the identification, but a knowledge
of other recognized types will sometimes enable one to decide that, since the specimen does not belong to another
type, it can be considered an imperfect Folsom Fluted, or
one that lacks one or more of the typical features. Such difficulties will be met in any identification work.
The Clovis Fluted can ordinarily be readily distinguished
from Folsom by its greater size, ranging from about three
to six inches in length with length three to five times the
width, by the rudeness of its flutes, and the gentle curvature
of its base. The edges may be quite parallel from half to twothirds the distance forward, but in other cases the midpoint
is distinctly wider than the base, so that t~he specimen presents a long and narrow leaf shape with slightly convex
edges. In some cases they are not much longer than Folsom
Fluted, but they seemingly never present the most common
Folsom outline, that wieh the widest part forward of the
midsection. The fluting is inferior by comparison, that on
the Clovis points seldom extending as much as half way forward, the flute scar often being ragged and longer on one

Certain Projectile Points o] the Early American Hunters

13

face than the other. The flute may be absent from one face.
It was perhaps realized that too much fluting would weaken the point, a common defect of Folsom Fluted. The basal
concavity, rather than a deep U, is shallow and gently curving. It is often in fact, not a single curve, but a compound
one, concave in the middle and rounding in the opposite
direction into the corners.

The type provisionally termed "Ohio Fluted" (for lack
of a type site) is definitely more similar to Clovis Fluted
than to Folsom. The shape varies more, the edges sometimes
tapering forward rather than parallel or widening at the
middle, or strongly recurred so that the blade is much narrower between the base and midsection. Again the fluting
is crude and may occur on but one face. The smoothed
edges, however, are probably fully as common on both Clovis
and "Ohio" Fluted as on Folsom Fluted.
It is urged that archaeologists use these names wherever
it is possible to identify the specimen. If it cannot be placed
in one of these types, but bears a flute, or if it is too incomplete to reveal the key features, it should be called simply
a "fluted point". The common tendency to regard all fluted
projectile points as °°Folsom" should be abando~zed, for it
clearly ignores matters of considerable significance. One
may, however, speak of individual specimens as "Folsom
like" or "Clovis like" when they are fluted and resemble
one of these types, but cannot definitely be assigned to it.
However, these expressions should never be used as though
they were type names. Thus there can be a "Folsom like"
specimen but never a "Folsom-!ike type".
No unfluted projectile point should ever be called "Folsom like", no matter how closely it may resemble a fluted
point in other respects. Many such specimens may now be
identified as Plainview points (see below). The former
"Generalized Folsom" points almost always prove to be
Clovis Fluted or "Ohio Fluted".

14

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Yuma Points
The recognition of definite Yuma projectile points
seems to have been more difficult than that of fluted points,
principally because the absence of a flute on many long
and narrow points enabled some archaeologists to consider
a great range of artifacts as closely related within a "Yuma"
category. To cite the history of developments in naming
"Yuma" types would result only in such conflicts ~hat the
general reader would give up in despair. However, it may
be said that such terms as "Collateral Yuma", "Oblique
Yuma", ’~Generalized Yuma", "Indeterminate Yuma",
"’Yuma-like", and ~’Folsom-Yuma" have all been used frequently. Some authors have held that special forms of chipping distinguish Yuma from all other points, while others
claim that special shapes of the blade, stem, and base are
more important. To the reader interested in how these arguments developed, the excellent pamphlets of Miss Wormington are recommended.~
One of the most difficult matters to understand, in
view of the present terminology, is how Yuma points could
ever have been confused with Folsom. Yet many attempts
to draw lines of distinction between them have been made
in the belief t~hat they overlap. It is quite clear, however,
that it is not the Yuma types as we now understand them
that have been confused with Polsom, but a number of
other types which are neither Folsom nor Yuma and should
be given entirely different names. The Plainview type is one
of l~hese, and there are others not yet named (see below).
The insistence of J. D. Figgins many years ago that true
Folsom and Yuma points need never be confused is therefore fully borne out today.
Three Yuma types are now recognized which, with a
little practice, can be distinguished from one another readily. Probably the most spectacular is the Eden Yuma, a long
~H, M. Wo~mington, op. cir., and earlier (1939) edition of the same booklet,

Certain Projectile Points of the Early American Hunters

15

and narrow object with a pronounced ridge running the
length o£ the blade. This technique is called collateral flaking (or chipping), but the term Collateral Yuma point is
no longer used because ot? the Santa Fe agreement to name
definite types after sites in which they were found in place.
Hence the name Eden Yuma after the Eden valley in southwestern Wyoming.’
An idealized Eden Yuma is shown in the accompanying
plate. The most striking feature, next to the regular chipping with opposed scars, is the extreme narrowness with
parallel edges. Examples are known with the width as little
as one-seventh, or even one-eighth, of the length, q~e edges
are parallel for two-thirds or even three-quarters of the
total length. An Eden Yuma probably never widens above
the base. They also have notched-in stems, unlike any known
fluted type. These notches are sometimes extremely shallow
and seen only with close inspection, but there is no question
that a stem was intended in most cases. The stem is thus
only slightly narrower than the blade, its edges parallel and
smoothed. The base is straight or slightly convex.
The second type now recognAzed is ~he Scottsbluff Yuma. Unlike the Eden type it does not bear collateral flaking, the flake scars being roughly parallel across the blade,
or irregular. A peculiar feature, which one feels in handling
these specimens, is the "fatness" of the blade. Though it is
rather thick in cross-section, the faces are well rounded and
often very well chipped. These specimens also lack the long
parallel edges of Eden Yuma, the whole artifact being notably wider, with the blade edges parallel only a fourth or a
third of the distance forward before they begin to curve
toward the tip. The stem is also muc’h more prominent than
on Eden Yumas, the right-angular notches being cut inward
strongly one-half to three-quarters inch above the base. The
base line itself is typically quite straight, although I believe
vhere are instances of a shallow concave line meeting the
’E. B.

Howard, "The Finley Site"

(see

note.

1)

16

Texas Archeological ~nd Paleon$ologicaI Society

corners sharply. The stem edges are not so well or so often
smoothed as in the other types mentioned so far, probably
because of the more prominent shoulders. (Most projectile
points with strong shoulders do not reveal much smoothing,
and when barbs are present the stems are not smoot~hed).
The Scottsbluff Yuma, named after the Scottsbluff bison quarry in Nebraska, seems to be much more widely spread
than the Eden, although both occur in the High Plains in
general and western Wyoming. Scottsbluff specimens, for
example, are found in various parts of Texas and are well
represented in northern Louisiana,’ vc1~ere Eden Yumas are
quite unknown. Association with particular animals is very
imperfectly known, the only definite cases being with large
bison, probably Bison o~ciclentalis. They have never been
found w~th the mammoth, and most students of the subject feel that Eden and Scottsbluff Yumas were used more
recently than fluted points.

The third type is called "Oblique Yuma", referring to
a characteristic chipping technique of parallel scars crossing the blade at an angle. This type has not been found in
any definite association, hence the name is temporary until
a site is discovered with such artifacts in place. The accompanying sketch Shows a typical specimen with the sides expanding toward the middle as in some examples of Clovis
Fluted. In other cases the edges are quite parallel for a considerable distance forward, as on the Eden type. However,
the extreme narrowness of Eden points and the longitudinal
ridge with collateral chipping do not occur on it. A stem
is seen faintly on some specimens, on others it is notched
from one edge only (see plate), and on others it may be
absent. It will be best not to attempt to describe the tyt~e
definitely until more is known about it, but it s1~ould be
clear that it can hardly be confused with the other Yumas.
’ Clarence H. Webb, article in preparation. I have been able to examine the specimens described and feel no doubt that they belong to the Seottsbluff type. A few examples have also been found in adjacent northeastern Texas.

Certain Projectile Points of the Ecrly American Hunters

17

PIainview Points
The discovery, by Glen L. Evans and Grayson E. Meade
of the Texas Memorial Museum, of 27 artifacts in direct
association with a mass of bison skeletons at Plainview, Texas, in the summer of 1945, is of considerable importance to
the problem of defining projectile point types. It is estimated that at least 100 bison were killed at the edge of an
old valley of Running Water Creek, one of the headwaters
of Brazos River on the High Plains of Texas, and after some,
at least, had been butchered, the skeletons were covered by
a mantle of valley fill at least eleven feet thick. The circumstances of this discovery, the bone bed, geological situation, and the artifacts have just appeared in print.’
The projectile points, 19 in all, belong to one type which
might have been called "unfluted Folsom" at one time, but
has now been given a distinct name.

Since the artifacts from Plainview have been described
in detail in the publication mentioned, I shall repeat only
the main features here. Two examples are shown in the
present figure. One has a well-defined ridge in the center
of each face, with rather crude but nevertheless definite
collateral chipping. Several other specimens from the site
show similar chipping. The other example shown .here has
the irregular chipping which is most common in the Plainview series. The edges of most specimens are parallel but
some expand very slightly at about the midpoint. None are
widest beyond the midpoint in the typical Folsom Fluted
fashion. In length they vary from about 2 ½ to 3 ½ inches,
longer than most Folsoms and more llke Clovis Fluted. The
basal concavity is shallow and compound, rounding into the
basal corners exactly as in Clovis Fluted, and hence different from Folsom. Generally soeaking, the Plainview points
strongly suggest Clovis Fluted in most respects, exceot of
s E. H. Sellards, Glen L. Evans, and Grayson E. Meade, "Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainvlew, Texas", and Alex D. Krleger, "Description of the
tlfacts", Btdletin of /he Geological Society of America, October, 1947.

18

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

course for the absence of fluting. The collateral chipping,
on the other hand, suggests some relationship with the Eden
Yuma, even though there is great difference in the shape
and proportions. The basal edges of Plainview points, in all
but one case, are well smoothed.
Like the fluted points and Scottsbluff Yuma, the Plainview type had an immense distribution. Many specimens
once called "Folsom like", "unfluted Folsom", or "FolsomYuma" can now rather safely be called Plainview, and are
found in various collections from central Alaska to southern Texas? The western and eastern limits are unknown, but
from personal experience I believe that numerous examples
will be recognized from the eastern United States also, and
possibly from far to the west.
The numerous bison at the Plainview quarry included
at least two male skulls identified as Bison taylori?° The
teeth of a Heistocene wolf represent the only other animal
in this bone bed, but mammoth remains have been found
in the same valley fill nearby. This suggests that Plainview
points may also be found with other extinct animals. This
is particularly interesting in view of the known occurrence
of Clovis Fluted points with the mammoth, and the resemblance of Plainview points to Clovis Fluted.
Both the Plainview and the Folsom Fluted type have
been found in unquestionable association with remains of
large bison, such as B. occidentalis (or "B. taylori"), and
for this reason alone they would appear to be of about the
same age. However, the two types, one unfluted and the
other fluted, are not often found together. When they are,
the unfluted Plainview form is represented in much smaller

~Some of the most definite occurrences are tabulated in the publicatlon cited in
note g.
~ Note that this "species" is now included in B. o¢¢idenlalis by Skinner and Kaisen (see note 4).

Cerbain Projectile Points of the Early American Hunters

19

numbers than the true Folsom.~ In other sites, Folsom Fluted
occurs alone): As we have mentioned, the Plainview form
also shows a tendency toward the collateral chipping of
Eden Yuma, while Folsom does not (unless such chipping
was done on some of them before the central flake was removed). It therefore appears that either (1) there was a
time difference between Folsom and Hainview points even
though the same kind of bison was hunted over a considerable period, or (2) the two styles were used during the
same time period by different groups of people. If both types
had been used by the same group of hunters we would expect both to be well represented in the same sites, but this is
not the case.
It should be plain to everyone that more discoveries,
¯ carefully studied by competent observers, can be expected
to yield information of great interest to science and the
public alike. When archaeologists understand the true typological nature of the many projectile points already present
in various collections, and the paleontologists can determine
some sequence in which the various Late Pleistocene mammals became extinct, it is quite probable that these discoveries can be correlated to show a Iong history of hunting
peoples on this continent, different styles of projectile points
being favored at different times, and various species of animals dying out during this long history. In the past, amateur archaeologists have made many more discoveries than
have professionals, because they become acquainted with the
country about their homes and come to know where to look
for buried artifacts. In the cases where they have taken the
m An example may be seen in the case of Sandia Cave, New Mexico, where Hibben (see note 2) recognized two projectile points "regarded as Folsom points lacking
the channel on either face" from the Folsom level in the cave (p.20). These are surely
Plainview points (see his Plate Y, fig. 2) and he says of them that this form "possibly
shouId be regarded as indicative of a group of peoples contemporaneous with, but possibly distinct from, the Folsom".
~For example, the Folsom site itself, and the Lipscomb bison quarry in the
Texas Panhandle (C. Bertrand Schultz, "Some Artifact Sites of Early Man in The Great
Plains and Adjacent Areas", American Antiquity, Vol. VIII, No. 3, 1943, pp. 244-248).

20

Texas A,rcheological and Paleontological Society

trouble to inform trained observers of their discoveries before removing them, the questionable matters of direct association with a particular animal or geological formation
have often been answered in so far as it is possible to do so.
Browns Valley Points

We shall dwell only briefly on these artifacts. Although
originally described by Jenks~ as "Minnesota Folsom-Yuma
artifacts", the leaf-shaped projectile points found with the
"Minnesota Man" burial cannot possibly be co~fused with
either Folsom or Yuma points as we now regard them. Rober&’ has already suggested that they are a distinct type, and
I have included two examples in the accompanying figure.
In some ways, principally the size and collateral chipping,
Jenks’ points remind me of Plainview, and indeed certain
other Minnesota points seem to be quite definitely of this
type?’ However, while it may be said that Browns Valley
points resemble Plainview more closely than any other type
discussed so far, they are wider, expand more into a leaf
shape, and the base is straight or only very slightly concave.
Sandia Points
Two types of Sandia point have been described by Hibben, but are believed to be so distinct from other known
types that they present no particular problem in the present
paper. One example of each type is shown in the accompanying plate. Since they occurred below the Folsom level
in Sandia Cave, these points are now commonly accepted
as the oldest known in America. On the other hand, it has
~aAlbert Ernest Jenks, *’Minnesota’s Browns Valley Man and Associated Burial
Artifacts", M~moir 49, American Antb.rol~ological Association, 1937.
The artifact
shown in Fig. 2 a-b is surely a projectile point and considered here to be a typica!
Browns Valley point, while Fig. 2 c is probably a knife.
a, Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr., "Developments in the Problem of the North American Paleo-Indian", Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 100, 1940.
See p. 65.
His alternative suggestion of "Browns Valley Yuma" would only be confusing and
appears to be unjustified by the shape of these points.

~Jenks (see note 13), specimens shown in plate 7 c and plate 8 a.

Certain Projectile Points o] the Early American Hunters

21

been hinted above that the true Folsom Fluted, which positively occurred in the Sandia Cave Folsom level, may not
rank quite as high in the scale of antiquity as many believe.
In Sandia Cave, animal bones from the Folsom level included
horse, camel, mammoth, ground sloth, a species of wolf,
and bison said to be "near Bison taylori but smaller". We
cannot be sure, however, that Folsom Fluted points were
used to kill all of these animals, including the mammoth.
Be that as it may, an hateresting feature of both Sandia
types is that they have stems notched in from one edge only,
with the stem edges ground smooth. I have placed them at
the bottom of the plate to show how the occurrence Of
stems in Sandia types is rather out of keeping with the lack
of notched-in stems on the fluted, Plainview, and Browns
Valley points, while they occur again on the Yuma types,
which most authorities regard as considerably later. The
"Oblique Yuma" may be notched from one edge only, although it is a very different artifact on the whole from the
Sandia points. If it were not for the stems on Sandia points,
one might set up a hypothetical progression in North America in general, beginning with fluted styles and others completely lacking in-cut stems or Shoulders, proceeding to the
Yuma types with slight but definite shoulders, then later
still to the tens of thousands of heavy dart points with good
shoulders and notches cut obliquely into the corners, and
finally arriving at the myriads of small arrow points notched
from the corners in some styles, directly in from the side
in others. In a very general sense such a progression can be
seen rather clearly from the oldest known cultures to the
latest ones, except for the two Sandia types. This affords
us with another problem which may lead somewhere, or
may not.

Unnamed Types
It seems not to be generally appreciated that, in addition
to the projectile points discussed above, there are still other
styles, distinct from one another and distinct from all fluted

22

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

and true Yuma types, which nevertheless have been thoroughly confused with them. I have seen some hundreds of
these in collections from all parts of Texas, and in excavated
material from the burnt-rock middens of central Texas.
Always there is the same question: do you think these are
"Folsom" or "’Yuma" points?
By this time, I hope it has been impressed on the reader
that the socalled "Folsom-Yuma" projectile point problem
has suffered greatly at the hands of those who seem to insist
that all projectile points without good shoulders, but with
smoothed edges, must be either ’~Folsom" or "Yuma". The
key to this problem is to admit that there are styles which
do not need to be thrown into either the fluted or the
"Yuma" category.
Specimens a and b in the plate show two styles of this
nature, found quite regularly in the burnt-rock middens of
central Texas. They are never common in any one site, but
quite consistently appear in a ratio of about one in every
one or two hundred projectile points of all kinds. When
time permits further work on these points, they should be
described, their ranges of variation and comparative ages
determined. For the present, it can be said that a is characterized by a long and narrow lanceolate form, the stem end
tapering to a narrow, concave base. The lower edges are
well smoothed in all cases, and may vary from straight (as
shown) to concave between the base and widest part. Specimen b generally has a short blade and long stem curving
out to the small shoulders, as shown. The base is straight or
s!ightly convex, never concave, and the whole artifact often
has the *’fat" feel of a Scottsbluff Yuma. Its basa! edges
are smooth.
The age of these styles is hard to determine, but due to
the fact that neither, so far as I know, has been found with.
an extinct animal species, we cannot set them back as far
as those projectiles which have. They may provide one of
those long-sought links between early hunters and the relatively recent hunters and gatherers.

Certain Projectile Points oy the Early American Hunters

23

The third unnamed type, shown as c in the plate, also
occurs in small numbers in the burnt-rock middens of central Texas, and miscellaneous collections in other parts of
the state. Messrs. F. M. and Charlie Parks of Plainview in
the Panhandle have found several dozen such specimens in
erosion exposures on the High Hain. They occur in the
same general circumstances as Plainview, Clovis and Folsom
Fluted, and perhaps also Scottsbtuff Yuma points, all of
which are represented in the Parks collections. The Parks
are unusually keen observers, and if any of their specimens
had been in association with animal remains, they would
have been the first to note this fact. There is every reason
to expect that such discoveries will be made in this vicinity
at stations similar to the Plainview bison-bone bed.
The type in question (c) is similar to (a) in its lanceolate shape, but in general ranges to considerably greater
length, up to five inches and possibly more; it is a thick oval
in cross-section, the lower end tapers evenly with straight
edges to the narrow base, which is commonly, if not always,
convex. The edges are well smoothed from the widest part
to the base, and many specimens are deeply patlnated on
both faces. The leaf or lanceolate shape, widest atthe middle, the long, tapered proximal end with smooth edges~ the
thickness, and convex base form an unmistakable combination.
There remains some possibility that a, b, and c will work
out into one type with several variations, but it is my opinion
at present that such is not the case. While we do not know
their age, anyone familiar with them can hardly escape the
impression that many belong to the same general horizon
as the other points discussed, namely, a long period during
which the large Pleistocene animals were becoming extinct.
Some examples of al! three of these unnamed types are obviously re-chipoed, at times showing fresh scars tbrougl~ the
patina, and these may be regarded as re-used by later, perb.a,s even near-historic peoples. However, this is not true
o~ such examples as those in the Parks collections.

24

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The three unnamed types just mentioned do not exhaust
our problem of unraveling the "Folsom-Yuma" projectile
point conflicts by far. There is little doubt that still others
will be recognized over North America, once the student becomes accustomed to the idea that the fiield is wide open for
new suggestions, and a very considerable range of types can
already be seen.
CONCLUSIONS

It has, of course, been impossible to treat adequately the
subject of projectile points of "early man" in North America
in a short paper. The statements are not fully explained or
documented, for this would require a volume. We have
also confined the study in the main to the so-called i’FolsomYuma" series. This article was prompted in the first place
by the writer’s experiences with professional and amateur
archaeologists on the subject of how to recognize certain
types of projectile points. Many persons far better qualified, ’and with much longer experience in this field, have
written on various aspects of "early man" and his artifiacts,
but it is clear that the type names agreed upon at Santa Fe
in 1941 have not "caught on" very widely. I shall be satisfied if this article serves to stimulate others to using these
type names, and to appreciate the fact that many actually
distinct types have been loosely lumped in most persons’
minds as some kind of "Folsom", some kind of "Yuma", or
something vaguely in between. The plate is intended to
show how these forms tend to break up, and the several types
readily recognized in most cases. It is also stressed that still
other distinct types will be revealed by more work. In the
meantime, the following conclusions are offered:
1. Identification of the three known fluted types, the
three Yuma types, Plainview, Browns Valley, two Sandia
types, and at least three others not yet named, is a relatively
easy problem in the field of oroiectile points. The many
cases of "overlappln~ features" prove not to be so formidable
once one realizes that they resulted from trying to force

Certain Projectile Points o] the Early American Hun$~rs

25

several really distinct types into two categories, ~’Folsom"
and "Yuma".
2. The term "Folsom point" should be restricted to one
single type, the true or classic Folsom Fluted (see g’~nd h
in the plate), and completely abandoned for any other
type. Clovis Fluted is distinct and should .be called so.
’Ohio Fluted" is not yet well defined, but the name will do
for many specimens in the eastern United States until examples discovered in place permit a better knowledge of its
variations. At any rate, "fluted point" is not synonymous
with "Folsom point"!
3. Little is known of the precise association of the types
discussed here with p~rticular animal species. The problem
is difticult because of the scarcity of such finds, and because
we cannot expect the hunters to have slaughtered more than
one or two kinds of game in one spot. However, correct
terminology will help, and cave sites may show where different animals were consumed. At least the general tendencies of association between projectile types and animal species
(as Clovis Fluted with mammoth) should appear eventually.
4. It is unreasonable to think ~that there was a sudden"
extinction of Late Pleistocene mammals, that all species became extinct at about the same time for some mysterious
reason, or that each species became extinct at about the same
time over vast areas. Some archaeologists tend to assume
that "extinction" marks a point in time, such as 10,000 or
15,000 years ago, promptly following the retreat of Wisconsin glacial fronts. On the other hand, the paleontologist is
accustomed to thinking of faunal changes proceeding over
periods of time; thus Pliocene fauna gradually shifted to
Early Pleistocene over some 100,000 or 200,000 years, and
similarly from Middle to Late Pleistocene the faunal changes
must have taken equally long. Although the disappearance
of Late Pleistocene fauna must have occurred in a much
shorter time, geologically speaking, it still must ’have taken
many thousands of years. The Recent therefore did not

26

Texas Archeological ~nd Paleontological Society

begin at any particular point in time, this being only a term
of convenience to indicate geological deposits too late to conrain the remains of extinct animals (unless deposited through
re-working of the material from an original source). An
association of artifacts and extinct animals does not therefore give us any set number of years. Rough guesses can
and have been made by geologists, but the archaeologist
should not accept them as "dates" on their face value. The
time is not far off when archaeologists will be able to help
geologists date these deposits in favorable circumstances, in
which case one science might have to give somewhat to the
other on datings.
5. There is also a strong tendency in archaeology to regard such a term as "FoI~om culture" or even a single "’Folsom point" as an indicator of a "’date" like 10,000 years.
Since we know that many distinct styles of projectile point
were used by early hunters over a very considerable time in
America, and there must be thousands of such artifacts still
buried for every one found so far, it would seem undeniable
that the occupation of this continent by early hunters continued for many thousands of years. Thus, while one example of a projectile point type such as Folsom Fluted may be
as old as 10,000 years, this is far from meaning that they
all are, or even most of them. One of our great problems
today is to determine so far as possible which discoveries
really demonstrate great antiquity and which do not. We
can keep our minds flexible and critical, not insisting on the
static interpretations which hold sway at present. The idea
of great age does have an inherent attraction, but the impartial mind will not be drugged by it.
6. Since our problem involves far more than "Folsom"
and ’~Yuma" points, it can be urged that these terms be
abandoned for general purposes. The term "early man"
has widespread use, and lately much abuse. Roberts has used
the term "Paleo-Indian" but objections have been raised
that we know nothing about the appearance of the earliest

Certain Projectile Points o5 the Early American Hunters

2’/

American inhabitants, only their weapons and general mode
of life. It may be offered that "early American hunters" better describes their economic life and serves as a convenient
and accurate phrase.

