Reports a~d Editorials

251

REPORTS AND EDITORIALS
Excavation at/lrrowhead Ruin

During the month of June and the first half of July of this year,
1939, Texas Technological College conducted its fourth season of
excavation at Arrowhead Ruin which is located two miles east of
Glorieta, New Mexico. Previous expeditions had been made in
1933, 1935, 1937.
Arrowhead Ruin is located on a masilla overlooking the Pecos
valley. It is in the lower Sangre De Cristo mountains and has an
elevation of 7,300 feet. Excavation rights were given to the college
by the owner, Mr. Thad C. Slaughter, in 1933.
¯ Prior to this summer, forty-two rooms and a kiva had been excavated, and three rooms and the kiva reconstructed. During this
season thirteen rooms, a passageway, and four trenches were excavated.
In all, approximately 36,000 items, including potsherds, have
been found, tabulated as to stratigraphy, and classified as to type.
The findings of the first three seasons were incorporated into a
report by Mr. William M. Pierce, now instructor in the Department
of History and Anthropology, Texas Tech, and submitted as a
Master’s thesis. The findings of 1939 are now in process of being
put into a report by Mr. J. Merrill Kayser.
There still remain three or four seasons of work for completion of
the ruin. When the ruin is completely excavated it is our intention
to issue a final report incorporating all phases of excavation and
the findings.
W. C. HOLDEN.
Lubbock, Texas.
Is the ~tmerican Mano o] Pleistocene/tge?
Several times since 1930 the writer has found mano stones in the
loose gravel of the Gibson Site close to the bottom of the vertical
bank which contains superimposed midden strata, at 24½, 27 and
30 feet below the present soil surface.
In 1930 he found a mano stone on the creek bed immediately below

252

T¢~cas A~’¢h~o~ogical ~c~ Pa~eo~tologlcal

a large hearth buried 241/~ feet deep, the hearth contained burnt
stones, charcoal and a few man-made flint flakes. The mano lay in
loose gravel as though it had just fallen out of the bank above. In
1936 another mano stone was found below the same bank. This
mano has the same type of mineral incrustation which adheres to the
paleolithic type Abilene Points (Ray) found at this site embedded
in the 241~ feet deep stratum.
In August, 1939, the writer again visited the Gibson Site, and
then saw exposed about two inches of the edge of what seemed to be
a mano stone. This was embedded firmly in the red clay, along
with some charcoal, at a depth below the present soil surface of
thirty feet. On excavating this stone he found it to be a typical mano
firmly fixed in the hard, red clay and charcoM stratum (see Plate
55, ~qos. 1, 2). The mano is just above the handkerchief in both
pictures.
This is the same Gibson Site where an elephas leg bone was found
embedded in gravel in the bank at a place a short distance farther
up the creek. This leg bone lay at approximately the same age
level, if not above that of the mano stone.
In 1937 the writer dug out a mano and portions of a metate buried
19½ feet deep in a charcoal stratum at the Hodges Site. This site
is located about thirty miles northeast of the Gibson Site. The writer
dug back into the hard silt eighteen inches to find the mano and
metate fragments. At that site the grinding implements were in a
stratum containing quantities of charcoal, burnt rocks, mussel shells,
and some flint flakes.
CYRUS N. RAY.
The Council o] Texas !lrcheologists
According to a resolution passed at the Southwestern Division A.
A. A. S., meeting in Alpine, Texas, in a conference on Texas Archeological Methods, Dr. J. G. McAllister of Texas University’s DepartPLATE

55.

Fig. 1, Showing Gibson Site Mano stone embedded in red clay near
water’s edge thirty feet below the present soil surface, Taylor County.
Fig. 2, A close-up picture of the deeply buried Mano.
Fig. 3, View of Matthews Site where hearth is shown buried over
thirty feet below the present soil surface, Shackelford County.

Repor£~ and Editorials

255

ment of Anthropology was empowered to appoint a State-wide committee, representative of the various Texas archeological regions, to
consider such problems. This committee was to meet on the night
preceding the annual convention of The Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society at Abilene, Texas. The membership of that
committee was named as follows:
1. J. Gilbert McAllister, non-voting Chairman, University of
Texas.
2.

Victor J. Smith, Sul Ross State Teachers College (West Texas).

3. W. C. Holden, Texas Technological College (Northwest
Texas).
4. Floyd V. Studer, Panhandle Plains Historical Society (Northwest Texas).
5. Cyrus N. Ray, Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society (Central West Texas).
6. Mrs. Ellen Schulz Quillin, Witte Memorial Museum (South
Texas).
7. Frank H. Watt, Central Texas Archeological Society (Central
Texas).
8.

A.T. Jackson, University of Texas (East Texas).

The committee will meet on Friday, October 27, at 7:30 P. M. at
tbe Wooten Hotel in Abilene, Texas. The annual sessions of The
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society will meet at the
same place on Saturday, October 28.

