Texas A~.cheolo~fica~ Soc~e~

386

CENTRAL TEXAS POTTERY TYPES
LEON PLAIN
(Plate 74, A-F, H, K-M)
PASTE

Method of Manufacture: Coiled.
Temper: Fine clay-grit and pulverized bone, the latter occurring perhaps more commonly than in any other type in
Texas. The bone was very finely ground and often shows
on surfaces (K, ~M).
Texture: Rather fine, very compact, tendency to break with
sharp edges.
Color: Shades of brown, gray-brown, and gray from very light
to very dark. A few sherds are reddish brown to bright
red from firing only, not filmed. Fire-mottling not common. Cores darker than surfaces, brown to black.
Surface finish:
polished.

Ranges from poorly smoothed to somewhat

Wall thickness: 3 to 8 ram.
Lip: Rounded and flush with rim or turned outward slightly.
Base: Flat and same thickness as side wall in some cases,
possibly convex and somewhat thickened in others; very
few found.

Vessel shape and size: Sherds indicate more or less hemispherical bowls, and jars with high vertical rims, bodies
bulging outward only slightly below rim zone (A, H, K; K
is largest part of vessel for this type yet examined). A
single round knob below the rim (B) and two loop handles
in same position (C, D) are only examples of appendages
which may belong to this type." Holes for suspension or
crack repair occur rarely (H).
DECORATION

None.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Associated with Central
Tonkawa Indians.

Texas

Aspect,

and

possibly

with

DISTRIBUTION
Central part of Texas, particularly in drainage basin of Colorado River and tributaries, but also extending westward

PLATE 74

Texas Archeological Society

388

at least as far as Uvalde and San Angelo. Very scarce on
most sites, often only a half dozen such sh’erds being present; other sites have produced 100 or more, but not enough
to restore individual vessels. Trade pottery from Caddoan
units of East Texas, particularly Frankston Focus, commonly occur on same sites as Leon Plain.

ESTIMATED AGE
May have existed for several centuries prior to 18th century;
not proved to have been present in historic times but this
is possible.
R]~F]~RENCE~
Krieger, 1946, pp. 166-167.

MISCELLANEOUS
(Plate 74, G, I-J, N)
GENERAL NO’I~ES
A few Central Texas potsherds have been designated "Doss
Red Ware" by Kelley (1947, p. 123), who does not describe
them except as "thin potsherds with sand and bone temper,
and a red washed semi-polished surface". The pottery we
have designated Leon Plain does not have a wash or film,
but some sherds are bright red as a result of firing temperatures. On the other hand, certain sherds which do have
faint remnants of a red wash on a cream or pale yellow
background (G), are not tempered with sand or bone, but
with abundant small particles of a white mineral substance, probably volcanic in origin.
Almost identical
sherds, even including a faint red wash, are found in
the Huastecan archeological area on the east coast of
Mexico, where they belong to Period V (Buena Vista
Period: see Du Solier, Krieger, and Griffin, 1947). Thus,
if the "Doss ,Red Ware" should be proved to be trade ware
from the Huastecan area, a date of about 1000 to 1100 A. D.
would be indicated.

Brushed utility ware occurs in Central Texas, mainly as trade
pottery from Frankston Focus in East Texas. Occasionally,
however, brushed pottery appears to have been made in
the central area. Specimens I, I" are parts of one such
vessel, a jar with high rim brushed vertically, body brushed
horizontally and diagonally, and a row of fingernail puncrates at the rim-body junction. Specimen J is very faintly
brushed. Incised decoration is very rare on pottery apparently made in this area; N is an example which in paste
and temper is similar to Leon Plain.

