NOTES ON THE W. A. MYATT SITE

By Jo~ B~ W~u~r

The Myatt Site is a buried middensite on the home ranch
of Mr. W. A. Myatt in the east-central part of Jones County,
Texas, some twenty mi!es east of Anson, Texas, and approximately the same distance north of Abilene, Texas. It
lies on the east bank of the Clear Fork of the Brazes River
~nd is at present being eroded by that stream.
Excavation of the Myatt Site was made by Texas Technological College-W.P.A. Archeological Project, during the
early summer months of 1940. The work was begun by
the writer and during a leave o£ absence Mr. Arden King
acted as archeologist through most of the later part of the
excavation. I am indebted to Mr. King for the basic field
records concerning the stratigraphy of the site. Thanks
are due also to Mr. W. A. Myatt who kindly permitted excavation on his land and to Dr. Cyrus N. Ray who located
the site.
The site lies alongside the river (Plate 6,A). A short
contributary arroyo formed by intermittent run-off rain
water has cut across the southern end of the site. To the
east and northeast there is a gentle slope to this arroyo and
lateral erosion has carried away much of the top soil dropping and exposing camp debris once contained in the stratified deposits. To the north the river banks exhibit further
cultural debris eroding from the silts.
The area chosen for excavation lies on the highest portion of the land remaining between the river and the arroyo.
A datum point (Datum A) was established approximately
midway between the river and the creek. An east-west base

* Assistance in the preparation of these materials was furnished by the personnel
of the Works Project Admi.nistration, official Project No. 13,543.

88

Texas Archeolog~cal and Pa~eontological Society

line was established through Datum A and the site staked
off in five foot squares. The deposit was removed in arbitrary levels of one foot. Specimens were individually measured and all vertical and horizontal measurements were
made from Datum A.

Excavation was initiated in three pits. Pit A was completed during the course of the work from 0 to 15 feet
south, from 75 feet east to 65 feet west from Datum A. Pit
B and Pit C were begun to check the stratigraphy revealed
in Pit A. These were joined together and completed from
40 tO 50 feet South and 0 to 25 feet East from Datum A.
Five strata (Plate 6, B) were revealed in both Pit A
and Pit B-C. Stratum 1 is primarily of aeolian deposition,
but with some indications of increments by heavy silted
floodwaters during occasional periods of river overflow. It
has largely been deposited since the abandonment of the site
as a permanent camp and very few indications of cultural
material were recovered in this stratum. It is at present
undergoing some erosion.
Stratum 2 is midden deposit and the earth is heavily impregnated with charcoal, humic material, and mussel shells.
Scattered concentration of tabular limestone fragments are
probably the remains of hearths, the broken pieces being discarded as soon as they became too small for further use
around the fire. Quantities of flint chips, mussel shells, and
small amounts of badly decayed animal bone as well as the
majority of the artifacts demonstrate that this stratum was
the zone of heaviest occupation. The greater percentage
of artifacts within the midden stratum was in the lower
portion.
Stratum 3 consists of a silt deposit of reddish-brown
sandy clay. A few artifacts, flint nodules, and chips, a
PLATE 6
A. Map of Myatt site.
B. South profile of Myatt site.

Shetch M~p of

MYATT SITE

~

house

A

LEGEND
~

~,.or~~

SOUT. 40-~,~s’r o’~

STRATUM

~

STRATUM

r---J

STRATUM

~

STRATUM

~

STRAT UM

~

U NEXCAVATED
scale in ~eet

B
Plate 6

Notes on the W. A. Myatt Site

89

small amount of charcoal and animal bone fragments were
found, for the most part concentrated in the upper six
inches o£ the stratum.

A culturally barren layer of light brown sand which in
no place exceeded three or four inches comprised Stratum 4.
Stratum 5 is a red sandy loam deposit of variable thickness which overlies the Permian limestone bedrock unconformably. The only signs of occupation from this layer
were a few bits of charcoal and some flint chips recovered
at a depth of thirteen feet.
At the west side of the site and forming the stream bank
is a small flat bench-like terrace of redeposited material. It
is of recent origin and contained no cultural material.
Although the absolute elevation of the site increases
slightly southward from Datum A the thickness of the
strata diminish and it appears that the original concentration of occupation was near the Datum and perhaps to the
north and east where erosion has deposited all cultural material on a common exposed surface.
The artifact yield of the site Was quite low. This appears robe a commonplace of the sites in the region. Ten
whole and fragmentary projectile points were found in the
excavation. Five of these (Plate 7,a-e inclusive) are of
one type an da sixth (Plate 7,f) probably belongs to the
group, although the extreme proximal end of the base is
broken, and its shape cannot be precisely determined. The
one whole point of this type is 64mm in length, 25mm in
width, and 7ram thick. These measurements seem about
typical for the speciments from this site as nearly as can be
determined. The bases are slightly concave and are usually
somewhat thinned by a short longitudinal flake. The lateral edges of the stems are mostly parallel, but occasionally
are slightly expanding. The blades are long with straight
to slightly convex lateral edges and are usually beveled and
frequently serrated. Shoulders are usually square but may
vary from sloping to slightly barbed. These points are all

90

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

from Stratum 2 or the upper portion of Stratum 3 and appear to be the most common type for the period at least in
this site.
One point (Plate 7, g) is of crude workmanship with
irregular edges and with the base unaltered from the nodule
surface on one face and from the original flake face on the
other. It is 57mm long, circa 28mm wide, and 7mm thick.
It came from a relatively deep stratigraphic position in
Stratum 3.
Plate 2h, shows a roughly chipped projectile point with
a slightly concave base, small lateral notches immediately
above the base. Above these notches one edge is straight
while the other is slightly convex and together give the
point a somewhat assymetric appearance. Its dimensions
are length 40mm, width 20mm and thickness 5mm. This
piece is from Stratum 2.
A slender, serrated projectile point (Plate 7,i) has a long
narrow stem with ~lightly expanding edges and a straight
base. It is thin and relatively well worked. Its length is
39mm, width 15mm, and thickness 4mm. This point was
found stratified close to the top of Stratum 2 in Pit B-C.
The remaining point (Plate 7,j) is a small, relatively
broad piece with a short expanding stem concave base and
slightly convex blade edges. The length is 24mm, width
16mm, and thickness 4mm. It is well worked. This specimen is from the upper part of Stratum 2.
There are 9 while and 13 fragmentary blades of varying
sizes which have been classified as knives. Of the whole
specimens, 6 have square to slightly convex bases (Plate 7,1-o
inclusive) and one each is double pointed (Plate 7,~),
round base or leaf shape (Plate 7,p) and ovoid (Plate 7,q).
Specimen 7,1 is a large crude blade broken across the center where it has a piano-convex cross section. The base is
straight, the lateral edges convex. Its length is 102mm,
width 46mm, and thickness 11mm. It is from Stratum 3.

Notes on the W. A. Myatt Site

91

Specimen 7,m has a slightly convex base, one edge nearly
straight and at a right angle to the base. The other edge is
convex and curves up to the point to form an assymetric
blade. It was found in the lowest part of Stratum 2.
A large leaf shaped blade (Plate 7,n) with slightly convex base has convex lateral edges. It was found in the lower
part of Stratum 3.
One smaller specimen (Hate 7,0) is an assymetric roughly percussion flaked blade with a square base, one straight
edge, and a convex edge curving up to the point. This
specimen is from Stratum 3.
The leaf shaped specimen (Plate 7,p) is from Stratum 1,
six inches from the surface. The base is round and the lateral edges straight.

Specimen 7,q is a roughly percussion flaked blade, thick
and ovoid in outline. It was found in Stratum 3.
The double pointed piece (Plate 7,$) was made from
a long curved flake. The piece is relatively well made, the
percussion flaking being largely obliterated along the edges
by pressure retouch. The lateral edges of the longest end
are slightly beveled. Its length is 129mm, width 39mm
and thickness 8mm. This piece was found in the contact
zone between Strata 1 and 2.
Three side and three end scrapers domprise the implements in this category.
Specimen 7,r is the finely retouched edge of a narrow
flake. It is from Stratum 3, as is specimen 7,s. This piece is
from a large flake and has a minimum of retouching along
the cutting edge. The rest of the specimen is unaltered.
The specimen in Plate 7,t is a thick, tapering flake struck
from a flint boulder. Retouching was done along the thin
edge to form a scraping edge. This piece was found in
Stratum 2.

92

Texas Archeological and Pal~ontologica~ Society

Two of the end scrapers (Plates 7,u and 7,v) are from
Stratum 3. They are both made of thick flakes worked to a
rounded end, scraping edges beveled at an acute angle. One
of the pieces (Plate 7,u) has what may have been used as a
graver worked along the scraping edge.
The specimen shown in Plate 7,w has a thick beveled
scraping edge much polished by usage. It was found in
Stratum 2.
A single graver was found (Plate 7,x).
was not recorded on this specimen.

The location

Animal bones were present in very small quantity, but
were badly decomposed and for the most part were not salvagable. The distal end of the cannon bone of a young buffalo was found, and the right mandile of a beaver (Castorides sO.)
Basically the site is a one-phase occupation site. As
has been noted in the d,~scussion of the physical stratigraphy
of the site, the majority of the artifacts came from the upper
part of Stratum 3, the red sandy layer and the midden,
Stratum 2, which was built on the exposed surface of Stratum 3. Seven of ten projectile points found (Plate 7,
and i) are typical of the Brazos Culture,’ as agreed upon
by Ray and Sayles. Although, because of the smallness of
the series the result may be a happenstance of associatipn, all
the larger, square stemmed, concave based, and bevel bladed
points, were found in the upper part of Stratum 3 and in
the lower portion of the midden level, while the s!ender long
stemmed type was stratified above them nearly in the top of
the midden. Also, in the upper levels of the midden were
found two other projectile points. One of these (Plate 7,n)
21~ay and

Sayles,

1941.

PLATE 7
Artifacts from the Myatt site.

o

b

c

d

¯

h

v
,o
o
r

s

t

Plate 7

~

w
~

~
i

~

,~cm.
~ ioche ~;

i

j

Notes on $he W. A. Myat~ Site

is like the type projectile points for the late Edwards Plateau.’ The other (Plate 7, j) is very small and more typical
of the late projectile points found in the sand dune area
camp sites to the west and south. The remaining projectile
point (Plate 7, g) was stratigraphi~ally the earliest in the
site and is the least diagnostic. Because of its crudity and
the possibility of its having been unfinished it tells us little.
The knife forms are diagnostic of the Brazos Culture as
agreed upon by Ray and Sayles. They include the square
based types and the double pointed form. Here, however,
the double pointed knife was stratified at the extreme top
of the midden level. Moreover, one end was slightly beveled.
It was not a typical four bladed knife, however, and it probably is Brazos rather than Valley Creek Culture.
Scrapers are of both the end and side scraping varieties,
and are not particularly diagnostic.
The graver was unlocated within the site.
The paucity of artifacts makes cultural placement somewhat doubtful. The maiority of the artifacts, particularly
those of Stratum 3 and the lower t~art of the midden are diagnostic of the Brazos Culture, however, and so the major
part of the occupation is tentatively assigned to the Brazos
Culture. The upper part of Stratum 5 is not assignable because no recognizable artifacts were found associated.
It appears that a considerable amount of excavation in
both stratified and pure sites will be necessary before the
archaeology of the Abilene area ;s fully known.
~Sayles, 1935

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sayles, E. B., "An Areheological Survey of Texas," Gila Pueblo, 193L Medallion
Papers, XVII.
Ray, C. N., and Sayles, E. B. "An Agreement on Abilene Region Terminology,"
Bulletin of The Texas Arcbeological and Paleonlological Society, Vol. 13, 1941.

