Texas Archeological Society

396

SPEAR POINT TYPES
ALMAGRE POINTS
(Plate 77)
DESCRIPTION
Outline:
Broad triangular to leaf-shaped blade with edges
fairly straight in some cases (J, N, P) but usually convex.
Chipping very crude and one edge may be straighter than
other (E, F, K). Shoulders vary from weak to wide and
right-angular; no good barbs. Stems contracting, sometimes pointed (I, M) and sometimes approaching parallel
edges (L). Bases convex, concave, pointed, but seldom
straight because of crude workmanship. Usually thick and
heavy; might be considered as unfinished examples of
types such as Gary (Plate 94) and Lang$ry (Plate 98) but
distribution distinct from both.
Dimensions: Total length 6 to 10 cm., average 7 or 8 cm. Maximum width 3 to 5 cm.; thickness 0.5 to 1.5 cm. While
thinnest and smallest examples are well within range of
"dart points" as described in other types herein, the largest
and thickest ones appear far too heavy for such function
and would have served better as spear or lance points. If
so, it is interesting to note that there are only t~vo such
"spear" types in Texas, the other being the Pogo points of
northeast Texas (Plate 78).
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
In Texas the distribution is about same as Langtry and Shumla
points (Plates 98., 119), characteristic of ,Pecos River Focus
and also occurring as minor types in Falc6n Focus, but
whereas the latter two types do not extend far into northeastern Mexico, the Almagre type continues as far south
as southern Tamaulipas (Information from MacNeish).
An ancient connection with the Gary type of East Texas
seems possible, but if so this basic form was never used
to any extent in the large intervening area of Central
Texas; both Gamj and Almagre. points are exceedingly rare
there and the few known specimens appear to be intrusive
from both east and west, as seen in the grades of flint
used.
DISTRIBUTION
See paragraph above:
ESTIMATED AGE
May have appeared earliest in southern Tamaulipas, some
thousands of years before Christ, and lasted longest in
Pecos River Focus, until perhaps 500 A. D. or later. In
Falc6n Reservoir area, lower Rio Grande, type apparently
associated with middle post-glacial Rosita Terrace, roughly
between 3000 B. C. and time of Christ.
REFERENCES
Named by R. S. MacNeish, manuscript in preparation on archeology of southern Tamaulipas.

4

5

6

7

PLATE 77

8:9

|~

Texas Archeological Society

398

POGO POINTS
(Plate 78)
DESCRIPTION
Outline: Large triangular to leaf-shaped blade with considerable variation in edges from concave to straight and
convex. Shoulders vary from small (B, C) to square (G,
I, K, L) and well barbed (E, H, J). Stem slightly to
strongly contracting in some cases, parallel-edged in others. Base straight to convex.
Dimensions:

Total length varies from about 8 to 15 cm.

Stem

¥4 to 1/7 of total length. Maximum width 4 to 6 or 7 cm.,
usually across shoulders but may be farther forward (E).
Pogo points appear much too large for use on atlatl darts,
for in addition to large dimensions they are thick and
heavy; it is supposed they were used on spears or’ lances.
Perhaps more than one type is indicated, for some may be
nothing more than very large Gary points (A-C, K).
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Some found on non-pottery sites and presumed to belcng to
East Texas Aspect of Archaic Stage. Others occur on pottery sites which appear to belong exclusively to one or
another of the Caddoan foci, from which it is suspected that
the type may have been made until historic times, or nearly
so. Many of the specimens are made of novaculite, a material found in western Arkansas and eastern Oklahomai
others are ferruginous sandstone, flint, or chert.
DIS’TR ~IBUTION
Occurs sporadically in northeast Texas, never common on any
one site. Also occurs in adjacent parts of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Oklahoma, and perhaps more widely; no distribution study has been made.

ESTI~MATED AGE
Possibly from some time before Christ to early European times.
REFERENCES.

Ncne.

PLATE 78

