S~e C~dtures Near Cer~o Pedernal

9

STONE CULTURES NEAR CERRO PEDERNAL
AND THEIR GEOLOGICAL ANTIQUITY~
BY KIRK BRYAN

The present active interest in the early human cultures of the New
World has been largely focused on the cultures associated with
extinct animals. These were hunting or food-gathering peoples
apparently quite different from the American Indian. Geologic
studies indicateI that at least one of these cultures, the Folsom, is
of considerable antiquity and presumably many of the other cultures associated with extinct animals are also old. In consequence,
the interval of time between Folsom man and the earliest Puebloan
or other strictly Amerindian peoples is a long one. Many new
groups of people may have entered the New World and many cultural phases may have developed during this time.
The present paper records the finding of a stone culture in north
central New Mexico, here called the Los Encinos culture, which
seems on geologic grounds to find a place in this interval. The
artifacts of tiffs culture hre l£rge, made by percussion chipping, and
in marked contrast to the relatively delicate points and other tools
of the earlier cultures. However, they closely resemble the artifacts
of the stone cultures of Texas and Oklahoma which have already
been accorded some measure of antiquity. It seems probable that
the Los Encinos culture lies in the great time interval pre-Amerindian
and post-Folsom.
Geologically, this study indicates that alternate periods of erosion
and alluviation on streams furnish a chronology of late Quaternary
time and that similar sequences are found in widely separated localities. It seems clear, however, that local chronolgies cannot be completely reconciled with one another until the stone cultures contained
in the alluvium are better understood.
A preliminary investigation of the Cerro PedernaI area was made
in 1937, as already recorded.2 Five days of field work in 1938
*Shaler Memorial Series.
1.

Bryan, Kirk, and Ray, I_~ui~ L., Antiquity of the Lindenmeler Mte: Smithson.

Misc. Coll. (In press).
2.
Bryan, Kirk, Pre-hi~torie quarries and iml~lement~ of pre-Araerindian aspect in
New Mexico: Science n. &, voL 87, pp. 343-346, 1938.

10

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

yielded much additional information and an enlarged collection.
It is obvious, however, that the area and the culture must have further investigation before definitive results can be obtained.
Geology el the Cerro Pedernal

./lr6"a3

Cerro Pedernal is a well-known peak on the north flank of the
Jemez Mountains in Rio Arriba County, New Mexico. It has a
maxiznum elevation of 9,857 feet and stands about 3,000 feet above
the broad lowland of the Lower Chama Valley (Plate 1). The
Spanish word "pedernal" means "flint" and it seems likely that the
name is a translation of an Indian term of similar meaning for in
the Tewa language this peak is called Tsiping,’~ which means "flint
mountain."
In the vicinity of Cerro Pedernal, the rocks consist of flat-lying
sedimentary and volcanic beds which range in age from Permian
to Recent. Cerro Pedernal itself is composed of Tertiary rocks resting on Cretaceous sandstone. Near the base of the Tertiary, at an
elevation of about 8,500 feet, the Pedernal cherts crops out. This
bed, to be discussed later in detail, formed the source of the artifacts
whose discovery led to the present paper. Above the chert lie tuff
beds which are capped by the remaaants of a basalt flow.
Great and extensive landslides mantle the slopes of Cerro Pedernal. They consist largely of fragments of the basalt that forms the
flat summit of the mountain, but fragments of all the other rocks
of the mountain including the chert occur in them. Most of the
landslide masses are probably of considerable antiquity for streams
have cut valleys in them that attain depths of 100 feet or more. The
extent of the landslide movement is indicated by the presence of
masses of debris three or four miles north of the mountain. These
masses are mere caps on hills now entirely isolated by the extensive
3. Further details of the geology will be found in:
Smith, H. T. U., Tertiary Geology of the Abiquiu Quadrangle: gout. Geol., vol. 46,
Church, F. S., and Hack, J. T., ~ ~xhum~ e~sion surfa~ on San Ped~ Moun~ln,
Tierra Amarlll~ County, New Mexico: Jour. G~I. (In pr~).
4. Hib~n, F. C., Excavation of ~e ~ana ]Ruin and Chama Yall~ ~rv~: Univ.
New Mex. Bull. (An~mp. Set.), voL 2, V~ 1, p. 1~, and PL VA, 1937.
5. No~: The m~ori~ of Ameri~n g~log~ u~ the te~ "che~" ~ the name
of any fin~in~ chalcedonic ~ck. They ~e~e the ~ "£1i~t" tot matv~al
work~ or ~ ~ work~ into art~fac~.

PLATE 1.
:Map of the Cerro Pedernal and adjacent ar~a redrawn from the
U. S. Geological Survey’s Gallina topographic sheet.

106° 30’
0

05

I0

15

~0

Scale oF

Plate 1

~5

Ston¢ Culture.s Near Cerro Pedsrnal

13

erosion that has occurred since the original movement. The phenomenon of extensive and ancient landsliding is not confined to
Cerro Pedernal but is also characteristic of much of the mountain
front to the west.

There are stream deposits of two categories in the area, including
alluvium of several ages and pediment gravels. The pediment
gravels arc not important here. The alluvium is three-fold in charaeter and is typically developed in the valley of the Rito de los
Eneinos, a small stream just west of Cerro Pedernal (Plate 1).
The Rito de los Encinos is a tributary of the Rio PuertoO which
in turn joins the Chama River. It has a small perennial flow and
irrigates fields near the village of Youngsville, locally called E1
Rito.

Its valley lies incised in the remnants of old erosion surfaces

which now stand above it as gravel-capped spurs and small, flattopped ridges. The valley flares out below Youngsville into a broad
alluvial plain with island-like hills of sandstone. It ends suddenly
at the brink of the shallow canyon occupied by the Rio Puerco.
The Rito and its companion streams are held to a high level by the
massive Permian sandstone which forms the walls of the canyon.
The alluvium that fills the valley of the Rito may be divided into
three types (Plate 2). These three fills, here called the Early
Alluvium, the Intermediate Alluvium, and the Late Alluvium, differ
largely as to color, compactness and humus content.

The Early Alluvium has a more reddish color than the other
types. It is also more firm and compact not only in the gravelly
beds but also in the finer-grained beds. No trace of human occupation was found, but near the point A, Plate 1, a fragment of Probescidian tusk, too small and decayed to be more closely identified, was
found.
The Intermediate Alluvium is less compact than the Early Alluvium and contains more humus. Its gravelly beds are cemented by
lime carbonate to form masses relatively resistant to erosion. Here
were found large flint chips in considerable quantity and several
impleraents to be more partieularly described.
6. l~ote: There are two other R|o Puercos tn l~ew Mexico, beth larger and better
known.
"l~he R|o Puerto (of the East) is a tributary of the Rio Grande ~ the Rio
Puerto (of the West) flow~ into Ariffiona and is a tributary of the Little Colorado.

14

Texas A~’eheological and Pa~eon$olog~cal Society

The Late Alluvium is loose and friable. Its finer materials, sandy
clays and loams, are bro~wa with humus and its deposition was but
recently interrupted by the cutting of the existing arroyo. Its surface represents the floodplain abandoned by the stream when it
began to cut the present arroyo. The date at which the present
arroyo-cutting began has not been determined historically, but it is
clearly recent and presumably falls in the period since 1885 when
most of the arroyos of the area were deepened and widened. The
Late Alluvium contains a few charcoal hearths and many flint chips.
It is notable that these chips are all small and thin and such as
would result from the manufacture of the relatively small, chipped
implements used by peoples of the Pueblo culture.
The two younger bodies of alluvium occupy most of the valley
south of the main road passing through Youngsville. It is obvious
that the Late Alluvium occupies a large gully in the Intermediate
Alluvium which forms most of the valley floor. The Early Alluvium appears in the banks of the present arroyo near the road and
north of the road occupies both banks of the present arroyo. During
the time of the deposition of the two younger alluviums, the stream
probably had a somewhat more easterly course in the area north
of the road.
These three bodies of alluvium record three periods of alluviation
when the Rito de los Encinos built a broad floodplain. Each of
these periods was followed by a period of dissection during which
the stream excavated a broad gully in the floodplain (Plate 2). It
appears that the dissection following the deposition of the Early
Alluvium was severe and perhaps prolonged as the alluvium was
almost entirely removed from the area of the valley south of the
road. The gully formed by the dissection of the Intermediate
Alluvium was smaller in size and very little larger than the present
arroyo.
It seems probable that other streams of the vicinity had a similar
history, but field work has not been extended to thern. Somewhat
similar conditions of alternate erosion and sedimentation are known
on other streams of the Southwest. As these events occurred in part
PLATE

2.

Idealized cross-ssction of the valley of the Rito de los Encinos showing the three-fold division of the valley alluvium.

St~one Cultures Near Cerro Pederr~l

17

at least during the occupation of the area by prehistoric peoples, a
chronology of the changes in the streams becomes also a chronology
of the cultures. Furthermore, the cultures become tools for the
interpretation of these geologic events.
The Peder,~ Chert

The Pedernal chert is a member of the Tertiary Abiquiu formation
whose type locality is an area of badlands in the vicinivy of the
of Abiquiu, east of Cerro Pedernal. The work of Church and Hack7
shows that the chert horizon is locally persistent. They have traced
it (or beds of similar chert at the same horizon) westward in the
Mesa de Grulla and Mesa Valdez to San Pedro Mountain, a total
distance of 20 miles. They found that it is associated with and
grades into limestone so that the chert seems to be a replacement of
limestone by silica. Further study must precede complete solution
of the problem of origin.
The chert is commonly white to pearly gray in color though in
places the color may vary considerably. Near the base and sometimes near the top tho chert ~ows bands ¼ to ½ inch thick and is
Mack in color. In pla~es near the top, weathering has changed the
color to pink, red, or yellow. The red color also occurs as flecks
or spots in the white to pearly gray mass. Generally the yellow
color is associated with clear, very translucent phases of the chert.
This translucent type usually occurs in small masses near the top
of the bed.
Hack’s study of thin sections shows that the greater part of the
mass consists of chalcedony in long, thin fibres. There are many
spherulites and clusters of granular quartz. Small quartz crystals
line small, open cavities and cracks which, in places, form linear
patterns in the mass. Grains of feldspar and more or less rounded
quartz, obviously sand grains, occur sparingly. In places, the:re are
single crystals or small masse of calcite, particularly in localities
where ~he chert passes over into limestone.
The chert is remarkably free from flaws and joints. Joints are
widely spaced and the other flaws and imperfections in the chert
are not numerous so that masses of clear, sound flint 2 to 3 feet in
Church. F. S., and Hack, John T., Supra~

Tezas A~’¢lreolog"ie~ and Paleorttologic~ Society

18

diameter can be obtained. The material breaks by conchoidal fracture with almost equal facility in any direction. Examination of
quarry fragments shows that the aboriginal flint workers were only
occasionally hampered by the quartz-lined cavities and other original
flaws and defects of the material. Flat surfaces with the delicate
tracery of "feather breaks" are quite common and in marked contrast to the conchoidal breaks.
The color and variations in color, the "feather breaks," and the
character of the flaws all provide criteria for the identification of
the material. The large size of the pieces furnishes a further, if
negative, criterion. There is no other known source of chert in north
central New Mexico from which such large pieces can be easily
obtained. Artifacts made from the chert and found at localities
40 to 80 miles from Cerro Pedernal have already been identified.s
The Quarries
The main quarry on Cerro Pedernal has already been described.9
This quarry lies on the southwest side of the peak (Plate 1, Locality
1). There are two other quarry sites (Plate 1, Localities 2 and 3),
but there the quantity of quarry refuse is small. The chips from
these two localities are also small in size indicating that these quarries were either worked by later peoples than those who worked the
main site or that later peoples have carried off the quarry refuse.
The quarry refuse at the main site, as shown by a small pit, Is 1½
feet deep and composed of large fragments and chips. It contains
implements in various stages of manufacture similar to those found
on the surface of the quarry refuse. There are also a few hammerstones made of fragments of basalt from the cliffs above or of river
pebbles of quartzite from the Chama River or the Tertiary gravels.
The ~4rti/acts
General Considerations
The interpretation of artifacts found in quarries is beset with dif~L

Bryan, Kirk. and Butler, A. P., Jr,, Artlfaets made from the glassy

~y, ~uia ~, A~ifa~ ~ f~m ~ flint of ~ P~: ~len~

~).
9.

B~n, Kirk, ~i&, p. 343,

PLATE 3.
A. Large biface of primitive aspect, presumably a stage in the
manufacturing o£ other implements. Locality 1 (quarry).
B. Crude ax found near Locality C (Intermediate Alluvium).

®

Plate 3

S$on~ Cultures Ne~" Cerro Pedernal

21

ficulties. Obviously such artifacts can be put in three main categories: (1) tools u~ in quarrying or in fashioning artifacts; (2)
rejects, or’artifacts partially or imperfectly made and rejected; (3)
"blanks" or partially fabricated or conventionally shaped pieces to
be carried away and elsewhere fabricated. Such a classification is
based on the assumption, which cannot be wholly true, that no perfectly fabricated artifacts were lost in the d6bris and that no artifacts
were locally used except for quarrying.
The theory that blanks are common features of quarry refuse has
been argued at length by Holmeslo who, in 1894, investigated a
quarry site in what is now Oklahoma, seven miles northwest of
Seneca, Mo., and 10 miles southeast of Baxter Springs, Kau. Here
over an area of four or five acres he found numerous pits and great
quantities of chips and fragments of flint. He found partly formed
and almost complete implements taking the form of "blades" or
"disks" which he interpreted as "blanks." He held that the quarries were worked by professionals over a long but relatively continuous interval of time. Further, because of the suitability of the
material and the skill of the workman, the shapes produced were
predetermined and at certain pits only certain shapes were made; at
others all the local forms were made, perhaps by the same workman.
The illustrations, of Holmes’ paper, both photographs and drawings, show bifaces made by percussion chipping. Mostly they are
large, thick ovals. In size they range from a maximum 18 by 10
inches and 6 inches thick (45x25x15 c~n.) to 4x2 inches and ½ of an
inch in thickness (10xSxl.2 cm.). The average length would not
exceed 6 inches. This average is about the usual size of hand axes
of the Paleolithic cultures. He Mso gives an illustration (see Fig. 7)
of a thin but broken blade which is leaf-shaped and about ~ of an
inch (1 cm.) in maximum thickness. As restored, it is 5 inches long
and nearly 2 inches wide (12.5x5 cm.). Other objects shown include
bifaces that could be used as choppers although Holmes considers
that they (see his PI. 9, a and b) are merely cores from which flakes
were removed. He also gives an illustration (see his P1. 9, c) of a
large flake struck from a core and resembling a ’q~evallois" flake.
One edge seems to have been retouched either to shape the edge or by
use. It is what is usually called a high-backed or carinate scraper.
10,
Holmes, W. l-L, An Ancient (~uarry in Indian Territor~; Smtthson. Inst. l~r.
Ethnol. Bull. U..,~I, pp. 1-19, 1894.

22

Texas Archeologizal a~wl P~teon$ological Soci¢ly

He also gives illustrations of two cores each with flat and parallel
striking platforms and trapezoidal cross-section. Such corcs are, as
Holmes infers, suitable for the systematic production of thin flakes.
Hohnes considers that none of these forms is a final form but that
all except the cores are "blanks" or rejected, partially formed
"blanks." These blanks were to be carried elsewhere for final finishing. This is an ingenious theory which might be accepted except for
three considerations: (1) the forms are usable as they stand without
further shaping; (2) as blanks for further elaboration they appear
because of their t~ckness to be unusable if the ordinary scrapers
or arrow points of the late Indians are to be made; (3) bifaees of
similar aspect have been found in the Burnt Rock Mounds of Texas11
in circumstances which indicate that they were in use as implements.
It would seem that further investigation would bring to light the
habitation sites of the quarrymen and demonstrate that the greater
part of the forms were used as manufactured in the quarry.
Holmes argues at length on the comparative recency of the work,
basing his argument on the freshness of the chips, the form of the
pits, and the youthfulness of the trees. This line of argument is
strictly qualitative. Few things are as resistant to weathering as a
well-drained pile of flint chips. The age of the trees growing in
the quarry refuse, estimated at 75 years, is interesting evidence, but
as fires in these woods have occurred on numerous occasions in the
past, the age of the present forest merely records the length of time
back to the last fire. One "aged" oak on the edge of a quarry pit,
with its roots almost wholly in the rock rather than the refuse heap,
is thought to have been growing when the pit was worked. This
argumentation seems faulty, the tree roots may have avoided the
quarry refuse as too dry an environment in favor of uhe cracks in the
bed-rock.
It seems entirely possible that such pits might persist for a period
as great as 1000 o~ even 5000 years. Their antiquity must be deII. Jackson, A. T., The Fall Cr-~k S|~: Annual Report W. P. A. and Unive~i~
of Te~s Arc~ ~s. ~ke Buchanan, 19~37: Unive~i~ of Te~ Bull. No. $$~, p.
I01 e~ al., Fig 27 (N~. 2 and 3), 1988.

PLATE 4.
A. Ax of massive cross-section resembling a celt, possibly for use
in the quay. Locality 1 (quarry).
B. Small biface of ax-like form. Locality 1 (quarry).

®

®

Plate

Stone Cultures Near Ce~’ro Pedernat

25

tided on that of the stone culture. The large implements made by
percussion resemble those of Texas cultures such as the lower part
of the Burnt Reek Mound culture, Edwards Plateau culture, and
Clear Fork culture, all of which have claims to some antiquity.
The artifacts from the Cerro Pedernal quarry are interpreted as
quarry tools and partially fabricated implements intended for use.
The theory of "blanks" seems unacceptable because of the argument heretofore made with regard to the Oklahoma quarry, and
further because certain types have been found in the Intermediate
Alluvium which show evidence of wear and use. Until such time as
caches of "blanks" are found in camp.sites associated with the
artifacts made from them, the theory seems to be an argument without substantiation.

A large proportion of the artifacts found in the quarry are large
bifaces ranging from 3~z~ to 6~ inches (9 to 16 cm.) in length.
Some were made by taking out deep scalloped chips, and others
with flatter flakes. They resemble the large hand-axes of the Paleolithic, particularly the Abbevillian, as shown in Plate 3, A. It
appears that these bifaces were made as part of a sequence of manufacture. They are the cores from which flakes of "Levallois" type
were struck as discussed on a previous page. However, a massive
hiface illustrated in Plate 3, B, was found in a gravel bed in the
Intermediate Alluvium near Locality C, Plate 1. This implement
is worn and stream-rolled but it also shows small chips such as
would result from use on its cutting edge, Plate 3, B).I~’ If this
implement was. actually used, it may be that some of the massive
bifaces were intended for use and were not made merely as stages
in a process.
Several bifaces measuring 5 to 5½ inches (13 to 14 cm.) long have
a massive almost rectangular cross-section (see Plate 4, A). They
resemble crude celts and one of them has been much used so that
its almost square end or pene is much battered. These implements
could not have been effectively used unless halted but no groove or
other indication of a haft is present. Closely related to these axes
are a group of similar size and mass. The cross--section is, however,
I2. In all the illustrations the supposed cutting or useful edge Is placed at the top.
The implements are all repre~l,t~l at exactly half their natural sl~.

26

Texas Arcb~ological and Palcontological Soviety

lozenge-shaped rather than rectangular. The artifact illustrated in
Plate 4, B, is made of very clear, pearly gray flint and is somewhat smaller than most of the "axes" of this category. In a broad
way, they all resemble rough "celts." They are all so well-~aped
and so thick as to preclude the possibility that they were intended
to be "blanks" from which other implements could be produced. It
may be that they were used in the quarry as hammers although of
the numerous specimens that belong to th~-e two categories only
one shows much use.
The ax.like form represented by the specimen illustrated in
Plate 5, A, has a less massive cross-section and a better edge on all
sides. There are two or three of these specimens which may perhaps
be best regarded as attempts to make an oval blade which were
failures because of too great a thickness.
Five specimens are of unusual interest as they have the general
form of the "axes" previously described although somewhat slimmer in cross-section. All of ahem, however, have the characteristic,
well-brought out in Plate 5, B, that the cutting edge at one end has
an axis offset to the axis of the main part of the implement by 30
degrees. This twist in the axis begins about 1½ inches (4 cm.) from
the end of the implement on all specimens and is obviously an intentional feature. This type has been referred to as the "twisted ax"
largely, because the specimens are about the size and general shape
of the "celt.like" axes. However, it seems more probable that this
is a chiseI-like tool intended to be lmfted up to the point of the
twist. If held in the hand with the axis vertical, the edge beyond
the twist is at right-angles to the axis of the fore-arm. Held in this
fashion, the purpose of the twist appears to be to place the cutting
edge in a convenient position. As none of the specimens show signs
of use, they may all be somewhat imperfectly made and this interpretation may need to be later modified when used specimens have
been found.
Choppers
Various stone cultures of the Southwest have chopper types of
PLATE 5.
A. Small biface of ax-like form, Locality 1 (quarry).
B. "Twisted ax," a biface with axis of cutting edge, turned 30 degrees from the main axis. Locality 1 (quarry).

®

®

Plate 5

29

artifact.v13 Many of the bifaces of this collection have a welldeveloped cutting edge on one lateral side and a blunt edge on the
other. The specimen illustrated on Plate 6, A, is typical of many
found in the quarry site. The cutting edge is sinuous, formed by
alternately placed, strongly marked chips. The specimen on Plate 8,
A, was found in the Intermediate Alluvium at Localit~ B, Plate 1.
Here the alluvium contains much sidehill slump from the hill adjacent on the west. There are many large chips such as would be produced in making such an implement. The chopper shows no signs
of wear. The specimen illustrated in Plate 7, A, was found in the
cemented gravel of the Intermediate Alluvium near Locality C,
Plate 1. It has been much worn by stream action and there is a
retouch on the cuffing edge as if it had been used.
"Leva//ois" Flakes and Derivative Scrapers
¯ One of the characteristic forms found in the quarry d6bris is a
large flake struck from a biface. These flakes give a pseudo-Paleolithic aspect to the collection as they are associated with large bifaces
of generalized forms like the specimen illustrated in Plate 3, A.
These flakes, as illustrated in Plate 10, A, have on one face the
strongly marked percussion chipping of the large hifaces and on the
other a single conchoidal break showing a strong bulb of percussion.
The size of the bulb of percussion is reduced in this specimen by a
chip which may have broken out at the instant of formation of the
bulb or may have been afterwards struck out. The flake was struck
from a platform having an inclination of about 60 degrees to the
newly struck face. This platform was made by a succession of
definite small chips whose forms are still preser,¢ed. It is obvious
that this flake and its companions were formed by a technique
similar to that of the European Paleolithic. There is, however,
reason to believe that this was merely a stage in the process of
fabrication, of scrapers.
The scraper illustrated in Plate 7, B, was found in the arroyo
bed near Locality A, Plate 1. It had evidently just fallen out of
the bank and still retains some of the calcium carbonate cement
characteristic of the pebbles and artifacts of the Intermediate
Alluvium. The scraper has on one side two broad, flat chips; on
13. F. W. and W. tL Campbell and others, Southwest Mus. Papers, No.
pp., 1937. Eap. ~iOn of artifact~ by C. ,A_ Ana~d~n.

11o llS

3O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Soc~y

the other side it has a single, not wholly perfect, conchoidal brmak.
Its resemblance to the "Levallois" type of flake rests largely on the
definite chipped and prepared platform from which it was struck.
The edges apparently have been chipped both through intention and
by use. These smaller chips and the main edges and faces are all
water-worn like other artifacts found in this alluvium.
The end-scraper or snub-nosed scraper illustrated in Plate 8, B,
was found in the quarry d~bris. It, also, was struck from a prepared platform on a biface. It has been retouched to give it the
snub-nosed end, but apparently was never used. It seems likely
that it was rejected because the strongly concave chip near the end
gave it a weak edge. The platform is small and, in the illustration,
it is impossible to show the minute and careful chipping by which
it was prepared.
The artifact illustrated in Plate 10, B, was found in the quarry
d~bris. It is roughly similar to the other scrapers in form in that
one side was made by a single conchoidal break from a platform.
The platform is, however, a break on a joint and the face is imperfectly conchoidal. Further, this appears to have been at least the
second flake struck as the main face (left in Plate 10, B) is largely
a conchoidal break. The flake has been retouched so as to form a
good edge and may have been used although the signs of wear are
obscure. In this artifact, the technique is imperfect and also pre.
sumably the material broke more irregularly than the artisan expected.
Points or

Blades

Two specimens from the quarry d~bris are broad, flat blades. The
better one of these specimens is illustrated in Plate 9, A. It is
roughly leabshaped and made by percussion chipping from the
edges of a thin slab of flint bounded by two flat breaks. It seems
likely that fltis is a reject which could not be sufficiently reduced
in thickness. Though rougher and heavier it is not greatly different
in shape from the numerous leaf-shaped blades found in cultures of
various ages in the Plains area.
PLATE 6.
A. Biface with lateral edge, "chopper" type. Locality 1 (quarry).
B. Small biface of pointed oval form. Found on surface of high
terrace southwest of Youngsville.

Plate 6

Cultures Near Cerro Pede~nal

of Europe.

37

However, invoking the principle that the youngest types

in a collection of associated artifacts determine the age, it appears
that the presence of the leaf-shaped blades and the end-scraper
places the culture within the known range of New World types. The
forms having the aspect of greatest antiquity are merely stages in
the fabrication of some of the modern types.
In the present state of knowledge, the antiquity of the culture
can be best based on the geological relations.

The culture is defi-

nitely associated with the Intermediate Alluvium from which as yet
no fossil remains have becn obtained. This alluvium is, however,
separated by a period of erosion from a still older alluvium containing remains of a Proboscidian.

It is tempting to correlate the

sequence of alluviation and erosion in this valley with similar
.sequences worked out on other streams in the Southwest.

The re-

suits of such a correlation are shown in Table 1.
It is obvious that the mere proce~ss of tabulation gives a rigidity
and definiteness to the correlation that does not in fact exist.

The

sequence on the Rito de los Encinos is three-fold, but the correlation
with the three-fold Zuni River sequence is without confirmation.
The sequence in the Hopi Country worked out by Hack16 is also
similar but there is no recognizable culture in his No. 2 fill and
this fill may be Puebloan in age as is the earlier of the two fills at
Chaco Canyon.

Furthermore, scattered finds in open sites of thin

oval scrapers and small bifaces suggest the presence of peoples of
non-Puebloan aspect in the Cerro Pedernal area. As these people
are presumably later than those represented by the Los Encinos
culture but also pre-Puebloan, there is further uncertainty on this
point. The correlation with the Alpine and Abilene areas of Texas
seems to be the most perfect. The stone culture of the Calamity
formation is very crude and its affinities will not be plain until
after publication of J. Charles Kelly’s analysis. The Clear Fork
culture is rich in types but it has not yet been proved by excavation
16. :Hack, John T., The late Qnarternary history of s~rer~l valleys of northern
Arizona: a preliminary statement: North. Ariz. ~Muse~m ~ot~, voL
~7-73, 1939.

PLATE 8.
A. Biface with lateral edge, "chopper" type, found in alluvium at
Locality B (Intermediate Alluvium).
B. End-scraper or snub-nosed scraper made from flake of "Levallois’! type. Locality 1 (quarry).

S~on~ Cultures Near Cerro Pedernal

41

that all of these types are found in the Elm Creek silts.

Much

knowledge of the transition between the relatively rich Clear Fork
culture and the crude culture of the Calamity formation is needed.
Knowledge of the still greater transition to the imperfectly known
Los Encinos culture is required before this correlation is on a firm
archeological basis.

The correlation of the Early Alluvium of this

area with the No. 1 fill of the Hopi Country and the Neville and
Durst silts of Texas is based largely on a common content of Proboscidian remains.

Even this correlation may not be exact as the

Proboscidians as a whole and even the subgroup of Elephants lived
over a long period of time and it is quite possible that beds here
correlated with the Early Alluvium may in fact have been deposited
in several different episodes and in sevdral corresponding periods
of time.
That the Chaco River has two alluviums both of which were deposited in the Puebloan period demonstrates that episodes of alluviation on one stream system may easily be missing on the other streams
and makes us pause in too hasty correlation.

Nevertheless, the table

shows that the sequences of alluviation and erosion are gradually
being brought into relation with each other, and also that, in this
process of correlation, the contained stone cultures provide a criterion of equivalent age which, as knowledge increases, will become
of greater and greater value.

zt cknowledgments
My obligations to my students and colleagues who called my
attention to the main quarry on Cerro Pedernal have already been
acknowledged. The necessary supplemental field work of 1938 was
done under the terms of a grant from the Milton Fund of Harvard
University.

The illustrations were prepared by Edward A. Schmitz

whose artistry gives a highly accurate delineation of the forms of
the artifacts.

Here the "scratch board" technique is used for the

first time in the representation of stone artifacts.

The very sub-

stantial cost of these illustrations and part of the cost of the plates

42

Teza~ Arch~oIogica~ and Paleontological Society

is borne by a special grant from the Shaler Fund of Harvard University.
1938.

Mr. Samuel Vaughn, Jr., was my volunteer field assistant in
As in many other instances, I have had the help and advice

of Franklin T. MeCann in the preparation of the manuscript.
Department of Geology and Geography,
Geological Museum, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Mass.

PLATE 9.
A. Large, leaf-shaped point made from a flake and probably incompletely finished. Locality 1 (quarry).
B. Biface of pointed oval from (the so-called "war-club spike")
from Abilene, Texas.
PLATE 10.
A. Flake of "Levallois" type struck from a biface and a .prepared
platform. Locality 1 (quarry).
B. Large scraper (?) struck from a biface but obviously at ]east
the ~econd ~lake. Platform a natural joint. Locality 1 (quarry).

Plate

®

®

Plate 10

