The Pa!o Duro C9mplex: Redefining the Early
Ceramic Period in the Caprock Cany nlands
Douglas K. Boyd

ABSTRACT
When the Palo Duro complex was first defined in 1978, it appeared to represent a group of hunting-oriented
peoples who obtained a few Jornada Mogollon pots in trade. Recent excavations at the Kent Creek and Sam Wahl
sites have revealed rectangular and circular pithouses, storage pits, large baking pits, and substantial ground
stone assemblages. The evidence suggests that Palo Duro peoples may have been under considerable influence
from, and maintained ties with, the Jornada Mogollon region, but the nature and extent of Plains Woodland
influence/interactions is not well defined. The complex is reinterpreted as representing peoples who subsisted
primarily by collecting, processing, and storing wild plant foods (perhaps also involving limited horticulture?)
during seasonal occupations in the Caprock Canyonlands. The emphasis on plant foods may be related to
increasingly mesic conditions after A.D. 500, while the onset of xeric conditions and increasing numbers of bison
after A.D. 1100 may have necessitated shifts in human subsistence and settlement strategies that ultimately led
to the disappearance of the Palo Duro complex.

INTRODUCTION
Paleoclimatic interpretations for the Southern
Plains suggest that the the Early Ceramic, or Late
Prehistoric I, period was probably wetter than the
preceding Late Archaic period, and it appears that
conditions were generally less favorable for bison.
While the precise relationships between climate,
vegetation, and bison may never be fully understood, a general decline in the number of bison in
the Southern Plains may have occurred around A.D.
500, and populations probably remained relatively
low until around A.D. 1200 (Dillehay 1974:187).
Just prior to or during this time, two major events,
the westward spread of Eastern Woodland culture
and the eastward spread of Southwestern Puebloan
culture, had a significant and widespread impact on
the peoples of the Southern Plains. The two traditions met, or perhaps collided, along the eastern
margins of the Llano Estacado, and this canyonland
region, herein termed the Caprock Canyonlands,
apparently played a prominent role in the cultural
developments and interactions during the first
millenium A.D.
The Woodland tradition spread eastward from
the upper Midwest into the Great Plains, arriving
in North Central Oklahoma by A.D. 100-300, and

in South Central Oklahoma prior to A.D. 450.
There are a number of diagnostic traits, such as
"corner-notched dart and arrow points, shell disc
beads, burial in mounds or ossuaries, an increase
in the frequency of ground stones, and the appearance of tools associated with horticulture," but it is
the distinctive cord-marked pottery vessels (elongated forms with conoidal bottoms) that is the hallmark of the Woodland tradition (Vehik 1984:175).
Not all of these diagnostic traits are manifest in the
Oklahoma Plains Woodland sites, however, and it
is not until ca. A.D. 800 that good evidence for
agriculture and semipermanent villages appears
(Vehik 1984:195-197). Despite the absence of
definite evidence for pre-A.D. 800 agriculture, it
is notable that most of the Woodland complexes in
the Southern Plains are thought to have begun between A.D. 100-500 (Hofman and Brooks 1989).
Other researchers have noted that agriculture probably appeared in the Plains during this time. In the
Chaquaqua Plateau of southeastern Colorado, for
example, Campbell (1976:53-54) suggests a date
of A.D. 500 for the appearance of maize.
The Woodland tradition had spread into the
Delaware Canyon area of West Central Oklahoma
by around A.D. 50-250 (Ferring 1982, 1986), and
archeological evidence from sites on the Thurmond

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

462

Texas Archeological Society

Ranch (Thurmond 1991) and the Swift Horse site
(Briscoe 1987) indicates that it had spread into western Oklahoma as early as A.D. 200-400. A thermoluminescence date of A.D. 520 on a cord-marked
sherd from the Tascosa Creek site is the earliest
occurrence of Woodland pottery in the Texas Panhandle, but absolute chronological evidence is limited, and Woodland occupations probably began
somewhat earlier. The appearance of the Woodland
tradition in the Panhandle Plains occurred at approximately the same time as the disappearance of
the Late Archaic bison-hunting lifestyle, around
A.D. 500. The Plains Woodland remains in the
Texas Panhandle are called the Lake Creek complex (Hughes 1962, 1991).
At about this same time, the Jornada Mogollon
culture of South Central New Mexico, Trans-Pecos
Texas, and northern Chihuahua (Lehmer 1948) expanded across all of southeastern New Mexico and
onto the western edge of the Llano Estacado. This
eastern extension of the Jornada Mogollon (Corley
1965a, 1965b; Leslie 1979) may represent the spread
of Jornada Mogollon peoples, or at least considerable expansion of their cultural influence among
neighboring peoples. Additional Southwestern influence, indicated by the sporadic occurrence of
Mogollon brownware pottery (see Miller, this volume), may be traced all across the southern Llano
Estacado, particularly around large playas or pluvial lakes, and into the southern Caprock
Canyonlands. First recognized at a small rockshelter
in Swisher County, Texas, the Palo Duro complex
(Willey and Hughes 1978b) appeared to represent a
group of hunter-gatherers who simply obtained
brownware pottery in trade, directly or indirectly,
with Jornada peoples. More recent archeological
findings of residential base camps with pithouses
and storage facilities at the Kent Creek (Cruse 1992)
and the Sam Wahl (Boyd et al. 1994) sites are
changing our perceptions about who the Palo Duro
peoples were, and it now appears that the Jornada
Mogolton influence involved much more than just
pottery (see Hughes 1991).
Although there are many similarities between
the Plains Woodland-tradition Lake Creek complex and the Jornada Mogollon-influenced Palo
Duro complex, the differences in these manifestations have been interpreted as evidence that two
groups of people occupied the Texas Panhandle
Plains during the first millenium A.D. Assuming
that the distribution of pottery traditions represents

the maximum extent of cultural influence (e.g., the
extent of exchange networks, diffusion of technology, or even the spread of related peoples),
Couzzourt (1982, 1985) and Hughes (!991) interpret the archeological data to indicate that a cultural boundary between Woodland and
Southwestern-influenced peoples existed along the
drainage divide between the Canadian and Red rivers. As early as the 1940s, Krieger (1946, 1978)
observed the existence of this cultura! boundary,
and suggested that it represented the southern limit
of Central Plains-tradition complexes or influence.
It is notable that brownware pottery occurs in very
few sites in the Canadian River drainage, while it is
much more common to the south in the Red River
and Brazos River drainages. Conversely, while sites
yielding Woodland pottery are common in the Canadian River valley, only a few are found in the
northern tributaries of the upper Red River, and
none are known south of the Prairie Dog Town
Fork. Consequently, defining the relationships between the Palo Duro and the nearby Plains Woodland and Southwestern cultural phases and
complexes is critical to understanding the Late Prehistoric I period (ca. A.D. 500-1100/1200) in the
Caprock Canyonlands.
The goals of this paper are as follows: (1) to
describe briefly the Caprock Canyonlands as an
archeologically significant ecological subregion; (2)
to summarize the Late Holocene culture history
and paleoclimatic reconstructions for the Caprock
Canyonlands; (3) to identify pertinent regional cultural phases and complexes that surround the Palo
Duro complex; (4) to identify the important archeological remains that are attributed to the Palo Duro
complex; (5) to reevaluate and redefine the Palo
Duro complex in light of recent archeological finds;
and (6) to speculate on the intercultural relationships between Palo Duro peoples and the cultures
around them.
This paper evolved out of the ongoing cultural
resources studies at Lake Alan Henry, a municipaluse water reservoir built for the City of Lubbock,
Texas. From 1987 to 1993, Prewitt and Associates,
Inc. of Austin, Texas, conducted a series of archeological surveys, testing, and data recovery efforts
within the 11,280 acre project area on the Double
Mountain Fork of the Brazos River in Garza and
Kent counties, Texas. Each phase of work resulted
in a separate archeological report, but the publication of a regional synthetic archeological overview

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Cotnplex
was planned for the conclusion of these studies.
The extensive research done in conjuction with the
regiona! synthesis, which is scheduled to be published this year (Boyd et al. 1996), concentrates on
redefining the culture history of the Caprock
Canyonlands. One of the more significant contributions of this study is a thorough reevaluation of the
Early Ceramic period Palo Duro complex, which is
the subject of this article.

THE CAPROCK CANYONLANDS:
ENVIRONMENTAL DIVERSITY,
PALEOENVIRONMENT, AND
CULTURE HISTORY
One of the important conclusions that was
reached during the course of the Lake Alan Henry
archeological investigations is that the traditional
view of the Texas Panhandle Plains environment
and ecology is an oversimplification that obscures
some very important concepts that have significant
bearing on archeological interpretations. The traditional archeological view is that the Texas Southern Plains is comprised of only two regions--the
High Plains and Lower Plains. The High Plains and
Lower Plains are distinct in many ways, and each is
broadly characterized by its own geology and physiography, climate and hydrology, and flora and
fauna. What became apparent during the course of
the investigations at Lake Alan Henry, however, is
that the archeology of the project area did not fit
neatly with that of either the High Plains or Lower
Plains. The greatest similiarities were seen in other
project areas located in the rugged canyonlands
along the Caprock Escarpment, but not to the west
in the vast expanses of Llano Estacado flatlands or
to the east in the rolling hills that comprise most of
the Lower Plains. Emerging from this research, then,
was the concept of the Caprock Escarpment as its
own archeological region; one that is intimately
related to, but yet distinctive from, the archeology
of the High Plains and most of the Lower Plains.
The southern end of the High Plains, which is
physically separated from the central Great Plains
by the wide Canadian River valley, is an isolated
plateau called the Llano Estacado. It is the single
dominating physiographic feature in the southern
Great Plains. It is a flat, nearly featureless plain
broken only by occasional ephemeral stream valleys (or draws) and small basins called playas (that

463

seasonally hold rainwater) or pluvial lakes (that
intersect the underlying Ogallala groundwater aquifer). To the east of the Llano Estacado is the Lower
Plains, a region that is largely comprised of undulating or rolling hills of soft Permian mudstones
that have been severely eroded. Hence, other names
that have been used for this region include the
Redbed Plains, Eroded Plains, Rolling Plains, Western Rolling Plains, and Low Rolling Plains.
While the notion that the High Plains and
Lower Plains are environmentally unique is accurate, it is a gross oversimpification. Sandwiched
between the Llano Estacado and the Lower Plains
is the Caprock Escarpment that constitutes the eastern edge of headward stream erosion eating away
at the High Plains plateau. The Caprock Escarpment is often thought of as a single dividing line,
but it is more realistically viewed as a long, northsouth strip of rugged canyonlands that separates the
High Plains from the Rolling Plains. The Caprock
Canyonlands generally coincide with exposures of
Tertiary Ogallala and Triassic Dockum Group formations on any state geological map. Because the
Ogallala caliche and Triassic sandstones are more
resistant to erosion than anything above or below,
differential erosion has resulted in the formation of
a rugged canyonland topography. The term "Caprock Canyonlands" is a fitting name for this northsouth corridor that divides the High Plains from the
Rolling Plains (Figure 1).
Caprock Canyonlands is a term borrowed
from Flores (1990), whose book Caprock
Canyonlands: Journeys into the Heart of the
Southern Plains is a treatise on the unique
ecologica! character of the rugged canyons along
the Caprock Escarpment. Notably, the Natural
Heritage Policy Research Project, a Texas ecology
project sponsored by the Lyndon B. Johnson
School of Public Affairs, calls this area the
"Escarpment Breaks" and recognizes that it is a
distinct ecologica! subregion. In addition, the
National Park Service recognized the ecological
importance of the escarpment canyonlands as early
as the 1920s and, in 1934, they considered the
development of a million acre "National Park of the
Plains" that focused on the canyonlands of the Red
River (including Palo Duro Canyon). For various
political reasons (Flores 1990:160-165), the
National Park Service never followed up on any of
its proposals, but the State of Texas has created two
small parks along the Caprock Escarpment--the

464

Texas Archeological Society

The environmental characteristics of the Caprock
Canyonlands, and the many
subtleties that distinguish it
from the High Plains and Lower
Plains, are not described in detail here. What is important is
the recognition of the fact that,
because of its geologic and geomorphic history, the Caprock
Canyonlands was an oasis in
an otherwise arid landscape. For
prehistoric peoples, the
canyonlands provided more
abundant (in terms of quality
and quantity) and predictable
resources than could be found
anywhere else in the Southern
Plains--natural shelter, firewood, raw lithic materials, plant
and animal foods, and, most importantly, water. Freshwater
springs emerging primarily
from the Ogallala aquifer, and
to a lesser extent from Triassic
and Quaternary aquifers, are
common all along the Caprock
Escarpment, and major riverHigh Plains (includes Llano Estacodo)
ine systems were generally
Caprock CanyonlQnds
well-watered in prehistoric
Lower Plains
Cross Timbers into Grand Prairie
times. Prior to the depletion of
West Central Texas (inlcudes Edwards
groundwater aquifers in the
Plateau & Northern Creteceous Outliers)
twentieth century, such springs
and spring-fed tributaries proFigure I. Ecological/archeological regions within the Texas Panhandle Plains.
vided abundant water and lush
The Caprock Canyonlands subregion is defined based on a combination of
vegetation that attracted man
topography (Raisz 1957), surface geology (Curtis and Ham 1972; Renfro
and beast. Water has always
1973; Williams and McAllister 1979), vegetation areas (Arbingast et al.
been,
and still is, the single most
1973), and geographic regions (Johnson 1931).
critical resource dictating the
distribution of plant, animal,
and human communities throughout the Southern
16,400 acre Pato Duro Canyon State Park, and the
Plains. Prehistoric peoples recognized this fact, and
13,906 acre Caprock Canyons State Park. Just as
they adapted their lifestyles and settlement patterns
modern man finds the Caprock Canyonlands to be
accordingly.
unique and inviting, so too did the prehistoric
In contrast to the well-watered canyonlands,
Native Americans living in the Southern Plains,
surface water over most of the Llano Estacado was
and it is not surprising to find that the archeology
(with a few exceptions such as major pluvial lakes
of this subregion also is unique. This is not an
or spring-fed draw segments) sporadically
entirely new revelation, but the culture history
distributed, subject to considerable seasonal
synthesis by Boyd et al. (1996) is the first attempt
fluctuation, and generally unpredictable. The same
to formalize the concept of the Caprock
is true of the Lower Plains, but the water supply
Canyonlands as a unique archeological subregion.

Boyd -- The Palo Duro Cotnplex
there also suffers from one additional problem: Any
surface or groundwater that passes through the
Permian redbed country becomes ch!ofinateO, often
to the point of being unpalatable because it is several
times more salty than sea water. Because of this, it
is likely that there were large areas of the Lower
Plains where little or no potable water could be
found during prehistoric times.
The resource-rich Caprock Canyonlands
played a major role in the development and
evolution of cultures in the Southern Plains. The
escarpment area seems to have been a critical zone,
in terms of subsistence and settlement, for many

465

Boyd et al. (1996) reviewed the regional
paleonvironmental and cultural data for the Middle
to Late Holocene in the southern Panhandle Plains
and Caprock Canyonlands, and summaries of their
interpretations are presented in Figure 2. The various
lines of evidence that form the foundation of these
interpretations are not presented here, but it is
notable that the paleoenvironmental reconstruction
and culture history are in general agreement with
studies done throughout the Southern Plains. The
focus of the remainder of this paper is the Late
Prehistoric I cultural period from prior to A.D. 500
to ca. A.D. 1100-1200.

different prehistoric populations over many
thousands of years. In a simplistic fashion, the
Caprock Canyonlands may be viewed as a home

REGIONAL CULTURAL COMPLEXES
AND PHASES DURING THE LATE
PREHISTORIC I PERIOD

base for many cultures whose seasonally oriented
activities extended over a much larger territory that
included the Llano Estacado and Lower Plains.

SOUTHERN
YEARS

0-

PANHANDLE PLAINS
PALEOENVIRONMENTAL
RECONSTRUCTION

CAPROCK CANYONLANDS
NATIVE AMERICAN
CULTURE HISTORY

PERIODS

CULTURES

Historic

Comanches,
Apaches, & Teyos

Protohistoric

Late Prehistoric

YEARS

- 1950

Tierro Slanca &
GorzoComplexes

- 1000

1000Late Prehistoric I

Palo Duro &
Lake Creek
Complexes

Tronsitlonal

-o

2000Late
Little Sunday &
Archaic

3000-

Summers
Complexes

- 1000

Period

- 2000

4000

Middle

5000

Archaic

undefined

- 3000

Period

6000

- 4000

Figure 2. Comparison of the Middle to Late Holocene paleoclimatic
reconstruction for the southern Panhandle Plains and the culture
history of the Caprock Canyonlands (from Boyd et al., 1996).

The Late Prehistoric I period was
a time of dynamic cultural interaction
in the Southern Plains, and the cultural
conditions and changes that characterize the Palo Duro complex cannot be
fully understood without a brief mention of the archeological manifestations
defined for surrounding areas (Figure
3 and Table 1). The Late Prehistoric I
period in the Caprock Canyonlands
spans the entire Plains Woodland stage
of cultural development in the Texas
Panhandle (i.e., the Lake Creek complex), and the latter part of the period
is contemporaneous with late Plains
Woodland/formative Plains Village occupations in western Oklahoma (i.e.,
the Custer phase) and with unknown
cultural groups in West Central Texas
(i.e., the Blow Out Mountain phase).
This period also coincides with the
Southwestern pithouse periods in
southeastern New Mexico and far western Texas (i.e., the E1 Paso and Dofia
Ana phases of the Jornada branch of
the Mogollon; the Querecho and
Maljamar phases of the eastern extension of the Jornada Mogollon; and the
18 Mile and Mesita Negra phases of
the Middle Pecos), and ends at the time
of the pithouse to surface pueblo transition. The reader is referred to Bell

466

Texas Archeologieal Society

western Oklahoma have
evidence of contemporaneous
Plains Woodland occupations.
Plains Woodland sites in the
Texas Panhandle are attributed
to the Lake Creek complex
(Hughes 1962, 1991). A
detailed summary of the Lake
Creek complex is beyond the
scope of this paper (see Boyd et
al. 1996), but this manifestation
is discussed later because it is
critical to defining the nature of
the interaction between Plains
Woodland and Palo Duro
Complex peoples.

ARCHEOLOGICAL
REMAINSOFTHE
PALODURO
COMPLEX

Based on the 1973-1974
excavations at Deadman’s Shelter in Mackenzie Reservoir,
Willey and Hughes (1978b) proposed that the site was representative of a widespread
cultural manifestion characterCultural Complexes/phases
ized mainly by Mogollon
brownwares and early cornerand basal-notched arrow points.
Many other sites in the Red
River drainage had produced
Figure 3. Map of Late Prehistoric I culture complexes and phases in and around
similar materials and were
the Texas Panhandle Plains.
thought to be related to this new
"Palo Duro complex" (Willey
and Hughes 1978b: 190). A few
(1984), Brooks (1989), Creel (1990), Corley
more
Palo
Duro
sites
have been investigated since
(t965a), Hofman (1975, 1978, 1984a, 1984b),
that
time,
including
some
in the Brazos River drainHofman and Brooks (1989), Hughes (1991), Jelinek
age, and the complex now covers a larger area than
(1967), Lehmer (1948), Leslie (1979), LeBlanc and
was originally proposed (see Figure 4 and Table 1).
Whalen (1980), and Lintz (1982, 1984, 1986) for
The chronology of the Palo Duro complex is known
general information on these and other Plains Woodprimarily from radiocarbon dates from eight sites
land and Plains Village manifestations in the south(Table 2).
ern Great Plains.
Most of the Palo Duro sites that have been
Many sites in the Caprock Canyonlands and
tested or excavated may be grouped into one of two
surrounding areas date to the Late Prehistoric I period
site type categories--campsites or rockshelters-and are of considerable importance for defining the
and there appears to be considerable variability in
Palo Duro complex (Figure 4). Many of the sites
site function within these groups. Recent inveshave been attributed to the Palo Duro complex, but a
tigations have added a third category, that of
large number of sites in the Texas Panhandle and

Boyd n The Palo Duro Complex
Table 1. Selected Late Prehistoric I sites in and around the Texas Panhandle Plains

No.*

Late Prehistoric I
Cultural Affiliation

Site Name (Number)

Reference

Residential Bases
1
2
3
4

Kent Creek (41HL66)
Sam Wahl (41GR291)
Buffalo Lake (PPHM-A2042)
Tahoka Lake

Palo
Palo
Palo
Palo

5
6
7
8

Greenbelt (41DY 17)
Duncan Ranch (41HC124)
Merchant (LCAS-E4)
Laguna Plata (LA-5148)

Lake Creek complex
Lake Creek complex
Eastern Jornada Mogollon
Eastern Jornada Mogollon

9
10
11

Boot Hill (LCAS-B5)
Salt Cedar (4lAD2)
King Ranch (LA 26764)

12

Fox Place (LA 68188)

Eastern Jornada Mogollon
Eastern Jornada Mogollon
Middle Pecos or Eastern
Jornada Mogollon
Middle Pecos or Eastern
Jornada Mogollon

Duro complex
Duro complex
Duro complex (7)
Duro complex (?)

Cruse 1992
Boyd et al. 1994
Hays 1986
Lee Johnson, personal
communication 1993
Campbell 1983
Gustafson 1994a, 1994b
Leslie 1965
Lea County Archeological
Society 1971; Runyan 1972
Corley and Leslie 1960
Collins 1968
Wiseman 1981, 1988
Wiseman, personal
communication 1993

Campsites
13

Chalk Hollow (PPHM-A883)

14

Blue Clay (41BI42)

15

County Line (41BI33)

16

Cat Hollow (41GR303B)

17

Gobbler Creek Bridge (41GR383)

18

South Sage Creek (41KT33)

19

Fatheree (41GY32)

20

Maintenance Barn (PPHM-A1543

21

South Ridge (PPHM-A 1568)
Floydada Country Club (41FL1)

22
23

Montgomery (41FL17)

24

Big Spring (41HW2)

25

Lake Creek (PPHM-A48)

26

Tascosa Creek (PPHM-A2060)

27

Sanford Reservoir unnamed (41MO5)

28

Sanford Reservoir unnamed (41PT29)

29

Night Storm (41RB21)

30

Sandy Ridge (41HF5)

31
32

Swift Horse (34RM501)
Beaver Dam (34RM208)

33
34
35

Middle Cheyenne (PPHM-A2082)
Carrizozo Bridge (34CI199)
East Levee (41TG91)

Palo Duro compelx

Wedel 1975
Willey et al. 1978
Palo Duro complex (?)
Willey and Hughes 1978a
Palo Duro complex
Boyd et al. 1994
Palo Duro complex (?)
Boyd et al. 1994
Palo Duro complex
Boyd et al. 1992
Palo Duro/Lake Creek complexes Hughes et al. 1978
Palo Duro complex
Couzzourt 1982
Palo Duro complex
Etchieson 1979
Palo Duro complex
Word 1963, 1991
Palo Duro complex (?)
Word 1965; Northern 1979
Palo Duro complex (?)
Sommer 1971
Lake Creek complex
Hughes 1962
Lake Creek complex
Couzzourt 1985
Lake Creek complex
Green 1986
Lake Creek complex
Green 1986
Lake Creek complex
Hughes et a!. 1978
Lake Creek complex
Quigg, Lintz, Oglesby,
Earls et al. 1993
Lake Creek complex (?)
Briscoe 1987, 1989
Plains Woodland
Thurmond 1988a, 1988b,
1988c, 1991
Lake Creek complex
Couzzourt 1982, 1985
Plains Woodland
Saunders !983
Blow Out Mountain phase
Creel 1990
Palo Duro complex

Rockshelters
36
37
38
39

Deadman’s Shelter (41SW23)
Boren Shelter No. 2 (41GR559)
Canyon City Club Cave (PPHM-A251)
Blue Spring Shelter (PPYM-A485)

Palo
Palo
Palo
Palo

*Numbers are key to site locations shown on Figure 3.

Duro complex
Duro Complex
Duro complex
Duro complex

Willey and Hughes 1978b
Boyd et al. 1994
Hughes 1969
Hughes 1978

467

468

Texas Archeological Society

possible residential bases of the
Palo Duro complex. These two
sites are important because
they highlight the fact that
there may be many other Palo
Duro residential base sites that
have not yet been identified.
Hays (1986:10-11, 20)
identifies a probable Palo Duro
complex site (PPHM-A2042)
in the Buffalo Lake National
Wildlife Refuge, Randall
County, Texas. This site was
initially visited in 1980 by
Hughes (Jack T. Hughes
fieldnotes, February 6, 1980),
who observed a greater density
of cultural materials (e.g., bone
fragments, fire-cracked quartzite, burned caliche, and lithic
debris) than seen at any other
site in the Refuge. Artifacts observed or collected consist of
dart points, arrow points (including some Deadman’s),
bifaces, unifaces, ground
stones, and sherds of Mogollon
Polo Duro Complex 8ires
brownware. A test pit indicated
~ Rockshelter
e Compsite
that substantial buried deposits
,~ Residentiol Bose
exist. Of particular importance,
Other Sites
Hughes noted that several de~ Rockshelter
o Compsite
pressions at the site were probA Residentiol Bose
ably pithouses. Without further
testing, however, the interpreFigure 4. Map of selected Late Prehistoric I sites in the Texas Panhandle Plains
tation that the site represents a
and surrounding areas.
Palo Duro pithouse village is
tentative.
Tahoka Lake, a large pluvial lake in Lynn
residential bases, to the site type inventory, also
County, Texas, also has been suggested as a posadding a new dimension to the settlement pattern.
sible location of a pithouse site that might be reA fourth class of archeological remains, that of
lated to the Palo Duro complex (see Boyd 1995a,
human burials, also has important implications for
1995b). Lee Johnson (personal communication,
defining the complex. Each of these site types is
1992) remembered seeing possible pithouse depresdiscussed below.
sions and Mogollon ceramics in the vicinity of
Tahoka Lake many years ago, prior to the complete
Residential Bases
cultivation of the area. Lacking an adequate archeological investigation, however, it is impossible
The Kent Creek and Sam Wahl sites are the
to evaluate the potential for the existence of a Palo
only two sites that have been positively identified
Duro pithouse site near Tahoka Lake. Surface colas residential bases of the Palo Duro complex. Two
lections from a site 5 km south of Tahoka Lake
other sites that have not been adequately
have yielded corner-notched and stemmed arrow
investigated have been tentatively proposed as

Boyd m The Palo Duro Complex

+l

+1

~:~

~

+1

469

470

Texas Archeological Society

O~

0

0

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Cotnplex

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

!

I

I

471

472

Texas Archeological Society

g<

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
points, indicating the presence of Late Prehistoric I
occupations, but no pottery was found (Riggs 1965).
Watts (1963:1-4) notes that undifferentiated
brownwares have been found near Tahoka Lake
and at many other lake sites on the southern Llano
Estacado. Watts’ (1963) study is quite outdated,
but another ceramic distribution study is in progress
(Wiseman et al. 1994) that eventually should provide much more detailed information on Southwestern wares on the Llano Estacado. Given the
limited data available at this time, the presence of
Palo Duro complex occupations on the southern
Llano Estacado cannot be discounted.
Both of the sites that have been identified confidently as residential bases of the Palo Duro complex have been investigated intensively. The Kent
Creek site, located along a spring-fed tributary of
the North Pease River in southeastern Hall County,
was excavated in 1985/1986 by Cruse (1992), and
was the first site where habitation structures were
identified. The early occupation period at the Sam
Wahl site, located in the canyonlands along the
Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River in
Garza County, was identified as a residential base
based on excavations by Boyd et al. (1994). The
similarities and differences between these two sites
have important implications for defining the Palo
Duro complex.

Structure 1 is a rectangular (4.3 x 3.3 m)
pithouse with an east-facing entryway centered
along one long wall. Interior features include a
trough or step-down just inside the house (probably a water trap), a large posthole just off-center,
three other postholes along the front and side walls,
and two clusters of burned caliche rocks lying on
the floor that are thought to be heating ovens. A
subfloor human burial (see Burials below) also was
found in the center of Structure 1, but the house
was abandoned at the time the individual was interred, and the burial pit could have destroyed a
central hearth. Charcoal from the floor of Structure
1 was radiocarbon dated to A.D. 665-977, providing an approximate age for the occupation of the
pithouse and the subfloor burial.
Structure 2 is a rectangular (2.3 x 3.3 m) house
with a west-facing entryway and no interior features except for shallow "troughs" or depressions
all along the front and back walls (possible water
traps). The floor of this structure was virtually devoid of artifacts.
Because of their differences, Structure 1 is interpreted as a habitation while Structure 2 is thought
to represent a storage facility, but they both exhibit
some similar characteristics. Both structures have
clay-plastered entryways, approximately 1 m wide

Kent Creek Site (41HL66)

The 62 m2 of hand excavations
at the Kent Creek site uncovered two
complete rectangular pithouses, a
possible third structure, and five extramural features (Figure 5). The latter consist of two oval pits (one claylined and one clay-capped) that may
have functioned as storage facilities,
a smal! rock-lined hearth, an unlined
hearth, and a large baking pit (80 cm
diameter, 30 cm deep) filled with
ash, charcoal, and burned rocks.
Charcoal from the !ower and upper
portions of the baking pit provided
calibrated radiocarbon age ranges of
A.D. 733-985 and A.D. 902-1393,
respectively. Two postholes located
just outside Structure 1 could represent extramural activities, or they
may be related to the structure.

473

Unlined

Hearth

Cloy-copped Pit

I

°

~Possibte Structure
-

STIR

°T

LEGEND
~ Depression
~
~:~ IRockFeoture
o

Post Hole

01/21

b
0
’

meters
2 ,i
f~-~et

2
8

P&AII9515LH

Figure 5. Map of structures and features at the Kent Creek site (modified
from Cruse 1992:Figure 6).

474

Texas Archeological Society

and over 2 m long, in the form of ramps that gradually slope upward from the floor level. The pithouses
are shallow, with floor levels at ca. 35 cm below
the ground surface. Some erosional beveling of the
landform probably has occurred, but it is unlikely
that the houses were dug down much more than 50
cm, and some form of superstructure must have
extended above ground. Pieces of daub recovered
from the fill of Structure 1 suggested that it may
have had a wattle-and-daub superstructure. Patches
of clay/gravel and large rocks with plaster remnants found in the fill may indicate that Structure 2
had a partial masonry superstructure.
The possible structure is a small (190 x 85 cm)
subrectangular depression with cobbles, gravel, and
daub fragments mixed in its fill, and a mano cache
(n=3) along one end. Since it is too small to have
been a habitation, this possible structure may have
served as a storage facility or perhaps a small grinding shelter.
The precise duration of the occupations at the
Kent Creek site is not well established since there
are only three radiocarbon dates (see Table 2). The
two dates from the baking pit are problematic. They
may indicate reuse of the feature at different times,
but two use episodes some several hundred years
apart does not seem likely. The 1-sigma ranges for
these two dates do overlap somewhat, at A.D. 902985, and the feature might date to this time. Another interpretion is that the older date is accurate
while the upper sample may have been contaminated by younger carbon. The latter seems most
likely since the standard deviation for the upper
baking pit sample is quite large (i.e., + 250 years).
Since the earlier baking pit date is very close to the
date for Structure 1, it is suggested that the site
occupations occurred primarily around A.D. 7001000. Cruse (1992:124) calibrated an average of
the three dates and concluded that the site was
occupied between A.D. 690-1010, and the total
duration of the occupations may have been between
100-300 years.
Over 13,000 artifacts were collected from
Kent Creek, including 57 arrow points (Deadman’s
and Scallorn are the only identifiable types), 12
dart points (some identified as Ellis), a variety of
other chipped lithic tools (bifaces, unifaces, drills,
gouges, and spokeshaves), cores and debitage, 20
manos and 8 metate fragments, and 34 brownware
sherds. Of the latter, most were identified as
Jornada Brown, Roswell Brown, or Middle Pecos

Micaceous Brown, while one sherd is unlike any
varieties of Jornada Mogollon pottery and could
represent a locally made brownware. The faunal
assemblage indicates that the inhabitants killed and
ate more deer and/or antelope than any other animals, and only one bison element was recovered.
Other animals that may have been utilized for food
include skunks, rabbits, and turtles, while snake,
prairie dog, and other rodent remains are probably
intrusive. Pollen analyses provided somewhat
equivocal results (and a preservation bias is likely),
but slightly higher concentrations of Cheno-ams
were observed in some features. Charred plant remains recovered from extramural features indicate
that goosefoot and purslane may have been food
resources, and juniper and cottonwood/willow
were used as firewood. In addition, charred oak
acorns were recovered from the fill of the burial,
from a trough depression inside Structure 2, and
from the possible structure. Although the species
was not identified, it is likely that these represent
the use of shin oak (Quercus havardii) as a food
resource. The number of analyzed pollen and flotation samples was minimal, and Cruse (1992:141)
notes that "the possibility that horticulture was
practiced cannot be ruled out."
The Kent Creek site is interpreted as a multifunctional residential village but its size (i.e., the
number of pithouses present) is unknown because
the excavated area represents only a small portion
of a much larger site. The primary activities that
are evident at the site are hunting and processing
of small- to medium-sized animals; procurement,
processing, and possibly storage of plant foods; and
a full range of lithic tool manufacture and maintenance.

Sam Wahl Site (41GR291)

The Sam Wahl site was discovered in 1987
(Boyd et al. 1989) and tested in 1988 (Boyd et al.
1990). Diagnostic and unusual artifacts recovered
consist of four arrow points (including one Scallorn
and one Deadman’s), an untyped dart point, two
plain brownware sherds (cf. Jornada or Roswell
Brown), and a fragment of a pendant made of nonlocal kaolinite that is visually identical to the hydrothermally altered kaolinite found at Burro Mesa
in Big Bend National Park (Alex 1990). No radiocarbon dates were obtained, and a thermoluminescence date on a burned rock yielded an erroneous

Boyd-- The Palo Duro Complex

o

o

3,970 artifacts had been recovered.
Site chronology is established by 11
radiocarbon dates that indicate numerous occupations over a long period of time (Figure 7). When the
features, calibrated radiocarbon
dates, and artifacts were analyzed, it
was clear that they were separable
into three time periods that were defined as separate analysis units.
A burial component consists of a
single cairn-covered burial (discussed below) that is radiocarbon
dated to ca. A.D. 230 to 400. This
burial is some two centuries earlier
than, and may be unrelated to, the
earliest occupational evidence at the
site. The late occupation period is
defined by 1,916 artifacts and two
features that are radiocarbon dated
to ca. A.D. 1150/1200 to 1350/1400.
This later occupation postdates the
Palo Duro complex and appears to
have been quite different from the
earlier occupations.
The early occupation period is attributed to the Palo Duro complex
and is represented by 1,445 artifacts

29

BLOCK 4
O BLOCK

LEGEND
-- Backhoe Trench
Blade Cut
o Excavation Unit
¯ Feature in Blade Cut

BLOCK 3

~5

28

Cairn Burial
BLOCK 1
37
thouse
0
0

10
40

20
80

4O
160

feet
Contour Interval = 50 cm

~

LEGEND

o HeorthtookJng Pit
~ Burned Rock Cluster

meters
0 510 20

Figure 6. Map of the north-central portion of 41GR291
showing locations of data recovery mechanical excavations,
hand excavations, and cultural features.

475

1400 LATE
OCCUPATION
PERIOD

age. The site occupations were considered to date
to Late Prehistoric I times and to represent a manifestation of the Palo Duro complex.
Data recovery excavations in 1992 consisted
of extensive mechanical excavations (three long
maintainer blade cuts and 36 backhoe trenches) and
hand excavation of 106 lxl m units (Figure 6). The
extensive mechanical excavations were done in an
effort to locate buried structures and features and
these were quite successful. Many of the features
that were critical for accurately interpreting the site
(i.e., the pithouse and storage pit features) were
first encountered in maintainer bladecuts and backhoe trenches, and they might not have been discovered otherwise.
By the end of the data recovery investigations,
37 cultural features had been documented and

O’,mcoe~umed

8OO
EARLY

OCCUPATION
I

Z

F.17 He:Y~
F.41
8’°r°ge

PERIOD

5~

t

BURIAL
COMPONENT

Fo23

Figure 7. Graph of calibrated radiocarbon dates from
the Sam Wahl site.

476

Texas Archeological Society

and a feature complex that consists
of a pithouse, 10 storage pits, and
two baking pits that are radiocarbon
dated to ca. A.D. 600 to 1050/1100.
The pithouse (Feature 37) is a 3 x
3.5 m oval, basin-shaped depression
that was dug down ca. 40 cm below
the former ground surface into the
bedrock substrate (Figure 8). Two
large oval-basin metates were found
Figure 8. Overview of excavated pithouse at the Sam Wahl site (looking
cached (i.e., stored upside down) innorthwest). The two largest rocks are upside-down metates.
side the pithouse, and a third slabtype metate in the structure (found
in the backhoe trench) also may have
storage capacities of these pits range from 0.24been cached. Subtle burned areas in the central
0.31
m-~ for the smallest to 0.53-0.68 m3 for the
floor of the pithouse may represent an interior
largest.
Flotation samples did not provide definihearth(s); no definite entryway was identified, but
tive
evidence
of what was being stored, but charred
it may have been to the southwest. Charred mesgrass seeds (four taxa) were abundant and may
quite beans were recovered from the floor of the
represent the use of grass linings inside the pits.
pithouse.
Other features associated with the early occuThe 10 storage pits (Features 17-20, 24-25,
pation period include two baking pits that presum30-32, and 39) are all quite similar in morphology,
ably were used to cook some type of plant food.
being round in plan view and ranging in diameter
Unfortunately, flotation of the feature fill failed to
from 85-110 cm and 50-80 cm deep with rounded
yield any definitive macrobotanical evidence of
to flat bottoms and sides that taper slightly inward
what plants were being cooked. Notably, the rocks
(Figure 9). All of the pits are intrusive ca. 40-60
used in the construction of one of the baking pits
cm into bedrock, and two had large oval-basin
included 25 recycled ground stone fragments (mano,
metates cached (again upside down) at the top of
metate, and indeterminate fragments) representing
the pit. The fill of these features is generally fairly
31 percent of the total rocks.
clean sandy sediment (except for one that may have
In addition to the pithouse/storage pit/baking
been backfilled with trash), and there is little doubt
pit complex, two bedrock mortars were found 170
that they represent storage pits. They are all clusm southwest of the pithouse. Although these featered into a relatively small 8 x 8 m area (see Figure
tures cannot be directly dated, they are indirectly
6), and it is hypothesized that they were located in
associated with the early occupation period because
this particular spot and dug into the bedrock in
a broken pestle was found on the floor of the
order to provide rodent-proof storage. The estimated

a
Figure 9. Storage pit (Feature 17) at various stages of excavation: (a) Half-excavated pit; (b)
completely excavated pit.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Co~nplex

pithouse. This provides circumstantial evidence that
mortars were used at approximately the same time
as the pithouse.
One of the late occupation period features (Feature 12) is of particular importance and is radiocarbon dated to ca. A.D. 1200. It is a well-defined,
ovate (2 x 3 m) charcoal-stained area that is superimposed on top of, and definitely postdates, two of
the storage pits (Features 17 and 18). A small charcoal-filled pit along one edge of the stain appears
to represent an in situ unlined hearth. This feature
is interpreted as representing an ephemeral surface
house with a small interior fireplace. If this interpretation is correct, then the occupants of the Sam
Wahl site may have shifted from living in pithouses
during Palo Duro times to living in surface houses
after ca. A.D. 1100.
The early occupation is interpreted as a small
pithouse village of the Palo Duro complex. Plant
procurement, processing, and storage were major
activities. Except for the mesquite beans found in
the pithouse, the specific plants that might have
been utilized are not well documented. Charred
remains of some other plants, such as Chenopodium
and cucurbit seeds, may represent food resources,
but their archeological contexts do not confirm this
interpretation. The charred cucurbit seeds cannot
be identified to species and probably represent a
wild species (such as Buffalo Gourd) rather than a
cultivated variety, but the absence of domesticated
plants in the macrobotanical samples from 41GR291
cannot be interpreted as an absence of agriculture
altogether. Since the absence of cuttigen remains
could be due to differential preservation or plantprocessing techniques that did not result in charred
remains, the question of whether the early occupants were involved in farming must remain open.
The archeo!ogical evidence (primarily the features and artifacts) suggests that there were dramatic changes in site function and subsistence
activities around A.D. 1100. In general, the early
occupation period is characterized by a greater dependence upon plant processing (i.e., more and
larger ground stone tools), and the late occupation
period is characterized by a greater reliance upon
hunting (i.e., more arrow points) and an increase in
the manufacture of chipped stone tools (i.e., more
unmodified debitage). It is hypothesized that the
increasing importance of hunting activities and the
shift from pithouses to surface houses are related to
climatic changes that occurred around A.D. 1100.

477

There is not enough evidence to determine whether
the late occupation represents a late variant of the
Pa!o Duro complex or something else entirely.

Campsites and Rockshelters
Twelve campsites and four rockshelters that
have been tested/excavated constitute the bulk of
the archeological data for the Palo Duro complex.
Boyd et al. (1996) present individual site summaries for Palo Duro campsites and rockshelters, but
they are only discussed briefly as a group here.
Subsurface investigations at many open campsites have produced definable Palo Duro components with artifact assemblages that are useful for
comparative purposes, while investigations at other
campsites have yielded only minimal evidence of
Palo Duro occupations (Table 3). The level of work
at these sites varies from minimal testing with scattered units, to comprehensive excavations involving
large blocks of contiguous units. The discreteness of
the Palo Duro components or occupations, and the
quality of the data reporting, also range from very
good to very poor. Thus, one must take into account
the quality and quantity of the archeological data
when evaluating the interpretations offered by various investigators. To illustrate the differences, it is
notable that only five of the campsites meet the
following criteria: (1) have discrete Palo Duro components with definable artifact assemblages of over
1,000 specimens, (2) have had more than 30 m2 of
hand excavation, and (3) have adequately reported
excavation data that are useful for comparative purposes. As discussed later, however, it is clear that
the campsites vary considerably in terms of site
function and intensity of use/occupation.
One point in regard to open campsite investigations is worth stressing. Most campsites attributed to the Palo Duro complex were investigated
before pithouse structures were recognized as an
important component of the complex. The existence of residential base villages has been realized
only within the last decade, and archeologists were
not consciously searching for such evidence prior
to this time. Cruse (1992) excavated at the Kent
Creek site for quite some time before accidentally
discovering the pithouses there, and a substantia!
mechanical testing effort at the Sam Wahl site was
specifically designed to search for buried houses.
Since the pithouses at these sites were undetectable
on the surface, it is very possible that many of the

478

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3. Summary of Campsites Attributed to the Palo Duro Complex
Total No. of
Area

Site/Component

No.

Diagnostic Artifacts

Assessment of

Artifacts in

Excavated

of

Palo Duro

(m2)

Dates

Assemblage

Points

Brownware

Palo Duro

Data

Sherds

Component

Quality

?

x

good

none

--

1,701

x

good

good

70

--

1,492

x

good

good

Cat Hollow

27

2

623

x

good

fair

Gobbler Creek Bridge

53

3

2,160

x

good

good

South Sage Creek

62

1

2,052

x

X

good

good

11

6

Blue Clay

65

County Line

Chalk Hollow,
upper midden

7

--

213

x

X

~ir

fair

Maintenance Barn

28

--

?

x

X

poor

fair

South Ridge, East

32

--

x

X

good

good

Floydada Country Club

108

--

?

x

X

poor

poor

Montgomery

>20

--

?

x

X

poor

poor

15

--

?

x

X

unknown

fair

Fatheree, Area 1

Big Spring

1,077

*See Table 1 for references to site investigations
Component
good = discrete component
fair = may be discrete component but investigations are limited
poor = component is mixed or otherwise poorly defined
unknown = possible Palo Duro component cannot be adequately defined

Data Quality
good = data adequately reported and sample size is adequate
fair = data adequately reported but sample size is small
poor = assemblages are not defined/definable
none = no data are reported

campsites listed in Table 3 are actually residential
bases. Sites that have a wide diversity of features
and artifact types, brownware ceramics, and large
ground stone tool assemblages are particularly likely
to be residential bases.
The South Sage Creek site is an example of a
site that has many interesting characteristics that
indicate it is a good candidate for a possible residential base. It is the only other site in the region

that has yielded a complete large basin metate, like
those found in association with the pithouse and
storage pits at the Sam Wahl site. Unfortunately,
the South Sage Creek site was not recognized as a
Palo Duro complex site at the time that the data
recovery work was planned and, without realizing
the potential for structural remains, the investigation strategy was quite different from that employed
at the Sam Wahl site.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex

Four rockshelters in the Caprock Canyonlands
contain evidence of occupations by Palo Duro
peoples or date to Palo Duro complex times. The
archeological evidence suggests that the canyonland
rockshelters were used in different ways by Palo
Duro peoples (Table 4). Occupations at Boren Shelter No. 2 (lower shelter) were brief and periodic,
generating little cultural debris (only 28 artifacts
excluding debitage). Occupations at the Canyon
City Club Cave also appear to have been brief and
generated few artifacts (44 excluding debitage), but
the greater number of projectile points and bones
indicates that hunting was a primary activity. In
contrast, a higher frequency of artifacts (643 excluding debitage) indicates that occupations at
Deadman’s Shelter were much more intensive (i.e.,
of longer duration and more frequent). While hunting is well represented (i.e, points account for 15
percent of all artifacts), the number of manos and
metates is exceptionally high (17 percent of all
artifacts). In addition, the total artifact assemblage
from Deadman’s is quite varied, and certainly denotes a wide range of activities. Consequently, the
data are interpreted to mean that occupations at
Deadman’s Shelter were more like those at multifunctional campsites or residential bases than those
at the other rockshelters.

479

Burials

Human burials in the Southern Plains are particularly important because they provide direct evidence of cultural behavior that is very different
from the subsistence activities documented at most
sites. There are only 10 burial locations in the region that include burials dating to Late Prehistoric I
times and have a bearing on defining or understanding the Palo Duro complex (Figure 10). Of
these, only seven burials at five localities are definitely or possibly affiliated with the Palo Duro complex.
The burial of an adult male, in an almost extended position with its legs semiflexed in an oval
pit inside Deadman’s Shelter, is described by Willey
and Hughes (1978b:154, 190). The skeleton was
accompanied by the following artifacts as grave
offerings: a complete terrapin (mud turtle) shell,
two mussel shells, and nine modified deer bones
(an awl, an ulna, and seven neatly stacked split
metapodial halves). The burial apparently occurred
during or near the end of Statum D times, radiocarbon dated to A.D. 79-383 (see Table 2). Based on
similarities in cranial measurements, Willey (1978)
indicated that the Deadman’s cranium was most
similar to skeletal populations at Pecos Pueblo, and

Table 4. Comparison of Palo Duro Complex Components at Rockshelters
Deadman’s Shelter

Canyon City Club

Boren Shelter No. 2

(all strata)

Cave (Level 4)

(Lower Shelter)

35-50
(estimated)**

16.7

<30

30

41.8

15 (inside only)

630

44

28

3,720

?

88

No. of faunal elements

2,000+

1,844

482

No. of points/manos and metates

96/108

1314

1/0

Attributes
Shelter size

(m2)

Area excavated (mz) including areas
outside shelter
No. of artifacts (excluding debitage)
No. of debitage

*See Table 1 for references to site investigations. Blue Spring Shelter is excluded from this table because no excavation data
have been reported.
**The size of the shelter is estimated because dimensions are not given and the shelter was not completely excavated.

480

Texas Archeological Society

pendants. The tip of an arrow
point was found beneath the
skeleton, and since the grave
fill was otherwise devoid of
cultural material, Cruse
(1992:55) speculated that an
arrow wound may have been
the cause of death. Since the
pit was dug into the floor and
the gravelly fill was piled up
above the level of the floor,
the pithouse must have been
abandoned immediately after
the interment. Thus, a radiocarbon date on charcoal from
the floor of Structure 1 places
the approximate age of the
interment at A.D. 665-977
(see Table 2).
The Jim Arnold site, also
located along Kent Creek in
Hall County, consists of a ca.
60 cm thick cultural zone exposed in a gravel pit. Two
separate but closely spaced
burial pits observed in the wall
of the gravel pit were subsequently investigated by
Cultural Affiliation
o Polo Duro Complex
Tunnell (1964). Both burials
® Unknown, possibly Palo Duro Complex
had been disturbed by gravel
~ Plains Woodland/Custer Phase
operations and subsequent
[] Blow Out Mountain Phase
0 Unknown
slumping of the edges of the
* Exact location within county is not known
P&A It9515L H
gravel pit walls. Hence, the
skeletal materials and artifacts
Figure 10. Map of selected Late Prehistoric I burials in the Texas Panhandle
that were recovered are incomPlains.
plete, but sufficient information was salvaged to indicate
the nature of the graves. Burial
1,
a
young
adult
female,
had been dislodged from
to Middle Woodland and Kansas Hopewell populathe
burial
pit,
but
four
modified
deer bones (two
tions. He tentatively suggested a possible genetic
awls
and
two
awl
fragments)
were
found with the
affiliation representing a mixture of Southwestern
redeposited skeletal remains. Burial 2, an adult male,
and Woodland traits.
was partially intact, probably in a semiflexed posiThe burial of an adult female, tightly flexed in
tion, inside an oval pit. Associated grave offerings,
a circular pit in the floor of Structure 1 at the Kent
which were found in situ, consisted of six modified
Creek site (see Figure 5), contained four modified
deer bones (three awls and three split metapodial
deer bones (one awl and three split metapodial
halves) and three modified mussel shells as grave
halves), three mussel shells (two unworked valves
and one with notches along its ventral edge), and a
offerings. One of the mussel valves had a ground
bifacial chert knife.
edge and may have been used as a scraper, while
The graves at the Jim Arnold site, located
the other two had drilled holes, were found in the
within 1 meter of each other, are similar in that
skeleton’s chest area, and probably were worn as

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
both were primary interments in shallow oval pits,
both were in identical stratigraphic contexts with
identical pit fill, and both contained modified deer
bones. Tunnell (1964) noted that the burial pits
were intrusive into a sterile zone from the bottom
of the overlying cultural zone. No investigation of
the cultural zone was made, but flint artifacts and
bison bones were noted and dart points were found
on the surface. Tunnell (1964) could not determine
their age and cultural affiliation, but subsequent
researchers (Hughes 1991; Miller 1992; Willey and
Hughes 1978b:190) have indicated that the Jim
Arnold burials are probably associated with the Palo
Duro complex, and noted that the burial site is
located less than 2 km from the Kent Creek site.
Lacking a radiocarbon date or any temporally diagnostic artifacts, the assignment of this burial to the
Palo Duro complex is based only on similarities in
mortuary offerings.
The four burials described above are considered
to be affiliated with the Palo Duro complex, and
they exhibit many similar mortuary characteristics.
All are primary burials containing modified deer
bones as grave offerings, and three of the burials
contained a combination of deer bone awls, split
deer metapodials (awl preforms), and modified and
unmodifed mussel shells. The burials differ in pit
shape (round to oval) and in skeletal placement
within the pits (nearly extended to tightly flexed),
but differences in their intrasite contexts (one in a
house, two in open campsites, and one in a
rockshelter) may account for some of this
variability.
Two individuals buried in a single cairn-covered pit in Donley County were excavated in 1938
(Witte 1955). Both were buried in flexed positions,
but one was reported to have been placed "head
downward" on top of a "carefully prepared sitting
burial" (Witte 1955:85). The skeletons represent
adults (sex not determined) that had apparently been
killed. Two arrow points were found among the
ribs and left scapula of the first individual, and five
arrow points were found in the torso and pelvic
areas of the second person. The points, several of
which have impact breaks, are quite similar to
Deadman’s points in that they have corner to basal
notches and long prominent barbs (see Witte
1955:Plate 13), but the burial specimens are generally larger (i.e., longer and wider with slightly
broader expanding stems) and have serrated blades.
No grave offerings were present, but the points

481

indicate that the burial dates to the Late Prehistoric
I period. Although its precise location is not stated,
the Double Burial site is !ocated between 50 and
100 km north of the Kent Creek site.
The Double Burial is undated, but the associated points indicate that it is probably contemporaneous with, and perhaps related to, the Palo Duro
complex. This was suggested by Willey and Hughes
(1978b: 190) based primarily on the similarities of
the burial points to the Deadman’s arrow point style.
This interpretation is plausible, but the fact that
these two individuals probably were killed by arrows tipped with Deadman’ s-like points is equally
important. An alternative interpretation is that these
individuals may have been killed by people of the
Palo Duro culture rather than having been Palo
Duro peoples themselves, and this possibility also
has been noted by Lintz (1986:225).
The only other burial that might possibly be
associated with the Palo Duro complex is one found
at the Sam Wahl site. It is a single, cairn-covered
human interment (Feature 23 in Figure 6) that is
radiocarbon dated to A.D. 256-415. The human
skeletal materials were found in an oval pit and are
interpreted as a secondary (i.e, bundle) burial of a
middle-aged male. The bones were extremely fragmented and jumbled, and their context (in a tight
cluster in one portion of the pit) suggested that they
might have been confined inside an organic container such as a basket or a hide bag. The only
grave inclusions were a ground and faceted piece
of hematite (i.e., paint stone), and a 6 cm long
Scallorn arrow point. The latter was found in a
context suggesting that an arrow had been laid over
the bone cluster.
Since the Sam Wahl site burial dates to the
transitional Archaic period and is earlier than the
earliest documented occupations at the site, it is
possible that the burial is not associated with the
Palo Duro complex at all. This interpretation is
supported by the fact that the Sam Wahl burial is
quite different from the three Palo Duro burials
described above, none of which are secondary cairn
burials. An alternative interpretation is that the
burial is affiliated with the early Palo Duro complex.
Three lines of circumstantial evidence suggest that
this interpretation is tenable: (1) the burial at the
Sam Wahl site is approximately contemporaneous
with the Palo Duro complex burial at Deadman’s
Shelter; (2) the associated Scallorn arrow point,
although unusually large, would not be stylistically

482

Texas Archeological Society

occurred on-site. Not surprisingly, the residential
bases have the widest range of activity diversity
with 15-16 of the 17 artifact categories represented.
Deadman’s Shelter also has a high activity diversity
with 15 categories represented, while all of the
campsites exhibit moderate artifact diversities with
between 10 and 13 categories represented. Boren
Shelter No. 2 has the lowest artifact diversity with
only 9 of the 17 categories represented.
Two other calculations presented in Table 6
are useful for further comparing and contrasting
these components. One is the total artifact density,
calculated as the number of artifacts per mz of
excavation, and the other is the adjusted artifact
density, calculated as the number of artifacts
(excluding unmodified debitage) per mE of
excavation. These artifact densities are considered
to be crude measures of the relative intensity and/or
duration of occupation.
The Kent Creek site and Deadman’s Shelter
have much higher total artifact densities than do any

out of place in the Palo Duro complex; and (3) the
burial was found at a pithouse village of the Palo
Duro complex. Based on the current evidence,
however, the cultural affiliation of the burial from
the Sam Wahl site is debatable, and the possibility
that it represents a burial of a transitional Archaic
or even a Plains Woodland (i.e., Lake Creek)
individual cannot be discounted.

REDEFINITION OF THE
PALO DURO COMPLEX
Chronology

Many components attributed to the Palo Duro
complex have been radiocarbon dated (Figure 11;
see Table 2). Occupations that are attributable to
the Palo Duro complex may have begun during
transitional Archaic times (ca. A.D. 0-500), but are
definitely recognizable by at least A.D. 500. Palo
Duro occupations apparently continued until around
A.D. 1100, but they seem to disappear quite suddenly. Thus, the Palo Duro complex is
contemporaneous with the Plains
Woodland occupations in the northern
YEARS RESIDENTIAL
BASES

ROCKSHELTERS

CAMPSITES

3URIAL

(A.D.)

Texas Panhandle (i.e., the Lake Creek
complex) and western Oklahoma, the
Blow Out Mountain phase of West
Central Texas, and the pithouse phases
of the Jornada Mogollon and Middle
Pecos areas.

Kent
Creek

Som
Wahl,
Eady

Cot
-k~llow,
Lc~,er

Ct~tk
Hollo,v,
Upper

Deo~
man’s
Shelter

Cony~
~
~kxen
Shelt~’g2,
City
Spring
Loa~
CiubCav~ Shelter

Som
Wahl

1500.
~

Subsistence and Site Function
Material Culture
A comparison of artifacts recovered from residential base camps,
rockshelters, and campsites of the Palo
Duro complex indicates that there are
some significant similarities and
differences between and among these
site types. The data presented in Tables
5 and 6 show that the Palo Duro
material culture is extremely diverse
overall, but that there are some sites,
presumably where limited or special
activities occurred, where the diversity
is rather low. The site data may be
compared using the artifact diversity
index (see Table 6) as a crude representation of the variability in activities that

1000

-

500 -

0
P&Altg,5/SLH

]~ Calibrated Radiocarbon Dates

~ Uncalibrated Radiocarbon Dates

Figure 11. Graph of radiocarbon dates for Palo Duro complex
components.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex

483

484

Texas Archeological Society

o

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Co~nplex

48~

of the other sites. As discussed below, this may be
Wahl, and its radiocarbon dates indicate that it was
due to differences in site function or in the total
occupied repeatedly for a long time, perhaps as
duration and intensity of the occupations, but one
much as 450 years during the early occupation peother factor also plays a role in the unusually high
riod (see Figure 11). Thus, one must suspect that
artifact density seen at Kent Creek. The Kent Creek
the differences in the artifact densities at these two
site has a significantly higher percentage of unsites are related primarily to site function rather
modified debitage (accounting for 97 percent of all
than the duration of the occupations.
artifacts recovered) than does Deadman’s Shelter
Another calculation useful for identifying site
(debitage represents 86 percent of all artifacts) or
function is the projectile point/grinding tool index
any of the other sites (debitage represents 76-91
(see Table 6), calculated as the number of projecpercent of all artifacts). The differential availability
tile points divided by the number of grinding tools
of lithic source materials seems to be a partial expla(manos, metates, and pestles only). The projectile
nation for the higher total artifact density at Kent
point/grinding tool index is a crude measure of the
Creek, because it is the only site where good quality
relative importance of hunting vs. plant processing
chert is immediately available and abundant. Tecovas
within each component. When the adjusted artifact
jasper, which is found in the stream terrace gravels
densities are compared with the projectile point/
exposed on-site, comprises over 90 percent of all
grinding tool indexes, the Palo Duro components
the stone artifacts at Kent Creek and most of the
display considerable variability that may be attribcorticate debitage represents stream-worn gravels
uted to differential site function and use intensity
(Cruse 1992:72 and Table 2). Because the Kent
(Figure 12).
Creek occupants were sitting on a chert source area,
Somewhat surprisingly, the Kent Creek site
it is not surprising that they would generate a higher
has the highest representation of hunting activities
percentage of waste lithic debris than would people
while the Sam Wahl site is at the opposite end of
in areas located much farther from good quality
the spectrum. The vast difference between these
lithic sources.
two residential bases is interpreted as evidence that
The immediate availability of lithic material is
these two residential bases functioned quite differonly a partial explanation for this phenomenon,
ently. While the diversity of artifacts indicates that
because when the adjusted artifact densities are compared, the Kent Creek site
falls to second place, but it still appears
NIGH
to have been used more intensively than
4, LOW
INTENSITY/DURATION
¯
OF OCCUPATION
INTENSIVE
most of the other sites. The adjusted
×
NUNTING
t,
artifact density indicates that the most
Kent Creek
intensively occupied site is Deadman’s
.~
Shelter, and the radiocarbon dates sugCounty Une
~3
gest that this may be due in part to the
~"
_z
long duration of repeated occupations
RELATIVE
there (perhaps as much as 500-800
IMPORTANCE
,7-21
OF ACTIVITIES
years). The spatial confinement of acFatheree
~
tivities within the rockshelter also may
~"
oSo~h Rk~
have played a role in that refuse accu~
mulation would be expected to be much
~ 1 -t Sam Wahl
more concentrated.
Deedmen’s
,B,ue Clay
Shelter
The Kent Creek site, with the second highest adjusted artifact density,
has radiocarbon dates that indicate this
5
10
15
20
residential base was occupied for at least
ARTIFACT DENSITY (per ma)
200-400 years and perhaps as long as
R~helter
~ Cam~ite ¯ Residential Base
400-600 years. In contrast to Kent
Creek, the least intensively used site
Figure t 2. Comparison of artifact density and projectile point/grinding
(except for Boren Shelter No. 2) is Sam
tool indexes for Palo Duro components.
C.43! HO~!OW

, , , , .... ,,,

486

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

both sites were multifunctional, the data presented
in Figure 12, along with other lines of evidence
discussed below, support the interpretation that the
Sam Wahl site was a specialized residential base
and that the primary activities there were related to
the processing, storage, and utilization of plant
foods. The low artifact density at Sam Wahl is
further explained by the fact that these activities
would have generated much less residue, particularly chipped stones, than would hunting activities.
All of the Palo Duro campsites exhibit similar
artifact densities but vary considerably in terms of
site function. While hunting activities are fairly
well represented at the County Line, Fatheree, and
South Ridge sites, plant processing was very much
the dominant activity at the Blue Clay, South Sage
Creek, Gobbler Creek Bridge, and Cat Hollow sites.
In this regard, the latter sites are more like the Sam
Wahl site than they are the other campsites.
The chipped stone tool assemblages from Palo
Duro sites (see Table 5) can be characterized as
being rather homogeneous, but the relative frequencies of artifacts vary considerably from site to site.
When only the chipped stone tools (i.e., projectile
points, drills, gouges, bifaces, cobble tools, unifaces,
and edge-modified flakes) are considered, and sites
with stone tool samples of less than 50 specimens
are excluded, some interesting patterns emerge.
Unifaces and edge-modified flakes are the most
common tools, and they respectively constitute between 10-40 percent and 20-53 percent of all
chipped stone tools in a single site. Most of these
tools cannot be attributed to specific functions, but
they occur in relatively high frequencies both in
sites where activities were mainly hunting oriented
and in sites where plant processing was the dominant activity. Projectile points, bifaces, and cobble
tools are less common in general but are quite variable from site to site, respectively constituting between 2-43 percent, 3-24 percent, and 2-26 percent
of the chipped stones at any one type of site. There
is a tendency for cobble tools to be much better
represented at plant-processing sites, and it has
been suggested that these tools may have been used
to refurbish (i.e., peck the surfaces of) grinding
stones (Boyd et al. 1994:78-79, 145). Two classes,
drills and gouges, are generally rare and respectively make up between 0-5 percent and 0-8 percent of chipped stone tools at any one site.
Most of the gouges found at Palo Duro sites
are Clear Fork-type unifaces (Turner and Hester

1985:205-208), and they usually have some
evidence of haft wear. There is a tendency, albeit
weak, for these tools to be better represented at
sites where intensive plant processing occurred. If
gouges were used for wood working, as has been
suggested for South Texas (Hester et al. 1973),
then it is possible that they were used as adzes for
making and maintaining digging sticks or other
wooden tools. Alternatively, gouges could have
been used to tip the ends of some type of multipurpose scraping/planing tool or digging stick (Ray
1941:161-162). Of particular interest, Clear Fork
gouges have been found in sufficient frequencies
and at enough Palo Duro complex sites to dispel
the popular notion that they are diagnostic Archaic
tools in the Panhandle Plains (e.g., Bagot and
Hughes 1979:50; Etchieson et al. 1977:33, 35,
1978:83, 1979:353; D. Hughes 1984:116; J. Hughes
1991:19).
Dart points are present at some sites, and despite the possibility of earlier components in some
cases, there seems to be growing evidence for the
contemporaneous use of dart and arrow points in
the Southern Plains between ca. A.D. 200 and A.D.
500 (see Boyd et al. 1996). The arrow points associated with the Palo Duro complex are characterized as early corner-notched and stemmed forms
that are usually typed as Scallorn and Deadman’s,
respectively. However, arrow point assemblages
also are characterized by a great deal of variability,
and there are seldom few specimens from any one
site that can be considered classic Scallorn or
Deadman’s forms. One need only look at the early
arrow point forms from the Sam Wahl, Kent Creek,
and Deadman’s Shelter sites (Figures 13-15) to see
the diversity in gross morphology. Points typed as
Deadman’s generally have the diagnostic long slender barbs and long straight or bulbous stems, but
other variations include specimens with shorter, often reworked, barbs and wider Scallorn-like expanding stems. Most of the points typed as Scallorn
do not fit the classic wide-stemmed form illustrated by Turner and Hester (1985:189), but conform more closely to the coryell and eddy varieties
illustrated by Jelks (1962:Figure 13). The Scallorn
and Scallorn-like specimens from Palo Duro sites
often appear to be nothing more than reworked
Deadman’s points with the barbs shortened or removed altogether.
Ground stone tools are obviously well
represented at some Palo Duro sites (see Table 5),

Boyd D The Palo Duro Complex

0

I
cm

Figure 13. Early arrow points from the Sam Wahl site: a,
Bonham; b-e, Scallorn. A barb fragment, typed as Deadman’s,
is not illustrated. Specimen e is associated with the cairn
burial.

but the assemblage from Sam Wahl is rather unique
in comparison with the other sites. There appear to
be three sets of grinding tools repesented at the Sam
Wahl site. One set consists of the thin oval pestles
used with pointed-oval bedrock mortars. These may
be tools for grinding mesquite beans, as has been

487

suggested for mortars (bedrock and portable)
and pestles throughout the southwestern United
States (Bel! and Castetter ! 937). The abundance
of pestles at Mesilla phase sites in the Tularosa
Basin is considered to be evidence of extensive
mesquite processing (Carmichael 1986:220),
and it is possible that bedrock mortars, which
are common in the Caprock Canyonlands, may
have been used in a similar fashion.
The second set of grinding tools consists of
flat-faced manos, usually sandstone, used with
fiat-slab metates, and the third set consists of
convex-faced manos, usually quartzite, used
with oval-basin metates. The latter set is the
best represented of the grinding tools at the Sam
Wahl site. Caching (or storing) of complete
large oval-basin metates may indicate that this
grinding tool kit was the most important in
terms of the amount of materials being processed at Sam Wahl.

o

t

/
0

1
×

o
I

Figure 14. Scallorn and Deadman’s arrow points
from the Kent Creek site: a-g, Deadman’s; h-o,
Scallorn. Drawn from selected specimens illustrated
in Cruse (1992:Figure 18).

I

Figure 15. S caltorn and Deadman’s arrow points from
Deadman’s Shelter: a-j, Scallorn; k-y, Deadman’s.
Drawn from selected specimens illustrated in Willey
and Hughes (1978:Figures 54 and 55).

488

Texas Archeological Society

Although less abundant, the grinding tools from
the Kent Creek site do exhibit roughly the same
morphological variability as do those from Sam
Wahl. At Kent Creek, no complete metates were
found, but the fragments represent both slab and
basin types (one fragment of a thick slab with a
deeply worn concavity), and the manos are either
oval in shape with flat or convex faces or they are
rectangular with flat faces. Two of the rectangular
manos have beveled faces.
When the ground stone assemblages from the
residential bases are compared by material type and
completeness, an interesting pattern emerges (Table
7). Metate fragments heavily dominate the assemblage at Sam Wahl, but they are only moderately
abundant at the Kent Creek site. In addition, most
of the metate fragments at Sam Wahl were recycled
(i.e., reused as hearthstones), while none of those at
Kent Creek were found in recycled contexts: Since

Triassic sandstones and Quaternary gravel outcrops
are immediately available at both sites, the distance
to material sources is not a factor affecting the
frequency of grinding tools. Thus, some other factor must account for these differences. While it is
possible that grinding activities were simply more
important at Sam Wahl than at Kent Creek, this
explanation is not totally satisfactory. Schlanger
(1990, 1991) has observed that complete and fragmentary ground stones are considerably more abundant in villages sites that were occupied for longer
periods of time. The early occupations at the Sam
Wahl site lasted for some 400 years or more (based
on six radiocarbon dates), certainly long enough
for numerous’ grinding implements to have been
broken and recycled. The chronology of the Kent
Creek site is less precise (see discussion above),
but it may have been reoccupied for only one or
two centuries. If this is the case, then the lower

Table 7. Comparison of Grinding Assemblages
from the Sam Wahl and Kent Creek Sites
Kent Creek Site

Sam Wahl Site, Early Occupation

Sandstone

Tool Class

#

Sandstone

Quartzite

%

#

%

Quartzite

%

#

%

Manos
Complete

1

1.3

5

6.4

6

21.4

2

7.2

Fragments

4

5.1

5

6.4

6

21.4

6

21.4

Metates
Complete

5

6.4

48

61.5

3

3.8

7

9.0

Subtotals

68

87.2

GRAND TOTALS

78

Fragments

....
--

--

8

28.6

Pestles
Complete
Fragments
Other
Complete
Fragments

(100.0)

......

10

12.8

20

28

71.4

(100.0)

8

28.6

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
frequency of grinding tool recycling could be a
function of time rather than evidence that grinding
activities were less important at Kent Creek. As
discussed later (see "Seasonality, Residential Mobility, and Settlement Pattern" below), differential
abandonment processes (i.e., planned vs. unplanned)
are evident at these sites and at dwellings within
these sites.
The results of a study of ground stone tools in
the Jornada Mogollon area by Calamia (1991) support the interpretations that the Sam Wahl and Kent
Creek sites are both residential bases but that their
functions are somewhat different. It was observed
that complete manos are much more common in
special-activity sites, while broken manos are more
common in residential bases. Calamia (1991 :Figure
8) shows that only ca. 38 percent of the manos found
at Jornada Mogollon residential bases are complete,
compared to ca. 77 percent complete manos at special-activity sites. The higher frequency of broken
manos at residential bases is thought to be related to
the greater intensity and/or duration of occupations
that occurred there. The percentages of whole manos
at the Sam Wahl and Kent Creek sites (ca. 40 percent at each) are very close to the figure given for
Jornada Mogollon residential bases.

489

Calamia (1991:Figures 2-7) also uses mano
size as an indirect measure of residential mobility
and intensity of plant processing in the Jornada
region. He demonstrates that manos are generally
smaller at special-activity sites than at residential
bases and that there is a general increase in the size
of manos through time (from the Archaic period to
the E1 Paso phase). Other researchers have
suggested that increasing mano size is a reflection
of increasing dependence upon plant foods in
general and horticulture in particular (e.g., Mauldin
1991, 1993).
When the mano size data for the Sam Wahl
and Kent Creek sites are compared (Table 8), another interesting pattern emerges (acknowledging
that the sample sizes are quite small and thus interpretations are tentative). Although ground stones
are most abundant at the Sam Wahl site, the manos
there are considerably smaller than those at the
Kent Creek site. These data may indicate that grinding activities were more intensive at the Kent Creek
site but that the overall duration of occupations was
longer at the Sam Wahl site. If the site occupations
were sequential, these data could reflect increasing
dependence upon plant resources through time, as
is suggested for the Jornada area. But there is no

Table 8. Comparison of Mano Size Data for Palo Duro Complex Residential Bases
Attributes

Sam Wahl (Early Occupation)

Kent Creek

6

8

Length

7.1-11.4

9.7-14.0

Width

5.4-8.5

8.3-9.9

Thickness

2.9-6.2

2.6-5.7

11.6

Sample Size (# of whole manos)
Size Range (minimum-maximum, cm)

Mean Size (cm)
Length

9.0

Width

7.2

8.7

Thickness

4.6

3.5

Mean Length/Width Ratio

1.25

1.34

Mean Grinding Surface Area (cm2)*

66.5

101.38

*Grinding area is an approximation that is figured as length times width. It slightly overestimates the grinding areas of most
manos because they are subrectangular, oval, or round rather than rectangular or square.

490

Texas Archeological Society

evidence indicating that the Kent Creek site occupations are dominantly later than those at the Sam
Wahl site. In fact, the chronometric evidence points
to the contrary, and it appears that the Palo Duro
components are more or less contemporaneous, but
that occupations of the Sam Wahl site continued
later (i.e., the post-A.D. 1100 late occupation period) than at the Kent Creek site. If the Palo Duro
occupations at these sites were indeed contemporaneous (perhaps with Sam Wahl being occupied more
frequently), then the data may be interpreted as
representing differences in site function. This interpretation is preferred, and it is possible that differences in the grinding tools between these sites are
due to the processing of different plants (see "Faunal and Floral Remains" below).
The ceramics from Palo Duro sites are interesting for a variety of reasons. Sherds are usually
absent or rare in most sites (see Table 5), accounting for less than 9 percent of all artifacts (excluding
debitage), but sherds are quite common at the Blue
Clay and South Ridge sites, where they comprise
22 percent and 16 percent of all artifacts (excluding
debitage), respectively. The total absence of pottery sherds in some Palo Duro sites could be due to
limited investigations, but their absence at other
sites that have produced large artifact samples is
intriguing. The fact that no sherds were found at the
County Line and Gobbler Creek Bridge sites, despite fairly extensive investigations, may indicate
that pottery was not being used by the inhabitants.
From a functional perspective, one should not expect pottery to be present at every site occupied by
Palo Duro peoples, and it should not be surprising
to find special-activity sites with no pottery.
The brownware pottery found at Palo Duro
sites is generally classifiable as belonging to the
Jornada Mogollon tradition. Detailed visual analyses by Southwestern ceramicists (i.e., Jack Hedrick,
Regge Wiseman, and Helene Warren) have identified several different varieties that probably represent different source areas within southeastern New
Mexico and/or western Texas. The types that have
been specifically identified are Jornada Brown (and/
or Alma Plain), Roswell Brown, Middle Pecos Micaceous Brown, South Pecos Brown, and McKenzie
Brown. Some researchers recognize many regional
variations of Jornada Mogollon brownwares and
are willing to make visual type identifications in
some cases, while others think that few or no types
may be identified accurately by visual examina-

tions alone. Petrographic studies of brownwares
from several Palo Duro sites, however, generally
support the visual type identifications made by various ceramic experts.
Petrographic studies of Palo Duro complex
brownwares include two sherds from 41BI265
(Etchieson et al. 1977:64); three sherds from
Deadman’s Shelter, six from the Kent Creek site,
and three from the South Sage Creek site
(Robinson 1992); and five sherds from the Sam
Wahl site (Robinson 1994). These petrographic
data indicate that there is considerable compositional variability in the brownwares, representing
different source areas. These studies also have confirmed that almost all of this pottery is of non-local origin and was made in the Jornada Mogollon
or Middle Pecos areas. As yet, there have been no
convincing studies to indicate that brownware pottery was made in the Caprock Canyonlands or
Southern Llano Estacado, although occasional
sherds that do not match any varieties of Jornada
brownware are considered to be possible candidates for locally made wares (e.g., one sherd at
Kent Creek was identified as possibly being of
local manufacture).
There may be some evidence, albeit weak, for
temporal differentiation of brownware types.
Thicker brownwares tempered with crushed igneous rocks primarily containing quartz and feldspars,
such as the Jornada Brown/Alma Plain found at
Deadman’s Shelter, appear to be the earliest
brownwares in the Texas Panhandle Plains, perhaps dating as early as A.D. 100-300. Thinner
sherds with more-variable crushed rock tempers
may be later. In particular, some sherds found at
the Kent Creek and South Sage Creek sites contain
significant quantities of biotite (see Robinson 1992,
1994), and have been tentatively identified as
Middle Pecos Micaceous Brown, while some distinctive sherds from the Sam Wahl site have been
tentatively identified as South Pecos Brown. According to Jetinek (1967), these wares were manufactured in the Middle Pecos area between A.D.
800-1300.
There are some interesting patterns in the
distribution of bone and mussel shell artifacts. Most
notable is the presence of modified deer bones
(primarily metapodial awls and awl blanks), and
modified and unmodified mussel shells (scrapers,
pendants, and shell blanks) in human burials. As
mentioned above, the use of these items as mortuary

Boyd m The Palo Duro Complex
offerings is intriguing, but their significance is not
understood. Excluding burial contexts, the
distribution of modified bones within Palo Duro
sites (see Table 5) is almost certainly related to
differential preservation rather than differing site
function. The total absence of modified bones in
residential bases and campsites does not mean that
no bone artifacts were used at these sites. Since
bones are generally sparse and poorly preserved in
open sites, it is reasonable to assume that bone
tools could have been deposited but subsequently
lost to deterioration.
Modified bones are found in only one site, the
intensively occupied Deadman’s Shelter, where
bone preservation was very good. Since differential
preservation does not seem to be a factor in any of
the rockshelters, one may assume that bone tools
were not commonly used and/or discarded in the
ephemerally occupied rockshelters. The 21 bone
artifacts that were found at Deadman’s Shelter include: awls and awl blanks made. of split deer
metapodials, polished deer antler tips (flaking
tools?), and unidentifiable fragments that were cut,
polished, and/or incised. One fragment with two
drilled holes in it may have been a pendant.
Mussel shell fragments are common in many
Palo Duro sites (see "Faunal and Floral Remains"
below), and differential preservation is less likely
to have been a factor affecting the distribution of
shell artifacts. Mussel shells occasionally were used
as scrapers, but the most common forms of modification (such as cut edges, drilled holes, notches,
and surface etching) probably represent shell jewelry or waste debris as a by-product of the manufacture of shell jewelry. Evidence for the use of
shell jewelry and/or the manufacture of shell ornaments was found at the South Sage Creek, Sam
Wahl, and Kent Creek sites.

Features
A comparison of feature types for Palo Duro
complex sites (Table 9) shows a wide range of
generalized and specific activities and supports the
differential site functions seen in Figure 12. As
expected, the diversity of features is greatest for the
residential bases and is somewhat less variable for
campsites and rockshelters. There are some
obvious correlations, such as the presence of
pithouses and storage pits only at residential bases,
but the most ubiquitous features at all sites are

491

rock-lined and unlined hearths, burned rock
clusters, and baking pits. While the former types
are considered general heating/cooking features,
the baking pits are more substantial rock-lined or
rock-filled pits that are interpreted as plantcooking ovens (see Boyd et al. [1994:38-43, 135138] for descriptions of baking pits found at Lake
Alan Henry). Baking pits were found at the
Gobbler Creek Bridge and Cat Hollow sites, along
with large quantities of burned rocks thought to be
residue discarded during pit baking. Because of the
tremendous quantities of burned rocks at these
sites, they are interpreted as specialized plantprocessing campsites.
There is considerable variability in the architecture of the roughly contemporaneous pithouses
at the Kent Creek and Sam Wahl sites (Table 10).
These pithouses include both ovate and rectangular forms, their sizes vary somewhat with floor
areas ranging from 7.6 to 14.2 m2, and the entry
directions are all different. As described earlier,
there also are many differences in the interior features and in the construction of the superstructures.

Faunal and Floral Remains
Faunal remains provide substantial evidence
for the use of animals as food resources by Palo
Duro peoples. The animal bones recovered from
various sites, summarized in Table 11, generally
have been treated in one of three ways: they have
been completely ignored during analysis; they have
been identified by taxa and listed but not analyzed;
or they have been identified by taxa and analyzed
for evidence of modification (e.g., burning and
butchering), and their distributions have been carefully studied. This differential treatment helps explain many of the question marks that appear in
Table 11. It also is important to realize that in many
cases, particularly when dealing with rodents and
other burrowing animals and with rockshelter assemblages, it is unclear whether animals were introduced into sites by natural processes rather than
human activity.
The largest faunal assemblages are from the
Kent Creek site and Deadman’s Shelter. At both of
these sites, deer is the only medium-large animal
recognized as having been a significant food
resource while bison is poorly represented. A wide
variety of other small animals are present, but their
relative importance as food resources is

492

Texas Archeological Society

Table 9. Comparison of Features Associated with Palo Duro Complex Components

Residential Bases

Rockshelters
Various

Feature Type

Kent Creek

Pithouse (habitation)

X

Pithouse (storage)

X

Sam Wahl

Deadman’s

Boren No. 2

Campsites

Small pitroom
Storage pit

x

Bedrock mortar

x

X

Baking pit

x

X

Unlined hearth
Rock-lined hearth

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Burned rock cluster/scatter*

?

Fire-cracked rock cluster**

?

Hearth fill dump

X

Wind deflector

X

Human burial
No. of Feature Types Represented

6-7

4-7

*Burned rock cluster/scatter is a catchall type that includes many undefined burned rock features.
**Fire-cracked rock features are distinguished by the presence of heat-fractured quartzite rocks and may represent boiling stone
dumps.

comparatively low or unclear. In contrast to these
sites, the faunal evidence indicates that rabbits and
rodents were the most frequently eaten animals at
Boren Shelter No. 2.
The faunal assemblages at all of the other sites
are either so meager that they are uninterpretable
(and they are likely to be biased by differential
preservation) or they are just large enough to provide some interpretable information. When the probably intrusive animal bones are weeded out and
burning/butchering are taken into account, the minimum numbers of individuals for specific taxa are
so low that it is impossible to determine the relative
dietary importance of various animals. Thus, even
though they were carefully analyzed, many of these
smaller faunal assemblages produced little more
than a grocery list of animals that were likely to
have been or definitely were hunted. The faunal
remains from the Chalk Hollow site, although apparently a sizable and interesting assemblage, have
not been analyzed at all.

Freshwater mussel shells are consistently present
in Palo Duro sites, and there is some evidence that
they may have been utilized as food. For example,
heated hinge fragments (presumably heated to cause
ttie live mussel to open) were recovered from the
South Sage Creek site. Mussel remains have not
been found in sufficient quantities, however, to suggest that they were an important food resource. They
certainly were never used by Palo Duro peoples to
the extent that they were in other areas. Large accumulations of shells in the East Levee site, 41TG91
(Creel 1990), near San Angelo, and at sites at Lake
O. H. Ivie (Treece et al. 1993:519-523), indicate
that mussels were an important food for peoples in
the Colorado and Concho river valleys, but there is
no such evidence for the Caprock Canyonlands. In
fact, the relatively high frequency of modified mussel shells and single unmodified valves (but never
whole mussels) in Palo Duro complex sites and
burials suggests that the shells themselves may have
been much more important than the mussels.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex

493

Table 10. Architectural Variability in Pithouses of the Palo Duro Complex
Kent Creek Site
Sam Wahl Site
Attributes

Shape
Size (m)

Pithouse 1

Pithouse 2

rectangular

rectangular

ovate

4.3x3.3

3.3x2.3

3.5x3

Pithouse

Floor area (ms)

14.2

7.6

10.5

Entry direction

east

west

southeast (?)

plastered ramp

plastered ramp

unknown

35+

33+

45+

Troughs (or water traps?)

yes

yes

no

Large postholes

yes

no

no

Entry type
Depth (cm)*
Interior Features

Small postholes
Hearth
Rock clusters/ovens

Exterior postholes
Probable type of

yes

no

uncertain

no**

no

probable

yes

no

no

no

no

uncertain

wattle and daub

stone masonry

very ephemeral,

superstructure

jacal-like

*Depths represent minimum estimates of how deep the floors were excavated from the original ground surface.
**No interior hearth was found, but a post-abandonment subfloor burial in the center of the structure could have destroyed a
hearth.

Palynological samples have been taken and
analyzed from several Palo Duro sites (i.e., the
Kent Creek, Sam Wahl, and Gobbler Creek Bridge
sites), but the fossil pollen in these samples consistently has been found to be seriously degraded,
and the data are generally considered unusable for
economic (or paleoenvironmental) interpretations
(Bryant 1993; Dering 1994; Dering and Bryant
1992; Jones 1990). Phytoliths have been extracted
from feature sediments at Lake Alan Henry sites,
but the resulting data are generally not useful for
subsistence interpretations. Unlike pollen, the
phytoliths have been found to be well preserved,
but the interpretations are limited by the current
state of the art (primarily the inability to recognize
specific taxa and the lack of comparative collections, but phytolith analysis has improved considerably in recent years). One notable exception is
that calcium oxylate crystals found in sediments
associated with a baking pit at the Gobbler Creek
Bridge site are thought to be from prickly pear

(Cummings 1990:541).
Macrobotanical remains recovered from
sediment flotation provide the most useful evidence
for interpreting the plants that were or may have
been used as food resources (Table 12). Carbonized
seeds of many different plants have been recovered
from sediments in a variety of contexts (e.g., on
pithouse floors, in storage pits and baking pits, and
in nonfeature samples), and in all cases the charring
is thought to be the result of human activities (as
opposed to natural fires). The question, then, is
which plants were used as food and which plants
may have been burned accidentally or used in some
other manner, such as for fuel? The data presented
in Table 12 show various plant taxa as being either
present or moderately abundant in charred form but
do not attempt to make a judgment as to why the
seeds were burned. Various analysts generally
address these questions on a case by case basis,
taking many factors into account (e.g., the nature of
the plant, the frequency of charred seed occurrence

494

Texas Archeological Society

Boyd m The Palo Duro Cotnplex

495

Table 12. Comparison of Macrobotanical Evidence for Use of Specific Plant Foods
at Palo Duro Complex Components*
Residential Bases

Common and Scientific Name

Kent Creek

Rockshelter

Sam Wahl,

Boren No. 2,

Early Occupation

Lower Shelter

Goosefoot (Chenopodium sp.)

X

Pigweed (Amaranthus sp.)
Prickly poppy (Argemone sp.)
Purslane (Portulaca sp.)

?
?

Bottle gourd (Cucurbitacaea)
Carpet weed (Mollugo verticillata)
Skullcap (Scutellaria sp.)

X

Mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa)
Oak (Quercus sp., probably shin oak)
Lotebush (Ziziphus obtusifolia)
Hackberry (Celtis reticulata)

X

Brome grass (Bromus sp.)

0

Paspalum (Paspalum sp.)

0

Dropseed (Sporobolus sp.)

0

Panic grass (Panicum sp.)

0

Number of flotation samples analyzed

4

14

X

X

10

*Macrobotanical evidence consists of carbonized seeds recovered from flotation (charred wood is not included). A few flotation
samples from the Gobbler Creek Bridge and South Sage Creek sites were analyzed, but no carbonized seeds were recovered.
? = presence noted in one or more samples.
x = moderately abundant; found in multiple samples from different types of features.
o = recovered only in storage pits; may be evidence of grass lining rather than food.

in various contexts, and ethnographic evidence for
utilization of plants).
While any of the taxa listed may represent food
resources, the taxa that are most abundant (in terms
of the quantity of charred seeds from individual
samples and the ubiquity of their occurrence in
multiple samples from different types of features)
are more likely to have been used for food. Of all of
the taxa listed, however, only the mesquite beans
and shin oak acorns have been found in archeological
contexts that strongly suggest they were used for
food. Dering (1994:335-341) provides an interesting
discussion of the probable use of mesquite at the
Sam Wahl site, and Cruse (1992:121) discusses shin
oak acorns found at the Kent Creek site.
It also is notable that Chenopodium is much
more abundant than any other taxa and is associated with three types of features (i.e., pithouse,

storage pits, and baking pits) at the Sam Wahl site.
Dering (1994:341) suggests that the ubiquity of
charred goosefoot at the Sam Wahl site, in contrast
to its absence at other Lake Alan Henry sites, is
evidence that goosefoot was being processed as
food. While goosefoot was very abundant in one
storage pit flotation sample, it was not found in
sufficient quantity or consistency in other storage
pit samples to indicate that it was the principal
plant food that was being stored.
In addition to the evidence for food use,
Dering (1994:340-341) observed that four species
of grass seeds consistently were found in storage
pits at the Sam Wahl site, but they were not recovered in any other type of feature. He speculated that
this may be evidence that the pits had been lined
with grass, rather than that grass seeds were being
stored in the pits.

496

Texas Archeological Society

There is no definitive evidence for the range of
plant foods that might have been processed in the
baking pits (see Hines et al. [1994] for a detailed
discussion of pit roasting) at residential bases or at
specialized campsites, or what season(s) of the year
they might have been used. There are a multitude
of possibilities, however, such as baking pits having been used: (1) during one time of the year for
cooking a particular plant, (2) during one time of
the year for cooking a variety of different plants,
(3) during multiple seasons for cooking a few specific plants, or (4) during multiple seasons for cooking a wide variety of plant foods. It is likely that the
baking pits were used primarily during the late
spring, summer, and fall, when a wide range of
wild plant foods (e.g., seeds, beans, berries, tubers,
and tunas and pads) are available for exploitation.
Given the paucity of direct evidence, it is impossible to know whether these ovens were
multiseasonal and multifunctional (i.e., used for
cooking many plant foods as they became available), or season and resource-specific (i.e., used
primarily for cooking some superabundant plant
food during one particular season).
Based on ethnographic evidence for arid and
semiarid environments (e.g., Basehart 1960;
Castetter and Opler 1936:35-38; Pennington 1963;
Sonnichen 1958), many different plants were
cooked in pit ovens, but the principal ones were
agave, sotol, prickly pear, yucca, and corn. Agave
is not found in the Caprock Canyonlands today and
probably never ranged that far north. Sotol, although
not found there today, may have been present there
in the past since its current range has been seriously
altered by modern ranching practices (see Boyd et
al. 1994:264). Prickly pear and yucca are ubiquitous in the area today and probably were abundant
in Palo Duro times as well. Although it is not known
whether the Palo Duro peoples practiced horticulture, corn is yet another possible plant food that
was oven roasted.
Although their contemporaneity has been demonstrated by the radiocarbon dates from the Sam
Wahl site, it is not known if the grinding tools,
baking pits, and storage pits were used together as
part of an integrated technology for some specific
resource(s) or if they were used independently for
different resources. Some foods may have been
ground before being cooked, or vice versa, and these
foods may or may not have then been stored for
future use. It also is possible that many plants were

ground while only a few were cooked and/or stored.
Again, the possibilities are numerous, and there is
no hard evidence to support any one interpretation.
Besides the possible oven-baked plant
resources mentioned above, a wide range of other
plants may have been important food resources
(including but not limited to all of the plants listed
in Table 12). Boyd et al. (1994:264-266) provide a
detailed discussion of the various plants that could
have been significant food resources in the Caprock
Canyonlands and Rolling Plains. The plants and
plant parts that may have been sufficiently abundant
and nutritious to have been utilized intensively as
food resources by Palo Duro peoples are (in no
particular order): seeds of various grasses and
flowering plants (e.g., dropgrass and Cheno-ams);
various roots and tubers (e.g., buffalo gourds and
prairie turnip); pads, stalks, fruits, and/or bulbs of
desert succulents and cacti (e.g., yucca, sotol,
prickly pear, and cholla); various cucurbits (e.g.,
bottle gourds); acorns of shin oak and possibly live
oak (remnant groves of live oak are present at Lake
Alan Henry); possibly pecan or hickory nuts
(charred Carya sp. wood from a hearth at 41GR484
indicates that pecan or hickory was once in the
Lake Alan Henry area); and mesquite beans. There
are undoubtedly many other plants that might have
been important food resources, but they are perhaps
less obvious in the ethnographic or archeological
records. A variety of horticultural crops (e.g., corn,
squash, and beans) should not be discounted as
possible food resources despite their absence in the
archeological record.
Of all the plants mentioned above, shin oak
and mesquite warrant further consideration as having been important or staple sources of food for
Palo Duro peoples. The extent of shin oak distribution in the Caprock Canyonlands today is not well
known, but it is confined mainly to areas where
sandy calcareous soils predominate and in areas
where limestone crops out. Assuming that its distribution was similar in the past, one may only speculate that shin oak may have been sufficiently
abundant in some areas to have comprised a significant food resource for Palo Duro peoples. The
occurrence of charred acorns, tentatively identified
as shin oak because it is the only species that grows
in the immediate vicinity today, in several feature
contexts at the Kent Creek site is intriguing evidence. Since shin oak is not a particularly good fuel
source, the acorns are not likely to have been intro-

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
duced incidentally or accidentally. Although the
use of shin oak acorns for food is not well documented ethnographically, its use by prehistoric
peoples in and around the northern Llano Estacado
has been suggested by various researchers (e.g.,
Collins 1971:76; Leslie 1979:185).
Mesquite, on the other hand, is well documented in the ethnographic literature as a staple
resource for many peoples in the southwestern
United States and northern Mexico (Bell and
Castetter 1937:21-33), along the Texas Coast and
in Central Texas (Covey 1961:66, 86-87, 100), and
in the Rio Grande delta (Salinas 1990:117-119).
Although direct archeological evidence is limited,
mesquite has been suggested as having been an
important resource throughout the Jornada
Mogollon region (Brethauer 1979; Carmichael
1986:220; Leslie 1979:186), and even the historic
Comanche and Kiowa of the Texas Panhandle
Plains utilized mesquite beans as food (Carlson and
Jones 1940:530; Galvin 1970:30-3t; Vestal and
Schultes 1939:33-34). Nutritional data compiled
by Hiles (1993) indicate that mesquite pods and
beans are very high in protein, carbohydrates, fiber, and sugar.
Boyd et al. (1994:265-266) dispel the myth
that mesquite was not present or rare in the Texas
Panhandle Plains prior to late nineteenth century
ranching. The distribution of mesquite has certainly
increased dramatically due to historic and modern
ranching and agricultural practices (Flores
1990:60-61; Kirkpatrick 1992:141). Its rapid
spread into new areas (such as uplands) that were
once devoid of mesquite is the source for the common misconception that "there was no mesquite
before ranchers came." However, early historic
accounts (e.g., Bailey 1951:105, 121; Foreman
1937:97; Parker 1984:170-171, 184) clearly indicate that mesquite trees were very abundant in riverine environments prior to cattle grazing (and
overgrazing), root plowing and chaining, and control of range fires. The mid-nineteenth century
distribution of mesquite suggests that it was abundant throught the Caprock Canyonlands in prehistory, and it is the best candidate for having been a
staple resource (but not necessarily the only one)
for Palo Duro peoples. It also should be noted that
charred mesquite beans should not be expected to
be common in the archeological record even if they
were extensively utilized. Most ethnographic accounts indicate that beans were crushed and ground

497

before being cooked. If they were not cooked in
pod or bean form, the chances of their being
charred, and hence preserved in the archeo!ogica!
record, are much lower.
Five main interpretations can be derived from
the Palo Duro Complex subsistence data. First, bison hunting and use of bison as a food resource are
poorly documented. That bison were present during Late Prehistoric I times is unquestionable since
bison remains dating to this time are found in many
sites. Bison remains are exceedingly rare, however,
compared to the preceding Late Archaic period,
and even at sites where the artifactual evidence
indicates that hunting was an important activity,
the principal game animals appear to have been
deer and smaller animals. In addition, no bison kill
or butchering localities are known for the Palo Duro
complex, and it appears unlikely that any form of
communal bison hunting occurred. From this, one
may infer that bison were somewhat scarce in, but
never absent from, the Caprock Canyonlands during Palo Duro times (assuming that people would
have hunted them much more if large populations
were present). While a general scarcity of bison
remains has been noted for the Southern Plains
between A.D. 500 and 1200 (Dillehay 1974), this
does not preclude the possibility that bison were
abundant in other areas at this time. Treece et al.
(1993:523-524) note that bison remains dating to
this time period are well represented in sites at
Lake O. H. Ivie in West Central Texas.
The second major point is that multiple lines
of evidence indicate that the primary subsistence
resources for Palo Duro peoples were plant foods.
Although hunting activities are fairly well
represented at some sites, some evidence for the
use of plant foods is found at all Palo Duro sites,
and it is overwhelmingly dominant in many
components. The contemporaneous use of storage
pits, baking pits, at least two kinds of portable
grinding tool kits (i.e., mano/metate sets), and
bedrock mortars/pestles at residential bases, all
denote a heavy emphasis on plant foods. The
activities that occurred at these sites were often of
sufficient duration to warrant the construction of
pithouses, and it is likely that these residential
villages were occupied on a seasonal basis.
Third, while a wide range of plant foods probably was utilized, it may be hypothesized that, just
as they were important in the Jornada Mogollon
and Eastern Jornada areas, mesquite beans and shin

498

Texas Archeological Society

oak acorns also may have been important foods for
Palo Duro complex peoples. Many Eastern Jornada
campsites may have been occupied by people harvesting these foods, and Leslie (1979:185-186)
notes that "acorns and mesquite beans mature at
about the same time (August-early September) but
vary in different areas and different years; the two
foods were possibly harvested at the same time
when possible." The same may be true for peoples
living in the Caprock Canyonlands.
The fourth point is that in spite of the absence
of domesticated plant remains or definite agricultural tools, the possibility that Palo Duro peoples
practiced some form of limited horticulture must be
considered. The introduction of domesticated plants
into the southwestern United States has been characterized as a "monumental nonevent" that had
"little immediate impact on native human populations" (Minnis 1985:310). It was the intensification
of agricultural production, rather than its mere introduction, that had significant and widespread impacts upon prehistoric economies. Following
Bronson’s (1977) terminology (cited in Minnis
1985:338), it may be suggested that Palo Duro
peoples were not agriculturalists ("those dependent
upon cultivated plants"), but that they could have
been cultivators ("those for whom crops are not
necessarily major economic items"). Lacking definitive evidence, it can only be suggested that limited plant cultivation may have been incorporated
into a seasonal pattern of resource collection (Minnis
1985:331). Certainly, it is likely that Palo Duro
peoples were at least aware of farming since agricultural systems were well established in the Southwest by A.D. 500-700 (Minnis 1985:310;
Woodbury and Zubrow 1979:50-51), in the Central Plains by A.D. 900 (Adair 1988:114), and in
South Central Oklahoma (Vehik 1984:196) and
Northeast Texas (Perttula 1992:13; Perttula and
Bruseth 1983:17) by A.D. 800. Ford (1985:352,
362-364) suggests that the Southern Plains may
have been a corridor for the continued eastward
spread of cultigens (specifically maize and beans),
and presumably farming technologies, from the
American Southwest. If so, the Palo Duro complex
may have even played some critical role in the
diffusion process.
The final major point is that there is ample
evidence for considerable variability in site function. This has been observed not only between different types of sites but also between sites of a

single type. The differences between the contemporaneous pithouse occupations at the Kent Creek
and Sam Wahl sites are particularly notable. This
diversity of site function is indicative of a high
degree of residential mobility within the Palo Duro
complex, which in turn is suggestive of a seasonal
organization of subsistence activities.

Seasonality, Residential Mobility,
and Settlement Pattern
Reconstructing the settlement pattern of the
Palo Duro culture is a daunting task given the paucity of definitive seasonality data and the constraints
imposed by the small sample of sites that have been
adequately investigated. Limited inferences may be
made, but they are based largely on indirect and
circumstantial evidence. Thus, the interpretations
offered in this section are tentative and should be
viewed cautiously and critically.
It can be stated with some degree of confidence
that the Palo Duro complex peoples organized their
subsistence activities on a seasonal basis. This
interpretation is based in large part on the fact that
the distribution, abundance, usefulness, and
predictability of various plant and animal resources
in the Caprock Canyonlands varies according to the
seasons and certainly did so in prehistoric times as
well. When the residential bases, rockshelters, and
campsites are considered together, the adaptive
strategy of Palo Duro complex peoples must be
viewed as extremely mobile and dominantly plantoriented. The discovery of pithouses and substantial
storage facilities at sites in the Caprock Canyonlands
constitutes new evidence requiring a total
reevaluation of the settlement pattern of Palo Duro
complex people.
As discussed below, it may be inferred from
the archeological evidence that Palo Duro peoples
maintained a high degree of residential mobility in
response to seasonal changes in the availability of
food resources. Although the seasonality of their
occupations is speculative, rockshelters and campsites probably represent habitation sites that were
occupied at different times of the year than were
the residential bases. Two types of Palo Duro
rockshelters have been noted: some, such as Boren
Shelter No. 2, were used only on an ephemeral
basis, while others, such as Deadman’s Shelter,
were intensively occupied. It is notable that the
material culture from Deadman’s Shelter mimics

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
that from the residential bases, and denotes the
considerable importance of grinding plant foods
and hunting deer and smaller animals. There is no
convincing direct evidence for seasonality, but it is
likely that there was winter or cold-weather use of
larger rockshelters as short-term residential bases,
and ephemeral use of smaller rockshelters by
smaller groups (families or task groups?) during
various seasons, perhaps mainly as temporary havens from inclement weather.
Campsites range from multifunctional locations
where hunting was an important component (e.g.,
the County Line site) to very specialized activity
areas where grinding and cooking of plant foods
were nearly exclusive activities (e.g., the Cat Hollow and Gobbler Creek Bridge sites). It is likely that
some of this variation in subsistence activities is
related to different seasons of occupation. Again,
there is no good evidence for seasonality, but most
of the plants that would have been cooked at the
specialized plant-processing localities ripen or are
ready for harvest during the late spring to fall. The
absence of storage pits at campsites suggests that
they were not occupied during the winter. If the
plant foods that were processed were intended for
storage, one might expect that some of these plantprocessing campsites would be located in close proximity to residential bases. This does seem to be the
case at Lake Alan Henry, as evidenced by the close
proximity of the Cat Hollow and Sam Wahl sites.
The two residential bases also appear to have
functioned in different ways. At the Sam Wahl site,
baking, grinding, and storage of plant foods were
extremely important activities, but the use of animal resources appears to have been minimal. At
Kent Creek, grinding, cooking, and storage of plant
foods also are evident and represent important activities, but hunting of deer and smaller animals
was significantly more important than at Sam Wahl.
The differences in storage techniques used at these
sites are particularly notable and probably relate to
variations in site function. While pit storage is well
represented at the Sam Wah! site, it is only minimally represented at Kent Creek where aboveground storage may have been more common. As
discussed below, however, it is somewhat difficult
to translate the apparent functional differences between these sites directly into interpretations of the
seasonality of occupation.
Perhaps of equal or greater importance to the
recognition of the variability between the residential

499

bases is the fact that the Kent Creek and Sam Wahl
sites are, in many ways, more similar than they are
different. The presence of permanent habitation
structures and storage facilities at both of these
sites provides considerable evidence for speculating
on the seasonal orientation of subsistence activities.
From a theoretical perspective, pithouse dwellings
generally imply some degree of residential mobility
and seasonal organization of activities, storage
generally implies seasonal changes in resource
availability, and subterranean food storage implies
the use of plant foods. These concepts are important
for understanding the Palo Duro culture’s settlement
pattern, and warrant more consideration.
In the southwestern United States, recent research has emphasized the importance of understanding residential mobility (e.g., Carmichael
1990; Nelson and LeBlanc 1986; Whalen and
Gilman 1990). Shifting away from the view that
pithouses are evidence of sedentism, most researchers now embrace the view that the pithouse
period may have been characterized by considerable and varying degrees of residential mobility
(e.g., O’Laughlin 1980, 1993; Whalen 1977, 1978,
1980). Bearing in mind that "hunter-gatherer adaptations come in many kinds, with many levels of
mobility" (Whalen and Gilman 1990:73), some
inferences can be made about the nature of residential mobility in the Texas Panhandle Plains during
the latter half of the first millenium A.D. Gilman
(1987:548) states that "pithouse structures are the
most adaptive and useful choice of habitation under conditions of biseasonal settlement systems,
dependence upon stored foods, and cold season
sedentism." If this idea holds true beyond the
Southwest, then the pithouse occupations at the
Kent Creek and Sam Wahl sites can be interpreted
as having been at least seasonal, and possibly
biseasonal, residences. However, it should not be
assumed that the mere presence of pithouses is
indicative of a single site function or a particular
season of occupation. This assumption does not
seem to be valid for the Jornada Mogollon region
(Carmichael 1986:218), nor is it particularly tenable for the Caprock Canyonlands. In fact, until
archeological data prove otherwise, it is probably
safer to assume that differences in architectural
styles, storage facilities, artifact assemblages, and
macrobotanical remains could relate directly to
variations in site function and/or the seasonality of
occupation.

500

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

Storage in general, and subterranean storage
in particular, has been interpreted as evidence of
seasonally oriented resource distribution and residential mobility (Binford 1990; DeBoer 1988;
Goland 1983; Ingold 1983; O’Laughlin 1993;
Raymer 1988; Ward 1985). Boyd et al. (1994:262)
provide a more detailed discussion of the implications of storage at the Sam Wahl site, but a few
major ethnographic observations need to be considered: (1) bulk food storage generally occurs at
the locality where the resource is procured or harvested; (2) subterranean storage in temperate climates almost always involves storage of plant
foods (both wild and domesticated); (3) one important function of pit storage is to conceal foodstuffs
during periods of site abandonment; (4) stored
foods are usually consumed at or near the storage
locality; and (5) consumption of stored foods most
often occurs during the winter--the lean season
when most food resources are scarce.
Based on these observations, one possible scenario is that the Sam Wahl and Kent Creek sites
were occupied between late summer and late fall
when plant foods were harvested and stored. Archeological evidence for the use of mesquite beans
(and possibly goosefoot) at Sam Wahl and the use
of shin oak acorns (and possibly goosefoot) at Kent
Creek support this interpretation. The use of storage implies that the sites also may have been occupied during the middle to late winter, at which time
the stored foods were consumed. It is more speculative, however, to infer whether the sites were
occupied continuously from fall through winter, or
whether they may have been abandoned during late
fall to early winter and reoccupied during mid- to
late winter. Assuming that one function of subterranean storage was for concealment, the predominant use of storage pits at Sam Wahl may be
interpreted as evidence that the site was temporarily abandoned during late fall/early winter. In
contrast, the predominant use of above-ground storage at Kent Creek could mean that this site was not
temporarily abandoned during this time, perhaps
because the inhabitants had greater access to other
resources such as game animals. Thus, it is possible
that differences in site abandonment could have
been at least partially responsible for some of the
archeological differences between the Kent Creek
and Sam Wahl sites.
Numerous ethnoarcheologicat and archeological case studies (e.g., Cameron and Tomka

1993) suggest that the caching of complete and
fully functional metates at the Sam Wahl site may
be evidence of planned abandonment on an episodic
or, more likely, seasonal basis. Schlanger (1990,
1991) notes that complete tools are often found in
use contexts (i.e., cached or left in primary activity
areas) within village sites, presumably because the
last abandonment was perceived as temporary by
the final inhabitants. The last inhabitants at Sam
Wahl, who left the metates stored upside down on
storage pits and inside the pithouse, probably left
fully expecting to return to the site.
In contrast, Structure No. 1 at the Kent Creek
site may have been abandoned hastily and its inhabitants left with no intention of returning. This
pithouse probably was abandoned permanently upon
the death and burial of one of its occupants. Cruse
(1992:136 and Figure 27) was able to define two
distinct activity areas (a lithic work area and a food
storage/processing area) based on the distribution
of artifacts within the structure. Some of the tools
that were left behind, including a mano and a side
scraper, were complete. This does not necessarily
mean that no usable artifacts were salvaged from
the house, but it does suggest that the final
abandoment was unplanned and disorderly. Brooks
(1993) notes similarly well defined artifact patterning in the interior of a Plains Village period Washita
River phase house which had burned. The burning
of the house could have been accidental, but it
seems more likely that it was intentional upon the
death of a child occupant who was buried inside. In
either case, the abandonment was unplanned, and
the house-floor artifacts, including a grinding basin and five manos, were left in their primary contexts reflecting the locations of household activities.
If limited horticulture was incorporated into
their subsistence base, Palo Duro peoples might
have occupied the villages on a biseasonal basis.
The people may have occupied the villages during
planting season in early spring, abandoned the site
while foraging and hunting during the summer, and
returned in the late fall to harvest the crop and stay
through the winter. A simplistic model of prereservation Western Apache horticulture, as defined
by Welch (1991), is useful for understanding one
way in which such subsistence activities might have
been scheduled. No genetic affiliation with
Athapaskan-speaking peoples is intended nor is it
suggested that this model is a direct analog for Palo
Duro culture adaptation. It is simply one possible

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex

scenario for how Palo Duro peoples might have
organized a biseasonal adaptation involving limited
horticulture.
According to Welch (1991:78), the pre-reservation Western Apaches’ diet consisted of "roughly
equal amounts of cultivated, gathered, and hunted
foods." He states that:
...Apache horticulturalists integrated cultivation
with foraging through scheduling and resource
procurement task groups (see Binford 1980).
When a food source failed, greater emphasis
could be placed on the other two, or on raiding.
Family clusters based loosely on clan affiliations were the main settlement and subsistence
units. These clusters contributed labor to the
cultivation (mainly maize and cucurbits)...The
cultivation cycle began as early as March and
as late as July with digging out silted irrigation
ditches and clearing and planting fields. The
very old and young sometimes remained at the
farmsteads to weed, protect, and irrigate the
crops while others descended to harvest cactus
fruits and other late spring and early summer
foods. Additional gathering took place until the
band reunited in early September to harvest and
store food for late winter and early spring and
to prepare for fall hunting [Welch 1991:78, 81 ].
The concentration of Palo Duro sites in the
Caprock Canyonlands suggests that these people
made this area their home for most of the year
because it offered the most abundant and predictable food resources and the widest range of other
essential resources such as wood and water. When,
why, and how often they moved about within the
canyonland environment and adjacent regions is
still a mystery because too many pieces of the
puzzle, particularly good subsistence and seasonality data, are still missing. At this point, one can
only speculate on the precise manner in which residentia! bases, rockshelters, and campsites fit together to form a coherent picture of the adaptive
strategy of the Palo Duro peoples.

Geographic Range and
Intercultural
Relationships
The vast majority of sites and components
attributed to the Palo Duro complex are located in
the escarpment breaks along the Prairie Dog Town

501

Fork of the Red River and the Double Mountain
Fork of the Brazos River. This constitutes the core
area of the Palo Duro complex. Besides the Palo
Dum sites that have already been discussed (see
Table 1), other possible Palo Duro components that
have not been tested may be present at Lake Alan
Henry (41GR256 in Boyd et al. 1989:Table 12) and
in Caprock Canyons State Park (41BI365 in Bagot
and Hughes 1979:Figure 43; 41BI265 in Etchieson
et al. 1977:Figure 23). Since Palo Duro components
have been found in all three of the intensively
surveyed canyonland areas (i.e., Mackenzie
Reservoir, Caprock Canyons State Park, and Lake
Alan Henry), one must speculate that the complex
may be well represented all along the Caprock
Escarpment, including the intervening areas that
have yet to be studied. So little archeological work
has been done over most of the Caprock
Canyonlands that our view is limited to a few little
windows into the landscape. Extrapolating site data
from these intensive survey areas, however, there is
likely to be a very high density of Palo Duro
complex sites in other areas of the canyonlands,
particularly along all major tributaries. One must
also realize that for every Palo Duro complex site
that has been identified, many more probably go
unrecognized because the prehistoric cultural
activities did not generate, or the archeologists failed
to find, any diagnostic residue.
As mentioned above, the northern boundary of
the Palo Duro complex seems to overlap with the
southern boundary of the Lake Creek complex.
Couzzourt (1988:47) states that "Deadman points,
characteristic to diagnostic of the Palo Duro Culture,
are rare to absent in the northern Panhandle, though
they do occur, as do some seemingly ’intermediate’
types between corner-notched and base-notched
types." Mogollon brownwares also are relatively
rare in the Canadian River valley (as compared to
the Caprock Canyonlands), but a few Palo Duro
components are found in the upper headwaters of
the Prairie Dog Town Fork (i.e., upstream of Palo
Duro Canyon State Park as far as Buffalo Lake)
and even into the Lake Meredith area of the
Canadian River (see Figures 3 and 4). Thus, the
area of overlap is the drainage divide between the
Canadian River and Prairie Dog Town Fork, and it
is this zone that has been proposed as a territorial
border between the Plains Woodland and
Southwestern-influenced cultures (Couzzourt 1982;
Cruse 1992; Hughes 1991; Krieger 1946, 1978).

502

Texas Archeological Society

The evidence for violence and intercultural
conflict seems to support the existence of a cultural
boundary between Palo Duro and Lake Creek/
Plains Woodland peoples. The Palo Duro woman
who was buried, presumably by her relatives, in the
pithouse at the Kent Creek hamlet probably was
killed by non-Palo Duro peoples. The cultural
identity of the two men who were killed and buried
together in a single grave in Donley County is
uncertain, but they may have been killed by
members of the Palo Duro group. Could they have
been Lake Creek or Plains Woodland peoples?
Other Plains Woodland or transitional Archaic
burials to the northeast of the Palo Duro area also
have evidence of violence. Numerous human burials exposed by shoreline erosion at Lake Altus, in
Greer County, Oklahoma, represent cemeteries dating to the Plains Woodland period and into the
Custer phase (Agogino and Button 1985; Boyd 1982;
Button and Agogino 1986, 1987). These burials
occur mainly as primary (usually flexed) skeletons
in isolated graves but also include a few secondary
burials and one primary interment of five individuals. Although many of the burials contained no artifacts and have not been dated, they are found at sites
dominated by Late Prehistoric I materials, including
abundant cord-marked pottery. Cord-marked sherds
have been found in the fill of two of the burials, and
sherds from one were identified as Stafford
Cordmarked, a diagnostic type of the Custer phase
(Boyd 1982:10-16). In addition, a single burial is
dated to A.D. 470-650 (uncalibrated), and the multiple interment of five individuals is dated to A.D.
590-770 (uncalibrated) (Button and Agogino
1987:19, 31). While the pottery suggests that these
cemeteries might be affiliated with the Custer phase,
the dates indicate that some of the burials are earlier.
Which cultural complex or period the Lake Altus
burials are assigned to is a matter of semantics and
the lack of chronological control. Of particular importance, however, are the two clear cases of violence within the Lake Altus cemeteries. One
individual, possibly a bundle burial, had an untyped
fragmentary arrow point embedded in its ulna (Boyd
1982:15-16; LeVick and LeVick 1966). One of the
individuals in the multiple burial had a fatal blow to
the head, and the composition of the multiple burial
group--an elderly male (with the head injury), a
middle-aged female, two juvenile males, and a female child--led Button and Agogino (1987:30-31)
to speculate that the entire group had been killed.

Another multiple burial in western Oklahoma
provides evidence for violence during the transitional Archaic period. Gettys (1991) reports that
Burial 2 at 34RM668 consisted of three flexed skeletons in a single interment. One of the individuals
was beheaded prior to burial, and corner- and sidenotched dart points associated with two individuals are interpreted as the cause of death. Two
radiocarbon dates on bone collagen indicate that
these individuals were killed and buried between
A.D. 210-440 (Oklahoma Archeological Survey
1993). This multiple burial, which is approximately
contemporaneous with the Sam Wahl site burial,
provides evidence for intercultural conflict immediately preceding or perhaps early in Palo Duro
complex times.
The archeological evidence indicates that intercultural conflicts had begun at least by the first
few centuries after Christ and continued throughout
the first millenium A.D. While there is no indisputable evidence indicating that the Palo Duro and
Lake Creek/Plains Woodland peoples were enemies,
both groups were engaged in conflicts of some type
and it seems likely that this might have been the
case. If the Double Burial victims were Plains
Woodland folks who were killed by Palo Duro
peoples, the evidence argues for a cultural boundary between Palo Duro and Lake Creek/Plains
Woodland peoples somewhere in the vicinity of the
Prairie Dog Town Fork of the Red River.
The few Palo Duro components found along
the Canadian River (i.e, the South Ridge, the Maintenance barn, and Fatheree sites) are located well
inside the area where Lake Creek occupations are
common. Given the possibility of warfare between
these cultures, this phenomenon is somewhat difficult to explain. These sites indicate that Palo Duro
peoples ventured into the Canadian River valley,
but it is not known if this represents an unusual
occurrence or if there may have been consistent
overlap and/or periodic fluctuation in the territorial
boundary. The presence of occasional brownware
sherds in some Lake Creek components could indicate that there was some form of exchange between
the two groups.
There are many possible explanations of the
relationship between the Palo Duro and Lake Creek
(and other Plains Woodland) peoples, and a few of
them are offered here, as food for thought: (1) the
Palo Duro and Lake Creek peoples were never
enemies, their territories overlapped and they

Boyd m The Palo Duro Complex
interacted frequently, and other groups were
responsible for the violence; (2) the Palo Duro and
Lake Creek peoples were long-time enemies who
came from very different cultural traditions, the
territorial boundary between them fluctuated, and
the Palo Duro culture extended into the Canadian
River at some time; (3) the Palo Duro and Lake
Creek peoples may have coexisted peacefully for
some time, but hostilities developed near the end of
the Late Prehistoric I period; or (4) the Palo Duro
and Plains Woodland cultural traditions actually
represent many different groups (rather than just
two) who interacted with each other in various ways
(as allies or enemies) at different times.
The extent of the Palo Duro complex to the
east is uncertain. Diagnostic Palo Duro artifacts
were not recovered in the surveys and testing at
Truscott (Etchieson et al. 1978) and Crowell
(Etchieson et al. 1979) reservoirs, nor have they
been reported elsewhere in the Texas Rolling
Plains. Thus, it is not certain whether Palo Duro
peoples avoided the region or perhaps ventured
there occasionally but left behind no diagnostic
artifacts that archeologists have recognized. It does
seem unlikely that residential bases would be common in some parts of the Texas Rolling Plains.
Even if some riverine areas had sufficient flesh
water and other resources to support such occupations, these areas would have been isolated oases
within a sea of saline water and sparse resources.
And, being outside their primary territory, such
isolated villages would have been much more vulnerable to attack.
It is not known whether the Palo Duro complex extends south into the canyonlands of the upper Colorado River drainage. Little archeological
work has been reported immediately south of Lake
Alan Henry, but one gets the impression that
Deadman’s-like points and Mogollon pottery are
rare. No pottery or early stemmed arrow points
were found during the recent survey and testing at
Mitchell Reservoir, but Scallorn-like points indicate that some occupations occurred during Late
Prehistoric I times (Lintz, Oglesby, and Treece
1993; Lintz et al. 1991). There are not sufficient
archeological data to indicate whether the upper
Colorado River (in Borden, Dawson, Howard,
Mitchel!, and Scurry counties) was or was not occupied by Palo Duro peoples. The Big Spring site
(Sommer 1971) in Howard County, for example,
has produced artifacts similar to those of the Palo

503

Duro complex, but the context and age of these
materials are not certain. If this site represents a
Palo Duro component, which is possible, it would
provide evidence that the complex does extend into
the upper Colorado River drainage.
Immediately southeast of the Palo Duro complex is the aceramic Blow Out Mountain phase. It
is possible that this poorly defined cultural entity is
misrepresented because the apparent absence of ceramics is due to inadequate archeological sampling.
The Blow Out Mountain phase appears to be different from the Palo Duro complex in some ways, but
the projectile points are similar. While no true
Deadman’s points are reported in the area, the arrow points of the Blow Out Mountain phase include stemmed Bonham-like varieties that look like
Deadman’s with shorter barbs or without barbs (cf.
Creel 1990:Figure 42; Wulfkuhle 1986:Figure 132),
and they are quite similar to many of the stemmed
points found at Palo Duro sites. Not much is known
about the Blow Out Mountain phase because the
East Levee site (41TG91) is the only site that has
been investigated intensively (Creel 1990), except
for burials. Thus, it is quite speculative to comment
on the relationship between the Palo Duro and Blow
Out Mountain cultures at this time.
A large number of excavated burials have been
attributed to the Blow Out Mountain phase, and
they constitute an important data base.
Unfortunately, published data are nonexistent or
inadequate for most of these burials, and none have
been radiocarbon dated. In the 1930s, Cyrus Ray
(1932, 1933, 1936, 1946)investigated numerous
burials found on prominent hills and ridges, both as
isolated cairn--covered burials, and as large rock
cairns containing individual and multiple graves.
These "covered mounds" or "stone cist mounds" as
Ray (1932, 1933) called them, represent cemeteries
that usually contain primary burials in flexed
positions, but cremated remains are sometimes
present as well. Many burials in the region are
found inside rock-lined cists, but most contain few
grave goods and no diagnostics. Hence, their
association with the Blow Out Mountain phase is
tentative and is based on the fact that some of the
burials have stemmed (Bonham-like) arrow points
associated with them. It is interesting that Ray
(1933:23) suggests a Southwestern origin for the
cist-lined graves observed in many of the Abilenearea burial mounds, but the diversity of Blow Out
Mountain mortuary traits (e.g., lined and unlined

504

Texas Archeological Society

graves, with and without cairns, containing primary
interments, bundle burials, and cremations) has not
been studied in any detail. What is important,
however, is that the stemmed points in Blow Out
Mountain burials are somewhat similar to points
found in the Palo Duro complex, and the contexts
of many of the points indicate that they represent
the cause of death rather than grave offerings.
The Roberts Covered Mound no. 3 (probably
in Taylor County) is a good example of a Blow Out
Mountain phase cemetery, and Ray (1933) reports
that this mound contained 10 individual interments.
Two were bundle burials, found in the upper part of
the mound, and one of these had a stemmed (Albalike) arrow point associated with it (Ray 1933:Plate
8). The other eight were primary flexed burials in
individual cists, and very few artifacts were found
in association (i.e, a bison toe bone and a bone awl
are the only items mentioned). Five of the primary
burials had no mandibles, and their absence could
not be attributed to any form of disturbance. Ray
(1933:19-20) suggested that the j aws had been taken
as war trophies. A mandible also was missing from
one cist grave in the nearby Alexander Mound (Ray
1933:22).
Forrester (t951) reports similar findings in a
series of burials in Shackelford County. A total of
18 individuals were found in four separate burial
areas, or "burial plots," within 300 yards along a
creek terrace. Of particular interest, two young
males in Burial Plot II (a single grave) had been
killed. Both had stemmed arrow points found in
contexts indicating that they were the cause of death.
One individual was missing his hands and feet, and
cut marks on the distal end of the ulna suggest that
they were removed as war trophies. In addition, the
charred mandible of a child was found in the chest
area of one skeleton, indicating that this war trophy
had been worn as a pendant.
Of nine individuals in Burial Plot III, which is
similar to Ray’s (1933) covered-mound cemeteries, two adult males (Skeletons 4 and 5) were buried with grave offerings reminiscent of those in
Palo Duro complex burials (i.e., mussel shells and
deer bone tools). A stemmed arrow point was found
in association with one man (Skeleton 4) who had
been buried in a single grave with three other people
(Skeltons 1-3 are an elderly female and two infants). The point has proximal and distal breaks
that appear to be impact related (the proximal break
is almost identical to the one on the arrow point

embedded in the humerus of Skeleton 2 in Burial
Plot II), and the point probably represents the cause
of death. If this interpretation is correct, it is quite
possible that the other three individuals buried in
the same grave also were killed.
None of the Shackelford County burials have
been radiocarbon dated, but the association with
early style arrow points indicates that they date to
Late Prehistoric 1 times, and also suggest a likely
affiliation with the Blow Out Mountain phase (Creel
1990:17). These points are basically similar to the
Alba, Bonham, and Sabinal styles, but they do not
quite fit into a single type. Forrester (1987) has
since suggested that they be called Moran points.
Several cairn burials have been found in and
near Lake O. H. Ivie in Concho, Coleman, and
Runnels counties, and two date to Late Prehistoric I
times. Although it is not yet reported in detail,
Lintz et al. (1993:647-649) mention a burial excavated by the Concho Valley Archeological Society
at 41CN94 that is similar to the Shackelford County
burials and yielded a Sabinal arrow point (J. A.
Jaquier, 1993 personal communication). At
41CC237, a child cremation and a bundle burial of
an adult male probably were interred at the same
time in a single cairn-covered grave (Lintz et al.
1993:649-659). Although the artifacts found in the
burial pit (i.e., thin bifacial preforms, unifacial tools,
debitage, modified limonite fragments, and 19
Olivella shell beads) are not temporally sensitive, a
radiocarbon date of A.D. 280-570 (calibrated) was
obtained on bone collagen from the adult skeleton.
A possible cut mark observed on one rib may be
evidence of dismemberment, and the mandible is
notably absent from the burial.
The evidence for violence in Blow Out Mountain phase burials (and in culturally unassigned burials such as at 41CC237) is intriguing, but it is too
early to draw any firm conclusions. Perhaps the
Palo Duro peoples were engaged in conflicts with
peoples to the south and southeast, as well as with
groups to the north and northeast? The taking of
human jaws as war trophies attests to the intensity
of the hostilities, which had perhaps escalated to
the point of all-out warfare.
To the west and southwest of the Palo Duro
complex are the Middle Pecos and Eastern Jornada
Mogollon culture areas. Lying between is a sizable
portion of the Llano Estacado which, one would
think based on the paucity of published
archeological data, was virtually uninhabited.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
While this perception may be true to an exent, there
is evidence that people traversed the Llano using
southeastward-flowing drainages as highways, and
there is evidence for more than ephemeral Late
Prehistoric occupations at some large playa and
pluvial lakes on the southern Llano. The only welldocumented Late Prehistoric playa lake site in the
southern Llano Estacado is the Salt Cedar site
(Collins 1968). Occupations at this residential base,
which currently marks the easternmost edge of the
Eastern Jornada Mogollon, date primarily after
A.D. 1100, but may have begun during Late
Prehistoric I times.
Based on survey evidence alone, it may be
speculated that the Palo Duro complex extends up
onto the eastern edge of the southern Llano
Estacado. The possibility that a Palo Duro component may be present in Lynn County has been mentioned, and early stemmed arrow points and Jornada
brownware pottery have been found at several playa
lake sites in Lubbock County (Brown 1985, 1990a,
1990b, 1991a, 1991b, n.d.). The presence of Palo
Duro occupations on the southern Llano has yet to
be confirmed through excavations, but it is possible
that at least a few components did exist around
playa and pluvial lakes. If this is the case, there is
still much to be learned about how these High Plains
sites fit into the overall Palo Duro subsistence and
settlement pattern.
Despite the geographic gap in the regional data,
the Palo Duro complex contains definite evidence,
in the form of brownware pottery, that there was
some transfer of material culture from the Jornada
Mogollon area across the southern Llano Estacado
and into the Caprock Canyonlands. There also is
other circumstantial evidence for some form of cultural interaction and exchange of ideas between
Jornada Mogotlon and Palo Duro peoples. It is this
author’s opinion, apparently one that is also shared
by Cruse (1992) and Hughes (1991), that the interaction between these groups was direct, that the
Jornada influence upon the Palo Duro culture was
quite strong and consistent through time, and that it
involved much more than just the acquisition of
pots. The nature and extent of the interaction between the Eastern Jornada peoples and the Palo
Duro culture is a research problem that is likely to
be controversial. Although the ideas discussed below admittedly are speculative, it is hoped that they
will spur debate between Southwestern and Southern Plains archeologists.

505

Pottery constitutes the only direct evidence for
influence from the Jornada Mogollon area. Almost
all of the pottery sherds found at Pa!o Duro sites
are identified generically as some variety of Jornada
Mogollon brownware. Most are tempered with
crushed igneous rocks and are indisputably of
nonlocal origin when found in the Texas Panhandle
Plains. The varieties that have been identified (i.e.,
Jornada Brown, Alma Plain, E1 Paso Brown,
Roswell Brown, South Pecos Brown, Middle Pecos
Micaceous, and McKenzie Brown) were manufactured in the Jornada Mogollon or Middle Pecos
areas, and very few brownware sherds have been
identified as possibly being locally-made wares.
The consistent presence of small quantities of
nonlocal brownwares in many Texas sites indicates
that the Palo Duro peoples maintained at least periodic contact with Jornada Mogollon peoples over a
long period of time. Pottery sherds are not very
abundant, but sometimes as many as four vessels
are represented at a single Palo Duro site. Ceramics
are sufficiently scarce to indicate that the supply of
pots was rather limited, perhaps because Palo Duro
groups did not make journeys to the Jornada region
on an annual or regular basis, or perhaps because of
the high labor cost involved in transporting large,
fragile vessels over long distances on foot. Exactly
how the pots made their way into the Panhandle
Plains region is not known. Although intermediary
groups could have been involved, the relatively
short distance between the Caprock Canyonlands
and the Pecos River valley (i.e., 250-300 km) suggests that Palo Duro peoples acquired pots directly
from the Eastern Jornada groups.
Other evidence for the Palo Duro complex having been influenced by the Jornada Mogollon culture is circumstantial, but it is nonetheless strong.
The architectural similarities between the Palo Duro
and Eastern Jornada pithouses are particularly intriguing. Various researchers have noted similarities between the Palo Duro pithouses and those of
the Jornada Mogo!lon area, while noting the lack of
similarities with houses of nearby Plains Woodland
and Plains Village complexes (Boyd 1995a, t995b;
Boyd et al. 1994:116-117, 260; Cruse 1992:127129; Hughes 1991:26). Although rectangular and
circular pithouses are found among many cultures
and the shape alone is not diagnostic, when the
combination of traits is considered, the closest architectural parallels are clearly to the west and
southwest rather than to the north or east. It is

506

Texas Archeological Society

notable also that pithouses in the Jornada Mogollon
area exhibit considerable architectural variability,
and if the sample of three is any indication, so do
the pithouses of the Palo Duro complex.
Rectangular structures--both surface and
pithouses--are known for Southern Plains Woodland and Plains Village complexes but they are
very different from those at the Kent Creek site
(Boyd et al. 1994:116). In contrast, Cruse
(1992:127-129) notes that many architectural traits
observed for the Kent Creek pithouses are similar
to those seen in Jornada Mogollon pithouses. Particularly diagnostic are the ramped entryways, which
are a common feature in Jornada pithouses but are
not seen in any Plains Woodland or Plains Village
houses. Other architectural parallels between Kent
Creek and Mogollon pithouses include small trough
features/steps just inside the entryway, comparable
variability in interior floor area, the use of a single
large roof support post, and the practice of subfloor
burials inside houses.
In addition, there is one example that shows a
striking parallel between Kent Creek and the
Jornada area. A rectangular pithouse (Pitroom R2) excavated at the Merchant site in Lea County,
New Mexico, is very similar in size, shape, and
entry configuration to Structure 2 at Kent Creek
(cf. Leslie 1965:Figure 3 with Cruse 1992:Figures
6 and 10). Unfortunately, there are no radiocarbon
dates directly associated with either structure, and
Leslie’s (1965) assessment that the Merchant site
dates to the fifteenth century is based solely on a
few decorated pottery sherds (which make up only
a small percentage of the total ceramic assemblage)
and could be very misleading. Cruse (1992:129)
notes that the elongated trough features along the
front and back walls of Structure 2 are unique to
the Kent Creek pithouses.
Similarly, the ephemeral pithouse at the Sam
Wahl site has no analogs in nearby Plains Woodland
or Plains Village complexes, but very similar round
to oval structures are present in the Keystone Dam
area near E1 Paso (Carmichael 1985:142-149;
O’Laughlin 1980:135-149) and at the Fox Place
and King Ranch sites near Roswell (Wiseman
1981:174-175,
1988:229, 1993 personal
communication). The Keystone Dam structures date
earlier (ca. 550 B.C. to A.D. 150) than the Sam
Wahl pithouse, while the King Ranch structures are
later (ca. A.D. 1150-1300). No dates have been
published for the Fox Place pithouses. Southwestern

pithouse occupations are continually being pushed
back earlier in time, and it seems likely that Jornada
Mogollon pithouses will prove to be the prototypes
for those in the Caprock Canyonlands.
There also are broad similarities in the subsistence strategies and settlement patterns of the Palo
Duro and Eastern Jornada peoples. Mesquite and
shin oak have been identified as probable staple
foods utilized by both groups. Except for a slightly
lower rainfall and minor differences in plant and
animal communities, the Mescalero Escarpment on
the west edge of the Llano Estacado is in many
ways similar to the Caprock Escarpment. Consequently, it should not be surprising that human
populations adapted to these areas in a similar
manner. Many of the subsistence and settlement
pattern characteristics proposed for the Eastern
Jornada area are similar to adaptive strategies that
Palo Duro peoples may have employed in the Caprock Canyonlands. Leslie (1979) notes that the
Querecho-Maljamar phases are characterized by
pithouse villages and seasonal campsites, a heavy
dependence upon plant foods, the predominant use
of oval-basin metates and convex-faced manos,
and the dominant use of a variety of cornernotched arrow points.
The same amount of variability in arrow point
morphology within the Palo Duro complex is evident in the arrow points of the pithouse period in
the Eastern Jornada area (Leslie 1978). The corner- and basal-notched stemmed arrow points of
the Palo Duro complex are very similar to, and
exhibit the same range of variability as, Leslie’s
(1978) Types 3A through 3E, including occasional
serrated blades. These points are associated with
Leslie’s (1978:Figure 13) Querecho phase, although
the dates that he gives for this phase are probably
far too young. Jelinek (1967:103-105, 110) also
documents a similar variety of points in the Late
Archaic through Late 18 Mile phases and notes that
serration is most strongly associated with pithouse
occupations of the Early 18 Mile through Early
Mesita Negra phases (i.e., A.D. 800-1100).
Similarly, the most common points associated
with the Blow Out Mountain phase are a variety of
stemmed points that do not fit neatly into a single
type but are similar to arrow points of the Palo
Duro complex and Eastern Jornada areas (i.e., Type
3D in Leslie [1978]). Regardless of the names one
assigns to them, there seems to be some morphological continuity between the stemmed arrow

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
points of the Palo Duro complex, the Blow Out
Mountain phase, the Eastern Jornada, and Middle
Pecos areas. While corner-notched dart points (i.e.,
Ellis-like) of the Panhandle Plains Late Archaic
bison hunters may be the prototypes for ubiquitious
Scallorn-like arrow points of the Lake Creek and
Palo Duro complexes, the unusual Deadman’s arrow points seem to appear suddenly and rather early
(probably before A.D. 500). There is no precursor
evident among Southern Plains Late Archaic points,
and it is possible that the prototype for Deadman’s
points may be found in the Shumla dart points of
the Lower Pecos and South Texas areas. Shumlalike dart points are present, but rare, throughout
much of the Jornada area at least as far west as Las
Cruces, New Mexico (MacNeish 1993:179). In addition, the corner-notched to stemmed (and sometimes serrated) Pendejo points found in southern
New Mexico (along with Shumla and Hueco points)
are quite similar to the early stemmed arrow points
found in the Caprock Canyonlands and West Central Texas. In the Jornada area, Pendejo points are
found in the Late Archaic and in the Mesilla phase
(MacNeish 1993:183-184), and they could be the
prototype for similar arrow points in the Palo Duro
complex and Blow Out Mountain phase.
The rather sudden appearance of Deadman’slike arrow points may only signal the adoption of
the bow and arrow by indigenous groups, or it may
mark the appearance of new peoples in the Caprock
Canyonlands (i.e., the Palo Duro complex) and in
West Central Texas (i.e., the Blow Out Mountain
phase). This author prefers the latter interpretation
and suggests that strong evidence for the arrival of
new peoples is found in the burials throughout the
region. A growing amount of evidence--some definitive, some circumstantial---denotes the formation of territorial boundaries and increasingly
widespread violence among many Southern Plains
cultures during the first millenium A.D. These
events set the stage for the escalating warfare seen
during later Plains Village times (Brooks t994).
If Palo Duro peoples were newcomers to the
Caprock Canyonlands sometime between A.D. 1
and 500, where did they come from? Perhaps Krieger
(1946:80-82) was on the right track some 50 years
ago when he observed that there was virtually no
difference in the archeology of the New Mexico and
Texas portions of the southern Llano Estacado. He
suggested that the southern High Plains had been
"actually inhabited by Puebloans, if only season-

507

ally" (Krieger 1946:80). Given the evidence for
cultural influence from the west, one must look to
the Jornada Mogo!lon region (including its eastern
extension east of the Pecos River) as the most likely
area of origin for many cultural traits of the Palo
Duro complex. It is not suggested that Palo Duro
peoples were direct lineal descendants of Jornada
Mogollon peoples. Although this certainly is one
possibility, there simply is not enough evidence to
support such a statement. There is sufficient evidence, however, to suggest that Palo Duro peoples
may have been descendants of hunther-gatherers
who, having lived in close contact with Jornada
Mogollon peoples in what is now southeastern New
Mexico and far western Texas, migrated east or
northeastward onto the Southern Plains.
What became of the Palo Duro complex is
equally problematic and perplexing. Without going
into the myriad of possibilities regarding the fate of
this culture, the most logical idea is one that links
the Palo Duro complex (and perhaps the Blow Out
Mountain phase) with the Toyah phase of Central
and South Texas. Shafer (1977) originally proposed
that the Toyah culture was derived from Southern
Plains bison-hunting peoples who migrated southward. Johnson (1994:271-281) recently elaborated
upon this idea and proposes that the classic Toyah
phase retains enough subtle traits, primarily in pottery styles and manufacturing techniques, to link it
to the Jornada Mogollon cultural tradition. While
much of its material culture represents classic Plains
bison-hunting gear (i.e., the beveled Harahey skinning knives and Plains-style hafted end scrapers),
the pointed-stemmed Perdiz point is distinctive,
and its logical prototype is found in the stemmed
arrow points of the Blow Out Mountain culture.
Johnson (1994) suggests that Toyah peoples are
descendants of groups who made Jornada
Mogollon-tradition pottery, slightly modified their
stemmed arrow points into the distinctive Perdiz
style, and adopted a Plains bison-hunting lifestyle.
He also suggests that the Mogollon influence may
have been indirect and that the earliest Toyah
peoples could have come from the Southern Plains
rather than from the Jornada Mogollon region.
I would further modify Johnson’s (1994) hypothesis and suggest that the Blow Out Mountain
phase is somehow related to the Palo Duro complex. Although purely conjectural, these manifestations may prove to be northern and southern variants
of the same cultural tradition. The stemmed

508

Texas Archeological Society

Bonham-like arrow points that characterize the
Blow Out Mountain phase are little more than modified Deadman’s points, but the latter represent the
earliest narrow-stemmed arrow point form in the
Texas Panhandle Plains. Consequently, the
Deadman’s point is the logical prototype for the
stemmed Blow Out Mountain points and ultimately,
if Johnson (1994) is correct, for Perdiz points as
well. Although it will be difficult to prove that the
Palo Duro complex and the Blow Out Mountain
phase are ancestral to the Toyah phase, this is an
hypothesis worth testing.
One possible scenario is that, as the climate
dried and bison populations increased in the Southern Plains around A.D. 1100-1300, peoples of the
Palo Duro complex and the Blow Out Mountain
phase quickly adopted a Plains bison-hunting
lifestyle and material culture, and they began to
migrate southward. This migration may have been
spurred, in a domino effect, by pressures from southward-migrating Athapascan-speaking peoples who
moved from the Central Plains into the Southern
Plains around A.D. 1300-1400 (but this is another
story altogether!). The wide geographic range and
the extreme archeological variability that characterize the Toyah phase may be partially explained if
these proto-Toyah peoples spread throughout Central and South Texas within one or two centuries and
eventually displaced or assimilated with, but adopted
traits from, many of the indigenous groups.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The Pato Duro complex has been redefined in
light of recent archeological finds. The complex
dates to the period between A.D. 500 and A.D.
1100-1200, and a wide range of activities and site
functions are inferred for the three types of habitation sites that are recognized. The Kent Creek and
Sam Wahl sites are identified as residential bases
where people lived in pithouses while procuring,
processing, storing, and consuming a wide range of
wild plant foods. Mesquite beans and shin oak
acorns have been identified as possible staples, but
other plants such as goosefoot and buffalo gourds
also may have been important foods. Although no
cultigens have been found, this does not preclude
the possibility that limited horticulture was practiced at residential sites. Occupations at these villages were at least seasonal (i.e., during late summer

to fall harvest and into winter) and may have been
biseasonal (i.e., during planting and then again during fall harvest and into winter).
Palo Duro peoples lived in rockshelters and
open camps at various times of the year and for
different reasons. Rockshelters were occupied on a
sporadic and ephemeral basis, or were more intensively used and may then have served as relatively
permanent bases. Some campsites were little more
than specialized processing sites where baking and
grinding of plant foods were the primary activities,
while others were multifunctional bases where considerable hunting and processing of animals was
done. Deer and small animals appear to have been
the principal game animals. Bison were hunted but
they do not appear to have been a major food resource, and the evidence suggests that populations
may have been relatively low.
Palo Duro culture is now viewed as
representing semisedentary peoples who maintained
a high degree of residential mobility in order to
exploit a wide range of resources that were locally
available and abundant on a seasonal basis. Sites of
this complex are found mainly in the Caprock
Canyonlands, an ecological subregion that offered
the most predictable and widest range of subsistence
resources (i.e., water, plants, and animals) within a
relatively arid landscape. The home territory for
Palo Duro peoples was in the upper drainages of
the Red and Brazos rivers, although they may have
ranged on occasion north into the Canadian River
valley, east into the Rolling Plains, south into the
upper Colorado River drainage, and west onto the
Llano Estacado.
Human burials provide evidence of widespread
violence in and around the Caprock Canyonlands
during the Late Prehistoric I period, and the Palo
Duro culture may have come into periodic contact
with enemy peoples to the north and east (i.e., Lake
Creek or Plains Woodland groups) and to the south
and southeast (i.e., Blow Out Mountain and other
undefined groups). Palo Duro peoples did maintain
some form of cultural contact with the Jornada
Mogollon peoples of southeastern New Mexico and
western Texas over a long period of time. There
appears to be a significant amount of Jornada
Mogollon cultural influence across the southern
Llano Estacado and into the Caprock Canyonlands,
and the Palo Duro complex exhibits many traits
(e.g., imported brownware pottery and pithouse
architectural styles) that were derived, whether

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Cotnplex

directly or indirectly, from the Jornada Mogollon
region. In addition, the similarities between the
subsistence and settlement patterns proposed for
the Palo Duro complex and those proposed for their
eastern Jornada Mogollon neighbors may be more
than a mere coincidence. In summary, it is unclear
whether.the Palo Duro complex represents an actual
migration of Jornada Mogollon or related peoples,
or whether it simply represents indigenous Southern
Plains people who came under the widespread
influence of Jornada Mogollon culture, or something
much more complex.

509

REFERENCES CITED
Adair, M. J.
1988 Prehistoric Agriculture in the Central Plains. Publications in Anthropology No. 15. University of Kansas, Lawrence.
Agogino, G. and V. T. Button
1985

A Secondary Burial of Human Cranial Fragments
from 34GR6, a Prehistoric Cetnetery on the Shoreline of Lake Altus, Greer County, Oklahoma. U.S.
Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation,
Southwest Region, Amarillo.

Alex, T.C.
1990 The Search for the Elusive Kaolinite: Prehistoric

Utilization of a Lithic Resource for Ornamental Artifacts. In Papers from the Third Sy~nposium on
Resources of the Chihuahuan Desert Region, pp.
163-168. Chihuahuan Desert Research Institute,
Alpine, Texas.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This article stems from a multi-year archeological research effort at Lake Alan Henry, conducted by Prewitt and Associates, Inc. of Austin,
Texas, and funded by the City of Lubbock, Texas.
The successful completion of the project is due
primarily to the supervision and guidance of Elton
R. Prewitt and Ross C. Fields. This article was
initially edited by Fields and Linda Nance Foster,
and final editing was done by Timothy K. Perttula.
The illustrations were prepared by Sandy Hannum.
Individuals who have at various times contributed
ideas or insights during the author’s study of the
Palo Duro complex are, in alphabetical order, Jim
Couzzourt, Brett Cruse, Lain Ellis, Ross Fields,
Billy Harrison, Jack Hughes, Lee Johnson, Chris
Lintz, Elton Prewitt, Mike Quigg, Steve Tomka,
and Regge Wiseman. Many of the ideas and interpretations presented in this article were developed
during discussions with these individuals over a
period of many years, but they may not agree with
all (or perhaps any) of my conclusions, and I take
full responsibility for the interpretations proposed
herein. Any errors of omission or fact are the sole
responsibility of the author. Special thanks go to
Jack T. Hughes, the now-retired "dean of Panhandle archeology," who has contributed more than
he will ever know to inspire "the boy from Tulia"
(as Jack noted in his field notes for Mackenzie
Reservoir during the Winter of 1973) to become an
archeologist.

Arbingast, S. A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, A. Lo, D. L.
Karney, C. P. Zlatkovich, M. E. Bonine, and R. G. Steele
1973 Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Bagot, J. T. and J. T. Hughes
1979

Archeological Inventory of a Portion of Caprock
Canyons State Park in Briscoe County, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Research
Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.

Bailey, C. H.
1951

The Texan Santa Fe Trail. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review 24 (entire volume).

Basehart, H. W.
1960 Mescalero Apache Subsistence Patterns and SocioPolitical Organization, Section I: MescaleroChiricahua Land Claims Project. The University of
New Mexico, Albuquerque.

Bell, R. E.
1984 The Plains Villagers: The Washita River. In Prehistory of Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 307324. Academic Press, New York.
Bell, W. H. and E. F. Castetter
1937 The Utilization of Mesquite and Screwbean by the
Aborigines in the American Southwest. University
of New Mexico Bulletin No. 314. Ethnobiological
Studies in the American Southwest, Biology Series
5(2). University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Binford, L. R.
1980 Willow Smoke and Dogs’ Tails: Hunter-Gatherer
Settlement Systems and Archaeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45( 1):4-20.

510

Texas Archeological Society

Binford, L. R. (Continued)
1990

Mobility, Housing and Environment: A Comparative

Brethauer, D. P.
1979 The Possible Role of Mesquite as a Food Resource

Study. Journal of Anthropological Research

in the Jornada Mogollon Region. In Jornada

46(2): 119-152.

Mogollon Archaeology: Proceedings of the First
Jornada Conference, edited by P. H. Beckett and R.

Boyd, D. K.

N. Wiseman, pp. 67-80. Historic Preservation Bu-

1982

Human Skeletal Remains from 34GR6, Greer

reau, State Planning Office, Santa Fe, and Cultural

County, Oklahoma. Department of the Interior, Bu-

Resources Management Division, New Mexico State

reau of Reclamation, Southwest Region, Amarillo.

University, Las Cruces~

1995a Rethinking the Palo Duro Complex: Jornada
Mogollon Influence in the Texas Southern Plains’?

Briscoe, J.

Transactions of the 30th Regional Archeological

1987

Analysis of Cultural Materials from the Swift Horse
Site, an Early Plains Woodland Site on the Black

Symposium.for Southeastern New Mexico and West-

Kettle National Grasslands, Roger Mills County,

ern Texas. Clarendon Archeological Society,

Oklahoma. Briscoe Consulting Services, Butler,

Clarendon, Texas. In press.

Oklahoma.
1995b Archeological Investigations at the Sam Wahl Site:
Jornada Mogollon Influence in the Texas Southern

1989

Chronology and Distribution of Lake Creek Focus/
Complex: Information from the Swift Horse Site. In

Plains? In Jornada Mogollon Archeology: Proceedings of the Eighth Jornada Conference, 1993. Hu-

In Light of Past Experience: Papers in Honor of

man Systems Research, Tularosa, New Mexico. In

Jack T. Hughes, edited by B. C. Roper, pp. 105115. Publication No. 5. Panhandle Archeological

preparation.

Society, Amarillo.
Boyd, D. K., J. T. Abbott, W. A. Bryan, C. M. Garvey, S. A.
Tomka, and R. C. Fields
1990

Phase H Investigations at Prehistoric and Rock Art
Sites, Justiceburg Reservoir; Garza and Kent Counties, "12,xas. Reports of Investigations No. 71.2 Vols.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Boyd, D. K., M. D. Freeman, M. D. Blum, E. R. Prewitt, and

Bronson, B.
1977 The Earliest Farmers: Demography as Cause and
Consequence. In Origins of Agriculture, edited by
C. A. Reed, pp. 23-48. Mouton, The Hague.
Brooks, R. L.
1989

J. M. Quigg
1989

ern Great Plains, by J. L. Hofman, R. L. Brooks, J.

Phase I Cultural Resources Investigations at

S. Hays, D. W. Owsley, R. L. Jantz, M. K. Marks,

Justiceburg Reservoir on the Double Mountain Fork

and M. H. Manhein, pp. 71-90. Research Series No.

of the Brazos River, Garza and Kent Counties,
Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 66. 2 Vols.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Village Farming Societies. In From Clovis to
Comanchero: Areheological Overview of the South-

35. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
1993

Household Abandonment among Sedentary Plains
Societies: Behavioral Sequences and Consequences

Boyd, D. K., J. Peck, S. A. Tomka, K. W. Kibler, and M. D.

in the Interpretation of the Archeological Record.

Freeman
1994

Ethnoarchaeological and Archaeological Ap-

Reservoir), Gatza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase

proaches, edited by C. M. Cameron and S. A.

111, Season 3. Reports of Investigations No. 93.

Tomka, pp. 178-187. Cambridge University Press,

Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Cambridge.

Boyd, D. K., S. A. Tomka, and M. D. Freeman
1996

In Abandonment of Settlements and Regions:

Data Recovery at Lake Alan Henry (Justiceburg

Caprock Canyonlands Archeology: A Synthesis of
the Late Prehistory and History of Lake Alan Henry
and the Caprock Escarpment. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin. In preparation.

Boyd, D. K., S. A. Tomka, C. B. Bousman, K. M. Gardner, and
M. D. Freeman
1992 Data Recovet3’ at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan
Hen~. ), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase lII,
Season 1. Reports of Investigations No. 84. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.

1994

Warfare on the Southern Plains. In Skeletal Biology
in the Great Plains: Migration, Warfare, Health,
and Subsistence, edited by D. W. Owsley and R. L.
Jantz, pp. 317-323. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Brown, C.
1985 A Tale of Two Sites: A (41LU34) and B (41LU29).
Transactions of the 20th Regional Areheological
Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 143-155.
1990a SPAS-LU-10: Report #1--Middle Archaic. South
Plains Archeological Society Newsletter 102.

Boyd m The Palo Duro Complex
Brown, C. (Continued)
1990b SPAS-LU-10: Report #2--Late Archaic. South

Carmichael, D. L.
1985

Plains A rcheologicaI Society Newsletter 103.
1991a SPAS-LU-10:

Report

#3--Arrow

Catnpsites Near Keystone Dam, El Paso, Texas.
versity, Las Cruces.

Manos--Core Knives--Perforators. South Plains
1986

Archaeological Survey in the Southern Tularosa
Basin of New Mexico. Historic and Natural Re-

1991b SPAS-LU-10: Report #4. South Plains Archeologichl Society Newsletter 105.
n.d.

Archeological Excavations at Two Prehistoric
Occasional Papers No. 14. New Mexico State Uni-

Points--

Archeological Society Newsletter 104.

511

sources Report No. 3. Environmental Management
Office, Directorate of Engineering and Housing,

A Lubbock County Site: 41LU75. Unpublished MS

United States Army Air Defense Artillery Center,

on file with the author.

Fort Bliss, Texas.
Bryant, V. M.
1993

1990

Patterns of Residential Mobility and Sedentism in

Pollen Analysis of Archeological Sediments from

the Jornada Mogollon Area. In Perspectives on

4IKT53. In Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reser-

Southwestern Prehistory, edited by P. E. Minnis

voir (Lake Alan Henry), Garza and Kent Counties,

and C. L. Redman, pp. 122-134. Westview Press,

Texas: Phase III, Season 2, by D. K. Boyd, J. Peck,

Boulder, Colorado.

S. A. Tomka, and K. W. Kibler, pp. 435-443. Reports of Investigations No. 88. Prewitt and Associ-

Castetter, E. F. and M. E. Opler

ates, Inc., Austin.

1936

The Ethnobiology of the Chiricahua and Mescalero
Apache. A. The Use of Plants for Foods’, Beverages,

Button, V. T., and G. Agogino
1986

and Narcotics. The University of New Mexico Bul-

A Report on Additional Human Skeletal Matelial

letin, Biological Series 4(5). University of New

Exposed by Reservoir Induced Erosion at Lake Altus,

Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Southwestern Oklahoma. U.S. Department of the

1987

Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Southwest Region,

Collins, M. B.

Amarillo.

1968

Data from the Southern Llano Estacado, Texas. Un-

Human Skeletal Material Exposed by Reservoir-

published Master’s thesis, Department of Anthro-

Induced Erosion at Lake Altus, Southwestern Okla-

pology, The University of Texas at Austin.

homa. Bulletin of the Oklahotna Anthropological
Society 36:15-37.

The Andrews Lake Locality: New Archeological

1971

A Review of Llano Estacado Archaeology and
Ethnohistory. Plains Anthropologist 16(52):85-104.

Calamia, M. A.
1991

Ground Stone Variability among Jornada Mogollon

Corley, J. A.

Sites and Its Implications for Interpreting Residen-

1965a Proposed Eastern Extension of the Jornada Branch

tial Mobility. In Mogollon V, edited by P. Beckett,

of the Mogollon. Transactions of the First Regional

pp. 119-132. COAS Publishing and Research, Las

Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas: 31-36.

Cruces.

1965b Proposed Eastern Extension of the Jornada Branch
Cameron, C. M., and S. A. Tomka (editors)
1993 Abandonment of Settlements and Regions:

of the Mogollon. Bulletin of the Lea County Archeological Society 1:30-36.

Ethnoarchaeological and Archaeological Approaches. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Corley, J. A. and R. H. Leslie
1960

Campbell, R. G.
1976

The Boot Hill Site: L.C.A.S. B-5, a Preliminary
Report. Reprinted 1965. Bulletin 2. Lea County Ar-

The Panhandle AsT)ect of the Chaquaqua Plateau.

cheological Society, Hobbs, New Mexico.

University Graduate Studies 11. Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Couzzourt, J. E.
1982

Campbell, T. J.
1983 The Greenbelt Site: An Example of Variation among
Prehistoric Plains Village Sites in the Texas Panhandle. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department
of Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Carlson, G. G. and V. H. Jones
1940

Archaeological Testing at Cal Farley’s Boys Ranch,
Oldham County, Texas. Transactions of the 17th
Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas. Midland Archeological Society, Midland, Texas.

1985

Preliminary Report: Testing at the Tascosa Creek
Site, Oldham County, Texas. Transactions of the

Some Notes on Uses of Plants by the Comanche

Twentieth Regional Archeological Symposium for

Indians. Papers of the Michigan Academy of Sci-

Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp.

ence, Arts, and Letters 25:5 !7-542.

65-142.

512

Texas Archeological Society

1988

The Tascosa Creek Site: New Developments and

Dillehay, T. D.

Dates. Transactions of the 23rd Regional Archeo-

1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the
Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19(65): 180-

logical Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico

196.

and Western Texas, pp. 44-79.

Etchieson, G. M.
Covey, C. (translator)
1961

Cabeza De Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown

1979

Archeological Testing at the South Ridge Site, Lake
Meredith RecreationArea, Hutchinson County, Texas.

Interior of America. University of New Mexico

Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Re-

Press, Albuquerque.

search Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.

Creel,
1990 Excavations at 417~91, 7bin Green County, Texas.
O.G.

Publications in Archaeology Report No. 38. Texas

Etchieson, G. M., R. D. Speer, and J. T. Hughes
1977

An Archeological Survey of Certain Tracts in and
near Caprock Canyons State Park in Eastern

State Department of Highways and Public Trans-

Briscoe County, Texas. Archeological Research

portation, Highway Design Division, Austin.

Laboratory, Killgore Research Center, West Texas

Cruse,
1992

State University, Canyon.
Archeological Investigations at the Kent Creek Site

1978

(41HL66): Evidence of Mogollon lnfluence on the

voir Area, King and Knox Counties, Texas. Archeo-

Southern Plains. Publication No. 6. Panhandle Ar-

logical Research Laboratory, Killgore Research

cheological Society, Amarillo.
Cummings, L. S.
1990

Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.
1979

Counties, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Research Center, West Texas State

Art Sites, Justiceburg Reservoir, Garza and Kent

University, Canyon.

Counties, 7)xas, by D. K. Boyd, J. T. Abbott, W. A.
Bryan, C. M. Garvey, S. A. Tomka, and R. C. Fields,

Ferring, C. R.

pp. 533-550. 2 Vols. Reports of Investigations No.

1986

71. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

homa. In Current Trends in Southern Plains Archaeology, edited by T. G. Baugh, pp. 55-82. Plains

Geology and Earth Resources of Oklahoma: An At-

Anthropologist 31 ( 114, Pt. 2), Memoir 21.

las of Maps and Cross Sections. Education Publication No. 1. Oklahoma Geological Survey, Norman.

Ferring, C. R. (editor)
1982

DeBoer, W. R.
1988

The Late Holocene Prehistory of Delaware Canyon, Oklahoma. Contributions in Archeology 1. In-

Subterranean Storage and the Organization of Sur-

stitute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State

plus: The View from Eastern North America. South-

University, Denton.

eastern A rchaeology 7( 1 ):1-20.
Dering,

Late Holocene Cultural Ecology in the Southern
Plains: Perspectives from Delaware Canyon, Okla-

Curtis, N. M., Jr. and W. E. Ham
1972

Archeological Investigations in the Crowell
Reservoir Area, Cottle, Foard, King and Knox

Phytolith and Pollen Analysis: A Feasibility Study.
In Phase H Investigations at Prehistoric and Rock

1994

Archeological h~vestigations in the Truscott Reser-

Flores, D. L.
J. P.

Analysis of Plant Remains from 41GR291 and

1990

Caprock Canyonlands: Journeys into the Heart of the
Southern Plains. University of Texas Press, Austin.

41GR559. In Data Recovery at Lake Alan Henry
(Justiceburg Reservoir), Garza and Kent Counties,
Texas: Phase IlL Season 3, by D. K. Boyd, J. Peck,
S. A. Tomka, K. W. Kibler, and M. D. Freeman, pp.

1985

Patterns of Prehistoric Food Production in North
America. In Prehistoric Food Production in North

331-345. Reports of Investigations No. 93. Prewitt

America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 341-364. Anthro-

and Associates, Inc., Austin.

pological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology,

Dering, P. and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
1992

Ford, R. I.

Pollen Analysis of Archeological Sediments from
Justiceburg Reservoir. In Data Recovery at
Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan Henry), Garza
and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase HI, Season 1, by
D. K. Boyd, C. B. Bousman, S. A. Tomka, K. M.
Gardner, and M. D. Freeman, pp. 211-220. Reports
of Investigations No. 84. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Foreman, G. (editor)
1937 Adventures on the Red River: Report on the Exploration of the Headwaters" of the Red River by Captain Randolph B. Marcy and Captain G. B.
McClellan. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Cotnplex
Forrester, R. E.
1951 A Series of Eighteen Indian Skeletons Excavated in
Shackelford County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 22:132143.

Hiles, H.

1987

The Moran Point from North-Central Texas. Bulle-

Hines, M. H., S. A. Tomka, and K. W. Kibler

tin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society

1994

1993

513

Guide to Protein and Nutritional Values of Plants
Used by Native Americans of the Southwest. Southwest Research Native, Fairacres, New Mexico.

Data Recovery at the Wind Canyon Site, 41HZl19,
Hudspeth County, Texas. Reports of Investigations

36:131-136.

No. 99. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Galvin, J. (editor)
1970

Army Expedition Led by Lieutenant James W. Abert

Hofman, J. L.
1975 A Study of Custer-Washita River Foci Relationships. Plains Anthropologist 20(67):41-5 i.

of the Topographical Engineers. John Howell

1978

Through the Country of the Comanche Indians in
the Fall of the Year 1845: The Journal of a U.S.

Books, San Francisco.
Gettys, F.
1991

Salvage Excavation in Roger Mills County. Oklahoma Archeological Survey Newsletter 11(3).

Gilman, P. A.
1987 Architecture as Artifact: Pit Structures and Pueblos
in the American Southwest. American Antiquity
52(3):538-564.
Goland, C. A.
1983 The Ecological Context of Hunter-Gatherer Storage Strategies. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill.

The Development and Northern Relationships of
Two Archeological Phases in the Southern Plains
Subarea. In The Central Plains Tradition: Internal
Development and External Relationships, edited by
D. J. Blakeslee, pp. 6-35. Report No. 11. Office of
the State Archeologist, Iowa City.

1984a The Plains Villagers: The Custer Phase. In Prehistory of Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 287305. Academic Press, New York.
1984b The Western Protohistoric: A Summary of the
Edwards and Wheeler Complexes. In Prehistory of
Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 347-362. Academic Press, New York.
Hofman, J. L., and R. L. Brooks
1989

Prehistoric Culture History: Woodland Complexes
in the Southern Great Plains. In From Clovis to
Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the South-

1986

ern Great Plains, by J. L. Hofman, R. L. Brooks, J.

Report on Archaeological Salvage in the Sanford
Reservoir Area. Publication No. 4. Panhandle Ar-

S. Hays, D. H. Owsley, R. L. Jantz, M. K. Marks,

cheological Society, Amarillo.

and M. H. Manhein, pp. 61-70. Research Series No.
35. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Gustafson, A. A.
1994a The Duncan Ranch Site 1: A Late Woodland/Incipient Antelope Creek Phase Site. Paper presented at
the 30th annual meeting of the Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies, Clarendon,
Texas.
1994b The Duncan Ranch Site 1: Evidence for Late Woodland Transition to Antelope Creek Phase Development. Paper presented at the 59th annual meeting of
the Society for American Archeology, Anaheim,
California.

Hughes, D. T.
1984

The Foragers: Western Oklahoma. In Prehistory of
Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 109-117. Academic Press, New York.

Hughes, J. T.
1962 Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
32:65-84.
1969

The Canyon City Club Cave in the Panhandle of
Texas. Ms. on file, Office of the State Archeologist,

Hays, J. S.
1986 An Archeological Survey of Portions of the Buffalo
Lake National Wildlife Refuge, Randall County,
Texas. United States Department of the Interior,
Bureau of Reclamation, Southwest Region.
Hester, T. R., D. Gilbow, and A. D. Albee
1973

A Functiona! Analysis of "Clear Fork" Artifacts
from the Rio Grande Plain, Texas. American Antiquity 38(1):90-96.

Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
1978

Archeology of Palo Duro Canyon. Panhandle-

1991

Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the Texas

Plains Historical Review 51:35-57.

High Plains. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 60:1-55.

Texas Archeological Society

Hughes, J. T., H. C. Hood, and B. P. Newman

Lea County Archeological Society

1978

1971

Archeological Testing in the Red Deer Creek

The Laguna Plata Site, L.C.A.S. C-IO-C, LA-5148:

Watershed in Gray, Roberts, and Hemphill Counties,

A Prelimina~ Report. Lea County Archeological

Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore

Society, Hobbs, New Mexico.

Research Center, West Texas State University,
LeBlanc, S. A. and M. E. Whalen (editors)

Canyon.

1980
1983

An Archeological Synthesis of South-Central and
Southwestern New Mexico. Office of Contract

Ingold, T.
The Significance of Storage in Hunting Societies.

Archaeology,

Man 18:553-571.

Albuquerque.

Jelinek, A. J.

Lehmer, D. J.

1967

1948

A Prehistoric Sequence in the Middle Pecos Valley,

University

of

New

Mexico,

The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. Social Science Bulletin 17. University of Arizona, Tucson.

New Mexico. Anthropological Papers No. 31. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann
Leslie,

Arbor.

1965

The Merchant Site: L.C,A.S. E-4. Transactions of

Jelks, E. B.

the First Regional Archeological Symposium for

1962

Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp.

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect

23-29.

Site in Hill County, Texas. Archaeology Series No.
5. Department of Anthropology, The University of

1978

Texas at Austin.

Projectile Point Types and Sequence of the Eastern
Jornada-Mogollon, Extreme Southeastern New
Mexico. Transactions of the 13th Regional Archeo-

Johnson, E. H.

logical Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico

1931

and Western Texas, pp. 81-157.

The Natural Regions of Texas. Bulletin No. 3113.
University of Texas, Austin.
1979

The Eastern Jornada Mogollon, Extreme Southeast-

Johnson, L.
1994 The Life and 7)’mes of Toyah-Culture Folk: The

ern New Mexico (A Summary). In Jornada

Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16, Kimble

Jotwada Conference, edited by P. H. Beckett and R.

County, Texas. Office of the State Archeological

N, Wiseman, pp. 179-199. New Mexico State Uni-

Report 38. Texas Department of Transportation and

versity, Cultural Resources Management Division,

Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Las Cruces.

Jones,
1990 Assessment

Mogollon Archaeology: Proceedings of the First

LeVick, G. and L. LeVick
of

Pollen

Preservation

and

1966

The Case of the Aching Ulna or Would you Believe

Macrobotanical Analysis. In Phase H hzvestigations

a Projectile in an Elbow? Oklahoma Anthropologi-

at Prehistoric and Rock Art Sites, Justiceburg Res-

cal Society Newsletter 14(9):9-10.

ervoir, Garza and Kent Counties, Texas, by D. K.
Boyd, J. T. Abbott, W. A. Bryan, C. M. Garvey, S.
A. Tomka, and R. C. Fields, pp. 521-532. 2 Vols.

Lintz,
1982

actions of the 17th Regional Areheological Sympo-

Reports of Investigations No. 71. Prewitt and Asso-

sium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western
Texas, pp. 37-56.

ciates, Inc., Austin.

1984

Kirkpatrick, Z. M.
1992

Academic Press, New York.
1986

ies in Oklahoma’s Past No. 14. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.

Mississippi Valley. Publication No. 4640. University of Texas at Austin.

Architecture and Community Variability within the
Antelope Creek Phase of the Texas Panhandle. Stud-

Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northetv~
Texas with Extension of Puebloan Datings to the

1978

The Plains Villagers: Antelope Creek. In Prehistory
of Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 325-346.

Wildflowers of the Western Plains: A Field Guide.
University of Texas Press, Austin.

Krieger, A. D.
1946

An Overview of the Antelope Creek Focus. Trans-

Lintz, C., A. Treece, F. M. Oglesby, K. Kibler, P. O’Neill, W.

The Southern Limits of Central Plains Culture
Complexes. In Proceedings of the Fifth Plains
Conference .for Archeology, assembled by J. L.

N. Trierweiler, C. Frederick, J. M. Quigg, and A. J. Taylor
1993

Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. lvie
Reservoit; Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties,

Champe, pp. 98-99. Reprint of 1949 Laboratory of

Texas, Volume H: Test Excavations at Prehistoric

Anthropology Note Book No.

Sites and Assessment of Rock Cairn Features. Tech-

Nebraska, Lincoln.

1. University of

nical Report 346-II. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
Lintz, C., W. N. Trierweiler, F. Oglesby, P. O’Neill, W.
Doering, and M. McFaul
1991

A Cultural Resource Survey at Mitchell Reservoir,
Mitchell County, Texas. Technical Report 433.
Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

MacNeish, R. S.
1993

O’Laughlin, T. C.
1980 The Keystone Dam Site and Other Archaic and Formative Sites in Northwest El Paso, Texas. E1 Paso
Centennial Museum Publications in Anthropology
No. 8. The University of Texas at El Paso.
1993

P.reliminary Investigations of the Archaic in the Region of Las Cruces, New Mexico. Historic and Natural Resources Report No. 9. Cultural Resources
Management Program, Directorate of Environment,
United States Army Air Defense Artillery Center,
Fort Bliss, Texas.

1984

lands. In Mogollon V, edited by J. H. Kelley and P.

Texas, in the Summer of 1854. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Pennington, C. W.
1963

search, Las Cruces, New Mexico.
1993

The Tarahumar of Mexico. University of Utah Press,
Salt Lake City.

The Relationship between Groundstone and Agricultural Intensification in Western New Mexico.
Kiva 58(3):317-330.

Miller,
1992

Notes Taken during the Expedition Commanded by
Capt. R. B. Marcy, U.S.A., through Unexplored

Agricultural Intensification in the Mogollon HighH. Beckett, pp. 62-75. COAS Publishing and Re-

The Long and Short of It: Jornada Pueblo Occupational History. Paper presented at the Jornada
Mogollon Conference VIII, March 18-21, 1993,
Tularosa, New Mexico.

Parker, W. B.

Mauldin, R.
1991

515

Perttula, T. K.
1992 "The Caddo Nation": Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives. University of Texas Press,
Austin.

41HG66 Skeletal Analysis. In A rcheological Investigations at the Kent Creek Site (41HL66): Evidence of Mogollon Influence on the Southern Plains,
by J. B. Cruse, pp. 161-165. Publication No. 6.
Panhandle Archeological Society, Amarillo.

Minnis, P. E.
1985 Domesticating People and Plants in the Greater
Southwest. In Prehistoric Food Production in North
America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 309-339. Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Perttula, T. K. and J. E. Bmseth
1983 Early Caddoan Subsistence Strategies, Sabine River
Basin, East Texas. Plains Anthropologist 28(99):921.
Quigg, J. M., C. Lintz, F. M. Oglesby, A. C. Earls, C. D.
Frederick, W. N. Trierweiler, D. Owsley, and K. W. Kibler
1993

Historic and Prehistoric Data Recovery at Palo
Duro Reservoir, Hansford County, Texas. Technical
Report No. 485. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Quigg, J. M., C. Lintz, F. M. Oglesby, and A. C. Treese
Natural Heritage Policy Research Project
1978

1993

The Testing Phase at Mitchell Reservoir, Mitchell

Preserving Texas’ Natural Heritage. Policy

County, Texas. Technical Report No. 820. Mariah

Research Project Report No. 31. The Natural

Associates, Inc., Austin.

Heritage Policy Research Project, Lyndon B.
Johnson Schoo! of Public Affairs, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Raisz, E.
1957 Landforms of the United States. Map, 6th revised
edition, to accompany Atwood’s "Physiographic

Nelson, B. A. and S. A. LeBlanc
1986

Provinces of North America."

Short-Term Sedentism in the American Southwest:
The Mimbres Valley Salado. University of New

Ray, C. N.

Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

1932

Archeological Research in Central West Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontologi-

Northern, M. J.
1979 Archaeological Investigations of the Montgomery
Site, Floyd County, Texas. Master’s thesis,
Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.
Oklahoma Archeological Survey
1993 Radiocarbon Dates for RM-668. Oklahoma Archeological Survey Newsletter 12(3).

cal Society 4:63-70.
1933

Multiple Burials in Stone Cist Mounds of the
Abilene Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 3:14-24, and 32
(Plate 8).

1936

Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found near Colorado, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 8:9-16.

516

Texas Archeological Society

Ray, C. N. (Continued)

Saunders, R.

1941

1983

The Various Types of the Clear Fork Gouge. Bulle-

Highway Archaeology 7. Oklahoma Department of

Society 13:152-162.
!946

Transportation, Oklahoma City.

Two Buried Multiple Stone Cist Structures. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 17:18-27.

Raymer, L. E.
1988 The Form and Function of Subterranean Food Storage Structures: A Cross-Cultural Study of the Conditions Affecting Pit Storage in the Ethnographic
Records. Paper presented at the symposium "The
Economics of Storage: Developing an Iuterpretive
Framework for Archaeology" at the 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology,
April 29, 1988, Phoenix, Arizona.

The Carrizozo Bridge Site: A Plains Woodland Site
on the Oklahoma/New Mexico Border. Papers in

tin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological

Schlanger, S. H.
1990 Artifact Assemblage Composition and Site Occupation Duration. In Perspectives on Southwestern Prehistory, edited by P. E. Minnis and C. L. Redman,
pp. 103-121. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
1991

On Manos, Metates, and the History of Site Occupations. American Antiquity 56(3):460-474.

Shafer, H.
1977

Late Prehistory of Centra! Texas. Bulletin of the
South Plains Archeological Society’ 3:18-27.

Renfro, H. B.
1973 Geological Highway Map of Texas. United States
Geological Highway Map Series, Map No. 7. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa.

Sommer, A. E.

Riggs, A. D., Jr.

Sonnichsen, C. L.

1965

LY-4: A Surface Site of the South Plains. Bulletin

1971

Big Spring Site. Transactions of the Sixth Regional
Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New
Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 111-122.

1958

The Mescalero Apaches. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman.

of the South Plains A rchaeological Society 2:1-35.
Floydada, Texas.
Robinson, D. G.
1992

Petrographic Analysis of Nonlocal Plainwares. In

Stuiver, M. and H. A. Polach
1977 Discussion: Reporting of ~C Data. Radiocarbon
19:355-363.

Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan
Henry), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase 111,
Season 1, by D. K. Boyd, S. A. Tomka, C. B.

Stuiver, M. and P. J. Reimer
1993

221-227. Reports of Investigations No. 84. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.
1994

Thurmond, J. P.
1988a The 1988 Society Field School: The Beaver Dam

Petrographic Analysis of Plainwares from 41GR291.

Site, 34RM208, Roger Mills County. Oklahoma

In Data Recovecv at Lake Alan Henry (Justiceburg

Anthropological Society Newsletter 36(4):2-5.

Reservoir), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase
HI, Season 3, by D. K. Boyd, S. A. Tomka, K. W.

1988b An Update on Investigations at the Beaver Dam
Site (34RM208), Roger Mills County. Oklahoma

Kibler, and M. D. Freeman, pp. 356-361. Reports

Anthropological Society Newsletter 36(6):3-9.

of Investigations No. 93. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.
Runyan, J. W.
1972

Extended ~C Database and Revised CALIB 3.0 Age
Calibration Program. Radiocarbon 35:215-230.

Bousman, K. M. Gardner, and M. D. Freeman, pp.

1988c Update on the 1988 Fall Dig at 34RM308. Oklahoma Anthropological Society Newsletter 36(8):3.
1991

Archeology of the Dempsey Divide: A Late Ar-

The Laguna Plata Site: LCAS-CI0-C, LA 5148.

chaic/Woodland Hotspot on the Southern. Plains.

Transactions of the Seventh Regional Archaeologi-

Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society

cal Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and

39:103-157.

Westetw Texas, pp. 101-114.
Treece, A. C., C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg, and
Salinas,.M.
1990

Indians of the Rio Grande Delta: Their Role in the
History of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico.
University of Texas Press, Austin.

K. A. Miller
1993

Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas. Vol. III: Data Recovery Results from
Non-Ceramic Sites. Technical Report No. 346-III.
Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Cotnplex
Tunnell, C. D.
1964 Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
35:83-93.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas h~dians.
Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Vehik, S. C.
1984

The Woodland Occupations. In Prehistory of Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 175-197. Academic
Press, Orlando.

Vesta!, P. A. and R. E. Schultes
1939 The Economic Botany of the Kiowa Indians as it
Relates to the History of the Tribe. Botanical Museum, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

517

Willey, P. S.
1978 Human Skeletal Remains from the Deadman’s
Shelter Site. In Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir,
edited by J. T. Hughes and P. S. Willey, pp. 198204. Archeological Survey Report 24. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
Willey, P. S. and J. T. Hughes
1978a The County Line Site. In Archeology at Mackenzie
Reservoir, edited by J. T. Hughes and P. S. Willey,
pp. 115-137. Archeological Survey Report 24. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
1978b The Deadman’s Shelter Site. In Archeology at

Mackenzie Reservoir, edited by J. T. Hughes and P.
S. Willey, pp. 149-190. Archeological Survey Report No. 24. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.

Ward,
!985

Social Implications of Storage and Disposal Patterns.
In Structure and Process in Southeastern Archaeology, edited by R. S. Dickens and H. T. Ward, pp. 82101. University of Alabama Press, University.

Willey, P. S., B. R. Harrison, and J. T. Hughes
1978

The Blue Clay Site. In Archeology at Mackenzie
Reservoir, edited by J. T. Hughes and P. S. Willey,
pp. 138-140. Archeological Survey Report No. 24.
Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical

Watts,
1963 Distribution of Pottery in Surface Sites on the South
Plains of Texas. Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society 1 : 1-25.

Commission, Austin.
Williams, J. L. and P. E. McAllister
1979

New Mexico in Maps. Technology Application Center, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.

Wedel, W. R.
1975 Chalk Hollow: Culture Sequence and Chronology
in the Texas Panhandle. Actas del XLI Congreso
Internacional de Americanistas 1:271-278. Mexico,
D.F.

Wiseman, R. N.
1981 Further Investigations at the King Ranch Site,
Chaves County, New Mexico. The Artifact 19(3 and
4):169-198.
1988

Welch, J. R.
1991 From Horticulture to Agriculture in the Late Prehistory of the Grasshopper Region, Arizona. In
Mogollon V, pp. 75-92. COAS Publishing, Las
Cruces, New Mexico.
Whalen, M. E.
1977

Settlement Patterns of the Eastern Hueco Bolson.
El Paso Centennial Museum Publications in Anthropology No. 6. The University of Texas at E1
Paso.

1980

The Pithouse Periods of South-Central New Mexico.
In An Archeological Synthesis of South-Central and
Southwestern New Mexico, edited by S. A. LeBlanc
and M. E. Whalen, pp. 318-386. Office of Contract
Archaeology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque.

Whalen, M. E. and P. A. Gilman
1990 Introduction: Transitions to Sedentism. In Perspectives on Southwestern Prehistory, edited by P. E.
Minnis and C. L. Redman, pp. 71-75. Westview
Press, Boulder, Colorado.

The Continuing Saga of the King Ranch Site (LA
26764): Update and Summaries of Findings. In
Fourth Jornada Mogollon Conference (Oct. 1985)
Collected Papers’, edited by M. S. Duran and K. W.
Laumbach, pp. 223-254. Human Systems Research,
Inc., Tularosa, New Mexico.

Wiseman, R. N., D. V. Hill, and D. Mclntosh
1994 The Llano Estacado Pottery Project. Paper presented
at the 52nd Plains Conference and 65th annual meeting of the Texas Archeological Society, Lubbock,
Texas.
Witte, A. H.
1955 A Double Indian Burial from Donley County, Texas.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Review 28:82-86.
Woodbury, R. A., and E. B. W. Zubrow
1979 Agricultural Beginnings, 2000 B.C.-A.D. 500. In
Southwest, edited by A. Ortiz, pp. 43-60. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 9.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

518

Texas Archeological Society

Word, J. H.

Wulfkuhle, V. A.

1963

Floydada Country Club Site (41FL1). Bulletin of
the South Plains Archeological Society 1:37-63.

1986

1965

The Montgomery Site in Floyd County, Texas. Bulletin of the South Plains A rcheological Society 2:55102.

1991

The 1975 Field School of the Texas Archeological
Society. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
60:57-106.

Investigations into the Prehistory of the Upper Clear
Fork of the Brazos River, Fisher and Jones Counties, Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

