Texas Archeologicctl a,~d Pc, leon$ologizal Society

McKENZIE CAVE AND ADJACENT SITES
IN PECOS COUNTY
By W. C. HOLDEI~
Approximately twenty-two miles east of Fort Stockton, Pecos
County, Texas, is Tunis Spring. A current of clear water some
eight feet wide and a foot deep flows from beneath a stratum of
limestone. The stream runs between eight and ten miles before it
sinks into the sands and gravels of Tunis Creek. A stage stand of
the Butterfield Trail, built in 1858, was located at the Spring. In
1936 the stage stand was moved and reconstructed by the State
Highway Commission on Highway No. 290 one-third of a mile
northeast of the original site. The original rock corrals are still
intact at the Spring.
Tunis Canyon, in which the Spring is located, varies from two to
four miles in width. The bottom of the Canyon which is almost
level, save for Tunis Creek, is covered with growth of brushy mesquite. The sides of the Canyon, which have the appearance of mesas,
rise some four hundred feet and are covered with a caprock of limestone about twenty feet thick. This caprock, in its perpendicular
sides along the edges of the Canyon, contains a number of caves and
rock shelters. A number of these caves and rock shelters show
signs of human occupation. Panther Bluff, located three miles
southwest of the Spring, has one cave and two shelters. The cave
whose entrance measured seven feet eight inches wide and five feet
three inches high, was filled with debris to a depth of three feet.
Its ceiling had considerable smoke incrustations. The cave had
been previously excavated by Mr. Woodrow Smith and Mr. Jeff
Crump of Fort Stockton. We examined the materials and found
them to be similar to those taken from McKenzie Cave, a description of which follows. Of the two shelters in Panther Bluff, one
measured twenty-one feet wide, six feet six inches deep, and six
PLATE 6
No. 1. McKenzie Gave. No. 2. Close view of McKenzie Gave. No.
3 and 4. Matting from McKenzie Cave. No. 5. Sandals from the
cave. No. 6. Surface artifacts of the cave region.

McKenzie Cave a. nd Ad.ia~ent Sites in Pecos Coun~.y

49

feet three inches high. The other was nineteen feet six inches wide,
eighteen feet deep, and eight feet six inches high. The ceilings of
both had smoke incrustations, each had a pictograph on its wall,
and neither coniained any debris.
Approximately six miles east and four miles south of Tunis
Spring is McKenzie Cave,1 located on the ranch of Mrs. Mary Lea
McKenzie. It measured at the entrance 38 feet seven inches wide,
23 feet four inches deep, and five feet high. The ceiling is practically level. However, the floor slopes upward toward the back
until it is within 18 inches of the ceiling. Between ten and fifteen
inches of debris covered the floor. The debris was for the most
part pulverized limestone and windblown material mixed with a
limited amount of ashes. Most of the artifacts came from the front
central part of the cave.
Matting
The large specimen in Plate 6, Fig. 3 is similar to one found
by A. T. Jackson in Val Verde County Rock Shelter2 and classified
by him as Type III. It seems to have measured originally 58 cm by
62 cm. It came from a small dark cave about five by seven feet
located two miles southwest of McKenzie Cave. It is made of triangular culms threaded together at intervals of 17 to 13 cm with
cords. The culms, having a width of 5 ram, are of tule grass which
still grows in the vicinity. The four cords which hold the mat
together vary as to diameter, material, and hardness of twist. The
top cord is 5 mm in diameter, made of agave lechuguilla, and is of
loose twist. The second one from the top is 4 mm in diameter, made
of agave lech~guilhr, and is of compact twist. The third one is 2
ram, apparently of a grass fiber, and of hard twist. The fourth, or
bottom, cord is 3 ram, and is of Spanish dagger.
The small specimen in Plate 6, Figure 3, from a small cave two
miles north of Tunis Spring in the Eight Ranch, is of the same
material as the large specimen, only the triangular grass blades
1.
tion

This cave was reported to us by Wilson

Smith of Fort Stockton.

An expedi-

consisting of Dr. C. J. Wagner, W. G. McMillan, W. M. Pearce, Jr., E. J.
Lowery, Porter Montgomery, Wilson Smith, Mr. and Mrs. C. W. Edwards, Mrs. W.
C. Holden and the writer, set out to explore the Tunis Canyon area on February
1941. Work was done in the caves of Panther Bluff and in McKenzie Cave. Considerable excavation had already been done in McKenz~e Cave by C. R. McKenzie aud
his wife, Billye.
We are indebted to Mr. McKenzie for permission to photograph his
materials.
The photographs were made by W. Go ]¢IcMillan.
2.
A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde County, ~Jnlversity of Texa~ Bulletin,
No. 3327, p. 106, and Plate XXIII,

5O

T~xa~ Archeologi~zal and Paleontological So~ty

have been pounded flat. The ends have been twisted, turned back,
and woven together with two alternate cords of firmly twisted agave
lechwguilla. A similar specimen not shown, came from the same
small cave as the large specimen in Plate 6, Figure 3.
A third specimen, shown in the lower right corner of Plate 6,
Figure 4, came from an unexcavated cave three miles northeast of
McKenzie Cave. It differs from the two specimens described immediately above in that the selvedge is formed by the flattened
grass blades being twisted into a cord along the edge. The four
specimens on the left of Plate 6, Figure 4, came frora McKenzie
Cave, and are similar to the large specimen in Plate 6, Figure 3,
only these specimens are thicker and more closely woven. The
cords near the edges are about 1 cm from the edge, and the ends of
the culms are cut off evenly. In as much as the edges to the large
specimen in Plate 6, Figure 3 are not existent, it may be that its
edge was like these four. Although these specimens are cornmonly
referred to as matting, a loop of cordage attached to the edge of one
of them suggests that they might have been u~d as hangings, or as
the back of a cradle.
The back of a cradle board from a cave in the Huecos Mountains
30 miles from E1 Paso is of similar material and construction. The
cradle board is shown in Picturesqu.e Southwest, Vol. I, No. 1, p. 24.
The frame of a cradle was found by George C. Martin in a cave on
the lower Peeos, and is shown in Big Bend Basket Maker Papers No.
3, Witte Museum, p. 4~4, Plate XLIV, Figure 7. It is probable that
this frame, like the one from the Hueeos Cave, was covered with the
matting in question. Incidentally, these cradle boards, together with
the presence of similar types of matting may represent an affinity
between the lower Pecos’and the Hueeos cultures.
The piece of checker board, or square weave matting in upper
right of Plate 6, Figure 4, is similar to types reported by George C.
Martin from caves on the lower Pecos and shown in Big Bend Basket
Maker Papers, No. 3, p. 60, Plate XLI, Figure 5, and p. 61, Plate
XXI, Figure 3.
Prickly Pear Leaves
Seven prickly pear leaves came from McKenzie Cave.

Two have

PLATE 7
No. 1. Fire s~icks, quids and wooden artifacts from McKenzie Cave.
Nos. 2 and 3. Two skulls from burials in the region.

Plate 7

M~K~z~ ~a~ a~ Ad~c~c~ S~t¢s ~ P¢cos ~ou~

53

been carefully split on the two sides and bottom, leaving the parts
attached at the top with a hinge like connection about 7 cm long.
Fi~,e other leaves were split on one side only, the split side being
stitched together with a slit piece of Spanish dagger leaf. One of
these was stuffed with shredded cedar bark. The leaves are shown
in Plate 6, Figure 5, top.

Quids
Numerous quids resulting from the chewing of young and tender
fibrous stalks, which perhaps were sotol, were found in McKenzie
Cave. Similar quids have been reported from Murrah Cave on the
lower Pecos, from Pearce and Jackson’s Rock Shelter in Val Verde
County, and from Jackson’s caves in Culberson County. The specimens are shown at the bottom of Plate 7, Figure !.
Sandals
Ten fragments of different sandals came from McKenzie Cave.
Prototypes of all of them have been reported from other sections of
the Big Bend area. The specimens in the middle left and lower left
of Plate 6, Figure 5 are similar to those described by Victor J.
Smith, Texas zlrchaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin,
Vol. V, as Type I, Round toe, and shown in Plate 13, No. 30, p. 65.
The same type of sandal is also described by A. T. Jackson from
Caldwell Cave No. 1 in Culberson County, Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. IX, pp. 154-179. The specimen third from the left, bottom row, Plate 6, Figure 5, is similar to
a type described by Martin from the lower Pecos Caves in Big Bend
Basket Maker Papers, No. 3, pp. 71, 72, 73. Two specimens in the
middle upper of Plate 6, Figure 5, are like two sandals from Murrah
Cave and shown in Texas Archaeological .and Paleontological Society
Bulletin, Vol. IX, p. 63.
One of the ten specimens is of unsplit Spanish dagger (Yucca
trecullana Cart). Six are of split Spanish dagger. Three are of
either yucca (locally known as soap weed) or of bear grass. Two
of the sandals have complete tie-strings of split Spanish dagger, and
one has a tie-string of split yucca.
Flint
Only two flint artifacts have been found in McKenzie Cave or the
other caves in the immediate vicinity. Unfortunately neither speci-

54

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

men is shown in Plate 6, Figure 6. Both are knives. One is of
white chert, 8.3 c.m. long and 3.5 c.m. wide, and is leaf shaped.
The other is of grey chert, 9.9 c.m. long and 4.5 c.m. wide with a
thickness of 7 ram, and has a pear shape.
The other specimens shown in Plate 6, Figure 6 are from surface
sites in the McKenzie Cave area. They may or may not have an
association with the cave cultures.
Pottery
The eight pot sherds shown in the second row from the top of
Plate 6, Figure 6 came from a surface site on Tunis Creek some
three miles northwest of McKenzie Cave. Five of the sherds are
from the same pot, apparently of a thick Plains ware. Another,
the fourth from the left, is thin ware, without a slip, but polished
on the outside. The third sherd from the left is a Pueblo black on
white ware, probably a trade item. The seventh from the left is
also of Pueblo origin, and is both painted and incised. As in the
case of the flint mentioned above, there is no association between
any of the~ sherds and the adjacent cave cultures.
Fire Sticks
Two fire, or hearth sticks, and one fire drill, shown in the center
of Plate 7, Figure 1, are like those reported by Smith from Hard
Rock Shelter near Alpine, by Jackson from Val Verde County and
Culberson County,.and by the writer from Murrah Cave.
ShaJts
One stick with a tenon-like end, measuring 11.4 c.m. long and
5 mm wide with a fork on the other end, came from McKenzie
Cave. It is shown in Plate 7, Figure 1, third item from the left,
top row. A gum-like substance on the tenon end indicates that
another shaft or other object had been bound to the shaft. Jackson
shows four such sticks in Figure 28, p. 122 of his report on a Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde County. Coffin reported similar
sticks from Brewster County.
Two shafts, measuring 24.6 and 52 cm in length respectively, and
1.2 c.m. in diameter, apparently of button willow are shown in
Plate 7, Figure 1.

PLATE 8
Nos. 1 and 2.

Cave.

Specimens of knots and cordage from NIcKenzie

McKenzie Cave and Adjacent Sites in Pecos County

57

One shaft fragment of a reed, locally known as tule measures
9 mm in diameter and 11.1 cm long. One end has been burned,
so that the original length and use of the shaft cannot be determined.
Tule grass still grows along Tunis Creek.
Burials
Two burials were revealed by erosion on Tunis Creek approximately three miles north of McKenzie Cave. The skulls are shown
in Plate 7, Figures 2 and 3. The skeletons were approximately
of the same height, the fe~nurs measuring 44. cm. There was nothing to indicate a relationship of the burials with the caves.
Cordage and Knots

Eighty-nine specimens of cordage and knots ca~ne from McKenzie
Cave. Materials used consist of Agave Lechuguilla, Spanish dagger, yucca, sotol, algoe, and bear grass. Some of the specimens are
made from the twisted fiber, and some are of split leaves. The
specimens are similar in materials, and construction to cordage and
knots reported by Jackson, Smith, Coffin, and Martin from caves
in the area extending from the Pecos on the east to E1 Paso on the
west. No attempt is made here to analyze or describe in detail the
McKenzie cave specimens. They are shown in Plate 8.
Conclusions
The evidence from McKenzie Cave and other nearby sites indicates that the culture is typically Big Bend Cave Dweller. Nothing
was found which would cause one to believe that McKenzie Cave
was occupied in historic times. There was considerable evidence of
wind erosion on the ceiling of the cave. Considering the amount
and rate of erosion, we arrived at a rough estimate that it had been
four hundred years since the cave was last occupied. This would
place occupation within the time range of Jackson’s Culberson
County caves. Jackson, basing his conclusion upon the occurrence
of pottery of known horizon, placed the occupation of his sites at
between 1300 and 1600.
Texas Technological College,
Lubbock, Texas.

