SKELETAL REMAINS OF MAN AND EXTINCT
ANIMALS:

A CAMP SITE COVERED BY RIVER DRIFT
E. T. ADAMS
It has been the opinion of many eminent anthropologistS
~f some years past that the Americas have not been occupied by members of the human race for-more than a few
thousand years. This opinion has been modified somewhat
in the last twenty years or more due to flqe research of
American archaeologists, so that until recently it had been
thought that man has lived in North America ten to fifteen
thousand years. Due to the recent excavations of the Ventana Cave near Tuscon, Arizona, the date of such occupation
is~ now placed at thirty-five thousand years or more. .~
The failure to regard the Americas, particularIy North
America, as a center of the development of the human race
is influenced by the fact that neither the fossil remains of
the ape nor those of a man of the Neanderthal type have
been found in North America. The presence of fossil man
in both North America and Europe is generally deemed to
be due to migrations from both the west and the east.
Having become interested in the Piltdown man during hi~
student days, the writer has devoted a greaf amount of tim~
since to field research in the area surrounding his own home~
to determine if any comparable evidence of ancient ma~
could be found. This is the locality of the four bends of the
Brazos River, which has cut its valley about nineteen mile~
wide and about six hundred feet deep through the limestone
of the Lower Cretaceous. It is a very ancient river: In the
many canyons and other water courses flowing across the
valley and cutting into the river drift, are exposed banl~
which exhibit the deposits of the ancient river, particularly,
those of the Miocene and of the Pleistocene. Along the
carpments of the Cretaceous stone are cliffs where the less
indurated stone has decayed, forming shelter caverns

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

which there are many. It is believed that the stratigraphy
of the more favorably situated caverns dates from the third
interglacial period upwards.
Some modern farming operations had uncovered some
bones, which were ignored by the operator. A large piece
of a human occiput was given the writer by an amateur
archaeologist, and from him the location was ascertained.
The occiput was unusually thick: 14 mm. at the internal
bccipital protuberance, and 10 mm. elsewhere.
A thorough search of the locality has been made, and continues to be made at infrequent intervals. Parts of the
skeletal remains of four individuals have been discovered: a
young woman about nineteen years of age, another woman
eight or ten years older, an infant, and an old man. There
was a fire hearth but neither pottery nor grinding stones.
About the hearth were bones of extinct animals. Pieces of
glyptodont armor were the most frequent. Teeth and parts
of the mandibles of pig, bison primigenius, wolf, ground
sloth~ and an ancient deer, together with unidentified teeth
were found.
.Thesmaller foramina of the human bones were filled with
the~blu~h loess which marks the second interglacial period.
The stratigraphy of the site was destroyed by the farming
operations. Only one bone was found intact, the right femur
of the young woman. (Measurements: 17½ inches long;
platymeria, taken at UF., LM 28, AP 20 mm. Pilaster taken
at middle, LM 24 mm., AP 26 mm.: muscular attachments
~light.)
!Sufficient of the fragments of the skull of the young
woman were found so that a profile view could be. reconStructed in part(Plate 1, Fig. 1). The skull was not unusually thick, and, upon:comparison with the skull bits of the
’older woman and the "old man, it seems that the thickness
Of’these skulls increased with age. Onlyone of the principal
measurements was estimated; that of the biporionic vertic~il
height, which ~vas placed at 79 mm. No attempt has been
’made to estimate the nasion-inion distance because it is

PLATE 1

Skeletal Remains of Man and Extinct Animals

11

evident that the nasion was well forward of the position
usually expected. The supra-orbital rims diverge laterally
and posteriorly from the supra-orbital notches (Plate 2,.
Fig. 2). The frontal sinuses are large and extremely extensive laterally. The basion and the whole of the right
maxilla and zygoma are missing. The greater part of the
left half of the young woman’s mandible and a portion of
the left maxilla were found, as well as the left zygoma.
The extinct snails and clam shown on Plate 2, Fig. 4c do
not form a basis for estimating the date of the occupation
by these people. They were there in any event. The animals
mentioned could have belonged to a much later period, except the B. Primigenius. It is assumed that the many different remains of the animals reached this place by the
hands of these people.
The bison deserves particular mention. He is far younger
than the human race in his development, and exhibits more
clearly the climatic conditions through which he passed to
achieve the specialized form of his teeth of the present day
(Plate 2, Fig. 3). The teeth and mandible shown in Fig. 3
(Plate 2) exhibit the pieces of jaws and teeth found scattered about the site. The crests are high and the width
(bucchallingual) narrow. These are compared with those of
the bison (Plate 2, Fig. 3) of the "pitch bog" days. The
latter are about twice as broad as the former and have the
crests well ground down. The present day bison has teeth
about.twice as wide as the "pitch bog" bison, without crests,
and well affixed to the jaw, forming an efficient mill .for
grinding his food (Plate 2, Fig. 3 b).
Recourse is next had to the:differences between the scanty
skeletal remains of these people and the same portions of
modern man’s skeleton. On the whole, so many of the skeletal exhibits are so like those of modern man that many of
them would pass unnoticed by a competent observer of such
matters.Mention has been made above of.the peculiar position a~d direction of the supra-orbital rim. This makes
an angle of about seventy degrees with a plane passed verti~
cally through the saggital suture and the center of the frontal

12

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological Society

and suggests the Rhodesian Man and the extinct lemur of
North America for a likeness of structure, contrasting strikingly with the frontal plane of modern man. This is believed
to occur as some sort of compensation for the rigidity of the
spine of these people. The processes of each vertebra overlapping the one just below present a box-like trough effect
instead of the V-shaped effect of the modern spine, which
permits us, by pivoting the body about, to look entirely
around us without moving our feet.
The orbit of the eye is strikingly small, covering about
one fourth of the area contained within the orbit of modern
man. On Plate 2, Fig. 1 is shown the comparison between an
orbit of these people (formed by the right supra-orbital rim
of the older woman and the zygoma of the younger woman)
compared with the orbit of a modern Indian man taken
from a shelter cavern. The minimum templar width of the
Indian is 92 mm., and that of the young woman is estimated
at 98 mm.
It is also to be noted that the suture between the orbital
rim (Fronto-sphenoidal process) and the zygoma is close
to the supra-orbital notch and well upon the rim. (The position on Plate 2, Fig. 1 is exaggerated.) This again suggests
the extinct lemur. It has been noted from several skeletal
remains found by the writer that this suture has receded
from this position regularly until in the modern Indian
cave man shown here it is nearly in the normal position of
modern man.
The parietals bend sharply inward at pterion, so that
the broad low vault may conform to what is evidently a
narrow maxilla. The squamatic suture forms a low, long
arch, the type to conform to the low squashed down and flat
parietals and frontals. The frontal is very short. This feature,
together with the small orbits, cause the vertex of the line
marking the .biporionic vertical height to fall behind the
bregma as in modern man. The lateral sinus passes around
the hinder, inferior angle of the parietal in two cases; the
others have not been found. This feature has been observed
in other skulls of the southwestern United States, occasion-

®

®

®

pLA’P I~ 2

Skeletal Remains o] Man and Extinct Animals

15

ally cutting across the angle of the parietal and in others
going around it.
The antrum or nasal sinus of the young woman merits
attention. It is compared with that of a modern cave man,
associated with the Yuma type knife, and the sinus of a
young man of the third interglacial period (Plate 3, Figs.
1, 2, and 3, respectively). It is well known that the size of
the sinus increases with the age of the individual at the
expense of the walls surrounding it. The sinus floor usually
extends from the third to the first molar, occasionally to
both premolars. The sinus floor reached the roof of the
alveolar process in the region of the third molar (which
was about to erupt) and extended upward to the upper rim
of the nasal aperture. This left a spongy mass of bone from
the third molar region forward, which continued medially
between the palate and the floor of the nasal cavity. Viewed
from above, the floor of the nasal cavity is concave and the
palate convex so that only along the mid-line between the
halves of the maxilla does the bone become as thin as found
in modern man. The palate is smooth. This feature is perhaps more unusual than significant except that it is believed
to indicate a very prominent alveolar prognathism. This
is confirmed by the obtuse angle of the ascending ramus and
the body of the mandible. The dental arcade is V-shaped.
The body of the mandible is smooth, laterally and medially, and the border is rounded. A slight mylo-hyoid ridge
extends forward to the first molar and from there to the
symphysis is a slight groove. The alveolar cavity remains
open in the old man’s jaw (Plate 1, Fig. 2a), and the lower
border is rounded as in the young woman (Plate 1, Fig. 2b).
Prominent muscular attachments are noted about the region of the gonion. T~is is confirmed by the unusual wear
of the molars. Both women had two lower molars. The premolars had a peculiar polish and were still rounded. They
were not used for grinding food, but rather for shredding
it so that the molars could grind it more easily. This feature
is also found in the people from the third interglacial period.
The molars were not particularly different from those of

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

modern man except for the extra-ordinary thickness of the
dentyne, which is three or four times as thick as that of the
modern cave Indians. The lower borders of the body of the
mandible rises upward at the symphysis to form an arch,
incisura submentalis (Plate 1, Fig. 2b).
The region of the ramus about the mandibular foramen
exhibits either no mylo-hyoid groove or a very shallow and
faint groove. The lingula, a platelet of bone which overhangs the lower rim of the foramen in modern man, is lacking. To this platelet are attached the sinews of the pharynx.
The lingula exists in a very rudimentary form in these
mandibles. It is a mere tip rising up from the upper or forward rim of the foramen. It is well removed from the rim.
The gradual shifting of the tip to form the modern lingula
has been observed in the closer approach to the rim in the
mandibles from the third interglacial period and the platelet begins to form and overhang the rim in the mandible
from the fourth glacial period, finally reaching the position
of modern man in the postglacial cave Indian (Plate 3, Figs.
4 and 5; Plate 2, Fig. 4a and 4b).
The mylo-hyoid groove in the mandible from the fourth
glacial period is covered over in part of its length with a
sheath of bone (Plate 3, Fig. 4). This seems to indicate that
the mylo-hyoid nerve and vessel was at some prior time
extricating itself from its imprisonment within the body of
the mandible. It is but a step backward to the showing of
~wo foramina, as in the Piltdown and ape mandibles. The
fact that the covered groove occurs in two known specimens
(Plate 3, Fig. 4), one coming from the interval between the
Wurm :I and Wurm II glaciations, and the other probably
earlier, is believed to be due to a reversion to a former type
b6cause of the hatdships of the glacial periods mentioned.
This reversion to a former type is not unknown to students
of paleontology. These physical facts lend support to the
theory that the Piltdown jaw belongs to the skull although
the skull of the young woman supports the British workman’s description of that skull as a brown "kokernut."
The,shelter caverns here reflect the fact that the .fourth

Skeletal Remains oS Man and Extinct Animals

19

glacial period was one of extreme dryness, except for a
slight interval, between Wurm I and Wurm II. Whether the
climate was cold is not shown. There were probably extremes of heat and cold. If this section, about thirty degrees
north latitude, was a desert of such nature that animals and
plant life could not be supported, then all animals drifted
either north to a wet fringe or toward the tropics where
moisture was plentiful during this period. Along the northern fringe, animals could have drifted either west or east.
The presence of extinct animals in a more northern latitude
does not mean that such presence was contemporaneous
with the presence of the same animals in this latitude. There
was little inducement for a migration into this section during the Iast glacial period. The close of ~this period is marked
in the caverns here by. evidence of excessive rainfall, which
might have meant that the same precipitation in the form
of ice, snow, and sleet freezing and covering the ground in
more northern latitudes caused the extinction of the mastodon, horse, camel, and other animals which once roamed
North America. According to the cavern evidence here, the
end of the glacial period came suddenly.
The various features of the skull fragments of the people
in question, such as the long low arch of the equamous
suture, dove tail flanging, the rounded occiput and sloping
curved nuchal plane, light supra-orbital ridges, and many
other features mentioned suggest the Piltdown, Swanscombe, and other skulls found, but whether there is a racial
affinity is a matter for future years and further-discoveries.
The race or perhaps phylum of these people is marked. An
inspection of the tibia reveals faintly but unmistakably that
these people are ancient Indians of the southwestern part of
North America.
The shift in the position of the lingula, and the development of the mylo-hyoid groove probably accompanied an
improvement in the swallowing efficiency of the pharynx
and the further development of the oral digestive system.
The exhibits of such skeletal features do not constitute a
case for definite antiquity. If the theory is correct, the man-

2O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

dible of the Eskimaux, before the advent of the white man,
should show some interesting facts. The teeth of the people
under discussion showed~.neither cavities nor pyorhhea. The
same theory accounts for the modern type of wear and nature of the teeth exhibited by the Mauer jaw. The Heidelberg man and his ancestors could have stayed more closely
at home and have subsisted principally on grass seeds, rather
than on food from the chase.
The typical and theoretical ancestor of ape and man (if
such animal is ever identified) would be neither of the two
but would possess physical capabilities of producing either
descendant under a suitable environment. If the conditions
of food and other surroundings had not changed, then neither
of the two would have evolved. The theoretical ancestor
would have continued its existence and there would have
been no one to have known about him. If the subsequent
conditions of living had been favorable to the development
of the ape, such would (and did) result. A dissimilar but
favorable environment would have resulted in the evolution of man. The ape probably needed four hands to place
food in his mouth, thus efficiently gathering all the fruit and
such like food within reach of the numerous hands without
moving the body about.
Under a favorable environment suitable for the development of man and isolated from an environment which would
in like manner have been suitable for the evolution of the
ape, there is no reason that man should not have evolved
without the development of an ape. The treeless plains of
North America were not suitable for the evolution of the
ape, but were suitable for the ancestor who "took a chance"
on the ground. Under such conditions, man could have come
into being. Too little is known at this time about the matter
to form the basis of a very serious argument, but eventually
the ancestry of both will be traced further into the remote
past than it has been hitherfore believed possible.

