18

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

TWO BURIED MULTIPLE STONE CIST
STRUCTURES
By CYaus .N. RAx
Multiple Burial Cist Complex One
Late in the year 1942 the writer found an arrangement of
stones on a hilltop above Sweetwater Creek in Fisher
County, which had the appearance of having been placed
there by man, and while the conditions for excavation at
that time were unfavorable experience had shown that when
this was long delayed one was likely to find that the site had
been ruined during the interval by either treasure hunters
or arrowhead hunting boys. The mound was excavated in
two days of hard digging with the help of an Abilene lawyer,
Mr. R. W. Haynie. The debris of an old burnt rock mound
covered the hilltop and in the center were embedded a few
larger stones which barely showed on the surface. On digging down, however, a typical complex of stone slab cists
was found, such as those unearthed in previous years in
Jones County and elsewhere (1) (2). This mound extended
down into the earth for a depth of about four feet, ~d contained a great number .of heavy limestone slabs used as
lining for the five separate cists (3) (4). Four of these
cists were composed of separate closely flexed burials of
long headed men, and the fifth one was a cist containing a
completely cremated burial in which the bones were burned

PLATE 2
No. 1. Site of Fisher County buried multiple stone cist structure
before any excavation was done.
No. 2. After first layer of stones was exposed in Fisher County
structure.
No. 3. Abalone shell ornament found in grave under bush in
foreground.
PLATE S
No. 1. View of buried multiple stone cist structure in Taylor
County after earth had been removed from over top layer of stones.
Judge R. B. PIaynie on left and Mr. Willard Vinson on right just
beyond structure.
No. 2. Second layer of stones in Vinson Ranch structure.
No. 3. Three skulls lying in a row in bottom of buried multiple
stone cist structure.

Plate 2

Plate 3

Two Buried Multiple Stone Cist Structures

23

into small fragments, and this was the deepest buried one.
There were some charcoal fragments all through the cist
complex but whether or not these were thrown in with the
earth when the hole was filled, one cannot say. The cremated remains were buried nearly four feet deep and there
were fiat limestones set on ends over a horizontally laid
large flagstone which covered the bottom and under that
the bone and shell cremated materials were found. Only
one intact artifact was found in the cremated materials
and it is the heavily mineralized center of a conch shell, two
and seventh-eighths inches in length, and five-eighths of an
inch in diameter, and nearly cylindrical in shape, and has a
hole dr.illed in one end. This specimen is heavier than
ordinary shell of that size usually is. On the eroded slope
below the mound a bone tube was found which also is heavily mineralized. In the two feet above this cremated burial
cist was another stone cist which contained a poorly preserved flexed burial whose bones were fragmentary. Lying
just above the bones was a large flat stone in the bottom of
which a depression existed and in this had been placed three
round shell ornaments made by cutting a rough circle about
three inches across out of a shell and then cutting a hole
about one-half an inch in diameter out of the center.
These ornaments were badly decayed but were so pressed
against the stone that one could plainly see three of them
in a row lying against the inside of the stone’s hollow, but
when removal was attempted they crumbled away. A fine
square based knife of gray colored patinated flint was found
~vith them and this is three and five-eighths inches in length,
and one and eleven-sixteenths inches across at the straight
or square base. This blade is sharp edged, and fine pointed,
and has considerable limestone incrustation over the chipping on one face and some small patches of it on the other
surface. There were three other flexed burials in this complex of stone cists, each with its surrounding nest of stone
slabs, but there were no artifacts with the others.
Below the mound the steep hillside had been cut into
gullies and one cannot determine how much earth originally
covered the ridges between them. At a place about twenty

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

feet down the slope below the stone cist complex the writer
noticed a few fragments of human bones under the edge of
a small hearth like collection of small stones and on sticking
a pick into the earth above it struck something quite hard
near the surface which on excavation was found to be a
heavily mineralized, caliche encrusted, circular ornament
of the type of the decayed round shell ornaments found in
the mound above. This saucer shaped ornament is three and
one-fourth inches across in one diameter, and three and oneeighths inches in the other, and has a round hole cut out of
the center which is eleven-sixteenths of an inch in diameter.
This ornament is pitted, but is quite hard and heavy for a
shell of that thickness. The position of the much decayed
skeleton indicated that the ornament had been lying on its
chest. All three of the intact ornaments from these six
burials are so hard as to be properly classified as petrified,
but evidently became so after being placed with the burials.
The twisted texture of the she!l artifact with the cremation
has the characteristics of a marine conch shell center and
the saucer shaped ornament probably is of abalone shell,
although all lustre is gone. The tube probably is of bird
bone.
Multiple Burial Cist Complex Two
In 1944 a commercial gravel hauler brought a piece of
what he termed Indian pottery to the writer with the statement that he had dug it up in a rock pile and would show
me where he got it. The specimen was part of a parietal
bone of a very thick human skull and had been burned black.
On visiting the site it was found that two gravel diggers had
dug out the central portion of a stone cist burial complex on
the farm of Mr. Willard Vinson, situated in Taylor County.
Apparently the diggers had opened a cremated burial in the
PLATE 4
Artifacts from two buried multiple stone cist structures.
No. 1. Large round shell ornament with hole in center.
1-2-3 from Fisher County structure.
No. 2. Twisted center of conch she!l drilled at mac end.
No. 3. Bird bone tube, Nos. 1-2-3 petrified after burial.
No. 4. Sma]l almond shaped knife from Taylor County structure.
No. 5. Fine flint knife from Fisher County structure.

Plate 4

Two Buried Multiple Stone Cist Structures

27

center of the complex and on finding human bone fragments
and nothing of intrinsic value left the site. On digging into
this complex we found the typical stone slab cist arrangements, but apparently the bones had been reburied there
by the makers of the cists as they were not arranged in any
order, which would not indicate a proper flexed burial as
three uncremated skulls were arranged on a stone in a row,
very close together in the bottom. Either rats had scattered
fragments of the thick blackened skull of a cremated burial
all through the complex, or the uncremated burials had later
been made in the site of an older cremated burial. Here also
a truck load of heavy flat limestones was removed from the
excavation. Only one artifact was found in this excavation
wa small almond shaped knife which is one and elevensixteenths inches in length and one and three-eighths inches
across and is patinated a gray color.
The circumstances were such as to make it necessary that
this complex, like the other one, be excavated at an unfavorable time, and this required three days of hard digging
by two men and the writer again had the assistance of Mr.
Haynie in this work.
P. O. Box 62,
Abilene, Texas
REFERENCES
1. Cyrus N. Ray, Archeological Research in Central West
Texas, Bulletin of The Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, 1932, pp. 66-67, Plate 14.
2. Cyrus N. Ray, Multiple Burials in Stone Cist Mounds
of the Abilene Region, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 5, 1933. Plates 4-5-6-7-8.
S. Ernest A. Hooten, Notes on Five Texas Crania, Bulletin
of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol 5,
1933.
4. Cyrus N. Ray, Isate Discoveries in the Abilene Region,
Bulletin of the Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society, Vol. 9, 1937, pp. 193-205, Plates 34 and 35.

