The Genus Bootherium, New Record of Occurre~uze

77

THE GENUS BOOTHERIUM, WITH A NEW
RECORD OF ITS OCCURRENCE
BY CUIITIS J. HESSE

The Pleistocene formations of North America are rich in vertebrate remains as well as localities from which collections have been
made. Tar seeps, lake beds, caves, river terraces, and glacial drift
have all contributed and still contribute to the ever growing faunal
list of this epoch.

In no other subdivision of geologic time is our

knowledge of the vertebrate life so complete from the tiny shrew
and vole to the huge Paraelepluts.

Since the first papers on Pleis-

tocene vertebrates appeared in this country, over one hundred years
ago, the detailed knowledge of the animals of these deposits has
steadily increased.
Probably the earliest North American fossil locality to become
well known throughout the world was Bigbone Lick, Kentucky.

As

early as 1739 fossils were collected here and vast quantities of fossil bones were later sent to various Musenms,

Here was collected

a Pleistocene fauna, not extensive in species, but typical of many
later discoveries. The animals of the Bigbone Lick are well known
now.

As the years bare progressed, other localitit~ and Bigbone

Lick itself have yielded additiona! material of the forms represented.
An exception to this generalization is the extinct genus named
Bootherium.

The original specimen, a cranium and incomplete

horncores, was found at Bigbone Lick.

It was a part of the col-

lection made there by Governor William Clark and sent to President
Thomas Jefferson who was keenly interested in such things.
In
1818 C. Wistar described the specimen and regarded it as allied to
the Bison.

A few years later Harlan (!825) confirmed this view

and gave it the name Bos Bombi]rons.

As the years went on the

specimen was mentioned by other authors, but it was not until 1852
that Joseph Leidy recognized the Muskox-like characters of this
queer animal. He gave it the distinctive name Bootherium, bombi.
FOltS.

For almost 100 years our knowledge of this genus has remained
unchanged. Various writers have discu~ed its relationships, some

Texa~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

78

differing but mostly agreeing with Leidy’s interpretation.

In 1908,

Dr. J. W. Gidlcy (p. 683) described a second specimen from the
"Pleistocene, post glacial" of Moorland Swamp, Michigan.

This

specimen was little better than the first, a frontal and complete
horn-cores, the basal rugosities of which; "extended much beyond
l]le horn-core base, nearly or quite meeting tile one from tile opposite side in the median line." Other writers (lid not agree with
Gidley’s generic reference, and believed that his B. sargenti was a
female skull of .~’mbos cavi]rons. This idea does not seem to have
met with wide acceptance and Gidley’s specimen stands in the literature today as he originally referred to it.
In 1915, O. P. Hay (p. 523) described a third species, basing it
on both horncores and frontals of a specimen that had been collected in 1880 at Elel)hant Point, Alaska. This specimen was inter~nediate in its horn characters between the original B. bombijrons
and B. sargenti.

It was designated as B. nivicolens.

Some years prior to this Gidley

(1906, p. 165)

peculiar ruminant from the Pleistocene of New Mexico.

described a
Again

specimen was a very poor one, and Gidley did not compare it wida
Boothzrium.

He did point out that it was more closely allied to

Oviboa (the living Muskox) than it was to the California Euceratherium-Preptoceras forms.

Unfortunately Gidley used a preoccupied

generic name, Liops zuniensis for this form, and a year or so later
(1908, p. 584)
genus.

attempted to substitute tire name Lissop~ for his

Meanwhile M. Cossmann (1907, p. 6~’1,) had a!:ready sub-

stituted Gidleya as a generic name, and for many years it stood as
such in the literature.

In tire recent work of Frick (1937, p. 560) on

flmse groups, this specimen is regarded as (?) Ovibos but from a
study of Gidley’s figures it seems to the) writer that it is more likely
another Bootherium. This view was also suggested by Gidley himself (1908, p. 684), but due to the confusion of names, it was not
made clear.
This completes the list of described species, so we may now turn
to the additional finds which may be referred to the genus BootherPLATE 18
Fig. 1. Boot~,c.ri~m br~zosis, incomplete cranial roof and horn-cores,
Type
superio~ view. T. A. M. C. No. 2553, Brazos County, Texas.
specimen.
Fig. 2.

Bootheri’t,m. brazosiso

Side view of type specimen.

Plate 18

The Genus Boo~her~u,’n, New Rscorc~ of Occurrenc~

81

/urn. Other finds, recorded in the early literature as Bootheriurn
cavi]rons are now regarded as Symbos. The records of Bootheriurn
are few in number and often of questionable accuracy. The first of
these is from Bigbone Lick, Cooper (p. 173) wrote that a second
skull was preserved in the Finnell (Phinnell) Collection which was
made in 1830. The whereabouts of this specimen is today unknown.
Second, in faunal lists and reports of the early 50’s Liedy mentioned
Bootherium as one of the animals found at Natches, Mississippi, but
all evidence seems to indicate that Syrnbos cavi]rons was the animal
he identified. Third, in 1870, after partly draining Beaver Lake in
Newton County, Illinois, skeletons of Mastodon and Bootherium
were supposed to have been found. What became of this material
is unknown, but again it is more likely that the find was S. cavifrons
since this form is more common. These records are all discussed
by O. P. Hay in his work on the Pleistocene of North America.
Hay (1924, p. 263) in discussing a Pleistocene fauna from Kemmswick; Jefferson County, Missouri, mentions a horn core "resembling
that of Bootheriurr~ bombi]rons." This specimen was in the private
collection of Mr. C. W. Beehler of St. Louis. One of the most important finds of material of this genus was that described by Peterson (1926, p. 258) from Frankstown Cave in Pennsylvania. Unfortunately, so little of the skull was preserved that the generic deterruination may be uncertain. Frick (1937, p. 565) suggests that this
may possibly represent true Ovibos which was discovered in a nearby
cave. There was, however, considerable skeletal material and a few
teeth with this diseovery, which providing the identification is correct, gives us tim only information we have on these parts of
Bootherium. The latest recorded find of this genus, the usual incomplete cranial roof and broken horns, was described by Barbour
(193!, p. 227). This specimen was probably found near Omaha,
Nebraska, and from the measurements given seems to be slightly
smaller than the genotype. In 1937 Frick (p. 566) records the
finding of three ne~," specimen~ referred to B. nivicoIens in Alaska,
but does not describe the material.
From the above records, we may consider Bootherium as definitely
recorded from Kentucky, Michigan, Alaska, Nebraska and probably Missouri. It is probably recorded from Illinois, Pennsylvania,
and if Gidley’s genus is Bootheriurn, from New Mexico. To this

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

82

list we may now add Texas, the southern most record yet established.
Bootherium brazosis n. sp.

Type: An incomplete cranium with bases of horncores, T. A.
M. C. No. 2553.
Locality: This specimen was collected in the spring of 1940 at
Pitt’s Bridge (loc. no. 3), Brazos County, on the Brazos River.
Material has been collected here since 1899 as the river cuts away
its lowest terrace. Few specimens are found in place, but are picked
up, as was this one, on the bars below the eroding banks. The
specimens are mostly fragments, but two fairly complete Paraelephas
skulls have recently been found in place here. That the specimens
are indicative of Pleistocene age, no one would question, but assigning this age to the terrace itself might be open to question, since
the fossils may have been transported to their present site.
Description o] the specimen:

This specimen is less complete than

the others, it consists of the cranial cap made up of the heavy
frontals, with the base of the right horn core and about two-thirds
of the left.

The fragment is well preserved, and since the sutures

are completely obliterated it was probably a fully adult animal.
The most striking feature of the specimen is the great thickness of
the cranial roof in proportion to the size of the skull.

Just hack of

the bases of the ho~u~ cores this is 63 ram. thick, and while there is
some suggestion of thinning anteriorly this roof is approximately
50 ram. thick in the region of the orbits.

The horn cores are round

in cross section, are set on a well marked pedicel and are directed
outward and down. It is difficult to orient the skull cap accurately
enough to say which way the horns are then deflected.

The horn-

cores themselves do not have a heavy burr, but their bases are quite
distinct. The parts preserved are not ridged or grooved and while
they are somewhat rugose they are by no means as much so as
Ovibos or Bison.

There is no sign of the development of exostosis
PLATE 19

Fig. 3. Superior view of skull outlines of various Ovibovinae. A.
Boothe~-iu.m bombif,ro~, geno~ype. B. B. nivi~olens. C. B. sargenti.
D. Symbos. E. Boothe;-ht.v~ sp. indet., from Nebraska. F. B. brazosis.
G. Gidley¢ zuniensis. H. Ovibos.

B

C

D

H

Pla~e 1 ~

The Genus Boother~um, New Reco.rd of Occurrence

85

across the forehead or of any outgrowths on the horns at all. Another outsta:nding feature is the facial angle of the dorsal outline
of the skull. As in the original specimen, this angle is divided
by a line between the bases of the horncores. Allen (1913, p. 211)
gives the figure of 55° for the angle between the front and back
parts of the genotype. In the Texas specimen the angle is 60°+.
In the mid-line of the posterior part of the specimen is a wide but
very low ridge, this feature also is readily seen in Allen’s figure
(p. 211, Fig 45) of the genotype. Little more may be said of the
specimen. Within the heavy boney cap are large sinus cavities and
the general construction of the skull is heavy although it is small.
ReIazionships o] B. brazosis to the other species: Of the three described species of the genus, B. brazosis is most closely allied to the
genotypic one. The three species are most readily distinguished on
the direction, size, and exostosis of the horncores. In B. bombi]rons
the horn cores leave the skull at right angles, have a pedicel, and
curve slightly forward and down. In B. rdvicolens the horn cores
are directed outward and less downward, and on the ripper surface
exostosis has developed to the extent that the pedicel is obscured.
In B. sargen:ti the exostosis has developed even further and the slender horncores sweep forward and downward. This last species has
been regarded by some (see Allen, 1913, p. 214) as a female of
Symbos cavi]rons, which is allied to the true Muskox. The Texas
specimen approaches most closely the condition of B. bombi]rons as
does the specimen recorded by Barbour from Nebraska. From a
careful study of the figures of B. bombi]rons its horncores are much
more ribbed, have a larger, more definite "burr" at their base and
turn down more sharply than those of B. brazosis. Judging from
Allen’s figure of the Kentucky specimen the skull is somewhat arched
transversely between the horncores, while in the Texas form this
area is flat. In size there is little difference, the Texas specimen
is a few millimeters larger in most comparable dimensions.
In this connection it is of interest to note the Nebraska skull
described in 1931. This specimen is somewhat less complete than
the genotype.

The horneores are very similar to those of the Texas

form, but leave the skull at a nmch higher angle, this producing
a broad valley instead of a flat or convex surface between the bases
of the horncores.

In other respects it seems to resemble the geno-

86

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

type and the Texas specimen. It is difficult to evaluate such characters, since we know so little of the genus.
General Relationships of the Genus Bootheriurn
Bootherium is one genus of a family about which we know very
little. Some difference of opinion exists as to the families and
subfamilies into which these groups are divided. In general the
Cavicornia is an old world family, with its present center of distribution in Africa. It originated either in southern Europe or Asia,
although certain genera are undoubtedly of North American origin.
The group is characteristic of the Pleistocene in North America, and
is of particular importance for the domestic forms it contains (sheep,
goats, etc.).
The subfamily Ovibovinae contains one living genus and four
that are extinct. The living form Ovibos is the Muskox, an inhabitant of the tundra of North America. In Pleistocene time it ranged
over Asia and Europe as well as North America as far south as
the United States. Symbos, an extinct genus, is most closely allied
to the living Muskox and was probably an animal of similar habits.
Bootherium discussed in the paper is a third genus, also extinct,
and resembles the Muskox more than any other animal. However it
is distinct enough to suggest that it had different habits, and since
it is so rare it was probably not one of the common Pleistocene
forms. Euceratherium and Preptoceras may be sexual variations
of the same animal. In their characters they are not closely related
to the Muskox, although they have a general re~mblance to the other
animals that make up the subfamily. By some (Frick, 1937, p.
540) they are regarded as between the sheep and the true antelope.
At best we can only regard them as peculiar horned animals of
somewhat uncertain relationships.
Assistant Curator, The Museum
Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas,
College Station, Texas.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allen, J. A., 1913.

Ontogenetic and Other Variations in the Musk-

oxen with a Systematic Review o] the Muskox Group, Recent and
Extinct, Mem. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., N. S., 1, Part IV, pp. 103-226,
45 Fig’s., 7 Pls.

The Genus Boother~um, New Record of Occurrence

87

Barbour, E. H., 1931. The Musk.Oxen o] Nebrask.a, Bul. Neb.
State Mus., 1, No. 25, pp. 211-233, 15 Figs.
Cooper, W., 1831. Notices o[ Big Bone Lick, Mo. Amer. Jour.
Geol. and Nat. Sei., 1, pp. 158-174; 205-217.
Frick, C., 1937. The Horned Ruminants o[ North ,4merica, Bull.
Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., 69, pp. 1-688, 68 Figs.
Gidley, J. W., 1906. .4 New Ruminant from tlre Pleiztocene
New Mexico, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 30, pp. 165-167, 3 Figs.
Gidley, J. W., 1908.

Descriptions o] Two New Species o] Pleis-

tocene Ruminunts o] the Genera Ovibos amt Bootherium, with Notes
on the Latter Genus, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 34, pp. 681-684, 3 Pls.
Harlan, Richard, 1825. Fauna/imericana; Being a Description
o] the Mammals o] North !imerica, Anthony Finely Publisher, Philadelphia.
Hay, O. P., 1915.

Contributions to the Knowledge o] tlre Mam-

mals of the Pleistocene of North America, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 47,
pp. 515-575, 7 Pls.
Leidy, Joseph, 1854.

Remarks on the Question o/the Identity

Bootherium cavi]rons with Ovibos Mesehatus, Proe. Aead. Nat. Sei.
Philadelphia, vii, pp. 209-210.

Peterson, O. A., 1926. Tire Fossils o] the Frankstown Cave, Blair
County, Pennsylvania, Ann. Carnegie Mus., 16, no. 2., pp. 249-300,
10 figs. 8 Pls.
Wistar, Caspar, 1818. !In !Iccount o[ Two Heads Found in the
Morass, Called the Big Bone Lick, and Presented to the Society by
Mr. Jefferson, Trans., Amer. Philos. Soc., N. S., 1, pp. 273-380, 2 Pls.

