Infant Burial in Ca~’yb~g Basket

77

INFANT BURIAL IN CARRYING BASKET
B~ E. B. S-,tY~.Es
While making a survey of Texas, in 1932-33 for Gila Pueblo,
several sites were investigated in the Rustler Hill Region, about 40
miles northwest of Toyah. In one of these an infant burial was
found, which is now de~ribed with the permission of the director
of Gila Pueblo.
The site is a typical sink-hole shelter, formed by water carrying
away the gypsum strata which underlie the surface limestone.1 The
latter, being more resistant, forms a dome; the ceiling eventually
falls, which leaves a cave with an overhanging encircling rim.
These sites were generally occupied by prehistoric man, the camp
debris being preserved where moisture had not touched it, although
much of the human debris of every site investigated by this writer
had been burned. This was true of this site.
The principal part of the sink-hole occupied was that directly
beneath the opening, where hearth stones were abundant.

This was

reached from the surface by a slope, where drainage into the cave
had built up a talus covering the bed rock which formed the principal living area, and which was about 20 feet below the outside
ground level. On each side of this living area the overhanging rim
provided protection; opposite to the entrance slope was an extension of the sink-hole, semi-dark, ending in a small sink into which
the surface water disappeared, after draining along each side of the
main part of the shelter.

This semi-dark extension of the cave was on a general level about
15 feet lower than the living area, which was limited by the sheer
drop in the bed rock to the lower part of the cave. Debris had
accumulated mainly in the lower level and had formed a talus extending from the living area to the lower space.
The site had had a great deal of occupation as evidenced by sotolpits on the outside, round mortar holes in the exposed limestone of
the rim adjoining the cave; also by numerous pictographs covering
1. Similar sites in the same area have been investigated and described by Jackson,
~. T., 1937, pp. 146-192.

78

Texa~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

parts of the walls of the shelter, but particularly by the accumulation of refuse in the cave itself. This extended from beneath the
overhanging rim, where it was protected from moisture, a width of
about 60 feet, and to a like distance into the darker part of the cave.
The deepest part of this refuse was where it joined the living
area; that is, along the face of the bed rock, where it dipped to the
lower part of the cave. Here the trash was 7 to 8 feet deep, and
from here it sloped, becoming thinner, until it joined the guano
which covered the floor of the darker part of the cave.
The basket had been buried near the face of the bed rock, where
it dipped into the lower part of the cave. The antelope skin covering the basket was at a depth of 4 feet, 6 inches below the surface.
PLATE 18
INFANT BUl~IAL IN

CARRYING BASKL~

1. Sink Hole Shelter, to right of car; diameter of opening about
60 feet.
2. Twined Carrying Basket containing infant burial with objects
shown in this Plate 13 and Plate 14. The twined basket was supported by four yucca stalks, tied with yucca leaves to an oval frame,
formed by a bent twig.
Twine consists of two-strand yucca fiber
cords; the encircling elements are twisted about the upright ones and
are looped onto the frame. The basket is fastened to the yucca stalks
by some of the elements being looped around them,
The head band consists of two broad yucca leaves, tied by yucca
fiber cords to the framework.
Maximum diameter of oval frame,
56 cm.
3. Desiccated body of still-born infant; short brown hair. Length
85 cm.
The infant lay on the pad of down covering the squirrel skin P1. 14,
No. 3, and was wrapped in the rabbit skin blanket, P1. 13, ]No. 4. With
it were the dog, P1. 14, No. 9, and fox, P1. 14, No. 10, skins, the string
of olivella shells, Ft. 14, No. 2, hank of human hair, P1. 14, No. 7,
two "prayer" sticks, P1. 14, No. 5, cotton yarn, P1. 14, No. 8, and bullroarer, P1. 14, No. 4, which had been broken, the two parts laying side
by side.
All of these were wrapped in the twined mat, Plate 13, No. 5, which
was tied in a roll with the hair cord, P1. 14, No. 6, and placed in the
carrying basket. This bundle and the basket ~vere then covered by
the antelope skin, P1. 14, No. 1, and over it were several pieces of
ocotillo, Fouquie~ splendens (Engelm.), stalks, crossed upon one
other, and covered with grass.
4. Rabbit Skin Blanket: Strips of rabbit skin ~wi~ted on yucca
fiber cord and loosely held together by yucca fiber cordage in a
simple one over, one under twining. Cordage of two fiber strands.
Approximate width, 80 cm.
5.
Mat: Of bunch grass, Nolin~ ~e~an~ (Watson), leaves held
together by yucca fiber cord in a simple one over and under fashion;
two outside warps interlocked. Width, 85 cm.

5

5
Plate 1~

lnfan$ Burial in C~-ry.ing Baske~

81

The basket rested upright in an excavation made for it through several very compact strata. The topmost one was of rotted fiber,
followed by dust and stone, then a thicker deposit of rotted fiber,
underlain by one of loose, burnt fiber and stone; then rotted fiber
resting on the guano. The overlying deposits .were quite different.
At the surface of the midden was about a foot of loose sticks with
but few artifacts. Beneath this was a single deposit of rather irregular layers of fiber, ash, dust and burnt stone, containing potsherds
identified with E1 Paso Polycbrome and associated wares,z The
underlying deposits, in which the excavation for the burial had
been made, contained no pottery.
The cultural remains have been analyzed as Hueco Cave Dweller,3
a period of the Texas Cave Dweller, in which pottery was present,
probably intrusive, in the latest stage, but which lacked pottery in
earlier stages. Other than tiffs difference in the presence of pottery
in the last stage, trait differences have not been established.
There is every indication that there were earlier stages of the
Hueeo Cave Dweller than those defined with pottery.

Howard has

found, in the Guadalupe Mountains to the north, certain extinct
fauna associated with artifacts in deposits underlying what appear
to be typical Basket Maker II artifacts,z~ At another site identified
with this culture, the writer found the radius and mandible of Tetra~neryx.5 The Conkling Cave,6 with various extinct species in association with man, is also in the same region.

There is sufficient

evidence that man was in the area identified with the Hueco Cave
Dweller at a fairly early time, as measured by American archaeology.
There is no evidence as to how early the Hueeo Cave
Dweller may have been, but we can assign an estimated date of
about !.I00-1.300

(?)

A. D. to the pottery that overlies this burial.

This date probably also represents the last stage of the culture.
The culture, as now known, is cotnparable to that of other Texas
Cave Dwellers in many respects, differing mainly in the presence
of pottery in the last stage, varied sandal forms, and particularly

2.
3.
4.
,5.
Paso.
F. H.
6.

S?-allings, W. S., Jr., 1931.
Sayles, E. B., 1935, p. 66 ; Table 6.
Howard, N. ~., 1932, pp. 7-19.
This site is known as the "Ceremonial Cave." about 20 miles northeast of El
It has been investigated by the Gosgroves, Peabody Museum, and by Roberts,
H., Jr., 1929, pp. 1-14 ; also describad, briefly’, by Alves, E. E., 19,~0, ]pp. 64-68.
Conkling, R. P., 1932, pp. 7-19.

82

Texas Archeological a~l Paleontological Society

in the absence of many traits which characterize other periods of
Texas Cave Dwellers. It would, however, appear to belong to that
pattern rather than to the more highly specialized and geographically restricted Basket Maker Culture of the Southwest, which seems
limited to the Four Corners area, while the Texas pattern has been
found at least as far north as the Panhandle of Oklahoma, south
into Chihuahua and west well into New Mexico.7
While the objects found with this burial are interesting in indicating a burial custom, represented by rather well-preserved specimens, ~e Plates 13 and 14, ~veral things ,nay be pointed out:
First of all, the custom represented is not exactly that of other
Texas Cave Dwellers, in which an infant is buried in a cave in a
q.
For descriptions of Te;:as Gave Dweller and Basket Maker Cultures,
enccs below.

see refer-

PLATE 14
INFANT BURIAL IN CARRYING BASKI~T
1. Antelope Skin: Cut lengthwise and squared off at lower end;
legs and head removed. A slit, 88 cm. in length, midway along the
back, had been sewn together with ~cca fiber cord. Length, 85 cm.
2. Ten olivella shells strung on a fine, two-strand yucca fiber cord.
3. Skin: Squirrel (?) skin covered with a mat of fine bird down.
Length, 27 cm.
4. Bull-roarer (?) : Thin piece of wood slightly curved, pointed at
one end, squared at the other, with five perforations; all edges bevelled; rich brown color. Length, 42 cm.
5. "Prayer" Sticks: Bird bones with tufts of iridescent duck (?)
feathers; the larger end of each bone is incised with a series of notches
and two parallel transverse lines on the outer surface only; smaller
ends are bevelled. Length, 19 cm.
6. Twine: Coarse, reddish brown hair; bison (?); 8 single-strand
cords, each app~:oximately 2 mm. in diameter, twisted together forming a cord about 12 ram. in diameter.
7. Hank of human (?) hair; dark brown; cut evenly at one end.
Length, 35 cm.
8.
Cotton Yarn: Thirty, unevenly spun threads, varying from
.05 to 2 ram. in diameter, tied in the middle with a yucca fiber cord
and twisted so as to form a loose rope-like yarn about 5 m. in length.
The loose ends of the threads were twisted to form two cords and
knotted.
9. White and Brown Dog Skin: Held in a fold by three leather
thongs knotted at each end and placed through slits., made in the
skin. Each thong about 10 cm. in length and spaced equally from top
to bottom of the skin and about 20 cm. from the fold; lower part of
skin cut squarely.
Raw side of skin shows red pigment. Length, 71 cm.
10.
Fox Skin: Carcass had been removed through a short cut
along the belly and by splitting hind legs and tail; all feet removed,
the skin forming a natural pouch. Length 88 cra.

Infant Burial in Carrying Basket

85

bundle, but without a basket container,e The motive is probably
the same, but the particular custom found here is more suggestive of
that in the Basket Maker-Pueblo area, to the west, where child
burial is frequently made in a cradle.9
Other western connections are suggested in the presence of the
olivella shells (from the Gulf of California, or Pacific), probably
in the cotton, the "prayer" sticks, the bull-roarer, and the carrying
basket. The latter is known to have been used both by the Apache
and Pima during historical times.1 o
Dog remains are common as bones but other remains of this domesticated animal from prehistoric times are not common.11
The rabbit fur blanket and the twined mat are typical of the Texas
Cave Dweller.
The hank of human hair seems evidence of the rather widespread
custom of cutting off the hair as a sign of mourning. Further evidence of this sacrifice seems to be indicated by all the objects, as
they unquestionably represented a great deal of wealth.
Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
REFERENCES
Alves, E. E., 1930. Shelter Caves o] tlre E1 Paso District, Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. II, pp. 64-68.
Abilene.
Amsden, C. A., 1938. The Ancient Basketrnakers, The Masterkey,
Vol. XII, No. 6, pp. 205-214. Southwest Museum, Los Angeles.
1939. Ibid, Vol. XIII, No. 1, pp. 18-25.
Conkling, R. P., 1932. Conkling Cavern: The Discoveries in the
Bone Cave at Bishop’s Cap, New Mexico, West Texas Historical and
Scientific Society, Publication No. 4, pp. 7-19 (Sul Ross State
Teachers College, Bulletin 44). Alpine.
Guernsey, S. J., 1931. Explorations in Northeastern Arizona,
Papers, American Archaeology and Ethnology, Peabody Museum,
Harvard University, Vol. XII, No. 1. Cambridge.
8.
The writer has found evidence of infant burials in several caves correlated with
the Pecos Cave Dweller; this custom has also been reported by other investigators
working in the same area.
9.
Haur~, E. W., 1934, :pp. 68-72.
10.
Russell, F., 1908, pp. 140-143.
11.
Guernsey, S. J., 1931, PI. 52, E, illustrates a pouch made from a dog skin ;
Basket Maker II Culture.

86

Te~a~ A~’cheological and Paleontological Society

Guernsey, S. J., and Kidder, A. V., 1921. Basket-Maker Caves of
Northeastern Arizona, Papers, American Archaeology and Ethnology, Peabody Museum, Harvard University, Vol. VIII, No. 2. Cambridge.
Haury, E. W., 1934. The Canyon Creek Ruin and the Cli/] Dwell.
ings of the Sierra Ancha, Medallion Papers, No. XIV, Gila Pueblo.
Globe.
Holden, W. C., 1937. Excavation o] Murrah Cave, Texas Archeo.
logical and Paleontological Society, Vol. IX, pp. 48-73. Abilene.
Howard, E. B., 1932. Caves Along the Slopes o] the Guadalupe
Mountains, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol.
IV, pp. 7-19. Abilene.
Jackson, A. T., 1937. Exploration o[ Certain Sites in Culberson
County, Texas, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. IX, pp. 146-192. Abilene.
Martin, G. C., 1933. Archaeological Exploration o] the Shumla
Caves, Big Bend Basket Maker Papers No. 3, Southwest Texas
Archaeological Society, Witte Memorial Museum, Bulletin 3. San
Antonio.
Martin, G. C., and Woolford, S., 1932. Painted Pebbles o] the
Texas Big Bend. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. IV, pp. 20-24. Abilene.
Mera, H. P., 1938, Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeastern New Mexico, Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association, No. 51. Menasha.
Nusbaum, J. L., 1922. ,4 Basket-Maker Cave in Kane County,
Utah, Indian Notes and Monographs, Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation. New York.
Pearce, J. E., and Jackson, A. T., 1933. A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde County, Texas, University of Texas Bulletin No.
3327, Anthropological Papers, Vol. I, No. 3. Austin.
Roberts, F. H. H., Jr., 1929. Recent Archaeological Developments in the Vicinity of El Paso, Texas, Smithsonian Miscellaneous
Collections, Vol. 81, No. 7. Washington.
Russell, F., 1908. The Pinta Indians, Bureau of American Ethnology, Twenty-sixth Annual Repo.rt. Washington.
Sayles, E. B., 1935. An Archaeological Survey o[ Texas, Medallion Papers, No. XVII, Gila Pueblo. Globe.

In[an$ Burial in Ca~,fing Ba~ke~

87

Setzler, F. M., 1935. A Prehistoric Cave Culture in Southwestern
Texas, American Anthropologist (N. S.), Vol. 37, No. 1, pp. 104-110.
Menasha.
Smith, V. L, 1932. The Relation o] the Southwestern Basket
Maker to the Dry Shelter Culture of the Big Bend, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. IV, pp. 55-62. Abilene.
1933. Sandals of the Big Bend Culture with ¢ldditlonal Notes
Concerning Basket Maker Evidences, Texas Areheologieal and
Paleontological Society, Vol. V, pp. 57-65. Abilene.
1934. Hord Rock Shelter, Texas Areheological and Paleontological Society, Vol. VI, pp. 97-106. Abilene.
1938. Carved Rock Shelter, Texas Areheological and Paleontological Society, Vol. X, pp. 222-233. Abilene.
Stallings, W. S,, Jr., 1931. E1 Paso Polyehrome, The Laboratory
of Anthropology, Archaeological Survey, Technical Series, Bulletin
3. Santa Fe.

