Foreword
Edward B. Jelks

The papers in this volume of the Bulletin of the
Texas ArcheoIogical Society constitute an excellent
overview of current knowledge about Texas prehistory. They also evoke many personal memories
about the growth of Texas archeology over the past
half century and about some of the archeologists
who contributed to that growth. I beg your indulgence while I reminisce.
After almost four years in the Navy, I returned
to Austin at the end of World War II in 1945 and
re-entered The University of Texas (UT), where I
had dropped out in the middle of my junior year to
go to war. Casting about for a suitable major, I
became hooked on anthropology--especially archeology-after taking courses from Tom
Campbell, Charles Kelley, George Engerrand, and
Gilbert McAllister.
At that time there were four archeologists in
Texas who could be termed professionals by virtue
of job title and advanced degrees in archeology/
anthropology: Tom Campbell and Charles Kelley,
both on the teaching faculty of the Department of
Anthropology at UT; Alex Krieger, a non-teaching
research scientist at UT; and Bob Stephenson, director of the Texas division of the Smithsonian’s
River Basin Surveys (RBS) program. Several geologists had been doing scientific field archeology
for years, especially at Paleoindian sites: notably E.
H. Sellards and Glen Evans at the Texas Memorial
Museum, and Grayson Meade at Texas Tech. Historians Curry Holden at Texas Tech and Victor
Smith at Sul Ross also were competent archeologists. To the best of my knowledge, the only university in Texas offering a degree in archeology
was UT.
We archeology students at UT became aware
that in the minds of at least some of the
professionals, Texas had been divided, like ancient
Gaul, into three parts, with one archeologist having
proprietary rights to each part. Krieger’s primary
domain was East Texas, and he also held rights in
the Panhandle because of his publications on the

Antelope Creek phase; Campbell focused on the
coastal region; Kelley claimed a broad area
encompassing Central Texas and the Trans-Pecos
region. I recall an occasion when one proprietor
was outraged because another professional was
alleged to have trespassed on his territory.
Paleoindian sites, few and far between, were
viewed as a special case and were pretty much up
for grabs for whomever could find one. However,
it was generally recognized that the team of
Sellards and Evans had some priority on Paleoindian sites because of their previous work at
Plainview, Miami, Berclair Terrace, and other early
sites. Krieger also had a long-standing involvement
in Paleoindian research.
In addition to these professional scholars, there
were a number of avocational archeologists with
various backgrounds who had made important
contributions to knowledge of Texas archeology by
publishing descriptions of their fieldwork and,
sometimes, synthetic interpretations. Osteopath
Cyrus Ray, was the best known of these. A founder
of the Texas Archeological Society, he served as
the society’s president for its first 20 years, during
which time he published extensively about the
prehistory of the Abilene region. Other prominent
avocational archeologists included printer Frank
Watt of Waco, leading light of the Central Texas
Archeological Society; railroad engineer R. K.
Harris of the Dallas Archeological Society;
businessman Richard Worthington of the Houston
Archeological Society; and attorney O. L. Sims of
Paint Rock, who was instrumental in protecting the
nearby spectacular pictographs. They, along with
many others all over the state, maintained a close
working relationship with professionals.
By the fall of 1949, having completed the
classroom requirements for an M.A., I was hired by
Bob Stephenson as his assistant at the RBS office
and laboratory, then housed in the old "nut lab" on
the southeast corner of Red River and 19th (now
Martin Luther King Drive) in UT’s Little Campus

Bulletin of the Texas Archeologieal Society 66 (1995)

2

Texas Archeological Society

complex. A large collection of artifacts and
fieldnotes--largely from WPA archeology projects
in Central and eastern Texas, but including eclectic
accumulations from various sources--were housed
in the nut lab. When Bob left in 1951 for graduate
work at the University of Michigan, I inherited the
directorship of the Texas RBS program.
By the mid-1950s, the tripartite archeological
segmentation of Texas had disintegrated, largely
because RBS archeologists were working pretty
much all over the state. Also, two of the proprietors
pulled up stakes: Kelley joined the faculty at Southern Illinois University about 1950, and Krieger
moved to California to become director of the Riverside Museum about 1956.
As of the early 1950s, regional chronologies
and definitions of culture units had been advanced
by several researchers. Krieger had organized postArchaic East Texas cultures into a number of foci,
grouped into two aspects, following the Midwestern, or McKern, nomenclature of cultural classification. But Krieger arranged his aspects in
chronological sequence, in contrast to the assumption underlying the Midwestern system that cultural units in the system were atemporal.
Campbell also had used Midwestern nomenclature in defining Archaic and post-Archaic foci
and aspects for the Texas coastal area, again ascribing them temporal values within a regional chronology. Kelley had followed the same plan in identifying
foci, aspects, and phases for the Central Texas region, arranging them in chronological sequence.
Since those days, new types have been recognized and new phases have been defined, of course;
and the old types and phases have been redefined.
But it is noteworthy that many elements of the
archeological classifications developed and promulgated by Campbell, Kelley, and Krieger are still
current, including names for important types and
culture units (generally phases now instead of foci).
These three pioneers are due a lot of credit for
limning the broad outlines of several major prehistoric cultural patterns in Texas that have served
archeologists well over the years.
Between the mid-1950s and the time I left
Texas for Illinois in 1968, the amount of archeological fieldwork expanded dramatically. This was
primarily due to the RBS program and the contract
programs that it spawned at Texas universities and
museums, fueled by ever-increasing funding for
archeological fieldwork by federal and state

agencies as a series of conservation bills was passed
by Congress and state legislatures. As a result, a
great need for skilled field and laboratory
archeologists arose, which led to the establishment
of archeology curricula in a number of Texas
universities, including Southern Methodist
University, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Rice University, and Texas A&M University, and
to the expansion of existing programs at UT and
Texas Tech.
By the 1970s, each field season saw scores of
field crews from a dozen or more institutions and
private firms conducting contract archeology in
Texas. In contrast to the four professional archeologists in Texas in 1950, the Council of Texas
Archeologists currently lists some 200 members,
all with professional credentials. The largely
avocational membership of the Texas Archeological Society, about 200 in 1950, now numbers well
over 1,400.
The way that archeological research is done
has changed significantly since the late 1940s. New
methods (radiocarbon, thermoluminescence,
archeomagnetic alignment, etc.) have made it possible to date field data with confidence in many
cases. Computers have made it simple for archeologists to perform statistical computations, make
neat and accurate maps and drawings, store vast
quantities of readily accessible data, and produce
prettily printed papers with few misspellings and
typographical errors. Advanced collecting methods
(for example, flotation and statistically based sampling) have added new dimensions to the study of
the archeological record.
Until the 1960s, almost every American archeologists collected only artifacts, discarding the byproducts of the artifacts’ manufacture. But then
experiments in stone working techniques opened
the door to the study of flakes, cores, and other
residue of flintknapping. The Texas Archeological
Society can be proud that one of their members, J.
B. Sollberger, is widely recognized as a pioneer
and leading authority on knapping.
I recall a time about 35 years ago when Jerry
Epstein announced that he had found burins in Centipede and Damp Caves at Amistad Reservoir. No
one had ever recognized burins in Texas before,
and Jerry had to do some tall talking to convince
us. But eventually he did, and now every field archeologist looks for burins along with other chipped
stone artifacts. Such examples point up the many

Foreword m Edward B. Jelks

changes in how archeology is done in Texas and
elsewhere, almost all of them for the better.
Looking back to a time several decades ago
when a few underfunded archeologists--flying
pretty much by the seats of their pants--scrambled
to salvage a tiny fraction of the archeological
record that was about to be destroyed by construction projects, I am tempted to contend that those
were better times: that things were simpler then,
and we could devote our energies to doing archeology, without the frustrations and distractions
imposed on today’s researchers by layers of bureaucracy and tangles of red tape. And it can reasonably be argued that some desirable skills
practiced by the typical dirt archeologist of yesteryear now are rarely seen in the high-tech enterprise
that it is today.
But upon full reflection, nostalgia succumbs to
reason, and the superiority of today’s archeology-with its advanced scientific techniques, rigorous
methodology, political support, large body of
practitioners, and reasonably ample funding--is
evident.
This volume of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society is the third comprehensive effort to summarize knowledge of Texas archeology

3

on a state-wide basis under a single cover. E. B.
Sayles’s An Archaeological Survey of Texas, published in 1935 was first; second was the 1954 Handbook of Texas Archeology, largely the work of Dee
Ann Suhm (Story), with help from Alex Krieger
and myself. The demographics of the archeological
community noted above are reflected in the respective authorship’s of the three summaries: one author in 1935, three authors in 1954, and more than
20 in 1995.
The phenomenal growth of Texas archeology,
along with archeology all over the United States,
since the late 1940s bodes well for the discipline’s
future. Some problems have accompanied this phenomenal growth: for example, the current Native
American repatriation issue, and temporary aberrations that flowed from over zealously scientistic
applications of the "New Archeology" by some
archeologists in the 1970s and 1980s. However,
despite such problems and vagaries, the trend toward better archeology, conservation of archeological resources, and wide appreciation of archeology
by the public continue on a progressive track.
The papers in this volume constitute clear proof
that Texas archeology is alive and well and continuing to move ahead.

