News No~es and Edi~rials

187

NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS
ANCIENT ARTIFACTS AND MAMMOTH’S TEETH
OF THE McLEAN SITE
In July, 1938, the writer conducted Dr. Kirk Bryan and his assistant, Samuel Vaughan, Jr., to a location in the McLean Site where
he had removed the teeth of a mammoth in 1935 with the assistance
of Dr. E. H. Sellards and Otto O. Watts. (1). Subsequent heavy
rains in 1938 had exposed more of the animal’s bones in the hard
alluvium, and in the margin of the hole where the teeth had been
excavated the rains had also exposed the base of a Folsom point. (2)
This Folsom blade was complete except for the small tip of the point
and the blade was more than three inches long. The flint had been
almost in contact with the mammoth’s teeth. (3) The writer had
collected Folsom, Yuma and Clear Fork artifacts from this site’s
gullied silts ever since 1929, but no satisfactory illustrations had
been previously made of them. (4) The 1938 Bulletin article should
have shown the Folsom point found with the Elephas Columbi skeleton (identified by Dr. E. H. Sellards and pictured in plates 35 and
36) but the writer found it to be impossible to get good pictures of
the blade in Abilene. Dr. Kirk Bryan kindly had some pictures of
the McLean Site flints made, which are shown herewith. Of these
Plate (30) shows two views of a typical Clear Fork gouge found in
gravel near another mammoth’s skeleton at a locality situated about
two miles from the McLean Site. Plate (30), No. (I) shows the
gouged out face of this gouge. Plate (30), No. (2) shows the convex face of the same gouge.
Plate (31), Nos. (1) and (3) shows two faces of the mid-section
of a fine Folsom blade found by Floyd V. Studer of Amarillo when
the writer conducted him through the McLean Site in 1929. Plate
(31), Nos. (2) and (4) show the two faces of a side ~raper found
by the writer, buried eight feet deep in the McLean Site silt in 1929.
Plate (32), Nos. (1) and (3) show both faces of a channelled blade
the writer found embedded in the alluvium of the McLean Site in
1929. Plate (32), Nos. (2) and (4) are of a dart point found on
the McLean Site alluvium by the writer during Dr. Bryan’s visit.
Plate (33), Nos. (1) and (3) show the two faces of a channelled

138

Te~a~ Ar~heol~gical and Paleontological Society

point found by the writer on the McLean Site’s alluvium during
Dr. Bryan’s visit. Plate (33), Nos. (2) and (4) show the two faces
of a blade found on the McLean Site alluvium in 1929 by the writer.
Plate (34), No. (1) shows the long Folsom blade which was fotind
embedded in the McLean Site Durst Silt by Bryan, Ray and Vaughart
where it had been almost in contact with a mammoth’s teeth. (3)
Plate (34), No. (2) shows a beautifully polished Yuma point found
by the writer in the Durst Silt of the McLean Site during Dr. Bryan’s
visit. Plate (35) shows one of the mammoth’s teeth found with the
Folsom blade, approximately natural size. Plate (36) shows two
teeth of the mammoth’s skeleton found with the Folsom blade (approximately half natural size).
Some bones of other animals were also found in the McLean Site
in 1938 and during previous years, but the writer has not thus far
been able to obtain identifications of them for publication.
C. N. R.
1. Folsom Sites, Editorials, Vol. 7, 1935, Bulletin of Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, page 128.
2. Cyrus N. Ray and Kirk Bryan, Folsomoid Point Found in
Alluvium Beside .4 Mammoth’s Bones, Science, Sept. 16, 1938.
3. Kirk Bryan, Deep Sites Near ~Ibilene, Texas, Vol. 10, 1938,
Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society.
4. Cyrus N. Ray, Report on Some Recent .4rcheological Researches
in the zIbilene Section, subhead ~/ Folsom CaMpsite, Vol. 2, 1930.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Plate 10, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
PLATE 30
Nos. 1, 2 show both faces of a typical Clear Fork gouge.
PLATE 31
Nos. 1 and 8 show both faces of a section of a fine Folsom blade,
from McLean site. Nos. 2 and 4 show two sides of a Folsom side
scraper from same site.
PLATE 82
Nos. 1 and 3 show both faces of a channelled blade from McLean
site. Nos. 2 and 4 show both faces of a dart point found in same site.
PLATE 33
Nos. 1 and 3 show two faces of a channelled point from McLean
site. Nos. 2 and 4 show both faces of another McLean site blade.

News Notes and Editorials

147

WHAT CAUSED THESE PERMIAN GROOVES?
In 1934 the writer found a series of parallel slickened grooves in
a horizontally laid stratum of Permian limestone which forms the
bed of Paint Creek near where it flows into the Clear Fork of the
Brazos. The site is situated approximately thirty miles north of
Albany, Texas, and is across the Brazos River west of the Matthews
family ranch, known as "The Lamb’s Head Ranch."
Paint Creek at the point mentioned flows approximately from
west to east and is here floored by a horizontal bed of Permian
limestone. In very dry periods the creek bed becomes entirely dry
at this locality. The banks rise rather steeply on both sides, and
on the north bank the limestone is covered by a bed of hard packdd
gravel. This coarse gravel is filled with various sized rounded or
water worn stones ; a large percentage of which are of igneous origin.
In Plate 37, No. 2 some of these rounded stones are shown.~ The
two large angular edged stones also pictured in No. 2 are loose
blocks of the limestone composing the stream bed and came from a
break in the stratum above, and have recently been washed down
so as to lie on the gravel formation.
For a considerable distance the stream seems to have been cutting into the north bank and removing the gravel which overlies the
stone, leaving the fresh surface of the Permian limestone exposed.
On this fresh surface are a series of parallel grooves in the limestone
w.hich extend under the bed of gravel in the north bank.
This series of parallel grooves go under the bank in a northeastward direction or diagonally to the west-east direction of the
present stream flow.
It has been the observation of the writer that water worn stone or
wave ripple marks on limestone are rough in finish, and not polishcd
and slickened so that they glisten in sunshine as these do.

The site is isolated and the writer has been able thus far to get
0nly one geologist of note to see it. Unfortunately tile site then had
~At the writer’s request E. B. Sayles made the photographs, of
the grooves shown in Plate (37), Nos.
was being shown the site in 1934.

!) and (2), when Sayles

148

Texas Areheologi~al a, nd Paleontological Society

water in the grooves and the shine on the slickened grooves was not
very noticeable, and the geologist termed them "ripple marks."
The appearance of the grooves is as though several extremely
heavy objects had slid across the surface in parallel formation and
in so doing had produced a series of slickened or highly polished
grooves.
The polish has an appearance exactly like that produced by pushing a hard stone across a bed of damp firm clay.
The stream action flowing from west to east across the grooves
which run north-eastward has entirely removed them in the center
of the stream bed and the grooves are only to be seen along the
north side where they have been exposed within recent years.
If heavy masses of ice formed during a Per~nian period of glaciation and moved across previously formed limestone, it seems that
this might be a possible explanation of the slickened grooves. However nothing else suggesting such a theory has thus far been found.
The writer directs the attention of competent geologists to this
unusual site, and would like to have a satisfactory explanation of it.
C. N. R.

PLATE 34
No. ! shows a long Folsom blade found embedded in the alluvium
of the McLean site with a mammoth’s bones and teeth. This picture is
much larger than the blade, which actually is 3 9/32 inches long by
1 1/16 inches across. No. 2 is also greatly enlarged in this picture.
The actual size of this Yuma blade is 3 1/16 inches long by 1 1/8
inches wide. These pictures ~vere enlarged to bring out the fracture
marks more plainly. No. 2 seems to have been polished al! over to
remove most of the fracture marks.
PLATE 35
Shows one of the mammoth’s teeth found with the Folsom blade in
(Photographs show~
the McLean Site. Approximately natural size.
in Plates 35-36 by E. H. Sellards).
PLATE 36
Shows two teeth of the mammoth’s skeleton found with the Folsom
blade in the McLean Site. Approximately half natural size.
PLATE 37
Nos. I and 2 are two views of a series of highly polished parallel
grooves in the top of a horizontal stratum of Permian limestone.

Plat~:

3-I

Plate 35

Plate 36

Plate 37

