~ 28

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

THE RATTLESNAKE IN THE ART AND LIFE
OF THE AMERICAN INDIAN*
By M. L. CRnvnvm~s
The art of the American Indian is often associated with
things connected with his life, his myths, and his religion.
We are fortunate in having many graphic records of the
rattlesnake, the chief of the snake tribe, created from human
beings according to many Indian legends and the cause of
the first death. The rattlesnake was considered supernatural. It could move without legs, wings or fins. It could
cause sudden death without crushing with jaws or tearing
with claws. And their bite burns like fire and killed the
victim. It had the orenda or magic power that made other
animals fear it. Snakes have always been objects of horror
or worship inspired by fear. In the first Book of Moses in
the Bible, they are the first animals named after the creation
of woman. In Genesis 3:1 is stated "The serpent was more
subtle than any beast of the field." And they were the cause
¯ of the first woman going wrong, for in Genesis 3:13 (unlucky 13) Eve said to the Lord, "The serpent beguiled me
and I did eat."
There are many myths recorded but I will tell some to
give an idea how they effected the lives of our Indians. Dr. J.
Walter Fewkes who studied Indians for fifty years liked the
fonowing: The Zunis tell how the first rattlesnake took its
present form, for once they were people even as you and I.
~But one day long ago, some Indian children begged their
mother and grandmother to allow them to take their little
sister for an outing, as they were going to the banks for a
sand slide. Permission was granted, provided they used
every care, which they promised. So carrying the little one
in a blanket, they hurried to the sand slide laughing with
glee, in anticipation.
*This paper was read at the 1946 annual session of the Society held in
Abilene, Texas, on Nov. 2, 1946.

PLATE 5
Rattlesnake at Hueco t~nks thirty miles northeast of E1 Paso,
Texas.

Plate 5

The Rattlesnake in the Art o~ the American Indian

31

They placed their precious little sister on the blanket in
the shade of a bush, near the foot of the slide, where she
would always be in sight and soon the little one was sound
asleep.
So they climbed the bank and slid down the slide shrieking
and laughing with childish joy, but always looking to see if
the baby was safe, when they got to the bottom. Now the
little one woke up and toddled to where she heard the laughter, just as one of the larger girls started down the slide.
Seeing the baby in danger she screamed a warning but the
little one didn’t heed it nor understand. So the big girl
struck the baby and rolled over her and she became very
thin and long. Now the little children gathered around the
victim and started to weep and wail and picked her up in
the blanket and carried her home. The sorrowful parents
and grandparents wept and wailed, rocked and writhed in
their agony of sorrow, casting their hands in the air and fell
in a swoon on the ground. And as one after another villager
arrived, such was their sympathy and sorrow, that they did
likewise and soon all were wriggling and writhing on the
ground and when they became conscious, they could notrise,
but squirmed, for they had become rattlesnakes. Now as
you know rattlesnakes were once people and you must treat
them as such and do not invade their rights nor kill them
without just cause, for all things were created for a purpose
and you must not destroy life you cannot replace.
It was considered bad luck to dream of a rattlesnake by
the Dakotks because they might bite a man’s horse or enter
a man’s ear, nose, or mouth and it is a sure sign of death.
Remember in Psalms 58:4 they tell of "the death adder that
stoppeth the ear."
The Cherokees were the largest and most important Indian
tribe in the United States, having their own national government, civilized code of laws, national press, schools and
seminaries. They originally lived in an area covering 40,000
square miles in Virginia, West Virginia, Tennessee, North
Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia and Alabama. The Cherokees say if you dream a rattlesnake bites you, you must

32

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

take the same treatment as if bitten, for it was the rattlesnake ghost that bit you. Should a rattlesnake be killed accidentally, one must ask pardon from its ghost, otherwise it
will seek vengeance.

In the spring of the year when they

pair off for a month, snake collectors even in these days are
bitten by the mate of one collected, as happened to Snyder,
the retired Chief Attendant at the Bronx zoo who was collecting a rattlesnake near Suffren, New York, in the spring
of the year, when he was bitten by its unseen mate and died.
They have a myth of a rattlesnake’s vengeance. In the
old days when animals spoke to people, a mother heard the
children scream and when she saw it was a rattlesnake that
frightened them, she killed it with a stick. The father was
hunting in the mountains and was coming home through a
gap when he heard a strange wailing sound and found he
was in a large group of rattlesnakes, all of whom had their
mouths wide open and seemed to be crying. He asked the
reason an~ they said his wife had killed their chief yellow
rattlesnake and they were sending black rattlesnake to take
revenge. The hunter said he was sorry and they told him
he must give in satisfaction, his wife, for the life of their
chief. He was so frightened he consented. They said the
black rattlesnake would go home with him and wait outside
the door of his lodge and he was to enter and ask for a
drink of fresh water and say nothing. It was very dark
when he got home and his wife had his supper ready. He
asked for water and she gave him a gourd full and he told
her he only wanted fresh water from the spring, so she went
out to get it. He heard a shriek and rushing out found the
black rattlesnake had bitten his wife and she was already
dying. When she was dead the rattlesnake said his tribe
were now satisfied and he taught the hunter a song and said
"when you meet us sing this song and we will not hurt you
and if by accident one of your tribe is bitten let him sing
this song and he wil! get well." The Cherokees have kept
the song to this day.
The rattlesnake motive controlled the character of Indian
art in many parts of North and Central America. The ser-

The Rattlesnake in the Art of the American Indian

33

pent was seldom reproduced realistically and yet we may
safely infer that the rattlesnake was the prevailing model.
Parts of other creatures were sometimes added to express
a power or attribute. We add halos to saints, wings to angels
and fairies or dragons and the ancient Greeks did to horses
also. Plumes were added as a head ornament or emblem
and so was a single horn. The rattlesnake was idealized
especially among the Mayas and the lines characteristic of
it entered into the delineation of many subjects distinct from
the serpent itself.
The rattlesnake has always taken a leading place in the
mythology and the art of the more cultured American races
and crest-plumes and wings have sometimes been considered
its proper emblems.
I. The first picture I will describe was on the inside of a
Mimbres bowl, found near Fort Stanton, New Mexico. It
shows "a rattlesnake speaking to a mountain sheep" according to Dr. Fewkes.
II. We find two mountain sheep with a conventionalized
snake above them, but with the head and rattle missing,
recorded at the Hueco Tanks 30 miles east, northeast of E1
Paso, Texas, by John Russell Bartlett, 3-29-1851.
III. And nearby in a well sheltered cave close to a per-manent water hole, a twelve-foot white rattlesnake, with
seven Indian warriors and four horses also sketched by
Bartlett.
IV. In the Tusayan co.untry of Northeast Arizona we find
in a bowl a plumed serpent ~vhich is presumed to be a rattlesnake. It represents a serpent with a curved body, the tail
being connected with the head like the ancient symbol of
eternity. The cross hatching of black lines marking the
body are diagonal, except on the tail, which is marked in
segments like rattles. The tongue is a lightning symbol,
for like the ancient Jews, they were told in Numbers 21:6
"The Lord sent fiery serpents among the people and they
bit the people" for poisonous snakes cause a ~burning pain
and our primitive people considered it one of the supernatural qualities of rattlesnakes.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

34

¯ V.

Another example of the plumed serpent found painted

inside a pottery bowl on the ruins of East Mesa in Northeast
Arizona.

It also has plumes and an arrow tipped tongue

and both eyes on the same side of the head, but the body has
a fan-shaped end. The Indians sometimes indicated the
waving rattle that way, as we in our comics show dogs’
tails wagging.
~ VI. Dr. Fewkes shows a Hopi food bowl that had a Hopi
maiden figure with the typical head dress, with a plumed
one-legged rattlesnake with both eyes on the same side of
the head, with an X-ray like picture, showing the alimentary
canal, as if the serpent had swallowed bismuth. It may be,
the picture story of Tcua-Mana, the Corn Mist or Snake
Maid, a sacerdotal society name for the Germ Goddess and
the Snake Hero.
VII. a. Then we show Baho-Li-King-Ya the plumed and
horned rattlesnake god worshipped by living Mold priests,
th,e Genius of Fructification. The mammae symbolizes it
was the source of the blood of all the animals and of all the
waters of the land.
bo Below it are found two rattlesnakes from Harrison
County, West Virginia and they were shown with three
human heads above and two mountain lions, with one mountain lion and a turkey and a bird of prey with wide spread
wings below.
VIII. Then we have some rattlesnakes from Texas. They
are found painted or pecked in rock shelters in many parts
of West Texas, especially from E1 Paso to Real County. The
petroglyphs are more common in West Texas and the pictographs in East Texas.
a. The top figure shows a plumed snake with geometric
designs on the body and a forked tail, which may represent

PLATE

6

Picture of two rattlesnakes at Cornudas Del Alamo sixty-five
miles northeast of E1 Paso, Texas.

Plate 6

The Rattlesnake in the Art o~ the American Indian

37

the movement or vibration of a tail, when a rattlesnake is
rattling. This was found in a cave 20 miles northeast of
E1 Paso.
b. Next we have a snake with a triangular head like a
rattlesnake, with a flattened end of the taft like a rattle.
c. Then we have another plumed serpent with a lump in
its body, showing it had recently eaten, also from E1 Paso
County.
d. Then we have a clear-cut rattlesnake (Crotalus Lepidus) from Culberson County where this rare snake is
found.
IX. Next we have two winged and plumed rattlesnakes
from mounds near Little Rock, Arkansas, engraved on a
small vase encircling the widest part of the vessel, with two
sunflower-like symbols alternating with them. These designs are carefully engraved with needle-point and are adjusted to the form of the vase in a way that suggested forethought and experience and the appreciation of the decorative value of the figures. They are undoubtedly fine examples of design derived from the mythologic art of the
people.
We will now show some Hopi Katcinas connected with
the snake cult. Tcua the snake clan made the heads of
snakes of cottonwood or gourds that are painted and the
protuberan~t goggle-eyes are small buckskin bags tied to the
top: Each head has a medial horn curving forward, sometimes made with joints and sometimes solid. A radiating
crest of feathers is tied vertically to the back of the head.
The teeth are cut in the gourd or wood of which the head
is made and arepainted red. The tongue is a red painted
leather strap protruding some distance from the mouth.
The upper half of the head and body is black or brown and
the under surface white, with white bird tracks and white
parallel lines--the symbol of feathers, on the back and similar black marks on the white under surface. The body
consists of a central stick, called a back bone over which is

38

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological Society

ex~tended a covering held in place by a series of hoops
graduated in size from head to tail. In the Macibol Katcinas
the hand and forearm is inserted in the snake and holds
the stick forming the back bone to make it "act alive."
X. TATCUKTI is a mudhead clown with the great
plumed and horned snake Palulukon effigy, is made to rise
from a jar on the floor to the ceiling and when it has arisen,
a clown steps up and tackles it and is defeated. Note the
white bird tracks and two~ parallel lines, the symbol for
feathers that is shown in all the paintings of the plumed and
horned rattlesnake.
XI. TCANAU is an instructive personage that appears
in the /knkwanti dances in March. The brown masks are
flat and three eagle feathers radiate from the margin, with
curly brown feathers between and covering the back of the
head. A yellow stuffed rattlesnake is carried in the mouth,
a crooked cane in his right hand and a slat of wood and a
meal bag in the left.
XII. CITULILU is a Zuni name, meaning rattlesnake,
and this has a green rattlesnake painted on the forehead of
his mask, with a fan-shaped crest of turkey tail feather on
top with a bunch of red dyed wool below the crest. The
snout is long and protuberant with a red leather tongue.
The Hopi snake priests wear a similar costume except the
bodies and upper arms are red and not black. The plumed
serpent surrounds the middle of the kilt with a green band
above and below representing rainbows. He carried a Yucca
whip in each hand.
XIII and XIV are both MACIBOLS who take part in the
Palulukonti (Andwanti) festival in March and carry the
great plumed and horned rattlesnake. One Macibol carries
a brown snake and his left arm is inserted in the snake and
his hand holds a limber wand by which he can make the
snake move as if alive. The lefi arm we see is false. There
PLATE 7
Plumed rattlesnake picture, Site 3, E1 Paso County.

Plate 7

The Rattlesnake in the Art o~ the American Indian

41

are long feathers, on the crest of the head, with a black
snake, edged with white, around the crown of the helmet
with green black-tipped horns on each side of the head.
Macibol is another name for Calako the Sun-God and the
episode here figured represents the Sky-God yielding the
lightning symbol.
The Macibol with the black rattlesnake has his right arm
inserted in it, to give it life-like movements and the right
arm we see is false.
XV. This is the Mexican symbol from the Codex Vatcanus, Vol. VI, of Lord Kingsboroughs "Antiques of Mexico," 1831-48. The codex shows a human figure with 20
symbols that represent cures for ills in 20 different parts of
the body and the rattlesnake is the symbol of reproduction
as well as the source of all ills and the most ominous of
signs.
312 Geneseo Road,
San Antonio, Texas.

