98

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

SUGGESTION FOR IDENTIFICATION OF

CERTAIN MID-OUACHITA POTTERY
AS CAHINNIO CADDO
Bx" T. L. ~D M~ts. HOD~ES
Within the tentative confines of the Caddol-linguistie family of
the Lower Mississippi Valley Indians, the area of the Mid-Ouaehita2
basin has been archaeologically neglected heretofore. However,
recent activities in this section have revealed much archaeological
evidence of the historic horizon of its aboriginal occupants. Confusing is the prevalent dearth, almost absence,3 of associated objects of European origin. This apparent anachronism however is
justified in the record of the earliest histo’ry of this region; such
Old World products as axes, knives, guns, glass beads and brass
ornaments trickled very slowly into the northeastern Caddo territory, even after the stimulation of colonization by the French possession of the Mississippi Valley in the late seventeenth century.
Especially slow was such contact in the valley of the Middle
Ouachita River where the rugged hilly terrain obstructed the progress of the exploring Spanish, French or English. In tho interval
between the earliest Lower. Mississippi Valley discoveries by the
Europeans, and the later ones, Caddo cultural complexes had
changed.in both geographical location and physical aspects. Within the Caddo Confederacy, for instance, by 16874 the Kadohadach~
(Cadodacho, Cadadoquis) had established themselves on the big
bend of the Red 1River (Sabloniere5) ; the Tula,6 centering along
the headwaters of the Caddo River in 1541-1542 wl4en DeSoto
encountered them, had then disappeared; and the Cahinnio Caddo
had emerged in the Middle Ouachita River basin within a province
which apparently had formerly embraced in part both the provinces
of the Cayas and the Tula-Caddo of DeSoto’s passage.
The earliest documentation of the lower Mississippi Vglley history presents both a false and true beginning o~f European incursion
into the native cultures of southwest Arkansas. In 1541-1542, the
DeSoto Expedition established the first European contact with the
eastern provinces of the Caddoan Confederation, but only one

Identification o~ Mid-Ouachita Pottery as Cahinnio Caddo

99

member, a deserter,7 lingered to settle within the Caddo country.
Colonization was not DeSoto’s motive.

This initial brief impact

was fo’llowed by a historical blank of more than 140 years, which
was finally broken by the French exploring from the north.

LaSalle,

particularly, nurtured plans of future colonization to reinforce
France’s claim to the Mississippi Valley.

In 1687, M. Cavelier,8

brother of LaSalle, and his party of six sur~’ivors, passed through
the Kadohadacho and Cahinnio provinces from the Cenis country,
to report the ill-fated LaSalle expedition to their superiors in the
Illinois country.

This journey, recorded by Joutel, marked the true

beginning of European intrusion into the Mid-Ouachita area of
Caddoan culture.

The interlude between the DeSoto and LaSaile

explorations, although proto-hlstorie, is for the archaeologist an
uncharted chronological blank within which may be rooted the
beginnings of the later known historic phases o:f the Arkansas Caddo.
Lack of associated European trade-material is therefore no criterion of the prehistory of an Arkansas Caddo relic.
At an unknown time after DeSoto~s passage through the MidOuaehita region, the (:ahinnio tribe emerged as the most eastern
ally and probable member9 of the Kadohadacho

(Real Caddo),

leading tribe~O of the Caddo Confederacy who centered upon the
upper Red River. Hist(~rical data is very meager on this independent frontier tribe of Kadohadacho affiliation. The frontal headdeformingl 1 Tulas fought by DeSoto in the region of Caddo Gap
and identified by him as Caddo, seem to have lost their identity
before the historical horizon of the Cahinnio.

The Tula’s oblitera-

tion as a tribe, or possible absorption12 into Cahinnig identity
remains to be determined from future mass data of regiona! archaeological surveys.

In 1687, however, M. Cavelier and Joutel8 on their

return journey from the assassination of LaSalle, left the town of
the Kadahadacho in the company of two Cahinnio Indians who were
there ~eking osageorange bows.
Led by these friendly Cahinnios, the French party visited Cahaynohoua, the Cahinnio village
on the Ouachita River apparently in the vicinity of the present
Arkadelphia.7a Here they saw a Spanish sword, hawkbells and two
horses in Cahinnio possession. They also witnessed the ceremonial
dance of the calumet for the first time. The Red River Caddo used
pipes but had no such ceremony; yet the French party were again

100

Texas ArcheoZog$cal and Paleontological Society

to be subjected to the calumet ritual among the Quapaw (Uzutuhi)
at the mouth of the Arkansas River.

The French also observed

that the village consisted of a hundred separate cabins.

Guided by

Cahinnios carrying bows and arrows and Tonica salt-cakes for barter with the Quapaws, M. Cavelier’s party continued their passage
over difficult hills and swamps to DeTonti’s Post on the lower
Arkansas River. Joutel chronicled the Cahinnio Chief’s name as
Hinma.KiapgrnicheI z~ (Big Knife). This name is definitely Caddol 5
and supports the Caddoan ethnology of the Iirmly established Cahinnio of 1687.
Documentary

historical

excerpts support evidence

of a

con-

tinuous Cahinniois existence. Sometime between 1690 and 1692,
Fray Francisco Casafias de Jesus Maria, a Spanish missionary, was
carried northward to a settlement believed by Espinosa to have
been called Cainio~7 and its people Canigua.

Casafias also enumer-

ated in his list of tribes of Hasinais and of the Caddo group, the
Caynigua18 (Cahinnio). In 1700, d’Iberville, founder of the French
colony at the mouth of the Mississippi River, received rep6rts of the
names of "tribes in the Red River region.

Among them was Caehay-

mons,19 which Swanton interprets as Cahinnio.

On De l’lsle’s2O

map of 1718, Cahinnio is located on the Ouachita River, on the
north side and parallel to the upper Cadodaquios villages above
the great bend of the upper Red River. By 176321 the Cahinnios,
decimated by the incursion of white men, had finally moved northwest on the upper Arkansas River near the Mentos, and there they
eventually became extinct.

In 1771,22 the Spanish governor at

New Orleans, Unzaga, through the negotiations of Anathanase De
M~zier~s, diplomat and Indian agent among the Naehitoches, sueceeded in making a peace compact among the Caddos and nations
of the north.

The Canniones22 are recorded for the last time

among the signators.

Thus ended the scant historical sequence o,c

the Cahinnio Caddo.

Archaeologically we presume to attempt to interpret certain types
of pottery in the mass of Mid-Ouachita data, heretofore casually
called late Caddo, as representing the Cahinnio pottery complex
of Caddo culture. To conform with the archaeological custom of
avoiding historic tribal names, we suggest that this complex be

Identi]ica~ion o~ Mid-Ouachita Pottery as Cahinnio Caddo

known as the Mid-Ouachita focus.

101

The regional material under

consideration occurs within the Ouachita basin from above Hot
Springs to the mouth of Terre Noir Creek, traversing Garland, Hot
Spring, and Clark Counties in southwest Arkansas.
In recent years localz3 archaeological activity in this region
has removed about two thousand pottery specimens from burials.
Most of the burial pits were one to two and a half feet in depth.
The exhumations were single, contained extended skeletons, and
were ordinarily grouped on the periphery or near a village midden,
rarely a burial mound.

Certain .artifacts found in deeper strata

presented a difference of appearance and were tentatively labeled
old Caddo or early Caddo.
factory classifications.

We considered these terms very unsatis-

Although the archaeological materia! under discussion shows a
minor sprinkling of culture material from Marksville to the histo’ric horizon, a large portion appears to be late Caddoan.

Any

pre-Caddo phase is absolutely excluded in the evidence under considera~on.
The chief argument in favor of Cahinnio Caddo identification
with the predominant types of the late Caddo Mid-Ouachita ceramic
ware, is the incredible multiplicity of certain types and decorations within that region. Surely duplication of form and often
of decoration in great numbers is of sufficient archaeological
significance to indicate a close organization of the aboriginal posssessors. Commonness is a positive factor in an analysis of unification and hence a determinant. Also the cor:elation of a particular
ware to its proper co-existent historical neighbor assists in coinciding the archaeological entity with historical sequence.
The inserted tabulation indicates the count of outstanding ceramic
types as indicated by prlvate23 collections repr~enting findings
from sites in the area under study. The territory archaeologically
studied extends from Social Hill in Hot Spring County to the mouth
of the Terre Noir Creek into which drains the Little Missiour River.
The Hodges collection blankets the Ouachita Valley north of Arka-

0 ~
0

Z

-~

Identification of Mid-Ouachita Pottery as Cahinnio Caddo

103

delphia and three Arkadelphia collections cover the terrain in the
vicinity~ of Arkadelphia and south in Clark County.
TYPE I--FrC.endship Engraved
Within the Mid-Ouachita regional confines, the unequivo’cably
predominant pottery form is the cazuela with its deeply engraved
rim.

In instances these vessels have been found stacked in the

graves of the populous Caddo sites of the Middle Ouachita region.
That cazuelas are functional is shown by the remains of pieces of
animal bones found in the gravel-earth of some.
Among the cazuelas of the Friendship and Arkadelphia vicinity, a characteristic Mid-Ouachita variant emerges from the masses.
(See Plate 18, No. 1).

The rim decoration is typically engraved

with a motif featuring banded links combined with cross-hatched
fillets. The links are formed by segmenting a horizontal band
into equal adjacent rectangles by deeply scratched vertical lines.
The band of links is often a straight finished unit or may curve
to adapt itself into combination with the cross-hatched fillet. A
frequent negative motif of key2z~ figures and negative discs results
from the combined elements of the design. Sizes vary from 3 inch
miniatures to 12 inch diameter bowls~ The paste is fine, homogeneous, usually sand and clay. This highly polished, vertical
rimmed, round bottom, shallow bowl is red-brown to brown-black
in color. The rim frequently has a tiny marginal roll. The engravure is rarely white-paint filled, and cross-hatching is almost
exclusively produced by crossing slanting lines.
The proportion of this banded-link variant of the Red River
cazuela diminishes below Arkadelphia (Clar.k County), and progressively decreases as the center of Red River Caddo culture at
Fulton is approached. If the above described cazuela rim decoration centers in the neighborhood of the confluence of the Ouachita
and the Caddo rivers, this recession of the link-banded cazuela rim
decoration is logical.
*The Caddo River empties into the Ouachita about three miles
above Arkadelphia.

104

7"exas A~’cheoIogical and Paleontological Society

TYPE II--Military.Road Mear~=ler Incise.J
The next type is purely culinary, namely the collared jar.

These

are found in all sizes from an inch across-diameter toy to the giant
12 inches across-diameter containers of a five gallon capacity. This
pottery form is urn-shaped, rough ware, which has heavy incisions
on both the collars and bodies of the vessels. Most of these pots
retain the soot of cooking fi~es on their surfaces. They are of a
seemingly poor grade of ware. usually broken within the grave
and difficult to excavate in perfect condition. Their very friable
texture was probably found adaptable to temperature changes, and
therefore became the practical ware to withstand the uneven expansion and contraction contingent to cooking.
Tempering includes sand and grit, clay, shell and fiber. The late Caddo of
Mid-Ouachita area certainly were plentifully equipped with these
culinary objects. Shattered small bones have been found in this
type of pot. However remains of funerary offerings of animal
origin usually decompose completely in the clay and sand soil
of the river-bottoms where even skeletal human remains are often
entirely obliterated. This type of Caddo ceramic ware is so plentiful as to become monotonous.

The predominating pattern of the collared jars is the all-over
meander, a deeply incised decoration on the body and collar which
combines repeated vertical lunar punctates in curvilinear bands
with row~ of horizontally curvilinear parallel incised lines . (See
Plate 18, No. lI). Bands of multiple rows of upright lunar punctuates alternating with deeply incised meandering lines are repeated
compactly on the entire modified globular vessel body and the
broad, outcurving collar. This domestic type resembles in shape
the Fosterzs Trail-Incised vase of the Belcher Mound. The vessels
range in size from 3 inches diameter and 3 inches height to 12 inche~
diameter and 15 inches height and possess thick walls (in larger
vessels ~ inch thick), made doubly heavy at the circular flat base.

]PLATE 18
No. 1. Engraved cazuela from site near Friendship, Hot Spring
County, Arkansas.
No. 2. Meander incised collared jar from site near Friendship,
Hot Spring County, Arkansas.

t~tatc 18

Identification o] Mid-Ouachita Pottery as Cahinnio Caddo

107

Some of these vessels are large and have capacity of about three
gallons.

Their color ranges from pale tan to a smoke-mottled

greyish light-brown.
TYPE III--Blakelytawn Engraved Bottle
The two described common types are found in their late Caddo
graves with Type III bottles.

The great number of bottles found

in Mid-Ouaehita burials is noteworthy.

The range of variation in

decoration appalls the classifying archaeologist.

Prevalent char-

acteristics of the Mid-Ouachita bottle are that it is highly polished,
black drab in color, globular in shape and is commonly engraved.
The engravure is often red paint filled.

Decorations include: the

simple broken-line, involved interlocking scrolls and cross-hatched
fillets, nested chevrons, concentric circles.
paratively scarce.

Plain bottles are com-

Eccentric forms add their personality to the

complex and include effigies, tripod, compound, the rare loop and
the equally rare cowled.

However, the characteristic bottles of the Mid-Ouachita valley
are the broken-line or geniculate-engraved. (See Plate 19, Panel
III). Three main variations are apparent. On the body of a highly
polished, black drab bottle, are engraved with equal spacing:
Xo

Geniculated line variants using vertically-2 groups of gerticulated (a) 3 parallel lines;
2 groups of geniculated (b) 3 parallel lines alternating with
2 groups of 3 straight parallel lines;
2 groups of geniculated 3 parallel lines alternating with
2 groups of 3 parallel lines kinked in middle;
4 groups of straight 3 parallel lines;
3 groups of 5 centrally kinked parallel lines.
Two bands of 6 parallel lines engraved diagonally across
body of bottle, ending at double spurred rings at base of neck.
Lines are broken in center by symmetrically curved linkedbands balancing away from main band on either side.

3.

Diagonally curved band of 5 parallel lines fringed at center
with balanced arc effect of curved line and linked-band.

Texas Archeologicat and Paleontological Society

:108

Band of links and spurred ring at ba~ of neck.

This deco-

ration is present on a tripod bottle as well as a flat bottomed
one.

The paste of the geniculate-types described is fine and homogeneous. Necks are straight, plain, and often have a spurred ring
engraved at the base.

The bottles are flat bottomed.

TYPE IV--Watermelon.Island Seed-Jar
The seed-jars, both plain and engraved, appear localized to the
territory of the Middle 0uachita. (See Plate 19, Panel IV). These
unusual pottery vessels with their thumb-sized apertures, are found
most abundantly on Waterme!on26 Island near Social Hill and at
Friendship, Hot Spring County, Arkansas. In this vicinity their
occurrence with highly polished engraved Caddo ware is common.
In the light of contemporary excavations, the seed-jar thus far
stands out as a critical type of ceramic ware in the region under
discussion.
The banded link engraved cazuela, the broken-line engraved bottle, the all-over meander incised collared jar, and the outstandingly
unique seed-jar are frequently found together in the Mid-Ouaehita
graves.

Yet bowls and bottles, artistically executed, of the late or

known historic27 Keno’, Glendora and Natchitoches phase of Caddo
culture occur in burials with the former described pottery forms.
Many of the burials are unmistakedly late Caddo.

Moreover, their

contents indicate a specific historic phase of Caddo culture.

The

poltery shows peripheral and trade influences as well as local
variations in types and decorations.
Corroboration of historical

and

archaeological coincidence is

suggested by the following data:

1. The presence of prehistoric novaculite29 mines near Hot
Springs, Arkansas, for arrow making material bears out the evident
prowess of the Cahinnio in bow and arrow manufacture used in
their exchange with the 0tsote Quapaw. A unique site exists near
the Friendship Mound on the Ouachita River in which a half acre
is literally blanketed with flint chips and broken projectiles, suggestive of a workshop.

Identification of M~d-Ouachita Pottery as Cahinnio Caddo

2.

109

An insignificantly low, sandy burial mound near Gum Springs,

Clark County, yielded 200 pieces of engraved polished pottery, 80%
of historic Glendora and Natchitoches type. However both cazuelas
and incised collared jars were associated therewith. Burials were
single, extended, with funerary offerings about the head and arms,
skulls natural and no apparent sign of head deformation.
3.

Another Caddo site near Friendship Mound yielded nests of

collared jars.

A Keno bottle and two engraved small circular

platters were found with one burial.

Also a typical Caddo loop

pipe surmounted a stack of incised collared jars in another.

Skele-

tal remains were almost obliterated by decomposition.
The loop-pipe (See Plate 19, Panel V) appears to be the frequent
form of pottery pipe asso’eiated with the previously classified MidOuachita pottery types.

Eleven of the sixteen earthenware pipes

in our collection have the looped end, three of which have a deep
notch or rather decoration in the loop.

In literature, only C. B.

Moore records finding a related specimen at Kent, Arkansas.
tiquities of Ouachita Valley, Fig. 99).

(An-

The loop pottery pipe is of

hard texture, buff to red in color and precisely fashioned.

An ex-

tension of the stem, curved and neatly joined to the front margin
of the bowl, makes a graceful and practical handle for the wellbalanccd pipe which appears to be an exclusive product of the
Middle Ouachita aborigines.
Projectile ~oints, celts, beads, bone implements, and bone ornaments are lacking or very rarely found in the burial pits with the
heretofore described pottery complex.

Neither are copper nor are

polished stone artifacts found in the grave furnishings with lhese
ceramic types.

Approximately 200 burials, scattered and in groups in Hot
Spring County (in Ouachita River bottoms eight miles above Friendship), had mixtures of many types of Caddo ware in the extensive
exhumations. Yet an inclusive survey of the artifacts identical with
or similar to Caddo, presents many ceramic types of the BelcherZS
Mound including the engraved, incised and stamped ware.
Since the historic Cahinnio and Kadohadacho of the Red River
were Caddz provinces, their ceramic forms would be expected to

Texas Archeo!ogical and Paleontological Society

110

bear a striking similarity. Thus the typical Caddo3° pattern
remains the same: highly polished and engraved pottery, as well
as the rougher wares featuring incising, punctate, appliqu6 and
brushing. However changes become apparent as the area approaches
the Red River great bend. Spurred lines become more prevalent
and exaggerated in both cazuela and bottle engravure. Motifs
change slightly and are bordered near the top of bowl rims by
one, two or three horizontal lines. Bottle forms change to taller
body, more angular shoulder and shorter neck. Again, approaching the center of the Red River31 Caddo culture, collared jars
sometimes develop four peaks on the rim, the body decoration
often occupies only the upper two-thirds of body space, and herringbone linear incised decoration predominates. The seed-jar type
almost disappears. These changes begin to appear in pottery forms
below Arkadelphia in Clark County, the fringe of the contact belt
between the historically coeval tribes, the. Red River Kadohadacho
and the Cahinnio Caddo.
In conclusion, within the Mid-Ouachita basin:
1.

Four definite pottery types are well defined in this area;

2. These types occur in profusion in the approximate geographic
area occupied by the historic Cahinnio’;
3. The historic temporal lateness is borne out by corresponding
archaeological associations;
4. These four pottery types show relationship with the Red
River Caddo.
For these reasons we suggest the designation of the pipe and
four pottery types as Mid-Ouachita focus. We further believe
this can be identified historically to represent the pottery complex of
the Cahinnio Caddo.
PLAT~. 19
Panel 3. Four geniculate engraved bottles, from Hot Spring and
Clark Counties, Arkansas.
Panel 4.
Arkansas.
Panel 5.
Arkansas.

Two seed jars, from Hot Spring and Clark Counties,
Loup pipes,

from

Hot Spring and Clark

Counties,

Plate !9

Identi]icafion of Mid-Ouachita Pottery as Cahinnio Caddo

113

History and archaeology apparently correlate in the Mid-Ouachita
Valley and suggest the identification of the region’s historic aborigines as Cahinnio’, the firmly established tribe of the northeastern
outpost of the Caddo Confederacy.
We are grateful to Dr. Robert Proctor, Artist Charles Richardson,
and Mr. Vere L. Huddleston, all of Arkadelphia, Arkansas, for the
use of data pertaining to" their excavations. Also, to Major and
Mrs. Earl W. Foizie of Army and Navy General Hospital, Hot
Springs, Arkansas, for their accurate translations of pertinent passages in Margry’s Descouvertes, etc. Finally, we express our
indebtedness to Dr. C. H. Webb, The Children’s Clinic, Shreveport,
Louisiana, for his critical review and generous assistance in completing this hypothesis.
Bismarck, Arkansas.
September 3, 1945

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Historical
1. Swanton, John R., Indian Tribes o[ the Lower Mississippi
Valley, Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 43, ~Vashington, t9!1, map (frontispiece).
2.

Hodges, Dr. and Mrs. T. L., The Watermelon Island Site in

Arkansas, Bulletin of Texas Archaeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 15, 1943, Abilene, Texas, p. 56.
3.

S. D. Dickinson, Certain Vessels From the Clements Place,

An Historic Caddo Site, Bulletin o’f Texas A. and P. Soc., Vol. 13,
September, 1941, p. 117.
4.

Margry, Pierre, tome III, Descouvertes, Paris, (1875-1886),

pp. 412-413 (Joutel’s Relation).
Shea, John Gilmary, Discovery and Exploration o] the Mississippi
Valley, with the original narratives of Marquette, Allouez, Membre,
Hennepin and Anastase Douay, p. 217 (Do~aay), New York, 1852.

French, B. F., Louisiana Historical Collectionz, Vol. 1, p. 169,
(Henri de Tonfi’s letter).

114

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

5. Margry, Pierre, tome V, Descouvertes, etc., Paris (1887),
p. 420 (Penicaut).
Glover, William B., .4 History o] the Ccddo Indians, Louisiana
Historical Quarterly, Vol. 18 No. 4, October, 1935, p. 879.
6. Final Report o] the United States DeSoto Expedition Commission, Hou~ Document No. 71, 76th Congress, 1st Session, U. S.
Gov’t. Printing Office, Washington, 1939 (John R. Swanton, Chairman ).

7.

Final Report, etc., vide supra, p. 278.

Gentleman o] Elvas, Narratives o], Edward Gaylord Bourne, editor, 2 vol., Trail Makers (Series), New York, 1904.
Garcilaso De La Vega, Barnard Shipp, The History o] Hernando
DeSoto and Florida, 1512-1568, Philadelphia, 1881, p. 428.

8.
420.

Margry, Pierre, vide supra, tome III (1885-1886), pp. 412-

9. Swanton, John R., Source Material on tire History and Etl~
nology o~ the Caddo Indians, Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 132, U. S. Ptg. Office, Wa~ington,
1942, p. 7 and p. 12.
10. Swanton, J. R., Source Material, etc., vide supra, p. 14.
W. B. Glover, vide supra, p. 879.
Bolton, Herbert E., ,4nathanase De M~zier~s and the Louisiana.
Texas Frontier, 1768-1780, Cleveland, 1914, p. 22.
11.

Swanton, J. R., Source Material, etc., vide supra, pp 30-31.

12.

Swanton, J. R., Source Material, etc., vide supra, p. 8.

13.

Swanton, J. R., Source Material, etc., vide supra, p. 41.

Le Clercq, First Establishment o] the Faith in Ne~v France, Vol.
II, J. G. Shea, N. Y., 1881, p. 265.
14. ,Margry, P., vide supra, tome III, p. 420.
15.

Swanton, J. R., Indian Tribes, etc., vide supra, p. 7, note.

Identification o] Mid-Ouachita Pottery as Cahinnio Caddo

16.

115

Hodge, F., Handbook of American Indians, Smithsonian Inst.,

Bureau of Ethnology, Bulletin 30, Washington, 1912, p. 184.
La Clercq (1691), First EstabL o] the Faith, Vol. II, 1881, p. 265.
17.

Bolton, H. E., vide supra, p. 93, note 115; Espinosa, Chron-

ica Apostolica, 1746, p. 281.
18.

Swanton, J. R., Source Material, etc., vide supra, p. 9.

19.

Swanton, J. R., Source Material, etc., vide supra, p. 50.

Margry, P., vide supra, t6me IV, p. I78.
20. Guillaume De t’Isle, Map, B. F. French, Hist. Coll. of La.,
Part II, 2nd edition, Philadelphia, 1850, frontispiece.
21.

Hodge, F., vide supra, p. 184.

22.

Bolton, H. E., vide supra, Vol. I, p. 265.
Archaeological

23.

Private collections at Bismarck and Arkadelphia, Arkansas.

24. Dickinson, S. D., Notes on the Decoration and Form o[
Arkansas Caddo Pottery, Bulletin of Texas A. & P. Soc., ¥ol 15,
1943, p. 24.
25. C.H. Webb and Monroe Dodd, Jr., Pottery Types From the
Belcher Mound Site, Bulletin of Texas Archaeo’logical and Paleontological Society, Vol. 13, 1941, Abilene, Texas, p. 96.
26. Hodges, Dr. and Mrs. T. L., The Watermelon Island Site,
etc., vide supra, p. 74.
27.

Alex D. Krieger, Archaeological Horizons in the Caddo

Area, El Notre De Mexico Y El Sur De Estado’s Unidos, Mexico,
D. F., 1944, p. 154.
Walker, W. M., A Caddo Burial Site at Natchitoches, La., Smithsonian Misc. Coll., Vol. 94, No. 14.
Phillips, Philip, Special Report to Nat’L Park Service on Behalf
the Central Mississippi Valley Archaeological Survey.

116

28.

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleonto~ogica~ Society

C.H. Webb and Monroe Dodd, Jr., vide supra.

29. Holmes, W. H., Handbook of Aboriginal Amerizan An.
tiquities, Part !, Introductory, The Lithic Industries, Smithsonian
Inst., Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 60, Washington,
1919, pp. 197-200.
Lemley, Harry J., Prehistoric Novaculit~ Quarries o] Arkansas,
Bulletin of Texas A. & P. Soc., 1942, p. 35.
30. Ford, James A., Analysis of lndia#z Village Site Collections
From Louisiana and Mississippi, State of Louisiana, Dept. of Conservation, Anthropological Study No. 2, La. Geological Survey, New
Orleans, La., Nov. 1, 1936, pp. 72-96.
31.

References to Red River Caddo Pottery:

Harrin~on, M. R., Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas, New York
Museum of American Indian, Heye Foundation, 1920.

Moore, Clarence B., Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River, Academy
of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 1912.
Dickinson, S. D., Notes on the Decoration and Form o] Arkansas
Caddo Pottery, Bulletin of Texas Arehaeo!ogical and Paleontological Society, Vol. 15, 1943, Abilene, Texas.

