House Types Among $he Caddo Indians

49

HOUSE TYPES AMONG THE CADDO
INDIANS
Bx¢ CLARE.BICE H. W~BS
Considerable historical and archaeological evidence exists concerning dwellings of the various Caddoan tribes, but very little of
this relates to the Kadohadacho or Caddo proper in the region of
their historic confederation on Red River in northwest Louisiana
and southwest Arkansas.
The simplest Caddoan house type, which was frequently described
by French and Spanish travelers of tile 16th and 17th centuries,
was the grass lodge, which persisted among the Wiehltas up to
within recent years. Fletcher (1) states that in making these beehive shaped houses, a circle was drawn on the ground, along which
a number of crotched posts were set, beams being laid across the
crotches. Clo~ly-placed poles were leaned inward across the beams,
the tops drawn together and tied, and willow rods laced across them.
A close thatch of grass was laid and bound down with similar rods.
Surmounting the peak of the house were two rods crossed to indicate
the cardinal points.

For ceremonial houses, four openings or doors

were left on the sides corresponding to the cardinal points; for the
ordinary dwellings, openings on the east and west sides were used
in the mornings and afternoons, respectively.

Joutel (2) described similar dwellings among the Cenis and the
A~onis, stating that their cabins were in groups of seven to fifteen,
separated by their fields. Houses of the Cenis were large, sometimes
60 feet in diameter, accommodating eight to ten families.
Professor Bolton (3), in "Texas of the Middle Eighteenth Century," published a drawing of a Caddo village near Texarkana, in
1691, showing beehive-shaped grass houses as described above,
also a second type, which had grass thatched roofs and mud-plastered
wails. Similar wattle-and-daub construction of round and oval
dwellings is seen in a photograph of a Caddo village by Soule
(1868-72) which is reproduced by courtesy of the Smithsonian
Institution (Plate 8, No. 1). Members of the tribe are seated beneath a platform of the type used to dry the corn.
A third type of house, u~d by the Pawnees and other Caddoan

5O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

tribes of the Plains area, was the earth lodge. Fletcher (1) states
that after digging a circular excavation of 2 to 4 feet, a grassthatched structure was built, using two circles of supporting posts,
then covered with sod. A single entrance on the east side, also sod
covered, projected 6 to 10 feet from the wall. Skin curtains closed
the entrance way and, during the winter season, were also placed
around the inner circle of supporting posts, making a smaller room
around the fire.
Inside arrangements of the lodges have been described by Joutel
(2), Father Manzanet (4) and others.

The floors were smoothed

and hardened; in the center a small excavation accommodated a
fire, the smoke from which escaped through a small hole in the
roof.

Beds or couches were placed around the walls, separated by partitions of buffalo skins, which also served for blankets. Large
shelves above the door and on the opposite side of the lodge held
hampers and baskets of cane or bark, in which shelled corn, nuts,
beans, acorns, and other foods were stored. Pottery and other household utensils were also placed on these platforms or shelves.
Larger ceremonial structures were made iu similar fashions. Jackson (5), who excavated a circular house floor in the Asinai area
which evidently represented one of the ceremonial fire-temples,
quotes the description by Father Manzanet of the house of the Governor of the Nabedache, a large grass lodge as described above.
In the center of the house was a fire which was never extinguished
and from which the fires of all the suri’ounding households were
kindled.

Similar fire houses were stated to be at the Neches and

among the Nacogdoches and Nasonis.
To the east of the Caddo area, Swanton (6) states that the "fire
temple" was a characteristic feature of lower Mississippi culture.
The Natchez and Taensas built oval temples, with vertical wails of
wattle-work, peaked roofs covered with cane mats and surmounted
by carved figures of three birds. Inside each temple, a fire was
kept burning continuously by elders of the tribe, appointed for this
PLATE 8
3..
2.

Photograph of a Gaddo Camp by $oule (1868-1874).
Floor plan, tIouse 1, Belcher Mound B.

Plate 8

House Types Among the Caddo Indians

specific duty.

53

Dry hickory and oak logs were used and only the

ends of the logs were lighted, to keep the fire from blazing too
brightly.
Farther afield, the council houses of the Cherokees and Creeks
were very large, "capableof accommodating several hundred people," according to Bartram (7).

A large central post was sur-

rounded by two or three circular rows of upright posts, the roof
covered with bark layers, occasionally mud coated.

The Chickasaws

and possibly the Choctaws of Mississippi were stated to have built
earth lodges similar to those of the Pawnee.

Turning to archeological evidence, besides the description of the
east Texas fire-site by Jackson, the most pertinent is that of Harrington (8), who excavated many sites between the Red and
Ouachita rivers in southwest Arkansas, where the preponderance
of artifacts was Caddoan. In some thirty instances, at nine sites,
he mentioned either floor levels in mounds, with post molds, fire
places or charred timbers; or floors on the ground level, covered
with a small mound of earth, one to three feet high. There seemed
to be little uniformity of detail, the shapes being square, oval,
round, rectangular and square or rectangular with rounded corners; sizes varied from 16 feet square to 33 feet in diameter; fire
pits were central, eccentric or sometimes lacking. Of the five structures where entrances were identified, one each faced east, west,
southeast and southwest, while the fifth had entrances to both southeast and southwest. In the six instances where post molds were described, only a single row or circle was found.
Charred timbers, cane, grass and wattle-work were found in many
instances, covered with one to five feet of sand or clay, indicating a
widespread custom of burning the houses on deserting them. Harrington apparently considered all of these structures to be the remains of earth lodges, covered with earth from the collapsed house,
with additionaI earth used in some instances to build the mound
higher. It is significant that his assistant, Alanson Skinner, (9~
described the one house which he excavated as a burned grass lodge,
although its details were not greatly different from others described
by Harrington.

Te~a~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

54

House I, Belcher Mound Site
During the past four years, Mr. Monroe Dodd and the author,
with the assistance of various friends, have conducted excavations
in a small mound site on a lateral stream in the Red River Valley
near Belcher, located twenty miles north of Shreveport, in Caddo
Parish. A complete report is being prepared for publication and
those interested in detailed features are referred to this report. For
the purpose of the present description of house types, it suffices
to note that we have uncovered four habitation levels in Mound B,
with a structure on each level, immediately superimposed and separated by about two feet of sand fill between each level, with a fifth
structure on the surface immediately adjoining Mound B: No trade
objects have been found and pottery types all fall within the Caddo
classification as given by Ford (10).
Houses 1 to 4 occurred in the. succeeding levels of Mound B and
are numbered from the surface downward. The floor of House 1
lay under an 8 to 12 inch layer of soil, the lower 4 to 6 inches of
which was black humus containing many sherds, small segments of
charred timbers and cane, masses of baked clay, mud-dauber nests
and other debris. This refuse material was especially abundant on
the slopes of the small mound and around the outer circle of post
molds. The structure outline was incomplete, as the western half
had been disturbed by deep plowing. The eastern half (Plate 8,
No. 2), was a semicircle of post molds, 15 feet in radius, the molds
being 6 to 9 inches in diameter, 1 1-2 feet in depth and spaced at
intervals of approximately 2 feet. Grouped post molds and heavy
masses of burned clay in the northeast segment suggested this point
as the entrance. No projecting post molds were found.
A second circle of grouped post molds, most of which contained
charred segments of cypress posts, was found 6 to 7 feet within the
outer circIe.

These posts were 7 to 10 inches in diameter, larger

than the outer molds, and evidently served as roof supports.

In the center of the structure there was a bed of extremely white
a~es, 2 by 2 1-2 feet in size and nearly a foot in depth. It was de-

PLATE 9
1.
2.

Floor plan, House 2, Belcher Mound B.
Photograph of Eastern half of House 2.

P!ate ~

House Types Among the Caddo Indians

57

void of sherds or animal bones, although these occurred in abundance around a smaller ash bed which lay just outside the outer
circle of post molds. An intact small pottery jar and fragments of
a pipe lay near this outside fire bed.
At two points on the house floor (Plate 8, No. 2) heavy masses of
pottery sherds lay together. Four vessels, including two large olla
types, were reconstructed from one of these sherd masses. The
second mass was found to be a single large jar, crushed in situ, with
an inverted and unbroken bowl nearby. Around these were charred
hickory nuts. The positions of these objects suggests that they
fell or were crushed when the lodge burned.
House H, Belcher Mound B
Approximately 2 1-2 feet below floor 1, separated by a practically
sterile sand fill, lay a level floor of packed white sand, which could
be perfectly delineated because of the charred materials which had
fallen on it. The absence of a humus layer indicated that the building had not been used very long before it was burned. Almost immediately underlying the semicircle of House 1 was a circle of post
molds (Plate 9, No. 1) which could be completed for its entire circumference. The circle was mathematically exact, no mold varying more than 6 inches from a perfect circle, 30 feet in diameter.
Parallel lines of post molds, 3 feet in width, formed an entrance
way (Plate 10, No. 1) which projected 7 feet from the northeast segment of the circle. Seven posts were used on each side of the entrance way. A large or double mold marked the point where the
entrance joined the outer wall of the structure. The extra mold
inside the doorway, with the inset terminal mold on ~e north line,
may represent posts to support a bench, as Skinner (9) suggested
of a similar occurrence in the Flower’s mound structure; or, possibly, supports for doors. It is mentioned of the Natchez ceremonial
structures, that entrances were kept carefully closed to prevent children from entering these lodges.
The floor of the entrance way was of hard packed sand, which
e~-tended inside the lodge toward the central fire. In the middle of
the entrance there was a 10 inch square bed of white ash, (Plate
10, No. 1) possibly the result of some ceremony related to entering
~)r leaving the lodge.

58

Texas Archcological and Paleontological Society

An inner circle of molds (Plate 9, No. 1) was spaced as in House
1, apparently 8 groups which were 5 to 8 feet apart. Strong (11)
reports 4 to 8 central posts in the Pawnee lodges, stating that their
number and location had ceremonial significance.

Some of the

groups in House 2 were destroyed by burial pits, but it is to be
noted that the north and south groups are exactly on the compass
line through the center of the structure. Shallow cache pits, containing only pottery sherds, surrounded several of these grouped
molds. Over and around this inner circle of post molds lay masses
of burned clay which showed impressions of poles, sticks and grass.
Many had one side quite smooth, often greenish in color, as though
covered with a green wash. The abundance of this material around
the inner circle of molds suggests a wall or partition dividing the
inner room from the outer portion of the building. Over the outer
portion of floor, between the two circles of posts, heavy masses of
charred materials lay on the floor--a layer of grass usually next the
house floor, then a layer of split cane, then poles and sticks. This
probably was roof material and must have inverted in falling, as
masses broke loose from the burning structure, otherwise the relative
position of the materials is difficult to understand. It is unlikely
that the roof was sod covered, since this sod would have fallen between the house floor and the grass-cane layers when they inverted.
Several inset post molds between the two circles suggest seats,
bunks or partitions.
In the exact center of the structure there was a large .post mold,
12 inches in diameter and 18 inches deep, partially surrounded and
covered by an oval shaped bed of very white ash (Plate 10, No. 2),
identical with that of House 1. In both instances the ash was so
white and free of charcoal or burned materials as to have the appearance of lime.

It is probable that carefully selected ash or oak wood

was used and the fires carefully tended, as reported of the Natchez.
The large post must have been temporary, such as those used by the
Asinai in constructing their lodges, otherwise the fire would not
have been built on this spot.
PLATE 10
1.
inset
2.
3.

Entrance way, House 2, Belcher Mound B. Notice ash bed and
post molds.
Central ash bed and large post molds, House 2.
Floor plan, House 3, Belcher l~Iound B.

<

o

Plate 10

House Types A~wng the Caddo Indians

6I

Six large masses of sherds lay on the floor, from which a dozen
nearly complete vessels were assembled. Sherds of a single vessel
were often found in three or four separate heaps and, after these
vessels were con~pleted, comparatively few sherds remained. These
facts suggest that the vessels were broken shortly before destruction
of the building and were thrown or swept into the separate heaps.
At, one place in the back half of the house, sherds of two entire vessels were found with fragments of charred basketry and charred
seeds. In other places a small pipe and a water bottle, both intact,
lay on the floor.
The floor was cut through by eight burial pits which started from
the fill between floors 1 and 2. Details will be found in the complete report. The pottery found in these burials, as well as the
sherds on House floors 1 and 2, was of the highly developed Caddo
type.
House 111, Belcher Mound B
The flat summit of a small circular mound was found two feet
beneath the floor of House 2. The mound was covered in its entirety with a cap of charcoal-streaked red clay, about 1 foot in
thickness. Two circles of post molds were found (Plate 10, No. 3),
the inner circle of 5 to 8 inch molds, about 2 feet in depth, forming
an irregular oval, 13 by 15 feet in diameters. The outer circle of
smaller molds, 3 to 4 inches in diameter and only 1 foot in depth,
slanted slightly inward. It was 20 by 22 feet in diameter, and both
circles were interrupted by the second floor burial pits, which apparently cut through the entrance way on the northeast side. The
absence of charred materials or post suggests that the building may
not have been burned, as were the other structures. Internal post
molds were irregularly placed. A small ash bed, surrounded
~erds and animal bones, lay between the circles of molds on the
south side. A moderate number of sherds was found on the floor
and the slope of the small mound.
House IV, Belcher Mound B
The mound described above was found to overlie the remains of
a burned structure (Plate 11), which had been built on the original
ground surface, 3 feet under House floor 3 and 8 feet beneath the
summit of Mound B. This surface was of clay, stained dark with

62

Texaz Archeological and Paleontological Society

humus. House 4 wreckage consisted of heavy masses of baked clay
daub over the central areas of the house; charred timbers, split cane
and grass over the outer portions. In a straight line along each
wall, charred timbers projected upward 1 to 1 1-2 feet into the
covering sand. Their molds extended do~ into and through wall
trenches, for a total depth of 21/~ feet (Plate 12, No. 2). The trenches,
8 to 10 inches wide and 18 inches deep, extended the length of each
wall, failing to meet at the corners by about 3 feet, this space being
filled in by three post molds, 4 to 6 inches in diameter, to produce
a rounded corner. Red clay to the height of one foot was banked
against the outside of each wall. The structure was 24 feet wide, 20
feet 8 inches in length (Plate 12, No. 1).
The front wall had two trenches with a 3 foot opening in the
center, from which projected a 7 foot long entrance, similar to that
of House 2. The entrance floo~ had been built up one foot to ’form
a ramp or incline, declining to floor level within the structure. Atop
the ramp, midway of the entrance, was a small white ash bed
(Plate 11), identical in size and relative position to that of the
House 2 entrance. Projecting laterally from the ends of the doorway were one foot high walls of clay (Plate 11), paralleling the
front wall of the structure. Outside of the right wall, a smooth,
crescentic bank of clay, 2 feet high, 8 to 9 feet long and 3 to 4 feet
wide, faced toward the southeast.
The structure contained two large ash beds. Near the center of
the house, a shallow basin of yellow clay, 3 to 3 1-2 feet in diameter,
contained very white ashes. In the northwest corner of the structure, there was a larger ash bed with many sherds and deer bones.
Spaced on opposite sides of this fire bed were four post molds,
probably representing cooking supports.
By the opposite (south) wall of the house, 4 post molds formed
a 4 1-2 foot square, probably a platform of some type. Just within
the doorway, closely placed molds formed an irregular circle, but
these started beneath the clay ramp and may have represented some
earlier structure. A large clay pipe of modified platform type lay
in the wreckage of the back wall.
Two large burial pits started just beneath the clay cap of House
floor 3, Pit 11 cutting through and six feet below House floor 4,

PLATE 11
Floor plan, ttouse 4. Belcher Mound B.

House Types Among the Caddo Indians

65

Pit 12 extending just to this floor. The pottery, although Caddoan
in type, differed from that of the first and second levels, being
scanty in amount, cruder in manufacture and plainer in ornamentation.
House V, Belcher She

About 15 feet northwest of Mound B, another circle of post molds
was discovered (Plate 13, No. 1). The center of this structure lay
under 6 inches of topsoil and humus; the periphery sloped downward slightly and, immediately beyond the circle of post molds,
the black humus layer dipped downward for 2 feet, forming a
small house mound (Plate 12, No. 3).
The outer circle was 36 to 37 feet in diameter, of 6 to 8 inches
molds, spaced 2 to 2 1-2 feet apart. The western segment of the
house had washed into the small stream. The entrance was in the
northeast segment, formed by a number of grouped posts on each
side of a steep ramp, in the center of which was a large mold filled
with very black loose charcoal and ash. No projecting entrance way
was found.
An inner circle of grouped post molds resembled those of Houses
1 and 2. Many irregular molds occurred. Two small cache pits,
1 1-2 to 2 feet in diameter, contained sherds, shells, bones and baked
clay material. Several disturbances indicated burial pits, but these
have not been investigated.
A single ashbed was found in the exact center of the structure,
about 2 feet in diameter and surrounded by scattered sherds. On
the house floor and in the covering humus were a moderate number
of sherds, 8 to 10 diminutive arrow points, 2 ear ornaments, several
whetstones, fragments of flaked stones, numerous flakes, a few
pieces of charred timbers and moderate amounts of baked clay daub
material. Sherds and daub material were more abundant in the
post molds and down the slopes of the house mound.
House I, Greer Site, Gibslalut
About 3 miles east of Gibsland, Bienville Parish, Louisiana, a
mixed Coles Creek-Caddo site lies along Black Bayou, on the Ed
Greet farm. In 1938 a burial was struck by the plow, and with the
assistance of Mr. Greet, we uncovered the skeleton, finding no arti-

66

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

facts in association.

We noticed a layer of very white sand and on

following this, uncovered numerous molds (Plate 13, No. 2), which
probably represent two separate structures.

The floor was formed

by a layer of firm white and yellow sand under about 8 inches of
cultivated soil. Post molds were 5 to 12 inches in size, I to 1 1-2 feet
in depth, containing dark humus and occasional sherds. No charred materials were found.

A definite entrance way projected from the southeast side of the
structure, near the burial, arid a possible entrance way was on the,
northeast side. Three fire beds and three small cache pits were
found, the cache pits containing sherds, shells and animal bones.
No other artifacts were discovered.
Fire Pit A was large, 5 by 4 feet, containing a thick layer of very
black ash and humus, with a few sherds. Opposed post molds suggested cooking supports. We were amazed, after removing two feet
of the black ash, to break through into a cache pit beneath the fire
bed which had been dug into the hard clay for a depth of about 4
feet, the pit was 2 1-2 feet in diameter. It contained a number of
Caddo sherds, but no whole artifacts. This is the first deep cache
pit of the Nebraska type (11) found in this area, so far as we know.
We conclude that this structure is Caddoan, rather than the earlier
Coles Creek, because the sherds found on the floor, in the pits and
post molds were almost exclusively Caddoan in type.
Discussion
Mound B a[ Belcher affords interesting evidence of temporal
~quence in house types. The first people who lived here built a
rectangular house on the level ground, using the trenching technic
for placement of the wall posts, then covering the house with poles,
split cane mats and sedge grass. The trenching technic, a method
not previously found in this area, was reported for the circular
structures at Deasonville, Mississippi, by Collins (12). It was also
described by Cole and Deuel (13) for rectangular.houses of the
Middle Mississippi phase in Fulton County, Illinois. Numerous
PLATE 12
1.
2.
3.

Photograph of House 4, Belcher Mound B.
Wall trench with post molds, House 4.
Photograph of House 5, Belcher Site.

Plate 12

House Types Among the Caddo Indians

69

rectangular structures at various sites in the Norris Basin of Eastern
Tennessee, as described by Webb (14), exhibited the trenching
technic.

They also showed centrally placed ceremonial ash beds

in prepared ciay basins, and construction of cane, grass and wattleand-daub, these materials being preserved by incomplete burning.
House 4 differed from the Norris basin structures in having a projecting doorway and having the burial pits cut through the fallen
debris. Horizontal log molds found in the trenches of the Norris
Basin structures and the clay seats or pedestals inside these structures were lacking in House 4 at Belcher. However, the 2-foot-high,
crescentic ridge of clay in front of House 4 may have served as a
seat.
Incompleteness of data allows us to draw few conclusions from
the small structure (House 3) which surmounted the first small
mound heaped over the remains of House 4. It lacked a centrally
placed firebed and is the only structure found at Belcher which
showed no evidence of burning. The unique feature of this floor
is the complete capping over of the small mound with the layer of
red clay before construction of House 3.
The people who built Houses 1, 2 and 5 had the culture traits of
the later Caddos, who had developed a high degree of proficiency
in pottery making. It is probable that they were intrusive into this
area, displacing at Belcher the crude pottery makers of floor levels
3 and 4. It is interesting to note, as we have discussed in our complete report, that the simpler incised straight line type of Caddo
pottery is widespread over this area, the highly developed engraved
curved line pottery complex appearing much less frequently. Dickinson and Lemley (15) in Arkansas and Goldschmidt (16) in East
Texas, present evidence of this same intrusion of engraved, curvedline Caddo wares into an indigenous complex of inferior pottery
~-ith incised designs.
These later Caddos built circular structures using an outer circle
of grouped posts for roof supports, with coverings of poles, stakes,
split cane and grass. Wattle.and-daub, often plastered with a green
slip (Skinner (9) also found green coloration of the clay plastering) was used for the walls. The central fire bed, the ash bed of
the doorway and the lack of cooking fires in Houses 1 and 2 suggest

70

Tex~s Archeologica. l a~d Paleontological Society

that they were ceremonial structures, identical with the "eternal
fire" lodges of the Asinai and Natchez.
The constructional features mentioned above are quite similar
to the structures of the historic Pawnees, Cherokees and Creeks,
previously described. There is no evidence of excavated floors
such as the earth lodges of the Pawnees had, but the projecting
doorway is quite similar in type.

The cache pit of ttouse 1 on the,

Greer site suggests Plains affinities.
The question of earth lodges among the southern Caddo tribes
is an interesting one.

The Chickasaws and Choctaws among south-

ern tribes were stated to have built earth lodges, similar to the
Pawnees of the midwest. Webb (14) concluded that the square
structures excavated in the Norris Basin area gave evidence of having had sod covered roofs, which on collapse of the burning buildings, covered over and preserved the charred materials.

Harrington

(8) reached similar conclusions of the Caddo structures in southern
Arkansas, and Fowke (17) attributed to collapsed Caddo earth
lodges the thousands of low mound-like elevations seen over a wide
area of Arkansas, Missouri, Louisiana, eastern Oklahoma and East
Texas.
With respect to these mound-like elevations, Fowke’s conclusions
were based on incomplete observations.

Hundreds of them in North

Louisiana have been cut through during road construction, and none
of those examined by local geologists or ourselves show any evidence of habitation.

They dot the hills of this area, often miles from

water courses, and are attributed by geologists to some peculiar erosional feature of geological formation.

The following reasons lead us to believe that at Belcher the
structures were not earth lodges:
1. The surface structures, Houses 1 and 5, were covered with a
relatively thin humus layer, showing no evidence of heaped
up earth.

PLATE 13
1. Floor plan, House 5, Belcher Site.
2. Floor plan House 1, Greer farm, Gibsland, Louisiana.
numerous molds, fire beds and cache pi~s.

Notice

0
0

0

o

Plate 13

House Types A~wng the Caddo Indians

73

2. The earth covering the deeper structures was a clear sand,
instead of the clay or sod which would be expected had they
been earth lodges.
3. The san~ immediately overlying the fallen burned structures
had the same appearance as the higher sand fill.
4.

The burned clay daub material which appeared with the house
debris was tightly pressed, showing imprints of sticks, cane
and grass.

One surface was usually smooth, indicating its

use as an adobe or piaster in wall construction.
5. The greater abundance of charred materials around the periphery suggests that earth was thrown on the collapsed structure as it burned.

Inversion of the roof sections, with grass lying directly on the
floor, then cane, then poles, would not be expected if the roof
had been sod covered.
We advance the hypothesis that when death of important personages, epidemics, war, or depreciation of the buildings made it
desirable to construct a new lodge, the Caddos had the custom of
burning the old structure, probably intentionally breaking the potteries used therein (House 2) and, as a part of the ceremony, gathering around the burning structure to heap on earth as it collapsed.
Additions of soil built up a higher mound, on which the new temple
was built. There is an obvious analogy witt~ the custom among the
Aztecs of Central Mexico, of destroying their houses, furnishings
and potteries at the end of their 52 year cycle and building new
temples on successively higher pyramids. The presence of burial
pits dug through the covered ruins, before building a new structure,
suggests that death of these individuals was responsible for or connected with destruction of Houses 2 and ¢ at Belcher.
Conclu~ons

1. Historical evidence indicates that grass lodges and lodges
with wattle-daub walls and grass thatched roofs were the prevailing
types of structures among the southern Caddoan tribes.
2. House remains from a mound site within the historic Caddo
area indicate several types of houses, with the custom of burning
the houses when deserting them or before building new structures.

74

Tez~s Archeologica2 and Paleontological Society

3. The highest type of Caddo culture at this site is associated
with circular structures, where split cane and grass roofing, wattleand-daub walls are constructional features.
4. A simpler and apparently earlier type of Caddoan pottery
culture is associated with a rectangular house, which presents the
Middle Mississippi feature of wall posts set in trenches.
5. No definite evidence of the earth lodge type of house was
found.
6. Deep cache pits and burials through the floor while in use,
do not seem to be prevalent in this area, although burial pits are cut
through the ruins of burned structures.
The Children’s Clinic,
Shreveport, Louisiana.
Bibliography

1. Fletcher, A. C., in Handbook of American Indians, by F. W.
Hodge, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bull. 30, p. 505.
2. Joutel, Relation, pp. 341, 343, 3~k5, quoted by Harrington,
M. R., Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas, Museum of the American
Indian, Heye Foundation, N. Y., 1920, pp. 247-248.
3.

Bolton, Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century, quoted by

Harrington, op. cit., pp. 250-251.

4. Father Manzanet, quoted by Jackson, A. T., A Perpetual Fire
Site, Bull. of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Abilene, Texas, 1936, pp. !59-160.
5.

Jackson, A. T., op. cit., pp. 134 to 172.

6. Swanton, J. R., Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of the Gulf of Mexico, Bull. 43, Bur. Amer.
Ethnol., pp. 59-60, 1911.
7.

Bartram, Win., Travels Through North and Sbuth Carolina,

Georgia, East and West Florida, pp. 366-367, London, 1792. Quoted
by Collins, H. B., Excavations at a Prehistoric Indian Village Site
in Mississippi, United States National Museum, Vol. 79, pp. 1-22,
1932.

House Types Among $he Caddo Indians

8.

75

Harrington, M. R., op. cir.

9. Skinner, Alanson, An Ancient Town or Chief’s House of the
Indians of Southwestern Arkansas, in Harrington, M. R., op. cir. pp.
291-297.
10. Ford, J. A., Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from
Louisiana and Mississippi, Anthropological Study No. 2, Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, 1936.
11. Strong, W. D., An Introduction to Nebraska Archeology,
Smithsonian Miscellanous Collections, Vol. 93, Washington, D. C.
1935.
12.

Collins, H. B., op. cit.

13. Cole, Fay-Cooper and Deuel, T., Rediscovering Illinois,
University of Chicago Press, 1937, pp. 111-119.
14. Webb, W. S., An Archeological Survey of the Norris Basin
in Eastern Tennessee, Smithsonian Institution Bull. No. 119, Washington, D. C., 1938.
15. Dickinson, S. D. and Lemley, H. J., Evidences of the Marksville and Coles Creek Complexes at the Kirkham Place, Clark County, Arkansas. Bull. of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 11, 1939, p. 138.
16. Goldschmidt, W. R., A Report on the Archeology of Titus
County, Bull. of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 7, 1935.
17. Fowke, Gerard, Archeeological Investigations (II), 44th Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, D. C.,
1928, p. 408.

