THE BONNELL SITE

The Bonnell Site is situated in an area where the present
archaeological picture is not clear. Thus far only a few sites
have been excavated in the area, and the cultural context is
largely hypothecated. In order to add to the archaeological
knowledge of the area and to define the relationship with
other cultures, field expeditions were organized by Texas
Technological.College in the summers of 1950 and 1951.
Site Location. The site is located on the Bonnell Ranch,
Lincoln County, in Southeastern New Mexico. This ranch is
fourteen miles east northeast of Ruidoso. The site lies on a
mesa across Highway 70 from the ranch house and overlooks the Ruidosa valley near the junction of Fort Stanton
Creek and the Ruidoso River.
Physiography. The Bonnell Ranch is located in the Sacramento region of the Basin and Range Province, only eight
miles west of the line which divides this Province from the
Pecos section of the Great Plains Province.1
The Sacramento section is a long north-south strip that is
three hundred miles long, but nowhere over seventy miles
wide. It is more or less plateau-like throughout, faulted and
strongly sloping. It contains mature block mountains of
gently tilted strata and block plateaus. Bolsons generally
characterize the Basin and Range Province, and are present
in ~his section. The line of mountains that dominate this
section of the Province are, from north to south, the Jicarilla, Sierra Blanca, Sacramento, Guadalupe, and the Delaware. All are monoclinal ranges bounded on the west by
fault scarps and consisting largely of eastward d,.’pping carboniferous limestones. Sierra Blanca peak reaches a height
of 12,003 feet. The Capitan Mountains represent an eastward
volcanic spur. The Bonnell Ranch is east of the Sierra Blanca
and south of the Capitan Mountains.
I. Fennernan, Nevin M,, Physiography of the Western United States, New York:
M~’~raw Hill Book Company, 1931, pp. 47-50, 327-395.

The Bonnell Site

79

Less than ten miles to the east is the border of the Pecos
section of the Great Plains Province. The central part of the
Pecos section is an alluvial filled basir~ This plain stretches
fifty miles north and a greater distance south of Roswell.
It has a width of five to thirty miles. The soil is similar to
that of the High Plains. The topography is suited to irrigation and a water supply is available from the Pecos and
from abundant artesian water constantly replenished by
rains on the nearby mountains to the west.
The Ruidoso River Valley varies in width from one-eighth
to one-half mile in the vicinity of the site. The valley bottom
is covered with an alluvial soil, and at the present time,
supports a heavy growth of fruit orchards and fields of
grains, such as wheat, oats, rye, and barley.
Geology.2 The mesa on which the Bormell Site is located
is forty-seven feet high, and is composed entirely of Pleistocene stream gravel, capped with one to four feet of finer
alluvial deposits. The stream gravel was evidently dep_osited
by a large river with a high velocity; this is indicated by
the large size of the boulders in the deposit and by the cross
bedding which shows that the river changed its course, The
present valley could be the result of a fault or of down cutting by the stream. There was formerly less difference between the valley floor and the mesa than at the present time,
since the stream is now cutting down instead of filling.
Climate. The climate is characterized by cold winters, and
summers with hot days and cool nights. Ther~e is a marked
variation in climate and life zones within this area, which is
due almost entirely to the range in altitude. Because of the
high evaporation in the low country, effective precipitation
increases, with altitude. There is a decided variation in the
seasonal distribution of rainfall. For example, at Fort Stanton, which is about ten miles from the site and has an elevation of 6,331 feet, the rainfall is .50 inch in January and 3.21
inches in July. The nearest weather recording station is
2.
Information about the geological formations of the mesa was supplied by
Glenna Kee~ee and Selman Cooke, graduate geolo~ry students in the 1950 field school.

8O

Te~s A~cheologica! and Pa~eo~to~ogica~ Soci~t~j

located at Fort Stanton; there the average annual precipitation is fifteen inches, with the recorded extremes varying
from six inches to twenty-five inches. The average for the
Bonnell Ranch is somewhat lower, due to the lower altitude.
Bioti~ P~’ov~ce. The site is in the eastern periphery of the
Navahonian biotic province as defined by Dice.3 Some fifty
miles to the east is the Kansan Province, which is the shortgrass region covering the southern part of the semi-arid
Great Plains. The Navahonian Province is characterized by
pinon and juniper woodland. The pinon-juniper growth is
in clumps, with the intermediate area being covered by
grasses and small scrub bushes. The most common grass is
blue gama, associate~d with which are a number of other
plants, such as narrow leafed yucca, prickly pears, and
milk-weeds.4
Game animals that inhabit the immediate vicinity are
deer, antelope, mountain sheep, and cougar. There are also
numerous small animals such as rabbit, squirrel, skunks,
porcupines, and bats.
Grozvi~zg Season. The growing season is somewhat related
to altitudes, but sheltered valleys give a longer growing
season than would be expected at high altitudes. The growing season at Bonnell extends from May 2 to October 20,
or one hundred and sixty-one days. The temperature ranges
from 0° F. to 110° F.~ Below zero temperatures are rare in
the valley, although they are common in the hills and in the
Pecos Valley.
Water’. In the general area of southeastern New Mexico
surface water is not plentiful at the present, and probably
little was available to the aboriginal population. A few
springs occur. Away from the main rivers, the few permanent mountain streams are quickly lost in the pourous valley
$. Dice. Lee R., The Biotic Provinces of No~rth America, Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Pres~, 1943, p. 39.
4. Bailey, Vernon. Life Zones and Crop Zones of New Mexico, Wv~hington : U. S.
Department of Agriculture, No. 15, 1913, l~p. "/-74.
5. Culver, C. A.. Co-op Observer. Ruido~o, New Mexico. personal correspondence.
October, 1950.

The Bonnel! Site

81

fill. The numerous shallow depressions which collect surface
run-off during the rainy season must have been the main
prehistoric water supply. Many contain water for several
months.
Contrary to the general situation, the water supply at the
Bonnell Ranch in prehistoric times may have been less
serious than elsewhere in the area, because there are springs
across the Ruidoso River from the ranch which have not
dried up since 1856, when weather records were begun in
the area. The Ruidoso River is considered a permanent
stream, although in dry years it only flows as far as Glencoe
or San Patricio. This means that even in dry years the Bennell Site was only a short distance from water, since it is
only two miles to Glencoe upstream, and San Patricio is
four miles downstream. The snow cover on the Sierra
Blanca range is available for stream flow after the spring
thaws.
Excavation. The Bonnell Site consists of a number of low
knolls, the result of successive occupations in local areas,
scattered over an area of approximately five acres along
the .edge of the mesa. The knolls are generally less than
four feet above the surrounding area. Five of the knolls are
well defined. The largest elevation, which is the easternmost,
was chosen for excavation. It is approximately one hundred
feet north and south and ninety feet east and west.
Excavation was done by members of three archaeological
field schools from Texas Technological College, under the
supervision of Dr. W. C. Holden. Actual field work was
directed by the author. The field schools were held in the
summers of 1950, 1951, and 1952, and each school had a
duration of five weeks. Fill was removed in sections four
feet square and six inches deep. All dirt was troweled and
screened.

Previov.s Work in the Area. Archaeological investigation
of this area started in 1925; however few scientific excavations have been carried out. A definite archaeological
picture has not been formed to date. Since excellent sum-

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

82

maries of the pertinent published material are available to
the reader in other bulletins,6 such an anotated bibliography
will be omitted here.
Houses

There was probably a long occupational period at Bonnell
as is evidenced by the depth of the fill, which reaches five
and one-half feet in thickness. There was a superimposition
of house floors throughout the fill. A basic pattern is discernable in the structure of most of the houses. Not all of
the houses show all of the features, and each of the features
has a wide range of variations; however, there is enough
consistency in construction to allow the definition of a basic
pattern, which follows:
1. The house is usually partially subterranean, with the
floors being from three inches to twenty-two inches below
the ground surface at the time of occupation. Some of the
pits have straight, well-plastered walls and level floors.
others have irregular walls and rough floors.
2. Four central posts carry the weight of the roof. These
are fairly large posts that are set in the soil at a depth of
eight to twenty-five inches. Usually these posts are pine or
cottonwood. Cross beams are placed between these central
posts, and these cross beams carry the roof (Figure 5).

FI GU]t~E 5
Diagram

of

house-type,

]]onnell

Site.

6. Consult: Lehmer, Donald J., The 3ornada Branch of the ]~|ogollon, Tuc~n:
The University of Arizon Prc~. Social Science Bulletin, I~o. 17, 1948.
Mera, Ho P., An Outline of Ceramic Development~ in Southern and Southeastern
New Mexico, Santa Fe: Laboratory of Anthropology, 1943. Technical Series, Bulletin
No. 1.

The Bonnel! Site

3.

83

Secondary posts of cedar are set in the room at irrego

ular intervals. These are sometimes used in the wall; in this
case, the posts were set close to the wall, and slanted toward
the cross beams. Small wall posts could be set at the floor
level or in the ground outside of the pit. Many small post~
were found that could not have been used in wall construc~
tion; they were probably associated with the various domestic affairs.
4. The fire area is centrally located. Construction varie~
from deep, well-plastered pits of less than a ten inch diameter to large shallow depressions with an irregular outline
covering an area thirty-six inches across.
5. The superstruct~ure of the building was made by
placing poles at intervals of eight to twenty inches apar~
at the outer edge of the building. Presumably the walls:,
were completed by interweaving brush through the poles
and plastering. These small poles were usually not deeply
embedded in the earth, but set in shallow depressions. Evidence for the covering of brush and clay is found in the’
form of large pieces of baked clay with reed and brush
impressions on them, and layers of charred reeds in the
roof fall-in of buildings.
Construction Timber. The timber used in house construc-.
tion consists of cedar, pine, and cottonwood. Cottonwoods~
grow along the Ruidoso River at the present time, and hence"
were available within one-quarter of a mile. The cedar is
native to these hills, and is also readily available; however"
the nearest pine at the present time is on the higher slope~
of the Sierra Blanca Mountains.
Discussion of Individual Houses. House 1 (See Figure 4)..
This is the largest pit house encountered. This floor level is"
five feet five inches below the present ground surface. It:
measures twenty-one feet eleven inches by twenty-two fee~
two inches. In depth, the pit varies from twenty-one inches’
to twenty-two inches. Walls are straight and well-plastered"
with a light colored clay. The floor has been likewise plas-

84

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

FIGURE 4

Floor pla~s of Bonue]! Site rooms,

The Bonnet! Site

tered until hard and level. The walls of the building are
placed nearly square to the points of the compass.
Four large posts formed a square in the central part of
the room. All of these post holes had a diameter of between
eleven inches and sixteen inches. These formed the basis for
the cross beams of the roof. A few disintegrated fragments
of the wood remained in each hole. On the east side, between the two major posts, was a large supporting post of
white pine which had not been set in a post hole, but merely
rested on the floor. It is about ten inches in diameter and
had been burned to within some two inches of the floor.
Secondary posts were located around the edge of the
walls, and some were in the room proper: Wall posts were
laced both at the floor level and at the top of the pit.
ften, the post was embedded at the floor level, and
cessed into the wall, so that the wall plaster covered the
pole. Cedar was used for these posts.

~

Five small posts were set in the room (Figure 4). These
could have been used to hang things on, or they could have
been used for some domestic purpose that is not now discernable.
~Roof construction is thought to be the same as the walls.
Small poles of two to four inch diameter were used on
rafters across the large supporting roof beams, spaced about
sixteen to eighteen inches apart. This was topped by small
poles laid close together and covered with brush or reeds.
The whole was covered by a thick layer of clay. This provided a well insulated dwelling. One charred end of a large
cross beam was found in the northwest corner of the pit
house. It was cottonwood with a diameter of twenty inches.
This beam showed evidence of being worked into a plank;
it has a rather uniform thickness of three inches. Undoubtedly there was an air vent in the roof above the fire pit.
The fire pit of this house was roughly in the center of the
room. It has a sixteen inch diameter, and is six inches deep
at the center. This fire place has the shape of a gently

86

Texo-~ ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

rounded bowl; and the interior is smoothly and heavily
plastered.
Artifacts encountered in this pit house include pottery,
bone objects, and stone implements. Numerous pottery
sherds were found of the local types, such as E1 Paso ware,
Plain Brown ware, Chupadero Black-on-White, Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, and Lincoln Black-on-Red. Two complete pottery vessels were recovered. One is a Chupadero
Black-on-White jug which was sitti.ng in the southeast
corner (Plate 16, A). This jug is eight inches tall and seven
and one-half inches in diameter. In direct association with
the jug were six bone gaming pieces. The other pottery
vessel is Lincoln Black-on-Red; however, it lacks the characteristic black design. This bowl is seven inches in diameter and two and five-eighths inches high. Three bone awls
were found, two of which are split long bones, while the
other is a deer ulna awl with the effigy of a mountain sheep
carved on the handle (Plate 17, b). Three crude hammerstones and a fragmentary arrow shaft straightener are the
stone implements associated with this house.
House 2 was occupied later than House 1, because it is
higher in the stratigraphy of the site, and the east side
overlaps the outline of the first house (Figure 4). Three
occupational periods of this room are indicated by three
floor levels. The earliest floor is about two and one-half feet
below the present surface. There are eight inches of fill
between this and the middle floor level. The latest floor
level is separated from the middle floor by three inches of
fill. Each of the floors is of hard packed clay. The house was
built in a pit. On the south side an adobe wall had been built
which was nineteen inches wide, and two feet high at the
time of the first occupation. The wall remained the same
height for the subsequent occupation, hence the pit became
more shallow as the fill accumulated. The other walls of
the pit seem irregular; however, it is diffic~flt to discern the
original height of the pit as the area has been disturbed by
previous digging. The adobe wall on the south served as the
partition between rooms two and three (Figure 4).

A, r~om 15: Bo ~t h~le de~ig~ |~ are~t t~tw~ r~ont I a~d r~m 15~

The Bonnel! Si~e

89

Four central posts were present at all three floor levels,
as were secondary posts. Set in the south adobe wall are
depressions where small poles had been set. Some of these
post holes were four inches deep, while others were only
two inches in depth. Presumably the usual construction of
poles slanting from the ground to the cross beams and covered with brush and mud was followed. Charred vigas found
on the floor indicate that the cross poles of the roof ran
north and south.
The fireplace for the first, or earliest, occupation had a
diameter of ten inches .and was ten inches deep. The walls
of the firepit were straight and well-plastered. There was a
layer of caked ashes in the bottom. The middle floor level
used the same fire pit, building up the sides until the pit
was eighteen inches deep, and the same diameter as the
earlier one. Again the sides are smooth and plastered. The
latest occupation sealed up the old fire pit and had a shallow
depression ten inches in diameter and two inches deep, in
which were found some ashes and charcoal. It was located
above the previous fireplaces. All three of the fireplaces are
located close to the center of the room.
House 3 is located directly south of House 2 (Figure 4),
and they are separated by the common adobe wall. Dimensions of this house are twelve and one-half feet by thirteen
feet. The floor is three feet below the present surface of the
ground. The house is set in a pit that was about twelve
inches deep at the time of occupation. The room has been
refloored once; there is only one inch between the two floors,
which indidates that there was no time lapse between the
two occupations. Both of the floors are smooth and made of
hard clay.
Four centrally located post holes carried the weight of the
roof: The southwest post hole is twenty inches deep and has
a fifteen inch diameter. The southeast one is fifteen inches
deep and eight inches in diameter; the northeast hole is
seven inches deep and has a seven inch diameter; the north-

9O

Texas A~ch~o~ogica! and Paleontological Society

west post hole is fourteen inches deep and six inches in
diameter. Fragments of cedar posts were found in the holes.
All of the secondary posts are located close to the walls
(Figure 4). There is a concentration of large, deep post holes
on the west side of the building. In both the southwest and
the northwest corners were double posts. This could indicate
that more of the weight of the walls and roof were carried
on this side.
From the charred vigas and burned clay that had fallen
into the room, it is presumed that the walls and roof were
completed by placing poles across the large cross beams,
covering these with smaller poles, and topping with mud or
clay.
The fire pit has a twelve inch diameter at the surface, and
a seven inch diameter at the bottom of the pit. In depth, it
measures nine and one-half inches. The interior has been
well plastered, and the bottom had a layer four inches thick
of caked ashes.
House 4 is directly south of houses 2 and 3; however, it belongs to an earlier occupation than either. The floor is five
feet below the present surface of the ground. This house has
an irregular shape. The west wall is ten feet long; the east
wall is thirteen feet ten inches long; the south wall is twelve
feet four inches long; and the north wall is twelve feet nine
inches long. The house was placed in a pit that had been dug
into the gravel. The surface of the gravel was uneven, hence
the depth of the pit varied from seventeen inches on the
east side to twenty-three inches on the north side.
The floor of the pit was rough and was somewhat higher
at the edges of the room, and having the greatest depression
at the center of the room. The rough gravel bottom was
covered by a thin layer of clay that has been worn away in
many places. The walls of the pit had large stream rocks
protruding. No effort had been made to effect a smooth wall;
although some plaster had been irregularly applied.

The Bonnell Site

91

Four central posts formed a rough square in the center
of the room that measured approximately five feet nine
inches. These post holes varied in depth from eighteen
inches to twenty-three inches; and they varied in diameter
from seven to nine inches. There are no secondary posts in
this house. If any small posts were present, they were set on
the ground level of the pit and have been obliterated by
later occupations.
No definite fire pit was in this house. Instead, there was a
~large depressed area in the center of the room where the
fire had been. This area is twenty-eight inches from north
to south and nineteen inches from east to west. In this area
the clay of the floor has been burned to a bright orange, and
there are ashes and charcoal.
In the extreme northwest corner a burial was found. A
hole had been dug through the floor to a depth of thirteen
inches. The opening in the floor measured twenty-four
inches north and south and eighteen inches east and west.
The skeleton was a child of approximately five years. The
body was in a tightly flexed position with the head oriented
to the north. The floor had been sealed after the burial,
which would indicate that the house had been abandoned
after the burial.
House 5 was not followed to the limits of the ~valls because
of previous digging. However, it was possible to ascertain
the p~osition of the four central posts, the fire area, and the
depth of the pit on one side. This house is located south of
House 1 and east of House 3 (Figure 4). This floor level is
thirty inches below the present surface. According to stratigraphy, this house was occupied about the same time as the
lower level of House 2.
Outside dimensions of the room are not available. The
central posts form a rectangle seven feet two inches from
east to west, and the east side of the rectangle is six feet
while the west side is four and one-half feet. These posts
averaged six inches in diameter. Approximately in the cen-

92

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

ter is a bed of ashes. These ashes were caked in an area
twenty-four by eighteen inches. This is the only fire place
associated with this house. The floor was plastered and had
been smooth and even. From the one wall that was found,
it is presumed that this house was in a shallow pit, only
three to four inches deep.
Artifacts associated with this house are a large unidentified bone implement (Plate 17, k), a flat metate fifteen
inches long and nine inches wide, and a mano eight and
one-fourth inches long.
House 6 is approximately square, and is eleven feet north
and south and nine and one-half feet east and west. The
floor level is just above the undisturbed gravel. The house
was no doubt occupied at the same time as House 5 and has
similar characteristics.
Houses 7 and 8 are structures with slab stone walls. These
two rooms have rock walls on two sides. The walls are
formed by large rocks, sometimes measuring eighteen by
eight inches. These are stacked on edge in two or more
courses, being only one rock in thickness. Two such walls
were encountered, one running north and south, the other
running east and west (Plate 12, a and c). The north-south
wall is made of larger rocks, is higher and is in a better state
of preservation. The other wall, which has been subjected
to erosion at the southern edge of the mesa, was made of
smaller, rounder stones. The walls were nearly perpendicular to each other, forming a pattern like a "T". The top of
the "T" runs east-west on the south of the mesa, with the
perpendicular piece running north from the south wall.
Plaster is not present on any of the rocks in the walls. Two
adjacent rooms were formed by these walls, the north-south
wall being the common wall (Fig. 4). There are two levels
of occupation in room 8 with four inches of fill between.
Room 7 did not have a fire place. Each occupational level of
room 8 had a fire place, with the upper one being about two
feet to the northeast of the lower one. Both of the fire pits
of room 8 have diameters of thirteen to fifteen inches and a

The Bonnell Site

95

depth of four to five inches (Plate 12, b). The walls of the
fire pits are straight but unplastered.
South of the southern wall are small projections that
could have been used for storage bins, but nothing was
found in any of them. Just south of the wall of the east room
was a shallow pit in the gravel that contained sherds of E1
Paso pottery, all fire-blackened.
The remaining walls of these houses were supported by
posts. These two rooms were not placed in pits, but the
packed clay of the floor was placed directly on the ground.
Artifacts found in association with the stone walled houses
are identical to those found in the other structures.
House 9 was oblong in shape, being nine feet north and
south and thirteen feet six inches east and west. Its floor
level was just above the undisturbed gravel deposit.and was
well made and easy to trace. On the south edge of the room
is an adobe base wall twelve inches wide and fourteen inches
wide (Fig. 4). The fire place is twelve inches in diameter
and four inches deep, and is well plastered.

Ho~es 10, 11, and 12 are similar,to 5 and 6 and belong to
the same occupational level.
Hoarse 13 belongs to lower, or original occupational level
with its floor being on the undisturbed formation, and being
eighteen to twenty-four inches below the present surface.
The room is approximately thirteen feet north and south
and seventeen feet east and west. Six cedar posts were found
in their original positions within the room. Four of them
were center posts and two with the same spacing and alignment were adjacent to the west wall. There were no corresponding posts or holes near the east wall. The fire pit,
approximately in the center of the room, was well-made and
plastered with clay. An unusual amount of pottery shards
were found immediately on the floor. Two or three ollas
were broken on the floor at the close of, or after, the room’s
last occupation.

96

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological Socie~g

House 14 differs from all the others described in this paper
in that it belonged to the upper, or most recent, occupatiom
Its floor level was six inches below the present surface and
is eighteen inches above the levels of Houses 5, 6, 16, and
13. The dimensions of the room are sixteen by ten feet. The
floor is poorly made, indistinct, and hard to follow. The fire
place, located off center, was rough and poorly made. A pit
was dug in the southeast corner of the room, and fifteen
inches below the floor level, another floor of excellent make
was found. In al! likelihood house 14 is superimposed on the
fill above another house which belongs to the same period
as houses 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13.
House 15 is similar in every respect to house 1, only slightly smaller in dimensions, being eighteen feet square. The
original builders had excavated a pit two feet deep, quite
a chore for them considering the hardness of the riverdeposited gravel and boulder formation. A beautiful, smooth,
hard floor had been laid on gravel bottom. Since the house
was abandoned, from eighteen to twenty-four inches of fill
has accumulated above the original ground level, or from
three and one-half to four feet above the floor level.
Obviously the interior of the room burned out shortly
after its abandonment. The charred bases of the four center
posts are still in place. These extend above the floor level
from four to eighteen inches and vary in diameter from
nine to twelve inches (Plate 11, a). On the floor was a segment of roof beam about two feet long and fourteen inches
in diameter. It had doubtless been the beam which connected
the tops of the two west center posts. It had not been charred and was in badly disintegrated form. However, its dimensions were easy to measure.
In the center was a bowl shaped, beautifully plastered
fire place with its top flush with the floor save for a slight
elevation of the rim an inch high and two inches wide. One
foot to the east of the round, central fire place was another,
oblong, with each of the four sides formed by a flat stone

The Bo~e~ ~i~e

~

on edge. The inside dimensions were six by eleven inches.
Both fire places were filled with ashes.
The west wall still retained the original plaster which had
been covered with successive layers of greyish wash. In one
place five thin layers of the wash were intact.
At floor level in the southwest corner was a niche eleven
inches wide and ten inches high. As it extends back, to a
depth of fourteen inches, it slopes downward to a depth of
five inches. The bottom and sides were plastered. The niche
contained a number of pot shards, two pieces of yellow
ochre, and one piece of dark red paint. This niche is similar
to one found in the northwest corner of house 1. Of interest
is a hole in the floor two inches in diameter and nine inches
deep. It is located eighteen inches east of the southeast center post. (Plate 11, A).
S~mmar~j of obse~atio~s on ho~ses. There were two major periods of occupation, the lower, or older period, and the
upper, or later period. An interval of unknown length intervaned between the major occupations. The houses of the
lower occupation followed a similar pattern with a central
fire place, four center posts, leaning side walls for the parts
above ground, and well-made, smooth, compact floors.
Houses of the upper occupation were poorly made, varied
considerably in shape and size, with floors indistinct and
often difficult to trace, small posts, and without well-defined
fire places. There is some evidence that some of the houses
of the later period were rather flimsy, jacal-like structures.
(See post hole pattern in Plate 11, b).

The number of houses of the second occupation, superimposed over those shown in Figure 4 (with the exception of
house 14 which is an upper level room) probably outnumber
the lower level rooms shown. The upper level rooms, with
the exceptien of house 14, are plotted due to the fact that
their floors and boundaries were so indistinct that they
could not be mapped with certainty. Their existence was
indicated by scores of posts and post holes whose bottoms

98

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

terminated in the fill above the floor levels of the lower
rooms. The posts in the upper, looser fill often had rock footings. (Plate 12, d).
Pottery
At the Bonnell Site, as elsewhere in Southeastern New
Mexico, pottery provides the most useful and reliable basis
for cultural classification and dating. Over 100,000 sherds
have been collected from the site. Fifteen pottery types have
been identified, which are as follows: 7
E1 Paso Polychrome
Polished Brown
Plain Brown
Jornado Brown
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta
Lincoln Black-on-Red
Chupadero Black-on-White
Corrugated or Rubbed Coil Ware
Mimbres Black-on-White, Bold-Faced
Tularosa Black-on-White
Gila Polychrome
Playas Red Incised
Ramos Polychrome
Agua Fria Glaze-on-Red, or Rio Grande Glaze I
Heshotauthla Glaze-on-Red
Eight types are considered to be resident to the site because of their large occurence. These are E1 Paso Pol~chrome, Polished Brown, Plain t~rown, Jornado Brown,
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, Lincoln Black-on-Red, Chupadero Black-on-White, and corrugated. Mimbres Black-onWhite, Tularosa Black-on-White, Gila Polychrome, Playas
Red Incised, Ramos Polychrome, Rio Grande Glaze I, and
Heshotauthla Glaze are considered to be intrusives.
Brown ware is characteristic of the entire southern area
of the Southwest. E1 Paso Polychrome, Polished Brown,
7. A type collection was identified by Dr. H. P. Mera, Erlk Reed, and Stanley
Stubbs in Santa Fe, August0 1950.

h

The Bonnell Site

101

Plain Brown, and Jornado Brown are identified with the
Jornado culture. Typological differences of the four brown
wares are indefinite at the present time, consequently a
thorough sherd analysis was not possible. Morphological
differences used in distinguishing the four types in this
paper are as follows. E1 Paso Polychrome has a paste that
is gray to black with coarse sand tempering.8 The decoration is red and/or black on brown. Jar rims are thickened
everted (Plate 15, b, d). Walls of the vessels are thin, averaging one-eighth inch in thickness. The most common form
of E1 Paso pottery is the ella or jar (Plate 16, d).
Polished Brown ware has an even paste that is medium
brown in color. The walls of the ollas are about one-fourth
inch thick, which is decidedly thicker than E1 Paso Polychrome. The outside of the jar is a highly polished brown;
the inside of the jar has been scraped smooth. Ollas are the
only form of this ware present at Bonnell.
Plain Brown ware has a light brown paste that is fairly
regular in texture. The vessels are crude and irregularly
made. Usually there is no decoration, but incising and puncrating occur. Walls vary in thickness, but in general they
are about one-fourth inch thick. This ware is the most crude
of the four brown ware types, and more individual variation occurs.
Jornado Brown ware has a black to brown paste of grainy
texture. It is thicker than E1 Paso Polychrome, and is always
in the ella form. Crudely made, it sometimes has a black or
red design of no special form.
Approximately fifty per cent of the Bonnell pottery is
brown ware. Plain Brown and Jornado Brown are the most
numerous. It must be remembered that most of the brown
ware was in the form of large ollas which would break into
more sherds than the smaller jars and bowls of the other
pottery types; hence it is possible that a sherd percentage

8.

~ennlnge. 1940.

102

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

does not give an accurate idea of the actual number of vessels belonging to each pottery type.
Broad- lined Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta comprises
the next most numerous ceramic group. The only known
form is the bowl (Plate 16, c). Rims are direct and flat; the
paste is even and tempered with fine sand. Decoration consists of a broad line applied to the bowl interior (Plate 15,
b, c). The time range begins before 1350 A. D. and ends
c~rca 1450 A. D. Thin-lined decoration is present on only a
few sherds.
Chupadero Black-on-White has a long time range, being
in existence from circa A. D. 1050 to 1650. This ware has a
gray paste with fine sand tempering. The characteristic design is alternating solid black and hatched areas (Plate 15,
b, j and k). The interior is usually given a rough finish by
brushing, which results in striated hnes on the interior surface. The base is a disc type, so called because a disc was
shaped apart from the rest of the vessel, to which the walls
of the jar or bowl were added. The most common form of
Chupadero Black-on-White at Bonnell is a jar with a flaring
rim (Plate 16, c); bowls with straight rims are also found.
On jars the handles are usually formed by two or three
pieces of rolled clay placed side by side. One small ladle of
Chupadero ware was found. This ware was in constant usage
during the occupation of the site.
Corrugated or rubbed coil ware occurs throughout southern New Mexico. This ware at Bonnell ranges from sharp
corrugation to a rubbed-over coil. In color, the range is dull
red to gray and black (Plate 15, B, e).
The paste of Lincoln Black-on-Red is like that of Three
Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, the main difference being in the
decoration. Lincoln Black-on-Red has a deeper red background on the interior and black line decoration (Plate 15,
B, b); however, sometimes, the bowls have the red slip on
the interior, but are lacking the black line decoration.

The Bonne/l Site

103

The remainder of the pottery types represent distinct intrusives, for only a few sherds of each type were found.
Although the intrusive wares are few in number, they give
the best available indication of outside contacts. They also
offer the best technique of dating the site through cross
dating with areas where the chronology has been fully
worked out.
Gila Polychrome occurs in both bowl and olla forms; it is
the second most numerous intrusive. Bowls have black-onwhite interiors, red exteriors, and flaring rims. Ollas have
black-on-white designs on the exterior and are red to yellow
on the interior. This ware, which comes from the Gila Valley
of Arizona, generally from the region about Safford and
west to Globe, has a time range of about A. D. 1350-1450
(Plate 15, B, m).
Mimbres Black on White is the most numerous type of intrusive pottery. It is the late Bold-Face type. There were
Mimbres villages as far east as Ruidoso, and it is likely that
sherds are from these nearby sites (Plate 15, B, f).
Tularosa Black-on-White has a harder paste than the Mimbres Black-on-White and the white is often crackled. The
hatching design is parallel to the area blacked in, and the
black often appears as brown (Plate 15 B, g).
Ramos Polychrome and Playas Red Incised are both from
Chihuahua (Plate 15, B, h and i). These two wares are commonly associated with Gila Polychrome, Chu_padero Blackon-White and St. Johns Polychrome, which would give it an
approximate date of 1350-1450.
Heshotauthla Glaze is represented by six sherds from the
same bowl. This ware is from Zuni, and slightly predates
Agua Fria Glaze-on-Red. It has a redder slip than the Agua
Fria Glaze-on-Red; in fact the slip is sometimes thick enough
to crackle.

Agua Fria Glaze-on.Red, or Rio Grande Glaze I, is a member of the Rio Grande Glaze group, the development of

104

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

which is well-known and accurately dated by dendrochronology. This Glaze I starts about A. D. 1350 and lasts until
1450. The fifteen sherds found at Bonnell probably come
from the southern portion of the glaze area, possibly the
Jornado del l~Iuerto. Since this pottery provides the most
precise date available for the Bonnell Site, it would indicate
that the occupation of the site includes this time period. The
dates of other intrusives also fall generally into this same
time range, and it seems that the closing occupancy was
approximately A. D. 1450. This is substantiated by the absence of Glaze H which would have reached the area by
this date.
Saint John’s Polychrome is rare in this complex, but one
practically complete bowl was found on the floor of room 13.
Ur~dentified sherds numbered approximately 1% of the
v~hole amount. Among these areseveral sherds of a polished
black ware. There is one unidentified black-on-red type.
Miscellaneous objects of pottery include three pipes of
undecorated brown ware, which are tubular and average
three inches in length. Three sherd discs could have been
used as pendants. Some have perforations near the top as
though for suspension and show wear around the holes,
while others have holes .in the center, or merely have a hole
started but not completely drilled. Usually the pottery is a
brown ware, but one black-on-red disc was found. One pottery pendant is in the "~orm of a triangle with notches on
each side; all of the edges are beveled (Plate 15, A, c).
Ground Stone Objects
Grinding and Pounding Implements. Three types of grinding stones occur at the Bonnell Site. They are a trough or
scoop metate, which has been ground with a backward and
forward motion, a flat metate that shows no sign of wear,
and a basin type milling stone which has been ground with
an elliptical or rotary motion. Fourteen grinding stones were
recovered.

The Bo~,~e~l Si~e

10’/

At the proximal end of each trough metate is a flat heel
about four inches in width (Plate 13, o). The distal end is
thinner than the proximal end and is open. This type of
metate averages eighteen inches in length and thirteen
inches in width. The actual basin is about fourteen by
eleven inches.
Basin milling stones average nineteen by sixteen inches.
Only one has the "heel" which occurs on the trough metates.
These all show grinding with an elliptical motion and have
a central basin about four inches in depth. One of these basin
milling stones has been worked on the sides and bottom to
a uniform thickness, while the others are very uneven, varying in thickness from four to seven inches.
The fiat metate is exceedingly ~well made. It m~asures
twenty-four inches in length, fifteen inches in width, aM is
two inches thick at the grinding section. It is of a finer gralm
than the other grinding stones, which are made of coarse
igneous rock. It also has a four inch "heel", which is elevated
one-half inch above the level grinding surface, and there is
no depression from grinding. On the reverse side of the
metate is the imprint of a large cloven hoof. The imprint is
four and one-half inches long.
Seventy-seven manos were recovered in the excavation,
plus fifty-five surface finds that were available for" analysis.
Manos include the two handed cylindrical type, a onehanded oval type, as well as some very large heavy cylindrical specimens. The two handed cylindrical manu" has a:
size range of six to nine inches in length and two to four"
inches in depth. These made up eight.y-two per cent of the;
total manos. This type of mano was probably used with’
trough metates, the mano covering the entire grinding sub,face (Plate 13, o). There is a great deal of variation in the
size uf theoval hand stones. They range from three to six
inches in diameter and from one and one-half to four inches
in depfh,~ and made upten per cent of the total number of
man6s. The~0val mano was probably used with ~ rotar~
¯ milling stone, covering only a part of the grindir~g surface_

108

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Only one flat mano was recovered. It is eleven inches in
length and varies from one-half to three-fourths inch in
thickness (Plate 13, n). This mano is well ground and has
copper oxide stains on one surface.
Three large heavy manos were found. They range in
length from thirteen and one-half inches to sixteen inches
and are five to six inches in width. These manos are exceedingly heavy, and of undetermined use.
Igneous rock was used to make all of the manos. Possible
sources of the material are igneous pebbles in the stream bed
or out-croppings of igneous dykes that appear at intervals
up and down the Ruidoso Valley.
One fragmentary pestle was recovered from the upper
occupation. It is four and one-half inches long; the grinding
surface measures three and one-half by two and threefourths inches. No mortars were found in the excavation,
but several are reported to be located in the large rocks in
the valley.
Axes. Nine full-grooved axes were recovered. Seven are
made from igneous rock and show signs of usage on the cutting edge. They vary in size and in workmanship. The smallest axe is four and three-fourths inches in length and shows
good workmanship. The largest axe is crudely made; it is
six and one-eighth inches long and four and one-fourth
inches wide and two and one-fourth inches thick. It has
been roughly peeked into shape, but the form is irregular.
One axe has been made from a mano, and merely had the
groove added. The best made axe is of a fine-grained rock
that is green in color (Plate 13, k). The blade shows no sign
of use and the axe is well-shaped.
Arrow-sha]t tools. The seven arrow-shaft tools from this
site are of a uniform type. Each has been made from a small
~welloshaped mano .and has a single groove running transversely across the upper surface (Plate 13, h). The lower
surface of the shaft tools is fiat and well-ground. The speci-

The Bonnell Site

109

mens average four and .one-fourth inches in length, three
inches in width, and two inches in thickness. The grooves
are uniformly made, being one-half inch in width and onefourth inch in depth.
Most of the arrow-shaft straighteners previously described
in the literature are much more elaborate. The site which
has yielded arrow tools most similar to those at Bormell is
the Bradfield Site in the Lower Tularosa Basin, where most
of the tools have one or two transverse grooves.
Hammerstones. No accurate count of the hammerstones
was kept; however, sixteen were noted. They are fashioned from battered nodules of igneous rock and are of
various sizes and shapes, showing heavy usage on the
various prominences (Plate 13, I).
Paint Palettes. Fourteen palettes were recovered, and
these occur in three distinguishable forms. One form is a
flat, unshaped stone slab that has adhering particles of red
and yellow ochre. This type averages six and one-half inches
in length. Another form is a shaped stone, with a central
depression two and one-half inches in diameter and onehalf inch in depth at the center (Plate 13, i). Three palettes
show this depression. The other form of palette, of which
only one specimen was found, is a piece of broken El Paso
pottery that had been used to mix yellow ochre.
Stone Ornaments. One stone pendant was recovered. It is
one and one-half inches in length and one and one-fourth
inches in width. It has an engraved human face in inverted
position and a hole for suspension at the top (Plate 15, A, a).
A turquoise pendant is three-fourths inch long and onehalf inch in width (Plate 15, A, d). It is light blue turquoise
with golden matrix, such as is found at Oro Grande, which
is in .the lower Tularosa Basin eighty miles southwest of
Bonnell. Four discoidal turquoise beads, as well as two small
masses of unworked turquoise, were also recovered.
One stone bead is made of a pink stone; it is three-fourths
inch in length, and is in the shape of a comma. A hole for

110

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

suspension is in the larger end. Two discoidal beads of
purple fluorite were found; they measure only one-fourth
inch in diameter. One small unworked mass of the material
was also present. These beads were associated with other
discoidal shell beads, and a Conus tinkler in House 8.
Miscellaneous Objects o] Stone. Three unidentified stone
objects are made of a stone that is not native to the mesa,
and thus were obviously imported. Each of the three specimens shows crude workmanship. They are in the shape of
an elongated rectangle with a cross-section measuring about
one and one-half inches square. One of these stones is
eleven and one-half inches in length (Plate 13, m), while
the other two are about four inches in length. Similar objects have been found ia the lYlimbres sites, but they are
usually made. It has been suggested that they are ceremonial s~ffs.~
One grooved ball-like object was encountered (Plate 13,
b). It is two and one-half inches long and two inches in
diameter. Around the center is a groove about three-fourths
inch wide and one-third inch deep. Its use is undetermined,
although it could have been used ~in a handicraft, such as
weaving, to weight a ball of yarn.
Fifteen granite pebbles were found. They vary from
three-fourths to two inches in diameter (Plate 13, e). Those
which show use could have been used in polishing pottery,
while others may have been gathered because of the varied
and attractive colors of the pebbles.
Chipped Stone
Scrapers. Twenty-four scrapers were present. Approximately two-thirds of these scrapers are side scrapers (Plate
13, a), while the others are end scrapers (Plate 13, c). The
largest scraper has a width of three and one-half inches,
while the smaller retouched flake scrapers measure one to
one-half inches. One scraper has a sharp graver point at
one end.
9.

Conversation with Mere, Santa Fe, 1950.

P L.ATI’; 15
A. Ornament-,t of shell. I~one, turquoi.~e, anti pottery from
tery typc~ of Bonnell Site.

Bonnell Site:

IL Pot-

The Bonnell Site

113

Gravers. Four gravers were recovered. All are small
flakes, averaging one and one-fourth inch in length, with
a sharp projection on one side.
Drills. Five stone drills were found (Plate 13, f and g).
The largest is two and one-half inches long.
Projectile Points. Ninety-five projectile points were recovered at Bonnell (Plate 14). Materials used in making the
points are white opal, chert, chalcedony, flint, Alibates flint
from the Canadian River of Texas, red jasper, and obsidian.
Most of the points are made from flint and chert. White
opal, jasper, and obsidian are found in only one or two
points each. They may be classified on a basis of form as
fonows.
Form
No. ol Point~
Triangular
4_........
Long triangular point
with indented base .__ 4........
Side-notched
55 ....
With concave base ............20 ........
With convex base ............. 21 .......
With straight base ............. 13 ...........
And base-notched
1
.21
Corner-notched
.24
Broken

Key to Plate 14
a

g
f, k, 1, m, n, p
q, s
C, t

r, u
e

b, d, h, i, j, o, v, w, x

The triangular point is one-half inch wide at the base and
one inch in length. It is made of flint (Plate 14, a). The four
long, narrow triangular points with indented bases vary in
length from three-fourths inch to one and one-half inches.
All exhibit fine chipping. White opal and obsidian are the
materials used in these points (Plate 14, g).
Side-notched points with concave bases measure from
three-fourths to one and five-eighths inches in length and
are three-eighths to five-eighths inches wide at the base.
Side-notched points with convex bases vary in length from
one inch to one and one-half inches and are one-half to threefourths inch wide at the base. All of these are made of flint

Texas ~rcheological a~d Paleontologica~ ~oc~etN

and chert. The side-notched points with straight bases usually exhibit fine chipping. In length, they vary from one and
one-fourth to one and three-fourths inches. When the three
varieties of side-notched points are grouped together, they
form the most numerous group of points found at the site.
Only one basal fragment of a side and base-notched point
was found. The base is one-half inch wide; the length cannot be determined (Plate 14, e).
Corner-notched points vary a great deal in size, shape and
workmanship (Plate 14, b, d, h, i, j, o, v, w, x). The smallest
point of this form is seven-eighths inch long and nine-sixteenths inch wide at the base (Plate 14, b) ; while the largest
is one and three-fourths inch long and one inch in width
(Plate 14, x). One Perdiz point was found (Plate 14, j) ; this
type is from the Big Bend of Texas.lo The asymmetrical
point (Plate 14, b) is common near Dimmit, Texas, but is
unreported elsewhere.l I
Objects of Bone
Bone Awls. Fifty-two bone awls were recovered from the
Bonnell site (Plate 17, b, c, and d). These include splinter
awls, split bone awls, and awls made from deer ulnae. They
vary according to size and the amount of work expended on
each. The largest awl is six and three-fourths inches long,
(Plate 17, c), while the average length is about four inches.
Several of them show an unusual amount of shaping and
polishing. For example, the awl in Plate 17, d is very slender,
having a diameter of one-fourth inch, is highly polished, and
both ends are shaped to a point. One fragment of an awl has
three light yellow bands running transversely around the
tip.
One split-bone awl is of particular interest. The proximal
end of this awl is carved to represent a human head with a

The Bonnell Site

115

mountain sheep head-dress (Plate 17, b). It is five inches
long and one and one-half inches wide at the broadest point,
and three-eighths inch thick at the top. The eyes are not
fashioned alike. On one side, the eye is diamond-shaped,
while on the other side it is roughly circular. Green stains
appear on both sides of the awl, and could have been caused
by copper oxide or some chemical action in the soil. In southeastern New Mexico this is the only object that has been
reported which shows a combination of human head and
mountain sheep crown. However, the mountain sheep motif
is known in the Penasco valley on a bodkin-shaped objectlz
in the Tularosa Basin on stone figurines,’3 and it is also reported in the Chupadero country to the north.’4 This awl
was found on the floor of House 1, which is the largest and
deepest pit house.
Needles. One bone needle was recovered. It is two and onehalf inches long, has a spherical head at one end, and the
opposite end is sharpened to a fine point.
Punches. Three antler punches were found. They each
show a great deal of use (Plate 17, j).
Gaming Sticks. Thirty-one gaming sticks were recovered.
There are two sizes of elongated oval sticks; one is about
one and one-half inches long (Plat6 17, 1), while the other is
three-fourths inch long (Plate 17, g). Both are usually onefourth inch wide. Three round gaming sticks have a diameter
of one-half inch. Each has a depression in the center of one
side that is about one-sixteenth inch in diameter (Plate
17, f).
Agricultural implements. There are three hoes made from
bison scapulae. These vary from seven to nine inches in
length (Plate 17, 1). Bone hoes have not been reported from
the immediate area, but stone hoes are found in the Tularosa
Basin at the Alamogordo Sites.1~ The scapular bone hoe is

12.
1~.
14.
15,

Jennings, 1940, p. 9.
Lehmer. 1948, 1~. 69.
Personal conversation with Mera, 1950.
Lehmer0 1948, p. 66.

116

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

common on the Southern Plains. One implement which is
seven inches long, and is also made of bison scapula, shows
longitudinal marks ~long one edge, as if it had been used
with a sawing motion (Plate 17, k).
Miscellaneous objects oj~ Bone. Two tubular bone beads
were found which are three-fourths inch long and onefourth inch in diameter. They show signs of polishing (Plate
17, a, g). A turkey leg bone whistle is three inches long with
an opening midway on one side (Plate 17, i). One spatulate
smoothing object was recovered (Plate 17, e). It is made
from a split long bone and shows a great deal of usage.
One unidentified object was made of a hollow long bone
(Plate 17, a). It is six inches long and three-fourths inch in
diameter. The bone has two longitudinal slits on one side.
Encircling lines are engraved at both ends and at the center.
To my knowledge, a similar object has not been reported
previously. It could hardly have functioned as a flute. Other
uses have been suggested, such as a hair ornament or some
type of weaving implement. This object was found in the
center of a group of rocks in association with a bone smoother (Plate 17, e) and a clay pipe.
Objects of Shell
Shell was used entirely for making ornaments. A number
of different shells were used. Mussel shells from the local
streams are utilized most, but specimens of GIycemeris,
Conus, and OIivella are also used.
Olivella shells are strung as beads (Plate 15, B, h). Of the
two hundred and twenty-seven OIivelIa beads found, two
hundred and twenty-three were associated with one burial;
this burial was a child who had a burial offering of a five
strand necklace of these beads as well as a "killed" Chupadero Black-on-White bowl.
Mussel shell was used for twenty-one ornaments of varied
shapes (Plate 15 B, c, d, i, j, k, 1, m, and n). Some of these are
well worked with the rough exterior removed to give a fin-

PLATI*; 16
OlIa anti bowl tyi~e~,

t~onne||

The Bonnell Site

119

ished appearance, while others are rough and relatively unshaped. One of these shell ornaments is roughly rectangular;
it. is one inch long and one-third inch wide. It is similar in
size and Shape to the bone gaming sticks, and could have
been used for the same purpose (Plate 15 B, d).
Two roughly triangular objects are made of a shell that is
three thirty-seconds of an inch thick. One is one and onefourth inches long (Plate 15 B, i), and the other is threefourths inch in length (Plate 15 B, k). Neither have a hole
for suspension.
In six instances, shell ornaments are engraved (Plate 15,
B, c, j, m, n). Four of these are in animal form, two representing fish (Plate 15, B, c), and one an animal such as a
prairie dog or a squirrel, and the other some type of fowl
(Plate 15, B, j). Two of these ornaments have holes drilled
in them so that they might be suspended as pendants.
Only one bracelet was found, and it is of the usual GIyce~neris variety (Plate 15 A, b). It was made by removing the
central part of the shell and grinding the remaining ring and
the hinge smooth. By-products of the manufacturing process
are absent, except for the local mussel shell, which encourages the belief that at least part of the work was done elsewhere.
A Conus shell tinkler was present. It is three-fourths inch
in length and one-half inch wide at the base. It has a small
hole drilled near the top for suspension.
Twenty discoidal beads were encountered, and the type
of shell used to make them cannot be determined. They are
small, having a diameter of one-eighth to one-fourth inch.
Food
Evidences of food at the Bonnell Site are meager, but
there is enough data to furnish an outline of the diet. Charred maize was found, although not in large quantities.
cause of the sedentary nature of the culture represented,
maize was probably an important food. The maize has rather

120

Tezas Archeological and Pa[eonto~ogica~ Society

slender cobs with small kernels; the row number is low,
usually six or eight. "From the total excavation only about a
quart and a half of charred maize was recovered. Most of
this was small and badly broken. Only one place at Bonnell
had any concentration of charred cobs, and here there were
ten cobs on a burned section of a flQor. The remainder of the
corn cobs were scattered throughout the excavation.
No beans or squash were found, although they were probably in use, because they are generally associated with the
maize complex in the Southwest.
Certain wild plants were probably gathered and used.
Seeds of the pitahaya ~were found. The pitahaya is a cactus
(Lema~reocereus thurber~) with an edible fruit. Charred
walnut sh~ells were also present.
Animal bones are plentiful. Most of the animal bones were
broken and some were split. The following animals were
identifie~ bison, deer, wolf, coyote, squirrel, jack-rabbit,
and turkey1 ~
Food was supplied by both hunting and agriculture. Since
agricultural remains are scarce, it seems that hunting was
more imp~rtant; however, there are too few projectile points
to permit the supposition that these people had a hunting
culture. It must be kept in mind ihat no refuse heap was
located, and hence a great deal of evidence is not available.
Burials
At the Bonnell Site burials are placed between houses or
under floors in graves only deep enough to accommodate
the body. Skeletons are in a flexed position on the side or
back with no particular orientation of the head in any direction. Grave offerings are rare, although they are occasionally present in the form of Olivella beads or ceramic burial
bowls.
16. A sample collection of animal bones was
th~ Texas Memorial Museum, Universi~, ~f Texas,

identified by Eugene C. Meat of

The Bon~eH ~te

121

Fifteen individuals were encountered in the excavation,
of which only three were adults. The others vary in age
from infancy to adolescence. Most of the skeletons are well
preserved, the bones being articulated and in the position in
which they were buried. Burials 4 and 14 were located under
floors. Burials No. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 were
between the houses.
Burial 1. This grave contained two individuals, both of
whom are children (Plate 18, c). One child is under six,
while the other is approximately, twelve. Both of the skeletons had apparently been in a flexed position; the exact
position could not be determined because of the disarticulated nature of the bones. The alignment of the grave is
north an_d south, and the grave measured forty inches in
length and twenty-five inches in width. A skull was located
at each end of the grave, and the bones of the bodies were
overlapped. Both skulls contained several body bones. In the
northern skull were sixteen vertebrae, several ribs, and a
scapula. This skull is also of interest because it has large
parietal foramina (Plate 18, a). These foramina are located
about one inch above the lambdoid suture, and measure
about one-fourth inch in diameter. This burial was located
west of House 7.
Burial 2. This

grave contained two children, one of whom

was about six years of age and the other only a few months
old (Plate 18, b). The burial had a north-south alignment,
and measured thirty-five inches in length and eighteen
inches in width. Both bodies lay on the back, with legs
flexed and arms extended, and the heads oriented to the
north. There were no grave offerings with either child. The
vertebral columns of the two individuals were in a straight
line, and there was a distance of seven inches between the
skeletons. The burial was placed northeast of House 10.
Burial 3. This was an incomplete burial of a child about
six years of age (Plate 18, d). The position of the body at:
the time of burial could not be discerned, since the bones

122

Texas Archeolog$cal and Paleontological Society

were not all present and were disarticulated. The alignment
of the grave was east and west, with the head to the west.
Burial 4. This is a single burial of a child placed on the
back with knees flexed. The alignment of the grave was east
and west, and it measured sixteen inches in length and ten
inches in width. The head was to the east. Grave offerings
included a small Chupadero Black-on-White bowl that was
placed over the face, and a strand of Olivella beads that had
been placed around the neck and over the chest of the individual. The Chupadero Black-on-White bowl is five and onehalf inches in diameter and rather crudely made. It had
been "killed" by knocking a small piece from the center of
the bottom of the vessel. The Olivella beads had four or five
strands. This burial was located under a house that is not
plotted because of the incomplete excavation. The floor had
been cut through, indicating that the burial was made at
the time of occupation.
Burial 5. This single burial contained a child between four
and six years of age. The grave was aligned east and west,
with the head to the east. The skeleton lay on its right side
with the legs flexed. The bones of the body had been badly
crushed, particularly the ribs. Burial 5 was located just east
of House 8, as was Burial 6.
Burial 6. This child was placed in a grave with an eastwest alignment. The body was almost fully flexed on the
left side. Orientation of the head was to the east. The skull
and rib cage had been crushed. This burial was located nine
inches to the north of Burial 5, and interment had been from
the same occupational level.
Burial 7. A foetus was located in a small grave with an
east-west alignment. The grave pit measured only seveh
inches in length and three and one-half inches in width.
The bones were so small as to be difficult to identify, and
the position of the body was not clearly discernable, although it appeared to have been flexed.

The Bonnell S~te

125

Burial 8. This was the burial of a child. Grave alignment
was east and west, with the head of the individual oriented
to the west. It contained one burial offering, a large Three
Rivers Red-on-Terracotta bowl, which had a diameter of
ten inches, and which had been placed over the face of the
child. Most of the body bones were missing, and those present were in a poor state of preservation.
Burial 9. Burned fragments of an infant skeleton were
found scattered throughout an area which measured thirtysix inches from north to south and sixteen inches from east
to west. The bones were broken and none of the skull was
recovered. Small discoidal beads were found scattered in
the surrounding soft. This is the only cremation found at
Bonnell.
Burial 10. An adult male was interred in this grave, which
had a north-south alignment. (Plate 18, e). The body was
placed on the back with legs flexed over the chest and arms
folded across the chest under the legs. Occipital deformation
is evident on the skull. Pathological bony growths are present on the skull, but no other bones of the body exhibit this
pathology. A large projection of bone is present on the lower
right parietal. A similar growth, although smaller, is on the
left parietal. The inferior external Occipital ridge shows an
abnormal projection. There are small growths in the facial
region, especially one on the nasal bone.
The skull is asymmetrical, the right side being larger.
There are two Wormian bones in the lambdoid suture, which
were presumably caused by the deformation. The sagital
suture had become obliterated in one small area; however,
the suture is very marked for the rest of its length. The
teeth are all present and contain no cavities. They show a
great deal of wear, especially on the incisors which are
shovel-shaped. All of the teeth have been worn down to an
even surface. Judging from the skull and teeth, the individual was probably thirty years of age at death.
Burial I1. This grave, which contained an individual of

126

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

advanced age, was oriented north and south, with the skull
to the north. Only the skull and some of the long bones were
present, and they were in a poor state of preservation..
Bur~.a! 12. The skeleton of a young child was found in this
burial. Body bones were scattered over a grave approximately three feet and fourteen inches wide. Orientation of
the grave was north-south, with the head to the north. The
body had been placed on the back, and was probably flexed;
however, the body bones were so scattered that the actual
burial position was undiscernable. Associated with the body
was a worked bone splinter three inches in length, a charred corn cob with eight rows, and pottery sherds of Chupadero Black-on-White and Heshotauthla Glaze.
Burial 13. A young adult female had been buried in a
flexed sitting position, in which the arms were crossed
over the pelvis and the knees drawn up against the chest.
The body faced east. The skull was not found; however, it
is probable that the skull had been uncovered by erosion
and was picked up by passing pot hunters. The scapulae
were located only three inches below the present surface of
the ground. A broken Chupadero Black-on-White bowl was
found in the fill around the shoulders of this female, indicating that she may have had a burial offering over her
head.
Burial 14. A child approximately five years of age had
been placed under the corner of the floor of House 4. The
grave was roughly two feet square; and it had been dug
into the native gravel that underlies the floor of this house.
Position of the body was on the back in a highly flexed position. The body was aligned north and south with the head
to the south. There are no grave offerings associated with
this burial.
Burial I5. This was a child about five years old found six
inches below the surface just east of room 9.

The Bo~e~ ~ite

12~

Co~el~s~o~
The Bonnell site was evacuated between 1350 and 1450.
This is shown by the presence of Rio Grande Glaze I and
the absence of Rio Grande Glaze II, which would have
reached the area by 1450. The opening date of the site cannot
be definitely established at the present. A fairly long occupatioh is indicated by the depth of .the fill, the superimposition of houses, and by the fact that to date, none of the
datable trade pottery has been recovered from the earliest

houses. A beginning date of c~ca 1200 is suggested.
The culture of the Bonnell inhabitants was sedentary, with
the economy depending on both agriculture a~d hunting.
Possibly there was some emphasis on hunting. Pit houses
at the site show a tendancy to become shallower toward the
end of the occupation. The earliest pit houses were between
fourteen and twenty-two inches in depth, while the later
ones were progressively shallower, until the most recent
houses were built on the surface or in a depression only
three inches deep.
The Bonnell Site belongs to the Jornado Branch of the
Mogollon~v. Geographically, the site is located on the northern periphery of the Jornado. In time, it falls into the San
Andres Phase of the Northern Area. Due to a lack of published material for sites in the Northern Area of the Jornado,
the material trait list is indefinite. The Bonnell Site has the
cultural complex that would be expected from a general
knowledge of the archaeology of the area; this site will contribute to a more detailed definition of the material culture
of this phase.
This site is very close to the line Where Pueblo and MogolIon influences meet. Some traits present at the Bonnell Site
having a southern or Mogollon origin are the pit houses,
brown ware pottery, and burial customs. Traits with a
Pueblo origin are the Chupadero Black-on-White pottery
full-grooved axes and the rock walls. While the Bonne11
The d~|nit~on of th~ are~ and the phs~m a~moc~ated with Jornado ar~ defin~
Lehrner. 1948.

128

Texa.~ Arch~ological and Paleontological Socie~

site shows this mixture of traits, it is predominantly of
southern origin. However, other sites within a fifty mile
radius that fall within the same time range have a much
stronger Pueblo influence18. When enough of these sites
have been excavated, there will be an excellent basis for
a study of the effect of the contact of the two cultures.
External contacts are indicated by the intrusive ~tems.
Trade pottery comes from northern Chihuahua, the Gila
area of southern Arizona, the Mimbres and Tularosa areas,
and from the Rio Grande pueblos. Alibates flint is from the
Canadian River of Texas; and the bison implements possibly have a Texas Panhandle or South Plains origin. Contact with the Texas Big Bend is indicated by the Perdiz
projectile point. Turquoise is present from Oro Grande to
the Southwest. Olivella beads are from the coast. Trait similarities and mutual intrusives would further suggest contacts with these contemporaneous cultures.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alves, Eileen E.
"A Small Ruin in New Mexico," Bulletin o] the Texas
Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society, Abilene, Texas, Volume 4, 1932, 11.40-43.
"Pottery of the E1 Paso Region," BuIIetin o] the Texas
ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society, Abilene, Texas, Volume 3, 1931, pp. 57-59.
"Shelter Caves of the E1 Paso District," Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Abilene, Texas, Volume 2, 1930, pp. 64-68.
Bailey, Vernon.
Li]e Zones and Crop Zones o] New Mexico, U. S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Biological Survey, Washington, D. C., Government Printing Office, 1913.
Bradfield, Wesley.
"Excavation in the Sacramentos," El Palacio, Santa Fe,
For example, Fall Ranch ~t Capitan, and Bloom Mound at Roswe]l.

PLATE

The Bonnell Site

131

New Mexico, School of American Research, Volume
XXXVII, No. 1-7, 1929, pp. 3-6.
Cosgrove, C. B.
Survey Made For the El Paso Archaeological Society,
1925, Files of the Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas, Unpublished.
Haury, Emil W.
The Mogollon Culture of Southwestern New Mexico,
Globe, Arizona, Gila Pueblo, Medallion Papers No. XX,
1936.
Holden, W. C.
"Excavation of Saddleback Ruin," Bulletin of the Texas
ArcheoIogicaI and Paleontological Society, Abilene, Texas, Volume V, 1933, pp. 66-68.
Jennings, J. D.
A Variation of Southwestern Pueblo Culture, Santa Fe,
New Mexico, Laboratory of Anthropology, Technical
Series, Bulletin No. 10, 1940.
Kelley, J. Charles.
"Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House Structures in Western Texas," Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Abflene, Texas, VoN
ume 20, 1949, pp. 89-114.
"Excavation of a Presidio Pithouse," El Palacio, Santa
Fe, New Mexico, School of American Research, Vol..
XLIV, No. 10, 1939.
Lehmer, Donald J.
The Jornado Branch of the MogolIon, Tucson, Arizona~
University of Arizona, University of Arizona Bulletin,.
Volume Xl’X, No. 2, Social Science Bulletin No. 17, 1948.
Lewis, Thomas I-I.
"Some Artifacts From the Tularosa Basin of New Mexo.
ico," El Palacio, Santa Fe, New Mexico, School of Amer-ican Research, Volume 57, No. 7, 1950, pp. 198-203.
Mera, H. P.
An Outline of Ceramic Developments in Southern anti
Southeastern New Mexico, Santa Fe, New Mexico, Lab~

132

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

oratory of Anthropology, Technical Series, Bulletin No.
11, 1943.
Chupadero Black-on-White, Santa Fe, New Mexico, Laboratory of Anthropology, Technical Series, Bulletin No.
1, 1931.
W. S. Stallings, Jr.
Lincoln Black-on-Red, Santa Fe, New Mexico, Laboratory of Anthropology, Technical Series, Bulletin No..2,
1931.
Population Changes in the Rio Grande Glaze Area, Santa
Fe, New Mexico, Laboratory of Anthropology, Technical
Series, Bulletin No. 9, 1940.
"Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeastern New
Mexico," Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association, No. 51, 1938.
Roswell Archaeological Society.
Field Notes From 1932 to 1950, Roswell, New Mexico,
Roswell Museum. Unpublished.
Stallings, W. S., Jr.
El Paso PoIychrome, Santa Fe, New Mexico, Laboratory
of Anthropology, Technical Series, Bulletin No. 2, 1931.
"Notes on the Pueblo Culture of South Central New
Mexico and in the Vicinity of E1 Paso, Texas," American
Anthropologist, N. S., Volume 34, No. 1, Menasha, 1932,
pp. 67-78.
Stubbs, Stanley.
"Preliminary Report of Excavations Near La Luz and
Alamogordo, New Mexico," El Palacio, Santa Fe, New
Mexico, School of American Research, Vol. XXIX, No. 1,
1930, pp. 3-14.
Watson, Virginia.
"The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect," B~.dletin
o~ the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Lubbock, Texas, Volume 21, 1950, pp. 7-68.

