MASTODONS, MAMMOTHS, AND MAN
IN AMERICA
Hugo Gross
FOREWORD
Av,Ex D. K~nt
Dr. Gross is a German scholar of long experience in the
.problems of late Quaternary geology, climate, and paleontology
~n northern Europe. His interest in comparing the evidence
from Europe and North and South America for the time of
extinction of the mastodons and mammoths, and the age of the
archaeological remains associated with these animals, was
kindled by his tracing, in the museums of Germany, some of
the artifacts found in Missouri in 1838 by A. Koch, reportedly
associated with mastodon remains. We in America can greatly
benefit from the experience and perspective of Europeans in
these problems, for they have at their disposal a vastly greater,
highly integrated body of data derived from paleontology,
biology, geology, glaciology, pollen analysis, etc. in a much more
compact area. Our tentative geological datings for early cultural remains and the disappearance of now-extinct mammals
are derived from a few sites scattered over vast areas.
Although our perspectives are now improving rapidly with
more exact field reports and radiocarbon datings, comparisons
with European data should be of great additional value. Dr.
Gross has therefore consented to prepare thi~ article as a preliminary statement, to be enlarged and corrected by American
scholars, as further published material and ideas are made
available.
The manuscript I received from Dr. Gross in May has been
extensively re-written, with his approval. In view of ~he fact
that Dr. Gross, like many European scientists in recent years,
was working almost entirely with secondary American accounts and brief news releases in popular scientific journals
(due to the destruction of entire libraries during the war), %he
original manuscript seemed to me a remarkably well-balanced
treatment with shrewd insight into the strengths and weaknesses of each discovery and interpretation. Some sources not
available to him were entered in the text and bibliography,
but in order to keep the article to a reasonable length, no
attempt at complete documentation was made. To facilitate
future research on these intriguing problems, may I urge all
who read this article to forward to Dr. Gross any publications
you can spare which bear on these subjects in any way. His
address is: Kunigundendamm 59, Bamberg, Bavaria, Germany.

The problem of mastodon and elephant antiquity, and its
bearing on early prehistoric archaeology in America, has not
been solved satisfactorily. In 1935, John T. Sanford held

102

Texas Archaeo$ogica~ and Paleontological Society

that the Richmond mastodon skeleton in Indiana "is~ not
much over 5,000 years old and it may be considerably
younger than this."

Two years later the noted paleon-

tologist W. B. Scott maintained that many Pleistocene
mammals, including mastodons, "were in existence, only a
few centuries ago, in what is called historic times in the Old
World," because many a mastodon skeleton has been found
beneath only a few inches of peat.

Eiseley (1945) refutes

these datings, believing that the mastodon saw the recession of the ice-sheet from its outermost boundaries, but
that "his life span did not extend into the time of the
archaeologically known horizons." Yet Eiseley cannot date
the extinction of either mastodons or elephants in America.
Not a single mastodon site has yet been correctely dated
on geological evidence, stratigraphical research or pollen
analysis.
The latest comprehensive publications on early archaeology in America (Roberts, 1940; Wormington, 1949; Macgowan, 1950; Canals Frau, 1950) enumerate an astonishing
number of archaeological sites which have yielded remains
of Pleistocene proboscideans (mastodons and elephants),
implying both the contemporaneity of man with these mammals and the great antiquity of these sites. The first man
to maintain such a contemporaneity was a German immigrant, Albert C. Koch, more than a hundred years ago. He
is now forgotten in Germany but is often quoted in American papers and has recently been critically appreciated in
a meritorious treatise by Ashley-Montagu and Peterson
(1944). Not all of Koch’s data were correct (he was not a
trained paleontologist or geologist, but a trader in fossils),
but his observations were acute and cannot be ruled out for
this reason. They can be checked by his collections still
preserved at different museums, and his descriptions of the
circumstances of occurrence do not sound fictitious. Being
in a position to check some of Koch’s data, and having spent
many years in research in the late-glacial phenomena of
northern Germany (especially East Prussia), I take the
liberty of critically reviewing the investigations undertaken

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

in America to solve the problem indicated by the above
title, and of suggesting some re-examination.
The first site to yield a seeming primary association of
human artifacts and remains of an animal now extinct in
America was unearthed by Koch in the bottomlands of the
Bourbeuse River in Gasconade County, Missouri, in 1838.
At first it was taken for a mammoth (Koch, 1842), but later
(Koch, 1845, p. 68; 1857, 1860) it was ascribed to Mastodon
americanus.’ The skeleton was half-burned, covered by
plenty of ashes and cinders, and afterwards by a dark vegetal
mould eight to nine feet in thickness. Unfortunately an intermixture of bones found elsewhere in the region has perhaps slipped in, for Koch’s descriptions of the foot bones do
not agree with those of the mastodon, but rather (according
to the description by Stock, 1917) with those of the ground
sloth.~
Koch took for granted that ancient hunters killed this
mastodon mired in the clayey mud of the river bottom, tried
to destroy him by fire, and at last stoned and speared him
(for large stones were found upon and within the ash layer).
Curiously no one questioned this absurd conception of ancient hunters having annihilated .such a bulk of flesh in this
fashion; it is much more likely that a huge mastodon skeleton was found exposed, possibly by a spring freshet, and
Indians tried to destroy it by fire for superstitious reasons.
Such an interpretation may be substantiated by the notorious mastodon skeleton of Alangasi, Ecuador (Cuvieronius postremus) excavated in 1928 by the German F. Spillman, with the assistance for five days of the americanist
Max Uhle (Spillman, 1929 a, 1929 b; Uhle, 1930; Osborn,
1~: Koch ~1~57) stated : "The bones were snfficiently well preserved to enable me to
decide, l~ositiveIy, that they belonged to Mastodan giganteus ....
Some small
remains of the head were left unconsumed [by fire], but enough to show that they
belonged to the ~d:astodon."
2. Koch (1842) also ascribed" "toes armed with claws or nails" to his mastodon
from Benton County. Missourt:
However, his paper of 1845 refutes the belief that
"to Koch a ground sloth was as good as a mastodon."
He had excavated remains of
:Mylodon h~rlani and Megatherium before 1842 (Ashlsy-Montagu and Peter~on, 1944,
p. 412} and therefore cannot be suspected of not’ knowing the difference between
these remains.
Ashley-Montagu and Paterson arc mistaken in assuming that the
remains found by Koch in Ga,conade County were "almost certainly" those of tha
ground sloth Mylodon harIanl (Gravigrada).

104

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

1936, pp 566-572).

This skeleton (even the backbone) was

also found to be partly charred and covered by ashes, and the
underlying clay baked to a depth of 8 cm. Both Spillman and
Uhle maintained that Indians of the 2nd or 3rd century of the
Christian era had killed this mastodon (5 m. in length)
mired in the clayey mud of a valley bottom, and had roasted
it on the spot, without having cut it up.
It is curious that no one has yet refuted this idea.

The

Folsom hunters of 9,000 to 10,000 years ago are known to
have butchered the big bison they killed before consuming
the flesh (Roberts, 1936, pp. 15-16).

The late Aurignacian

hunters in Europe cut up mammoth game although their implements are scarcely superior to those of the Folsom
hunters; and most savages of today cut up their big game
before roasting it (confirmed by Prof. Krickeberg, personal
communication).
Thus, as in the case of Koch’s mastodon skeleton in Gasconade County, Missouri, the Indians at Alangasi apparently
found a huge fossil mastodon skeleton, perhaps exposed by
a spring freshet, and tried to destroy it by fire for superstitious reasons, then hurled stones, potsherds, and perhaps
other objects upon it.

Such a hypothesis might answer the

questions posed by Macgowan (1950, p. 145): "Although
there were no fewer than 152 broken pieces, they could
not be fitted into even one restored pot. Why? Further,
140 of these sherds were from a primitive type of pottery,
imperfectly fired, while 12 pieces were from an advanced
and decorated type which, in other locations, is supposed
to show Maya influence. Why should two varieties of potterywso widely separated in technique, and, presumably, in
age---appear at this one time?" The idea of magical destruction of an ancient skeleton by comparatively recent
Indians allows for the lapse of an unknown length of time
between the animal’s death and the deposition of the accompanying artifacts; the apparent association need not

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

105

have been a primary one.3 The Alangasi mastodon had two
healed injuries on the occiput, which suggested to Spillman
and Uhle that earlier hunters had wounded it, but such injuries might have been inflicted by the tusks of another
mastodon.
Koch (1860) indicated that he sold the skeletal remains,
stone artifacts,4 and soil samples from the Gasconade
County site to the Royal Museum of the University of Berlin. Prof. W. O. Dietrich, Director of the Museum fuer
Naturkunde in Berlin, was kind enough to search for them
at my request. He found numerous mastodon (not sloth)
bones and eight stone artifacts from Koch’s collections,
and sent the latter to me for examination. Four of these
(Plate 18, A, B, C, and D) are flint and inscribed "Missouri
Koch," as are the mastodon bones. The other four (Plate
18, E, F, G, and H) are chert and were sent by Prof. Dietrich "for the purpose of comparison"; they are labeled
"Feuersteinwaffen der Indianer. Harmann (?). Gasconade County, Mis., Nordamerika." "Harmann" is, of course,
the town of Hermann on the Missouri River more than 25
miles distant from the Bourbeuse River. All these artifacts show the same pressure flaking technique and little
evidence of the action of fire. Typological dating of such
a small assemblage is only possible by comparison with
ample collections in America.
I therefore sent photographs of Koch’s specimens to some American museums.
Miss H. M. Wormington, Curator of Archaeology at the
Denver Museum of Natural History, judged them as fol~
lows: "The artifacts do not resemble any of the earliest
forms. They are, however, very much like some of the
artifacts from some of the so-called Archaic levels. Farther
east some of these have been dated by the Carbon-14 method
3. A~ex D. Krieger. Archaeologist of the Unlversity of Texas, writes to me that
"’The controversy ha~ raged for ma.~y years whether the mastodon in Ecuador was
in primary a~soclatiop with the numerous potsherds found with it.
In view of
the ~otal situation in North and South America, I am extremely doubtful of such
an association with an extinct Pleistocene mammal."
4.
Koch described these as "Indian implements of war. as stone arrowheads,
tomahawks, etc .... a spear and axe, the spear corresponds precisely with our common Indian spear, the axe is different from any I have seen ..... broken spears,
¯axes, knives, etc."
They were found upon and within the ashes at the mastodon
site.

106

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

and the indications are that some of them may be more
than 5,000 years old."
Dr. 1t. G. Spier, Director of American Archaeology, University of .Missouri, kindly gave this opinion: "Our acquaintance with the earliest cultural horizons in 1Yiissouri
is still very slight, much poorer than for many other North
American areas. However, the artifacts which are said to
have been associated with the Mastodon remains (Plate
18, A, B, C, and D) bear general resemblance to artifacts
of the Hidden Valley Shelter Culture, a presumed early
culture in Jefferson County, Missouri. One of the other
points (Plate 18, G), photographed for comparison with the
Mastodon-associated artifacts, bears a strong resemblance
to a projectile point of the presumed early Dalton Culture of
Cole County, Missouri. .Jefferson and Cole County are
not far to. the east and west, respectively, of Gasconade
County. On the basis of these resemblances in the general
character of "the artifacts, I believe that it can be cateZ
gorically stated that the points (Plate 18, E, F, G, and H)
are ancient and are not the products of recent (19th century) Indians in Missouri."
Dr. Donald M. Johnson, Chief of Museum Division, Missouri 11esources Museum at Jefferson City, Missouri, kindly
gave me the following information: "Flint materials taken
from Jacob’s Cavern (three miles southeast of Pineville in
the southeastern corner of Missouri) are roughly identical
with the material in your photograph (Plate 18, A, B, C, and
D)."

The projectile points from this cavern were found in

the thick, loose cultural refuse (black earth) covering compact red clay. The excavators of 1921 found a partly decayed
left humerus of a Virginia (?) deer, the upper end broken

PLATE

18

A, B, C. and D, archaic spear points, first set inscribed "’Missouri Koch," found
by A. C. Koch in 1838 ul~on and wRhin the ashes covering a half burned mastodon

skeleton in Gas~onade County, Mo.
E, F. G. and ~’I, archaic chert spear points (second set) labelled "Feuerstoinwaffea
der Indianer, Harmann (?).
Gasconade County, Miso (Moo), lqordamerika."
They
were found together with the first set of A. B. C. and D. A]] are in the Geo]oglse~espalae~ntologisches Institut, Beriln.
I and J, archaic dart points from the site of the Richmond mastodon in Indiana,
Courtesy of the Buffalo Museu.m of Science,

PLAT~ 1~

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

109

and the lower end perforated from both sides. On this
bone are very primitive scratched designs of a mastodon on
one side, and of a bull moose and a "big river" on the other
~Allison, 1926, Figs. 20, 21). A physico-chemical examination by Allison (Idem,. p. 335) indicated that this bone and
its carvings must be far older than 3,000 years, and he conjectures that a minimum date would be 12,000 B. C. Unfortunately it was not found in an undisturbed layer, and
geological dating is impossible. The head of an Eskimotype harpoon of ivorys was found close by the carved
bone (D. M. Johnson, communication by letter). If Allison’s statement of authenticity is correct,s the mastodon
drawing from Jacob’s Cavern would be the only prehistoric representation of a mastodon in America, but it gives
no clue for measuring the lapse of time between the life
of this animal and the manufacture of the broad, stemmed
spear points similar to those found by Koch.
To Alex D. Krieger, Archaeologist, University of Texas,
am indebted for the following detailed information:
"As to the eight artifacts in your two photographs, all from Gasconade County, Missouri, it is my opinion that they do not represent any of the types which have been proved to be associated with
the mammoth, mastodon, sloth, or any other American mammal
now extinct. I can say without much hesitation that all of them are
typical of what we call the Archaic culture pattern of the whole
Easern United States region.
The broad projectile points with
broad stems are especially common in the Archaic pattern and
do not occur, so far as I know, in the late Pleistocene deposits on
the one hand, or continue very far into the earliest pottery cultures
on the other hand.
(In th,_’s terminology I am considering the end
of the Pleistocene to correspond with the beginning of the postglacial climatic optimum, probably about 5,000 B. C., more or less)
.... The earliest Archaic dates, as indicated by the radiocarbon
method, fall within the usual span given for the post-glacial optimum (about 5,000 to 2,000 B. C.), while the earliest pottery seems
~o belong entirely within a later period (variously termed the Neoglacial, Sub-Atlantic. Peat Bog, or Meditherma] age) which probably began about 2,000 B. C. Thus, I would think that all eight

5. This may be ’oompared with Plate 16
Collections, Vol. 100, 1940,

A, Fig. 6 in

Smithson|an

Miscellaneou~

6.
Dr. Frank I-I. It. Roberts, Jr., Associate Director, Bureau of
Ethnology, kindly writes that "’Most of the archaeologists in this country
studied the engraved bone from Jacob’s Cavern are of the opinion that the
of the mastodon is a fraud ....
A Ions review of Allison’s paper by N.
in which Nelson gives a number of reasons why he does not think the

American
who have
engraving
C. Nelson
mastodon

engraving is authentic was !~ub]ished in the American Anthro.nologlst, Vol. 30, No. 2,
1928." Nelson m~de a three-weeks excavation of his own at this site.

110

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

of the artifacts in your photographs would fall within roughly the
period between 4,000 and 2,000 B, C. They could, of course, come
somewhat later, but probably not much earlier.
"I think it is possible to state that there is no reliable evidence
that any of the large Pleistocene manunals survived the postglacial climatic optimum (now called by Antevs the Altitherma!
age in North America). Certainly there are many geological indications that great parts of North America were denuded during this
warm and arid period, the great grasslands widely destroyed, and
numerous lakes and small streams dried up. Such conditions
could account in large part for destruction of many large Pleistocene grazing animals, and the carnivores which preyed upon them.
"In conclusion, it is my opinion that the eight artifacts whizh
survive fr.om Koch’s Missouri collection are from a period at least
two or three thousand years later (and perhaps much more) than
the time of final extinction of the large mammals."

A clue in support of this opinion, as well as the dating of
Koch’s spear points, appears in the discovery of the Richmond mastodon in northeastern Indiana. The interpretation and dating published by Sanford (1935) who excavated these remains in 1930-31, must be considerably changed
according to European experience. The site, a small pond
drained long ago, is a shallow, roughly circular kettle-hole
sunk into giacio-fluvial outwash laid down in front of an
ice sheet half way between the Tazewe!l and Mankato
boundaries. The kettle-hole and pond therefore were gradually formed by the melting of an underlying lump of dead
ice. The beginning and completion of this process depended
upon the thickness and petrographic condition of the rubble sheath covering the dead ice block, and extended some
thousand years from the final period of the treeless tundra
(late glacial) phase up to the beginning of the post-glacial
warm period or optimum. In Europe this is demonstrated
by pollen-analysis, applying hydrofluoric acid to the oldest
n~ineral sediments, and computing the non-tree pollen
percentages. In North America the time of these phases was
perhaps somewhat shorter than in Europe.
The higher ground surrounding the kettle-hole had been
subject to prolonged weathering because the clay washed
from it by rain into the pond is lacking in calcite. The prerequisite of such a rain wash is a discontinuous vegetation
on the surrounding ground. A subarctic climate is also evidenced by the scattered stumps of the northern black spruce

Mastodons. M~mmoths. and Man in Americ~

1!1

(Picea mariana) near the margin of the initial pond. The
drowning of these trees was caused by melting of the
underlying dead ice block and the consequent subsidence
of the overburden. The clay C on the pond bottom graded
upward into peaty Clay B, and this layer into muck7 A, the
upper part of which has been disturbed by cultivation. The
boundary between layers C and B obviously indicates the
beginning of the post-glacial climatic amelioration, the
boundary between layers B and A the beginning of the postglacial warm period. Buried at depths ranging from one
foot to five feet (mostly at about two feet), the incomplete
mastodon remains lay disarticulated and scattered upon
the clay layer C. This clay precisely correlates with the upper
Dryas Clay of Europe, outwashed from decalcified soil of a
subarctic forest-tundra, as evidenced by stratigraphy. Layer
B, with preponderant organic material, indicates the beginning of the post-glacial or Recent. The upper Dryas Clay of
Europe was deposited during the final glaciation ("Schlussvereisung") dating (in Finoscandinavia) from about 8,800
to 8,100 B. C., according to geochronology. In North America this final glaciation was the Mankato substage of the
Wisconsin Glaciation, now ascertained by the radiocarbon
method to have reached its maximum about 11,000 years ago
(Arnold and Libby, 1951; Deevey, 1951) or about 9,000 B. C.
The scattered black spruces of the Richmond mastodon site
grew at the close of the Two Creeks Forest Bed interstadial
which is to be correlated with the Allerod interstadial of
Europe. The Richmond mastodon consequently died at the
close of the Wisconsin Glaciation around 8,000 B. C. or
somewhat earlier.
The position of the skull lying bottom side up, one tusk
standing vertically in the clay (here three feet f~hick) and
the tip broken off against the gravel below the clay, the
other tusk almost piercing the clay, certainly shows that
the skeletal remains had fallen off the pond ice-sheet when
it melted away in spring. The mastodon is likely to have
~/. The pol~ular term "muck" ought to be replaced in American scientific papers
by a more technical one ; at the above site it obviously means peaty mud (grovdetrltus~
g~ttja).

112

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

been coursed by a pack of carnivores, slid on the pond ice
and cracked one humerus (excavated in this condition),
and then been overcome and mangled by the beasts. Near
the mastodon bones were found fragments of charcoal and
a charred log; perhaps ancient hunters found the remains
of the carcass and tried to thaw it.
Two flint projectile points (Plate 18, Figs. I and J) were
found at a distance of about 15 and 20 feet, respectively,
from the skeleton. One was found in the same stratum with
the mastodon, the other in the basal part of the "muck." The
similarity of these points to some of those found by Koch
(Plate 18, Figs. A, B, C, D, E, F, G and H) will be immediately apparent and they would likewise seem to belong to the
Archaic culture, with dates of perhaps 5,000 years at the
most. If as evidenced by the different finding levels of the
spear points, they are not as old as the mastodon, they might
have reached their positions by being hurled at some game
in the pond long after the death of the mastodon.
H. F. Osborn’s map (1936, Fig. 123 b), reproduced here as
Figure 3 shows the distribution of mastodon remains in
North America and discloses that Mastodon amer~canus
still lived during the recession of the Wisconsin ice
sheet (as stated by Eiseley, 1945), and became extinct only
a short time after the Mankato maximum, probably by 7,500,
or at the latest by 7,000 B.C. Alberta, Saskatchewan, and
Quebec are devoid of mastodon sites, whereas if these
animals had still been living they could have followed the
retreating ice border far to the north. They had become
adapted to a subarctic environment for many millenia during the Wisconsin glaciation. This sudden extinction implies a climatic amelioration really catastrophic and comparable with the contemporaneous Finiglacial amelioration
in Europe. The mastodon in Alaska (one site) certainly
dates from an interglacial epoch, as do Panthera atrox and
MegaIonyx in Alaska (Flint, 1948, p: 524). When American pollen analysts apply hydrofluoric acid to the mineral
sediments of basal bog sections and compute the non-tree
pollen percentages and tree pollen frequency, they will often

Mastodons, Mammoths, and Man in America

113

WiTH ELEo
FIGURE 3
Distribution of the mastodon sites of the americanus in North America (according
to I-I. F. Osborn, 1936, fig. 123 b) ; and outermost expansion of the Wisconsin glaciation {accbrdlng to R. F. Flint, 1948).

be able to ascertain a late-glacial tundra or forest-tundra
phase in the periglacial area, as yet known only from Maine
(Deevey, 1949, pp. 1355, 1357; 1951). The forest sequences
suggested by Sears (1948, p. 331), based on pollen diagrams
from Ohio and Connecticutt during the 1Y~ankato substage,
certainly indicate forest-tundra.
Unfortunately the circumstances of occurrence in North
America are known for only very few mastodon sites. In

114

Texas A~chaeolog~cal a~i Paleontological Societ~

European areas freed from ice during the late-glacial period
there are a great many kettle-holes formed by melting of
underlying lumps of dead ice and filled with late glacial
sediments (clay, shell-marl, clayey or sandy mud, sometimes peaty mud and seldom peat) covered by a thin layer
of recent humus or clay which, therefore, yield remains of a
Pleistocene fauna at very shallow depths

(see Mitchell,

1951, as to the Irish Giant Deer); and the same is true of
some mastodon sites in which the embedding stratum was’
mostly clay or shell-marl (Koch, 1845, pp. 66, 68; Osborn,
1936, p. 788; Sanford, 1935).
Concerning Mastodon americanus Eise~ey (1945) held that
"we do know that his life span did not extend into the ti~e
of the archaeologically known horizons." Today this statement has just been refuted by radiocarbon datings of 10,000
years or slightly more published as yet for the most ancient
archaeological sites (Arnold and Libby, 1951; Roberts,
1951); this method recently indicated an age of 11,000 and
19,000 years, respectively, for the Folsom and Sandia layers
in Sandia Cave (Dr. Frank C. Itibben, oral communication),
and undoubtedly there are still older cultures which have
yet to be dated by a refined radiocarbon method. But the
fact remains that there have not been found any mastodon
mass kills comparable with the mammoth mass kills made
by late Aurignacian hunters in Czechoslovakia and southwestern Russia. However, from about 8,000 to 5,000 B. C.
(according to radiocarbon datings) several bison kills (comprising up to a hundred bison from a single site!) have
been unearthed in North America, associated with Folsom,
Plainview, and "Yuma" artifacts. Very few archaeological
s’.ites have yielded probably contemporary mastodon remains; and in many of these it is difficult to prove that
early hunters actually killed and butchered these animals.
Sometimes prehistoric hunters picked up fossil bones and
carried them to camp to use for making implements or for
use as fetiches, etc., and sometimes as the result of the same
collecting instinct that is found in people today (Roberts,
1940, p. 82, footnote). So far as I know, no archaeological

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

115

site has yielded mastodon bones split, charred, or burned by
contemporary man; the partly burned complete skeletons
may be explained in a different way, as I have shown above.
There are no authentic effigies of mastodons, either among
the mound builders of the Eastern United States from
3,000 ]3. C. onward

(Schellhas, 1908; Macgowan, 1950, p.

144), or in the Maya culture (Stromer, 1934), although both
regions abound in animal sculptures.

The real background

of Indian myths dealing with proboscideans lies in their
finding the fossil remains of these animals, in tales of negro
slaves, and in leading questions pumped into the Indians
by eighteenth century white men (Macgowan, 1950, p 143) o
Archaeological sites which yield mastodon remains associated with semi~ropicaI p~ants and animals require geological re-examination.

In 1840, Koch (1842, 1845, 1857)

excavated an almost complete mastodon skeleton (his Missourium theristocaulodon) associated with stone weapons
and buried apparently at the base of a bluff near the La
Pomme de Terre River, a tributary of the Osage River, in
Benton County, Missouri.

Here the river has cut a basin

some miles long and wide, filled with mineral sediments
somewhat beyond the Older Drift (unfortunately not yet
geologically surveyed).

Four layers of clay alternating

with three thin strata of limey gravel and sand as hard as
concrete, totaling twenty feet in thickness, covered a
stratum from four to six feet thick of "brown alluvial soil"
which contained the mastodon skeleton partly mingled with
the underlying quicksand. The brown alluvial soil "was
mixed with a great quantity of vegetal matter, and most of
this in a wonderful state of preservation; but what is still
more surprising, all of the vegetable remains are of tropical
or very low southern production. They consist of large
quantities of cypress burs, wood and bark; a great deal
of tropical swamp moss; several stumps of trees, if not logwood, yet bearing a close resemblance to it; even the greater

116

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

part of a flower of the StreIitzia class,s which, when destroyed, was not full blown; also several stems of palmetto
leaf,~ one possessing all the fibers in perfect condition or
nearly so ..... There was embedded immediately under the
femur .... an arrowhead of rose colored flint, resembling
those used by the American Indians but of larger size." In
the same stratum were found three more arrowheads of the
same form and one more "of very crude workmanship." At
least one of these five points is said to have been ~luted
(Ashley-Montagu and Peterson, 1944, p. 419) but unfortunately it could not be traced for verification. The semitropical plant remains argue in favor of Sangamon .age
rather than the post-glacial warm optimum; but we do not
know whether or not the brown alluvium overlies unconformably a much older stratum. The primary association of artifacts and mastodon remains, however, is unquestionable.
On the eastern coast of Florida, at Melbourne and Vero,
human bones and artifacts were excavated in the upper part
of layer No. 2, associated with remains of mastodon, two
elephant species, a tapir jaw (at Melbourne), and plant remains of living semitropical species. Layer 2 (Melbourne
bone bed which yielded at one locality 49 vertebrate species,
28 of which are extinct) has just b~en dated by Rouse (1951
pp. 31, 33) as "Early Postglacial up to about 1800 B. C." according to the changes in sea level, but these changes (and
more than these: the fossils) argue rather in favor of a
temperate Wisconsin interstadial as supposed by other
scientists (most probably Peorian) ; the human remains are
intrusive according to Rouse.
The Bee County sites in the Coastal Plain region of Texas
were buried in the basal part of a river terrace (compare
Melbourne and Vero layer 2), and yielded bones of mastodon, mammoth, horse, camel, bison, sloth, and artifacts
8. One of the 50 or 60 svecles of Heltconia (the only genus of Strelitzioideae in
Amerlc~) now growing in Central America, Colombia, Guiana, Peru, and the West
’:Indies. but absent from the Gulf Coast region of the Unitedl States (~L Winkler in
Engler-Prantl’s "Die ]’$atuerliahen Pflanzenfam~iien," Band 15a, 1930).
9. Sabal adansoniana, characteristic of the Cypress Swamp. which sl~reads northward to northern Louisana (Harshberger’s "’Vegetation der Erde." Band 13, 1911).

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

~ 17

which include an odd combination of projectile points:
fluted-lanceolate, unfluted-lanceolate, stemmed with large
corner notches, and a "Yuma" fragment which would now
be called a Scottsbluff point (Sellards, 1940). The vertebrate fauna is similar to the bone-bearing layer No. 2 at the
Vero and Melbourne sites in Florida and has been tentatively correlated with it (Sellards, 1940; Bryan, 1941 b). According to Sellards (1940, p. 1659) the geologic age of this
formation is definitely Pleistocene, and "one is inclined to
think of an interval of possibly two or three times 25,000
years."
Thus there are very few sites so far which have yielded
true or probably true primary association of mastodon and
man. It appears that the first immigrants did not contribute
anything to its extinction.
These inferences apply to the mammoth also. As is well
known, this name does not apply to the mammoth in the
European sense only (i. e., to Elephas primigenius) but to
all of several American species. Moreover, mammoth and
mastodon are sometimes confounded (compare Dunbar and
Schuchert, 1941, pp. 45 and 233), and American authors,
especially archaeologists, usually call the mammoth
"Elephas sp." even though molars are present. According
to Flint (1948, p. 360), "mammoths clearly did persist into
post-ice-sheet-time in North America," and Roberts (1951)
states that they were being hunted by early man.
During the Wisconsin Glaciation, Elephas (Mammonteus)
primigenius, the woolly mammoth, ranged southward only
to about 40° N. Lat. (Osborn, 1930, map on p. 230; 1942,
pp. 914, 1135, 1164, and Figs. 795, 1005, 1028). This is curious
because the arctic musk ox ranged southward to Texas and
southern New Mexico. This discrepancy may be due to
Osborn (1922) having assigned the woolly mammoth remains from about the 40th parallel southward into Mexico
to another species, EIephas (Parelephas) jeffersonii.~o
10.
In a communication by letter, Dr. K. D. Adam, Curator of paleontology
at the Staatlichen Museum fuer Naturkunde, Stuttgart, and expert in Elephas
taxonomy, considers the specific identification of Elephas (Parelephas) Jeffersonii
progressus (Osborn, 1924, from Ohio), floridanus (Osborn, 1929, from Florida), and
E. ~Mammonteus) primigenius, based on the molars.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

In the United States, remains of the woolly mammoth
have not been found in bogs, as have those of the mastodon (Flint, 1948, p. 523), even though E. primigenius, characteristic of Pleistocene tundra and steppe, might have been
able to live in a discontinuous forest-tundra (compare Field,
1948, p. 57). In Europe, too, remains of this mammoth have
not been found in late-glacial bogs. In western Europe, E.
pr~migenius became rare in early Magdalenian time and extinct in western and central Europe around middle Magdalenian time. He has not been found in the peat of the
middle Magdalenian site near Schussenquelle in southern
Germany, nor in the oldest bog sites of Holstein in northern
Germany, dating around 14,000 B. C. (earliest Gothiglacial
time). In Russia and Siberia he became extinct perhaps
somewhat later, but long before the close of the late-glacial
period; the paleolithic sites of eastern Siberia lack remains
of the woolly mammoth (Field, 1948, pp. 63, 64). Therefore
the absence of such remains in bogs of the United States
argues that this elephant died out before the formation of
bogs and swamps in the northeastern section, i. e., prior to
the Two Creeks Forest Bed interstadial, for which radiocarbon datings of about 9,000 to 10,500 B. C. have been
obtained (Arnold and Libby, 1951). The first bogs of the
Wisconsin periglacial and the late-glacial recession area are
not older than the bogs of northern Germany and Scandinavia, although the Wisconsin (Laurentide) ice sheet extended twelve degrees of latitude farther south than did
the Scandinavian ice-cap; but today the southern boundary
of the tundra zone in North America (in the Hudson Bay
region) also reaches twelve degrees farther south than
it does in northeastern Russia.
In Alaska alone, remains of the woolly mammoth have
been found with artifacts in frozen muck, e. g., near Fairbanks, Circle, and Chinitna Bay. According to Rainey
(1939, pp. 390-401) frozen muck from one to forty meters
thick covers many of the richest gold-bearing gravels on
the floors of stream valleys tributary to the main rivers.
It is thawed and sluiced off by hydraulic methods applied in
the modern large-scale placer operations which are strip-

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

119

ping wide cuts, often miles in length, along numerous
streams.
"The overburden of frozen muck which is made up largely of
fine mica silt from eroded schist bedrock also contains lenses of
gravel, sand, peat, volcanic ash, large quantities of vegetable matter, and often clear ice deposits. In addition to trees, stumps,
brush, moss, and other vegetable remains there are fresh water
mollusks as well as large numbers of mammal bones ..... No
regular stratification exists in the muck, but .... there were, apparently, separate flows of muck from higher slopes in the valley.
The flow of soil from upper slopes down into broad glacial stream
valleys, brought about by alternate freezing and thawing (a condition which can be observed at the present time in central Alaska),
may prove to be the explanation; if so, it is probable that some
vegetable as well as faunal remains in the muck have been redeposited, or moved down from the slopes during different advances." (Rainey, 1939, pp. 390-391).

This solifluction hypothesis apparently explains the
origin of these muck deposits far better than the suggestion
by Hibben (1943) that they are wind blown materials
from outwash plains of local glaciations, although this (and
downwashed material) probably were accessory.
Near Fairbanks there have been collected the frozen but
unfossilized bones of such living species as moose and caribou, and of such extinct mammals as woolly mammoth and
Pleistocene bison (both common), horse, mastodon, musk
ox (two species), sabre-toothed tiger, lion (Pan, hera atrox),
camel, gazelle, antelope, sloth (Megalonyx), an extinct bear,
rodents, and sheep. Part of this fauna (e. g., Panthera atrox,
Megalonyx, sabre-toothed tiger, mastodon) certainly should
date from an interglacial period, probably late Sangamon.
The radiocarbon method has given an age of more than
20,000 years for wood found under 80 to 100 feet of frozen
muck in the gold diggings at Eva Creek near Fairbanks
(Arnold and Libby, 1951, p. 118). Considering the mixture
of faunal remains from different periods, as unearthed by
the hydraulic giants, it will rarely be possible to prove their
primary association with artifacts.
A small stemmed projectile point decidedly younger than
the fluted points is reported to have been piped out of
"virgin gravel" at least 24 meters below the muck surface
(Rainey, 1939, p. 397). A few implements were found at

120

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

the base of the muck in frozen hummocks which often remain after the bulk of muck has been thawed and removed.
At some 20 meters below the surface a projectile point
allegedly lay in a depression of half the maxillary bone of
a young mastodon, but the latter shows no trace of injury
inflicted by the point (Rainey, 1939, pp. 397-398), so that a
primary association seems questionable.
The best evidence of woolly mammoth having been hunted
bY man in central Alaska seems to be "a deposit containing
over one hundred young mammoth teeth scattered over an
area a few meters in diameter," together with several burned
bone fragments (Rainey, 1939, p. 399). This is reminiscent
of the Predmost findings in Europe and was at the base of
muck some 20 meters thick on Ester Creek. Unfortunately,
no datable artifacts were found.
Macgowar~ (1950, pp. 119, 151) has described the frozen
muck at the foot of the volcano Iliamna near Chinitna Bay,
Alaska, as
".... an extraordinary formation four to one hundred feet deep.
Packed into it are masses of dismembered skeletons of the mammoth, a jaguar, and other extinct animals, acc.ompanied here and
there by ligaments of flesh and hair .... Their numbers are appalling. They lie frozen in ~angled masses interspersed with uprooted trees. They seem to have been torn apart and dismembered and then consolidated under catastrophic conditions. Yuma
and Plainview spear points and perhaps one Generalized Folsom
have been found in these chill beds. Skin, ligament, hair, flesh
can still be seen."

Here again the occurrence of interglacial fauna such as
Panthera atrox, and of artifacts probably no older than the
Mankato maximum, gives evidence of the mixing of materials of different ages.
So far as I can find out, there is no evidence in America
of mass kills of woolly mammoth comparable to those of
Czechoslovakia and southern Russia, except probably the
undated occurrence at Ester Creek mentioned above. There
is not a single incontestable case of man having hunted the
woolly mammoth in North America outside of Alaska, the
mammoths of the United States being of other species.

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

121

An astonishingly large number of sites in the United
States (a score or more) have, since 1931, yielded mammoth
remains with artifacts and/or human bones (Roberts, 1940;
Wormington, 1949; Macgowan, 1950). The species has in
most cases not been determined, however, except for E.
columbi at the Cowan Ranch in the Texas Panhandle (Sellards, 1938) and the skeletons from the Clovis site in eastern
New Mexico, which have been listed as E. columbi (Cotter,
1937 a) and as "Parelephas ? columbi Falconer" (Cotter,
1937 b) for the same remains. At both sites virtually complete skeletons were found and in direct association were
large fluted projectile points originally reported as "Folsomlike." These points should now be considered good examples of the Clovis Fluted type, rather than Folsom, and
there is evidence that they may be considerably older than
Folsom artifacts (A. D. Krieger, communication). Sellards
(1938, p. 1008) states that "Among the many sinks of the
High Plains, the one on the Cowan ranch, which contained
the artifacts in association with the fossil elephants, is
relatively old. It would not be surprising if it should prove
to be pre-Wisconsin in age. However, an exact determination of the age of these fossils must await correlation data
not now available."
E. columbi was reported some decades ago in ~wam~s of
Whitman County, Washington, outside the formerly glaciated area." This find ought to be dated by a competent
geologist.
Besides E. columbi, remains of E. (Archidiskodon) imperator and E. (Parelephas) jeffersonii have been reported from
archaeological sites in the western half of the United States
south of the 40th parallel and in Mexico. Unfortunately,
we don’t know reliably as yet the life span of these American elephants; the dates given by Osborn (1936, 1942) are
often contradictory and sometimes not reliable for other
reasons. Flint (1948, p. 523 footnote 1) holds that not only
the woolly mammoth, but also E. imperator andE. coIumbi,
11.

In Science, n. s., Vol. XVII, No. 430, D~. 511-512, 1903 (not available to me).

122

Texas Archaeological and Pa~eon$ological Society

"likewise persisted until very late in the Wisconsin age."
More precise dating of their extinction is needed.
Near Dent, Colorado, excavations uncovered a large number of "mammoth" skeletons (Archidiskodon, according to
Bryan and McCann, 1943, p. 289), mostly those of young
females. Large fluted spear points (type Clovis Fluted, according to Wormington, 1949, p. 39) were reported in association and this find possibly suggests a mass kill.

Bryan

and Ray (1940, pp. 48-49) correlate this site either with the
maximum advance of the Corral Creek glaciation or with
the beginning of its retreat; they also correlate Corral
Creek of the Rocky Mountains with the Mankato advance
of the Great Lakes region.and suggest a date of about 25,000
years ago, "subject to an unknown error which may reach
30 per cent." The current radiocarbon datings for the Mankato stage, about 11,000 years ago, would seem to give too
late a date for these elephants, and it is not certain that the
Corral Creek advance can be dated through the Mankato.
Most of the sites which yielded Elephas remains and artifacts can be interpreted in different ways. Erosion by wind
or water has perhaps exposed skeletons millenia after they
were deposited in ponds, and sometimes brought them together with younger artifacts; or ancient floods may have
washed them together. Sediments obviously rede~)osited
and therefore misleading were found in the bank of Whitewater Draw northwest of Douglas, Arizona. Here the remains of a Cochise complex with one radiocarbon dating
of about 8,000 years includes hearth stones, hammerstones,
manos, flat milling stones, and charcoal of poplar and hickory, found buried 13.5 feet below the present surface in a
sand stratum described as a floodplain deposit from a permanent river in a wet era. The cultural remains were associated with bones of sloth, dire wolf, extinct bison and
horse, and a mammoth identified as Archidiskodon (Sayles
and Antevs, 1941, p. 64). The skull of a mammoth was removed several years before from laminated marl said to
overlie the sand stratum. A direct association of Archidis-

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

123

~mdon with such an artifact assemblage seems strange indeed; and it may be pointed out that if elephants had
roamed North America as recently as 6,000 B. C. there
should be instances of their more or less complete skeletons
in bogs of the northeastern United States or in stratified
lake deposits of this period in the Western states, together
with Folsom points or younger artifacts.
The mammoth of Angus, Nebraska, is E. meridionalis
brascensis, according to Osborn, and consequently suspect
of lower to middle Pleistocene age if the identification is
correct (which seems to me very questionable). Allegedly
below a shoulder blade of this mammoth there was discovered a large fluted point, but this is open to suspicion
with the species determination mentioned above, and the
fossiliferous stratum has not been geologically dated. Moreover, the skeleton being complete and the bones intact, this
mammoth, while possibly hunted, apparently was not dismembered or roasted by man.
The evidence for man having hunted elephants and mastodons will be of two kinds: an unquestionable, primary
association of artifacts with the remains; or the dismembering, splitting, and burning ofthe remains. The finding
of only a bone or a tooth in an archaeological site need not
mean that the animal was killed by man. Hunters must occasionally have picked up the bones or teeth of animals and
carried them to camp merely as curios, and this seems to me
probable in the case of the mammoth teeth in the Folsom
stratum of Sandia Cave, New Mexico, deposited at the most
about 11,000 years ago. In some cases, isolated bones or teeth
may have reached the upper strata of archaeological sites,
as in the digging of pits by the Indians.
Thus, the problem of mastodon and elephant hunting ascribed to early man in America requires critical examination
both of primary association of artifacts and geological dat.ing of the deposits. Some sites that have yielded mammoth
game remains (such as Dent, Ester Creek, Cowan rancl~,
Clovis, and possibly Angus) might possibly date from the
Peorian interstadial. Moreover the problem of Sangamon

124

Texas Archaeological and PaleontoZogical Society

interglacial immigration of the earliest hunters ought to
be approached by further investigations. Especially since
Penck (1930, pp. 24-25) has wholeheartedly advocated sucl~
a dating for the first immigration, and Canals Frau i1950,
p. 548) and Macgowan (I950, p. 222) have at least shown
no inclination to reject it.~2
During the last 25 years American archaeologists and
geologists have achieved admirable researches and illuminated the earliest pre-history of their country by a really imposing standard. The magnificent American radiocarbon
method is an invaluable improvement of dating. Paleobotanical (especially pollen-analytical) researches ought to be
undertaken systematically in order to explore the environmental conditions experienced by the £irst human inhabitants of America, and to date archaeological and paleontological finds discovered in lake sediments and bogs.
Summary. Eight of the flint projectile points and knives
or axes [Plate 18] found by Albert C. Koch in 1838 with the
half-burned skeleton Of Mastodon americanus, in Gasconade
County, Missouri, have recently been located in Berlin.
They can be ascribed to the Archaic culture pattern of the
Eastern United States and are thought to date no earlier than
the latter part of the post-glacial warm period or optimum,
probably some thousands of years later than the extinction
of mastodons. It is suggested that later Indians found a
practically complete skeleton near their camp, perhaps exposed by a spring freshet, and for superstitious reasons tried
to destroy it by burning and then hurling rocks at it. The
same reasoning may account for the famous purported association of a partly burned mastodon skeleton and numerous potsherds at Alangasi, Ecuador: Two projectile points
[Plate 18, Figs. I and J] found near the Richmond mastodon
in Indiana are very similar to those found by Koch and may
’12~
E. B. Howard (Bulletin, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol 4, pp. 17-18, 1932) has described finding a "Generalized Fo]som" point in Burner
Cave, southeastern ]New Mexico, in levels which also contained bones of an extinc~
musk-ox or animal of the musk-ox group.
If such a musk-ox, an arctic animal of
~he open tundra, were actually killed by man here, it must have been at a time
much more ancient than Folsom man.
This spear point would now be clas~ifled
with the Clovis Fluted type (A. D. Krieger, communication).

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

125

also have become accidentally associated with a mastodon
killed much earlier by carnivores; this skeleton can be
geologically dated toward the close of the Mankato substage
of the Wisconsin Glaciation. The alternative interpretation,
that tl~e artifacts shown in Plate 18 are to be considered as
old as the mastodons and the Mankato substage, does not
agree with. present estimates of American archaeologists
on the age of these "Archaic" artifacts. Furthermore, in the
three cases cited, the skeletons had not been dismembered
nor the bones split open, as one would expect if they had
been killed by man. Osborn’s map of mastodon localities
in North America (Fi.gure 3) shows a close agreement between their northward distribution and the southern boundary of Wisconsin glaciation; from which it is inferred that
the mastodon: had disappeared completely very soon after
the Mankato substage or by 8,000 to 7,000 B. C.
The woolly .mammoth so far as is known is never found
in (lacustrine) bogs like Mastodon americanus; that this may
be due to its being a tundra dweller, while mastodon was
primarily a forest browser, is certainly a wrong argumentation, because the late-glacial tundra, too, was rich in
swamps and lakes (compare the case of the fossil Irish
Giant Deer). The woolly mammoth was probably hunted
in Alaska (as at Ester Creek) but it can not as yet be
accurately dated there. Other fauna in the same "muck"
deposits suggest a much warmer climate than the present,
possibly the Sangamon interglacial. In Europe the woolly
mammoth became extinct prior to 15,000 B. C.
Other ~species of mammoth have been reported from numerous archaeological sites in the United States and as far
south as Central America, but it is difficult to distinguish
in the literature between isolated bones and teeth which
may hav.e been carried into camp sites as curios, or by
stream or wind erosion, or other causes, and those which
prove that these animals were killed and butchered by man.
The discoveries at Dent, Colorado; the Cowan ranch in
Texas;Clovis, .New Mexicb; and perhaps others, prove that
man killed Elephas (PareIepha~)columbi, but the geological

126

Te~a~

dating of these sites has not yet attained precision. It is
possible that American geologists and archaeologists have
been somewhat too conservative in their estimates of 10,000
years or so for the extinction of elephants; such remains
could date from interstadials of the Wisconsin glaciation, or
even from the Sangamon interglacial. Man probably did
not contribute greatly to the extinction of either the mastodon or the various species of mammoth in North America.
Bamberg, Bavaria, Germany
August 8, 1951
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allison, Vernon C.
(1926) "The Antiquity of the Deposits in Jacob’s
Cavern." Anthropological Papers o5 the American Museum o5 Natural History, Vol. XIX, part VI, pp. 297-335.
Arnold, J. R., and Libby, W. F.
(1951) "Radiocarbon Dates."
2927, pp. 111-120.

Science, Vol. 113, No.

Ashley-Montagu, M. F., and Peterson, C. Bernard
(1944) "The earliest account of the association of human
artifacts with fossil mammals in North America."
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol.
87, No. 5, pp. 407-419.
Bryan, Kirk
(1941 a) "Correlation of the deposits of Sandia Cave,
New Mexico, with the glacial chronology." In: Frank
C. Hibben, 1941.
Bryan, Kirk
(1941 b)
"Geologic antiquity of man in America."
Science, Vo!. 93, No. 2422, pp. 505-514.
Bryan, Kirk and McCann, F. F.
(1943) "Sand Dunes and Alluvium near Grants, New
Mexico," American Antiquity, Vol. 8, pp. 281-295.

Bryan, Kirk, and Ray, Louis L.
(1940)

"Geologic antiquity of the Lindenmeier Site

in Colorado," Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections,
Vol. 99, No. 2, pp. 1-76.
Canals Frau, S.
(1950)

Prehis~oria de America.

Cotter, J. L.
(1937 a)

Buenos Aires, 588pp.

"The Significance of Folsom and Yuma

Artifact Occurrences in the Light of Typology and Distribution," Philadelphia Anthropological Society, 25th
Anniversary Studies, Vol. 1, pp. 27-35.
Cotter, ,/. L.
(1937 a)

"The Significance of Folsom and Yuma

in Pluvial Deposits near Clovis, New Mexico: Part IV,
Report on Excavation at the Gravel Pit, 1936." Proceedings, Academy o] Natural Sciences o] Philadelphia, Vol.
LXXXIX, pp. 1-16.
Deevey, Edward S. Jr.
(1949) "Biography of the Pleistocene.

Part I. Europe

and North America." Bulletin of the Geological Society
o] America.

Vol. 60, pp. 1315-1416.

Deevey, Edward S., Jr.
(1951)

"Late-glacial and postglacial pollen diagrams

from Maine."
pp. 177-207.

American Journal oS Science.

Vol. 249,

Eiseley, Loren C.
(1945) "The Mastodon and Early Man in America."
Science, Vol. 102, No. 2640, pp. 108-110.
Eiseley, Loren C.
(1946) "Men, Mastodons, and Myths."
Monthly, Vol. LXII, pp. 517-524.

The Scienti]ic

128

Texa~ Archaeologicgl and Paleontological Societ~

Field, H.
(1948) "Contributions to the Anthropology of the Soviet
Union."

Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections.

Vol.

110, No. 13, pp. 1-244.
Flint, R. F.
(1948) Glacial Geology and the Pleistocene Epoch. New
York and London, 589pp.
Flint, R. F., and Deevey, E. S., Jr.
¯ (1951) "Radiocarbon dating of late-Pleistocene events."
American Journal of Science. Vol. 249, pp. 257-300.
Hibben, Frank C.
(1941) "Evidences of early occupation in Sandia Cave,
New Mexico, and other sites in the Sandia-Manzano region," Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 99,
No. 23, pp. 1-64.
Hibben, Frank C.
(1943) "Evidence of Early Man in Alaska."
Antiquity, Vol. 8, pp. 255-257.

American

Koch, Albert C.
(1842) Description of the Missourium Theristocaulodon
or Missouri Leviathan (Leviathan M~ssour~ensis) together with its supposed habits, and Indian ~raditions
concerning the location from whence it was exhumed;
also, comparisons on the whale, crocodile, and Missourium, with.the Leviathan, as described in the 41st chapter of the book of Job. Fourth edition, London, E.
Fisher, 33 Cannon Street. City, 23pp. (pp. 20-23 Evidence of human existence contemporary with fossil
animals).
Koch, Albert C.
(1845) Die Riesenthiere :der Urwelt oder das neuentdeckte Missourium Theristocaulodon (Sichelzahn au~
Missou~) und die Mastodontoiden im AII~emeinen und
Besonderen, nebs~ Beweise~, dass vieIe, uns dutch ihre
Ueberreste bekannt gewordene Thiere nicht praeada-

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

129

misisch, sondern Zeitgenossen des MenschengeschIects
waren. Berlin, Verlag von Alexander Duncker, 99 pp.
Koch, Albert C.
(1857) "Mastodon Remains, in the State of Missouri, together with evidences of the existence of Man contemporaneously with the Mastodon." Transactions of the
Academy of Science, St. Louis, Vol. I, pp. 61-64.
Koch, Albert C.
(1860) "On the bones of mastodon." Transactions o] the
Academy of Science, St. Louis, Vol. I, pp. 116-118.
(Journal of Proceedings for meeting 5 April 1858)..
Macgowap., Kenneth
(1950) Early man in the New World.
Company, New York, 260 pp.

The Macmillan

Mitchell, G. F.
(195I) "Studies in Irish Quaternary Deposits No. 7".
Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, Vol. LIII, B,
No. 11, pp. 113-206.
Osborn, Henry Fairfield
(1930) "The romance of the woolly mammoth.,’ Natural
History, Vol. XXX, No. 3, pp. 227-241.
Osborn, Henry Fairfield
(1936-1942) Proboscidea, Vol. I and II, New York.
Penck, A.
(1930) "Warm kamen die Indianer nach Nordamerika?"
Proceedings of the 23rd International Congres~ of
Americanists, (held at New York, September 17-22,
1928), New York, pp. 23-30.
Rainey, FroeHch G.
(1939) "Archaeology in Central Alaska." Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History. Vol. XXXVI, part IV, pp. 355-405..
Roberts, Frank H. H., Jr.
(1936) "Additional information on the Folsom complex.
Report on the second season’s investigations at the Lin-

130

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

denmeier site in northern Colorado." Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 95, No. 10, pp. 1-38.
Roberts, Frank H. H. Jr.
(1940) "Developments in the problem of the North
American Paleo-Indian." Smithsonian Miscellaneous
Collections, Vol. 100, pp. 51-116.
Roberts, Frank H. H., Jr.
(1951) "The early Americans."

The ScientiSic Monthly,

Vol. 184, No. 2, pp. 15-79.
Rouse, Irving
(1951) "A Survey of Indian River Archeology, Florida."
Yale University Publications in Anthropology, No. 44,
296 pp., New Haven.
Sanford, John T.
(1935) "The Richmond Mastodon." Proceedings o] the
Rochester Academy o] Science. Vol. 7, No. 5, pp. 137-156.
Sayles, E, B. and Antevs, Ernst
(1941) "The Cochise Culture." Gila Pueblo, Medallion
Paper, No. XXIX, Globe, Arizona.
Schellhas, Paul
(1908) "An den Grenzen unseres Wissens. Dunkle Gebierte der Menschheitsgeschichte." Wien und Leipzig,
pp. 56-62. (Elephanten in Amerika.)
Sehuchert, Charles and Dunbar, Carl O.
(194I) "Outlines of historical geology." War Departmerit Education Manual E. M. 463, 291 pp.
Sears, Paul B.
(1948) "Forest sequence and climatic change in northeastern North America since early Wisconsin Time."
Ecology, Vol. 29, No. 3, pp. 326-333.
Sellards, E. H.
(1938) "Artifacts Associated with Fossil Elephant."
Bulletin, Geological Society o] America, Vol. 49, pp. 999-

I010.

Mastodons, Mammoths. and Man in America

Sellards, E. H.
(1940) "Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils
from Bee County, Texas." Bulletin, Geological Society
o5 America, Vol. 51, pp. 1627-1658.
Spillman, Fr.
(1929 a) "Das letzte Mastodon yon Suedamerika," Natur
und Museum, Bd. 59, Heft 2, pp. 119-123.
Spillman,
(1929 b) "Das suedarnerikanische Mastodon als Zeitgenosse des Menschen majoiden Kulturkreises." Paleonto~og. Zeitschr. Bd. XI, No. 2, pp. 170-177.
Stock, Chester
(1917) "Structure of the pes in My~odon harlani." University of California Publications, Bulletin o5 the Department o5 Geology, Vol. 10, No. 16, pp. 267-286.
Stromer, E.
(1934) "Gibt es zeitgenoessische Abbildungen von Mastodonten?" Palaeontolog. Zeitschr. Bd. XVI, pp. 85-90.
~Jhle, Max

(1930) "Spaete Mastodonten in Ecuador," Proceedings
of the 23rd International Congress o5 Amer~canists,
(1928), New York, pp. 247-258.
Wormington, H. M.
(1949) Ancient Man in North America. The Denver Museum of Natural History Popular Series No. 4, third
edition, 198 pp.

