ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF LAVON AND

GARZA-LITTLE ELM RESERVOIRS:
A PRELIMINARY REPORT
ROBERT L. ST~PH~NSOZ~
Introduction~
The Corps of Engineers, Dept. of the Army, has begun
work on four dams and reservoirs on the upper drainage of
the Trinity River. Benbrook Dam on the Clear Fork of the
Trinity in Tarrant County is small and a brief investigation
of the area showed that no archaeological material was to
be losi by inundation. Grapevine Dam on Denton Creek in
Denton and Tarrant Counties is also small and a brief investigation showed no significant archaeological material
was to be lost by flooding. Garza-Little Elm Dam on Elm
Fork of the Trinity in Denton County, and Lavon Dam on
East Fork of the Trinity in Collin County are both moderately large, and extensive surface surveys of the areas to be
flooded revealed considerable archaeological material. It is
with these latter two reservoirs that the present paper will
deal.
Garza-Little Elm Dam is located one mile north of the
Town of Lewisville, Texas. When completed it will be 125
feet high with 32,700 feet of earth embankment and 600 feet
of concrete spillway forming a reservoir to be used for flood
control and water conservation. This reservoir will have a
surface area of 66,100 acres at an elevation of 553 feet M.S.L.,
and will affect the present river level 21 miles upstream on
Elm Fork, 17 miles upstream on Little Elm Creek and 13
miles upstream on Hickory Creek, completely inundating the
present Lake Dallas. Impounding of water in this reservoir
will probably begin in August, 1952.z
Lavon Dam is locate~l fhree miles northeast of the Town
1 Permission of the Smlthsonlan Institution for publication of this article
has been kindly granted the writer by Dr. Frank H, PI. Roberts, Jr.
2 Data furnished by the Fort Worth Suboffice, Corps of Engtnoers. Fort
Worth, Texas.

22

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

of Wylie, Texas. When completed it will be 69 feet high with
8,972 feet of earth embankment and 568 feet of concrete
spillway forming a reservoir with a water surface area of
24,190 acres at an elevation of 496 feet M.S.L. This will affect
the present river level 10 miles upstream on the East Fork
and 14 miles upstream on Pilot Grove Creek. Impounding of
water will probably begin in August, 1951.~
The streams on which these reservoirs are being built
form the headwaters of the Trinity River, one of the series
of large rivers flowing in a southeasterly direction across
Texas to empty into the Gulf of Mexico. The East Fork and
Elm Fork are relatively small branches of the main stream,
but at flood stage frequently attain a width of 300 feet or
more. Their immediate channels are normally quite narrow
and seldom over 5 feet or i0 feet deep. Each, however, is cut
into an older channel of one-half to one mile in width, the
latter being filled with alluvial sediments. The entire area
lies in the upper reaches of the Coastal Plains physiographic
province. The Elm Fork area forms the border between the
low, rolling hills of the Eastern Cross Timbers Region to
the east and the Grand Prairie Region to the west. The East
Fork area is entirely within the Eastern Cross Timbers
Region. The basic geologic formations in the Elm Fork area
are Woodbine sandstones and the Eagle Ford formation,
while the East Fork area is largely composed of Taylor NIarl.4
In both areas the soil is principally a heavy, black, silty clay
but in the western parts of the Elm Fork area this gives
way to a light brown sand. Natural vegetation consisting of
typical southern river bottom hardwoods, vines and brambles is quite heavy along both stream channels while the
areas a few hundred yards from the streams are under cultivation, or in pasture. This land has been cultivated for
50-100 years prior to which time it was partially timbered,
particularly in the East Fork area. Cotton, corn, maises, and
peanuts are the principal present day crops.
Under the direction of Dr. Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr., Dio
Idem,
Data based on Ralz, Erwi~0 :t939 and

Fenneman, N. IV~.o 1931.

,: :(

LAVON R£~RVO;H , Co~ ,

24

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

rector of the River Basin Surveys, the write~" made a~ archaeological survey of the areas to be flooded by these two
reservoirs. This project is a part of the River Basin Surveys,
a cooperative program of archaeological salvage between the
National Park Service and the Corps of Engineers, and is
under the direction and supervision of the Smithsonian Institution. The survey was begun on Augu~st 2, 1948 and
brought to completion on September 17, 1948. A total of 25
sites in the Lavon area and 27 sites in the Garza-Little Elm
area were examined and surface collections made from them.
Some minor test trenching was carried out in the former
area. Eight sites in the Lavon area and seven sites in the
Garza-Little Elm area proved to be of major significance
in the interpretation of the pre-history of this region. These
sites have been recommended for further excavation and
are described below. In the interest of brevity, the remaining 37 sites which are relatively insignificant are not described here.
Summary Tabulation o] all SAtes
Lavon
Early lithic sites ....................................................... 0
Late non-pottery sites ...................................... 13
Small pottery-bearing camps coeval with
late Fulton Aspect ........................................... 5
Large pottery,bearing villages coeval with
late Fulton Aspect ................................................ 6
Double occupation sites .......................................... (?)
Artificial mound sites ............................................... 1 (?)

Garza
1
10
17
4
5
0

Acknowledgments
To the Corps of Engineers, Dept. of the U. S. Army, and
to the National Park Service, Dept. of the Interior, is due
sincere appreciation for providing funds to make these surveys possible. During the course of the surveys the District
Office, Sub-office and field Offices of the Corps of Engineers
were most cooperative and extended every possible assistance to the survey. The many landowners and local collectors were very helpful. The members of the Dallas
Archaeological Society, who for a number of years have col:

Survey o] Lavon and Garza-Li$tle Elm Reservoirs

25’

lected extensively in this area and kept accurate records,
made all of their collections, notes and data available for
study. Members of this group, especially R. K. Harris, Lester
Wilson, and Rex Housewright extended most generous
hospitality to the writer and gave unstintingly of their
time in field assistance and discussion of problems.

The

Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, extended is complete facilities to the survey, including laboratory
and storage space, file information and valuable technical
advice and criticism. To all of these people and organizations is due deep and sincere gratitude.
Garza-Little Elm Sitess
41-I8C7-3, Lake Dallas Site. This site is located in alarge
sand dune area one mile below the present Lake Dallas.
It is partly destroyed by wind action on the sand, but one
section remains that may still show stratigraphy. Two
periods of occupation are implied here on the basis of artifact
types. The earlier period is indicated by a group of lanceolate
projectile points, including several of the Plainview type,e
and some unnamed types that are often found in association
with early lithic sites. A large number of net sinkers were
also found here.~ Occasional specimens of these artifacts
are often found in relatively modern sites. However, here
a large enough group was found in a single site to indicate
actual occupation of the site by the people who made these
artifacts. The major occupation of the site is indicated by
Gary, Sterrett, Trinity and Ellis Stemmed projectile points,
gouge-shaped scrapers, several large, barbed blades, many
flake scrapers, reworked projectile point scrapers and a
boatstone fragment but no pottery. These artifacts imply a
later, pre-pottery occupation similar to that found in many
sites of east and east-central Texas.e The artifacts imply
an occupation of this site at a very early period followed at
a much later time by a pre-pottery occupation probably
5
w|th
6
7
8

Artifacts collected in the present survey are reported here. together
those collected by members of the D. A~ ~. in past years.
Krieger, A. D., 1947, pp. 939-942.
Watt, F. H., 1938.
Stephenson, R. I~., 1948, pp. 69-70.

26

Texas Archeo~ogical and PaleontoIogica~ Society

coeval with or just preceeding Gibson Aspect times.~ It
will be extremely important if stratigraphy can be found
here and the true sequence of these artifact types determined.
41-18C7-2, Ledbetter Site. On a high, sandy ridge 100 yards
west of Elm Fork, this site is 1½ miles above the damsite.
Potsherds are relatively plentiful and are 60% of the plain
shell tempered type. Only 10% are de.corated and none are
definitely identifiable by type. The clay tempered sherds
generally appear to be of Frankston Focus types,o while
the shell tempered sherds are similar to the Nocona Plain
ware of Henrietta Focus. ,, The shell tempered sherds are
of two kinds; those in which shell fragments are visible and
those with small cavities resulting from the leaching of the
tempering material. This ware is referred to here as vesicular.~ Projectile points while few in number are largely
arrow point types with Alba Barbed predominating. The
small, triangular and triangular side-notched points are very
rare in the surface collections. Scrapers, celts, drills, and
other artifacts are similar to those associated with the FuIton Aspect. The presence of shell tempered potsherds in
combination with apparently Frankston Focus types and
other artifacts that seem to represent that focus may indicate the presence of a group of people who borrowed traits
from both the Frankston and the Henrietta foci but were,
themselves, of neither. There are indications of at least one
house structure and several burials in the site.
41-I8C4-3, Brown Site. This site is located on a high, sand
and clay ridge on the east bank of Little Elm Creek. The
surface collections here show some differences from those
of most sites in this reserv-oir. Potsherds are only 21% shell
tempered. Clay tempered sherds are largely engraved with
some incised, plain and punctate decorations appearing.
Projectile points are predominantly arrow point types over
half of which are of the Alba Barbed type. Large blades and
9 Kelley, J. C., 1947, pp. 103-104.
I0 Krieger, A. :D., 1946, pp.
11 Krleger, A. D., 1946, pp. 109-111.
12 See discussion of this vesicular ~vare under the Pottery
this report.

section

of

28

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

gouge-shaped scrapers are very prominent here. Probably
a double occupation of the site is represented, the earlier of
which was derived from the central Texas area,,3 the later
from the Caddoan area.,4
41-17D6-3, Cagle Site. On the east bank of Elm Fork, this
site is at the extreme northern end of the Reservoir area.
Numerous burials are reported here by the landowner, including one group burial of "several skeletons." In this group
burial were found "many beads" which have Since been lost
and the material from which they were made is unknown.
The land owner stated that artifacts and graves from the
eastern side of the site differed from those that were found
in the flat flood plain area near the river. He thought the
latter were more recent. Informants reported pottery, arrow
points and dart points from the site. However, due to a
heavy cover of grass, few artifacts were collected in the
present survey and definition of the site is at present only
presumed. The eastern section of the site is a vertebrate
fossil locality.
41-17D9-11 Pearsall Site. On the south side of Hickory
Creek, this site occupies the top of a small sandstone bluff
and represents a large village of the late pottery period. Artifacts are similar to those found at the Ledbetter site. One
sherd of Tonto Polychrome ware,, from southern Arizona
(Pueblo IV period) was found at this site. The soil here is.
shallow and excavation would be useless. It is recommended
that a further search be made of the surface area and the top
few inches of the entire site for other Puebloan artifacts.~
Such trade items are extremely useful dating tools. Presumably only one period of occupation is represented in this site.
41-18C4-1, Little Elm Site. One mile northwest of the
Town of Little Elm on a large sand and clay ridge on the
east side of Little Elm Creek is another small village site
13 Kelley, J. C. n. d.
14 Krieger, A. D., 1946, pp.
15 Identification by :Dr. Florence Hawley, Univ. of New Mexico.
16 In slto 41-I’/D9-1 (now inundated by Lake Dallas) a projectile, point o~
obsldlan wo~ found some years ago by 1~. K. Ha~Tls. This is undoubtedly"
another Puebloan trade item.

Survey oS Lavon and Garza-Little Ebn Reservoirs

of the late pottery period. Artifacts are similar to those
from the Ledbetter site. Some future excavation is recommended in this site as it represents the small pottery-bearing
villages of the area.
41-!7D6-4, Landtrip Site. This site, on the eastern flood
plain of Elm Fork, is located at the upper end of Lake Dallas.
It seems to be only a small temporary campsite but several
sherds found here are extremely interesting. Most of these
sherds are of Frankston Focus wares, but one may be Ripley
Engraved ware of Titus Focus.17 Three others are entirely
foreign to this area.Is More surface collecting and some test
trenching is recommended to locate additional foreign pottery types, and to place them in the cultural context of the
area.
Lavon Sites’9
41-18D4-1, Farmersville SAte. This site is located along a
low terrace on the west side of Pilot Grove Creek, five miles
northwest of the Town of Farmersvflle. Local collectors have
gathered artifacts here for many years.2o No excavations
have been made except for some minor test pits and recovery of a few plow-struck burials. These burials are all flexed.
Some are single interments; other double. Orientations are
to both the east and the west. In each grave, mussel shells,
charcoal and often red ocher were found. Bone beads ac-companled one infant burial. Bison scapula hoes (6 with
sockets, 2 without sockets) were found in one adult grave.2~’
These were placed in a group in front of the body and on tol~
of a prepared bed of charcoal. This is the only evidence of:
Bison so far recovered in this area, and it is the only buriaI.
furniture found. (The beads were probably ornaments worn
by the deceased and not true grave furniture.)
A large ceremonial pit is located in the southern part of
17 Identification tentative.
18 Dr. James B. Griffin, Univ: of Michigan, examined these sherds and
was uncertain of -their exact identity but suggested that they might
Mississippi ~v’alley wares; one Early Baytown and two of a late period.
19 Artifacts collected in the present survey are reported here,
with those collected by members of the D. A~ S. in past years.
20 Harris, R. K., 1945" 194~; 1948 and Wilson, L. L., 1946.
21 Harris, R.K., 1948: p. 40.

30

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

this site.~. It is roughly 100 feet in diameter and the rim is
1 foot-6 feet above the present surface of the center of the pit.
It was excavated into the eastern slope of the terrace and the
native soil of the terrace forms part of the west wall of the
pit. Cultivation and erosion have destroyed most of the pit
outline. There is evidence of numerous house structures in
the site in the form of many fragments of burned, wattleimpressed daub.
Pottery artifacts include two pipe stem fragmentS; a fragment of a small, thin-bowled, long-stemmed pipe; a clay ball
the size of a marble, and containing a groove and partial
perforation; and two small cylindrical objects, possibly parts
of an effigy bowl. One vessel was reconstructed from sherds.
It is a clay tempered, buff colored bottle with incised decoration. The design element ~is repeated four times around
the body (a Fulton Aspect feature). It has a flat bottom.
The neck has been broken off at the top but shows wear
from re-use after having been broken.~3 Potsherds are not
numerous-in the site. Of 1170 artifacts recovered only 186
are potsherds. These represent 40-50 individual vessels.
Scarcity of pottery is further attested by re-use of the
above-mentioned bottle. Shell temper occured in 42% of
the sherds, clay temper in 55%, and limestone temper in 3%.
Nearly all of the shell tempered sherds are undecorated,
none are vesicular, 2, and five possess a red film. The clay
tempered sherds are 34% plain. Red filmed, brushed, punctate, incised and engraved decorations occur. None are positively identifiable by type but the majority seem to be of
Frankston Focus wares. A few sherds reminiscent of older
22 See description of one of these pits in site 41-18C9-1 in this report.
23 This bottle is of a form common tn the Caddoan area in Fulton Aspect
times ~nd according to Krieger the design is ~aberrant and difficult to
identify with any specific tYPe, He believes it may belong to the Bossier
Focus, See Webb, C. PI., 1948, Plate 11, Fig. 1.
24 See dtsc(~Sston of "vesicular ware" in the Pottery section of this report.

PLATE
A~ Excavation at Campbell Hole Site, Lavon Reservoir. View looking
into test pit No. 2. ~Wilson standing, on bottom of upper level. Housewright
working in house pit and brushing off-clay flrehearth. /kugust 29, 1948.
B. View looking southwest toward :Bullock Mound, Lavon Reservoir.
Northeast edge of mound ts marked by small tree,, Stream flows through
timbered area in background. July 21, 1948.

Pl~te 6

Survey oS Lavon and Garza-Lit-tle Elm Reservoirs

33.

wares were found. Of the six limestone tempered sherds, one
is undecorated; two are vessel bottoms and are basketryimpressed; three are incised.
Artifacts of bone, shell and antler are abundant. Notable
among these is a bone atlatl hook, a perforated bear tooth
pendant, the bison scapula hoes mentioned above and a
large number of bone pins.
.The projectile points are 62% small, arrow point types
of the sort that are usually found in Fulton Aspect sites.
However, 16% are triangular or triangular side-notched
specimens of the type usually associated with Henrietta Focus. Dart points are mostly of the types found in Fulton
Aspect sites, principally Gary Stemmed. Scrapers, drills, and
blades are of types common to many Texas cultures.
The surface collections and features of this site differ
markedly from the culture patterns established for any of
the known loci of this or surrounding areas. The site is similar in most ~letails to other large East Fork pottery-bearing
sites. These sites appear to represent a focus of the Fulton
Aspect that has not previously been described. Excavation
in the undisturbed section of this site and test trenching
elsewherein it will add greatly to the ultimate definition
and description of this focus.
41-18D4-2, Bullock Mound. One mile northeast of the
Farmersville site, on Indian Creek is an eliptical knoll 15 feet
high, 270 feet long and 200 feet wide. It appears to be a terraced mound, the upper section of which is 10 feet high and
100 feet in diameter. No artifacts were found on or surroundingthis mound~ but some sherds and projectile points are
reported. Shell, bone and flint refuse was seen on the surface of the:mound and around the base. A test trench should
be cut in{b the mound to determine whether or not it is

artificial.
41-18D7-2, Campbell Hole Site. Located three miles northeast o£:=:~he Town of Wylie, on the south bank of the East
25 Artlf.lclal mounds of the Lower l~Itssisslppi and Red
lack surface artifacts.

frequently

River "Valleys

34

Texas Archeological and Paleon$ologica~ Society

Fork, this site covers two acres immediately adjacent to
the present stream channel. A slight ridge and shallow depression occupy the center of the site. Both are the result
of erosion and deposition due to river overflow. The entire
site is covered with dense, stream bottom vegetation. The
East Fork has cut its channel southward and encroached
upon the northern edge of the site, exposing a 15 foot vertical
bank on the south side of the channel. Here occupational
material is exposed to a depth of nearly five feet. Approximately a foot of the alluvial soil has been deposited over
the entire site by periodic inundation since the site was oc~
cupied. As a result almost no surface material is to be found
except in the eroded bank and in the shallow depression
mentioned above. One day was spent by the writer, accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. L. L. Wilson and Mr. Rex Housewright, in excavating a test trench into the exposed bank.
This was an extension of a previous test pit begun by members of the D. A. S. Occupational material was found to
be stratified into two zones. The upper zone, including
6 inches-18 inches of sterile topsoil varies in thickness from
12 inches to 36 inches. The lower zone varies in thickness
from 6 inches-24 inches. Below that level is completely
sterile soil. A house floor appeared at the junction of
the upper and lower zones at a depth of 36 inches, and
contained a well defined fire hearth of burned clay. Presuming the house tobe circular and the hearth to be in the
center, the structure would be about 12 feet in diameter,
with a flat floor curving sharply upward at the base of the
walls. No post holes were found but burned, wattle-impressed, daub fragments were abundant about the edges of
the house floor. This agrees in many respects with a house
site excavated in 1946-47 by the D. A. S. in the Butler Hole
PLATE
A. Projectile points from Lake Dallas Site, Garza-Ltttie Elm Reservoir.
1-3 type Sterrott Stemmed; 4 type Orla Expanding Stem; 5-7 type Slsterdale
Shouldered; 8-11 type Pl~vlew; 12-15 Miscellaneous d~t poin~ of the
early ll~ic.
B. ~Ifac~ ~om ~e Dallas Site.
1~ notched stones or "Waco
Sinker;" 4~5 ]~ge~ gouge-shaped scrapers m~e of ferruginous sandstone;
~-9 ~uge-~haped scrapers of flint.

Plate

Survey of Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs

37

Site some five miles downstream.2~ Time did not permit
excavation of more than a cross sectional face of the house
floor and fire hearth, which probably accounts for the lack
of post holes. It was not definitely determined whether one
of the ceremonial pits occurs in this site.
Pottery was extremely scarce in this site but this was
probably due in part to the inability to make surface collections. Except for one shell t~mpered sherd, all pottery
came from the upper zone. The shell tempered sherds
(nearly 50% of the total) are more nearly like the Nocona
Plain ware of Henrietta Focus than are any of the sherds
from other sites in either the East Fork or Elm Fork drainage. One clay-tempered bottle neck (nearly complete} is
unidentifiable but has a constricted opening reminiscent of
bottles of Spiro Fine-Engraved ware.27 Engraved pendant
triangles decorate tl~e base of the neck. None of the sherds
were positively identifiable by type.
Artifacts of bone occurred in both zones. All of the bone
pins, however, are from the upper zone; bone beamers, the
single bone flaker, and 8 of the 9 bone awls are from the
lower zone. All of the other flaking tools and the single
conch shell, disc bead are also from the lower zone.
In summary it may be said that this is a double occupation
site with probably little time elapsing between the two occupations, and both by people with similar but gradually
changing culture patterns. No burials were found. A house
structure with a central fire hearth of clay was found. A
ceremonial pit may or may not have been present in the
site. Pottery is of both clay and shell temper, but is not
abundant and is confined to the upper zone. The entire site
is probably preserved intact beneath a capping of depositional soil. The culture represented here cannot be identified with any known loci, but influence is seen from the
Caddoan area and the Henrietta Focus.
41-I8D7-8, Highpoint Site. One mile east of the Clearlake
26 Y:IoUsewrlght, Rex., et al., 1947, pp. 8-16. See also Webb, C. PI., 1940.
~70rr, I~. G., 1946, Plate X~VIII, Fig. b. Also Krieger, A.D., 1946, Fig. 19e.

38

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Community on the east side of Pilot Grove Creek, this site
represents one of the small, temporary, pottery-bearing
campsites in the East Fork drainage. It is recommended for
further excavation as a representative of this type of small
Site in the Lavon area.
41-18D7-9, Pilot Grove Site. This site covers five acres of
the east side of Pilot Grove Creek, ½ mile south of the confluence of Pilot Grove and Sister Grove Creeks. In the present flood plain, it is subject to frequent inundation and is
largely cover.ed with alluvium. Only a few artifacts were
found in the present survey but these artifacts, midden
refuse, wattle-impressed daub, and the general plan of the
site indicate that this is another of the large pottery-bearing
sites in the East Fork drainage.
41-18C9-1, Hogge Bridge Site. On the east side of East Fork,
three miles northeast of the Town of Wylie, this site covers
3 acres or more of the present river flood plain. Midden refuse was found scattered over most of the site; house structures were indicated by numerous fragments of wattle-impressed daub; and a large ceremonial pit2e occupies the center of the site.
This pit 2~ is a large, circular, concave depression in the
surface of the site with an earthen embankment completely
enclosing it. It is 90 feet in diameter and 2 feet to 4.5 feet
deep (erosion due to cultivation and periodic flooding has
reduced the rim unevenly making it higher on the east
side than on the west). A test trench 3o across this pit
showed the original depth to be roughly 8.5 feet to 9
feet with a concave floor sporadically covered with refuse. No post holes were found but some evidence of a
superstructure is indicated in fragments of wattle-impressed daub. The purpose of such a pit is unknown.
Perhaps it was an out-door dance or ceremonial arena.
Possibly it contained a large semi-subterranean corn28 Wilson, L. I~., 1946, Pl). ll-IP..
29 Stephenson, JR. L., ]949.
30 1%. K. Harris. Mr. and Mrs. L. L. Wilson. I-Ienry Hanna, Jr., J. B.
Sollberger, Mr. and Mrs ,1%obert lqatzenbuehler and C 1%-Allen very kindly
assisted the writer in this 2-day excavation, as a project of the D. A. S.

Survey o] Lavon and GarzaoLi~tle Elm Reservoirs

39

munity house. Certainly it was large enough to have had
some function in which all or most of the inhabitants of the
village could share. The feature is common to nearly all of
the large, pottery-bearing sites in the East Fork drainage,
a single such pit occuring in each site. Similar pits are unknown elsewhere to the writer. The term "ceremonial pit"
has been applied to this feature merely as a matter of convenience in reference.
The potsherds from this site are 55% clay tempered. The
majority are undecorated but fingernail punctate, brushed
and incised decorations appear on some sherds. Probably
5-10 individual vessels are represented in the clay tempered
group. Shell tempered, plain sherds are nearly as abundant
as the clay tempered and probably an equal number of
vessels is represented. There is some evidence of an orange
film on some of the sherds both of clay and of shell temper.
Pottery is not abundant here and probably all sherds represent trade wares, although actual types were not identifiable.3,
Small arrow point types comprise 55% of the projectile
points. The type Alba Barbed is dominant but some are of
the small triangular form. The larger dart points are all
of types also found in the Caddoan area. Drills are all small,
with shaped bases and these and other lithic artifacts are
of common types identifiable with no particular culture
complex. Numerous artifacts of bone, including a bone hook,
bone pins and a carved human ~ooth were found, but artifacts of shell and antler were rare. The only shell artifact of
note is a fragment of an undecorated, conch shell gorget.
The general cultural context of this site appears to be
similar to that of the other major pottery-bearing sites along
East Fork and quite distinct from any of the known loci
of this or surrounding areas. Pottery was probably not made
here but was obtained in small quantity from neighboring
groups. Further excavation of the ceremonial pit and parts
81 I-Iarri~. I~o 1:~. 19~6, ’pp. 119-114.

4O

Texas Archeo~ogical and Paleontological Society

of the village will provide important information regarding
this culture.
41-18C9-2, Branch Site. This three-acre site occupies a low,
sandy ridge in the eastern edge of the East Fork flood plain,
~ mile southwest of Branch store. Cultivation has lowered
the surface of the site by a foot or more and resulted in
a slight change in the artifact types found in surface collections. For example projectile points collected a number of
years ago were predominantly arrow point types, while
those collected recently are predominantly dart point types.
Thus a stratified site seems to be indicated. House structures ~re indicated by fragments of wattle-impressed daub.
A ceremonial pit is located near the center of the site. Potsherds are predominantly plain, shell tempered ware, but
clay tempered wares comprise 44% of the sherds found.
The only decorated sherds are of an incised ware. Probably
20-25 individual vessels are represented in the sherd collections. Projectile points, both dart and arrow point types
are typically Caddoan but a single, small, triangular point
was found. Other lithic artifacts are of types common to
many known loci. Artifacts of bone, shell and antler were.
found in small numbers and are of types common to sites
of the East Fork drainage.
This site is another of the pottery-bearing villages of the
East Fork area. The original surface of the site is not apparent so stratigraphy probably cannot be determined here,
but probably existed in the past. Excavation should be undertaken here to locate the house structures and burials and
to substantiate the artifact complex that the surface collections imply.
41-18C9-5, McGuire Si~e. This site, on the slope of a large
PLATE
A. Dart points from Farmersvllle Site, Lavon Reservoir. Typical pottery site artifacts. 1-16 type Gary Stemmed; 17 type Sterrett Stemmed; 18
type Orla Expanding Stem; 19-20 type Ellis Stemmed; 21-23 Mtscella~eous
forms.

B. Projectile point types from Garzo.-Little Elm Reservoir. I-8 Miscellaneous small dart points, tent~tlve type Trinity Stemmed; 9-11 type
Ga~" Stemmed; 12-13 type Ellis Stemmed; 14 type Perdlz Pointed Stem;
15-23 type Alba Barbed; 24-27 side-notched, tr|a.ngular arrow points; 28
Serrated ~dged arrow point; 29-32 triangular oxrow points.

Survey o] Lavon and Garza-LittZe Elm Reservoirs

43

gravel ridge on the east side of East Fork is 4 miles northeast of the Town of Wylie. Refuse is abundant on the site
but no potsherds nor small arrow points have been found.
It seems to be a campsite of a non-pottery culture.
PoPery
Garza-Little Elm Area. No complete vessels or pottery
artifacts other than potsherds were found. Sherds were
found in 9 sites and totaled 271 in number, or 21% of the
1270 artifacts recovered. Sherds were reported from 12 additional sites making a total of 21 pottery sites out of the
27 sites located. These sherds are dominantly shell tempered
(55%), none of which are d~corated in any way. However,
they seem to be of two varieties: plain ware with a heavy
percentage of coarse, shell temper; and plain ware with
"hole temper." The former is either Nocona Plain ware of
the Henrietta Focus~2 or a very similar ware. It is, though,
of a wider range of shades and colors than the typical Nocona Plain ware and usually of poorer quality with a smaller
percentage of shell temper. The latter is here called "vesicular." It is very similar to the shell tempered ware in
color, paste, thickness, and surface treatment, but is somewhat softer. The temper of this ware is usually entirely
missing and is replaced by small, pin-head sized cavities,
giving a vesicular appearance to the sherd. Some sherds
contain combinations of this vesicular structure and shell
temper. It may be that this is merely a shell tempered ware,
which has had all or most of the shell leached out by a
Chemical action of the soil. On the other hand the vesicular
appearance of the sherds may be due to limestone temper
which burned out in the firing process or has otherwise
disintegrated. If so, some of the vessels were made with a
combination of both shell and limestone temper. This
vesicular ware constitutes 40% of the sherds from the GarzaLittle Elm area while the plain shell tempered ware constitutes only 15%. The remaining 45% of the sherds are
clay tempered and as a whole represent Caddoan types.s3
32 Krieger, A. D., :1946, pp. 109-111.
33 :Krieger, A. D., 1946, ;pp. 186-255.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The plain undecorated sherds (31%) probably represent the
body sherds of the decorated wares, although a plain ware
is also present as identified by a few plain rim sherds. The
decorated sherds (14%) contained engraved, incised, fingernail punctate and brushed decorations. All are small and
difficult to identify accurately. One Patton Engraved sherd
of historic Allen Focus and two Harleton Applique sherds
of Titus Focus were identified.3, One sherd is of a polished
redware; several are of unpolished redware; one is identified
as Tonto t)olychrome from southern Arizona and three oth~
ers seem to be Middle-Mississippi wares.3~ While exact type~
are not easily assignable to most of these clay tempered
sherds it is reasonably certain that most of the incised, punctate, engraved, and brushed wares are of Frankston Focus
types.
Lavon Area. Pottery was found in 9 sites in this area and
reported from 3 others, making a total of 12 pottery-bearing
sites. Sherds indicate that all 12 sites were probably coeval
and were also coeval with the pottery-bearing sites in the
Garza-Little Elm area.
Most of the pottery in the Lavon sites is in the form of
small potsherds, but one bottle of an unknown clay tempered ware was reconstructed and a pottery pipe bowl, a
clay bead, two pipe stems, and two small effigy fragmentss~
were also found. Vessel shapes indicated ~re few. Water
bottles certainly were present and probably even relatively
numerous. Other shapes that seem to be indicated are small
carrinated bowls, hemispherical bowls, shallow bowls, and
flat bottomed pots expanding in diameter toward the top:.
Pottery was not abundant (a total of 442 sherds were found
or less than 23% of the 1926 artifacts) and apparently was
sometimes used even after having been broken. However,
a wide variety of types was used. Clay tempered sherds are
dominant in the collections studied (52.6%). Of these nearly
34 I~:rleger0 A. D., 1946.
35 As tentatively identified by Griffin, See footnote lS of this paper.
36 These probably represent appendages of small effigies such as wer~
often Incorporated into the rim decorations of Frar~kston and Titus Focus
vessels.
:

Survey o] Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs

45

two-thirds are decorated. Decorations consist of punctations,
incising, engraving, brushing and application of a red film.
Pottery types could not be identified but the majority of
the decorated sherds appear to be of Frankston Focus types.
Red filmed sherds may be of a Titus Focus type. Shell tempered sherds (45.8%) are nearly all undecorated and appear to be either of Nocona Plain ware or of a closely
related ware. Sherds of this type from the Lavon area are
more similar to the Nocona Plain type than are similar
sherds from the Garza-Little Elm area. In the Lavon area
only 13 sherds (2.9%) are vesicular. The unusual occurrence
of red filming on shell tempered Pottery was found in 16
sherds. Limestone tempered sherds numbered 6 or 1.4%
of all sherds. One of these is undecorated; 3 are incised and
2 are vessel bases bearing coiled basketry impressions.~7
These are reminiscent of pottery of the Grant Focus of
southern Oklahoma.
In both the Lavon and Garza-Little Elm areas, the combination of such factors in the pottery complex as: (1)
scarcity of pottery, (2) wide variety of types known to several other cultures, (3) relative inferiority of the wares as
compared to type specimens, and (4) re-use of broken vessels, leads one to believe that no pottery was manufactured
at these sites. All vessels were probably secured by trade
or other means from neighboring cultures. If so, a wide
range of trave! is indicated, extending for 50 to 100 miles
to the east, north and west. If pottery was manufactured
in these villages it was not an indigenous part of the culture
complex but rather was made by a few individuals who
came from neighboring areas. Such a situation could result
from intermarriage with the known pottery peoples.
Lithic Artifacts
Garza-LittIe Elm Area. The majority of the projectile
points from these sites are of types usually associated, in
varying proportions, with pottery sites throughout the Gibson and Fulton Aspects __in the Caddoan area. Alba Barbed,
37 Kr|eger, A. D., 1946, 1~. 132, refers to similar sherd-~ from ~ site on the
Red River.

46

Texas Archeological and PalesntoIogical Society

Gary Stemmed, Ellis Stemmed and Trinity Stemmed are
dominant types. Types found in late Balcones Phase sites
in central Texas are second in numerical significance. These
include Sterrett Stemmed, Orla Expanding Stem, Sisterdale
Shouldered, and a large, triangular type.3s The small, triangular and triangular side-notched arrow points commonly
associated with the Henrietta Focus, were also found here
in significant quantity. It will be noted that of the several
types listed, those thought to represent atlatl dart points
are dominant (68.9%) over the smaller, arrow point types
(31.1%). In one site, however, a completely different lithic
complex Occurs. Here a very early horizon is represented
by a series of lanceolate projectile points. In one other site
an obsidian projectile point of intermediate type was found
and is probably of Puebloan origin. Scraping tools are of
many types. Small reworked flake scrapers dominate.
Gouge-shaped scrapers made of flint and also of ferruginous
sandstone; small, well made, snub-nose scrapers; rejects;
and chopping implements were common throughout. Sew
eral four-bladed, beve]ed knives were found in the same
site with the obsidian projectile point. Unfortunately that
site is now inundated by Lake Dallas and no further work
can be done there. One mid-back-tang knife3, came from
site 41-18C4-1. Notched stones (or net sinkers) occurred in
two sites. Small flint drills with unshaped bases; small, triangular celts; one incised, perforated, slate pendant;4o a
boatstone fragment; several deeply grooved sandstone
abraders; and numerous manes and metate fragments complete the list of lithic artifacts.
Lavon Area. Few significant differences were noted in
~88 Kelley, J. C., n. d.
39 Patterson, J. T., 1930; pp. 12 and 44-75.
40 Harris. I:L I~:., 1936, I~P. 126-130.
PLATE
A~ Miscellaneous artifacts from Garza-Ltttle Elm Reservoir. 1-5 small,
snub-nose scrapers; 6 and 8 large flint drills; 7 engraved slate pendant; 9
mid-back-tang scraper; 10-11 beveled, four-bladed knives; 12 large, barbed
blade.
B. Artifacts of bone, shell and antler from Farmersville site, Lavon
Reservoir. 1 ulna awl; 2-11 bone pins; 12-13 bone beads; 14 perforated bear
tooth; 15 dog tooth; 16-19 antler flakers; 20 conch head; 21 conch columella;
22-24 shell artifacts; 25 bone awl; 26 turkey spur; 27 bone atlatl hook.

Survey of Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs

49

the lithic artifacts from Lavon area sites designated as nonpottery and those in which pottery was found. There may
actually be typological differences within certain sites as is
indicated by the stratigraphy in the Campbell Hole site and
there undoubtedly are some differences between the pottery
and non-pottery sites. ,, Such differences will need to be
determined, though, on the basis of future, excavated material. At present the lithic artifacts from all sites in the
Lavon area can only be considered as a homogenous unit
in a single tabulation and typological differences noted. The
majority of the projectile points are of types usually associated, in varying proportions, with pottery sites throughout
the Gibson and Fulton Aspects in the Caddoan area. Alba
Barbed and Ga~ Stemmed types are dominant. The small,
triangular and triangular side-notched types commonly associated with Henrietta Focus occur in significant quantity
(8.0%).42 A few specimens of types found in the late Balcones Phase sites in central Texas were also found.,3 The
types thought to represent arrow points (57.5%) are dominant over the larger, atlatl dart point types (42.5%). Scraping tools are dominantly small flakes with one or more
chipped edges. Other scraping tools are small, snub-nose
scrapers and reworked projectile points of ~the Gary
Stemmed type. Small, triangular celts, boatstones, and a
few sherds of small stone vessels were found but not abundantly. In the Lavon area no artifacts representing the early
lithic horizon were found. Otherwise the lithic complexes
from %he two reservoir areas are very similar. The difference, however, lies in the relative shift in percentages of
types. The Lavon area produced more arrow point types
than dart point types. The reverse was found in the GarzaLittle Elm area.
Bone, Shell and Antler ArtiSacts
No artifacts of bone, shell or antler were found in the
Garza-Little Elm area nor have any been reported to the
41 Klrkland, Forrest, 1942, pp. 32-38.
42 See Wright, G. T., 1940 for suggestion of an Identification of these
projectile points with the Caddoan area.
43 Kelley, J. C., n. d.; See also S£ephenson, R. L.o 1947.

5O

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

writer. On the other hand a large number of these aritfacts
were found in the Lavon area. Antler tips were utilized as
flaking tools. Mussel shells with deep, narrow notches in the
edges were probably used as string softeners. Other mussel
shells were used as scraping tools. Some conch shell was
used in making simple ornaments. Bone was utilized extensively in the manufacture of pins; some short with
grooved ends; others ungrooved; and yet others very long
and slender often with engraved decorations. Awls, flaking
tools, beamers, fish hooks, atlatl hooks and beads were also
made of bone. Bison scapula hoes (found in a single instance as burial offerings) were the only evidence of bison
found in the area. Other animals whose bones were used as
artifacts were deer (95%), bear (tooth pendant), coyote
(or dog), and both large and small birds (beads). Shells
found are all (except the conch) of species that are now
living in the streams in that area.44
Summary and Speculations
Fifty-two archaeological sites were located in the areas
of these two reservoirs. Indications of their cultural content
and significance is derived solely from surface collections
and from some minor test trenching in some of the sites of
the Lavon area. Three chronological periods were isolated
and some information was obtained regarding each. The
earliest period is represented by a single site in the GarzaLittle Elm Reservoir (41-18C7-3).* This seems to be a campsite of the early lithic period and may be coeval (broadly
speaking) with the Plainview and other early sites of the
44 Land and freshwater shells identified by Robert J. Drake, University
0f New Mexico.
¯ Sites marked With an asterisk have been recommended for further excavation and are described in this report. Those sites that are not so marked
are relatively small and insignificant and no further work is recommended
in them. However, they do serve to fill out the cultural assemblage and
substantiate the information derived from the major sites.
PLATE 10
A. Unusual potsherds from Lavon Reservoir. 1-~ Marksvllle incised
(?); 4 Holly l~lne Engraved (?); 5 Pennington Puncture-Incised (?); 6-11
are limestone tempered; 10-11 are basketry-impressed vessel bottoms.
B. L~nusual potsherds from Garza-I~ittle Elm Reservoir. 1 late
sissippi Valley ware (?); 2 early Baytown ware (?); 3 late Mississippi
ley Red on Buff (?); 4 Tonto Polychrome sherd; 6-’/ Harleton Applique
sherds; 8 Patton Engraved sherd; 5 and 9-14 are the usual decorated types
of clay teml}ered sherds from this area~

Plate 10

Survey oS Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs

53

southern plains. Plainview points, other early lanceolate
projectile point types and notched stones (or net sinkers)
serve to identify it. It is hoped that future excavation in
this site will provide a stratigraphic record and more identifying material from this site.
The intermediate period is represented in a later occupation of this site as well as occupation of nine additional sites
in the Garza-Little Elm area (41-18C7-5; 41-18C4-1"; 4118C4-3"; 41-17D9-1; 41-17D9-7; 41-17D9-8; 41-17D9-9; 41-17D62; 41-17D6-5). In the Lavon area this period is represented
in thirteen sites. (41-18D7-3; 41-18D7-4; 41-18D7-5; 41-18D7-6;
41-18D7-10; 41-18D7-11; 41-18D7-12; 41-18D7-13; 41-18D4-3;
41-18D4-5; 41-18C9-3; 41-18C9-5"; 41-18C9-7). No potsherds, nor small arrow point types were found in these
sites, nor can any house types or distinctive village features
be associated with them. Artifacts consist of large dart
point types of projectile points similar to those found in
Balcones Phase sites of central Texas (Sterrett Stemmed,
Orla Expanding Stem and Sisterdale Shouldered); triangular gouge-shaped scrapers; large, corner-notched blades;
roughly made chopping implements; and large flint drills.
The artifact lists from these sites are not as distinctive as
could be hoped for but lack of such items as pottery and
arrow point types is sufficient to differentiate the sites tentatively, until further work is done in the area. Apparently
".hese twenty-three sites in both reservoir areas are approxi.nately coeval, and are part of a widespread culture complex
embracing the major portion of east Texas from the Brazos
to the Sabine River and perhaps beyond. Too little is known
of the chronological position of these sites in northeastern
Texas to assign cultural affiliations at this time. Probably
an aspect of theBalcones Phase is represented as the artifact
types are similar to those found in central Texas aspects of
that phase. On the basis of Dr. J. Charles Kelley’s identification of certain foci and aspects of that phase,~ it seems
reasonable to assume that these sites occupy a chronological
period coeval with or possibly just prior to Gibson Aspect
times, perhaps sometime between 500 A. D. and 1,000 A. D.
Kelley, J. C., 1947, pp. 103-104.

54

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The late period is represented in the Garza-Little Elm
area by re-occupation of four of the non-pottery sites (41I7D9-1; 41-18C4-1"; "41-18C4-3""; and 41-18C7-5;) and by occupation of seventeen additional sites (41-18C7-1; "41-18C72*"; 41-18C7-4; 41-18C7-6; 41-18C7-7; 41-18C7-8; 41-18C7-9; 4118C4-2; 41-17D3-1; 41-17D6-1; "41-17D6-3""; 41-17D6-4"; 4117D9-2; 41-17D9-3; 41-17D9-4; 41-17D9-5; "41-17D9-11""). In
the Lavon area this period is represented in eleven sites, ("4118C9-1""; "41-18C9-2""; 41-18C9-4; 41-18C9-6; "41-18D7-1";
"41-18D7-2""; 41-18D7-7; "41-18D7-8""; "41-18D7-9""; "4118D4-1""; and "41-18D4-4). Another (41-18D4-2") is probably an artificial mound but its cultural affiliation is unknown. Relatively large villages (as indicated above by
quotation marks) were found in both areas as well as smaller
temporary campsites. There is no indication of a cultural
difference between the small, campsites and the large village
sites within each reservoir area. Perhaps the small campsites were even occupied seasonally by the same people who
lived most of the year in the villages.
There seems to be a rather high degree of cultural similarity between the sites of the two reservoir areas at this
period, yet there are some significant differences. In the
Lavon area the villages are all located within the river
flood plain. They are 3-4 acres in extent. Houses, were
(probably) circular, 10 feet to 15 feet in diameter, with a centrally located fire hearth of clay and were made of wattle and
daub construction. Burials were within the village but apparently outside the houses; were flexed, unoriented and
without burial furniture (with one exception). Interments
were both single and multiple. Each major village contained
a large earthen pit with an encircling embankment. The
purpose of this pit is unknown but probably was some sort
of community center. Pottery was used but apparently not
made by these people, as it was not abundant and individual vessels were valuable enough to be mended and re-used
after having been broken. A wide variety of pottery types
were used. Clay tempered wares of Frankston Focus and
Titus Focus types were most common. Plain, shell tempered wares similar to the Henrietta Focus type, Nocona

Survey o~ Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs

55

Plain, was of secondary importance. Limestone tempered
pottery (some with basketry-impressed vessel bottom) was
used but rarely. The bison does not seem to have been hunted
for food but deer and small animals were. Fish, mussels and
snails were apparently eaten. Agriqulture was practiced.
NIanos and metates were used with both back-and-forth motion and circular motion. Projectile point types were dominantly small arrow points and in order of importance were
Alba Barbed, Gary Stemmed, ’Trinity Stemmed, Ellis
Stemmed, Perdiz Pointed Stemmed, and triangular and triangular side-notched types. Many types of scraping tools
were used including small flakes of flint with one or more"
edges retouched; small, well made, snub-nose scrapers; and
reworked projectile points. Abraders were made of smal!
blocks of coarse sandstone. Ornaments of non-perishable"
materials, such as stone, bone and shell, were used but not
aboundantly. Red ocher pigment was commonly used. Small,
triangular, polished celts, boatstones, perhaps small stone
bowls, and gaming stones were also used. Bone was abundantly used for making pins, awls, fishhooks, flakers, and
tools for preparing hides. Stone implements were apparently
chipped with both antler and bone flaking tools. The lack
of abundant pottery, re-use of broken vessels, and the wide
variety of pottery types used indicate an extreme, range of,
trade for these items by the people of the Lavon Reservoir,
or the procurement of wives (as potters) from distant areas.
In the Garza-Little Elm area the villages were located on
knolls above the river flood plain for the most part, although
some villages were found extending into the flood plain.
These villages were 3-4 acres in extent. Nothing is known
of the house types except that they were probably of wattleand-daub construction. Burials were within the villages and
both single and multiple interments were made. In none of
these villages was the large ceremonial pit used. Pottery
was used but" apparently not made by these people. The
same variety of types was used as was the case inthe Lavon
area. However, there were significant differences in percentages of these types. A variety here called vesicular, and
the shell tempered ware that is similar to Nocona Plain,

56

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

were most commonly used. Of secondary importance were
the clay tempered wares of Frankston and Titus Focus.
Limestone tempered ware was apparently not used here.
None of the wares in either area can be considered intrinsic.
The bison does not seem to have been hunted for food, but
deer, small animals, fish, mussels and snails were eaten.
Agriculture was practiced. Ma~os and metates were used
with both back-and-forth motion and circular motion. PrOjectile point types were very similar to those used in the
Lavon area but there were significant differences in percentages of types used. Dart point types were dominant and
in order of importance they were Trinity Stemmed, Alba
Barbed, Gary Stemmed, Ellis Stemmed, triangular and Perdiz Pointed Stemmed types.,6 Other lithic artifacts used
were generally similar to those used by the people of-the
Lavon sites. No bone, shell, or antler artifacts have been
found in association with the Garza-Little Elm sites. The
people of this area apparently had as widespread contacts
with other cultures as did the people of the Lavon area.
The sites of this period in the two reservoir areas seem,
at this time, to represent two distinct and previously undescribed cultural units. The Lavon sites appear to be basically Caddoan but distinct from any known group of the
Caddo. Their culture extends from the upper reaches of
the East Fork of the Trinity River, including the tributary
streams, to the confluence of the East Fork and the main
Trinity River. Pottery and other artifact types indicate that
this culture is coeval with Frankston, Titus and Henrietta
Foci and may be roughly dated between 1500 A. D. and
46 ProJecti}e point types used throughout this report are types established
¯ by either Dr. J. Chas. Kelley .or Mr_:. Alex D. Krieger and in use gen.erally by
¯ the members of the Anthropoiog~ Dept., University of Texas. The tangle exeel~tlon is the type Trinity Stemmed~ a tentative type established by the
~uclter.
PLATE 11
A. Typical undecorated potsherds from both Lavon and Garza-Little
Elm Reservoirs. 1-5 plain clay tempered sherds; 6-10 vesicular sherds from
Garza-Little Elm; 11-14 plain shell tempered sherds; 15 sherd of l~ocona.
Plain ware from Clay County included for comparison.
B. Incised pottery bottle from Farmersville Site, Lavon Reservoir.
(R. :K. Harris collactiOno)
Legend for Plate 12, Ayala Site

Survey o] Lavon and Garza-Lit~Ie Elm Reservoirs

59

1650 A. D.4~ The writer and the members of the Dallas
Archaeological Society have agreed on a tentative name of
Wylie Focus for this culture. When the excavation recommended as a result of the present survey has been completed
it should be possible to fully describe and define this focus
and to establish its relation to other neighboring loci.
The pottery-bearing sites in the Garza-Little Elm area,
as has been shown, are similar in many respects to those of
the tentatively identified Wylie Focus, and certainly are
coeval with them, i. e. 1500 A. D. to 1650 A. D. Too little,
however, is known about these sites at present to attempt
to place them in their proper cultural position. On the basis
of the known similarities it may be reasonable to assume
that this group of sites represents a separate component of
the Wylie Focus. However, the differences that were shown
between the sites in the two areas are differences of kind,
as well as of degree, and seem significant enough in their
aggregate to imply a separate focus. If this is so and a separate focus is represented here, it may be more closely related to the Henrietta Focus to the west than it is to the
Caddoan groups to the east. The present survey has only
served to present and outline the problems here involved.
The future excavation that has been recommended should
provide the necessary information to place these sites in
their proper perspective.
47 Krleger, A. D.o 1946, I~P.

REFERENCES
Bennett, Leonard D.
1936. Interesting Artifacts of Clay County, Texas, Bulletin
of T.A.P.S., Vol. 8, pp. 87-93.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1931. Physiography of ~he Western United States. New
York and London.
Ford, ,~. A.
1936. Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from

Texas Archeologfcal and Paleontological Society

6O

Louisiana and Mississippi. Anthro. Study No. 2, Dept.
of Conservation, La. Geological Survey.
Ford, J. A. and Gordon Willey
1940. Crooks Site, A MarksvilIe Period Burial Mound ~n
La Salle Parish, La. Anthro Study No. 3, Dept. of
Conservation, La. Geological Survey.

Harris,

R. K.

1936. Indian Campsites of the Upper Trinity River Drainage, Bulletin of T.A.P.S., Vol. 8, pp. 113-133.
1939. A Net Sinker Site in Denton County. The Record of
the D.A.S., V(~I. 1, No. 2, pp. 8-10.
1945. A Bone Implement Burial, Collin County, Texas.
Bulletin of T.A.P.S., Vol. 16, pp. 84-90.
1947. An Infant Burial. The Record of D.A.S., Vol. 6, No.
4, pp. 18-19.
1948. A Pottery Site Near Farmersville. The Record of the
D.A.S., Vol. 6, No. I0, pp. 38-45.
Housewright, Rex, et al.
1947. The Butler Hole House Site. The Record of the
D.A.S., Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 8-16.
Kelley, J. C.
N. D. Excavation and Interpretation of 5 Central Texas
Archaeological Sites, Manuscript, University of
Texas.
1947. The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position
of the Clear Fork Focus. American Antiquity, Vol.
XIII, No. 2, pp. 97-109.
Kirkland, Forrest
1942. A Series of Non-Pottery Sites in Dallas County,
Texas. The Record of the D.A.S., VoI. 3, No. 6, pp.
32-38.

Survey o] Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs

61

Krieger, A. D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas. The University of Texas, Publication No. 4640.
1947. Artifacts ]rom the PIainvisw Bison Bed. Bulletin of
the Geological Society of America, Vol. 58, pp. 938954.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1946. The Archaeological Situation at Spiro, Oklahoma; A
Preliminary Report. American Antiquity, Vol. XI,
No. 4, pp. 228-256.
Patterson, J. T.
1936. The Corner Tang Flin~ Artifacts o$ Texas, The UniVersity of Texas Bulletin No. 3618.
Raiz, Erwin
1939. Map o~ the Landforms of the United States, Wallace
Atwood, Ginn & Co.
Stephenson, R. L.
1947. Archaeological Survey o~ Whitney Basin. Bulletin
of T.A.P.S., Vol. 18, pp. 129-142.
1948. Archaeological Survey o~ McGee Bend Reservoir.
Bulletin of T.A.P.S., Vol. 19, pp. 58-73.
1949~ A Note on Some Large Pits in Certain Sites Near
Dallas, Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. XV, No. 1.
Watt, F. J.
1938. The Waco Sinker. Central Texas Archaeologist No.
4, pp. 21-71.
Webb, Clarence H.
1940. House Types Among the Caddo Indians. Bulletin of
T.A.P.S., VoI. 12, pp. 48-75.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1942. Archaeological Remains in Central Kansas and Their

62

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

Possible Bearing on the Location o~ Quivira. Smithsonian Misc. Collections, 101, No. 7.
Wilson, Lester L.
1946. Problematical Pits on East Fork. The Record of the
D.A.S., Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 11-12.
Witte, A. H.
1936. Kitchen Middens o] the Upper Red River Drainage.
Bulletin of T.A.P.S., Vol. 8, pp. 71-86.
Wright, George T.
1940. T~iangular Points o5 Red River County. Bulletin of
T.A.P.S., Vol. 12, pp~ 169-174.

