ARCI-IAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE ADDICKS
BASIN: A PRELIMINARY REPORT

BY Jo~ B~.N W’H~T

This note constitutes a summary report on field work
conducted for the Smithsonian Institution River Basin Surveys in the Addicks Dam Basin in the vicinity of Houston,
Texas, by the writer, during the spring and summer of 1947.

During the course of the work a total of nine sites was
recorded. Two of these had been destroyed by construction
work. Two more were scattered, sparse accumulation of
habitation debris. The remaining five were midden accumulations of varying extent and thickness. Three of these five
were tested to obtain comparative stratigraphy, while the
remaining two (the Kobs and Doering Sites) were excavated because of the danger of destruction by physical damage or of pillage by vandals.
Seven burials were recovered; four from the Doering
Site, and three from the Kobs Site. One of these can be
tentatively correlated with the middle zone of occupation.
This burial was semi-flexed, but was so disturbed by ground
pressure that no further deductions concerning it may be
made. The remaining six burials are probably to be correlated with the late phases of occupation. Five of these were
flexed and one semi-flexed. Burial pits could be positively
identified in two cases where soil differences made them readily discernible, and in a third instance because a previous
burial had been cut through in excavating the burial pit
for the later inhumation. There was no definite association
of burial furniture of diagnostic value.
Indigenous pottery is represented by a single highly variable ware tentatively termed Goose Creek ware by Dr.
Thomas N. Campbell, who established the type. This is

144

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

sub-divided into Goose Creek Plain and Goose Creek Incised, the decoration consisting of incised parallel banding
lines, pendant triangles, ladder-like elements, hatching, and
occasional punctuations, serving as the criterion for the division into sub-types. The color ranges from a bright
orange through browns to grays. Fire clouding is common,
and smudging is occasionally found. Variations in surface
color and in paste color, which ranges from red to dense
black, appear to be the result of firing differentials. Temper
is primarily of sand, the percentage varying from vessel to
vessel. Two vessel £orms have identified; one a deep bowl
with direct rim and round bottom, the second a deep, widemouthed, almost cylindrical jar with a round or pointed
bottom. At the present stage of analysis no differences of
chronological significance have been found. Fragments of
two intrusive wares were found. One of these has been tentatively identified as Tchefuncte Rocker Stamped, and the
other as Chinchuba Brushed ware.
Projectile points may be divided into three main groups.
During the initial occupation the expanding stemmed types
of points predominated. These were replaced by a type
termed Cary Contracting Stem, which in the upper middle
level of occupation formed 86 percent o£ the projectile
points in use. In relatively late times these were almost completely replaced by the small, light projectile points, Perdiz
Pointed Stem, Alba Barbed, Scalhorn, and Eddy Stemmed.
Knives were represented by several types: stemmed, leafshaped, oval, and round forms predominating. Two intrusive beveled-edge knives are significant in dating the upper
level of occupation at the Kob Site, since they are known
from historic sites in north-eastern Texas and probably date
somewhat later than 1450.
End scrapers, side scrapers, flake scrapers, gravers, drills,
choppers, etc., were found in all levels.
Two fragmentary banner stones were found unassociated.
Other artifacts of ground stone comprised sandstone abraders, a fragmentary handstone or mano, and a fragmentary

Survey o:f the Addricks Basin

145

milling stone. Miscellaneous objects include paint, hematite
(?), and limonite (?) ; and two artifacts of shell.
Animal bone (deer, turtle, etc.,) was present in considerable quantitites, but very little was utilized as a raw material for the manufacture of artifacts. A few fragmentary
awls made of bone, and a few antler projectile points and
other artifacts made of antler, comprise all the finds in this
category.
Although complete analysis may well change certain
parts in the reconstruction of the history of occupation at
these sites, enough information is at hand to construct a
tentative chronology.
It was noted that there is no development in the native
pottery diagnostic as a time marker. However, the lowest
levels contain little or no pottery. The amount of pottery
in use increases from the bottom level up and becomes
common in the upper levels. It is the pottery tentatively
identified as Tchefuncte Rocker Stamped and Chinchuba
Brushed trade ware that offers the first chronological tie.
Ford and Quimby assign dates from 500 to 900 A. D. to
this culture. Since these sherds were found in the top level
of the hnoll underlying the midden deposit at the Kobs
Site, a tentative date of circa 900 A. D. may be assigned
that level of occupation.
The occurrence of the beveled knives in the uppermost
level at the Kobs Site points to a date of not earlier than
1450. This occurrence, together with the small projectile
points, probably places the date for final abandonment at
circa 1700 A. D.
Thus, it seems likely that the material represents a cultural continuum from pre-pottery times, somewhat prior
to 900 A. D., to abandonment of the sites in proto-historic
times.
Ford, James A., and Quimby, George I., Jr.: "The Tchefuncte Culture, An Early
Occupation of the Lower Mississippi Valley," Memoir No. 2. The Society for American Archaeology, 194L

