N~ws No~es and Editorials

179

NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS

THE POCKET GOPHER AT THE JOHNSON SITE:
A CORRECTION
In an article entitled "The Johnson Site: Type Site of the
Axansas Focus of the Texas Coast," published in Volume 18 of this
Bulletin, I reported (p. 46) the occurrence of bones of the pocket
gopher, genus Thomomys, at the Johnson site.

Dr. W. Armstrong

Price of Corpus Christi recently called my attention to the fact that
Thomomys does not now live on the Texas coast, and he suggested
that the pocket gopher remains from the Johnson site may have
been incorrectly identified (letter, May 10, 1948).
A_t the suggestion of Dr. Price, these pocket gopher remains
were sent to Dr. William B. Davis, Head of the Deparmtent of
Wildlife Management, Agricultural and Mechanical College of
Texas. Dr. Davis, author of "Distribution and Variation of Pocket
Gophers (Genus Geomys) in the Southwestern United States"
(Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Bulletin No. 690, 1940),
has extensively collected pocket gophers from the Coastal Plains
of Texas and has also described many new subspecies from that
area. In a letter dated May 15, 1948, Dr. Davis reported as follows:
"The specimens of pocket gopher you submitted for identification
prove to be Geomys cf. persona~us .... The size of the mandible
and the teeth compare favorably with Geomys personatus, a form
now li.ving from Corpus Christi southward:"
It is regrettable that this error has entered the published record,
for some mammalogists may be misled into believing that
Thomomys, a western pocket gopher, once had a more southeastern
distribution in the United States than at present. The occurrence of
Geomys at the Johnson site agrees with the present known distribution of that genus. According to distribution maps pu~lioned
by Dr. Davis (reference cited above, Figs. 2, 3..ha s), Geomys cf.
personatus of the Johnson oi~¢ ~,ccurs Just north and east of fahe
present rsng¢ o£ Oeornys personatus and on the southern margin
of ~_he present range of Geomys brevice~s. The scanty data provided by the Johnson site fauna suggests that within the past
thousand years Geomys personatus lived somewhat farther north
than at present.
T. N. ¯ Campbell
The University of Texas

180

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society
PANHANDLE-PLAINS MUSEUM, CANYON

In response to our inquiry, Mr. Floyd V. Studer replied:
"It would be a pleasure to respond to your request with reference to a report of our field activities of the Panhandle.
Plains Historical Society Museum, except for the fact that we
have done so little in this direction since the war that we actually have nothing to report."
However, this does not mean that things have not been happening at Canyon. A new addition to the Museum building has been
made, and although there is no plaster on the walls as yet, the
floor space is there and usable. Boone McClure and his assistants
have set up a number of new exhibits. A visit to the Museum
gives one the feeling that it is growing with a lusty abandon. All
of Texas is proud of what the Panhandle institution is doing to
preserve the cultural history of the area.

EL PASO ARCH/KEOLOGICAL SOC~
The E2 Paso Archaeological Society has forty-three (43) members
at present, and have regular monthly meetings, with the exception
of June, July and August. The election of officers was held in
January, 1948. Mrs. Glen E. Moore was elected President, Mr. Ray
O’Bryan, Vice President, and Mr. Lloyd Ault, Secretary-Treasurer.
At the February meeting, Mr. Wiltz Harrison, silversmith, gave
an interesting talk on "Indian Silver, Old and New." At the March
meeting, Robert Zingg spoke on the Tarahumara Indians. In April
Mr. Chas. Hutchinson talked on the Klondike Gold Rush, using
pictures that were taken at the time but since colored and made
into slides. In May the entire group were the guests of the Grant
County Archaeological Society, arriving at Silver City on a Saturday. Joint meetings of the Societies were held that night with Dr.
C. L. Sonnichsen, E1 Paso historian, giving a talk on the Apaches.
D,-. ~rold E. Cooley, president of the Grant County Society also
gave a tal~. o~-, ~,luday morning the combined groups first visited
Treasure Hill, excavated by tl~e Cwg~oves, next they stopped at
the Santa Rita mine, then went to the Galaz ~uin, and on to
Mimbres Hot Springs for picnic lunch. After lunch the g~-up
followed the Mimbres to the old Butterfield stage depot, City of
Rocks, and to Faywood Hot Springs. It was a wonderful trip.
For the October meeting, the El Paso group made a field trip to
cave shelters in the Hueco Mountains~
The Society has a very nice collection of Chihuahua pottery,

News Notes and Editorials

181

from the collection of Mrs. D. Bruce Smith, placed at the Municipal
Airport. This is we hope, a permanent display, to be changed
twice a year.
Our principal objective at the present is to preserve our camp
sites and educate our members to make records of all trips, finds
and excavations.
Mrs. Glenn E. Moore

UNIVERSITY OF OKLAHOMA MUSEUM, NORMAN

The Museum of the University of Oklahoma is a departure
from the usual practice among universities in that a lot of small
and inaffective departmental "museums" have been combined into
one organization with a common exhibition building, research and
storage laboratories.
At present, the Museum is moving into its new quarters.
stallation will probably be completed by April of 1949.

In-

The exhibition building is fireproof. The windows have been
closed and an attic fan provided for cooling and changing the air
to increase the comfort. The large and small animal groups of
the Divisions of Zoology, Botany, and Geology and Paleontology
exhibits occupy the first floor. The Divisions of American Indian,
Classical Art and Archaeology, Anthropology, and History occupy
the second floor.
All of the exhibition cases are cloth lined, and the trimming is
light in color.
The laboratory and storage space will make all collections more
Consequently, research is expected to take on new

available.
vitality.

Special features of interest to all Divisions of the Museum are:
(1) a Dendrochronology laboratory, (2) a Caddoan typological
pository, (3) a Lapidary room, (4) a Photographic studio, (5)
General Work Shop, and (6) a Conference and Lecture Room_

a

Robert E. Bell

WITTE MUSEUM, SA!q ANTONIO

About two thousand years ago the Cave Dweller Indian and
Basket Maker Indian settled in what is now known as the Big
Bend of Texas. It is believed that ~t nn~ *~ ~l~e people occupied a strip ~rom ~l~= c~u~x u~ Mexico to Utah. From where they
came and where they went is still unknown. A large mural

~182

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

8’ x 15’ by Anthony De Young depicting these people is high
on the wall opposite as we enter the museum and the Cave D~ve!ler
room is on the right.
That these people loved peace there can be little doubt, but,
that they found it necessary to constantly defend themselves and
their families is plainly shown by their choice of weapons and
the location of their homes.
Their home was a shelter or cave high in the canyon walls. One
needs the sure foot and dexterity of a mountain goat to reach
them. How they prevented all of their youngsters from taking
the shortest route to the canyon floor before they developed this
agility we will never know, unless they had the instinct of fledglings. The prospect of carrying the daily water supply up these
canyon walls is appalling.
During their time the bow was not yet known, so they used
what is known as the Atlatl, or spear thrower and the rabbit
stick, which was also used to fend off the shafts of their enemies.
The so-called rabbit stick is always found in conjunction with the
Atlatl.
These people spent their days hunting and fishing and although
it was a necessity to keep themselves supplied with food, they
were not without sporting blood. They devised weapons, traps,
snares and nets to help and to satisfy their necessities. They devised fishhooks without barbs. The lures were tied somewhat in
the manner of a present day fly and were attached to a very light
fiber line.
We imagine the twilight hours spent around the fire were devoted to the telling and retelling of the day’s adventures. Those
of special note were painted on the shelter walls in black and
red. The job was so well done that the animals and fish depicted
can be identified today, and are more realistic than we see in
many so-called "modern art" pictures.
There was no store around the corner or in the next block that
the family could go to if they needed a new knife, basket or dress.
They manufactured what they needed using every piece of bone,
stone, wood, shell or grass that came into their hands. If the need
was urgent the manufacturing process was carried only so far
as to~ make the article usefu!, but at other times the process was
completed and a good polishing and sometimes carving job was
thrown in.
x~ ~=s v~]~ ~ al~uce around this room to see that nearly every
article and tool in every day us= ~. had ~ eoun~r1~ar~ m~nulfactured by these primitive people.

News No$es and Editorials

183

They smoked, and their pipes consisted of a joint of cane filled
with cedar foliage. The cane pipe was consumed at the same rate
as the cedar tobacco. When they finished their smoke they threw
the whole thing away and when they again wanted a smoke a new
pipe was cut.
As we enter the room we see the cast of a Cave Dweller’s head
and eleven oil paintings by Peter L. Hohnstedt depict the country
these people Hved in: Santa Helena Canyon; Rio Grande; Brewerstar County, Mule Canyon near Langtry looking south; Mule
Canyon near Eagle Cave; Haze in Chisos Mountains; Entrance of
Santa Helena Canyon; Evening, Del Carmen Mountains; Mule Ear
¯ Peaks, Brewster County; Castelon Peak, Brewster County. These
paintings are about a yard square and the large painting 5 x 7 on
the west wall shows the Chisos Mountains; and below it a plaster
model 6 x 12 feet of Petroglyphs found near Terlingua. There are
14 wall cabinets below the paintings, a map showing 20 named
sites; fiber sources; cordage; netting; basketry; matting; sandals; clothing; ornaments; tools; weapons; food; protectile
points; about 50 metates and manos are on the floor below the cases.
There are four floor cases showing protectile points, drills, bird
points, hatchets, arrow shafts; coiled pitched baskets, twin woven
storage baskets, lance blades, split pebble knives, fist axes, manos
and metates, hammer stones, celts, grooved manos, painted stones,
boat stones, fetishes, pendants and bone heads, sinkers, obsidian
cores, small points, drills and arrows.
There are two glass cases 5 x 5 and 31~ feet deep showing an
adult burial with accompanying artifacts and the other three infant
burials with their shell and paint stone toys and cradles.
The museum publishes the following illustrated bulletins of the
Southwest Texas Archaeological Society by George C. Martin:
Bulletin I, Big Bend Basket Makers, pp. 14.
Bulletin II; Big Bend Basket Makers, pp. 18.
Bulletin III, Big Bend Basket Makers, pp. 95.
Painted Pebbles from the Lower Pecos and Big Bend Regions of
Texas by J. Walker Davenport and Carl Chelfo

M. L. Crimmins

HOUSTON ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, HOUSTON
Our group here is still excavating in the Doering Site, started
by Joe Wheat, but we have to finish before Christmas or abandon
the site as the new owner of the land does not want any excavating

184

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

done on his property. He gave us this short time to finish what
we could. We also have started a survey of Buffalo Bayou beginning about four miles above Addicks Dam, where the Bayou
is just a trickle of water, and working down towards Houston
some twenty miles away. We expect to finish this survey by
summer. Several interesting sites have already been noted.
We now have several new members in the group who are really
interested and who are helping to keep the organization going.
We try to hold one field trip each month for the entire membership, at which time we work on the Doering Site, and we also
have been putting one day~ a month into our survey. Meetings
are held once a month at the museum and from ten to twenty
people generally attend; of these about eight are actually interested in doing any field work. We more or less disbanded last
winter due to bad weather curtailing our excavating and the
fact that only a couple of others besides myself would share in
the responsibility of doing anything towards working up a program. The attendance also fell off considerably due to the museum
being poorly heated, however, we have done much better this
summer. We use the Texas A. & P. BuIlet~n a great deal on our
programs.
Concerning the museum itself, which has long been a disgrace
to Houston due to its poor building and meager budget, the Gold
Star Mothers are now talking with the City Fathers for a million
dollar building to be erected in memory o£ our war dead, and
should this become a reality the new museum would probably
have its own archaeologist, or a. curator of anthropology, and this
branch of science would come into its own at last in this area. We
are all keeping our fingers crossed hoping this may come about.
I will keep you posted of any new developments.
R. B. Worthington

DALLAS ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, DALLAS, TEXAS
That the Dallas Society has been unusually active is evidenced
by its mimeographed issues of The Record, Numbers 1, 2, and 3,
Vol. 7 for September, October, and November 1948.
Mr. Robert
Hatzenbushler is the editor and Mr. 1R. K. Harris is the assistant
editor.
Communications concerning the publication may be addressed to assistant editor, R. K. Harris, 9024 San Fernando Way,
Dallas, 18, Texas. The Dallas organization has been especially cooperative with Mr. R. L. Stephenson who has been making an
archaeological survey of the proposed reservoir sites in the Dallas

W. C. H.

News Notes and Editorials

185

WEST TEXAS HISTORICAL AND SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY,
ALPINE
Mr. Victor J. Smith writes:
"We will have some news notes for the Bulletin, but should
l~ke to develop latest information concerning a large gift
collection."
We will look forward to this announcement in time for the next
issue of the Bulletin.

THE 1948 ANNUAL MEETING AT AUSTIN

The twenty-first Annual Meeting of The Texas Archaeological
and Paleontological Society was held in Austin, Texas, October
23, 1948. The Society is especially indebted to the Program Committee, consisting of Dr. Tom N. Campbell, Dr. Alex D. Krieger,
and Dr. J. Charles Kelley, for the splendid arrangements and
cellent program. Members of the Department of Anthropology"
at The University of Texas held open house for visiting members
in the Anthropology Museum, Friday evening, October 22.
The following papers were read at the meeting:
Alex D. Krieger, Aims and Problems in Texas Archaeology.
Charles E. Meat, The Discovery of Folsom Points in Kincaid
Shelter, Uvalde County, Texas.
E. H. Sellards, Progress Report on the Excavation of Kincaid
Shelter, Uvalde County, Texas.
Robert E. Bell, Recent Archaeological Research in Oklahoma.
Jane Holden, Fingerprint Cave.
Cyrus N. Ray, Summary of Twenty Coke County Sites.
Clarence H. Webb, Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier and Haley
Foci as Transitior~al Cultures.
Robert L. Stephenson, Archaeological Survey of the Lavon Reservoir, Texas.
J. Charles Kelley, An Archaeological Reconnaissance of the Rio
Grande Valley betweer~ Redford and Fabens, Texas.
Herbert C. Taylor, Jr., An Archaeological Reconnaissance in
Northern Coahuila, Me:vAco.
Erik K. Reed, Functions of the Staff Archaeologists in the National Park Service.

186

Texas Archeological and PaleontoZogicaI Society

TITLE OF PRESIDENT EMERITUS CONFERRED UPON
DR. CYRUS N. RAY
At the business sessio.n of the Austin meeting Colonel 1VL L.
Crimmins of San Antonio was elected President. Colonel Crimmins
is the second President of the Society, Dr. Cyrus N. Ray having
been elected President annually since its organization. It was
upon his own insistence that Dr. Ray was not re-elected. By a
unanimous vote of the members present, the following resolution
was adopted:
In recognition for twenty years of service as President of
The Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, and
as Editor of its first seventeen volumes of the Bulletin and in
appreciation of the great amount of time that he has put in,
and for the contributions that he himself has made in archaeology, the Society confers upon Dr. Cyrus N. Ray the permanent honorary title of President Emeritus.

FINANCIAL CONDITION OF THE SOCIETY

The Secretary-Treasurer desires to call attention to the critical
financial condition of the Society. Our balance at the end of October, 1948, was $511.42 as compared to a balance of $878.07 at the
end of October, 1947. This reduction in finances is the result of
the tremendous increase in the cost of printing the Bulletin while
at the same time, membership and membership dues have remained practically constant. It appears that ~he Society must
adopt one or more of the following alternatives within the near
future:
1. Increase membership dues.

2. Increase its membership. At least one hundred new members will be needed, at the present rate for annual dues, to
obtain needed revenue.
3. Reduce the size of the Bulletin considerably (possibly to approximately 64 pages).
4. Obtain voluntary contributions. This appears to be the most
desirable method provided it can be done. Here is an opportunity for some person or organization of charitable inclination to make a worthwhile contribution. The Society operates
with practically no overhead. Probably more than ninetyfive per cent of every dollar received is spent directly to pay
for cost of publications and mailing charges.
5. As a temporary expedient, the Society still has available most

News Notes and Editorials

187

volumes of the Bulletin at the regular price of $3°00 each. If
your file is incomplete, why not give us your order while the
Bulletins are available and while we are in desperate need
of more money.
It is hoped that the Society will take action on this matter at
the Alpine meeting.

THE 1949 MEETING

The next annual meeting of the Society will be held in the
spring of 1949 at Alpine in conjunction with the Southwestern
Division of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science. Heretofore, it has been our custom to meet in October,
but the benefits to be derived from meeting jointly with the
Southwestern Division seem to justify holding our next annual
meeting several months early.
The over-all program for the
Social Sciences is being handled by Dr. Erik Reed, National Park
Service, Santa Fe. It is the plan for the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society to hold a one day’s session under the direction of Col. M. L. Crimrnins, president of the Society. The
program for the sessions of the Society is being arranged by a
committee composed of Dr. T. N. Campbell, Dr. J. Charles Kelley,
and Mr. Alex Krieger. Anyone having suggestions for the program may communicate with the members of the committee. The
committee is also working with Dr. Erik Reed in order to correlate
the papers which will be presented at the sessions of the Society
with the general anthropological theme selected by the Southwestern Division.

THE 1949

BULLETIN

It is our intention at this time to get out the 1949 Bulletin im~
mediately after the Alpine meeting in the spring. We already
know of some five or six papers which will be available at that
time. We are sure that there will be a number of others. Anyone
who has something which he would hke to include in the 1949
Bulletin should have the manuscript in our hands not later than
May 15.
W. C. H.

