"/4

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

AN ARCHAF.OLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCI~.

IN NORTHERN COAHUILA
HERBERT C. TAYLOR, JR.

If one places the point of a compass at the confluence of
the Pecos and Rio Grande, then sets a thirty mile radius
upon the instrument and draws a circle, one has achieved a
crude circumscription of the known boundaries of the Pecos
River Focus pictograph area. Deform the circle to the eastward by blunting it to follow the west bank of the Devil’s
River and place a question mark in all that circumscribed
area which lies south of the Rio Grande.,
These are
roughly, the accepted limits of the pictograph area of the
Pecos River Focus~ and it is with the question mark that this
paper is concerned.
A coherent discussion of this archaeological reconnaissance cannot, however, be developed without a brief statement concerning the geography, chronology, and cultural
characteristics of the Pecos River Focus, per se.
The area about the mouth of the Pecos is notably arid and
is slashed by deep arroyos eroding the Cretaceous limestone
which is the underlying rock formation. The walls of these
canyons are spotted with overhanging rocks or indentations
which form rock shelters--the homes of the Pecos River
Cave Dwellers.
From various indications it is believed that this culture
flourished during the period which immediately preceded
1 Dr. Walt Taylor of the Smithsonian Institution has done extensive work on
the ~outhern periphery of the area and although he has not yet published on th~s
reconnaissance, conversations reveal the possibility that the Pccos River Focus
extends at least sixty miles south of the Rio Grande.
2 E. B. Sayle~ originally gave the name Peeos River Cave Dweller to this culture in his An Archaeological Survey of Texas.
The Witte Museum customarily
refers to the culture as Basket Maker in publications.
The University of Texas

has employed the term Peeos River Focus which will be adhered to in this paper.
The limits of the Pecos River Focus Pictograph Area are, north of the Rio
Grande, the equivalent of Sayles’ Pecos River Cave Dweller area. However, Kelley,
Campbell and Lehmer in their The Association of Archaeological Materials Of Geological Deposits in the Big Bead Region of Texas have established the Peco~ River
culture far into the Big Bend.
:No diagnostic pictographs of this Focus are found,
however, beyond Sayle~’ delineation, except the are~ with which this paper is

concerned.

An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern Coahuila

75

the Kokernot, a wet period dated at ~from 800-1000 years
from the present.3 This would place the terminal chronological date at about 1000 years from the present.
Both climatically and topographically the land was
perhaps a little less forbidding. The annual precipitation
would seem to have been higher lending a more verdant
aspect to the area, and the erosion cycle had not advanced
quite so far, although, certainly there was no significant
difference in the major geographical features.
The Pecos River Focus was first defined as a cultural
entity by E. B. Sayles in his monumental Survey of Texas
Archaeology." He classified this culture as an early food-

PLATE
Numerals indicate sites as follows:
1, La Elephante; 2, San Martin;"
3, E1 Seis Pictograph Site; 4, E1 Seis Rock Shelter; 5, La ~kngelita Rock
Shelter; 6, CoahuilanoShumla Rock Shelter; 7, Coahuilan Pecos
huilan Pecos II; 9, Burnt Rock .~Iound; 10, Santa l~osa Rock Shelter.

3 Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell and Donald J. Lehmer, The Association,
of Archeological Materials and Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of Texas,.
Sul Ross State Teachers College Bulletin, VoL XXI, No. 3, Sept~ 1940. PIate XIX.
4 Sayles, E. B., An Areheologlcal Survey of Texas, Medallion Papers, GII~
Pueblo, Globe, Arizona, May 1936.

76

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

gathering group and defined its geographical limitations
approximately as those given earlier in this paper. Sayles
postulated the continuation of the Pecos River tradition into
the late pre-historic period which he refers to as food-gathering and early agricultural groups.~ He recorded several
distinctive or diagnostic characteristics for this culture.
Among these were: flake knives retouched along a straight
or slightly curving edge; projectile points which were thin
with fine points, long stemmed, squareshouldered, and broad
bladed; ornaments of snail shell, conch and fresh water
gorgers, and olivella shells; and painted pebbles.
Site types of the Pecos Cave Dweller, according to Sayles~
and J. Charles Kelley,7 were of two types: rock shelters
and sotol pits.o
Dr. J. Charles Kelley of the University of Texas lists
several other diagnostic criteria: square or round toed
sandals, two rod and a bundle coiled basketry. LangtryStemmed projectile points,° and as a negative characteristic,
he stipulates lack of agriculture.
Perhaps the most distinctive trait of the Pecos River
Focus are the remarkable pictographs. These cannot be
mentioned under the heading of diagnostic criteria because
they have a much smaller distribution than does the Focus
proper.
Thus it may be seen that we are dealing probably with a
discrete group of ancient gathering horizon peoples who
.5 It must be remembered that Mr. Sayles was

conductiug au

initial

survey

of

Texas archeology as he has frequently emphasized. Present day evidence would
seem to indicate that the Pecos River Focus came to an end at the beginning of
the Korkernot and that there is no evidence of agriculture in this culture.
60p. cir., Sayles. Table 6.
70p. cir., Kelley, Campbell and Lehmer, 1~. 24.
8 So-ca!led "sotol pits" are found both in the caves and at considerable distances
from them.
Mr. Arnold D. Peterson and the writer trenched one near Langtry
in June of this year.
It eontained quantities ~f amaIt shell; no bone or fiber.
There were no artifacts. In this connection it might be mentioned that Mera (Mera,
H. P., Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeastern ]New Mexico, Memoirs of the
American Anthropologica! As.,~ociat]on, Vol. 51, 1938, pp. 15-17) xvho excavated
mounds of marked similarity in southeastern New Mexic~ cast doubt upon the apt~
n~ of the tr~litional term "s~tol pit3’" and employs the te~n midden-circle~.
Because, in the area under discussion, no ~rtlfa~t~ have b~en found in thes~
"so~ol pits’~ and because amateur archaeologists with great experience in the are~:
such as Guy and Jack Skiles and E. L. Rhodes state that these pits are usually
artifact sterile, the writer does not believe it possible 1o l)<~tulate, at this time.
the oulture to which these mounds belong.
90p. cir., Kelley, Campbell and Lehmer, pp. 24, 25.

An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern CoahuiIa

77

existed in the general area of the mouth of the Pecos and
to an indeterminate distance southeast and northwest along
the Rio Grande.
All that was known of the Pecos River Focus lay in the
area north of the Rio Grande. It seemed probable that the
culture extended into Mexico. To determine the veracity
of this presumption, and if true, to determine the extent of
the Pecos River Focus south of the Rio Grande, and in hope
of obtaining suitable sites for excavation and study at some
future date, the writer carried on an archaeological reconnaissance in northern Coahuila in August of this year.,o
Headquarters for the reconnaissance was established at
the Hacienda Santa Rosa. Rancho Santa Rosa extends from
a point east and south of the mouth of the Pecos to some
distance beyond Langtry on the Mexican side and includes
nearly all of the area covered in the reconnaissance.
A crow would find the distance between these two points
about twenty miles, but following the tortuous writhings
of the Rio Grande makes the distance nearly fifty miles.
The country is drained by three major arroyos, La Zorra
enters the Rio Grande about twenty miles east of the mouth
of the Pecos; approximately halfa mile further west is
Arroyo E1 Caballo. Arroyo E1 Salado joins the Rio Grande
about eighteen miles west of the mouth of the Pecos. Approximately in the center of this area lies a smaller, but
relatively large, canyon, La Parida, which enters the river
just east of the Pecos. In addition the country is characteristically criss-crossed with smaller arroyos and washes. In
the main, the sites described herein, it will be noted, lie on
10 To say that the author carried on an archaeological reconnaissance carries
an inaccurate c~nnottion, for the rev~nnaissa~ce is largely the work of many others.
What the author knows of trans-Pecos archaeoiogT is but a reflectSon of knowledge of J. Charte~ Kelley of the University of Texas; it i~ his research0 his ideas.
his work~ that is largely recorded here, The author is under obligation for aid in
field ~’ork to .A.D. Peterson, s~udent, Pennsylvania State College and William
lqe~ms, student, University of Texas, Miss Ruby Oncken, A~slstant Curator of the
Museum of Anthropolo~T, University of Texas, for aid in research, and to Mrs.
Frank L. Stevens, for steongraphia work. The field work was financed by Mr.
and Mrs. H. C. Taylor, of Houston, Texas, Primary thanks for whatever success
this reconnaissance may have enjoyed is due to Don Valieriano Diego and his sons
of Hacienda Sauta Rosa, Coahuila.
Raw~n Diego-Riza, in particular, wa~ the
author’s frequent companion in the field and a quite capable guide with an intelligent interest in archaeology.
Every courtesy and consideration was shown
the writer durin~ his stay on their Ha¢ien.da.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological SocieSy

~r near the Rio Grande.

However, the region was covered

to a maximum of twelve miles inland.

Depending upon

the terrain, reconnaissance was done by truck, horseback,
and foot.

The map is not entirely accurate and in the case

of one site, La Elephante, it may be off more than a mile.
Rather than attempt a synthesis of the information
gleaned, it will be better to describe the sites briefly as they
are recorded in the field notes, present a short summary,
and to postpone conclusions until further study and some
excavation may be done in the area.
San Martin
San Martin is a relatively small and short arroyo which
joins the Rio Grande at a point approximately five miles
downstream from Langtry.

Up the canyon, about five

hundred yards south of this confluence there is a stream cut
back forming a rock overhang along the western wall of
the arroyo.,, For about one hundred and twenty feet along
this natural gallery the wall is covered with paintings,
most of which seem to be of the Pecos River style.,2 Some
of the paintings along the roof of the overhang seem to be
more recent in origin. In contrast to the polychrome, highly
conventionalized paintings of the presumed Pecos Focus
pictographs, these latter are crude, naturalistic representations of men invariably done in bright red.
At this site the Pecos style paintings are done in bright
and dark red and black. (The writer does not wish to leave
the unequivocal impression that all polychrome paintings at
this site are, per se, Pecos Focus. His knowledge of the subject is too slight to allow such an assertion and, in his
.opinion, some of the black on bright red pictographs seem
open to question as to origin. Spalling has partially obliterated some of the paintings and doubtless has removed
others).
] l See Plate
12 See Plate

An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern Coahuila

79

La EIephan~e
Some two miles upstream at La Elephante there is another
arroyo which contains two galleries of paintings similar to
those of San Martin. Perhaps it should be pointed out
here that La Elephante is not actually an arroyo, but a series
of washes fronting upon the t~io Grande, which to someone’s
fertile imagination suggested a pachyderm and, thus, garnered the site’s distinctive name.
Here again, the paintings are mostly Pecos River Focus
polychrome,’3 but several paintings are bright red, in some
cases superimposed upon the polychrome paintings, and
clearly more recent in origin. In this case these latter paintings would seem to extend into the historic period. (For
example, one of these paintings portrays a woman wearing
a skirt and balancing a pot upon her head. Occasionally, in
the Pecos River area one finds painting depicting bows and

~LATE
A.
B.
C.
:D.
E.
1~.
G.

Pictograph
Pictograph
Pictograph
Pictograph
Pictograph
Pictograph
Pictograph

from
fcom
from
from
from
from
from

13 Sce Plate 8.

8

San A~[artin (probably Pecos River Focus).
San :Martin (probably Pecos River Focus).
Coahuilan-Shumla (probably recent),
La Elephante (probably recent).
Coahuilan-Shumta (probably Pecos River Focus).
La ]~31ephante (probably Pecos River Focus).
:El Seis Pictograph Site (probably Pecos River Focus)

80

Texas ArchaeoIogical and Paleontological Society

arrows, crosses and saints, always crudely done in bright
red).
There were no midden deposits or burnt rock mounds in
the area and only a few flint chips and nodules were in
evidence.
El Seis Pictopraph Site

About one and three-quarter miles north of Et Seis windmill and about six miles southwest of the San Martin site,
is a pictograph site which is very similar to that at San
Martin. On the east bank, in a relatively small, nameless
canyon, is a rock-overhang on which are paintings for a
distance of about 100 feet.
The paintings are well-nigh obliterated but enough may
be seen to assure that they are indubitably Pecos River
Focus in origin.
All of those which are still discernible depict Pecos conventionaliz~d men.
On the wal! of a ledge some twenty feet up the arroyo and
about twentyfive feet above the bed of the stream are faint
remnants of paintings. Their depictions are no longer
apparent.
El Seis Rock Shelter
About one and three-quarter miles north of E1 Seis pictograph site and approximately one-third of a mile south of
the Rio Grande immediately to the west of Shumla Bend is
E1 Seis Rock Shelter (a name arbitrarily bestowed). This
shelter is narrow in depth extending for perhaps seventy
feet just under the rim of the canyon wall. The canyon, a
small and nameless arroyo, proceeds northeast into the Rio
Grande.
The shelter measures less than ten feet from floor to roof
at its center and is less than the height of a man at either
end. The walls are heavily fire-blackened at both ends and
sporadically elsewhere in the shelter. There is a midden
deposit of indeterminate depth on the floor of the cave.

A?~ Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern Coahu~Ia

Some chipped flint and a few side scrapers were found on~
the precipitous talus slope immediately beyond the tip of
the cave.
La Angelita Rock Shelter
La Angelita is located about two miles southeast of the
town of Shumla, Texas, and about one-half a mile northnortheast of E1 Seis pictograph site. It fronts directly upon
the Rio Grande about 120 feet above the stream.
The shelter is long bdt extremely shallow, having an
entrance approximately 120 feet wide and averaging perhaps
twenty feet in depth. There are no pictographs, but spalling
is proceeding apace and there well may have been in some
places. Fire-blacking is present throughout the cave wherever recent spalling is not apparent.
Surface finds included two Paisano indented base, one
Langtry Stemmed, one Shumla serrate, one Juno broad base,
and one uncertain (being broken on both base and edge).
Two enormous boulders occupy the central portion of the~
cave. Toward the western end of the cave, at a point where
the limestone has begun to slope upward to form the wall,
there:is a stone shelf and in it are a number of deep, smooth,
rounded holes (a typical one is one and one-third feet deep
with a diameter of approximately eight inches). About
these holes are pitted more than a score of smaller pits.
Coahuilan Shurnla Rock Shelter~4
Coahuilan Shumla Rock Shelter is located on Arroyo Seis
(which has its origin near Santa Rosa windmill six). It is
nearly due south from Shumla, Texas, and about one mile
south of the Rio Grande.
According to Ramon Diego-Riza this cave had numerous
paintings and some smoke-stains. About a year ago brush
was piled in the cave and fired in order to kill parasites
which were infesting the sheep that lived, seasonally, in the
14 .The term "Coahuilan" is here used in order to differentiate this site from
Shumla Cave on the American side,
A similar terminology is employed in
reference to the Pe~ sites.

82

Texas Archeologfcal and Paleontological Society

shelter. In the process nearly all paintings were obliterated.
Surviving are two red ochre paintings of "cowheads.’’’~
A remnant of a painting resembling one found in Seminole
Canyon, near Comstock, is also discernible. Jackson em.ployed the term sun-brusts to describe this type of painting.,~
Round blobs with lines depending downward and with a
broad, intersecting, wavy, line near the bottom comprise the
painting.
This cave had been slightly pitted by haphazard digging,
Autographs of several individuals and some crude Western
European drawings were present on the walls.
Near the western entrance there was a patch of glossy
limestone with several indentations or scratches on the
surface.
Coahuilan Shumla rock shelter has a huge midden deposit
and a steep talus slope. It measures about forty feet across
the entrance, tapering toward the rear. It is about one
hundred feet in depth.
Coahuilan Pecos I Rock Shelter
There are two rock shelters near the confluence of the
Pecos and Rio Grande.
Coahuilan Pecos I is the smaller and is located almost
immediately south of the mouth~7 of the Pecos, high on the
south bank of the Rio Grande. The shelter is approximately
forty feet across the mouth and possibly fifty feet in depth
at the center.
Chipped flint, pestles and matting are scattered about the
surface of the midden, which is evidently rather deep.
Projectile points found are tentatively identified as variant
Shumla serrate. Deep rounded mortar holes, such as those
described for La Angelita are found at the west front.
Metates are located at the east rear.

15 See Plat~ ,~.

16 Jackson, A. T.,
ve~i~ of T~s.
17 See Plate 7.

Field

Note~, Fate Bell Rock

Shelter

{Unpublished). Uni-

An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern CoahuiIa

83

CoahuiIan Pecos II

This rock shelter is located some four hundred yards
stream from the previously described site. Coahulan Pecos II
is high on a canyon wall with an extremely precipitous talus
slope.
The cave measures some three hundred feet across at
the mouth but only twenty-five feet in depth at the maximum. There is a large and apparently deep midden deposit.
At the west entrance are some fifty deep rounded mortar
holes, with one at the front center. At the eastern and near
the front there are numerous metates in the cave wall and,
here, the stone is worn or polished to gleaming, white, slippery smoothness. In this area are numerous grooves or
indentations such as described for Coahuilan-Shumla Rock
Shelter.,8 The only projectile point found was LangtryStemmed.
La Parida Mound Site

A glance at the map will show that La Parida Arroyo is
formed by two intersecting canyons some six miles below
the Rio Grande. At this juncture there was a burnt rock
mound which has been washed considerably, but would
seem to have been of the same type as the "sotol pits" found
in the Pecos River area. There were no artifacts and no
chipped flint in the vicinity of the mound. Burnt rock was
scattered for a considerable distance downstream.
Santa Rosa Rock Shelter
Located on the eastern branch of La Parida Canyon some
seven miles below its confluence with the Rio Grande is
Hacienda Santa Rosa, headquarters for the Santa Rosa
rancho. On the opposite and eastern canyon wall is a small
rock shelter which has suffered enormous rock falls almost

18 In

converr~atlon

Dr.

W~It

Taylor

described

similar

glossy,

~cratched

l~atches of ~ve w~ in ~k shel~ ~e sixty mil~ ~ the ~th and w~

~.

Taylor s~ that the nature of ~e inclusions s~g~ that th~ we~ not
used for s~pening a~ifac~ but that he ~uld not venture an opinion ~ ~ the
~nifi~n~ of ~ phenomen~
Dr. Ke]l~ s~ ~at he h~ found similar
in~n~ gl~ $~ne pat~ ~ve the Rio G~nde in t~ Big Bend A~a and
that he has not de~in~ ~ u~e.

84

. Texas Archeological and Paleon~ologtcal Society

obliterating the shelter. On one spalled piece of limestone
in the rear of what remains of the shelter were found two
parallel bars of red ochre paint.

Some chipped flint was

found but no artifacts were present on the talus slope beyond
the lip of the shelter.
Summary
Pecos River Focus sites are to be found south of the Rio
Grande near the mouth of the Pecos in virtually the same
locations and numbers in which they occur north of the
border. As on the American side, typically the sites are
located on or near the Rio Grande. In this, the Pecos River
Focus pictograph area differs from the culture per se. Pecos
sites are to be found well into the interior of the Big Bend
but no Pecos Focus pictograph site was located at a greater
distance than ten miles from the Rio Grande or from the
Pecos.te
Projectile points and other flint artifacts found in surface
collections=o indicate Pecos River Focus and possibly Chisos
Focus2, cultures.
Pictographs are typically of two discrete types: Pecos
River Focus and a distinctly cruder and more recent type of
pictograph which has been tied to no culture.
19 It should be noted here that no Pevoe Foetm Pi~graph Site i~ known to
exist more than ten miles from e|ther the Peco~ or the R~o Grande
20 The writer did not have permi~lon ~m the Mexic~m government to
21 In conve~-sation Dr. Kelley ha~ indicated thgt he regard~ the Pai~ano
indented ba~e. not as a cultural intrusive from the Cht~ Focus in thi~
but rather ~ a typical point of the Pec~ Focu~
Wh~her there i~ a chronological
overlsp and tht~ material culture borrowing between these loci,or wht~her
River Focus points have a cultural continuum into the Chi~e~ Focu~ period, is not
known.
In any ease projectile points commonly r~g~rded ~ diagnostic of
Chi~o~ Focus occur virtually everywhere in Peco~ Focus $ite~ in a~octatlon with
the Langtryostemmed projectile points.

PLATE

,k. Western edge ,)f entrance to Coahuilan Pecos II, Ramon Dlego-Rlz~ on
ledge.
Note U. S. :Highway No. 90
:B. Coahuilan :Pecos I from interior of cave.
in upper right hand corner of photograph.

C. View Coahullan-Shumla entrance.
D. From left to right, bottom row, Lungtry-Stemmed, W’ariant ShumlaStemmed, uncertain, Sh~mla-Stemmed.
:b’Tom left to right, top row. L~ngtry-Stemmed, Ararlant Shumla-Stemmed.
Juno Broad Ba~e, and Palsano Indented Base.

Plate 9

An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern Coahuila

87

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell and Donald J. Lehmer:
The Association of Archaeological .Materials and Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region oS Texas, Su]
Ross State Teachers College Bulletin, Vol. XXI, no. 3,
Sept. 1940.
Jackson, A. T.; Field Notes, Fate Bell Rock Shelter (Unpublished), University of Texas.
Mera, I-I. P.:Reconn~tissance and Excavation in Southeastern
New Me~ico, ]Ylemoirs of the American Anthropologica!
Association, Vol. 51, 1938.
Pearce, J. E. and A. T. Jackson: A Prehistoric Rock Shelter
in VaI Verde County, Texas, The University of Texas,
Anthropological .Papers, Vol. I, no. 3, July 1933.
Sayles, E. B.: An Archaeologica~ Survey of Texas, Medallion
Papers, Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona, Ma.~ 1935.

