Boat-Shaped Objects, Val Verde and Bosque Counties

91

BOAT-SHAPED OBJECTS FROM VAL VERDE
AND BOSQUE COUNTIES, TEXAS
By CAI’..L
In 1939, at the suggestion of Dr. E. H. Sellards, Director of Texas
Memorial Museum at Austin, a small party was sent to the region
of the lower Pecos River for the purpose of excavating one or more
small rock shelters. Through the courtesy of Mr. Jess Cox permission was granted to explore his ranch on the Peeos River in an area
north of the town of Langtry. One small shelter was located and
completely excavated and a long stretch of the river was scouted.
In searching the thick and scattered refuse heaps located along the
lower edges of the limestone cliffs which are hardly above the
present stream level, a boat-shaped stone object was found on the
surface. As a surface find, its association with a definite focus,
whether intrusive or not, is not known. Surface artifacts in the
site appear to represent projectile points of both the Pecos River
and Chisos foci.~
The second specimen described in this paper is from Bo’sque
County, Texas, and is from the Jesse James Howard collection.
Both specimens have been found in recent years and represent finds
in counties in which boat-shaped stones or atlatl weights were not
kno’~’n at the time of publication of Patterson’s2 monograph on
boat-shaped objects of the Gulf Southwest States.
Terminology

In an attempt to use a terminology in describing boat-shaped
objects which is in keeping with the evidence which has accumulated
in recent years, the normal .position or functional orientation of
the stone should be considered. In this regard, it will be apparent that the writer has essentially reversed the portion of Patterson’s2 terminology in which he terms the plane or flat side the
base and the opposite the convex surface. On the basis of proper
orientation or position of the stone with respect to the under side
of the atlatl it appears that the flat or plane side would be regarded
as the upper or top surface and the convex surface the bottom or

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

92

lower surface.

This is also in general agreement with the manner

in which the stones are oriented in many publications.
Val Verde County Stone

This is a well polished specimen made of a green and white
banded lime silicate rock. The narrow white bands are calcium carbonate marble and the wider dull green bands are composed of
vesuvianite.

The stone is a metamorphic rock and could have

come from one of the several pre-cambrian areas of Texas or
possibly from some similar area outside of Texas. The base or
plane view is sub-quadrate or roughly elliptical in outline. A sidz
view is an isosceles triangle, base upward, with its ends truncated
at right angl.es to the base of the triangle. The upper or plane side
is slightly concave but the concavity is not pronounced. The stone
has a pronounced groove that passes around it at right angles to
the long axis. This grove is cut around the base and both sides
but does not traverse the upper or plane side. This feature indicates
that the groove was cut in the object to facilitate its attachment to.
some other object.
It is 2 inches in length, 1 inch wide at the center or widest point,
and 15-16 of an inch high.
Bosque County Stone

This is a skillfully made boat-shaped object and suggests the
name boatstone. The upper surface has been carved into a symPLATE 17
Drawings of boat shaped objects from Val Verde and Bosque
Counties, Texas.
Val Verde County: la. Plane or upper surface. There is only a
faint suggestion of a trough.
lb.

Side view showing 3-4 notch or groove.

lc.

Convex or base view showing notch or groove.

Bos.que County:
ance is evident.

la.

Plane or upper surface.

lb.

Side view.

lc.

Convex or base view.

Boat-like appear-

Boat-Shaped Objects, Val Verde and Bosque Counties

metrically rounded trough.

95

The ends are gently notched.

The

sides are almost vertical and the base is convex and flat.

The

material is a close-grained travertine (calcium carbonate) or algal
limestone.
The specimen is 31~ inches in length, 15-16 of an inch wide at the
center or widest point, and 1/12 inch high.

The trough is 1/~ of an

inch deep at the center of the stone.

Atlatl Weights
Evidence accumulates to show that the distribution of the atlatl
in the Americas was very widespread at one time.

Indeed, it varied

a great deal in form although the basic principle remained the
same.

In recent years a great deal of the mystery surrounding

many of the problematical stone objects such as boatstones, butterfly or banner-stones, prismatic stones, and bar weights, has been
cleared due to careful observation and new discoveries. The connection between the problematical forms named and the atlatl has
become apparent.
As early as 1893 Otis Mason3 described some atlatls from the
Southwest and stated that one had several objects attached to it
by wrappings.
In 1898 Starr4 described an additional atlatl from Utah that
had a luckstone or charm attached to it.- The "charm" was of
translucent quartz, flat on the atlatl contact side and convex on
the opposite side.
In 1919 Kidder and Guernseys described additional specimens
from their excavations in Arizona. In some cases the stones were
attached to the atlatt. In this article they stated that they believed
the stones were intended to ~rve as weights to improve the function
of the atlatl. Their work6 described in a later publication (1921)
is even more interesting. Two atlatls were found which had three
stones each attached to their backs.

In 1931 Guernsey7 described another specimen that had three
objects attached to it. Two of the three could be called weights.

96

Texas A~’cheolog~cal and Paleontological Society

In 1933 George Martin8 described an object from a cave in Va!
Verde County which he called, and it appears rightly so, the spur
of an atlatl. His was the first specimen of this type found in Texas.
In 1937 Patterson2 wrote his monograph on boat-shaped objects
from the Gulf Southwest States. This is an exhaustive study of all
of the available literature and artifacts up to that date. His thorough study led him to the conclusion that such objects were in most
instances attached to the underside of the atlatl but he stated that
"There is no way of knowing whether this practice had as its
object a purely utilitarian purpo~, or also carried with it the idea
of luck or charm."
In 1939 Fenenga and WheatS described lhe first atlatl that has
been found in Texas with a stone attached to it.
In the same year Webb and Haag1° published the results of
careful excavation and study of some graves in Kentucky which had
atlatl spurs in them. Of extreme importance, however, was the
position of the spurs with respect to the assorted shaped weights
in the graves. Their work showed tha~ the drilled weight~ were
mounted on the atlatl shaft with the spur. Their reconstructions
are noteworthy.
P~rpose of Weights
This point is not clear. That there is some doubt concerning the
actual usefulness of the stones of various shapes and weights is
reflected in the writings of several authors. They are considered
to be strictly utilitarian weights by some, and others look to them
as both a balancing weight and charm. To quote Patterson:2
"In the judgment of the writer, however, the general import of
these stones in the American Indian life is that they were used
primarily as weight stones bound to atlatls to give the weapon
additional weight and efficiency, and that in some instances, at
least, the motive of charm may be assumed."

With the evidence that has accumulated in the past few years, a
study of good copies of some of the specimens of various types
would, in all probability, aid in settling the question from the
standpoint of actual or intended benefit. The employment oi

97

Boat-Shaped Objects, Val Verde and Bosque Counties

stone attachments to at least two very different types of atlatls
should indicate in experiments whether the ’stone would actually
improve the efficiency or performance of the weapon.
811 E. 32nd Street,
Austin, Texas.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, Donald J. Lehmer, "The
Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological Deposits
in the Big Bend Region of Texas," Sul Ross State Teachers College
Bulletin, Vol. XXI, No. 3, Alpine, 1940.
2. Patterson, J. T., "Boat-shaped Artifacts of the Gulf and
Southwest States," Anthropological Papers, ihe University of Texas,
Vol. 1, No’. 2, Austin, 1937.
3.

Mason, O. T., article in Science, September 3, 1893.

4.

Starr, F., "Some North American Spear-Throwers," Archiv

fur Ethnographic, Bd. 9, 1898.
5.

Kidder, A. V., and S. J. Guernsey, "Archaeological Explo-

rations in Northeastern Arizona," Bureau Amer. Ethnology, Bull.
65, 1919.
6.

Guernsey, S. J. and A. V. Kidder, "Basket-Maker Caves of

Northeastern Arizona," Papers of the Peabody Mus. of Amer. Arch.
and Ethnology, Vol. 8, 1921.
7.

Guernsey,

S. J., "Explorations

in

Northeastern Arizona,"

Papers of the Peabody Mus. of Amer. Arch. and Ethnology, Vol.
12, 1931.
8.

Martin,

George C., "Archaeological

Explorations

of

the

Shumla Caves," Publication of the Witte Memorial Museum, Bulletin 3, San Antonio, 1933.
9.

Fenenga, F., and Joe Ben Wheat, "An At!atl from the Baylor

Rock Shelter, Culberson County, Texas," American Antiquity, Volo
V, 1939.
10.

Webb, W. S., and W. G. Haag, "The Chiggerville Site,~"

Reports in Anthropology, the University of Kentucky, Volume IV,
No. I and No. 2.

