A SURVEY OF OKLAHOMA ARCHAEOLOGY
ROBERT E. BELL

and DAWD A.

BAER!~EI8

INTRODUCTION
The prehistory of Oklahoma is not well represented in
the archaeological literature, and much of the published information is not readily accessible. Therefore, it seems desirable to bring together in a summary fashion the information available about the various archaeological manifestations found within the state. A portion of the following
formation is based upon published accounts by other individuals while other sections of the text present new material
previously unpublished. Photographs have been carefully
selected to illustrate what are believed to be typical artifacts
for the cultures concerned.l For the most part, these specimens have not been illustrated elsewhere, and they will serve
to compensate for the limitations in descriptive information.
This synoptic survey of Oklahoma archaeology is based
upon the present status of research. In some cases, earlier
concepts have been accepted; in others, some questions have
been raised, and in a few instances new interpretations are
hereby offered. Irregardless of the ultimate validity of the
cultural sequence and interrelationships, it is deemed worth
while to occasionally synthesize the available data, not only
for the benefit of co-workers in other localities, but for one’s
own information. In so doing, the area can be better understood in terms of a larger setting; unknown localities and
gaps in the record become more obvious and various problems which require solution are rather forcefully brought to
one’s attention. This helps considerably in planning additional research and avoiding over-specialization in some particular area or subject which may have enticed the individual’s
interests.
Within the last few years, great progress in archaeo!ogy
has been made in the Mississippi valley. The overall sequence
1. Aalde from the exceDt|ons noted, all apee|mens are in the Department of
thro~ology collections at the University of Oklahoma Museum, Norman, Oklahoma.

B

Texa~ Archgeologica~ and Paleontological ~ociet~

of events is becoming clear but the details remain obscure
and uncertain. In this general picture, Oklahoma is merely
part of a larger unit and the trend of prehistoric events more
or less duplicates that found in other sections of the Mississippi basin. However, it is also clear that eastern Oklahoma,
although a portion of the Caddoan Area, presents

develop-

ments which are different and more regional in character.
It is in this regional development that Oklahoma reflects its
individuality and distinctive features, and the role played,

FIGURE 1

Diagramatic Chart Indicating suggested chronological Relationships for the Various
Are~h~eologlcal Horizons of Oklahoma. Relative chronology is indicated by beginning at the bottom and proceeding towards the top.

A Survey o;f Oklahoma Archaeology

with respect to the broad trend of events, remains controversial and unsettled.
As materials already excavated are critically analyzed, and
as new excavations are planned with the purpose of answering troublesome problems, a clearer and more dynamic
terpretation of Oklahoma prehistory can be offered.
The Paleo-Indian Horizons
The term Paleo-Indian has been used to designate the various archaeological horizons in which artifacts have been
found in association with exf2nct animM remains. The most
common associations are the finding of projectile points along
with the bones of extinct types of bison and elephant. Such
an association indicates considerable antiquity, and, as such,
represents the earliest inhabitants of North America.
Although no actual Paleo-Indian site has been excavated
in the state of Oklahoma, accidental discoveries and surface
collections indicate that such sites are present and that the
better known complexes are represented. Most of these early
cultures are recognized by a specific Projectile point type
which characterizes these early peoples. Four Paleo-Indian
projectile point types are found in Oklahoma: Folsom, Clovis
fluted, Plainview and Scottsbluff.
The Folsom complex is generally represented by the Folsom fluted point, flint knives, snub-nosed scrapers, side
scrapers, crude choppers, gravers, hammerstones and some
worked bone objects.Well known Folsom sites are the Folsom site in New Mexico, the Lipscomb site in Texas and the
IAndenmeier site in Colorado. Folsom points have been found
in various sections of Oklahoma, and occur more frequently
in the western half of the state.
The Clovis fluted point is so named from types found at
Clovis, New Mexico. The Clovis point is similar to the Folsore point except that it is generally larger in size, thicker in
cross-section, less finely chipped and displays shorter channel flutes. Recent excavations in the Clovis area by the
Texas Memorial Museum indicate that the Clovis point is

10

Texas Archaeological and Paleontoloqical Society

older than Folsom. In Oklahoma the Clovis points are found
chiefly in the western section of the state.
The type known as the Plainview point has been established through excavations at Plainview, Texas. The Plainview
point is similar to the Clovis and Folsom types except that no
channel flutes have been removed. The relationship of the
Plainview type to either Clovis or Folsom is not understood
at the present time. The Plainview point is probably more
common in Oklahoma than either of the above mentioned
fluted types.
The Scottsbluff point has been found associated ,with extinct bison near Scottsbluff in Nebraska. This point is readily distinguishable from those mentioned above in that the
base is clearly differentiated from the blade. The .typical
Scottsbluff point is rather large in size, skillfully made and
has a square stemmed base. Examples of the Scottsbluff
point are to be found in Oklahoma although they are quite
scarce.
There are undoubtedly many ancient Paleo-Indian sites
present in Oklahoma; their discovery merely awaits recognition and excavation.
The Grove Focus
Probably as early as five thousand years ago the northeastern portion of the state was occupied by small scattered
bands of Indians whose subsistence was based entirely upon
hunting and the gathering of wild seeds. The occupation in
Oklahoma appears to represent an extension of the peoples
in the adjacent states of Missouri and Arkansas known
as the Ozark Bluff Dewellers. The sites in Oklahoma, however, rarely allow the preservation of the
perishable materials which characterize the latter group;
therefore, the occupation in Oklahoma is designated
as the Grove Focus.
The sites of this group have
been found in open fields besides the rivers and streams, but
the complex is primarily known from the excavation of
caves and bluff shelters where the remains of the Grove
Focus tend to be found in the deepest levels of the deposits.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

13

The sites themselves are small and suggest that they represent the remains of small family bands and were perhaps
hunting stations of a largely migratory people. The distribution of the sites in Oklahoma is primarily on the drainage
system of the Grand River and Neosho River in Delaware
county though it probably extends as far so~th as the eastcentral portion of the state.
The sites are small so far as areal extent is concerned.
However, they at .times attain a thickness of as much as
twelve feet of deposit during the preceramic period, which
suggests a long temporal duration. Th~s long period of occupation in the area is also indicated by the fact that during
their stay in the region their culture did change slightly so
that three periods of occupation can be segregated. The periods, or stages of cultural development, suggest a gradual
shift in economy from a purely hunting and gathering one to
one in which maize agriculture is beginning to play an important role. It is this latter stage which appears to be comparable to the Ozark Bluff Dweller culture.
In the earliest stage, the projectile points are represented
in a variety of large forms including side notched and corner
notched, contracting stem, broad parallel-sided and slightly
expanding stem and a variety with an expanding stem and
lobed base. Their distin,~ishing features are the presence of
a proportionately broad blade, occasional coarse serrations
on the blade, and a series having a distinct beveled blade.
In addition some points were made with a blunt tip, perhaps
for use in hunting birds. Other chipped stone implements include large drills, knives, a variety of scrapers including end
and side scrapers and roughly fabricated choppers. Polished
and ground stone implements include the full-grooved axe,
concave-faced abrading stones, anvils and small grinding
stones and mortars. It is suggested that the latter implements may have been utilized in grinding seeds.
In the second period essentially the same projectile points
are present though in different proportions. Additional
forms noted include a variety with a deep notch originating
toward the base of the point, a variety with a small stem

14

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological SocieSy

formed by shallow notches and forms resembling the Plainview types. The mean dimensions of the projectile points begin to diminish in this period. Drill, scrapers, and choppers
continue in this phase but in a greater variety of forms,
with the exception of the choppers which are decreasing in
numbers. A variation in the ground stone complex is indicated since large carefully shaped manos outnumber the small
grinding stones. This suggests a change in this aspect of the
economy and perhaps signals the introduction of corn. No
polished stone artifacts were found, but this period adds some
implements of bone and shell including a shell scraper and
bone awls and flaking tools.
The third period, representing the last phase of occupation
of the preceramic group, has a culture complex much like
that of the second period though again with changes in the
relative popularity of some of the artifact types. New additions include a series of small projectile points which sugges~ the appearance of the bow and arrow to supplement an
earlier exclusive us~ of the spear-thrower or atlatl. Other
new additions are a solid atlatl weight in polished stone and
with grooved ends and the chipped stone axe and hoe. Carefully fashioned manos become increasingly important which
suggests an increasing dependence upon agriculture. On the
other hand, the proportion of scrapers declines so skindressing may have been partially supplanted by some types
of textiles.
In accounts of the Ozark Bluff Dweller culture, suggestions of affiliation with the Southwestern portion of the
United States have been stressed. This has been based largely on some of the perishable remains such as the coiled
basketry and baby cradles and the type of corn. The complex
as seen in Oklahoma, stripped of its perishable materials
shows a far greater basic relationship to the Archaic cultures widespread in the eastern United States. The complex
is quite probably an early variant of this latter manifestation which, late in its stay in the Ozark region, received a
series of traits from the western states which modified the
basic eastern culture.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

15

The Cave Cutture of Western OkJahoma
Throughout western Oklahoma, especially in the Panhandle, there are many caves and rock shelters which have
produced archaeological materials. Our knowledge of this
region and the artifacts to be found in these caves is based
largely upon the excavation and publications of Dr. E. B.
Renaud.z Some additional salvage work was carried on in
this area by a University of Oklahoma field party.

Dr. Renaud excavated three sandstone caves located near
Kenton, Oklahoma in the summer of 1929. All of the caves
produced archaeological materia! which appeared to represent a simple semi-nomadic hunting people. The simplicity
of the culture and the types of specimens found suggested a
relationship to the better known Basket Maker people of
Arizona and New Mexico. Although this relationship remains questionable, a considerable antiquity is indicated by
many of the cave discoveries.
Cave excavations, because of the better conditions for
preservation, commonly yield artifacts not normally found
in mounds or village sites. The Kenton caves were no exception, and Dr. Renaud found an abundance of m~terial including many items such as basketry, fur, seeds, wood and
vegetal matter.
All of the caves were marked by the presence of pictographs painted in red on the sandstone w~l]s or ceilings. The
figures examined were square shouldered men and women or
various conventionalized symbols. In most cases, the natural
elements had so damaged the paintings that it was impossible to determine their original nature.
The caves produced a quantity of animal bones, apparently
the debris of successful hunts by the inhabitants. Bison and
deer bones were most abundant although other animals represented were elk, antelope, jack rabbit, cotton tail, coyote,
2.
Renaud, E. B.. "Les Plus Anciennes Cultures Prehistoriques du St~d-ouest
Americain," L’Anthropologie, Tome XL, No. 3. ]~p. 233-258, Paris, 1930. "Prehistoric Cultures of the Cimarron Yalley, Northeastern New Mexico and Western
Dklahoma," Colorado Scientific Society Proceedings, Vol. 12, No. 5 pp. I13-150.
Denver, 1930.

16

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

wild cat, badger, rodents and various birds including the
eagle and wild turkey. In plant remains, the caves produced
a variety of wild seeds, acorns, various fruits and berries,
squash and corn. The corn w~ represented by husks, . grains,
cobs and some complete ears. In one instance several ears of
corn were found encased in a prairie-dog skin bag.
Perishable artifacts included a variety of items. Two types
of yucca leaf sandals were found, one with a square toe and
another with a rounded toe. Some examples have a double
thickness with a reinforcement of cedar bark as padding for
the sole. Several types of basketry including the coiled variety so common in the Southwest were found. Various samples
of string and cordage of vegetal fiber, as well as bits of
rabbit fur and skin bags, were reported. Objects of wood
which were excavated included a dart foreshaft, a tube, a
fire drill, pointed sticks and what may be parts of a snare.
To the complex of wooden artifacts may be added the spearthrower found in earlier excavations of one of the same caves
studied by Renaud.3
Bone objects discovered were awls or perforating tools and
beads. The awls are sharpened pieces of bone, some having
been made from fiat sections of various animal bone fragments. The beads are tubular sections cut from bird bones.
No polished stone objects were found, and stone artifacts
were rather rare. Renaud reports the finding of several metares, all of irregular shape with an oval shaped grinding
basin. Small manos or hand stones were used as pounders or
grinders to crush their seeds and grain. A single selenite
pendant, rectangular in shape and with a small hole at one
end, was found in cave No. 1. The supporting string was still
tied through the perforation at the time of discovery.
The chipped stone materials are chiefly of quartzite, re!>resenting either crude unmodified flakes or flakes having a
small amount of chipping along the side or end. I~Iost of the
specimens appear to have been used as scrapers although
Baker, W. E., and A. V. Kidder. "A Spear
American Antiquity, VoL 8, No. 1, pp. ~;1-~;2, 1957.

Thrower From

Oklahoma,"

PLATE 2
Artifact~ from eaves of Western OklahDnut.
Kenion C~ave~: Woven snndals (1. ;I); hide moccasi~ t2); hammerstone {4); wooden
fire drill parts (5) ; skin bag containing seeds (6); scrapcr~ (7} ; corn e(~bs (8) ;
g’rindtng stone (9).
Acknowl~l~ents: Specimen 1, W~olaro.c Museum, l]art|esville: specimens 2-~, 5-6,
Oklahoma Histor|cal ~’v~eiety Museum, Ok|shores City.
Specimens 1, 2. 3 and 6 are I /16 actual size; all others are 1 /3 size.

A Survey o] Oklahoma Archaeology

19

some may have served as knives, choppers, points or punching tools.
The fact that no pottery, grooved axes, polished stone or
finished projectile points were found in any of the caves suggests considerable antiquity. Renaud suggests that the western Oklahoma cave materials represent a very early Basket
Maker culture which may have survived in an area marginal
to the Anasazi region of the Southwest.
The Fourche Maline Focus
The archaeological complex considered as Fourche Maline
is found in east central Oklahoma in southern Le Flore county. The excavated sites are situated along the Poteau River
and Fourche Maline Creek within a fairly limited area. It is
known, howover, from surface collections, that the Fourche
Maline materials are found throughout a much larger region
beyond the limits of the above mentioned area.
At the present time the actual content of the Fourche
Maline culture is not too clearly defined, and the analysis of
materials now on hand may alter the present concept concerning its nature. The Fourche Maline culture appears to
represent an early pre-pottery Archaic hunting and gathering people who’became acquainted with pottery and incorporated its manufacture into their technological achievements. The appearance of pottery, however, does not appear
to have materially changed their general pattern of life.
Although little data is available in the literature, a large
number of Fourche Maline sites have been completely or
partially excavated. Some sites where Fourche Maline materials ha~,e been found include Williams, Adams, Redwine,
Coplin, Heflin, Mackey, Sam, Cantre]!, Ward, Conser and
Scott. Most of these are now within the confines o~ the
Wister Reservoir.
The Fourche Maline sites are represented by accumulations of village debris or midden deposits situated on the
bar~_k of a river or stream. These middens are characterized
by a black colored earth which contains, scattered throughout the deposit, considerable amounts of clam shells, animal

20

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

bones, charcoal, fire cracked rocks, various artifacts, h~lman
burials, occasional occupational surfaces and other miscellaneous objects. No house patterns have been found at any of
the sites although occasional post holes were encountered
within the middens.
Both human burials and dog burials are found in the middens. The dog burials are not common, but human burials are
often found scattered throughout most of the midden area.
The majority of burials are of single individuals placed in a
flexed position without apparent body orientation and without grave offerings. Some multiple burials and bundle burials are known but occur only in a minority of cases. In
most burials there is no evidence of a grave outline which
suggests either that the body was placed upon the ground and
merely covered over with the surrounding midden debris, or
that the dark colored soils obscured the grave outlines. In
some cases where burials were found at the base of the midden, a shallow circular grave had been scooped out of the
underlying subsoil. In other instances, no grave outline was
observed even though soil colors should not have obscured
the evidences.
Projectile points are by far the most common chipped
stone artifact on the Fourche Maline sites. Points are
abundant on all sites, and the typical types are large in size,
rather crude in workmanship, and most commonly are made
of a dark colored quartzite or black flint. The predominant
shapes are stemmed forms with either a square or tapering
base. Other chipped stone objects include knives,
scrapers, double-bitted axes and miscellaneous unfinished
or unclassified specimens. The flint knives are usually
simple leaf-shaped or lanceolate forms although examples
of the triangular corner-tanged knife have been found at
some sites. Stone drills are rather common and appear in a
variety of forms. Many of the drills a~e actually drillpointed projectile points and may have been used for a
reamer. Scrapers are represented by simple flakes which
have some secondary chipping along one side or end. They
are crude and poorly made. The double-bitted flaked axe

A Survey of OkIahoma Archaeology

23

is also associated with the Fourche Maline complex and commonly exhibits abrasions or smoothed surfaces in the midsection, presumably resulting from the method of halting
the implement.
Specimens of ground stone include celts, axes, pendants,
gorgets, boatstones, atlatl weights, beads, grinding stones,
hammerstones, cupstones and miscellaneous objects. The
celt is represented by two varieties, a small well made celt of
black hematite and a larger ovoid shaped celt of igneous
or metamorphic stone. The celts do not appear to be especially distinctive although they do have a thick cross-section.
Examples of full-grooved stone axes have been found but
their occurrence is very rare. Pendants and gorgers are
represented by oval or rectangular tabular forms having
one or several perforations for suspension. The types found
exhibit considerable variety, and some are similar to those
from Early Woodland horizons in eastern United States.
The boatstone is fairly common at all sites and occurs in
a great variety of shapes and styles ranging from slender
keeled forms to those resembling a hemisphere. The base
may or may not be hollowed out, and perforations are infrequent. The barmerstone or atlatl weight is represented by
some fragments, but it is certainly a rarity at most sites.
Since there is such a relative abundance of the boatshaped
forms, they appear to replace the bannerstone type of atlatl
weight in the Fourche Maline area. Other specimens found
which should be mentioned are large stone beads and a
single fragment of what appears to be the stem of a stone
pipe. Vlith this exception, pipes are conspicuously absent
at Fourche Maline sites.
The Fourche Maline people utilized bone for a variety of
tools and implements. At most sites the bone or antler objects are common artifacts, and many of them are well
polished, carefully made and preserved in fine condition.
Bone projectile points are represented by two kinds: those
made from cutting off the end of an antler fine, and those
made from a splinter of bone which has been roughly rubbed down to a point. Many of these latter points resemble

24

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

crudely made bone awls except for the battered or blunted
tip which appears damaged from impact in use.

Bone awls

or perforating tools and bodkins are found at most sites.
The bodkins or bone pins are long pencil like pieces of
polished bone having a flattened, carved or pin type of head.
Although they may have served as a perforating tool,
their length, form and careful workmanship suggest a use
as hair ornaments. Bone atlatl hooks are represented by a
small number of skillfully made specimens. They are without sockets for attachment and the base has a slot into which
the prepared atlatl shaft was secure~t by inserting a pin.
Other bone artifacts include flaking tools, tapping tools, fish
hooks, and whistles made of large bird bones. Ornaments
made of bone include cylindrical beads, small flat perforated
discs, bone rings resembling a napkin ring and perforated
animal teeth. There are, of course, some examples of
worked bone which do not fall into the above categories
and whose use remains problematical.
Although broken and whole mussel shells are abundant in
the Fourche Maline middens, shell artifacts are not
common. Some shells have rubbed or worn edges and appear
to have been used as scrapers. Others have deep notches cut
into the edges and it is not known for what they were used.
A few ornaments of shell have been found including simple
pendants, gorgets and large beads. Although mussel shell
was used for ornaments, conch shell seems to have been
preferred for most objects.
Pottery is found on the Fourche Maline sites and is most
abundant in the upper levels. The typical pottery ware is a
thick, granular, clay or sherd tempered ware of brown color.
No complete vessels have been found although the sherds
indicate the typical vessel is a large and deep cylindrical jar
having a flat disc shaped base occasionally displaying a
basketry impression. The great majority of pottery sherds
are plain, the few decorated specimens being designed with
bold incisions. The decoration is largely confined to the rkm
or upper portion of the vessel with simple chevron, diamond
or ladder designs being most typical.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

27

The Fourche Maline complex represents the earliest
archaeological horizon now recognized in east central Oklahoma. It apparently lasted for a long period of time and
further research will undoubtedly define clear sub-divisions
within this time period. It may be suggested on the basis
of present evidence that the preceramic levels of the sites
could well be the equivalent of an Early Woodland horizon
and that a Middle Woodland alignment is indicated for the
ceramic levels, in part on the basis of trade sherds. This
implies, then, that although close ties are indicated with the
Archaic of the Southeast in terms of artifact types, it is a
peripheral survival of this complex into later times. This
is supported by indications of relationship to the later Gibson
Aspect materials since the Fourche Maline pottery closely
resembles the utility wares of this aspect. Even though
analysis of present collections will shed considerable light
on this material, additional data are needed from the surrounding area, especially Arkansas, in order to properly
understand the role played by the Fourche Maline people.
The Woodland Horizons
The earliest occupants of the northeastern portion of the
state who manufactured and used ceramics clearly show
their affiliation with the northern Mississippi valley in the
type of pottery made. While these cultures have affiliations
with cultures as distant as those of Wisconsin and Illinois,
it is probable that the occupation in Oklahoma represents
the southernmost thru.st of peoples who had previously
migrated to Missouri and eastern Kansas. Within the state
they are known primarily from excavations conducted in
Delaware county, but evidence of their occupation is found
as far south as Cherokee county where traces of their culture
have been recovered in bluff shelters on the Illinois River.
In Delaware county, the most extensive occupation discovered was at the Cooper site, located at the former junction of Honey Creek and Grand River, an area now covered
by the Grand River Lake. The Cooper site will be considered as the basis for the description of this horizon
though Woodland remains are also frequently encountered
in bluff shelters. Some of the bluff shelters contain variant

28

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

pottery types which indicate a limited occupation of the
region by Woodland people at both earlier and later times
than that represented by the Cooper site.
Even at the Cooper site, distinct areas of occupation containing variant pottery types indicate that the broad level
river terrace was occupied for a sufficient length of time
for variant styles of pottery to develop. The pottery, the
principal means of identifying the culture, is consistently
tempered with coarse fragments of crushed chert or limestone. The characteristic vessel shape is an amphora form
having a slightly constricted neck and a round or conical
base. In one area of the site, designated DICoV, the pottery was decorated primarily by the impressions of a
coarse-toothed dentate stamp, impressions of a cord-wrapped
stick, and more rarely by impressions of a fine-toothed dentate stamp. The decoration was characteristically compressed to a narrow band around the rim of the vessel.
Typical arrangements of the design elements are: (1)
vertical or diagonal impressions of a cord-wrapped stick
on the lip and upper section of the rim of the vessel; (2)
diagonal or vertical impressions of a coarse-toothed dentate
stamp on the upper portion of the rim and lip, occasionally
bordered at the lower edge by a horizontal line of dentate
stamping; and (3) a decoration similar to (2) executed
with a fine-toothed dentate stamp, occasionally in variant
patterns such as a horizontal band of dentate stamping in a
chevron pattern. More varied decorative patterns are found
on the pottery from a second area at the Cooper site,.
designated DICoI. The common decorative elements of this
unit are the fine-toothed dentate stamp, embossed nodes
formed by punching bosses from the interior of the vessel
while the clay was still plastic before firing, the use of
broad incised lines to border areas of stamping and fine
incised lines to form a decorative band at the rim, and
punctate elements primarily circular or wedge-shaped
forms. The coarse toothed dentate stamp and impressions
of the cord-wrapped stick are rarely found. A typical
decoration on a vessel might consist of a band of incised
cross-hatching or fine-toothed, diagonal impressions of a

A Survey o:f Oklahoma Archaeology

29

dentate stamp about the rim. This would be bordered on
the lower edge by a horizontal row of punctate impressions
or a broad incised line. Below this, on the shoulder area
of the vessel, would be placed diagonal bands, vertical bands,
or oval areas of dentate stamping, the stamping being
bordered by a broad incised line. The effect of the decoration is to get in opposition roughened areas covered by
dentate stamping with smooth or slightly polished plain

zones.
The latter pottery style, found at DlCoI, is most characteristic of the Hopewellian phase of the Woodland pattern
and probably represents a slightly earlier period of occupation than that of D1CoV. The indication of Hopewellian
affiliation is confirmed by the presence of a few artifacts
not found in the area in which the pottery of D1CoV is
present. The most interesting of these consists of ~wo
fragments of a small pottery figurine. One fragment is the
head of a figurine which bears an elevated area on the top
resembling the copper head plates which are occasionally
found on skulls of burials in Ohio Hopewell mounds. Details
of hairdress and ornament are given in what appears to be a
rounded coil of hair at the right, rear of the head and in
an elongation of the lobes of the ears---probably the representation of ear spools. The other portion of the figurine
is a section from the waist to the knees, the person being
represented as wearing a breechcloth. Similar specimens
are frequently found in Hopewell sites, one of the notable
series coming from the Turner Mound in Ohio. Other artifacts confined to this unit include some objects of polished
hematite, among them fragments of a perforated gorget and
a boatstone. A few sherds found in this unit probably
represent fragments of vessels obtained in trade. Their
temper, containing a large portion of mica, is foreign to the
Oklahoma region and some aspects of the decoration, such
as the use of smooth rocker impressions, set the fragments
apart from local pottery types. The sherds are quite similar
to pottery found in the Kansas City area.
Chipped stone artifacts from the two components are
quite similar. Projectile points are found in large numbers,

3{}

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

the most common shapes being large points with deep or
shallow notches in the corners. Points with contracting
stems are less common but are found in both components.
The abundance of projectile points suggests that hunting was
an important aspect of their economy. Though animal bones
have largely decayed, the teeth of bison as well as deer
were found. The importance of hunting would appear to be
confirmed by a large series of scrapers which could have
been used in skin dressing activities. They occur in a great
variety of form and sizes including end scrapers and a
series of forms which are circular in outline and often somewhat cone-shaped. The latter varieties appear to be distinctive features of the Woodland horizons~in Oklahoma. Other
chipped stone forms include large and small knives in
lanceolate, ovate and stemmed shapes, perforators, and
chipped stone axes, though the latter appear infrequently.
That the economy of the Woodland peoples is not solely
dependent upon hunting is indicated by large numbers of
grinding stones, many of these being carefully shaped oval
manos of sandstone, and grinding basins or metates having
an oval depression in which corn could have been reduced
to flour.
It is probable that the Woodland peoples did not build
very substantial houses. No traces of them have been found
in the excavations though a number of slightly depressed
areas which could have represented house floors were
uncovered. In some of these, fragments of metates and
grinding stones were present as were numerous pieces of
limestone that could have been originally in association
with fireplaces to support the pottery vessels used in cooking. The pottery vessels, because of their conical bases,
could not stand without some sort of a support. So far as
household equipment is concerned, one distinction between
the two components described is that in D1CoV a number
of small cache pits were discovered, some of them having
been lined with slabs of limestone and shale. These pits,
generally about 2.5 to 3 feet in diameter and perhaps about
two feet in depth, could have been utilized as a~ storage
place for supplies of corn.

~5
17

PLATE 5
Stone iml>|ements and
pottery figurine from the Wood/aod Horizons in Northeastern
Oklahoma.

~,,~
-,. XnIy~ 116 ~ ~,~ ,,~e ~ace on]~- ,c~ . 0.faces (5):
...... mnno fragmeni (~9~’’~v~ ; pink (20) * ~,,~.~ ’ cn~pped stone
Potte~, fi~rine is characteristic ¯ --~ : pottery figt~ri~e’ ~,,u~e celt (21) . abr :...s
(1 ~ ).
,
artier
m~ are found throughout th-- ~" ~; the
manufaCtUred

count)..

...... ~. v U~Oer ~ite, Unit V : a~ othur~ Cool, or site. U~it I, Delnware

All specimens are i/3 size,

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

33

Though Woodland peoples elsewhere, particularly the
Hopewellian group, buried their dead in mounds, no traces
of such a practice have been uncovered in Oklahoma. A few
burials were found among the occupational debris of the
Cooper site but hardly enough to account for what must
have been an occupation of’ substantial numbers. It seems
possible that some burials may have been made in the various rock shelters of the area. In one, located on the opposite
side of Honey Creek from the Cooper site (D1CoVI), the
more than seventy five individuals buried in the shelter represented far more people than could be accounted for on the
basis of the small area that actually represented a habitation
zone. It would appear that the frontier settlements of the
Woodland pattern in Oklahoma, burying their dead with
little ceremony and no grave goods in whatever areas were
convenient, failed to keep up all of the religious and ritual
aspects of life as maintained in their major cultural centers.
The Spiro Focus
The Spiro focus has been defined by Orr as including the
following sites: Craig 1, Brown 3 and 4, Evans 3, Ward 2,
Groseclose, Brackett, Norman, Gahagan and Mineral
Springs 4.4 Krieger has brought attention to the Spiro focus
and pointed out the fact that much work must be done
before anything definite can be accepted.S It is certainly
apparent that detailed analyses and reports are necessary
before a reinterpretation of these materials can be presented.
Krieger has considered the Spiro focus materials as a
part of a larger Gibson Aspect which underlies the later
Fulton Aspect horizons. The Gibson Aspect includes not
only the Spiro focus, but also Alto, Gahagan, Sanders and
Haley. In addition, Krieger offers a slightly different list
of sites as comprising the Spiro focus: Craig, Brown, Ward,
Evans, GrosecIose, Hughes, Norman, Brackett, Mineral
4.
Ore. Kenneth G., "The ArchaeIogical ~ituation at Spiro, OkIahoma:
liminary Report," American Antiquity, Vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 228-2S6, 1946.

5.

A

Pre-

Newell, H. Perry and Alex Kr~eger, The George C. Davis Site Cherokeo County,

Texas, Memoir No. 5, Society for American Archaeology, p. 199, 1949.

34

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Springs, Jaggers and Mustang Creel~e Bell has recently
added the Harlan site as another example.7 Thus it is
clear that what actually constitutes the Spiro focus is rather
vague.
It is becoming increasingly apparent that sites included
in the Spiro focus do not comprise a uniform group. It is
also clear that differences between some of the sites indicate
either a chronological or regional variation. The differences
in cultural material between such sites as Harlan and Norman or Harlan and Hughes suggest that these differences are
a result of time rather than location since they are all three
situated within twenty miles of each other. When all of
these sites are grouped together under the Spiro focus, the
relationship of the sites to each other is obscured. A
much better understanding of the situation would be to consider all of the sites as representing a more generalized
Gibson Aspect, with the different sites occupying various
chronological positions within the Gibson Aspect time period.
As additional analysis and discoveries appear, the inter-relationships and focus assignments will become much clearer.
For purposes of~general description in this paper, the
Craig, Brown and Evans sites will be used as representing
the Spiro focus. This is basically the same as what Orr
has designated as the Middle Spiro component.8
The three sites, Craig, Brown and Evans all represent
excavations in the Spiro area, and the Craig mound is the
one site from which so much spectacular material was removed a few years ago. All of these sites are located north
of Spiro, Oklahoma in the Arkansas River valley of Le Flore
county.
The Spiro focus materials appear to be found chiefly in
east-central Oklahoma along the major water courses. The
sites are characterized by various sized earthen mounds of

6.

]’/ewell, H. Perry and Alex Krieger, ibid., p.

199-200.

7.
I~ell, Robert E., "Archaeological Excavations at the Hartan Site, Fort Gibson
Reservoir, Cherokee County, Oklahoma," Plains Archaeological Conference New~letter, VoL 3, lqo. 1, pp, 3-1~, 1949.
8.

Orr, K. G., op. cir.

PLATE
Pottery sherds from Wo~tland ttorizons in Northeastern Okhdumm.
Upper two rows are rim sherds from the lto!~cweHian horizon {C~per site, Uoit
~wo pottery types are represented, one grit tempert~t {1-2, 6), the other clay tempered

~3-5.

The lower two rows are sherds f~om the ]ate Woodland horizon {Cooper
Unit V).
All are ~r[t tempered.
Sherd~ ~-12 represent ~ continuity of
~hnlque~ while the remainder show the ~ew decoration motifs that nre dominant
during the lute period.
All apec~mens are 1 /3 si~e.

A ~uruev o] O~ho~ A~chaeo~ogy

two types: burial mounds and domicilliary or gub-structure
mounds. The burial mounds are conical or hemispherical
in shape, and commonly two or more may be connected
together to form a compound mound. The domicilliary
mounds are square or oval truncated mounds serving as a
foundation for a house structure. These sub-structure
mounds commonly exhibit several construction phases
wherein the mound was enlarged from time to time.
The Craig mound produced a variety of burials including
group or multiple burials, single burials; extended, flexed
and semi-flexed burials; bundle burials and cremations.
Group burials are probably the most common and may
contain from two to thirty individuals. Grave goods were
found with a large number of the burials although not all
graves contained artifacts. Some burials were especially
rich in grave goods while others produced relatively little,
if any, associated material.
The Spiro focus houses are found in the general region
of the mounds, and are represented by square or rectangular
structures having a narrow passageway entrance. The
floors are of baked clay and without additional features
such as fireplaces or cache pits. The house walls are represented by post holes placed every foot or so apart; the
covering roof apparently having been constructed over four
centrally placed support posts.
Village debris is not
abundant around the Spiro houses and this adds to the
difficulty of correlating the architecture with the burial
complex.
The various artifacts from the Craig mound have received
much recognition for their quality, workmanship and
unusual characteristics. In addition, many items of a perishable nature were well preserved, and this material permits a more detailed picture as to the life and cultural accomplishments of the Spiro people.
Chipped stone materials from the Spiro focus are of
excellent workrnanship and include a wide variety of forms.
Small flint projectile points are very common in many of

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

the graves.

The points range through a wide variety of

shapes and forms with slender serrated and barbed types
being most common.

Flint knives and spear points are also

varied in form but typically of good workmanship.

Many

of the knives are unusual in size, some measuring twelve
inches or more in length.

The smaller knives are sometimes

notched to ~facilitate halting, and some notched forms may
represent either knives or spear points. Many of the large
Hint knives are of such size and workmanship as to suggest
that they were not ordinary utilitarian objects but rather
served some more sacred function. Flared or spatulate celts
of flint are also present, and in most cases the flint has been
ground and polished to remove the flake scars. Several flint
maces or batons have been found, and in most cases these
have also been ground and polished.
The Spiro chipped flint not only exhibits an unusual skill
in workmanship, but the flint material has been derived
from a number of sources. Specimens from quarries as far
away as Illinois, Arkansas, Tennessee and Nebraska can be
seen in the flint collections.
Chipped stone hoes are also found in the Spiro focus.
These are long rectangular or oval forms and in most
examples, are rather crude in workmanship.
Objects of ground stone are also abundant and include
the following: celts, spatulate celts or spuds, discoidals,
boatstones, plummets, ear spools, both plain and effigy
pipes, perforated spatulate axes, monolithic axes, beads, flat
button shaped objects, hammerstones, metates, manos and
other miscellaneous articles. Items which appear to be
especially distinctive are the pulley-shaped stone ear spools,
the T-type stone pipe and the black stone beads. The stone
ear spools are commonly designed and covered over with
a thin veneer of copper on one side. The T-type stone pipe
has a projection which extends beyond the bowl to a length
about equal to the stem. Some of these pipes are unusually
large, and examples having two bowls are known. Much of
the stone material illustrates careful and skillful workman-

S~e

t~,~. pottery

Si~

~ll~tt°n: All spectn~ens ~re fron~ the

~untY.

specin~en~ I~ are I

A Survey o~f Oklahoma Archaeology

41

ship with all types of stone, including quartz crystal, having
been utilized.
Artifacts made of bone are very rare in the Spiro focus
sites.

Bone awls or perforating tools, disc shaped beads,

occasional ornaments and flat polished pieces of ribs or long
bones are represented.

These latter specimens are long flat

pieces of bone which would make good tools for weaving
textiles; however, there is no assurance that they were used
for that purpose.
The Craig mound is famous for the abundance of shell
artifacts found, especially the carved and engraved conch
shell containers. The preferred shell was the marine conch,
and it was manufactured into a variety of objects, primarily
ornaments. Shell specimens include beads of many types,
pendants, figurines, gorgers, ear spools, plain and engraved
shell dippers, button-like objects, and other miscellaneous
items. Shell was also used as a decorative inlay on wooden
objects. The most interesting part of the shell work is the
various scenes engraved on the shell dippers or circular
gorgets. The engravings illustrate various aspects of life
among the Spiro people, and a detailed study of the existing
specimens would shed much light on the Spiro focus.
Copper is also represented in the Spiro focus, and the
Craig mound produced a rather large quantity of hammered
copper specimens. Copper was used not only to make
specific objects such as axes, but it was commonly used as
a veneer on stone or wood. In fact, many wooden objects
were salvaged primarily because of the surrounding copper
sheath which protected and preserved the wood. Objects
of copper include long needle like bodkins or hair pins,
beads, axes, ear spools, various shaped head ornaments and.
flat copper plates having embossed designs. The copper
work is typically flat and in rather thin sheets which are
composed of many small pieces which have been overlapped
and riveted together.
Many specimens exhibit mends,
patches and repairs which suggest a long and rather vigorous
usage.

42

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

The Spiro focus pottery wares require careful analysis
and identification before anything definitive can be accepted. The pottery represented, however, falls into two
main groups, the common utility ware and the variou~ wares
associated with the burials. The utility pottery is represented by a rather thick, granular clay tempered ware.
The common vessels are large globular jars or bowls having
a round flat disc or squared base. The decoration is limited
to horizontal incised lines extending around the rim of the
vessel. The distinctive burial ware has a similar paste and
tempering material but the sherds are thinner, the tempering more finely pulverized, and the surface has been more
carefully smoothed and polished. The burial pottery also
differs in vessel form and decoration. Two vessel forms
which appear to clearly represent the Spiro focus are the
deep straight sided bowl and the tall conical necked bottle.
The vessels are commonly incised or decorated within a
wide band delimited by three or four horizontal line~.
Enclosed design elements include interlocking scrolls, reed
or triangular punctates and circle figures. It is also common
to have triangular areas of the designs filled in by a series of
nested arcs.
The pottery from the Craig site is much more varied than
the above data would indicate, and a large variety of shapes
and designs have been found. Much of the burial pottery,
however, is probably trade specimens from outside areas
and not therefore especially typical of the Spiro focus.
Pottery pipes are also present in small numbers. Some
of these are ciay imitations of the T-type stone pipe, and
others represent a distinct variety.
The latter type is
characterized by a thin conical bowl placed on a small
tubular clay stem, the tubular base projecting for a short
distance beyond the bowl. These clay pipes are much
smaller in size and appear rather fragile beside the more
massive stone pipes.
A large variety of wooden objects, most having been preserved by their association with copper, were recovered
from the Craig mound. Specimens represented are spindle

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

43

shaped beads, small carvings of the human head, various
types of ear spools, button-like objects, combs, human face
masks, axe handles and a variety of effigy forms. Some
of the wooden objects still have pigments clinging to the
surface indicating that they had been painted when in use.
Wood was also used in combination with shell to produce
more elaborate artifacts. Red cedar was used in manufacturing most of the wood specimens.
A number of miscellaneous items which have not been
mentioned above have been found at the Craig site. These
include pearl beads, seed beads, various pigments such as
green, red, white, black and yellow; mica fragments, quartz
crystals, iron pyrites, polished concretions, plaited cane
and bark matting, fiber cloth, feather cloth, lacework, fragments of leather and galena. The presence of irregular or
rounded lumps of galena appears to be especially characteristic of the Spiro focus sites, and it is a common feature in the
burial mounds.
It is, of course, impossible to adequately describe the
Spiro focus materials in such a short space as this, and
in all probability the picture presented by the Craig site is
a very distorted one. The matter of preservation and the
fact that the Craig mound must represent an unusual site
even in prehistoric times makes it atypical and hence difficult to interpret and understand. As related sites are
analyzed, and as the neighboring areas are better understood, the Spiro focus will become more properly a part of
the surrounding cultural setting and can be viewed in a
more realistic perspective.
The Bryan Focus
The construction of a dam on Red River which resulted
in the innundation of much of the fertile bottom lands adjacent to the river and its tributaries in Bryan and Marshall
counties was responsible for a series of excavations of Indian
sites in this region. One of the most distinctive complexes
found in the area is represented by several sites excavated
on the Red and Washita Rivers and has been designated the

44

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Bryan focus.

The site which best represents the complex

is the NIarrs site (BrMaI) which covers several acres on a
high bluff bordering the eastern edge of the flood plain of the
Washita River.

The site is a particularly valuable one since

relatively extensive excavation and testing suggested that
an accurate picture of the village as a whole had been obtained. Details on house construction and village arrangement are derived from this site though the sketch of material
culture of the complex is based upon a series of sites in this
area.
The house form shows a generic relationship to those present in the eastern portion of the state in the Spiro and McCurtain loci, though there is a much greater uniformity in
the houses of the NIarrssite. All of the houses are square,
ranging from eighteen feet to thirty-seven and a half feet
along the side. The roof was supported by four center posts.
The open area in the center of these supporting posts was
used as a fireplace, and in one house the fireplace was carefully manufactured of baked clay. Its diameter was seven
and a half feet, and the concave base was surrounded by an
inward leaning wall of clay a foot and a half in height. No
post molds are found in the exact corners of the house which
suggests that perhaps in these areas the wattling was bent
around to form a rounded corner. The entrance to the houses
is represented by a row of parallel posts. In all, five houses
were found at the lYlarrs site. Of these, four faced the west
and one the east. In the village area, scattered among the
houses which appeared to be arranged with little thought
toward a uniform village plan, are numerous cache pits.
These occur in both bell-shaped and U-shaped forms and
often attain quite a large size. Occasionally charred corn
was found in these pits, which suggests their function. The
people of the Bryan focus must have been primarily farmers
and, if the size and number of the pits constitutes valid
evidence, highly successful farmers.
The implements and pottery manufactured by this group
set them apart from other prehistoric Indians in Oklahoma,
but a few fragments of pottery and other implements are so

~9

P |,AT~:

Bryan focus artifacts.
¯
Chipped stone drills

~0

S

~rojectile points (3-9) ; knife (10) : double-t~olnt~l
o ¯
(1-.) ,, ]
~t" ~1">~" antler flaking t~!
~
-

t~l (19); antler ~ppmg ~m~
~ne ~lt

~--..- .......

Sit~ allocation: I, 7-9, 11, g4-25 Marts ai~. Bryan county; all others Fl~nagan ~i~,
~an county.
All ~imena I/5

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

47

similar to remains of these other groups as to indicate that
they were probably acquired through trade. Such artifacts
enable one to determine the relative age of the Bryan focus
and place it in its proper position in relation to these other
cultures. Two types of pottery appear to have been manufactured locally. One is commonly tempered with medium
to large fragments of shell, rarely with crushed particles of
bone. The surfaces are smooth, but not polished, and range
from grey-brown to tan with darker shades predominating.
The walls of the vessels are relatively thick, ranging from
.6 to 1.2 cm. Two vessel forms appear to be present: (1)
a large to medium globular jar with a short flaring rim or a
vertical, collared rim; (2) a deep wide-mouthed jar or bowl
either lacking a defined rim area or having a.collared rim.
The bases of the vessels are flat, and on one the impression
of a coiled basket was noted. Vessels of this type are rarely
decorated, but one has a strip of clay pinched up with
finger nail imprints from the clay of the wall. The second
type of pottery has a temper of fine clay or sparse bone and
its texture is much more compact than that of the preceding
type. Colors tend to be somewhat darker, and the surfaces
are also smooth. The vessels appear to be somewhat smaller
in size, and the forms include a deep bowl or jar with convex
or straight sides and a jar with a curved, slightly flaring
rim. Occasionally this type is decorated with a series of
horizontal, widely-spaced incised lines or by means of short
vertical tabs on the rim. Sherds which apparently represent trade vessels include: (1) rim sherds from a bowl
bearing a red slip and a short vertical rim having an engraved decoration of diagonal lines of the exterior--a type
suggestive of Sanders Engraved; (2) sherds of a thick, black
smoothed ware representing a squat globular vessel bearing
abundant, horizontal finger-nail impressions; (3) sherds of a

thin-walled bowl with a fine incised decoration reminiscent
of a Spiro focus type; and (4) clay and grit temper sherds
of a tall jar with slightly constricted orifice.
Pottery techniques were also used in the manufacture of
pipes. The form present has a small bowl with a thin, cylindrica! stem and stem projection. The form is similar to the

48

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

small pottery pipes of the Spiro focus though the bowl has
either nearly straight or convex sides rather ~:han the conical
bowl of the latter complex. The polished and ground stone
complex includes celts which taper from the edge to a
pointed or rounded poll, manos and metates with a~ elliptical grinding basin. Bone implements include awls manufactured from splinters of animal long bone and from deer
ulnae, bone beamers, antler cylinders and flaking tools both
of deer antler and deer ulnae with blunt tips. Chipped
stone implements include flake knives, small end scrapers,
knives, T-shaped drills, bipointed drills and a series of projectile points. The common projectile point is small, about
2. to 2.5 cm., in length; it is carefully flaked and has straight,
convex or recurved sides to the body, a horizontal shoulder
area and a stem that may be straight sided but is usually
rounded and contracting. Some large points of similar shape
are also present. A few small points of variant shape are
present but do not appear to have been manufactured locally,
or at least, not in large numbers. These include triangular
points with horizontal side notches and small points with
diagonal corner notches. Some of the latter have a body
with a serrated edge. The presence of coiled basketry is
indicated by impressions on the base of pottery vessels.
In ceramics, suggestions of alignment in time were noted
in what might be trade sherds of both the Sanders
focus in Texas and the Spiro focus. It might also be noted
that the small projectile points are not unlike the type
Bonham Barbed of the Lamar focus. This would suggest
a temporal placement in perhaps late Gibson Aspect times,
though the cultural complex is more divergent than even the
Sanders focus from the cultural units of this aspect. It is,
in most respects, a more typical Plains culture.
The NeZson Focus
This complex is based upon material recovered in the
excavation of two sites in southern Choctaw county located
not far from the town of Grant on Red River. The available
¯information regarding these sites does not permit an analysis which might reveal whether the sites contain more than

A Survey of Oklahoma Arch~eoIogy

49

one cultural component or an occupation of long duration in
which cultural changes are to be detected.

Consequently,

realizing that further excavation to check this point would
be desirable, we have tentatively described the artifactual
material

as

representing a

single cultural complex

of

relatively short duration.
The burial complex of both sites is remarkably uniform
and distinctive. The graves consist of single interments,
fully extended and resting upon the back. The arms were
normally extended along the side of the body, but in a few
instances one or both arms were flexed. A single burial,
though resting on the back, had the legs flexed backward
on either side of the body. The majority of the burials were
without grave furniture but some possessed pottery vessels,
pottery pipes, and/or a few projectile points. The pottery
vessels in particular tended to be clustered around the head
of the individual. In all, six pottery vessels were present as
burial associations; three were found with one burial, two
with a second, while the third had but one. Four of these
vessels are undecorated bowls comparable to Sanders Plain
of the Sanders focus of Texas.9 Two of these are simple
bowls; one has a scalloped lip while the other has four vertical lip tabs. The other two are carinated bowls. One of the
remaining vessels found as a burial association is a small
bottle having a cylindrical neck and a truncated body of
angular outline. It is decorated with engraved concentric
circles, of which there are three elements separated by a
vertical cross-hatched element. The remaining vessel of this
group is a small globular jar with a flaring rim having as a
decoration four small non-functional strap handles, horizontal incising on the rim and body and a series of vertical
rows of small nodes. The pipes utilized as burial associations included a thin-walled elbow pipe of pottery as well
as a pipe with a flaring bowl and stem of small diameter.
The projectile points included a single large dart point with

9.
Krieger, Alex D., Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas, The
University of Tex~s Publication No. 4640, pp. 187-190. 1945.
Descriptions of additional potte~" types attributed to the Sanders focus are to be found in this- report.

50

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological SocieSy

a contracting stem as well as four small arrow points with
stems formed by notching.
Material found as refuse in the general area of the burials
adds considerably to the trait complex. In pottery, ~it is
evident that additional Sanders focus types are present.
These include Sanders Engraved, Canton Incised, and
Monks~own Fingernai~ Impressed. Maxey Noded Redware
may be represented by a single fragmentary bottle with a
composite silhouette. There are, however, many sherds that
suggest incised and engraved types that would be more at
home in Spiro focus components. One basal sherd bore
a coiled basketry impression. Pottery pipes found in the
refuse appear to be exclusively of the variety having a thinwalled, conical bowl and a long, slender tubular stem.
Implements in bone and shell are also represented in the
collection. A single fishhook of bone is a sturdy specimen
made of thick-walled animal long bone. The bone awls are
sharpened splinters of long bone. Flaking tools are represented both by antler tips and bone splinters with worn,
rounded tips. A deer cannon bone with grooves cut in four
places may be comparable to an unusual implement form
present in the Sanders focus and perhaps was used in the
same manner as the bone beamer to which it is related
in form. Large mussel shells having a single large perforation are of the familiar "hoe" type.
The characteristic celts of the complex are either carelessly ground into a rectanguloid form or roughly flaked into
shape, with the major grinding occurring about the blade.
Blocks of sandstone, which are ungrooved but have concave
facets indicating use, may have been used in the manufacture of these implements.
Other specimens with a
depression pecked in one surface may have served as anvils.
Chipped stone implements include the double-bitted axe,
a leaf-shaped point or knife and projectile points of the types
indicated as being used as burial associations. The large
points uniformly have a contracting stem and range in
length from 29 to 86 mm., the average length being 48 turn.
The small projectile points have stems of varying shape

9

PLATE 9
Nelson focus artifacts.
Chipped double-bitted axe (1) ; deer cannon bone with longitudinal grooves 12) : pr~jectile point.~ (3-5. 10-11): stone colt~ (6, 14): douhlc pointed hone implement (fish
gorue ~) ~7)’ ~ne awl (S)" fish hook ~9); potte~ pipes (12-13): antler flaking
~i" (1~; ~o~ awl Of canno~* "hone (16) ; mussel shell hoe (17) ; pottery sherds {18-26).
19 is the rim of a carinated Imwl with r~t slil~ and a flatten~ lip scalloped on the
ex~rior, and is suggestive of Sanders Engrave.
Of the sherds illustrated only
19 and ~r~p~ 21 show the clo~e relationship to the Sanders focus t~ugh ~elect~l
~rial could show this clearly. The sherds were selected to illustrate the variant types
found at the sites which set the material almrt from the Sanders focus.
Site allocalion : I, 11. 14-15, 21, 26 Cook site ; all others Nelson site, Choctaw county.
All

a~ecimens are one-third

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

53

produced by notching, and in some instances the body is
serrated. These range in length from 23 to 28 ram., the
average length being 26 mm.
Though there are important differences, the complex
designated as the Nelson focus shares a large series of traits
with the Sanders focus now known primarily through manifestations in Texas. The Nelson focus may possibly represent a peripheral variant of this culture, strongly influenced and modified by contacts with Spiro focus components
in Oklahoma.
The McCurtain Focus
Our knowledge of the achaeology of the southeastern portion of Oklahoma is derived from a partial survey made of
the area and the excavation of two sites located on Little
River and its tributaries. In the light of culture sequences
established elsewhere in the state and in adjacent regions,
it seems probable that the two sites represent, in part,
slightly different time periods of the same culture complex,
which has been designated the McCurtain focus.
The earlier of the two sites is the Clement site. Excavations at this site included a flat-topped temple mound, several
houses and a midden and cemetery area. A smaller mound
is located several hundred feet west of the one excavated
and a rather large mound is a short distance t~ the north.
Neither of these two mounds was excavated, but they appeared to also represent temple or sub-structure mounds.
The temple mound excavated had been built in two superimposed stages, and a house had originally been constructed
underneath the mound. Details of the house type were not
clear. Two overlapping house patterns were discovered in
the midden area north of this temple mound. One house was
square, slightly over twenty-five feet along the sides and
had a trench entrance with a length of six feet orientated
slightly west of south. The roof of this house was supported
by four center posts, and immediately inside the entrance
passageway was a flat, elevated area of baked clay having
the outline of a half circle. To the west of ~his house, with

54

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

walls slightly overlapping upon it, was a second house. It
was not possible to tell which of the two houses was the
later. The second house might almost be classified as rectangular, the dimensions of the sides being 17.4 feet by
18.7 feet. The center roof supports consisted of but two
posts. This house also had a trench entrance passageway
with a length of 15 feet and facing the southwest. Additional houses were found on a ridge adjacent to the river,
but, since numerous burial pits in the same area have
tended to destroy the patterns, it was impossible to obtain
details other than that they are square or rectangular.
Burials were found in the house area just mentioned,
in the midden area north of the temple mound and in a
large rectangular pit excavated in the center of the temple
mound. Though this latter burial was inserted after the
temple mound was constructed, the mound itself was undoubtedly constructed by the same group of people since
their characteristic pottery types are found in the mound
fill. In many instances it was not possible to obtain details
concerning burial customs since the bone had often completely decomposed. The original position of the burials was
indicated by the outlines of the grave pit and by the placement of burial associations which usually took the form of
pottery vessels. Where bone material could be found, it
was evident that the characteristic burial position was extended upon the back, and from one to four pottery vessels
were placed beside the head and sides of the body. The pit
burial in the temple mound deviates from the typical individual grave in the area surrounding the mound and
deserves special comment. Vertical posts placed in the
corner of the pit indicated that perhaps some type of roofing
originally covered the burial. On the floor of the pit were
the remains of ten individuals, both fully, flexed and
extended with a variable orientation of the head and some
superposition of the bodies. Grave offerings were extremely
abundant for this complex and were placed among and on
the bodies. The offerings consisted of pottery vessels,
pairs of ear spools made of wood and stone, small projectile points, a ground stone celt, a shell gorget of marine

A Survey o:f Oklahoma Archaeology

55

conch shell bearing an engraved cross, and shell, seed, and
pearl beads.
Other structural features found at this site included cache
pits that had the form of a shallow basin and a variety
with deep straight sides.
The second site excavated in NIcCurtain county is the
McDonald site located approximately four miles north of
the town of Glover on the west bank of Glover River.
Excavation was primarily concentrated upon a midden area
which had also been used as a cemetery. Less extensive
testing was done in other portions of the site. There are no
traces of house floors in this midden area which in a deposit
of from two to three feet of thickness sherds, stone artifacts and bone refuse are scattered. The burials were inserted in rectangular pits dug in this deposit, and in a few
instances the graves penetrated into the clay subsoil.
Although frequently the bone had completely decomposed
or only teeth caps were present, extended burials on the
back were suggested. A total of thirty burials were found
and of these only five lacked grave associations. The most
characteristic burial offerings were pottery vessels and from
one to seven were found with single individuals. The average number of vessels found in a grave is 2.7. The only
additional types of burial furniture were a group of 17 projectile points, a deer mandible and a few sherds, each of
these traits having occurred only once. It should be mentioned that the burials may not have been extended in all
instances, since one primary adult inhumation was partially
flexed on the left side. This burial had characteristic burial
furniture in that two pottery vessels were placed at the
back of the individual near the pelvis. While there was
considerable variety in the placement of associations, there
appeared to be a general tendency to group them about the
head and shoulders. There were two instances in which a
vessel was deliberately inverted and one instance in which
a small vessel was placed inside a larger one. These latter
traits are quite interesting since, in these instances at least,
we cannot assume that the purpose of the placement of yes-

56

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Soc~ety

sels in the grave was as a container for a food offering. There
seems to have been some need for the vessel itself.
A village area to the west of the midden zone described
above was only briefly tested since the war brought operations in this county to a close.

However, the area did yield

four burials. The only new trait added to the burial complex was the presence of green pigment in one of the pottery vessels used as burial furniture. The area also yielded
a single house, the only one excavated at this site. The
house was circular in outline with a maximum diameter of
18 feet. The entrance on the north side of the house is represented by pairs of post molds set at each end of the entrance passage and connected by a trench slightly V-shaped
in cross-section. This passageway was eleven feet in length.
No center posts were located but an ash bed in the central
portion of the floor appeared to represent the fire area, and
two shallow metates were found near the outer limits of this
zone on the floor level.
Ceramic remains of the two sites in iVfcCurtain county
are quite similar since the same three basic wares are present. One of these is a dark, polished ware having the
surfaces decorated either by engraving or incising. Red
ochre is frequently rubbed in the lines of the decoration.
Vessel shapes include water bottles with spherical or flattened bodies and straight sided necks, and cazuela bowls. A
second common type bears a red slip on the surface and is
generally found as a composite olla shape and as a deep bowl.
.The decoration takes the form of scalloping of the lip with
incised and excised decoration on the rim and shoulder
areas of the olla or jar. The third pottery type probably
represents the ordinary utility form and characteristically
occurs as a jar with a squat, globular body and with a proportionately tall, recurred or flaring rim. The orifice of the
vessel is frequently square with the rim decorated with
pinched corrugations or an incised decoration. Additional
decoration is also found in the form of applied strips of
clay and as strap or loop handles, these latter being decorative rather than functional.

PLATE
McCurtain focus artifacts.
I’rojt~ctile points (1-6) ; pottery elb~w pipe (7) ; conch shell gorget (8~ ; stone hoe (9) ;
stone blade il0~ ; perforated sherd (11) : stone celt (12) ; ~tone ear" sp~ls, front and
back 113): pottery vessels (14-20).
14 and 15 are miniature v~els, duplicating r~
slipp~ ~wls that are normally four to five times the size of these upectmens.
14 is
a characteristic Avery Engraved Corm,
16 is the basic utility ware, a Nash Neck
l~and~ variety.
17, while duplicating the form of N~sh N~ck Banded, represents a
mixture of pottery types since it hau the pollshvd surface and engra~’ed decoration of
the polish~ and cngravt~l ware as see~ in I8 and 19, 20 ~l)l)ears to be a trade piece.
Sit~ alioeatlan:
thin county, 5-$,

1-S. 10-15. IS-19 Clement site: all others
and 1~ are all f~om :~ s~ng~e b~rial.

13

Macl)onald site.

S~ecimens 13 through 20 are t /6 act~al size : all others are 1/3 size.

McCur-

A Survey

o~

Oklahoma Archaeology

For other aspects of the material culture of this group the
specimens found in the excavations of the Clement site
will be used. These do not markedly deviate from those
of the McDonald site and present a greater variety
and richness of form. This greater variation suggests the
possibility that while the two sites overlap in time, some
temporal phases are present at the Clement site which are
lacking at the other site. Aside from the pottery vessels,
other artifacts of clay include perforated pottery discs and
pipes. The pipes are present in two forms. One is a thick
walled, bi-conical elbow pipe. One specimen has a shieldshaped area applied at the base of the bowl and decorated
with reed punctate impressions. The other form has a small
conical bowl with a thin stem, and in one instance there is
a stem extension which was bent upward and plastered on
the bowl.
The ground and polished stone complex includes manos
and metates with an elliptical grinding surface. Celts occur
in two shapes. One has a petaloid outline and a pointed
poll. The more common form is small and elongated and
is usually quite irregular in outline since the implement was
ground only in the area about the cutting edge. It was
noted that the cutting edge was normally placed at the
smaller end of the implement. The single pair of stone ear
spools was found with the burial in the temple mound.
Each spool has a concave face covered with a copper sheath,
and the inner flange is divided into two sections by a broad
transverse groove.
Chipped stone implements, while abundant, occur in a
limited series of forms. A few roughly flaked hoes with
a pear-shaped outline were present as were a few knives
and scrapers with ovate and asymetrical outlines. Projectile
points were the most abundant, and these are represented by
a var}ety of shapes. The most common projectile points are
of a large size, 35 mm., to 84 mm., in length and have a
rounded stem, contracting to the base; some of the larger
ones were doubtless used as knives. Usually there is no
distinct shoulder area. The materials utilized for this type
include white, black, brown and red chert and more rarely

Texas Archaeologica! and Paleontological Society

60

:

o

o

#:

o

-~

o

o

:

o

f’:t’J’~CJJ ’"° ° °

o

o°°

Prehistoric House Patterns in Oklahoma.
Scale: .A.]I ~atterns reduced to the same scale.
Site and focus alloemtlon :
LfEvIII.--Spiro focus, Evans site, Le Flore county.
LfBo I.--Fort Coffee focus, Bowman site, Le Flore county.
LfCt II.--Fort Coffee focus, Choates site, Le Flore county+
MsHu H.--Sptro focus, Hughes site, Muskogee county.
BrMa L--Bryan focus, Marts site, Bryan county.
LfCt II.--S~)iro focus, Choates site, Le Flore county.
BrMaIII.--Bryan focus, Marts site, Bryan county+
McMd II.--McCurtain focus, MacDonald site, MeCurtain county.
McC
IL--McCurtain focus, Clement site, MeCurtain county.

:

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

grey or brown quartzite.

61

A second type has a blade that

approaches an equilateral triangle in shape and contrasts
with the more elongated blade of the preceding type.

It has

a large squared stem which is frequently as long as the
blade. The materials are commor~ly grey quartzite and more
rarely translucent grey, white and red chert or chalcedony.
The length ranges between 35 mm. and 47 mm., and the
flaking is comparatively coarse.

Several other, types of

large points occur, though not in great abundance.

These

include points with a parallel sided stem or expanding
stem, and a notched type with deep notches originating in
the basal area.

Small points ranging in length between

15 ram. and 38 ram. are also present in a variety of forms,
frequently with a serrated blade.

They represent distinct

types; one has a recurred blade and a distinct stem, and
another is a triangular type with corner notches. The materials of the small points are generally varieties of chert,
quartz or quartzite.
The two excavated sites of the McCurtain focus appear
to represent a considerable span of time. A few bottles,
probably trade pieces, have the globular neck and closely
spaced, broad incising characteristic of the Glendora focus,
the historic Caddo complex. However, the practice of building temple mounds, the use of rectangular houses, some
burial traits and artifacts are reminiscent of Spiro focus
types and suggest an earlier time period. It should be
stressed that this is doubtless indicative of a sequence of
cultural remains, not a mingling of diverse materials at the
same time period. The greater part of the material here
grouped as the McCurtain focus is extremely close to the
remains designated in Texas as the Texarkana focus.
spite this, there are differences. Rather than to obscure
classifactory units by broadening the definition of the
Texas focus, it seems advisable to retain a distinct name for
the Oklahoma material until the temporal phases of the
components are clarified by careful analysis and, similarly,
until the Texas material is defined with greater precision.

The Fort Co]fee Focus
A series of late prehistoric sites from Le Flore county ir~
eastern Oklahoma has been grouped together and designated
as the Fort Coffee focus by K. G. Orr.’° This focus includes
the Gertrude Bowman, Granville Bowman, Skidgel, Moore,
Littlefield No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3, Pratt, Choates and Holt
sites. The two Bowman sites and Skidgel are grouped
together and treated as a single unit, Fort Coffee. Orr has
noted minor differences between certain of these sites and
suggests that some are older than others. He suggests that
the Littlefield site is earliest, the Moore site intermediate
and the Fort Coffee unit most recent. The entire focus is
interpreted as representing the final expression of a long
period of cultural development within the Spiro region.
Krieger considers the Fort Coffee focus as representing
the Fulton Aspect and hence related to other loci in the
general "Caddoan" area.’I Other Fulton Aspect cultures
are Texarkana, Titus, Frankston, Belcher, Bossier, Glendora
and McCurtain.
The Fort Coffee sites are represented by villages and
burial grounds; no mounds are known. The villages are
marked by house sites, refuse pits, cemeteries and village
debris. Several houses have been excavated; they are rectangular in shape with two central roof supports and a narrow passageway entrance. The house commonly had a
baked clay floor and a centrally located fireplace. In some
instances small cache or storage pits were present within the
house.
Circular refuse pits were also found scattered
throughout the village area.
Burials are commonly clustered in a limited area of the
village representing a cemetery. The graves are represented by pits dug into the cemetery area and include individual primary burials. The burials are predominantly in
a semi-flexed position although some fully extended individuals are found at most sites. Grave offerings are
10.
11.

Orr, Kenneth G., or,. tit.
Krieger, Alex, op. eft.

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

present and are usually pottery vessels placed near the head.
An occv~ional stone or flint artifact is found, but such associations are rather rare.
Pottery is the most abundant material from the Fort
Coffee sites. The typical pottery is a brown or red-orange
colored ware which has been tempered with crushed mussel
shell. Very often the shell has leached out leaving a porous
and fragile appearing pottery. Common vessel forms are
deep globular jars with slightly flaring necks and conical
or hemispherical bowls. Bottles and other forms are present but are not plentiful. Decorations are represented by
relatively simple designs which may be incised, engraved
or impressed with the finger nail. Lip nodes, tabs and lugs
are common embellishments. Linear design elements are
most frequent and are represented by chevrons or crosshatching. In addition to pottery vessels, simple elbow pipes
of clay are reported.
Chipped flint objects include arrowheads, blades or knives,
drills and scrapers. The most common arrowheads are
small triangular shaped points either with or without side
notches. In addition, there are some small stemmed arrow
points and a few large projectile points. The larger points
are commonly stemmed and taper toward the base. Orr also
reports large barbed points with an expanded base. Large
oval or diamond-shaped beveled knives are typical of the
Fort Coffee sites. These are commonly beveled on alternate
sides and are skillfully chipped. Flint drills or perforators
~re represented by two types: a short expanded base drill,
and a long slender ensiform drill pointed at each end. This
latter type is commonly four or five inches in length and
may have served some purpose other than as a drill. Flint
scrapers are the small snub-nosed or end scraper variety
but are not abundant.
Artifacts of ground stone include long elliptical shaped
celts, rectangular mullets which may or may not have pi~s,
grinding stones, pecking hammers, hammerstones, grooved
sandstone arrowshaft smoothers, cylindrical beads and
pipes. The stone pipes are of the elbow variety but corn-

64

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

monly have a rather tall bowl which is two or three times
as long as the stem.
Bone and shell materials are not especially abundant in
the Fort Coffee sites; bone awls or perforating tools and
bison scapula hoes are most common. Complete terrapin
shells have been found associated with burials, and it is
suggested that these may have been "rattles." Tubular
shell beads and perforated mussel shells, presumably used
as hoes, were found at the Moore site.
Other miscellaneous materials considered as a part of
the complex are crudely chipped stone hoes and pigments.
Red paint in the form of limonite has been found at ~hree
sites. Charred corn has also been found in the excavations.
Rather widespread contacts by the Fort Coffee people
is suggested by the discovery of turquois beads at the Moore
site. This material most certainly came from the west,
probably somewhere in New Mexico, as a trade item.
The distribution of the Fort Coffee materials is not known
although it apparently represents one example of a late
prehistoric people to be found throughout eastern Oklahoma.
A more detailed report must await analysis of the available excavated materials.
The Searcy Component
The Searcy materials are represented by a single excavation reported upon by Mr. 3. Joe Bauxar.,2 The Searcy
complex represents an element intrusive into the older Gibson Aspect. At this time, the Searcy component is represented by a series of intrusive burials which had been interred in mound Unit III at the Norman site on Grand River
in Wagoner county, Oklahoma.
The Norman site is a large mound group belonging to the
Gibson Aspect of eastern Oklahoma. In excavating one of
the domicilliary mounds, designated Unit III, a large number of intrusive pit burials were found. These pit burials
12. Manuscript on file at Department of Anthropology, University of Oklahoma.

Fort COffee focus artifacts.

PLATE

PO//e.r~- vessels

. are 1 /6 act~a] size

A Survey oS Oktahoma Archaeology

67

were obviously not as old as the mound into which the
pits had been dug, and, since the associated pottery vessels
were different from those in other parts of the Norman site,
Bauxar felt justified in dealing with the material separately.
Whether the Searcy materials represent an unrelated people
who later lived on the Norman site or whether they represent a decadent survival of the earlier Norman peoples
remains to be answered.
The Searcy component is represented entirely by burials
and various associated grave offerings. No houses, mounds
or village materials are known. The burials were placed
in oval shaped pits dug, apparently from the top surface
of the mound, into the mound earth. The burials were in
a flexed or semi-flexed position; the size of the grave was
merely large enough to accommodate the body. The burial
pits were oval in outline with vertical walls and a flat bottom. The average size appeared to be about two or two
and one-half feet wide, three or three and one-half feet
long and from one to three feet in depth.
The condition of the burials varied considerably. Some
skeletons were in a good state of preservation while others
were represented only by fragments of the skull.
The graves had apparently been dug without any attempt
at arranging them in any special manner and were scattered
throughout the southeastern quarter of the mound. Some
attempt was apparently made to orient the position of the
body since many of the burials were placed on the right side
with the head toward the northwest. Burial offerings were
found in about one-half of the graves; pottery vessels were
the most common association. In most cases where burial
offerings had been made, a single pottery vessel was placed
near the head. Other grave goods included flint knife
blades, flint scrapers, flakes of flint, a clay elbow pipe,
grinding stones or mullers, a stone celt, a pair of arrowshaft
abraiders, a terrapin shell, a mussel shell and miscellaneous
fragments of animal bone.
The Searcy pottery consists of a single homogeneous ware
which resembles one variety associated with the Norman

68

Te~a~ A~’chaeologic~ a~:~ Pa~eo~to~ogic~ Socle~j

component; the differentiating characteristic is a difference
in vessel form. The Searcy pottery is an undecorated shell
tempered ware of poor or mediocre workmanship. Common
vessel forms are jars and bowls; bottles are represented by
a single specimen. The pottery jars are small in size, globular
in shape, have a wide shoulder and short neck, which may
be slightly flared. The bowl shaped vessels display a greater
variety ranging from those having almost straight sides to
those resembling a flattened sphere in outline. One vessel
has two opposing small rounded projections rising vertically
from the lip of the bowl.
Chipped flint objects include knife blades, a variety of
scrapers and miscellaneous worked and unworked flakes.
The knives are well made, thin in cross-section and oval
to lanceolate in outline: They range in size from four to
eight inches in length. The flint scrapers represented are
of the small snub-nosed type or the type made from a flint
flake which has been retouched along one or two sides to
produce a scraping edge. Several graves produced spalls
of flint which appeared unworked; apparently these were
to be utilized for making implements, or they served as
tools requiring no secondary chipping. It is interesting that
no projectile points were found.
Objects of ground stone include a single celt, a pair of
grooved sandstone abraiders which were presumably used
as arrowshaft smoothers, and a small bifaced muller or
grinding stone.
A single elbow pipe of clay is reported, but it is not
available for description.
Although no bone or shell artifacts were found, miscellaneous fragments suggest that food offerings had been
placed with the dead. One large mussel shell and a terrapin
carapice had been placed in pottery containers, and concentrations of bone fragments were sometimes found near
the skeleton.
Bauxar believes that there is a definite time gap represented between the Norman and Searcy components at the

PLATE 12
Searcy compone~t artifacts.
Potter,. vessels (1, 3. 7) : stone celt 12) : sandstone arrowshaft smw)ther
knives (5. 9) : flint side scrapers (6.
Site allocation: All sl)ecimens are
man site, Wagoner county.
All specimens arc 1/3 size,

from

the intrusive burial complex

(4) ; flint

at the Nor-

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

71

Norman site. In comparing the Searcy complex with other
archaeological horizons in the state, he notes a similarity
to the Fort Coffee focus materials. The relationship, however, will remain uncertain until such time as more data
becomes available for both the Searcy and Fort Coffee
materials.
The Neosho Focus
The uppermost levels of the bluff shelters in the northeastern portion of the state contain an abundance of shell
tempered pottery that probably represents the latest prehistoric occupation of this region. Some of this material
has in the past been designated the "Top-Layer" culture
of the Ozark Bluff shelters. More extensive excavation in
the shelters, however, indicates that a considerable variety
of material has been grouped under this heading. It seems
evident, at least so far as Oklahoma is concerned, that several[
closely related complexes, for the most part having affinities
with the Upper Mississippian phase, are found in these sites.
Like the earlier Woodland cultures in this same area, then,
the cultural remains indicate a migration of peoples from the
north who occupied the northeastern portion of the state
and whose influence may well have affected the cultures
in the more southerly sections.
One of the important complexes in these late deposits,
which are late prehistoric, has been designated the Neosho
focus. Because of the presence of several complexes, the
segregation of a single cultural manifestation is a difficult
problem if only the bluff shelters are utilized. However,
the Neosho focus is also represented at a single village site,
the Mode site (D1MdI). The village site does not appear to
be identical to the cultural remains found in the shelters,
but the same general pottery type is found in both and
serves as the major diagnostic feature of the complex. This
pottery is tempered with particles of crushed shell ranging
up to .6 cm. in size. Although vessel surfaces are smoothed
and occasionally have a slight lustre, the particles of temper
protrude and give a speckled appearance. The ware is of
medium thickness ranging between .6 cm. and .9 cm., and

72

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

surface colors include greys and variations of light orange
and red with mottling frequent on any single vessel. A
globular jar with flat base and a short vertical, flaring or
recurred rim appears to be most common. Wide mouthed
and convex-sided bowls are also present. The decoration
found on this ware indicates its relative freedom from the
influences of other pottery types found in Oklahoma. The
commonest decorative elements are wedge-shaped punctate
impressions and broad incised lines. Fine incised lines and
short incisions are also present. The lips of the vessels are
frequently decorated, either by notches or punctate impressions. Decoration on the rim and shoulder include herringbone patterns of wedge-shaped punctates, a series of vertical or horizontal punctates, broad incised lines bordered by
punctate impressions placed parallel or diagonally to
the lines, alternate incised lines and punctate impressions,
and opposed series of diagonal incised lines. Strap and loop
handles are frequent on the jars, and these, too, often bear a
decoration of punctate impressions. Miniature vessels and
a large elbow pipe with bowl and stem of nearly equal
diameter are other items of pottery.
The chipped stone complex includes both small triangular
points, either unnotched or with horizonta! side notches,
and large stemmed and notched points. End scrapers are
carefully retouched and are either diminutive thumbnail
scrapers or larger forms. Side scrapers, as well as drills,
are also present. The most distinctive form in chipped
stone is the rhombic or diamond shaped knife with an alterhate beve! on the edges. The Mode site, but not the bluff
shelters, contained double-bitted axes of chipped stone. In
polished and ground stone, large petaloid shaped celts were
found at the Mode site, and smaller and proportionately
broader celts were found at the bluff shelters. Grooved
abraiding stones with deep V-shaped grooves, which were
used in the manufacture of bone implements, were found as
well as those having broader U-shaped grooves, which were
probably used in finishing arrow shafts. In the preparation
of flour from corn both long, narrow loaf-shaped manos and
flat elliptical manos were used. Shells were used for the

PLATE 1.3
Nt~sho focus artifacts.
Sherds of Nessho Punctuate type (1-7) : miniature vessel (8) : strap handle, Neo~hu
Puncture ware (9); projectile i~oint.~ (10-11. 1~-16); mussel shell scraper (13):
grooved arrowshaft ahraider (14): flint end scraper (17); knives (18-t9); 18
a diamond.shalaed alternate beveled tyl~e: bone awls (20. 22-2:$); bone shaft wrench
(21) : stone celt (24); do~*ble-blt~ a~e
Site allocation: 1-4, 7-11, 18, 21-22 Cul~p site, Unit II; 5-6, 13, 15.16. 19-20 Evans
~ite, Unit II; 12. 14, 23-24 Mode Site; 17 Cooper site, Unit VL
All sites ~re iv
Delaware county.
All speeFmens are ] /3 size.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma ArchaeoZogy

manufacture of small disc-shaped beads, for scrapers, and
were perforated for use as a hoe. Bone awls were manufactured from splinters of animal long bone and from deer
ulnae and deer cannon bones with the condyles used as a
handle. Beads were also manufactured from cylindrical
sections of bird bone.
Though some cache pits were found at the village site,
no trace Of a permanent house structure was discovered.
This perhaps explains the popularity of the bluff shelters.
The shelters were also used for burial purposes and commonly contained individual partially flexed burials; a single
group burial was encountered. The burials rarely had
grave goods but the occurrence of pottery vessels, bone awls,
and red pigment has been noted.
The Washi~a River Focus
Throughout the central portion of Oklahoma along the
Washita River in Garvin and Grady counties, several village
sites representing a typical eastern Plains hunting-agricultural economy have been examined. The complex of traits
present is herein referred to as the Washita River focus and
appears to represent a late prehistoric horizon resembling
the Henrietta focus of northern Texas and the Paint Creek
culture of Kansas. Several sites appear typical of the
Washita River culture; among these the Grant, Braden,
Lee, Lacey, Frankenburg and Brown sites are best known.
The Washita River sites are usually located on a terrace
adjacent to the river or upon a nearby promontory overlooking the valley. The villages are marked by considerable
village debris including occasional artifacts, broken bones
and shell, flint chips, pottery sherds, wattle or other refuse
from occupation.
Excavation at some of the villages revealed house sites,
a number of refuse pits, an occasional burial and various
artifacts. The most common features found in the village
area were the circular pits which normally contained an
abundance of village debris. These probably served originally as storage or cache pits and were later used as a con-

Texas ArchaeoIogical and Paleontological Society

venient place to dispose of refuse. Most of these pits were
circular in outline and averaged between three and five feet
in diameter and three or four feet in depth. The pits usually
contained an abundance of animal bones, fragments of pottery and broken or discarded artifacts.
Lynn Howard, who excavated the Braden site, reports that
the houses are similar to those of the Bryan focus: These
houses were square in outline having four central roof supports and an extended passageway entrance. A prepared
clay floor and fire basin, as well as cache pits, appeared as
features within the houses.
Several burials have been excavated, and they are in a
flexed or semi-flexed position and usually without grave
offerings.
The economy of the Washita River people was based upon
hunting and agriculture. Among the animal bones identified are bison, deer, jack rabbit, terrapin and wild turkey.
Freshwater mussels, turtles and fish are also represented.
Evidence for agriculture is demonstrated by the discovery
of corn and beans.
One characteristic of the Washita River sites is the
relative abundance of bone artifacts. Many of these have a
highly polished surface indicating extensive use. Bone digging implements are abundant, the scapula hoe being most
common. The scapula hoe is characterized by an open
socket which aids in securing the handle. Another type of
hoe is that made from a bison skull in which the split
horn core serves as a handle for a blade and is cut from the
attached skull case. Perforated digging stick points cut
from a bison tibia are also quite common. Skin working
tools include various types of bone awls and needles. The
beamer or drawknife type of fleshing tool is also represented.
Arrowshaft wrenches are made from sections of rather
large bones in which a large perforation has been made
through the shaft. In most cases the edges of the perforation
are highly worn and polished from use. Flint flaking tools
and punches of antler are represented by several specimens,
and several notched or grooved bones suggesting the musical

PI,ATE 14

Wasblta River focus articafL~,

ine.~

(4) ;

perforated

~ne uwla
beveled knife
Site allocation: All s~ecimens from slt~ in Garvln count)’: ~e, Grant or Br~den.
Sp~tmens
13 anti 15 are l /3 size; all others are 1/6 actuttl ~ize.

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

rasp occur. Objects of adornment include tubular bone
beads and small perforated pendants made from flat bone
fragments. Additional bone artifacts are highly polished
animal jaws and worked pieces of bone which resemble
dice or the "counters" of some present day Indian gambling
games.
Chipped flint objects from the Washita River sites are
best represented by small arrowheads. Although a variety
of shapes are to be found, the majority are triangular in
outline with side notches at the base. Specimens are usually less than one inch in length and skillfully chipped from
a wide variety of colorful materials. Occasionally a large
sized arrowhead or dart point will be found; whether these
represent an integral part of the complex or something from
a different people remains unanswered.
Flint knives are represented by several types including a
triangular form, an oval leaf-shaped form and the diamondshaped beveled form. The beveled knives seem to be typical of many sites, and they are similar to those commonly
found throughout the Great Plains area.
Scrapers are
common and include three types: the snub-nosed scraper,
the side scraper and the flake scraper. The flake scrapers
are very abundant and are represented by flint flakes which
were utilized as scraping tools, the scraping process having
removed tiny flakes along the scraping edge.
Some
examples of flint drills or perforators exist although they are
not common. The Washita River sites also produce miscellaneous objects of flint which are difficult to classify. These
include crudely made objects which may have served as
knives or scrapers, turtleback cores and unfinished articles.
Probably the most common stone artifacts are small
pieces of sandstone marked by grooves or deep incisions.
These objects are usually loaf-shaped and have one or several
grooves cut into the surfaces of the stone. Some of the
grooves are angular as though used to sharpen a pointed
implement; others are rounded in order to receive one-half
of an arrowshaft or stick. Stone celts are found in the
Washita River complex; these are ground and polished with

80

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

a round or oval cross-section tapering to a pointed or
rounded poll. An occasional stone pipe has been found, and
all specimens represent a small elbow type of pipe.

Other

stone artifacts include simple stone pendants, mullers and
grinding basins, various hammerstones, and irregular pieces
of hematite, presumably utilized as a pigment.
Although mussel shells were found throughout the village
debris, artifacts of shell are quite rare. Examples of a shell
pendant, a snail shell bead and a perforated mussel shell
hoe appear among the specimens.
Clay materials are represented by small figurines, elbow
pipes, perforated discs and pottery vessels. The figurines
are small in size and are rather crudely made. They appear
to represent simplified figures of the human body. The
clay pipes are of the elbow variety and are similar to those
made of stone. Pipes are not common at any site yet
examined and are represented largely by various fragments.
Several specimens of perforated discs, commonly termed
spindle whorls, have been found. These are made from a
broken sherd of pottery, cut into a circular disc and perforated through the center.
By far the most common articles to be found in the
Washita River villages are fragments of pottery. Complete vessels are scarce although many large sherds offer
evidence as to the vessel form. A typical vessel is represented by a deep globular jar with a straight or flaring rim.
The base may be rounded or have a fiat disc-like bottom.
Examples of ornamentation are handles, lugs and applique
designs applied to the surface. The pottery, in general, is
a grey or brown colored ware, rather crudely made, thick
and poorly baked. The tempering material varies considerably and includes crushed mussel shells, crumbled limestone, sandstone and bone. The vessel surface is ordinarily
smooth although examples of a cord impressed surface are
found at most sites. The pottery appears as a heterogeneous mixture, and further research must be done in order to
understand the implications of the varied material.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

81

The Washita River focus is apparently late in time
although no post-Columbian or contact materials have been
discovered. Similar materials are found throughout most
sections of central Oklahoma, and related cultures exist in
Kansas and Texas. As more research is done, it may be
found that the Washita River materials have a greater
antiquity than now suspected and that they occupied the
region for several centuries. Possible age differences
may be obscured by similar cultural comp!exes which repo
resent adjustments to a similar type of environment.
The Custer Focus
Several prehistoric sites from west-central Oklahoma have
been tentatively grouped together to represent the Custer
focus. All of the sites are located in the Washita River valley
in Custer county and share similar cultural characteristics.
The Custer materials may represent an extension of the
Washita River focus peoples who pressed westward toward
the High Plains. Since the Custer county sites are not
identical to the Washita River materials (Garvin county),
it seems desirable to consider them as representing a separate focus. Additional work in the territory between the two
localities should aid in understanding their actual relationship.
Excavation or testing has been carried out at the followLug sites: Goodman I, Goodman II, Shahan I, Shahan II, McLaughlin I, McLaughlin II and Williams. The most extensive work has been done at Goodman I; Williams is represented only by surface collections. All other sites have been
subjected to test pits or minor excavations.
The structure of the Custer focus houses is Lucompletely
known at this time. The houses are apparently square or
rectangular in outline with four central roof supports. The
interior is marked by a centrally located fireplace and
irregularly placed cache pits. The abundance of burnt clay
indicates a wattle and daub type of construction.
The villages are characterized by scattered cache or refuse
pits. These are round or oval shaped pits dug into the

Te~a A~ch~eo~ogica~ a~d P~eo~to~o~ica~

82

ground surface for a depth of three to five feet.

Although

presumably used for storage, most of the pits contained
refuse when excavated.
The burial practices are poorly known although two
graves have been uncovered at the Goodman I site.

The

burials were flexed and placed in a round or oval grave
pit.

Both burials contained grave offerings in association.

Chipped flint artifacts are represented by projectile points,
knives, drills and scrapers. The projectile points are typically small triangular shaped points which may or may
not have side notches. The alternate-beveled diamondshaped knife and simple ovate forms are common examples
of cutting implements. Scrapers are plentiful with both
end and side scrapers being represented. Many of the
scraping tools are merely simple flint flakes having small
chips removed along one side or end. One scraping tool is
distinctive in that the working end of the implement i~
pointed or triangular shaped resembling a "beaked" type
scraper.
Grinding stones are represented by manos and metates.
Other stone objects include grooved sandstone awl sharpeners, arrowshaft smoothers and pipes. The stone pipes are
small, equal armed elbow pipes having a slightly bulghug
bowl and stem. The stem is sometimes decorated by a
grooved ring or by notches which extend around the shank
of the pipe.
Objects of bone are plentiful on most sites and include
bison scapula hoes, bison tibia digging stick points or
fleshers, awls or perforating tools, antler flaking tools,
tubular beads and notched rib bones resembling the musical
rasp. All of these items are similar to bone artifacts found
throughout the Plains area and appear to have no distinctive
features as far as the Custer county area is concerned.
The only shell specimens found are small olivela shell
beads and unworked mussel shells, which may have been
utilized as scrapers or spoons.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

Clay objects include perforated sherds, figurine fragments and pottery. The pottery is predominantly of two
types: Stafford Plain and Stafford Cordmarked. The two
wares are essentially the same except for the surface
treatment; one is a plain smoothed ware and the other
is marked by cord impressions. The tempering material is
caliche although small amounts of grit, sand, limestone,
clay, shell or bone may be included. Vessel forms are deep
conical jars which have a small rounded or flattened base
and a flaring rim. Attached features are represented by
handles and small tab like projections rising vertically from
the rim. The pottery resembles the common utility ware
Lindsay Plain from the Washita River focus except for the
caliche tempering and the greater abundance of cord-marked
sherds. Some small sherds having finger-nail punctates
straight incised lines have been found at one or two sites, but
the source of this material is not known.
The Custer county focus appears to represent a late prehistoric agricultural and hunting people who are most
similar to the Washita River peoples living further to the
east in central Oklahoma.
The Optima Focus
The Optima focus is found in the Oklahoma panhandle and
is represented by the Stamper site in Texas county near
Optima. A recent report by Virginia Watson presents the
available information concerning the focus.’3 At the present time, only one site has been examined although similar
sites are to be found in the general locality. The Stamper
site appears to be related to the Antelope Creek focus of
the Texas panhandle and the Upper Republican Aspect of
the Central Plains.
The Optima focus differs from other cultural groups herein described in that the houses are characterized by a row of
upright stone slabs which reinforce the wall construction.
13. Watson, Virginia, "The Ovtima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description
and Analysis." Texa~ Archaeclogical and Pal~ontolo~cal Society Bulletin 21, ~p. 7-68,
Sept. !950.

84

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

The houses are square or rectangular in floor plan with a
central fireplace and extended entrance passage. Some of
the unearthed structures have small attached rooms which
may have functioned as storage or work rooms.
Several burials have been found at the Stamper site,
and in each case the grave had been dug into the house
floor. The typical burial appears to be in a flexed position,
and grave offerings are not especially abundant.
Chipped stone artifacts from the Optima focus include
projectile points, knives, drills, scrapers and miscellaneous
broken or unfinished objects whose purpose remains obscure. The majority of all specimens have been manufactured from the multicolored alibates flint from the quarries along the Canadian River north of Amarillo, Texas.
The projectile points are commonly small, well chipped
triangular shaped points having side notches at the base. A
few specimens have an extra basal notch, and some are plain
triangular forms having no notching. The diamond-shaped
alternate-beveled knife is most typical ~0f the Stamper site
although slender oval or elliptical forms do occur. Many
of the flint flakes and pieces of worked flint were probably
used as knives or cutting tools. Flint drills are also fairly
common in the Optima focus. Some of the drills taper to a
drill point and may have been used as a combination drill and
reamer. The base varies considerably and appears to reflect
the original shape of the flake; only a few cases have a well
chipped and skillfully formed base. Flint scrapers are
abundant and are represented by well made piano-convex
snub-nosed types. Occasionally a flint flake was rechipped
along one end or side to produce a suitable scraping tool,
and many miscellaneous pieces of flint could have served as
scrapers.
Stone objects from the Stamper site include grinding
basins or metates, manos, hammerstones, sandstone awl
shapeners, arrowshaft smoothers, celts and pipes. Grains
were crushed and ground in circular or oval shaped stone
basins by use of an oval or rectangular muller. Hammerstones are represented by rounded or globular shaped peck-

|’LAT~ 15
Optima focus artifacts.
Bone digging stick point with portion of wooden stick intact {I) ; sandstone arrowshaft ~braider (2); stone pipes (3); tume awls (4); flint knives (5-6); three flint
side ~cravers (~) : three end scravers {8) ; projectile point tyl~es {9) : pottery sherds,
Stamper Coz’dmarked (10, 13) ; perforated l~ottery disc (ll) ; flint drills (12).
Site a|l~cation : Stam]~er si~e, Texa~ county.

All

specimens are 1 /3 size.

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

ing hammers commonly made of a quartzite pebble.

Sand-~

stone awl sharpeners and arrowshaft smoothers are represented by grooved blocks of sandstone containing longitudinal grooves extending across one or more surfaces.

The

only celt, small and of polished greenstone, is not too ~vell
made and exhibits a battered cutting edge and poll. The
stone pipes are small equal-armed elbow pipes made of fine
grained material, commonly with a bulging stem or bowl.
With the exception of manos or grinding stones, objects of
ground stone are not common.
Artifacts made from bone or antler are fairly common in
the Stamper site collections. Objects represented are bison
scapula hoes, digging stick points, awls or perforating tools,
spatulas, bone rasps, tapping tools and flakers. Agricultural
implements include the bison scapula hoe and the digging
stick point. The hoes are apparently similar to those found
throughout the general Plains area, although no evidence of
the halting method is present at the Stamper site. The digging stick points, sometimes called fleshers, are made from
bison tibiae which have been cut and perforated for halting.
Bone awls or punching tools are represented by a variety
of sizes and shapes, commonly made from a split deer bone
but also represented by sharpened splinters of bone.
Some awls are well shaped and carefully manufactured
while others indicate careless or hasty execution. Several
bison ribs with a series of deep notches cut across the flat
face of the bone have been found and have been termed
bone rasps because of their resemblance to the "musical
bone rasp" of some historic Indian tribes. Sections of deer
antler as well as antler tines are present and were apparently
used as tapping too]s or for chipping flint. Some flat paddle
shaped pieces of worked bone have been classified as
spatulas.
Shell objects are not common for the Optima focus
although scrapers, pendants and beads are represented.
Some complete mussel shells having worn edges were presumably used as scrapers or spoons. Simple perforated
pendants and disc beads were made of musseI shell, and

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

88

some beads have been made from the olivela shell by grinding off the spire.
Pottery from the Stamper site is remarkably uniform and
represents a single ware known as Stamper Cordmarked.
No complete vessels are known but the sherds suggest a
globular round bottomed jar having a straight or flaring
rim. The ware is utilitarian, dark colored, fairly thin and is
decorated with cord impressions over most of the outer surface. The clay has been tempered with grit, including mica
and sand, and the flecks of mica are commonly visible over
the vessel surfaces. Additional decorative features include
diagonal or circular punctates, commonly confined to the
neck or lip of the pot. No lugs or handles are represented
in the collections.
Small perforated pottery discs are also found at the site,
and in each case they have been made from a pottery sherd.
Other objects represented are small blocks of worked
hematite, which were presumably used as a source of red
pigment, charred corn cobs and burned fragments of coiled
basketry.
There is little doubt but that with additional excavations
more characteristics for the Optima focus would come to

light.
From the evidence now at hand, the Optima materials
appear to be closely related to the Antelope Creek focus in
Texas and apparently existed sometime during the period
from 1250 A. D. to 1450 A. D.
The Proto-Historic and Historic Horizons
Although white contact materials have been found in many
localities throughout Oklahoma, little work has been done to
identify the archaeological manifestations of historic tribes.
This is largely because known contact sites remain unexcavated and partly because of a difficulty in assigning specimens to a specific tribe. In addition, most of the various
tribes were removed to Oklahoma after considerable acculturation to white culture had taken place so that little

PI, ATE 16
Historic artifacts.
Cr~yk pottery vessel Melnto.~h Roughened (1): three rim sherds of Melntosh
P~ughened (2): Choctaw food I~wl
~3); six rim sher(~ of Mclnto~h Smooth~
4) ; bowl from hisN)ric grave, LfGai, Le Flore ~unty.
A tin eut~ was found
nside this pot (5); iron pipt~tomahawk from borial, Gaines Crt~k site 26, Eufaula
t~servolr (6).

j

Acknowledgments: specimen 3, Oklahoma Historlca] ~_~ciety
City ; specimen 6, W. O. Moody collection.
Specimen 1 is I /6 actual size; all others are i/;3 size.

Museum,

Oklahoma

A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology

in the way of aboriginal material remained.

91

With this loss

of distinctive aboriginal characteristics, the general similarities of historic trade materials makes it difficult to determine
the tribal affiliations.

At the present time, pottery appears

to be about the only item which is useful in identifying the
various groups, and it is by no means certain that these pottery wares are limited to the tribes to which they are
attributed. Materials which have been tentatively identified are Chilocco Historic, Creek, Choctaw and Chickasaw.
The Chilocco Historic materials refer to collections made
at one contact site in Kay county, Oklahoma. The site is
located near the confluence of Deer Creek and the Arkansas
River and may represent an outpost of early eighteenth century French traders. The various trade materials found at
the site suggest an occupation sometime between 1700 A. D.
and 1750 A.D. These specimens from the area include iron
hoes, axes, knives, and gun parts such as trigger guards,
gun barrels, butt plates and flint lock-mechanisms. Other
trade objects are glass and china beads, copper bells, copper
wire and copper cone shaped ornaments. Aboriginal specimens are represented by flint scrapers, bone awls and hoes,
stone awl sharpeners, clay pipes, and pottery, both plain
and incised. It is not possible to identify this material as
the product of any particular tribe at this time although
the Wichita appear as a reasonable choice since they were
residing in the state at that time.
Creek pottery has been identified and labled by two wares,
McIntosh Roughened and McIntosh Smoothed.~ Both wares
are to be found on historic Creek Indian sites throughou~
eastern Oklahoma. McIntosh Roughened is a plain colored,
brushed surface ware tempered with fine quartz sand or
grit. The complete vessels are large globular jars commonly
having a constricted neck and thickened lip. The lip may
have a line of simple notches or punctates extending around
the vessel. McIntosh Smoothed is a similar ware in so far
14.
Wenner,
David J.,
"Archaeologica!
Survey
unl)ublished manuscript on file at Devartment 9f
Oklahoma, Norman.

of the Eufaula
Reservoir,"
Anthropology, University of

92

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

as the paste and tempering is concerned; it is a smooth surfaced ware, normally thinner and more carefully made.
Decorations are represented by incised parallel lines placed
either parallel or diagonal with the rim and limited to the
upper portion of the vessel. These designs have commonly
been smoothed over and are partly obliterated by the
smoothing process in some areas. Although the vessel forms
are not well known, deep bowls with angular shoulders are
very common. Both of these wares are found on Creek sites
along with trade materials such as metals, crockery, china
and glass of historic times. The wares were presumably
brought into Oklahoma by the incoming Creeks and would
date sometime after 1832.
Choctaw pottery has been found at several localities in
the eastern part of the state, and several complete vessels are
preserved in the Oklahoma Historical Society ]VIuseum. The
distinctive ware is similar to that described by Ford~ and is
represented by small, black colored, highly polished food
bowls. The bowls are commonly decorated with a band of
three or four parallel lines produced with a comb like instrument. The decoration is applied to the upper part of
the bowl and is limited to rather simple designs.
The Choctaw also made a plain shell tempered utility
ware although it does not appear to be as distinctive as that
mentioned above.
Chickasaw pottery has been identified at four excavated
sites containing white trade materials. All of the sites are in
Bryan county and include the following: Novotny, Vaden,
White and Opel sites. Kassel has identified five wares which
are attributed to the Chicksaw. Rock Creek Brushed, Rock
Creek Plain, White Brushed, White Plain and Vaden Plain.16
The wares resemble the Chickasaw Ridge Plain identified
by Jennings in Mississippi.’7
15. Ford, .}’ames A., Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections From Louisiana
and Mississippi, Anthrol)ologica! Study No. 2, Louisiana Geological Survey, New
Orleans, 1936.
16.
Kassel, E. Marilyn. An Analysto of Archaeological Material Attributed to the
Chickasav¢~.
M. A. thesis, University of Oklahoma, Norman, 1949.
17. Jennlnge, Jess D., "Chickasaws and Earlier Indian Cultures of Northeast
Mississippi," Journal of Mississippi History, VoL III, No. 3, July, 1941.

l~Multi~le burial

¯

~-~Sem~.f/exe~"~’.~+: ~elson focu~--t~, ~acDo~a]d
~+e~ed buriaJ

~.~s~lo focus, ~t~+,~ ~e ~te, Le F~e’ Garvin county
.... ~,ma focus. ~+.=~" .~[~. Unit II
~0~ ~Unty.

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

9~

Rock Creek Plain is the most abundant ware and is represented at all sites by a smooth brown or grey colored pottery tempered with fine sand, charcoal and sandstone. Vessel forms are globular with a flattened base and a slightly
flaring rim. Some fragmentary vessels obviously indicate
native attempts to reproduce china tea cups.
All of the sites produced trade or contact materials such
as china, crockery, glass and various objects of metal. The
documentary evidence and the dating of the china ware
suggest an occupation during the middle part of the nineteenth century.~
Concluding Remark~
As stated in the introduction, the major objective of this
paper has been to present a brief summary of the kno~n
archaeological complexes in Oklahoma. While in part this
has been drawn from published sources, a large proportion
of the material has not as yet been presented in printed
form, not even in so brief a summary as this. Despite this,
the information has been utilized in the formulation of general trends and periods of cultural development for many
years, as the result of papers read at meetings and through
the examination of collections. Generalizations and broad
areal formulation have preceded the precise description of
cultural units that alone can provide a sound basis for such
interpretation. The reason for such an inversion of sound
procedure is not difficult to discover. Much of the archaeological work was conducted on an emergency basis; the information was recovered immediately prior to inundation
by water which was impounded by dams. Subsequently,
when published site reports might have been expected, the
work was interrupted by World War II with its consequent
dislocation of personnel and the cessation of such cuI~ral
activities. At the present time the work has been resumed,
but the primary task is still this initial phase of archaeo~logical research, the basic description of the varied cultural
units. Oklahoma, of course, is not alone in this position.
M~ny regions in adjacent states are also imperfectly
described.

96

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Still, it is possible to speak with greater assurance, at the
present time, of the sequence of cultural remains in the
area. While little light has been thrown on the Early
Hunting horizon, represented by such early projectile point
types as Clovis, Plainview and Folsom, the presence of at
least some comparable remains in the eastern as well as the
western portion of the state has been indicated. Much more
important, in terms of an early occupation, is the mounting
evidence for a long sequence of Archaic complexes in the
eastern portion of the state. Complexes which are primarily
represented by lithic remains which lack ceramics, and
which probably relied solely upon hunting and gathering
as a means of subsistence, are to be seen in both the Grove
focus and the early levels of the Fourche Maline focus.
While dating is as yet uncertain, remains of this complex
may well equal in antiquity some of the projectile point
types of the Early Hunting horizon. Subsequent to this
period, eastern Oklahoma was subjected to influences and
doubtless actual migration from several areas. A sequence
of Woodland cultures appears in the northeastern portion
of the state characterized by pottery types that show their
relationships to primary Woodland centers in the northern
Mississippi valley. The climax of this occupation is a ceramic phase of Hopewellian affiliations. Probably at about
the same time the Fourche Maline focus also received pottery, but affiliations are with the south and east.
Subsequent to this period the group of related cultures
known as the Gibson Aspect appear on the scene. During
this phase we are able to first recognize the Caddoan Area
as a cultural entity. Doubtless this was a phase of long
duration for the areal extent of affiliated cultures is greater
than in any subsequent time period; moreover, the specific
sites attain a size and complexity which is not again equalled.
The Gibson Aspect, then, represents a phase in which the
Caddoan Area achieves a cultural climax, when many large
burial mounds contain grave furniture of great richness and
marked aesthetic achievement. Furthermore, it is, despite
the presence of large quantities of trade material from wide
spread areas, a climax which is an internal development, not

A Survey o~ Oklahoma Archaeology

97

a reflection of high cultural development elsewhere for it
bears a distinctive regional stamp. The focal point about
which this climax revolves would appear to be a religious
one. The major sites during its florescent peak are characterized not only by the large burial mounds and their elaborate grave furnishings but also by the truncated pyramidal
mounds with temples or ceremonial structures placed upon
them. Such centers appear to have drawn upon. a number
of subsidiary villages for their support.
Such features of the Gibson Aspect are in marked contrast to the Fulton Aspect, which follows it. While the
marked superiority in some technological processes, particularly ceramics, continues and perhaps is even surpassed,
in general the Fulton Aspect is marked by a decrease in cul-~
tural complexity. The discovery of the factors responsible.
for this decline, or at least for this transition, constitute one
of the most interesting problems of the Caddoan Area. The
Fulton Aspect appears to be marked by the decline in
portance of the older ceremonial centers and the graduaI
disappearance of both burial and temple mounds, with the"
latter persisting for a longer period. As a positive contribu-.
tion to this problem, it may be noted that in Oklahoma thereis a marked shrinkage in the Caddoan Area during the Fulton Aspect period. Such cultures as the Neosho focus of
Upper Mississippi affiliation appear in the northeastern portion of the state taking the place of an earlier Gibson Aspect
occupation. Complexes in the east-central portion of the
state, such as the Fort Coffee focus, can no longer be regarded as "pure" Caddoan units but show strong influences
from the Plains Area. The major ceramic types of the
Fulton Aspect appear to be largely derived from types and
decorative styles which evolved in more southernly portions
of the region, areas occupied by the McCurtain and Texarkana loci. It would appear that during Fulton Aspect
timesthe Caddoan Area on its northern frontier had been
subjected to increasing external pressure which resulted
in both the decrease in actual area occupied and the dilution
of the culture through the acceptance of many foreign innovations.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

98

The sequence of cultures is best known in the eastern por:tions of the state where the known archaeological phases of
Indian occupation ever~ embrace remains of the historic
tribes.

While some cultures have been defined for both the

~cer~tral and western portions, these remain for the most part
isolated units whose antecedents and final phases are as yet
unknown. On the whole, they reveal a far greater affiliation
with known sedentary cultures of the Plains, and it is possible that eventually they may be traced to a Woodland
base rather than to one of Southeastern affiliation. Central
Oklahoma represents the frontier of a cultural area con°
raining hybrid cultures requiring considerable work for
their elucidation. The hybrid nature of the far western cultures, particularly the Optima focus, is equally apparent.
In conclusion, it should be stressed that there are at present many geographic as well as temporal gaps in the summany of archaeological complexes here presented. Not only
do many additional units remain to be defined, but continued
analysis will doubtless reveal further local variants and
temporal phases of the complexes here presented.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Baerreis, David A.
1951 The Preceramic Horizons of Northeastern OkIahome, Anthropological Papers No. 6, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Baker, W. E., and A. V. Kidder
1937 "A Spear Thrower From Oklahoma," American
Antiquity Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 51-52.
Bell, Robert E.
1949 "Archaeological Excavations at the Harlan Site,
Fort Gibson Reservoir, Cherokee. County, Oklahoma,"
Plains ArchaeoIogica! Conference Newsletter, Vol. 3,
No. 1, pp. 3-15.

A Survey o] Oklahema Archaeology

99

Burnett, E. K. and Forrest E. Clements
1945 The Spiro Mound Collections in the Museum and
Historical Sketch oS the Spiro Mound, Contributions
from the Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, Vol. XI’V.
l~ord, James A.
1936 Analysis of Indian V{llage Site Collections From
Louisiana and Mississippi, Anthropological Study No. 2,
Louisiana Geological Survey, New Orleans.
Jennings, Jess D.
1941 "Chickasaws and Earlier Indian Cultures of l~ortheast Mississippi," Journal of Mississippi History, ~rol.
III, No. 3.
Kassel, E. Marilyn
1949 An Analysis of Archaeological Material Attributed
to the Chickasaws,~M. A. thesis, University of Oklahoma.
Krieger,

Alex D.

1946 Cultural Complexes and Chronology in Norther~
Texas, University of Texas Publication No. 4640, Austin.
Newell, H. Perry and A!ex Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site Cherokee County, Texas,
Society for American Archaeology Memoir No. 5.
Newkn_met, Phil J.
1940 "Preliminary Report on Excavations of the Williams Mound, Le Flore County, Oklahoma," The Oklahoma Pre-historian, Vol. III, No. 2, pp. 2-6.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1946 "The Archaeological Situation at Spiro, Oklahoma.
A Preliminary Report," American Antiquity, Vol. XI, No.
4, pp. 228-256.

10{}

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Renaud, E. B.
1930 "Prehistoric Cultures of the Cimarron Valley,
Northeastern New Mexico and Western Oklahoma,"
Colorado Scientific Society Proceedings, Vol. 12, No. 5,
pp. 113-150.
1930 "Les Plus Anciennes Cultures Prehistoriques du
Sudouest Americain," L’Anthropologie, Tome XL, No. 3
pp. 233-258.
Schmitt, Karl
1950 "The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County Oklahoma,"
Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin No. 21, pp. 69-89.
Watson, Virginia
1950 "The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect. Description and Analysis," Texas Archaeological and PaleontologicaI Society Bulletin No. 21, pp. 7-68.

