9

PENDANTS AND THEIR USES
BY A.

T. JACKSON

One hesitates to discuss a class of problematical artifacts about
which so much has been written. Jones, l Holmes,2, 3 Fowke, Z~
Moore,5 Peabody, Moorehead,6, 7 and various other writers have
made valuable contributions to the subject of pendants. Apparently, however, further facts are needed which may shed even a
small measure of additional light on this hazy subject.
Moorehead in a map accompanying his book on "Stone Ornaments" shows the ovate fo~-m of pendant as occurring in only the extreme eastern part of Texas. The gorget form he indicates as reaching only into the northeastern tip of Louisiana and eastern part of
Arkansas--missing Texas completely. It, therefore, seems desirable
to put on record the fact that these forms occur over a wide area
in Texas.
Nomenclature
One of the apparent needs in connection with the study of this
subject is a uniform nomenclature. Different writers use dissimilar
terms for the same type of specimen. Among those used in the
literature are gorgets, shuttle gorgers, pendants, perforated plates,
pierced tablets, plaques, pendant ornaments, ovate ornaments and
problematical objects.
The names more often applied are gorgers and pendants.

In a

few cases there seem to have been attempted-though rarely so
stated---to apply the word pendant to specimens containing only
one perforation, while those with two or more holes are called
gorgets. But even this distinction often is ignored; as, for example,
when Moorehead~ speaks of "gorgers or pendants having one hole."
The Handbook of the American Indians9 states:
* * * "Gorgers may have one or two marginal perforations for suspension, or they may be piel’ced centrally or otherwise for attachment * * * The name gorget is also applied to composite ornaments
of various kinds suspended on or fixed against the chest." * * *
In this paper the meaning of the word gorget has been restricted
to include circular, and in rare cases triangular and rectangular
specimens that have two or more holes in horizontal line at or near
the edge.

The term pendant will be used to include oval, triangular

Texas Archeolol~ical and Paleontological Society

or rectangular specimens--of any material--that have a single perforation, or more than one when in a longitudinal line. When a
specimen is broken and has a row of horizontal small perforations
along the broken edge, it is assumed that the latter holes were
drilled after the breakage occurred. The specimen, therefore, is
classed as a pendant and not a gorget. Even with these distinctions
an occasional questionable case may arise.
Stone Pendants in Graves

There have been a few cases in Texas where perforated stone pendants were in graves. These discoveries will be reviewed briefly.
Outstanding among such finds are some reported by Ray.lo

In

this connection he states in part as follows:
* * * "A rock structure of circular form * * * was found. * * * Below the stones was 1 ~/~ feet of hard dry earth filled with small stones.
* * * We came to * * * bed rock and apparently projecting out of the
center of this were some large rough stones. * * * When these were
removed more black earth was found beneath. * * * A round hole
three feet across, which had been cut down into the solid bed rock for
about a foot in depth, we found * * * to be full of small burned bone
and shell fragments. * * * The writer unearthed the largest stone
pendant that he ever saw, an oval gray stone pendant, with an hourglass-shaped hole at one end. It was 5% inches long and slightly over
two inches across. * * * The fragments of bones were quite small and
fire-blackened, and the finding of two very small milk teeth showed
that the cremation was that of a very young child. * * * In addition
to the large pendant, there were four other oval stone pendants. * * * A
smaller pendant of shell * * * and a shell bead * * * were found." * * *

Among the numerous other artifacts accompanying the burial were
fragments of polished bone tubes, quartz pebbles from what may
have been rattles, and "three thick, roughly made, stemmed and
shouldered flint projectile points"--all of which later may be helpful in placing the burial and the associated pendants in their proper
age group.
In writing of another burial Ray11 says:
* * * "This * * * mound consisted of only one burial slab cist con°
taining one skeleton, * * * the shallowe~st long-headed flexed cist burial
found in the Roberts site. * * * Closely against anal on the outside of
the two right forearm bones * * * were two artifacts lying flat on
the bones and touching each other. One of the artifacts measures 2~
inches across and has a hole drilled through its center and dot decora-

Pendants and Their Uses
tion~ in one edge.

11

It is concave on the inner side and formed so as to

fit one’s wrist perfectly. * * * The other object is 1% inches long and
1 5/16 inches wide. * * * The surface lying agains~ the wrist was fla~
and the other surface was rounded." * * *

Dr. Ray kindly sent the two last mentioned specimens to Austin
for examination. The one containing the biconically drilled hole
is made of a thick section of conch shell, probably Fulgur perver.
sum. The convex side, highly polished, shows the remains of a
shallow groove extending from the hole to the adjacent broken edge,
where there remains on the concave side the edge of another perforation. The unbroken edge of the concave side is bevelled exactly like
many shell "celts" from the Texas coast. It seems that when the
proximal end of the original implement was broken the specimen
was converted into an ornament or possible wrist guard. Still later
the ornament was broken through one of its central holes.

The stone speci~nen, found
the shell one, apparently is
Dr. E. H. Sellards identified
the identification of the other

on the back of the right wrist beside
an undrilled fragment of a pendant.
it as a caIcareous stone, and verified
specimen as conch shell.

The fact that both specimens are broken, and one has no perforation, suggests that they may have been placed on the wrist, after
burial, as ornamental offerings--rather than bracers or wrist guards,
which usually were on the left wrist instead of the right. They
accompanied a small adult. The bones, in bad condition, perhaps
were those of a woman.
The position of these specimens on tim wrist is much like that of
a bone "gorget" reported by Webb and Dodd~z from Louisiana,
as well as certain shell specimens found by Duffen in South Texas
and mentioned elsewhere.
A. C. Stearns and wife report finding a rock-covered burial, on
the tip of a narrow high ridge, about 14, miles west of Robert Lee,
Coke County. There were three individuals, "one large and the other
two much smaller." With one of the smaller skeletons were two
stone pendants (Plates I, 4 and III, 1) and a conch shell gorget.

The shell gorget, some 4x3~ inches and slightly rectangular with
rounded corners, was on the right chest. It has two worn holes near

12

Texas Archeological and Paleon$ologi.ct~l Society

the edge of the narrow end, two other holes near the center and a
fifth at the edge of the wide end.
The smaller oval stone pendant, 4~,A2x11~ inches, and without
decoration, has a single perforation very near one end. It was at
the right wrist.

The larger stone pendant, also oval, is 6x25~ inches,

has three holes in a longitudinal row--two near one end and the
other spaced one-third length from the opposite end. It, decorated
with carved designs, "was at the center and slightly below the chest."
In June, 1936, Woolsey~3 exhumed several burials at a site near
Moran, Shackelford County.

In one of these graves was a large

undecorated stone pendant in a poor state of pre~rvation and with
fragments missing from one edge.
"The grave was located by a pile of rocks scattered over an area
eight feet in diameter. Rocks were around and over the body. The
skull was covered by a stone 23x17 inches and only eight inches deep.
The space occupied by the skeleton was 27x17 inches. The head,
badly crushed, was to the south. * * * The teeth were somewhat worn ;
the legs were flexed ~vith the body on the left side. It seemed to be
a small adult, probably a woman.
"On the chest, just below the chin ~vas an a~’tifact made of slate or
black shale. It measures about 5~/.,x3½ inches, and has a hole in
each end. The wider end, with the smaller perforation, was toward
the head; the narrow end, with a larger hole, pointed toward the hips.
T~here were no other artifacts in the grave."
J. J. Howard gives a verbal account of the finding of a "butterflyshaped" pendant of Eltenberger limestone in a shelter burial on
Cave Creek, Coryell County. He reports that a metate was on edge
along one side of the grave, with several limestone slabs that formed
a eist-like enclosure.

A large slab was over the flexed skeleton,

which he thinks was that of a young woman.

The grave floor was

at a depth of about 5:t/,~. feet below the surface.
He states that the well worked pendant was on the chest in a
horizonal position, slightly beneath the chin, and was broken across
PLATE 1
SPEGIMENS WITH

SINGLE END PERFORATION

1, Victoria County; 2, Uvalde County; 3, Williarr~on County; 4,
Coke County; 5, Navarro County. No decoration. These specimens
apparently would not have lent themselves readily to attachment as
atlatl weights. They may have been worn as ornaments. No. 4 was
in a grave at the right wrist of a small adult. No. 5 courtesy of Frank
H. Watt.

Pl:~te 1

15
the short axis when found. Despite the old break, the two pieces
were together; and five small perforations near each edge of the
break suggests that the holes were used in mending the specimen.
Any sinew or cord that may have been laced through the small holes,
to hold the pieces together, had completely decayed.
Two larger drilled holes, in the approximate center of the ornament, apparently were the first perforations. The break occurred at
the edge of one of these holes, and may have resulted from the drilling operations. The stone, with a thickness of scarcely a~ inch, has a
length of about five inches; wing width of some three inches and a
neck width of less than two inches.
Around the neck were many lithospermuln seed beads, possibly
strung with the pendant. Other artifacts in the grave included two
smal! bone "pins," sharpened at one end and rounded at the other.
Russell1 z~ reports the finding of a stone pendant, with three perforations, in a grave eight riffles west of Behon, Bell County.
"The site is in a very rocky country, on a hillside near an enormous
spring. The burial was about 18 inches under the surface and was an
accidenfml find.
The thrce-holer was with eight projectile points,
buried with the adult remains of two males. All artifacts were with
the skull, over which hillside stones had been placed. * * * Near this
same site I found a soapstone gorget about five inches long by two
inches wide and very thick, with three holes in it. I also found a
piece very similar, but broken across at one of the holes.

It originally

had three holes."

Unfortunately Russell does not illustrate nor give detailed information concerning the eight projectile points reported from the
grave in which the pendant was found.
Shell Ornaments in Graves

For the purpose of showing what may be significant similarities
between the uses of stone and shell pendants in graves, a few additional cases of the finding of shell specimens will be briefly mentioned.
Pete Wiseman gives a verbal account of finding, in 1933, a shell
di~ on the chest of a skeleton in a grave on Owl Creek, some 16
miles north of Belton, Bell County. The center of the disc is cut
away, leaving a circular hole about a/~ inch in diameter. There

16

Texa~ Archeological and Pa2eon~ological Society

are seven shallow dots or punctations forming a lhm across the
disc--which is scarcely two inches in diameter. There are no perforations other than the large central hole.
Wheat1~ reports the finding of a large abalone shell pendant
associated with a bundle burial of a woman and a child in a small
shelter, some 16 miles southeast of Lubbock.
E. D. Smith verbally states that several years ago he found a triangular shell pendant in a grave one mile west of New Braunfels,
Comal County. The specimen, 4 3/10 inches long, has a drilled
hole near the edge in each end. The ornament was on the chest of
an adult.
In burial M-1 at the Oso site,16 Nueces County, were eight small
triangular shell pendants. They were just to the south and partly
beneath the skull. The sizes of the specimens range from
to 1 13/16"xll/s". The edges are covered with many small notches.
There is a single perforation in the small end of each specimen.

In a child’s grave in Val Verde County cave~7 were three complete shell pendants and part of another, all made from large fresh
water mussel shells. An unbroken projectile-point-shaped specimen,
with notched edges and remains of a knotted leather thong in the
two stem-end holes, was near the right shoulder between two groups
of reed tubes. A broken pendant, almost identical except for having
only one perforation, was beneath the chin. A diamond-shaped
pendant, with two closely spaced central perforations, was near the
right femur. A third specimen was just above the hip.
Stone Pendants in Middens

The vast majority of the stone pendants are found in the rubbish
beaps of village sites. Although the specimens are widely .distributed, the available data indicates that they are much more numerous in certain areas.
In this connection two facts must be taken into consideration:
(1) Many parts of Texas are little known archaeologically. (2) In
some cases locally known facts regarding artifacts have not been
published and, therefore, are not available for incorporation in
comparative studies. It thus is evident that the present picture
may be materially changed in some areas. The following statistics

Pendants and Their Uses

17

concerning the regional distribution of stone pendants in Texas are
given with the full understanding that many parts of the state are
represented by very inadequate samplings. No pretense is made of
an exhaustive study in any section.
Suggestive Distribution o] Stone Pendants in Texas
(Based on Incomplete Reports)
Number Specimens

Area

Whole

Broken

Total

Central Texas ................ 57
East Texas ...................... 5
North Texas .................. 2
West Texas .................... 7
Southwest Texas ............ 9
South Texas .................. 2

61
7
3
4
8
3

118
12
5
11
17
5

70
7
3
7
10
3

Total .......................... 82
Per Cent .................... 49

86
51

168
100

100
........

Per Cent

The above figures suggest that Central Texas may easily rank
first in the distribution of stone pendants. East Texas, where much
intensive field work has been carried on for a number of years,
seems to fall far behind as regards this particular type of artifact.
Too much dependence cannot be placed on the percentages for the
other areas.
Certain counties in Central and Southwest Texas run high in the
percentage of broken specimens. These are the areas where burntrock middens predominate.
Distribution o] Pendants in Concentrated Bwrnt-Rock Midden ~4reas
Central and Southwest Texas

Number Specimens
Whole
Broken
County
Total
3
Bell ...................................................... 4
7
6
Coryell .................................................. 3
3
2
Edwards ................................................
2
2
2
Kinney ..................................................
5
Llano .................................................... 1
6
3
4
San Saba .............................................. I

18

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Travis .................................................. 30"
Uvalde .................................................. 2
.Williamson .......................................... 12

Total .............................................. 53
Per Cent ..........................................45

28
1
17

58
3
29

64

117
i00

55

*Eleven specimens are not completed and have no perforations.
If these are eliminated, we find that only 4~) per cent of the perrotated specimens in these areas have not been broken; while 60 per
cent bf them were in a fragmentary condition when uncovered in the
middens.
Other Texas counties in which stone pendants have been reported
include Bastrop, Burner, Falls, Gillespie, Kerr, Limestone, McLennan, Navarro, Real, Cass, Cherokee, Gregg, Harrison, Henderson,
Lamar, Red River, Sabine, Shelby, Titus, Van Zandt, Wood, Clay,
Collin, Denton, Rockwall, Hutchinson, Oldham, Potter, Coke, El
Paso, Mitchell, Shackelford, Stonewall, Taylor, Terry, Brewster,
Presidio, Val Verde, Aransas, Bexar and Victoria.
Stratigraphic Evidence
Of 49 specimens excavated in Travis and Williamson Counties,
in what seems to be the center of distribution, facts as to the comparative depths at which found are as follows:
Upper
Number of specimens ........ 20
Per Cent ..............................41

Arbitrary Midden Levels
Lower
Middle
26
3
53
6

Total
49
100

The above statistics suggest that very few perforated stone pendants were made by the first occupants of these sites; that the culture
trait flowered during the middle period of occupancy; and at most
sites had started a definite decline in the latest period.
PLATE 2
SPECIMENS WITH I~ULTIPLE PERFORATIONS
1, Williamson County; 2, San Saba County; 3, Wood County; 4,
Titus County; 5, Limestone County; 6, Henderson County, Texas; 7,
Yell County, Arkansas. Several of these specimens might have been
attached to an atlatl. Note groove above upper hole in No. 6. Nos. 4,
6 courtesy 1%. K. Harris; No. 5 courtesy F. H. Watt; No. 7 courtesy
H. J. Lemley.

Plate

Pendants and Their Uses

21

A few outstanding cases bearing on the comparative chronology
of the specimens in various areas will be cited.
In a large burnt-rock ~nidden at Cedar Park, Williamson County,
Pearce and the writer found a number of stone pendants. Eight of
the specimens were at depths ranging from one to !8 inches, thus
falling in the so-caIled upper level. Five were at depths of 25 to 48
inches, coming in the middle level.

The midden had a maximum

depth of approximately seven feet, but no pendants were found
deeper than 48 inches.
In the fall of 1932 two perforated stone pendants were found in
a large rock shelter on the Fate Bell ranch, Val Verde County.~a
One of these, in a fragmentary condition and with the remains o~ a
large perforation, was in an ash deposit at a depth of 36 inches.
The other, with three holes partly drilled, also was in the ash deposit 27 inches deep. In the same level were many flint artifacts,
manos, bone beads, etc.

Above tim ash was a "trash" deposit ex-

tending from the surface to a depth of about 18 inches. In that
level were basketry, matting, sandals, cordage, etc. Two stratified
levels were beneafl~ the ash deposit and extended to 82 inches,
where bedrock was struck. Nearly two-thlrds of the midden depth
thus was beneath, and older than, tim deposit in which the pendants
occurred.

The seven stone pendants from the Fall Creek sites,~9 Llano and
San Saba Counties, in most cases were at depths of i2 to 36 inches
and seem to be prehistoric.

One specimen, however, was on rite

surface and another at a depth of only a few inches in association
with potsherds that suggest mission influence.
Still another specimen, almost identical in shape to many stone
pendants, was made of lead apparently ’:mohted in an ordinary
tablespoon."

Eliminating this doubtful specimen, there remains

evidence that the inhabitants used pendants from about the middle
o~ their prehistoric occupancy down into the bisto.rie period.
In a rock shelter on the Lehmann ranch, Gillespie County, Woolsey
in January, 1936, found a stone pendant with two perforations at a
depth of 32 inches. Despite the depth the specimen seems to be
comparatively recent.

There were two sterile layers above: nine

inches at the top containing loo~ sand and sheep droppings, with

22

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

five inches beneath made up entirely of creek-deposited ~and. The
pendant thus was only 18 inches beneath the sterile layers. The
occupational level itself contained much gravel and sand from flood
periods, suggesting that the deposit may have been laid down in a
relatively short time. Some 30 inches beneath this upper habitation
level was another with much ash but few artifacts.
In the spring of 1934 the writer excavated five rock shelters on
the Craig ranch, Edwards County. In shelter No. 2 a fragmentary,
well-polished pendant was found at a depth of 16 inches, and another small piece at 14 inches. One shows the remains of two perforations and the other is broken through a single hole. The midden deposit in the square from which these specimens came ranged
in depth from 30 to 45 inches. It thus seems that the pendants are
comparatively recent. At depths of 10 and 18 inches in adjacent
squares were small arrowpoints confined to the upper level. At
the deeper levels in this shelter were only large projectile points.
This association of the pendants with the small points seems significant.
Stone pendants were plentiful at the Law Brothers site, Travis
County, and were confined largely to the middle period of occupancy. The depth range of the pendants was from 11 to 26 inches.
Eleven of the 15 specimens were in the rubbish of the adjacent
campsite, one was on the surface and only three in the concentrated burnt-rock middens or "mounds." These facts agree with a
statement made by Bliss,ZO who was in charge of the excavation:
"Results of excavations show that the burnt-rock areas of the
mounds produce £ew artifacts compared with the peripheral areas.
The deep mound of burnt rock produced very Yew artifacts."

Eight of the pendants are whole and ~ven are fragmentary.
addition, there are five incomplete and undrilled specimens.

In

An unusual fact, discovered in the laboratory, is that a fragment
from the surface fits onto another piece secured at a depth of 26
inches.
At the Williams site, Travis County, was another b~oken pendant
the fragments of which were found at different depths. According
to George R. Fox, in charge of the excavation, one was at a depth of
18 inches; while the other, in a different square, was only eight
inches deep. The restored specimen, with some still missing from

Pevdr~rtts and Their Uses

23

one end, has a length of 8a!.i inches and a maximum width of 234
inches. The greatest thickness is 5/I6 inch. Both surfaces are well
polished. ]’he material is slate and the edges contain 76 notches.
An interesting feature in connection with these fragments is the
presence of two ~ts of two offsetting perforations along the broken
edge of each piece. (Plate III, 3). They match so well as to force
the conclusion that they were used in repairing the broken specimen.
The two original end holes are drilled from only one side; tile
four holes along the broken edges are drilled from both sides.
We have here the possihility that the specimen was used after its
repair; later came apart, one piece was discarded and the other
continued in use for a time.
In writing of the stone pendants from the tleffington site, Travis
County, J. Charles Kelley,2 ~ in charge of the excavation, states:
"The two fragmentary specimens are both ~rom the burnt rock
midden at the t-Ieffington site. One comes from t.he 6"-12" level (below surface), the other from the 18"-24" level. At the present stage
of research no culturat differe~biation of significance has been noted
from one level to another. No clue to the relative age of the specimens within the midden is thus available other than the hare facts of
their depths. The si~e itself is in every obvious way a ts~pical burni>
rock midden, with the normal cultural associations thus implied. It
appears relatively late in regional archaeological chronology. There
is, however, no evidence that the site survived into historic times in
the area; it is, therefore, presumably la~e prehistoric."
Kelley22 also reports a broken "gorget" frown the Jackson-Caldwell site, Brewster County.

It came from the contact between the

Kokernot and the Calamity formations and may immediately precede the chronological picture as given for the Bravo Valley aspect.
"Sites of the La Junt~ focus, :Bravo Valley aspect, consistently produce ceramics of Southwestern origin; a complex of wares dated by
~ree ring methods at about 1200-1400 A. D. in the Southwe-st.’" * * *

William A. 1)uffcn,23 in charge of the excavation of a large midden on aa old river terrace remnant known as Morhiss Mound,
~v’ictoria County, dia:usses the comparative ages of three stone pendants from that South Texas site:
"One of the few polished stone specimens from this site is a heavy
pendant of a dense slate, occurring at a depth of nine inches in the
midden material. It is oval in outline, having a length of 2 9/16 inches

24

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

and a width of 1 9/16 inches; with a thickness of 9/16 inch at the
center, tapering off to a rather thin but rounded edge. The perforation is formed by two conical pits in opposition, showing a drilling
from both sides. The material and the artifact form are intrusive to
the coastal area.
Dr. E. H. Sellards of the Bureau of Economic
Geology of the University of Texa~ feels that the material might well
be from the Ouachita area near the boundary of Arkansas and Oklahoma. The specimen was in the horizon with small projectile points
and corner-tang knives and seems to be proto-historic.
it is a late period.

At any rate,

"The fragments of a banded slate pendant, or so-called gorget, came
from a depth of 33 inches in the midden deposit. It is piano-convex in
cross-section, and has been perforated by drilling from opposite sides.
This material as well as the artifact are foreign to the area. The
source of the stone could have been the same as in the preceding case.
The specimen seems to belong to the late prehistoric period.
"A single object, which at one time had been a bannerstone, was recovered from a depth of 15 inches in the midden. The piece had been
smoothed along the broken edges and then drilled with a single hole
for suspension, thus converting it into a pendant. The material of
which it is made and the resulting artifact are both intrusive to the
area. It seems to be late prehistoric."
Materials Used

Various stones were used in the manufacture of the pendants. The
most common were Packsaddle schist, slate, limestone, and sandstone. Others include limonite, hematite, steatite, banded siltstone,
turquoise, etc. The colors range through gray, brown, green, blue,
yellow, red and black. Some of the banded pieces are beautifully
colored.
In many cases the stone used was secured locally; as, for example,
the limonite and hematite in East Texas; the limestone and schist in
Central Texas.
In certain cases, as that previously nmntioned in South Texas,
slate seems to have been brought in from other regions.
PLATE 3

]~LABORATELY DECORATED STONE A!~TIFACTS
1. From a grave in Coke County. 2. From a burnt-rock midden,
Travis County.
3.
Fragments from different depths in midden,
Travis County. ttole_~ near broken edge apparen%ly used in aboriginal
restoration.
These specimens possibly may have been used--two strung together
--in playing a game.

P~ate :3

27

Varieties o] Stone Pendants
The stone pendants tend to subgroup into varieties. Certain of
these overlap, so there is not always a clear-cut line of demarkation.
It seems that shape alone is not the most desirable basis
sification. Neither can the matter of size be considered of
importance. The method here employed is to consider
number and position of the perforations; (2) the shape;

for clasprimary
(1) the
(3) the

size.

Data Regarding Per]orations
Most of the perforations consist of biconically drilled holes,
sometimes referred to as countersunk holes. Using a flint drill,
or reamer, the drilling was done from both sides, the two parts of
the hole meeting near the center. Often these were located with
great precision. In other cases the holes were not exact offsets and
were adjusted by enlargement. In a few specimens such action was
not taken, leaving the crude asymmetrical perforations.
When the holes were small and the stone thin, drilling sometimes
was done entirely from one side. In such cases there usually is
evidence that the edge of the hole was somewhat shattered when the
drill point emerged. This occasionally was remedied by a slight
reaming of the hole on that side.
A third method of perforation was by the use of small reeds or
bone tubes. In such cases the holes are cylindrical. A few holes
have been noted where countersinking was employed. The hole
first was put through with a small cylinder; then a larger one was
used on each side to a shallow depth. There is a definite break
between the holes of the different diameters. This feature is noted
in a pendant from Val Verde County and another from Bell County.
Number and Position o] Per]oratlons
Number and Placement
Number
of Perforations
Counties
Single perforation at one end .......................... 9
Single perforation at each end ........................ 10
Single center perforation ................................ 6
Two central perforations .................................. 11
Two or more perforations at one end and
one perforation at other end .................... 8

Number
Specimens
29
12
8
22
20

28

Texas Arch~ological and paleon$ologlcal Society

Two perforations at one end, one perforation at
other end and one perforation in center ..

1

1

4

8

Two or more small perforations near broken
edge .............................................................

The pendants with a single perforation at one end are more plentiful than the other varieties. The only appreciable difference between the specimens with a single perforation at each end and those
with two central perforations is that in the latter case the holes are
somewhat closer together. One variety merges into the other.
Specimens with two or more perforations at one end and with a
single hole at the opposite end also are fairly plentiful. They, however, are not distributed over as wide a region as some of the other
varieties.
Many of the broken specimens have the breaks running through
the center of one or more of the holes. Eighteen per cent of all
Texas stone pendants examined were broken through a perforation.
Such breakage may have resulted from the drilling process, or occurred later due to rough usage. As mentioned elsewhere, the small
perforations along broken edges seem to have been used for repair.
All stone pendants reported from Coke, Mitchell and Victoria
counties have only a single perforation at one end. In the latter
county, however, some shell specimens have two perforations.
In localities where stone pendants are numerous, as in Travis
County, all varieties listed above are present. The single perforation in one end is more frequent than any of the others.
Sizes o] Specimens
The sizes vary widely.

This is true not only in remotely separated

areas, but often applies in a single locality.
Of 58 specimens from Travis County, 25 yield all dimensions.
The length, apparently more diagnostic than the width, ranges from
7/8 inch to 98~ inches, with an average of 4~/~ inches. The specimens

have been divided into the following length groups:
Lengths o] Travis County Specimens
Number
Length Groups
Specimens
Less than three inches .......................................... 9
Three to six inches ................................................ 13
More than six inches ............................................ 3
Total ................................................................ 25

Per
Cent
36
52
12
~00

29
The maximum width, usually near the center of the specimen,
ranges in Travis County from z~ inch to 31/~ inches, with an average
of 2ai~ inches. The thickness of the same specimens varies from
3/16 inch to r/s" inch, averaging 2/5 inch.
The dimensions of the three longest specimens are 8¼"x3"x5/16",
91/~"x28/~"x5/16" and 9~"x3½"x¼". These taper gradually from
the center to rounded points, and have a single perforation somewhat removed from each end. All have suffered more or less
breakage.
In examining these large perforated stones a similarity was noted
between their sizes and shapes and those of three so-called blades
from the Fall Creek site,zz~ Llano County. The "blanks" from
Llano County, like the pendants from Travis County, are made of
limestone and "roughed out" by percussion, with the edges and ends
somewhat thinned. Thinning the edges in this manner would have
saved much grinding, and may represent the initial stage in the
manufacture of large pendants.
Specimens from other Central Texas counties compare favorably
with the averages stated above. The average size, 4"x17~’’, of specimens from East Texas also compare to those in Central Texas. On
the average, however, specimens fro,n North,Z5 South, Southwest 26. z7 and parts of West Texaszs, zg, 3o seem to be smaller
than those in Central Texas.
Few Primary Shapes
The primary shapes do not vary greatly. The predominant form
is the oval; a few are triangular, rectangular and square with
rounded corners; an occasional one is almost round, in the form
of a discoidal; and a few are "reel-shaped" or "butterfly-shaped."
The specimens with only a single perforation include a greater
variety of shapes than do those with combinations of two or more
holes. The oval with the hole near one end is the most popular
shape among the single-perforated specimens. Triangular pendants
usually have the hole in the small end, but occasionally it is in the
center of the wide end. The few small square pendants usually
have the hole in one corner. The rare round specimens more often
are perforated in the center; while the rectangular ones have a hole
in the center of one end.

3O

Tezws A~ch~olog~cal ~ P~l¢o~tological ~oc~e~y

Two central perforations occur in specimens that are approximately round, rectangular, reel-shaped, and rarely in oval ones.
Two holes near one end and one hole at the other are confined
almost entirely to oval specimens.
A form of considerable interest is the so-called reel-, wing- or
butterfly-shaped pendant. The writer knows of only six such specimens in Texas. One of these, reported from a grave in Coryell
County, has been discussed.
Another specimen of that general form was found by J. E. Hawkins in Limestone County. According to Frank H. Watt,3~ who
kindly furnished a photograph and data, it is made of black amphobile schist and was secured at Site No. 40A8-4. It has two central
biconically drilled holes, and is broken through the center of one
of these. (Plate II, 5).
Wilson32 reports "three broken gorgets of a very odd shape"
from a site located "about four miles southeast of Wylie," near the
Collin-Rockwall County line. A sketch restoration, based on about
one-fourth of a specimen, shows the original shape about the same
as the one from a cave burial in Coryell County. The only apparent
difference is that Wilson concludes his specimen probably had four
original pcrforations arranged in two groups; whereas, the one from
Coryell County originally contained only two central holes.
The remaining Texas specimen of this general form came from
a depth of only 14 inches in a burnt-rock midden, Travis County.
It is made of Packsaddle schist, and has two central perforations.
George T. Wright33 furnishes data on 35 stone pendants, including four reel-shaped slate specimens each with two central perforations, from surface sites near Red River in Choctaw and McCurtain
Counties, southeastern Oklahoma. (Plate IV). One of these is
much like several of the Texas specimens, while the others are of
the more pronounced four-wing form.
There is a noticeable similarity between the shapes of these stone
specimens and certain reel-shaped objects of copper from Alabama3z~ and elsewhere.
Decoration
Some form of decoration appears on 15 per cent of the stone
pendants reported from Texas. By far the greatest part of such

Pendants and Their Uses

31

decoration consists of small notches or serrations along the edges.
(Plates II, 1-2, III, 2-3; IV, 1, 3a-b).
In some cases the notches are wide, deep and fev~ in numbers;
in others they are narrow, shallow and numerous. The number
varies from two to 38 on each edge. Usually equal numbers appear
on the opposite edges. The symmetry often is such that one must
consider the notches as intended solely for decorative effect. The
theory that they are tally mark.s, or represent some record, seems
unlikely.
Engraved designs are present on a few specimens. (Plates II, 2, 7;
III, 1-2; IV, lb, 3a-b). These take the form of simple band lines,
ladder-like and diamond-shaped elements, rayed circles or so-called
sun-symbols; and occasionally a design suggestive of a plumed
serpent.
Beauty also was attained in certain cases by perfect symmetry,
highly polished surfaces, and the utilization of the natural colors ha
some stones.35 (Plates I, 3; II, 3).
The elaborately engraved designs on a specimen reported by
Harris36 from Denton County, Texas, is similar to one on a pendant from the southeastern corner of Oklahoma.
Uses to Which Placed
It may be well to present some of the facts and theories set forth
by various writers in an attempt to explain the uses to which these
perforated stones might have been placed.
As early as 1820 R. G. Wilson-37 wrote concerning a mound
burial in Ohio:
* * * "On the breast also lay a stone ornament with two perforations, one near each end, through which passed a string- by means of
which it wa~ suspended around the wearer’s neck. On this string,
which was made of sinews and very much injured by time, were
pIaced a great many beads." * * *

In 1873 Jones3~ expressed the belief that stones perforated with
two holes near the center or with one hole at the end--when thin,
with notched edges and decorated with carved lines--were "intended
as ornaments and were suspended from the neck or fastened to some
conspicuous part of the vestment." He thought, however, that other

32

Texas Archeological and Paleo~$ologicaI Society

specimens more thick and durable, with holes drilled all the way
from one side and twice as large on one side as on the other, were
used in manufacturing bowstrings. He then quoted Catlin, who
thought otherwise:
* * * "Those which I have seen were used * * * for grooving the
shafts of their arrows. * * * These grooves are * * * indented by
pressure produced while forcing the arrow, softened by steam, through
a hole in the tablet, with the incisor of a bear set firmly in a handle
and projecting over the rim of the hole, as the arrowshaft is forced
downward through the tablet. * * * It would be useless to pass the
bowstring through the tablet, for the evenness and the hardness of
strings are produced much more easily and effectually by rolling
them, as they do betwcen two flat stones whilst saturated with heated
glue."
Holmes39 a few years later wrote:
* * * "As a rule the larger and more important pendants are employed as gorgers, but vast numbers of the smaller specimens are
strung with beads at intervals along the string, attached as auxiliary pendants to the larger gorgers, suspended from the nose, ears
and wrists, or form
ments." * * *

tinkling

borders

to

head-dresses

and

gar-

He quotes Beverly in his "History of Virginia" (p. 196) regarding pendant ornaments:
"These they wear * * * before or behind their neck, * * * or else
they lace their garments with them, and adorn their tomahawks and
every other thing that they value."

Holmes then names other possible uses for pendants, such as
badges of authority, shuttles, armor plates, wrist protectors, sinewsizers and cord-twisters.
Fowke4o ten years later summarized the preceding theories and
added a few of his own. He stated that some perforated pieces "are
supposed to be bracers. It is said that the Miami Indians wore
similar plates
string." * ~ ~

of stone to protect their wrists from the bow-

"Some writers suppose the gorgets to have been shuttles; but this
PLATE 4
SPECIMENS FROM

CHOCTAW AND IV[CCURTAIN

COUNTIES,

OKLAHOMA

1, Notched edges; 2, Incurred or reel-shaped; 8, Incised designs and
notched edge.~.

PIa t(,, 4

and The6- U~¢s

35

supposition can hardly be entertained. * * * As twine-~wisters they
would be about as awkward as anything that could be devised. * * *
The bracer theory is plausible. * * * If they were ~o be worn, at the
belt or on any p~art of the dress they could easily have been fastened
by a knotted string. * * * If suspended around the neck, in order
to make them be flat against the bre~t they probably had a short
cord passed through the perforation and tied above the top of the
object, the suspending cord being passed through the loop thus
formed."

Mason41 defines bracer or wrist guard as "a contrivance for protecting the archer’s wrist from being galled by his bowstring: A
shield of leather or other substance fastened to the wrist of the
left hand to prevent injury from the bowstring."
Holmes42 mentions the use of large "pigment tablets." There is
a possibility that some of the circular perforated stones may have
been used in like manner. The present writer has seen no perforated stone with evidence of paint on it; but there have been
found small imperforated stones, of about the same size and shape,
on which appear red paint."~3
In the Handbook, Holmes’~4 in discussing pierced tablets states:
"Those with two or more holes were probably fixed to some part of
the costume, or to some article of ceremony. * * * Their distribution
is general, and their use must have extended at one time or another
to most of the tribes east of the plains and well northward into Canada. ¯ * * It is not unlikely * * * that some of these classes of objects
exhibiting marked diversity of form, size and finish had multiple
offices, serving on occasion or with different communities as implements, ornaments and symbols." * * *

Moorehead45 as late as 1917 wrote:
* * * "If these were made and used by the American Indian of
today, or of the past 100 years, it would have been far easier and
more simple to visit the descendents of such Indians and secure firsthand information as to the use and purpose of these perplexing objects. * * * That some of these objects were in use in historic times
no one wil! deny; that many of them are ancient is also quite true."

In referring to ovate forms with two central holes, or a hole near
each end, he states he found several of these on the chests and arms
of skeletons. A pendant from Maine had a polished groove between
perforations. He thinks the groove was the result of rubbing back
and forth of a thong by which the specimen was fastened to some

86

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

other object. With further reference to grave finds he quotes the
Ohio Archaeological and Historical Society (Vol. VII, p. 134):
"The Storey mound, west of Chillicothe, sheds some light upon the
gorget class. On the right wrist of a skeleton was found a fine
expanded-center gorget of ribbon slate with t~vo perforations. On th~
left wrist there was one of the same kind, but not perforated. Also
at the left wrist was a concave one with unusually sharp edges."

Webb and Dodd46 report the finding of a bone "gorget" on the
left arm of an adult male in a mound in northwestern Louisiana.
Attention is called to the fact that "bow-string protection would be
afforded only if the bow were held horizontally, not vertically."
They also mention a find by H. J. Lemley of "a double-perforated
stone tablet beside the arm of a skeleton in a Ouachita River mound
near Malvern, Arkansas."
Purpose o] Extra Holes

A po~ible use of what seem to be "extra" holes in pendants may
have been for attachment of objects of various kinds. This is suggested by Harrin~on:47
"Quartz cryst~als of various sizes were used by the Indians for surmounting ceremonial wands of bone or as pendants, asphalt being
applied to one end of the crystal for attachment."
Some years ago Pearce wrote the United States National Museum
requesting information concerning the perforations in certain specimens. In reply Graf4e quoted F. M. Setzler as follows:
"We agree with Pearce that the two holes near the outer edge were
made primarily for inserting a thong for suspension. The only explanation our archaeologists have for the larger hole in the center
and on the right hand edge is that feathers or some small animal skin
might have been suspended from these holes. We have no definite
proof for this theory. A careful examination of the edges of perforation might reveal evidence of wear."

In a few cases where there is a small "extra" hole near the edge
it shows some evidence of wear.
Pendaztts on War Bonnets?
One individual states that certain Indians in Oklahoma until a few
years ago used stone pendants in the tops of war bonnets. W.E.S.
Dickerson, a Choctaw Indian who formerly lived in Oklahoma, says

Pendants and Their Uses

37

he knows of no such practice; but that sometimes a shell or small
stone pendant might be used as a slide on a cord beneath the chin
when a war bonnet is worn.
Pendants As Possible Atlatl Weights

Perforated pendants in certain cases seem to merge into perforated boat-shaped artifacts. Pattersonz~9 discusses the possible use
of boat stones as "gorgers" and adds:
"In addition to their resemblance to certain forms of pierced tablets, boat-stones have been found in graves under conditions which
might support this suggestion. * * * According to the report~ made
by the discove~cers, three of these pieces were lying on the chest of
the skeleton. * * * All of these specimens are of the perforated type.
This may be regarded by some as presumptive evidence that they had
been worn after the manner of a gorget, suspended perhaps by a
string encircling the neck.
But it cannot be taken as conclusive
proo:~." * * *

It is interesting and perhaps significant that three of the Central
Texas counties--Travis, Williamson and Bell--with the greatest
number of stone pendants are likewise ones reported by Patterson
as among the greatest yielders of boat-shaped artifacts.
Webb and Dodd5° also have found that "Southwestern Arkansas
represents a minor culture center for gorgers, as Patterson found it
to be for boatstones."
If, as seems from the evidence Patterson presented, many of the
boat-shaped artifacts "were used primarily as weight stones bound to
atlatls to give the weapon additional weight and efficiency," may
not certain of the stone pendants also have been used as atlatl
weights? Some would lend themselves well to such attachment.
(Plate II, 3, 4, 5, 7).
Pendants Possibly Used in Games

Certain of the large so-called pendants possibly may have been
part of the equipment used in playing a game, (Plates III, V), somewhat after the manner of double balls or double billets as reported
by Culin:51
"The game of double ball throughout the eastern United States and
among the Plains tribes ks played exclusively by women. * * * In

Texas Archeologica2 ~d Paleontological Society

38

noTthern California, however, it is played by men.

The implements

for the game consist of two balls or similar objects attached to each
other by a thong, and a curved stick with which they were thrown.
The balls vary in shape and material. * * * Among the Sauk and
Foxes * * * the balls are oblong, weighted with sand and frequently
both, with the connecting thong, are made of one piece of buckskin. * * *
"A distinct variation is found among the ttupa; where, instead of
balls, two small bottle-shaped billets tied together at the top are
employed. The Klama~h use large billets fastened together by a cord
passing through a hole in the middle of each stick. * * *
"The sticks, made of saplings, usually taper to the end and are
slightly curved. * * * They vary in length from 23 inches to six
feet. One stick is ahnost invariably used. * * * The bases, two in
number, consist of poles (Chippewa) or of two piles Of earth (Omaha),
and vary in distance from 300 and 400 yards (Omaha) to a mile
(Cree) apart.
The object of the game "is to get the ball over the
opponent’s base line or to take it to one’s home. Bets are made upon
the result.
"’Another * * * is what is called the throwing game.

It is played

by two large bands, ~vho collect round two opposite poles, and try
to throw the object over the opponent’s pole. * * * They throw them
in the air by means of a staff excellently shaped for the purpose, and
catch it again very cleverly’." * * *

Culin also reports a small "stone buzz" from a cliff ruin in
Arizona. A few s~nall Texas specimens with two central perforations might have been twirled on a twisted cord to make a buzzing
noise.
Summary and Conclusions

Perforated stone "pendants" have been reported from 50 Texas
counties. They probably are present in many others. These are
scattered over a wide area, ranging from the Gulf of Mexico to the
tip of the Panhandle, from the Louisiana border to the E1 Paso
region.
The present known distribution suggests a tendency toward concentration along a comparatively narrow strip, extending from the
northeast part of the state southwest to near the mouth of the Pecos
River. This strip includes a large part of the burnt-rock mound
area of Central Texas, in which these specimens seem to be more

Pendants ~nd Their Uses

numerous than in any other part of the state.
in other areas may change the picture.

39

More extensive work

In the seemingly concentrated area the specimens tend toward
larger size and more elaborate workmanship than in other parts
of the state.
The stone pendants seem to belong to the middle and late prehistoric periods. Few, if any, appear to be of an earlier period. A
few apparently are historic.
Thirteen Texas specimens have been found in graves. Five were
on the chest, three on the right wrist, and ~ive were in a cremated
burial.
Among recorded Texas finds of shell pendants (not circular gotgets) eig)~t were beneath the back of the head, five on the chest, one
near the left wrist, three beside the pelvis, one near the right
shoulder and one on the right femur.
It seems that the~ burial finds, with the po~ible exception of
those on the wrists, may have been entirely for orna~nental purposes.
The bracer or wrist-guard theory is deserving of consideration.
After reviewing all available evidence on the subject, however, tim
present writer is inclined to the idea fl~at most of the specimens on
or very near the forearm were wrist ornaments, rather than bracers for
protection against the bowstring.
There is greater uncertainty regarding the possible uses to which
specimens from midden deposits may have been placed. It seems
unlikely that the Texas specimens were used in the manufacture
of bowstrings, or as sinew-sizers or cord-twisters. Practically all of
the perforations are too small for use in grooving arrowshafts.
The use of small pendants on strings with beads, and as auxiliary
pendants suspended from holes in larger ones, seems probable, z~,
shell pendant in a South Texas grave was in association with beads;
as also was a stone one in Central Texas.
It is possible that some of the stone specimens with two perfora.
tions may have been atlatl weights. Their distribution coincides
with boat-~aped artifacts thought to have been so used.
Some of the large specimens with two or more perforations may
have been attached in pairs, by a thong, and thrown with a stick in

Texa~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

40

playing a game. Such use might account for the large percentage
of bre,’~kage and battering of the specimens.
Anthropology Dept.,
University of Texas,
Austin, Texas.
REFERENCES
1. Jones, C. C., Antiquities of the Southern Irutians, D. Appleton and Co., New York, 1873, pp. 367-370.
2. Holmes, W. H., Art in Shell o] the Ancient Americans, 2nd
Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, 1880-81, Washington, 1883, pp. 255, 256, 264, 265, 266, 267.

3. Holmes, W. H., Articles about Gorgets, Pierced Tablets, Problematical Objects, in Handbook o] American Indians, Edited by F.
W. Hodge, B. A. E. Bull. 30, Pt. I, 1907, p. 496; Pt. II, 1910, pp.
247-248, 267-268, 308.
4. Fowke, Gerard, Stone Art, 13th Annual Report, Bureau of
American Ethnology, 1891-92, Washington, 1896, pp. 116-120.
5. Moore, C. B., A Cache o] Pendant Ornaments, Journal of
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. XI, 1898.
6. Peabody, Charles, and W. K. Moorehead, The So-Called
"’Gorgers," Bulletin No. 2, Phillips Academy, Andover, 1906.
7. Moorehead, W. K., Stone Ornaments of the American Indian,
The Andover Press, 1917, pp. 46-70.
8.

Moorehead, W. K., op. cir., Fig. 162.

9. Hodge, F. W., editor, Handbook o] American Indians, Pt. I,
B. A. E. Bull. 30, Washington, 1907; article by W. H. Holmes,
p. 496.
PLATE 5
POSSIBLE USI~ OF STON]~ PENDANTS FOR PLAYING A GAM~
Two perforated stones with a strong thong attached to one end
and feathers dangling from other end, may have been thrown by a
stick two or more feet in length. Rough usage would have resulted
in breakage of specimens.

Plate 5

Pe~lan~s and Their Uses

4~

10. Ray, Cyrus N., Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found Near
Colorado, Texas, Bull. Tex. A. and P. Soc., Vol. 8, 1936, pp. 10, 1112, P1. I, Nos. 13-17.
11. Ray, Cyrus N., Multiple Burials in Stone Cist Mounds o] the
.4bilene Region, Bull. Tex. A. and P. Soc., Vol. 5, 1933, pp. 20,
32, PI. 8.
12. Webb, C. H., and Monroe Dodd, Bone "’Gorget" ]rom a Cad.
doan Mound Burial, American Antiquity, Vol. 4, No. 3, Jan., 1939,
pp. 265-267, P1. 12.
13. Woolsey, A. M., Field Notes, Reconnaissance in Eastland and
Shackelford Counties, Anthropology Museum, University of Texas,
Austin, June, 1936.
14. Russell, F. B., Archeology in Bell County, Central Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 2, Waco, March, 1936, p. 48; and personal communication, January 13, 1941.
15. Wheat, Joe Ben, Report on Work ~n the Lubbock ‘4tea, Texas
Archaeological News, No. 2, Austin, December, 1940, p. 7.
16. Jackson, A. T., Field Notes, Oso Site, Nueces County, Anthropology Museum, Univ. of Tex., 1933, pp. 8-9.
17. Woolsey, A. M., Field Notes, Mrs. MartEn Kelly Cave, Val
Verde County, Anth. Dept., U. of T., 1936, pp. 6, 7, 8, 9.
18. Pearce, J. E. and A. T. Jackson, ,4 Prehistoric Rock Shelter
in Val Verde County, Texas, Univ. of Tex. Bull. No. 3327, Austin,
1933, pp. 44, 133.
19. Jackson, A. T., The Fall Creek Sites, University of Texas
Publication No. 3802, Austin, 1938, pp. 83, 112, 115.
20. Bliss, W. L., Field Notes, Law Bros. Site, Travis County,
Anthropology Museum, Univ. of Texas, 1939, p. 23.
21.

Kelley, J. Charles, Personal Communication, June 3, 1941.

22. Kelley, J. Charles, The Association o[ ztrchaeological Mate.
rials with Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of Texas,
Part I, Bulletin Sul Ross State Teachers College, Vol. XXI, No. 3,
Alpine, 1940, pp. 32, 39, 67, 70.
23.

Duffen, William A., Personal Communication, June 3, 1941.

24.
XII.

Jackson, A. T., The Fall Creek Sites, op. cir., pp. 76-77, P1.

Texa~ Archeologica~ and Paleontological Society

25. Witte, A. H., Archaeology o[ t~ Section o] Upper Red River
Drainage, Bull. Tex. A. and P. Sot., Vol. 7, 1935, p. 50.
26. Smith, V. J., ]lrchaeological Notes o] the Big Bend Region,
Bull. Tex. A. and P. Soc., Vol. 3, 1931, p. 67.
27. Coffin, E. F., Archaeological Exploration o] a Rock Shelter
in Brewster County, Texas, Indian Notes and Monographs No. 48,
Museum of American Indian, New York, 1932, p. 57.
28. Studer, Floyd V., Te.~s Panhandle Culatre Ruin No. 55,
Bull. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 6, 1934,
p. 91.
29. Holden, W. C., Excavation o! Saddle Back Ruin, Bull. Tex.
A. and P. Soc., Vol. 5, 1933, p. 49.
30. Watts, W. C., Lake Sites o] the South Plains o/ Texas, Bull.
Tex. A. and P. Soc., ¥ol. 11, 1939, pp. 84-87.
31.

Watt, Frank H., Personal Communication, June 3, 1941.

32. Wilson, Lester, Campsite On East Fork Near Wylie, The Record, Dallas Archaeological Society, Vol. 2, No. 5, Dallas, January,
1941, pp. 23, 25.
33.
1940.

Wright, George T., Personal Communication, November 27,

34. Webb, William S., ~In Archaeological Survey o] Wheller
Basin on tire Tennessee River in Northern .~/hrbama, B. A. E. Bull.
122, Washington, 1939, pp. 40, 50, 56, Plates 28b and 52b.
35. Jackson, A. T., Ornaments o] East Texaz Indians, Bull. Tex.
A. and P. Soc., Vol. 7, 1935, p. 23.
36. Harris, R. K., Indian Campsites o] the Upper Trinity River
Drainage, Bull. Tex. A. and P. Soc., ¥ol. 8, 1936, p. 133 and Plate
20, No. 11; also personal communication, May 21, 1941.
37. ztrchaeologia zlmerlcana, Transactions and Collections of
American Antiquarian Society, Vol. I, Worcester, Mass., 1820, p.
182.
38.

Jones, C. C., op. cir., pp. 367-370.

39. Holmes, W. H., .4rt in Shell, op. cir., pp. 255, 256, 264, 265,
266-267.
40.

Fowke, Gerard, op. cir., pp. 116-120.

Penda~t~ ~nd Their Uses

45

41. Mason, O. T., North American Bows, Arrows and Quivers,
Annual Report, Smithsonian Institution, 1893, Washington, 1894,
pp. 635, 636.
42. Holmes, W. H., Certain Notched or Scalloped Stone Tablets
o] the Mound Builders, American Anthropologist, (NS)., Vol. 8,
1906, pp. 101-108.
43. Jackson, A. T., Picture-Writing o] Texas Indians, Univ. of
Tex. Publication No. 3809, Austin, March, 1938, p. 455.
44. Holmes, W. H., Handbook o] American Indians, op. cit., pp.
257-248, 308.
45. Moorehead, W. K., Stone Ornaments o] the American Indians, op. cir., pp. 51, 61, 248, 251, 255, 258; quoting Carr, Lucien,
Dress and Ornaments of Certain American Indians, American Antiquarian Society, 1897.
46.

Webb, C. H., and Monroe Dodd, op. cir., pp. 265, 266.

47. Harrington, J. P., Exploration o] Burton Mound, 44th Annual Report B. A. E., Washington, 1926-27, pp. 92, 93.
48.

Letter, J. E. Graf to J. E. Pearce, October 21, 1932.

49. Patterson, J. T., Boat-Shaped Artiiaets o! the Gull Southwest
States, University of Texas Bulletin No. 3732, Austin, 1937, pp. 6162, P1. 10, Fig. 75, P1. 22, Fig. 143, 144.
50.

Webb, C. H., and Monroe Dodd, op. dz., p. 267.

51. Culin, Stewart, Games o] the North American Indians, 24th
Annual Report, B. A. E., 1902-1903, Washington, 1907, pp. 647648, 650, Figs. 851, 853, 857, 858, 863, 864, 866, 867.

