Vertebrate Paleontology in Texas

’37

VERTEBRATE PALEONTOLOGY
IN TEXAS
BY CURTIS

J.

HESSE

This vast state in which we live is blessed with a great diversity
of natural phenomena. Its climate, vegetation, wild-life, and topography offer many interesting leads to the student. As in these
other fields, so it is with our geology; although the first scientific
papers dealing with it were published one hundred years ago, only
the broad outlines of our geologic map have been drawn.
In studying the thousands of square miles of rocks exposed within
our borders many traces and remains of past life are found. These
were preserved when the surrounding rocks were being deposited
as muds, sands, and gravels. Such objects are fossils, and the collecting and study of them is the science of Paleontology.
Almost everyone is familiar with fossils of one sort or another,
for there is scarcely a county in Texas that has not produced some
fossil material. Indeed, certain of our fossil localities are known
the world over. Fossils themselves may be divided into three
groups, depending upon what type of life they represent. First are
the plants; their leaves, stems, wood, seeds, and sometimes flowers
are found preserved in the rocks. The study of fossil plants is called
paleobotrmy. Second are the animals without backbones, such as
sponges, corals, clams, snails, and insects. These are the most
common of all fossils and the study of them is called Invertebrate
Paleontology. Third, are the animals with a backbone, similar to
those we see about us every day. This is the field with which we
are primarily concerned in the following pages. It is called Vertebrate Paleontology.
The vertebrates are well known to all of us, they are: fishes, amphibia, reptiles, birds, and mammals. The ]ishes are so ~’amiliar
that they need no characterization. The Amphibia, the bridge form
between land and water, are animals of reptilian appearance but
which in early life breathe by means of gills, go through a metamorphosis and then have air-breathing lungs. This once dominant
group is represented today by the frogs, toads, and salamanders.

98

Texa~ Archeological az~ Paleontological So~y

The reptiles represent one more step forward in that they breathe
by means of lungs throughout life. We have all seen snakes,
lizards, turtles, and crocodiles, the common reptiles of today. These
are cold-blooded, scale-covered animals that are members of a Once
much more wide spread class. The birds are also familiar. They
are derived from the reptiles and retain many reptilian characters.
They are warm blooded, have feathers instead of scales, lay eggs,
and usually can fly. The last, and now dominant group are the
mammals. These are warm blooded, produce milk, and have hair.
Since mart is a. member of this group, it is regarded as the most
highly developed type animal.
With this brief survey of the kinds of vertebrate animals we may
now turn to the great collections of fossils amassed in Museums
to see what has been discovered in Texas by the pick and shovel of
the paleontologist or his collector.
The Paleozoic
Throughout north central Texas, along the eastern edge of the
Panhandle and to some extent irt the Trans-Pecos region there is
a great series of rocks known as the Permian (see Plate 21). These
rocks were deposited partly in the seas and partly on the adjacent
shores some 250 million years ago. One of the oldest and most
important assemblages of vertebrate animals in the world has been
found in the rocks of this ancient Permian shore. Some of the first
of these strange creatures to be discovered were collected, by Jacob
Boll and sent by him to eastern institutions.
There are approximately 100 different kinds of. fishes, amphibians, and reptiles known from these Texas localities. They are animals of estuaries, swamps, lagoons, alluvial, plain~, and open or
dense woodlands. No traces of birds or mammals have been found,
nor have many highly specialized reptiles (running, leaping, or
flying forms) been discovered. These higher types, if evolved at
this time, probably inhabited the higher interior lands.
The amphibia were at the peak of their evolution and the largest
amphibians that ever lived, the Stegocephalia (Stego-covering roof;
cephalo-head), were represented by about 25 species (see Plate 22
B). These animals were about five feet long, with a broad flat
skull, and the general body proportions of an alligator. They were

Vertebrate P~leon~ology in T~as

99

evidently carnivorous, judging from their sharp recurred teeth and
from numerous coprolites, (fossil excrement) supposed to have
come from them containing bones of fishes and other small vertebrates. Eryops (see Plate 22 C), the form most common in Texas,
was semi-aquatic. Although it had a heavy body, the forms of the
muscle attachments of its bones suggest it was probably capable of
quick movement. Diplocaulus (see Plate 22 D), although a smaller
form, was none the less interesting. The skull of this form was
shaped like an expanded A. The skull length along the side or
wing was about 10 inches and the distance across the posterior tips
of the sides was about 12 inches. The mouth, nares, and eyes were
at the apex of the skull, and the slender weak body was attached
immediately behind at the apex of the inner "V". Although it was
long believed to be a legless form, small leg elements were later discovered, but neither the body nor legs of this amphibian were in
proportion to the skull. This "arrow-shaped" animal evidently lived
in the mud and slime of pools and streams, wriggling its way along.
The amphibia were the dominant type of vertebrate in this and
other Permian faunas, but since that far off time they have steadily
declined in importance and are now represented only by the lowly
salamanders, frogs, and toads.
Of the reptiles on this old shore, there is a greater variety, in
some cases foreshadowing those groups which were to rule the world
in the following geologic era.

Of the 50 or so known kinds found

here in Texas, none are more striking than the Dimetrodon-Edaphosaurus group (see Plate 22 A). These animals resembled in a
general way the alligator.
skulls a foot long.

They were about six feet in length, with

They carried sharp recurred teeth characteristic

of carnivorous animals.

The neural spines of the vertebrae

were

tremendously elongated, extending about three feet above the animal’s back.
For what purpose this great expanded dorsal "fin"
could be used, it is difficult to imagine. It must have been a nuisance to the animal in getting around, and a drain on its vitality to
grow it and keep it in repair.

Faunas similar in age to the Texas Permian have been found in
New Mexico, Oklahoma, and scattered mid-continent localities.
These are in turn related in age and to some extent in kind to
groups of animals found in the Permian of Scotland, Russia, South

lo0

Te~a~s Archeological a~d Paleontological Society

Africa, and China. The University of Chicago, the University of
Michigan, and Harvard have the largest collections from Texas
localities. This material has been extensively studied and described
by.Cope, Case, Williston, and Romer, and is considered by them to
represent one of the most important fossil vertebrate faunas of the
world. Recently, under a Works Progress Administration project,
the Bureau of Econo~nic Geology at the University of Texas has collected some of this material. It is the only large collection of this
age in the possession of any Texas institution.
The Mesozoic
The following great subdivision of geologic time, the Mesozoic
(see Plate 21), began approximately 200 million years ago and
closed with the last retreat of the great inland seas more than 70
million years ago. This is commonly known as the Age of Reptiles,
for throughout this span of time collections show them to have been
the dominating forms. In Texas there is a great suite of rocks that
were deposited in the era, containing both marine and fresh water
beds. Although these rocks have been studied, their sequence worked
out, and distribution plotted, no adequate attempt has been made
to collect their vertebrate fauna. A fairly complete fauna is known
from the Triassic, amphibians, crocodile-like Phytosaurus, and a
few other reptiles having been found. It is indicative of about the
same kind of environment as in the Permian. The Jurassic, which
elsewhere contains the striking sauropodus dinosaur faunas, is not
well represented in Texas. The main Jurassic deposits of this state
are marine, and so far no vertebrates have been found in them. However parts of one dinosaur were found some years ago in Oklahoma.
The last and most widespread of the Mesozoic periods is the Cretaceous. It was the time of the final great invasion of the continent
by shallow seas. Almost everywhere that extensive Cretaceous rocks
are exposed, vertebrate fossils have been found. These rocks are
rich in both marine and land forms, and a wealth of material has
been collected from them in many parts of the world. From Texas
exposures of the Cretaceous have come scattered specimens; a few
PLATE 21
Standard Geologic Time Scale, modified to show those formations
most important in vertebrate paleontology of Texas.

THE- SUBDIVISION5 OF 6[-0L061C TIME-1
WITH ~MPHAP~ ON THOSe- Or- IMP0RTANCr=
VE.RT~ISRATE. PALE-ONTOLOGY IN ~r~XA~

IN

|

L~

Z
dl
0
<

CA M ~t>.IAN

CAMISRIAN

Plate 2l

Vertebrate Paleontology in Texas

103

fish, one or two Mosasaurs, a fairly good Plesiosaur and Other incomplete records, but nothing approaching the rich fauna of similar
beds in Kansas.
A few fossil fishes here in the collection at A. & M. are of interest
since they are forms related to those of the Cretaceous of the West
Indies and Europe.
A few hundred miles to the. north in the
Niobrara Chalk of Kansas (~ Austin Chalk of Texas) is a large
suite of fossil fishes yet many of the Texas forms are not represeuted there. It is possible that the Kansas fishes represent those
of a near shore part of the ocean, while the Texas species are more
of the open ocean types. The large, impressive Xiphaclinus audax
is recorded from both areas, both Oklahoma and Texas Universities
have good specimens of this form di~overed by Dr. Jo W. Stovall.
Fragments of Mosasaurs or great sea lizards, have been found in
many localities, mostly vertebrae, but the University of Texas has
one good skull and other fairly complete specimens have been found.
These large marine animals resembled, and are related to, the
modern lizard. They had paddles instead of feet, and ranged ia
size from 10 to 50 feet. They were predaceous forms, feeding on
fish, and in that far off day they must have been the rulers of the seas.
One of the most interesting Cretaceous vertebrates is a nearly complete skeleton of a rare Plesiosaur (see Plate 23 B), found near
Marlin, Texas. This is one of the rare types of plesiosaur, called
Trinacromerum, it is a small form about ].2 feet long, with a stout
body. Its head was small but carried a long slender snout armed
with sharp teeth, this, with its large flipper-like paddles made it a
swift, dangerous animal. With these were great sea turtles, some
as much as 10 feet across the shell, and most peculiar of all the
Pterodactyl (Pteranodon) (Plate 23 A), a great toothless flying
reptile with a wing spread of over 20 feet. Although complete
skeletons of these winged reptiles have not been found in Texas,
the only uncrushed bone of such a form was found here a few
years ago. Since the bones of their skeletons were hollow as they
are in birds, and are always as flat as this paper when found, great
difficulty was experienced in identifying this uncrushed element
when it was found. Nothing like it had been seen before. All
these and other strange creatures have been found in the rocks of
the Cretaceous seas.

104

Texas Archeological ~_nd Paleon$olagical Society

In the past few years it has been noted that certain of the Cretaceous deposits in the Big Bend had dinosaur bones in them as
well as marine forms. It is still too early to say much about the
monstrous dinosaurs of this time in Texas. Mr. Strain’ of the College
of Mines and Metallurgy at E1 Paso and Dr. J. W. Stovall, of the
University of Oklahoma have both been collecting this material.
They report many finds of leg bones and fragmentary parts of
skeletons. The fauna will be, apparently, similar to one in Wyoming. So far Ceratopsian (Plate 23 D), or horned forms, have been
discovered and Trachodont (Plate 23 C), or duckbilled types. The
latter were apparently aquatic, living along the shore lines and
feeding on plants. They were bi-pedal, and a long heavy tail enabled them to walk about in an upright position. Their skull with
its bill some two feet long, does resemble that of a duck, and in all
probability indicates some similarity of feeding habits. The American Museum of Natural History, New York City, has prospected in
this region as well as Dr. Charles W. Gilmore of the U. S. National
Museum, Washington, D. C. It remains to be seen just what Cretaceous fauna of the Big Bend region will contain.
For many years reptilian tracks have been kno~n to occur in the
Cretaceous rocks of Texas. Many of the~ are dinosaur tracks, even
though they are not all large, for not all the dinosaurs were big
animals. Some are without doubt those of other kinds of reptile~,
possibly even of forms about which we know nothing. These tracks
are found at many localities and always excite considerable local
interest. Recently, Mr. Bird, of the American Museum of Natural
History, found the first sauropodus dinosaur tracks that have ever
been discovered near Texas. Another fine series of tracks was obtained by the University of Texas and the American Museum of
Natural History, and moved to a shelter outside the Museum at
Austin.
The Cenozoic
At the end of the Cretaceous most of the great reptilian orders
became extinct, and their place in nature was taken over by the more
adaptable, warm blooded mammals. Although the mammals had
appeared in the Upper Triassic in other parts of the world, we have
none of these early records in Texas. The Cenozoic (see Plate 21),
or Age of Mammals, opened with the deposition of a series of rocks

Vertebrate Paleontology i.n Teo~as

105

called the Eocene. These rocks are well exposed in this state, extending in a broad band from the Louisiana-Arkansas border to the
Rio Grande about Laredo. There are both marine and terrestrial
beds in this extensive formation and invertebrate faunas have been
known from the Eocene of Texas for many years. Shark teeth ~nay
be found at some localities, and a sword-fish rostrum has been recently discovered by H. B. Stenzel of ~e University of Texas. A
few vertebrae of the great primitive whale, Zueglodon, were collected
many years ago in San Angustine County. These were large, free
swimming animals, with a long, slender snout, armed with sharp
teeth. They retained the front paddles, and with their slender bodies
must have been swift moving animals with habits similar to those of
a whale. Complete skeletons of these animals found outside the
state are from 50 to 70 feet long. Another interesting record about
which we know very little is a series of 16 vertebrae discovered a few
miles west of College Station in Burleson County. Dr. Kellogg of
the U. S. National Museum believes that these vertebrae are those of
a sirenian, an animal related to the living sea-cow. If we could find
more of this or other similar specimens it would be of great interest,
since little is known of the fossil history of this group of animals.
Some years ago a single bone of a fossil crocodile was found in
Falls County, but nowhere in Texas has the Eocene produced extensive or even fragmentary vertebrate material. Why this should be
is not at all clear. Leaves, stumps, etc., all show that much of the
area was land. So far as one can tell these formations are as favorable as any for the preservation of vertebrate fossils. Nor can one
say that the fossil fields have not yet been discovered. These Eocene
outcrops have been quite thoroughly explored, and hundreds of invertebrate localities are known.
With the next sub-division of the Cenozoic, the Oligocene, the
story is much the same. Throughout the east and central Texas,
rocks of this age are represented by a formation known as the Catahoula. It has produced one vertebrate fossil, a fragment of an
upper jaw containing four teeth. It was found near Burton, in
Washington County, and is a part of an extinct kind of rhinoceros
known as Caenoptts. On this slim record the dating of these rocks
as Oligocene rests.
In the Big Bend region of the state are extensive lake deposits

106

Texas A rcheolo gieal and Paleontological Society

made up of volcanic tuffs and other sediments. These beds lie
above the Cretaceous in that region, so it has long been known that
they represented some part of the Tert!ary or Age of Mammals.
In 1938, Dr. J. W. Stovall of the University of Oklahoma discovered
a locality in these lake beds that contains fossil vertebrates. This
interesting and important locality proves that part of these beds are
Oligocene in age, and the nearest known Oligocene vertebrate faunas
are almost 800 miles to the north! These faunas of the north are
characteristic of the Dakota bad-lands and are found where these
formations are exposed. They are called the White River, from the
very productive areas along that stream. Mr. Stovall has collected
about 10 different kinds of "White River" animals and we await
with interest the results of his future investigations.
One of the most interesting and scientifically important of the
fossil faunas of Texas is that of the Miocene, some 12 million years
old. From the Sabine River near Burkeville, down to the Rio
Grande is a band of clays and sandstones representing the deposits
built up near the mouths of ancient rivers. In these old gravel bars
and silts of the flood plain and delta are the bones of long extinct
animals. These were first discovered in 1860, but it was not until
1914 that a collection was made for scientific study. C.L. Baker,
now head of the Department of Geology at Texas A. & M. College,
then geologist for the Southern Pacific Railway, made a small collection of this material from several localities, .and the results of
his work were published. This aroused the interest of the late Dr.
Mark Francis of Texas A. & M. College, who although he was a
veterinarian, collected fossils as a hobby, and he began to collect
at two of the Miocene localities. By the time of his death in 1936,
Dr. Francis and others had brought together a fairly large and com.prehensive collection of these Miocene vertebrates. The fauna is
now known to occur at several localities in East Texas. That the
animals were washed in by streams is shown by the presence of catfish spines, ganoid scales, and otoliths (ear bones) of fishes. Although shark teeth are also found here, they are abraded and incomPLATE 22
Texas Permian VeTtebrates. A. Dimetrodon the "Sail Fin" reptile. B. A Stegocephalion amphibian. C. E~u!ops, one of the common forms in the Texas Permian. D. Diplocaul~s, one of the strange
animals of the old Permian shore.

Plate 22

Vertebrate Paleontology in Tex~s

109

plete, so it is likely they are derived from the Eocene rocks that
were being eroded to form the later deposits.

It is not impossible,

of course, that the Miocene sharks and rays came into the mouths
of fresh water streams, as many of the modern forms do.

From

this formation, near Coldspring, San Jacinto County, comes the
only Amphibian skull known from the Miocene rocks of the world.
Indeed, it is one of two specimens that have been found in the entire
Tertiary of North A~nerica.

This small skull was found by Mrs.

Claude Riley of Crockett, Texas, in 1938, and is being studied by
Dr. Edward H. Taylor of the University of Kansas.

Two species

of turtles, a crocodile and a single snake vertebra make up the list
of reptiles. The mammals of this collection are very interesting,
since this is one of the ~nost Southerly Miocene faunas.

We can

co~npare them with the faunas of similar age in different geographic
regions such as Nebraska and Florida. The influence of latitude
may thus be demonstrated. For example, iu the southern fauna is
a small horse called Miohippus, in the north it is kuown only from
the Ollgocene rocks where it is common.

Here in the south it is a

survivor, a carry-over from an earlier day living aloug with animals
that have evolved far beyond it.
Another odd horse-like creature was Itypoh.ippus, a side branch
of the equine family.

These were three-toed animals with browsing

rather than grazing teeth.

Along with these unusual ~orms is the

true horse of that time, Merychippus. A cmnplete skeleton of this
fortn was recently found by Claude Riley of Conroe. It is now in
the American h{useum.

One of the most striking anhnals of this

fauna is Prosynthetoceras ]rancisi, (Plate 24 A) an antelope. It
had the usual pair of horns behind each eye socket, and in addition
it carried a forked horn at the tip of the snout just back of the nostrils. Only six skulls of these strange beasts are known and all have
come from Texas. In Miocene time it must have been a very common form, for many loose teeth and fragments of horn cores are in
collection ,here at A. & M. College.

It is interesting to note that

prior to 1935 the very existence of such an animal was unsuspected.
Another unusual animal of this fauna is the great Amphioeyonine
dog, commonly called the bear-dog. The skeleton of this animal was
similar to that of the dog, but the teeth were similar to those of a
bear.

This must have been a formidahle animal; it was as large or

110

Tez, as A~-cheological and Paleontological Society

larger than a grizzly bear and capable of the same muscular achievements. The remainder of the fauna is made up of more normal
mammals, but all are long extinct forms. There is a peccary,
camel, dog, rhinoceros, and other forms similar to those found in
the Miocene deposits to the north. Unfortunately, the general preservation of this fauna is not good. Most of the specimens are fragments and loose teeth. However, the finding of the horse skeleton
by Mr. Riley suggests the possibility of better material to be found
in the future.
The Pliocene deposits of Texas are well developed, covering most
of the Panhandle, as well as a strip similar to the Miocene in the
coastal region. In the latter area, some distance east of Beeville,
the University of Texas has discovered a rich deposit of Pliocene
,bones in a quarry and several other productive localities. It is too
early to say much about this fauna yet, but it appears to be one of
the most important discoveries made within the state. Much of this
collection is now being studied by Dr. Joseph T. Gregory of the
University of Michigan, who was at the University of Texas at the
time the collection was made. The Pliocene of the Panhandle stands
close to the Permian in the wealth of material it has produced and
in the number of good collecting localities. These beds were first
worked by Cummins and Cope in the early 1890’s, and the results
of their investigations were published in the Fourth Annual Report
of the Geological Survey of Texas. This is the first important paper
to deal with the fossil vertebrates of Texas, and the first collection
of any size to be made by a Texas institution. Later this region was
worked by the American Museum of New York, and a large collection obtained. Local people made some collections, but not until
1928 did interest in this region revive. In that year C. L. Baker and
associates, while working on the geology of Hemphill County discovered about 30 localities in that county where vertebrates could
be obtained. The University of California worked these and other
localities each summer from 1928 until 1933, obtaining much material. Denver Museum of Natural History and the Frick-American
Museum parties have all worked in this region. Through the efforts
of F. V. Studer of Amarillo and others a museum has been established at the West Texas State Teachers College at Canyon, and that
institution is now working this field. The late Mr. C. Stuart John-

V~r~ebra~e Paleontology in Texans

111

ston was most active in forwarding the paleontological work of this
museum.

His untimely death was a serious blow to the work in

this area.

However, Dr. A. McAlpin is now in charge of the paleon-

tological work there so the area is not being neglected.

Texas Tech-

nological College at Lubbock has recently established a museum
and Mr. Ike Meade is in charge of their program.

All this points

toward a period of great activity in the Panhandle.
The fauna is a rich one and there are many localities from which
it comes.

It was preserved in stream channels, and is made up of

those forms inhabiting the open grass lands as wel! as the streamborder types. It represents conditions similar to those of a few
years back in that same area, where winding streams with their
forested bottom lands were a meeting place of the plains-roving
bison, antelope, and wild horse, as well as the forest dwelling deer,
and elk all drawn together by a common need of water.

The Plio-

eene animals were caught in quicksands, drowned at water holes,
or died naturally and their bodies swept away in floods.

Many

modes of death sugg~..’.st the~nselves for these skeletons. Today we
find the bones in the channel deposits of those vanished rivers.
There were three different kiuds of horse, and they are the most
common animaI iu the fauna.

They must have roamed the plains in

great herds, as did the bison of later day.

These horses and the

antelope called Cat)rom, eryx probably represent true plains types.
The rhiuoeeros was fairly connnon, and the largest skull of any
ancient or living rhinoceros was collected just nine miles east of
Miami, Texas.

There were two different kinds of rhinos present, a

horned and a supposedly hornless form.

The rhinos, and the sev-

eral kinds of camels from these deposits, were probably inhabitants
of the savanna-like bottoms, where they browsed on the trees and
brush.

The beaver, raccoon, badger, and deer-like animals, all

found in these sands, suggest 12he more forested stream-border association.

Carnivores were common, from the great bear-dbgs, ~veral

kinds of wolves and foxes to the saber-tooth eat, a forerunner of the
still larger Stnilodon. of the Pleistocene. Of course, there must have
been many animals of which we have found no trace, nevertheless,
the Pliocene o~ the Panhandle gives a fairly complete picture of the
life of that day.

The epoch seems to have been the last of the times

when the great mammals held sway.

Already it was beginning to

112

Texas A~cheologic~l and Paleontological Society

cool in the north, and some of the larger forms, as if worn
the long evolution of their kind, were beginning to die out.

out

by

Three notable events marked the history of life on earth during
the Pleistocene. First, the epoch was marked by the encroachment
a] tire continental ice sheet that was to advance and retreat over the
northern hemisphere for the next million years. Second, vast
changes in the geograp]~ic distribution o] the mammals were brought
about, accompanied by the extinction of many forms. Third, at
some time early in the epoch, probably in Southeast Asia, man ]irst
appeared. The great continental ice cap, such as Greenland now
carries, made four major advances and retreats in North America.
At the maximum of the advance, the ice cap extended as far south
as Kansas, but did not reach any part of Texas. However it must
have had great influence on the climate of this area. During the
retreats, both the flora and fauna moved back into the glaciated
area. At the maximum retreat of the ice, conditions were much the
same as they are today, indeed some believe that we are living in
an interglacial stage now.
The fauna of this epoch, as we know it, was a rich one. This is
probably due to its being the latest of all fossil faunas, and therefore has suffered less from the vicissitudes of time. Specimens of
this age are common, some deposits are incredibly rich. Within
the glaciated area to the north the deposits of the four advances and
retreats can be made out, thus dating any fauna found within them.
Outside this area, in Texas for example, such a ready reference cannot be made. Our Pleistocene deposits are extremely difficult to
date as to whether they are early or late, since we do not have a
clear picture or the chronology of the fauna either in Texas or elsewhere in North America. We know that the horse became extinct
here in North America during the Pleistocene, but when this occurred we are uncertain. It may be possible, in time, to build up
a picture of this million year old epoch, with the time of extinction
of the various forms worked out. This would be invaluable in dating
PLATE 23
Texa~ Cretaceous Vertebrates.
A. Pter~nodon, the great ~lying
reptile. B. T~inoero*nemt~r~, the short neck plesiosaur. C. Trachodon, the Duck-billed dinosaur.
D.
Triceratops, one of the horned
dinosaurs.

Vertebrate Paleontology in Texas

the nonglacial deposits.

115

It has been done to some degree in Europe.

The most striking thing about the Pleistocene fauna is not unusual animals, but the vast changes in the distribution and extinction that have occurred. Elephants and the elephant-like Mastodons
were very common in Texas, and their remains have been discovered in hundreds of places within our state. They probably lived
up to comparatively recent time, at least until the first men reached
this part of the world. The rhinoceros became extinct here at the
close of the Pliocene, and I am aware of no record of them in the
Pleistocene of the New World. The bison and its relatives made its
first appearance in Pleistocene time. Possibly it was better adapted
to the country, able to reproduce faster or to withstand the clirnate
better than the horse which seems to have occupied the same environmental niche prior to its extinction here in North America.
One of the bison, B. :atifrons, was noted for its tremendous spread
of horns. This animal is not well known. Less than five good
skulls have been found, and never in association with good skeletons. The spread of the horn cores is seldom under six feet and
often near seven. When one recalls that this represents but twothirds of the span of the horns as they were in life, some idea of the
great size may be obtained. The animal must have been heavily
built, similar to an ox. With this form, and much more common,
were bisons of approximately the same size as our living form.
With these bisons was a large camel, differing in certain details
from the living forms, and slightly larger. This camel was fairly
common throughout the Pleistocene and until recent times. Along
with it, and much rarer, was a slender legged Llama-like form, first
discovered only a few years ago and known in Texas from a few
fragments. There were several different kinds of antelopes in the
Pleistocene, including the living Antilocapara americana. Another
form, Tetrameryx (see Plate 24 B) had four straight horns arising
just back of the orbit. This animal was first discovered in the sand
pits near Dallas, but it has proven to be fairly common in the Pleistocene of this and other states.
The great ground sloths, now extinct, are represented in almost
every collection made in the Texas Pleistocene. Early in the spring
of 1942 Dr. K. Hussey, of the University" of Houston, was fortu-

116

Texas A~,cheologica~l and Pc~leon~ological Society

nate enough to find most of the skeleton of one of these large creatures. It is called Megatherium and the specimen, from near Humble, Texas, is probably the best yet found in this country. These
large, slow moving creatures were immigrants from South America,
as were the Glyptodons. This latter group resembled very large
Armadillos. Some of the "shells" measure as much as eight feet
in length. Unfortunately, complete specimens of this, or any other
fossil animal are hard to obtain, and it is represented in most collections only by fragments of the big carapace. With these animals was a large lion, the well known saber-toothed cat (Truci]elis
]atalis), wolves, bears, pumas, and all the other elements making up
a complete fauna.
As to the important question of man’s first appearance on this
continent, in fairness to all we must admit is as yet unanswered.
That man was contemporary with certain animals now extinct has
been fairly well established. The important question of when this
was is still open to answer. According to the best evidence we can
obtain the final retreat of the ice, which marked the close of the
Pleistocene occurred approximately 25,000 years ago. No actual
"fossil man" has been found in this country, that is, actual skeletons. Those that have been found in deposits which might be old,
are similar to the Indian skeletons of a later date. Traces of man,
artifacts, fire places, etc., have been discovered in deposits believed
by some to be late Pleistocene. The entire literature of this field
is a difficult one, the question shrouded in controversy, and unbending personalities present a distorted picture. As stated before,
that man was contemporary with certain animals now extinct has
been proven beyond reasonable doubt. Some of these animals, characteristic of the Pleistocene, may have lived on after the last retreat
of the ice, up to a comparatively recent time. Since we have not,
thus far, been able to build up a chronology of cultures here, comparable to that of Europe, the question becomes one of dating the
finds by the beds in which they are found. These deposits, caves,
lake beds, river terraces, and others are among the most difficult of
PLATE 24
A. Synthetoceras frc~ncisi, a Miocene antelope from east Texas.
B. Tetrazneryx, a four horned Pleistocene antelope. C. Bootheriu~,
a rare musk-ox like animal of the Pleistocene.

4

fl

Plate 24

Vertebrate Palean~ology in Texas

119

all formations to date, and especially since the dating must be quite
exact to be of any value. Again we meet wide diversity of opinion
among the geologists, a criterion selected by one man as the key of
the age is considered worthless by another. In the last 15 years
there has been a tremendous increase in interest in the problem and
ten men are at work on it where one was prior to that time. The
studies of the Yuma and Folsom cultures which began some 15 years
ago also holds some promise of the development of a chronological
culture pattern by means of which other finds may be dated. We
must look to the future then, for the solution of this question and
hope that Texas will be the scene of some of the important and definitive discoveries.
As mentioned early in this report, most of the work in the field of
vertebrate paleontology in Texas has been done by institutions outside our state.
science.

This is also true of certain other related fields of

The recent Centennial celebration in Texas suddenly made

the people conscious of their history and possible future development of the state.

In the wake of this celebration came the estab-

lishment of many museums, and through govermnent aid extensive
field programs.

So at last Texas seems to be on the way toward

the building of institutions that will preserve, within our own borders, relics of at least a part of our interesting background.
Assistant Curator of the Museum of the Agricultural and Mechanical
College of Texas.
College Station, Texas

