Some Suggestions on Archeological Terms

41

SOMI3 SUGG17.STIONS ON ARCHAEOLOGICAL
TERMS
BY ALEX D. KRIEGER

A number of terms in common use by professional and private
archaeologists alike are very inaccurate, and in some cases positively
misleading. These terms are quite widely employed without, apparently, much concern for their implied meaning. Their origins are
for the most part obscure, but probably for reasons of convenience,
or for want of better terms, they became perpetuated until they were
used habitually even by those who realized their inaccuracy. It is
the purpose of this paper to review some of the more serious abuses,
and to attempt to clarify their use and meaning.
In Texas it is particularly urgent that archaeologists make a real
effort to adopt accurate terminology for certain kinds of sites and
classes of artifacts. This is because the interpretation of Texas archaeology involves several of the major culture areas of the continent; its connections lie with Southwestern, Southeastern, and Plains
cultures, and with the eastern parts of Mexico and Middle America.
Texas has long been a center of interest to those concerned with
possible connections between Middle American civilizations and
some of those of the eastern United States. Thus the following
suggestions emphasize those terms which have more than local significance.
"Mound.~’"
"Mound" is a name applied to virtually every kind of accumulati~;n above ground level, whether it be a few inches or several feet
high. In the aforementioned problem of possible relatious between
Middle America and some cultures of the eastern states, the prevalent loose usage of the terxn "mound" has some rather dangerous
implications.
First of all, a distinction must be made between intentionally- built
structures and so-called "mounds" which are purely incidental heaps
resuhing from extended occupation on the same spot. Obviously,
if the hundreds of sites called "mounds" in various parts of Texas
were actually the result of a definite practice of building eminences

42

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

for some purpose, this matter would be of great importance in understanding the origins of true mound-building in the eastern United
States.

Let us examine briefly the prevalent applications of this

term.
Along the Texas coast are many accumulations o[ catnp midden
and broken shell called "mounds" or "shell mounds." Sometimes
they lie on fairly level ground and attain a height of two or three
feet; when found as caps on natural knolls or sand dunes the total
height may be much greater.

In central Texas (principally the

Edwards Plateau and surrounding regions:from the upper Brazos
to the Nueces River) there are hundreds of "rock mounds" or "burntrock mounds." These represent heaped accunmlations, often vast in
extent, of the remains of limestone hearth slabs, used until broken
by heat and then discarded and replaced by new slabs or complete
new hearths. As these "mounds" occur near almost every spring ira
the region, and on the level terrace lands along the stremns and
river confluences, they represent occupation in certain favored spots
for long periods of time. Where the camp sites were exposed to
occasional overflow they often were repeatedly buried by silt and
gravel before much refuse and rock could gather. In other, less
exposed spots, the discarded rocks and midden refuse collected to
heights of as much as seven feet.

Therefore, those which attain

some height, a more or less definitely humped center, and a fairly
definite perimeter, are traditionally called "mounds," while shallow
or buried deposits are called "sites" or "camps."

There is no reason

to suppose that the great rock heaps were the result of any con~ious
building trait. Neither does the inclusion of occasional burials in
such rock middens lend reason to their being called "burial mounds."
An excellent example of the dangers of such terminology may be
seen in the case of the so-called "Morhiss Mound" (also called
"Waelder-Joshua Mound") in die Guadalupc River bottoms near
Victoria, Texas.

This site was excavated ira 1938-1.939 by- the WPA-

University of Texas Archaeological Survey, W. A. Duffen, Field
Archaeologist. While the site was called the "Morhiss Mound" in
all the field notds and catalogs, the actual dissection showed no
evidence of any conscious attempt to erect a mound. Rather, tim
site appeared to be composed of a huge midden capping over a gravel
bar left in the bend of an old course of the Guadalupe River. This

Some Suggestions on Archeological Terms

43

gravel bar rose several feet above the surrounding flat botto’mland
and doubtlessly provided a convenient dry spot for Indian tribes;
it also contained bones of many extinct animals.

It was used as a

camp site until a great cap of refuse from tw~ to six feet thick had
accumulated. Burials were made in it, over 200 being found by the
excavators. In this case, for many years before the main excavations,
the site had been known as a great "mound" and had been interpreted as evidence of mound-building practice about midway between
the Mexican border and the Mississippian cultures of east Texas.
This assumption was based mainly on the size and shape of the site,
without regard to whether it could have been erected purposely.
Thus, references to "Morhiss Mound" or "Guadalupe River burial
1hound" are not only inept, but have been falsely inferred as evidence of the diffusion of mound-building practices between Middle
America and the "Mound-Builders" of the eastern United States.
"Mound" has even been applied to some puebloan ruins in the
Southwest, to puebloan-like masonry ruins in the Texas Panhandle,
and to large refuse piles associated with village ruins. When walls
are badly collapsed and the ruins more or less filled with dust and
wash, the resultant pile of rubble might attain considerable area
and height. Perhaps no one would seriously consider a relation
between such a heap and actual m0und-building, but why is it necessary to employ such an ambiguous term as "mound" at all in such
circumstances ?
In the so-called "Caddo area" of northeast Texas, northwest Louisiana, southwest Arkansas, and southeast Oklahoma, the current
usages of the term "mound" are even more confusing than elsewhere.
For this area lies on the frontier of the vast eastern region in which
several forms of mound-building are positively known to have been
practiced, with certain developments traceable through several distinct culture periods. Largely due t~ the extraordinary influence
of Harrington’s "Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas," which appeared
in 1920, a very large number of sites in this area have been called
"mounds." In a few cases this label is rather obviously correct
when applied to certain large eminences which rear up from flat
bottomland along the Red River and other major streams with wide
valleys. On the other hand, the same.term is commonly applied to
hundreds of other localities which turn out to be small heaps of

Texas Archeological and Pateontological Society

camp midden perhaps 30 feet across and six i~ches to" two feet high.
Thesd prove to be composed of sand or clay, ash, char, animal hone,
mussel shells, potsherds and other artifacts, and may or may not
include burials. Thus, the level sites are called "camps" or "camp
sites," while those of the same origin and composition but which
rise to a slight elevation, are known as "mounds" or "burial mounds."
One of the best known localities in northeast Texas is the so-called
"Sanders Burial Mound" on the T. M. Sanders place south of the
Red River in northwestern Lamar County. Excavations by the University of Texas did not reveal any substantial evidence of intentional
building, but rather the "mounds" (there are two adjacent eminences) seemed possibly to be nothing more than midden cappings
over natural knolls. The larger of these eminences yielded 21
graves ~ontaining 62 individuals, and hence was classed as a "burial
mound" by the excavators. Yet the field notes clearly state that the
bulk of the occupational refuse formed a cap over a small natural
ridge. Without satisfactory details on the internal structure of such
sites, the unconsidered label of "burial mound" again has misleading implications.
Fully as serious is the use of "domiciliary mound" in the Caddo
field, as employed by Harrington and many of his followers. In
many instances this name was given to a very small knoll formed on
more or less level ground by the collapse of an earth-covered house.
To call such a heap, usually but a few inches high, a "domiciliary
mound" is stretching the imagination and provides a direct Conflict
with the intended meaning of this term in eastern archaeology. For
elsewhere this term is considered to apply to an earth structure or
platform which can be shown to have been built up with loads of
clay taken from nearby "borrow pits." If the superimposed building conforms to dwellings, the platform becomes a "house mound"
or "domiciliary mound"; if evidence of perpetual fire, ahars, or
unusually large buiIdings is present, the earth structure becomes a
"temple mound."
Naturally, there is not always sufficient evidence on which to
classify artificial eminences. Nonetheless, careful dissection and
examination of th~ trench walls can usually reveal the difference
between intentional building (pockety construction as though earth
had been dumped by the basket-load) and growth incidental to oc-

Some Suggestions on Archeologica$ Terms

45

cupation (lenticular construction, midden and ash layers, etc.).

It

does not help tc~ read in a report that such and such "mounds"
are "man-made."

This can be interpreted in two ways: man-rna~e

could mean either that the eminence was built by hand for a purpose,
or it could mean merely that the "mound" was not natural, i. e., was
due to human occupancy.

Wherever there is any possibility of doubt

or misunderstanding, the author should include a few sentences on
the composition of the site. If trench walls can be photographed
or diagrammed, this should by all means be done and included with
the published account.

It appears that in site terminology there are three principle alternatives. First, "mound" might be continued in the present lo~se
sense, simply to indicate that the site has some height to it. Or,
second, we could confine the term "mound" to just those eminences
which give satisfactory evidence of intentional construction. Third,.
the old term tumulus could be revived and applied to those particular sites which reveal intentional building, whether to cover large
graves, to provide platforms for buil~lings, or t~ fulfill some other
function, perhaps unknown. The use of tumulus would then carry
this definite meaning and could not be confused with the loose and
ambiguous label of "mound.’"
Over most of the state, such
midden, midden site, camp site,
serve perfectly well in nearly
picture with the word "mound"
terms will do as well or better?

labels as shell heap, burnt-rock
burial site, village site, etc., can
every case. Why confound the
where it is ambiguous and other

Regarding the distribution of purposely built mounds or tumuli
in Texas, there seem to be very few of these indeed. They are,
moreover on the basis of available evidence, completely restricted
to the northeastern corner of the state. In examining the field notes
and photographs of over three hundred east Texas sites, and visiting some personally, my opinion is that only five of them contain
good evidence of intentional building. These are: the A. J. Hatche!
MoundI 12 miles N. W. of Texarkana, Bowie County; Ge6rge L.
1.
Excavated by the WPAoUniversity of Texas Statewide
Survey, 1938-39; W. C. Beatty, Field Archaeologist.

Archaeological

46

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Keith2 Mound near Mt. Pleasant, Titus County; Pace McDonald
Mound3 N. E. of Frankston, Anderson County (west side of Neches
River); George C. Davis Mound4 6 miles S. W. of Alto, Cherokee
County

(east side of Neches River); and a burial mound5 on

Mustang Crook near Sulphur River in southern Red River County.
The first four mentioned are large and imposing, and of the rectangular, flat-topped variety usually supposed to be temple platforms.

Several other sites appear to bear possibilities but have

not been carefully examined.

The point is, that extreme caution

must be exercised in the whole question of mound-building in
Texas; and in

that section where this

practice

was

definitely

present, only a very small fraction of the total sites known are of
this sort.
Proceeding

northward toward the Arkansas river

system and

northeast Arkansas, and eastward toward the Mississippi valley
proper, true mound-building becomes a much better established
and more general trait.

In the opposite direction, there is no

authentic case on hand of an intentionally constructed eminence
west of the Neches river, or anywhere between the large Davis
Mound near Alto in the Neches valley and the region about Tampico, Mexica.
"’Bird Points," "~lrrow Points," etc.
Certain terms for projectile points have very wide usage over
large parts of the United States.

The most curious is that of "bird

point" for the small, thin, light projectile points which occur in
the latest archaeological horizons almost everywhere.

The term

is usually applied to points less than about Ia/2 inches in length.
but occasionally the same light construction and fine pressure chip-

2.
Excavated by the University of Texa.% Anthropolog~o Department, :1935;
se~ "~Valter :R. Goldsehmidt, "~k Y4eport of the Archaeology of Titus County
in East Tex~s,’" ~ulletin of the Texas Archaeological ,~nd :Paleontological
Society, vol. 7, pp. 89-99, 1935.
¯~.
Notes on test pits made by University of Texas are in Department of
Anthropology files.
4.
~xeav,’~ted by the XVt)-&-Universlty of Tex,~ St:~tewide Archaeologiea3
Survey, 1939-1941; 19erry ]-I. Newell, l~ield Arch~teologist; full reI~ort in preparation.
5.
Notes and specimens donated to Anthropology ,-M~useum of the University
ol Texas by T. N. Cole in 1931.

Some Suggestions on Archeological Terms

47

ping are seen in specimens up t6 2 inches or even greater length.
In Texas everyone seems to recognize a sharp distinction between
these light "bird points" and the great numbers of heavier, longer,
thicker, and broader points found widely over virtually the whole
state.

The latter projectile points are thus called "arrow points"

and it is rarely indeed that one finds anyone who questions that
the heavy points were used on arrows.
There appear to be two general interpretations of the "bird
points."

One is that they were used on small arrows for small

game and birds, and thus constitute a special class of points used
in connection with the bow. The other is that "bird points" were
not used with the, bow and arrow at all, but were attached to the
tiny darts shot with a blowgun! Surely no one familiar with the
blowgun would believe for a minute that stone heads, even tiny
ones, could or would be attached to its darts. There is, moreover,
no reason to believe that a blowgun of any kind was used over the
vast areas of North America in which "bird points" are found.6
Now, it is of great importance toward understanding the history
of the bow in native American culture that this matter of projectilepoint terminology (and functional interpretation) be placed on a
realistic basis.

If it is true that light "bird points" and heavy

"arrow points" do indeed represent nothing more than two spe.
cialized uses for the bow and arrow, then the bow must be of considerable antiquity in America, for the heavy "arrow points" are
found in the earliest definable horizons.

Various persons have

built bows of different weights, and with them shot arrows of
different size and length, and concluded that all the stone projectile
points (except the very heavy ones probably used on spears) could
be shot with bows without weighting down the arrows too much.
These assumptions and experiments, while interesting and

chal-

!enging, nevertheless do not conform to commonly known archealogical facts.

6. Another curious term for light, thin projectile points is that of
"mierolith."
As originally used in the ~Mediterranean area, this term is
sometimes used to designate small chipDed stone teeth fitted into sickle
blades, or as a general term for a small-artifact industry.
CertainIy, it is
completely meaningless as a projectile-point term in any area.

48

Texas Archeologtcal and Paleontological Society

It is very easy to demonstrate, both by archaeological and by
ethnological data, that the so-callear "bird points" are in fact true
arrow points, and that they are, furthermore, the only points that
can be positively associated with the bow in American culture history. For example, anyone interested in the subject can examine
arrows collected from various American tribes in the larger ethnological museums, and he will find that arrows, if they bear any
stone heads at all, will have very light, thin heads which, found
archaeologically, would unhesitatingly be called "bird points."
Not all arrows have chipped stone heads, of course, for many of
them are merely sharpened sticks, or are constructed of cane with
pointed hardwood foreshafts. On the archaeological side. whole
and fragmentary arrows have been removed from dry caves in
many parts of the country; again, where the projectile can be positively identified as an arrow, the point will either be a sharpened
stick or will have a light "bird point" attached or associated in
the same deposit.
As for the heavy, broad, thick points commonly called "arrow
points," it can be equally demonstrated that they were not used on
arrows and their presence does not indicate the use of thc bow.
Again, in dry caves and shelters in all the western states, whenever a
heavy point is found still attached to its shaJt, and tJ~e sturJt can
be identiJied, it proves to belong to an atlatl dart. Thus, in Basketmaker cave sites, where we know positively 1hat the atlatl was used
and the bow was not, such chipped points as are found still halted
to their shafts belong to the heavy, broad category.

Conversely,

the "bird point" class are never found attached to atlatl dart shafts.
There are enogh specimens from the dry western areas to prove
this association almost beyond doubt.

Ethnologically, the point

can not be proved as in the case of arrows, for nowhere in the
United States did the native tribes continue the use "of the atlatl into
modern times.

Except among a few persons directly interested in the subject,
the atlatl has been greatly underrated in American archaeology.
If one accepts the interpretation that the vast numbers of heavy
projectile points found over nearly the entire continent are indeed
atlatl points and not arrow points, then it is certain that the atlatl

Some Suggestions on Archeological Ter~.s

49

was a very old and widespread propelling instrument in America.
Actually, arrows and darts7 are very similar projectiles--so similar,
in fact, that the bow may possibly be regarded as a new way of
projecting the same sort of missile. To judge from cave specimens,
both arrow and dart were feathered in the same way, and both were
made either with sharpened wooden foreshafts or chipped stone
points. On the whole, the dart is a longer and heavier projectile
than the arrow. It usually ranged from 41/~ to 51/2 feet in length,
as against 20 to 30 inches for the arrow. In diameter the dart
ranges from ½ inch to’ ~ or even 8~ inches, the arrow from 1/~ to
’~ inches. The most certain diagnostic feature lies in the butt of the
projectile, the dart having a small cup to fit against the hook at
the dista! end of the atlatl, the arrow having a nock for fitting
against the bow string.
I do not mean to’ imply that there is invariably a clean distinction between the size and weight of chipped points used with the
arrow and dart. There are several intermediate sizes which might
have belonged to either, and in some cases some proof would be
needed in the form of halted specimens to reach a decision. Thin,
too, there is ample evidence that when the bow and arrow entered
various sections of the country, the atlatl was continued in use along
with it. This contemporaneity of the tw~ propelling instruments
probably led to experimentation in point styles best suited to certain
uses. Possibly some dart point styles were modified to suit the
strength and carry of the bow, and this circumstance would have
varied locally according to the type of bow in use. Among various
tribes the bo~r itself ranged from a very simple and weak form to
the powerful sinew-backed varieties.
Be this as it may, there is also a very decided chro~aological distinction between "bird points" and the heavier dart point.q. The
true arrow points with their light construction definitely appear at
a relatively late time in all sections of the country. In Texas, as
well as to the west, south, and east, arrow points appear in the
latest horizons, along with agriulture and pottery making. This
7. "Dart" is itself a rather I~oor term for the atlatl missile. Some such
term as "j,~velin" might be more appropriate. I-Iowever, archaeologist~
well agreed on the meaning of "dart" in the atlatl complex.

Tex~s Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

50

association varies in different areas but in Texas it.ll there is a
very close (if not absolute) agreement in the appearance of arrow
points, pottery, and agriculture, in all parts of the state.

Dart points,

on the other hand, are very numerous in the cultures which precede
this general horizon, but continue to appear sporadically in the
late horizons.

For some reason, however, they do appear

(on

present evidence) to have passed out of use with the beginning of
historic cultures.
In Texas archaeology, as elsewhere, it is time that mere consideration be given to the possibilities of the bow-atlatl relationship
and its connections with the habits and economy of the various
native peoples.

In a recent paper by Ray and Sayles the terminology

of projectile points has been given very accurately and should be
continued by other workers.8

They correctly use the term "arrow

points" instead of the obsolete "bird points" in their latest culture
periods, and "dart points" for the heavy varieties which have long
been incorrectly termed "arrow points" by other workers.

Ray has,

in fact, been using the term "’dart" for certain types of Abilenc
projectiles for many years.
Burial Terminology
In the various reports on Texas archaeology, burials are described by such terms as "flexed," "folded," "doubled," "sitting,"
"bunched," "bundle," etc.

As several of these are ambiguous, . it

might be well to suggest that only those terms commonly accepted
by American archaeologists be used.

Thus "flexed°’ should be used

for any burial placed in a horizontal position with tim knees drawn
up toward the abdomen.

"Sitting" should not be u~d as synony-

mous with "flexed" unless the body was actually placed upright
in the grave in a true sitting position, a very rare practice ac.ywhere
and probably unknown in Texas.

"Bunched" has been used to de-

scribe both "flexed" and re-buried skeletons.

If the

bo~es are

actually so mixed that they must have been gathered from one grave
and dumped into another, the term "bundle" is the commonly accepted one, and "bunched" should not be u~d at all.

8.

For all

C. zN*. Ray and :hi. 1~. S~yles, "An Agreement,
,
on Abilene Region"
"
Termi-

vnXloll~,"pDBul~6ti~7~f l~h4~

Texas

Archaeologie,-d

a, nd

~’aleontologic,’d

Society,

Some Suggestions on ArcheoIog~cat Terms

51

burials laid at length, the term "extended" has common acceptance.
"Met~¢e’" versus "Seed Slab"
Much needless confusion has been caused by the to~ prevalent
use of the name "metate" for any kind of a grinding slab.

Over vast

areas of America a grinding process was used by many tribes who
had no knowledge of cori~ growing, but who used a simple, unshaped, flat stone for a platform and any convenient stream pebble
for a hand stone in order to smash and grind ~eds, berries, bulbs,
etc.

This hand stone was used with a rotary motion, and tl~is

method of grinding was known to many American natives before
agriculture and corn grinding appeared.

Corn grinding, on the

other hand, as practiced by the Puebloan and Mexican Indians, involved a back-and-forth motion on a fairly flat slab or one with a
rectangular depression in which the mano was pushed back and
forth. Such a mano was used with either one or two hands, and
the slab itself was generally brought to a rectangular shape by
chipping its edges.
At the Third Round Table Conference in Mexico City in the
summer of 1943 it was generally agreed that the term "metate"
should be applied only to the corn-grinding i~nplement of ~oughly
rectangular shape and a back-and-forth motion with either one or
two hand mano.

The simple unshaped slabs in which round or oval

basins are worn with a rotary motion should, accordingly, not be
called "metates" at all, but by such a term as "seed slab." Thus,
of all the grinding implements found in Texas from one end to the
other, true metates are known only in the west, Panhandle, and
north-central parts.

Moreover, they are probably confined to the

relatively late horizons and reflect influence from tire Puebloan
Indians.

This matter requires further study.

Tire tendency to treat

"metate" as synonymous with grinding is only obscuring an important archaeological problem.
It is hoped that the above notes will aid in bringing greater coordination into Texas archaeology and its relations with surrounding
areas.
Department of Anthropology
University of Texas
Austin, Texas

