Mexican Pottery Head Found in Texas

93

MEXICAN POTTERY HEAD FOUND
IN TEXAS
By IV!~. AtOP M~s. J. HE~rR~ RAY
Reports of the finding of Mexican-like objects in Texas
have occurred sporadically over a period of years.* In 1916,
one was found near Cisco, Texas, which we believe will be
of considerable interest to archaeologists. This is a small
pottery representation of a human head, which was discovered by Truva Lisenbee while hunting projectile points
on East Sandy creek in Eastland County west of Cisco. At
this site near the junction of East Sandy with West Sandy
creek, there was a large spring, known to early settlers in
the region as an Indian camp ground. The head was found
about one mile above the site of the old spring, in a spot
long found to contain many Indian artifacts.
The head, which is broken off at the neck, is hollow, and
the inner cavity is an inch and a half in diameter. The
specimen is three and one-half inches in height and was
made of reddish clay with mica and sand used as temper.
The neck contains a clay core which is half an inch in diameter and this apparently is a peg from the body over which
the neck fitted closely. The eyes are of the traditional
coffee-bean shape of Archaic figurines in the Valley of
Mexico, set in well-defined orbits. The nose is platyrrhine
and somewhat worn at the tip. The mouth is wide open, entering into the head cavity, its lips a rather thick roll of clay
extending completely around the mouth area and clearly
everted at the bottom. The chin is rounded and makes a
sharp angle with the neck.
*EDITOR’S NOTE: In September of 1928, a finely sculptured
sandstone piece representing a human head, wearing a conical
shaped cap, was found near a gravel pit located five miles south of
Cross Plaihs, Texas, which is in the same region. This image had
similar shaped eyes but was considerably larger than the one
described above and had also been broken off in the neck region.
The cap was conical in shape with what seemed to be a hat-band
around the base of large beads. The patina and white incrustations
on the image indicated some age.

94

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

On top of the head is what appears to be a five-lobed
turban or five coils of hair, extending across the forehead.
Two of these lobes still stand out clearly as rounded areas
raised slightly above the plane of the forehead.

The other

three have been broken off, but their position remains distinctly outlined on the surface.

Inside the mouth there ap-

pears to be some artificial coloring, denser and darker than
a smoke smudge:

There are also slight traces of black on

the left cheek and on part of the head covering, which may
be accidental
In September, 1946, we attended the Caddoan Archaeological Symposium in Norman, Oklahoma. Among the members there were Drs. Eduardo Noguera, Pedro Armitlas, and
Wilfrido Du Solier, all of the National Museum of Mexico.
We showed the pottery head to Dr. Noguera, who examined
it and passed it to his two co!leagues. They were all of
the opinion that the head was part of a figurine representing
Xipe-Totec, Aztec God of Agriculture, made some time between the tenth and twelfth centuries. They were convinced that it was clearly of Mexican origin.
~
Whether this is to be regarded as simply a fortuitous
occurrence or as an authentic archaeological clue, we cannot say at present. However, the discovery of the figurine
in a known archaeological site and its exact identification
by authorities in the Mexican field certainly argue for its
authenticity.
We are indebted to Mrs. Margey Hayes Krieger for aid
in preparing this manuscript.
Below are copies of some letters concerning the image
from Dr. E. Noguera, University of Mexico, Mexico City,
Mexico, and Dr. James B. Griffin, University Museum, Uni-

PLATE 21

Mexican Pottery Head Found in Eastland County, Texas. No. t,
front view of head, No. 2, side view of pottery head, No. 3, view of
top of pottery head.

Plate 21

News Notes and Editorials

97

versity of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, and copy of our
request for information.
October 8, 1946
Dr. E. Noguera,
University of Mexico,
Mexico City, Mexico.
Dear Sir:
We are writing an article describing the finding and identity of the pottery head, Xipe-Totec, for Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Abilene, Texas.
We wish permission, to quote in this article, your identity
of this head which you kindly furnished us at the Symposium, Norman, Okla., Sept. 12th.
Very little information of value had been received by us
regarding the head before you so generously made its identity for us. We quote the memo you made for us: "XipeTotec, God of Agriculture, Aztec, 1000-1200 A. D."
Your identity of the subject, we feel sure, will be appreciated by the editor of this publication, as well as splendid
archaeological reference for Prof. Alex. D. Krieger, Archaeologist, University of Texas.
Thanks, sincerely,
Mr. and Mrs. J. Henry Ray.
Instituto Nacional de Anthropologia e ttistoria, S.E.P.
Direccion De Monumentos Prehispanicos
Zacatecas No. 218
Mexico, D. F.
October 18, 1946
Mr. and Mrs. J. Henry Ray,
Yamparika and Fannin Stso,
Vernon, Texas.
Dear Mr. and Mrs. Ray:
I am very glad to answer your kind letter in regard to
the interesting figurine you showed me at the Symposium,

98

Texas Archeolog$cal and Paleontological SocieSy

held at Norman, Oklahoma. I shall be delighted for the
quotation about the identity of this head hoping this will
add interest to it.
With my best wishes I am,
Sincerely yours,
(Signed) E. Noguera.
University Museum
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan, U.S.A.
Anthropology.
November 8, 1946
Mr. and Mrs. J. Henry Ray,
Yamparika and Fannin Streets,
Vernon, Texas.
Dear 1Vir. and Mrs. Ray:
Thanks very much for the photographs of the figurine.
I certainly hope that you will obtain permission from Mr.
Noguera to use has statement in the article you plan to
publish. Noguera’s statement will be much more valuable
than mine.
I think it is interesting, however, that even with my short
acquaintance with Mexican archaeology that I was able to
recognize that your figurine was of the type known as "XipeTotec" in the Valley of Mexico.
It was a pleasure to meet you at Norman, and I was sorry
that you were not able to stay for the rest of the conference.
Sincerely yours,
JBG-pmc
Vernon, Texas.

(Signed) James B. Griffin.
Director, Museum of Anthropology

