88

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

VERTEBRATE PALEONTOLOGICAL FIELD
TECHNIOUE AND ITS APPLICATION TO
ARCHAEOLOGICAL COLLECTING
WANN LANGSTON~

JR.

Introduction

It has frequently occurred to the writer during cursory
inspections of archaeological collections in various North
American museums that certain collecting practices developed in the field of vertebrate paleontology might be
applied advantageously to various phases of archaeological
collecting. That the preservation of in situ relationships in
certain specimens, both archaeological and paleontological,
is of paramount importance cannot be questioned, but such
associations are al! too frequently destroyed by improper
collecting methods. In areas where great interest in the
association of human artifacts with fossil mammal bones
obtains it is most desirable that any such associations be
preserved intact and undisturbed. Although field notes and
photographs play an integral part in presenting evidence of
such associations their value as substantiating media may
decrease with time. Actual preservation to the contrary
can seldom be challenged.

The field methods outlined beloxv have been long established in the field of vertebrate paleontology and have
proved invaluable by permitting the removal of very large
and fragile skeletons and masses of bones in such a manner
that all anatomical evidence afforded by the natural association of the various skeletal elements has been preserved
intact. Any skeleton can be removed from its place of
burial and transported to the laboratory in exactly the same
condition in which it was found.
Editor’s Note: Professienat ~Lrchr~eologists may find little ne~v in Mr. Langston’s
ar~cle, bug m~y sma~u~ will find it a u~ful manual for field work.
In.much
~ one of the b~ic ~sons for the exis~nce of the Texas Arch~logi~! nnd
Pal~n~logi~ ~i~y is ~ encou~ge the ~rious ~a~ur and fu~ish ~n outlet
for his re~, we feel that this paper is a vMusble cont.~bu~on.

Vertebrate Paleonfo!ogical Field Technique

89

It must be remembered that these are the methods of the
paleontologist developed by him to meet problems peculiar
to his particular science.

It appears probable, however, that

with certain modifications, best suggested by the archaeologist himself, this technique can be adapted to the collecting
of human skeletal materia! and associated artifacts as wel!
as to fossil mammal remains which may be encountered
during the excavation of archaeological sites. It is conceivable that they may even be employed satisfactorily in
collecting badly broken and crushed pottery and fragmentary basketry. They have already been utilized in
modified forms in the removal of ancient friezes and wall
sculpture.
Tools and Equipment
A complete listing of tools and equipment required in
archaeological collecting is scarcely necessary in the present
paper. However, certain materials the uses of which will
be described below are listed briefly in the following paragraphs.
Shellac: A good grade of white or clear shellac should be
used (orange or brown varieties will result in an undesirable
discoloration of the specimen). A fifty percent dilution with
alcohol is nearly always necessary and further thinning may
prove desirable. A thick coating of undiluted shellac will
form a gummy surface over the specimen which may prove
difficult to remove when preparation is begun.
Glue: Various types of binding agents may be used in
addition to shellac. For paleontological purposes a cellulose
acetate glue or commercial "Duco" has proved most satisfactory. This can be made by dissolving clear celluloid in
acetone until the desired thickness is obtained. Other binding agents such as "Ambroid" and "Alvar" may also be used,
but furniture glue and other water-soluble cements should
never be employed.
Paper: Any type of tissue paper with good absorbent
qualities may be used, but a rough-surfaced toilet tissue is
most easily applied. Rice paper has been employed for

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

many years, but it is now obtainable only with difficulty and
at some expense. Paper towels are too thick and stiff, and
facial tissues are too fragile for most work. Either should
be used only as a last resort.
Plaster: Plaster of Paris is an indispensable agent in collecting. Moulding plaster No. I is an excellent quick-setting
utility product which can be obtained readily and at little
expense at almost any lumber yard or hardware store. There
is no necessity to purchase expensive dental plaster Or other
specially refined products. Great care must be taken in
the handling of plaster of Paris. It should never be exposed
to water and even moisture in the air may reduce the "setting" ability once the plaster has been opened. Before using
each broken or old sack, the plaster should be tested for rapid
setting qualities. Dead plaster when used in a cast must
be removed before applying another jacket and such treatment cannot be expected to have a favorable effect on the
specimen.
Burlap: Burlap bags may be obtained from any feed store
or from local farmers at moderate expense. Potato sacks
should be of the coarse or loose-woven variety and patched
bags are usuall~r as satisfactory as new sacks.
Water: Sufficient water should be available to mix the
required amount of plaster and to soak the burlap bandages
before application.
Buckets: At least two galvanized pails should be carried;
one for mixing plaster and one for soaking the burlap. The
plaster bucket should be cleaned after each mixing since
hardened plaster has a tendency to destroy the setting ability
of later batches.
Excavation
The various excavation methods employed by the archaeologist have been long established and it is assumed that the
reader is familiar with them. Paleontological techinque,
however, will be discussed in some detail for the benefit of
those who have had little experience in this type of co!]ecting.

Vertebrate Paleontological Field Technique

91

The first stage in collecting a vertebrate:skeleton is one
with which the archaeologist is thoroughly familiar: the
removal of overburden from the specimen.

Heavy tools

(picks, shovels, and even slips and small frenznos)may be
used for this purpose~ but care must be exercised in approaching the level of the specimen. Generally heavy work
should be diseontinued at least six inches above the suspected
position of the bones. From this point small tools (ice picks,
awls, sacking needles, whisk brooms, and paint brushes)
should be used to remove the remaining overburden. The
ever-present tendency toward digging straight down to the
specimen must be avoided and removel of the matrix should
be accomplished by working back from the exposure in a
horizontal rather than in a vertical direction.
In exposing the bones, only enough matrix is removed ~o
permit accurate outlining of the specimen; no attempt should
be made to prepare the specimen in the field. The enclosing
material will serve to hold the broken elements together
and will offer some degree of support and protection to the
specimen during transportation. In no case should the
bones be undermined during this stage in the operations,.
As each new area of bone is exposed it should be carefully
brushed to remove all loose matrix. After br~hing, the
bone is shellacked thoroughly, Brushing-on of the shellac
is not always desirable since the bone may be badly broken
and thoroughly rotten. In such cases the first coat may be
applied by dripping very thin shellac from the end of a brush
or, in extreme instances, by spraying the bone with shellac
or cellulose acetate cement. An ordinary insect spray-gun
wil! prove entirely satisfactory for this purpose. The she]lac should be allowed to soak into the surface of the bone
and application should continue at short intervals until
absorption ceases. A thick outer coating of shellac or glue is
usually undesirable inasmuch as it must be removed during
preparation.
Shellac and "Duco" must never be applied to a moist
surface. Water prevents penetration of the binding agent
and a useless or even harmful coating will accumulate on the

92

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

bone. Shellac should be permitted to dry thoroughly before
any further work is undertaken in the vicinity of its application.
If the containing matrix is loose and unconsolidated, a
strong tendency toward slumping may be evidenced. In
this eventuality it will be necessary to indurate the matrix
with shellac, but under ordinary circumstances this expedient is not recommended.
When outlining has been completed the specimen should
be photographed and careful notes concerning the mode of
occurrence should be recorded. If the specimen is to be
removed in more than one block each section must be carefully plotted on an excavation chart so that adjacent blocks
may be reassembled in the laboratory.
Blocking Out the SpecLmen
After the upper side of the specimen has been completely
exposed a surrounding trench must be dug in such a way
that the bones will be supported by a pedestal of undisturbed matrix. This trench should be of such proportions
that the excavator may work underneath the pedesta! and
somewhat below the lowest possible level of the bones.
Digging should commence at some distance from the specimen and should be continued toward it with a view toward
reducing the size of the pedestal and of the final block.
PLATE 10
A. View of bone quarry near Agate, Nebraska, illustrating the degree to
which it may be necessary to remove the overburden from a specimen.
The skeleton for which thi~ excavation was made lies near the feet of the
worker.
B. View of mammoth excavation ~fter removal of bones has begun. The
scapula, center foreground, has been cast on the upper surface and is
here shown re.sting upon a pedestal of undisturbed matrix.
A tunnel
hms been cut through the base of the pedestal to permit partial bandagirig
and strengthening of the under side before inverting the block.
Casts
in the upper left background have been turned over and ca~ting of
the underside before inverting the block. Casts In the upper left background have been turned over and casting of the undersides is about
to begin.
C. View of mammoth humerus showing method of trenching and the
destal of undisturbed matrix.
D.
¯ Skull, humerus, and scapulae of mammoth partially exposed and
"
shellacked.
E. View of a large deposit of mammoth bones found near Levelland, Texas.
l~ost of th~ hoses have been exposed and some are blocked out preparatory to casting.

Plate 10

Vertebrate PaleontoZog~cal Field Technique

95

When the entire specimen has been blocked out, serious
consideration should be given to the problem of transportation. Large blocks of bones with their enclosing matrix are
extremely difficult to handle. The majority of such blocks,
howe,~er, can be divided or sectioned into several smaller
pieces. In such an undertaking any apparent areas of weakness are the obvious points for separation. Cutting or breaking a specimen for purposes of separation is not to be desired,
but when necessary, it can be done with a minimum of damage to the specimen. When the areas through which the
block is to be cut have been located~ trenching may proceed
through them thus dividing the original large pedestal into
several smaller ones.
The edges of the pedestals must now be undermined. The
extent to which this is necessary or possible can be determined only through experience, but it should never be
produced so far as to result in caving or slumping of the
bones or upper edges of the block. Undercutting should
begin near the base of the pedestal and proceed upward to
within a shor.t distance of the lowest possible bone level.
Casting
Casting or jacketing should be undertaken as soon as
possible after the completion of the blocking-out process
outlined above. All ne.cessary equipment should be available before this stage is begun.
Bandages must be prepared by cutting burlap bags into
strips of varying~ dimensions. The majority of such bandages will probably, range from six to twelve inches in
length and from four to eight inches in width, but larger or
smaller sizes may be indicated in certain instances. The
strips must be thoroughly dampened befor: ~sing since dry
burlap will tend to remove the moisture from the plaster
thus reducing its setting ability.
In order to prevent the plaster from adhering to the bone
surfaces tissue paper can be applied to all exposed areas.
/k small amount of water may be splashed onto the bones in
order to hold the paper in position during application. If

96

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

toilet tissue is used it may be rolled onto the exposed surfaces very easily. All paper should be tamped down witha
wet brush in order that any overhangs which may be present
can be detected before the cast is applied. When such overhangs are located they must be eliminated by wadding tissue
paper into them or by filling them with mud. If catches or
overhangs are allowed to go into a cast without proper preventive measures, great difficulty may be experienced in the
removal of the cast in the laboratory. In most specimens
two or three thicknesses of paper will prove adequate, but
greater thicknesses may be used if desired.
In preparing the block to receive the jacket .the entire
pedestal should be moistened. Failure to do this will result
in a poor purchase for the plaster bandages and much inconvenience may result.
Plaster and water must now be mixed thoroughly until
a mixture approaching the consistency of thick cream is
obtained. One or two previously moistened bandages are
dipped into the plaster and manipulated until they become
well impregnated. Generally such a bandage will Contain
far too much plaster, but the excess may be removed by
running the strip between the thumb and index finger.~ The
bandages are applied to the block until the entire upper and
latera! surfaces are completely covered. If the bandages
fail to adhere to the overhang around the edges of the block
they should be held in place or tamped in around it until
setting has begun. It is imperative that this part of the cast
be of the greatest possible strength in order to prevent the
block from falling out of the jacket when the-specimen it
turned over. If desired, greater strength may be obtained
by wrapping a collar composed, of several long pieces of bandage around the base of the entire pedestal.
The most desirable thickness for the jacket will be determined by the individual Collector o~y after considerable
experience ~n casting. Except in very small blocks, at least
two thicknesses of bandage should probably be used and in
specimens weighing several hundred pounds casts of an inch
or more in thickness may be advisable. It must be remem-

Vertebrate-Paleontological Field Techrdque

97

bered, however, that the thicker the cast the more difficult
will be the task of opening the specimen once it has been
received in the laboratory.
Casting of the upper side of each block should be accomplished in a single operation wherever possible since later
bandages will adhere with difficulty to .those in which the
plaster has already hardened. If this process cannot be
completed in one operation, the dry plaster bandages already
applied must be thoroughly moistened before new bandages
are laid upon them. Failure to clean the plaster bucket~
before each new mixing may result in the complete failure
of the new batch of plaster.
Large or irregular blocks may require additional strengthening. Such strength may be provided through the use of
wooden or metal splints which can be cut or bent to shape
and bandaged onto the exterior of the block.
When the plaster jacket has hardened the block must be
separated from the lower part of the pedestal. This is done
by.cutting away the base of the pedestal a small section at a
time until the block can be turned over from a pivotal
position. In small or moderate sized blocks this can usually
be accomplished in a single operation, but in larger blocks
containing unconsolidated matrices it may be necessary to
undermine a small area at.a time supporting each new
undercut with plaster bandages as:it is developed.
When overturning the block a lever should be inserted
beneath it and no great pressure should be applied to the
cast itself since at this stage there is usually only a narrow
"lip" of retaining bandages around the under edges of the
block and the danger of slipping the cast off of the top of the
black may be very great. Whenever possible the block
should be turned over in a single coordinated operation.
Once the operation has begun, hesitancy on the part of the
collector may prove fatal insofar as the specimen is concerned.
¯ Once inverted the reduction of the block may be completed. The amount of matrix that can be removed from

98

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

the open side of the block will be determined largely by the
method of preparation to be employed in the labortary, the
available means of transportation, and the overall strength
of the block itself.
The rough and jagged edges of the plaster Cast should be
cut away and the open side of the block bandaged in the
manner described above. To facilitate the opening of the
block in the laboratory, some collectors do not allow the
new cast to overlap or adhere to the other half, but prefer
to wind a long strip of bandage around the line of separation
of the two half-casts. This method cannot be recommended
for use in large blocks where strength of the cast is the paramount concern.
Applications in Archaeological Collecting
The method described in the preceding paragraphs presupposes that the subject is a skeleton or a mass of bones. It
can therefore be applied with little modification to the co!lecting of human skeletal material and associated artifacts
and burial regalia. The entire mass may later be prepared
as a panel or slab mount without the necessity of rearranging
any of the specimens concerned. In most instances, human
bones will be found enclosed in unconsolidated and poorly
compacted matrices and the bones themselves may exhibit
a strong tendency toward crumbling. Special precautions
wil! probably be necessary to prevent undue damage to the
specimen. Very little of the entombing matrix should be
removed from the upper surface of the skeleton and the
entire specimen should then be collected in a single block
still embedded in as much of the surrounding matrix as
possible. Caution should be exercised in casting a large
block of unconsolidated material to assure that no free
space occurs between the block and any part of the enclosing
cast. The smallest void can easily become a focal point for
crumbling and the ultimate disintegration of the entire block.
The cast must be strengthened by the use of splints and in
some instances it may be desirable to construct a crate or
box over the block before it is inverted.

Vertebrate Pa~eontolog~ca~ Field Technique

99

In collecting masses of fossil bones in which primitive
spear points have been located, the artifacts should be well
padded and their position plainly marked on the exterior of
the plaster jacket.
it seems probable that this technique may also be adapted
to the collecting of badly broken or crushed pottery vessels.
Excavation should proceed as outlined, followed by blocking
out and casting. The use of shellac, however, is not recommended. The surfaces of the pottery will not require hardening and some other material which can be readily removed
in the laboratory may be used for the purpose of holding
the broken fragments in their relative positions. Commercial
Gum Arabic is here suggested as a satisfactory substitute for
shellac. The dry powder can be mixed with water until a
liquid gum solution is obtained. The pottery surface may
then be coated with gum-soaked pieces of tissue paper or
surgical bandage. Removal of the gum may be accomplished
in the laboratory simply by dissolving it in warm water.
The laboratory technician may open the cast with all the
broken pieces still retained in their original positions. No
longer must he be confronted with a great mass of small
fragments, the piecing together of which often becomes a
tedious and exasperating process.
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES
Camp, C. L. and Hanna, G. D.,Methods in Paleontology. University of California Press, 1937. xxii÷153pp., 58 figs.
Hermann, A., Modern Laboratory Me~hods in Vertebrate Paleontology. American Museum of Natural History Bulletin Vol. 26, art.23, 1909, pp. 263-332.

