TRANS-PECOS AREA
Little evidence of the Paleo-American Stage in TransPecos Texas has been found, although remains of late Pleistocene fauna have been reported. Lack of data on early
occupation of this region is due perhaps to insufficient
reconnaissance, and intensive search for Paleo-American
sites is likely to be fruitful.
Principally for clarity of presentation, archeological
manifestations post-dating the Pleistocene have been divided into two groups. In the western portion of TransPecos Texas from E1 Paso to the Guadalupe Mountains ~n
the east and southward down the Rio Grandevalley to th~
Rio C0nchos are sites either of Puebloan occupation or
strongly influenced by Puebloan culture, The southeastern
part of Trans-Pecos Texas, much less influenced by Puebloan culture, includes the Big Bend region and lower Pecos
River drainage. Virtually nothing is known of the remainder of the Pecog River valley in Texas and the area east of the
Guadalupe Mountains. The following chart lists and aligns
chronologically the complexes in the western and southeastern portions of Trans-Pecos.
WESTERN
Historic
Stage:

Presidio Focus
Alamito Focus
Conchos Focus

SOUTHEASTERN

Nomadic Groups

Concepci6n Focus
Neo-American
Stage:

E1 Paso Phase and
La Junta’Focus
Dona Ana Phase
Mesilla Phase
Hueco Phase

Archaic
Stage:

Livermore Focus

Chisos Focus
Pecos River Focus
Red Bluff (?)
Santiago
Maravi!las

28

Texas Archeological Society

Western Trans-Pecos Texas
In south-central New Mexico, northwestern Texas, and
the adjacent portion of Chihuahua are sites of the Jornada
Branch of the Mogollon--a cultural sequence of relatively
long duration defined by Donald J. Lehmer (1948). The
Jornada Branch has been traced through a developmental
sequence beginning with a late Archaic phase1 (Hueco) and
progressing through a series of successive phases (Mesilla,
Dona Ana, and E1 Paso) of the Neo-American Stage. The
pottery and house structures of the Jornada Branch clearly
indicate that this Branch is a southward extension of Puebloan culture. We include Mogollon in the general term
"Puebloan culture".
Beginning with the Mesilla Phase there is an expansion
southward down the Rio Grande valley by sedentary agriculturalists of the Jornada Branch. Between A. D. 1100
and A. D. 1400 many farming villages of the Dona Ana and E1
Paso Phases were established in the Rio Grande valley,
reaching at least as far south as the head of El Cajon, a
canyon located about 125 miles down the Rio Grande from
E1 Paso (Kelley, 1952, p. 361). Possibly because of unfavorable climatic factors and/or raids by nomadic groups,
the entire area occupied by Jornada peoples was suddenly
abandoned shortly after A. D. 1400.
Archeological remains of the Neo-American and Historic Stages in the Rio Grande valley south of El Cajon have
been grouped into the Bravo Valley Aspect (Kelley, et al,
1940). The Bravo Valley people were sedentary agriculturalists and their culture seems to have been a marginal
manifestation of the Jornada Branch and related traditions
of the Southwest, with an admixture of traits which may
have been derived from a local Archaic and/or diffused from
areas to the north and east. La Junta, the eartiest of the
Bravo Valley foci, is entirely prehistoric (being dated at
A. D. 1200-1400) and has evidence of a close relationship
I. The term ’~phase" is here roughly equivalent to a "focus" of the McKern
classification system, but since "phase" is more commonly used in Southwestern clasaification it is retained for complexes which represent extensions of Puebloan cultur~

Trans-Pecos Area

29

with the Jornada Branch,’ particularly the E1 Paso Phase.
The Concepci6n Focus which seems to have developed out
of the La Junta Focus extends into historic times, thus
bridging the Neo-American and Historic Stages.
Contacts with Western European culture, begun in the
late 16th century with the Spanish explorations and continued to the present time, ushered in the Historic Stage
and resulted in accretions to the aboriginal culture. The
four latest loci of the Bravo Valley Aspect trace this development by gradual stages, from the purely native culture
of the early Concepci6n Focus through the Conchos and
Alamito Foci to the present day population, termed Presidio
Focus.
Southeastern Trans-Pecos Texas
In the southeastern portion of Trans-Pecos Texas, the
Archaic Stage is represented by three poorly known lithic
complexes and the Big Bend Aspect. Indications of a relatively early appearance of the Archaic Stage in this portion
of Texas consists of the Maravillas and Santiago complexes.
A third lithic complex, the Red Bluff, is included in this
group, but the temporal relationship of the Red Bluff to the
Maravillas, Santiago, and other Archaic complexes is not
known. Present data pertaining to these three complexes
are extremely scarce, however, and no accurate statements
regarding artifact inventories or distributions are possible
at this time.
Two foci, Pecos River and Chisos, have been recognized
as comprising the Big Bend Aspect. The Pecos River Focus
is known principally from a number of excavated rockshelters in the vicinity of the lower Pecos River, although
components have been reported as far west as the Big Bend
region. Lithic artifacts, particularly dart point types, suggest that affiliations of the Pecos River Focus lie predominately with the Edwards Plateau Aspect to the east. Known
Chisos Focus components are located in mountainous areas
west of the Pecos. Chisos Focus is essentially an Archaic
complex, like the Pecos River Focus, but stratigraphic evi-

Texas Archeological Society

dence and the occurrence of intrusive pottery (which could
hardly have been acquired before A. D. 1200) in the upper
levels of Chisos components indicate that it is later, at least
in part, than the Pecos River Focus. Broad similarities between Chisos Focus and Archaic complexes to the west,
notably with the Hueco Phase, have been observed.
Little is known about the Neo-American Stage in the
southeastern portion of Trans-Pecos Texas, the only complex which has been recognized thus far being the Livermore Focus. This focus, however, is known from only one
occupational site, a component near Alpine which has an
admixture of Chisos Focus material (Kelley, et al, 1940,
p. 87). Detailed descriptions and accurate cultural and
temporal placement of the Livermore Focus must await
further research. Additional work will probably result in
the recognition of other Neo-American complexes in this
portion of Texas.
In historic times, from the 16th century on, large portions of Trans-Pecos Texas were inhabited by nomadic
hunting tribes such as Apaches and Tobosos. Virtually no
archeological remains have been attributed to them, but a
few crevice burials and pictographs showing horses and guns
probably should be. The Jumanos, Sumas, and Chisos tribes
were found to be settled agriculturalists along the Rio
Grande and Conchos Rivers by 16th century Spanish explorers and are thus involved in the development of the
Bravo Valley Aspect; other members Of these tribes, away
from the large and fertile valleys, probably were nomadic
hunters. Little has been published on these tribes and
their cultures to clarify the historic archeological picture.
Broad historical developments in Trans-Pecos Texas are
fairly clear, but many details cannot be accurately filled
in at present. Carefully controlled excavations with particular attention to the stratigraphic distribution of artifacts
are vital to the solution of most current problems. In general, there are two lines of investigation of prime importance: (1) more accurate determination of focal artifact

Trans-Pecos Area

31

invento~ries, and (2) relationships of one complex to another, both in time and space.
PALEO-AMERICAN STAGE
No sites of the Paleo-American Stage, nor any artifacts
which can be attributed to this stage have been reported
in Trans-Pecos Texas. Extensive reconnaissance in Pleistocene deposits may, however, uncover evidence of an early
occupation in this portion of Texas.
WESTERN TRANS-PECOS AREA
ARCHAIC STAGE
Hueco Phase
This phase was first described systematically by E. B.
Sayles (1935) who termed it the Hueco Cave Dweller, to
distinguish it from the Big Bend (now Chisos Focus) and
Pecos River (now Pecos River Focus) Cave Dwellers. In
general, subsequent work of C. B. Cosgrove and Donald J.
Lehmer has sUpported Sayles’ three-fold division, although
a comprehensive comparison of these "Cave Dwellers" is
badly needed. Sharing of traits is most evident in basketry,
matting, wooden utensils, and other artifacts of a perishable
nature. Actually the problem is a far-reaching one, for it
involves similar material found over a large portion of the
western United States.
The Hueco Phase, like other early branches, of the
Mogollon, seems to have developed out of the widely distributed "Cochise Culture". During the latter portion of
its existence, the Hueco Phase received pottery from peoples
to the northwest and gradually developed and differentiated
into the Mesilla Phase and the closely related Capitan Phase
of southeastern New Mexico.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: None designated.
Principal Excavated Components: Several sites excavated by the Peabody Museum in the southern portion New Mexico and neighboring regions of Texas

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

32

(Cosgrove, 1947) ; sites in Culberson County (Jackson,
1937) ; William Cave, Culberson County (Ayer, 1936) ~
Ceremonial Cave near E1 Paso (Alves, 1930); and an
unnamed cave near Toyah, Texas (Sayles, 1941).
TYPES OF SITES:
Rockshelters,.caves, and open campsites; areas of occupation often indicated by accumulations of burned
rock.
HOUSES:
No data.
LIVELIHOOD:
Hunting of small game, deer, and antelope; gathering of
wild plant products (cacti, mesquite beans, sotol, agarita berries, grass and yucca seeds, and fibrous stalks
such as agave and lechuguill.a); some cultivation of
corn and squash in the latest stages (there is a possibility that cotton was also grown).
STORAGE PITS:
Pits found in rockshelters may have been used for
storage.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
A late accretion to the complex is a plain brown pottery,
with sand or coarser material for ~empering. Pottery
seems to have been derived from peoples to the northwest of the Hueco area.
CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS (not abundant):
Projectile Points
Arrow Points:
fine-pointed,
dered; broad

(no type names designated):
Described by Sayles (1935) as thin,
with long stem; also square-shoulbase.

Dart Points: Long blade, round base and deep side
notches; another form with broad base, side notches,
and indented base.

Trans-Pecos Area

~3

Scrapers: Core with one end retouched into concave
base; and flakes~retouched along a straight or slightly
concave edge.
Handaxes:

Present.

Knives: Leaf-shaped.
Drills: Shaft finely chipped with rounded base,
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Mortar holes: Deep and cylindrical with rounded bottoms, found in boulders and rock outcrops.
Pestles: Long and tapering.
Milling stones:

Flat or oval depressions.

Manos: One-hand, circular ~o oval in outline shapes
with one or both faces used, and flat, convex, or occasionally wedge-shaped in cross section.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Stone beads and pendants.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE:
¯Awls made from split metatar.us of deer.
Flaking tools.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
-Disc and tubular shaped beads.
Olivella beads.
Bracelets and pendants made from GIycymeris (?).
ARTIFACTS OF WOOD AND CANE:
Atlatl.
Notchect cane dart with pointed wooden foreshaft.
Flat, grooved club, sometimes bound with skin (these
have been called rabbit sticks, fending sticks, and
boomerangs).
Fireboard of split yucca stalk.
Bow fire drill.

Texas Archeological Society

Planting or digging stick.
Notched rasping stick.
Miscellaneous pointed and battered sticks.
Fiber bundles tied to yucca stalk.
Carved pahos (prayer-sticks) with iridescent feathers.
Split stick awl with sharpened end and looped handle
bound with fiber.
Cane cigarette.
Section of cane with small holes burned in row lengthwise (flute ?).
ARTIFACTS OF SKIN:
Dog and fox skin bags.
Antelope skin pouches.
Rabbit fur blankets.
Miscellaneous fragments of tanned skin, occasionally
with stretching holes tied with fiber.
ARTIFACTS OF FIBER:
Basketry: Fiber-cord twined; coiled with grass foundation, yucca-leaf sewing element, split-stitch; and
yucca-leaf warp, threaded with fiber cord.
Matting: Yucca-leaf, checkerboard twill; yucca-leaf,
fiber cord twined; and thick twist of yucca fiber,
cord-twined.
Cordage: Fiber 1, 2, and 4-strand; human hair, 2-strand.
Sandals: Squared toe: Frames of lechuguilla, sotol or
yucca leaves; braided with same material, and reinforced with strands interwoven lengthwise. Ends of
all elements on sole side.
Squared toe: 4-warp.
Rounded toe: Frames of yucca leaves,.crossed toe and
heel, and braided with same kind of material ("fishtail" sandal).
Rounded toe: Frame of yucca or lechuguilla leaves,
elements twisted at toe and heel, and braided with
same kind of material.
Yucca-leaf awls.

Trans-Pecos Area

Bundles of yucca leaves.
Plain weave, of cotton.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Gourd vessels.
Pigments.
Pictographs: Conventionalized figures drawn in lines
and dots; colors of red, orange, black, and yellow.
Hammerstones.
Incised lines on boulders and rock outcrops in shelters,
probably identical to the grooved, polished areas in
Big Bend Aspect sites.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Adult: In shelters, flexed and wrapped in rabbit-fur
blankets tied with human-hair cord. Burial offerings
include ornaments, matting and basketry.
Infant: In shelters, in fiber-cord twined conical basket,
built on Wood and yucca-stalk frame, with lechuguillaleaf tumpline. Offerings include pahos, bags, and miscellaneous tanned skins and down; cotton and humanhair cord, hanks of human hair, ornaments, rabbitw
fur robes, and matting.
RELATIONS:
Olivella shells from Gulf of California or Pacific Ocean.
A number of traits common to Chisos Focus and, to
a lesser extent, the Pecos River Focus.
Pottery from San Marcial Phase of the Mogollon in
south-central New Mexico.
ESTIMATED AGE:
? to A. D. 900 (Lehmer, 1948, p. 89).
SOURCES:
Alves, 1930; Ayer, 1936; Cosgrove, 1947; Jackson, 1937;
Lehmer, 1948; Sayles, 1935, 1941.

Texas Archeologica~ Society

NEO-AMERICAN STAGE
Mesilla Phase
The incipent development of the Neo~American Stage
began in the latter part of the Hueco Phase, as evidenced
by the appearance of agriculture and small quantities of
pottery. These new traits spread in popularity and were
supplemented by other innovations so that a Neo-American
complex, termed the Mesilla Phase, gradually emerged out
of the old Archaic pattern of the Hueco Phase.
Sites of the Mesilla Phase, which contain pit houses
and an abundance of pottery, are known from surface collections in southeastern New Mexico and the adjacent portion of Texas, and from work at Los Tules, the principal
excavated component. The following characterization, of
the Mesilla Phase is based mainly upon Lehmer’s list of
traits at Los Tules (Lehmer, 1948, pp. 13-34):
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: Los Tules Site, on the Rio Grande
just above the Mesilla Dam, excavated in 1940 by
the Arizona State Museum and the Museum of New
Mexico, under the direction of Donald J. Lehmer.
Excavated Components: At the La Cueva Site, near
Las Cruces, New Mexico, El Paso Brown pottery found
in the lower levels of a test pit suggest an occupation
by the Mesilla Phase.
TYPES OF SITES:
Villages of small pithouses, with refuse scattered over
the site.
HOUSES:
Pithouses varying considerably in depth. Unaltered
bottom of the pit served as the floor; pit walls not
plastered except in one instance.
Superstructure~
probably made of poles laid on heavier framework
and covered with grass thatch. The houses can be
divided into two types, circular and rectangular. Fea,

Trans-Pecos Area

tures of rectangular houses include sloping entrance,
leading from east or southeast; and main roof supports in the corners and at the centers of the shorter
sides. Posts at the ends of the long axis suggest a
central beam which formed the ridgepole of a peaked
roof. As a group, the rectangular houses are smaller
than the circular ones.
Circular houses are characterized by the absence of
any trace of a doorway (a hatchway may have been
used as an entrance); primary interior roof supports
in the center, so the walls sloped in from the rim of
the pit to the roof. Fire areas occur consistently in
rectangular houses but rarely in circular ones. One
circular pithouse at the Los Tules site was exceptionally deep, with a bench 45 cm~ wide encircling
the wall 1 meter above the floor. There was an unusual posthole arrangement, suggesting that this particular structure may have served a different purpose
from the other circular pithouses.
STORAGE PITS:
Located inside and outside the houses; shapes of pits
are oval, circular or irregular. Circular and .oval pits
are undercut, while irregular pits have straight sides.
Depths range from 30 to 75 cm,; width across opening range from 43 to 75 cm. Pits contain refuse.
LIVELIHOOD:
Agriculture inferred, supplemented by hunting and
gathering.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery Types: El Paso Brown.
Temper: Angular fragments of limestone and quartz.
Decoration:
Typically undecorated; v e r y rarely
sherds have black or red painted design, foreshadowing the development of El Paso Polychrome. Oc-

Texas Archeological Society

casionally shreds show gouging, punching, and incising.
Forms: Jars without necks, and rarely bowls.
Scraping tools made from potsherds.
OTHER ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE (uncommon):
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points (no named types): Long, thin, slender
triangular points, with straight and concave bases;
also triangular points with side notches and expanding stem with concave base.
Dart Points:
Phase.

Possibly carry-overs from the Hueco

Knives: Oval, percussion-chipped.
Scrapers: Side (not as frequent as sherd scrapers).
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Manos: One-hand, predominantly round or oval in outline shape, with convex and straight faces and rarely
a distinct pit on one face; occasionally wedge-shaped.
Milling stones:
Pestles.

Oval basin, ~rough and flat basin.

Mortars in boulders and rock outcrops.
Stone bowls with incised decorations.

ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Turquoise, polished and perforated for suspension.
Incised pendants.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE:
Awls made from splinters.
Ring made by perforating a disc; another type made
from transverse segments of long bone of some large
animal.

ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Bracelets of GIycymeris.

T~ans-Pecos Area

39

Beads of OliveIla shells.
Pendants made from broken segments of Glycymeris.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Flexed, reclining position; occasionally pottery as offering. Burials usually in abandoned house floors and
in refuse areas.
RELATIONS:
Intrusive pottery from the Mimbres Phase, including
types Mimbres Black-on-white, Mimbres Corrugated,
San Francisco Red, and Alma Plain.
Livermore point (Livermore Focus) found at Los Tules
Site. Sporadically, El Paso Brown occurs in the Big
Bend region.
ESTIMATED AGE:
A. D. 900-1100 (Lehmer, 1948, p. 89).
S~URCES:
Lehmer, 1948.
Dona Ana Phase
The short-lived Dona Ana Phase is transitional between
the Mesilla and El Paso Phases. The persistence of pithouses and El Paso Brown pottery indicate a direct linear
descent from the Mesilla Phase. Such traits as surface
houses and painted pottery were evidently borrowed from
Afiasazi groups to the north and from the Mimbres people
already in the Jornada area to the west (Lehmer, 1948,
pp. 78-80).
Expansion of the Jornada Branch down the Rio Grande
valley, begun during the Mesilla Phase, was continued in
Dona Ana times (Kelley, 1952, p. 361). Cultural relations
also extended over a wider area than in the earlier phases
of the Jornada Branch, for intrusive pottery types furnish
evidence of contact with the Zu5i district, and the Mimbres,
Three Rivers, and Cedarvale Phases.

Texas Archeological Society

Since no Dona Ana sites have been excavated, this phase
is known solely from surface collections, which consist almost entirely of pottery.
COMPONENTS:
None excavated; however test pits at the La Cueva Site,
near Las Cruces, New Mexico, indicate that a Dona
Ana occupation succeeded the Mesilla Phase at that
site.
TYPES OF SITES:
Appear to be small villages composed of pithouses and
surface structures.
HOUSES:
Pithouses and adobe-walled surface structures with contiguous rooms.
LIVELIHOOD:
Probably same as Mesilla Phase.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery types: El Paso Brown (similar to Mesilla Phase
with modification of rim), and El Paso Polychrome.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Arrow-shaft tools: Straighteners and abraders.
RELATIONS:
St. Johns Polychrorne and Houck Polychrome from the
Zu~i district of New Mexico.
Three Rivers Red-on-terracotta and Broad-line Red-on~erracotta from the Three Rivers Phase of the Jornada
Branch, northern variant.
Mimbres Classic Black-on-white, San Francisco Red,
Alma Plain, Mimbres Corrugated from the Mimbres,
area in southwestern New Mexico.
Chupadero Black-on-white from the Cedarvale Phase.
ESTIMATED AGE:
A. D. 1100-1200 (Lehmer, 1948, p. 89).
SOURCES:
Kelley, 1952; Lehmer, 1948.

Trans-Pecos Area

41

El Paso Phase

At about A. D. 1100, influences from the !knasazi or
northern division of the Puebloan culture1 began to be felt
by peoples of the southern or Mogollon division--more specifically, by the Jornada Branch with which we are here
concerned. Many of the older cultural patterns were now
markedly altered. Although the reasons are not clear, a
number of population movements are evident in the Southwest during the 12th and 13th centuries.
The E1 Paso Phase appears to be the result of such
movements or i.nfluences extending down the Rio Grande
valley in southern New Mexico and western Texas. The
phase was first defined by Sayles (1935) and later supplemented by the work of Mrs. Glen E. Moore (1947) and
Donald J. Lehmer (1948). The artifacts are derived directly
from the Dona Ana Phase, with a few changes and additions.
A southward expansion, probably initiated during the
Mesilla Phase, was continued by agriculturalists of the E1
Paso Phase, who established villages on alluvial terraces
along the Rio Grande. This Puebloan-derived culture spread
as far south as the Presidio vicinity at the Rio Conchos
entry, and perhaps up the Conchos from there. In the Presidio area the La Junta Focus of the Bravo Valley Aspect
represents this southward thrust; however, the Bravo Valley
Aspect itself represents a distinct cultural development
which only borrowed part of the Puebloan traits of the
Jornada Branch, particularly of the E1 Paso Phase.
Shortly after A. D. 14{}0, the E1 Paso Phase seems to
have disappeared rather suddenly. Climatic changes may
have forcdd migration to other regions, or the pressure of
nomadic invaders may have been responsible. Perhaps
both factors operated. !k similar situation obtained widely
i~ the Southwest at about this time, for reasons which
warrant close study.
1. We use "Puebloan" here in the same sense as Reed (1946, 1952).
The Auasazl
is the northern division of this great culture pattern, from Basket Maker t~mes t~
the l~resent. "Phe Magollon is the southern division, beginning by about B. C. 40~) nr
300, and continuing until 1400 or 14/;0, by which time the whole southern region was
practically abandoned by agricultural Indians. Presumably the nomadic in~’aders from
the north, mainly the Apache tribes, were responsible for much of this abandonment

for they were found in possession by the early Spanish explorers.

Texas Archeological Society

~2

COMPONENTS:
Type Component: The Bradfield Site in the lower Tularosa Basin, excavated in 1940 by the Arizona State
Museum and Museum of New Mexico, under the direction of Donald J. Lehmer.
Principal Excavated Components: Twelve Room House
Ruin, near E1 Paso, Texas (Moore, 1947); Alamagordo Site I and II, both near Alamagordo, New Mexico (Lehmer, 1948).
TYPES OF SITES:
Villages, consisting of multi-roomed, one-story pueblos.
Refuse middens and ruins mark the sites.
HOUSES:
Surface structures with adobe walls. Two Characteristic
ground plans: (1) rooms grouped around plazas and
(2) long tiers of rooms oriented east and west.
Interior features include fire pits, storage pits with
straight walls (often irregular in outline), and post
holes. Floors are of adobe and rooms may or may
not have doorways. Adobe "altars", similar to those
of the La Junta Focus, are found only in the. southern
portion of the E1 Paso Phase region.
STORAGE PITS:
See above.
LIVELIHOOD:
By inference, same as in earlier phases.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery type: El Paso Polychrome.
Temper: Sand.
Forms: Jars and bowls.
Decoration: Usually black over red, red over black,
black and red on brown base; design rather crude,
alternate lines of black and red, massed colors, and
stepped motifs. Infrequently, textured shreds of
same paste as polychrome; include incising and
punctating.

Trans-Pecos Area

Animal effigies.
Tubular pipes.
Sherd discs, perforated or unperforated.
Potsherds used as scrapers.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points (no named types) : Small, thin, triangular forms; bases straight, concave or convex.
Dart Points: No data.
Drills: Long, tapering shaft and expanding base.
Scrapers: Keel-backed, end scrapers; side scrapers.
Gravers: Present.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Tubular pipes.
Mauls.

Manos: Oval, one-hand; more frequently, two-hand
manos with only one face used.
Milling stones: Flat-surfaced, trough, and oval basin.
Mortars often in boulders and rock outcrops.
Pestles: Long and tapering; also short and cylindrical.
Arrow-shaft tools.
Full-grooved and ~-grooved axes, rarely double-bitted.
Stone hoes, roughly triangular, with base sharpened to
blunt cutting edge and side notches just below the
apex.
Palettes: Tabular pieces of stone.
Polishing stones from waterworn pebbles.
Spherical stone balls.
Grooved picks.
Stone bowls.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
Animal effigies.
Pendants of turquoise and other stones.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE:
Bone awls.
Antler-prong flaking tools.

Texas Archeological Society

ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Tubular and discoidal Olivella beads.
Beads from an unidentified shell made by drilling transverse hole through spine.
Bracelets.
Pendants from shell of bivalve.
Shell tinklers.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Hammerstones.
Quartz crystals.
Pigments.
Turquoise and malachite fragments.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Flexed, both sitting and reclining positions; sometimes
in house floors, but more commonly in village area,
probably in refuse heaps. Burial offerings not abundant, consisting mainly of pottery.
RELATIONS:
Intrusive pottery:
Most common intrusives are: Three Rivers Red-onterracotta and Lincoln Black-on-white, frbm San
Andres Phase in central New Mexico; and Chupadero Black-on-white from the Cedarvale Phase.
Gila Polychrome from Animas Phase in Chihuahua.
Agua Frio Glaze-on-red and Arenal Glaze Polychrome
from the Arenal Phase in the central Rio Grande
Valley.
Ramos Polychrome and Playas Red Incised ~Ramos
Phase in northwestern Chihuahua).
St. Johns Polychrome and Hesho~authla G~aze Polychrome from the St. Johns and Heshota Phase of
the Zufii district.
Close contact with the La Junta Focus suggested by
El Paso Polychrome in La Junta sites; house types of
the La Junta Focus; adobe "altars" which may ben a
La Junta intrusive in the E1 Paso Phase.
Widespread distribution of El Paso Polychrome outside
the Jornado area.

Trans-Pecos Area

ESTIMATED AGE:
A. D. 1200-1400 (Lehmer, 1948),
SOURCES:
Kelley, 1952; Lehmer, 1948; Moore, 1947; Sayles, 1935.
Bravo Valley Aspect
Largely through the work of J. Charles Kelley, five
loci, La Junta, ConcepciSn, Conchos, Alamito, and Presidio,
have been recognized as comprising the Bravo Valley Aspect. This aspect is a marginal manifestation of Puebloan
culture which appears to represent local groups who also
borrowed a number of traits from their neighbors to the
south and west (Kelley, 1952). The earliest focus of the
Bravo Valley Aspect, La Junta, was contemporaneous with
the E1 Paso Phase, while other loci of this aspect date from
about A. D. 1400 to the present. Only the La Junta Focus
is entirely prehistoric, the ConcepciSn having evidence of
European contact toward its end. The following period of
increasing acculturation of the native culture has been
termed the Conchos Focus. Since the Presidio and Alamitos
are modern, they will not be considered here.
With respect to the La Junta, ConcepciSn, and Conchos
Foci, house styles and pottery types are the main differentiating features; most other traits appear to be shared. To
avoid needless repetition the traits common to all three loci
will be characterized first, then the traits tentatively assigned to each focus will be listed separately.
COMPONENTS:
Centered in the Rio Grande valley, in the vicinity of
Presidio, Texas.
TYPES OF SITES:
Rockshelters and small caves in tuff cliffs; pithouses,
often marked by surface depressions and large middens; and surface houses, sometimes indicated by partially standing walls. Villages known, but detailed
descriptions lacking.
HOUSES:
Pithouses vary from one focus to another, but were

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

46

usually built with walls of jacal construction. Evidence at present seems to indicate that entrance was
through the roof.
LIVELIHOOD:
Agriculture (beans, corn, and squash), hunting, fishing, and food-gathering.

CERAMIC TRAITS:
With the exception of the pottery types from the Southwest, there are as yet no published descriptions of the
Bravo Valley Aspect pottery. Undescribed types include Pulicos Red-on-Brown, Chinati Plain Ware, Capote Red-on-brown, and Paloma Red-on-gray.
Ovals and discs cut from potsherds, both perforated and
unperforated.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Perdiz, Piedras, Shatter, and Fresno.
Dart Points: Absent.
Handaxes: Crudely chipped.
Scrapers: Finely made snub-nosed or thumb-nail scrapers; side scrapers; small flakes carefully chipped to
straight, concave, an~] convex cutting edges.
Drills: Small, carefully chipped, shaft oval in crosssection, no base.
Small flakes with chipped saw-tooth edges.
Knives: Diamond-shaped with alternately bevelled
edges. Also well-chipped plain knives.
Sinkerstones: Made from small to medium-sized river
pebbles; oval, rectangular or circular in shape; notches
chipped in ends; occasionally marks of wear on faces
of pebbles between grooves.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Grinding implements: Large basin-shaped, oval-bowl
metates; and shallow trough-like, oval-bowl metates.
Manos: One-hand, convex and flat grinding surfaces,
rectangular in outline with rounded corners, carefully shaped; also unshaped manos.

Trans-Pecos Area

Pestles: Both shaped and unshaped, cylindrical, and rodlike.
Arrowshaft smoothers, abraders or straighteners.
Small boulders with shallow rectangular grinding basins
cut in face, sometimes marks of red pigment in basin
(paint mortars).
Small to medium-sized polishing stones having facets
from usage, or scratches on one or more sides.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
No data.
ARTIFACTS OF FIBRE:
Some reported, but detailed descriptions not available.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
Awls and flaking tools of bone.
Bone needles and spatulas.
Tubular bone beads, often decorated with incisions.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Pendants, beads, gorgets, "buttons", discs, and problematical forms made from fresh-water mussel; also
Olivella shells and others from the Gulf of Mexico
and Gulf of California.
MISCELLANEOUS:
Red pigment.
Hammerstones.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Usually flexed inhumation, with or without offerings.
RELATIONS:
Varies from one focus to another, but in general reflect
contact with the Southwest, as evidenced by the intrusive pottery types and architecture (see Jornada
Branch of the Mogollon).
ESTIMATED AGE:
A. D. 1200-1800 (1800 is terminal date suggested for
Conchos Focus; Kelley, et al., 1940, p. 163}.

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

48

SOURCES:
Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940; Kelley, 1939, 1949,
1951a, 1952; Sayles, 1935, !936; and Shackelford, 1951.
La Junta Focus
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: Early horizon at Shafter 7:1 (Millington Site), near Presidio, Texas (Kelley, et al.,
1940).
Other Components: Loma Seca, near the Rio Conchos
in northern Chihuahua, Mexico; Shafter 7:6, Shafter
8: 1, Shafter 8: 3, Ruidoso 6:3, Ruidoso 6:2 in the Big
Bend (Kelley, et al., 1940) ; and the Polvo Site (57D23) near Redford, Texas (Kelley, 1949; Shackelford,

1951).
HOUSES:
Small, shallow, circular or oval pithouses.
Rectangular rooms in sha!low pits with adobe-base walls
and jacal superstructure; built in series of two to five
rooms.
Rectangular houses built in deep pits, with or without
low adobe curb; jacal superstructure. Walls of houses
built inside the pit and usually unplastered. However, at the Polvo Site decorations consisting of bands
of yellow, black, red, and perhaps white were painted
on plastered walls. Also at the Polvo Site, "turtleback" bricks, laid up longitudinally and plastered together, were used in wal! construction.
Rectangular blocks of adobe set with long axis flush
with the south interior wall of rectangular houses.
These "altars" are plastered, well-made, about 30x60
cm. and 30 or 40 cm. in height, and show no signs of
usage. Roof supports present in all houses, with considerable variation.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Types: El Paso Polychrome, Chihuahua Polychromes
(Ramos, Babicora an d Villa Ahumada), Tusayan

Trans-Pecos Area

49

Polychrome, Playas Red, Chupadero Black-on-white,
and unnamed red and brown wares.
Present evidence suggests that the preceding pottery
types are trade wares, and that locally made pottery is
rare or absent; yet these wares are consistently associated and seem to warrant listing as part of the cultural complex.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Small and medium-sized bowls carved from volcanic
tuff, round, oval, and irregular in shape; occasionally
these occur with curvilinear designs carved on the
exterior.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Flexed inhumation of infants and, to a lesser extent,
adults; placed below house floors.
ESTIMATED AGE:
A. D. 1200-1400 (Kelley, et al., 1940).
SOURCES:
Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940; Kelley, 1939, !949,
1951a; Shackelford, 1951.
HISTORIC STAGE
Concepci~ Focus
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: Shafter 7:3, near Presidio, Texas
(Kelley, et al., 1940).
Other Components: Shafter 7:1 (upper component),
Shafter 7:6, Shafter 8:1, Ruidoso 6:2 (Kelley, et al.,
1940; Kelley, 1939).

HOUSES
Large rectangular pithouses, averaging about 28x30 feet;
no adobe used, walls and roof of jacal structure. Entrance probably through roof. Interior features include row of wall posts along inside of pit; main roof
supports forming rectangule in pit. Occur singly or in
series of three to seven.

50

Texas Archeological SocieSy

Large circular pithouses, probably With jacal walls and
roof (association with focus uncertain).
STORAGE PITS:
Pits with prepared clay floors, dug into alluvium near
houses; interior support of sapling poles around circumference.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Pottery types:~ Chinati Plain Ware, Capote Red-onbrown, PaIoma Red-on-gray. Unnamed polished red
and brown ware; and unnamed gray ware.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Plain stone bowls (?)
Rubbed and grooved stones.
Arrowshaft straighteners or abraders, oval shaped,
smoothed surface, transverse groove and one end
shouldered (for hafting?).
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Flexed inhumation in refuse heaps.
RELATIONS:
Trade sherds of type Patton Engraved (Allen Focus of
the Fulton Aspect). In later phases of the focus, items
of European origin.
ESTIMATED AGE:
A..D. 1400-1700 (Kelley, 1949, p. 104).
SOURCES:
Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940; Kelley, 1939, 1949,
1952; Sayles, 1935.
Conchos Focus
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: Shafter 7: 1, late horizon, near Presidio, Texas (Kelley, 1939; Kelley, et al., 1940).
Other Components: Perhaps the upper component at
the Polvo Site (Kelley, 1949).
HOUSES:
Surface houses of adobe and jacal construction.

Trans-Pecos Area

51

Large rectangular houses built in pits.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Types: Conchos Red-on-brown and Pulico Red-onbrown.
Mexican or Spanish majolica ware and associated Spanish utility wares.
Brown, red, orange, and gray wares. These are often
polished, and roughly finished. Thick, coarse paste.
Sometimes have grayish-green slip or wash, which
grades into a bubbly green glaze; often wheel-turned.
ARTIFACTS OF METAL:
Crude knives, fishhooks, and other artifacts of copper
and iron.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
No data.
RELATIONS:
Ceramics, metals, and glass of European origin.
ESTIMATED AGE:
A. D. 1700-1800 (Kelley, 1949).
SOURCES:
Kelley, 1939, 1949, 1952; Kelley, et al, 1940; Sayles, 1936 a.
SOUTHEASTERN TRANS-PECOS AREA
ARCHAIC STAGE
Early Lithic Complexes of the Big Bend
To be briefly considered in this group are three lithic
complexes, the Maravillas, Santiago, and Red Bluff. Stratigraphic evidence at the Calamity Creek Site in Brewste~"
County (Kelley, et al, 1940, pp. 107-119) indicates that Maravillas is older than the Santiago, but, as yet, the Red Bluff
has not been found in any context that clarifies its chronological relationship to the other two. These Archaic complexes are known from only a few projectile points, scrapers,
knives, blades and grinding implements. Available data
indicate that Maravillas and Santiago antedate the big Bend

52

Texas Archeo!ogical Society

Aspect, and thus, are the earliest known archeological manifestations in the Big Bend region. It seems likely, however,
that further work in extreme western Texas may find evidence of the Paleo-American Stage, which to date has been
notably absent in that region. An accurate interpretation
of the Maravillas, Santiago, and Red Bluff complexes will
not be possible until additional excavations give a better
representation of the artifact assemblage and distribution of
these complexes.
SOURCES:
Kelley, et al, 1940.
Pecos River Focus (Big Bend Aspect)
The Pecos River Focus is the earliest manifestation of
the Big Bend Aspect. This focus is best known and characterized from rockshelter sites, although open campsites
are known. The combination of aridity and occurence of
archeological material in rockshelters is conductive to the
preservation of such items as clothing, basketry, matting,
wooden implements, etc., which do not survive under ordinary circumstances. Consequently, many of the artifacts
from these sites provide data on aboriginal technology and
enable a fairly accurate cultural reconstruction. Pictographs on the rockshelter walls, while not unique in the
Pecos River Focus, are unexceptionally well represented.
Many of the pictographs consist of conventionalized human
and animal figures.
Similarities between Pecos River and Basketmaker artifacts have been pointed out. While basketry, matting, sandals, and other perishable items are reminiscent of Basketmaker material the resemblance seems to be largely superficial and there is probably little direct relationship between the two complexes. Relationships, especially lithic
artifacts, appear to lie to the east with the Edwards Plateau
Aspect.
COMPONENTS:
Type Component: Fate Bell Shelter in Val Verde County, Texas; excavated in 1932 by The University of
Texas, under the direction of Ao T. Jackson (Pearce
and Jackson, 1933).

Trans-Pecos Area

53

Principal Excavated Components: Murrah Cave (Holden, 1937), Shumla Caves (Martin, 1933), and Eagle
Cave (Davenport, 1938) in Val Verde County; component at the Bee Cave Site (Coffin, 1932) and lower
level at Alpine 2:7 (Kelley, et al, 1940) in Brewster
County. A number of other sites, particularly rockshelters, in Val Verde and Brewster Counties have
been located, but, unfortunately many have been disturbed by looters.
TYPES OF SITES:
Rockshelters and open sites; midden deposits often quite
deep in both.
HOUSES:
No data.
LIVELIHOOD:
Food-gathering primarily; to a lesser extent hunting
and fishing. No evidence of agriculture.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Absent.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile Points:
Arrow Points: Absent.
Dart Points: Langtry and Shurala most common and
diagnostic; Abasolo, Almagre, Bulverde, Ensor, Frio,
Marcos, Montell, NoIan, Palmillas, Pandale, Pedernales, and Tortugas well represented; Darl, Ellis,
Kinney, Lerma, and Refugio occur infrequently.
Bulverde, MonteIl, Nolan, and Pedernales points
poorly made and small compared with same types
in Edwards Plateau Aspect; other types very similar
in the two areas.
Handaxes: Made by chipping end of pebble to rounded
cutting edge; unworked end fits into palm of hand.
Drills: Large and stemmed.
Scrapers: Cores; heavy end scrapers; and flakes with
finely retouched straight or curving edge.
Knives: Ovoid and lanceolate forms.

54

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Milling stones: Slabs with oval basin.
Metates: Flat, thin slabs.
Deep circular, bedrock mortars.
Manos: Both convex and flat faces; pitted manos;
wedge-shaped manos.
Unshaped pestles.
Tubular pipe (?).
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
Snail-shell beads.
Gorgers and pendants of conch shell and fresh-water
mussel.
Olivella beads.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER:
Bone awls, spatulas, needles, gouges, scrapers, and flaking tools.
Antler flaking tools and gouges.
Whistle, bone.
Tubular bone beads.
ARTIFACTS OF ANIMAL SKIN:
Sewed skins.
Painted skins. "
Pouches.
Rabbit-fur cloth, made by wrapping fur around fibre
string and weaving the composite yarn into loose cloth.
ARTIFACTS OF WOOD AND CANE:
Atlatl or spear-thrower.
Atlatl darts, composed of mainshaft and foreshaft; foreshaft either pointed or with slit for attachment of
projectile point.
"Rabbit clubs" (also called throwing or fending sticks) :
curved, and often decorated with incised lines.
Cradle: V-shaped frame, small twigs twined into place
with cordage form the bed of the cradle.
Fireboard of split yucca.
Fire drill of yucca or lechuguilla stalk.
Wooden scoop-shaped objects.

Trans-Pecos Area

55

Sticks with beveled ends.
Cane cigarette.
Battered stakes; pointed sticks; and painted sticks.
*Bow and arrow (association uncertain).
ARTIFACTS OF FIBRE:
Basketry: Predominantly coiled, with single bundle
foundation using interlocking and non-interlocking
stitch. Less frequent are coiled basketry with splitstitch; wrapped twined; and plaited diagonal and
twilled weaves.
Sandals: Made from whole and split yucca leaves,
lechuguilla and sotol; rectangular in shape with a
squared toe, Usually consist of two opposing warp
leaves, or one split leaf forming the two opposing
warps, with a weft of braided flat material between
the warp elements. Less common is the use of simple
flat elements between the two-warp foundation in a
criss-cross fashion.
Occasionally, the rounded-toe "fish-tail" shape, apparently a late accretion to the cultural complex.
Aprons: Made of two-ply Apocynum cord, perhaps with
human hair ties.
Netting: Woven from fibre and grass cord by a series
of loops, slip-knots, and larkshead knots.
Matting:
Yucca, lechuguilla and sotol leaves, and
whole or split cane or reeds served as raw materials.
Techniques include diagonal twilling and twining.
Numerous fragments of cordage, knots, and snares.
Wrapped bundles of grass and yucca leaves.
Fishhooks of cactus thorns.
MISCELLANEOUS:
Hammerstones: Discoidal and globular forms, made
from nodules and discarded handaxes.
Flat, stream-worn pebbles with designs painted in red
and black.
Pecked and scratched pebbles.
*Primarily on the basis of studies of pictographs, Kelley

(!950) suggests that the

bow and arrow should be placed with a more recent cultural stage than the full Pecos=
River Focus.

Texas Archeological Society

56

End-notched pebbles (so-called "net-sinkers").
Pictographs on shelter walls and on cliffs near shelters;
paintings in red, yellow, orange, and black.
Petroglyphs on cave walls.
Miscellaneous incised grooves on boulders and rock outcrops, rock well polished over and around the grooves.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Placed flexed in rockshelters and in open ground. Burials often wrapped in matting, animal skins or woven
bags; offerings of weapons, food, tools, ornaments, and
basketry. Less common method of disposal was cremation, the calcined bones and ashes being placed in
woven bags.
RELATIONS:
All dart-point types except Langtry and Shumla also
common in Edwards Plateau Aspect, Central Texas;
Langtry and Shum~a points occur occasionally in Central Texas and down Rio Grande valley to FalcSn Focus in Southwest Texas. Abasolo, Almagre, Tortugas,
Kinney, Lerma, and Refugio points also occur in Coastal and Southwest Texas, and. Tamaulipas in northeastern Mexico, in the Archaic Stage.
ESTIMATED AGE:
A. D.?-900 (Kelley, et. al., 1940, pp. 158-163).
SOURCES:
Coffin, 1932; Davenport, 1938; Holden, 1937; Jackson,
1938; Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940; Kelley,
1950; Kirkland, 1937, 1939; Martin, 1933; Pearce and
Jackson, 1933; Sayles, 1935; Setzler, 1935; Smith, 1932,
1940; Taylor, 1949.
Chisos Focus (Big Bend Aspect)
Centered in the mountainous Big Bend Region of Texas
are many sites of the Chisos Focus. Like the Pecos River
Focus, it is best known and characterized from rockshelter
occupations, although Chisos components have been found
in open campsites.

Trans-Pecos Area

57

Many traits of the Chisos Focus are shared with the
Hueco Phase of the Jornada Branch to the north and.vcest.
and, to a lesser extent, with the Pecos River Focus to the
east. The Chisos Focus appears to be roughly contemporaneous with the Hueco Phase and, despite a slight time
overlap, later than the Pecos River Focus. Although it is
essentially an Archaic complex, intrusive Southwestern pottery types, evidence of agriculture, and possibly the bow and
arrow occur in the upper levels of Chisos components, suggesting that in the later part of this focus there were contacts with Neo-American groups to the northwest.

COIViPONENTS:
Type component: Muller Rockshelter, excavated by
Victor J. Smith in cooperation with Gila Pueblo,
Globe, Arizona (Kelley, et. al., 1940).
Principal excavated components: Located in the Big
Bend area, Alpine 2: 5, Alpine 2:7 (upper level, with
Livermore admixture), Sentinel Canyon Shelter (Kelley, et al., 1940); and Bee Cave Site in Brewster
County (Coffin, 1932).
TYPES OF SITES:
Rockshelters and open campsites; occupation often indicated by midden deposits.
LIVELIHOOD:
Food-gathering, hunting, and agriculture. Direct evidence of agriculture (corn, squash, and beans) in the
latest (?) sites.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Indigenous pottery probably absent.
Perhaps clay figurines; association uncertain.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE (uncommon) :
Projectile Points:
Arrow points: Occasionally types associated with the
Bravo Valley Aspect occur, probably a~ intrusives.
Dart points: Dominant type Paisano; possibly other
types.
Drills: Large and stemmed.

Texas Archeological Society

58

Scrapers: Poorly made side scrapers; crude end scrapers.
Knives: Well-chipped blades, uncommon.
ARTIFACTS OF POLISHED STONE:
No data.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE:
Crude disc-shaped beads.
Milling stones: Oval bowl.
Metates: Flat slab.
Deep, cylindrical bedrock mortars.
Manos:
Both convex and flat-surface manos;
wedge-shaped and pitted manos.

also

ARTIFACTS OF SHELL:
No data.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE:
Awls made from split metarsus of deer.
ARTIFACTS OF SKIN:
Sewed skins, occasionally painted.
Rabbit fur cloth or blankets.
ARTIFACTS OF WOOD AND CANE:
Wooden fire tongs, consisting of two halves of split
saplings bound together at the proximal ends.
Flat, painted dice (?).
Sticks with feathers and other bits of wood tied to one
end with fibre cord (possibly prayer sticks).
Flat, grooved rabbit clubs; often decorated with incised
lines.
Atlatl and dart.
Fireboard of split yucca stalk.
Fire drill.
Small sticks with fine points.
Scorched wooden scoop (fire shovel ?).
ARTIFACTS OF FIBRE:
Basketry: l~Iost common technique is split-stitch on
single-bundle foundation. Minority types include:
Wrapped twined, coiled with single-bundle founda-

Trans-PecosArea

~9

tion using interlocking and non-interlocking stitch,
and plaited diagonal and twilled weave.
Sandals: Dominant type is rounded toe, "fish-tail" in
shape; crossed toe and heel on yucca frame with
braided weft, also of yucca leaf. Of less frequent
occurrence is the rectangular squared toe sandal, most
commonly associated with the Pecos River Focus.
Netting:

Of infrequent occurrence.

Matting: Yucca leaf most common raw material; techniques include checkerboard, diagonal twill, and
twined.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS:
Pictographs.
Gourd vessels.
Hammerstones.

BURIAL CUSTOMS:
Placed flexed in rockshelters and in open. Burials often
wrapped in matting, skins, and woven bags. Occasionally individuals cremated, but not as commonly as in
the Pecos River Focus.
Burials accompanied by
grinding implements, weapons, and ornaments.
RELATIONS:
Lithic artifacts shared with Livermore Focus.
Possibly arrow points from the Bravo Valley Aspect.
El Paso Polychrome and Chupadero Black- on- white
trade pottery.
ESTIMATED AGE:
A. D. 800-1400 (Kelley, et al, 1940, p. 163).
SOURCES:
Coffin, 1932; Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer,
Sayles, 1935; Setzler, 1935; and Taylor, 1949.

1940;

NEO-AMERICAN STAGE
Livermore Focus
The only known complex in central and southeastern

Texas Archeological Society

6O

Trans-Pecos Texas which might be placed in our NeoAmerican Stage has been called the Livermore Focus. This
"focus" is based almost entirely on the presence, in the
Davis Mountains area, of a single arrow-point type known
as the Livermore point. There is but one excavated component. Another component is not an occupation site, but
a large cache of these distinctive points on the top of Mt.
Livermore, the highest peak of the Davis Mountains (James,
1930, pp. 8-9).
This complex has as yet no evidence of agriculture or
indigenous pottery. Its placement in the Neo-American
Stage is therefore a questionable procedure, based entirely
on the assumption that there is a distinctive complex dominated by small arrow points. Other stone artifacts, few in
number, and trade pottery of El Paso Polychrome appear
to show a link with Chisos Focus. Chisos Focus is said to
have agricultural products in its "latest" components, and
conversely, to have few if any small arrow points. Little
sense can be made of such a situation with present information.
It has been suggested that Livermore Focus first appeared while the Pecos River Focus still existed (before 900
A. D.), then continued to co-exist with the Chisos Focus, and
finally was succeeded by the Bravo Valley Aspect (Kelley,
et al, 1940, p. 163). We fail to see how such a nebulous
"focus" can be interpreted as covering such a long time span.
It is further suggested that "the Livermore culture" represents an intrusion of Plains hunting people into Trans-Pecos
Texas, who might thus have been responsible for the appearance of certain "Plains traits" which appear in the
Bravo Valley Aspect (Kelley, 1952, p. 359). The traits are
not itemized, nor is it explained why they could not have
reached Trans-Pecos Texas by normal diffusion from the
southern Plains.
COMPONENTS:
Type component: Alpine 2:7, Brewster County, excavated in 1938 by J. Charles Kelley for the West Texas
Historical and Scientific Society.

Trans-Pecos Area

61

Other component: A large cache of arrow points on top
of Mt. IAvermore.
TYPES OF SITES:
Said to be "rockshelters and open campsites".
HOUSES:
No data.
LIVELIHOOD:
Primarily hunting and food gathering. No evidence of
agriculture.
CERAMIC TRAITS:
Indigenous pottery absent. El Paso PoIychrome trade
pottery.
ARTIFACTS OF CHIPPED STONE:
Projectile points:
Arrow points: IAvermore most common type; perhaps
some of Bravo Valley types also associated (?).
Dart points: Absent (?).
Gravers: Made from disk-shaped flakes with short
needle-like points.
Knives: Diamond-shaped with four bevels. Oval and
triangular knives possibly associated.
Scrapers: Flakes retouched on one or both sides; and
small, finely made snub-nose or "thumb-nail" scrapers.
Long, narrow, sharply-pointed drills or awls.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE, SHELL, AND ANTLER:
No data.
BURIAL CUSTOMS:
No data:
RELATIONS:
Some artifacts shared with Chisos Focus.
El Paso PoIychro,me trade pottery.
Livermore points occur in~ Mesilla Phase of Jornada
Branch.

Texas Archeological Society

62

ESTIMATED AGE:
A. D. 800- 1200 (Kelley, et al., 1940, p. 163). The present
authors see no reason to set the date earlier than
~bout A. D. 1200-1400, since this is the date given by
Kelley for the La Junta Focus, which lies to the west
and also contains El Paso Polychrome. The apparent
lack of agriculture cannot be taken to give an early
date if the E1 Paso ware is associated with the Livermore points.
SOURCES:
James, 1930; Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940; Kelley, 1950, 1952.
HISTORIC STAGE
No complexes have been accurately defined for Indian
cultures within the Historic Stage in all of Trans-Pecos
Texas, except for those of the Bravo Valley Aspect in the
vicinity of Presidio, namely, the ConcepciSn and Conchos
Foci. Sayles (1935) defined a Lipan Phase for Trans-Pecos
Texas, but it was not formulated from cultural material
found on sites identifiable with the Lipanes or "Lipan
Apache", and many of its traits are identical to those in his
Hueco and Pecos River Cave Dweller phases. The Tobosos,
Chisos, Jumano, and other tribes inhabited this section of
Texas in the 16th century, so that camp material and artifacts, even if they come from sites with European trade
materials, can hardly be lumped under a single label "Lipan". As in other parts of Texas, research in historical
archeology is badly needed.

