NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS
THE 1950 ANNIIAL MEETING
The twenty-third annual meeting of the Society was held in
Canyon, Texas, on October 27-28, 1950. The program committee
deserves a r~und of applause for the excellent program and splen~did arrangements which it had prepared. The Panhandle-Plains
ttistorical Society sponsored a chuck wagon supper at Palo Dur~
Canyon on Friday evening for the attending members and guests.
Saturday’s program was a field trip to archaeoIogical sites on the
Canadian River. The following papers were presented:
¯ Dr. Karl Schn~dt, ’~urther Material fr~om the Washita Valley,
Oklahoma."
Dr. Robert E. Bell, "Field Work by the University of Oklahoma
During the Summer, 1950."
Dr. E. H. Sellards, "The Plainview Site."
Glenn L. Evans, "Recent Developments at the Clovis and Lubbock:
Sites."
Dr. Tom N. Campbell, "The Kent-Crane Site."
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, "Types of Clear Fork Points."
Dr. Erik Reed, "Pre-historical Chronology in the Southwest."
Rober~ L. Stephenson, "Smithsonian Institution’s Excavations at:
Whitney and Lavon Reservoirs."
Jane Holden, "Preliminary Report on the Bonnell Site."
Dr. Ernest Wallace, "Burial Customs of the Comanche Indians.’"
Fellows Sot the Society
The Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society at its
annual meeting at Canyon, October 27, 1950, provided for the election of Fellows in the Society. The qualifications of Fellows and
the method ~f their election are as follows:
(1) The number of Fellows is never to exceed one-tenth of the
membership of the Society.
(2) The candidate must have been a member of the Society for
five years.
(3)

The qualifications for election are:
a. Sustained activity in the field of archaeological or/and
paleontological research.
b. Recognized contributions with emphasis upon publications in archaeology and/or paleontology.

(4)

Election to membership is to be by the Board of Directors
of the Society, which consists of the executive officers and
three directors elected annually.

228

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society
Correction in the 1950 Bulletin

On page 59, line 10 of Mrs. Virginia Watson’s article, "The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect", Volume 21, 1950, of the
Bulletin should read "could now be expapded" instead of "could
not be expanded".
Increase in Dues

Members present at the 1950 Annual Meeting unanimously voted
to increase annual dues in the Society from $3.00 to $5.00. Paid
up membership entitles a member to a copy of the Bulletin without additional cost. The price of all BuIletins was set at $5.00 each.
This is the first time any change has ever been made in either
the membership dues or in the price of the BuLletin; but due to the
rising cost of printing, the increase was necessary in order to continue the publication of the Bulletin. As you probably well know,
the Society depends entirely upon membership dues and the sale
of its Bulletin to meet its financial obligations, and during recent years all expenditures have been limited to printing, engraving, postage and stationery.
E.W.
Stone Beads ]rom Bell County
Mr. W. P. Walker, of Crosbyton, Texas, has found an assortment
.of small stones with holes in them. The stones came from gravel
pits adjacent to Darr Creek in Bell County, eighteen miles south of
Temple. The specimens vary in size from one-half inch in diameter
to three inches in diameter. In shape, they vary from small doughnut-like objects to large irregular masses. The holes in some of
the rocks have been drilled, and some have been formed by natural
causes. The rocks could have been used as crude beads or as
sinkers on a fish net. Mr. Walker reports some similar stones,
which are from Oaxaca, Mexico, on display in the Witte Memorial
Museum in San Antonio. At present, Mr. Walker’s "beads" are at
the Museum, Texas Technological College, Lubbock (Plate 26, II.)
Dr. Ray Honored
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, president emeritus of the Texas Archaelogical
and Paleontological Society, has been elected a l~ellow of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Field Notes
The staff of the Department of Anthropology of the University
of Oklahoma is to be commended for their informative "Newsletters" issued from their field camp this summer. The camp was
on the Illinois River thirteen miles southeast of Tahlequah, Oklal~oma.
Mr. Alex Krieger, University of Texas, spent a month in Mexico
this summer, where he attended the Annual Round Table Conference at Jalapa, and visited many Maya sites.

The University of Texas ran a field school in the vicinity of
Austin the first part of the summer. It was under the direction of
Dr. T. N. Campbell.

Newsnotes and Editorials

229

Texas Tech had their annual field session at the Bormell Site,
in New Mexico. Field work was under the direction of Jane Holden.
The site belongs to the Jornado Branch of the Mogollon. A full
site report is to be prepared this fall.
In regard to field work done by the Texas Memorial Museum,
Dr. E. H. Sellards writes: (quote from Dr. Sellard’s letter)
"Our summer’s w~rk was at the two localities, the city lake at
Lubbock and the Friesenhahn Cave in Bexar County. Both were
very successful. We were especially fortunate in being able to
pr.ove the Folsom culture level at the Lubbock lake deposit. It is,
as we concluded last year on the basis of stratigraphy, the diatomite layer, that is, the layer next above the gray sand. From this
layer we have charred bison bones, which gave age determination
of 9,883 q- 350 years, so that we now have F,olsom age fully proven,
both as to postion and age."
Work at the Lubbock site was under the general supervision of
Mr. Glen Evans. The field party was directed by Dr. Grayson
Meade.
Acknowledgments
We are indebted to Miss Jane Holden for several days of her tirn~
spent in helping us prepare and edit the !951 Bulletin.

