138

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

I~LAK~.D Wt~APON POINTS
By E. B. RENAUD

Weapon points were heads of implements which were employed
in hunting, war and sometimes fishing. They were made of stone
or bone, and, later, of metal. The smaller ones, more frequently
used as arrow-heads, as well as the large points for lance and spear,
were usually made on a flake, more or less skilfully shaped and
finished. The elongated points, often used for darts, javelins or
assagais or lances, were made on a blade, which is a specialized
type of flake with relatively extensive length in regard to the narrow
width. The earlier or simpler types of weapon points may be uniface, but they tended progressively to spread flaking to both sides,
thus they became true biface artifacts in the later cultures or more
advanced types of stone points. The flaking needed for the shaping
and especially for the final sharpening of the edges and tip as well
as the even thinning of the faces often displays remarkably fine work
done by skilful pressure flaking. The purpose of this careful
making and finishing was to produce a better weapon point. The
sharp tip acted like a perforator or borer in puncturing the skin of
the animal or the enemy. The keen edge of the well shaped sides
permitted an efficient penetration into the flesh which enlarged the
wound and rendered it deeper and more effective. The ancient
hunter or warrior was thus rewarded for his skill and his trouble
in producing a more deadly weapon. He also probably took pleasure and pride in manufacturing a beautiful artifact of symmetrical
and elegant shape, perfect edge and face finish, with fine and regular
flaking. To facilitate his task he seems to have selected the best
available material in the region and he even went afar for it. Not
only colors and markings of the stone pleased his eye and gave a
beautiful appearance to the finished artifact, but the fine grain of
the stone and its evenness of nature and quality permitted better
and more regular flaking, nearer shaping, and often a smooth and
g!ossy appearance added to the power of penetration’of the weapon
point as well as to its beauty. This is why these weapon points are
often the most perfect specimens and the most attractive artifacts
of a culture. This alone would justify the fascination which they
still exert on all collectors who, too often, neglect the common ira-

Flaked Weapon Points

139

plements, although more representative of a certain culture, to gather
almost exclusively arrow-heads and the like.
Weapon points made on flakes plunge deep roots into the Early
Palaeolithic. Flakes, at first, were merely Eolithic in origin, that is
to say, utilized by primitive man as found in nature regardless of
the cause of their formation; at most a minimum amount of rough
flaking was the only human contribution to their shaping. Then,
flakes which were the by-product of the manufacturing of corebiface artifacts, such as coups-de-poing or hand-axes, were utilized
as scraping or cutting edges or borers, with or without retouching
to add to their efficiency. The third step consisted in purposely
producing flakes to be used as implements or for the fashioning
of more specialized artifacts such as sidescrapers, knives, etc. These
flakes were made according to two principal techniques, a simpler
and earlier one named Clactonian, which occurred in Chellean
time, the second or Levalloisian was more complex and later came
to be known in Western Europe in Middle Acheulean or somewhat
later. Both types of flakes continued to evolve parallel to the core
industry of Early Palaeolithic and constituted two important factors in the making of the Mousterian culture. In this Middle Palaeolithic period stone implements were predominately of the flake
type. In fact, the two characteristic Mousterian artifacts are the
sidescraper, which does not interest us here, and the point. One
of the sub-types of this point, often fairly well shaped and flaked,
is obtained by the convergence of two scraping edges meeting at the
tip, not usually very pointed. It is a good tool but does not seem
to be in tho line of evolution which was to prepare the appearance
of the weapon point. Different may be the case of the other and
simpler sub-type. It is a sub-triangular artifact with sharp tip and
cutting edges. These characteristics are common to many weapon
points and to the arrow-heads in particular. It should seem to make
of this kind of Mousterian points a sort of proto-type of the ordinary
and numerous spear points and arrow-heads of later date. However, these Neanderthal-made points were often left with hardly any
retouching. Thus, symmetry of form and balance of weight required
for the true course of a missle were rarely achieved. Moreover, they
are thick butted and with an amorphous base. The bulb of percussion, often prominent, was rarely struck off, leaving an artifact that

140

Texa~ Archeologic~l and Paleontological Society

could not have been hafted on a stem or handle in the direction of
its lengthwise axis~ as was the case of weapon points. They, therefore, could not have been so utilized. They must have been held in
hand or halted cross-wise, if at all, and probably were not weapon
points, although foreshadowing in their general shape, acuteness
of tip and sharpness of edges, the arrow-heads and spearpoints of
the future.
Some less common points of Early Mousterian, found associated
with remains of a warm fauna, already displayed an almost symmetrical sub-triangular shape. The lateral edges, although generally
unretouched, are sharp and converge at a tip of medium acuteness.
The dorsal face shows little or no flaking and of course the ventral
side was left untouched. The base interests us for two reasons.
First, it is rather thin and so would easily allow halting on a shaft
and, in view of its size and shape, it would make a good spearhead.
The second point attracting our attention is the unusual line of the
base, which is decidedly convex in the medial part. It would have
assisted in more securely making fast the point on the split end of a
shaft. It was already a strong suggestion of the later stem, which
in spite of other attempted solutions at good halting, was the one
which survived and remained popular the longest because it was
the most practical. However, this early and well directed start in
the right direction was not followed immediately by the develop~nent of the stem common to so many weapon points of various
periods. Man had to wait until the end of the Aurignacian for its
realization and the Solutrean for variations. It may be interesting
to note here that some javelin points of Portuguese Neolithic dis:
play in more symmetrical form and better fin;.sh, with good marginal flaking, a shape strikingly resembling the early Mousterian
flake point with base projection or convex line.
The weapon points of Late PalaeolhMc, whether stemmed or
stemless, were made on blades. As already stated, a blade is a
flake of elongated form, and relatively narrow width. The story of
the blade is not quite as long as that of the flake-itself. In the
Early Palaeolithic there was no blade with any degree of thinness
and regularity of shape. In the Mousterian there were a certain
number of blades used for cutting and scraping, others were notched,
but nono led to the production of weapon points.

Early
Triangular T
sectioned flake

Neollthi¢

lance heads

~ ceolmte

Nebl~1

.~rr~h ....
Ill

Tardenoisia~
Trapezoidal
Microllths
~lddle
T~rdenole an

Sc~m~enavla

II

Fo~sand
C~t~ree

~Acrollth

East eb~ i17~ine

arrowheads

slotted
bone ~__bone
points with

ciliate~

Ea~ Tard~
Geometric
Microlit]

point
~ul~ures

Azilien ~ lat harpo
Vl

"So~ ~A~l~aclan
Fon~ ~Robert

II
I

points

I

III
II
I

shouldersd points, ?palates ~ cram’,
French end Spanish types
Leurel amd ~illo~ leaf blades or
~olnta
Proto-Solutrean points

,J
~t ~ber~ ~Ant
tamg~ a~d ~houlder~.
Aurig~ac Inn
~vette ~int with
III
II

PLATE 26
Culture chart

of

prehistoric weapon points.

bone

Flaked Weapon Points

143

During the Aurignacian period, first phase of the Late Palaeolithle, the still broad and irregularly shaped Audi point evolved
into the classical Chatelperron knife blade.

It is fairly long and

pointed; the cutting edge was left unretouehed whereas the dorsal
edge was partly or wholly blunted. The base had no standard
shape. It was a typical tool of Aurignacian II, and apparently not
a weapon point. Through intermediate stages it evolved into the
Gravette point of Aurignacian V. This artifact tended to be smaller,
narrower and sharp pointed. Mounted at the end of a stem it would
have made a penetrating and deadly weapon. However, we have
no proof that it was so used, and it may have been employed only
as a small knife blade and borer.
One peculiarity of the form of some Gravette points is worthwhile
for us to consider as it seems to have been the first step toward
the development of a stem. The blunted back of a certain number
of Gravette points instead of being fairly straight or slightly convex, as was the case for the Chatelperron knives, shows a kind of
hump or "gibosite." From that higher point to the lower end or
base the line of the back slopes either slowly and over a relatively
long portion of the artifact, thus narrowing the blade, or else it
drops abruptly and ends in a pointed base. In either case it forms,
or at least strongly suggests, a tang; which would facilitate holding
and halting. This is the type called by the French "pointe a’ cran,"
to distinguish it from the "pointe a sole" with a clearly shaped stem
made by incurring both edges of the blade in its inferior part, this
produced at times well marked shoulders, with a fairly long and
narrow stem, or a pedunculate base. The~e Font Robert points,
as they are called, belong to the final Aurignacian, or phase VI.
Their shapes were not yet standardized as is natural for new inventions; they merely were the results of various degrees of modification of the original blade progressively becoming the proto-type of
a great many weapon points to follow for a long time. The Font
Robert points, with sub-triangular bodies, fairly sharp tips and the
cutting edges of the best specimens, can hardly be conceived as
anything but weapon points. How they were mounted and used is
only conjectural. They may have served as heads of javelins or
darts. These may have been thrown by hand or possibly by means
of a propulsor, corresponding to the American "atlatl." As these

144

Texas A~’cheological and Pa2eon$ological Society

were likely made of wood, they have disappeared. We actually
know that such an implement was in use during the later Magdalenian phase as we have carved bone and horn handles of such
propulsors showing the rear hook to hold in place the butt of.the
shaft of the dart. There is absolutely no proof that the bow was
known during the Late Palaeolithic period in Western Europe if
we except parts of Spain where different tribes of a culture more
affiliated with Africa than Europe have left their pictographs to
prove it. There, large bows with long arrows, with apparently one
sided barb, are seen in use by hunters and warriors as represented
in color pictures on the walls of rock shelters. These interesting
scenes, not lacking a real sense of action and composition, probably
belong to the last phase of Palaeolithic times. No such irrefutable
proof of the existence of the bow and arrow exists for the rest of
Western Europe, north of the Pyrenees, and for the cultural phases
following the Aurignacian we see only blade points although of a
variety of forms and degrees of perfection, especially in the Solutrean industry.
This Solutrean culture came more or less suddenly in Western
Europe and is considered by the prehistorians as being a sort of
intrusion which came from Central Europe and interrupted the
normal evolution of French Aurignacian. This is clearly seen in
the story of weapon points. The newly developed Font Robert
point with triangular body and long stem, in spite of its practical
form and anticipated evolution toward the arrow-head type not so
far different, was dropped. Entirely new styles came successively
through the three phases of the foreign Solutrean culture.
In Solutrean I, formerly designated as proto-Solutrean, there
were blades with partial or total flaking of the dorsal face, and
flaking of the other side limited to the re, on of the tip, marginal
retouching along one edge, and thinning of the base. These artifacts tended toward an oval shape, round butt, pointed tip, but
broader body than the Aurignacian blades. They progressively
evolved into the laurel leaf type of Solutrean II: These vary
from a small size to a length reaching over a dozen inches. They
are true biface blades, which were very skilfully flaked over both
faces by the pressure method and sometimes finely retouched along
the edges. Some are very thin and usually their shapes are quite

Flaked Weapon Points

145

elegant. They are relatively narrower and more elongated than
their proto-type of Early Solutrean. They are oval, elliptical, sublozengic, or double pointed. In spite of the fragility of the longer
and thinner o~es, prehistorians state that they must have been used
as lance.heads. As for the very small specimens some say that
they were arrow points, although, as already mentioned, we have
absolutely no material proof of the existence of the bow at that
time. However, they could have been utilized as dart points. All
these leaf-shaped blades of Middle Solutrean have a convex base
and generally pointed.
The tradition of the Font Robert points with their useful stem
had been completely obliterated and forgotten. Nevertheless, shouldered points with lateral stem did come, in Solutrean III, from a
new development. The so-called willow-leaf points, often narrower
and smaller than the classical laurel leaf type and contemporaneous
with it, did produce the less common, yet quite typical, shouldered
points or "pointes a cran" of late Solutrean. These new weapon
points are relatively long, narrow, sharp tipped, and were very
carefully shaped and skilfully flaked by pressure. The best specimens display fine, ribbon like parallel flake scars, produced, it is
likely, by means of a pointed bone, fabricator or flaker, pressing
from the edge toward the medial part of the blade; where the flake
scars from both edges meet they form a more or less visible dorsal
ridge lengthwise. This reinforces, somewhat, the slender triangular
point and gives to the cross-section a shape from lenticular to
slightly rhomboidal. Some specimens, probably early, are less
regularly shaped and show only a minimum flaking, whereas the
more typical and finished products of late Solutrean display a dorsal face entirely flaked even if the chipping of the other face is
limited to the tip and edges.
What is most interesting for us to observe is the presence of the
lateral stem by which it was hafted on a shaft. It was obtained by
removing from the original double pointed willow-leaf blade about
one.third of its width on approximately one-half the length of the
piece. This was always done on the right side of the specimen in
dorsal view. Thus, the left edge of the original blade remained
intact from tip to base; even the dorsal ridge was seldom affected.
Only the right edge was notched off about half way down, leaving

146

Texas Arch~ological ~.nd Paleontological Society

a ~houlder, sometimes carefully shaped into a

sort

of barb, then

forming a long side stem and a narrow pointed base to the left of
the body of the blade.

This was obviously invented to assist in

making secure the stone point hafted on a wooden shaft.

Whether

this asymmetry affected the trajectory of the javelin is not known.
If it did it may have been the cause of their scarcity, as in fact they
are not present at all sites, and even of their early abandonment,
as they disappeared with this ending phase of the Solutrean.

They

are found in France, especially in the Southwest region, and in
northern Spain as far as the Solutrean influence was felt.
It is in Spain that we find a greater variety of lance-heads and
javelin-points, and it is also in that country that we witness the
evolution leading to the formation of the unexpected lateral stem on
weapon points. In the Spanish Solutrean we see three types of long
pointed leaf shaped blades. First, the kind with pointed or convex
base, then, a second class with a broader base from nearly straight
t~ concave in outline; finally, the shouldered point, or "pointe a
cran," as just described for France. At the site of Cueto de la Mina,
in the Asturias, the number and variety of the Solutrean points is
fortunately such that one may observe the evolution from the concave based leaf blade to the shouldered point. The concave line
seems always to favor one side, that is to say that one lateral point
of the base is at first slightly longer than the other. Then, by increasing this light asymmetry, a well formed longer and broader
point appeared to grow, while the other remained as a short and
often sharp barb. Another stage shows a lateral stem fully developed, similar to those observed on the French specimens, but rarely
as long in proportion to the total length of the piece. While in
Southwestern France it seems that the lateral stem of the "pointe a
cran" is always on the left side, there are examples in Spain of the
contrary. Another difference is seen in the degree of finishing of
those weapon points. In France the flaking is often.finer, but in
Spain it frequently spreads more extensively on the ventral face.
These shouldered points were likely used as heads for darts or javelins. Some are small and light enough to have served as arrowpoints which could be shot by the large bows represented on the
rock shelters of Eastern Spain. However, these pictographs may

Flaked Weapon Points

147

not be contemporaneous with the weapon points of the Northern
area.

In Northwestern Spain we have the Cantabrian type of pointed
blade with a deep concave base, having a short, rudimentary
peduncle on the left side and a sharp barb-like point on the right,
a type also found in the Pyrenees region of Southern France. In
the Northeastern section of Spain we find the Catalonian shouldered
point type. This kind is interesting because it is different from the
others of Solutrean culture; also for the reason that it seems to
restart the interrupted tradition which the Font Robert points began,
and finally because it will be followed by many varieties of the same
general style in several cultures both of the Old and the New World.
¯
The base of this triangular weapon point is narrower than the body
of the blade, yet it is relatively broad, flat, and flaked in the same
manner as the rest of the artifact, and it gradully narrows to a
roundish point or peduncle. The two shoulders are well shaped,
symmetrical, and sharp. This seems to constitute a very serviceable
type of stone head for lance, spear or dart, without being too bulky
as the average length is about 6 or 7 centimeters.
The Solutrean people, known to be great hunters and warriors,
developed in France and especially in Northern Spain, a remarkable
variety of weapon points of the finest appearance; in fact the best
for the whole Palaeolithic period.
We know that the Magdalenians of France and neighboring districts used the propulsor to throw their javelins and assagais farther,
and several examples of dlese, beautifully carved in animal forms,
are the precious possessions of European museums. But as these
later Palaeolithic people reached a high degree of proficiency at
manufacturing points and harpoons of bone and horn, they rather
neglected their stone industry. We have nearly nothing to show as
flint weapon points of that cultural phase except, strangely enough,
a few small and roughly shaped shouldered points of Aurignacian
type, similar to the Font Robert style, and coming from late Magdalenian deposits. Was it a local revival of an older tradition or
was it due to the survival of remnants of an ancient Aurignacian
tribe?
Since nothing remains of any importance to say about the stone

148

Texas Archeologict~l and Paleontological Society

weapon points of the Old Stone Age and not intending to discuss
the bone points of Upper Palaeolithic times, it may be an opportunity to compare our American Yuma-Folsom points with those of
Solutrean culture which they constantly bring to mind.

There is no

need here to arsme of their relative antiquhy, nor mention their ever
extending distribution in North America.

The only points of com-

parison to be taken up here are those of technique and typology.

These beautiful artifacts, both of the New and the Old World,
were made by the pressure method. The typical Yuma points of
our Western Plains are just as skilfully flaked and shaped as the
best Solutrean laurel-leaf and willow-leaf blades of Western
Europe, and nothing is more like the long triangular "pointes a
eran" of Southwestern France than our "type 3" Yuma points, with

PLATE 27
1. Early Mousterian point from North France.
(GouTy, fig. 22,
p. 105).
2. Late Mousterian point from La Quina, S. W. France. (Goury,
fig. 25, p. 108).
3-4. Stemmed points, Mousterian type, from North Africa. (Pond,
P1. 36, p. 61).
5-6-7-8-9-10. Evolution from Gravette point to shouldered point of
Font Robert type, late Au~’ignacian.
(Obermaier, fig. 42, p. 105;
No. 8 from MacAlister, fig. 99, p. 370).
11. Solutrean point from Solutre, France. (de Mortillet, P1. XVII).
12. Laurel leaf point from South France. (de Mortillet, P1. XVII).
13-14. Laurel leaf points, convex and concave bases.
(Obermaier,
fig. 43, p. 106).
(Obermaier: fig. 91, p.
15. Shouldered point of Cantabrian type.
206).
16-17-18. Shouldered points from Cueto de la Mina, Spain. (Obermaier, fig. 77, p. 173).
19. Solutrean ’point a cran’ from Southwest France. (d~ Mortillet,
fig. 134, P1. XVIII).
20. Shouldered point of Catelonian type.
(Obermaier, fig. 91,
p. 206).
21-22. Tanged points. Ahrensberg-Lavenstedt culture, from North
Germany.
(Clark, fig. 16).
23. Tanged points from Remonchamps, Belgium. (Clark, fig. 18).
24. Tanged points from Wesphalia, Western Germany.
(Clark,.
fig. 17).
(Clark, fig.
25. Tanged points from Swiderian industry, Pola~td.

19).

26. Tanged points from Bradenburg, Germany. (Clark, fig. 20).

(Clark, fig.
27. Tanged points from Komsa culture, Finnmark.
22).
28. T~nged points from Fosna culture, Norway. (Clark, fig. 23).
29. Tanged points from Hamburg culture, North Germany. (Clark,
fig. 26).

14

16

Plate 27

18

19

Flaked W~apon Points

151

their slender blades, sharp tips, fine ribbon like flaking, except for
the style of the base.

Shape, proportions, symmetric outline~ beau-

tiful appearance, are of equal perfection.

In the same manner

could our Yuma blades of "type 2" with concave base be compared
with the best specimens of the Cantabrian type of Northwestern
Spain. The laurel-leaf blades of the classical Solutrean are of the
types of longer and broader Yuma-like points of the Mid-West, such
as some which I haw seen in collections exhibited at St. Louis and
New Orleans, except that the French artifacts have a convex and
even pointed base. Some of the narrower and sharper weapon
points of Northwestern Spain also have a roundish base. The convex base line, our Type D, is rare in the west; my survey shows only
3.44 per cent for the Yuma points examined, and none, of course,
for the Folsom class. The straight base line or Type A, rare for
Folsom, is much more frequent 31.03 per cent, for Yuma points,
especially our types 2 and 3. Some Solutrean points from the As.
turias have a base approximating the straight line. But, by far the
most frequent are those with a base more or less concave and even
deeply notched, such as those of Cantabrian type. This was more
favorable for a secure hafting and so we find 65.5 per cent of our
Yuma points and 86 per cent of the Folsom points examined with
that Type B base. Our Type C, squarish or wavy in contour found
in 11.84 per cent of the Folsom points, is seen neither on Yuma,
nor on European points.
But the principal interest in the comparison of these remarkably
similar weapon points from the two continents rests with the observation of the devices experimented with in an effort to obtain a
better mounting of the stone heads on wooden shafts. Thus the
French and Spanish invention of a lateral stem or peduncle, either
rudimentary as in the Cantabrian type, or longer as seen on the
small points from Cueto de la Mina, in the Asturias, or fully developed to one-half the total length of the artifact, as in the French
type, is entirely without equivalent in America. The second kind
of stem, a narrower base in the same axis as the blade, was known
to the Solutrean of Northeastern Spain, in the form of the Catalonian
point. In Nevada caves have been discovered points approximating
this type but with a much less developed projection of the base, a
mere embryonic stem.

152

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The Yuma points evolved two types of stemmed blades which
may be considered as variants of the Catalonian style. The first
kind was produced on a blade of type 1 or more often of type 2 by
r~lucing the width of the lower fifth or so of the point by one, two,
or three millimeters on each side, straight down to the base line,
which, in this 4-b sub-type, is most frequently straight, exactly 57
per cent, or slightly concave, 22.44 per cent of the time, less often
deeply concave, or convex. The specimens of this kind are generally of fine workmanship and good proportions, which should be
expected in a later and more advanced stage of development. In
fact they are found longer than the simpler and possibly older types.
Another stemmed class, our sub-type 4-a, consists of a lanceotate
point, with rounded shoulders and a narrower and often thicker
stem. This kind of weapon point is nowhere important and its
distribution does not seem general. The differences between the
two stemmed sub-types are in accordance with the kind of blades
which they complete to assist in their halting. The stem of 4-b
is broad and thin to match similar proportions of blades of type
1 and 2; the peduncle of 4-a is narrow and thick to go with a blade
body more of the kind of type 3-a. Such are the stem types of comparable weapon points of Europe and America. The North American stemmed Yuma points are more directly in the line of evolution of the javelin and assagais and lance heads to develop later
both in the New and the Old World, in stone, and to be supplanted
by metal forms in the Eastern hemisphere.
We have seen that concave bases were common to some Solutrean

points and many Yuma-Folsom points. However, an exclusively
American development is witnessed in the formation of the classical
Folsorn points. It seems to have evolved somewhat in the following
fashion. Taking for instance a Yuma point of type 1 or 2, with
concave base, in order to facilitate halting the contour of the base
was made thin by careful marginal retouch. This does not affect
the type yet. Then we observe specimens with one, or several narrow flakes, of irregular, but limited length, taken off from the base
line upward, obviously to help further the setting of the point in a
wooden shaft. This is a development of a new phase of the thinning
of the base over a more extended area, not exceeding one-third of the
total len~h of the piece. This is our sub-type 5-a. Then, and pos-

Flaked Weapon Points

153

sibly later, the ancient stone worker, more daring and more skilful,
produced a broader and longer groove, reaching about half way
the distance be.tween the concave base line and the tip of the point.
It is our sub-type 5-b. In this phase the groove is still often irregular in shape and size, not symmetrical on both faces, and even
sometimes missing on one face. This probably was due to fear of
an accident in thinning out excessively the body of the blade. At
this stage one understands that the grooving was not only helpful
in hafting, but it reduced the weight of the missile, which ma~, be
considered an advantage. With time and practice the groove seems
to have grown in size and in both length and width, now covering
approximately two-thirds of the length of the specimens in our subtype 5-c, the better known type of Folsom points. The groove, in
some cases, is still irregular, but more often it is regularly shaped,
and similar on both faces. It follows the form of the blade, leaving a thicker marginal ridge, while reducing the thickness of the
body of the piece. The cross-section of such a specimen is bi-concave
as a consequence. The base line is either deeply concave, or
squarish, or even wavy, and the lateral points or corners of the base
are frequently sharp and relatively long, aImost like barbs. It is
the now classical and first found Folsom type, apparently the final
phase of a typological evolution from a plain Yuma point, with
thinning of the concave base, progressive lengthening of the basal
flaking into a groove increasingly broad, long and regular, as evidenced by the many intermediate steps seen on a large number of
specimens. Sometimes the workman shot beyond his mark and the
groove, at least on one side, goes the full length of the blade, and
covers the larger part of the surface obliterating most of the original
flaking as seen on the Yuma specimens. There is no doubt that it
reduced greatly the thickness and weight of the point. Supposing
that it was a real advantage for a weapon point, it seems to have
gone too far, for the excess of the thinning of the body of the piece
caused its weakness. This is proved by the large number of Folsom
points found in fragmentary condition. In the impact, the tip of
the point was broken or even more frequently the ba~ part which
held in the shaft, is found, while the rest of the blade went another
way, remaining in the body of the animal shot, or lost later. This
weakness may be the reason that so many of the true Folsom points
are much shorter than all the other types, in fact 10 to 20 millimeters

154

Texas AreheologicaI and Paleontological Society

less than the mean length of the other types, as the shortening
reduced its fragility. It may also have contributed to its final abandonment.
Such are the American weapon points comparable to the Solutrean
types of Western Europe, their common flatness and their special
characteristics.

The fine pressure flaking seen on those Old and

New World points appears only sporadically in time and space.
These are a few of the best examples that may be quoted.

The

stemless lance points of Neolithic times in France, are often long,
narrow, uniface blades, showing very little retouching and their
cross-section is either triangular or trapezoidal.

Except for their

slenderness, 20 to 25 centimeters in length by 3 or 4 in width, they
are of little interest.

But one kind, found in Northern France, is

piano-convex in section, and beautifully flaked by the pressure
method. The whole dorsal face is covered with narrow, parallel
flake channels, extending obliquely from edge to edge.

This recalls

closely many of our Yuma points, except that the American specimens are bi-face blades. There are also shorter stemmed lance heads,
uniface and with triangular body and well formed peduncle. But
the ribbon-like flaking is nowhere found finer or more extensively
used than on the numerous Danish daggers.

These remarkable

biface flint weapons are sharp pointed, symmetrical in shape and
with well retouched edges.

The earlier ones consist simply of a

blade progressively narrowing toward the base.

Others have a dis-

tinct stem, fairly long, and sometimes less carefully flaked than the
body of the blade.

Still others of a later pha~ and they usually

are the best finished, have a leaf-shaped blade with a well fashioned
handle of quadrangular cross section owing to a median ridge.

The

base line is straight and the corners of the base are often sharp.
They look more like metal daggers than one piece stone weapons.
Other Danish artifacts of the same Robenhausian period display the
same characteristic and perfect flaking.

Some elegant dagger and

knife blades from prehistoric Egypt show the same flaking technique
and perfection of execution.

All these remarkable examples represent the highest skill in flint
work during late Palaeolithic and Neolithic times; the incoming
metals prevented their repetition. Fine pressure flaking after that
~,as used in the making of the best arrow-heads which survived for

Flaked Weapon Points

155

a while. The consideration of these smaller projectile points will
bring us back to the Mesolithie period when they started in Western
and Northern Europe.
The Mesollt~ic or middle stone age is thus called because it is a
period of transition between the Old and the New Stone Age. It
comprises survivals of the preceding cultures under the name of
Epi-palaeolithic, and as Proto-neolithie it also contains some new
industries foreshadowing the fully characterized New Stone Age.
A very curious point is that, as far as arrowheads are concerned,
it presented us with two entirely different types, foreign to each
other, as well as a new and composite kind of bone and flint point.
Several of the Mesolithie industries were wholly or partly composed of mieroliths or pigmy flints.

One of these is trapezoidal in

form and often called "petit tranchet" after the ax-like tranehet of
larger dimensions, one of the typical tools of the Campignan Culture. This "petit tranchet," as the British and French authors call
it, was mounted at the end of a light shaft and used as a projectile
point.

It is then properly designated as a "transverse arrow.head,"

a most unexpected form.

Th~ Font Robert points, whether "pointe

a cran" or "pointe a sole," had been the proto-type of what was to
become the universal type of arrow-heads, that is to say, essentially,
a triangular point with sharp tip.

Here, on the contrary and with-

out root in any known typologic tradition, we have a weapon point
with a cutting straight-end, and a single bevel, somewhat like a fragment of a safety-razor blade.

The body is more or less elongated,

narrower than the working edge, sometimes constricted, and ending
in an indifferently shaped base line, straight, oblique or irregular.
This extremity is thin to fit into the notch or groove of the wooden
shaft, to which it is made secure by means of animal sinew or bast
fibre according to places. Only the lateral edges show small flaking
retouches. This type of transverse arrowhead is found in fair number in the shell-heaps or kitchen-middens of the Ertebolle culture of
Denmark and Northern Germany, during the Period III of MesolithiC, that is to say around 4,000 B. C.

But they are not special

to that section, and their distribution is very extensive.

They have

been found in European countries as far east as Poland, north as
Jutland, west as Belgium and Southeastern England, south as Portugal and in the Capsian middens of Algeria as well as in Egypt.

156

Texa~ ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

Microlithic trapezoid flints are known in some phases of French
and Belgian Tardenoisian as well as other geometric forms, some
of them used in making certain specialized weapons.

They consist

in a bone point, of round or flattish cross-section, about 18 centimeters in length and provided with a bilateral armature of pigmy
flints set in a longitudinal groove. The cutting edges of the microllths a few millimeters out in a discontinued line forming short
oblique barbs on both sides. This, together with the sharp tip of
the bone shaft, makes it look like an efficient weapon. Five types
of these "slotted points with ]lint insets," as they are sometimes
designated, were in use in the Maglemose culture, which flourished
during the Period II of the Mesolithic, about 6000 B. C., in Northern
Europe.
We are coming back now to the ancestral form of the more recent
arrowhead, and it is because of this typological relation that we’ll
consider it last although it led us to follow a reversed chronological
order. During the Period I of the Mesolithic, when the temperature
of the pre~boreal climatic phase was rising gradually but rapidly,
several cultures appeared in the Northern Plains of Germany and
extended from Belgium to Poland. Only recently have they been
better known and coordinated under the general label of "tangedpoint cultures." This suggests what is one of their leading characteristics and the weapon point common to them all. They present
various forms even within the limit of a single culture, besides local
variations. They do not seem standardized nor falling into easily
classifiable sub-types. In general appearance they have a roughly
triangular body with a fairly sharp tip, some sort of a tang or
peduncle of length and shape often different with each specimen.
These points range from 2.5 to 5 centimeters in length and in Jutland
rare pieces reach 7 centimeters. The stem is produced by secondary
flaking along both edges of the lower part of the flake and usually
showing on the dorsal face. The body of the point either remains
untouched or, more frequently, one edge is blunted obliquely along
a part or all of one side, indifferently right or left. These tang
points recall immediately the older Font Robert points of Aurignacian VI. What is exactly the relation existing between the Palaeolithic and the Mesolithic projectile points is not clear. Is it a
coincidence, a case of convergence or a survival?

Flaked Weapon Points

157

We have already noticed that points much like the original Aurignacian Font Robert type reappeared in late Magdalenian, a phase
immediately preceding the Mesolithic stage, and possibly linking
the Palaeolithic tradition with the tanged point cultures of Early
Mesolithic. On the other hand, to the south of their area of distribution the presence of a similar stemmed point is known in
Moravian loess stations, or at least at Predmont, site of the special
facies of Central Europe Aurignacian. This, however, seems to be
a less likely place of origin.
It is interesting to note that the tanged point survived in Norway
through the Periods II and III of the Mesolithic. The later axe cultures coming from the South influenced the more primitive aboriginal people but in retura they borrowed from them the tanged point
which in their hands became the triangular flake arrowhead, practically in the forms known ever since.
The Neolithic period comprises a variety of cultures even if we
only consider Europe. As expected, the typology and quality of
workmanship of the weapon points of that time are equally varied.
It may suffice for our purpose to mention three main classes. First,
the class of the largest artifacts is that of the lance heads. They
are generally of the elongated blade type, without distinct stem, only,
in many cases, the progressive "narrowing the lower parts formed
a pointed or roundish base. A few have a slightly concave base line.
Some recall, in the more sl~nder shape, the classical Solutrean blade,
others are closer to certain Yuma types. They usually are biface
artifacts. However, the fine, rlbbon-like, pressure flaking does not
always cover entirely the two faces of the blade. In many instances
this is reserved for marginal retouch while the rest of the surface
is either more roughly flaked or even left as struck off from the
prepared nucleus. They are all of the blade type, with nearly
straight or slightly convex sides; a few have serrated edges.
The second group is that of the javelin class. These points are
often smaller or at least lighter than those made to head the stouter
shafts of lances. They are not essentially different from them in
shape and in type and quality of flaking, but a few are uniface and
others have a stem and even lateral notches to fasten them more
securely to the shaft. Some are very narrow and of elegant shape,

158

Texa~ Archeological and Pa!eontological Sociz$y

especially certain specimens from iNorway, and made of siliceous
schist or slaty material, and others from Russia were made of bone.
Those two kinds, of course, are not flaked. They display a longitudinal dorsal and ventral ridge giving them a lozengic cross-section.
The sharpness of the tip and slenderness of the body must hive
endowed them with a great quality of penetration.
The arrow-heazls constitute the third group of weapon points.
There are an enormous variety of shapes, some showing exaggerations of form which could not survive long nor come into general
use. They are frequently skilfully shaped and flaked by the pressure method, sometimes, however, leaving a fraction of the original
flake surface unretouched. It is useless to go into a description
of their endless varieties. Some prehistorians merely classify them
into three main classes which might be named after their positive
or negative characteristics. Thus, the simplest kind is stemless and
barbless; the second, is stemmed but still barbless; the last one
has both stem and barbs. To the first group belong arrowheads of
triangular, lozengic, ovoid forms or leaf shaped. Their base lines
may be straight, or more or less convex or concave. The second
group comprises arrowheads with a stem either narrow or broad;
PLATE 28
1-2-3.
Transverse axrowheads: 1, from Jutland; 2, from Oldenberg; 3, from Egypt.
(Clark, fig. 51, p. 144).
4. Transverse arrowhead, Erteb!le culture, Jutland.
(Clark, fig.
51).
5. Trapeze flake from Upper Tardenoisian of Belgium.
(Clark,
fig. 72).
6. Slotted bone point with flint insets, Stora Dote type.
(Clark,
fig. 41).
7. Slotted bone point with flint insets, Copenhagen, lanceolate
type. (Clark, fig. 41).
8-9. Slotted bone point with flint insets, Maglemosian bone points
showing halting of pigmy flints.
(Burki~t, p. 34).
10. Neolithic lance point, from France.
(de Mortillet, P1. XLV).
11. Neolithic lance point, from Northern France.
(de Mortillet,

P1. XLV).
12. Neolithic lance point, from Denmark. (de Mortillet, P1. XLV).
13. Neolithic lance point, from Denmark. (de Mortillet, P!. XLV).
14. Neolithic lance point, from France. Dechelette, ~ig 173, p. 494).
(de 1Yfor15. Neolithic javelin point, flint, from South France.
tiller, P1. XLVI).
16. Neolithic javelin point, schist, from Norway.
(de Mortillet,
P1. XLVI).
17 to 32. Neolithic arrow heads.
(de Ylortillet, Pl. XLVII and
P1. XLVIII).

16
1

1
,,15A
ii~

25

26

27

28
Plate 28

29

30

31

3~

Flaked Weapon Points

in the latter case it often is notched on both sides to help in halting.
The edges of those stemmed points are straight, rarely concave, more
often slightly convex which gives them an oval contour. The barbs
of the last kind’vary greatly in shape and size. Some are the results
of the triangular arrowhead being notched at the base to form a
short stem. Other barbs are turned down and square at the end.
Still others are long, slender, and sharp. Some of this kind are
often seen on arrowheads with a deeply concave base. They are
numerous in Egypt but also found in Portugal and Southern France.
It has been noticed that arrowheads are less frequently found in
Northern Europe, that is in Scandinavia and Germany, than in
France, for instance. It is sometimes difficult to distinguish with
certainty between a large arrowhead and a small javelin point, and
also between a strong javelin point and a lance head.
All that which has been said here for the Neolithic weapon points
could be stated with equal truth of the American artifacts of the
same or corresponding kinds. The grouping into lance, javelin or
dart, and arrow heads could also be employed since those weapons
were also in use in prehistoric, and even in historic, times in the
New World. The atlatl or propulsor was common in the Western
Hemisphere before the use of the bow, the same as it is known to
have existed in the late Palaeolithie of Western Europe.
The classes above reported for the Neolithic arrowheads could
also be accepted for the Indian projectile points, unless one would
prefer the classification which I proposed elsewhere, some time ago.
It is about as simple and refers only to the base type since the
pointed form of the body of the arrowhead is essentially functional
and not a source of differences. My classification, which has been
used speedily to sort out thousands of arrowheads, is practical and
easy to learn. It allows any number of subdivisions able to answer
all possibilities. It comprises only three main types: 1. Stemless,
the same as for Neolithic points; 2. Stemmed, again similar to Neolithic.classification, but regardless of the presence of barbs; 3. Based
points, this being different and necessary to take care of its relatively
large class of generally fine arrowheads found in America. The
reason why I dropped the barbs as an element of classification is
because otherwise it would be found in two classes, as in the case
for the Neolithic system. Besides, I do not consider it as a primary

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

162

characteristic; it can be indicated as a supplementary descriptive
element, if desired, in either the first or the second class. Third, it
introduces another factor as a criterion of classification, whereas I
use exclusively the type of base.
Thus the first type covers all arrowheads without any stem.

The

base can be straight, convex or concave; the form may be triangular,
lozengic, ovoid or leaf shape; all exactly the same for Indian arrowheads as for Old World projectile points.

The second type com-

prises all arrowheads with a stem, that is to say a basal projection
narrower than the width of the body of the point proper.

This stem

may be short or long, narrow or large, and of any shape.

The

sides of these first two types may be straight, convex, or concave;
the edges may be serrated; barbs of any kind may be present or not.
All this is secondary.
The third and last type is called based points, because the base
is broader than the maximum width of the body of the arrowheads.
It is its main feature, always accompanied by notches. They are
either lateral notches, usually round, and seen on the edges of the
point, to keep in place the fastening holding the stone head on the
shaft.

A sub-type displays both lateral and basal notches for the

same purpose.

Here again the shape of the side and the base of

the point, straight, concave, convex, serrated or not, does not affect
the type.
This simple classification, admitting of endless sub-types based
on secondary features, has easily taken care of all forms found in a
dozen years of archaeological survey and of classifying of thousands
of arrowheads.
As to the relative antiquity of the various types of arrowheads and
other weapon points, and their sequence, it would require a comprehensive survey of different cultures over vast areas or several
continents, coordinating stratigraphie finds of many sites or the
dating of types by their association with archaeological remains of
known periods.

As far as I know, no such sutwe~, of sufficient

amplitude has ever been attempted to furnish reliahle data concerning the relative chronology of arrowhead types, or the order
of their appearance in various areas, or the respective distribution
of those types at different times.

Typologically it may be suggested

Flaked Weapon Points

163

that the likely sequence, on the basis of the general principle often
illustrated in the evolution of stone artifacts that the development
proceeds from.simple and undifferentiated towards more complex
and specialized forms, may have been the following; first, a roughly
triangular type, without stem or barb, would appear, that is to
say a flake with a pointed tip and more or less sharp edges, the base
line being somewhat indifferent provided it could be attached to
the slotted end of a stick or shaft. The refinement of better finish
would come later with experience proving its advantage. This might
comprise a thinner and more regularly flaked body, more symmetrical shape, sharper tip and edges. The base line could be modified
into two directions. By making it concave it might help in hafting,
and by extending the corners of the bass thus set in relief, the idea
of barbs would naturally evolve. Some Egyptian arrowheads display the extreme development of this line of evolution. On the
other hand, the base could be made convex thus leading towards the
oval or leaf-shaped points numerous in some cultures. A variety of
this change would produce a sort of projection in the median section
of the base line thus creating the sub-lozengic pointed blades of the
Solutrean and other cultures, or else the points with a broad, flat
and roundish or pointed stem or peduncle such as the Catalonian
variety and others. In another manner a double notch on the base
line would form a small and narrow stem in the median axis of the
point. Once the usefulness of this stem had been recognized in
facilitating hafting, this stem would easily be lengthened and develop
a variety of shapes. The corners of the base could either be left
straight, or made oblique and pointed, long and sharp, and again
the barbs would thus result. If, instead of an arrowhead evolving
from a flake, the evolution took place on a blade, as seen in the
Aurignacian, then one edge was flaked obliquely towards the other
and the lower part of the original blade came to form a tang.
If both edges were flaked to reduce the width of the lower section of
the blade, a stem or peduncle would have resulted. The shoulders
thus formed could have been rounded as in the lanceolate points, or
else cut square as in certain Yuma points, or made sharp and pointed
as seen in many cases. The early steps of this evolution were witnessed in the final phase of the Aurignacian, giving us the Font
Robert points. The other and more advanced stages were also actual
occurrences seen in several cultures. The lateral base stem, as

164

Texas Archeologica. I and Paleontological Society

exemplified by the French and Cantabrian points of Solutrean times,
not being very practical was soon abandoned. The middle base stem,
giving better balance to the weapon point, being found much more
satisfactory su~’ived and multiplied. In fact it became the most
common for lance heads, dart and javelin points, as well as arrowheads on both hemispheres. The Folsom solution, reducing excessively the strength of the point, was also given up.
But there is still a possibility. Restarting with our original triangular flake the problem of hafting securely the stone head on the
wooden shaft tip, and avoiding the weakness of a narrow and fragile
stem, two small notches were flaked off the lateral edges of the
point, leaving the base line, whether straight or concave, the widest
part of the specimen. Probably satisfied with the result, another
notch was added, this time on the base line. These two sub-types,
being apparently more complex and specialized, may well have been
the last to evolve. They usually are less numerous than the others
in most collections, especially of earlier cultures, and, besides, they
often are among the best shaped and flaked. All this, in the measure
that it proves true, clearly suggests a later appearance.
Such may have been, roughly speaking, the general line of evolution of the weapon points and especially of the arrowheads, and
the possible chronological order of their development. But this
logical supposition is merely based on typological grounds and
some other observations. The scientific and objective demonstration
remains to be done; however, it may serve as a guiding thought.
A question arises. Were the various types of weapon points
selected for di]]~rent purposes? This is difficult, if not impossible,
to answer satisfactorily. We choose different kinds of guns and projectiles according to the game which we intend to hunt and a hunting gun is different in some respects from a military rifle. To
what extent, primitive peoples in the Stone Age selected their types
of weapon points to suit their purposes, is hard to t.e.lh Obviously
small arrowheads would have been chosen to kill birds and small
game, whereas stout points would have been! used to arm lance and
javelin for hunting big game. But for the minor peculiarities of
shape of the point and of the base type nobody can answer. Some
call the triangular arrowheads, war points; it may be correct.

Flaked Weapon Points

165

It is often asked whether the di]]erent kinds of arrowheads were
made by dif]erent tribes and so whether we can name the tribes
having produced this or that type of points. Personally I cannot
tell although it can be admitted that certain tribes had a preference
for special forms of arrowheads. This happens for other artifacts
and therefore it is perfectly admi~ible for weapon points. A survey
of the types of points found in collections, private and public, with
the knowledge of the origin of the specimens, and conducted over a
vast territory, has led to conclusive observations based on several
thousand pieces. It showed the evident preference of a certain type
of arrowhead over the others in a whole region, whereas the selection was very different in a neighboring district. A quotation from
another study will illustrate this point. "The stemless points were
used almost in equal proportions in Wyoming, 6.78 per cent, in
New Mexico, 8.22 per cent, in Colorado, 9.46 per cent, or a range
of less than 3 per cent, while in Western Nebraska it reaches the
very high percentage of 30.79. The stemmed points show a similar
difference between the other three states and Nebraska. This is
clearly revealed by the following figures: New Mexico, 72.14 per
cent, Wyoming, 75.31 per cent, and Colorado 78.45 per cent. This
shows that this second type of arrowhead was greatly preferred to
all others by the Indians of the High West Plains, whereas in Nebraska it drops to the relatively low level of 22.91 per cent. This
is only some 6 per cent between minimum and maximum use of the
three Western States, while a gap of about 50 points separates Nebraska from the others."
"The first sub-type of based points, that with lateral notches,
shows the same grouping: Colorado, 10.01 per cent, Wyoming, 14.66
per cent, and New Mexico, 16.44 per cent, or slightly less than 6.5
per cent difference between them. On the other hand this class of
arrowheads was the one preferred in Nebraska where it reaches the
percentage of 34.85, a third wide divergency."
"The last is the second sub-type of base points, with both lateral
and basal notches. We see the following low ratios. In Colorado
there are 2.06 per cent, in New Mexico, 3.18 per cent, and in Wyoming 3.35 per cent; only a 1.50 per cent difference. Although low,
Western Nebraska, with 11.38 per cent, is far above these figures."
Now, these differences consistently grouping Wyoming, Colorado,

166

Texa~ Archeological and P~eon~ologicaI Society

and’ New Mexico together and placing Western Nebraska apart, are
real and objective. They have also been tested on other grounds
such as the proportions of side-scrapers, end-scrapers, etc., in the
same state. Are they cultural differences, or do they represent tribal
typologic traditions, which, in part, is also cultural? At any rate
they, at least, indicate a choice in the use of types of arrowheads
and it is as far as I can answer the question of relation of culture,
or tribes, to weapon point types.
I have heard it said that the Indians, so often considered inferior
to the Europeans, were ahead of them in the matter of arrowheads.
Ii this means a greater variety of forms or better skill in shaping,
it is to be doubted. Such a judgment reflects the experience of the
enthusiastic collectors of Indian arrowheads who are often ill informed as to Old World archeology. If it means, as I understand
from some reading, that the prehistoric Americans have evolved
weapon points before the peoples of Europe, not to speak of Asia
and Africa, this also does not seem correct. For such an unexpected
assertion seems only based on recent studies of Texas cultures, the
ages of which are not yet clearly and absolutely established and,
therefore, no safe comparison of typology and antiquity can yet
have been made leading to conclusion of priority for the New World.
It may suffice to recall that the usual type of triangular body and
stem of most weapon points, and arrowheads in particular, was
already known in the Font Robert points of final Aurignacian. The
beautiful Solutrean points followed with a variety of forms, paralleled by our Yuma-Folsom points, as to typology and technique,
but not of equal age. The tanged points of Mesolithic although of
poor shape were apparently satisfactory as their range is considerable. The arrowheads, lance points, and javelin points of Neolithic
time are quite numerous and varied, as well as skilfully made. Th.ey
can stand comparison with those of the New World.
Moreover, it must not be forgotten that during late Palaeolithic
and Mesolithic. there were two different traditions in Europe. Side
by side with the weapon points made of flint, and at times submerging that kind, there was a strong tradition of bone points. These.
began earIy in Aurignacian and developed several successive types
showing different improvements in regard to hafting, the constant
problem already seen elsewhere. Eclipsed by the perfection of flake

Flaked Weapon Points

167

work during Solutrean, they came back in full force with the Magdalenian. Halfway through that period they evolved into several types
of harpoons, reindeer antlers, being often substituted for bone. The
harpoon degefferated with the Azilian due in part at least to poor
material. But it reappeared with Maglemosian together with a large
variety of types of bone points. We have seen that in the Ertebolle
culture, which followed, the union of microlithic flint Trapezes and
of the slotted bone point produced a new and efficient weapon.
Thus, if there is any comparison made as to the greater antiquity
and variety of the weapon points, the Old World, on both counts,
seems to have the advantage over America. This is no reflection on
the intelligence and inventivity of the prehistoric Indians. They
were entirely isolated, as well as handicapped by other conditions.
They had to be autochthonous in most of their inventions. The
Europeans, on the contrary, were in contact with centers of cultures
both in Asia and in Africa. Migrations from other continents
brought new men, new ideas, new artifacts. Ethnic movements and
cultural currents account for many of the apparent advantages of
prehistoric Europeans ai~d the more rapid developme~nt of their
cultures and civilizations. Yet Early Aurignacian, not to speak of
Mousterian, is much earlier than the time of the first American
weapon points so far known.
Professor of Anthropology,
University of Denver,
Denver, Colorado.
September, 1938.
Bibliography
deMortillet, Gabriel and Adrien, Musee Prehistorique, Paris, 1903.
Dechelette, Joseph, Manuel d’¢lrcheologie Prehistoriqtte, Vol. I,
Paris, 1908.
Moorehead, W. K., The Stone ~lge in North America, New York,
1910.
Macalister, R. A. S., European ~l.rcheology, Cambridge, 1921.
MacCurdy, G. G., Human Origins, 2 Vols., New York, 1924.
Obermaier, Hugo, Fossil Man in Spain, New Haven, 1925.

168

Texa~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

Goury, Georges, Origine et Evolution de gHomrae, Paris, 1927.
Burkitt, M. C., Our Early Ancestors, Cambridge, 1929.
Burkitt, M. C., The Old Stone Age, Cambridge, 1933.
Renaud, E. B., The First Tho~and Yuma-FoIsom ~lrti]acts, Denver, 1934.
Clark, J. G. D., The Mesolithic Settlement o] Northern Europe,
Cambridge, 1936.
Gladwin, Harold S., Excavation at Snaketo.on, 1L Comparisons
and Theories, Globe, 1937.
Renaud, E. B., The Archeological Survey o] the High Western
Plains, Ninth Report, Northeastern New Mexico. Denver, 1937.
Renaud, E. B., The Archeological Sarvey o[ the High Western
Plains, Tenth Report. The Black’s Fork Calt~re of Southwest
Wyoming, Denver, 1938.
Pond, Alonzo, Prehistoric Habitation Sites in the Sahara and
North A]rica, Logan Museum, Beloit College, Beloit, Wisconsin,
1938.
Renaud, E. B., Typology o] Lithi.c ,4rti]acts, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, September, 1938.

