SOME NEW ASPECTS OF THE TEPEXPAN
MAN CASE
B~ A. R. V. ARELLANO
With the appearance of criticisms on ttelmut de Terra’s
publications on Tepexpan Man by Black’ and Kriegerz, it
is felt that some of the ambiguities should be clarified, by the
addition of some previously unpublished information. In
this we have been aided by the personal services of Krieger
and Prof. Pablo Martinez Del Rio.
The Exhu~nation o] Tepexpan Man
The writer was in close communication with de Terra
during the latter’s work in Mexico, particularly during

Borrila¢o pa~Jocal
nizobl¢
/
5rn

0

/

/

/

/

A

FIGURE 10.
Plan

of Tepexpan-man

excavations.

Ruled

areas

are

undisturbed

blocks

within

excavation area. I. Original pit dug about Feb. 20, 1947. IL Enlargement of Feb.
’21, 1947. YII. Excavations of March-April, 1947, IV. Trench dug in January, 1950.
Zones of Barrilaco paed0cal (Caliche) development are separated by solid line within
pits where observed, and by dashed line where inferred,

Publisher by permission of the Director, Instituto Geologlco de Mexico.
American Antiquity, VoL 14 pp. 344-6, 1949. This criticizes de Terra’s article
in American Antlquit~G Vol. 13, pp. 40-4, 1947, chiefly from the standpoint of
excavation and recording technique.
2. American Antiquity, VoL 15, pD. 343-9, 1950. This deals with problems of
lake levels, geological interpretation, climatic inferences, etc. in Tepexpan Man, by
Tlelmut de Terra, Javier Romero, and T. Do Stewart (Viking Fund Publications
in Anthropology, :No. 11, 1949).
1.

218

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

January and February of 1947. He had ~considerable participation in the spade work concomitant with Segerstrom’s
topographic survey and Lundberg’s electrical survey. De
Terra generously offered to donateall fossil material that
he might find to the Instituto Geologico.
Thus, on February 21, 1947, de Terra b~ought to m:~ office
a long thin bone recovered from the central pit of the three
dug along the electrical anomalies. I thought it looked like
the broken epiphysis of an elephant vertebra and accompanied de Terra in the exhumation of what we thought was an
elephant. InOctober and December, 1946, I had found the
remains of two elephants in the Tepexpan vicinity, one of
which was associated with a worked obsidian Eake.3
Neither of us recognized the bone for what it was: part of
a human leg bone.
When we arrived at the site the next day, February 22,
as de Terra has explained, the laborers had removed the
deposits overlying the skull, but not the rest of the skeleton,
which was entirely in its matrix. It was noticed then that
the caliche zone (or paedocal) was not as conspicuous in
the walls as it was at the elephant sites previously excavated, but it was present.
When Javier Romero arrived we were ready to look for
the rest of the skeleton. De Terra allowed Romero and
myself to execute the manual phase.
He was present
throughout the operation and opined freely on how
it might best be accomplished. Being already familiar with
the local stratigraphy, I assumed most of the responsibility
for the exhumation.

3. ~he first was reported in El elefante fostl de Tepexpan y el hombre primitivo
(Revista Mexicans de Estudios Antropologicos Vol. 8, pu. 1-6, 1946).
Immediately
aft-st this was written, the author excavated a second skele~n, also ve~ nearly
~mplete, about 1 kin. west of the first one and in the same atrat~graphic Dositiom

Here again ~ve found one of the forelimbs complete, and fu~hermore a~iculat~
with its s~pu]~ Human inte~ention may be suspected from the fact t~t, of the
head elements, only a piece of tusk, the mandible, and hyoidal bon~ were ~ecovered ;
~d especially from the position and condition of the hyoldal bon~.
We sent

these ~re awl-like fo~ils ~ de Te~a in ~ew York, where he ob~ined identffi~tlon
by G. G. Simpson and ~ G. Chaff~ at the Ameri~n M~eum o£ ~atural Hist.. All
thee hyoIdal ~n~ had their ~ips b~ken and one of them w~ impinging on a s~
of several ve~ebrae.
A num~r of tips w~e also r~vered but no~ one ~uld ~

fit~ ~ the hyoidal el~en~. Apparently Te~expan Man or his con~m~
u~ ~e natural ~]s on the ~rc~, and While ~ doing b~ke their point, ~
which the damaged in~t~ment would be discarded.

Some New Aspects ol the Tepexpan Man Case

219

To retain as much evidence as possible, the north wall of
the pit, some 20 cm. at most from the skull, had been left
intact. Coordinates X, Y, and Z were obtained from a reference stake. Romero’s figure of 1.07 m. from the surface
to the skull is correct for the Z coordinate. The skull was
originally face downward. It was shifted to show the face
when pictures were taken. The mandible lay a few cms.
below, enclosed in a small lens of sand within the unmistakable buff silt characteristic of the upper weathered portion of the lacustrine facies of the Becerra formation. (This
terminology is discussed below).
We explored further southward from the skull and found
more bones. We decided to remove only the skull, and
left the site guarded overnight.
The following day, Feb. 23, we commenced to expose the
limb bones. The chief members were numbered and marked
with arrows indicating azimuthal direction and dip from the
horizontal (See Tepexpan Man, Pls. 32, B and 34, A). Again
we noted the matrix as being the buff silt that contained
the mandible, except that the deepest bones reached into an
olive gray silt4. We emphasized this because the proof of
association between the Tepexpan Man and the Becerra sediments lies in the undisturbed nature of this distinctive buff
clayey-silt quite as much as in the presumed presence of the
Barrilaco paedocal (caliche).
As has been stated, no pelvis, scapulae, or thorax appeared.
This absence has been variously explained5.
The Caliche Problem
The preliminary inspection seemed to show a caliche zone
in the north, west, and south walls in the immediate vicinity
of the skeleton; but in the east wall, about 1.5 m. from the
skull, it was absent. When we discussed the results of
Lundberg’s electrical survey, geophysicists Ricardo Monges
In Fig. 2, layers ~; and 6 are considered to re,)resent one continuous sedirnenprocess, the difference in color and texture being due to weathering of layer 5.
For the writer’s views see the magazine "Unlversidad de Mexico", September
wherein he l)ubltshed anonymously the article E! Hombre fosil de Tepexpan.

220

Texas ArcheoIog~cal and Paleontological SOciety

Lopez (then Director of the Instituto Geologico), and Alfonso de la O Carreno (Chief of the Geological Section of
the Secretaria de Recursos Hidraulicos) suggested investigating the possible relation between the absence of hard
lime crust and the electric anomalies. Accordingly, Ing. de
la O Carreno supplied resistivity equipment operated by a
competent technician, and Ing. Lopez directed me to make
borings in the immediate vicinity of the excavation. I was
assisted by Rafael Molina of the Instituto Geologico, who
also took a selection of samples. These samples have been
used to make dehydration curves for quick estimates of the
nature of the material; other analyses have been left pending.
The borings (Figure 12) prove that the zone of Barrilaco
paedocal (this is the proper name for the paedocal formed
on Becerra soils of a pedalfer and other more or less humid
types, corresponding to de Terra’s phase VII in Table !,
and layers 3 and 4 in P1. 3, A of Tepexpan Man) is also missing north of the long ditch in what seems like a wide reentrant which, however, does not seem to have any apparent relation to Lundberg’s equipotential lines.
The resistivity equipment was used to measure a profile
(seen in Figure 12) across the zone where the Barrilaco
paedocal disappeared and very clearly showed that where
the paedocal was missing the conductivity of the layers
within 1 to 3 m. from the surface increased.
An important feature is that every bit of soil from and
including the grass roots down to some 15 cm. above the
olive-gray silt fizzes vigorously with dilute hydrochloric
acid; whereas from that point down and into the olive-gray
silt the acid produces no reaction (Figure 11). This makes
it impossible to distinguish the Barrilaco paedocal on the
basis of lime content, so it must be identified through
characteristic texture. Fortunately this is simple (see Fig.
4 and P1. 3: A in Tepexpan Man) as the carbonate of. lime
deposited in the B-horizon of a soil profile produces textural patterns which mere consolidation cannot imitate
even though the degree of compaction and lime content be
the same in both zones. The origin of lime in layers 1 and

Some New Aspects o~ ~he Tepexpan Man Case

Reconstructed

Parma nest
Block

221

Reconstr uct,ed
~

I Archeologi
2~Totoltsing~
3

8arrilac

÷

,4.- Le~s of pumice grovel upto 2¢m, with buff Becerro for matrix.
5.oBecerro buffdoyey silt (weathered), "~
6.-Becerro olive groycloy~er silt I fresh )..[ Distinction col.~ed by weathering.
Intense llne above Borrilaco is paper thin film of llme with may be on evoporite
~’ Prickly grass (Zacahuixtls)

FIGURE 11
Gross-seotlonal reconstruction along line A-A’ of Fig. I.
The central block is that
shown in P1. 3, A of Tepexpan Man.
The hypothetical eastward projection of the
strata show how the Barrilaco paedocal merges laterally into a clayey silt similar
to underlying buff Becerra silt except for the darker color.

FIGURE 12
ElectrO.a! survey of Tepexpan site by Lundberg. February. 194V.
Lettered
.a~ e~ui~otentlals.
Bs~ed on heliograph furnished by de Terra on scale of
Adaptation and BarrHaco ~aedocat determinations by Arellano.

222

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

possibly 2 (Figure 11) can most probably be ascribed to
carbonate dust from the Lake Texcoco bed. In any dry
season large surfaces around its edges are exposed to wind
action.
In spite of abundant lime in the profile, no concentration
is going on at present. On the contrary, there is evidence
of leaching; hence the Barrilaco paedocal must have formed
during a drier and perhaps warmer period than the present. In the Mexico City basin (and perhaps in many other
valleys of central Mexico as well) this same paedocal everywhere overlies the elephant-and-horse extinct fauna. For
this reason it is correlated with the North American postglacial "Optimum" by Kirk Bryan6 (Altithermal period of
Antevs).
Plate 26, I, shows the east wall of the excavation on June
6, 1950, somewhat enlarged in respect to its position on February 23, 1947. The contrast between the zones of "Barrilaco paedocal diffused but recognizable" and "megascopic
Barrilaco paedocal destroyed" may be seen. This roughly
vertical contact does not continue down into the Becerra
buff silt, suggesting that it is not an erosional feature or an
excavation of some sort, but the limit of the more effective
leaching of the paedocal. The transitional nature of the 25
cm. of grayish silt overlying buff Beccera silt leads to the
conclusion that the grayish silt may be the leached equivalent of the partially leached Barrilaco in the block opposite
the skeleton, as we have indicated in Figure 11.
Lake Levels and Stratigraphic Relation Strips
According to de Terra, the E1 Risco III lake beach occurs
at 2240 to 2245 m. elevation and marks the end of Becerra
time. The top of the Tepexpan Man skull was at approxi-

6. Los suelos
omplejos y fosils de la altiplanicle de Mexico, en relaeton a los
¢ambios ellmatico~ (Boletin, Socledad Geologies Mexicana, Vol. xIn, pp. !-20, 1948.)
(Radiocarbon Dates as of September ~, 1950 Institute of ~Nt~clear Physics, University
of Chicago, 1950).
J. R. Arnold and W. F. Libby released a radiocarbon date on
plant matertml colIected by de Terra at a, depth of 1.22 to :1.78 m. in the Tepexpan
:Man site in January, 1950. The date of 41:18~-300 years is increadlble and we interpret this as due to contamination of ~-ome sort.
Chiefly. !~erhavs, the penetration
of small amount~ of Barrilaeo caliche down minute root holes.
De Terra (~.
in press, personal communication} explains this possible contamination as due
to later vegetation sending its rcots into the Becerra silt.

Some New Aspects o.! the Tepexpan Man Case

223

mately 2240.3 m. elevation. The lake must have stood at 2240
m., or lower, when the skeleton was deposited, and soon
thereafter risen at least to 2245 m., remaining there for the
2,000 years estimated by de Terra for the deposition of the
overlying silt.
There followed the Barrilaco dry period during which the
lake may have become completely dry. The heavy lime
coating on boulders under the ceramic site at Zacatenco
extends up to the 2248 m. lake level (the "Zacatenco beach"
in P1. 7 of Tepexpan Man). The lime may have formed
during the Barrilaco recession, rather than later as postulated by de Terra, in which case the E1 Risco III lake must
have reached an elevation of at least 2248 m. rather than
2245 m. The humic soils called Totolzingo evidence a moist
environment during which the lake reached an elevation of
2248 m., according to de Terra. In a moist environment
beach deposits do not usually accumulate lime in appreciable
quantity, and for this reason we consider the above-mentioned lime development at Zacatenco as of Barrilaco age.
At any .rate it would be desirable for de Terra to
reconsider the term "Zacatenco beach" for his 2248 m. lake
level. Zacatenco already has such wel!-established chronological status in ceramic stratigraphy that it should not be
applied to a lake level antedating the archaeological culture.
Stratigraphic Status o~ "El Risco" and "Older Becerra"
E1 Risco is a small andesitic knob about 10 km. northeast
of Mexico City, at .the foot of which are remnants of former
beaches elevated 2 or 3 m. above the plain. Thus de Terra
chose to name his shore deposits (beach sands, mudflats,
etc.) E1 Risco I, II, and III. It is a mistake, however, to apply
these labels to deeper water lake deposits. To name such
a deposit after a certain beach or lake level, is to imply a
distinction that experience has shown cannot be observed
in the field, since the entire Becerra lacustrine sediments,
2 to 3 m. in thickness, form a homogeneous mass (except for
alteration by weathering to buff or light brownish color,
usually developed on the top).

224

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

In 1945 I studied a beach-swamp deposit on the southern
outskirts of Mexico City and called it the Armenta Horizon.7 This is at ca. 2241 m. elevation and is overlain by 8
m. of Becerra fossil soil developed on an alluvial fan. A
radiocarbon date of about 11,000 to 16,000 years plus has
been determined by Libby and Arnold (see note 6) for the
Armenta Horizon. This horizon is probably the same as
E1 Risco III, as otherwise it would have to be older than E1
Risco I, a most unlikely alternative. Yet since Tepexpan
is 35 km. from the type locality of Armenta, retention of
"El Risco beaches" for the Tepexpan-E1 Risco area may be
desirable.
The term "Older Becerra" as used in Tepexpan Man requires revision since some of the material included (bed No.
3 and possibly 4, Fig. 8) is much older, possibly even Pliocene. In the Tepexpan area, however, the "Older Becerra"
is true Becerra alluvium which grades lakeward into the
lacustrine silt facies, and together with the narrow beach
deposits forms a rather complex intergradation. In general the Becerra formation bearing elephant and horse fossils is a compact unit which may go back to pre-Wisconsin
time. Any subdivision has only local significance.S
Institute de Geologico de Mexico
Mexico, D. F.
December 31, 1950
’L
A. R. ~P’. Arellano, Dates Geologicos sobre la Antiguedad de] Hombre en la
Cuen¢~ de Mexico (Segundo Congreso Sociedad Cienclas de Mexico, Vo]. 213-9, 1946.)
8.
A~ P~ V. Arellano, The Becerra, The Becerra Formation (Latest PIelstoeene) of
Central Mexico (XVIII International Gcologica! Congress, London, 1948).

PLATE 26 I
Tepexpan site on June 6, 1950, looking slightly north of east.
Spread tape
measures Irm
Burlap sack rests on natural surface; face below it (extreme right
in Fl. 3, A of Tepexpan Man) shows deep incision where paper-thin film of lime
Drotec~ the underlying stratum.
Farther down, the moisture limit is indicated by
darker color, below which is seen the lens of fine pumice grave].
The back (east)
mall was cleaned from b~y at left to man at right to show transition from "Barrilaco
paedocal diffused but recognizable" (lower two-thirds at ]eft) to zone of "Megascepic
Barrlelao destroyed" (lower half of tape). The upper stratum, archaeological and
historical, thickens toward the right, probably due to wind erosivn and later filling
the narrow dark zone between it and Barrilao may be Totolzingo.
PLATE 26, II

Rock and shell "beads" f~ora a gravel deposit in Bell County, Texas. The holes
in all were either entirely or ~)artlally drilled. See item in NEWS NOTES.

PLATE

26

