POTTERY OF THE RIO BONITO AREA OF
LINCOLN COUNTY, NEW MEXICO
As a more thorough archaeological picture is constructed
in the Southwest, the remaining gaps become increasingly
apparent. One of the areas about which knowledge is most
scant is that with which this paper is concerned. An attempt
will be made herein to place the culture of the area in context (with regard to relative chronology and association
with contemporary developments)

by means of ceramic

types, both native and trade, found in the area.
The material was collected in connection with the University of New l~Iexico Field School during the 1950 and
1951 seasons from sites along the upper reaches of the Rio
Bonito in the vicinity of Fort Stanton, New Mexico. Several
sites in adjacent territory are also represented in an attempt
to widen the view of developments in the area.
The eight sites in the Bonito valley, from east to west
(see map), hereafter referred to by number are:
(1) Lincoln Rock Shelter--a small rock shelter near
Lincoln.
(2) Double Crossing Ruin Ma pueblo-type ruin with
wall bases in evidence, between the Fort Stanton
cutoff and Lincoln.
(3) Stanton Ruinma ruin of the same type as (2) near
U. S. 380 on the Fort Stanton Reservation, east of
the cutoff.

(4) Feather Cave--a large cave on the shoulder of the
hill directly across the valley from (3).

(5)

Upper Bonito Site I--a site with possible wall remains on the Stanton Reservation, three miles west
of the hospital.

(6) Three Post Site--a site apparently of pithouse type,

148

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

FIGUI~E "/

Potte~ o] the Rio Bonito Area

149

being cut by an arroyo near three large posts west

of (5).
(7) Upper Bonito Site II--a site with no structural evidence, 6 miles west of the Fort Stanton Hospital.
(8) Upper Bonito Site III--a small site with one ceramic type in evidence, two miles west of (7).

The majority of the sites lie between 150 and 200 yards
from the river, 1, 2, 4, and 6 on the north side, and 3, 5, 7,
and 8 on the south.
Included sites not in the Bonito Valley are:
(9) Petroglyph Site--a pueblo-type site with wall bases
clearly in evidence, about four miles north of Bernardo Gap.

(I0) Mesa Ranger Station Site---a site without evident
structural remains west of the station, arroyos are
cutting the site on two sides.

(11) Fred Pfingston Site--a large site west of (10) with
possible remains of wall structures in the westerr~
portion and definite pithouse remains in the east,
it probably includes two separate settlements, each
on its own hill.
Sites 9 and 11 are much larger than any of the Bonito developments while 10 conforms more to their average size,
Miscellaneous mat.erial was collected from sites on the
Morris and Padilla ranches between the Bonito and the,
base of the Capitan Mountains.
The sites are all in the Sacramento Highlands east of
Carrizozo and would be included in the "Highlands" care-.
gory in the survey by, Stallings’. It is a hill country of grass
alternating in less favorable locales with juniper and, in a
well watered spot, with clumps of larger trees and lush
undergrowth, indicatir~g the fertile potentials of the area.

1.

Stallingz, 19S2.

150

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

FIGURE 8
Pottery perccntage~ from Rio Bonito Sites,

Pottery o] the Rio Bonito Area

151

The first comprehensi.ve report on the complex in which
this area is included was by Stallings in 1932; previous to
that time reports2 had been published on separate wares and
types found in single sites with little attempt at correlation.
Roberts in 1929 described a "very sandy dark red ware with
decoration in dull black", extending from the E1 Paso district north and west and dating, on the basis of Mimbres
evidence, from the Great Pueblo period. In 19313 this was
named "El Paso Polychrpme". The .same year the predominant black-on-white ware of the region was designated
"Chupadero Black-on-White’’4 and the black-on-red as "Lincoln Black-on-Red"~. Stallings’ report listed two types of
native ware, Chupadero Black-on-White and the E1 Pasotype brownwares. Lincoln Black-on-Red and Three Rivers
Red-on-Terracotta were classified as variants of Northern
Rio Grande wares, both the wide and narrow line. varieties
of the latter and glaze variants of the former were mentioned. His conclusions were that this was a Pueblo ceramic
district, designated "El Paso", with native brown and blackon-white wares, influenced by Mimbres and Casas Grandes
developments, and occupied from .early Pueblo HI to early
Pueblo 1-V times, after which the population withdrew to
the north.
Sayles6 refers to dates of 1310-1330 and 1345 for E1 Paso
Polychrome and associates it wiih Chupadero Black-onWhite, Lincoln Black-on-Red, Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, Mimbres, Chihuahua, St. Johns, and Gila Polychrome
in the E1 Paso phase. In the J~uman.o phase to the southeast
of the E1 Paso he lists a basic red-on-brown complex including buff, grey, and brownish wares, plain and decorated
with broad and narrow red lines, occurring in both bowl and
jar forms. The paste is coarse, tempered with sand and
gravel, and the surface frequently floated.
2.
Alva, 1931, 1932, p. 42. Mera. 1931. Mera and Stallings, 1931. ~, 1929,
S~]in~s, 1931.
~,
S~llin~. 1931.
& M~ 19Sl.

5,

Me~ and S~in~s, 19~I.

6.

S~I~, 1935, v~. ~2-7~, 78-79. Table 7.

152

Texas A~’cheo~ogica~ and P~eontologica~ Societal

Mera7 lists the brownware as originating in the 1Vlogollon
area, with eastern variants possessing thicker walls than
the Alma types, light colored angular temper, and in some
cases a red interior slip. In work on Jackson’s8 ceramic material from caves in Culbertson County, Texas, Mera found
Chupadero Black-on-White underlain by E1 Paso wares, the
lowest sherd being of El Paso type paste with a red interior
slip. He states that these wares are all "roughly contemporaneous" (50-100 years), and gives the closing date for blackon-red in that area as 1350. In a later publication9 he reports
Chupadero, E1 Paso, Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, and
Rio Grande Glaze Polychrorne east of the Pecos in southeastern New Mexico. In the Saline-Medano district to the
north of the area vJi~h which we are concerned he finds!o
San Marcial Black-on-White, Mogollon Red-on-Brown, Socorro Black-on-White, and M_imbres Black-on-White as intrusive wares, with E1 Paso Polychrome, Chupadero Blackon-White (from Socorro Black-on-White), and a corrugated
brownware as the native developments. The native brownware is said to possess a peculiar temper and much of it is
indistinguishable from E1 Paso Polychrome paste. The corrugated ware is thought to be the result of Pueblo influence
on the basic brownware. In his last publication on the area, ’
Mera points out the existence of Jornado Brownware, a
coarsened derivative of Alma Plain in the southern part of
his "brownware district" (as opposed to Saline-Medano in
the north). He gives a plausable derivation o5 Three Rivers
Red-on-Terracotta from San Francisco Red. He lists the
earliest dated sherds in the area as three specimens of 1Vfogollon Red-on-Brown from three separate sites. He also
states that all intrusives in the north were of Pueblo derivation although’ black-on-white wares from this source were
absent. The latest of these intrusiv~s was Agua Fria Glaze-

7. Mere, 1948.
8. A, T. Jack,on, 1987, pp. 152-154.
9. Mera. 1938.
10. Schole~ and Mera, 1940, pp, 291-299.
II,
Mer~ 1943.

Pottery of the Rio Bonito Area

153

on-Red, which was introduced shortly before the abandon.ment of the area.
Toulouse12 states that the brownware found in early levels at Pueblo Pardo in association with Chupadero Blackon-White and a redware similar to San Francisco Red
is almost indistinguishable from Alma Plain.
Krieger’s reports Chupadero, E1 Paso, and Lincoln Blackon-Red occurring with Glaze I and Glaze III in one Llano
Estacado site and Chupadero and E1 Paso Brown with Glaze
II, Glaze III, and Potsuwii Incised at the Antelope Creek
Site.
Later references have been made to the high percentages
of E1 Paso Polychrome (90%) in a site adjacent to the city
of E1 Paso14 and to the occurrence of all types mentioned
by Sayles, plus corrugated, scoured brown, and Little Colorado black-on-white wares in the area east of E1 Paso,4A.
Jennings, in 1940’~, stated his belief that the brownware
of this area is part of a Mogollon development. This was
crystalized a few years later by Lehmer~, who designated
it as the Jornada Branch of that culture and divided the
territory into a northern and southern area, each of which
passed through three phases as follows:
North
1400
1300 San Andres
1200
1100 Three Rivers
1000 Capitan
900

South
E1 Paso
Dona Ana
Mesilla

Hueco
The Capitan phase ~includes the earliest pottery types in
12.
13.
14.
14A.
I$.
16.

Toulouse, 1944, p. 73.
Krieger, 1946.
Moore. 194~/, ~p. 104-109.
Smith. 1936, pp, 104-109.
Senning~, 1940.
Lehmer. 1948.

154

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the area with which we are concerned, they are, polished
Jornado Brown, Broadline Red-on-Terracotta, and in rare
instances, Mimbres Boldface. The Three Rivers Phase includes Jornado Brown, E1 Paso Polychrome, Three Rivers
Red-on-Terracotta, Mimbres Black-on-White, Mimbres Corrugated, Chupadero Black-on-White, and some St. Johns
Polychrome. The San Andres Phase is characterized by
E1 Paso Polychrome and Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta
accompanied by Lincoln Black-on-Red, Chupadero, Gila
Polychrome, Ramos Polychrome, Playas Incised, Agua Fria
Glaze-on-Red, Arenal Glaze Polychrome, St. Johns Polychrome, PIeshotauthla Glaze Polychrome, and smudged corrugated.
With this data we find that a generalized picture of the
southeastern New Mexico area includes a basic brownware,
sometimes similar to Alma Plain, accompanied in degrees
by Chupadero Black-on-White, E1 Paso Polychrome variants, and a group of painted redwares, which in some cases
appear similar to the northern Rio Grande types. Chupadero is apparently a derivative of the northern black-onwhite tradition. Most of the material appears to coincide
in time with late Pueblo III and early Pueblo IV developments to the north. Using this. as a background we approach
the specialized developments of the Rio Bonito area.
Virtually all material recovered was from surface collections, the few stratigraphic samples obtained being either
too small or too homogenous to be of value in correlation.
Sites 4, 6, and 8 (see chart) contain an overwhelming
percentage of brownware, large amounts of which have
been polished. The sherds are divisable into E1 Paso Brown
and a coarse variety of Jornado Brown, with the latter
occuring in the highest percentages. Alma Plain and Alma
Scoured are also in evidence. Parts of two small vessels of
coarse polished redware were found at site 6. The crudeness
of form and rough finish over which a polishing stone had
been rubbed would suggest an individual experiment, had
not parts of two vessels of the same obvious type been

Pottery of the Rio Bonito Area

157

found. Nothing similar was encountered on any of the other
sites. Decorated wares from these sites are confined to one
sherd of the fine-line type of Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta with an unsmoothed exterior (in contrast to the normal smoothed) found at site 6.
Site 1 seems to represent a transitional stage, since while
containing a large majority of brownware with Jornado
Brown dominant, it also yielded Chupadero Black-on-White,
Broadline Red-on-T~rracotta, and ~1 Paso Polychrome.
Sites 5, 7, and 11 are dominated jointly by Chupadero
Black-on-White and brownware which occur in more or
less equal quantities, together forming about 70% of the
sherds from each site. Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta is
present at all three, the highest percentage occurring at
site 11 which is closest to the type site. E1 Paso Polychrome
is also present at a~ll three sites, though in two of them
it does not attain one per cent. Corrugated ware (the
smudged corrugated of Lehmer) is found only in site 7,
suggesting a time relationship. Lincoln Black-on-Red also
occurs only in site seven.
Site 10 falls out of the range of the above in that the percentage of Chupadero Black-on-White is about 15% less
than their average, while that of E1 Paso Polychrome rises
from less than one per cent to over.15% of the total content.
The percentage of corrugated ware is also markedly higher,
while that of Lincoln Black-on-Red is less noticeably so. The
ratios of brownware and Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta
remain about the same.
The remaining sites, 2 and 3, can be classified in one
group characterized by the dominance of corrugated ware
over the relatively minor occurrence of both plain brown°
ware and Chupadero Black-on-White, the two of which,
when combined, in neither case equal over 25% of the total.
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta is all but absent. Lincoln
Black-on-Red shows a substantially higher percentage than
it does in any of the other groups as does E1 Paso Poly-

158

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

chrome (except at site 10 where the higher percentage may
be due to the relative proximity to the source of the E1 Paso
wares).
We therefore have three main categories of sites and two
transitory examples which can, with increasing difficulty as
they become more recent, be fitted into Lehmer’s northern
Jornado classification; the first with the Capitan, the second
with the Three Rivers, and the third with the San Andres.
The contradictions and discrepancies with this system are
given below.
In the Capitan Phase of the Upper Bonito we have only
brownware, a few sherds of which show a red wash. None of
the Mimbres types or Broadline Red-on-Terracotta are in
evidence at these sites at the present, although several sherds
of the latter were found in site 1 (apparently next in chronological order) accompanied by variants of Chupadero Blackon-White and the E1 Paso wares, which would tend to place
it in the next phase.
In the sites tentatively assigned to the Three Rivers Phase,
with the exception of the above, we find all of the requisites
present except Mimbres Corrugated. Broadline Red-on-Terracotta is coexistent with Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta
(fine-line). Lincoln Black-on-Red and the local smudged
corrugated wares make a sudden appearance in the latest
site of the period. The design elements of the early Lincoln
Black-on-Red assign it definitely to a Three Rivers inspired
origin (see Plate 20). Brownware has begun its decline, E1
Paso influence (i.e. recent influence from the south) has not
been felt to any extent and Chupadero Black-on-White, emanating from a northern source, is at its peak.
The transition between the Three Rivers and San Andres
Phases represented by site 10 shows Chupadero declining in
favor of what must have been a strong wave of influence
from the south bringing E1 Paso Polychrome. The local
wares which had manifested themselves at the last of the

Pottery o~ the Rio Bonito Area

159

Three Rivers Phase continued to improve their status
through the transition and the following San Andres Phase.
This final development, contrary to Lehmer, finds Three
Rivers Red-on-Terra Cotta missing from the Bonito Area.
Also in disagreement is the dominance of corrugated ware
rather than E1 Paso Polychrome, which, although present in
increased percentages was by no means dominant; in fact,
it may have been intrusive in this area rather than a native
ware.
The abandonment, in the late 14th century, occurred when
corrugated and Lincoln Black-on-Red wares were at their
peak, the latter giving way to an early glaze ware (Agua
Fria Glaze-on-Red), a ware similar in many ways to the
later forms of Lincoln. As already mentioned, Chupadero
Black-on-White and the plain brownwares were very much
on a decline and Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta had disappeared (the appearance of a few sheyds at site 3 is due to
the extended occupation of this si~e, evidenced also by the
percentage of Chupadero and specific trade material). The
general impression given by collections from these last sites
is one of Pueblo culture.
Trade material is..present in most sites to the extent found
in those reported on by Lehmer. The most useful are the red-on-terracotta types and the early glaze wares. The former
have been dealt with to some extent in the foregoing material, a brief summary of their development follows. A
brownware with a red wash, presumably that which DIera
postulated as ancestral to the series, has a spotty distribution among the sites, occurring in all three phases. Sherds of
this type from the ,later sites appear considerably worn
which may indicate an extended or interrupted occupation
of the site, placing the sherds in an earlier phase than that
by which the site is characterized. The broadline variety of
red-on-terracotta is present to a larger extent in the sites of
the Three Rivers Phase than in the San Andres, where it
occurs sporadically, indicating a somewhat later development of this ware in the Bonito Area than in those to the

160

Texa~ Archeological and Paleontological Society

south. In the earlier sites it is difficult to distinguish between examples of this and Mogollon Red-on-Brown ware.
A distinctive type of Broadline Red-on-Terracotta occurs at
site 5 in the form of both bowls and ollas, with a heavily
roughened exterior and interior respectively. It is also characterized by a black core with large, angular crystaline inclusions, all of which brings to mind the red-on-terracotta
wares mentioned by Sayles,7 in connection with the Jumano
Phase of the lower Rio Grande. 0nly a few sherds were
found at the one site of its occurrence. The co-existence of
Broadline and Three Rivers (fine-line) Red-on-Terracotta is
demonstrated at sites 3, 5, 6, and 7. ~11 forms of red-on-terracotta were apparently replaced by Lincoln Black-on-Red in
the San Andres Phase. Further work in the area will clarify
lYlera’s red wash, broad-line, fine-line, black-on-red, glaze
(see Plate 20) sequence.
The Rio Grande Glaze I red ware (Agua Fria Glaze-onRed) is present locally in fair amounts (1-2%) in the San
Andres Phase and, with the more plentiful local ware, Lincoln Black-on-Red, is as excellent a guide to this phase as
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta (fine-line) is to the Three
Rivers Phase. The glaze ware is distinguished from Lincoln
Black-on-Red, which it resembles superficially, by a grey
core, a finer paste, and a sharper fracture. Rims are both
square and round. From the external similarity it is probable that this was replacing the Lincoln ware at the time of
the abandonment of the area. Other glaze wares, mostly
from the Little Colorado occur sporadically as far back as
site 7, where the Lincoln Black-on-Red and smudged corrugated wares first appeared. This may be another case of
extended occupation.
Mimbres Black-on-White wares occur only in Three Rivers
Phase sites, and have their heaviest distribution, as does
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, in the westernmost sites,
which are also those with the easiest access to the trade from
the Mimbres area.
17.

Saylcs. 1935.

Pottery o] the Rio Bonito Area

163

The accompanying chart contains a summation of the material presented above.
A few additional peculiarities with regard to the blackon-white ware of the area deserve mention. One of interest is
that glaze on Chupadero (apparently accidental) occurs in
all sites on which Chupadero Black-on-White is found and
in no definite ratio. The earliest occurrent is at site 1
and the latest at site 3. It is most plentiful at site 9, although probably early San Andres was not included in the
general summary because of its radically high percentage
(for the Bonito area) of Chupadero Black-on-White. This
is presumably due to its comparative proximity to the center
of development of that type. Another development concerning this ware is the early appearance of a number of blackon-white types differing from each other in one or more
ways (finish, rim form, etc.) and yet similar in at least one
respect to the homogeneous Chupadero of later sites. This
would contradict Mera’s origin of Chupadero, although
nothing definite can be stated without work of a stratigraphic nature.
Conclusions
As may be deduced from the high percentages of Chupadero to the north and E1 Paso Polychrome to the south,
closer than 30 miles each way, the culture of the Bonito
Valley was on a borderline, its foundations in the south and
west and its progress toward the culture of the north.
The briefest summation of the ceramic history would
point out a brownware origin stemming from the south and
west with increasing influence from the north’which finally
enveloped all of the earlier traits and left it, at the time
of its abandonment, a full-fledged Pueblo ceramic development. The situation is best demonstrated by the sequence of
red wash- on- brown, to Broadline Red- on- Terracotta, to
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta, to Lincoln Black-on-Red
with a fine-line decorative scheme which degenerated into

164

Texas Archeolog$cal and Paleontological Society

the panel below the rim decoration of the Pueblo black-onred wares, and finally gave way in part to the earliest
Pueblo glaze-on-red ware. This last type apparently arrived
in the Bonito Valley at a date somewhat later than that of
its appearance in the north as evidenced by the tree ring
date of 1310 to 1360 for both Agua Fria and E1 Paso Polychrome in Gallo Canyon.18
This development, while cont~uous, can be separated into
three distinct phases to which the names Capitan, Three
Rivers, and San Andres postulated by Lehmer can be applied with varying degrees of certainty. Somewhere between the Three Rivers and the San Andres Phase the culture of the Upper Bonito crossed the line from an aberrant
~orm which could be associated with Mogollon to a stage
which, ceramically, is indisputably Pueblo. Therefore it is
suggested that the northern boundary of the Jornado be
made more flexible, passing through the Bonito area in the
Three Rivers Phase, and to the south of the Bonito Valley
in the San Andres Phase, leaving the valley in Pueblo territory during the final development.
Lesser developments will help in. establishing the identity
of the people concerned. The first .of these is the influx of
Mimbres ware from about 1100 to 1200, an indication that
some of the population of the Mimbres area abandoned at
that time joined the eastern Jornado branch. There is evidence of this at Site 11 where two separate settlements are
apparent, one area containing high percentages of Mimbres
ware and another much larger are£ containing almost exclusively native wares of the same period. Other evidence
of this sort is the sudden influx of large amounts of E1 Paso
Polychrome in the "San Andres" Phase, whereas only traces
of it had been present up to that time. In the south large
percentages are present in the Three Rivers Phase. This
indicates that in the last stage of northern development the
southern settlements were already being abandoned in favor

18.

Lehmer, 1948.

Pottery o~ the Rio Bo~to A~ea

165

of the north. Cultural influence from this direction had been
steadily weakening for a long period o£ time as evidenced
by the continually increasing absorption and adoption o£
northern traits. It is probable that the Apache entered the
Southeast New Mexico area, which was their stronghold at
the time of the Spanish arrival, through these weaker southern villages, driving some of them to the north, and following up in that direction, eventually eliminated the Bonito
Valley settlements. This final abandonment can be said to
have been completed by 1350, the Gallo Canyon dates to the
north being considered contemporaneous with the abandonment which took place shortly after both Agua Fria Glazeon-Red and E1 Paso Polychrome began arriving in the area
in substantial amounts.
There is evidence that the population may have scattered
to the north (Abo and other pueblos of the Ssline-Medano
district) and west, sherds of Lincoln Black-?n-Red, E1 Paso
Polychrome, and Chupadero having been found on the
Texas side of the Llano Estacado accompanied by Rio
Grande Glazes I and HL
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alves, E. E.
1931. "Pottery of the E1 Paso Region." Bulletin of the
Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society, Vol.
III, Abilene.
1932. "A Small Ruin in New Mexico." Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol.
IV, Abilene.

Jackson, A. T.
1937. "Exploration of Certain Sites in Culbertson County, Texas." Bulletin of the Texas ArcheoIogica! and
Paleontological Society, Vol. IX, Abilene.
Jennings, J. D.
1940. "A Variation of Southwestern Pueblo Culture."

166

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Laboratory of Anthropology Technical Series, No. I0,
Santa Fe.
Krieger, A, D.
1946. Culture CompIexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas, Univers{ty o] Texas Publications, No. 4640, Aus-

Lehmer, D.
1948. "The Jornado Br~unch of the l~ogollon." University
of Arizona Bulletin, Social Science Bulletin No. 17, TucMera, H. P.
1931. "Chupadero Black-on-White." Laboratory o]
thropology Technical Series No. 1, Santa Fe.
1938. "Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeast New
Mexico." Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association, No. 51.
1943. "An Outline of Ceramic Developments in Southern and Southeastern New Mexico." Laboratory of
thropoIogy Technical Series No. 11, Santa Fe.
Mera, H. P. and Stallings, W. S. Jr.
1931. "Lincoln Black-on-Red." Laboratory of Anthropology Technical Series No. 2, Santa Fe.
Moore, Mrs. G. E.
1947. "Twelve Room House Ruin." Bulletin of the Texaz
Archeological and Paleontological Soc{ety, Vol. XVHI,
Abilene.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. "An Archaeological Survey of Texas." Medallion
Papers, No. XVII, Gila Pueblo, Globe.
Roberts, Fo H. H., Jr.
1929. "Recent Archaeological Developments in the Vicinity of E1 Paso, Texas." Smithsonian Institution Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 81, No. 7, Washington.

Pottery o~ the R~o Bonito A~e~

167

Scholes, F. V. and Mera, H. P.
1940. "Some Aspects of the Jumano Problem." Carnegie
Institution of Washington Contributions to American
Anthropology and History, Vol. VI, No. 34.

Stallings, W. S., Jr.
1931. "El Paso Polychrome." Laboratory of Anthropol.
ogy Technical Ser~es No. 3, Santa Fe.
1932. "Notes on Pueblo Culture in South-Central New
Mexico and in the Vicinity of E1 Paso, Texas." American
Anthropologist, Vol. 34, No. 1, pp. 67-78, Menasha.
Toulouse, J’ H.

1944. "Cremation Among the Indians of New Mexico."
American Antiquity, Voh X, No. 1, Menasha.
University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque,
January, 1952.

