238

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

REPORTS AND EDITORIALS
(1) Unusual Skull
The small skull found by Mr. W. C. Fritz of Midland, Texas, has
several unusual features. The skull in general size and shape and
shortness of face resembles the Horace Heffaner skull found by the
writer in 1927. The length of the skull is 6 7-8 inches and the width
5 inches. There are no discernable supraorbital ridges. The skull
is low browed and extremely narrow in the frontal region. Thc
occipital region has the backward or bun-shaped extension of the
posterior portion so often observed in Texas skulls, and has in
addition a feature not previously observed by the writer in Texas
skulls. This is the occurrence of two small extra bones at the juncture of the parietal bones and the occipital bone. The upper middle
one is I 1-8 inches across from side to side and 3-4 of an inch from
top to bottom. The other bone adjoins the first one, below and to
the left, and its measurements are from side to side, 7-8 of an inch,
and from top to bottom 7-8 of an inch. The face of this skull is
uncommonly short. The sockets for the upper second molars are
extremely large. Both of the upper molar 1 teeth are in place, as
are also the two of premolar 2. The molar I teeth measurements
are, tongue to cheek 15-32 of an inch, and slightly over 14-16 of an
inch in antero-postero diameter. The empty sockets for the upper
molar 2 teeth are the largest the writer has ever seen and must have
held enormous teeth. The extraordinary size of the upper first
molars would be a notable feature in a large skull, and are especially noticeable in this small skull, which probably is that of a
female. The left upper premolar 1 is gone. The right premolar 1
was just erupting as also were the canines. Sockets show for three
incisors and one large incisor is’in place. The upper second premolars are considerably worn, and the first molars less so. There
seem to be five cusps in the upper molar 1 teeth.
The mandible is extremely short in antero-postero measureluent.

PLATE 43
Panel A, Nos. 1-2, Durst Silt with embedded flint flakes, embedded
30 feet deep. Gibson Site. No. 3. Mano stone found embedded in
Durst Silt 30 feet deep. Gibson Site.
Panel B, No. 1, New type painted pebble, Shackelford County. No.
2, Painted pebble, Taylor County. No. 3, Painted pebble, Fisher
County.

Pla~e 43

Repor~ and Edi~ori~s

241

The canines are very large. The two right premolars are worn down
to the roots. Left premolar 2 is worn down to the roots but left
premolar 1 was still beneath the gum. The second molars were
unworn. There were no lower third molars nor any space for them.
There is a slight mental depression just above two very small
pinhead sized surfaces which are mere suggestions of mental spines.
(2) Four Sand Dune Culture Burials
Several Sand Dune Culture burials have been found previously
but owing either to cremation of the bones1 or to greater decay
which takes place in bones buried in sand, no complete skulls had
been found until recently. During 1939 a Burial A. M. (4) was
excavated2 but the skull was in poor condition and no artifacts were
found. On another visit to the site which is located on a high hil!
which overlooks the Brazos River, the writer noticed a large stone
which erosion had exposed eighteen inches north of that one grave
structure. On digging it was found that this stone was part of a
large buried stone structure which was 100 1-2 inches from east to
west and 75 inches from north to south. See Plate 44, No. 1. Under
the first layer was a second layer 72 by 60 inches across, and going
down into the earth was a third structure, and under that were buried
either four Sand Dune Culture Men, or men who were their contemporaries.
In the northeast end of the pit one large skull lay on top of a
much smaller skull, and two long thin serrated arrow points lay
beside them on the south. The long bones of the skeletons were
mixed below them. A third skull lay in the southeast end of the
pit, which extended down into the caliche.
In the west end another skeleton lay, and two more serrated
points were found with it. See Plate 44, No. 2. In the bottom
another serrated point lay amongst the long bones.
The points were like those illustrated in Plate 51, Vol. 11, 1939,
Bulletin of this Society. The pit was cut down into the hard caliche
for about a foot. The total depth of the bottom of the burials was
58 inches below the soil surface. The top of this large stone structure was buried beneath the hard soil about six inches, and no sign
of it was visible on the original flat surface. Eighteen inches of

Texas Archeological and Pcdeontologlzal Society

242

soil lay between the two burial pits, and only the excavation of the
first one caused the one described above to be found. This burial
is on the same ridge where the writer has excavated several others
during the past ten years and where Mr. Joe Ben Wheat has been
excavating some burials for Texas Technological College during
the past six months.
The skulls are long headed, but no study of them has yet been
made. This excavation was done on funds provided by the HanleyBridwell Excavation Fund.
(3) Texas Technological College Digs Near zlbilene
Since January, 1940, Texas Technological College has been excavating in sites near Abilene, Texas, which were discovered by the
Editor during the past twelve years. During the winter a crew of
W. P. A. laborers under direction of Mr. Joe Ben Wheat has worked
on the Hodges Site, where several superimposed midden strata have
been studied by the writer for several years. Later excavation was
carried on at the Myatt Site in which the writer did some excavation
in 1929. See Plate 44, No. 3.
Since finishing the Myatt excavation, Mr. Wheat has been engaged in some extensive excavation of burials along a high ridge on
the Brazos River where the writer has also removed a number of
burials at intervals since 1930.
(4) New Type o/Painted Pebbles Found Near ,4bilene
During the past fourteen months the writer has found several
painted stones in open campsites which he believes to be of a new
or previously undeseribed type.
The first one of these was found during July, 1939, in Shackelford
County, about twenty-five miles north of Albany, Texas, on the surface of a thin burnt rock mound. This is a brown quartzite mano
stone which had first been polished by use on both sides, and then

PLATE 44
No.

1.
No. 2.
in pit dug
No. 3.

Buried stone structure, top layer, Sand Dune Man burials.
Fourth skull Sand Dune burials. Fifty-eight inches deep
into caliche.
Texas Technological College Myatt Site excavation.

Plate 44

Reports and Editarials

245

painted on one slick face with a brown paint. The painting some~
what resembles writing, and runs across the stone like some strange
script. The.lines wave along for a space, and then go suddenly
into either a long down or a long up stroke, and these run far
below or above the main line. This stone is 4 3-4 inches long,
3 1-2 inches broad, and 2 3-16 inches thick, and the painting covers
a polished surface which measures 2 1-2 by 3 1-2 inches. The ends
of this mano are also heavily battered from use as a hammerstone.
Only one side is painted. The other side is smooth except for a
number of peck marks made to sharpen it for use as a mano. The
stone had been used very little since this sharpening was done. See
Flate 43, Panel B, No. 1.
The second painted pebble was found in December, 1939, in a site
south of and near Abilene in Taylor County. At this place were
two circles of thin burnt rock remains and a very thin accumulation
of camp debris near a small temporary water hole. As the writer
crossed one of these burnt rock piles he noticed an oval waterpolished light colored quartz pebble that had a peculiar brown
wavy banding on it. Or~ close examination what appeared to be
stone banding at a distance proved to be something painted on
the outside with brown paint. This pebble is painted on both sides,
and both the style and the brown paint are the same .as that used
on the mano described above. This pebble is much smaller, being
3 3-16 inches long, 2 1-4 inches wide and 1 1-4 inches thick. This
stone shows no evidence of any use other than as a painted pebble
and is too small for a mano. The painted bands are 1-8 inch wide.
See Plate 43, Panel B., No. 2.
The writer found a third one of these painted stones in the collection of Mr. Lawrence Weatherman, who found it on the Green
Ranch in thin burnt rock debris in Fisher County. This stone is
also of quartzite, and had been first used as a mano and then painted
on the polished surface. This stone is 3 7-16 by 3 9-16 inches in
diameter by 1 13-16 inches thick and has signs of painting on both
polished surfaces, but these are dim. See Plate 43, Panel B, No. 3.
The fourth stone was brought to the writer by Mr. Lacy Beckham.
It was Iound by a tenant who plowed it up near a spring in Taylor
County a few miles from Abilene, Texas. The ~Titer has not seen

246

Texa~ ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

the exact location where this stone was found and does not know
whether it als~ is connected with one of the burnt rock mound cultures. This is a quartzite stone which is 16 3-4 inches long, 7 3-4
inches wide and 1 3-4 inches thick. This stone is oval and at the
broad end has been sharpened to an edge. The broad end has been
sharpened from both sides to make an edge which is striated and
polished as though it may have been used either to dig or possibly
as a pestle. However there are n~ known oval mortar holes near
where it was found, ahhough a similar type of pestle must have
been used in such holes. This stone has brown painted lines all
around the edges and across the face. These painted lines are of
the same type and paint as those used on the other stones.
The paint possibly may have been made of asphalt, as it resembles
that substance in color and there was some of that material available
in the region. The stone has the shape and thickness and general
appearance of one of the smaller metates of the region except for
the polished sharpened and striated edge at the end.
These painted stones probably are more common in open sites
than the fact of the finding of only four would indicate. The writer
believes that he has overlooked some in the past, thinking that they
were metal marks made by plows in scraping across hard smooth
quartz, and some of them do have that appearance until examinerl
closely. The writer would be interested to learn if others have also
found these script-like pebble paintings.
After the above was written the writer decided to examine some
quartzite mano and rubbing stones which were collected in Jones
and Taylor Counties years ago and had been in a dark store room
since. On examining some of these with a poor light nineteen more
good specimens of the Abilene region painted pebbles were found.
The writer had long noticed what he thought were metal marks of
plow points which had scraped across these stones, but he never
had examined them with a glass until recently. The paint on some
of these stones is raised on the surface to a degree which makes it
improbable that the work could have been done in any manner except by the use of liquid paint. In all cases however the paint
seems to have gone into the stone somewhat.
Of the nineteen additional stones all are of quartzite except one

Reports and Editorials

247

flint polishing stone. Thirteen are definitely quartzite manos. One
is a quartzite abrading stone. Five are fine textured polishing
stones, and two of the latter and the abrading stone have also been
~sed as hammerstones on the ends. One mano has a pecked pit
surrounded by the markings. Ten of the stones are marked on both
flat surfaces. When the time is available the writer intends to go
over his collection carefully and prepare a more complete report for
next year. There are undoubtedly many more in the stored collections.
CYRUS N. RAY.

