120

Texaz Archeological and Paleon$ologicaJ Society

ANIMAL HOLE MOLDS IN THE PERMIAN
B~ Cvaus N.
In a deeply gullied depression in Permian red clay and argillaceus shale, located nearly ten miles northwest of Abilene, Texas,
an unusual fossil formation is exposed for a distance of more than
two hundred feet across the bottom of the southern portion. The
gullied area is about five hundred feet in diameter and drains to
the north. On top of the north bank the formation is different and
here is an outcrop of thinly laminated arenaceus shale which contains some Permian fossil imprints, ripple marks and a few holes
which were bored vertically through the laminations.
This sandy laminated shale resembles the Castle Peak Permian
shale which contains numerous animal tracks of various species,
which were described by Roy L. Moodie (1) although the tracks seem
not to occur here. Castle Peak is situated 20 miles by road farther
up the same Mulberry Creek valley.
The writer will only attempt to describe the peculiar fossils of
the southern end of the depression mentioned above. Here there is
a bedding plane containing thousands of stone cylinders which lie
vertically in the stratum. These vertically placed cylinders are exposed for a distance of 215 feet near the bottom of the depression.
The vertical thickness of the layer of cylinders varies from twentytwo inches to three feet. The upper portion is eroded away and the
formation once might have been much thicker. (See Plate 25).
The writer has explored the Abilene region during many years
and has not previously found anything like this cylinder deposit.
The cylinders are rather uniform in size within certain limits.
On measurement of cross sections the greater number fail within a
diameter of between seven-eighths and one inch, although a few are
so large as one and three-fourths inches in diameter, and some so
small as five-sixteenths of an inch. The cylinders break off into
various lengths wherever a crack has formed in the shale. A large
PLATE 25
Nos. 1, 2, 3. Three view~ of the Permian bedding plane which contains thousands of animal hole molds.

Plate

Animal Hole Molds in the Pe~nian

123

percentage of the broken off cylinders are between four and five
inches in length although sections of all lengths up to ten and
seven-eighths inches are found. The bedding plane is filled so
thickly with columns that they crowd each other, and in many places
little or no matrix remains between them. (See Plate 25). In other
places they had penetrated masses of clay more thinly and this has
turned to stone. It is in such places that one can best study the
evidences of the manner in which the cylinders were formed. Many
cylinders show that subsequent to their being formed as holes, and
filling with mud, other holes were excavated beside them which removed enough of their filled substance to gutter out the sides of
the original cylinders for many inches. (See Plate 26, Nos. 4-5-6).
In some more than half of the original column has been removed.
In very large cylinders one may see where a column of one-half inch
diameter has been driven vertically down through the center of a
much larger one. (See Plate 26, Nos. 11 and 15.) The diameters
of all cross sections of any one column are about the same throughout its length, and this is true of even the longest which are three
feet long in some parts of the formation.
Due to erosion the original tops of the columns can not be examined but the bottoms end at approximately the same level and
there are no signs of the cylinders in the red clay below that general level.
The lower ends of the cylinders end abruptly in the stony matrix
in blunt rounded ends of nearly the same size as the remainder of
the columns. (See Plate 26, Nos. 8, 9, 10, 12, 13.) In large pieces
of the stony matrix where the lower end pieces of cylinders have
fallen out, the second finger of a large man will fit snugly into the
ends of some of them. (See Plate 27, Nos. 1, 6, 7, 13, 14.) In other
cases the cylinder ends have remained in the matrix and when removed these somewhat resemble the rounded ends of large bullets.
There are hard stone split matrices which show some longitudinal
sections of the holes with the cylinders fallen out, and some in place;
where the cylinders are out one can see innumerable circular scorings as though some animal had used its claws in excavating the
holes. (See Plate 27, No. 3.) This left the insides of the holes
roughly circularly scored and indented. It seems that then a smooth

Texas Archeological ~nd Paleontological Society

lining of some substance, presumably mud, was applied to the
walls of the holes. There is one cylinder, embedded in its original
stony matrix, which shows on cross section an entire diameter of one
and three-sixteenth inches and of this the outer lining showed a
thickness of nearly one-fourth inch.
There are specimens which show very small pittings such as could
have been made by an arthropod walking on moist clay.
Encrusted in the outside of many of the cylinders are fossil remains of ~only one kind. These are slightly curved, are slender and
from three-eighths to one-half inch in length, and have a shallow
groove lengthwise down the center. These organs always lie crosswise to the long axis of the cylinders. The fossils have an angular
appearance resembling arthropod legs and in two cases there seem
to be miniature hooks at the smaller ends reminiscent of those seen
on a grasshopper’s feet. Some have a resemblance to sections of the
chitinous body shells of small crustaceans. One collection of the leg
like fossils radiates from a common center in a manner somewhat
resembling a crustacean’s legs.
The stone of both cylinders and matrices is the same and is a
very hard clay shale. The centers of the cylinders show no evidences
of fossil remains, the organic remains are embedded in the outer
surfaces of the cylinders in positions which evidently were just inside the linings.
Examination of the stone matrices from which the cylinders and
their linings have fallen shows a manner of excavation reminiscent
of that used by modern crayfish.
This site probably was the shore of a Permian body of water as
PLATE 26
ANI~ HOLE MOLDS IN THE PERMIAN
Nos. 8, 9, 10, 12, and 13 are hole mold ends. Nos. 4, 5, and 6 were
guttered by later bored holes. Nos. 1! and 15 show portions of smaller
later holes driven into older molds.
PLATE 27
ANIMAL HOLE MOLDS I.~ THE PERMIAN
Nos. 1, 6, 7, 13, 14 show hole mold endings in matrix where molds
have dropped out. No. 3 shows shale matrix with holes where molds
have dropped out; the circular scorings produced in boring the holes
are seen. Nos. 4, 5, 8, 10, 11, 12 are ~ide guttered hole molds.

Pla~e 27

Animal Hole Mold~ i~ ~he Permian

129

shown by the ripple marks and Permian fossils embedded in the
sandy shale of the north portion.
Evide.ntly some gregarious type of animal life lived on its mud
flats in countless thousands, and bored its holes in the moist clay.
Holes eventually filled with mud which later solidified into stone
cylinders; and after the first dug holes filled, other holes were bored
down beside or slanting against them and guttering their sides. Some
smaller holes were bored straight down through the centers of older
filled ones.
The animals died and their remains were left in the soft linings
of the holes’ sides and bottoms.
A small species of crab today bores holes in great numbers in the
flat shorelines of quiet Texas bays and it may be that its far distant crustacean projenitors had similar habits.
"Identification of the animal species which made the holes will
have to await the attention of some one who has the requisite specialized knowledge.
Box 62, Abilene, Texas.
1. 1929, Moodie, Roy L., Vertebra~te Footprints From the Red
Beds o] Texas, American Journal of Science, pp. 352-368, New
Haven, Conn.

