INTRODUCTION
In many fields of science it is possible to obtain handbooks or guides which summarize knowledge in those fields,
reducing a vast amount of original research by many different persons to a concise, relatively simple form. Thus,
if One wishes to identify certain mammals, birds, fishes, insects, reptiles, trees, flowers, rocks, minerals, and so on, there
are many books designed for this purpose, giving descriptions and illustrations of species and types, outlining their
distributions and principal identifying characteristics.
For exact, positive identifications, it is still necessary
to have specialists do this directly; for not only does the
specialist have knowledge of the alternative possibilities, but
he may have a file of material built up carefully over a long
period with which he can make direct comparisons and thus
eliminate errors. Handbooks are nevertheless tremendously
useful for educational purposes, for the pleasure they bring
in enabling each person to gain an idea of what he has found,
and for what they show about the complexity of nature.
Archeology has never developed the handbook principal,
except in the case of guides to individual museum collections. The archeological profession has often, and justifiably, been criticised for its clannish attitude, its refusal to
make the products of its research clearly understandable to
the layman. It is, however, not so much refusal to meet this
obligation that impresses me, as the fact that this profession has not yet found any consistent procedures for establishing types of artifacts. By and large, each archeologist
classifies to suit himself. It is as though the zoologist or
botanist classified organisms in all sorts of ways, according
to what seemed significant to him, but without the central
concept of a species. The species concept did not reach perfection overnight, and for a long time each biologist had his
own idea of how to apply it in practice. As a result, the
biological world was long swamped with new "species" for
almost everything collected; but in recent years re-organization has taken place and superfluous species gradually weed-

Texas Archeological Society

ed out. Archeology, at least in the New World, has yet to
face this problem of superfluous, conflicting, and overlapping "types" of artifacts. They are created constantly, either
by name or by some system of symbols, without much regard for the effect they have on other archeologists or confusions in the minds of students who attempt to understand
these "types".
From a purely practical point of view, it is unreasonable
to expect that everyone interested in archeology should try
to remember all of the details, agreements, and conflicts, between the hundreds of "types" set up by scores of workers,
without some sort of concise guide to follow. This step must
come eventually for American archeologists, and we regard
this "Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology" as a step
in that direction.
The word "Introductory" is necessary because this work
is far from complete, even for the State of Texas. Part I
consists of trait lists for the culture complexes which we
regard as fairly well established. These are subject to revision as information increases; new traits may be added in
the course of time; and as more studies are made it is possible that some of the traits we have listed will prove not
to be associated with these complexes, but with others of
earlier or later date in the same areas. We expect and welcome suggestions as to how the lists may be improved. It
must be realized that great parts of the State are not represented at all in these lists--particularly the bulk of the
Panhandle and the plains to the south of it--and that amateurs as well as professionals have ample opportunity to find
new material.
Part II consists of descriptions of the better-known types
of pottery and projectile points, also incomplete for lack of
typological analysis in many parts of the State. It has been
necessary to confine the type descriptions to these two categories, first because the bringing in of all other recognizable
classes of artifacts would entail a great deal more research
and time than we had available for this volume; and second

Introduction

3

because of the prohibitive cost of publishing it all in a single
volume. It is to be hoped that the many other classes of
artifacts, houses, burials, earthworks, etc., can be formally
typed and illustrated in future volumes.
We have chosen pottery and projectile points for this
initial volume for a very practical reason: they provide the
best clues to the presence of particular culture complexes in
this State, if not elsewhere. Where definitely identifiable
types of pottery and projectile points are present, it is usually seen that other traits of the same complexes are also
present. However, it is necessary to warn the reader that
the presence of a single type of artifact is not reliable evidence for the identification of the complex of which it is
supposed to form a part. Complexes are identified through
the presence of several key traits in association; a single type
can--and usually does--appear as a part of several distinct
complexes. In other words, several different Indian tribes
living over a large area may have shared in the manufacture
of a particular type of artifact,~ and that type would not prove
the presence of one of those tribes any more than the others;
but when a complex consisting of several types of weapons,
utensils, skinning and sewing implements, a particular burial
practice, special form of pipes, ornaments, and the like can
be worked out, the total assemblage is usually distinct in
some ways from the total assemblage of traits of any other
tribe or cultural group. Each complex, then, is a combination of culture traits which happen to coincide in a particular
way in one place or area, whereas each of the traits embraced by it will have a somewhat different distribution,
traceable in different directions, from each of the others.
Archeologists have themselves been classified into "splitters" and "lumpers". The "splitters" prefer to set up types of
great refinement, so that the smallest differences are considered to designate typological distinction and a collection will
be sorted into innumerable small groups of rigid uniformity.
Thus, projectile points which are similar in stem and blade
shape will be subdivided into "types" with short barbs, medium barbs, and long barbs; the average "splitter" would be

Texas Archeological Society

horrified at the suggestion that concave bases could be included in the same type with straight bases, or that pottery
bottles could be included in a single type with bowls. The
"lumpers", on the other hand, make only rough divisions
along general lines, either because more refined types do not
seem worth the effort, or because they hold no particular
interest in comparing the products of man from one site to
another and one region to another. In practice, very rough
typing of the "lumper" variety is often quite useless for strict
comparisons.
We do not identify ourselves with either of these extremes, believing that all archeological material must be
analyzed for consistency, and the groupings continually tested for what they reveal about the distribution in time and
space of the underlying, human idea behind the manufacture
of the objects in question. Thus--as will be noticed in many
of the plates in Part II--a specimen at the extreme range
of variation of one type may be identical to one at the extreme range of another type. Artifacts which seem identical
to the eye may each have been produced with a somewhat
different pattern in mind--patterns dictated by the cultural
habits of the group--and their identity is thus due to coincidence rather than to intent.
Both the "splitter" and the "lumper" have a comparatively easy time of it. The former simply puts together all
specimens which look alike, and if he then has 50 "types"
of arrow points for a single culture complex, this causes him
neither concern nor curiosity about what the ancient people
were actually doing. The "lumper" likewise is not concerned about how many actually distinct--and therefore
culturally significant--styles were being manufactured by
the people he is studying through their archeological remains.
Concern with the inner problems of artifact typologyhas been going on for many years at the University of Texas.
This partly explains why it has taken so long to produce
typological results such as herein presented. As recently

Introduction

as the fall of 1954, when this Handbook was still being planned (due to the fact that no manuscripts were re~eived for
the 1954 Bulletin), many of the types herein presented were
still quite tentative, and others had not even been created.
The amount of trial sorting, re-sorting, and checking against
facts of time and space distribution done between October,
1954, and April, 1955, would be impossible to convey to the
reader. The types of pottery and projectile points herein
presented are the principal results of that process; but many
other possible types emerged which will require more study
--and more material from different parts of the State--before we will know whether they constitute real types or not.
In all, over 4,000 complete pottery vessels and 200,000
potsherds have been examined. Most of these are in the
University of Texas collections, but many were examined
through the courtesy of private persons and museums, as
acknowledged under "Plate Identifications~. We also examined intensively more than 25,000 projectile points for
establishing the types, holding in reserve another 20,000 or
so which were then examined to see whether the types could
be readily recognized in consistent form and variation. This
check showed generally good results, although we would be
the first to admit that some revisions may be needed as exact
data increases. In other words, there is little purpose served
in juggling the types further, until specific information on
distribution in space, or position in a stratigraphic sequence,
is available to provide objective bases for altering the inelusiveness of a given type--information which we do not
now possess. Without going into detail, the premises and
procedures used to form these types are those discussed by
Krieger (1944) and Newell and Krieger (1949, pp. 71-74).

A common stumbling block in archeology is to try too
hard to make every specimen fit into some kind of a type.
Usually this means that endless numbers of new "types"
have to be created just to take care of a minority of divergent
specimens. We have followed the principle that it is utterly1
impossible to establish the type of every specimen. Our
types have been established on the basis of large sampling~,

Texas Archeological Society

so that contrasts become clearer than in samplings of only
five or ten specimens (as is too often the case in this country). The pottery types are based on a minimum of 25 complete vessels each, but most include at least 100 vessels each,
and several are represented by hundreds. The single exception is in the Alto Focus types, where no complete vessels
were found among 96,000 potsherds excavated; but the number of sherds in this case which revealed vessel shape and
design distribution on rim and body plainly made up for
their lack of completeness. As a general rule, no pottery
type has been defined unless we had good knowledge of what
the whole vessels looked like. The projectile-point types are
based on a minimum of 100 specimens each, but few of them
were so scantily represented; most consist of several hundred, and some of as many as 3,000 specimens.
The problems and headaches of sorting grow in proportion to the magnitude of the sampling, so that the more
specimens, the more complete and exasperating their overlapping in all ways. On the other hand, the magnitude of
our sampling has made the principal contrasts in pattern
clearer, and--most important--errors in judgment have been
to a large extent overcome by sheer numbers. Thus, -while
it was impossible to make satisfactory decisions about all
specimens belonging to this or that type, the borderline
cases can hardly constitute 10 per cent of the total number
typed, if that much.
In the case of both pottery and projectile points, we
have not even attempted as yet to establish types for minor
groups which do not agree well with the many large gro,ups.
Their identification should follow as knowledge of them increases. It is particularly important that such material
should be fully reported in the publications on individual
sites. Thus, future reports will include frequency tabulations of types as they are given here, provided there is no
argument about their reality; proposed revisions in the present types (with the reasons therefore) ; new types (with explanations of why they are new) ; and "left-overs" which do
not fit into any well-established types and should be de-

Introduction

scribed and illustrated individually. The "left-overs" may
eventually be expected to assume one of three statuses, hence
their individual treatment in publications is of critical importance. They may be identified in due time as:
1. Representatives of new types, developed by further
research in a single area, or in another area or state where
they prove to be more common.
2. Intrusions, brought from elsewhere by native trade,
visits, war parties, intermarriage, etc.; or intruded into a
site by some sort of accident (e.g., when an Indian picked
up a more ancient artifact and, out of curiosity, took it home,
just as we do).
3. Curiosities and accidents: odd products of some person’s imagination or "doodling" which, never having been
adopted by the cultural group, or even by a second person,
do not attain the status of culture traits. Included here are
artifacts which probably simply did not turn out according
to plan, but their deviations from normal did not spoil them
for use.

Progress in Texas archeology depends far more on research by amateurs than most of them realize. The University of Texas, contrary to popular opinion, does not provide
funds for field work or site exploration; such work as has
been done since the 1930’s has been done on grants which
have to be raised from a number of sources with a great deal
of time and trouble. The University does maintain an archeological laboratory, now in comfortable new quarters
with much more working and storage space than before. The
University thus has the facilities for acting as a center of
research, a place where archeological material can be seen
and compared, where problems can be discussed, and advice
given as to how amateurs can work independently.
In order to develop the typological problems initiated by
this Handbook, the University needs the help of all amateurs who wish to contribute something to human known

Texas Archeological Society

edge; from past experience, I think that this includes the
majority of them. We urge that amateurs as well as professionals view the present results critically: if specimens
in your collections do not seem to fit rather readily into any
of the types presented here, it may very well be that new
ones should be defined. This is quite possible--even probable-in those parts of the State which we have not been
able to cover for lack of adequate collections in our records.
However, as indicated above, new types, to be valid, must
be based on quantities rather than a few odd specimens. It
would be very desirable as well as practical for tentative
new types to be discussed by those concerned, perhaps during the annual meetings of the Society. Various types have
already been proposed independently here and there, but
without reference to what is being done in other areas. This
results in a multiplicity of names being coined for artifacts
which are very similar if not identical, and adds to confusior~ without advancing the science of archeology. It is
very difficult to get rid of superfluous names for the same.
artifacts after they have been recorded in print, and still
more difficult to explain to the uninitiated why there are so
many different names already in the literature which conflict with one another. This goes on in different states as
well, for lack of consultation beforehand.
One of the purposes of this Handbook is to encourage
amateur archeologists to analyze their own collections, and
thus contribute to increasing knowledge of the thousands of
years of native history of this State. Many of the most important discoveries already made in Texas and other states
have been made by amateurs who not only have sharp eye.s
and a good sense of observation, but who learn a great deal
more about the details of a small area over the years than
any professional who is able to spend only a few days--or at
most a few weeks--in the intensive investigation of selected
sites.
We should like to see amateur archeologists throughout
the State make a compilation of artifacts in their own collections, starting with the types of pottery and projectile

Introduction

9

points described herein. The notes which we have given
on distribution are very general, barely suggesting the main
areas in which each type has so far been found. This has
been done because we really do not know the full distribution of a single type. We have presented enough for the
reader to gain some perspective, to get a general idea of what
he can expect to find in various pa~ts of the State, and the
general time position of such remains. In order to increase
this knowledge, and eventually to publish maps showing the
full distribution of each type (and new types), we suggest
the following procedures:
1. Count the specimens that you feel can be readily
identified from the present descriptions and illustrations, but
keep separate accounts for those found on different sites. Do
not force the identification too much, for it is not to be expected that all your specimens are of known types.
2. Make outline drawings or photographs of those that
do not agree, and label them by some system to indicate the
sites on which they were found. If possible, bring such material to the annual meetings for discussion and comparison
with other members (the Texas Archeological Society meets
annually in late October or early November at a place announced by September; non-members have always been welcome too).
3. List the other classes of artifacts found on the same
sites, so that associations can be checked with the trait lists
in Part I and the particular culture complexes identified. We
expect that new complexes will be identified in many parts
of Texas, and local archeological groups can do much to discover them.
Some warnings are in order. First, a single type of artifact may have a very restricted distribution, hardly ever
being found away from that area, while another may be
found over half the North American continent. Many of
those found in Texas will eventually be recognized far beyond the boundaries of this State, but at this point we prefer
to wait for such matters to develop. Named types as de-

10

Texas Archeologica! Society

scribed herein should not conflict with the innumerable
numbered "types" found in hundreds of publications. With
time and patience those that are really similar and have the
same meaning in history should be brought together under
the same name.

Second, a particular complex or "focus"

cannot be recognized through any one artifact type.

A

single type can--and normally does---occur in two or more
foci, sometimes in dozens of them, being borrowed by one
cultural group after another. A focus is recognized by the
presence of several key types in association. The number
needed for such recognition cannot be stated exactly and
advice should be sought on this point.

The most common questions asked by students of archeology are: What Indians made these artifacts? How old
are they? It is one of our curious paradoxes that the most
simple and obvious questions are the hardest to answer,
even after years of intensive effort. The most famous Texas
tribes, such as Comanche and Apache, only entered the State
shortly before or after the first Europeans had explored it;
and as they wandered constantly, they left no accumulation
of remains anywhere that compare with those of the older,
native tribes. In other cases, such as the Karankawa, Wichita, and Caddo, connections have been made with archeological material in some areas, as noted on the trait lists.
For the most part, however, it is practically impossible to
state that such and such artifacts were made by any particular tribes. A great field of research remains to be done on
this subject, particularly in conducting excavations around
Spanish missions and other historic sites, where the early
documents often give the names of tribes who gathered about
the settlements. Usually the pre-European material must be
discussed without the use of known tribal names; thus we
speak of the "people of Pecos River Focus"; "the Edwards
Plateau Indians", etc., using the name of the cultural units
applied to their archeological remains.
The determination of age is one of our most difficult
problems. It would be of greatest benefit if we could obtain
more Carbon 14 age determinations in Texas, but the labora-

In~roduc~io~

11

tory established for this purpose at the University of Texas
has not, at this writing, yet produced a dating to aid in this
survey. Meanwhile, we have entered an "estimated age" in
the trait lists and type descriptions which has been carefully
considered from different points of viewmby comparison
with culture complexes elsewhere dated by Carbon 14; by
comparison with tree-ring datings in New Mexico and
zona; by stream terrace association; and so on. Any of the
estimates we have used may be badly off, but we have tried
to make them reasonable without being insistent. Back to
about 1000 A. D. we have made estimates in spans of about
two or three hundred years (1400-1700 A. D., 1200-1500 A.
D., etc.), within which we think the cultural unit existed.
This is not to say that the unit existed for 300 years in each
case, but that it is believed to have thrived during at least
good part of that time.
Going back beyond 1000 A. D., estimates have been made
in blocks of 500 years or 1000 years. We prefer them to be
so generalized because there is a deplorable tendency among
archeologists to publish precise dates for many phases of
culture, when as a matter of fact there simply is not information enough to do any close figuring. The Southwestern
culture area provides a notable exception through the treering dating system, which does enable extremely close figuring, almost to an exact year in some cases, back approximately to the time of Christ.

A word must be said about the reasons for the tardiness
of this printing. During the winter and spring of 1954, Miss
Suhm was a University of Texas graduate student in anthropology, and part-time office assistant to Mr. Jelks, the
Texas representative of the River Basin Surveys of the
National Park Service (formerly this Survey was a division
of the Smithsonian Institution). Her interest in archeology
and conversations with Mr. Jelks and myself and others led
Miss Suhrn to try to draw up a list of traits and artifact types
in various parts of Texas. She also made a wall chart for
purposes of clarifying the picture.

12

Texas Archeological Society

It seemed to me that this survey should be encouraged
and eventually put into publication when it was full enough.
By June 1954 it was time to plan the 1954 Bulletin of this
Society, but instead of asking for manuscripts from various
members, I decided to see what would be submitted voluntarily. Part of the summer was spent in Mexico writing a
dissertation, and on my return to Austin early in September, I found that not a single manuscript had been submitted
for the Bulletin, nor did anyone even indicate plans for submitting one. This left the field open for following up the
idea of a guide or manual of Texas archeology. Miss Suhm
and Mr. Jelks had worked on the trait lists during the summer whenever time permitted. In September we began to
plan this Handbook seriously and made a survey of the
amount of new typological research we would have to do to
round it out.
By this time it was fully apparent that new research
would have to be performed on artifact types in all parts
of Texas before we could present enough of them to be really
helpful for others in analyzing collections. I went through
great numbers of specimens, photographs, and notes to see
what could be used. By October, we were moving along
fairly well and had hopes of finishing by the year’s end. As
in all such cases we underestimated the job or overestimated
our abilities. Unfortunately, it was at this time that we lost
the services of Ed Jelks. The National Park Service closed
its River Basin Surveys office in Austin and transferred him
to the Jamestown project in Virginia. His last month was
taken up with ordering and packing the extensive files and
equipment of the Austin office. From November 1st onward, Miss Suhm and I continued the research and writing
alone. Due to the fact that she was now the secretary of the
Anthropology Department, and I was rather desperately trying to complete other manuscripts for other deadlines, neither of us was able to spend more than a part of our time
on the Handbook. After February 10th, I was able to increase this time.
The actual writing of this Handbook would not have

Introduction

13

been too difficult if all the typological research had been
well set beforehand. However, it was necessary to reexamine every pottery and projectile-point type set up by
all those who have created them in the State, including the
re-examination of those of the authors themselves. Adjustments were made in some of these, but it was necessary to
create many new ones to take care of even the general run
of artifacts in most parts of the State. Thus the experimental
sorting, study, and re-sorting done by Miss Suhm and myself since November 1st has taken at least twice the time
spent on actual writing.
Miss Suhm deserves the place of senior author because
of her original idea of a simplified guide, the vast araount
of interest, energy, and judgment that she exhibited in ex~
tracting information from the literature, her writing the
first drafts of all the sections of Part I and the descriptions
in Part II, and her critical and acute role in extending the
typological studies. My part has been one of planning and
organization, contributing unpublished information and evaluations, criticizing and reconciling previous works (including my own), re-writing most of the sections, making final
decisions on most of the types, preparing the illustrations;
and doing editorial work for the final printing. Jelks has
provided information from excavations and eolleetfons of the
River Basin Surveys in dozens of reservoir basins in Texas
between 1947 and 1954, and contributed typological determinations from his own researches and those of his predecessor, Robert L. Stephenson. Jelks is also responsible for
the basic scheme of four cultural stages--Paleo-Ameriean,
Archaic, Neo-Ameriean, and Historiemwhich we have used
to discuss the data; the first and third of these terms were~
coined by him.
This work contains deficiencies and it may raise more
questions than it answers. Much more data could have been
included, but we had to be brief and reduce expenses. The
type descriptions have been trimmed to fit single pages
facing the illustrations, except in those cases where two
pages of illustration allowed two pages of description. Much

14

Texas Archeological Society

more data on types could have been included, but we hope
we have included enough for general purposes, and believe
that the facing-page system will prove convenient.
Each plate’showing a type of projectile point attempts
to convey (1) an impression o.f the total range ol variation
as we see it, with largest, smallest, broadest, narrowest,
finest, and crudest extremes; variations in shoulders, barbs,
shape and size of stem in relation to blade; variations in
shape of base, etc.; and (2) a representation roughly reflecting the frequency of such details: Thus thbse variations seen
least often in actuality appear least often on the plates. The
pottery types also attempt to show variations in form and
design distribution, but it is difficult to do this with as much
success. Whole specimens cannot always be found for each
variation; we have no photographic record yet of many ir~teresting specimens in other hands; and som~ vessels are so
decorated that it is almost impossible to make their designs
show in photographs.
The trait lists in Part I do not include explanations for
many decisions made about what to include and not to include in the various loci and aspects. To have done so
would again have increased the length of this work, and
moreover would be very confusing to the average reader.
Such problems are best threshed out in the discussion sections of individuai~ site reports and areal surve.ys. Here w~e
have omitted those trait problems which cause the greatest
controversies, and it may well be that traits other than the
ones we have listed should belong to a particular complex.
Certain type descriptions do not agree closely with
previous publications. In such cases we have notedthat a
change of opinion has taken place since the original work
¯ was written. The reader is to assume that the present wording is our best estimate, the previous ones obsolete..
Some type names for projectile points in Central and
western Texas are those coined by J. Charles Kelley many
years ago, provided that they have been mentioned in print
in one way or another, and quoted by other writers. Since

Introduction

he has never described or illustrated any of these in any detail, we cannot be sure that his conception of their ranges
of variation coincides with ours. It simply seemed best not
to create new names when these had already gained some
use in his and others’ publication.s. On the other hand,
scores of other type names coined by him but never described have not been used here. We have, in fact, done .the
projectile-point typology over again for central and western
Texas, at considerable labor. This was desirable anyway,
to bring a uniformity of concept into the present work for
all sections of the State.
All qualifying terms have been dropped from projectilepoint names, even from those which have previously been
¯ published. Thus, they are simply "Nolan points", "Gary
points", "Folsom points", etc. Qualifying terms give too restr,ictive an idea of what variations may occur within a type.
Thus, those with "Barbed" in the name need not always be
barbed; those with "Contracting Stem" as part of the name
may vary from sharply contracting to parallel-edged; and
so on. No one is going to learn the appearance and variations of any type anyway until he has studied illustrations
and gained some idea of what features to look for, just as
he would with animals, plants, minerals, etc.. If desired,
types can always be tabulated under certain headings such
as "triangular", "stemmed", "notched", "lanceolate". In pottery typology, on the other hand, there is more reason to use
qualifying names such as "Engraved", "Punctated", "Stamped", "Incised", "Plain" for purposes of stressing technique
and technological tradition.

Some of the cultural terminology used herein shouldbe
briefly explained: The four stages are ~ery broad in concept
but they serve to indicate the principal differences in age of "
most archeological remains.
1. Paleo-American is used in place of the more commonly used Paleo-Indian because there is growing doubt that
the earliest migrants to the New World from Asia were truly

16

Texas Archgological Society

Indians. They may not even have been Mongoloids (a race
which some anthropologists regard as of rather recent development in Asia), but representatives of a stock which
might be called proto-Caucasian. Whoever these first inhabitants were, their initial migrations occurred a long time
ago. For some time it has been popularly believed that the
makers of Folsom points were the New World’s first inhabitants, about 10,000 years ago, but there are now evidences of
much older people. We cannot guess the span of human
occupation as yet, except to say that it beg’an well back in
the Glacial or PleiStocene epoch, probably as much as 25,000
years ago and perhaps much more than that. The Pleistocene, on the other hand, has been shown by Carbon 14 datings to have lasted somewhat later than previously estimated, the last full glaciation having reached its climax
about 11,000 .years ago. The characteristic Pleistocene mammals such as mammoth, mastodon, saber-toothed cat, native
American horse, camel, giant ground sloth, giant wolf, cave
bear, extinct species of bison larger than the modern one,
etc., rather certainly became extinct everywhere in America
by 5,000 B. C, when a long period of desert conditions (the
Altithermal Age) set in, destroying the grass on which some
of the animals lived, and the carnivores which lived on the
grazing mammals. Most of these animals had, however,
disappeared long before the Altithermal Age, or even before
the last major glaciation. The large bison, probably also the
sloth and dire wolf, seem to have lingered on longer than the
others, so that there may have been a differential of several
thousand years between the extinction of various species;
and, na.tu~ally, some may have lingered longer in some areas
than in others.
We therefore apply the term "Paleo-American" to those
unknown people who arrived in the New World by way of
northeastern Siberia. at some remote but unknown time
during the latest phases of the Pleistocene, lived as nomadic
hunters of big game, and survived about as long a~ the last
of the Pleistocene animal species which eventually became
extinct--that is, until approximatel~y 5,000 B. C. The term

Introduction

"Paleo-American" is thus synonymous with Pleistocene
habitants of the New World. Between approximately 11,000
and 7,000 years ago, when Pleistocene animals were finally
disappearing, archeologlcal sites show less and less evidence
of the hunting of such animals, ~as one would expect. Thus
a Plainview, Scottsblu]], or other early post-glacial type of
projectile point may be found with now-extinct bison ir~
some localities but not in others because man was now turning to other foods to exist. Milling stones and manos first
appear widely in North America during this early postglacial period, indicating use of plant foods, nuts, berries,
roots, etc., which were ground into meal. It is important to
note that we have distinguished between ground and polished stone artifacts, the first category consisting of implements ground by use on certain faces, the second being
shaped, grou~.d, and polished for beauty as well as utility..
Thus~ manos, milling stones, mortars, and pestles are the’
chief artifacts ground by Use alone, but of these, mortars
and pestles are exceedingly rare in Texas. Manos and milling stones definitely appear before the end of Pleistocene
times as we define this stage, that is, in early post-glacial
times, while true polished-stone artifacts do not appear until
later, in the Archaic Stage, beginning perhaps as early as
4000 or 3000 B. C.
Archeological evidence of the Paleo-Americans is very
scanty at best, consisting largely of choppers, scrapers, and
projectile points. The earliest known projectile points, however, did not appear until America had already been inhabited for some time. These were the Sandia and C~ovis types,
both appearing, it now seems, somewhat before the final
Wisconsin ice advance, or roughly between 18,000 and 15,000
years ago. They are the~:efore approximately as old as any
of the Old World stone points. The FolSom type, developin~
out of Clovis, belongs more or less to the final major Wisconsin ice advance, called Mankato by most geologists. The
FoIsom type appears to have disappeared rather rapidly, by
about 9000 years ago, giving way to Plainview, Scottsblu~,
Eden. Anaostura. Meserve, and Browns Valley points (some

1.8

Texas Archeological Society

of which have been widely termed "Yuma" points) in early
post-glacial time, or roughly 9,000 to 6,000 years ago.
Most of the known Paleo-American sites are simply
places where characteristic Pleistocene animals were killed
and butchered. The artifacts are therefore largely from the
weapons used spears or atlatl darts--and implements used
for skinning and dismembering the carcasses. Dwellings, if
any, and burial customs are totally unknown, nor has any
evidence of domesticated dogs been found. In spite of the
simple existence lived by wandering bands of people in
search of game, there probably are thousands of such sites
in North America alone; but because of their age and the
changes in climate which have occurred, the vast majority
of such sites must be buried under layers of sand and
alluvium. Those which have been found have almost always
been exposed by erosion of the covering materials, so that
the chances of discovering them are infinitely small in proportion to the enormous amounts of covering up of ancient
land surfaces.
2. An Archaic Stage is used in the usual sense in North
America north of Mexico. It bridges the time between
Paleo-American nomadic hunting people on the one hand,
and the settled agricultural, pottery-making Indians on the
other. Hunting~ gathering of wild plant foods anal shellfish,
and fishing were all pursued. Chipped-stone artifacts cover
a much wider range of classes and types than before; projectile points reveal scores of distinct shapes, most of them having stems formed by making notches in the corners in various ways. 1Vfanos and milling stones continued in use, while
mortars and pestles appear widely in some regions. ~Polished-stone artifacts such as pendants, boatstones and bannerstones (beautifully shaped weights for atlatls), tubular
beads, and t~bular pipes provide entirely new traits) Probably canoe transportation and domestic dogs were spread
over most of America in this stage. Dwellings must have
been rude brush shelters, perhaps co~ered with mats or skins
in some areas, or simple lean-tos; but being easily built of
light poles and sticks, evidence of them is practically im-

Introduction

19

possible to find archeologically. Generally speaking, the
dead were buried in flexed position and without offerings
except for personal adornments left on the bodies. There
are notable exceptions, as in California, where whole cemeteries have been found with bodies extended; but whether
flexed or extended, they were accompanied by numerous
offerings.
The Texas Archaic remains fit into this generalized
picture, but there are important differences within the State.
The East Texas material is closely connected with that of
the Eastern United States as a whole; Trans-Pecos Texas’
shows connections with the Southwe.st; Southwest Texas
with northeastern Mexico; and the central part is unique in
some ways. No Archaic Stage has yet been defined in the
Panhandle and South Plains. North-Central Texas shows
blends of artifact types in Central and East Texas.
In western New Mexico and southern Tamaulip~s, perhaps in other areas yet to be discovered, agricul~ture was
introduced before the end of Archaic times, as shown by the
discovery of large amounts of primitive races of maize pre-.
served in dry cave deposits. ~Where such preservation is
lacking it is difficult to determine whether agriculture was
present or not, for there were no farming implements of
imperishable nature to provide even indirect evidence. In
Texas. so far as known, no agriculture was practiced before
pottery was made; tt~at is, it belongs in the next or NeoAmerican Stage. While the atlatl and dart was the common
weapon of Archaic people everywhere, the bow and arrow
was widely adopted not long after the time of Christ, as
seen in the appearance of small, thin, light stone points over
tremendous areas. In some parts of Texas, such small projectile points appear somewhat in advance of pottery, which
is t.o say that, if pottery is the chief criterion for the NeoAmerican Stage, the bow and arrow must have appeared
before the end of Archaic times. However, it was a recent
acquisition in terms of the several thousand years that the
Archaic Stage must have lasted in Texas as well as elsewhere. Its beginning may be estimated at between 4000

2O

Texas Archeological Society

and 3000 B. C., and its end somewhere between 0 and 1000
A. D., depending upon the time of appearance of pottery in
different parts of Texas.
3. The Neo~American Stage includes cultural manifestations which possessed pottery (whether made locally or acquired by trade) ; small, light arrow points; and agriculture
of a more developed nature than that of the late Archaic
Stage. Usually a still greater refinement of artifacts accompanies these traits; houses were often large and well built,
located in permanent settlements; earthworks were erected
for ceremonial purposes in the Eastern United States (including East Texas); ceremonial objects used in rituals,
dances, prayers, and sacrifices appear; some sites were quite
large and became ceremonial or trading centers; and withal
a level of culturai development was reached in Some regions
which may be called civilization (which, literally, means
life in cities, with specialization of labor and social stratification). Arts and crafts were more highly developed than
before, due to greater security of food supply and more
leisure time. Not only was pottery one of the world’s great
inventions, but some Indian groups exercised a great deal of
ingenuity in creating new and pleasing forms and design
conceptions as this stage went on.
In Texas archeology we have several anomalous situations in which it is difficult to assign a particular complex
to a late phase of the Archaic Stage or to the Neo-American.
That is, they do not show, as yet, clear evidence of whether
the three institutions--pottery-making, agricultures and bow
and arrow--appeared simultaneously or with some time differentials between them. We have done about all that could
be done under the circumstances--placed the cultural units
in a Neo-American Stage if they showed the presence of any
two of these three developments. Future research may prove
these decisions wrong in some cases; in most, they should be
confirmed and amplified.
4. The Historic Stage is used to embrace all remains
associated with objects of European or modern American

In~roductio~

origin, such as metal, glass, porcelain, etc. The presence of
such tangible objects is the only practical way we have of
proving that a given archeological complex belongs to a time
¯ of contact (direct or indirect) with members of the white
race. This, lzowever, was seldom the first such contact, for
many of the earlier explorers passed through certain areas,
meeting and conversing with the Indians, obtaining food and
travel directions from them, claiming the area in the name
of their King~ and so on, but leaving practically nothing
among them that can be recovered by archeologists. With
the establishment of trading posts and missions, trade was
carried on with Indians, so that they obtained European
articles in some quantity, leaving them about their villages
or placing them in graves. Thus, the firs~ contacts made no
appreciable effect on native life, and only gradually did sufficient change come about to mark a separate "stage" of
culture., lYfany archeolbgica! complexes, although they may
have existed after the discovery of America--~.yen as much
as two or three centuries after Columbus in some cases-therefore remained in the Neo-American Stage until evidence of white contact can be picked up. As this contact
increased, the native Indians abandoned some of their weapons, tools,, and utensils, substituting steel arrow points for
stone, iron knives and axes for flint and polished stone, glass
beads for shell pendants and bead,s, copper or iron buckets
for pottery cooking jars, and so on.
We have discussed the Historic Stage only very briefly
in the various sections of Texas, first because such sites are
very rare in Texas compared with those of the Archaic and
Neo-American Stages, and second, because a great deal of
documentary research remains to be done in connecting such"
sites with specific tr~bes existing in definite locations during
definite dates. Where we have felt that such connections
can.be made, we h~ve noted the tribal names.

It must be pointed out that the above ".stages" are of
the most general nature. The traits of any stage may and

22

Texas Archeological Society

commonly do continue into the next one. A stage is therefore recognized by the new elements which appear, regardless of how many older ones continue. At the same time, the
four stages mark a series of developments in economic evolution, increasing exploitation of the environment for new
and more varied foods, increasing population density and
size of villages, increasing social stratification and specialization of labor, and with the exception of the Historic
Stage--by increasing development of arts and crafts. In
the last stage there was a general breakdown of native culture everywhere, in great part due to the terrible decimations of smallpox, when most tribes lost from half to threequarters or more of their numbers; in part to the intertribal
wars which were fostered and encouraged by the white man
in order to help the Indian to destroy himself; in part .to
the white man’s own warfare to take away the Indian’s
lands;.and in part to substitution of the white man’s weapons,
tools, and utensils for those of native origin.
Furthermore, each stage may have begun at a different
time in one area from that in another. The Neo-American
Stage, for example, probably began at different times in
Texas, according to the source of the influences which
brought agriculture, pottery-making, and bow and arrow,
not to mention the many other traits which accompanied
these three in the course of normal diffusion. Thus, the
Neo-American Stage was instituted in far western Texas
by influences from cultures already well established in New
Mexico and Chihuahua; in the upper Panhandle from cultures already well established in the Great Plains and northern New Mexico; in North-Central Texas from the Great
Plains of Oklahoma and Kansas; in East Texas from the
general lower Mississippi Valley region (at least in part).,
and possibly by migration from the Middle American province. In Central, Coastal and Southwest Texas, agriculture has not been proved present prior to establishment of
Spanish missions in the 18th century, when the friars specifically state in several instances that they taught the Indians to plant and irrigate. The origins of arrow-point

Introduction

styles and ceramics in Central and Coastal Texas have not
been traced satisfactorily in any specific direction as yet, except for obvious trade pieces. Thus, even within the boundaries of Texas alone, the onset of a Neo-American Stage
may differ by as much as a thousand years in one section
or another.
It remains to define certain cultural terms used throughout this work. These are:
Site: !~uy place ~revealing occupation by human beings.
There may have been more than one occupation, superimposed in vertical order, or overlapping horizontal.ly. Sites
may-,be open camps, caves or ro~ck shelters,-mounds, pict0,
graphs, bedrock ,mortar holes, pr burial areas. Burials may
sometimes be isolated, away from an occupation area., and
while not technically sites, are evidence of occupation nearby.
Focus: One or more sites consistently revealing similar culture traits. These are seldom identical, especially over large
areas, but provide complexes of traits which, taken as a
whole, are distinct from other such combinations; in other
words, "they reveal thematerial-culture remains of similar
people .living ~iuring a limited time span. One focus may
change into another in the same area.
omponent: A site, or part of a site, which reveals the remains of a single focus..
Aspect: A grouping of loci which contain a number of culture traits in common, bind~ing them more closely together
than with the ioci of another aspect.. These foci may occupy
adjacent areas and be more or less contemporaneous with
one another~ or they rhay follow one another in time within
the same. general area. In some cases there are both hori-.
zon~al and vertical relationships between the loci of one as:.
pect. A focus may be a mixture of-traits, so that it is difficult
to place within one aspect or another. This is’ sometimes
"solved" by assigning the focus to one aspect rather than another on the bas~s of themajority of its traits; however, we

24

Texas ArcheoZogical Society

prefer to describe these situations as mixtures rather than to
force decisions where they are far from clear.
Phase: This has two meanings. In the original McKern or
Midwestern System of classifying cultural units, a "Phase" is
a grouping of aspects which show important traits in common, in distinction to other such groupings. This process
has caused so much difference of opinion among archeologists that it has now been virtually abandoned. The second
meaning is that of a slight change in culture which took place
during the life-span of a given focus. Thus, One speaks of an
"early phase" or a "late phase" of a focus. The authors have
used "phase" in this latter sense.
Pattern: In the McKern System, a "pattern" is a major cultural division, a grouping of "phases" in the first sense men:
tioned above. In North America as a whole there would be
only a very few patterns: the Archaic would be one (at
least in the Eastern United States) ; the Woodland and Mississippian cultures in the Eastern United States would
provide two others; and probably the Puebloan and Hohokam cultures of the Southwest would provide others (in
which case the Anasazi and Mogollon would be separate
"phases" of the "Puebloan Pattern").
Culture: This is always used loosely by archeologists to embrace almost any kind of complex, from focus to pattern.
Probably it should be confined to the largest groupings or
conceptions, such as "pattern". Thus, one may speak of a
Woodland, Mississippian, or Puebloan "culture", within
which there are various subdivisions such as aspects and
loci.
We present this Introductory Handbook, then, as (I) a
general summary of what is fairly well known in Texas
archeology, and (2) as a sort of manual which we hope will
be used for identifying various culture complexes and individual types of pottery and projectile points in collections
everywhere. As such, it is merely a starting point for more
intensive and exact research.
ALEX D. KI~IEGER,
University of Texas.
~Viay I, 1955

