ARCHEOLOGICAL EXCAVATIONS AT THE
BELTON RESERVOIR, CORYELL
COUNTY, TEXAS~
E. O. MILLER AND EDWARD B. JELKS
Introduction

The Belton Dam, presently under construction by the
United State Army Corps of Engineers, is located on the
Leon River 3 V2 miles due north of Belton, Texas. The reservoir impounded by the dam will extend 17V2 miles up the
Leon and 12 miles up Cowhou~se Creek, the principal tributary. It will function in flood control, and will supplement
the water supplies of Temple, Belt0n, Killeen, and Ft. Hood.
A preliminary archeological reconnaissance of the Belton
Reservoir area was made by Robert L. Stephenson in July,
1949. He located 38 archeological sit~es which will be affected
by the reservoir. Twelve additional sites were discovered
subsequently by E. O. Miller.
Working intermittently ~rom January 18 to March 2,
1951, E. H. Moorman and E. O. Miller completed minor
excavations at the Grimes-Houy shelter (41-39D4-17) and
the Urbankte Site (41-39D4-15). Later, in November and
December, 1951, Miller spent six weeks at the Belton Reservoir working on the Grimes-Houy burnt rock midden (4139D4-19), the Johnson Hole Site (41-39D4-20), and the Horse
Creek burnt rock midden (41-39D4-21). Both Stephenson’s
survey and the subsequent excavations were part of the
Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program of the Smithsonian Institution, the National Park Service, the U. S.
Army Co_rps of Engineers, and the Bureau of Reclamation.
This program, designed to salvage archeological material
endangered by dam construction, has been supervised by
the River Basin Surveys--a unit of the Smithsonian InstitutionNunder the direction of Dr. Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr.
¯ Permission for the publication of this ]paper has been kindly ~rant~d by the
Searetary of the Srnithsonian Institution.

Archeological Excavations a~ the Belto~ Reservoir

169

After the activities of the River Basin Surveys at Belton
had been terminated, additional excavations at some of the
same sites were undertaken by Mr. D. B. Hill, an amateur
archeologist of Moody, Texas. The material he recovered
was included in the tabulations and analyses of this study.
M.r. Hill’s cooperation in lending his specimens for analysis
and photographing is gratefully acknowledged.
Special acknowledgment is due Alex D. Krieger, University of Texas archeologist, who exhmined all the artifacts,
identified the Caddoan pottery types, and pointed out similarities between some of the lithic artifacts and their counterparts in the Caddoan area.
AnaIys~s o~ the Artifacts
Three fundamental steps were employed in anlyzing the
material from Belton. First, the artifacts from each site were
separated into classes on a basis of supposed functional design: i.e. they were classified as knives, awls, arrow points,
dart points, etc. Then, wherever possible, each class was
further sub-divided into types.. Many specimens fell inte
previously recognized typological categories; others require~t
new definition. The newly-defined types are presented here
as tentative ’groupings and will probably require revision as
additional data are gathered through future research. The.
third step in the analysis consisted of plotting the distribu-.
tion of the various classes and types, and seeking to recog-.
nize affiliations between groups through associations, one’
with another, within the sites.
In order to separate the artifacts into classes, it was neces-.
sary to draw certain arbitrary lines of definition, especially
for the chipped stone implements: these are explained here
to minimize confusion on the part of the reader.
Broad-bladed, stemmed implements--unless the stem was’
set at an inappropriate angle--were considered to be projectile points. Included also in the projectile point class were.
triangular-shaped blades of such size and shape as to suggest
their use on projectiles. Those implements with one smooth~

the Be~to~ Rese~oi~

171

unworked face were classified as scrapers, except for a few
specimens whose form compelled their inclusion with the
projectile points or drills. Thin, sharp-edged blades flaked on
both faces were classified as knives, while the thicker,
cruder blades with edges unsuitable for cutting purposes
were simply designated blades. Implements with very narrow, pointed blades were put into the drill category, and
those with short, sharp, beak-shaped projections were called
grave~
The term blade refers to any relatively flat implement
worked on both faces; it is also used to designate the body
(as distinguished from the stem) of a projectile point, or the
long, sharp-edged projection of a drill. The stem of a projectile point, drill, or knife is the projecting "tab" by which the
implement was presumably halted. The base of any implement is the bottom-most edge. The word base is also used to
indicate the broad, non-blade portion of a drill.
Stone ArtiSacts
Projectile Points
Differentiation between arrow and dart points on a basis
of size and technique of manufacture is now a generally accepted practice among North American archeologists. This
dichotomy was followed in analyzing the Belfort material,
the light, th~n, finely flaked specimens being designated
arrow points while the heavier, thick, crudely chipped ones
were classified as dart points. Although an occasional point
of intermediate size and design might have been either a
heavy arrow point or a light dart point, most of them fell
naturally and conveniently into one of the two categories.
Descriptions of the projectile point types follow: ~
Ellis Stemmed. (Plate 22, 1). This type, previously described by Krieger (Newell and Krieger, pp. 166-7), is a
1. Type names preveded by an asterisk were first recognized by J. Charles Kelley,
University of Southern ~llinols archeologist, but most of them have not been previously
d~cribed in l>rint. Kelley’s type names ar~ used here.

172

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

relatively small dart point characterized by an expanding
stem and strong shoulders. Ellis occurs over most of the
eastern portion of the United States in Archaic and Woodland sites as well as in many later complexes. A minor type
at Belton, it was found both in Edwards Plateau Aspect and
in Central Texas Aspect components.
Ensor Stemmed. (Plate 22, 2). This is the writers’ name
for a provisional dart point type of distinctive design occurring in large numbers in most sites in the Belton area. The
most prominent characteristic is a strongly expanding stem
with a straight or convex base, the lateral extensions of the
stem usually being approximately in line with the blade
edges. Ensor resembles Ellis Stemmed, but differs from it in
these respects: the expansion of the stem is sufficient to
bring the stem corners flush with the blade edges, a small
notch is frequently present in the middle of the base, markedly concave blade edges are common, the blade edges are
sometimes serrated, and Ensor is generally longer, thinner
and of more slender proportions than Ellis. While Ensor and
Ellis possibly are variations of a single type, in the writers’
opinion each has enough individuality to warrant a separate
designation. After having examined a number of private
collections from Central Texas, the writers believe that
Ensor Stemmed, together with type Darl Stemmed, described below, are affiliated with both the Edwards Plateau and
Central Texas Aspects.
Yarbrough Stemmed. (Plate 22, 3). Twenty-four points
from five sites were classified as Yarbrough Stemmed
(Newell and Krieger, p. 168), a relatively slender, mediumsized dart point, with slight shoulders and a parallel-sided
stem. Bases range from concave to convex and the stems are
frequently smoothed along the edges. This is a dominant
dart point type at the Yarbrough Site, Van Zandt County,
Texas, and is part of the late pre-pottery complex there. It
is also present at the Davis Site, type site of the Alto Focus,
in Cherokee County. Its principal affiliations appear to lie

PLATE 22
Stune dart p~llnis.

I.

EJI|~ S|emmed;

2.

Enter Stemmed:

3.

Ynrbr~u~h

Stem-

Archeological Excavation~ at the BeIton Reservoir

175

with the late pre-pottery cultures of east Texas, with continuation as a minor type into the pottery horizon.
Gary Stemmed. (Plate 23, 2). Gary (Newell and Krieger,
p. 166) is a barbless, shouldered dart point with a characteristic contracting stem. It is widely distributed over the
Southeastern area at both pre-pottery and pottery levels.
The two Belton specimens were found at the Johnson Hole
Site.
Darl Stemmed. (Plate 23, 1). This small, slender dart point
with a beveled blade is present in large numbers in the
Central Texas Aspect and Edwards Plateau Aspect components in the Belton area. A few examples were found at
the Yarbrough Site during excavations there by the University of Texas, and were classified by Krieger (personal communication) as a variant of the type Yarbrough Stemmed.
Darl is similar to Yarbrough in general outline, having
slight shoulders and a parallel-sided stem, but differs from
Yarbrough in its beveled blade, complete absence of stemedge smoothing, and in the semi-serrated effect--resulting
from fine pressure flaking along the edges of the blade-of most specimens. The present writers believe that this
style of point represents a significant depart.ure from the
Yarbrough motif, consequently they have considered it a
separate type. As with the type Ensor Stemmed, however,
Darl Stemmed is introduced as a provisional type. Its final
disposition must await broader distributional and associational studies than have been made to date.
*PedernaIes Indented Base. (Plate 23, 3-5). This point is
the principal diagnostic element of the Round Rock Focus
(Kelley, 1947b; Campbell). Fifteen specimens were recovered at Belton, eleven of them from the burnt rock midden
at the Johnson Hole Site. PedernaIes is a large dart point
with a characteristic bifurcated stem and a triangular blade.
There is considerable variation in general proportion and
outline between individual specimens.
*Nolan Beveled Stem. One dart point of this type was
found at Belton, in the Ament shelter. Nolan is the principal

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica! Socie~

projectile point type of the Clear Fork Focus as defined by
Kelley (Kelley, 1947a), but also occurs in Round Rock Focus
components. It can be easily identified by its square--or
sometimes slightly expanding--stem which is beveled to the
right, its straight base, and slight rounded shoulders.
*Castroville Convex Base. (Plate 23, 6-7). This point occurs frequently in components of the Edwards Plateau
Aspect and is considered by Kelley (Kelley, 1947b, p. 124) to
be a diagnostic element of the Round Rock Focus. The stem
is fairly broad and usually expanding, and the base ranges
through varying degrees of convexity. The shoulders are
well developed, and pronounced barbs are frequent. The
blade is broad with convex edges. Five specimens of Castroville were found at Belton, in three sites.
"Bulverde Barbed. (Plate 23, 8). Three possible BuIverde
dart points were found at Belton. All were in the Johnson
Hole burnt rock midden. This type is distinguished by a
straight base, square or slightly contracting stem, pronounced barbed shoulders, and a short, squat, triangular
blade. It is consistently found in Edwards Plateau Aspect
components in Central Texas, but its focal affiliations are
as yet undetermined.
"Martindale Fishtail. (Plate 23, 9). The one specimen of
this type was recovered at the Johnson Hole burnt rock
midden. Martindale is a thick, broad-bladed point which
occurs in components of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. The
term Fishtail was derived from its most distinctive feature,
the curving lateral stem projections which extend to either
side. The exact cultural affiliations are unknown.
Arrow Points
*Scallorn Stemmed. (Plate 24, 1). This is one of the principal arrow point types of the Austin Focus (K.rieger, 1946,
p. 166). An expanding stem, sharp barbs, and occasional
serrated blade edges are typical features. A number of the
arrow points at Belton possessed the essential form of type
Scal~orn Stemmed but, at the same time, had erratic features

Archeological E~cavat~o~ at the Belfort Reservoir

177

that would have prevented their inclusion within the type
limits as originally defined by Kelley. For purposes of the
present analysis, the limits of variation were extended to
embrace a greater diversity of form than was originally included in the type description. It is probable that future research wflI break down this extended "type" into several
groups.
*Perdiz Pointed Stem. (Plate 24, 2). This is one of the
most numerous arrow point types at Belton. It is widely
distributed in Texas, and is especially well represented in
the Toyah, Austin, Rockport, and Frankston Foci (Kelley,
1947b; Newell and Krieger, pp. 191-2). Light, thin, and finely
flaked, its most distinctive feature is a long, sharply pointed
stem. Long, sharp barbs are also characteristic.
*C!i]]ton Contracting Stem.z (Plate 24, 3). This is a crudely made arrow point with a very small contracting stem and
broad, unbarbed shoulders. A flint Lake of proper shape was
simply roughed into the desired form with little or no attention devoted to detail or accurate delineation. Many specimens retain one smooth, unchipped face and, in cases where
a curved flake was used, a marked degree of curvature frequently survives in the completed point. Cli]]ton is found in
the Harrell Site, type site of the Henrietta Focus, in Young
County, and in most components of the Austin Focus
(Krieger, 1946, p. 115).
*Foyle Flake. (Plate 25, 1). This arrow point lies typologically between Clif~ton Contracting Stem and Perdiz Pointed
Stem. Like Clif]ton, it is made from a small flake, with one
face usually left smooth and unchipped, but it differs from
CIif]ton in having a larger, sharply-pointed stem and in the
fine chipping and clean lines of most specimens. It is sufficiently close in type to Cli]]ton and Perdiz to suggest affiliation with both, and it is probable that future distributional
studies will result in some reshuffling among the three
~. C|iffton was mi~pelled Clinton in Kell~y, 194~b. l~th name~ refer to the ~ame
t~r~e srrow l~oint.

178

Texas Archeo~ogical a~d Paleontological Soci~

types. FoyIe, while far from rare, was not found in abundance at Belton.
Alba Barbed. (Plate 25, 2). This is a small arrow point
with a bulb-shaped stem and concave blade edges which
sweep out to broad barbs. Occasionally the stem edges are
parallel. According to Krieger (Newell and Krieger, pp.
161-2) Alba is widespread in loci of the Gibson Aspect in
the Caddoan area, but does not continue into the later
Fulton Aspect. Seven specimens were found at Belton, four
at the Johnson Hole Site and three at the Ament shelter.
Drills
The drills can be easily separated into two distinctive
categories: large and small. The large ones (Plate 23,
11) are chipped on both faces and are oval in cross-section;
their bases are almost invariably worked into some shape,
usually discoidal, square, or stemmed in th~ manner of
dart points. The stems are usually identical to those of local
dart point types. In contrast, the bases of the small drills
(Plate 25, 4) are irregular-shaped flakes, completely unworked, and the blades frequently have one smooth, unchipped face. The large drills seem to be associated entirely
with the Edwards Plateau Aspect cultures, while the small,
more delicate ones are later and associated with arrow
points.
Knives
It is unfortunate that a detailed study of flint knife types
in Central Texas has never been made. Several forms occur
in sufficient number to suggest that definite types do exist,
but their identification as such is beyond the scope of this
paper. A large-scale study involving thousands of specimens
would be necessary to determine the distinctive characteristics of the separate types and their distributions. Until
such a study has been completed, most of the knives in the
Belton area can be described only in general terms.
The knives are, for the most part, either triangular or
leaf-shaped and have sharp tips. Bases of the triangular

2

9

PLATE 23
Stone dart points and drill~,

1. Dar! Stemmed; 2. Gary Stemmed:

Fishtail; 1~11, Im~e dril~ with worked bas~

All app~xim~tely

~

Archeolo~ica! E~’cavatio~ at ehe Belton Reservoir

181

forms range from straight to deeply concave. In addition
to these, a few four-edged, beveled knives like those associated with the late Plains cultures and several specimens
similar to the Copena type are present. Some of the thin,
sharp implements classified as scrapers would make efficient knives and were probably used for cutting purposes.
Copena knives. A number of knives (Plate 26) were found
which bear a striking similarity to those of the Copena
Focus in Alabama, Mississippi, and Tennessee (Webb and
Dejarnette, pp. 301-6) and will henceforward be referred
to as Copena knives. This type also occurs in appreciable
numbers in components of the Alto, Spiro, and Gahagan
Foci (Newell and Krieger, pp. 173-4).
Scrapers
Scrapers can be classified as snub-nosed, side, and trimreed flake. The snub-nosed ones are of medium size and are
evidently associated almost exclusively with the Central
Texas Aspect. The other styles are more nondescript and
their affiliations are undetermined. Side scrapers of varying forms apparently were shared by both Edwards Plateau
and Central Texas Aspects, and irregularly shaped flint
flakes, retouched unifacially along one or more edges, occur
in all components.
Grinding Sfones
Manos are present in components of both the Edwards
Plateau and Central Texas Aspects. The deliberately-shaped
ones usually have parallel sides and rounded ends, and both
faces show evidence of use. Others, made from large, unshaped, water-worn quartzite nodules show wear on only
one face.

Limestone and sandstone grinding slabs with round or
oval depressions were used with the manos. No true metates
(i. e. grinding slabs used with back-and-forth motion) were
found.

A small piece of sandstone with several grooves set at
random angles was picked up on the surface at the Urbankte
Site. It was probably an abrading stone or hone used to
sharpen the tips of bone implements.
Pigments

There were small pieces of ochre at all sites. Red ochre
was most common, although a few fragments of yellow ochre
were also found. One piece of red ochre, from the Johnson
Hole burnt rock midden, has a cross-hatched design incised
on one facet, and a number of other pieces from various
sites have worn surfaces where the pigment was scraped off.
Artifacts o] Bone
Pointed Bone Implements
These were found associated with all components and can
be separated into two general styles. One style (Plate 27,
1) was made from a splinter, sharply pointed at one end,
with a smoothed, blunt base. Also included in the splinter
group are a few specimens with rough, unworked bases
(Plate 27, 1). The second, and most numerous, style (Plate
27, 2) retains all or part of the articular surface of a joint
on the basal end. No particular differences in the provenience of the two styles was observed. These implements,
generally supposed to be awls, pins, needles or weaving
tools, were all polished to some extent, especially toward
the distal end.
Flaking Tools (Plate 27, 5 and 9).
These were made from the proximal end of a deer ulna,
with the unworked articular surface and olecranon left as
a cQnvenient handle. The ulna was severed one to three
inches below the "handle" and the tip was smoothed into
a rounded or beveled shape. No other flaking implements
were found, with the possible exception of several fragments of deer antler (Plate 27, 8) which may have been
parts of flakers.

5
PLATE 24
1, Sca|l~rn Stemmed: 2, l)erd|z Pointed Stem; 3. Clifton ~ontr~ctln~ ~em.

All

A~cheo~og~c~l Exc~vati~ at ~he Be~t~ Rese~o~r

185

Tablet-Shaped Objects
Two fiat, rectangular-shaped bone objects of unknown
use were found, one at the Ament shelter (Plate 27, 3), the
other at the Grimes-Houy shelter (Plate 27, 4). Both were
collected by Mr. Hill and both were associated with burials.
Approximately ~ inch thick, they are polished on the outer
surfaces and around the edges. The inner surfaces, smoothed
slightly, still retain a veneer of the spongy, cellular structure found inside mammal bones. The size and shape of
these objects suggest that they were made from flat or long
bones of some large mammal, possibly bison.
Ceramics
Pottery was present at the Urbankte Site, the GrimesHouy shelter, the Johnson Hole Site, the Grimes-Houy burnt
rock midden, and the Ament shelter. Included are engraved,
incised, brushed, punctated, and plain sherds, all tempered
either with bone or clay-grit. No shell-tempered sherds were
found. Many of the plain body sherds probably belong to
vessels with decorated rims, but a few are plain rim sherds
which suggests entirely plain vessels.
Unfortunately, most of the sherds are too small for positive identification as to type. Several of them, however, are
unmistakably Holly Fine Engraved (Plate 29, 1-6), a diagnostic type of the Alto Focus (Newell and Krieger, pp. 8190). A pottery pipe from the Ament shelter (Plate 29, 8) is
assigned by Krieger to the Fulton Aspect--probably the
Frankston, Titus, or Texarkana Focus. The pottery as a
whole appears to be typical of the Caddoan area and undoubtedly represents both the Gibson and Fulton Aspects.
The relative scarcity of potter~] in these sites and the similarity to Caddoan area styles argue against its indigenous
manufacture. It is more probable that all the sherds are
fragments of trade vessels brought in from the east.
Analysis of the Sites
In the following analysis only those artifact types considered diagnostic of previously-defined cultures are dis-

Texa~ A~¢heoloflica~ a~d P~leocttologic~ ~ociety

cussed in detail. The Central Texas loci thus far defined
have been identified and delineated principally on a basis
of projectile point types, consequently they are the only
criteria available for diagnostic interpretation. This situation is urffortunate, for distinctive types could very probably
be recognized in other artifact classes if they should be subjected to thorough analysis; until such analyses have been
made, however, it is necessary to rely chiefly on projectile
point types for interpretation.
Space and time limitations would not permit detailed descriptions of all the artifacts, and since no comprehensive
studies have been made for scrapers, blades, drills, awls,
:[faking tools and so on for Central Texas in general, they
have been largely eliminated from this analysis. A tabulation of all artifacts from each site has been included, with
the intra-site provenience of the specimens recorded whereever possible, and anyone who is interested in correlating
~/~e various diagnostic types with the other artifacts ~rom
the same components can do so by examining these tables.
The cultural affiliations of the artifact types under consideration are as follows:
Edwards Plateau Aspect
Round Rock Focus
Pedernales Indented Base
Castroville Convex Base (?)
Nolan Beveled Stem (?)
Clear Fork Focus
Nolan Beveled Stem
No established focal affiliation
Bulverde Barbed
Martindale Fishtail
Ensor Stemmed (?)
Darl Stemmed (?)
Central Texas Aspect
Austin Focus
Scallorn Stemmed

PLATE 25
Stone arrow i~oints and drills.
1, Foyie Flake; 2, Alba Bacb~d~ 3, triangular
arrow poinL~ found in Auatia Focus component.~ ; 4. small drills with unworked baaed.
All approximately ~ size,

Perdiz Pointed Stem
CliO]ton Contracting Stem
Foyte Flake
Ensor Stemmed
Darl Stemmed
Toyah Focus
Perdiz Pointed Stem (?)
East Texas Archaic
Yarbrough Stemmed
Ellis Stemmed
Gary Stemmed
Gibsoa Aspect
Alto Focus
Yarbrough Stemmed
Wells Contracting Stem
Morrill Stemmed
Ellis Stemmed
Gary Stemmed
Alba Barbed
Copena
Holly Fine Engraved
Urbankte Site (41-39D4-15)
The Urbankte Site is located on the left bank of the Leon
River immediately above its confluence with Horse Creek,
about a mile below ~Iother Neff Park. It is in the southeastern corner of Coryell County on the property of W. A.
Urkankte, and covers an area of 3 to 4 acres.
In December, 1950, Moorman and Miller excavated two
test pits there, each five feet square, and made twelve tests
with an auger. It was determined that the cultural zone lies
at the surface, extending no deeper than 15 inches in any
place,~ indicating an occupation of fairly short duration.

190

Te~’as A’tcheological and Paleo~ologica! Society

Except for potsherds-which are unusually numerous for a
Central Texas site---and two types of stone artifacts, the
artifact assemblage is typically Austin Focus.
Scallorn Stemmed, Cliffton Contracting Stem, Foyle
Flake, and Perdiz Pointed Stem are the dominant arrow
point types; dart point types include Darl Stemmed, Ensor
Stemmed, and Ellis Stemmed. Four knives are probably of
the Copena type.
A number of potsherds were recovered, all seemingly
trade material from the Caddoan area to the east. Tempering
agents are bone and clay-grit, and decorative techniques
include brushing, incising, and engraving. Most of the sherds
are too fragmentary for positive typological identification,
but the ceramic assemblage as a whole is unquestionably
Caddoan. Three sherds are identified as Holly Fine Engraved
of the Alto Focus, Gibson Aspect.
Summary. Because of the shallowness of the cultural zone
and the typological uniformity of the artifacts, the Urbankte
Site is considered to be a "pure" component of the Austin
Focus (Table 1). The presence of Caddoan pottery, Copena
type knives, and Ellis Stemmed dart points in evident association with the Austin Focus material is construed as indicative of trade relationships between east and central
Texas Indians, and the presence of potsherds of the type
Holly Fine Engraved suggests partial contemporaneity of
the Austin and Alto Foci.
Grimes-Houy Shelter (41-39D4-17)
This rockshelter is situated some 600 yards east of the
junction of Horse Creek and the Leon River. It is about
60 feet long, with a depth of 6 to 12 feet and a ceiling height
of from 6 to 8 feet above the present surface. It lies near the
head of a box canyon with walls 20 to 30 feet in height.
Moorman and Miller spent several days excavating in the
Grimes-ttouy shelter in January, 1951. A grid system of fivefoot squares was established and four of the squares were

Archeo~ogical Excavations at the Belton Reservoir

191

excavated to bedrock at an average depth of 24 inches. The
provevAence of the specimens was recorded by square and
depth below the surface. At odd times during the late spring
and early summer of 1951, Mr. D. B. Hill excavated further
in the shelter.
The principal occupation appears to have been by the Austin Focus. ScalIorn Stemmed and Perdiz Pointed Stem are
most numerous of the arrow point types, and both Foyte
Flake and Cli]fton Contracting Stem are also present. Dart
point types include Ensor Stemmed, DarI Stemmed, Ellis
Stemmed, Yarbrough Stemmed, PedernaIes Indented Base,
and Castroville Convex Base. The two latter types are considered diagnostic elements of the Round Rock focus and all
examples of both occurred relatively deep in the site (Table
2). Their presence here may indicate survival of Edwards
Plateau Aspect artifact types into the Austin Focus since
Austin Focus material occurs at the same levels. Ensor
Stemmed and Darl Stemmed are thought to be local manifestations of the Austin Focus. Three four-edged, beveled
knives of the type commonly associated with cultures of the
Plains area were also found.
Artifacts pointing toward contact with the Caddoan area
consist of Ellis Stemmed and Yarbrough Stemmed dart
points, Copena type knives, and fragments of a single pottery vessel. The vessel is very similar to one from the
Clements Site in Cass County which was found in association with European trade material. The fragments were
found by Mr. Hill within a very restricted space and the
vessel they represent was probably grave furniture included
with one of the burials. Since the exact provenience was
not recorded, however, it is impossible to assign it to the
proper one.
No natural stratigraphy was discernable and any typological stratigraphy that may have existed was evidently
disturbed by the numerous graves which were, in most
cases, dug to bedrock. However, the arrow points as a

192

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

group were mostly ir~ the higher levels while the dart points
were generally somewhat deeper.
Twelve burials comprising a total of 17 skeletons were
found, all between the back w.all and a heavy rock fall
running longitudinally through the center of the shelter.
There were eight single, three double, and one triple intermerits. All the skeletons were flexed except for one infant
which was extended on the back. One burial contained a
flat, rectangular bone tablet (Plate 27, 4) which may have
been used as a wrist guard for protection against the slap
of the bowstring, and a plain, polished pendant of mussel
shell (Plate 28, 2). No other burial furniture, with the possible exception of the pottery vessel mentioned above, was
found.
Sum.mary. The Grimes-Houy shelter yielded a quantity of
artifacts identified with the Austin Focus. Three artifacts
attributed to the Round Rock Focus were found in the
lower levels, and the presence of four-edged, beveled knives
suggests contact with Plains cultures. Copena type knives,
dart points of the types Ellis Stemmed and Yarbrough Stemmed, and sherds from one pottery vessel point to a relationship with the peoples of east Texas.
Grimes-Houy Burnt Rock Midden (41-39D4-19)
This midden, located on top of the canyon wall in which
the Grimes-Houy shelter is situated and about 200 feet
northwest of the shelter, is oval in shape with a length
of approximately 50 feet and a breadth of 30 feet. Six
three-foot test squares were excavated in the midden by
Miller in November, 1951. So far as the site was tested, the
maximum depth of the cultural debris is about two feet.
No natura! stratigraphy was apparent.
The artifacts indicate occupation by both the Edwards
Plateau Aspect and the Austin Focus. Dart points predominate over arrow points, with types Dar~ Stemmed, Ensor
Stemmed, Ellis Stemmed, and Yarbrough Stemmed being
represented. Arrow point types include Scaltorn Stemmed,

PLATE 26
St~)ne knive~ ~imi!ar to "’Copen~~’ blade~.

AI| approximately ~ ~Ize.

A~cheologica! Exca~atio~ at the Belton Reservoir

195

Perdiz Pointed Stem, and Cliffton Contracting Stem. One
Copena type knife was found, and a number of potsherds
were recovered. The shards, which were found exclusively
in the top twelve inches, all appear to be of Caddoan styles.
Five sherds from one vessel were identified as type Holly
Fine Engraved, and at least two more vessels were represented by a series of brushed and plain shards.
Summary. The frequency of dart points suggests occupa~
tion by the Edwards Plateau Aspect. A few diagnostic
arrow point types indicate a later occupation by the Austirr
Focus. Trade with the Alto Focus is represented by a vessel
of Holly Fine Engraved, the fragments of which came from
the upper one-half of the midden. Other indications of conr
tacts with cultures to the east include one Copena knife and
dart points of the types Ellis Stemmed and Yarbroug~
Stemmed.
Johnson Hole Site (41-39D4-20)
This site (Fig. 10) lies along both banks of Stockton
Branch near a large "pothole" known locally as Johnson.
Hole--a popular swimming place. Two archeological components are present: a dissected burnt rock midden in the
vertical east bank of the, branch and a shallow midden, on’.
the west bank, between the branch and a vertical limestone.
bluff. The burnt rock midden evidently accumulated at a
time when the stream channel ran alongside the bluff, and
was subsequently dissected when the channel migrated lat-.
erally to the east. After the channel had shifted, the area
between its new position and the bluff was built up with.
alluvium, and it is in the upper portion of this alluvial fill.
that the later component is found.
Test E, a 10 by 15 foot rectangular excavated to a depth.
of five feet, was dug in the burnt rock midden by Miller in.
November, 1951. Most of the artifacts recovered are of types
affiliated with the Round Rock Focus and include dart
point types Pedernales Indented Base, Cas~roviIle Convex
Base, Bulverde Barbed, and Martindale Fishtail. Also present were a few Ellis Stemmed dart points and several others:

A~cheo~ogica~ E~cavatio~ a~ the Benton Reservoir

19"/

that may be variants of types Wells Stemmed and/or Morrill
Stemmed (Newell and Krieger, pp. 167-8). One Ensor Stemmed point was found in the upper portion of the midden.
On the west bank, Miller excavated squares A, B, C, and
D, each five feet square. Deposits attributed to the Austin
Focus extend 12 to 18 inches below the present surface.
Mr. Hill later excavated in the same general area. Diagnostic
artifacts from this comI~.onent include arrow point types
ScaIIorn Stemmed, Cli~lton Contracting Stem, and AIba
Barbed; dart point types Darl Stemmed, Ensor Stemmed,
Yarbrough Stemmed, and Ellis Stemmed; one sherd of the’
type Holly Fine Engraved; and two Copena knives.
Test F was excavated by Miller on the east bank above
the pothole, about 350 feet upstream from Test E. It revealed
no trace of the burnt rock midden encountered in Test E.
The cultural material e~xtended to a depth of about 20
inches below the surface and included arrow point types
Scallorn Stemmed and "Perdiz Pointec~ Stem, and dart point
types Ensor Stemmed, Yarbrough Stemmed, and Ellis Stemmed. These types, together with the Shallowness of the
posit, suggest a correlation between this area and the later
component below the pothole.
Summary. Two components are present at the Johnson
Hole Site: a burnt rock midden of the Round Rock Focus
and a later occupation by the Austin Focus. Associated with
the Austin Focus material was a diagnostic trait of the Alto
Focus: pottery type Holly Fine Engraved. Also in association with the same material were Alba Barbed arrow points~~
Copena knives, and dart point types Yarbrough Stemmed,
Ellis Stemmed, Ensor Stemmed, and Darl Stemmed. Ellis
Stemmed and possible variants of WeIIs Stemmed and/or
Morrill Stemmed were associated with the Round Rock
Focus component, and one specimen of type Ensor Stemmed
came from a relatively high position in the same midden.
Horse Creek Site (41-39D4-21)
This burnt rock midden is about 100 yards west of the
Grimes-Houy shelter on the right bank of Horse Creek. The

198

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

creek has cut into the midden so that it is exposed in vertical
cross-section. Resting on a bed of yellow clay and gravel,
the cultural material is visible from 12 inches below the
surface to a depth of 66 inches.
In November, 1951, starting at the vertical face, Miller
excavated a trench five feet wide back into the midden for
a distance of ten feet. The artifacts, which were sparsely
scattered through the midden debris, are unquestionably of
Edwards Plateau Aspect affiliation. One dart point of the
type Pedernales Indented Base was found near the bottom
of the cultural zone, and one specimen of Darl Stemmed
came from near the top (Table 5). The middle portion
yielded one Ensor Stemmed, one Yarbrough Stemmed, and
two Castroville Convex Base points. The other artifacts,
from throughout the entire depth of the midden, were of
Edwards Plateau Aspect forms and styles. No natural stratigraphy was discernible.
Summary. The Horse Creek Site is a burnt rock midden
component of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. One Pedernales
Indented Base dart point was found near the bottom of the
midden, suggesting occupancy by the Round Rock Focus.
Ament Shelter (41-39D4-23)
The Ament rockshelter was not excavated by the River
Basin Surveys since it is not within the reservoir area of
the Belton Dam. It is included here, however, because of
significant parallels betweer~ it and the other sites. It was
discovered and excavated by Mr. Hill. Because of previous
looting only a small undisturbed area remained, and it was
there that Mr. Hill dug.
The indigenous artifacts are typically Austin Focus except for one Nolan Beveled Stem dart point (Clear Fork and
Round Rock Foci) and one Pedernales Indented Base (Round
Rock Focus). Of especial interest was a flexed burial, enclosed in a cist of fiat stones placed vertically on edge, which
contained the following burial offerings: five Perdiz Pointed
Stem arrow points, five or six Scallorn Stemmed arrow

boneAllaPproxll;~ate|ytablets;
5 & 9. l-3deersixe,ulna flaking, tools : 6-7. bone h{-ads ; 8, Polished antler til~

Archeological Excavatior~ at the Belfort Reservoir

201

points, a flat bone "tablet" (Plate 27, 3), and a mussel shell
ornament with notched edges (Plate 28, 4).
Arrow point types from the Ament shelter include ScalIorn Stemmed, Perdiz Pointed Stem, Cli~fto~ Contracting
Stem and Alba Barbed; dart point types are Ensor Stemmed,
DarI Stemmed, Ellis Stemmed, Yarbrough Stemmed, Pealerhales Indented Base, and NoIan Beveled Stem. Two Copena
type knives, three obsidian flakes, eleven potsherds (probably from two vessels), and the bowl of a pottery pipe also
came from the shelter. The latter has been identified by
Krieger as a Fulton Aspect form.
Summary. Occupation_ at the Ament shelter is essentially
Austin Focus, with traces of the Round Rock--or possibly
Clear Fork--Focus. A pottery pipe fragment indicates probable trade between the Austin Focus and northeast Texas
in Fulton Aspect times. Alba Barbed arrow points, Cope~a
knives, and Ellis Stemmed and Yarbrough Stemme~ dart
points also link the site with cultures to the east. Contact
With the Southwest is suggested by the presence of three
obsidian flakes.
Synthesis and Conclusions
Indigenous occupation at the Belton sites can be identified
with the Edwards Plateau and Central Texas Aspects. The
Edwards Plateau Aspect is characterized by a lithic complex
of relatively large dart points, knives, blades, scrapers, drills,
and other classes of artifacts in a variety of forms. Several
specimens considered diagnostic of the Round Rock Focus
were found, all in lower occupational levels.
The areal distribution patterns of the two dart point
types Ensor Stemmed and Darl Stemmed, so far as they are
known at present, indicate a comparatively localized development. Since both were found in the Horse Creek site, a
component of the Edwards Plateau Aspect with no Austin
Focus material, they probably came into existence before
the end of the aspect.

202

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The Central Texas Aspect components are all considered
to represent the Austin Focus. The writers’ conception of
this focus is somewhat different from that of previous investigators and requires some explanation here.
Krieger (1946, pp. 165-168) and Kelley (1947a and 1947b)
originally defined the Austin Focus as a protohistoric and
early historic culture, probably to be connected with the
Tonkawa tribes. The principal diagnostic element was the
arrow point type Scallorn Stemmed. Other traits were snubnosed scrapers, four-edged beveled knives, crude side scrapers, notched bison ribs, Oliva-shell beads, triangular conchshell pendants, flexed burials in crude, stone-lined pits,
small, delicate flint drills, and (on some sites) European
trade material. Many of these traits are typical of the sites
at Belton. The Toyah Focus, another unit of the Central
Texas Aspect, was differentiated from the Austin Focus
by Kelley principally on the basis of an arrow point type,
Perdiz Pointed Stem. Kelley (1947b, p. 122) also considered
Cliffton Contracting Stem an element of the Toyah Focus,
although this does not seem likely since, except in rare instances, it occurs only in Austin Focus components.
The Toyah Focus was identified with the Jumano Indians,
and the widespread distribution of type Perdiz Pointed Stem
was attributed to extensive trade activities by that group.
Thus the large numbers of Perdiz points occurring in the
Frankston Focus (East Texas), the Rockport Focus (Texas
Gulf Coast), the Bravo Valley Aspect (West Texas), and
the Austin Focus (Central Texas) were all thought by
Kelley to have been traded in by the Jumanos (Toyah
Focus). However, Perdiz is such a consistent trait of these
foci that its presence in their components must be considered integral, whether manufactured on the spot or acquired
through trade. Except ~or this arrow point type, there is
nothing to suggest the presence of two different loci in the
Belton components of the Central Texas aspect, and since
ScalIorn, Perdiz, and Cli]]ton are ~onsistently associated
with one another in these sites it does not seem completely

feasible to separate them on a focal basis. In analyzing the
Belton sites, then, Scallo~n, Perdiz, and CIiffton, together
with the associated complex of other artifacts, are all considered traits of the Austin Focus.
Austin Focus (and Toyah Focus) material in the Colorado
River region south of Belton apparently occurs only in thin
deposits, frequently overlying earlier components of the
Edwards Plateau Aspect. The occasional presence of Eun.opean trade artifacts suggest historic occupation. Krieger
(1946, pp. 165-8) and Kelley (1947b, p. 127) assigned a
n~mimum date of circa 1500 A. D. for the appearance of the
Austin and Toyah loci in Central Texas, but data from the
Belton sites indicates a much earlier appearance.
Kelley’s and Krieger’s estimates were based primarily on
evidence from sites on the Colorado near Austin. While
it is possible that the Austin Focus components there are
somewhat later than the ones at Belton, an appreciable time
difference is extremely doubtful.
The apparent association of Austin Focus material at
Belton with Alto Focus trade pottery and arrow points,
Copena knives, and dart point types Ellis Stemmed and
Yarbrough Stemmed suggests a relatively early appearance
for the Austin Focus. This probability is strengthened by
recent River Basin Surveys investigations in the Whitney
Reservoir, not yet reported, where an Austin Focus component consisting of deposits approximately five feet in
thickness (a striking contrast to the thin Austin Focus
deposits on the Colorado River) was excavated in a rockshelter. This component, as well as the ones at Belton, contained no evidence of contact with white man, consequently
its terminal date was almost certainly prior to the 18th century ¯ and its beginning some centuries earlier.
Available evidence, then suggests that the Austin Focus
existed for several conturies in the Brazos-Leon area. Disappearance from the area by the beginning of the 18th century is indicated by the complete absence of associated trade

206

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

material of European manufacture.4 That Austin Focus
components in the Colorado River region are sometimes
associated with European trade material suggests a continuation there into the historic period. The writers believe that the Austin Focus appeared in the Brazos-Leon
area no later than 1200 A. D., and possibly long before.
The principal argument here--that the Austin Focus was
in existence in the Brazos-Leon area by 1200 A. D. or earlier
--is based largely on the assumption that the sherds of pottery type Holly Fine Engraved found at Belton were associated with Austin Focus components. As the tables show,
no identified sherds were found in situ, consequently there
is a possibility that the Holly sherds actually belong with
the Edwards Plateau Aspect components in the multiplecomponent sites. This does not seem likely, however, since
no pottery whatsoever was found at the Johnson Hole and
Horse Creek burnt rock middens---the only two sites investigated which contained no Au~2n Focus material. The other
burnt rock midden (Grimes-Houy) did contain pottery, ineluding type Holly Fine Engraved, but all sherds came ]ram
the top level where Austin Focus artifacts also occurred. In
addition, the Austin Focus components at the Johnson Hole
and Urbankte Sites, where Holly sherds were found, yieIded
~o indigenous artifacts except those of the Austin Focu~
complex. Thus the evidence leans toward the Austin Focus
as the source of the Holly sherds with a preponderance that
amounts to virtual certainty.

Other evidence supporting a proposed linkage between
the Austin Focus and the Alto Focus exists in a surface
collection from the Chupek Site (Watt), on the Brazos River
in McLennan County. A number of potsherds collected there
by Mr. Frank H. Watt of Waco are of Alto Focus types. Also
picked up from the surface of the Chupek Site were several
arrow points, all apparently Austin Focus types. Again,
4, Indirect evidence of hl~torlc occupation exlst~ in the sherds of one pottery
ves~el found at the Grime~Houy ~helter by Mr. Hill. ~ls v~l ~ ~imi~r ~ ~ ~
which is p~ent ~ ~e C~mvn~ Si~. C~ ~un~, In ~ciatton with Eu~p~n
~de materi~l.

Archeological Excavaeion~ af: the Bell;on Reservoir

209

however, the evidence for association is only circumstantial
since none of the Chupek artifacts were found in situ.
Looking toward the Caddoan area for further data, we
find that three Perdiz points and two possible Cli~Ston points
were found at the Davis Site, type site of the Alto Focus
(Newell and Krieger, pp. 164 and 191-2, Fig. 56, and Table
18). Although Krieger attributes their presence to a post-

Alto Focus occupation by the Frankston Focus, it is of
interest that one of the CHeVron points and two of the Perdiz
points came from excavation units in phase three of the
Alto Focus occupation (Newell and Krieger, Table 18). The
other possible Cli]~ton point came from the temple mound
phase, the second of the three Alto Focus phases. Thus the
Austin Focus artifacts found at the Davis Site were all in
levels which also contained Alto Focus material.
The broad distribution of arrow point type Perdiz Pointed
Stem involves problems which cannot be dealt with here.
The complete absence of European trade material and the
apparent contemporaneity of Perdiz Pointed Stern and Alto
Focus pottery, however, argue for an earlier appearance of
Perdiz in the Belton area--and probably in other areas-than has heretofore been postulated.
Bibliography

Campbell, T. N.
1948. "The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas."
BuZZetin o~ the Texas ArcheoIogica! and Pa~eonto~og.
icaZ Society, Vol. 19. Abilene.
Jackson, A. T.
1938. "The Fall Creek Sites." University o] Texas, PubIications, No. 3802. Austin.
Kelley, J. Charles.
1947a. "The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Po-

210

Texas Archeo~ogical and Paleontologicab Society

sition of the Clear Fork Focus." American Antiquity,
Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 97-109.
1947b. "The Lehman Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of
the Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci." Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 18, pp. 115-128. Abilene.
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer
1940. "The Association of Archeological Material with
Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of Texas."
West Texas Historical and ScientiSic Society, Publication, No. 10, Sut Ross State Teachers College, Bulletin,
Vol. 21, No. 3, Alpine.
Krieger, Alex D.
1944. "The Typological Concept." American Antiquity,
Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 271-288.
1946. "Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas." Publications, University of Texas, No. 4640. Austin.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger.
1949. "The George C. Davis Site~ Cherokee County, Texas." Society For American Archaeology, Memoirs, No. 5,
(American Antiquity, Vol. 14, No. 4, part 2.)
Ray, Cyrus N.
1938. "The Clear Fork Culture Complex." Bulletin o~
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 10, pp. 193-207. Abilene.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. "An Archeological Survey of Texas." Medallion
Papers, No. 17. Globe.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1950. "Culture Chronology in Texas." American An-

TABLE I.

Tabulation of artifacts, Urbankte Site (~I-39D~-15).
0-6" 6-12"

io~
!~
o~

~

Perdiz Po S.
Cllffton G.S.
Foyle Flake
Triangular
Unclassified
indet ermlnat e

0-6"

6--12"

Random

2
1
,,
1
1

Ensor S.
Darl S.
Ellis S.
Unclassified
Indeterminate

1

Copena
Concave base
Convex base
Straight base
Double pointed
Ind et ermlnat e

2
1
1
1

1
1

1

i

1

Side
Snub-nosed
Trimmed flake

2

,~
1
1
18
19
7
1

Large
Small

1

Gravers
Blades

12-18"

1

1

1
. .i~FlintQuartzite
.
u2oppers
Sandstone abrader,~
Hemat ire fragment~
Holly Fine Engr.
Incised
Engraved
Brushed
Pumctat e
Plain

21

lO
88

I

TABL~ 2. Tabulation of artifacts by 6-inch levels, Grimes-Houy Shelter (&l-39D&-17)
Square No.

Scallorn
Perdlz
Cliffton
Foyle
Triangular
Unclassified
Indeterminate
~nso~
Ds.TI
~llls
Yarbrough
Pedernales
Castroville
Triangular
Unolassifled
Indeterminate
Copena
Concave Base
Convex Base
Straight Base
Double-pointed
Four-edged, beveled
Indeterminate
Side
Snub-nosed
Trimmed Flake
Circular

1
1

1
12
i0

1

I
1

2
3
1

1

2

Large
Small
Gravers
Blades

2

Quartzite
Flint
Choppers
Hematite
IIolly Fine Engr
Incised
Engraved
Brushed
Punctate
Plain
Witl~ Basal joint
Splinter
Indeterminate
Deer Ulna Flakers
Bo~e ~eads. tubular
~one Tablets
Shell Pend~ts

li
|

6
5
1
1

1

0

o

Tcbulatlon of artlfects by 6~inch and 12-1rich levels, Johnson Hole Site

2o)

rEST

Soallora
P~rdiz
Cliffton
Alba
Triangular
Unclassified
Indeterminate
Ensor
Darl
E111s

1
2
7

Yarbrou~h

~artlndale
Bulverde
Castrov!lle
Pedernales
Gary
Wells or Morrill (?)
Unclassified
Indeterm£nate
Trlan~.ular
Oopena
Concave ~ase
Convex Base
Straight Base
Indeterminate

1
ll

2
i

17

2

Side
Snub-nosed
i Triced flake

3
1

19
2

Blades ~
@ravers
iHcmatite
Choppers
~e~a~es

Quartzite
Flint

De~ Ulna Fl~ers
i~Vith Joint
!S~£nter

~|Ol~y ~’ln~
Incised
Brushed
Plain
~n~rave~

2
10

1,

TABLE 5. Tabulation of artifacts 12-inch l~vels, FmrseCreek Site(Ai-39DA-21)
end Ament Shelter (~1-39D%-23}.
Horse Or~ Site
12-2~" 25-~6" ~6-~8" 68-60" 60-72"
Scallora
Perdiz
~liffton
Alba
~nclasslfied
Indeterminate
Ensor
Darl
~arbrou~h
Sastroville
Pedernales
Nolan
Unclassified
Indeterminate
~opena
Sonvex Base
Strai~ht Base

Ament Shelter
Unlmown Provenienc~
ii

1
1
1

2

1

1
i

1
1

16

Side
~rlmmed flake

3
~emat ire
~hoppers
~m

~uartzlte

~

~ano
~lint
¯wls, ~plln~ er
Dbsidien flakes
Bone tablets
~hell pendants
!Pottery pipes

2
1
1
1

Incised
Plain
Dravers

i

tiquity, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 151-157.
Watt, Frank H.
1941. "Preliminary Report on Potsherds from Chupek
Site." News-Letter, Central Texas Archaeological Society, No. 4, pp. 17-19. Waco.
Webb, Wm. S.
1939. "An Archaeological Survey of Wheeler Basin on
the Tennessee River in Northern Alabama." Bulletin,
Bureau oS American Ethnology, No. 122. Washington.
Webb, Win. S., David L. De Jarnette, and others.
1942. "An Archaeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in
the Adjacent Portions of the States of Alabama, Mdssissippi, and Tennessee." Bulletin, Bureau of American
Ethnology, No. 129. Washington.

