BOOK REVIEWS
The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas, H. Perry
Newell and Alex D. Krieger.

Appendix, "Maize from the Davis

Site: Its Nature and Interpretation," by Volney H. Jones.

Memoirs

of the Society for American Archaeology, Number 5, lYlenasha,
Wis., 1949. XV - 255 pp., 66 figs., 20 tables.

This publication continues the valuable studies by Krieger and
his co-workers which are delineating the cultures of the "Caddoan Area," especially during the earlier or Gibson Aspect, as
distinguished from the protohistoric and contact cultures of the
Fulton Aspect, which are universally accepted as Caddoan in
origin.
The Davis site, which lies on the second terrace of the Neches
River near Alto in Cherokee County, Texas, was partially excavated
as a W. P. A.--University of Texas project in 1939-1941, under the
direction of Perry Newell. I-Ie spent the following year in study of
the materials and preparation of the report of excavations, which
forms Part I of this volume. After Newell’s tragic death in 1946,
Krieger continued the analysis and interpretations, on which they
had previously collaborated, presenting them herein as Part II.
In the Appendix, Volney H. Jones analyzes the maize remains from
the site. The authors have done a superb job of reporting on this
site, which assumes a key position in the area, regardless of any
questions which may arise from the interpretations.
In Par~ I Newell described the site and its environment within
the forest zone of Central East Texas. Careful historical research,
as well as results of the excavations, eliminates the idea that this site
marks the location of an historic Neches Indian Village and an early
Spanish mission established in 1680 among these Indians.
Details of the excavations reveal the meticulous care with which
Newell worked, attested also by a number of excellent photographs.
Nearly 600 10-foot sections of village area were removed by 5-inch
levels and about half of a large mound, approximately 150 by 250
feet in diameters and 16 feet high, was removed by sections traversing the entire mound in 10-foot widths and 5-foot vertical walls.
The mound, one of three on the site, was L-shaped and constructed
of village soils, no borrow pits being in evidence. Newell considered the L shape to have resulted from the incorporation of two
original mounds into one larger tumulus, or possibly from a watercut gully, partially filled; Krieger favors the first interpretation.
The village level extended uninterruptedly under the mound, which
Newell states (Fig.. 6) consisted of a primary and secondary stage.
Seven thousand, eight hundred forty-five specimens were catalogued, of which 11,247 were in the primary mound, 16,045 in the

Book Reviews

113

secondary mound and 70,553 in the village area. Ninety eight per
cent of these were potsherds.
Of the 34 house outlines wholly or partially uncovered, 4 were
atop the primary mound, 7 unquestionably in the submound village
level and the remainder were beneath the mound wash or in the
surrounding village. The structures generally lacked projecting
or recognizable entranceways, r~gularly-spaced roof supports or
prepared floors. Posts were usually set separately, although a few
sections of wall trenches were found; central firebeds were usually
present and placed over a covered post mold (suggesting a center
post used in construction and later removed, as described among
the historic Tejas). Several sub-mound buildings were unique
in having large oval cache-pits in their floors. On the primary
platform within the mound there was evidence of a shift from
circular structures to squared, with rounded corners. Krieger
attributes this to influence from Spiro, a suggestion which is given
weight by the presence of projecting entranceways from two presumably ceremonial structures which seem to equate temporarily
with the primary mound houses. One of these atypical structures,
a "maze" with the appearance of two double rows of entrance
posts (Figs. 20-21), may suggest to some the possibility of two
separate houses with irregular outlines, but this reviewer visited
the site while this feature was exposed, observed the extreme care
which Newell devoted to its details and is disposed to accept the
conclusions of the authors that it was an unusual ceremonial
building.
An .areawide comparison of house types, with conclusions as to
derivation of constructional features, is still difficult because of
inadequate excavation, although more information is available
than in 1940 when I tentatively reviewed the subject. Among
Gibson Aspect cultures, the Alto Focus demonstrates the transition
from circular buildings to squared houses, with details as noted
above. In the Spira area, rectangular and square houses with projecting entranceways and regularly space roof supports are characteristic of Spiro II, with a similar pattern continuing into the McCurtin Focus (Fulton Aspect). House types are not established for
the Gahagan Focus. At the Sanders site floor plans were described
as three walls outlined by post molds, with the fourth side open,
but their specific relationship to the Sanders Focus is not established. Among Haley Focus sites, the premound I-Ialey component
at the ttatchel site had a large circular structure without recognizable entrance; later Texarkana Focus (Fulton Aspect) houses at
this site were circular with projecting entrances. The premound
Haley component at Belcher had a rectangular house with wall
trenches, rounded corners and projecting entrance; it was followed by an oval structure which had Bossier Focus (transitional)

114

Tezas Archeological and Paleontological Society

sherds in association; the higher Belcher Focus (Fulton Aspect)
levels had circular houses with projecting entrances, later a welldefined opening without projecting entrance. Sites at Ozan I,
Washington and Mineral Springs, apparently representing ttaley
and Spiro II Foci, presented a variety of house shapes, but more frequently are described as square or rectangular, with or without
rounded corners and well-defined or projecting entrances. In the
historic contact period, all Caddoan houses are described or illustrated as round or oval, without projecting entrances.
In Part II, Krieger first analyzes the physical stratification of the
site, establishing 11 "zones" of mound construction and 4 for the
field. These are next grouped into a sequence of cultural stratigraphy by analysis of cultural remains, largely pottery, establishing
three sequent ’~hases" of culture change for the mound, which
was borne out by similar study of materials from the field. As
nearly as possible, house outlines are assigned to the phases, the
majority having evident or apparent association with Phase I. One
hesitates to agree that this fact connotes a markedly longer habitation on the site in the premound or Phase I period than after
mound construction began, especially since none of the village level
structures are assigned to Phase III. As mound construction proceeded, houses may well have been placed further away, beyond
the limits of the excavation. It is evident, also, that the authors
did not attach the same significance to the lensing noted in the
primary mound, which Newell seemed to consider a construction
method of little temporal significance, whereas Krieger includes
Zones 2 to 5 in Phase I, speaking of them as "four small mounds",
and also speaks of Zone 6 as the first flat-topped mound, probably
built and used as a temple mound.
Despite minor evidences of cultural stratigraphy, artifact study
showed that the site was occupied throughout all phases by the
same cultural group. Pottery analysis was based on 11,840 sherds
of the 96,000 total, eliminating body sherds and non-distinctive
fragments; matching and grouping of sherds further reduced the
total to approximately 5,920 vessels. Krieger considers this method
to be more reliable, especially since previous experience demonstrated marked, differences between percentages calculated from
total sherds and from actual vessels after sherd matching. Sequential studies, relating to source from the various zones and
phases, were then made of resident and presumed trade or foreign
types, after a prolonged study of materials in comparison with potteries throughout the "Caddoan Area," adjoining areas and even
very distant cultures. From original 17 tentative types worked
out by Newell, a process of combination of variants and elimination of types based on body sherds enabled Krieger to evolve 7
major and 2 minor types of resident pottery.
Typology was

Book Reviews

115

achieved necessarily on the basis of decorative technic and design
motifs, with some assistance from vessel shapes, because of the
conistent ceramic tradition of clay tempering supplemented often
with pulverized vegetal material.
The engraved series included
Holly and Hickory Fine Engraved, which differed chiefly in that
the latter had wider spacing of lines and simplified designs. Holly
Fine Engraved is a beautiful ware, with highly polished black
surfaces cut through by fine engraving and excised spaces, forming complex curvilinear and straight line patterns on the larger
vessels, often with pigment impressed into the design elements.
Carinated bowls and tapered-spout bottles were the predominant
vessel forms. This type was found through all phases of the excavations and additionally seems to be the marker type throughout
the "Caddoan Area" for the earliest known engraved ware and
probably the first bottle form in the area (possibly the first bottle
for the entire United States). Holly and Hickory Engraved appear
also at Crenshaw and Gahagan, where this reviewer considers them
to be resident types, not trade items as suggested by Krieger. The
distinctive features of these engraved wares, together with a
number of traits suggestive of Meso-American influence which appeared in the Caddoan Area during and after the Gibson period,
led Krieger to search as far as the Guatemalan highlands for
relationships. The nearest counterpart for the fine line engraved,
polished black Davis wares appears with terraced clay mounds in
the Miraflores phase of the Highlands and, in the valley of Mexico,
the bottle form appears in the same general Formative period.
The suggestion of a possible source from the Guatemalan Highlands as early as 300-500 A. D. appears startling at first, but tentative Carbon 14 datings and other researches give the impression
tha~ previous Southeastern chronologies are too conservative; the
space factor also is more acceptable when one examines the tradition of tremendous cross-county travel and trading exhibited
by some of the Gibson Aspect peoples (Spiro, Gahagan), exceeded
only by the Ohio Hopewell.
The incised and punctated wares at the Davis site follow to a
considerable degree the ceramic traditions of the lower Mississippi
valley and Krieger points out numerous relationships with potteries
to the east and north of the Davis site. Despite certain changes
occurring during the later phases--the introduction of bone temper,
scroll motifs, lighter surface color, cruder decoration technic-¯ all types remain remarkably stable. One of the most controversial
points concerning the interpretation of ceramics in this report relates to evidences adduced by Krieger to suggest that resident wares
anteceded presumed trade sherds of the Marksville-TroyvilleColes Creek sequence and were contemporaneous with sand-tempered pottery resembling Tchefuncte and Pickwick Basin types.
Conclusions based on placement of sherds included in the mound

116

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

fill must be indefinite because the method of mound construction
from village soil made the inclusion of artifacts from prior habitation dependent more on the particular area and depth from which
the soil was taken than on the time at which this was done. However, the chronological and correlative possibilities (p. 223, Fig 66)
are challenging toward ~uture research.
Space does not permit full discussion of other artifacts. Ear
spools, long-stemmed pottery pipes and white sandstone hones are
consistent with these traits in other Gibson cultures; flat adzes
and "greenstone" petaloid celts are represented. Projectiles include "arrow" points, chiefly Alba Barbed, also the predominant
projectile at Gahagan, and Hayes Barbed, which is the type point
for Haley Focus; larger or "dart" points, including several types
which evidently carried over from late Archaic or preceramic
cultures. A shift from dart to arrow points is indicated in the
three phases, although both types are present throughout. The
finding of a fragment of fluted point, two stone bowl fragments
and a clay ball of the Poverty Point type indicate intermittent usage
of this site in prepottery times.
The relationships of the Alto Focus with other Gibson Aspect
loci, their correlation with culture horizons of the Eastern United
States, and possible affiliations wih Middle American cultures
are discussed fully. Krieger’~ final conclusion that the culture represented in Phase I of the Davis site was an amalgamation of Middle American and Eastern United States ~lements, dating "somewhere around 500 A. D., if not earlier" receives interesting support
from the independent conclusion arrived at by Volney Jones from
a study of the maize remains, reported in ~he appendix. The
Davis corn fits the category of Northern Flint corn, which falls
in the Eastern Complex, as distinguished from the HohokamBasketmaker Complex and the Mexican Complex. Jones states
that Eastern Complex corn was derived from Guatemala, that the
Davis site is its further southwest occurrence, and that the Alto
Focus can be considered as one of the earliest recipients of this
corn in the United States area, probably by 700 A. D.
CLARENCE H. WEBB.
1560 Line Avenue, Shreveport, Louisiana.

Early Man in the New World. By Kenneth Macgowan, with
drawings by Campbell Grant.
The MacMillan Company, New
York, 1950. 260 pages, numerous figures and maps. $5.00.

This new book must be brought to the attention of all archaeologists, amateurs as well as professionals. For the first time, a

