THE COMANCHE EAGLE DANCE*

Bli" ERI~EST WALLAC~

Religious practice or ritual among the Comanches consisted primarily of socially recognized patterns for obtaining supernatural favor or power, generally called medicine.
Although there were ceremonial patterns for both individual
and group participation, the latter were extremely limited in
extent and importance. In most every instance, it must be
emphasized, the observance was a matter of individual concern. There was no religious organization; no theocracy; no
priestly class. Every man was his own priest and his own
prophet--the individual interpreter of the wills and ways of
the spirits. A direct revelation without priestly go-between
was the panacea for all human problems. To the Comanche
it was an unquestionable means of obtaining power. To any
major catastrophe, to any overwhelming urge, there was an
automatic response: :. revelation was sought. Power came
in a mystic visitation, a dream phenomena or hallucinatory
experience. Its authority was absolute; psychic experiences
were socially recognized and regarded as the very cornerstone
of Comanche cultural life.
The Comanches also gave social recognition to the transfer of power, but the owner of strong medicine was careful
not to spread his medicine too thin lestit become impotent.
The transfer might be made either to an individual or to a
group if the medicine was strong.
The Eagle Dance was a search for war power by one or
more youths turning warriors. The power-seeker could not
* In his study of the culture of the Comanche Indians, the author spent the summer of 1945 in the field among them. Although a number of older Comanches were
aware of the existence of the Eagle Dance, very few remembered any details. Wiley
Yellowfish of Apache, Oklahoma, who danced it possibly about 1885 or 1886 was my
best informant. Wiley’s father was a Comanche warrior of the Kwahadi band who
danced with I’satai each night while enroute to attack Adobe Walls.

84

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

merely call upon a medicine man and ask to share his power.
He might wait for a vision that would give him permission
to ask or for the owner of strong war medicine to tell him
that "My power wants you to take part of it." Possibly
more often the Eagle Dance was sponsored by some prominent member of the band, usually the father or uncle of an
ambitious youth.
The sponsor sought out a medcine man with strong
eagle or war power and offered a smoke. If the medicine
man accepted, he assumed complete charge of the ceremony.
The decision was a ~erious one for him. If he accepted, his
own power would be diminished since some of it would be
spread among the dancers. On the other hand, refusal might
be interpreted as a lack of the warriors confidence in his own
powers to risk spreading it out. In such a case, he would
suffer loss of prestige among his own peOple. Furthermore,
there was the factor of renumeration. Relatives and friends
of participants contributed gifts. The medicine leader could
keep what he preferred for himself, leaving the remainder
for the dancers.
After the medicine man accepted the request, he announced the time and place of the ceremony. He and the
dancers arose before daylight, went to the creek, bathed,
stripped to the breechc!out, put on war paint, let their hair
down and put eagle feathers in it, and rubbed themselves
with sage. After that they sat in a semi-circle with the
opening toward the east and smoked ceremoniously.

When the smoking was over, the leader arose, and followed closely by the dancers, sneaked silently to a nearby
camp to "capture" a girl. Spectators remained some distance
apart. In the old days the girl had to be a captive. The
girl’s family made z pretense of defending their camp
against the attacking party. The "victorious raiders" carried the ~captured" girl to their own camp where preparations had been made for the remainder of the ceremony.

The Comanche Eagle Dance

85

A tipi was used. The medicine leader provided two,
four, or six drummers and singers to help---never an odd
number. They sat close together facing the east. The girl
sat beside the leader. The dancers first assumed a position
directly in front facing east, but when the music began they
formed a circle around the musicians. Each dancer carried
in his right hand a ratde, decorated with feathers, paint, and
beads, and in his left hand carried a wand or fan prepared
from the wing feathers of an eagle. The dancers were young
eagles attempting to leave their nest and parental care in
order to soar away, masters of the sky. The symbolism is
obvious. The dancers did not sing, but attempted from
time to time to imitate the cry of the young eagle. When
a dancer lagged or wearied, the leader either blew his eagle
bone whistle as a warning for him to speed up or reinvigorated him with new power by waving the eagle fan above
him. When the music ceased, the dancers dropped on their
knees and sat back against their legs to rest, but the moment
the music resumed they sprang to their feet and were dancing again. Between the dances some warrior would rush
into the circle and recite some outstanding coup or deed
which he had performed. At the close of his recital a deafening applause went up, yells, drum beats, goard rattles,
and the stamping of feet. These speeches were pep talks
to encourage the young dancers to acts of bravery. During
the dance, the warriors of the girls’ people theoretically rushed up and attempted to recapture her. In actual practice
they rushed in and recited some coups of their own. Their
recital had to be true because the power of eagle medicine
was so strong, that misfortune would result to any who on
this solemn occasion falsified the facts. Spectators looked
on in reverential silence.

About mid-morning, the mother of one of the dancers
brought water for the participants and sat it down near the
circle. The leader drank and offered it to the dancers, each
drinking in turn and passing it to the one on his left. After
the failure of the girl’s relatives to recapture her, they

86

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontologica~ Society

brought in presents and deposited them in the circle before
her. Relatives and friends of the dancers might provide
some of the gifts.
The medicine man retained a portion and gave the others
to the dancers. One informant received a horse when he
danced. Not infrequently a dancer went through the ceremony without gaining power. "There had to be something
inside stretching and pleading, reaching and grasping for
power if it were to be obtained."
The dance ended shortly before mid-day. No ceremonial
departure was remembered, but the feather wands and rattles used by the dancers were given to the girl and the
dancers rushed to the creek to bathe. They dived into the
water upstream four times, then dressed in their best attire
and returned to camp to partake of a feast prepared by the
women.

