72

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

CERTAIN CACHES OF FLINTS FROM
THE NORTH TEXAS AREA
BY ADOLPH H. WITTE
Several similar caches of worked flints have been discovered in
the North Texas area. Data on four lots are in the writer’s file, and
these will be described here. The first two groups are of special
interest as they do not seem to correlate with known culture complexes. This fact itself is not surprising since Texas remains are
largely unexplored and neglected. However some progress has been
made toward outlining a stream terrace chronology based upon
paleontological contents. Obviously these stream terrace explorations should be expanded and accelerated since more and more
ancient implements are discovered each year in the Pleistocene deposits in the state.
Whitzitt Cazhe
A group of 28 unusually large flint implements was brought to
the writer during 1935. The cache had been discovered beneath a
flat stone on the Whitzitt farm in Jack County. The area lies within
the drainage pattern of the Trinity River and the topography is
rough, with scrub oaks and mesquites dominating the landscape.
Various members of the Lower Harpersville formation of the Upper
Pennsylvanian System are exposed along the strike which extends
almost east to west.

The formations exposed consist of sandstones,

shales, and coal measures and do not contain cherts or siliceous
nodules suitable for artifacts.

Subsequently, the writer visited the locality where the cache had
been discovered, but was unable to find middens or workshops
which might be correlated with the cache.
The weight of the cache is six pounds. The average length of the
implements was 3a,/4’’, the width 3", the thickness almost 1~". When
considered as a whole the entire group is somewhat similar in outline, and might be described as ovoid with a point. One flint is
evidently a scraper, as it is chipped only on one face. Another
PLATE 17
FOUR FLINTS FROM THE JOHNSON CACHE

Plate

CerSain Caches of Flints Frown the North Texas Area

75

specimen might be classified as a spokeshave. The opposite edges
of one axe show a curious S twist; as if the blade had been plastic
and had been twisted. Similar "twisted" axes appear to be found
exclusively with Acheulean tools in Europe, according to Burkitt.
All of the tools exhibit long, well controlled flake ~ars. The
technique employed in manufacture is percussion. The edges of all
the tools are dull, indicating considerable use, and perhaps age.
Four of the artifacts are light brown in color; and the source of
this excellent stone is unknown. The re~naining 24 are of a fine
semi-translucent flint usually considered Cretaceous in origin. The
color includes various shades of blue with ~nany light colored spots
due to patination since manufacture~
lohn.~on Cache
This cache was also found within the Trinity River drainage and
was discovered a few inches below the surface of a cultivated
field.

The locality is in Clay County and is approximately 20

miles eastward from where the Whitzitt cache was discovered. The
area is near the contact of the Harpersville and Pueblo formations
and suitable cherts are not found.

This cache consists of 30 implements and the weight is 9 pounds.
With only one exception the individual flints are somewhat smaller
than those of the Whitzitt cache. However, the material is of the
same light blue Cretaceous flint and came from distant quarries.
The largest specimen in the group is a big oval axe with point, and
this measures 7a,~"x6" and is almost 2 inches in thickness. The
pointed end shows considerable battering. There are no grooves
or notches to indicate that this huge 3~ pound object was ever
halted (See Plate 17). One knife-like object is four inches in length
and semihmar in outline. Another specimen, a finely fashioned axe,
exhibits a "twisted" appearance, and is very similar to the one described from the Whitzitt cache. Considered as a whole, the Johnson and Whitzitt caches are surprisingly similar.
Palo Duro Cache
The cache was discovered two feet below the surface of the tableland and in the edge of a sxnall gulch which drains into the Palo
Duro River, a few miles from Canyon, Texas. The cache consists
of 608, sharp, unworked, flint flakes. The weight is 7~/.., pounds.

Texas Archeological and Paleo~tological So~ie$y

76

The materials, red and brown c!mrts. The flakes are from 1 to 4
~nches in length and obviously could have been fashioned into
almost any type of artifact.

The source of this cache, a vast pre-

historic quarry, was discovered a short distance down the canyon.
Many huge hammers and quarrying tools were observed in situ, just
as the ancient miners left them. Countless spalls, chips, and flakes
mantle the slopes below the horizon where the chert nodules are
expo~d.

The chert deposit seems to be Triassic in age.

Much of

the debris has changed color since it has been exposed to weathering.
This fact itself is significant, as Palo Duro cherts and artifacts
seldom exhibit patination.
The picturesque Palo Duro Canyon abounds in archeological stations of various sorts, such as middens, workshops, quarries, and
burials. Shallow oval and deep circular mortar holes are found in
addition to the rare boat-shaped type.
Potter County Cache
This lot, consisting of 81 unworked flakes was discovered 3 feet
below the surface of the tableland in a ravine which drains into
the Canadian River.

The material is of a red varigated chert, pos-

sibly Alabates. The size ranges from 1 inch to 5 and all are covered with gray mineral incrustations. Cord marked pot sherds and
small triangular points with side notches of recent Panhandle types
were observed on the surface of the locality.
cache is 2 pounds.
Henrietta, Texas.

The weight of this

