ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES IN CUSTER
COUNTY, OKLAHOMA
BY HAROLD D. BRIGHTON

This report is intended to present data about six prehistoric Indian village sites located in Custer county, Oklahoma.
Custer county is situated in the western and central part of
Oklahoma, and since little archaeological information is
available for the western section of the state, this brief
contribution should be welcome.
A total of six sites are herein considered, Goodman II,
Shahan I and II, McLaugh!in I and II and Williams I.
All of the sites are to be found within the Washita River
valley in the southern part of Custer county in the vicinity
.of Stafford, Oklahoma.l The sites in question were surveyed and examined by a cooperative archaeological project sponsored by the Department of Anthropology at the
University of Oklahoma and the Federal Government
under the Works Progress Administration. Dr. Forrest E.
Clements was responsible for the field survey, and excavations were under the immediate supervision of Mr. Lynn
Howard, at that time a graduate student at the University.
The survey and excavations were conducted in 1941. The
specimens, reports and data upon which this report is based
are now in the collections of the Department of Anthropology at the University of Oklahoma Museum at Norman.2
Goodman 1I Site (cu-2)
The Goodman II site was brought to the attention of the
University by Mr. Boone Goodman, who had picked up a
,considerable amount of surface material in the plowed
field just south of his house. The site is located on the
Goodman farm one-half mile west and one-fourth mile south
of Stafford, Oklahoma.~ The site is situated upon a river
terrace which rises above the flood plain of the Washita
1.
One additional site is reported as Goodman I by Art Gallaher elsewhere in thi~
journal.
2.
Acknowledgment for aid in preparing this rel~ort is hereby extended to
Willis Stovall, Director of the University Museum, Mr. Ralph Shead, Dr. Robert
Bell, Chairman Department of Anthropology, Dr. Karl Schmitt and :Mr. Art Gallaher.

Archeological Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

165

River bottoms. At the present time the river flows perhaps
one-half a mile east of the site on the opposite side of the
valley, although at the time of habitation, it may have been
closer to the occupation area. The Goodman I site is also
located in the same area and upon the same farm, being
separated from Goodman II merely by a few hundred
yards distance. In view of the proximity of these two habitation areas and the fact that the cultural materials from
both are similar, both Goodman I and Goodman II probably
represent different sections of the same village.
Two areas were excavated at the Goodman II site: both
localities having some evidences for aboriginal house structures. The excavations were conducted by horizontal stripping within a grid system based upon ten foot squares.
The various squares were excavated by arbitrary levels four
inches in depth to reveal any stratigraphy that might be
indicated. No significant differences appear in the materials
from the various levels, and it is believed that a single
occupation is represented by the site.
Evidences of houses are found in both excavation areas
although in neither case could the outline or perimeter of
the houses be detected. Both areas are marked by village
debris, fire pits, deposits of wattle and other features.
Excavation area No. 1 contains a circular fire place about
one and one-half feet in diameter. Surrounding this fire
basin were five small features which are reported as cache
pits in the field records. The size o~ these pits, however,
as well as their position suggest that post holes are represented. The pits are about one foot in diameter and one
to one and one-half feet in depth, much smaller than one
would expect for a typical cache pit. Since the nearby
Goodman I site produced similar pits which were recognized
as being center posts for a house structure, it is suggested
that post holes are represented in this case. Iqo wall posts
or additional features other than wattle are reported for
this locality.
Excavation area No. 2 contains a fireplace, four cache
pits and an easily discernable house floor. No post holes

166

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

HOUSE I

GOODMAN

’17

I
t

Key -

]

HOUSE 2

Ex;,nt of

]
Polthole~

GOODMAN

FIGURE 7
House Plans of Goodman IL

were found. The fireplace is irregular in outline but marked
by burned clay and filled with matted ashes and charcoal.
The cache pits are circular in outline, from two and onehalf to three and one-half feet in diameter and from three
to four feet in depth. Cache pit No. 2, for example, is
three feet in diameter and extends to a depth of three feet
beneath the surface. It contained a metate fragment, one

ArcheologicaI Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

167

grit tempered pottery sherd and seventy small fragments
of broken animal bones.
Throughout the excavation occasional artifacts are found
which give insight into the cultural complex of the Goodman II site. Since the specimen inventory is~ limited, both
excavated and surface materials are treated together in the
following discussion.
Chipped Stone Objects
Chipped stone artifacts include projectile points, a variety
of scrapers, a drill, a flake knife, and three fragments which
are presumably from knives. In addition many flint spalls
or flakes are found which do not appear to have been
worked, merely representing the debris from chipping or unmodified flakes.
Two small projectile points were found, both a different
type. One is an elongated side notched triangular point
with a slightly concave base. The second point, although
damaged, is a broad, triangular, urmotched form having a
convex base.
Scrapers are the most common flint tool, and appear to
represent two major types, a snub-nosed or end scraper,
and the side scraper. All of the scrapers are rather small
in size, few being over one inch in length. The end sc~pers are represented by three examples, all chipped from
flat flakes with blunt retouching at one end. The side
scrapers are represented by eight small irregular flakes
which have had slight secondary chipping along one slde
to produce a scraping edge. The shape of the scraper seems
to be dependent upon the original form of the flint flake
from which it was made, no attempt being made to produce
a uniform type of tool.
A single narrow spall of flint has been rechipped along
one side to produce a sharp cutting edge and was presumably used as a knife. Another single chipped specimen
represents a drill or perforating tool. It has not been carefully chipped and the base remains irregular and unmodified by secondary chipping. There are three small frag-

168

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

ments of what may represent knives or other unfinished
artifacts.
Many of the flint artifacts have been burned as evidenced
by the fire scar fractures present on the surfaces. It is
interesting to note that much of the material is derived from
the extensive quarries north of Amarillo, Texas, and can
be recognized as the Alibates flint.
Ground Stone Objects
There are two stone implements which occurred in excavation area No. 2. The larger of these, a broken metate,
is made from an elongated red granite boulder measuring
ten inches in. length and five inches in width. The upper
surface of the metate shows the usual basin like depression
characteristic of these items. The smaller object is a long
rectangular awl sharpener of sand-stone. This implement
has been used for sharpening bone awls or pointea fools,
since the narrow grooves running linearly along its surface
are triangular in cross-section.
Bone Objects
The only bone item found is very fragmentary and was
removed from the fire pit in excavation area No. 2. Several
pieces of a buffalo scapula which are evidently part of a
single hoe were recovered. Some of the pieces show the
signs of smoothing and rubbing typical of the scapula hoe.
No evidences for the manner of halting can be noted.
Pottery
There are one hundred and thirty fragments of pottery,
which in general are rather crude and poorly manufactured. Most of the pottery came from excavation area No.
2. From a technical standpoint, many of the sherds indicate wide coils poorly welded together and an excessive
amount of coarse tempering material The surface finish
is rather carelessly done, many sherds bearing marks and
scraping scars. Almost all of the sherds have been tempered with either caliche or a combination of caliche and
grit. The tempering material varies considerably in size

ArcheoIog~cal Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

169

of the particles, some sherds havfiag fragments up to six
mm. in size, others having finely pulverized granules. The
grains of tempering material seemingly are roughly correlated with the thickness of the sherds, and hence perhaps with vessel size, the thick heavy sherds containing large
particles and the thinner sherds having the caliche more
finely ground. The sherds are most commonly a plain
surfaced ware although some cord-marked wares are present. A single sherd has two small clay nodes attached to the
surface. It is impossible to determine the actual vessel
shape from the sherds represented even though some pieces
are obviously portions of a flares type rim.
The pot~.ery from the Goodman II site is similar to "~hat
identified b~ Gallaher as Stafford Plain and Staffor~ Cordmarked.3 The single noded sherd is similar to Stafford
PZain in all characteristics except the presence of the nodes.
Out of the one hundred and thirty sherds represented, one
hundred and twenty are Stafford Plain, nine are Sta~ford
Cordmarked and the noded: sherd is unique.
The single noded sherd is of interest because it resembles
sherds from archaeological sites on the Washita River in
central Oklahoma. The sherd suggests that it came from
a wide mouthed globular jar having a flaring neck. The
two attached nodes appear on the vessel wall jus~ below
the neck of the pot. Although this application of fillets or
nodes of clay upon the vessel surface is not common, several
specimens have been found at various sites in the Washita
River focus.
Shahan I Site (Cu-3)
The Shahan I site is crossed by the Rock Island Railroad
near the Washita River on the Shahan farm about four
miles south of Stafford, Oklahoma. The excavation, whic~h’
was also under the direction of the University of Oklahoma,
was contemporary with the work on the Goodman sites.
Horizontal stripping with a ten foot square grid system
3.

Gallaher, op. cit.

170

Texas Archeological and paleontological Society

and levels of four inches was again utilized in digging this
site. Only twelve ten foot squares were excavated and ~lue
to the scarcity of the material, both the surface finds and
the excavated items were jointly considered in this report.
No houses or other village features were found, however,
the site was not exposed to an exhaustive study a~d some
such evidence may occur in the undisturbed portion of
this area.
Chipped Stone Objects
The chipped stone series contain four types of scrapers,
including the two types at the Goodman II site and two
others. The most abundant variety is the plain end scraper.
Some of the side scrapers are modified into a curved variety
and these are rather crudely chipped. Knives and projectile pointS are also found on the site.
In addition to these, the Shahan I site produced a type,
which is tentatively termed a pointed scraper. There are six
of this variety. To produce the pointed scraper, two edges
join at one corner, making an angle of less than ninety
degrees. These edges show secondary chipping while the
Other rough edges are untouched. These are usually made
from flakes and have a varying size, ranging from one inch
to two and one-half inches in width or length, usually Being
as wide as they are long.
Scrapers are the most common flint item at this site.
The snub-nosed or end scrapers and the pointed variety are
the most common types. Most scrapers are small and some
are less than one inch in length. The snub-nosed or end
scrapers are sixteen in number. Six of these are chipped
from flat flakes with rechipping at one end representing
the snub-nosed type, but ten are made from cores with secondary chipping at one end. The side scrapers are made
from small flakes with one of the edges retouched. The
original shape of the flake is unaltered and consequently the
shape of this type is quite variable.
Two implements seem to have been used as knives. Both
of these are fragmentary and quite small. A single narrow

PLATE 23
Specimens from Caster County Sites.
All artifacts are actual size with the
tlon of the Dot.
The scale for it is 1 inch equals 5 inches.
L Perforated lag for
string support. (Ca-6).
2, A noded strap handle, (Ca-7).
3. Incised Dot sherd,
(Ca-5).
4. Noded shoulder and rim sherd, (Ca-2).
5, Large c6rdmarked caliche
tempere<l rim and shoulder sherd, (Ca-6).
6. Large storage jar of Stafford Plain
ware. (Ca-4).
7. Incised pot sheed, (Ca-4).
8. Finger nail punctuat~l sherd, (Ca-4).
9. Stippled of punctuate sherd, (Ca-6),
10. Projectile points (from aDDer left to
lower right).
A~ wide hssc~l bl~lnt pointed side notched point. (Ca-3), trianffular
tlr~riint, ,(Ca-6): conc.a,ve,based point. (,Ct~-3), triangalar side notched point.
rlangular siae notcae~ point, (Cu-7). round based side notched point, (Cu-2L
II. Sandstone awl sharpener. (Ca-4).- 12. Sandstone arrow shaft smoother, (Ca-2).
15. Narrow based, drill, (Ca-2).
14. Flared based drill, (Ca-7).
15. Irregular b~ed
short shanked drill, {Ca-7).
16. Narro~ bsst~l drill, {Ca-6).
17, Musical rasp fragm~]t, (Ca-7}. 18. S-shaDed knife, (Ca-7). 19, Flake knife: (Ca-5). 20. Flake knife,
{C~.6). 21. Fragment of a hmgltudi~al!y flaked knife~ (Co7). 22, Scapula hand h~e.
(CUe7). 23. S~uh-nosed scraper. (Ca-2), 24. Snuh-~osed scraper, (Cu-7). 25. Snub-nosed
scraDer, ~Cu-7), 26. Snt~b-~osed scraper, (Ca°4). 27. Snub-nosed scraper. (Ca°2).
28. End scraper. (Cue7). 29, Side scraper, (Ca-6). 30, Pointe<~ scraper.
31. Pointed scraper,
Editor’s N~te: This plate ~vas reduced to two-fii’ths its original ~ize.

ArcheologicaI Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

173

flake of flint is rechipped to produce a sharp cutting edge and
was presumably used as a knife. This fragment is about two
inches long. The other fragment is seemingly one end of
an alternate beveled diamond-shaped knife.
Four varieties of projectile points are found. Three triangular straight based examples are un-notched while another
un-notched triangular point has a convex base. One specimen has a wide, heavy, notched based with a short and
fairly blunt body. Another is basically triangular with a
convex base and an elongated body. All of these examples
are small, not exceeding one and one-half inches in length.
From the appearance of the remaining flint item, it was
possibly used as a drill. This specimen is extremely narrow
and oval in cross section with sharpening at the edges near
the pointed end only.
Many of the chipped stone artifacts in this series, like
some of those of the preceding Goodman II site, have been
made from Amarillo Alibates flint.
Ground Stone Objects
Only one ground stone fragment was found on the Shahan
I site. The fragment seems to be a portion of a stone muller,
being made of sandstone and oval in cross section. Flattening on one side has resulted from the manner in which th-.’s
stone was utilized. The stone has been fractured at one end
and the other end has a rounded appearance.
Bone Objects

A small burned fragment of a deer cannon bone was found
that had been highly polished. This specimen may have
been part of an awl, since the manufacture of awls from
this particular bone was quite common on the plains, but
it is so small that the exact use could not be ascertained.
Pottery

One hundred and seven pottery fragments were obtained
from the Shahan I site and these are astonishingly similar
to the Goodman II examples. The caliche or caliche and grit

!74

Texas Archeological and PaleOntological Socia~y

tempered wares again display a wide range of texture variation with the thick wares having the coarsest temper while
the thin pieces have finer tempering particles.

The surface

finish in the smooth examples is crudely produced with
smoothing marks on many 0f the sherds.
fragments are also crudely fashioned.

The cordmarked

One sherd has been

tempered with sand, and one has a mixture of caliche particles added to the sand. The former is smooth and the latter
is cordmarked. One small caliche tempered fragment is
incised but it is too small to determine any pattern design.
The shape of the vessels, as assumed from the appearance
of the body sherds and flared rim fragments, seem generally
rounded, however, definite form could not be determined
from the available specimens.
Shahan I pottery, like Goodman II, has a high frequency
of Stafford Plain ware and in addition, some Stafford Cordmarked. Of the one hundred and seven sherds, a total of
one hundred and four are Sta]ford Plain, while only two
Stafford Cordmarked examples were obtained. The two
sherds having sand temper are unique only in tempering
and to the naked eye they cannot be separated from the other
types.
The caliche tempered incised sherd could not be traced
to any adjacent group and is also unique~ for this site.
McLaughlin I Site (Cu-4)
The McLaughlin I site, or Cu-4, is three miles east and one
mile south of the Shahan II site. Work began in the area
on April 22, 1941 and was conducted contemporarily with
other sites in Custer County. The excavation procedure explained in the earlier sites was utilized on the McLaughlin I
site. Eight ten foot squares were excavated and surface
finds are included in the collections analyzed in this report.
There is reference in Mr. Howard’s report to traces of a
house, which presumably was not excavated as no other
mention of it occurs inhisfield data.

A~cheologicaI S~tes in Custer County, Oklahoma

175

Chipped Stone Objects
The flint artifacts included in the McLaughlin I sample
show a greater degree of refinement in chipping technique
than is found in the other sites reported; especially the
scrapers and the projectile points exemplify this higher development of chipping tradition.
The chipped stone items include projectile points, a drill,
a knife, and a variety of scrapers.
Four types of scrapers occur in the site. The snub-nosed
variety is manufactured from a concave flake, with chipping
on the convex surfaces, in the same manner as the Goodman II and Shahan I examples. Five of this type were
found.
The most abundant chipped stone objects are side scrapers. These are represented by ten scrapers. The size of
these vary as does their degree of chipping technique, some
being crudely produced and others being well done.
Three pointed scrapers were found with the surface material and are exceedingly small in size. These are produced in a similar way to those in the Shahan I material.
Projectile points are clearly evidenced by two fragments.
The first type is made from a concave flake and is chipped
only on one side, having a narrow rounded base with a
somewhat wider shoulder. The other point is the rear portion of a triangular shaped point. Both of these points are
small in size.
A piece of a drill, which is partly unfinished, wa~ included.
The base is wide as is the unfinished portion. The drill
shank is small and had been fractured about one-half inch
from the base.
/( long thin mid-section of a knife is included in the flint
items. The base is rounded and the edges are almost parallel
with an eliptical cross section. This piece has been chipped
on both surfaces and gives evidence of a refined chipping
technique.

176

Texas Arch~ologica~ and Paleontological Society

Ground Stone Objects
Three small arrowshaft smoothers, generally rectangular
in shape, occur on the site. Al! of these have probably been
used as smoothing devices for arrow shafts as the grooves in
them are semicircular.
The small mano fragment found could easily be identified
by its rectangular shape and is of the rectangular, biface
variety.
Bone Objects
Three small charred fragments of what possibly might
have been a bison scapula hoe were obtained, two of these
pieces show evidence of abrasion, so undoubtedly they have
been utilized for some endeavor.
Pottery

One hundred and twenty-nine sherds were found in the
McLaughlin I area. Surface finds include fifty of these
pieces. They are crudely manufactured and show evidence
of coil welding, which is not durable, as many of the sherds
have broken at the point of weld.
The caliche or caliche and grit sherds constitute ninetysix percent of the finds.
There are sixty-two sherds with
caliche, which varied greatly in coarseness, from flecks
almost invisible to some as large as six mm. in cross section. The caliche and grit sherds include sixty-one specimens and these also have a wide range of coarseness. These,
being smooth, constitute, along with the restorable jar,
the Stafford Plain portion of the sample. The remainder
of the series are StaS]ord Cordmarked with the six unique
pieces as exceptions. One small cordmarked sand tempered
sherd, which is very brittle, was found. Four grit tempered
sherds are included and in these the particles are very finely
ground. The one shell tempered piece is of medium coarseness in texture.
A small grit tempered incised fragment and a fingernail
punctated grit tempered fragment could not be traced to any
adjacent groups and may be unique or items of trade.

Archeologica~ Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

177

The six rim sherds are exceedingly small and give the
appearance of belonging to the flared rim variety. Most of
the series is included in the body sherd group. Judging
from these one hundred and twenty-three examples, the
majority of the vessels must have been round.
One large restorable storage jar was located on the site, being found partially on the surface and with fragments going
down to a depth of about six inches. This pot, found by the
survey party, was obtained in the vicinity of the house mentioned in the report. It has a rounded base and a wide
flared mouth. The vessel is twenty inches high and at its
maximum diameter is sixteen inches wide. Having a
smooth surface, the jar is about one centimeter in overall
thickness, and is caliche tempered. The rounded base is arranged so that overall body shape for the pot is not unlike
as inverted pear. In hardness, it tests at 4.5. The vessel is
now on exhibition in the University Museum.
McLaughlin II Site (Cu-5)
This site is referred to as the McLaughlin II site in the
Museum report and adjoins the site I area. Work was in
progress during the month of June in 1941 but definite
dates are not available for the excavations. The area was
staked out and excavated in the same manner as were the
previous sites. Fourteen ten foot squares were taken down
to a twenty inch depth, divided into five levels.
No houses are defined but a fire pit was discovered one
foot below the surface with traces of baked clay at its rim.
The walls are vertical and the bottom generally flat. This
pit is circular in overall appearance and two feet, eight
inches in diameter with a pit depth of one foot, four inches.
This feature was discovered one foot below the surface
so that its bottom is two feet, four inches below ground level.
At a depth of four and one half inches from the top of the
pit, two large rocks were located. One is a fragment of unworked stone and the other is a circular rock of ten and onehalf inches in diameter and one and three-fourths inches in
thickness, with the circular rock being smoothed on the

178

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

one side.

Two triangular notched points were associated

with these stones. Below the stones was a thick layer of ash
10 inches in depth.
Chipped Stone Objects
Included in the Chipped Stone series are knives, a variety
of scrapers, and projectile point types.

Many fragments of

unworked flint indicate discarded flakes or unworked pieces.
A small sample of flint was found on the McLaughlin II
site. Four classes of scrapers are included. One snub-nosed
type occurs and it had been manufactured in much the same
manner as those on the Goodman I or II series.
The group of ten side-scrapers are again rather crudely
fashioned and from an assorted selection of stone. These are
all small, not averaging more than one and three-fourths
inches in maximum length.
End scrapers here are variable in their manufacture. Two
are rather small while one is three inches in length but has
a small scraping edge. The other is triangular with the short
edge being chipped for scraping and making a total of four
end scrapers.
Two pointed scrapers were found, being produced in a
manner similar to those previously mentioned. ¯
Two small knives were obtained and these are not over
two inches long and three-fourth inch in width. These had
been produced from concave flakes, with chipping on the
upper surface extending completely around the flake. Both
knives have rounded corners and are finely chipped specimens.
The two projectile points are basically triangular.4 One
is flaked on both sides and without notching, but the other
is flaked on both sides, having two side notches and one
4.

Th~)ugli,

~tccordtng to

the

report,

three .points

should

be

available,

ov~ly

two

~f these are no~’ on hand in the laboratory. A few years after these sites were
excavated, some of the better worked items wdre rut on display during a
eolloquim. Following this event, some of the materials were misplaced,

Archeolog~ca! Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

basal notch.
long.

179

Both of these points are less than two inches
Ground Stone Objects

Of the five sandstone abraders found, two, by evidence of
their striations, are arrowshaft smoothers. The other three,
having triangular grooves, were probably utilized to sharpen
bone implements.
One rectangular mano stone occurred, it being fragmentary.
A fragment of a round hammer stone made of sandstone
was found which had been only slightly polished.
A smal! fragment of a stone pipe was found with the bowl
decorated by one concentric striation, one-fourth inch below
the top of the bowl. Subsequent striations came up and
into the bowl from this one. The bowl, itself, is one-fourth
inch in diameter with a height of 1¥4 inches. This item is
badly weathered, even though it was not found on the
surface.
Fragments of two fossil clam (Gryphaea) were located
at level 4 in the site. It is doubted whether these had any
significance to the Indians, however.
Bone Objects
Three fragmentary bison scapula hoes were found, but
not enough of ~he fragments were found for any of them to
be restored. A tubular bone bead one and one-fourth inches
long was included, which probably had been produced from
a bird bone.
Pottery
In the McLaughlin II area, two hundred and forty sherds
were found. Of these, sixty-six are surface finds. The
smoo~th finished caliche or caliche and grit ware again accounts for most of the series. There are one hundred and
eighteen smooth caliche tempered sherds with coarseness
ranging from finely ground, almost invisible particles, to
very large flecks.

180

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The smooth caliche and grit tempered sherds number one
hundred and fifteen and they too have a wide range of
coarseness.
marked.

The two sand tempered pieces are both .cord-

Five shell tempered smooth sherds are included

in the finds.

The smooth surfaced finds occur primarily

with grass or brush markings still evident.

However, the

five, smooth, shell tempered sherds do not show this tendency.

Eight cordmarked sherds are present in the afore-

mentioned sites.

All of the cordmarked series have been

smoothed, to a certain degree, and only two sherds show
this process in McLaughlin II. One incised sherd was found.
The body sherds seem to suggest a round shape but there
are no restorable pots in this series to confirm that fact.
Two flat top rim fragments were found. Parts of small
strap handles appear in some of the surface finds. In respect to hardness, there is a fairly equal classification in all
categories examined.
The Sta~Sord Plain and Sta~Sord Cordmarked traditions,
treated as smooth and cordmarked, are both found on the McLaughlin II site but tempering is varied to a certain degree. Five of the plain sherds show shell temper, which
is not so abundant in the other sites of the area.
The one incised fragment is not found in enough quantity
to validate establishing a new tradition, however, as before,
no correlation with other areas could be found for this
sherd.
Williams Site (Cu-6)
The Williams site was surveyed on April 8, 1941 and no
excavation was undertaken. All the data below is on the
basis of surface survey material. The site is located in the
Stafford area also.
A good supply of flint items was discovered, considering
the fact that all the finds were on the surface and no test
pits were dug.

Archeo~ogical Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

181

Chipped Stone Objects
Various types of knives, drills, projectile points and scrapers appear in the Williams material. Some of these have
been fashioned from Kay County flint.
Five types of scrapers appeared on the surface. Six snubnosed scrapers of the concave flake variety were found.
Fifteen side-scrapers are included in both the straight and
curved types. Three pointed scrapers were picked up and
a new type, for this area, was found. This is an oval shaped
or round scraper, being chipped on both sides with secondary
chipping around the perimeter on both surfaces of the item.
There are three types of knives located on the Williams
site. One appeared to be a fragment of an elongated, diamond shape type with alternately beveled edges. Two are
of the flake variety explained in the McLaughlin I report.
Also a third type is represented by three pieces, being made
from a refractured flint spall, similar to those found in
Shahan I. All of these pieces are about three inches in
length.
A wide variety of projectile points ranging from threefourths inch to three inches in. length were found on the
Williams farm.
The triangular type accounts for six points. Three points
are basically triangular with two side notches and a basal
notch. There are six points of the triangular type with only
two side notches. Five points fall into the triangular pattern class but they have concave basal edges. All the
above mentioned arrowheads do not exceed one and one
half inches in length.
A long slender drill was found without shoulders. The
drill is only three fourths inch in length and is manufactured to a high degree of efficiency. Upon first seeing this
artifact, it was mistaken for a point due to its fragmentary
condition.
Two oval shaped drills were found that were made from
Kay County flint and these are chipped on both sides. They

182

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

are both more than two inches in length. Another peculiar
fragment was found, two inches in length. This has a side
projection and is ovoid in cross section. It is finely chipped
and may have been used as a knife but its exact use is
unknown.
In addition to these flint items, a 44 cal. brass cartridge
was found in the area. This was the first time a contact
item was discovered in relation to any of these sites and
as all of the items of the Williams site occur on the surface,
it is probably not associated with the flint material.
Gound Stone Objects

One rectangular mano, made of red sandstone, was picked
up with two other mano fragments on the surface. Five
pieces of sandstone have been used as abraders, one arrow
shaft smoother, three awl sharpeners and one flat abrader.
Hammerst0nes are included and two round igneous rock
examples, three inches in diameter, with flattened sides,
were picked up.
A stone pipe fragment was picked up which was too
small to give evidence of shape.
Pottery
Pottery for the survey is represented by one hundred and
forty sherds, all of which are surface finds.
Smooth caliche or caliche and grit ware occurs with the
temper being finely ground or as heavy, thick particles ranging up to six ram. in width. The same range for tempering
is found for the cordmarked caliche or caliche and grit
wares. In the caliche, grit and sand tempering, all the particles seem to be finely ground. The two grit sherds are of
a coarse tempered variety and the shell tempering is finely
ground.
Surface finish in the series is rather widely exemplified.
About one-half of the sherds are smooth in finish. A greater
percentage of the sample is cordmarked than in any of the
previous sites, including sixty-seven sherds. One punc-

Archeotogical Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

183

tate,caliche sherd was found, which is unique for the site.
Both Sta]ford Plain and Sta]ford Cordmarked are found in
abundance on the site and both are represented in all the
temper categories. There is no cordmarked caliche, grit and
shell or no smooth grit tempering in the site.
The vessels must have had a rounded appearance as the
body sherds were concave. There are one hundred and sixteen of these. Twenty-one rim sherds were picked up and
are of the flat edged, flared rim, non-decorated variety.
Two lugs of the strap variety occur as well as one base
sherd. The latter is circular and flat bottomed in appearance.
Two worked body sherds have been rounded on the edges
and are possibly game counters.
Shahan II Site (Cu-7)
The Shahan II site is located on the Shahan farm and is
cut through the center by U. S. Highway 66 and the Rock
Island railroad at a wide bend of Turkey Creek. tt is about
four miles south of the Goodman I and II sites. The survey
of this area was conducted April 7, 1941.
At least eight test pits were excavated but only pits No.
4, 5, 6 and 8 yielded any material. Three ten foot squares
were excavated and square 3:1 produced a cache pit. No
houses were indicated by either survey or excavation.
The cache pit is not included in the Field Supervisor’s
report and its dimensions are not available for study. It
yielded a bison scapula hoe and a bone digging stick point.
Chipped Stone Objects
There was a relatively large sample of flint objects
picked up in this area and the Chipped Stone series for
Shahan II includes a small amount of both Kay County and
Amarillo flint items. A large sample of knives, projectile
points, drills and scrapers with many discarded flakes and
unworked spalls indicate a great amount of industry in the
surveyed area and the possibility of a workshop.

184

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Three snub-nosed scrapers were found, similar to those
mentioned in the previous sites. Eleven side-scrapers were
found in the area. The largest number of scrapers of one
type represented is the end-scraper. Ten of these are included. Two examples of pointed scrapers were recovered.
All the above mentioned varieties are seemingly manufactured by methods explained in relation to other sites in the
immediate vicinity, so it will not be necessary to repeat
them.
Knives included are of the rounded end, concave flake type
earlier mentioned and the reflaked spall variety. There are
three of the former and four of the latter patterns found.
In addition to these, there is a third S-shaped knife variety,
which is flaked on both sides with secondary flaking along
the edges. It is only about two inches in length.
Projectile points are of five types. Five specimens of the
triangular point were found. Some of these had been manufactured from flakes and are chipped only on one side. One
other basically triangular point was found, with a concave
base and an elongated body. This example is chipped on
both sides. Two points are triangular with two side notches
and one basal notch. Also a type is present having only the
two side notches. All these points are less than one inch
in length.
Another fragment was found, which is oval in cross section and elongated with parallel sides but fractured at both
ends. This item may or may not have been used as a projectile point or knife.
One flint drill was obtained in the Shahan II ~rea, which
is exceedingly well manufactured with a wide, curved, flat
base and a long shank that widens toward the point and is
diamond shaped when viewed from the point end. The
drill is two inches in overall length.
Ground Stone Objects
Three sandstone abraders of conical shape were picked
up. They were probably used as awl smoothers since their
grooves are angular in cross-section.

Archeological Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

185

Bone Objects
A bison scapula was found in the cache pit mentioned
earlier.

It is fragmentary but shows evidence of abrasion,

not only on the blade but the butt as well.

This suggests

that the implement may have been used in the hand rather
than being mounted. A portion of a bone digging stick point
was picked up, having abrasive marks on its point.
A peculiar bison rib specimen was found with three cross
striations at one end, occurring at regular intervals.

This

item, which may have been a portion of a musical rasp, was
found only in part as the entire cross section of the rib is
not available.
Pottery
Pottery on the Shahan II site numbered one hundred
and twenty-one sherds.
In all these samples, smooth or cordmarked smooth caliche
or caliche and grit tempered sherds have coarsely ground
temper with most of the particles being four ram. in cross
section. The caliche, grit and shell seems to be more finely
ground and the three grit sherds are of medium coarseness.
The shell temper is also finely ground.
The smooth sherds are representative of the larger portion of this series with eighty-nine sherds falling into this
category.

Thirty cordmarked smoothed examples occur on

the site and only two noduled pieces were picked up.
No restorable pots were found but from the appearance
of the one hundred and five body sherds, the vessels were
round: The rim sherds (twelVe) are the flared rim type
.as in the Williams series of pottery.

Three strap lug handle

fragments occur, which have nodes attached along the outer
edges.
base.

The one base sherd available is circular with a flat

186

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Stafford Plain and Stafford Cordmarked are in evidence
with the same temper types discussed in the Williams site.
The noduled pieces are possibly indicative of trade with
the Washita River Focus since they are strikingly similar
to the type found there.
Associated Animal Remains
On all the six sites mentioned in this report, there is evidence of buffalo, deer and rodent bones.

They are all frag-

mentary and some of them have been worked into bone implements.

Some unworked clam shell fragments are also

found.
CONCLUSION
It is my conclusion from overall familiarity with these
materials that temper is not significant in the area since
both Stafford Plain and Stafford Cordmarked traditions
are dominant, and any of the temper variants do not differ
significantly from these traditions .except for temper consistency.

Consequently, it may be concluded that temper

was not a determining factor in this region and that both
these traditions include pottery with a wide temper variation
which does not alter their general appearance.
The dating for these sites has not been definitely established. The entire group probably followed a dual subsistence pattern since both implements of agriculture and
various types of animal bones are present. No direct connection with historical groupings can be definitely stated.
Evidence that any of the groups had yet obtained the horse
is lacking and the only possible contact item was the mentioned .44 calibre cartridge case.
These sites are probably more closely related to those of
the lower Washita River region, which has been exemplified by the Lee Site, than any other groups of prehistoric
Oklahoma.

Archeological Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma

187

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Schmitt, Karl,
"The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County, Oklahoma,"
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 21, Lubbock, Texas, 1950.
Watson. Virginia
"The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis," The Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 21, Lubbock, Texas, 1950.

