NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS
THE 1951 ANNUAL MEETING
The twenty-fourth annual meeting of the Society was held in
Junior College auditorium at San Angelo on October 27, 1951. On
the evening before, Judge and Mx& O. L. Sims and 1M_r. and Mrs.
Harry E. Weaver entertained approximately eighty members and
guests of the Society with a dinner at the Weaver’s ranch home
twenty miles north of San Angelo. The evening was most convivial and will long be remembered.
The following papers were presented:
Dr. Robert E. Bell, "Excavations in the Tenkiller Reservoir,
Cherokee County, Oklahoma."

Charles Proctor, "Exploration in the ’Enfoula Reservoir, Eastern Oklahoma."
Dr. Karl Schmitt, "Wichita and Caddo Burial Customs."
Dr. Tom N. Campbell, "The Rock’port Focus."
Edward 5elks, "The Towash Indians and the Stansbury Site."
Jane Holden, "A Further Repor~ on the Bonnell Site."
Dr. E. I-I. Sellards, "Recent Evidence Concerning the Age of
Folsolm Man."
Glen Evans, "Archaeological Problems in the Dune Belts of
the High Plains."
Dr. Erik Reed, ’~fhe Historic Range of the American Bison."
Alex Krieger, "North American Archaeology in the Light of
Radiocarbon Datings."
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, "Two Mineralized Skulls from Texas."
R. B. Worthington, "Houston Area Archaeo!ogy."
THREE SITES NEAR BAYTOWN
On May 26, 1952, 1Yir. W. L. Atwood of 501 Ruth Street, Baytown, Texas, wrote us as follows (see Figure 19 for locations):
"I am attaching a section of a map covering three sites in east
Harris and Chambers counties. The material sent from Devil’s
Elbow came from an old midden which is believed to have been
occupied by an Atakapan tribe, perhaps the BidaL The Arkrokisi
pottery is a little different, being somewhat thinner, rarely incised,
but usual.ly with a scalloped decoration on the top of the rim.
You will notice on the map that an old county road goes right
through the bend marked "Devil’s Elbow." This road has since
been abandoned and the ferry is no longer in use, traffic now
going over a bascule bridge at the mouth of Cedar Bayou. On
the west bank of Cedar Bayou stream, starting at the bascule
bridge, are pre-historic mounds and midden representing a long
period of time.

304

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

The first begins at the bridge, with a shell midden two or three
feet in thickness. I have failed to find a single piece of pottery at
this location and am of the opinion that it represents a pro-pottery
occupation. A few unidentified bones found there were in a rotten

condition.
A little to the north of Ash Lake is an old shell midden, with
some pottery known as Goose Creek Plain and Incised. This site
~s later than the on near the bridge, but earlier than one located
on the point of land shown protrudging out into Iajms Lake. This
point contains an artificial mound about six feet in height and
probably 60 x 100 feet, shaped somewhat like a fish, with the soil
from borrow pit removed in such manner as to form a moat. It
has been quite interesting to study the method of construction of
this mound, as there were baskets of clay carried to the site and
dumped into the fill, leaving the imprints of large leaves around
the individual loads. In some cases instead of leaf mold around
the clay, it was a thin layer of lime. I finally decided the clay
was being dug from a wet place and the leaves were used to line
their baskets, with the whole business thrown into the mound. At
first I could not account for the lime and thought it could have
been caused by feathers of some sort. I finally came to the conclusion that garpike skins were used, and when rotted would leave
a small amount of powdered lime around the clay. The reinforcing was rattan vines and these became silicitized and retained their
original shape.
Projectile points were fashioned from bone in a few instances,
but garpike scales were the usual type of point used, with some
kind of fish bone that may have been used. The only type of rock
material found at this site was a hoe and shovel fashioned from

FIGURE 19
Bay’town Area Sites.

News Notes and Editorials

305

sandstone, an occasional axe from the same material, and one
diamond shaped object, about 4" long, with one edge ground to a
point. This object was made from the same kind of sandstone and
could have been used to saw bones. This object was shaped like
knives found in Oklahoma but the edge was not sharp enough for
that purpose. I believe the hoe and shovel were used in constructing the mound. I was surprised that no artifacts fashioned from
hematite were found here, nor was there any burnt pieces showing
that it had been used in making a red pigment for warpaint or
decorating pottery. There is a type of red clay at the site which
leaves a very good wash on pottery and it may have been used for
paint as well. I did not find a single piece of flint of any kind.
There was evidence to show that clam and oyster shells were used
as scrapers, and some of the refuse found in such scrapers were
fishbones and small pieces of birdbones, probably wild pidgeons.
Pieces of tortoise and turtle shells were common, deer bones were
~lentiful
and there
was an bear
occasional
a larger animal,
aps a bison.
Sharpened
claws bone
were of
occasionally
found perand
were probably used for some purpose by the inhabitants. At the
top of the midden some glass was found showing that they had
come in contact with Europeans. An old oak tree at the site has
markings of a striking adder coming down the tree, and I have
been told this marking may have been put there by early Spanish
explorers, perhaps of the 16th century. The pottery type found
here is the same as that sent you last year.
At the Devil’s Elbow site there is an old midden which fails
to show any evidence of contact with European people. The pottery
and other artifacts are about the same as mentioned above, although
no agricultural implements have been found. Some of the pottery
decorations are much on the same order as that found in Louisiana
and known as Harrison Bayou.
Here comes the interesting part of this site. ~Professors and
students from the University of Houston have been here a number of times, a road has been cut through the center of upper part
of the mound, exposing large amounts of pottery, bones, shell, etc.,only a few months ago was it discovered that the entire midden
was located on the side of a large artificial mound, which may be
the largest in Texas. The mound is 688 feet in length, 360 feet in
width at the east end and somewhat less at the west end, The
maximum height before the road was cut through there was approximately 15 feet.
I kept finding traces of a type of pottery similar to Deasonville
11:111:14 but could not find the midden representing the people
who made this. Finally I decided to look for a Deasonville type of
mound, and then the problem was easily solved. I have dug into
the mound and found the pottery where it had been used with
other refuse in filling in a trench conf~aining cedar posts. These
were found at a level about six feet beneath the surface of the
mound prior to its disturbance by road construction workers. Beneath these post molds were a circular wall, which must have
been a village site prior to the construction of the mound. The
wall was circular Jn appearance, and probably constructed by
wattle and daub. The thickness was rather uniform, and all that
is left is a dark layer of soil about three inches in thickness, with
clay and sand on each side of it. I estimate that 56,000 yards of soil

306

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

was used in constructing this mound. I dug to a depth of 10~
feet at the east end of it, and this showed that it was constructed
by stages. I believe that there were originally two circular mounds,
and these were later joined together by a plaza.
A little farther up the Bayou there are a couple of pencil mark~.
The first represents a circular mound, perhaps 150 feet in diameter
and eight or ten feet in height. I have never made any kind of
excavation or borings at this site, nor have I observed any shells
or artifacts near there. I don’t believe Indians ever lived there
and it was undoubtedly used as a burial mound.
The only reason I have to state that it was an artificial mound
is the large quantity of sand found at the site. Normally the soil
near the top along the Bayou is a black gumbo. But in the construction of such mounds the natives dug soil from a site where it
was easy to get with their crude tools. Naturally sand was easy
to dig up and fill their baskets. Even today there is a distinct
di~erence from the type of topsoil found on these mounds from
that found on natural formations nearby. This makes it quite
easy to determine if a mound is a natural formation or was constructed by humans.
A part of the site is below sea level.
(See Figure 19.) It
can be found protruding from the banks of Cedar Bayou stream
when the wind is from the north and the tide quite low. About
five feet of topsoil covers the site. I think this represents a period
co-eval to the Tchefuncte period of Louisiana. A little distance
from the bank is evidence of a small mound, which may be a burial
location.
The place marked Lawrence Island is rich in cultural refuse,
human burials, etc. About 15 or 20 years ago the University of
Texas removed some skeletons from this site, but the owner of the
land objected to further explorations. An oil company is to drill
a well on the island, and it will be necessary to excavate a channel
through the march to carry material to the site. This is land representing a large amount of cultural refuse, and it has accumulated over a period of many centuries.
The site marked "McCullom Park" is interesting from the
standpoint of the amount of clam shells that have accumulated
there. It is located on the A. B. Lawrence property and Chambers
County road employees have been removing clam shells from a
large shell midden there. This site probably represents the terminus of the Bidai trail. Potsherds found there show a variety of
types, including one ~vhich I believe to be Tchefuncte Red Filmed.
The artifacts found there were turned over to Dr. R. A. Shearer,
at Mont Belvieu, Texas. I visited Dr. Shearer last Saturday and
he stated that they had given him about 100 pieces of pottery and
a number of bones taken from the site. He stated the workers
told him the pottery had come from all levels. The amount of
pottery found at this site is surprisingly small considering the
amount of material that has been hauled away. Shell in varying
depths is to be found over an area about 800 yards wide by three
miles in length. The lower level of the shell fails to show bones
of any kind but an occasional piece of pottery is found. I sent
what I found at the si~e to Dr. T. N. Campbell, and am sending
you all that I found on my last visit to the site. They are prob-

News Notes and Editorials

309

ably too small to be of any value, but you might want to look
them over and could possibly identify some of them. You may
retain them or throw a~vay if of no value.
I would like to see the State obtain some of this property along
the banks of Cedar Bayou and keep these mounds, middens and an
old corn-field as a State Park. Such locations that have not been
disturbed by farming are getting rather scarce."
THE MOUND LAKE SITE

A surface site was discovered by the Cart Austin family of
Brownfield, Texas, 14 miles northeast of Brownfield near Mound
Lake, an alkaline body of water known to the Spaniards as Lake
Umbilico because of its shape. Located on the Frank Roberts
Z-Ranch in Lynn County, the site covers some two acres of a
rising on the northwest side of the lake. There is no evidence of
house structures. The lake is surrounded by sandy fields such as
the one on which the site is located, so that frequent blowouts reveal new artifacts.
The artifacts collected by the Austins were donated to The
Museum, Texas Technological College, Lubbock, Texas, and the
following inventory made:

Flint

Artifacts:
265 projectile points
191 broken projectile points
65 snub-nosed scrapers
98 side scrapers
52 knives (only two complete)
6 gravers

Stone Artifacts:
1 hammerstone
1 mano
5 grinding stones

Shell Artifacts:
1 Glycemeris pendant.
5 broken pieces
The pottery collection consists of 386 sherds. The percentage
cannot be accurate in a surface site, but the sherds were so numerous at this site as to warrant mention.
Type
Percent.age
No.
Brownware-(El Paso, Jornada, Alma Plain, Polished) ...... 181
46.77
Chupadero Black-on-White ....................................... ll0
28.42
Corrugated ....................................................... 40
10.33
Three Rivers Red-on-Terracotta .......................... 20
5.17
Gila Polychrome ................................................... 17
4.39
Lincoln Black-on-Red .............................................. 12
3.10
Rio Grande Glaze I ................................. 3
.78
Unclassified ................................................... 3
.78
The similarities in pot sherds and the types of projectile points
lead us to conclude that the people who inhabited such sites as

310

Texas ArcheologicaI and Pa~eon$ological Society

Bonnell, near Ruidoso, New Mexico, or Bloom Mound, near Roswell, New Mexico, may have spent their summers on the plains in
search of meat for the winter. The Mound Lake Site is typical of
~many camp sites found in this area and doubtless has been used
for centuries as a hunting camp.
NOYCE JENNINGS,
Lubbock, Texas.
THE MORRIS SITE, CHEROKEE COUNTY, OKLAHOMA
Robert E. Bell and Richard H. Frazier have recently published
a twenty-page report entitled "Archaeological Discoveries at the
Morris Site, Cherokee County, Oklahoma" in the Chronicles of Oklahoma, Vol. XXX, Number 2.
THE WHEELER SITE, DALLAS COUNTY, TEXAS
Wilson W. Crook, Jr. has published a paper, "The Wheeler
Site: a 3500-Year of Culture in Dallas County, Texas," in ~he
Fie/d and Laboratory, Voh XX, Number 2, April, 1952 (University
Press, Southern Methodist University, Dallas).

