Kenneth Honea

ABSTRACT
The Marks Beach site in Lamb County exhibits parallels in specific stratigraphic details and
cultural data to both the Lubbock Lake and Blackwater Draw Locality No. I sites. It is assumed
reasonable that successive units in the three sites are culturally analogous and_essentially contemporaneous. A Bison antiquus pelvis fragment from a diatomaceous unit at Marks Beach
was radiocarbon dated at 9920 + 380 years BP; samples from an apparently equivalent unit at
Lubbock Lake were dated to the same period.

INTRODUCTION
The Marks Beach site (provisional designation TT5) is located to the
southeast of Earth (Texas) in Lamb County on the Llano Estacado. Exploratory excavations were conducted during the summers of 1968, 1969,
and 1970 by student teams from Texas Tech and Northern Illinois universities. The site is situated in a recent blowout or deflation hollow on the north
bank of an east to west bend of Blackwater Draw at an altitude of 1102 m
(3650 ft). The irregular course of the draw in the area follows a northwest to
south pattern, veers west a short distance in the vicinity of the site, and then
continues to the southeast (Earth Quadrangle Map, U.S.G.S. 7.5 minute
topographic series).
The site area, known as the Sand Hills, is characterized by numerous
dunes and drifting sands, which block the course of the draw in spots. These
sands belong to the Tivoli-Brownfield series, which bisect the central portion
of Lamb County from west to east. The former series occurs as dunes up to
25 m in height (Newman, 1962:3, 20-21).
The importance of Marks Beach lies in shared geomorphic and
stratigraphic similarities to both the Lubbock Lake site (E. Johnson, 1976),
located about 50 miles downstream in Yellowhouse Draw near the confluence of Blackwater and Yellowhouse draws, and Blackwater Draw
Locality #1 (Hester, 1972), 50 miles upstream in New Mexico. Analogues
occur over much of the Llano Estacado in respect to general geomorphology and gross stratigraphy, aiding in stratigraphic and cultural correlations of sites and palaeoenvironmental interpretations (C. Johnson,
1974:81) (Fig. 1).

244

Texas Archeological Society

M i÷5
Fig. 1 Map of Llano Estacado showing locations of (I) Blackwater Draw Locality No.

1, (2) Marks Beach (both on Blackwater Draw drainage), and (3) Lubbock Lake (in
Yellowhouse Draw).
Marks Beach is situated on a bank of what during the Late Pleistocene
had been a perennial stream. The stream dried up gradual by the end of this
epoch and was accompanied by local development of ponds. With extended periods of increasing dessication and development of dunes, the site
came to be occupied by a small marsh. This minor moist period was followed by another drying period, characteristic of the landscape today.
Postulated intermittent seepage springs, perhaps issuing from gravels
beneath caprock outcrops in the north edge of the site, may have been instrumental in making the location a choice way station through time (Fig. 2).
Seepage springs still occur in the region.
Two distinctive dune trends are evidenced at the site. The modern one is
along the east and southeast margins of the site and an older one on the
northeast and east margins. The latter underlies the former in part.

Honea - Marks Beach

245

Surface evidence of cultural activities at the site is indicated by numerous
exposed cobble hearths, bone, and lithic concentrations (Fig. 2). This
material occurred in modern sands above the preserved margins of the terminal marsh deposits at the leeward base of the dune on the east, southeast,
and south inner margins of the blowout. The disturbed basin surface of the
blowout exhibited a scattering of lithic debitage, tools, and occasional
sherds. Most were probably derived from recent sands occupying the basin
prior to deflation.
A number of apparently older bone accumulations, not clearly associated
with cultural remains, were observed during initial survey. They were
eroding out of the upper portion of the marsh deposits below the level of the
recent sands. Indications of Pleistocene sediments or cultural activities were
not seen on the surface.
Because of the situation of Marks Beach in the Blackwater Draw
drainage, it seemed possible that exploratory excavations would yield
cultural and stratigraphic sequences that could, at least in part, be correlated
with those known from both Lubbock Lake (Johnson, 1976; Plolliday and
Allen, in press) and Blackwater Draw Locality No. 1 (Hester, 1972).
Preliminary evaluation of the resultant data suggest such a correlation is well
founded.
EXCAVATION PROCEDURES
Surface cultural materials were noted and recorded on the south and east
preserved margins of the terminal marsh deposit and on the wind scoured
leeward slope of the modern dune. These cultural features were associated
with several late prehistoric occupations (probably successive) and may occur in a stratigraphic context. They were recorded, mapped, and cultural
and faunal materials retrieved. Excavations were minimal. Only shallow surface skimming with flat shovels was carried out since penetrating excavations were to be conducted only in the blowout and along its margins.
Blocks of one or more site provenience numbers were used during each
of the three seasons work to identify materials~ features, and excavation
units. The numbers were applied serially each year and gaps were intentionally left in the numbered sequence from year to year to separate each
seasons work. Each numbered phenomenon was recorded on appropriate
forms and in the field catalog and mapped. During initial surface and excavations (1968), the number block 1 to 60 was used. The number 80
(1969) designated a deep test pit. The block of numbers 85 to 96 were used
in excavation (1970). Random surface finds not associated with particular
artifact concentrations or features were assigned the provenience number 0.
Exploratory penetration excavations or tests, in the form of trenches or
pits, were undertaken in the southwestern quarter of the site in areas identiffed as excavation units 35, 40, 41, 42, 43, and 44 (Fig. 2). Arbitrary i0
cm excavation levels initially were employed. Once distinctive stratification
was apparent, digging proceeded by natural levels. Where thickness warranted, natural levels were subdivided into 5 cm or less levels.
Excavation unit 35 was the first 20 x 1 m north-south oriented test trench
excavated to a 1 m depth to explore stratigraphy. It was located on the
south inner margin of the blowout. Excavation in a final 1.5 m unit at the

Texas Archeological Society

246

north end of this unit was extended to a depth of 2.5 m, where sandy
diatomaceous earth was encountered. The west profile (Fig. 3) of this trench
was drawn.
Excavation unit 40 is comprised of two 2 x 2 m northeast and northwest
test pits at the north end of unit 35. They were separated from it and each
other by I m balks. Both were excavated to a depth of 3.5 m below surface,
to a point about I m below the uppermost diatomaceous surface. A profile

\
\

\
\

\
\
\
\

O9
<~

Fig. 2 Map of Marks Beach showing location of excavation units, caliche outcrops,
deflation basin, "beach", and younger Series I and older Series II dunes. Contour interval is 2 rn.

Honea -- Marks Beach

247

(Fig. 4) was drawn of the east wall of the northeast test pit and a series of
paired sediment samples taken from each stratigraphic unit. Unit 41, a 3 x 5
m test pit, was to the north of these excavation units (separated by a I m
balk). It was excavated to the upper surface of the diatomaceous earth.
Excavation unit 44, a 20 x 1 m test trench, further to the east, was excavated to a 1 m depth to further explore stratigraphy of the upper
sediments. It was located 12 m to the east and parallel to unit 35 (Fig. 2).
St rat a

ZONES

vA Secti on
VB
4
5
@
7

D

VA

5.0 m

2
3a
3b

IVB

C

4
IVA
III B

12.0 m

7
2

MB

vA
7
8

B

lib
~m

4
5
@
7

IVA

IIIB

A

10

o.o!

1;o 11
meters

Fig. 3 Representative profile of west wall of excavation unit 35 at O. O- 3.0 m (A), 6.0
- 9.0 (B), 12.0- 15.0 m (C), and 15.0- 18.0 m (D) intervals. PointA O.Ois at north
end of trench. Strata numbering follows that employed in field (1-11). Strata zonal
ordering follows that devised in data synthesis.

248

Texas Archeological Society

Stratigraphies of the two excavation blocks essentially were the same. Unit
43 was a 2 x 5 m test pit (due north of unit 44 and separated by a I ra balk)
excavated to the surface of the diatomaceous earth. The stratigraphic profile
compared favorably with that recorded in the northeast unit of unit 40 to the
west.

ZONES

££
££

U nexcavated

m÷te~s
Fig. 4 Profile of east wall of excavation unit 40, northeast test pit. Strata numbering
follows that employed in field. Unnumbered unit at profile top is recent blow sand.
Profile right edge is south and located about I m north of point ,4 0.0 at north end of
excavation unit 35 profile. Zonal designations are those devised in data synthesis.

Hones -- Marks Beach

249

Excavation unit 42 was a 20 x 1 m test trench..k was located about 5 m to
the north of unit 41 and was oriented southwest - northeast. Total excavation depth was 2 m. A profile was drawn of the north wail.
The following units were excavated in the northeast part of the blowout
basin close to the caliche outcrops: 52, 80, 94 AE, and 94 NR (Fig. 2). Units
52 and 80 are 2 x 5 m test pits excavated to a depth of 4.5 m below the
blowout surface into the top of the gray sand below the diatomaceous complex. The two excavation units were separal-ed by a i m baulk. A Bison antiquus bone bed was discovered in the upper diatomaceous complex in the
west halves of both pits. All excavated bone blocks were carefully mapped,
encased with reinforced plaster, and removed from the site. They were
subsequently opened in the laboratory, excavation was completed, and
bones preserved with butvar or shellac. The east stratigraphic profile of unit
52 was drawn (Fig. 5).
Excavation unit 94 AE was a 5 x 3 m test pit due west of units 52 and 80.
It was excavated to the diatomaceous level on which the bison bone bed was
situated in the units to the east. These units and 94 AE were separated by a
1 m balk. Bones were not found but the diatomaceous surface was entirely
covered with what may be hoof prints of the killed bison. The profile of a
prehistoric water well was discovered in the southeast corner of this pit.
Excavation unit 94 NR, 9 m to the south of 94 AE, was a 5 x 3 m test pit.
It was excavated to 5 m below the surface of the blowout basin into the
underlying gray sands. Excavation unit 96, a 4 x 1.5 m test trench, north of
unit 80, was excavated to a depth of 2 m in the base of the fossil dune.
Surface cultural features discovered during the initial survey (1967),
others exposed by later deflation (1968, 1970), and all phases of excavation
were photographed. Documentation includes: bison bone bed in various
stages of exposure and recovery (slides and a film), proposed bison hoof
prints, prehistoric well, and distant and close-up views of stratigraphic profiles and contact surfaces of various sedimentary units. The laminated
diatomaceous complex in the east wall of unit 52 is photodocumented,
some shots taken from a distance of only 5 cm to show structural detail.
Field numbering of strata at the site (lowest number at top of column) has
been retained since excavations are to continue. They have been correlated
in Table 1 with designations of specific sedimentary units (lowest number at
bottom of column). Thirty strata were recognized and recorded in the field in
various excavation units in the blowout basin and along its margins. They
are assignable to five major sedimentary complexes.
A bench mark or datum point for establishment of horizontal and vertical
controls during survey and excavations was established at an arbitrary location on a level, firm area on the southcentral margin of the blowout above
and away from the loose blowout sand.
An extensive series of sedimentologic and palynologic samples was taken
from profiles in key sections of Marks Beach. Where of sufficient thickness,
paired sedimentologic and palynologic samples (± 0.5 kg) were removed
from the contact surfaces of stratigraphic units and successively, the upper,
middle, and lower portions of each stratum. In some cases, a stratum was
sampled two or three times in different areas of the site for later comparative
studies.

250

Texas Archeological Society

Strata

ZONES
7
9

llIB

11

Ilia

12

:[ 3

:[4,
:[5
:[@

II

c::::) BONE
BED

30
0.0

1.0
meters

Fig. 5 Profile of east wall of excavation unit 52. Bison antiquus bone bed lay on
stratum 16 surface at west end of this and excavation unit 80.

Honea - Marks Beach

251

Radiocarbon samples were recovered from Zones II through V in various
parts of the site. Charcoal and ash samples taken from post Pleistocene
deposits (Zones III and V) were generally sufficient weightwise. Charred
bone fragments were collected when charcoal was rare or nonexistent. For
control purposes, unburned bone samples also were taken frequently. The
fossil dune in the northeast quadrant of the site, which may be coeval with
Zone III, also was sampled. A series of samples were taken from deep strata
producing carbonaceous materials. Unburned bone samples were taken in
these zones for control purposes.

STRATIGRAPHY
The provisionally established geological units, numbered oldest to
youngest, follow (Table 1).
Zone I: massive deposit of compact, unstratified, grayish calcareous sands. The upper contact
surface is eroded. Auguring in excavation units 52, 80, 94 AE, and 94 NR showed the deposit
to be greater than 2 m in depth. Faunal remains were not discovered. Neither basal gravels nor
bedrock were reached in testing.
Zone II" complex of laminated beds of sandy diatomaceous earth and diatomite of variable
thicknesses in different parts of the site. Most of the beds exhibit even horizontal lamination but
some are undulate and swirled. A thick bed of sandy diatomite, containing extinct faunal remains, is situated in the upper section of the complex in excavation units 52 and 80 (Fig. 5).
The lowest subunit of the complex, directly under the bone bed, rests unconformably on Zone
I. This subunit is rich in carbonaceous, peaty, vegetal matter.
While the contact surfaces of subunits in most of this sedimentary complex are conformable,
both the upper and lowermost subunits represent erosional surfaces. The zone is about 2.0 m
thick in the immediate area of the bone bed. Exploratory tests into this zone were made in excavation units 94 NR and 40 to the southwest, further offshore in the former bed of the pond.
Testing revealed a lack of faunal and carbonaceous materials and increasingly sandier
diatomaceous earth laminae that were much more widely separated from one another by sandy sediments (Fig. 4). The most extensive exploration of the complex was carried out in excavation units 52, 80, 94 AE, and 94 NR. Phenomena observed in the first three are suggestive
of a former pond margin.
Zone III: complex of semiconsolidated, stratified, black and gray to greenish clayey to silty
sediments (lower unit: A) and friable reddish to tan or gray sandy (upper unit: B) sediments of
about 3.0 m thickness. The lower unit is initially carbonaceous, then gleyed and yellow motfled; it contains abundant root casts. The upper unit is of progressively more sandy texture, has
fewer root casts, and is oxidized in part.
Contact surfaces in the complex vary from conformable in the lower unit to erosional in the
upper unit. The topmost, deflated, subunits of Zone III B comprise the present central basin of
the blowout. Excavations showed that component parts of the whole complex are preserved intact only along the inner east and south margins of the blowout, undisturbed under the Zone IV
complex (Fig. 3).
Zone IV: complex of friable, tannish to dark gray, sandy, aeolian and marsh sediments of
about 0.8 m depth. The lowest unit (A) is composed successively of brown sand, yellowish
white silt, and gray sand. Contact surfaces of the two lower subunits are conformable while that
of the third eroded.
The upper unit (B) is made up of grayish green silt (lower) and grayish to black carbonaceous
silt subunits. The latter contains abundant small land snails. Contact surface between these
subunits and surface of the top subunit are erosional. Compact upper surface of the grayish to
black subunit of this zone is preserved mainly along the inner south and southeast margins of
the blowout basin, producing a flattish bench or beach effect (Figs. 2, 3).
Zone V: modern tannish to brownish dune sands along the east, southeast, and south margins
of the blowout. The deposit is comprised of lower (A) compacted, stratified, humus stained,
near recent and upper (B) loose, recent sands. The dune is oriented to the east-southeast side
of the blowout. Maximum height is about 10 m above the blowout basin (Fig. 2).

252

Texas Archeological Society

CALICHE OUTCROPS, SPRINGS, AND ANCIENT DUNE
Gravels at the base of two caliche outcrops may have played a substantial
role in attracting prehistoric visitors to the site area. It is hypothesized the
gravels were an aquifer, giving rise to seepage springs. Springheads still occur in the region, e.g., Springlake and Sodhouse springs near Earth. The
rock outcrops are local expressions of the widespread Llano Estacado
caprock caliche (pedogenic calcrete) and are of Miocene/Pliocene age.
The caliche outcrops are situated on the north margin of the present
deflation hollow (Fig. 2). During the Late Pleistocene, they probably were
situated closer to the then existing north bank of Blackwater Draw and were
considerably more exposed to view than now. Presently, they are covered
partially with dune sands. The two outcrops are separated from one another
by a sandy saddle 45 m wide. The northwest one (larger) is oblong and
oriented approximately southwest-northeast; the northeast one (smaller) is
irregularly shaped.
The saddle is covered to an unknown depth with a consolidated dune
(orange hued) deposit. The highest point is about 8 m above the blowout
basin. It contains cultural and faunal detritus in at least the scoured upper
subunits. Lithics are typically Wind polished. This aeolian deposit may be
associated with one of the lower deposits in the blowout basin, perhaps one
of the oxidized subunits of Zone Ill.
The sedimentary complexes containing the most abundant faunal and
cultural assemblages of all periods seem to be located in proximity to the
outcrops (Fig. 2). Springheads may have originated at the base of the
caliche formation, attracting occupants. They also may have played a role in
local ponding phases and sedimentation processes at the site. The
prehistoric wells at the site in Zone Ill are believed associated with the possible springs.
A small exploratory test trench (excavation unit 96) was placed in the
northeast margin of the blowout at the south base of the upward sloping
fossil dune deposit (Fig. 2). The uncovered stratigraphic units are similar in
color and texture to those of Zone III buried in the blowout basin but contain
more abundant cultural detritus.
Heavily lime cemented caliche gravels were encountered below Zone III
at a depth of about 2 m. The gravels sloped upwards at about the same 20°
angle as the fossil dune surface. The gravels were not excavated beyond this
point.
A 50 cm diameter, circular grayish area encountered (free of conglomerate) in the test trench floor may be a small ancient water well. The
caliche conglomerate may represent either of two events. The gravels may
be fragments eroded from the nearby caliche outcrops that have moved
downslope. They also could represent a high on shore remnant, or facies, of
an ancient fluviatile gravel formation primarily associated with the basal
Zone I gray sands (Fig. 6).
The oxidized orangish sands of the fossil dune in the saddle are older than
the modern dune. Orientation of the two dunes is different: that of the latter
is to the east-southeast, the former to the north-northeast. A major shift in
wind direction is indicated (Reeves, 1965). Deposition of the older oxidized
sands probably can be correlated with the Zone Ill sedimentary complex

Honea - Marks Beach

253

©

Z

Z
Fig. 6 Hypothetical cross section sketches of east walls of excavation units 96 (a) and
80 (b). Diagram a shows gravel encountered at base of Zone III as shore facies of gray
sand. Gravels are shown in b as materials eroded downslope from caliche caprock
outcrops.

254

Texas Archeological Society

now buried in the basin. Similar oxidized sands occur in subunit B of this
complex in all excavation units.

CULTURAL AND FAUNAL SEQUENCES
Cultural and faunal materials were sparce in excavation and stratigraphic
units with two exceptions. Exceptions are: the bison bone bed of Zone II and
extensive late prehistoric camp debris of Zone V A. Lithics were not found
with the former. If there was an associated camp, it was situated elsewhere.
Zone I" sterile to a depth of 2 m.
Zone II: the dismembered, arranged, well preserved bones of a mature, butchered Bison antiquus lay scattered on the surface of one of the upper diatomaceous earth units of excavation
units 52 and 80 (Figs. 5, 7). The bones were covered with a very hard, thin layer of calcrete. A
series of possible large hoof prints, perhaps representing trampling by the creature, are preserved on the same surface near the bones in adjoining excavation unit 96 AE (Fig. 7). The surface
exhibits a scattering of ash, charcoal flecks, and vegetal impressions. The entire bone feature
and possible prints were covered by 30 cm of nearly pure, unstratified diatomite. This sedimentary subunit is overlain, in turn, by several, increasingly sandy, laminae of diatomaceous earth
(Fig. 5).
Disjointed bones include the pelvis, sacrum, a scapula segment, femur, radii, vertebrae,
metacarpals, and metatarsals. Several of the latter were longitudinally broken and exhibit percussion marks. The cranium, with articulated atlas and cervical vertebrae, lay dorsally on a pile
of ribs and scapulae. The frontals exhibit several possible massive concussion areas above the
orbits (Fig. 8). The fracture areas, however, may be due to erosional damage from ground conditions (E. Johnson, personal communication).
The mandibles lay detached in front of the cranium, the left resting symmetrically on top of
the right. The edge of a small, partially surface polished, possible bone tool, made from a non
bison ungulate scapula, protruded longitudinally from under the lower edges of the stacked
mandibles (Fig. 9). Due to poor preservation and incomplete cast excavation, it has not been
entirely freed of matrix. Identification as a tool is speculative.
A stack of eight ribs were evenly placed with distal ends one over the other and proximal articular ends resting on the ground in a V shaped configuration (Fig. 10). Parallel placed
metacarpals lay near the rib stack. The pelvis lay several meters from the cranium-mandibles-rib
concentration; it served as a radiocarbon sample in lieu of charcoal. A second bison pelvis was
discovered in excavating a large bone block from the bed in the laboratory (1980), suggesting
two bison may be present (Fig. 11).
Projectile points or lithic tools were not recovered during excavation of the bison bone
feature. A small chert flake found among the bones is considered dubiously associated with
them.
The butchered bison remains, possible bone tool, and charcoal flecks are indicative of
cultural activities by a small Paleoindian population. A bison was trapped on the muddy bank of
an early Holocene pond, perhaps lamed by stunning (cranial fractures), killed, and
dismembered. The bison, perhaps mired, was approached and attacked from downwind. The
possible bone tool may have been used in the butchering process to detach the mandibles, extract the tongue, and strip meat from the carcass.
The lowest laminated diatomaceous sections of this zone contained scattered faunal remains
but not direct evidence of human presence.
Zone III: diffuse cultural materials occur in all members of both subunits A and B. Materials include caliche cobble hearths in excavated basins, a water well, small (burned and unburned)
broken bone, bone tools, three projectile points, scrapers, bifacial lithic tool fragments (rare),
flaking debitage, hammerstones, and abrading stones. The fauna consists of bison (Bison sp.),
pronghorn antelope (Antilocapra americana), and other small mammals. Bone in the zonal
base (III A) is mineralized.
A possible water well was discovered at the base of Zone III B in the southeast corner of excavation unit 94 AE. About a quarter of it was situated within the unit. The unexcavated portion appears as a silhouette in the profile wall (Fig. 12). A wall peel was taken.
Diameter was about 1.5 m and depth 2.5 m. The vertical shaft walls were well preserved and
the bottom (disturbed) was probably basin shaped. The well had been sunk into Zone II
sediments, possibly an aquifer at the time. The well fill was composed of a humus and ash

Honea -- Marks Beach

255

0

0
oO

7!! ,===+

W
<

+=

©

Fig. 7 Map of excavation units 52, 80, and 94 AE showing horizontal location of
Bison antiquus bone bed, possible bison hoof prints, and later water well: 1) water.
well, dug from base of Zone III B; 2) possible bison hoof prints; 3)parallel placed
metatarsals; 4) paired bison mandibles; 5) bison skull lying dorsally on broken ribs
and vertebrae; 6) scapula; 7) stacked ribs; 8) pelvis; 9) cracked tibia. Items 2-9 are
situated on a diatomaceous earth surface in upper part of Zone II that represents an
ancient pond edge. Southwest corner of excavation unit 80 was expanded to permit
recovery of bison skull block.

256

Texas Arcbeological Society

Fig. 8 Views of Zone II Bison antiquus skull bone block in laboratory after clearing of
diatomite mantle: top)from distance; bottom) close up showing possible concussion
marks on frontals between orbits. 10 cm scale intervals.

Honea - Marks Beach

257

Fig. 9 Views of paired Bison antiquus mandibles in Zone II: top) in situ at time of
discovery; middle) bone block in laboratory after clearing diatomite; bottom) possible
bone tool under lower edges of mandible (arrow).

258

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 10 Stacked Bison antiquus ribs in Zone II (in situ). Cracked femur adjoins ribs on
right; patella located right of crossed ribs. Trowel is 25 cm long.

Fig. 11 Poorly preserved pelvis cleared,of matrix mantle in laboratory (1980). Scale
interval is 10 cm.

Honea - Marks Beach

259

Fig. 12 Silhouette of water well in southeast corner of excavation unit 94 AE, dug
fTom base of Zone III B down into Zone II.

stained sandy sediment containing a few bone scraps. Artifacts were not recovered. The former
ground level margin of the well was quite hard packed, perhaps from trodding by users. Rapid
filling of the well after abandonment is likely since wall slumping is absent.
The water well appears, on the basis of stratigraphic evidence from this and other parts of the
site, to have been dug from Zone III B and in use during the Archaic period. The possible unit
96 well also was situated in the Zone III B base.
Zone IV: culturally sterile; fauna includes bison (Bison sp.), pronghorn antelope, a canid, and
small ~nails.
Zone V: subunit B is sterile. Subunit A (stratified) exhibits numerous caliche cobble hearths in
excavated basins, clay lined (rare) and unlined storage pits, hackberry seed caches, broken
bone (predominantly bison), tortoise shells (rattles?), and lithic artifact concentrations (Fig. 13).
An infant burial with a turquoise pendant necklace and two partial adult burials (femur and
cranial fragment) were recovered. Features occur mainly along the east and southeast margin
of the blowout, especially on the leeward slope of the modern dune.
Other material includes Washita arrowpoints, bone tools, abrading stones, manos, grinding
slab fragments, heavy duty chopping and scraping tools, flake scrapers, lithic debitage, sherds,
worked turquoise and malachite, and limonite. Flaked lithics are of chert brought in from some
distance, e.g., Tecovas from the No Trees area to the southwest, Edwards Plateau from the
southeast, and Alibates from the north.
Pottery indicates contact with Puebloan and possibly Mogollon groups to the northwest and
southwest respectively. Ground stone tools of sandstone and heavy tools made of silicified
caliche are of local materials. Successive ephemeral occupations of nomadic hunter-gatherers
are indicated. Fauna consists of modern bison (Bison bison), unidentified small mammals, and
reptiles.

DIAGNOSTIC CULTURAL REMAINS
Due to their diagnostic value, projectile points and ceramics discovered in
the site and at other nearby surface sites are discussed. They have been subjected to preliminary analyses.

260

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 13 Views of cultural features uncovered by deflation in Zone V A at base of
Series I dune in southeast quarter of site: top) charcoal filled hearth associated with
burned caliche cobbles (middle right) and charred bone (upper left); bottom: circular
concentration of cracked bison bone.

Honea - Marks Beach

261

Projectile Points
Ten complete points and base fragments were recovered from the
deflated basin surface and vicinity of in situ Zone V A cultural features (Fig.
14). All are Washita points associated with the final prehistoric occupations
of the site. Washita points also were recovered from the surfaces of other
nearby sites.
Two Ellis and three base fragments and Marcos and Martindale bases (Archaic) were collected from the site surface (Fig. 14). Presumedly, they
originated in the deflated upper sections of Zone III B in the blowout basin.
A quartzite Marcos point (Archaic) was recovered from an undisturbed
lower Zone III B level in excavation unit 80. A chert base from a point of the
same type was obtained from an upper level of ~he same zone in excavation
unit 94AE. The water well and several in situ hearths discovered there or in
other units could be coeval.
A proximal dart point fragment (Alibates chert), excavated from uppermost Zone III A, is stemmed and reminiscent of a Frio-Uvalde form in
respect to the recurved base shape. However, it is not shouldered (Fig. 14).
The transverse cross section at the top of the stem is biconcave, suggesting it
may have been refashioned from a Clovis point.
Pottery
About 150 potsherds were recovered mainly from deflated Zone V A
cultural areas along the inner south and east margins of the blowout. The
majority are quite small due to trampling.
Most sherds are fragments of oxidized, fired, culinary and brown wares.
Detailed studies of temper have not been made. Preliminary sorting created
two basic groups: nonmicaceous (commonest) and micaceous (rarest).
Stone temper is common to both, either weathered or crushed igneous rock
or sand. Exterior surfaces in the first group, which tend to be thick, are either
coarsely smoothed or smeared indented corrugated. Exterior surfaces of the
second group, thinner sherds than the preceding group, are either finely
smoothed or smoothed and finely striated. This group was made from a
micaceous clay. Both may be interiorly polished. Closed and open vessel
forms are represented. Some of this material may be derived from a
Mogollon source, e.g., the lower Pecos drainage.
The collection of 20 small Upper Rio Grande paint decorated sherds are
in two groups. The carbon painted, reduced fired group are probably of the
Jemez or Wiyo Black-on-white types. The remainder are glaze painted.
Most are Glaze A types Agua Fria Glaze-on-red and Cieneguilla Glaze-onyellow. They are dateable to the mid 14th Century A.D. (Honea,
1968:163, Table 30). Several reduced fired sherds lacking surface decoration are stone tempered and may stem from the New Mexico Middle Rio
Grande drainage.
Radiocarbon Date
Half of an unburned Bison antiquus pelvis from excavation unit 52, Zone
II, was processed for a radiocarbon date. The specimen (TT5-52-108) was
submitted to Geochron Laboratories, Cambridge, Massachusetts. It had
been covered with a deposit of calcrete and a bed of nearly pure diatomite.
It was cleaned of diatomite in the laboratory and a final dry bone sample of

262

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 14 Marks Beach projectile points. Top row (Neo American): a) Washita; b) Harrell. Bottom row (Archaic): c) unnamed type, Zone III A; d) Marcos, lower Zone Ill
B; e) Marcos base, upper Zone III B; f) Marcos, surface; g) Ellis, surface; h) Martindale, surface.
261 gm obtained. In the course of analysis, the carbon dioxide fraction was
extracted from the contained apatite of the bone sample and this fraction
was dated. The estimated date was + I0,000 B.P. The sample assayed at
9920 + 380 years B.P. (GX-1458; 5,570 years half life).

REGIONAL CORRELATIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
Stratigraphy
The geomorphic sequences in Marks Beach, Lubbock Lake (E. Johnson,

1976; Holliday and Allen, in press),

and Blackwater Draw

Locality

#1

(Haynes, 1975) exhibit generalized similarities in stratigraphy. At present,
only correlations of the most generalized kind are made between the three
sites. The Marks Beach sedimentary units that can be correlated with this
basic scheme are in Table 2.
Common regional geologic denominators seem to be the

following:

Lower Sedimentary Complex: basal, predominately fluviatile, massive gray
sands, overlain on an erosional contact surface by a series of lacustrine
sediments comFosed of laminated diatomaceous earth, diatomite, carbonaceous
and/or sand strata, indicating moist conditions.
Middle Sedimentary Complex: progressive series of carbonaceous, clayey, silty to
increasingly sandy strata, some of the latter oxidized, deposited unconformably on
the proceding complex, marking a change from a moist climatic regime to increasing
dessication of the landscape, lowering of groundwater level, and terminated locally by
one or several ponding phases.
Upper Sedimentary Complex: series of unconformable sands of locally variable facies
but mainly of aeolian origin and indicative of continuing arid conditions, extending to
the present.

Caliche Aquifers
Blackwater Draw Locality No. 1 (Haynes and Agogino, 1966) is
associated with ancient, intermittent, caprock seepage springs. Such springs

Honea - Marks Beach

263

Table 1
Stratigraphic Description and Concordance of Excavation Units 52, 35, 40 at
Marks Beach Site
Stratum
la
lb

3a
3b
4
5
6
7
8
9
I0
11

Zone

Color and Characteristics

VB
VA

Recent tannish blow sands.
Compacted, near recent, stratified, brownish
sands.
Gray black, sandy, carbonaceous silt with
abundant small snails.
Gray green silt; snails; root holes.
Light gray sand; snails.
Gray sand; root holes.
Yellowish white silt; root holes.
Brown sand; root holes.
Tannish sand; root holes.
Light gray sand; root holes.
Brownish tan sand; root holes.
Light gray sand, in part oxidized; root holes.
Firm, brownish tan sand, in part oxidized;
calcareous hard pan, scattering of caliche
pebbles at base; unit 94 AE well dug from this
stratum; root holes.
Soft, light gray sand; few caliche pebbles in
upper margin; scattered root holes.
Firm, brownish tan sand with firm discontinuous
laminae; brownish black diatomaceous earth and/
or carbonaceous silt, darkest at base.
Firm, diatomaceous earth with sand lens;
undulate, finely laminated.
Soft, loose, sandy diatomite with sparce root
holes in upper portion; lower portion harder,
limonite stained, with fine root casts; lower
part covers Bison antiquus remains lying on
surface of llxiv encased in a shell of calcrete
in excavation units 52 and 80.
Firm, diatomaceous earth; finely laminated;
Bison antiquus remains in units 52 and 80,
possible hoof prints in unit 94 AE; firm,
muddy, pond edge suggested.
Firm laminae of diatomaceous earth, sandy
diatomite and/or sand; small unidentified
mammal bone recovered from lliv, deepest
faunal material discovered; lliii through
llx to greater or lesser extent limonite
stained; lli sandy and transitional to deeper
gray sands; some laminae in the upper part of
profile with carbonaceous vegetal material.

IVA
lllBix
lllBviii
lllBvii
lllBvi
lllBv
lllBiv
lllBifi
lllBii
lllBi

12

lllAii

13

lllAi

14

llxvi

15

llxv

16

llxiv

17-30

lli-xiii

occur at Rattlesnake Draw, west of Buckeye (New Mexico), but have not
been studied in detail (Smith et al., 1966:305-306). Blackwater Draw
Locality #1 spring conduits are older than the initial occupation and are
associated with deposition of both the lower complex gray sand and
diatomaceous units. The conduits appear as nearly vertical, irregularly cylindrical, or tapering sand filled tunnels close to the caprock caliche aquifer.
Some of the tunnels are reported to extend under the caliche into underlaying red sands and gravels (Haynes and Agogino, 1966:813). Many of the

264

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2
Marks Beach Sedimentary Units Correlated With Regional Scheme
Regional Scheme
Lower Complex
Middle Complex

Upper Complex

Marks Beach Units
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone

!
II
III A
III B
IV A
IV B
V A
V B

conduits contained cultural detritus of both Paleoindian and Early Archaic
periods.
The springs dried up because of increased aridity and a regional drop of
the water table during deposition of Middle Complex sediments. This event
was correlated with onset of the Altithermal (Haynes, 1975:83). The excavated water wells from this site (Evans, 1951; Green, 1962) and those at
Rattlesnake Draw (Smith et al., 1966) may be contemporaneous with this
particular event.
Evidence for springs at Marks Beach is at best circumstantial. Although
spring conduits were not identified, a possible water well was. The well
seems to have been excavated in the same stratigraphic complex as those at
the Blackwater Draw (Haynes and Agogino, 1966) and Rattlesnake Draw
(Smith et al., 1966) localities. A temporal equivalency is implied, although
not demonsirated.
Dune Trends
Ephemeral playas on the Llano Estacado are usually associated with
distinctive dune trends produced by shifts in paleowind directions (Reeves,
1965). Marks Beach is significant since it exhibits two dunes of different
lithology and orientation. They are the active modern dune of tannish sands
in the east and southeast part of the site with an eastsoutheasterly orientation and an oxidized, orangish fossil dune in the northeast part with a northeasterly orientation. The former comprise the Upper Complex sediments
(Zone V A and B), while the latter is believed coeval with the buried Middle
Complex (Zone III B sediments).
Reeves (1965:504~508) noted three successive dune trends, the latter
two of which are pertinent to Marks Beach. Series III dunes, furtherest from
present playas, accumulated more than 15,000 years ago in mean paleowind directions of S 60° E. Evidence of these dunes at the site is lacking.
Series II dunes accumulated mainly on the north and east edges of playa
blowouts with paleowinds blowing predominantly southeast to east at a
mean direction of S 60° E. They are dated 15,000 to 5,000 years ago.
Series I dunes accumulated on the northern and eastern blowout margins at
a prevailing mean paleowind direction of N 20 o E. The inference is that they
were deposited in part over earlier Series II trends on the north and east
blowout margins. Development of this trend is believed to have begun
5,000 years ago. Such dunes are active today on the Llano Estacado
(Reeves, 1965).

Honea - Marks Beach

265

At Marks Beach, the exposed oxiodized fossil dune between the two
caliche outcrops is evidently a remnant of the Series II type based on probable age and orientation; it probably extended onto the east edge of the
site. Buried portions of it may still be preserved. The buried Zone III oxidized
sediments in the site proper are believed associated with this early period of
deflation.
The present active sand dune (Zone V) is equivalent to the Series I trend.
It is separated from Series II dune sands on the east margin of the site. Middle Complex Zone IV marsh sediments separate the two dunes. Deposition
of both dune trends was affected by the two caliche outcrops in the site.
They present a kind of barrier or windbreak and as such have influenced
wind flow patterns over the millenia.
Since deposition, the Series II fossil dune has been affected physically by
the shift in paleowind direction (S 60 o E to N 20 o E). Surface indications of
it are lacking east of the blowout, although present in the protected saddle
area between the caliche outcrops in the northeast quadrant. In the former
area, it either is buried intact under Series I sands or it was partially or fully
deflated as the Series I dune trend accumulated. The remnant of this older
dune in the saddle area is being subjected to severe wind scouring in the
course of which ostensibly older cultural and faunal materials are being exposed. Lithics are typically wind polished.
An hypothesis concerning the possible location of transitory camps of early site habitants is based on available data. Cultural detritus buried in
sediments of Zones II and III is rare. Similarities exist between buried Zone III
sediments in the basin and those exposed in preliminary excavation of the
south leeward margin of the fossil dune. Fossil dune sediments on the saddle between the caliche outcrops may contain stratified cultural deposits of
these early camps. They should be present above the caliche gravels and
possibly below. This area is in a dry position which would have been away
from muddy or marshy edges of the draw and/or later ponds and marshes.
The testing of this hypothesis involves more thorough excavations and
radiocarbon dates.
Local Related Sites
The as yet unexcavated Amherst site, stratigraphically similar to the lower
geologic units of Marks Beach, was discovered about 2 mi further upstream
on the same bank of Blackwater Draw (Fig. 15). An oblong area of whitish,
weathered diatomaceous earth measuring about 20 x 50 m is exposed. The
long axis of this unit is parallel to the course of the draw. The exposure may
represent an ancient pond margin. Weathered faunal material is embedded
in the surface. Lithic debris and other cultural detritus occur on but not in the
surface and could be secondarily associated. This diatomaceous unit is on
the same level as the present level of the draw and may correlate with the
Zone II sedimentary complex at Marks Beach.

Chronology
The available Marks Beach bison bone date from Zone II is 9920 + 380
years B.P. (GX-1458). Charred bone from a comparable stratigraphic unit
at Lubbock Lake produced a date of 9883 + 350 years B.P. (C-558)
(Green, 1962:115). Recent Lubbock Lake Project work in the same
stratigraphic unit (2B cienega/base) produced dates of 9960 + 80 years

266

Texas Archeological Society

Fig. 15 General view of Amherst site, located about 1 km to the north of Marks
Beach. Whitish material in center is weathered diatomaceous earth deposit corresponding to Zone II at Marks Beach. Overburden formerly covering this deposit appears as a dune in the right background.

B.P. (SMU-275; diatomite humates) and 9985 + 100 years B.P.
(SMU-728; cienega humates) (Johnson and Holliday, 1980; Holliday and
Johnson, in press).
Cultural Sequences
Evidence from the Marks Beach excavation suggests sporadic habitation
from the Paleoindian, Archaic, to the Neo-American periods. Diagnostic
cultural materials are rare, with only those of the final occupants recovered
in any quantity.
Camps associated with peoples living at the site during accumulation of
the Lower and Middle Sedimentary complexes (Zones II and III) most likely
are buried in the fossil dune in the northeast quadrant of the site near the
caliche outcrops. Results from exploratory testing support this hypothesis.
Disarticulation and patterned placement of bones in the Zone II bison
bone bed were observed in a comparable level at Lubbock Lake (Johnson
and Holliday, 1980). Stacking phenomenon was noted at the Hell Gap
Casper site in Wyoming (Frison, 1974:62-69), dated to 9880 + 350 years
B.P. (RL-125) (Frison, 1974:108).
The Marks Beach bison bone bed of Zone II probably represents a Plainview occupation. The three Lubbock Lake radiocarbon dates are in association with Plainview points and date the Plainview occupation at the site.
Although the earlier date (9883 + 350 years B.P.) originally was considered a Folsom date (Green, 1962:115), current Lubbock Lake Project
work has shown it to be Plainview (Johnson and Holliday, 1980; Holliday et
al., in press). The latter humate dates support the general accuracy of the
bone date.

Honea - Marks Beach

267

Other sites with dated Plainview occupations are the Plainview type site
(9800 + 500 years B.P.; Haynes, 1967:271) and Bonfire Shelter (average
age 10,080 + 130 B.P.; Dibble, 1970:251). Materials dated in the former
were unburned bone and in the latter charcoal.
Archaic projectile points recovered from Middle Sedimentary Complex
subunits III A and III B are too few to permit much speculation. A point
similar to the anomalous Frio-Uvalde like one was recovered from a spring
conduit at Blackwater Draw Locality No. 1 and believed to date to the Early
Archaic (Haynes and Agogino, 1966:818, Fig. 7). Two other examples
were surface collected from the Rattlesnake Draw site (Smith et al.,
1966:P1. III F, G).
Two Marcos points at Marks Beach were excavated from Zone III B, a
zone associated with the possible water well; a third was collected from the
site surface. The published age range of this type places its earliest occurrence at about 4,000 years B.P. (Bell, 1958:42). If the Marcos points are
contemporaneous with the well and dating of the Rattlesnake and
Blackwater Draw wells to the Altithermal (Smith et al., 1966:306; Haynes,
1975:83) is correct, then the earliest appearance of Marcos points may be
somewhat earlier than indicated.
Ellis points are believed to date to about 3,000 B.P. and Martindale points
to 5,000 or 6,000 years ago (Bell, 1960:32, 70). The Marks Beach
specimens are from the surface and could come from either the disturbed
upper Zone III B or IV sediments. Washita points recovered from Zone V A
have an estimated age range of about A.D. 1100 to 1600 (Bell, 1958:98).
The Upper Rio Grande pottery associated with them in the site suggests a
time period of about A.D. 1350 (Honea, 1968).
FURTHER WORK
Definitive conclusions regarding Marks Beach cannot be made until the
recovered data have been studied. Similarities with other deeply stratified
sites of the region are manifest.
Renewed excavations at the site should concentrate in the following
areas. First, the fossil dune and its contents should be explored. Secondly,
both the geologic and cultural stratigraphies in the modern dune base need
to be defined in detail. Finally, excavation of the nearby Amherst site should
provide a wealth of comparative data regarding local late Pleistocene and
early Holocene geologic and cultural events since the post Pleistocene overburden was removed by deflation.
This proposed work, new data from Lubbock Lake, and definitive studies
on Blackwater Draw Locality #I (Wendorf and l~lester, 1975; Hester, 1972)
should help in gaining new insights into the early archeology of the Llano
Estacado.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Marks Beach site was discovered by Mark Randall of Littlefield in 1967, then an
undergraduate student at Texas Technological College. It was reported to this writer and we
both carried out the initial surveys there and in the general area.
Grateful thanks is here extended to the management of the ranch on which the site is located
for permission to excavate. A condition for this was that the exact location of the site is to remain confidential.

268

Texas Archeological Society

The recovery of the important data from the site would have been impossible without the
dedicated efforts of the 1968 and 1969 Texas Tech student team members: Arthur Black, Randall Callahan, Susan Driskill, Robert Hayley, Kathy King, Mark Randall, Danny Sessums, Judy
Trotter, and Doug Yarbrough. The 1970 team, from Northern Illinois University, included
Lonny and Herbert Hothan, Nancy Nelson, and Craig Scheffler, My son, Andreas, provided
invaluable help during the three excavation seasons.
A paper presenting preliminary results of the excavations at the Marks Beach site was
presented by the writer at the December 1968 annual meeting of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science in Dallas, Texas.
Special thanks are due to Eileen Johnson, editor of this journal, for the herculian efforts that
went into making this a readable report. C.C. Reeves offered invaluable advice in the field.
Errors of omission, and mistakes, are of course my own.

REFERENCES CITED
Bell, Robert
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
1958
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Special Bulletin, 1:1-104.
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
1960
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Special Bulletin, 2:1-105.
Black, Craig C. (ed.)
History and Prehistory Of the Lubbock Lake Site. The Museum Journal,
1974
15:1-160.
Dibble, David S.
On the Significance of Additional Radiocarbon Dates from Bonfire
1970
Shelter, Texas. Plains Anthropologist, 15(50):251-254.
Evans, Glen
Prehistoric Wells in
1951
17(1):1-8.

Eastern New Mexico.

American Antiquity,

Frison, George
The Casper Site: A Hell Gap Bison Kill on the High Plains. Academic
1974
Press, New York.

Green, Earl
1962
The Lubbock Reservoir Site. The Museum Journal, 6:85-123.
Haynes, C, Vance Jr.
Carbon-14 Dates and Early Man in the New World. In: P.S. Martin and
1967
H.E. Wright Jrs. (eds.), Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search for a
Cause, pp. 267-286. Yale University Press, New Haven and London.
Pleistocene and Recent Stratigraphy. In: F. Wendorf and J.J. Hester,
1975
Late Pleistocene Environments of the Southern High Plains, pp. 57-96.
Fort Burgwin Research Center, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Haynes, C. Vance Jr. and George Agogino
Prehistoric Springs and Geochronology of the Clovis Site, New Mexico.
1966
American Antiquity, 31:812-821.
Hester, James
1972
Blackwater Locality No. 1: A Stratified, Early Man Site in Eastern New
Mexico. Fort Burgwin Research Center, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.
Holliday, Vance and B.L. Allen
Stratigraphy and Paleopedology. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.), Lubbock
in
press
Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern High Plains. University
of Texas Press, Austin.

Honea - Marks Beach

269

Holliday, Vance and Eileen Johnson
in
An Update on the Plainview Occupation at the Lubbock Lake Site.
press
Plains Anthropologist.
Holliday, Vance, Herbert Haas, and Robert Stuckenrath
in
Radiocarbon Dates from Lubbock Lake: 1950-1978. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.), Lubbock Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern
press
High Plains. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Honea, Kenneth
1968
Material Culture: Ceramics. In: Charles H. Lange (ed.), The Cochiti
Dam Archaeological Salvage Project, Part 1: Report on the 1963
Season. Museum of New Mexico Research Records, 6:111-169.
Johnson, Charles
1974
Geologic Investigations at the Lubbock Lake Site. In: C.C. Black (ed.),
History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake Site, The Museum Journal,
15:79-105.
Johnson, Eileen
1976
Investigations Into the Zooarchaeology of the Lubbock Lake Site. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Johnson, Eileen and Vance T. Holliday
A Plainview Kill/Butchering Locale on the Llano Estacado--The Lub1980
bock Lake Site. Plains Anthropologist, 25(88) :89-111.
Martin, P.S. and H.E. Wright Jr.
Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search for a Cause. Yale University Press,
1967
New Haven and London.
Newman, Allen L.
1962
Soil Survey: Lamb County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture Series, 1959(7) :1-69.
Reeves, C.C. Jr.
Chronology of West Texas Pluvial Lake Dunes. The Journal of
1965
Geology, 73(3):504-508.
Smith, Calvin, John Runyon, and George Agogino
A Progress Report on a Pre-Ceramic Site at Rattlesnake Draw, Eastern
1966
New Mexico. Plains Anthropologist, 11(34):302-313.
Wendorf, Fred and James Hester (eds.)
Late Pleistocene Environments of the Southern High Plains. Fort
1975
Burgwin Research Center, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

