Archeological Notes on the Route of
Cabeza de Vaca1
HERBERT C. TAYLOR~JR.

The physical hardships which Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca and
his three companions suffered in their wanderings are, perhaps, only
equalled by the mental travail of those who would trace their route.
There are at the moment at least a dozen proposed routes (whole
or partial) which any serious student of the subject must consider.2 In
addition at least that many more articles, books, and theses contain
extended commentary on Cabeza de Vaca’s route.~ There are, additionally, the various editors of Cabeza de Vaca’s Naufragios and
0viedo’s Report, plus scores of popular writers in five languages whose
contributions are marked by a boldness and enthusiasm as great as
their scholarly and geographic innocence, whom the author forbears
to cite.

The present paper does not represent an attempt to add another
proposed route to an already overburdened list. Rather, this paper is
an attempt to assess the archeological evidence, accumulated mainly
in the last quarter-century, relevant to the problem of the route of
Cabeza de Vaca. As it happens, no professional archeologist has published a study of the route of Cabeza de Vaca. The routes proposed by
Krieger in 1955 and by Taylor in 1951 both appeared in unpublished
doctoral dissertations.
All published studies of the route appeared before any extensive
archeological field work had been done in Texas, except for HallenMuch of this article is based upon unpublished work of Drs. A. D. Krieger, J.
Charles Kelley. and the writer. In addition to Krieger and Kelley, the writer is
indebted to Drs. T. N. Campbell and Jeremiah F. Epstein for aid and advice.
2 Shea in Smith, 1871; Prince, 1883; Ponton and M’Farland, 1898; F. and Ad.
Bandelier, 1904; H. H. Bancroft, 1886; O. W. Williams, 1899; B. Coopwood, 1899,
1900; J. N. Basket, 1907; Davenport and Wells, 1918, 1919; R. T. Hill, 1933, 1934;
Sauer, 1932, 1937; Hallenbeck, 1940; Taylor, 1951; and Krieger, 1955.
’~ De Leon (1649) quoted in Alessio, 1939; de Pichardo (1812) in Hackett, 1931;
Smith, 1851; Davis, 1888; Haines, 1891; Raines, 1896; Bandelier, 1900; Read, 1912;
Bolton, 1916, 1921, 1923, 1949; Belloguin, n.d.; Hodge, 1907; Twitchell, 1914; A.
Williams, 1939; Bishop, 1933; Dobie, 1942; Taylor, 1949.

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

beak’s book, published in 1940. The writer, therefore, proposes to
divide this paper into two sectioxls: (1) an analysis of the proposed
routes in the light of archeological evidence, and (2) a brief presentation of unsolved archeologiaal problems whose solution is necessal7 to
a proper analysis of the Naufragios.
It is assumed that the reader is familiar with the scholarly controversy concerning the route of Cabeza de Vaca. No attempt is made to
summarize the proposed routes’~ and, except where immediately pertinent, the Naufragios and Oviedo are not cited? The sole purpose of
this article is to discuss hitherto unpublished archeological data concerning the route.

The Proposed Routes in the Light o/
the Archeological Evidence
If one consults a map upon which all, or several, of the proposed
routes are superimposed,~ the first impression is almost certain to be
bewilderment. Starting on the Louisiana or Texas coasts, the lines of
march curve northwest into northern New Mexico, before starting
south, or plunge directly southwest, or dip or curve across Texas,
Tamaulipas, Nuevo Leon, Coahuila, New Mexico, Chihuahua, and
Sonora.
After the initial confusion has passed, however, a more leisurely
examination of the charted routes, along with the accompanying texts
of the various authorities, will reveal that the proposed routes may be
grouped into four categories:
(1) The New Mexican school, largely nineteenth century writers,
who seemed determined to get Cabeza de Vaca and his companions
across Texas to the Pueblos as expeditiously as possible.
(2) Judge Coopwood, in a category all his own, who was possessed
of the fixed idea that the wanderers did not end up at Culiacan in
Sonora, where Cabeza de Vaca said they ended their wanderings and
where the Spanish slave hunters under Guzm~n said they encountered
"~ The best summaries of the proposed routes are to be found in Williams (1939)
and Krieger (1955).
5 The writer is employing the Buckingham Smith translation (edition of 1871)
of the Naufragios as it appears in Spanish Explorers in the Southern United States,
1528-1543. Where deemed advisable this has been checked against the Spanish
original as it appears in the 1932 (Madrid) edition and compared with the Bandelier
(1904) translation.
G The most readily accessible such map is contained in Hallenbeck, 1940, p. 307.
Williams, 1939, also charts most of the routes individually.

ARCHEOLOGY AND CABEZA DE VACA

275

them. Instead Coopwood has Cabeza de Vaca and his companions
plunge steadily south-southwest, passing inland of the present Ciudad
Victoria in Tamaulipas until they were south and well inland from
what is now Tampico, whereupon they turn and trend west-northwest,
passing through present Guadalajara and approach the Pacific coast
in the region of Compostela.
(3) The all-Texas route, in which the castaways are kept north of
the Itio Grande, within the confines of the present state of Texas until
New Mexico is reached. Ponton and M’Farland, Hill,7 and Hallenbeck are the leading exponents of this view.
(4) The so-called "Mexican Detour,’’s which involves tracing the
wanderers south-southwest to the Lower Rio Grande and then across
that stream, thence having them turn west-northwest through northern Tamaulipas, Nuevo Leon, and Coahuila, and then crossing the
Itio Grande again before coming to La Junta de los I/ios. Davenport
and Wells and Krieger are the proponents of this route.
The first two categories wil! not be discussed here. The New Mexican school’s view was pretty thoroughly demolished toward the close
of the last century by Bandelier (1890). Judge Coopwood’s route was
examined and rejected by Baskett and by Williams.9 However, the
archeological evidence which will be adduced to question the feasibility
of the "all-Texas" route may be applied to the first two categories of
routes also.
All of the authors or routes in print (as distinguished from unpublished theses) emphasize geographic, geological, vegetational, and zoological factors in tracing their course. In considering whether Cabeza
de Vaca went, more or less, straight across central Texas, staying
north of Mexico and the Big Bend country as Ponton and M’Farland
and Hallenbeck have him do, or went through northeastern Mexico
and entered the Big Bend region of Texas as Davenport and Wells and
Hill does cause Cabeza de Vaca to cross and re-cross the tlio Grande just before
La Junta de los !tios is reached in order to obtain the right number of river crossings.
s This term was evidently first employed by Hill and is utilized by Williams,
1939, pp. 7’0.2, 82-83, in his attempt to categorize the routes. The use of the term is
symptomatic of the ethnocentric and anachronistic approaches most authors have
utilized in considering the question.
:J Baskett, 1907, Pt. I, and VVilliams, 1939, pp. 50-56. Curiously, Hallenbeck, 1940,
who gives the most complete summary of routes theretofore published, seems to
have ignored Coopwood. Since Hallenbeck’s route depends very largely upon the
assumption that buffalo did not occur south of the Pecos, and since Coopwood devotes considerable space to documenting the historic occurrence of buffalo in the
Big Bend and northern Mexico. this oversight is unfortunate.

TEXAS AtlCHI~OLOGICAL

SOCII~TY

Krieger have him do, it seems to the present writer that three descriptions, susceptible to archeological investigation, in the Naufragios need
to be considered:
(a) The description of rabbit hunting with clubs "three palms in
length."
Going through these valleys each Indian carried a club three palms in
length. They all moved in a front and whenever a hare (of which there are
many) jumped up they closed in upon the game and raised such blows
upon it that it was amazing to see . . . (Cabeza de Vaca, in Bandelier,
1904, pp. 142~-143).
(b) The curious description of the disciplining of a child:
In more than fifteen days that we remained with them we never saw
them talk together, neither did we see a child that laughed or cried. One
child, who had begun to cry, was carried off some distance, and with some
very sharp mice-teeth they scratched it from the shoulders down to nearly
the legs (op. cit., p. 148).
(c) Finally, Cabeza de Vaca’s mention of their first encounter with
sedentary agricultural Indians:
¯ . . Alonso del Castillo and Estevanico, the negro, left with the women as
guides, and the woman who was a captive took them to a river that flow-s
between the mountains, where there was a village, in which her father
lived, and these were the first abodes we saw that were like unto real
houses. Castillo and Estevanico went to these and, after holding parley
with the Indians, at the end of three days Castillo returned to where he
had left us, bringing with him five or six of the Indians. He told how he
had found permanent houses, inhabited, the people of which ate beans
and squashes,1° and that he had also seen maize (Bandelier, 1904, pp.
149-150).
Now, both because Cabeza de Vaca is not very specific about where
the events cited in (a) and (b) took place, and because there is a difference of perhaps 800 miles north to south, between the routes, at the
points when these events occurred, it is not possible to be very specific
about location. However, a reading of the Naufragios, or of Oviedo, at
least makes clear that events (a) and (b) transpired after the wanderers had left the Gulf coast and after they had left the Indians who ate
"tunas" (the fruit of the prickly pear) and before they reached the
first sedentary agricultural village. To possess verisimilitude, therefore, a route must, after the tuna fields are left behind, go through a
region where the rabbit stick was employed and through an area
lo In the Naufragios this is "melones." Bandelier, 1904, thinks squashes were
meant.

AI~Ct-IEOLOGY AND CABEZA DE VACA

277

where the children were disciplined by scratching with rodent jaws.
Rabbit sticks or clubs are known archeologically from a number of
sites in southwestern Texas, notably the area about the mouth of the
Pecos and the Big Bend; they also occur in the adjacent area of northern Coahuila and Nuevo Leon. They do not appear in the Llano Estacado and are found only rarely north of the Big Bend. The route of
Ha!lenbeck barely touches the northern extremity of known distribution of the rabbit stick in western Texas. That of Ponton and M’Farland does dip into rabbit stick country about the mouth of the Pecos;
and that of Hill, by virtue of his southern dip through the Big Bend
to La Junta de los Rios, goes through a considerable portion of the area.
On the other hand, the route of Davenport and Wells and that of
Krieger traverse, from east to west, the whole area of known rabbit
stick distribution in western Texas and adjacent northern Mexico. The
writer has discussed this problem with three archeologists at The University of Texas (Dee Ann Suhm, T. N. Campbell, and Jeremiah F.
Epstein). All of us are agreed that Hallenbeck’s route appears to lie on
the northern periphery of, or above, the known rabbit stick distribution. All of us are, however, also agreed that the actual distribution
of rabbit sticks may have been wider and that lack of preservation
(due to lack of dry caves) and/or lack of excavation may lead to a
faulty view of such distribution.
In the matter of the rabbit sticks, therefore, the "Mexican Detour"
routes appear to be the best bet, with Hallenbeck’s route the most
dubious of the five under consideration, although none of the routes
can be conclusively ruled out on this basis.
The matter of the rodent jaws is more esoteric and certainly singular. In 1936, A. M. Woolsey found a "medicine bundle" in Horseshoe
Cave that included eleven rodent jaws. Both Butler and Taylor noted
this point in master’s theses and quoted the above description in the
Naufragios. Butler located the wanderers near Presidio at the time
of the incident; Taylor located them near the mouth of the Pecos.11
If from this unique archeological find we may assume that peoples of
the late prehistoric period used rodent jaws for the purpose described
by Cabeza de Vaca, then the "Mexican Detour" routes and Ponton
and M’Farland all pass through regions where Cabeza de Vaca might
1~ Butler, 1948, p. 18; Taylor, 1949a, pp. 111-112. Horseshoe Cave is located about
five miles ENE of the mouth of the Pecos River. It is Site 50B8-1 in The University
of Texas’ former quadrangle numbering system and is shown as Site 12 in Taylor’s
(1949b) map of archeological sites in the area.

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

have seen such an incident; on the other hand, Hallenbeck’s route is
again far to the north¯
The use of rabbit sticks and rodent jaws has not, heretofore, been
discussed as evidence for determining Cabeza de Vaca’s route. However, the third piece of archeological evidence--the location of the
first agriculture and permanent dwellings on the route--has been discussed at great length. It has been so discussed because the Espeio expedition in 1582, at the junction of the Conchos River and the Rio
Grande, encountered Indians who
¯ . . gave us to understand through interpreters that three Christians and
a Negro had passed through there, and by the indications they gave they
appeared to have been Alonso (sic) Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, Dorante
Castillo Moddonado (sic), and a negro . . . (Pacheco y Cardenas, 1871,
pp. 105-108, quoted in Krieger, 1955).

There are three other documentary locations of the route of Cabeza
de Vaca which appear in about the century following the journey.12
None of these, however, is nearly as explicit as the Espejo location.
Thus, as Albert Williams points out, any tracing of the route of Cabeza
de Vaca must go through La Junta de los Rios or the tracer must show
cause to the contrary.
The three principal adherents of the "all-Texas northern route" have
dealt with the problem in a variety of ways.
(1) Ponton and M’Farland ignored, or did not know of, the Espejo
account. Since both Bancroft, in 1886, and Bandelier, in 1890, had
discussed this very point, the omission would appear about equally
serious, whether done by design or oversight.
(2) Hallenbeck faces the issue squarely and presents a nine-point
argument to show that the Espejo account is in error. These nine points
(see Hallenbeck, 1940, pp. 213-215) actually fall into five arguments,
as follows:
(a) That Cabeza de Vaca could not have reached La Junta de los Rios
because this would not jibe with Hallenbeck’s tracing of the preceding
route.
12 In de Leon, 1643, quoted in Alessio Robles, 1939, who locates the wanderers
in Nuevo Leon near Cerralvo; the better known accounts of Castafieda, who implies
that Coronado’s expedition crossed the track of Cabeza de Vaca on the Staked Plains;
and Jaramillo who, chronicling the same expedition, states that they met an old
Indian who had seen the four wanderers nearer to New Spain.

ARCHEOLOGY AI’WD CAB~ZA DE VACA

(b) That Cabeza de Vaca could not have been at La Junta de los Rios
because this would not fit with Hallenbeck’s tracing of the subsequent
route.

(c) That the Espejo account was erroneous, or misleading, in stating
that the Indians said three white men and a Negro had passed through
La Junta de los Rios, and that Castafieda’s mention of Cabeza de Vaca on
the Staked Plains is more reliable.
(d) That, while it is true that there is no archeological evidence of
agriculture at the point above E1 Paso where Hallenbeck has Cabeza de
Vaca strike the Rio Grande, subsequent archeological investigation might
reveal such evidence.
(e) That Cabeza de Vaca could not have been at La Junta de los Rios
because this would place him too far south of the range of the buffalo and
too far south for the range of the pifion at any altitude which Cabeza de
Vaca touched.
Concerning the first two arguments, all that needs to be said is that
they constitute an excellent example of post hoc, ergo propter hoc
reasoning.
In contending that the Espejo account is not reliable and that the
Castafieda account is, Hallenbeck is in disagreement with every authority whom the writer has consulted, particularly Hammond and
Rey and Krieger. Hammond and Rey, translators of both accounts, are
convinced that the Jaramillo account is the more valid. In the course
of developing this theme, Hallenbeck translated Jaramillo’s statement
that Coronado’s men met an old Indian who had seen the wanderers,
but "mas acia de Nueva Espafia" as "near there but somewhat toward
New Spain." It appears to me that the better translation would be
"much nearer to New Spain."
It is a curious fact that Hallenbeck only adduces "archeological evidence" twice in his study of Cabeza de Vaca’s route. In the first case
he denies that there is any "humana dejecta" about the mouth of the
Pecos River (Hallenbeck, !940, p. 253). As a matter of fact, there are
at least 48 archeological sites within a thirty-mile radius about the
mouth of the Pecos, a number of them visible from the juncture of that
stream with the Rio Grande (Taylor, 1949b). In the second case, Hallenbeck acknowledges that Cabeza de Vaca encounters agriculture, but
his preconceptions force him to place Cabeza de Vaca in an archeologically non-agricultural area. He therefore expresses the hope that
subsequent research will turn up evidence of agriculture in that area.
Such hope has not been realized by subsequent research. Indeed, as
will be shown, subsequent archeological research has demonstrated
rather strongly that the area about the juncture of the Conchos and

28O

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Rio Grande is the only spot where Cabeza de Vaca could have encountered permanent habitations and agriculture in this stage of his
journey.
In 1899 Coopwood painstakingly documented the presence of buffalo throughout southwestern Texas and adjacent northern Mexico.
Such southwestern explorers as Ugalde in the eighteenth century
(Nelson, 1936, p. 200) and Froebel in the nineteenth century (Froebel, 1859, p. 427) mention the presence of the buffalo west of the
Pecos in the Big Bend in the very region where Hallenbeck denies that
they occurred (Hallenbeck, 1940, p. 252, footnote 308). Archeological
excavation has also established the prehistoric occurrence of the buffalo in southwestern Texas. As to the occurrence of the pifion nut, in
his doctoral dissertation Krieger adduces evidence that the pifion occurs at relatively low altitudes in Nuevo Leon and Coahuila. The
present writer has seen pifion growing in the region through which
Krieger’s route passes and far south of Hallenbeck’s indicated distribution.
In discussing Hallenbeck’s zoological, botanical, and climatological
observations, Krieger characterizes these as preposterous. It is difficult
to take issue with this judgment. At one point in his study Hallenbeck
(1940, pp. 159-160) goes so far as to determine that Cabeza de Vaca
must have been on the Pedernales River in mid-October, because the
mid-winter isothermal line of 56° passes near there and Cabeza de
Vaca mentions, at this point in his narrative, being chilled at night!
It need hardly be pointed out here that, depending on the year and
the vagaries of the weather, this phenomenon could have occurred
anywhere from Durango to Manitoba in mid-October.
Nonetheless, while admitting the inadequacy of Hallenbeck’s work,
his publication deserves careful study because of the vast amount of
data it contains and also because of his interpretations. It is unfortunate that Hallenbeck’s study is probably the most widely distributed
and perhaps the most widely accepted by historians.
(3) Hill capitulates at this point by bringing the Cabeza de Vaca
party due south through the Big Bend to La Junta de los Rios. The
present writer can find nothing in the Naufragios to justify the view
that the wanderers walked through the whole of the Big Bend from
north to south. Indeed, since this trek occurs during a part of the
journey when Cabeza de Vaca assures us that he is going west, we
must assume distortion by Hill or hallucination by Cabeza de Vaca.
Hill traced Cabaza de Vaca’s route through a region with whose geography he was intimately familiar. This led him to a route far to the
north of the Mexican border. However, since he accepted the validity

ARCHEOLOGY AND CABEZA DE VACA

281

of the Espejo account, he was forced to turn the party south through
the Big Bend.~:*
Gonsiderable attention has been given in the preceding paragraphs
to La Junta de los Rios as a supposedly fixed point in the proposed
routes of Gabeza de Vaca by the three leading exemplars of the "allTexas route." The reason for this detailed consideration is that we
must either accept the implications of the Espejo account or deny the
validity of the Espejo accout as a prime requisite in tracing any
route for Cabeza de Vaca.
As it happens, recently adduced archeological evidence gives strong
inferential support to the acceptance of La Junta de los Rios as a point
on the wanderers’ route. In 1952 J. Gharles Kelley published an important study of agricultural settlements on the Rio Orande, in the
course of which he remarks (in partial summary):
Prior to the expansion of the puebloan occupation of the Rio Grande
region in the sixteenth century, there had been an earlier period~ c. A.D.
1400~ of even greater restriction of population than in the eighteenth
century. This catastrophic reduction of the sedentary cultures of the
Rio Grande~ like that of the later eighteenth century, resulted in widespread desertion of marginal areas and concentration of the surviving
population in the better-watered areas adjacent to La Junta. It also coincided with an apparent adverse fluctuation in climatic conditions, inferred
from geological and distributional evidence. At about the same time, there
had also appeared in the region the ancestral Jumano and Cibolo--perhaps
refugee hunters from the Great Plains evicted from their domain by the
same climatic change (Kelley, 1952~ pp. 382-383; also, see map, p. 360)

Kelley does not consider the route of Cabeza de Vaca and does not
examine the account of La Junta de los Rios contained in the Naufragios. However, Krieger (1955, pp. 159-163 and Fig. 9) summarized
those portions of Kelley’s article which bear upon the problem of
Cabeza de Vaca’s route and demonstrated that this archeological evidence neatly ties in with the description of the first agricultural communities described in the Naufragios and in Oviedo and with the Luxan
account of the Espejo expedition. Kelley’s evidence and Krieger’s
analysis make it clear that the region of La Junta de los Rios is the
only area which could have been where the wanderers first encountered agriculture. Since this conclusion corresponds exactly with the
13 Hill’s accounts were published in newspapers rather than in journals and are
not generally available today. Neither Hallenbeck nor Krieger includes a map of
Hill’s route. A. C. Williams (t939) does. Krieger (1955) and A. C. Williams both
give rather brief critiques of Hill’s route.

282

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

report of the Espejo expedition, the matter would appear to be settled
unless new evidence is adduced.
Interestingly enough, both Kelley and Krieger fail to note (and so
did the present writer in his previous studies of the problem) that O.
W. Williams reached exactly the same conclusions in 1899, evidently
without knowledge of the Espejo account and without archeological
data. Williams simply determined that the area about La Junta de
los Rios was the one region in western Texas and adjacent northern
Mexico which would support "temporale" agriculture (that is, agriculture without irrigation) under semi-drought conditions. His map
locating the region of agriculture is remarkably similar to Kelley’s
location.1.
The weight of the archeological evidence would, thus, seem to indicate that the "all-Texas routes" of Ponton and M’Farland, Hallenbeck,
and Hill are not tenable. On the other hand, both southern or "Mexican routes," those of Davenport-Wells and Krieger, appear acceptable
in the light of data here presented. Of these two routes, Krieger’s appears to be the better--certainly it is by far the more thoroughly presented and documented. Unfortunately it has not yet been published
and the hectographed doctoral dissertation is in Spanish.

Archeological Problems Presented in the NauJragios
There are three references in Cabeza de Vaca’s account which puzzle and fascinate the writer, and which may be susceptible to archeological inquiry:
( 1 ) The location of the shell middens on the mainland opposite MalHado Island.
(2) The method of grinding mesquite beans at the crossing of the
Rio Grande (river so identified, though at different points, by Krieger
and by Davenport and Wells).
(3) The use of stone boiling by an agricuhural people at or near
La Junta de los Rios (point so identified by Krieger, Davenport and
Wells, and others.
The location of the island upon which Cabeza de Vaca and his corn1, Williams, 1899, p. 63. The writer was fortunate in having accompanied Dr.
Kelley on part of the survey work incident to his study of La Junta de los Rios. It
is his memory that neither Kelley nor the writer was aware of Judge ~¥illiams’
investigations a half century earlier. The methods followed by Kelley in determining the nuclear agricultural area under drought conditions correspond closely to
Williams’ described techniques. In addition, of course, Kelley had archeological and
ethno-historical evidence unavailable and/or unknown to Williams.

ARCHEOLOGY AND CABEZA DE VACA

panions were first shipwrecked and from whence they began their
wanderings has been a matter of considerable scholarly debate. Galled
Mal-Hado and briefly described by Cabeza de Vaca in his Naufragios,
it has been located by various writers everywhere from the mouth of
the Mississippi to Padre Inland. The more competent scholars have
restricted themselves to a somewhat more narrow range from Isle
Dernier off the west coast of Louisiana to Mustang Island off Corpus
Christi Bay on the Texas coast. More recent publications tend to concentrate on Galveston Island or the San Luis peninsula (which Davenport and Wells think was an island four hundred years ago and which
Hallenbeck contends was even then a peninsula).
So far as the writer is aware, no effort has been made to identify
this island from archeological evidence. All authorities seem to rely
first upon the physical description of the island and second upon identification of the island based upon distances given by Cabeza de Vaca
to even more tenuous landmarks once the journey was begun. However, Gabeza de Vaca specifically mentions oyster shell middens with
lodges pitched upon them, these being located on the mainland opposite Mal-ttado. The Indians from Mal-Hado lived here three months
out of each year collecting oysters. A number of Spaniards were employed collecting oysters here from February to April of 1529 (Bandelier, 1904, p. 68).
Now, depending upon how one interprets 0vieda and Cabeza de
Vaca, something between eighty and ninety-five Spaniards got off
the wrecked barges on Mal-Hado. Fifteen or sixteen survived to the
following spring. We know that these men were in possession of a
considerable amount of personal goods and equipment and that these
were taken from them by the Indians.
T. N. Campbell informs the writer that shell middens can be found
along every Texas bay from the Louisiana line to Corpus Christi,
so that archeological survey probably will not prove too effective an
aid in identifying Mal-Hado. Excavation, however, might prove useful, since there is a chance that some of the artifacts from this expedition might have survived.
The writer is perfectly cognizant of the objections most professional
archeologists will raise to such an idea. As one who was invited to go
and find the cannon ball that the Spaniards fired over the Makah Indian village at Gape Flattery in early 1792~ he can appreciate the
needle-in-the-haystack effect of such a proposition. However, we are
not here dealing with one putative artifact, but with the possessions
of at least eighty men taken by two tribes of Indians in a few months.

284

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A second objection may well be that the climatic conditions along
the Texas coast will long since have destroyed any ferruginous metals
and surely leather, textiles, etc. For that matter, the shell middens
in question may long since have been destroyed by natural and/or
human agents. This is not only possible, it is probable; but it would
seem worth-while to make an effort at such location and excavation.
Finally, there may be the objection that Spanish artifacts, if found,
could not be attributed to the Panfilo de Narvaez expedition’s survivors. It is true of course that there was subsequent Spanish contact
on the Texas coast, but it was much later and probably consisted
of a different category of artifact deposition in the main.
Some time in July of 1535 the wanderers crossed a river "as wide
as the Guadalquiver." Davenport and Wells identify the river as the
Rio Grande and the point as about the present site of Reynosa, Tamaulipas. Krieger also identifies the river as the Rio Grande but favors
a point approximately mid-way between tlio Orande City and Laredo.
In any event, just before reaching the river Cabeza de Vaca halted at
a village where he witnessed the preparation of flour evidently made
from mesquite beans.
¯ .. This mezquiquez is a fruit, which while on the trees is very bitter and
is like the carob bean, and it is eaten with earth, and with this it becomes
sweet and is good to eat. The way they prepare it is this: they dig a hole
in the ground, of the depth each one wants, and after throwing the fruit
into the hole, with a stick as thick as a leg and one and a half fathoms
long, they pound until it is powdered; and besides the earth that gets into
it from the pound they bring several handfuls and throw them into the
hole and keep on pounding for another while, and after this they empty it
into a container like a pannier and add enough water (as it may be
needed) to cover it, in such a way that there is water on top, and he who
has mashed the meal tastes it, and if it seems to him that it is not sweet
enough he calls for earth and adds it to the meal, and this he does until
he finds it sweet, and all of them sit around the pannier and every one
reaches out with his hand and takes what he can; and the seeds are
thrown on some hides together with the peelings; and he who has prepared the meal takes them (the seeds and peelings) and puts them back
into the pannier, and adds water as he did before, and they, again, squeeze
out the juice and water of them, and the seeds and peelings are set again
on the hides, and they do this three or four times at every pounding; and
those who are at this banquet, which for them is a great occasion, get very
big bellies, from the earth and water they have swallowed . . .15
15 Cabeza de Vaca, quoted in Krieger, 1955 (English translation), pp. 93-94.
Smith, 1871, pp. 140-141, and Bandelier, 1904, pp. 126-127, each give slightly
different translations.

ARCHEOLOGY AND CABEZA DE VACA

285

Concerning this description Krieger has the following comments:
¯ . . The use of wooden pestles to pound the beans agrees very well with
archeological observations within the Falc6n Reservoir basin and nearby
areas, for milling stones and manos--quite common in other parts of
Texas--were here found to be quite absent. A half dozen small stone
pestles have been found, but no stone mortars, and wooden mortars would
not, of course, be preserved. Archaeology thus agrees with de Vaca’s notes
in this part of Texas, but would not in any other part. It is also significant
that when he compiled his generalizations on all the tribes up to and
including the Cuchendados . . . no mention whatever was made of mesquite up to that time. Yet it was only two leagues from the Guchendados
to the village where the meal was being prepared. There thus seems to be
a close linkage in the use of mesquite for food and the use of wooden
pestles¯ The "container" used was probably of basketry as it was likened
to a pannier.1G

This statement is a bit puzzling¯ Surely Krieger does not mean to
imply that there would be stone mortars large enough to accommodate
"a stick as thick as a leg and one and a half fathoms long." Perhaps
he means that had stone mortars been available the use of a large
pounding stick and an earthen pit would have been abandoned¯ In any
event, the writer is not confident that this is the only part of Texas
in which milling stones and manos are known to have been absent.
If archeological evidence is available to indicate that the area about
the present Falc6n Reservoir contains food preparation pits of the sort
described by Cabeza de Vaca, it would unquestionably be of great value
in tracing the route. Krieger did the initial archeologica! survey in
the Falc6n Reservoir area and subsequently worked with materials
excavated in this region. It is unnecessary to note here that he is one
of the most competent archeologists currently working on the North
American scene. The writer suspects that a sentence or two has been
left out of the discussion or that in subsequent publication Krieger proposes to present more complete archeologica! data.
Finally~ there is the curious matter of stone boiling practiced by a
putatively agricultural people. When Cabeza de Vaca and his companions reached the first agricultural settlements on the Rio Orande
1G Krieger, 1955, p. 97. The reader should be warned that heretofore citations to
Krieger, 1956, have referred to the hectographed copy of the dissertation in Spanish.
At this point in preparation of the manuscript, the writer did not have access to this
version of Krieger’s work and was employing a typescript English version from the
Department of Anthropology files at The University of Texas. There is a slight
discrepancy in page numbers between the two. In any event, this description and
discussion occurs in the section labeled Leg C.

286

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCI~TY

(identified by Davenport and Wells and by Krieger as La Junta de
los Rios), they noted the following method of food preparation.
They gave us to eat beans and squashes; their way of cooking them is
so new (to us) that on that account I want to mention it here, so that it
can be seen and it may be known how strange and diverse is the human
ingeniousness and his industries (man’s). They do not have bowls and in
order to cook what they want to eat, they fill up half a calabash, big, with
water, and on the fire they heat plenty of rocks of the ones that catch fire
most easily, and fire them; and when they see them (the rocks) afire they
take them with some wooden tongs, and throw them inside the calabash
with the water, until they make it boil with the fire that the rocks carry,
and when they see that the water is boiling they put in it what they want
to cook, and during all this while they do not do anything else but to take
out some rocks and set others in so that the water boils in order to cook
what they want, and this is the way they cook it.~

In both the Old World and the New World agriculture, at least in
the nuclear areas, preceded pottery. Thus it may be assumed that stone
boiling was a method of cooking employed at very early times by
agricultural peoples. However, so far as the writer is aware, there is
no concrete archeological evidence to support this assumption. A search
of the archeological and ethnological literature does not yield another
instance of an agricultural people who practiced stone boiling. Krieger
(1955, pp. 146-147, 155-156) discusses this matter at some length.
Probably the best hypothesis for this phenomenon is that the wanderers first encountered the Jumano, who had just entered the region,
were developing a symbiotic relationship with the agricultural peoples living about the juncture of the Rio Grande and the Conchos, but
had not yet adopted pottery. This explanation would fit very well with
Kelley’s (195£) remarks concerning the appearance of the Jumano
in the area some time in the fifteenth century. It is one of the explanations offered by Krieger, and it is the explanation given by Epstein
(verbal communication, November, 1960).
If this explanation is correct, however, there should be agricultural
levels in some of the peripheral sites about La Junta de los t/ios which
are pre-ceramic or non-ceramic in character, or at least lacking in certain forms of utilitarian ceramics, whereas contemporaneous levels at
La Junta de los Bios would possess these wares.
Alternatively, it would seem possible that Cabeza de Vaca was mis17Krieger, 1955, pp. 14,2; see also 153-154, and Smith, 1871, pp. 161-162. It
should be noted that Bandelier and Krieger render "melones" as "squashes," while
Smith omits the term.

ARCI-IEOLOG~- AND CAB:EZA

DE

VACA

287

taken in assuming that the "people of the cows" were actually agricu!turalists. Instead, they may very well have been engaged in the barter
of buffalo meat for agricultural products from their sedentary neighbors. If this was the case, and they led a nomadic existence, the utilization of pottery might have been impractical. Analogous situations
existed, of course, on the Great Plains in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries. I-Iere stone boiling was either reverted to or had never
been abandoned, and agricultural products bartered from the Prairie
Plains were so cooked.
Against this latter explanation stands Cabeza de Vaca’s specific
statement that the "people of the cows" lived in the first permanent
dwellings encountered. Permanent dwellings argue agriculture and,
inferentially, pottery.

Re]erences Cited
Alessio Robles, Vito
1939. Coahuila y Texas. Tomo I. Mexico, D.F.
Bancroft, Hubert Howe
1886. History of the North Mexican States and Texas, I. The History Publishing Company. San Francisco.
Bandelier, A. F.
]890. Contributions to the History of the Southwestern Portion of the United
States. Hemenway Southwestern Archaeological Expedition. Papers of the
Archaeological Institute of America, American Series, Vol. 5. University
Press. Cambridge, Mass.
Bandelier, Fanny (translator), and Adolph Bandelier (editor)
]904. The Journey of Alvar Nufez Cabeza de Vaca and His Companions from
Florida to the Pacific, ] 528-1536. Allerton Book Company. New York.
Baskett, James Newton
1907. A Study of the Route of Cabeza de Vaca. Texas State Historical Association Quarterly, Vol. 10, Nos. 3 and 4. Austin.
Belloguin, Andres Garcia
n.d. Vida y hazanas de Alvar Nufiez Cabeza de Vaca. Madrid.
Bishop, Morris
1933. The Odyssey of Cabeza de Vaca. The Century Company. New York and
London.
Bolton, Herbert Eugene
1916. Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. New York.
1921. The Spanish Borderlands: A Chronicle of Old Florida and the Southwest.
Yale University Press. New Haven.
1949. Coronado: Knight of Pueblos and Plains. The University of New Mexico
Press. Albuquerque.
Bolton, Herbert Eugene, and Thomas Maitland Marshall.
1923. The Colonization of North America, 1492-1783. The Macmillan Company.
New York.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Butler, C. T., Jr.
1948. A West Texas Rock Shelter. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, The University
of Texas.
Cabeza de Vaca, Alvar Nufiez
1952. Naufragios y eomentarios. Espasa-Calpe, S.A. Madrid.
Coopwood, Bethel
1899, 1900a, 1900b. The Boute of Cabeza de Vaca. The Texas State Historical
Association Quarterly, Vols. III and IV. Austin.
Davenport, Harbert
1925-1924. The Expedition of Panfilo de Narvaez. The Southwestern Historical
Quarterly, Vols. XXVII-XXVIII. Austin.
Davenport, Harbert, and Joseph H. Wells
1919-1919. The First Europeans in Texas. The Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vo!. XXII. Austin.
Davis, ~¥. W. H.
1888. The Spaniard in New Mexico. American Historical Association, Annual
Report III, No. i.
Dobie, J. Frank
1942. Cabeza de Vaca’s Great Journey. The Pan American Union. Washington,
D.C.
Froebel, Julius
1859. Seven Year’s Travel in Central America, Northern Mexico, and the Far
West of the United States. Richard Bently. London.
Hackett, Charles Wilson (editor)
1931. Pichardo’s Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana and Texas. University of
Texas Press. Austin.
Haines, Helen
1891. History of New Mexico. New Mexico Historical Publishing Company.
New York.
Hallenbeck, Cleve
1940. The Journey and Route of Alvar Nufiez Cabeza de Vaca. The Arthur H.
Clark Company. Glendale.
Hammond, G. P.
1940. Coronado’s Seven Cities. Albuquerque.
Hammond, G. P., and Agapito Bey
1940. Narratives of the Coronado Expedition. The University of New Mexico
Press. Albuquerque.
Hill, Robert T.
1933-1934. Articles in the Dallas Mm~aing News. 1933: July 2, 9, 16, 23, 30;
August 20, 27; September 3, 17, 24; October 8, 15, 22, 29; November 5, 19.
1934: February 18; March 4, 11 ; May 27; June 10, £4; December 30.
Hodge, Frederick Webb, and Theodore H. Lewis (editors)
1907. Spanish Explorers in the Southern United States, 1528-1543. Charles
Scribner’s Sons. New York.
Holden, W. C.
1937. Excavation of Murrah Cave. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 9, pp. 48-73.
Jackson, A. T.
1938. Picture-writing of Texas Indians. The University of Texas Publication
No. 3809.

ARC}-II~OLOGY AND CABEZA DE VACA

289

Kelley, L Charles
1952. Factors Involved in the Abandonment of Certain Peripheral Southwestern
Settlements. American Anthropologist, Vol. 54, No. 3, pp. 356-387.
Krieger, Alex D.
] 955. Un nuevo estudio de la ruta sequida por Cabeza de Vaca a traves de norte
america. Doctoral Thesis, University of Mexico (hectographed).
Nelson, A. B.
1936. Campaigning in the Big Bend of the Rio Grande. The Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. XXXIX.
Oviedo y Valdez, O. Fernandez de
1852. Historia general y natural de las indias. Madrid.
Pichardo, Jos6 Antonio de
1812. In: Charles Wilson Hackett (editor), Pichardo’s Treatise on the Limits
of Louisiana and Texas. University of Texas Press. 1931. Austin.
Ponton, Brownie, and Bates H. M’Farland
1898. Alvar Nufiez Cabeza de Vaca: A Preliminary Report on His Wanderings
in Texas. The Texas State Historical Association Quarterly, Vo]. I, No. 3,
pp. 166-186.
Prince, L. Bradford
1883. Historical Sketches of New Mexico. Bamsey, Millett, and Hudson. Kansas
City.
Raines, C. W.
1896. Bibliography of Texas. Austin.
Read, Benjamine M.
]912. Illustrated History of New Mexico. New Mexico Printing Company.
Santa Fe.
Sauer, Carl O.
1932. The Road to Cibola. Ibero-Americana, Vol. I, No. 3. University of California Press. Berkeley.
1937. The Discovery of New Mexico Reconsidered. New Mexico Historical
Review, Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 270-287.
Smith, Buckingham
1851. The Narrative of Alvar Nufiez Cabeza de Vaca. George ~¥. Riggs. Washington.
1871. Relation of Alvar Nufiez Cabeza de Vaca. New York.
Taylor, Herbert C., Jr.
194.8. An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern Coahuila. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19, pp. 74-87.
Abilene.
1949a. The Archaeology of the Area ahout the Mouth of the Pecos. Master’s
Thesis, The University of Texas.
1949b. A Tentative Cultural Sequence for the Area about the Mouth of the Pecos.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeotogical and Paleontological Society, Vol. 20.
pp. 73-88. Abilene.
1951. Social Change and Cuhural Death: A Diachronic Study. Microfilm publication. University of Chicago.
Twitchell, R. E.
1914. Leading Facts of New Mexico History. Vol. I. Los Angeles.

290

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Williams, Albert Calvin, Jr.
1939. The Route of Cabeza de Vaca in Texas: A Study in Historiography.
Master’s thesis, The University of Texas.
Williams, O. W.
1899. Route of Cabeza de Vaca in Texas. The Southwestern Historical Quarterly,
Vol. III, pp. 54~64.
Woolsey, A. M.
1936. Horseshoe Ranch Cave. Field Notes. The University of Texas.

Western Washington College
Bellingham, Washington

