135

The Mayhew Site: A Possible Hasinai Farmstead,
Nacogdoches County, Texas
Nancy Adele Kenmotsu

ABSTRACT
Prewitt’s excavations of the Mayhew site, 41NA21, in 1975 yielded an
artifact assemblage that seemed to represent a single component dating to the
Allen focus. Recent analysis of the data has basically supported this hypothesis
and also strongly suggests that the site was an eighteenth century Hasinai
Caddo farmstead.

INTRODUCTION

The Mayhew site, 41NA21, identified in 1972, was named for Thomas
Mayhew, a knowledgeable avocational archeologist from Nacogdoches who has
recorded several sites in the vicinity of Bayou Loco (Prewitt et al. 1972). In April
1975, the Texas Archeological Salvage Project (TASP), known today as the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory-Sponsored Projects, carried out archeological
excavations at the site. These excavations were under the direction of Elton R.
Prewittand were undertaken in anticipation of the construction of LakeNacogdoches,
a water supply reservoir for the City of Nacogdoches.
Evidence is explored here in the hope of proving the hypothesis that the
Mayhew site represents the remains of an Hasinai Caddo farmstead; the hypothesis
was developed after a suggestion by Dee Ann Story that this site might provide an
opportunity to study a single-component site. In a review of the artifact assemblage,
several aspects of the collection suggested that it was a farmstead. First, the major
part of the assemblage consists of small plain and brushed sherds that strongly
suggest a domestic occupation. Because of their uniformity in paste, temper, and
surface treatment, the sherds seemed to represent a single component. Second, the
remainder of the assemblage includes both aboriginal and early European artifacts,
all of which seemed consistent with a domestic function for the site. Third, the
nearby Deshazo site has been interpreted (Good 1982; Story and Creel 1982) as a
historic Caddoan hamlet. Spanish priests (Casafias 1968) described the historic
Caddoan settlement system as one of small hamlets surrounded by isolated
farmsteads. It seemed probable, then, that farmsteads would be found near the
Deshazo site. Finally, the excavation undertaken at the site was extensive; according to Prewitt (1975), 21 percent of the site was excavated in a large block. These
aspects of the site favored an analysis that centered on whether the site had indeed
been a Caddoan farmstead.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

136

Texas Archeological Society

The importance of such a study has been noted by Story (1990:334-336), who
pointed out that the basic unit of Caddoan settlement systems is the household.
However,
Caddoan habitation loci.., have not been adequately investigated ....
Most excavations have been too limited to permit accurate characterization of the settlement size and structure .... As a result, the most
fundamental building blocks of the Caddoan settlement system--the
household and community--are poorly understood [Story 1990:336].

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

Now inundated by Lake Nacogdoches, the Mayhew site was on the west bank
of Bayou Loco in central Nacogdoches County, in the Piney Woods of East Texas
(Figure 1). Nacogdoches County is characterized by a warm, temperate climate that
is typical of the southeastern United States. Summers are long with hot, humid
temperatures; winters are cool and relatively short (Creel 1982a: 14; Bomar 1983).
Annual rainfall in the county averages 127 cm (50 inches) (Dolezel 1980:2). Snow
is not common in the region, but frosts are frequent during the late fall and winter
when most low vegetation dies back to ground level.
Bayou Loco
Nacogdoches County
@

TEXAS

Figure 1. Map of Texas showing the location of Bayou Loco and the Mayhew site.

Soils formed in this humid environment under forest vegetation tend to be
acidic clay, or sandy loams more than acidic clays and clay loams (Doleze11980:3).
At the Mayhew site, the soils are a shallow, orangish tan sandy loam over a redorange sterile clay. According to the soil survey for Nacogdoches County, soils at
the site are of the Tuscosso-Hannahatchee association, which are loamy bottomland
soils. Because of flooding, "these soils have low potential for cultivated crops"
(Dolezel 1980:11), and are used ahnost exclusively for pasture land. Hardwoods
dominate the vegetative cover.
The Nacogdoches area consists of rolling hills dissected by many perennial
streams, one of which is Bayou Loco, which flows roughly southward from the
Mayhew site to a place some 20 km (12 miles) distant, its confluence with the

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

137

Angelina River. In the vicinity of the Mayhew site the stream is well entrenched,
with many meander loops in a wide, flat floodplain. Since the floodplain has only
a slight elevation gradient in this area, Bayou Loco is sluggish and overflows its
banks frequently during heavy rains (Prewitt et al. 1972:2; Creel 1982a: 17). The low
elevation gradient also causes the small tributaries of Bayou Loco to fan out quickly
at the margins of the floodplain and drop their sediment and water loads in the
floodplain rather than in the channel itself. The resulting alluvial fans probably were
quite fertile and suitable for aboriginal agriculture (Creel 1982a: 17).
Situated on the west side of Bayou Loco, the Mayhew site was contained on a
small knoll about 30 meters in diameter (Figure 2). The site was bounded on the
southeast and east by a marshy area in the Bayou Loco floodplain, on the west and
southwest by a seeplike boggy area, and on the north by an erosional gully that
separated it from another sandy knoll just north of the gully (Prewitt 1975). The
floodplain intersected the valley wall northwest of the site, and the land rose steeply
to the uplands just west of the site. Creel (1982a: 15) notes that the three microenvironments (riparian, bottomland, and upland) around sites in the reservoir contained many floral and faunal species that could have been readily exploited by
prehistoric and early historic aboriginal populations. These include various species
of fish, white-tailed deer, turkey, duck, rabbit, pecans, acorns, herbs, berries, and
other edible foods (Creel 1982a:15). Early historic accounts indicate that the
modem environmental setting has been essentially unchanged since A.D. 1700
(Espinosa in Swanton 1942:274; Casafias 1968:44).

Figure 2. Photograph showing excavation in progress at thc Mayhew site, April 1975.

138

Texas Archeological Society
CONDITION OF THE SITE

The history of land use at site 41NA21 and its immediate surroundings is not
entirely clear, but there is some evidence (Kenmotsu n.d.) that postdepositional
disturbances have been minimal. This is important because of the high percentage
(about 34 percent) of small, thumbnail-sized plain and brushed body sherds
recovered at the site. Most other sherds measure from 2 to 3 cm in diameter. One
possible explanation for the quantity of small sherds is that they are a result of
plowing, but Prewitt (1975; Personal comm un ication 1987) has argued strongly that
the site has never been plowed. The lessee of the pasture where the Mayhew site is
located told Prewitt he had never plowed the pasture and, moreover, that the boggy
areas surrounding the site argue against the feasibility of plowing; the floors of the
excavation units and the profiles show no evidence of plow scars. Finally, Prewitt
does not consider the small size of sherds evidence of plowing, because other sites
in the reservoir area that have been plowed do not have the number of small thumbnail sized sherds found at Mayhew (e.g., 41NA13/27 [Deshazo] and 41NA22).
Therefore, it is assumed here that the site was not plowed.
ARCHEOLOGICAL AND ETHNOHISTORIC BACKGROUND

The dominant component at 41NA21 is the Allen phase, but an Early Ceramic
period component comprising 22 sandy paste sherds, three Gary dart points, a
polished stone, and four pitted manos is also found at the site (Kenmotsu n.d.). The
small inventory and lack of features associated with the Early Ceramic component
indicate that it was adequately separated from the Allen phase material.
The Allen phase dates from A.D. 1600 to 1800 (Suhm et al. 1954:221; Story
and Creel 1982:36). It was during this time (e.g., 1690), that Spanish missions were
first established in East Texas. Although they were abandoned in 1693, another
series of missions was established in 1716 in or near the various divisions of the
Hasinai--the southern Caddo. Mission Concepci6n was on the Angelina River,
somewhere near present-day Douglas (Corbin 1991, personal communication), a
modern community about 5 km (3 miles) northwest of the Mayhew site. Mission
Guadalupe was established among the Nazadachotzi Hasinai (Casafias 1968:47) at
the present-day city of Nacogdoches, some 16 km (10 miles) east of the Mayhew
site (Corbin 1991, personal communication). The Spanish remained in the southern
part of East Texas until 1772, although Mission Concepci6n, together with several
others, was permanently withdrawn from East Texas in 1731. Mission Guadalupe,
however, remained until 1772.
In 1714, Saint-Denis established a French trading post at Natchitoches, and
France began to maintain regular contact with native populations (Cox 1906:10);
previous French contact had been infrequent. Once established, the French post at
Natchitoches endured, and in time became a thriving commercial center. The focus
of French trade was directed primarily at the Caddo on the upper Red River (Wedel
1981:37), although clandestine French trade with other East Texas native groups
continued throughout the eighteenth century (Bolton 1915:35; Gregory 1973:239).

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

139

The Spanish priests who came to East Texas brought a limited supply of trading
goods, and these quickly dwindled. In letters to their superiors in Mexico they
pleaded for more and better goods to entice potential converts:
If only I... [had] had, in this year and three months that I have been with
them, some hawkbells, knives, strings of glass beads, and a blue cloth
which they greatly appreciate, and some blankets and other presents to
give them, I could have had a convent made of the best materials that you
could have made of the things that there are here [Casafias 1968:65].
These and similar pleas indicate that there was a general paucity of Spanish
goods in East Texas during those years, and suggest that most European goods in
Allen phase sites were acquired from the French.
When the Spanish and French first traveled to the general region of Houston,
Anderson, Cherokee, Rusk, and Nacogdoches counties in the late seventeenth
century, the region was occupied by Native Americans variously called the Hasinai,
Asinai, Assoni, Assnay, and Cenis (Casafias 1968:43; S wanton 1942:7-38). Casafias
(1968:47-48) described the Hasinai (as they will be called herein) as agriculturally
based groups where individual families within each group lived at some distance
from other families in small clearings where they grew their crops. Espinosa (in
Swanton 1942:274) confirmed Casafias’s account of the Hasinai by stating that
these natives do not live in congregations reduced to a Pueblo, but rather
each parciality of the four principle groups, live on ranches, dispersed from
each other, the primary motive being that each family seeks a small parcel
competent for their harvest and that has enough water for their needs.
The Allen phase was defined first as the Allen focus (Story and Creel 1982:36),
based on cemetery sites in Anderson and Cherokee counties that were partially
excavated in the 1930s by the University of Texas (Suhm et al. 1954:221). In addition to the cemetery sites in Anderson and Cherokee counties, Allen phase sites have
also been recorded in Houston, Rusk, and Nacogdoches counties. The ceramic part
of the artifact assemblage consists of several recognized types, including Patton
Engraved, Hume Engraved, Poyner Engraved, Killough Pinched, Maydelle Incised,
and plain and brushed utilitarian wares, together with occasional late trade pottery
from other native groups, together with Spanish majolica and occasional other
European ceramics (Suhm et al. 1954:219-221). Other parts of the artifact assemblage consist of lithic, bone, shell, and glass and metal European artifacts. The lithic
assemblage includes small triangular and contracting-stem arrowpoints (notably
Cuney, Tumey, Talco, Fresno, and rarely, Perdiz [Suhm et al. 1954:220]), Jowell
and Anderson knives, which appear to be restricted to burials (Cole 1975:175), small
snub-nosed scrapers, and battered stone. The lithic material found in Allen phase
sites is generally of nonlocal origin (Cole 1975:163-174; Girard n.d.: 135), and the
shell used for beads and pins was from the Gulf Coast. European artifacts recovered
from sites of the Allen phase include glass beads, iron axes, adzes, chisels and other
heavy iron tools, brass and iron pots, case knives, gunflints, and metal gun parts.

140

Texas Archeological Society

Allen phase cemeteries were fairly well patterned, contained extended interments, and were often near midden debris (Cole 1975; Good 1982). Males were
buried with more material goods, such as arrowpoints and ceramic bottles; female
graves contained more European and exotic goods (Cole 1975:359). All Allen phase
structures that have been excavated are round, probably used for habitation, and
ranged in diameter from 9 to 12.2 meters (Good 1982). Good (1982:61) hypothesized that storage facilities "are surely represented by the numerous darkly stained
disturbances found within and around the structures," and that storage racks could
be inferred from the rectangular configurations of postholes.
The Allen phase shares several traits with the Frankston focus, which is defined
for the preceding period (A.D. 1500 to 1600). Frankston focus sites have been
recorded in the same general area, and are believed to be ancestral to the Allen phase
(Suhm et al. 1954:221). Ceramic assemblages are similar, although there is more
Poyner Engraved than Patton Engraved in the Frankston focus (Kleinschmidt
1982:226). The primary difference between the Frankston focus and the Allen
phase, however, is the absence of early European historic material in Frankston
focus sites.
THE MODEL

It is proposed that the Mayhew site represents a small Hasinai Caddo farmstead
as described by Father Casafias in 1691 (Casafias 1968:49). The initial impression
that Maybew might be a farmstead was based on its small size, lack of a cemetery,
lack of mounds, large number of ceramic sherds, and the general utilitarian
character of the arti fact assemblage. One of the most striking aspects of the artifact
assemblage at the Mayhew site is the near absence of sherds more than 3 cm in
diameter. Too, the greater number of the sherds have plain or brushed exteriors,
hinting at a domestic function for the site. The small size of the knoll on which the
site is situated and the frequency of flooding of the surrounding land suggest that
all occupation would have been confined to the knoll itself. Although there are other
knolls in the floodplain, the nearest is about 40 meters to the north, and in their
surface inspection, Prewitt’s crews failed to see any artifacts there. These factors,
combined with evidence from the artifacts, suggest that the Mayhew site was indeed
a Hasinai farmstead.
Unfortunately, the strongest evidence for a farmstead--architectural remains-is absent at Mayhew. There are three possible reasons for their absence: 1) there was
a house, but it was not detected during the excavations; 2) there was never a house
at the site; or 3) there was a house, but it was outside of the excavated area. The first
possibility was discussed with Elton Prewitt (1987, Personal communication), and
it was his conclusion that the excavators had not missed any postmolds. The units
had been carefully troweled twice, and no postmolds, except for a single possible
postmold in the north-central part of the site, were detected. The second possibility-that there never had been a house at the site--would mean that the site had been
used for another purpose, which seems unlikely, for, as noted above, if the Mayhew

Kenmotsu-- The Mayhew Site

141

site had been a dumping ground for an occupation in another area, that would mean
that the material dumped would have been transported some 40 meters across land
that was sometimes boggy. Therefore, the author again returned to the hypothesis
that the Mayhew site was a Hasinai farmstead. In the absence of architectural
remains, the hypothesis was tested by establishing expectations of what remains
would be yielded by a farmstead of the Hasinai. Five expectations were developed,
each of which is discussed below in some detail and is based on models of Hasinai
Caddo settlement systems that have been suggested by Wyckoff and Baugh (1980)
and Story and Creel (1982). These models are derived from secondary accounts of
mission priests and other eighteenth century European residents and visitors to East
Texas who described aspects of the Hasinai settlement pattern. Those European
accounts consistently describe dispersed farmsteads where individual Hasinai
families resided in quasi-isolation from other families. Therefore, the expectations
of the model are as follows.
1. 7"he Mayhew site consists of the general refuse scatter in a habitation area
rather than of refuse from a trash midden created by the use of the knoll
exclusively for disposal.

Activities of both large and small groups produce refuse, and some
ethnoarcheological investigations have been directed specifically toward the study
of refuse (e.g., Bin ford 1978; 1980; Yellen 1977; Hayden and Cannon 1983), based
primarily on the assumption that human behavior is patterned. The patterns of
discard of refuse, however, vary from group to group. According to O’Connell
(1987:75),"the relationship between behavior and its reflection in the archeological
record is apparently more complex than many have imagined. Nevertheless, clearcut patterns in refuse distribution are evident."
One of the facts verified by ethnoarcheological studies is that there are two
types of refuse. One type comes from locations deliberately established for disposal
of trash; the other type is the scatters of refuse found in primary living or activity
areas. Here, the former is termed trash midden and the latter is termed living-surface
residue. O’Connell (1987) suggests that there are differences between these two
types of refuse,
A strong pattern of size sorting is apparent [in Alyawara settlements].
Large items (more than 5 cm in length) are generally tossed onto the
nearest part of the [trash] m idden at time of discard. Small items are more
often dropped in the activity area at or near their location of last use. S ome
of these small items are subsequently swept to the edge of the [trash
midden] .... Despite the sweeping, many small refuse items remain in the
activity area [O’Connell 1987:82].
S imilar d i sposal pattern s were noted by B i n ford (1980) at Nunami ut residen tial
base camps. !Kung sites do not contain areas of deliberate trash disposal (Yellen
1977:115), but O’Connell (1987:100) concludes that the lack of trash in their sites
was due to the temporary occupation (e.g., 5 to 10 days) of sites by the ?Kung. "One

142

Texas Archeological Society

would predict that in !Kung camps occupied for longer periods of time, secondary
disposal would be more common" (O’Connell 1987:100). The archeological record
from some sites in East Texas reflects this general pattern. It was anticipated that a
comparison of the material remains from the Mayhew site with sites containing
trash middens and/or living- surface refuse would result in data to confirm or refute
expectation number 1.
2. Evidence that daily tasks (cooking, food storage, tool making, etc.) were
carried out by small nuclear or extendedfamilies will be manifested by small
concentrations of artifacts.

In his study of the structure of Alyawara sites, O’Connell (1987) examined the
creation of the archeological record in a camp composed of households and activity
areas. Despite complexity in the formation processes of the camp, his data make it
clear that it is possible to identify one or more household areas, adjacent special
activity areas, and trash middens (O’Connell 1987:105). He also notes (1987:91)
that these patterns are clearest on the fringes of large sites or where they are not
compromised by superimposed occupations.
Computer-generated maps showing densities of artifacts and features at several
archeological investigations in East Texas (e.g., Bruseth and Perttula 1981:55) or
on the margins of East Texas (McGregor et al. 1987:50-52) have assisted in the
identification of activity areas. The basic assumption behind the maps is that
clusters of artifacts and features "identify the loci of human activity" (Brnseth and
Perttula 1981:55). Contours on these maps represent levels of density of artifacts.
Density maps developed for the Richland Creek project were also useful in the
interpretations of intrasite patterning when limited investigations at a site"provided
only a partial picture of how site occupations were structured spatially" (McGregor
et al. 1987:49).
Since previous efforts had successfully used the patterning of artifacts to
interpret archeological sites, and since only one possible feature (a posthole) was
encountered during excavations at the site, it was anticipated that maps of artifact
densities might emphasize concentrations of artifacts of the same or similar classes
in the site. Such concentrations, if indeed there should be any, might be clues to the
types of activities that had been carried out at those loci. Moreover, it was
anticipated that the concentrations would make it clear that a variety of activities had
been carried out at the site.
3. The ceramics will be utilitarian.
Most often, pottery is manufactured to serve as containers in day-to-day
activities. This purpose can be accomplished with simple, undecorated vessels
formed in shapes and sizes to accommodate specific needs. Decorative elements
on pottery are an "embellishment beyond the procedures used in forming the...
final vessel shape and finishing its overall surface" (Rice 1987:144). Such
decorative elements can be minor or they can be very elaborate, requiring
considerable effort. Pottery used in routine daily activities would tend to have

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

143

fewer elaborate decorative elements, since such pottery would have a shorter uselife (Longacre 1985).
It was anticipated that, as a farmstead, the Mayhew site would yield ceramic
sherds with few decorated elements, and the site would have little to no elaborately
decorated pottery. However, it is difficult to identify elaborate pottery at Caddoan
sites. Legged vessels have been assumed to have ritual or ceremonial uses.
Anderson, Gilmore, McCormick, and Morenon (1974), and Cole (1975:319) noted
that animal effigy bowls appear to be associated with individuals of high status.
Most Caddoan ceramics, however, regardless of surface treatment, appear to have
served utilitarian purposes. For example, Stokes and Woodring (1981:236) comment that "the early Caddoan [ceramic] assemblage at Davis represents a community-wide.., ceramic tradition." In the Benson’s Crossing site, the "vessels in the
[trash] midden were almost certainly cooking and eating vessels that had been in
everyday use up until they were broken and thrown away" (Driggers 1985:92).
Many of these sherds had decorative elements. Similarly, the trash midden at
Deshazo contained vessels with a wide range of surface treatments (Fields n.d.:444).
Analyses of vessels from Allen phase burial sites tend to underscore the
generally utilitarian nature of most ceramic types in these sites. In her analysis of
eight Allen phase burial sites, Cole (1975:219) noted that the ceramic vessels in
Allen phase burials were quite similar from one grave to another, indicating that the
various styles present, including Patton Engraved, Hume Engraved, Darco Engraved, etc., were not manufactured for any one group among the eight burial sites.
In addition, the
ceramics coming from the burials.., show signs of usage (nicks, worn
spots, reworked vessels, etc.) which would preclude their being specially
produced burial wares. I have considered the ceramic offerings to be
everyday ware [Cole 1975:211].
In his analysis of the whole vessels from the Desh~o burials, Fields (n.d.:413)
reached a similar conclusion:
All five major surface treatment techniques identified in the sherd
collection are represented on the whole vessels. [In addition] more than
half.., of the motif and element categories of the incised or engraved
sherds are represented in the vessel collection. These facts point up the
fairly high degree of similarity between the sherd [collection from nonburial context] and vessel collections [from the cemetery].
The collection from Mayhew then, should have pottery types similar to those
at the eight Allen phase burial sites and at Deshazo. In addition, the site should have
few or no effigy or legged vessels.
Finally, the proportion of decorated to nondecorated ware at Mayhew should
differ from special activity sites such as the A. C. Saunders site, which has been
interpreted as a ceremonial center (Kleinschmidt 1982). In his vessel-batch analysis, Kleinschmidt (1982:240) identified surface decorations other than brushing on

144

Texas Archeological Society

more than 82 percent of 1264 vessels. At Deshazo, 51 percent of the whole vessels
from the burials and 51 percent of the body sherds had surface treatments other than
brushing (Fields n.d.:402-413, 431). It is expected that the Mayhew sample will
have a percentage closer to Deshazo than the percentage identified at A. C.
Saunders, supporting the third expectation in the model.
4. The artifact assemblage at the Mayhew site will reflect a range of utilitarian
activities rather than specialized use of the site.

In her analysis of eight Allen phase burial sites, Cole (1975:327-331),
identified several mortuary offerings that appear to indicate the acquired status of
selected individuals. The special offerings include animal effigy vessels, Anderson
knives, Jowell knives, metal knives, hawk bells, marine shell beads, blue-gray
schist, and glass beads. Similar goods in the burials at Deshazo (Good 1982:88)
were interpreted as status items. These include stone tools (two flint scrapers and
a white sandstone abrader), metal knives, a possible rattle, a clay pipe, and a copper
bell. If these artifacts are status items, it is unlikely that they would be in the living
surface residue from small farmsteads.
Analysis of the material remains at the A. C. Saunders site led to the inference-based on several unique aspects of the site and its collections--that the site had
functioned as a ceremonial center (Kleinschmidt 1982:240). First, the ash mound
and midden mound features are unique. "Of the 668 sites known in the six county
region, only 5 other mound sites are identified, none of which closely resembles this
site" (Kleinschmidt 1982:238). The sheer numbers of vessels from the midden
(N=1264) dwarf other collections (Kleinschmidt 1982:234). Moreover, the prominence of engraved vessels (45.5 percent) is unusual. It is known that the Mayhew
site did not have the special features of Saunders, but it is expected to have smaller
proportions of both vessels and engraved vessels. Finally, artifacts at Mayhew
should represent daily family activities, such as cooking, sleeping, manufacture of
clothing, and procurement of food.
5. The artifact assemblage will be consistent with a site with a population of
four to seven people.
The estimated size of Hasinai fam il ies is not well documented. Joutel (1851:102)
described dwellings in Hasinai hamlets that housed as many as eight families, so
they would certainly have populations of much more than seven individuals.
However, he also noted that there were both medium-sized and small houses (Joutel
1851:102). Further, upon entering the region occupied by the Hasinai, he remarked
on the random nature of the settlement pattern, since he often encountered "on the
trail cabins at a distance from each other" (1851:102). Writing several years later,
Fray Espinosa (in Swanton 1942:274) describes isolated farmsteads with individual
families. None of these early accounts, however, refers to the size of individual
families. Indirect evidence, however, suggests that families may have been small.
Both the early French and early Spanish accounts of marriage customs mention the
frequency of divorce among the Hasinai and the women’s insistence on monogamy

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

145

(Casafias 1968:51; Espinosa in Swanton 1942:274; Joute11851:102,104). Casafias
(1968: 51) states that
the thing I approve is that they have only one wife at a time. Ifa man wants
to take a new wife, he makes a difference between them, never living with
them both at the same time. If the first wife finds that he has another wife
in view, she makes it a point of honor.., to leave him at once.
These descriptions of male-female relations suggest that farmsteads would
have been occupied by only one woman of child-bearing age together with her
children, or older women. Considering these data, it is here assumed that a Hasinai
farmstead would have been occupied by male and female heads of household, two
or more children, and, at times, grandparents who may or may not have occupied
a second dwelling.
Analyses of vessel batches at the Mayhew site, based on work by Cook (1972),
Arnold (1985), Driggers (1985), and Longacre (1985), have been used to estimate
site population. Pottery vessels break from time to time, so various researchers have
studied modern populations to determine the average number of vessels broken per
family per year (Cook 1972; Arnold 1985; Longacre 1985), and it is assumed (Cook
1972) that prehistoric groups broke similar numbers of vessels per family per year.
If this is true, one can infer populations at Caddoan sites--from data gathered from
sherd counts--on the basis of the number of vessels broken per year (Keller
1974:188; Driggers 1985:90). Both Keller and Driggers began by utilizing the
analysis by Cook (1972). However, both ultimately reached their own conclusions
about the quantities of vessels broken each year. Keller established a base line of five
per family per year; Driggers used four and a half pots broken per family per year.
In a recent ethnoarcheological study, Longacre (1985:339) found fewer pots broken
per family per year (e.g., 1.2) than had been estimated by Keller or Driggers.
However, Longacre (1985:345) notes an influx of plastic bottles replacing ceramic
vessels, so the number of broken pots in modern sites is concluded to be fewer than
would be found in the pre-plastic-bottle era (Longacre 1985:345). Therefore, the
estimates of Driggers and Keller are assumed to be more applicable than those of
Cook, Arnold, and Longacre to the Mayhew site.
To make an estimate of population, the percentage of the site that has been
excavated must be established (Driggers 1985:91), and it is also helpful to know
how long the site was occupied.
EXCAVATIONS AND THE MATERIAL REMAINS

The Texas Archeological Salvage Program conducted the final investigations
at Mayhew in 1975, when, in all, 15 crew-days were spent at the site. The primary
source for the descriptions of the excavations is the daily log kept by Elton Prewitt
during that 1975 fieldwork. Maps, photographs, and other materials on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) were also used to clarify or
enhance those field notes. However, since this author did not participate in the

146

Texas Archeological Society

excavations, the description is, to some extent, an interpretation of the field notes,
maps, and photographs.
In all, 55 contiguous, 2-by-2-meter units were excavated by hand (See Figure
2), and all soil was screened through quarter-inch hardware cloth. At first, units were
excavated in 5 cm levels to the red-orange basal clay, but eventually this method was
discontinued in favor of excavation of the area as a single unit after Prewitt (1975)
concluded that "41NA21 is a single component site occupied only after historic
contact times." Two anomalies were noted at the site during the excavations: one
was a large irregular area where the red-orange, basal clay was seen at about 10 cm
below ground surface in several contiguous units. The other anomaly was a possible
posthole described as a shallow stain 5 cm in diameter and 10 to 15 cm deep. No
other anomalies were found, and only the artifactual evidence is used in interpretation of the site.
Domestic Artifacts
Domestic artifacts (Table 1) comprise all of those artifacts concluded to have
been used in relatively regular, routine, and daily activities associated with household duties. This category includes artifacts that were used in food storage or
preparation (ceramics, ground stone), and/or typical household chores (bone
tools, glass, metal, and some lithic artifacts). Pipes are also incorporated into
the domestic artifacts, since some evidence suggests that they were used on a
daily basis in Late Prehistoric and Historic period Caddoan houses (Napoleon
n.d.:364).
Ceramic sherds are the largest artifact class at the site. Except for the seven
fragments of pipes, all of the ceramics are fragments of broken vessels. More than
half of the sherds had evidence of brushing (Kenmotsu n.d.), a surface treatment
technique that is found in the Neches and Angelina drainages with increasing
frequency after A.D. 1300, and especially at Allen phase sites (Kleinschmidt
1982:238). Only 2981 sherds of the total ceramic inventory had surface decoration
other than brushing. As noted previously, although total numbers of sherds are high,
the sherds themselves are quite small (Figure 3). More than half are less than 3 cm
in diameter, and several thousand are less than 1 cm in diameter. Only 13 sherds in
the entire collection measure more than 5 cm in diameter.
The dominant tempering agent is bone, found in at least 80 percent of all sherds.
Bone temper is commonly found in Allen phase sites and, to a lesser extent, in
Frankston focus sites (Fields n.d. :443; Kleinschmidt 1982). Nineteen design motifs
other than brushing were identified on the body sherds; more than half of the
decorated body sherds (N=1595) are Patton Engraved. In addition to Patton
Engraved, decorated body sherds are engraved, punctated, or incised, often with
brushing; most are small.
The frequency of surface treatments on rim sherds contrasts markedly with that
of the body sherds. Most rim sherds have some form of decoration other than
brushing. Another distinction between the body sherds and rim sherds is the
percentage of Patton Engraved, which, although it dominates the design motifs of

Kenmotsu u The Mayhew Site

147

Table 1. Domestic Artifacts from the Mayhew Site, 41NA21.
Class
Vessel ceramics

Pipe ceramics

Type/Subclass
Plain and brushed body sherds
Base sherds
Patton Engraved body sherds
Other decorated body sherds
Natchitoches Engraved (rim and body
sherds)
Emory Punctated-Incised rims
Patton Engraved rim sherds
Plain and brushed rim sherds
Other decorated rim sherds
Vessel appendages
Pipe fragments

11
101
322
193
5
7
11

Ground stone
Antler tine

1
5

Glass
Brass kettles

18,238
52
1595
938
69

4

Battered and other stone
Bone tool

Quantity

Rim fragments

4

Nails

6

Chisel

1
17

Other metal
Nonweaponry lithics

Debris
Exhausted cores
Lithic tools

33
10
39

the body sherds, could be identified on only 101 rim sherds; most rim sherds are less
than 1 cm in diameter.
Vessel batches were established for the rim sherds from the Mayhew site
(Kenmotsu n.d.: Appendix I). Minimum vessel counts (or vessel batches) are not
new, for Krieger (1949:217) was an early proponent of such analysis; he reasoned
that total sherd counts were not useful in determining accurate estimates of specific
pottery types. Following Krieger’ s suggestion, Th urmond and Kleinsch m idt (1979)
made a vessel batch analysis and identified 134 vessels in a pit east of Mound C at
the George C. Davis site. Thirty more vessels were identified in a nearby feature
(Stokes 1981:375) using the same analytical technique. In both efforts, researchers
believed the vessel batch analyses provided more realistic information about the
frequency of pottery types discarded in the features than could have been derived
from raw sherd counts.

148

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Body sherds from the Mayhew site: Above, brushed body sherds measuring less
than 1.9 cm; Below, brushed body sherds measuring more than 1.9 cm.

A similar study was carried out by Driggers (1985:62) on ceramics from the
Benson’s Crossing site (41TFt 10) now under Lake Bob Sandlin, and minimum
vessel counts were also made for the A. C. Saunders site (Kleinschmidt 1982). By
using vessel batches, Driggers (1985:40) was able to identify at least 209 vessels at
the site and concluded that the effort had yielded a much more detailed description
of the ceramic assemblage, had resulted in estimates of the duration of occupancy
and population, and had made more precise examination of vessel shape and size
possible (Kleinschmidt 1982:97-99). Kleinschmidt’s (1982:97) analysis of the
ceramic assemblage from the midden at the A. C. Saunders site was completed in
a similar manner; there, 1264 vessels were identified (Kleinschmidt 1982:191).
The vessel batch analysis made on the Mayhew collection (Kenmotsu
n.d.:Appendix I) included only rim sherds. Considering the small size of many
sherds from the Mayhew site and the many plain and brushed body sherds, it was

Kenmotsu -- The Mayhew Site

149

believed that to include the body sherds would introduce too much subjectivity into
the analysis. The exception to this is vessel 46, a possible Natchitoches Engraved
vessel whose 69 sherds include both rim and body fragments. In all other cases only
rim sherds were counted, since use of body sherds would risk duplication of vessel
counts. Sixty-one vessel batches were recognized from rim sherds, so total counts
of vessels are in marked contrast to those at the A. C. Saunders site, which has many
more vessel batches. Too, there is much less variety in design motifs on the vessels
at Mayhew than on those at Saunders (Figure 4).

Figure 4. Photograph of three vessel batches: Top, B atch 34, Brushed rim sherds; Left, Batch
43, Incised rim sherds with diagonal motif bordered by horizontal line; Right, Batch 15,
Punctated rim sherds.

The next largest class of artifacts is lithics, with 82 specimens; in all the
remaining artifact classes there are fewer than 20 specimens. Fifteen diverse
specimens of battered and ground stone comprise five identifiable classes of
artifacts: battered stones, abraders, milling stones, unpitted manos, and pitted
stones. One bone antler tine was recovered from 41NA21 together with five small
fragments of clear and green glass too small (less than 2 cm in diameter) to

150

Texas Archeological Society

determine their age. The brass kettle fragments are also small (less than 2 cm) and
may all be from the same kettle. The nails are rectangular in cross section and of
varying lengths, and like the other ferrous metal artifacts, all are heavily corroded
and quite fragile.
The 82 chipped stone artifacts from the Mayhew site are here assumed to
represent non-weapon-related specimens. However, the 33 pieces of debris and the
10 exhausted cores could be the end results of either weapons or domestic tool
production. In the absence of better information, all are included under domestic
artifacts, but the debris is interesting in two ways. First, the stone is not from local
sources; many specimens are of a gray-blue chert. Second, some of the debris is
apparently the result of bipolar reduction, a reduction strategy often used when raw
material consists of small cobbles or pebbles. In the analysis, an effort was made to
identify source material from comparative material at TARL by comparing Mayhew
specimens to those in the well-analyzed and reported Desh~o collection (Girard
n.d.), which contains evidence of bipolar reduction and nonlocal material. The
lithics include both manufacturing debris (cores, reduction flakes, etc.), and tools.
The non-weapon-related stone tools from Mayhew include seven unifaces, two
bifaces, three perforators, two probable gravers, one strike-a-light, and 24 utilized
flakes.
In summary, the inventory of ceramic and glass sherds, lithic material, brass
kettle fragments, nails, and the bone tool that are the bulk of the Mayhew collection
appears to be consistent with domestic activities. Ceramic sherds dominate all
artifacts with 21,491 specimens; these sherds are similar to those in the collections
from Deshazo in surface treatment, high percentage of brushed body sherds, and
low percentage of engraved or incised sherds.
Wearing Apparel
Beads are the only wearing apparel represented in the Mayhew collection;
thirty-four glass beads and one chunk of glass beads, partially melted and fused,
were recovered from the site. Only 19 of the individual beads and the chunk of fused
beads are still in the collection; the others were lost or stolen in 1978 (Elton Prewitt,
personal communication, 1987). The 19 specimens are white, blue, and black; one
is white with thin blue stripes (Kenmotsu n.d.). All but one of the beads were made
by the simple drawn method (Harris and Harris 1967:135-137; Deagan 1987:170172). The exception is a single bead from Mayhew that is a fragment of a bead made
by the wire method (i.e., wrapping a thin wirelike ribbon of glass around a cylinder)
with thin stripes of another color applied to it. Like drawn beads, wound beads were
also relatively easy and inexpensive to manufacture, and they are also believed to
have become more popular than drawn beads in the New World during the
eighteenth century (Deagan 1987:160).
Only seven of the beads in the collection--the colored beads and the complex
bead have been dated by comparison with beads from well-dated Spanish colonial
contexts (Deagan 1987:172). The seven dates range between A.D. 1550 and 1800.
The blue seed beads in the lump of fused beads have the longest time range (i.e.,

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

151

1550 to 1800). If the latest date is removed, their range is between A.D. 1575 and
A.D. 1750. Under the Harris and Harris classification (1967), 14 of the 19 beads
from 41NA21 are types usually associated with the early eighteenth century. Two
(types 76 and 27) were introduced into theNew World between A.D. 1740 and 1767,
and at least 10 are types that do not appear as trade items after 1767 (Harris and
Harris 1967:156-157). No types that Harris believed were introduced after 1767
were found in the collection. Tentatively, then, it appears that most of the beads are
from the period between A.D. 1575 and 1750, which places them well within the
Allen phase.
Weaponry
Weapons and weapons-related artifacts at the Mayhew site are of both native
and European manufacture. The native-made weapons consist of bifacially chipped
arrowpoints and four native-made gunflints; the European weapons are gun
furniture and gunflints.
The bifacially chipped weapons are all arrowpoints (Figure 5): one Perdiz,
eight Fresno, one Maud, and four too fragmentary to classify. These arrowpoint
styles tend to be associated with the Allen phase, although Perdiz has a much
greater time span and is more closely associated with the preceding Frankston
focus (Suhm et al. 1954:185). Based on their similarity to the nonlocal chert
identified by Girard (n.d.) at Deshazo, all of the arrowpoints apparently are of
nonlocal material.
Fresno arrowpoints are generally associated with historic Indian groups (Story
1990:251), especially in Central, North, and East Texas. Whereas the triangular
Cuney arrowpoints are more closely associated with Allen phase burial sites (Suhm
et al. 1954:293; Cole 1975:177-178), Fresnos have also been recovered in small
numbers from several Allen phase burials (Cole 1975:177-178), and there were two
among Desh~o’s Triangular Bi faces (Girard n.d.: 84). On the other hand, they have
been recovered in substantial quantities from the Gilbert (Allen et al. 1967:194) and
Roseborough Lake (Miroir et al. 1973:123) sites.
The Maud arrowpoint (Suhm etal. 1962:281) is of white-tan chert with slightly
recurved shoulders, a concave base, and some serrations visible on its opposing
margins. No Maud points were identified at Deshazo (Girard n.d.), the eight Allen
phase burial sites (Cole 1975:177), or Mission Dolores (Corbin et al. 1990:121).
One was recovered from Gilbert (Allen et al. 1967:135) and four from the
Roseborough Lake site (Miroir et al. 1973:123).
Six gunflints (Figure 6) were recovered from investigations at the Mayhew
site. Two are honey colored and of French manufacture; the other four are of native
manufacture. All are within the size range of gunflints for flintlock rifles. The two
French gunflints, easily identified by their translucent honey-yellow color, are
roughly wedgelike or chisellike in transverse section and were manufactured by
spall technology rather than from blades (Hamilton and Fry 1975). The heels of both
tend to conform to the curved D shape of French gunspalls, but the narrower of the
two appears to have undergone rejuvenation, so its sides are slightly rounded.

152

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Arrowpoints from the Mayhew site. Top row, Fresno; Middle row, Unidentified;
Bottom left, Maud; Bottom right, Perdiz.

Despite their physical dissimilarities, wear patterns on all six specimens are
remarkably similar. Based on other gunflint studies (Kenmotsu 1990:111; Hamilton
1960), the wear patterns include extensive step flaking along working edges, and
some small areas also show evidence of crushing. Several have more than one
working edgeia pattern of rejuvenation that has been noted on other gunflints from
East Texas (Kenmotsu 1990).
Both the rejuvenation of gunflints and their manufacturing technique have
important implications for the dating of the Mayhew site. French gunflints dominated the market until about A.D. 1790 (de Lotbiniere 1984:vii-viii). From about
A.D. 1650 to 1750 French production was dominated by gunspalls in contrast to
a blade technology that was not perfected until about A.D. 1750 (Blanchette
1975; Hamilton and Fry 1975:111-113). The presence of two French gunspalls
suggests a date before A.D. 1750, and the presence of aboriginally manufactured gunflints also hints at an early eighteenth century date. Native manufacture of gunflints typically "continued until an accepted and reliable source of
European gunflints was available" (Kenmotsu 1990:97). Since it is known that
by A.D. 1700 French bills of lading document thousands of gunflints sent to
French colonies (Hamilton 1979:210), and the French were trading in the Bayou
Loco region by A.D. 1714, the Mayhew gunflints suggest a date between A.D.

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

153

Figure 6. Gun-related artifacts from the Mayhew site. Top row, L to R; Three butt plate
fragments (two probable), Two trigger guard fragments. Next to top row, L to R; Three side
plate fragments with dragon head/lacy pattern, Possible frizzen spring, Side plate screw,
Cock fragment. Middle row, L to R; Six lead balls and a ramrod fragment. Next to bottom
row, L to R; Four native-made gunflints, Two French gunflints. Bottom row; Gun barrel with
battered end.

1700 and 1750. This date corresponds well with the dates of the beads and of
the metal gun furniture from the site.
Gun parts at Mayhew include an incomplete gun barrel, two fragments of
trigger guards, 11 side plate fragments, four pieces of butt plates, two side plate
screws, one flintlock cock, two iron ramrod fragments, and six lead balls (Figure 6)
(Kenmotsu n.d.). The gun barrel is basically intact, and has been rejuvenated into
a different tool by beveling both ends. Although little gun-related material was
recovered from the Desh~o site, and none from the eight Allen Phase burial sites
(Cole 1975:199), other East Texas sites have also contained gun barrels with
beveled ends. The Gilbert site (41RA13) in Rains County had 23 fragments of gun
barrels, most of which were battered or flattened (Blaine and Harris 1967:59). One
gun barrel from the Pearson site (41RA5) is also flattened "as if it had been used as
a scraper or gouge" (Duffield and Jelks 1961:54). Several beveled fragments were
also recovered from the Roseborough Lake site (Miroir et al. 1973:143). Hamilton
(1960:126), working with material remains from Seneca and Osage sites, also found

154

Texas Archeological Society

a high incidence of beveling of gun barrels and concludes that the Osage used them
as fleshers and scrapers for removing flesh and fat from hides.
A sufficient amount of the design can be detected on the two trigger guards to
make suggestions as to their identi fication possible. They are quite similar to artifact
B217 from the Tunica site material. The Tunica trigger guard, which is classified
as Type C, dating from A.D. 1685 to 1730--is a type of inferior quality commonly
traded by the French to native groups (Hamilton 1979:212). Since they are so
similar, a manufacturing date of A.D. 1685 to 1730 has been assigned to these
specimens, and it is here concluded that they came from a French flintlock rifle.
Fragments of at least three side plates were recovered from Mayhew, and four
appear to be parts of a single brass side plate of a flintlock gun. All four are
characterized by a lacy, open pattern that is distinct from the patterns of the solid side
plates manufactured in France after about A.D. 1715 and in England after A.D. 1750
(Blaine and Harris 1967:67). Three of the fragments are nondiagnostic curved
fragments with curvilinear engraved designs. The fourth specimen has a dragon’s
head and half of the rear screw hole that was used to attach the side plate to the
wooden flintlock stock. The designs are considered representative of guns of second
quality that were produced in France from A.D. 1680 to 1730 in sizable quantities
for trade (Hamilton 1968:3-7). Since the French are known to have been trading in
the general Mayhew area by the early 1700s, it is here concluded that these four
fragments are from a single side plate from an early eighteenth century (about A.D.
1700-1730) French trade gun. Five fragments of what appear to be two other side
plates are also in the Mayhew collection. These heavily corroded fragments are of
a solid flat form that became popular in France after 1715 and in England after 1750
(Blaine and Harris 1967:71).
The four fragments of brass butt plates are believed to be the remains of two butt
plates; one is a flat, cast piece of brass with no identifying characteristics, and the
other three fragments appear to be from a single butt plate of Hamilton’s Type C,
dating between 1685 and 1730 (Hamilton 1979:212).
The additional gun parts are fairly fragmentary, and those that are of cast iron
are corroded and in poor condition. Based on the present evidence, there is sufficient
material for one, and possibly two probable broken or damaged and subsequently
discarded flintlock rifles. Despite the fragmentary condition of many of the parts,
some are sufficiently complete to make it possible to suggest a manufacturing date.
The side plates and trigger guard indicate a date of A.D. 1685 to 1730, and appear
to be from a French Type C trade gun (Hamilton 1968).
The dating of the Mayhew site is based primarily upon the known dates for the
European artifacts recovered from the site. To a lesser extent, the native-made
artifacts from the site were used in determining the approximate dates of its
occupation. Some of these artifacts (gunflints) suggest that the Mayhew site was not
occupied before A.D. 1700, and others (gun parts) suggest that abandonment was
no later than A.D. 1750. S everal of the gun parts (trigger guards, butt plates, and side
plates) are from French trade guns manufactured between A.D. 1685 and 1730.
Possible fragments of another flintlock rifle were manufactured in France beginning

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

155

about A. D. 1715. It can be further in ferred that the guns date to the period between
A.D. 1700 and 1750, since there was only limited French activity in the southern
areas west of the Mississippi before A.D. 1700, and Natchitoches was not established until A.D. 1714. The beads recovered at Mayhew also generally date to the
first half of the eighteenth century. None of the types introduced after A.D. 1767
were identi fled in the collection, and there was only one in the collection of the types
that were introduced after A.D. 1740. One of the bead types has a long time span
(i.e., A.D. 1550 to 1800); the remainder have been recovered from Spanish Colonial
sites dating between A.D. 1575 and 1750.
The similarity of the material remains at Mayhew to those from Deshazo also
suggests that the Mayhew site may date to about the same time period as Deshazo.
Two archeomagnetic dates are available for Deshazo: A.D. 1715_+30 and A.D.
1710-2_34 (Good 1982:78). The Deshazo artifact assemblage has many classes and/
or recognized types, and the Mayhew site has fewer recognized types or classes;
those that have been identified at Mayhew tend to have equivalents at Deshazo.
Mayhew resembles Desh~o in its proportion of brushed to plain ceramics. By
weight, brushed body sherds at Mayhew oumumber plain body sherds three to one,
a ratio nearly identical to the proportion of brushed to plain body sherds at Deshazo.
This is in contrast to the earlier A. C. Saunders site, where only 50 percent of the
sherds are brushed. The popularity of brushing at Mayhew strengthens its similarity
to Deshazo. Fields (n.d.:443) noted the increase and tentatively concluded that
brushing was more popular in the Allen phase as a surface technique than in the
preceding Frankston focus. These data suggest that Deshazo and Mayhew share a
common time span.
INTERPRETATION

The dominant component at Mayhew is the historic Indian component that has
been assigned to the Allen phase. This component is represented by more than
21,000 ceramic artifacts, contracting stem and triangular arrowpoints, other lithic
artifacts, and European-manufactured artifacts such as gun parts, gunflints, brass
kettle fragments, beads, and nails. This artifact assemblage conforms to those at
other Allen phase sites (Cole 1975; Creel 1982c; Good 1982).
In order to determine whether the Allen phase component at Mayhew is the
remains of a Hasinai farmstead, it was necessary to determine that the Allen focus
collection at 41NA21 represents a single occupation rather than a series of
occupations. Since the site has no features, its interpretation must rely on the artifact
assemblage.
As already noted, all of the dates of the European goods tend to coincide,
suggesting that they come from a single occupation. Too, there are some indications that the European goods are primarily of French origin, which conforms
well with the fact that the French were the dominant source of trade goods in
East Texas in the early eighteenth century. Although several Spanish missions
were established in East Texas between 1690 and 1722, letters from the priests

156

Texas Archeological Society

(Casafias 1968; Hidalgo in Swanton 1942:242) to their superiors in New Spain
indicate that at that time they generally lacked both staples and trade goods. Too,
a single source for the European goods also supports a single occupation, since
sequent occupations could result in a greater variety of material at the site from
a greater variety of sources. The native-made artifacts also tend to support a
single occupation, for the ceramic collection is relatively uniform in surface
treatment, paste, temper, and colors. There is greater diversity in the source
material of the lithics from the site, but a considerable number of the lithics
appear to be from the same gray-blue chert source. In sum, the material remains
from Mayhew are fairly homogeneous, suggesting that they reflect one occupation rather than sequent occupations.
1. The Mayhew site consists of general refuse scatter in a habitation area rather
than refuse from a trash midden resulting from the use of the knoll
exclusively for disposal.

Ethnoarcheological studies (cf. O’Connell 1987; Binford 1980; Yellen 1977)
have noted that some small groups have discard-areas set aside for deliberate
disposal, where the artifacts are larger (e.g., more than 5 cm) than those in the
general living area. These areas are trash middens, and are distinct from the areas
of living-surface residue that have small fragments of refuse scattered throughout.
Trash middens have been identified in Hasinai and prehistoric Caddoan sites
in East Texas, and are known at Deshazo (Good 1982:53), Benson’s Crossing
(Driggers 1985:34), and the ash mound midden at the A. C. Saunders site
(Kleinschmidt 1982:41). In all three sites the middens are believed to he areas of
deliberate trash disposal. In all three sites the middens are distinguished by their
distinctly dark soil color and their many large artifacts. The most prominent trash
midden at Deshazo was associated with structure 7 (Good 1982:55); located south
of the structure, it"yielded very high artifact densities and a good sample of faunal
remains. It represents the most concentrated trash or midden deposit at the site"
(Creel 1982b:41). Although there were some postmolds in the midden, Good
(1982:55) suggests that these were from supports for outdoor structures. Moreover,
Creel (1982b:40) noted that "midden-stain was not ubiquitous across the site," and
that the darker stain in this m idden was readily visible. In his analysis of the Deshazo
ceramics, Fields (n.d.:418) states that"the high density in [the midden] makes sense
because this unit appears to sample a midden.., based on high artifact frequency,
relatively abundant faunal remains, and scarcity of cultural features." The ceramic
density in the midden was 453 sherds per cubic meter (Fields n.d.:418), whereas
sherd density in areas of structures averaged about 100 sherds per cubic meter.
Moreover, sherd size in the Deshazo trash midden was considerably greater than at
Mayhew. Lithic material in the midden also exceeded the totals in the other units at
the site (Girard n.d.: 143).
At Benson’s Crossing site, the trash midden is described (Driggers 1985:105)
as

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

157

an extensive midden deposit roughly circular in plan and somewhat lensshaped in section; characterized by dark organic staining; 12 to 13 m in
diameter and approximately 15-20 cm in depth; associated artifacts
include numerous sherds, lithic debitage, lithic tools, and burned clay; also
associated with this feature were mussel shells, and bones of several whitetail deer, nutshells, and seeds.
In all, more than 20,000 sherds and 4800 pieces oflithic debris and tools were
recovered from this midden (Driggers 1985:36). About half of the sherds measured
more than 2 cm (Driggers 1985:53). Two other aspects of this trash midden merit
mention; first, Driggers concludes that the "stylistic and technical uniformity"
(1985:86) of the sherds from the feature is so consistent that the trash midden was
the result of occupation by a single group of people, and, second, he concludes that
the trash resulted from an occupation of two or more extended families for about 30
years (Driggers 1985:93).
Kleinschmidt describes the trash midden at the A. C. Saunders site (Feature 2)
(Kleinschmidt 1982:41) as "roughly circular" and measuring 19.7 meters north to
south, 16.4 meters east to west, and about 78.7 cm high. It had a "recognizably
distinct soil" that was a black-red color and contained red sand, clay, ashes,
charcoal, and artifacts (Ibid.). The midden has been tentatively called a discard area
for a ceremonial center (Kleinschmidt 1982:238-240). In all, this part of the site
yielded 6730 sherds, together with other artifacts (Ibid.:84). Total density of sherds
per cubic meter is about 33, less than at Deshazo, but the number of sherds and other
artifacts from the midden is probably understated. Excavated in the 1930s when"the
goals were primarily to collect... Caddoan artifacts, especially whole vessels"
(Kleinschmidt 1982:18), photographs on file at TARL show large piles of sherds,
bone, and other remains that were discarded in the trash midden. Only the finest
specimens were returned to Austin. The photographs attest to the many large sherds
(e.g., more than 5 cm in diameter) and also to the many large bones that were not
collected.
The descriptions of these three trash middens are at odds in several respects
with the material recovered from Mayhew. First, Mayhew did not have a noticeably
darker soil color. During the excavations at the site, Prewitt’s field notes include a
perplexed comment wondering why the site has "no more midden stain than it does"
(Prewitt 1975), and during the 1987 interview, he repeated that comment. Color
photographs of site excavations show that the soil was brownish orange: the absence
of darker soil color suggests that the Mayhew deposit is not a trash disposal area.
Second, the average sherd size in the middens at Deshazo, Benson’s Crossing, and
the A. C. Saunders site was considerably larger than the average sherd size at
Mayhew. This is in keeping with the findings of O’Connell (1987:95) at Alyawara
sites. At Alyawara sites artifacts in trash middens are generally larger than those in
the living areas. Moreover, the average sherd size in the Mayhew site agrees well
with experimental studies of the effects of foot trampling (Nielsen 1991). The
dominant damage to sherds from foot trampling is a general breakdown in sherd size

158

Texas Archeological Society

until a unimodal size distribution with a mode of 30 mm or less is achieved
(Ibid.:495-596). The mode at Mayhew is less than 30 mm. The small sherds at
Mayhew are also in keeping with archeological evidence from other contexts. The
Juntunen site in the Great Lakes had a high proportion of very small sherds in areas
that were concluded to have seen heavy traffic (McPherron 1967:288-289).
Similarly, sheet trash at historic sites is o f notieeably smaller size in pathways, areas
adjacent to porch steps, entryways, and in other areas of heavy foot traffic (Moir
1987). The sherd densities at Mayhew may be the result of trampling.
It should be noted that there are many more sherds at the site than in the three
trash middens. Densities in most of the site exceed 650 sherds per cubic meter.
However, the densities at the Mayhew site are related to the smaller average sherd
size and do not appear to reflect the breakage of more vessels there. Vessel batches
from Benson’s Crossing and A. C. Saunders indicate that there were many more
vessels at these sites than at Mayhew. At Benson’s Crossing, 209 vessels were
inferred from 10,369 sherds (Driggers 1985:47), and at Saunders, 1264 vessels were
inferred from 1465 rim sherds and 47 body sherds (Kleinschmidt 1982:97). In
contrast, only 61 vessels could be inferred from the rim sherds at Mayhew, so the
large number of sherds at Mayhew apparently reflects the effects of foot trampling.
Another difference between the trash middens at Deshazo, Benson’s Crossing,
and A. C. Saunders and those at the Mayhew site is their faunal inventory. There
were significantly higher quantities of faunal remains in the trash middens at
Deshazo, Benson’s Crossing and the A. C. Saunders site than at Mayhew. According to Henderson (1982:133), "most of the faunal debris [at Deshazo] was obtained
from the [trash] midden in Area D, which yielded numerous diagnostic artifacts of
the Allen phase." The total bone count from Mayhew was 45, compared to 852
identifiable vertebrates from Deshazo. The bone counts underscore the distinction
between the Mayhew deposit and the trash middens at the other three sites.
In summary, this expectation is tentatively confirmed. There is some archeological evidence that the remains at Mayhew are residue from an occupation rather
than from a trash disposal area. The ceramics from Benson’s Crossing--a site with
a trash midden--include a high percentage of small sherds, but the remainder tend
to be more than 30 mm in diameter, larger than the sherds at Mayhew. In addition,
the middens at the Deshazo and A. C. Saunders sites contained a higher percentage
of large sherds than small sherds. Moreover, the dark staining at the other three sites
was not seen at Mayhew, suggesting that the Mayhew site reflects a function other
than trash disposal. Finally, lithic and bone densities at the Deshazo and A. C.
Saunders sites are considerably higher than at Mayhew, further suggesting that
Mayhew was not a trash midden.
2. Evidence that daily tasks (cooking, food storage, tool making, etc.) were
carried out by small nuclear or extendedfamilies will be manifested by small
concentrations of artifacts.

Ethnoarcheological studies (O’Connel11987) have indicated that activity areas
can be identified in some archeological sites. Several recent investigation in or near

Kenmotsu m The Mayhew Site

159

East Texas (Bruseth and Perttula 1981; McGregor et al. 1987) have used computergenerated maps to identify activity patterns at prehistoric sites. Since the Mayhew
site lacks evidence of features, it was hoped that artifact concentrations might be
revealed by maps illustrating concentrations of the material remains, and it was
assumed that these concentrations probably would be the remnants of the activities
carried out at the site.
In view of the small quantities of all artifacts other than ceramics, the
distributions of ceramics, beads, battered and ground stone, and weaponry recovered from Mayhew were plotted by hand, and drafted on a computer (Figures 7, 8,
9, 10). However, contrary to the expectation, no clear, obvious, and definable
concentrations can be seen on these diagrams, although there may be some tentative
trends. First, if the ceramic totals (Figure 7) in any unit reflect the intensity of
trampling in that part of the site, then the area of heaviest foot traffic was northeast
of the site datum, with a smaller concentration north of the datum and a lighter
concentration east of the datum. Most of the beads (Figure 8) are in the area north
and east of the datum, but the largest cluster of beads is directly southwest of the
datum, well removed from the ceramic concentrations. A smaller concentration of
beads is in the northeast corner of the block excavation, and coincides with one of
the ceramic concentrations. The battered and ground stone (Figure 9) has one of the
lightest scatters; its only cluster lies between two of the ceramic concentrations.
Finally, as with beads and ceramics, there is a concentration of weaponry-related
artifacts in the northeast part of the block excavations (Figure 10), and a slightly
smaller concentration near the datum coincides with the heaviest concentration of
beads, but there was no ground stone in these units, and ceramics are less
concentrated in this part of the site.
In summary, no clear artifact concentrations could be identified in the site.
Since an estimated 21 percent of the site was excavated, any concentrations
should have been detected. There are, however, some trends in the patterning of
some of the artifacts. Some areas of the excavations had noticeably heavier
concentrations of sherds, possibly indicating areas of heavier foot traffic, and,
within or near these concentrations were slightly denser concentrations of beads,
battered and ground stone, and weaponry-associated artifacts.
It may be that trends are all that can be expected in farmsteads; the site
investigated by O’Connell (1987:105) was fairly large and complex. Because of
the frequency of relocation and abandonment of households at the site, household clusters could be sorted out through artifact patterning, but individual clusters displayed "little internal structure, except as a function of size sorting"
(Ibid.). In addition, the small artifacts in living area refuse are often scattered
across the site:
Razor blades and tobacco tabs are not used together.., nor is either
functionally connected with pull tabs from soft drink cans. Yet all have
very similar distribution patterns, largely because they are similar in size
[O’Connell 1987:95].

160

Texas Archeological Society

~,ontour Interval - 100 Sherds

0
o

4 METERS
Datum

Figure 7. Contoured diagram showing distribution of ceramics laid over a plan of the grid
system at the Mayhew site (41NA21).

O’Connell’s study suggests that the internal site structure may have been
obliterated by relocations of activities to accommodate changes in weather, personal preference, etc. If that is true, the search for trends rather than concentrations
in artifact patterning may be a more appropriate goal for sites like Mayhew.
Regardless, the data are certainly minimal, and the trends are sufficiently limited
that confirmation of the expectation has not been achieved.
3. The ceramics will be utilitarian.

In their analyses of other Allen phase sites, Cole (1975:211) and Fields
(n.d.:413) highlight the fact that most pottery types from this time were manufactared for utilitarian purposes, so it was anticipated that the collection from Mayhew
would have pottery types similar to those at the eight Allen phase burial sites and
at Deshazo. In addition, the site should have few or no effigy or legged vessels.

Kenmotsu -- The Mayhew Site

161

/ xg

LAx I

\x xlxU;x

N

/)

Contour Interval- 1 Bead

x

~X

0
o

4 METERS
Datum

Figure 8, Contoured diagram showing distribution of beads laid over aplan of the grid system
at the Mayhew site (41NA21).

Cole’s (1975:319) analysis of Allen phase burial site collections indicated that
animal effigy vessels are rare and are associated with burials of individuals of high
status. Finally, it was also anticipated that the proportion of decorated to nondecorated
ware at Mayhew would differ from the proportions at cemeteries or special activity
sites such as A. C. Saunders.
To some extent, this expectation was borne out. Plain and brushed sherds, with
18,238 sherds, dominate the collection of 21,491 ceramic sherds from the site.
However, the vessel batches based on rim sherds do not demonstrate the same
dominance of plain and brushed vessels. In the 61 vessel batches, there are six plain
and three brushed vessels; all of the remaining 52 batches have decorative elements,
including neck-bands, punctations, incisions, or engraved lines (Table 2), so surface
treatment is evidently more frequent than was anticipated. Some authors (Cole
1975:211; Fields n.d.:449) suggest that decorated vessels---except for animal effigy

162

Texas Archeological Society

i,

lxl

x

Contour Interval - 1 Artifact

N
4 METERS

0
~,

Datum

Figure 9. Contoured diagram showing distribution of battered and ground stone artifacts laid
over a plan of the grid system at the Mayhew site (41NA21).

vessels--were used for utilitarian tasks, and a fairly high proportion (85 percent) of
Mayhew vessels have some form of surface treatment. Although these numbers fail
to support the expectation, the vessel batches at Mayhew are distinct from those at
Saunders in their proportion of engraved wares. At A. C. Saunders, 45.5 percent of
the batches are engraved; at Mayhew only 10 percent are engraved. A similar
distinction with engraved pottery is found in Allen phase cemeteries, where pottery
in graves tends to be engraved rather than punctated, brushed, or plain (Cole
1975:347). However, although engraved pottery is found among utilitarian wares,
engraved wares seem to be preferred for pottery used in nonutilitarian contexts.
These differences suggest that at Mayhew there is indeed a higher concentration of
utilitarian pottery than is found at special activity sites.
In sum, this expectation is tentatively affirmed. Neither animal effigy vessels
nor legged vessels were identified in the collection. The absence of these wares,

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

163

i

x
x

Contour Interval - 1 Artifact

N
LXX

0

4 METERS

v

o

Datum

Figure 10. Contoured diagram showing distribution of weapon-related artifacts laid over a
plan of the grid system at the Mayhew site (41NA21).

together with the evidence that there are fairly high percentages of engraved ware
in ceremonial or cemetery areas, supports the expectation that the pottery from
Mayhew is utilitarian in function.
4. The artifact assemblage at the Mayhew site will reflect a range of utilitarian
activities rather than specialized use of the site.
As a whole, the Mayhew artifact assemblage confirms this expectation, for the
artifacts are dominated by utilitarian ceramics, with engraved wares comprising
only 10 percent of the ceramics. Among the other artifacts in the collection, only the
34 beads could be considered nonutilitarian. On the other hand, although beads are
sometimes recovered from Allen phase burials (Cole 1975:175), they are not found
exclusively in burials, and Good (1982:88) did not include beads among the special
mortuary offerings at Desh~o, even though there were many in the collection.

164

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Vessel Batches By Surface Treatment.
Average Number of
Sherds per Batch

Number of
Vesset Batches

Plain

26

6

Surface
Treatment

Brushed

16

3

Neck-Banded

5

4

Brushed~unctated

3

6

Punctated

7

12

Patton Engraved

11

8

Natchitoches Engraved

69

1

Emory Punctated-Incised

7

1

Parallel Vertical Incised

8

2

Pinched-Appliqued

3

1

Diagonal Incised

1

3

Notched/Nicked Rim

1

2

20

3

4

6

1

3

Horizontal Incised, Unticked
Incised w/Diagonal Motif bordered
by Horizontal Incised Line
Diagonal Incised

Espinosa (in Swanton 1942:288) notes that women often incorporated beads into
their costumes. The other artifacts from Mayhew, which-based on the evidence
from the battered and ground stone--are for battering, food and/or pigment
grinding, cracking and chopping hard foods (such as nuts), hammering, and
smoothing--all utilitarian activities. The weaponry at the site consists ofarrowpoints,
gun flints, gun furniture, and lead shot, which would serve the needs of a farmstead
to acquire meat and fur pelts. In addition, the pipes in the collection would have been
typical of households in the Allen phase (Napolean n.d.), and the nails, chisel, bone
tool, metal kettle, and glass are consistent with activities associated with daily needs
rather than special functions. Finally, in the chipped stone artifact collection from
the site are perforators, a graver, one knife probably used for cutting, two bifaces,
one strike-a-light, and six uni faces that apparently were used for scraping (Kenmotsu
n.d.). These artifacts and their use-wear patterns reflect activities that would be
expected as part of the day-to-day routine of a farmstead.
The reuse of several artifacts at the site strengthens the interpretation that the
material remains reflect utilitarian activities. The gun barrel recovered from
Mayhew had been rejuvenated into another tool, perhaps a scraper or gouge; the
gunflints also have been resharpened and rejuvenated.

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

165

Finally, the expectation was confirmed by the absence of metal knives,
Anderson knives, Jowell knives, hawk bells, marine shells, and blue-gray schist.
These artifacts have been known (Cole 1975) to be associated with the grave goods
of individuals of high status, and since the accounts of early Spanish priests have
indicated that individuals of high status did not live in isolated farmsteads, the
absence of these goods at Mayhew supports the expectation.
5. The artifact assemblage will be consistent with a population offour to seven
people at the site.
Rim sherds were separated from other Mayhew sherds in order to make a
minimum vessel count. Minimum vessel counts have several advantages over raw
sherd counts, for they provide a more complete approach to the frequency of vessels
used and broken at a site, a better estimate of the frequency of vessel surface
treatments, range and frequency of the vessel forms used at the site, population
estimates (Driggers 1985:40), and, since they, by identi fying vessel form, have been
used to suggest site function (Arnold 1985:11).
Theresults of the minimum vessel counts have not been as productive as hoped,
largely because of the small sherd size. Some data concerning vessel surface
treatment and population estimates could be inferred, but the small sherd size
precluded any evaluation of vessel form, so the range and frequency of vessel forms
at Mayhew could not be determined, and without vessel form, site function could
not be inferred. However, the study is not considered useless; some information
relating to population size and length of occupation was gained from the minimum
vessel counts..
In all, 61 vessel batches were identified from the 690 rim sherds (Kenmotsu
n.d.:Appendix I). Although 116 rim sherds could not be grouped into vessel
batches due to their small size, the remainder apparently represent distinct vessels. The numbers of sherds in the batches vary from one to 69, and many of the
batches have less than six sherds. However, the distinctive characteristics of lip
treatment, rim form, thickness, and decorative elements are sufficiently different that in some cases separate vessels can be inferred from single sherds. Temper in 60 of the vessels is bone, but many also have grog temper. Slightly more
than half of the batches have everted rims (n=32); the remaining rims are straight
or direct.
Seven sherds were identified as Emory Punctated-Incised, a style that has not
been well typed, but which appears to be associated with the historic Allen phase
in the Neches and Angelina drainages (Fields n.d.:400). Emory Punctated-Incised
is represented in the Deshazo collection, the ceramic sherds from Mission Dolores
(41SA25) in San Augustine (Corbin et al. 1990: 105-107), and in the collections
from Los Adaes (Gregory 1973:338-348). Natchitoches Engraved (Vessel Batch
46) is represented by 69 sherds (Figure 6); the crosshatching within a curved
engraved line appears to conform to this type. Natchitoches Engraved is typically
found in Late Caddoan period and Historic Caddoan period sites northeast and east
of Bayou Loco (Fields n.d.:395; Gregory 1973:356-358).

166

Texas Archeological Society

To make an estimate of population, it is necessary to know how much of the site
was excavated, and, if possible, the approximate duration of occupation (Driggers
1985:91). At Mayhew, Prewitt estimated that about 21 percent of the site was
excavated, but duration of occupation is not certain. If 61 vessel batches represent
21 percent of the vessels broken at the site, then 290 vessel batches would represent
100 percent of the vessels broken at the site. If five vessels were broken each year
by each family, then the Mayhew site would have been occupied for 58 years by one
household, or 29 years by two households, probably consisting of one house with
male, female, and children, and one house with grandparents, since site size is too
small to have held more than one or two structures as big as those at Deshazo. These
figures are consistent with a site population of four to seven individuals. Interestingly, a time span of 29 to 58 years is consistent with the dates of manufacture for
the European goods recovered (e.g., A.D. 1700-1750). In sum, the vessel batch
analysis supports the expectation.
SUMMARY

Does the Mayhew site (41NA21) in fact represent a Hasinai farmstead? The
artifact assemblage from the site is dominated by more than 20,000 ceramic sherds,
most of which are very small plain or brushed body sherds. Their uniformity in
temper (e.g., bone with some grog), color, and surface finishing techniques,
together with the presence of Patton Engraved sherds, indicates that they represent
a historic Indian component of the Hasinai Caddo. Early European trade goods at
the site dating to the early eighteenth century lend support to an affirmative
conclusion. In the light of this evidence, five expectations were set forth to test the
hypothesis that Mayhew was a Hasinai farmstead.
In general, the expectations are supported; the first expectation is concerned
with the evidence of whether the site represented a trash midden or living area
residue. Unlike the trash middens at Deshazo, Benson’s Crossing, and A. C.
Saunders, the Mayhew deposit lacks the dark organic staining of trash middens,
appreciable quantities of faunal remains, and sizable quantities of lithics or large
sherds. These facts confirm the first expectation that the site was a living area. The
second expectation seeks to identify activity areas in the site by means of artifact
densities. Although there are some possible trends of variability in artifact density
across the site, the trends are tentative, and the expectation is not so well supported.
The third and fourth expectations deal with the presence or absence of utilitarian
artifacts at the site. No animal effigy or legged vessels were identified in the
collection, there is less engraved ware at Mayhew than in graves or in ceremonial
sites, and the remainder of the artifacts strongly suggest utilitarian purposes. In the
light of these results, the third and fourth expectations appear to be confirmed. The
final expectation is concerned with deriving a population estimate for the site. The
estimate rests on a vessel batch analysis and the total area of the site. Sixty-one
vessel batches were assembled, using the rim sherds in the collection, and, based on
these vessels, it is projected that 290 vessels were broken at the site, and that the site

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

167

was occupied for 29 to 58 years by a maximum of one or two families. These figures
are consistent with a population of four to seven individuals at Mayhew, confirming
the final expectation. In summary, it appears that the Mayhew site in Bayou Loco
Reservoir was the farmstead of a single or extended family of the Hasinai Caddo,
occupied between A.D. 1700 and 1750.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Several individuals have been instrumental in the development of this effort,
but any errors are my own and not because of advice freely given. Dee Ann Story
first suggested that I undertake the analysis and interpretation of the site, and then
kindly and wisely shepherded me through the pitfalls of such an analysis. In
addition, Timothy K. Perttula provided advice and persistently urged its completion. Darrell Creel, of TARL, provided access to their collections and commented
on an early draft. The staff of the Department of Antiquities Protection at the Texas
Historical Commission were helpful in many ways. Jan Guy was a source of
encouragement and offered thoughtful comments. Finally, appreciation is owed to
Jeannie for her patience with long hours at night devoted to Mom’s work.

REFERENCES
Allen, G. L., Jr., Pauline Allen, Joe Cochran, Lathel F. Duffield, R. C. Forrester, Jr., Elbert
D. Helm, Isabell R. Lobdell, David Lubell, Roy E. Padgett, and Robert L. Tapscott
1967
Stone Tools. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeolog ical Society 37:191-211.
Anderson, Keith M., Kathleen Gilmore, Olin F. McCormick, Ill, and E. Pierre Morenon
1974
Archeological Investigation at Lake Palestine, Texas. Contributions inAnthropology No. 11, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Arnold, Dean E.
1985
Ceramic Theory and Cultural Process. Cambridge University Press, New York
Binford, Lewis
1978
Dimensional Analysis of Behavior and Site Structure: Learning from an Eskimo
Hunting Stand. American Antiquity 43:330-361.
1980

Willow Smoke and Dogs’ Tails: Hunter-Gatherer Settlement Systems and
Archeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45: 4-20.

Blaine, Jay C.
Analysis and Description of Armaments and Associated Items. In: Presidio
1982

Nuestra Sehora del P ilar de los A daes, Excavations: 1982, by H. F. Gregory, Jay
C. Blaine, and Shelia Morrison, pp. 110-143. Williamson Museum, Northwestern State University. Natctfitoches.

168

Texas Archeological Society

Blaine, Jay C., and R. K. Harris
1967

Guns. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 37: 33-86.

Blanchette, Jean-Francois
Gunflints from Chicoutimi Indian Site (Quebec). HistoricalArchaeology 9:411975
54.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1915
Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century, Studies in Spanish Colonial History
and Administration. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Bomar, G. W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Brain, Jeffrey P.
1979

Tunica Treasure. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Volume 71. Harvard University. Cambridge.

Bruseth, James E., and Timothy K. Perttula
Prehistoric Settlement Patterns at Lake Fork Reservoir. Texas Antiquities
1981
Permit Series Report 2. Texas Antiquities Committee. Austin.
Casafias, Francisco
1968
Relacion Sobre los Indios del Este de Texas. In: Primeras Exploraciones y
Poblamiento de Texas (1686-1694), editado por Lino Gomez Canedo, pp. 3968. Academy of American Franciscan History. Monterrey.
Cole, Nancy Mottashed
1975
Early Historic Caddoan Mortuary Practices in the Upper Neches Drainage, East
Texas. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
Cook, Sherburne F.
1972

Can Pottery Residues be Used as an Index to Population? Contributions of the
University of California Archeological Research Facility 14:17-40. Berkeley.

Corbin, James E., Heather A. Brown, Mary G. Canavan, and Sharon Toups
1990
Mission Dolores de los Ais (41SA25): San Augustine County, Texas, Archaeological Investigation, 1984. Papers in Anthropology, Number 5. Stephen F.
Austin State University. Nacogdoches.
Cox, Isaac J.
1906
The Texas-Louisiana Frontier. The Quarterly of the Texas State Historical
A ssociation 10:1--75.
Creel, Darrell G.
1982a The Environmental Setting. In: The Desh~o Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas,
Volume 1, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 33-50. TexasAntiquitiesPermitSeries,
No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.

Kenmotsu m The Mayhew Site

169

1982b

Site Description and Investigation. In: The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County,
Texas, Volume 1, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 3-19. Texas Antiquities Permit
Series, No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.

1982c

Artifacts of Non-Native Manufacture. In: The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches
County, Texas, Volume 1, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 113-130. Texas
Antiquities Permit Series, No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.

Deagan, Kathleen
1987

Artifacts of the Spanish Colonies of Florida and the Caribbean, 1500-1800.
Volume 1: Ceramics, Glassware, and Beads. Smithsonian Institution Press.
Washington D.C.

De Lotbiniere, Seymour
1984

Introduction, Updating Skertchly. In The Manufacture of Gunflints, by Sydney
B. J. Skertchly, pp. i-vii. Museum Restoration Service, Alexandria Bay, New
York.

Dolezel, Raymond
1980
Soils of Nacogdoches County, Texas. Soil Conservation Service and United
States Forest Service in Cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Driggers William, G.
1985
A report on the Analysis of the Ceramic Vessel Materials from the Benson’s
Crossing Site (41TT110) Titus County, Texas. Unpublished Master’s Thesis,
University of Texas.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks.
1961

The Pearson Site, A Historic Indian Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County,
Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 9. Department of Anthropology, University of
Texas. Austin.

Fields, Ross C.
n.d.
Analysis of Native-Made Ceramics. In: The Deshazo Site, Volume 2: Texas
Native Made Artifacts and Synthesis, edited by Dee Arm Story, pp. 370-508.
Texas Antiquities Permit Series, Unpublished manuscript on file at the The
Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
Girard, Jeff S.
n.d.
The Chipped Stone Collection: A Technological, Functional and Typological
Analysis. In: The Deshazo Site, Volume 2: The Native Made Artifacts and
Synthesis, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 47-235. Texas Antiquities Permit
Series, Unpublished manuscript on file at tile Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, Austin.
Good, Carolyn E.
1982

Analysis of Structures, Burials and Other Cultural Features. In: The Deshazo
Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Volume 1, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 51112. Texas Antiquities Permit Series, No. 7, Texas Antiquities Committee,
Austin

170

Texas Archeological Society

Gregory, H. F.
1973
Eighteenth Century Caddoan Archaeology: A Study of Models and
Interpretations. Unpublished dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University. Dallas.
Gregory, H. F., Jay C. Blaine, and Sheila Morrison
1982

Presidio NuestraSehora del Pilar de los Adaes, Excavations:1982. Williamson
Museum, Northwestern State University. Natchitoches.

Hamilton, T. M.
1960
Some Gun Parts from Eighteenth Century Osage Sites. The Missouri Archeologist 22:120-149.
1968

Early Indian Trade Guns: 1625-1772.ContributionsoftheMuseumoftheGreat
Plains, Number 3. Lawton, Oklahoma.

1979

Guns, Gunflints, Balls and Shot. In: Tunica Treasure, Papers of the Peabody
Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Volume 71, by Jeffrey P. Brain, pp.
206-217. Peabody Museum o fArchaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University,
Cambridge.

Hamilton, T. M., and Bruce W. Fry
1975

A Survey of Louisbourg Gunflints. Occasional Papers in Archaeology and
History 12:101-128. National Historic Parks and Sites Branch, Parks Canada.
Ottawa, Canada.

Harris, R. King, and Inus Marie Harris
1967

Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian
Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 129-162. Final report to the National Science Foundation, grant
NSF GS-964.

Harris, R. K., Inus M. Harris, and J. Ned Woodall.
1967
European Trade Goods, Tools. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in
Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. 37:18-32.
Hayden, Bruce, and A. Cannon
1983

Where the Garbage Goes: Refuse Disposal in the Maya Highlands. Journal of
Anthropological Archaeology 2:117-163.

Henderson, Jerry
1982
Faunal Analysis. In: The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Volume
1, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 131-157. Texas Antiquities Permit Series, No.
7, Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin
n,d.

Analysis of the Bone Tools. In: The Deshazo Site, Volume 2: The Native Made
Artifacts and Synthesis, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 11-16. Texas Antiquities
Permit Series, unpublished manuscript on file at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, Austin.

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

171

Joutel, M. T.
1851
Diario Hist6rico del t~ltimo vijae que Hizo M. de la Salle Para Descubrir el
Desembocadero y Curso deI Missicipi. Escrito en Idioma Frances pot M. T.
Joutel, Traducido al Espafiol por el Coronel Jose Maria Tomel. Jos~ Desnoues.
New York.
Keller, John
1974
The Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches Region of East Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of
Texas, Austin.
Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele
1990

Gunflints: A Study. HistoricaIArchaeology 24:92-124.

n.d.

Analysis and Interpretation of the Mayhew Site, 41NA21, Bayou Loco,
Nacogdoches County, Texas. Unpublished manuscript on file at Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas, Austin.

Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, James E. Bruseth, and James E. Corbin
1993

Moscoso and the Route in Texas. In: The De Soto Expedition West of the
Mississippi: 1541-1543, edited by Gloria A. Young. The University o f Arkansas
Press. Fayetteville.

Kleinschmidt, Ulrich Karl.
1982
Review and Analysis of the A. C. Saunders Site, 41AN19, Anderson County,
Texas. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, Department of Anthropology, University
of Texas, Austin.
Krieger, Alex D.
1949
Part 1I. Analysis and Interpretation. In: The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas, by H. Perry Newell and Alex D. Krieger, pp. 51-240. Memoir
of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 5. Society for American Archaeology, Menasha.
Longacre, William A.
1985

Pottery Use-life among the Kalinga, Northern Luzon, the Philippines. In:
Decoding Prehistoric Ceramics, edited by Ben A. Nelson, pp. 334-346.
Southern Illinois University Press. Carbondale.

McGregor, Daniel E., Jeffery Bohlin, James E. Bruseth, Gayle J. Fritz, Richard Fullington,
Holly Hathaway, Phillip Murry, and David R. Pheasant
1987
Excavations at41FT193, the Perry Site. In: Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations along
the Prairie Margin: Site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology,
edited by Daniel E. McGregor and James E. Bruseth, pp. 29-52. Richland Creek
Technical Series, Volume III. Archaeology Research Program. Institute for the
Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist University. Dallas.
McPherron, Alan.
1967

The Juntunen Site and the Late Woodland Period of the Upper Great Lakes.
Anthropological Papers No. 30, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

172

Texas Archeological Society

Miroir, M. P., R. King Harris, Jay C. Blaine, Jason McVay, Donald C. Book, Floyd
Cigoinero, Roger McVay, Joe B. Raffaelli, and Paul E. Schoen.
1973
B6nard de la Harpe and the Nassonite Post. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological
Society 44:113-168.
Moir, Randall W.
1987

Refined Earthenwares and Rural Ceramic Traditions. In: Historic Buildings,
Material Culture, and People of the Prairie Margin, Architecture, Artifacts, and
Synthesis of Historic Archaeology, edited by David H. Jurney, and Randall W.
Moir, pp. 97-120. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume V. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the S tudy of Earth and Man. Southern Methodist
University. Dallas.

Napoleon, Patty Neuhaus
n.d.
Analysis of the Native-Made Ceramic Pipes. In: The Deshazo Site, Volume 2:
The Native Made Artifacts and Synthesis, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 336369. Texas Antiquities Permit Series, unpublished manuscript on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
Nielsen, Axel E.
1991
Trampling the Archaeological Record: An Experimental Study. American
Antiquity 56:483-503.
,
O’Connell, James F.
1987
Alyawara Site Structures and Its Archeological Implications. American Antiquity 52:74-108.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1975

Bayou Loco: Investigations and Speculations. Paper Presented at the Caddo
Conference, Texas A&M University. On file at Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R., John W. Clark, Jr., and David S. Dibble
1972
An Assessment of the Archeological and Historical Resources of the Bayou
Loco Reservoir Area, Nacogdoches County, Texas. Research Report No. 11.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, University of Texas, Austin.
Rice, Prudence
1987
Pottery Analysis, A Sourcebook. University of Chicago Press. Chicago.
Stokes, Janell
1981
Appendix 3, Descriptions of Vessels Represented by Sherds from F196-11, Unit
64. In: Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas: Summers of 1979 and 1980, edited by D. A. Story. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Occasional Papers, No. 1. University of
Texas, Austin.

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

173

Stokes, Janell, and Joe Woodring
1981
Native Made Artifacts of Clay. In: Archeological Investigations at the George
C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas: Summers of 1979 and 1980, edited by
D. A. S tory. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Occasional Papers, No.
1. University of Texas, Austin.
Story, Dee Arm
1990
Culture History of the Native Americans. In: Archeology and B ioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by Dee Ann Story, Jan A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D.
Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366.
Research Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey. Fayetteville.
Story, Dee Ann, and Darrell G. Creel
1982
The Cultural Setting. In: The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas,
Volume 1, edited by Dee Ann S tory, pp. 20-34. Texas Antiquities Permit Series,
No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Kreiger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25.

Swanton, John R.
Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Smithsonian
1942
Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bullentin 132. Washington, D.C.
Thurmond, J. Peter, and Ulrich Kleinschmidt
1979
Report on the Fall 1978 Investigations at George C. Davis Site, Caddoan
Mounds State tlistoric Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin.
Varien, Mark D.
n.d.
Analysis o f Ground Battered and Polished Stone. In: The Deshazo Site, Volume
2: The Native Made Artifacts and Synthesis, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 1734.Texas Antiquities Permit Series, unpublished Manuscript on file at theTexas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin
Wedel, Mildred M.
1981

The Deer Creek Site, Oklahoma: A Wichita Village called Ferdinandina, An
Ethnolfistorian’s View. Oklahoma l l istoric Society Series in Anthropology No.
5. Oklahoma City.

Wyckoff, Don G., and Timothy G. Baugh
Early Historic Hasinai Elites: a Model for the Material Cultural of Governing
1980
Elites, Mid-Cominemal Journal of Archaeology 5:225-288.
Yellen, John E.
Archeological Approaches to the Present, Models for Reconstructing the Past.
1977
Academic Press. New York.

