70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

also in the Austin Focus the earliest stemmed arrow points have expanded or rectangular stems, while later arrow points in both areas
have contracting stems. Such parallel development may indicate that
contacts between the areas were established at a relatively early date.
As was pointed out previously, there is an intermediate zone between central Texas and the Caddoan Area where amalgamations of
traits from both areas are suspected. Farther north a similar situation
exists, exemplified by the Wylie, Fort Coffee, and Turkey Bluff foci,
each of which exhibits a more or less equal mixture of Plains and
Caddoan Area traits. Recent salvage excavations at McGee Bend
Reservoir, on the southern margin of the Caddoan Area, revealed several sites where Fulton Aspect material is mixed with artifacts similar
to those of the Galveston Bay Focus. Thus there is a curved strip of
territory skirting the western and southern edges of the Caddoan Area
where Caddoan Area traits are combined with traits of complexes to
the west and south.
In summary, it is clear that Caddoan Area peoples were influenced
prehistorically by neighboring peoples to the west and south. The intensity and duration of the influences are not yet fully known, a defect which may be remedied by additional research. It is suggested
that investigation of the "buffer" territory along the western and
southern margins of the Caddoan Area may hold much of the key data
for tracing these influences as well as for correlating the Caddoan Area
complexes culturally and chronologically with neighboring complexes
to the west and south. Strangely, little evidence of influences in the
other direction--that is, from the Caddoan Area into the neighboring areas-has been detected. Intensive, comprehensive studies of all
facets of the inter-areal relationships should do much to clarify the
picture.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

Discussion
By T. N. Campbell
Jelks’ paper on cultural relationships between the Caddoan area
and adjoining areas in Texas is a straightforward, compact, clearly
expressed statement of the status of current knowledge, the main problems that can be recognized today, and what is essential for further
progress in this particular sector. I find little that I can disagree with,

CADDOAkN" AREA AND TEXAS

71

either in general or in specific detail. My remarks will be somewhat
random and of an amplifying nature.
Jelks ignores the evidence of Paleo-Indian occupation in the Caddoan area, which is obviously intentional and certainly reasonable
in view of the tenuous nature of the evidence and the fact that this
symposium is more concerned with the opposite end of the chronological column. However, it is of some interest to note that in local surface collections the most common early types of points are Clovis,
Scottsbluff, Plainview, and Meserve. Other types are stated to be rare
or absent. West and southwest of the Caddoan area Scottsbluff points
appear to be notably rare, a distributional detail that may be of some
significance in tracing movements of early hunting peoples in this
part of North America.
For the Archaic stage in the Caddoan area, particularly in the
southwestern quadrant, one can only deplore the lack of attention
which its apparently numerous components have received. As in
Mesoamerica and elsewhere, the later and more complicated cultures
have been too attractive. This neglect of the Archaic is understandable
but nevertheless regrettable. As Jelks points out, what is known of
the Archaic in the Caddoan area indicates a local distinctiveness that
contrasts with known Archaic units to the west and southwest in
Texas. It appears to be oriented toward the Archaic of the southeastern United States, but it occupies a marginal position with respect to
that region and should share more traits with adjacent areas to the
west than Jelks is able to enumerate. It may be that the western margin of the Caddoan area was a more sharply drawn cultural boundary
during the Archaic than it was in later times. It is also possible, of
course, that the paucity of shared traits is more apparent than real, reflecting imperfect knowledge of Archaic complexes in both areas.
I fear that we cannot expect any early solution to problems connected with the Archaic stage of the Caddoan and adjoining areas in
Texas. Ideally, for the Caddoan area specialist, the first order of business should be concentration on the nebulous East Texas Aspect, followed by definition of Archaic complexes immediately south and
southwest of the Caddoan area. It is pertinent here to note that the
proiectile point typology developed and used in the Texas field greatly
facilitates comparative studies of Archaic units.
Perhaps the most interesting problem in Jelks’ paper is the proper
interpretation of the so-called generalized Plains traits in western
Caddoan complexes and in the late prehistoric and early historic cultures of northern, central, and southern Texas. The most common

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and widespread artifacts named by Jelks are triangular arrowpoints,
four-edged beveled knives, and small, well-made end-scrapers. These
appear to be related to hunting, butchering, and processing hides, particularly of the bison. 3elks discusses these traits in terms of their occurrence in roughly the eastern half of Texas and merely points to
their probable southern Plains derivation. Documenting the spread of
this cluster of Plains "traits is going to be difficult unless more cultural
units are defined in the southern Plains area itself. Except for certain
Paleo-Indian occupations and the relatively late Antelope Creek and
Optima loci of the Texas and Oklahoma Panhandles, very little is
known about the southern High Plains. Between the Canadian River
of the upper Texas Panhandle and the Pecos River to the south virtually nothing is known of both the Archaic and later prehistoric
stages. We must have more excavation in northwestern Texas, eastern
New Mexico, and western Oklahoma before we can begin to talk intelligibly about the southwestward diffusion of specific Plains traits
into the central, southern, and lower eastern parts of Texas..lelks has
phrased for us an interesting problem for further investigation.
The Plains traits in the western Caddo loci are to some extent illuminated by certain ethnographic details concerning the historic
Caddo in Texas, particularly the Hasinai groups, who are linked with
the Allen Focus as well as the preceding Frankston Focus of the Caddoan area. According to Spanish sources, groups of Hasinai frequently
left their forested area to hunt bison in "the grasslands of central Texas.
One account states that the nearest bison were more than 40 leagues
from Hasinai territory. This, of course, is after the Hasinai obtained

horses from Europeans, but lengthy bison-hunting trips to the west
were probably a very old cultural feature in the western portion of
the Caddoan area. The records of the De Soto expedition refer to it. In
this we have a specific local mechanism that helps to explain movement of cultural traits from the Caddoan area to central Texas and
vice versa. For the most part these hunting trips must have been made
into open areas or areas occupied by friendly tribes, and possibly there
were sometimes joint bison-hunting expeditions that involved extended visits to friendly villages in central and north-central Texas.
If so, this may help to explain the Wylie Focus and other mixed assemblages just west of the Caddoan area.
For the late prehistoric and early prehistoric periods, relationships
between the Caddoan area and adjoining areas in Texas would be
much clarified by additional detailed ethnohistorical studies. The unpublished archival records, both Spanish and French, have not been

CADDOA1N AREA AND TEXAS

73

exhausted~ they have merely been sampled or skimmed, and principally by historians who are concerned primarily with relations between Europeans and Indians, or between one group of Europeans and
their Indian satellites and another similar association. Focusing attention upon each particular Indian group, its movements, and its
relationships with all neighboring groups throughout the early historical period will lead to the accumulation of a significant body of
ethnohistorical data, useful for interpreting archeological situations
and also useful for posing archeological problems. Kelley’s studies of
the Jumano Indians exemplify this point. Jelks refers to Troike’s study
of Caddo and Tonkawa kinship terms, which is another example of
how archeological objectives in the Caddoan area may be furthered
without benefit of excavation.
In conclusion, may I say that I heartily endorse Jelks’ suggestion
that the greatest need is for more excavation and publication in the
"buffer" territory along the western and southern margins of the
Caddo area. As so much of our excavation is now determined by the
placement of river basin reservoirs, perhaps we should ask our representatives in Congress to be more scientifically selective about the location of Federal dams on the rivers of eastern Texas.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

