60

TEXAS AIICIIEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Lehmer, Donald J.
1952. The Turkey Bluff Focus of the Fulton Aspect. American Antiquity, Voh
17, No. 4, pp. 313-318.
Oakes, John Underhitl
1953. The Lacy Site, Garvin County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Voh I, pp. 17-24.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1952. Survey of Caddoan Area Archaeology. In James B. Griffin
Archaeology of Eastern United States, pp. 239-255.

(editor),

Schmitt, Karl
1950. The Lee Site, Gv-3, of Garvin County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Voh 21, pp. 69-89.
Schmitt, Karl, and Raymond Toldan
1953. The Brown Site, Gd-1, Grady County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Voh 24, pp. 141-176.
Steen, Charlie R.
1953. Two Early Historic Sites on the Southern Plains. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 24, pp. 177-188.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Voh 25.
Watson, Virginia D.
1950. The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Voh 21,
pp. 7-68.
’%¥edel, Waldo ll.
1947. Cultural Chronology in the Central Great Plains. American Antiquity,
Voh 12, No. 3, pp. 148-156.
University of Oklahoma
Norman, Oklahoma
May 1, 1958

Discussion
By David A. Baerreis
Robert E. Bell’s stimulating paper provides us with a broad interpretation of southern Plains history which in part differs sharply with
other studies of this area that rank among our early major contributions. Basically we are presented with a picture of steady movement
westward of Caddoan peoples, derived from a Gibson Aspect horizon,
and gradually modified in this western habitat. This split from the
main Gibson stock is postulated as taking place at the end of Gibson
times and culminating in the historic Wichita, Pawnee, and Arikara.
Among the representatives of this group, as prehistoric Wichita, is the
Henrietta Focus described by Alex D. Krieger in his 1946 monograph,

GADDOAN AREA AND TI-IE PLAINS

61

Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. Krieger, however, states (and in italics in his report) that "... there is very little
in common between the Plains-like Henrietta Focus and the cultures
of the ’Caddo area’ to the east" (p. 156). He further denies flatly
archaeological support for the obvious linguistic linkage between these
tribal groups in stating:
From archaeological studies, at least, there appears to be practically no
support for a contention that Pawnee material culture can be traced to
"the old Caddoan habitat" to the south or southeast. I cannot recall a
single Pawnee trait which may be said to point specifically in this direction (p. 158).

We are perhaps dealing with a somewhat oversimplified position
in both instances. A major gap in Caddoan research lies in the question
of the origin of the complex and elaborate Gibson Aspect materials.
What was the nature of the ancestral or formative culture from which
it deve!oped? Is there a basic complex which spread over this region
from which both the eastern and western variants developed, and could
this earlier, and probably simpler, complex have been the source of
the more northerly Wichita, Pawnee, and Arikara prior to their assimilation of local Plains straits ?
The University of Wisconsin
Madison, Wisconsin
By Marvin F. Kivett
As a non-Caddoan worker, I believe Dr. Bell’s paper offers a possible solution to certain Central Plains problems. The paper also poses
certain problems.
Workers in a particular area, failing to find a solution to their problems in their immediate region, tend to look to other areas for that
solution. In Nebraska this was a satisfactory arrangement so long as
field work lagged in nearby areas. However, with the acceleration of
research in these adjoining areas during the past ten years, we no
longer have totally unknown areas to which we can attribute our unsolved problems.
Strong in 1935 expressed his opinion that the Upper Republican
culture, as known in Nebraska, probably represented a prehistoric
stage in Pawnee development. He also regarded the materials designated as Lower Loup Focus as proto-historic Pawnee. The Nebraska
Culture, with a geographical distribution largely limited to the eastern third of Nebraska, was regarded as contemporaneous with the

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Upper Republican complex, with each definitely influencing the other.
Strong also suggested relationships for the rectangular earthlodge with
the prehistoric Caddoan culture of southwestern Arkansas.
Despite the relatively large amount of field research in the Central
Plains since 1935, I believe that most workers in the area will agree
that the picture has not greatly changed. The Nebraska area has not
produced direct evidence of cultural continuity between the Upper
Republican complex and the Lower Loup. It now seems somewhat more
likely that this sequence can be demonstrated from sites like the Arzberger (Spaulding, 1956) from the Missouri River Valley of South
Dakota. Sites to carry the Lower Loup complex into the historic Pawnee
period may also be lacking in the Nebraska area. It is difficult to extend
our Lower Loup sites much beyond 1700. On the other hand, sites of
the historic Pawnee variety are not known to date before about 1775.
This, of course, does not mean the rejection of Bell’s working hypothesis that the Gibson Aspect within the Caddoan area was terminated
by a movement of Gibson peoples out onto the Plains, where they later
became identified as the historic Wichita, Pawnee, and Arikara. Dr.
Bell’s suggested date for this movement of A.D. 1200 to 1400 does not
seem entirely out of line. However, it seems that some movements into
the Nebraska area may have taken place at an earlier period. Perhaps
the Nebraska Culture and even the Over Focus of South Dakota should
not be removed from consideration in this picture. In any event, it
seems likely that a series of Caddoan area influences over a considerable period of time may have occurred in the Central Plains area.
REFERENCES CITED

Strong, W. D.

1935.

An Introduction to Nebraska Archeology. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Col-

lections, Vol. 93, No. 10.
Spaulding, Albert C.
1956. The Arzberger Site, Hughes County, South Dakota. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Occasional Contributions, No. 16.
Nebraska State Historical Society
Lincoln, Nebraska

By Robert L. Stephenson*
Dr. Bell has presented a plausible, simple hypothesis that well
accounts for many of the known facts of Plains-Caddoan relationships.
It is not the only hypothesis possible here, but it has some real advantages to recommend it. Not the least of these advantages is its simplic* Submitted with the permission of the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution.

CADDOAN AREA AND THE PLAINS

63

ity. Some may say it is too simple. I incline toward a simple explanation of cultural phenomena, though, whenever possible, and especially as a basic framework upon which to build. Another advantage
is the flexibility within this hypothesis, making it readily adaptable to
cultural movements in several directions at the same, or at varying,
time periods.
Certainly something dramatic took place in the Caddoan area around
the end of Gibson Aspect times, roughly in the period of A.D. Ii00-1300. A shift of some of the bands or other socio-political units of
Caddoans away from the homeland and into the Plains seems a reasonable explanation. It accounts for a partial depopulation of the Caddoan
area and provides an origin in both time and space for the Caddoan
speakers in the Plains after that time. It may also account for the
decline in ceremonialism at the end of Gibson Aspect times.
Assuming that this hypothesis is substantially correct, we would
seem to have Caddoan groups of three kinds to consider. (I) There
would be the groups of major size and importance that moved out
into the Plains, shifting about as Bell has indicated and eventually
becoming completely Plains people. One of these major groups (or
possibly more than one) became the Henrietta-Washita-Great BendWichita peoples that Bell traces rather clearly. Another group (or
groups) became the Lower Loup-Pawnee-Arikara peoples who moved
farthest from the Caddoan homeland, into the central, and later, the
northern Plains. (2) There would be the groups of minor size and
importance that participated to a lesser extent in the Gibson Aspect
break-up, stayed near the Caddoan homeland, and remained more
Caddoan than Plains oriented. One of these minor groups became the
Turkey Buff Focus, another became the Sanders Focus, still another the
Wylie Focus, the latter (Wylie Focus) having some sort of intimate
connection with the larger group that became the Henrietta Focus, as
is suggested by Wylie Focus pottery. (3) There would also be the
groups that remained in the Caddoan area and ultimately became the
Fulton Aspect peoples. These latter would, of course, account for by
far the majority of Caddoan peoples. Such shifting about and realignments would bring the Caddoan culture area into closer contact with
the Plains culture area and help to account for the Plains traits noted
in the Fulton Aspect Caddoan sites.
These cultural shifts may have taken place rather suddenly, even
explosively. If, however, any considerable time elapsed between the
earliest migrations and the latest, I should suggest that the Lower
Loup-Pawnee-Arikara group would have been the earliest to move.

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

I would base this suggestion on an age-area concept and on the need
for a maximum span of time for Middle Missouri cultural units (LaRoche, Fort Thompson, Stanley) to develop.
Bell suggests some possible reasons why some of these Caddoan
groups left home to become Plainsmen. I don’t feel that these are very
strong reasons. Who would be the "other groups to the east" that would
be impinging on the Caddoan area, and what is the evidence? The importance of bison may be stronger, but there is some evidence that
woodland bison may well have been available to the Gibson Aspect
Caddoans without their having to go to the Plains for them.
Another reason may be suggested, and that is the elaborate Gibson
Aspect ceremonialism itself. A highly developed religious complex
may have been one of the major causes, rather than a result, of some of
the groups moving away from the homeland and of the later de-emphasis of ceremonialism within the Fulton Aspect. Church fights are nothing unusual in either primitive or civilized societies. If in a primitive
society the excessive rituals and ceremonies with their accompanying
heavy demands upon the people had failed to get the expected results,
or if the ceremonial leaders had become too domineering, a revolt may
well have been instigated. This would take the form of splinter groups
moving out of the homeland area, on the one hand, and disruption of
the !ong-established way of life of the groups that did not move away,
on the other. Some of the latter would tend to de-emphasize the ceremonials without actually breaking away from the homeland. Others
would maintain the old customs for a while, but gradually, as minority groups, they, too, would abandon the elaborate rituals. The splinter
groups that moved away may well have completely and at once abandoned the entire complex of offending ceremonialism. Other splinter
groups may have abandoned but parts of the complex.
This, of course, is difficult to demonstrate from archeological evidence, but it does provide an explanation for some of the archeologically and historically demonstrable facts. One way of getting at some
of these things--of tracing Caddoan relationships with the Plains as
well as with other areas--is by both intensive and extensive trait distribution studies. This is a resource that is yet to be exploited, except
for the ceramic studies that have been carried on, and it is a potential
source of answers to many of the Caddoan problems.
Smithsonian Institution
Missouri Basin Project
Lincoln, Nebraska

