METHODOLOGICAL COMMENTS ON WOODALL’S
PREHIS TORIC S OCIAL B OUNDARIES
DAVID S. VAUGHAN

Woodall (1973) has hypothesized that the location of prehistoric social
boundaries (as, for example, between tribes) may be identified through examination of similarities and differences between artifacts found at various
sites in relation to geographic locations of the sites. In his study, Woodall has
attempted to formulate an hypothesis concerning the location of a social
boundary in a set of late prehistoric Caddoan sites along the Neches River of
Texas and to test this hypothesis. The data analysis problem was defined in a
manner which allowed application of several quantitative procedures, which
is desirable. However, due to several defects in the manner in which the
statistical procedures were used, interpretation of the study is not clear. The
present author will point out these statistical errors and suggest alternative,
more appropriate, procedures.

ARTIFACT SIMILARITY AND
PHYSICAL PROXIMITY
First, Woodall attempted to show that, among his sample of sites, those
sites physically closest together contained the most similar artifacts. He did
this in two ways.
He obtained an ordinal scale of the sites based on their artifact similarities
and another ordinal scale of the sites based on their physical location along a
north-south axis. He then calculated a rank-order correlation between the
artifact scale values and the physical scale values of the sites. Since the
artifact scaling was based on an "eyeballing" procedure, it is not clear
whether or not the best scale values were obtained. Also, it is not clear that a
one-dimensional scale accurately represents the set of intersite similarities. If
the scale does not accurately represent the similarities, a high correlation
between the scale values and physical location does not necessarily represent
a strong relationship between intersite similarity and physical proximity.
Difficulties of this general class of scaling methods were described by McNutt
(1973). More appropriate scaling methods will be discussed below.
The second method used to test the relationship between artifact similarity
and physical proximity was to calculate the product-moment correlation
between the set of 36 intersite artifact similarities for the nine sites and the set
of intersite physical distances. The correlation was calculated correctly, but
the significance test was misinterpreted. A basic assumption of the test of
significance of a correlation is that all observations upon which the correlation is based are independent of each other. However, in the present situation,
the observations are definitely not independent. Each site enters in to several
observations; all observations which involve a given site are not independent.
As a result of this lack of independence, the significance test is probably
liberally biased. This means that, for example, if the test shows significance at

232

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the .05 level, the result is in fact significant at only the .10 level or worse. A
given number of non-independent observations may be thought of as being
equivalent to a smaller number of independent observations. A reduced
number of degrees of freedom and correspondingly increased estimate of
sampling variance may be used in performing the statistical test. Although
the number of degrees of freedom to be used cannot be exactly determined, a
conservative statistical test seems more desirable than a liberal one, and a low
number of degrees of freedom should be used. Based on an equivalent independent sample size of nine, the correlation of .43 was not significant (t =
1.248, df = 7).
How might the author have proceeded in testing this hypothesis? First, it is
necessary to obtain a (perhaps multidimensional) scaling of the sites based on
their artifact similarities. If a scaling procedure which depends heavily on the
investigator’s subjective judgment is used, it would be desirable to have a
disinterested person at least replicate thescaling to insure that expectations
of the investigator did not unduly influence the scaling result. Use of either a
metric (Torgerson 1958) or nonmetric (for example, Young 1968) computerized multidimensional scaling procedure is more appropriate. The result of applying such a procedure to the similarity matrix in Table 1 of
Woodall (1973) would be coordinates for each site on each of the number of
dimensions selected, along with a goodness-of-fit measure which may be
used to choose the appropriate number of dimensions. The configuration of
points representing the sites in this similarity scaling may be compared to the
two-dimensional physical configuration of the sites by calculating the canonical correlation (see, for example, Cooley and Lohnes 1962) between the two
sets of coordinates, or by first rotating the configurations to congruity and
calculating dimension-by-dimension correlations.

SITE CLUSTERS
The second examination made by Woodall was to search for two distinct
clusters among the sites. He postulated that variation of the sites along a scale
based on artifact similarity would be due to two main causes: different
geographic location and membership in different cultural groups. He postulated that within each cultural group, the physical and artifact scales
should be linearly related but that the best-fitting line should be different in
the two groups. A visual method was used to search for two groups which
would meet the above conditions. A formal statement of this clustering
procedure is "find a group division so that the F-ratio is maximized in an
analysis of covariance with artifact scale location as the dependent variable
and north-south geographic location as the covariate." His procedure has two
main defects. It was carried out by "eyeball," and therefore it is not clear that
an optimal clustering was obtained. Second, it is clear that the results of the
procedure depend on metric information in the artifact scale; however, the
actual scale values used were the similarities of each site with one selected
"base" site. While the ordering of the sites may not be arbitrary, the actual
scale values, which depend on the selection of a "base" site, are arbitrary.

VAUGHAN: COMMENTS ON WOODALL

233

Also, all metric information other than that contained in the similarities with
the "base" was lost. Use of one of the automatic scaling procedures mentioned above, which produce metric scale values and use more information in
the data, would be preferable.

ANALYSES OF DESIGN MOTIFS
The last set of analyses by Woodall were directed towards confirming his
finding of two main clusters among the sites through examination of design
motifs of sherds found at the sites. His procedure was to look for a grouping of
the sites that maximized a chi-square statistic for each design motif considered. As a method of finding clusters this procedure seems reasonable
though inefficient, due to the fact that no use was made of relations between
variables. However, use of the significance test is not appropriate since
classification of sites to maximize the test statistic allow capitalization on
chance that is not taken into account in the significance test. As a result, the
test is biased liberally and significance is more likely to be obtained due to
chance than it should be. Furthermore, the author did not report how many
chi-square tests he did altogether. One out of twenty or so tests will probably
be significant at the .05 level by chance, so five, six, or seven significant
results out of 100 tests are difficult to interpret.
If the main goal of this set of analyses was to search for clusters among the
sites, one of several multivariate clustering procedures, such as that of Cattell
(Cattell and Coulter 1966:237), Johnson (1967), or Ward (1963:236) would
make use of more information in the data, as well as being less dependent on
the investigator’s subjective judgment. However, if the main goa! was to
confirm the cluster structure suggested in the earlier part of the paper, use of
discriminant analysis might be more appropriate (see, for example, Cooley
and Lohnes 1962). To use this procedure, sites should be classified according
to the previous hypothesis, rather than to maximize a test statistic. Furthermore, an independent sample of sherds should probably be used (the set of
sherds might be randomly divided into two parts). The result of discriminant
analysis is a significance test for the classification based simultaneously on
all the design motifs and also a linear combination of the motifs which best
distinguishes between the clusters. In this linear combination, the variables
which best distinguish between the sets of sites will have the largest weights.

DISCUSSION
Woodall’s use of statistica! procedures was deficient in two main ways. He
used statistical hypothesis tests in two situations in which important assumptions of the tests were not met. It is seldom, if ever, the case in practice that a!l
assumptions of a test are met, and furthermore, violation of some assumptions
seems to have little effect on the tests (see, for example, Lindquist 1953).
However, the assumptions violated in the present situation are important.
Violation of these assumptions will probably cause the tests to be liberally

234

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

biased. The result of this is that conclusions are drawn from data that is more
likely to be due to chance than the test indicates. Alternative ways of testing
Woodall’s hypotheses were suggested.
The second set of deficiencies involved the selection and use of scaling and
cluster analysis techniques. In this type of data analysis situation, which is
more exploratory in nature (the main goal is to search for patterns in the data
rather than to test specific hypotheses), the main virtue of a technique is its
heuristic value. Several different methods of analysis might be used. However, methods which are relatively free from influence by the investigator’s
expectations and which make maximum use of all information in the data are
preferable to methods which do not meet these requirements. Several computerized multivariate scaling and clustering techniques were suggested as
preferable alternatives to the methods used by Woodall.

REFERENCES CITED

Cattell, R. B. and M. A. Coulter
1966 Principles of Behavioral Taxonomy and the Mathematical Basis of the
Taxonome Computer Program. British Journal of Mathematical and
Statistical Psychology, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 237-267.
Cooley, W. W. and P. R. Lohnes
1962 Multivariate Procedures for the Behavioral Sciences. John Wiley and
Sons, New York.
Johnson, S. C.
1967 Hierarchical Clustering Schemes. Psychometrika, Vol. 32, pp. 61-66.
Lindquist, E. F.
1953 Design and Analysis of Experiments in Psychology and Education.
Houghton Mifflin, New York.
McNutt, C. H.
1973 On the Methodological Validity of Frequency Seriation. American
Antiquity, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 61-79.
Torgerson, W. S.
1958 Theory and Methods of Scaling. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Ward, J. H.
1963 Hierarchical Grouping to Optimize an Objective Function. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, Vol. 58, pp. 236-244.
Woodall, J. N.
1973 Prehistoric Social Boundaries: An Archeological Model and Test.
Bulletin, TexasArcheological Society, Vol. 43 (for 1972), pp. 101-120.
Young, F. W.
1968 TORSCA-9, A FORTRAN-IV Program for Non-Metric Multidimensional Scaling. Behavioral Science, Vol. 13, pp. 343-344.
San Antonio, Texas

