THE TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE
IN THE BAYOU VERMILION BASIN,
SOUTH CENTRAL LOUISIANA:
A DEVELOPMENTAL CASE STUDY*
JON L. GIBSON
ABSTRACT
Eleven archeological sites in the Bayou Vermilion drainage basin of
south central Louisiana comprise the nucleus of the Lafayette phase of
Tchefuncte culture. The settlement pattern and paleoenvironmental contexts of Lafayette components-have been elucidated, and these findings
have provided a substantive test case for several hypotheses previously
formulated to explain the decline of Poverty Point culture and the interrelated development of Tchefuncte culture.

INTRODUCTION
Prehistoric cultural evolution in the Lower Mississippi Valley
traced a recurrent cycle of climax and decline. High points of development were separated by low ones as, individually, native cultures appeared, flourished for a while, and then gave way to sociopolitical forms at a distinctively separate level of organization. The
two millennia preceding the Christian era in the lower valley witnessed one of these complete transformational cycles. I am concerned
here with the low point in this cycle, what archeologists have identified as the Tchefuncte culture (500 B.C.-100 B.C.). The Tchefuncte
culture separated two widely recognized climax cultures, Poverty
Point (1500 B.C.-600 B.C.) and Marksville (200 B.C.-IO0 A.D.).
Cultural continuity among these cultures is apparent in some material systems, such as in the evolution of pottery styles but, by and
large, discontinuities are stronger and far more numerous. Poverty
Point culture introduced to the lower valley an interrelated complex
of large population aggregates, sedentism, monumental earthwork
construction, economic redistribution emphasizing foreign trade
materials, and social ranking (Ford and Webb 1956; Webb, Ford, and
Gagliano n.d.; Gibson 1973, 1974b), a complex that was also present
in varying degrees in Marksville culture. In contrast, Tchefuncte
culture appears to have reverted to seasonally mobile populations and
dispersed settlement patterns and to have generally lacked the organizational dimension essential for large scale mound building and
vast exchange networks.
*Paper presented at the Conference on Gulf Coast Archeology, Beaumont, Texas, 19 71.

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In order to understand Tchefuncte culture, it is necessary to: (1)
clarify its variability on a regional level, (2) specify its ecological
context and, (3} explicate its inherent evolutionary processes. Only
then can the reasons for developmental fluctuations be approached
from a perceptive point of view. This paper represents a preliminary
attempt to come to grips with the nature of Tchefuncte culture in one
small region of the lower valley. Its tentativeness stems from two
principal factors. First, the chronology of Bayou Vermilion
Tchefuncte has not been firmly established; no radiocarbon or thermoluminescent ages have been determined. Secondly, site and environmental data have not been collected under the kind of regional
research design which would have permitted the establishment of
quantifiable differences among components and environmental conditions (cf. Gumerman 1971). However, both these shortcomings are
being remedied, and the data organization and hypotheses advanced
in this paper should give ample structure and testability to future
work.
THE SURVEY AREA
The data used in this demonstration derive from the Bayou Vermilion drainage basin, parishes of St. Landry, St. Martin and Lafayette,
south central Louisiana (Fig. 1). This small confined region lies along
the western margin of the Mississippi alluvial floodplain and at one
period in its geomorphic development was actually occupied by the
main channel of the Mississippi River (Fisk 1944). The present drainage basin was created as a result of Teche-Mississippi River aggradation. The growth of natural levees along the Teche-Mississippi channel stem apparently blocked the outflow of water and produced a rim
swamp (Aurville Touchet, personal communication, 1973). As a consequence, the internal drainage was confined between the broad
Teche-Mississippi levees on the east and the steep escarpment of the
Lafayette surface on the west (cf. Gibson and Miller 1973), and the
whole area was aggraded through alluvial drowning (Aurville
Touchet, personal communication, 1973). This geomorphic process
eventually separated the Vermilion basin from the more active areas
of the Lower Mississippi Valley.
The Bayou Vermilion drainage basin is aligned north and south; it
extends for 35km along that axis, has a maximum width of 11km, and
covers about 300km2. It heads near the junction of Bayou Fusilier and
Bayou Bourbeaux, is bordered by the three to four meter high
Lafayette escarpment and by the natural levees of Bayou Teche, and
terminates at the confluence of Bayou Tortue and Cypress Bayou in
the south {Fig. 1). Bayou Vermilion, formerly a Red River distributary,

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

69

HILLS;

30°20
GENTA

WEST

~MAGENTA

)U

EAST

ST. CLAIR

-

BREAUX
BRIDGE
.

3~

’~

~

LA FAYETTE MOUNDS~ i

LAFAYETTE

BEAU RIVAGE ".-~j~
BAYOU

TORTUE

1#
:
e BAYOU

CAPUCIN

\\
PAUL

BLANCHET

ST MARTINVI -LE

FIGURE 1. Lafayette Phase Components in the Bayou Vermilion
Basin, South Central Louisiana.

70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

represents the master stream of the area today.
Aside from offering research convenience, the Bayou Vermilion
basin is important for a basic archeological reason. It constitutes what
I have chosen to call a "vital" region; that is, within its natural
boundaries are manifestations of all three cultures of the complete
evolutionary cycle with which we are concerned. Such regions are
few and far between in the alluvial valley; only five and possibly six
others are known to exist. Many other areas of the valley have
Tchefuncte or Marksville components, but most lack Poverty Point
sites. It is, in fact, on the basis of certain environmental regularities
common to these "vital" regions that hypotheses on intercultural
relationships and developmental processes have been conceived. It is
only in "vital" regions, such as the Bayou Vermilion basin, that the
full range of cultural continuities and discontinuities can be appreciated. Other regions are most likely to be informative on secondary cultural processes, e.g., diffusion, migration, etc., processes not
directly involved in the pristine genesis, development and transformation of cultures.
THE LAFAYETTE PHASE
In a monumental study of Lower Mississippi Valley archeology,
Philip Phillips (1970:882-884) formally established a Lafayette phase
of Tchefuncte culture which was intended to embrace Tchefuncte
components in south central Louisiana. Phillips took his lead from
Gagliano (1967:15, Fig. 6), who had previously proposed a Teche
phase to accommodate the then poorly investigated Tchefuncte sites
along the old Teche-Mississippi River system. In my opinion, Phillips’ phase is areally too broad and incorporates too many nonTchefuncte coponents to be of much utility, but his name is retained
to identify the cluster of Tchefuncte sites in the Bayou Vermilion
basin. This is in no way intended as a criticism of Phillips; considering the paucity of information available from this segment of the
valley in the 1960s, it is a tribute to his remarkable foresight that
Tchefuncte materials could be identified at all.
The Lafayette phase took its name from its most widely publicized
component, the Lafayette Mounds (Ford and Quimby 1945:21-24,
26-27; Jennings 1952:260; Phillips 1970:882-884). One of the mounds
of the Lafayette group was excavated in 1941 by the WPA archaelogical survey under the direction of Edwin Doran, Jr. and Robert Neitzel
and figured prominantly in the initial synthesis of Tchefuncte culture
(Ford and Quimby 1945). Ten additional components have recently
come to light; excavations of various types have been, or are presently

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

71

being, conducted at Bayou Tortue, Paul Blanchet and Hidden Hills
(Fig. 1); Magenta East and Magenta West (Fig. 1) have been systematically surface collected; and Bayou St. Clair and Ruth Canal (Fig. 1)
have been intensively, but indiscriminately, collected. Three additional sites, Baker, Olivier and Bayou Capucin, are believed to be
Lafayette components but little else is known about them. Bayou
Capucin has three mounds but whether these are Tchefuncte constructions can not be presently determined.
These 11 sites form the nucleus of the Lafayette phase (Fig. 1). The
abbreviated site descriptions below follow a reporting format developed in connection with another research project (Gibson and
Baker n.d.). This outline is subtended and is followed by brief explanations of the various categories.
Observational
Site name; brief description (cf. terrace edge site, west bank, Bayou
Carencro); kind of site (e.g., mound site with stained earth midden,
mound site without stained earth midden, nonmound site with
stained earth midden, or nonmound site without stained earth midden); nearest neighbor (metric distance); nearest neighbor of comparable age; componential nature (single or multiple component, specify
each); area covered (m2); depth and character of midden fill; size and
orientation of structures; general site orientation; artifactual distribution patterns; resource use (kinds of floral, faunal, lithic remains, and
others).
Interpretive
Site type (e.g., tentative categories; light use area, station, camp,
base camp, village, village center, vacant center, town, town center);
dominant site function (e.g., general maintenance; specialized function -- hunting, collecting, fishing, quarrying; limited function -burial, mortuary preparation, workshop, kill-butchering, etc.,
specify); nature of inhabitation (e.g., single short duration; reoccupation -- seasonal or sporadic; continual -- semi-permanent or permanent); occupant group composition (men, women or children); occupant group size; external trade and/or contacts; local phase; age.
Brief clarification of the interpretive part of the format is warranted
since some of the advocated categories differ from other proposed site
type or site functional typologies. These categories are by no means
final. They represent advance organizational types and, consequently, will require testing and modification.
The nine different site types hypothesized for lower valley cultures
provide a scale corresponding roughly to ascending site size, number
of occupants, permanency of residence, and number and variety of

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

activities performed. Exceptions to this general rule are the types
referred to as light use area and vacant center.
Station. A small spot conceived to have been the scene of a unique
procurative or extractive event, such as a Paleo-Indian mammoth kill.
A station would be indicated by the presence of very few tools,
probably broken, of limited functional utility (i.e., weapons, etc.) and
by the absence of manufacturing or refurbishing by-products and of
any structural remains. The spatial overlapping of a number of stations could result in the designation of an area as a light use area.
Camp. A small locus of short-lived activity, usually restricted to a
single dominant task and often, but not always, conducted by a
sex-specific group. A camp might be indicated by the presence of a
limited tool assemblage and/or by a restricted occurrence of special
kinds of technological by-products in a relatively small area. Ethnographic examples of this settlement type might include the awayfrom-home camps of hunters, warriors, and quarrying or exploitive
parties. Again, as in the case of overlapping stations, spatial proximity of a number of camps could result in a light use area.
Light use area. A territory, often quite extensive (20,000m250,000m2), with signs of repeated, prolonged use without permanent
occupation. Evidence would take the form of low density artifact,
facility (earth oven, fire pit, etc,), and ecofact (Binford 1964) scatter
along lowland streams subject to extended inundation. There should
be little indication of artifact manufacture and most of the tools might
be broken and unrepaired. This site type, at least in the central
Louisiana Caney phase (Gibson 1973, n.d.a), seems, to correlate with
summer fishing and possibly alligator hunting.
Base camp. A residential site of variable size which served as a
major focus of domestic activities in a seasonally shifting settlement
and economic system. A base camp should exhibit a significant quantitative and qualitative increase in artifacts when compared with
camps. Evidence of tool manufacture and repair as well as stationary
facilities (hearths, earth ovens, houses, etc.) should be present. Base
camps differ from villages in the degree of permanency; the former
should have some hints of seasonal specificity, while the latter should
reflect year-round inhabitation. This site type is identical with what
Beardsley and others (1955:138-140) have described as the primary
unit of a "central-based wandering" community.
Village. A residential site of variable size (generally larger than
camps and base camps) which was the scene of domestic activities for
prolonged, uninterrupted periods. A village would be indicated by
the presence of most of the criteria noted above for base camps but
should have evidence for continual, year-long occupation.

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

73

Village center. A residential site of relatively moderate to large size
which served as a village location as well as a focus of ceremonial
and/or local economic exchange for surrounding villages. A village
center should be recognizable by the presence of all the simple village
features and additionally by the occurrence of solitary or multiple
mounds, embankments, or other constructions requiring multicommunity cooperation. Concomitantly, or alternatively, a village
center might have been the central exchange hub for raw materials or
finished products, although these are expected to be of predominantly local derivation. Thus in contrast with a simple village, a
village center should have a relatively larger dominance in both
variety and quantity of these items. Social organizational analysis
should indicate the presence of a socially superior, probably religiously imbued administrative structure. Application of Christaller’s
central place theory (cf. Christaller 1966; Clarke 1968:507-510; Johnson 1972:769-785) would probably show that a village center was
centrally located with respect to an hexagonal or rhomboidal lattice.
Vacant center. A nonresidential site, perhaps occupied only by a
few ceremonial coordinators and/or caretakers, which served as the
locus for periodic community-wide ceremonies, funerals and
economic exchanges. A vacant center might be indicated by the
presence of earthworks, especially burial mounds, and/or of exchangeable lithics or other products. Some storage facilities (cache
pits), burned areas, and a few structural remains should be anticipated. A possible historical analogue of this settlement type in the
immediate area is found in the Chitimacha "worship-house" (Swanton 1911:344). Known archaeological counterparts include several
Marksville cultural components, especially Crooks (Ford and Willey
1940) and Coral Snake (McClurkan, Field, and Woodall 1966:3-26;
Jensen 1968:9-44).
Town. A permanent settlement component with large resident
population. Towns differ from villages of all types, not only in greater
relative size and number of residents, but in the kind and degree of
internal differentiation with regard to suprasubsistence activities and
services. Town life in the lower valley seems to have been in full
flower during DeSoto’s entrada of 1540-1543, and the early records
(Varner and Varner 1951; Bourne 1904) provide excellent models for
this hypothesized settlement type. Large settlements (200 to 500
houses and 1700 to 4500 residents; cf. Gibson 1974a), public constructions (mounds, temples, wall and palisades and moats) and central
square grounds or plazas were common to these towns. Society was
rigidly ranked, possibly even stratified in some cases and was dominated by a sun chief and royal family. Warrior corps were at least

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

partly supported by the administration as were various priests, ministers, emissaries and craftsmen. War was the central theme of society
and probably bore a strong functional relationship to hierarchical
ranking (Kroeber 1939:148-150; Gibson 1974a).
Town center. A town set apart from others by a combination of
factors, no doubt including situational logistics with regard to markets, sources of supply and transportation routes, and historical
events such as domination by force or strength of leadership. Town
centers are indicated in the DeSoto chronicles by reference to "provincial capitals" and "principal town surrounded by vassal towns"
(Varner and Varner 1951; Bourne 1904). Poverty Point may have
fleetingly been such a center, predating the general establishment Of
this settlement form by more than two millennia.
The interpretive categories of site function and nature of inhabitation are generally self-explanatory. The term "general maintenance",
however, requires amplification. General maintenance is a convenient description covering the full range of activities -- technological, economic, religious, sociological -- required to support an individual community in a relatively autonomous fashion. In other
words, the activities revealed through archaeological interpretation
should neither be limited nor strictly specialized, but should be
sufficiently broad to have permitted self-sufficiency.
Group composition based on age and sex has been primarily judged
on the basis of general ethnological analogies. The works of Swanton
(1911, 1946) are important in reconstructing social group composition. Summarily, his collated records indicate that men performed the
tasks related to hunting and warfare and made most of the durable
equipment; women on the other hand, carried out the duties required
in household upkeep, collected and prepared most of the plant foods
and made the equipment which required continual maintenance and
replacement. Observations on age and sex groups can rarely be made
directly, e.g., breakdown of burial populations, fingerprints in baked
clay objects.
Reconstructing demography from archeological data is a critical,
but often suspect, procedure. Nonetheless, several useful formulae
have been developed which seem to express direct relationships
between group size and floor space (Naroll 1962:587-589) and between number of people and total site area (Cook and Treganza
1950:223-262; Cook and Heizer 1965, 1968:70-116). For expediency, I
have used the logarithmic linear relationship between site size and
population discovered by Cook and Treganza (1950) and recalculated
in graphic form by Shenkel (1971: Fig. 10). A simplified version of
this graph is presented (Fig. 2). It must be stressed, because of the

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

75

iog

\

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

inherent difficulties in assessing prehistoric population sizes, that the
resultant figures should only be regarded as possible approximations
of community sizes, i.e., hints of the probable order of magnitude.
Evidence of external "trade" or extraregional contacts can be most
directly determined by the presence of lithic, faunal and other materials (sometimes, artifacts), which are not endemic to the region under
consideration. Whether this contact was directly with source areas
(actual mining or collecting by Vermilion peoples), procured through
middlemen or wandering traders (such as the Avoyel tribe of historic
times, Swanton 1911:272-274), or brought in via some supracommunity commerce network remains a separate investigative problem.
The Vermilion basin has no native stone sources, so in a very real
sense all lithic materials must be considered as evidence of external
contact. However, some materials, such as pebble chert, sandstone,
orthoquartzite, iron ochre, limonite and volcanic tufa are available
within short to moderate distances (50-150km) from the Vermilion
basin and for practical purposes will be considered as "local" materials. Foreign materials, native to areas distant as 1500km, are occasionally found on Vermilion sites. Such exotics, which include
quartz, galena, novaculite, white Ozark chert and Dover and other
midwestern flints, are certain indications of some sort of extraregional connection.

DESCRIPTION OF LAFAYETTE COMPONENTS
Lafayette Mounds
Natural levee site, east bank, Vermilion River; mound site with
three low conical mounds and associated stained earth midden;
0.5km upstream from Ruth Canal site (Fig. 1); multiple components
(Tchefuncte and Plaquemine); total site area unknown; midden depth
undetermined but undisturbed deposits incorporated in Gallion sediments beneath mounds revealed scattered postmolds (circular structures) and 15 refuse pits containing ash, bone and potsherds; Mound
one, a two stage structure containing at least eight flexed and 12
bundle burials in primary core, was 1.5m high and 18.3m in diameter;
mound two, 1.2m high and 15.3m in diameter; and mound three, 0.3m
high and 12.2m in diameter; mound orientation not specified; general
site orientation along levee crest; spatial patterns in and among distributions of refuse pits, house patterns and artifacts (potsherds, tubular pipes, baked clay objects, projectile points, other bifaces, ground
celt, bar weights and tablets, hones, stone bead and quartz crystals)
unclear, but burials in primary mound were massed in center and
slightly north (?) of central core (Ford and Quimby 1945: Fig. 6);
resource use included loca] and foreign ]ithics, clay for pottery, Pov-

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

77

erty Point objects, and mound fill, firewood and other woods for
construction, and at least one bird (perforated talon).
Village center; general maintenance and mortuary; continual
(semi-permanent to permanent) occupation, interrupted periodically
by annual or nearly annual floods; adult men and women present in
burial population (Snow 1945:Tab. XVII); all three crania studied had
evidence of degenerative osteoporosis, estimated ages at death, 22, 23
and 30 years respectively; occupant group size unpredictable but if
mounds were central focus of surrounding sites could have conceivably served as many as 100 people (if there had been no discrimination in burial practices, then based on hypothesized zero growth,
marriage at age 18, and calculated average death age of 25 years, the
number of dead in mound could have resulted naturally in the span of
less than three years and burial might represent a single mass interment); presence of quartz crystals suggests foreign procuration or
collection from nearby Poverty Point site; Lafayette phase, 300-100
B.C.
Bayou Tortue
Natural levee site, north bank, Bayou Tortue at confluence with
Vermilion River; one and possibly two conical mounds with possibly
"associated" lightly stained earth midden in Dundee silt loam;
nearest neighbors are overlying components of local Troyville and
Coles Creek phases, small Beau Rivage (Poverty Point) component,
50m west; large Beau Rivage site itself is 400m northwest on opposite
river bank; nearest neighbor of comparable age is Ruth Canal on
Vermilion Bayou, 6kin upstream, multiple components (Tchefuncte,
Troyville, Coles Creek, Plaquemine and spatially separated Poverty
Point components); total site area undisclosed but covers at least
5600m2; midden in places 1.25m deep, slightly darker than sterile
subsoil but not as dark as the black, greasy, later midden which
overlies portions of the Tchefuncte deposits; relatively homogeneous
with fairly low artifact densities; principally potsherds, amorphous
baked clay objects, lithic debris, projectile points, few faunal remains,
scattered postmolds (one pattern suggesting circular structure), and
ash; site conforms linearly to crest of natural levee, north-south orientation; distributional patterns of artifacts and features undisclosed;
resource use included local pebble cherts (projectile points, manufacturing refuse), clays (pottery, other baked clay objects), food remains
(deer, turtle, fish and small mammals), plus construction materials
and firewood.
Village or possibly village center; general maintenance (and possibly mortuary) function; semi-permanent or relatively permanent oc-

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cupancy, vacated during exceptionally high spring floods; artifact
composition suggests presence of men and women, length of inhabitation implies children; using Cook and Treganza’s formula (cf. Fig.
2), a resident, population on the order of 75-80 people can be predicted; no evidence for external "trade" or contacts except for pebble
chert which could have been gotten from gravel outcrops near Turkey
Creek, 70kin to the north; Lafayette phase; 300-100 B.C.

Ruth Canal
Natural levee site, east bank, Bayou Vermilion; nonmound site with
unstained earth midden; closest site and also nearest site of "comparable" age, Lafayette mounds, 0.5km upstream on same bank; apparently single component (no excavation), Ruth Canal facies of Beau
Rivage or Lafayette phase; site area undetermined, but bank erosion
and canal dredging exposed cultural detritus over an area slightly
over 900m2; midden depth undetermined but canal spoil contains
sherds brought up from depths of 3m, while some in situ material has
been found within 0.25m of present surface; midden materials incorporated in Iberia clay (i.e., Teche-Mississippi alluvium); part of site
oriented along present Vermilion channel and probably along edge of
old grassy swamp; resources used included clay for pottery and Poverty Point objects, foreign (midwestern flint, novaculite) and local
(p ebble chert) lithics for points and drill and plummet (hematite), and
palmetto (or grass) for pottery tempering (94 of the 252 sherds in
present collection are fiber tempered).
Base camp or camp(?); maintenance dominant function; nature of
inhabitation undeterminable but probably short and seasonal; occupant group believed toinclude men, woman and children; group size
uncertain but possibly as few as 30-35 people (Fig. 2); midwestern
gray flint, quartz crystal, novaculite and hematite indicate community participation in redistribution system specializing in imported
materials or alternatively aboriginal procuration from surface of Beau
Rivage, 6.5km downstream, or some other nearby Poverty Point component; Ruth Canal facies of Beau Rivage or Lafayette phase; 600
B.C.-300 B.C.
Paul Blanchet (Stone Road)
Terrace edge and natural levee site, east and west sides, Bayou
Tortue at Cypress Bayou junction; nonmound site with slightly
stained midden; nearest site of comparable age, Bayou Capucin,
7.0km north on Bayou Tortue distributary; multiple components,
Poverty Point, Tchefuncte, Troyville (?), Coles Creek and Historic;
area covered by Lafayette component not determined exactly but

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

79

covers minimally 3500m2; in spots, midden reaches depths of 0.6m
and where overlain by later midden, encountered to depths of 1.0m;
silty brown midden in Memphis and Baldwin soils, homogeneous
with variable artifact densities, materials include potsherds, Poverty
Point and amorphous baked clay objects, flint debris, projectile
points, drills, irregular and ovate bifaces, scaled pieces, abraders, bar
weight and boatstone; site oriented with edge of escarpment on west
side of Bayou Tortue and along old prairie remnant on east; resource
use included foreign (Ozark chert, novaculite, Dover and Midwestern
flint) and local (pebble chert, orthoquartzite) lithics and pottery clays.
Village or base camp; general maintenance; continual (semipermanent or permanent) occupancy; men, women and children present;
possibly inhabited by as few as 60-65 people but probably more;
extraneous contacts suggested by presence of various foreign lithics
but possibly derived from or should be attributed to the Poverty Point
(Beau Rivage) component also present; Lafayette phase; 600-200 B.C.
Hidden Hills
Terrace edge site, north side, Bayou Carencro; nonmound (?, one
conical mound reported but not relocated) site with unstained earth
midden; 6.0kin in direct line from nearest Lafayette phase site, Olivier
(Fig. 1); multiple components, Beau Rivage and Lafayette phases
represented; minimally covers 6300m2 but man-made lake inundates
an undetermined portion; artifacts encountered to depth of +l.0m,
midden rather homogeneous loessal silt (Memphis) with nodular
inclusions, charcoal flecks, ash, potsherds, baked clay fragments,
stone bead, lithic debris, and stone tools -- projectile points and
drills; variable artifact densities seemingly related to position along
slope of escarpment; resource use included stone, clay and firewood.
Village or base camp; general maintenance; continual (semipermanent or permanent) occupancy; occupant group composed of men,
women and children; group size on the order of 80-85 people (Fig. 2);
external contacts suggested by presence of exotic lithics but possibly
attributable to underlying Poverty Point (Beau Rivage) component;
Lafayette phase; 600-200 B.C.
Magenta East
Crevasse levee site, east side, Magenta crevasse at point of entry into
old swamp; nonmound site with minimally stained earth midden;
nearest neighbor, Magenta West, comparable age, 400m west; single
component, Lafayette phase; site covers about 7500m2; midden depth
undetermined but at least 0.3m in plow furrows, midden composition
of Dundee silt-loam, fairly dense occurrences of potsherds, lithic

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

materials -- debris, debitage, projectile points and other bifaces, and
baked clay fragments; site oriented north-south and conforms to crest
of crevasse ridge; distributional patterns of artifacts include heavy
mixed concentrations along highest part of ridge and lighter densities
on slopes; evident resource use included stone (local) and clay.
Base camp or village; general maintenance function; nature of inhabitation undeterminable with present data but semipermanency
(seasonality) suspected; occupant group composition of men, women
and children; group numbered between 85-90 individuals (Fig. 2);
external contacts nonexistent, except for stone procurement from
hills, 55km north; Lafayette phase; 300-100 B.C.
Magenta West
Crevasse levee site, west side of Magenta crevasse at point of entry
into old filled-in swamp called Magenta basin; nonmound site with
minimally stained midden; nearest neighbor, Magenta East of comparable age, 400m east on opposite crevasse levee; single component,
Lafayette phase; areal extent about 5000m2; midden depth undetermined but at least 0.3m; silty midden (Dundee silt-loam) with moderately dense cultural materials, such as potsherds, faunal remains,
baked clay, stone artifacts (projectile points and debris); site aligned
with crevasse levee ridge and old swamp rim; site limits rigidly
defined with artifact densities dropping rapidly at site perimeters;
certain resource use included deer, local stone and clay.
Base camp or village; general maintenance function; semipermanency suspected; occupied by approximately 70-75 men, women and
children; no external areal contacts aside from those related to stone
collecting; Lafayette phase; 300-100 B.C.
Bayou St. Clair
Natural levee site, east and west banks of Bayou St. Clair, opposite
point of exit of small unnamed distributary which joins Bayou Vermilion below Bayou St. Clair-Bayou Vermilion confluence; nonmound component with minimally stained midden; nearest neighbor
(comparable age), Magenta East, 6.0km up Bayou St. Clair; single
component, Lafayette phase; real extent undetermined; midden
depth not disclosed but at least 0.3m, midden in Gallion and Baldwin
soils with moderate artifact and ecofact densities, potsherds, baked
clay fragments, opaline clinkers (residue from burning of cane), chert
debris, deer, and turtle remains; site orientation along levee crest at
intersection with old prairie; contextual relationships not presently
determinable; resources certainly utilized, clay, local stone, deer and
turtle.

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

81

Base camp or village, general maintenance function (?); semipermanent occupancy; occupant group size not calculated; men,
women and children probably present; no evident outside contacts
other than extra-areal stone procuration; Lafayette phase, 300-100
B.C.
CULTURAL ECOLOGY OF THE LAFAYETTE PHASE
An understanding of man-land relationships is basic to comprehending not only intercultural and intracultural variability but the
processes which produced or contributed to these differences. Several approaches have been employed by archaeologists in modeling
ecological relationships but all have involved the explication of
paleoenvironmental factors either by projection of contemporary
conditions into the past, by reconstruction based on ecofacts (Binford
1964), or by some combination of the two. Still, much has been left to
subjective interpretation primarily because such reconstructions
were not quantified. Remedial plans have, however, been recently
offered (cf. Gumerman 1971), and their implementation should eventually provide some new dimensions to cultural ecological studies.
Unfortunately, one of the best of these new research strategies (Plog
and Hill 1971:7-36) still leaves much to be desired. This fairly comprehensive plan does not effectively deal with the problem of historical changes in environments or with dynamic environments. Fluvial
regions, such as the Bayou Vermilion basin, have undergone quite
dramatic and sweeping changes in short time spans and actually
exhibit quite variable seasonal fluctuations. Indians in the Vermilion
basin were adapted to constantly changing environments, not stable
ones, a condition which seriously compounds the difficulties of
ecological reconstruction.
There exists, however, a solitary environmental factor which, while
not a panacea, has enormous potential for assisting the archaeologist
in modeling man-environmental relationships. Soil morphology is a
"... result of interactions between climate, living organisms, and
parent materials, as conditioned by time and relief." (Lytle 1968:8).
Soil formation constitutes a temporal process, and thus is quite applicable to the study of cultural adaptive processes and interdigidated
geomorphic growth processes in fluvial regions. This is not to say that
Native American settlement and adaptive strategies were consciously
and specifically geared to soil types, but rather that they were adapted
to various environmental contexts which are today adequately embodied in soils. Soils and interpretations based on them provide a
potentially quantifiable, correlative yardstick for assessing cultural

82

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
2

o’~

o

.,-’ oB

~o

oo
0

Z

~o~

~o
e3

0

"~

0

°

~o~

Z
<

0
oO~

o3
~:)..~

’~ .-o MM

o~

<

z

0

~~, ~ ~

X o’p, ~

~

~° o

~
o~

~
s s~=o

<
Z

~£o
©

co

©

03

~.~
$.~
c3

~d

6

0

£

O3
..0

t~
CO

~

~

~

O

83

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

.

1.

©

c~o

o

Z~

0

Z

Z

m~

~

m

O~

0

~

"~

0

,x:
0

<

~

m

o

~,m

~0

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

variability and should be included among the objectives of all current
research designs. When coupled with componential artifactual composition and faunal and floral remains, these data reflect the basic
ingredients of Tchefuncte ecology.
Settlement System
Based primarily on soil identification and paleoenvironmental interpretations, it is possible to draw some tentative conclusions on the
Lafayette phase settlement strategy. These conclusions provide a
major point of difference with the preceding Beau Rivage (Poverty
Point) phase and a test case for several primary hypotheses on the
decline of Poverty Point culture and the interconnected appearance of
Tchefuncte culture.
Soil morphology in the Bayou Vermilion drainage basin has been
characterized with regard to composition, source of parent materials,
sites of development, floral cover and annual inundation (Table 1).
Table 2 provides a list of site-soil correlations and associated
paleoenvironmental conditions. Soil identifications and paleoenvironmental reconstructions have been primarily supplied by Aurville Touchet and Kenneth Murphy of the United States Soil Conservation Service, with additional details abstracted from leaflets prepared by the National Cooperative Soil Survey (1967, 1972-1973).
Several important conclusions may be postulated on the basis of
these data and correlations. Lafayette phase components are associated with a variety of soil types. Although we presently lack
quantifiable data and thus can not use discriminatory statistical
analyses, two qualitative regularities are immediately apparent. Except for the Ruth Canal site, all of the Lafayette components are
confined to soils of loamy or silt loamy character. A second, and
perhaps more critical uniformity shared by Lafayette components
(again with the exception of Ruth Canal) is that all of the sites were
positioned at elevations above normal backwater levels. There is no
question that the periodic winter through spring high waters, so
typical of the Lower Mississippi Valley floodplain, would have posed
a severe constraint on aboriginal use or occupation of lowland areas,
and this factor was no doubt one of the principal considerations in
aboriginal settlement founding decisions.
Environmentally, the Lafayette components were founded in several quite distinctive situations. Hidden Hills and Paul Blanchet were
positioned along the crest of the four meter high escarpment which
marks the western boundary of the Bayou Vermilion basin. Florally,
these spots were dominated by a mixed hardwood canopy over and
interspersed with grass. The Lafayette, Bayou St. Clair and Bayou

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

85

Capucin sites were located on natural levee crests, covered with
mixed bottomtand hardwoods, but were adjoined by grassy prairies
and cypress-tupelo gum swamps. Bayou Tortue, on a prism of natural
levee sediments, had immediate access to a large wet hardwood
swamp and to the drier hardwood-meadow dominated terrace escarpment. The Magenta sites were on narrow bankline ridges of a
crevasse at the point where blowout waters entered an extensive wet
hardwood-cypress swamp. Olivier was founded on an elevated alluvial or colluvial apron of grass and hardwood gallery forest composition. The unusual Ruth Canal site occupied one of the wetter zones of
the Bayou Vermilion basin, but it too was situated in such a way as to
maximize access to a periodically drowned prairie, a wet hardwood
backswamp and drier areas of mixed bottomland hardwood levees.
The settlement system of the Lafayette phase seems to have been
one very efficient means of coping with a dynamic floodplain environment. An overriding founding consideration appears to have been
hydrologic fluctuations; site locations were chosen to place village
residents above all but the most severe annual floods and inundations. Although assemblage composition and intersite variation have
yet to be completely worked out, most Lafayette components appear
to have been small, seasonal base camps or semi-permanent villages,
occupied by small groups of men, women and children (numbering
between 30-90 people). These groups appear to have been economically self-supportive. Few intervillage economic ties and almost certainly none which required a socially formalized and ritualistically
validated structure, seem to have been maintained in the Lafayette
phase. However, a possible focus of community-wide importance
may have been in communal burial of the dead and participation in
attendant ritual. If the small conical mounds at Lafayette, Bayou
Tortue and Bayou Capucin were erected by Lafayette Tchefuncte
peoples (and this has yet to be demonstrated beyond a shadow of
doubt), then the possibility that contemporary Vermilion communities shared similar causes and construction energies is also
emergent.
In summary, the Lafayette phase settlement distribution forms a
dispersed pattern; locational choices appear to have been conditioned
or reflected by the distribution of loam or silty loam and by high
emergent spots in the floodplain. Microenvironmental situations at
each of the sites were quite different, but locations maximized access
to multiple niches, which included hardwood, prairie and mixed
zones. What implication this settlement strategy has for the development of Tchefuncte culture in the Bayou Vermilion basin, and by

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

o~
~"~o

~ ~.~

N.°~ "=
¢,1

#4

N-~
CO

~

.

~D~

~.~
CO

COco

o

&-~

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

87

o
o

G3
O

.~o7~
.

o~
o~°o
~o~
~0"O

I::L ¢0

sN~

¯~ o

r.,0 ~0

pD

o

O~

~C3

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

extension for the other "vital" regions in the lower valley, is the
central topic to be considered below.
Developmental Dynamics
The cultural phase which immediately preceded Lafayette
Tchefuncte has been termed Beau Rivage; it represents an isolated
geographic node of Poverty Point culture (Gibson 1973:371-374). The
Beau Rivage phase shares many cultural details with the principal
phase centered at the Poverty Point site, some 350km to the north. It
has been argued elsewhere that the Poverty Point site and surrounding site nexus conformed to a model of sociopolitical structure known
as a chiefdom (Gibson 1973, 1974b, n.d.b). It is suspected, without
independent confirmation, that the Beau Rivage phase had a comparable structural organization, although its size and complexity were
certainly no match for the spectacular Poverty Point chiefdom.
Hypotheses
Several interdependent hypotheses have been advanced to explain
the fall of the Poverty Point chiefdom and the concomitant decline of
Poverty Point culture in all of the "vital" regions of the Lower Mississippi Valley (Gibson 1973:359-393, n.d.b). If the data from the Bayou
Vermilion basin do not invalidate these hypotheses, then a major
corpus of independent support for their general accuracy will have
been engendered. The hypotheses are abstracted below. The conditions they describe account not only for the collapse of Poverty Point
but for the rise (if rise is an appropriate characterization) of
Tchefuncte culture.
Hypothesis 1. Emigration of people from circumscribed, upland
edge-floodplain contact zones (brought on by population expansion
and budding villages) led to a breakdown of economic redistribution,
the principal integrating factor of chiefdoms. The resultant relocation
of population groups and the expanded, rather indiscriminant use of
previously little used or unused floodplain ecosystems is causually
related to the decline of Poverty Point chiefdoms and the appearance
of Tchefuncte "tribal" societies.
Hypothesis 2. The historical shift in the Poverty Point redistributive
system from an initial state in which exotic raw materials were predominantly used for technomic or "useful" equipment to a late and
final phase which concentrated on the restricted distribution of rank
and status validating raw materials led to a loss of technological and
economic efficiency with disastrous results on the underlying support base. When coupled with population emigration and movement
away from the chiefdom’s sphere of influence, the results were a

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

89

decreasing ability to insure a steady inflow of exotic materials, a
lessening capacity of redistribution to promulgate societal cohesion
and a growing impetus for lower social ranks to break out of the
system which they were increasingly supporting with decreasing
materialistic rewards. This process culminated in the appearance of
Tchefuncte culture.
Hypothesis 3. A third and final factor which contributed to Poverty
Point collapse and Tchefuncte crystallization may have been in political power usurpation. There are slim indications, based on the panregional distribution of certain kinds of exotic materials and probable
Poverty Point cult items (e.g., clay female figurines and special lapidary objects) that Poverty Point leaders at the height of cultural
elaboration may have been systematically attempting to incorporate
the widely separated chiefdoms, including Beau Rivage, under a
single political or religious hegemony. No doubt, the principal Poverty Point chiefdom by dint of its strategic location (convergence of
trade routes and centralized position) had since its nascent phase
commanded the entire sphere of commerce. But this later, florescent
and post-florescent expansion seems to have been accompanied by
increased administrative support for a body of warriors; a process
indicative of a true political revolution (basic to the formation of a
primitive state). This heightened support of a coersive or potentially
coersive body is indicated at the big Poverty Point site by the heavier
exploitation of midwestern flint and slate sources, by the transformation of these materials into restricted and probably status-symbolic
projectile point types (especially, Motley) and decorated gorgets, and
by the geographic isolation of the Motley point and slate gorget
distributions from all other combined point and gorget types based on
intrasite analysis (Gibson 1973:162-169,222-228; 1974b). It is probable that the maintenance of this program placed a considerable strain
on the economic adhesive of chiefdom society. The ultimate consequence was chiefdom fragmentation and the emergence of "tribal"
societies, collectively known as Tchefuncte culture.
Testing the Hypotheses
The Bayou Vermilion data seem to be in substantial agreement with
the emigration process postulated in hypothesis 1. Physiographically, each of the three known Beau Rivage (Poverty Point) components were located along the crest and slope of the abrupt escarpment
which separated uplands from floodplain. The situations at Hidden
Hills and Paul Blanchet (Stone Road) have been previously described.
Both of these sites have Beau Rivage components underlying those of
the Lafayette phase. The Beau Rivage site itself is positioned at the

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

point where Bayou Vermilion cuts through the high western scarp
and exits the floodplain. Beau Rivage has a few sherds with
Tchefuncte-like designs, but these are very likely to have been part of
the limited Poverty Point pottery complex. This site lies across Bayou
Vermilion, some 400m north of the extensive Lafayette component at
Bayou Tortue, and indeed at least three small exposures of Beau
Rivage phase materials have been recently uncovered by construction
work on the periphery of the Bayou Tortue site. The major point to be
made here is that all three Beau Rivage sites have or are in immediate
juxtaposition to Lafayette components. Yet none of the Lafayette units
in the floodplain have yielded Beau Rivage components. This is not to
say that Beau Rivage sites do not exist in the floodplain; they are
anticipated in view of the presence of analogous sites in several other
"vital" regions. In fact, it is not totally inconceivable that the strange
Ruth Canal site with its fiber-tempered pottery, attributed here to an
early Tchefuncte time range, may have been a small Beau Rivage
camp.
The important thing to remember, however, is the fact that
Tchefuncte sites in the Bayou Vermilion basin were overwhelmingly
oriented to several divergent ecosystems along upland bluffs and
down in the floodplain, while those of the Beau Rivage phase were
limited to escarpment edges. Although our data are far from complete
and we cannot at this time provide quantitative statistical support, the
settlement and adaptive strategies of the Beau Rivage and Lafayette
phases do seem to have been quite distinctive. And given the time
involved in the transformation of Poverty Point culture into
Tchefuncte culture, at least part of this distinctiveness would appear
to have been brought on by the increasing floodplain orientation of
Tchefuncte peoples. This affords substantial backing for the emigration process of hypothesis 1; it would have produced the collapse of
redistribution, the principal integrating mechanism, by removing the
environmental preconditions essential for its existence.
Time phasing of the Beau Rivage and Lafayette phases has not
reached the point where strong support can be summoned to validate
hypothesis 2. It is, nonetheless, quite evident judging by the paucity
of exotic materials on Lafayette sites, that during the Poverty PointTchefuncte transformation, the procuration and redistribution of
foreign raw materials in general rapidly slowed and eventually
stopped altogether. Actually, the historical shift toward restricted
access to redistributed materials may have played a far less important
role in Beau Rivage-Lafayette phase transition than it did in the
decline of the principal Poverty Point chiefdom. The possibly reduced importance of this process in the Vermilion basin would be

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

91

especially appropriate if these south Louisiana sociopolitical organizations were, as I suspect, dependent on the inflow of trade materials
from the Poverty Point site itself rather than on direct procuration
from source areas. Under such circumstances, the stoppage of exotic
material inflow alone would have been sufficient to relax the dependency on redistributed materials and to have brought on the decay of
administrative structure.
Similarly, the third hypothesis postulated to account for Poverty
Point-Tchefuncte transformation in northeastern Louisiana may have
played a very minor and secondary role in Vermilion culture change.
Power usurpation in the form of novel foreign policy enactment and
of creation of enforcement and/or protection bodies for political or
religious emissaries need not have been an endemic process of local
chiefdom evolution in the Vermilion basin to have contributed to the
overall cultural decline. Indeed, the smaller Poverty Point chiefdoms,
such as Beau Rivage, probably never had a support base and sphere of
political influence capable of initiating and maintaining such ambitious projects. If prestigious warrior groups were being increasingly
supported by Beau Rivage leaders in an effort to back up regional
policy and religious proselytizing, this situation is not registered by
the presence of special projectile point types of midwestern gray flint
and of decorated gorgets of slate, the status-symbolic representations
of this warrior force at the Poverty Point site (Gibson 1973:162-169,
225-228).

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Power usurpation is inherent in the cultural processes which generated and sustained chiefdoms. A chiefdom, of its own inertia, is
constantly moving toward greater centralization of power and more
explicit control of its masses. If these processes can be religiously or
militarily validated, the chiefdom will become a state, but if the
underlying economic support is superceded or withdrawn, societal
fragmentation will result. Poverty Point chiefdoms in each of the
"vital" regions of the lower valley, including Beau Rivage, had collapsed by 700-600 B.C. The causes of this decline appear to have been
embodied in three interrelated processes in the major Poverty Point
chiefdom -- population fragmentation and increasing floodplain
reorientation, reorganization of redistribution, and burgeoning
power accumulation by administrative leaders. Decline in the distantly separated Poverty Point chiefdoms appears to have similarly
involved the reorganized settlement and economic utilization of
floodplain environments and to a lesser and probably secondary

92

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

extent, the factors of redistribution shifts and power usurpation. The
ultimate outcome of these probably rapid changes was the appearance
of a significantly different mode of cultural adaptation, the
Tchefuncte culture. Geared primarily to divergent lowland ecosystems and lacking redistribution for societal cohesion, the Tchefuncte
culture represented a nominally successful, but less sociopolitically
complex culture, whose genesis was bound with the decline-related
processes of the preceding Poverty Point culture. Both Poverty Point
and Tchefuncte cultures can be understood in terms of their inherent
systems of adaptation to variable environmental situations, and
though cultural de-evolution is a proper characterization of the Poverty Point-Tchefuncte cultural transformation, it can be appreciated
as an inevitable and predictable consequence of certain evolutionary
processes operative in the Lower Mississippi Valley during the last
two millennia B.C.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Much of the perspective adopted in this paper is a result of frequent discussions with
Aurville Touchet, U.S. Soil Conservation Service, Layton Miller, University of Southwestern Louisiana, and Clarence Webb, Shreveport, Louisiana; I am indebted to
Touchet for soil identifications and interpretations, to Miller for his assistance in site
surveying and excavation, and to Webb for continued exchanges on Poverty Point
problems. Charles Bollich, Beaumont, Texas, furnished valuable information and extensive collections from the Ruth Canal site. My archeology students over the past five
years have assisted in excavation and analyses of materials, and I express my appreciation to them collectively for their continued enthusiasm and substantive ideas. The
present paper represents a substantially modified version of a paper read at the Conference on Gulf Coastal Archeology, held at Beaumont, Texas, April 17-18, 1971. I would
like to thank Lawrence Aten and Charles Bollich, the conference organizers.

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

93

REFERENCES CITED

Beardsley, Richard K., et al.
1955 Functional and Evolutionary Implication of Community Patterning.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 11, pp.
131-157.
Binford, Lewis R.
1964 A Consideration of Archaeological Research Design. American
Antiquity, Vol. 29, pp. 425-441.
Bourne, E. G. (ed.)
1904 Narrative of the Career of Hernando de Soto, 1539-42, According to
Elvas, Biedma, and Rangel. Trail Maker’s Series, New York.
Christaller, W. (trans. by C. W. Baskin)
1966 Central Places of Southern Germany. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
Clarke, David L.
1968 Analytical Archaeology. Methuen, London.
Cook, S. F. and R. F. Heizer
1965 The Quantitative Approach to the Relation between Population and
Settlement Size. University of California Archaeological Survey
Report, No. 64.
1968 Relationships among Houses, Settlement Areas, and Population in
Aboriginal California. In: Settlement Archaeology, (K. C. Chang, ed.),
pp. 79-116. National Press, Palo Alto.
Cook, S. F. and A. E. Treganza
1950 The Quantitative Investigation of Indian Mounds. University of
California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology,
Vol. 40, No. 5, pp. 223-262.
Fisk, Harold N.
1944 Geological Investigation of the Alluvial Valley of the Lower Mississippi River. U.S. Army, Corps of Engineers, Mississippi River Commission Publication, No. 52.
Ford, James A. and George I. Quimby, Jr.
1945 The Tchefuncte Culture, an Early Occupation of the Lower Mississippi Valley. Memoirs of the SocietyforAmerican Archaeology, No. 2.
Ford, James A. and Clarence H. Webb
1956 Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. American Museum of
Natural History, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 46, Pt. 1.
Ford, James A. and Gordon Willey
1940 Crooks Site, A Marksville Period Burial Mound in LaSalle Parish,
Louisiana. Louisiana Geological Survey, Anthropological Study, No.
3.
Gagliano, Sherwood M.
1967 Late Archaic-Early Formative Relationships in South Louisiana.
Proceedings of the 23rd Southeastern Archaeological Conference, No.
6, pp. 9-22.
Gibson, Jon L.
1973 Social Systems at Poverty Point, An Analysis of Intersite and Intrasite
Variability. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Southern Methodist
University.
1974a Aboriginal Warfare in the Protohistoric Southeast: An Alternative
Perspective. American Antiquity, Vol. 39, No. 1, pp. 130-133.

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1974b Poverty Point: The First North American Chiefdom.Archaeology, V °l"
27, No. 2, pp. 96-105.
n.d.a. The Catahoula Phase of East Central Louisiana: A Critical Appraisal.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Southwestern Louisiana,
Lafayette.
n.d.b. The Rise and Decline of Poverty Point. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Southwestern Louisiana, Lafayette.
Gibson, Jon L. and William Baker
n.d. Archaeology at Louisiana Delta Plantation, Phase I: The Survey. Manuscript in preparation, University of Southwestern Louisiana,
Lafayette.
Gibson, Jon L. and Layton J. Miller
1973 The Trappey Mastodon, Lafayette Parish, Louisiana. The University of
Southwestern Louisiana Research Series in Anthropology, No. 27.
Gumerman, George J. (ed.)
1971 The Distribution of Prehistoric Population Aggregates. Prescott College Anthropological Reports, No. 1.
Jennings, Jesse D.
1952 Prehistory of the Lower Mississippi Valley. In: Archeology of Eastern
United States (J. B. Griffin, ed.), pp. 256-271. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Jensen, Harald P., Jr.
1968 Coral Snake Mound. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 39,
pp. 9-44.
Johnson, Gregory A.
1972 A Test of the Utility of Central Place Theory in Archaeology. In: Man,
Settlement and Urbanism, (P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby, eds.). Duckworth and Co., London.
Kroeber, Alfred
1939 Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America. University of
California Press, Berkeley.
Lytle, S. A.
1968 The Morphological Characteristics and Relief Relationships of Representative Soils in Louisiana. Louisiana State University, Agricultural Experiment Station, Bulletin No. 631.
McClurkan, B. B., W. T. Field, and J. N. Woodall
1966 Excavations in Toledo Bend Reservoir, 1964-65. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 8.
Naroll, Raoul
1962 Floor Area and Settlement Population. American Antiquity, Vol. 27,
pp. 587-589.
National Cooperative Soil Survey
1967, 1972, 1973 Sharkey Series, Acy Series, Gallion Series, Fausse Series,
Memphis Series, Dundee Series, Baldwin Series, Iberia Series. United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. Fort
Worth.
Phillips, Philip
1970 Archaeological Survey in the Lower Yazoo Basin, Mississippi,
1949-1955. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Vol. 60, Pts. 1 and 2.

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

95

Plog, Fred and James N. Hill
1971 Explaining Variability in the Distribution of Sites. In: The Distribution
of Prehistoric Population Aggregates, (G. J. Gumerman, ed.), pp. 7-36.
Prescott College Anthropological Reports, No. 1.
Shenkel, J. Richard
1971 Cultural Adaptation to the Mollusk: A Methodological Survey of
Shellmound Archaeology and a Consideration of the Shellmounds of
the Marismas Nacionales, West Mexico. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, State University of New York at Buffalo.
Snow, Charles E.
1945 Tchefuncte Skeletal Remains. In: The Tchefuncte Culture, An Early
Occupation of the Lower Mississippi Valley (J. A. Ford and G. I.
Quimby, Jr.), pp. 99-113. Memoirs of the Society for American
Archaeology, No. 2.
Swanton, John R.
1911 Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of
the Gulf of Mexico. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 43.
1946 The Indians of the Southeastern United States. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin 137.
Varner, J. G. and J. J. Varner (tra.ns. and eds.)
1951 The Florida of the Inca. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Webb, Clarence H., James A. Ford, and Sherwood M. Gagliano
n.d. Poverty Point Culture and the American Formative. Unpublished
manuscript, Children’s Clinic, Shreveport.
University of Southwestern Louisiana
Lafayette

