COMMENTS ON WOODLAND CULTURES
OF EAST TEXAS*
HARRY I. SHAFER

ABSTRACT
The subject of this paper is the late Archaic adaptations of eastern
Texas and western Louisiana. The material assemblage of the late Archaic
cultures is discussed and compared to the Woodland tradition in the
Eastern United States. The temporal and spatial occurrence of a Hopewell
manifestation in east and southeast Texas is also discussed.

The Woodland tradition of the Eastern United States is characterized by cord-marked and fabric-marked ceramics, burial mounds, and
other earthworks, and at least the beginning of agriculture (Willey
1966: 267). At the onset, if we are going to call the material in the
following discussion "Woodland", we must broaden this definition by
being less particular about surface finish on ceramics, less particular
about the presence of mounds, and to impose a prerequisite of hunting-gathering efficiency which may have provided the basis for the incorporation of incipient horticulture.
The late Archaic in central and southern east Texas is characterized by a lithic assemblage consisting of contracting and parallel
stern dart points (Gary and Kent) plus an assortment of nondiagnostic biface forms, many of which are apparently the failures in
projectile point manufacture. No diagnostic uniface forms are
recognized and one is struck by the virtual absence of unifaces in this
assemblage. It should be pointed out that this is not so in the northern
part of east Texas, especially in the post-oak savannah region, where
numerous uniface tools -- those we call gouges and adzes -- occur.
For the convenience of this discussion I will refer to the lithic
assemblage described for the central and southern part of east Texas
(Figure 1) as the Gary assemblage. This assemblage has been found
underlying ceramics, but it is also associated with ceramics. Sites are
numerous and are usually located on small sandy knolls or ridges
situated either in or at the edge of stream valleys, Surveys at
Livingston Reservoir and Lake Conroe clearly show that sandy
locations were preferred.
The widespread popularity of the Gary assemblage in both time and
space serves as a good indication that the introduction of ceramics
was not made by populations with different technology invading the
*Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeological Society, Austin,
November, 1972.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

250

\

~OUTHEAST
TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL STUD’~

L

r/

,~REAS

.....

FIGURE i. Southeast Texas showing location of archeological study
areas.

area. The adoption of ceramic technology was made by indigenous
populations and had no apparent affect on either the settlement pattern or stone technology. The same sandy knolls and ridges were occupied. Again, sites were usually small, but sites of several acres are
known in both the Livingston and Conroe Reservoir districts.
Subsistence data on the Gary assemblage (both preceramic and
ceramic] are virtually non-existent north of the coastal plain.
Charred walnut shells and deer bones were recovered at Conroe

WOODLAND CULTURES

251

(Shafer 1968); deer was found at Livingston (McClurkan 1968); Webb
et a!. (1969) report hickory, walnut and pignut hulls from the Resch
site in Harrison County; Story (1965) reports deer, raccoon, bison, tortoise, and fish at the Gossett Bottoms site in Kaufman County. The remains at the Gossett Bottoms site suggest rather extensive use of
prairie-grassland and riverine environments which were located
nearby.
Despite the paucity of ecological data in archeological sites the
overall situation is not unlike other areas of the Eastern United
States; a successfully adapted hunting-gathering subsistence with
some degree of permanency (probably on a seasonal basis although
the seasonal patterns cannot as yet be defined) which readily adopts
ceramic technology at the utilitarian level.
There is regional variation in the early ceramics of east Texas, to
be sure. In the northern part, the early ceramics are grog tempered
vessels and Williams Plain seems to be the predominant type. In central and southern east Texas, sandy paste ceramics are the earliest.
This sandy paste ware is evidently contemporaneous with the
Tchefuncte Period on the coast and near Marshall in central east
Texas. In both localities, Tchefuncte and Tchefuncte-like ceramics
occur with indigenous sandy paste pottery.
The sandy paste ceramics are predominantely plain with both
rounded and fiat bases. Hemispherical bowls and cylindrical jars
predominate. Shapes indicate vessels were utilitarian in nature (i.e.,
cooking and serving vessels) and traces of charred organic matter on
sherds are frequent and support this supposition.
Incised, incised-punctated, and punctated decorations occur
rarely; lip notching occurs occasionally, but seems to be more common along the coast. Previously defined types Bear Creek Plain
described by Jelks (1965) at McGee Bend Reservoir, Goose Creek Plain
(Suhm and ]elks 1962: 55, 57) and its many variations, and McClurkan’s "Fat Orange" from Livingston Reservoir are all part of the
sandy paste tradition.
In some areas of east Texas, particularly in the central portion, the
sandy paste tradition is succeeded by grog-tempered and bone tempered Coles Creek and Caddoan ceramic assemblages. This change
took place about A. D. 700-800. In the coastal region, grog tempered pottery becomes dominant about A. D. 950 (Aten 1971) although
sandy paste pottery continues; it(sandy paste) remains the dominant
ware in the lower Trinity and San Jacinto river basins.
The full distribution of sandy paste pottery in east Texas is not
known at the early time level nor is this introductory period dated. It
is apparently spread over much of the central and southern portions

252

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

by the time of the Marksville period in the Lower Mississippi Valley
which begins about the time of Christ. Marksville Stamped pottery
is found at Jonas Short (]elks 1965), and Coral Snake (McClurkan et al
1966; ]ensen 1968) mounds (Coral Snake was in Toledo Bend Reservoir on the Louisiana side and Jonas Short was in McGee Bend -Lake Sam Rayburn). This type (Marksville Stamped) has also been
reported at the Resch site near Marshall (Webb, et al 1969), in the
lower Sabine (Aten and Bollich 1969) and as far west as the Trinity at
Livingston Reservoir (McClurkan 1968). It is also found in collections from Orange and Jefferson counties housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. In all sites mentioned above, sandy
paste pottery is dominant.
Jonas Short and Coral Snake mounds are part of a vaguely defined
Hopewellian expression in western Louisiana and eastern Texas. We
do not know the full extent of it as yet; perhaps it encompasses the
area included in the distribution of the sites mentioned where
Marksville Stamped has been found. The Bellevue Focus defined by
Fulton and Webb (1953) may be a part of a local variation of the same
expression. The ceramics in the Bellevue Focus sites are predominantly grog-tempered and the mounds lack the exotic goods recovered from Jonas Short and Coral Snake.
The latter two sites (Jonas Short and Coral Snake) had cremations
in central depressions as well as cremations and probably flexed
burials at the base of the mounds [or perhaps on surfaces within the
mounds). The accompanying artifacts together constitute an impressive array of exotic objects mixed with an indigenous lithic
assemblage consisting of Gary and Kent projectile points and percussion chipped bifaces, mostly of local cherts and silicified wood.
There are also sites in both reservoir areas which yielded sandy
paste pottery and the Gary lithic assemblage.
Mounds similar in form are known as far west as the Neches, and
the sandy paste pottery and local lithic assemblages virtually in-

however, that ,are do not know if this entire area was involved in the
Hopewell interaction.
The Adena and Hopewell similarities exhibited at Jonas Short were
noted by ]elks (1965); McClurkan (1966) and ]ensen (1968) were also
cognizant of the Hopewell-like nature of the Coral Snake assemblage.
~nis Hopewell expression shares basic underlying similarities with
other Hopewell manifestations. The Hopewell as recognized by
Struever (1964) and Caldwell (1964) represents a conglomeration of
regional cultural traditions each adapted to their respective en-

WOODLAND CULTURES

.......

253

vironments but which were interacting on a social level reflected in
certain burial practices and material goods. The exotic materials in
association with the burials reflects participation in an exchange network which transported objects over considerable distances; some
degree of social stratification is also indicated. The main point to emphasize here is that like other regional cultures reflecting participation in the Hopewell interaction, the Hopewell of east Texas and
western Louisiana represents a regionally adapted forest economy
which adopted a position in the interaction.
In short, I am stating that the sandy paste ceramics and the Gary
lithic tradition represents a local Woodland manifestation which was
involved for a time in the Hopewell interaction. This sandy paste-Gary
lithic assemblage continued after the demise of the Hopewell
although the geographic extent diminished somewhat.
It is appropriate to point out that judging from radiocarbon dates
from Coral Snake mound reported by Jensen (1968) and the Resch site
by Webb et al (1969), this Hopewell complex had absolutely nothing to
do with the Caddoan culture which appeared in these areas at least
400 and possibly as much as 1400 years later. One archeologist has
stated that the Caddoan settlements are unmistakably the elements
that supported the mounds (Gibson 1970). I am saying that, in view of
the chronological data, it is impossible for the Caddoan Indians to
build mounds and bury their dead in them hundreds of years before
the people appear on the scene.
Findings in Livingston (McClurkan 1968) and Conroe (Sharer 1968)
reservoirs indicate that in these areas, the sandy paste ceramics continue to be the dominant ware despite the introduction of grogtempered and bone tempered pottery; this is probably equivalent to
the time of the Caddoan development in the adjacent region to the
north. In the southeast portion of the state, the Woodland expression
survives probably until Historic times. This is inferred on the basis of
a continuum of the sandy paste pottery. The indigenous Indian groups
in this area were the Bidai, Deadose, Patiri, and Akokisa, all
Atakapan speakers (Newcomb 1961: 315-329). It is suggested that
these groups represent the historic survival of Woodland culture in
east Texas.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence, E.
1971 Coastal Southeast Texas Archeology. Paper presented at the Caddoan Conference, Magnolia; Arkansas.

254

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Aten, Lawrence E. and Charles Bollich
1969 A Preliminary Report on the Development of a Ceramic Chronology
for the Sabine Lake Area of Texas and Louisiana. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40, pp. 241-258.
Caldwell, Joseph R.
1964 Interaction Spheres in Prehistory. Hopewellian Studies, Illinois State
Museum Scientific Papers. Vol. XII, No. 6, pp. 133-143.
Fulton, Robert L. and Clarence H. Webb
1953 The Bellevue Mound: A ere-Caddoan Site in Bossier Parish,
Louisiana. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 24, pp. 1842.
Gibson, Jon
1970 The Hopewellian Phenomenon in the Lower Mississippi Valley.
Louisiana Studies, Vol. IX, No. 3.
Jelks, Edward B.
1965 Archeology of McGee Bend Reservoir. Doctoral Dissertation, University of Texas, Austin.
Jensen, Harold P.
1968 Coral Snake Mound, X16 SA 48. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 39, pp. 9-44.
McClurkan, Burney B.
1968 Livingston Reservoir, 1965-66. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, No. 12, The University of Texas at Austin.
McClurkan, Burney B~, William T. Field, and J. Ned Woodall
1966 Excavations in Toledo Bend Reservoir, 1964-65. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 8, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Newcomb, W. W. Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. The University of Texas Press.
Shafer, Harry J.
1968 Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin. Montgomery County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, No. 13, The University of Texas at Austin.
Story, Dee Ann
1965 The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson and Kanfman
Counties. Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 36,
pp. 163-258.
Struever, Stuart
1964 The Hopewell Interaction Sphere in Riverine -- Western Great Lakes
Culture History. In: Hopewellian Studies, Illinois State Museum ~cientific Papers, Vol. XII, No. 6.
Webb, Clarence H., Forrest E. Murphey, Wasley G. Ellis, and H. Roland
Green
1969 The Resch Site, 41 HS 16, Harrison County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40, pp. 3-106.
Willey, Gordon
1966 An Introduction to American Archaeology, Vol. 1: North and Middle
America. Prentice-Hall.
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas

