Proceedings of the
Fifth Conference on Caddoan Archeology

Proceedings of the
Fifth Conference on Caddoan Archeology
Edited by E. MOTT DAVIS

Contents
INTRODUCTION .
Accomplishments of the Conference
Nature of These Proceedings
....
Participants
.......
Note on Symbols and Maps.

78
78
79
79
80

DISTINGUISHING THE CADDOAN AREA .....

80
80
83
86
88
89

Introduction
............
The Geographical Area .............
The Formal Taxonomic Division
..........
The Culture-historical Development ......
Merits of the Name "Caddoan"

.

.........

ARCHAIC AND EARLY CERAMIC COMPLEXES ANCESTRAL,
OR RELATED, TO THE GIBSON ASPECT .....
East Texas Archaic
..........
Grove Focus
.........
Fourche Maline
.....
Sandy Pottery ............
Yarbrough, Sanders-like, and Related Sites
.....
Early Crenshaw
Snipes Site, and Further Discussion’of Plain Ware .

90
90
93
97
99
100
108
109

CORRELATION OF LOWER RED RIVER AND CADDOAN SEQUENCES
Alba Points
..........

111
114

THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT FROM ARCHAIC
TO GIBSON ASPECT

/15

HISTORIC SITES IN THE CADDOAN AREA

.....

122

GIBSON ASPECT CHRONOLOGY

.....

130

REFERENCES CITED ......

142

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Introduction
An informal conference of persons interested in problems of the
Caddoan archeological area took place at the University of Oklahoma
in Norman on April 30 and May i~ 1958. Moderator for this conference was Edward B. Jelks of the University of Texas. This was the
Fifth Caddoan Conference.I It immediately preceded the 23rd Annual
Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology~ at which there was
a formal symposium on relationships of the Caddoan area with neighboring areas, which appears earlier in this volume.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THE CONFERENCE

Participants in the Conference were supplied in advance with an
outline of the topics which it was proposed to discuss. This outline had
been drawn up by E. B. Jelks and E. M. Davis as a result of correspondence with many of those who planned to attend. Inevitably, the
discussion itself digressed, and the table of contents presented here
varies in a number of respects from the original outline.
The conference participants included a number of workers whose
interests are primarily in the problems of the Lower Mississippi Valley. As a result, the discussion kept moving into the question of
relationships between the Mississippi Valley and the Caddoan area,
and the correlation of their chronologies. In general, the Mississippi
Valley specialists felt that the earliest Caddoan materials are approximately contemporary with the end of Coles Creek times in the Mississippi Valley, whereas the Caddoan specialists felt that Caddoan materials appear at the beginning of Coles Creek times, or perhaps earlier.
This argument has been going on for a long time, and it was not
resolved at this conference. Possibly a major result of the conference
was that these two schools of thought had an opportunity to find out,
after some years, what the other side was thinking.
The other major accomplishment of the conference was an examination of the Archaic antecedents of the Cad(loan complexes in the
area. A fundamental continuity of culture from the Archaic into the
Caddoan cultures, reflected in the carrying over of many stone artifact
traits, was emphasized by many of the discussants. The matter of possible transitional complexes--post-Archaic, pre-Caddoan ceramic cultures-was also reviewed in some detail.
1 Preceding conferences are listed, with references, in the Proceedings of the
Fourth Caddoan Conference (Davis, 1961: 2-3).

FIFTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

79

NATURE OF THESE PROCEEDINGS

The proceedings as recorded here are based on detailed notes taken
during the sessions by Rudolph C. Troike, supplemented by more cursory notes by the editor. On the basis of these notes a first draft of the
proceedings was written, and mimeographed copies were sent to all
participants, who revised and amended the record of their remarks
according to their own notes and memories. In a few instances statements were extensively rewritten or added in the course of this procedure, and in all such cases an asterisk has been placed after the
participant’s name at the beginning of the revised or added statement.
Three persons who were not able to attend the conference--lt. K.
Harris, YV. W. Crook, Jr., and Stephen Williams--submitted statements which were entered into the record and are included here as
part of the regular proceedings. Williams was sent a copy of the discussion of his statement, and his comments are included, marked with
asterisks as already explained.
Parenthetically, it is worth noting that after wrestling with a good
many conference records, it is the editor’s experience that good notes,
made by a competent person who is reasonably familiar with the problems and the taxonomy of the subject at hand, form a more practical
and satisfactory basis for a record of this sort than does a precise
stenographic transcription. The latter is more costly to prepare and far
more troublesome to edit, because it is unconscionably long and is often
less coherent and no more grammatical than good notes~ furthermore,
it contains little of a substantive nature that can not be caught equally
well by a good note-taker.
The editor is grateful to Dr. Troike for his unusually complete record of the conference, to Mrs. Nancy P. Troike for her skill and speed
at the typewriter, which made the lengthy record available in rnimeog’raphed form soon after the conference, and to the participants for
their detailed attention to the editing of their remarks.
PARTICIPANTS

Those contributing to these proceedings, with their affiliations at the
time of the conference, are:
David A. Baerreis, University of Wisconsin
Robert E. Bell, University of Oklahoma
Stephan F. Borhegyi, University of Oklahoma
T. N. Campbell, University of Texas
John L. Cotter, National Park Service

80

TEXAS ARCIIEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

W. W. Crook, Jr., Dallas Archeological Society
E. Mott Davis, University of Texas
James A. Ford, American Museum of Natural History
James B. Griffin, University of Michigan
R. K. Harris, Dallas Archeological Society
Edward B. Jelks, National Park Service
Buddy C. Jones, East Texas Archeological Society
Alex D. Krieger, Riverside Municipal Museum, California
Charles R. McGimsey III, University of Arkansas
Robert S. Neitzel, Marksville State Park, Louisiana
Philip Phillips, Harvard University
William H. Sears, Florida State Museum
Robert L. Stephenson, Missouri Basin Project, Smithsonian Institution
Rudolph C. Troike, University of Texas
Clarence H. Webb, Shreveport, Louisiana
Sam Whiteside, East Texas Archeological Society
Stephen Williams, Harvard University
NOTE ON SYMBOLS AND MAPS

An asterisk after the name of a participant signifies that the passage
which follows has been added or significantly revised, by the participant, since the conference took place.
Included are maps of the Caddoan area showing loci of the Gibson
Aspect and other early loci (Fig. 1), loci of the Fulton Aspect and
other late loci (Fig. 2), and the location of sites mentioned in the
proceedings (Fig. 3).

Distinguishing the Caddoan drea
INTRODUCTION

Davis: The problem at hand is to compose a statement distinguishing "The Caddoan Area," whether this area is to be taken as a
geographical area or an area of study. The initial purpose of such a
statement is to serve as an introduction to the forthcoming symposium
on the "Relationships Between the Caddoan Area and Neighboring
Areas." When Dr. Bel! asked me to arrange a Caddo session for the
SAA meeting, he specified that the papers should not be overly technical; they should make sense to people not specializing in the Caddoan
area. This being the case, it is appropriate to begin the symposium with

FIFTI-I CADDOAN CONFERENCE

81

some statement as to what we mean when we say "Caddoan Area,"
so that the speakers at the symposium can assume a certain minimal
knowledge on the part of the audience.
The problem of distinguishing the Caddoan Area can be attacked
from three directions. I will first speak of each approach briefly and
then return to them one by one, soliciting comments and suggestions.
A. "Caddoan Archeology" can refer to the archeology of a particular
area, an area which, unfortunately, is not distinct geographically and
for which no geographic or political term is available. To define a
"Caddoan Area" in terms of geographical bounds is not fully satisfactory, because many archeological materials in the area--specifically, the Archaic and Paleo-Indian materials--are not usually
thought of as Caddoan. Also, the area varies according to the period in
question--and of course it may change as more work is done. Nevertheless, an area of operations for Caddoan archeologists can be roughly
defined, and it was so defined twelve years ago at the first Caddoan
symposium. I shall read that definition in the part of this paper devoted to discussion, and will comment on it and invite suggestions.
B. "Caddoan Archeology" can refer to a particular body of archeological materials, for which no formal taxonomic term other than
"Caddoan" has been devised. In general, when people say "Caddoan"
they mean the Gibson and Fulton aspects. In terms of the McKern
system these two intimately related "aspects" would constitute a separate Caddoan "phase" of the Mississippi "pattern."
There is no need to haggle about whether this "Caddoan Phase" is
or is not a purely formal, descriptive concept. No one thinks of it in
those terms, but rather as something existing in time, a cultural development if you will. Nevertheless, as one stage in the process of analysis we need to view it in the formal sense to see that we have something which can also be treated historically.
What we want to know, then, is, What distinguishes Caddoan from
other MississippianP Of course there is an array of artifact types which
are solely Caddoan (Barkman Engraved pottery, Talco points, and so
on) but none of which is diagnostic of Caddoan as a whole at any particular time. Then there are some traits which are diagnostic of the
aspects, Gibson or Fulton; these are Caddoan diagnostics at particular
times, but are not diagnostic of Caddoan as a whole. And finally there
are actual Caddoan diagnostics.
I will present a suggested list of diagnostic traits later in this presentation. The list is rather sketchy. I think it is well worth working
out in detail some time.

TEXAS A!RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

GOUAD
o

FOCI OF THE
GIBSON ASPECT
AND OTHER EARLY FOCI

o~
Oo\~
FOCUS NAMES ARE
UNDERLINED

0

50

scale

Fig. I.

in miles

I00

FIFTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

83

C. "Caddoan Archeology" can refer to a particular culture-historical
sequence, distinct from other sequences in the way that any history is
distinct from any other history, whether because of the presence of
particular elements, or the arrangements of the elements, or both.
Perhaps this is what we really mean by "The Caddoan Area." To do a
complete job of distinguishing the area in these terms would be to tel!
the whole story of Caddoan prehistory. For our purposes it should
suffice to mention a few trends and sequences which distinguish the
Caddoan development from other developments, and I will present a
few later on.
With the general situation in mind, we can look at the three aspects
of the problem in detail. I solicit comments on these details.
THE

GEOGRAPHICAL AREA

In his report on the First Caddoan Conference, Krieger (1947: 199)
says, "[In the Conference] the area was taken to include the adjoining sectors of Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana, and Texas, bordered
(approximately) by the Arkansas River on the north, by a line about
100 miles inland from the Gulf of Mexico on the south, a line running
from about Tulsa to Dallas to Waco on the west, and by Bayou Ma~on
in eastern Louisiana and Arkansas on the east. The western and eastern boundaries just mentioned apply to historic times, whereas earlier
’Caddoan’ remains are confined to a much narrower belt stretching
north and south along an axis formed by the Oklahoma-Arkansas and
the Texas-Louisiana borders."
In the twelve years which have elapsed since this definition was
drawn up, have we learned enough to be able to define the boundaries
of the Caddoan area more accurately?
Krieger: The lower Ouachita River would now be a better eastern
boundary than Bayou Ma~on.
Davis: The Douglas, Greer, and Old River Landing Sites, which
were discussed at last year’s conference, are on the lower Arkansas
east of the Ouachita. Last year there was a question whether the Caddoan pottery in them was of such a nature to merit their being called
Caddoan sites. It seems to be a matter of definition.
Webb: Instead of saying that the Ouachita is the boundary, we
should say the Ouachita and its immediate tributaries. For instance,
there are some Caddoan materials on Bayou Bartholomew.
Baerreis: The reference to the Arkansas Biver as the northern
boundary originally included its tributaries. Caddoan materials go up

84

TEXAS AltCttEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Grand River to the Kansas line. No survey work has been done up
the river beyond the state line into Kansas, to determine how far the
materials extend. A Caddoan mound group has been found near Miami
in the northeastern corner of 0klahoma--the northernmost thus far
located. The sites are very scattered along the Grand; it is not a dense
occupation.
Krieger: * I would agree with the boundaries as stated in my original
definition, with some modification. The Arkansas River is a suitable
northern boundry except for an extension into the northeast corner
of Oklahoma as mentioned by Baerreis. There are no Caddoan occupation sites as far west as the Dallas area, for although Hogge Bridge and
other sites in that area do have some Caddoan pottery, the sherds agree
so well with those of the Frankston and Sanders loci (and perhaps
others) farther east, that it is probably all -trade ware. The area between the Brazos and Trinity rivers is largely unstudied, but it can be
said that the Chupek site near Waco has enough pottery of Alto Focus
types, as well as Copena blades and Alba points, so that it looks like an
outlying, western component of Alto Focus. It also has potterT in lesser
amounts from other Caddoan loci. Near Bryan there is another site
with Alto focus pottery, Copena blades, and Alba points which apparently does not have other admixtures and may also be regarded as a
small outlying settlement far west of the main Alto Focus area.
Swanton thinks that De Soto found Caddoan people living as far
west as the middle Trinity River in 1542. When La Salle built Fort
St. Louis on Lavaca Bay in !685, it is said that "Cenis" ambassadors
came toward the fort, but it is hard to say how far they may have
traveled.
Baerreis: I hope the area is not going to be defined on the basis of
Caddoan-speaking groups, since this would include the Pawnee, Arikara, and Wichita, and would make the area pretty big and meaningless archeologically.
Davis: Here the two connotations of "Caddoan"--linguistic and
archeological--are causing difficulty. The use of what in the strictest
sense is a linguistic term for an archeological area was discussed at
the First Conference as being misleading. There has been some dissatisfaction with the term "Caddoan" for this reason, but no real problem.
I am going to bring this subject up for brief discussion as a postscript
to this presentation.

\
I

\
\
t
\

FOCI OF THE
FULTON ASPECT
OTHER LATE FOCl
GL.:GLENDORA

FOCUS

COMPONENTS

0
FOCUS

NAM~SARE

UNO~RIINED

Fig, 2.

50
scale in miles

I00

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
THE FORMAL TAXONOMIC DIVISION

Davis: It has been difficult for me to find distinguishing Caddoan
traits, partly because of my inadequate knowledge of Mississippian
archeology, and also because the problem has not been discussed in the
literature. But here is the list I have come up with:
Pan-Caddoan traits:
1. Carinated bowls and variations on that shape.
2. Bone tempering.
3. Relative popularity of engraving.
4. Relative popularity of the interlocking scroll motif.
5. No painted design (a negative trait).
6. Houses with a central fireplace having a large post-mold underneath it, indicating the use of a temporary center post in erecting the

house.
Baerreis: Narrow-necked spouts? Webb: Bottles with narrow necks.
Davis: These are early only, and do not characterize the whole
tradition.
Ford: Polished pottery.
Krieger: The bottle form. Davis: Does this occur in Mississippian?
Krieger: The scroll motif occurs in the Southwest and Southeast.
Davis: I should emphasize that many of these traits are to be defined
in terms of relative popularity. The scroll is more popular here than
elsewhere; that is all.
Ford: Do you mean the scroll or the meander? Davis: I mean the
scroll. It is not limited to any one vessel form.
Ford: Platform pipes. Krieger: Distinctive platform pipes, or better,
just distinctive pipe forms.
(Speaker unidentified): Earth lodges? Davis: There are no earth
lodges of the Plains type in the Caddoan area. The only distinctive
Caddoan house type that I know of is the kind in which the center post
was used in construction and then was removed, leaving a post-mold
under the fireplace. Is this trait found anywhere else? [No one knew
of other instances.]
Krieger: Large burial pits. Jelks: We are trying to find traits which
distinguish this area from the Southeast, and the Southeast has large

FIFTI-I CADDOAN CONFERENCE

8Z

burial pits. Ford: This points up the difficulty of finding hard and fast
characteristics to define cultural units, such as was tried in the Midwestern System. Engraving is found in the Southeast, and the interlocking scroll is found in the Mississippi Valley and is all over the
Southeast on the historic level.
Krieger: * We may as well admit that traits found only in Caddoan
(not to mention only in Gibson or only in Fulton) are hard to come
by, and we can only be confident of a number of concentrations or
emphases such as engraving, excising of polished surfaces, paint in
lines, certain vessel forms, graves, and so forth.
Baerreis: The Caddoan culture is an attenuated Southeastern culture. After these people moved into this area from the east, distinctive
characters developed.
]elks: Is bone temper in pottery a distinctive Caddoan trait? It is
found at the Davis and Sanders sites. Webb: I am not sure whether it
was found at Oahagan; perhaps some bone-tempered sherds were on
the surface. It was present ill about 3 ~o frequency in the Belcher site.
]elks: Bone tempering is consistent in all Caddoan sites, in percentages
from 3% to 30%.
lEd. note: From the above discussion, other traits can be added to
the list:
Relative popularity of: polished pottery, excising of polished surfaces, paint rubbed into engraved lines.
Distinctive pipe forms.]
Traits characterizing the Gibson Aspect:
1. Long-stemmed pipes.
2. Bottles with long tapering spouts.
3. Pottery types Hickory, Holly, and Crockett.
4. Fine-line engraving.
5. Large deep burial pits.
6. Alba points.
Discussion: Are the large deep burial pits all in the Gibson Aspect?
Krieger: They survived into the McCurtain Focus, hence should
not be considered exclusive to the Gibson Aspect. Davis: * Then they
are not diagnostic of Gibson Aspect, but are only most characteristic
of Gibson Aspect.
Davis: What about the Alba points? Krieger: They are a Gibson

88

TEXAS ARCI-IEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Aspect trait. Davis: Don’t they occur farther east? Discussion: These
are Alba-like. Webb: There are illustrations of Alba-like points from
the Gordon site, a Coles Creek site. Ford: Alba points constitute an
ordinary trait in late Coles Creek. At the Greenhouse site five were
found, and later a boy found 75 in the backdirt.

Webb: * The Gibson Aspect Alba points are different from the Albalike points farther east. I believe that rectangular-based Alba points,
and Hayes points, are distinguishing traits of the Gibson Aspect.
Distinguishing traits, Fulton Aspect:
1. Wide-mouth vessels with high flaring rims.
2. Relative popularity of quadrated interlocking scroll motif.
3. Conical bowl pipes.
4. Spurred line scrolls.
Webb: Add "cross-hatched engraving as a background motif." Ford:
Early Troyville has some cross-hatched incising, not engraving, but
otherwise it isn’t found outside the Caddoan area. ]elks: Within the
Caddoan area, what is its distribution? Webb: Only in the Fulton
Aspect, although Haley Focus may have some.
Webb: Possibly we should add the folded meander to the list.
THE

CULTUIIE-HIsTOIIICAL DEVELOPMENT

Davis: It is the cuhure-historical development in its entirety which
sets off the Caddoan Area; specific, distinct features are hard to isolate.
For instance, there is the possible early start of platform mounds and
Southern Cult material in the Caddoan area, perhaps as early as A.D.
400. In the Gibson Aspect, there were large ceremonial centers with
platform mounds, pit burials, and multiple interments. Changes from
Gibson Aspect to Fulton Aspect involve the following: a shift in area
eastward; a change in typical sites from the big ceremonial centers
to large graveyards of individual burials; brushing of utility pottery
becomes important; engraving becomes coarse; shell temper appears.
There is little information on possible changes in settlement patterns,
beyond the change in ceremonial centers.
Does anyone have corrections, additions, or other comments to make
regarding this statement? I shall be using it as the basis for my remarks
at the Symposium [No comments].
Of course it is more than just a matter of making that presentation.
The whole problem of distinguishing the Caddoan Area, insofar as

89

FIFTI-I CADDOAI"$ COINFEIIEINCE

it is a valid problem, is, in effect, the problem of the relation of the
Caddoan Area to the Southeast as a whole. Was it an attenuated local
development, as Baerreis suggested a little while ago? How isolated
was it?
MEtlITS OP THE

NAME ~’CADDOAN"

Davis: Now, as a postscript to this discussion, I should like to consider the use of the name, "Caddoan," for the archeological area. At
the First Caddoan Conference, Mera objected to it because it is a linguistic term. Already in our discussion this morning, the two connotations--linguistic and archeological have been confused once. At the
First Caddoan Conference, it was proposed that a new term be found,
and shortly thereafter Newkumet came up with the term "t-Iabiukut,"
which Krieger (1947: 206) included in his report of the Conference.
As far as I know this term has been used only once in print--by Orr
in the Cole Festschrift (Orr, 1952: 239)--and then only half-heartedly. Jelks and I have been discussing terms, looking for a good one.
We tried putting the four state names together, but Okarklatez didn’t
work very well, nor did any other combination. We tried the first
letters alone, but could come up only with "Alto," and that is preempted. The name "Caddoan" may be perfactly all right, as long as
the connotation is made explicit; but I note that authors are constantly
putting it in quotation marks, as if it weren’t quite acceptable. This
seems an opportune time to discuss the matter briefly.
Phillips: Are we talking about an area or a culture? Davis: We are
talking about a taxonomic unit. We have no single name in current
usage to designate the geographical area involved; the area does not
correspond to any modern political subdivision.
Webb: How about "Southern Caddo"?
Ford: Has anyone ever really been tripped up by the possible confusion in meanings ?
Campbell: "Why change now?
Baerreis: The name is already embedded in the literature.
Krieger: In Mexico, linguistic terms are used very commonly to
designate the archeological complexes and developments found in
certain areas, such as Mayan, Totonac, and Tarascan. These terms
don’t bother anybody. I see no objection to continuing the term "Caddoan Area." There is no need for confusion.

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Troike: * There are difficulties in Mexico rising from the use of
linguistic terms. Even the leading Mexican archeologists are not uncommonly led astray in their thinking by an unconscious one-to-one
correlation of the linguistic and the archeological concepts.
Krieger: * Yes, there are such difficulties in any terminology used.
Terms never actually explain anything; they are conveniences or
labels which themselves must be explained to the uninitiated. I don’t
think that "Caddoan" is any more difficult to understand or explain
than "Mayan," "Tarascan," or any other similar term. Archeology
suffers, not from the terms themselves, but from their common use
without definitions.
]elks: Are there any objections to the term "Caddoan" now? [No
objections.] That seems to settle the matter.

Archaic and Early Ceramic Complexes Ancestral, or
Related, to the Gibson Aspect
EAST TEXAS ARCI-IAIC

Krieger: Many sites in East Texas have no pottery, but do have Alba
projectile points. There are also several hundred sites with Alba points
and very little pottery--a poor plain ware. No tabulation of such sites
has ever been made, but it needs to be done. There should be a survey
of these sites. Small milling stones and nut stones are found in these
sites; they run from the Archaic through the Caddoan sequence. Polished and grooved stone axes are found in the Archaic but do not continue into Gibson Aspect. Boatstones are found in these "transitional
Archaic" plain pottery sites, but only rarely, and a few plummets are
found in northeasternmost Texas. Most large projectile point types
with definite notched stems continue into Gibson Aspect.
Ford: When did the changeover take place? When is the end of the
East Texas Archaic? Krieger: When the major Caddoan traits appear.
There aren’t many transitional sites, though there are these lithic sites
with a little plain pottery. And there is the Bellevue Focus near Shreveport. Webb: The Bellevue Focus is north, east, and southeast of Shreveport. Four sites have been excavated, and more surveyed. In one site
there are no identifiable Marksville sherds. On each of the rest of the
sites only two or three Marksville sherds are found. Ford: But even at
Marksville, only 8% to 10% of the sherds are decorated. Krieger:

FIFTIK CADDOAN CONFERENCE

91

Similarly, in East Texas if you have just a handful of sherds from the
surface of a site, the probability is that they will all be plain, and unidentifiable. Were there any Marksville sherds at Poverty Point? Ford:
No. Only fiber tempered sherds. Webb: * There were also some Coles
Creek sherds, probably intrusive (Ford and Webb, 1956: 105-106).
There was Marksville material at the Jackson site adjoining Poverty
Point.
Webb: The "East Texas Archaic" is not limited to that area alone;
it extends also into Louisiana and Arkansas.a In Arkansas, the Mineral
Springs, Ozan, and Washington sites have similar materials, and they
are also found in northern Louisiana. You have to consider a larger
region in order to find real differences. In northwestern Louisiana
there are only a few lithic sites. When you get into the Bellevue Focus,
the lithic materials are about the same as in the Archaic, with scrapers,
nut stones, and so forth. Even in Bossier Focus, most projectile points
are of large Archaic types.
Krieger: Here is a rough chart of the situation in East Texas:
5. Fulton
4. Gibson
3. Pottery
2. Arrowpoints
1. Archaic
The divisions are not sharp~ this is really a site classification. ’°Arrowpoints" means Archaic-plus-arrowponts. "Pottery" represents
a stage, as yet not demonstrated, with small arrowpoints, Archaic
materials, and plain sherds not now identifiable as to source, but
possibly from Fourche Maline, Marksville, Hopewel!, or some other
source. Arrowpoints could have come into the area before pottery.
Jones: There is a difference in Archaic sites in East Texas, just as
Krieger suggests. Some of the sites have arrowpoints. On minor streams
along the upper Sabine, there is a definite break between sites. There
are a few large points, small points, and plain sherds. Four variants of
the Alba point occur.
Krieger: It is not known how much time is involved here. The origin of the pottery is a major problem.
1 Webb has since proposed (1960: 47) the name "Red River Aspect" to cover this
material. However, more recently it has been noted that there is already a Red River
Aspect in Minnesota (Wilford, 1955: 137-138), so that either the old name must be
retained or another new one adopted.--EMD

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

I

®

OTYLER

@

o BRYAN

GOL~AD

MAP OF SITES MENTIONEE
IN THE PROCEEDINGS
THE CADDOAN
AREA
AND VICINITY
O

50

SCALE IN MILES

Fig. 3.

IOO

FIFTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

93

GROVE Focus

Baerreis: I would like to present the relationships of the Grove Focus
as a point of departure. For the past year I have been re-analyzing the
material from northeastern Oklahoma, obtained from a series of WPA
digs and still unstudied here in the Museum. In 1951 Bell and I did
a review’, published in the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
in which we showed the sequence in Northeastern Oklahoma thus

Numerical

24--Sanson

Haley--25

1--Reed

35--Greenhouse, Av-25

Harlan--2

2--Harlan

36--Gordon

Hatchel~20

3~Brackett, Vanderpool

37--Hogge Bridge

Hogge Bridge~37

4--Spiro

38--Talty, Blain, Miklas

Hunt--24

5--Scott

39--Trlnldad

Jim Allen--41

6--Greet

40--Yarbrough

Kaufman~l 9

7--Douglas

41--Jim Allen

Kelth~22

8--Old River Landing

42--Davls

Keno~13

9--Mineral Springs

43--McGee Bend Reservoir,

10--Ozan

Wylie Price

Kirkham--12
Lawton--33

11--Washlngten

44--Stansbury

Leary--20

12--Kirkham

45~Chupek

Los Adais--30

13~Keno

46--Addlcks Reservoir

McGee Bend Reservolr~43

14~Glendora

Alphabetical

Miklas--38

15--Poverty Point

Addicks Reservolr--46

Mineral Sprlngs~9

16--Spanish Fort

Allen Plantation--31

Mounds Plantation--27

17~Sanders

Av-25--35

Old River Landing~8

18--Womack

Battle Mound~26

Ozan--10

19--Kaufman

Belcher Mound--27

Poverty Polnt--15

20--Leary, Hatchel

Bellevue--28

Reed--1

21 ~Crenshaw

Blaln~38

Sanders~l 7"

22--Hale, Keith

Brackett--3

Sanson--34

23--Snipes

Chupek--45

Scott~5

24~Hunt, Clements

Clements--24

Smlthport Landing--29

25--Haley

Crenshaw--21

Snlpes--23

26--Battle

Davls--42

Spanish Fort~16

27~Belcher, Mounds

Douglas~7

Splro~4

Plantation

Fish Hatchery--33

Stansbury--44

28--Bellevue

Fredericks--32

Talty--38

29--Smlthport Landing

Gahagan--30

Trlnidad--39

30~Gahagen, Gem Island,

Gem Isiand~30

Vanderpool--3

Los Adais
31~Wilkinson, Allen
Plantation

Glendora--14

Washlngton--11

Gordon--36

Wilkinson Place--31

Greenhouse--35

Wornack--18

32~Fredericks

Greer--6

Wylie Prlce--43

33--Lawton, Fish Hatchery

Hale--22

Yarbrough--40

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Bell and Baerreis, 1951: 8) :
Neosho
Spiro
Hopewellian
Grove

B
A
This preliminary analysis had a typical non-ceramic assemblage-Grove A, B, and C---followed by Woodland, which is Hopewellian of
the Central and Western type (Kansas City and Missouri Hopewell)
and seems to cover some time span, like Middle and Late Hopewell as
defined in the northern area. These Woodland materials occurred in
stratified sites over Grove.
Also in this area are two other cultures: the expansion of the Spiro
Focus into northeastern Oklahoma, and the Neosho Focus, which is
similar to Fulton Aspect. We put Spiro between Neosho and Woodland, despite lack of stratigraphic evidence.
However, the chart above is conventional in form and distorts the
evidence. Actually in northeastern Oklahoma we have a remarkable
continuity of culture, not apparent from the chart. There is definite
continuity between the Archaic and each of the other three cultures.
The chart is an oversimplification; it implies at best that there was
just a handing-down of traits from one successive culture to another.
I would now chart the development thus:
Neosho
1600 A.D.
Interinfluence

750 a.D.

C

~ Spiro

~ Hopewell

Grove B
7000 B.c.

A

The earliest Grove materials seem to date back to 7000 B.c. About the
time of Grove C, Hopewellian materials enter and interact with
Grove C. We may have to speak of a "Grove D," of sites with Hopewell sherds. This terminated with the appearance of Spiro. Some
Archaic tradition survives and interacts with Spiro. About A.D. 1600
the appearance of Neosho (Upper Mississippi? ) terminates the earlier
interaction.

FIFTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

95

An ecological approach is fruitful here, for this is a varied area. The
river terraces are good agricultural land. The region is also on the
margin of the Ozark Plateau, and the rugged foothills present a contrast with the river terraces. The pattern of the Grove Focus was one
of hunting small game and gathering, with a tendency to cling to the
foothills where the game would be more plentiful, and to the small
streams, to hunt and collect seeds. The Grove people could have retained this environment and livelihood even when the Hopewell people moved in and occupied the river terraces. The latter were farmers
with milling stones and cache pits for grain storage. The Spiro people
utilized the same habitat as the Hopewellians, so that when the Spiro
people came in they must have disrupted the Hopewell people. Hopewell refugees could have fled to the hills and taken refuge in the shelters. This gives us the stratification of Woodland over Grove in the
shelter sites.
The final complex occupying the marginal zone was the Neosho
Focus. These people did some farming but emphasized hunting and
gathering. They stayed in the foothills and small valleys; there is
only one Neosho Focus site known on a river terrace.
The main point of this is that the heading "Transition from Archaic
to Gibson Aspect" [originally used for this part of the Conference discussion] may be misleading. By the occupation of complementary
ecological niches, the Archaic could have survived side by side with
Gibson Aspect.
Krieger: Can you be sure that the very first pottery is Hopewellian?
Baerreis: The very first is "Early Woodland": this is partly a matter
of definition. A few early Woodland sherds have a thick beveled lip;
this is early Hopewell; it still comes from the north. Ceramics support
the idea of interacting cultures in that we have also some hybrid types
of dentate stamped pottery with shell temper. Some are probably trade
pieces; others are degenerate hybrids.
These sites seem to tell a different story from what Krieger described
for East Texas; and I think that the Fourche Maline Focus presents
much the same situation. The initial pottery in the north is different
from the situation in the south. Gibson Aspect in this area will probably show more Archaic traits than in the center of the Caddoan area
proper, though whether their source is by borrowing is uncertain. All
these Grove Focus sites are in the bend of the Neosho River. The l~eed
site is an example of a northern Spiro site, and there are other Spiro
sites farther north, probably up into Kansas. Up here, Spiro sites are

96

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

very scattered. In Ottawa County are more sites, now flooded. No
survey has been carried into Kansas.
Langtry and Gary dart points run through the entire sequence in
northeastern Oklahoma, from Grove A through Neosho. This is also
true of milling stones (which are characteristic of Hopewell here but
not elsewhere; wooden mortars were probably used elsewhere). There
is probably a substantial lithic assemblage for which this long duration holds true. Complexes coming into the area probably took up these
traits.

]elks: What about chipped stone in complexes in neighboring regions? Is there only a pottery tradition sweeping into this area?
Baerreis: The only site reported in detail is Wedel’s t/enner site near
Kansas City, and the lithic assemblage there shows strong similarities
to the Oklahoma material. No comparable information is available
elsewhere. In the Kansas City Hopewellian complexes, pottery was
proportionately scarce in relation to the lithic assemblage.
Grove C has small arrowpoints (which are not Caddoan points) and
does not have pottery. Perhaps this means that the sites are not prepottery, but represent a time of interaction with a pottery focus, possibly Spiro.
Krieger: Do you think Grove C is contemporary with the Spiro
sites? Baerreis: It is a real possibility.
Krieger: Are there small points in the Hopewellian sites? How
thoroughly were the sites dug? Baerreis: The sites were dug thoroughly; there are 10,000 to 15,000 chipped stone implements from each
site. There are 4,000 projectile points; but on the Hopewellian level
there are only 10 to 12 small points, which could have been intrusive.
Krieger: Is this true of Hopewell in general? Are there small points in
Hopewell? Phillips: There is no good information on Hopewellian
villages; anything is possible. Sears: I don’t know of any small points
in Hopewellian Period sites in the Southeast. Webb: There are none in
Bellevue. Phillips: I don’t know of any in the Lower Mississippi-but
we don’t have proper data.
Phillips: Is Bellevue Focus like the situation in northeastern Oklahoma-that is, is it an attenuated Hopewellian? Webb: The pottery
decoration fits the pattern of Marksvi!le or Troyville Stamped, but the
paste is not ’like that of the central Louisiana materials. Phillips:
Otherwise the sites are a continuation of the East Texas Archaic?

97

Webb: Yes. Phillips: So the situation is like that in northeastern Oklahonla.

Webb: We have not found this Bellevue situation on other mounds
in northwestern Louisiana. These Bellevue sites are low mounds, with
cremations at the base or flexed burials on a low platform, one of the
cremations containing 40 to 50 stone beads and three rolled copper
beads, scattered around. At the Bellevue Mound we found 400 sherds,
of which only 1% to 2% were decorated. At the site with the rolled
copper beads, we found three Marksville Stamped sherds and one
Marksville Incised sherd. Some of the rims are notched, transversely
or obliquely.
Ford: North of Vicksburg, the early Baytown sites are small mounds

with very little decorated pottery--less than the 8% at the mouth of
the Red; the situation is similar to Bellevue.
FOURCHE MALINE
Bell: In WPA days, more than 20 sites were dug on the Poteau and
its tributary, the Fourche Maline. The materials looked like Archaic
and early Woodland. The analysis was done on the total lumped collection from 20 to 25 sites. Among the materials were worked bone,
heavy projectile points, heavy stone implements, ground stone--celts,
full-grooved axes, boatstones, plummets--some shell, and a thick
heavy granular-tempered pottery.
When I came to Oklahoma and began work on these materials I
wanted to see whether the Archaic-like materials could be differentiated from the pottery. Construction of the Wister Reservoir, now
covering the area, enabled further excavation, and I selected the Scott
site, with a five-foot deposit. The lower two feet had no pottery. From
the upper three feet we defined ~Williams Plain pottery, a granular,
clay-tempered type. The inventory from this one site is not large
enough to enable full differentiation of the WPA collection into
"Lower Fourche Maline" and "Upper Fourche Maline," except on a
purely typological basis. More extensive analysis of the collections
by sites may make it possible to work the whole thing out.
The WPA sites were completely excavated, not just sampled. If we
can get reports on these sites we can perhaps work out a sequence.
There doesn’t seem to be much change in the overall complex when
pottery comes in.
This Williams Plain pottery in late Fourche Maline seems to be an
early form of ware found all over southeastern Oklahoma. It is just

98

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

about the same as the utility ware at Spiro, Harlan, Brackett, and
other Gibson sites. Thus you have a carry-over into the Gibson Aspect.
Now and then in a Fourche Maline site we find a Gibson-like pot, so
that we may have an overlap or inter-change with early Gibson. In
the known Fourche Maline area there are mound sites which have
never been dug; if we can dig them, they may help us understand
the relationship, between Fourche Maline and the Gibson Aspect.
There is some cremation in both Fourche Maline and Gibson Aspect
sites. They also both have boatstones. But in general, the two-Fourche Maline and Gibson Aspect--have different flavors.
Fourche Maline-like material is found all the way south to McCurtain County, north to the Arkansas River, and east into Arkansas along
the Petit Jean. Also, Williams Plain is very like the earliest Ozark
Bluff Dweller pottery.
Another complex which is relevant to this problem is found at the
Vanderpool site, in the Ft. Gibson reservoir area on the Grand River.
It is really a series of connected sites along the river. Here I have collected a lot of crude heavy chipped implements, choppers, digging
tools, scrapers, and rough core materials. It is a big assemblage. At
first we thought it was Archaic, but when we dug we found Williams
Plain pottery. This material has not been published. I have been referring to it as "pre-Gibson," but it is above the Archaic.
Fourche Maline and Vanderpool are two examples that I have found
of the possible Archaic-Gibson transition. They are related to each
other insofar as Williams Plain pottery is concerned.
]elks: You mentioned the occurrence of pottery here. Where do arrowpoints come in.9 Do you have an "arrowpoint stage" like Krieger’s?
Bell: That depends upon what you mean by "arrowpoints." If you
mean the small pressure-chipped "bird points," they do not appear
until after the pottery comes in. They do not occur at all in the Vanderpool site, unless perhaps on the surface.
Webb: Is there any bone tempering in Fourche Maline? Bell: Williams Plain has a little bone tempering, mixed in with the clay. I have
segregated these sherds and studied their distribution, but it seems to
be entirely random; I cannot find any stratigraphic evidence as yet.
Krieger: The Fourche Maline and Vanderpool pottery is not IIopewellian, is it? Bell: No. Ford: Do you find Hopewellian flake knives
in these sites? Bell: No; the knives here are worked on both faces, and
are square-ended or oval. The houses are square in outline, with a
skort trench passage entrance. There are usually six central roof sup-

FIFTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

99

ports. This is not the typical Gibson house pattern, but it is interesting
because pre-Gibson houses are hard to find.
Krieger [referring back to his chart, p. 913: I do not visualize the
situation in East Texas as simply as this chart would imply. It is not
a neat layer-cake situation. Baerreis’ chart [p. 943 is a very good approach to the matter, and it may well be that the East Texas situation
was similar to that in northeastern Oklahoma. Simple succession is not
the proper model; we should not think of abrupt cuhure changes in
unilinear sequence.
It looks as if Fourche Maline may represent a pre-Gibson ceramic
complex having only large heavy projectile points, like the Woodland
situation. It may be that as we move south, the arrowpoints come in
without any pottery.
Ford: Note that the situation of an Archaic complex existing into
recent times is found in Central Texas, where the Archaic lasted into
historic times. Probably this circumstance occurred because the area
is peripheral to the Mississippi Valley. Similarly, on the Atlantic
Coast you find early stamped wares lasting into the historic period.
You do not find persistences like this in the central area. We had
wild savages on the peripheries.

SANDY POTTERY

]elks: This question of whether arrowpoints or pottery appeared
first is a knotty problem. In the Galveston Bay material excavated by
Wheat at the Addicks Reservoir near Houston--outside the Caddoan
area--there was a consistent sequence. At the bottom was an Archaic
complex like that which underlies Caddoan in East Texas. Then
above it you have the same complex plus sandy pottery; and shortly
afterward, arrowpoints appear.
In the McGee Bend Reservoir on the Angelina River in east Texas
we have been finding some very similar sandy ware mixed right in
with Caddoan ceramics. This is the same as the sandy ware at the
Davis site, which I determined by checking the original Davis site
sherds. The vessels of the sandy-tempered ware (Goose Creek ware)
on the coast are in this form [Fig. 4], very like the Woodland tradition.
Clay tempering appears later on the coast, and spreads down the
coast to Corpus Christi, in the Rockport Focus, in which the vessels
have incising on the rim and asphalt decoration. It is known that in

100

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 4. Form of Sand-tempered Coastal Pottery.

this latter region this pottery was being made in historic times by the
Karankawa, since it is found with points chipped from glass and European materials.
Wheat thought that at Addicks Reservoir this sand-tempered Goose
Creek ware was contemporaneous in part with Tchefuncte, since he
identified several sherds from one vessel as Tchefuncte, although Griffin disagreed with the identification. If Wheat is right, this sandy
ware covers a long time span.
Krieger: The sandy pottery is better-made as time goes on. At first
it is crude, and about a half-inch thick. Later, incised and punctate designs appear on the rim. It diffused as far down the coast as Corpus
Christi. Campbell: Yes, essentially the same pottery is found around
Corpus Christi.
]elks: Archaic peoples adopted this ware. I don’t know its source.
Ford: It is found all over the place.
YARBIIOUGH, SANDEI~S-LIKE, AND RELATED SITES

]elks: Along the upper Sabine we find small Archaic sites, and occasionally one will have a few sherds, and now and then an arrowpoint, on the surface. Only one site, the Yarbrough site, has been excavated. The sherds are Caddoan that is, the paste is Caddoan, with
clay and occasionally bone tempering. Most of it is plain, with a little
of it decorated--some are Canton Incised, some have simple engraving, some have scalloped tips. Essentially, this is a simplified version

FIFTI-I

CADDOA]N CONFERENCE

101

of the Sanders Focus pottery from the Sanders site itself, which in
turn is simpler than most Gibson Aspect material. There is no elaborate material in these sites, just a simple ware associated with typically Archaic material. The idea has been suggested that if there is
a "Caddoan ceramic tradition," this might represent the earliest developmental stage.
Crook and Harris have made a study of similar materials in the
same area and have submitted a statement on it.
[The following statement by Crook and Harris, who were unable
to attend the Conference, was read into the record.]

A Type of PotterT Site in North Central Texas
That May Be Pre-Gibson
BY W. W. C~ooK, Jl~., A~D R. K. HARRI.S
For the past few years we have been making a study of a type of
pottery site which may pre-date the Gibson Aspect. Several of these
sites have been found in the north-central part of Texas, in an area
east of the Trinity River as far east as Wood and Lamar counties,
and between Red River and Henderson counties. The purpose of this
statement is to place in the record a description of four of these sites.
Very few of these sites have been studied, as they are usually rather
small sites. Whether we are professional or amateur, we are sometimes prone to overlook the smaller sites and study only the larger
ones. We sometimes find that the larger sites contain the remains of
two or more groups or loci and are somewhat mixed up, while the
smaller sites seem to be the remains of one group and therefore pure
sites of the focus represented.
The type of site here discussed is usually found on a low rise or
terrace of a river or creek. The top of the rise or terrace is usually
made up of several inches of fine blow sand which we have called
the Pattillo Sand. This sand may vary from two or three inches to
several feet thick depending on erosion from cultivation and blowing
wind. These sites are usually located in the top few inches of the sand.
They are non-mound sites and usually cover about two acres. Bone
material is very scarce--if present at all--but mussel shell is sometimes present. No definite hearths have been found and charcoal is
found only in small flecks. The smallness of charcoal pieces resembles
the Archaic sites found in the area; however, definite hearths have
been found in the Archaic sites in some cases. As these sites will re-

102

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ceive more study in the future, hearths and charcoal samples may be
found, and also house sites may be located and excavated. In fact, we
now believe that we have located a house in one of these small sites
--not discussed here--in the southern part of Dallas County.
The Trinidad Site (H3). This site is located in Henderson County
on the plant property of The Texas Power and Light Company. It is
located on the east side of the Trinity River and has been mostly destroyed by levee building and erosion, but it formerly covered about
two acres of sandy land on a low terrace overlooking the river. The
site was almost destroyed during a big overflow in 1943 when the river
changed its course and left only a small part of the site undisturbed.
This small part of the terrace was later destroyed to build a levee, but
before this destruction of the last piece of the original terrace, the
stratigraphy of the site was studied. At this point the terrace was composed of the following: From the surface down to a depth of eighteen
inches was loose blow sand, below which was a red to yellow clay.
The pottery site was located in the top eight or ten inches of the loose
blow sand. About two inches above the top of the clay and extending
down six oi" eight inches into the clay was located an Archaic site of
the Carrolhon Focus. Collections were made from both levels, but here
we are concerned with the collection obtained from the pottery level
in the top of the sand.
Five pottery sherds were found, of which four are plain and one
is decorated with incised parallel straight lines. Four of the sherds are
clay tempered and one is bone tempered.
Lithic artifacts found total 132 pieces and are of the following types:
Arrow points, Alba
Dart points, Gary
Dart points, Ellis
Copena points or knives
Drills (unshaped base)
Drills (shaped base; broken Gary)
Turtle-back scrapers
Flake scrapers
Knives (leaf-shaped)
Total:
Other artifacts found:
Broken celt
Bead made from ironstone concretion
Scraper (mussel shell)
Hoe (mussel shell)

4
73
2
3
2
1
11
4
32
132
1
1
2
I

PIFTIK CADDOAN CONFERENCE

103

The Miklas Site (27D2~-1). This site is located on a small sand rise
on the east side of King’s Creek on the Miklas farm in Kaufman
County about 2~ miles southwest of the city of Kaufman. The site is
in the top few inches of the blow sand and covers about two or three
acres. During the past few years wind action has eroded the surface
of this sand, exposing the site, which seems to be six to eight inches
deep in the sand.
Forty-five pottery sherds have been found. Four of these sherds are
from decorated vessels and forty-one are plain sherds. The decorated
sherds are of the following types:
1
1
1
1

Weches Fingernail Impressed (about ~ of the vessel)
Canton Incised
Sherd with parallel straight lines--engraved
Sherd with parallel straight lines--incised

The tempering material of seven of the sherds is bone and the other
thirty-eight are clay tempered.
Lithic artifacts from the site are as follows:
Arrow points, Alba
Arrow points, Bonham-Perdiz
Dart points, Gary
Dart points, Ellis
Drills (unshaped base)
Turtle-back scrapers
Knives (leaf-shaped)
Tota!:

10
3
85
1
1
14
7
121

The Blain Site (27B8-1). This site is located on the west side of
King’s Creek on the Blain farm about six miles south-southwest of
Terrell in Kaufman County. The site is on a low sandy terrace and
covers about two acres. Erosion from cultivation and wind action has
exposed the site in some places, while in others it is buried. In the
deeper sand areas it seems to be six to eight inches in depth. In some
of the washes, the sand has been eroded away and the red clay is
exposed. The farm is no longer cultivated but is used as a stock farm
and grass is covering the site. Near the center of the site is an area
where the sand is from eight to ten inches deep and the site remains
in situ. Excavation is planned in this area in the future.
At this site a total of 80 potsherds have been collected. Five of them
are decorated and 75 are plain. Seventy-three of the sherds are clay

TEXAS AltCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tempered and seven are bone tempered. The decorated sherds can be
typed as follows:
1 Canton Incised
1 Free Punctates
3 Incised criss-crossedlines
Lithic artifacts collected can be typed as follows:
Arrow points, Alba
Arrow points, Cliffton
Arrow points, Fresno
Dart points, Gary
Pogo or spear point
Drills (unshaped base)
Turtle-back scrapers
Knives (leaf-shaped)
Total:

3
1
1
11
1
1
3
2
23

The Talty Site (27B5-7). This site is located on a small sand rise
on the east side of Bachelor Creek in Kaufman County about three
miles southwest of Terrell. Cultivation and wind action have eroded
most of the site away; however, a small part of the site is still in situ
near the top of the rise. The loose blow sand at this point seems to be
about four or five inches deep. In area the site covers about two acres.
A total of six pottery sherds have been collected, of which five are
plain and one is decorated. The decorated sherd has a single incised
straight line. Three of the sherds are clay tempered and three are bone
tempered.
Lithic artifacts collected are as follows:
Arrow points, Alba
Arrow points, Bonham-Perdiz
Dart points, Gary
Dart points, Ellis
Dart points, San Patrice
Turtle-back scrapers
Scrapers (broken Gary)
Knives (leaf-shaped)
Total:

5
3
62
!
1
8
2
1t
93

Comparisons and Conclusions. As the artifacts from all four of the
above sites are nearly the same in regard to types and numbers of
each type present, we will combine the artifacts from all sites and

FIFTII CADDOAN CONFERENCE

105

then discuss the sites. Below will be found the combined totals for the
sites.
Pottery Sherds
Weches Fingernail Impressed
Canton Incised
Incised straight lines
Incised criss-crossed lines
Engraved straight lines
Free punctates
Tota! Decorated:
Plain sherds

i
2
3
3
i
1
i1
i25

Total Sherds:

i36

Temp ering material:
Clay
Bone

i 18
i8

Lithic Artifacts
Arrow points
Dart points
Pogo or Spear Point
Drills
Scrapers
Knives

30
239
i
5
42
52

Total:

369-

Mussel Shell Artifacts
Mussel shell scrapers
Mussel shell hoe
Total:

2
1
3

Pecked and Polished Artifacts
Celt (broken)
Bead from ironstone concretion
Total:

i
1
2

Total artifacts all four sites .................... 510
1. A total of i36 pottery sherds has been collected. The tempering
material of i8 sherds is bone and the other il8 are clay tempered.

106

TEXAS AiRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

This small percentage of bone temper seems to be somewhat like the
situation in the Alto Focus. In color, the sherds from the above four
sites and related sites resemble sherds from both the 2alto and Sanders
loci; they are probably more like Sanders Focus sherds in this respect.
In terms of decoration, both Alto Focus and Sanders Focus sherds are
present. The incised straight lines may represent the Davis Incised
type of the Alto Focus; these sherds are small. The free punctates are
very much like Alto; however, some free punctates occur at the Sanders site. Comparison may be made with a group of sherds in the collection of R. K. Harris, which were excavated from cache pits at the
Sanders site. These pits had only sherds from the Sanders Focus, and
the sherds probably represent Sanders utility vessels. On examination,
one will find free punctates, a very sloppy Canton Incised, and some
type of Pennington or Crockett Incised.
No pipestem fragments have been found at the above four sites, but
from sites of this type in Lamar County, at the eastern edge of the
area, several fragments of the stems of beautiful long-stemmed pipes
like those from Crenshaw have been found. In a burial at the Crenshaw site, excavated by Mr. H. U. Girdley and photographed by Mr.
M. P. Miroir, there were found a long-stemmed pipe, several arrow
points very close to Alba, and a beautiful Copena point. Copena points
were found at Gahagan (Webb and Dodd, 1939) and here we have
three Copena points from the Trinidad Site described above. Some may
say this is round-about evidence for association, but we believe it is no
accident.
At the last Caddoan Conference, :[elks seemed to think that the Sanders Focus is older than has been supposed (Davis, 1961: 9). We agree
with him and also wish to state that we think it is time for someone
to make a study of the Sanders utility ware, as well as a study of some
of the type sites we have described above.

2. Projectile points from the four sites are of two sorts, arrow points
and dart points. The dart points far outnumber the arrow points: 239
dart points to 30 arrow points. Of the 30 arrow points, 22 are Alba, an
Alto Focus type, and six are Bonham-Perdiz, a Sanders Focus type.
We have used the term "Bonham-Perdiz" instead of just "Bonham"
because it has been noticed at the Sanders site, at sites like the four
above, and in shelter sites along the Brazos River where Sanders Focus
pottery sherds are found, that Bonham and Perdiz points grade from
one type to the other so that in a single site like Sanders it is hard to
distinguish the two types.
Of the 239 dart points found in the four above sites, 231 are Gary

107
points. Publications on the Sanders Site show no dart points as belonging to the Sanders Focus. However, in the Sanders site cache pits mentioned above, which contained Sanders Focus sherds, 34 dart points
were found: 3! Gary, 2 Ellis, one Pogo, and a drill made from a broken
Gary point. The dart points at the Sanders site are not found in the
areas where recent triangular arrow points are found, but rather with
the Sanders Focus material.
3. Although no Cahokia or Harrell points were found in the above
four sites, this type of point was found at Spiro, a few were found at
Sanders, several were found at Gahagan mixed with Alba points, and
several were found mixed with Bonham points in a grave containing
two Sanders vessels at a site (probably of the type described above)
in Collin County, Texas. The Harrell or Cahokia point may not be
a very good time marker.
4. Above all, we need a more thorough study of the Sanders utility
ware, a more thorough study of sites in north-central and northeastern
Texas which have no mounds, which are seemingly built on an
Archaic base, and which have basically plain pottery with some Alto
and Sanders decorated ware.
5. Last, but not least, we are in need of more Carbon-14 dates from
sites in Texas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Arkansas. Such dates should
not be too hard to obtain.
[Crook also sent the following statement: ]
Crook: In addition to Harris’ and my statement, I would like to add
a couple of thoughts to the discussion:
(1) Transition from Archaic to Gibson. Whether by conquest or
peaceful cultural absorption, the arriving Gibson Aspect people apparently mingled with the Archaic people already present, retaining
many of the Archaic traits for a while along with the new culture. According to my personal observation, this Archaic so involved was without exception the "East Texas Archaic" (or some other suitable name,
so long as it possessed the Gary type dart point as the major dart point
in numbers). True, there is an intermediate zone between East Texas
and, for example, our Trinity Aspect, wherein a number of dart types
of North Central or Central Texas are found--no doubt as contact
material--but the Gary points predominate. The Wylie Focus is a
perfect example. The "East Texas Archaic" is related to the general
Mississippi Valley, etc., and possessed polished stone and other traits
different from the Archaic in north-central Texas, possibly possessing

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

a cultural level better suited to take on the new Gibson traits. It may
even have already been practicing agriculture of some kind; the Leary
site of this "East Texas" group near Texarkana has yielded over 1,800
dart points, and it is difficult to imagine such a population center existing long without exhausting the game in the vicinity~ unless some
other food could support the group!
(2) "Sanders" Utility Pottery. "Sanders" still is 100% grave material from a ceremonial center possessing mounds. Absolutely undescribed and unestablished is its undoubted utility ware which, in
outlying centers (non-ceremonial, without mounds and cult), as well
as simple "contact" material in adjacent Archaic country, ought to
be the main material found! At the Sanders site itself we have a lot
of clay-tempered sherds, many plain, a number decorated, which are
undoubtedly Gibson Aspect; they certainly would not accompany the
side-notched triangular arrow points and shell-tempered pottery of the
later occupation. Presumably they are Sanders utility ware. If so,
many are very similar to Alto utility wares. Are these sherds specifically "Sanders," are they Alto trade sherds, or are they just general
"Gibson utility" sherds in common with most other Gibson Aspect
sites? And it is just such material as this that comprises the sherds in
our outlying, marginal area sites; except that out here in north-central
Texas, where we have no mounds and very little ceremonial burial
pottery (though we do get some of both Sanders and Alto!), what do
these sherds indicate? Do they represent trade or contact with Sanders
Focus, or with Alto Focus, or are they just generalized Gibson Aspect
utility sherds? I have a strong hunch that a study of Sanders utility
ware will clarify a lot of vague occurrences and associations.

Webb: Early Crenshaw pottery has Coles Creek decoration with
some Gibson Aspect characteristics, such as red-filming and pigment
impressed into the lines. Ford and Dickinson said that the paste differed
from Coles Creek ware elsewhere. The context is that of the Gibson
Aspect: the multiple extended burials, the kind and placement of
vessels and other artifacts with respect to the bodies, the placing of
points in caches or groups, long stemmed pipes, carapace rattles, and
colored sand on the floor of the grave--all this is pure Gibson Aspect.
The whole situation argues for the contemporaneity of Coles Creek
and Gibson Aspect.
Ford: I am challenged to a rebuttal. Where did these Gibson Aspect
burial characteristics come from? Webb: I don’t know; they iust ap-

109

pear here all at once at this time, so that the traits must have been
brought in. Ford: Might this actually be earlier than Gibson, and
might not Gibson Aspect have derived these burial characteristics
from this complex? Webb: In that case the Coles Creek people would
have had to pick up the traits elsewhere and transmit them to Gibson.
And in such case, where did the non-Coles Creek Gibson Aspect traits
come from? Where did they pick them up? These Gibson Aspect traits
are not found elsewhere with Coles Creek. It is easier to assume that
the Coles Creek people picked up traits from the Gibson Aspect people.
Ford: True, but there is no evidence for trade between Coles Creek
and Gibson Aspect. The wares at Crenshaw are late Coles Creek. I
would still prefer to assign this complex to a pre-Gibson Aspect time.
Webb: What about the red filming and the pigment in the lines?
Ford: Red-slipping is an early trait in the Mississippi Valley (Larto
Red), though it did not survive throughout the sequence. Phillips:
There is a good deal of red-slipped French Fork Incised further up the
Mississippi Valley in Mississippi. Ford: Pigment in the lines is a trait
found all over Mesoamerica.
Phillips: Regarding this early Crenshaw material, do you find arrowpoints with the Coles Creek material? Is there not an interspersion
of pre-Caddoan and Gibson burials? Lemley speaks of arrowpoints in
"pre-Caddoan burials" there. I am not entirely clear which is which.
Webb: These matters are not at all clear.
SNIPES SITE, AND

FURTHER

Discussion

OF

PLAIN WARE

Jelks [with specimens]: Here is some pottery from the Snipes site
in the Texarkana Reservoir area on the Sulphur River. Would you call
this Williams Plain? At this site we found 21 sherds (out of some
4,000) with incised lips and rims like Coles Creek Incised or Chase
Incised.
Ford and Phillips: This plain pottery is much the same as Baytown
Plain, the clay-tempered ware in the Mississippi Valley; you couldn’t
separate it if it were mixed in a collection from the Mississippi Valley,
except for the sherds with bone temper. Bell: This is Williams Plain.
Jelks: There are no square bases at this site. There is Caddoan pottery. The site is very shallow, and the materials are al! mixed, possibly
due to plowing. Two graves went below the plow zone, and in the fil!
of these two were Caddoan sherds and also sherds of this Williams

ii0

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Plain-Baytown Plain. This association could have been caused by
gopher activity~ it is not possible to validate primary association. Of
this plain ware 50% is bone tempered. How is one to interpret it? As
Webb has said, it seems to show a Caddoan trait which has relationships with the Mississippi area.
Ford: Might it not be that bone tempering was a western interpretation of the earlier northern Mississippian limestone tempering?

Krieger: Is there any bone tempering in the lower Red River Valley? Haag once told me so. Phillips: There is none below the middle
Ouachita, and none on the Mississippi unless we have missed it.
}elks: In some sites near Snipes there are some good Coles Creek
vessels.
Phillips: This material is similar to late Coles Creek~ there is some
evidence that in the Coles Creek and Plaquemine phases the number
of lines on the rim diminishes with time until only one remains, then
none, or one on the lip. This is the "Baytown Plain with Coles Creek
characteristics" of our 1951 survey report [Phillips et al., 1951: 81].
Ford: It is also found at Greenhouse in the Mississippi Valley. Isn’t
it true that as the pottery complex diffused, the plain ware was accepted before the rest, so that the plain ware spread and was adopted
more rapidly than the decorated ware? For instance, in Fourche Maline the plain ware was accepted before the Renner-like material. I
think this Snipes pottery came from the Mississippi Valley.

}elks: Is there any incising in Fourche Maline? Bell: Yes, on flowerpot vessels.
Ford: Possibly Fourche Maline material comes from the north. The
complex may have been moving in from the Mississippi Valley all the
way from Louisiana to Missouri. }elks: But at the Snipes site there
were so many Caddoan vessels that they must have been made there.

Baerreis: I doubt that Fourche Maline comes from the north. The
burial complex is Southeastern shell-mound Archaic, with the shell
and stone implements, the bone tools and the rest of the burial complex. There is definitely an early complex coming in here and it could
have persisted for a long time. The plain pottery in the four-state area
(Oklahoma-Arkansas-Louisiana-Texas) may be the earliest. I think
early pottery in the north is grit-tempered and cord-roughened, or
smoothed over cord-roughened. But this Williams Plain ware is not

FIFTH CADDOA?q CONFERENCE

]. J. ].

like that; it is southern smooth-surfaced ware, and may well not have
come from the north.
Jelks: Elsewhere in the Texarkana Reservoir area we found Pennington Punctated-Incised and other Alto Focus wares in tight association with this same Williams Plain ware.

Correlation oi Lower Red River and Caddoan Sequences
Krieger: There are no Coles Creek components at all in Texas, Oklahoma, or Arkansas; within the Caddoan area they are found only in
the Shreveport area. [Ford and Webb concur.] There is a mixture of
Coles Creek with Gibson Aspect in northwest Louisiana, and a few
Coles Creek trade sherds in northeast Texas; and at Spiro there are
some French Fork Incised vessels, probably as a trade ware, from
graves in the plowed fields, not from the mounds. At Crenshaw there
is a Coles Creek component in the graves. In the report on the Crenshaw Mound, Lemley mis-identified as "Coles Creek" what was later
named Davis Incised. Is the Smithport Landing site to be classed as
Caddoan or Coles Creek?
Webb: Smithport Landing is mostly Alto Focus, with some Coles
Creek pottery. There are no mounds; it is a village site. Mounds Plantation is Caddoan with a lot of Coles Creek; the Coles Creek materials
are Coles Creek Incised or Chase Incised with thickened rim, subjacent
triangles, lines with triangles between them; there are a few sherds
of Beldeau Incised. There is a lot of Hardy Incised, which goes with
Coles Creek, Plaquemine, Gibson, and Fulton; it is close kin to Coles
Creek Incised, not derived from it. The two types, Coles Creek Incised
and Hardy Incised, existed side by side for a long time.
Mounds Plantation also had a few Rhinehart Punctated sherds. One
interesting deposit was in the side of a borrow pit there, probably premound (originally there were a dozen mounds there, and a plaza);
there were 400 sherds in the deposit. Most of them were plain, many
were thick, and 30~0~ were bone-tempered. There was some thin
polished black ware, some Coles Creek Incised and Chase Incised. It
looks like fairly early pottery, with some decorated sherds coming in.
In many cases it was not possible to tell whether they were Davis Incised or a wide-line Coles Creek Incised.
Krieger: Was there Cotes Creek pottery at Gahagan? Webb: In the
field, but not in the mound. Krieger: That’s the way it always is, for
instance also at Crenshaw; it is impossible to tie in the Coles Creek

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

material under these circumstances. Baerreis: Not so at Spiro: no Coles
Creek pottery came from the field; there it is from the same area as
the burials and was surely associated with the burials; it is doubtless
a matter of trade there.
Ford: We have gone over this matter many times before in the past
years; but the situation is clear at the mouth of the Red River. Here,
Caddoan trade materials first appear at the Plaquemine level. Were
Coles Creek features perhaps preserved in the Caddo area? We need
to show how the trade went both ways. The Greenhouse occupation
began in mid-Troyville and continued on into Plaquemine.
]elks: There were certainly relations between the Caddoan area and
the Red River mouth. If Gibson Aspect began contemporaneously with
Coles Creek, then at the Plaquemine level, Caddoan material should
be of the Fulton Aspect. Ford: Call Gibson late Coles Creek. In late
Coles Creek there are tapering vessels, but there are no true bottles
with necks at the Red River mouth until Plaquemine. Webb: These
are wide-mouth bottles like Haley Focus bottles. ]elks: Taking the
list of Gibson Aspect traits drawn up earlier, what do you find in Coles
Creek--Gibson Aspect traits or Fulton Aspect traits? Ford: In late
Coles Creek we get no bottles at all; no long-stemmed pipes; no slendernecked pottery bottles; a little Hickory engraving. Fine-line engraving is Plaquemine; polished plainware is a mid-Coles Creek trait.
Webb: The Gordon site had Crockett Curvilinear Incised; and was
a Coles Creek site. Ford: It comes at the end of Coles Creek and most
of it is Plaquemine. Phillips: It is not claimed that there is any Coles
Creek component there. Webb: There were a few Marksville or Troyville stamped sherds; the site continued late enough to get a few
Natchez traits. Ford: It was originally my Coles Creek type site.
Phillips: * That was before Plaquemine had been set off from Coles
Creek.

]elks: It seems to me that Plaquemine is closer to the Fulton
Aspect. Ford: It is close to both Gibson and Fulton Aspects.
Krieger: * It would be remarkable for two groups living as much as
200 miles apart--at the Davis site and in the Mississippi Valley of
Louisiana--to be manufacturing a long series of pottery types in
approximately the same percentages or degrees of popularity. I can
think of no cultural reason for doing so. There is, on the other hand,
good evidence of trade between Gibson Aspect and Coles Creek, which
to me is better evidence of contemporaneity than any agreements in
bar-graphs of relative popularity.

FIFTH CAnnOAN COnFErENCE

i l3

Ford: In the Coles Creek area proper, we have no evidence before
Plaquemine times that the Caddoan area existed.

]elks: In that case, is there anything in Plaquemine to point to trade
with Gibson Aspect, or are the Gaddoan traits in Plaquemine sites
more like those of the Fulton Aspect?
Webb: In Plaquemine, seven pottery types out of a total of sixteen
are identical with Bossier Focus types. We are still arguing whether
the Sanson site on Catahoula Lake is Caddoan or Plaquemine; the
sherds are about 50-50. The Caddoan material is Bossier Focus--hence
Fulton Aspect--except for small contracting-stem points which are
more like Perdiz points than Bassett points. The rest of the material
is Plaquemine, not Natchez. [Ford concurs.]
Baerreis: We must assume for the Caddoan culture a derivation
from the Southeast. The Gaddoan area is marginal in the Southeast
and represents frontier groups moving out of the Southeast and into
this area among an Archaic population. We must allow for a population increase in the frontier group, the development of ceremonial
centers, and finally a period of expansion and its reflection in Plaquemine. It took time to develop the distinctive Caddoan complex, enough
time to develop distinctive trade relationships.
Ford: The Gahagan site weakens this argument. There are Coles
Greek sites to the north, but no evidence of trade relationships. Only
one site shows Gahagan material in Coles Creek. Baerreis: It would
be better for my hypothesis if Gahagan had never been found.
Webb: Bellevue-Marksville is the last period in northwestern Louisiana with no Caddoan material. All of the Coles Greek material in
the north Louisiana contact zone occurs with Gaddoan material. The
Kirkham site in Arkansas has Coles Greek and Marksville sherds, and
two Caddoan sherds. Marksville occurs in the Caddoan area without
Gaddoan materials. After that, all of the sites have Caddoan materials.
Ford: The term "Coles Creek" has been misused in the past. Coles
Greek proper had a distinct area, not extending very far west. It runs
from the mouth of Red River west to Alexandria, and up the Mississippi to below Vicksburg. It does not go above that.
Baerreis: You can have intrusion of one culture into another without mixture. A Chinatown in an American city would be an example.
Ford: But the Chinese still buy food in cans like other Americans. And

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in any case, you cannot have intrusion without mixture when the
cultures are similar. Baerreis: * To be more precise, my point is that
one can have a ghetto situation or a hostile military encampment
where the amount of cultural exchange would be at a minimum. In
such circumstances, archeological clues that would permit cross-dating
would be very meager.
Webb: The Fredericks site is the only foreign site on Red River. Is
it Marksville or Troyville? Ford: I don’t know.
ALBA POINTS (Fig. 5)
Webb: What is an Alba point? Does the type encompass both Forms
A and B?

A

B

C

D

Fig. 5. Arrowpolnt Forms.

Form A is a good Gibson Aspect diagnostic, found at Davis, Gahagan, and other places, but not found in central Louisiana. Form B
is the "fir tree" type found in Coles Creek and Troyville. What Cotter
called Alba points in his Gordon site report were like this B form,
except for one. The B form is not too different from Scallorn in Central
Texas. We have found many of them in Louisiana. Quimby found
Form B in Plaquemine sites.

Bell: I think these two forms occur together in the same quiver Df
arrows at Spiro.
Ford: It might be possible to prove that one of these forms is earlier.
Bell: Some pointed ones occur at Spiro; Scallorn and Hayes points
occur, but I am not certain whether the Hayes type occurs in the same
clusters.

FIIVTI~ CADDOAI~ COI~F!~I~ENCE

115

]elks: The bulbous stem is not Scallorn.
]ones: What about Form C?

Webb:This is what we cal! the Friley point.
]ones: In Gregg County, northeast Texas, and vicinity, Form C
occurs in what we call the Sandy Mound Archaic, but sometimes it
seems to occur with Forms A and B. It is not found with Scallorn
points. We do have Scallorn-like points--Form D--which are distinguishable from Form B; they show features of both B and C.
Webb: The Friley point is localized in northwest Louisiana. The
Gem Island site has 40% of this type. Elsewhere they occur in not
more than two to three per cent frequency.
Ford: I have not seen these points in central Louisiana. They do
not go as far as the Ouachita, though the Alba and "Fir Tree" forms
do. Webb: The Friley points barely go into Arkansas; but the "Fir
Tree" Alba form does.
]elks: I found Friley points at McGee Bend Reservoir, East Texas.
Webb: The sites in Louisiana where Friley points occur have Caddoan pottery, probably of the Fulton Aspect. There are no excavated
occurrences.
Ford: Alba points are from the Huasteca. They reached the mouth
of Red River in Troyville times.

The Historical Development ]rom Archaic to
Gibson Aspect
]elks: Following our agenda, we can ask these questions:
Does Gibson Aspect represent: (a) descendants of Archaic peoples
with new culture traits, (b) an invasion by a foreign ethnic group, or
(c) a combination of both?
If (a), are the new traits a result of local development or diffusion?
If (b), where did the foreigners come from and to what extent did
they replace the local Archaic peoples?
Did the Gibson Aspect appear in the Caddoan area as a well-developed cultural entity? If not, what evidence is there for a developmental phase?
And finally, where and when did the transition from Archaic to
Gibson begin?

TEXAS ARCIZIEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Ford: Is there any information on physical anthropology bearing on
these questions, or must we argue entirely on cultural grounds? Jelks:
We have very little skeletal evidence.

Krieger: There is a lot of continuity from Archaic to Gibson Aspect.
The full-grooved axe is striking in being one of the few exceptions. It
is difficult, under these circumstances, to believe that the appearance of
Gibson Aspect represents a sudden population movement into the
area; diffusion seems a more likely possibility. Shell tempering, red
filming, effigy wares, and appliqu~ certainly came h’om the east. But
agriculture, platform mounds, and burial mounds are not so readily
explained as to origin.
I have been misquoted as saying that the Davis site is the place
where the first group out of Mexico settled, but this is not true; it is
rather to be taken as representative of a cultural movement from
Mexico. The majority of ties between the Southeast and Mesoamerica
are with the Mesoamerican Late Formative--for instance in the matter of carinated polished bowls, pigment in lines, engraving, and so
forth. There may be a connection with the ceramic styles at Teotihuacan. The Hayes point, with diamond-shaped stem and occasionally with serrated blade edges, is found in Haley Focus and occurs in
:identical form--even including the tiny protrusions on the base and
blade--at Teotihuacan, where it was the most common type about
A.D. 300--400, possibly A.D. 500.
Another Formative trait is the fundamental idea of a platform
mound, without facing. When we begin the Mesoamerican Classic
stage, we have stone facing.
The corncobs from the Davis site were identified by Volney Jones
as being absolutely the same as ancient and modern Maya corn--not
Mexican corn. The Davis site type of corn is found all over the eastern
U. S., as far north as the St. Lawrence. We have no idea where it first
became established in the U.S., or where the idea of platform mounds
was first used.
In 1949 the estimate of the age of the Davis site was made on the
basis of comparisons with the Mexican Formative, and it was given as
A.D. 500 if not earlier. Then the radiocarbon date of A.D. 398 -- 175
[Sample C-153] came out. I find it hard to believe that that date could
be very wrong. It is possible to have falsely recent dates by contamination of the material, or falsely early dates if non-organic carbon
from the soil gets into the sample; but these Davis site samples were

FIFTH

CADDOAN CONFERENCE

117

clean charred corncobs, in excellent shape. The date, furthermore,
does not disagree seriously with the radiocarbon dates Ford has in
Troyville and Marksville. Troyville marks the appearance of temple
mounds.
Phillips: Regarding the first appearance of temple mounds in the
lower Red River area, I don’t think Ford is right in placing them as
early as Troyville; the earliest datable platform mounds are well within Coles Creek. Sears: I agree. Phillips: The evidence is not clear at
Greenhouse. Ford: Yes, it is. The oldest refuse from Greenhouse comes
from mounds which have sherds of Troyville and early Coles Creek
types; I date these mounds as late Troyville. Phillips: Of course there
is no sharp Troyville-Coles Creek division, and it depends on how you
draw the line. But to make the mounds late Troyville, you have to move
Coles Creek types into Troyvi!le. Ford: It is a matter of percentage
distribution.--For that matter, you have a suggestion of platform
mounds in Hopewell and at Marksville.
Phillips: These are platforms, but not platform mounds. They are
just piled-up shapeless flat-topped house mounds, gradually built up.
You can call them temple mounds if you want, but they aren’t. At the
point in the history of the Greenhouse site where you can say "This is
now a temple mound," you are already in Coles Creek.
Ford: I disagree with all this. The platform temple mounds started
in late Troyville. It seems strange that, following your idea, people
would have carefully lined up residences in anticipation of a future
mound. Phillips: Let’s hold the question suspended until a better site is
at hand. Ford: What about Av-25 P Neitzel: It is different from Greenhouse and from Mississippian. It is not amorphous. It is a real temple
mound. There is a Plaquemine overlay. I think I can associate the
mound with Troyville, but not as clearly as at Greenhouse. It may be
Coles Creek.
Phillips: I think the temple mound and Coles Creek pottery appeared together in the lower Mississippi Valley.
Ford: Griffin started with the assumption that no temple mounds
preceded the Mississippian, in his Mississippi Valley Survey.
Krieger: Let’s look at the radiocarbon dates we have. [He wrote
them on the board: ]

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A.D.

"Cdes Greek"
1310 ± 250
1250 ± 100
1180
1150
970
870
820

"Troyville"

1090
1050
960
850
780
770
690
650
540
530
510
20

Here we have a wide spread of dates. Troyville has dates from A.D.
1090 all the way back to A.D. 20. We still don’t know the time of entry
of features such as temple mounds.
Sears: The Kolomoki site in Georgia, which has temple mounds, has
two radiocarbon dates, one on either side of A.D.i.
Ford: This illustrates the fallibility of radiocarbon dating.
Sears: Bullen has a Kolomoki period site, in Florida, with good
datable material, and a date of A.D. 500.
Krieger: What I am trying to show, and this other evidence supports
it, is that temple mounds are earlier than has been thought in the past.
Borhegyi: In Mesoamerica, temple mounds are already present in
the Late Formative, as early as 1,000 B.c.
Krieger: * The Mississippi Pattern is very reminiscent of the Formative in Mexico.--The dates for Spiro run from 1800 to 2700 years ago,
and although I can’t believe that Spiro can possibly date that far back,
neither can I believe that it is as recent as most eastern archeologists
would like to have it, particularly in view of the Troyville and Coles
Creek dates which I listed.
Phillips: I think the best date for Spiro is A.D. 1300; the Southern
Cult appears to be a horizon in the Southeast, at about this date. Sears:
There are two dates from the Etowah Valley in Georgia, for two suc-

FIFTH CADDOAI’ff CONFERENCE

119

cessive cultures, both with Cult material. The dates are in the A.D.
1300--1500 range. The material practically duplicates Spiro. Krieger:
Falsely late dates are possible because of contamination of radiocarbon
samples, but falsely early dates are unlikely. Phillips: The late date,
A.D. 1300, is good because in the lower Valley whenever you find cult
material--which is not very often--it is all Plaquemine or later in
date. Since Plaquemine overlies Coles Creek, A.D. 1200--1300 is a good
date for the beginning of Plaquemine. How can Middle Spiro be A.D.
500, and Middle Mississippi be A.D. 1300? Krieger: But how about the
much earlier dates in Mesoamerica? Phillips: I don’t derive the Southern Cult from Mesoamerica any more. Ford: In looking at the possibility of Mesoamerican origins, a big time lag is possible when you
get out to the periphery like this, so that the differences in dates may
not be surprising.

Krieger: People in the East think of Hopewell as being about the
time of Christ, and go on from there. In the Valley the Mississippi pattern may be older than we think.
Phillips: If the Coles Creek dates are correct, then Plaquemine must
begin about A.D. 1300. We can’t assume the contemporaneity of Mississippian and Coles Creek.
[At this point, Baerreis, Bell, Krieger, and Webb had to leave for a
committee meeting.l Baerreis: I suggest that the Recording Secretary
note our departure, in order that the sudden silence of certain hitherto
active participants in this discussion will not be taken to indicate acquiescence or capitulation.
Jelks: Let’s get back to the question of how the transition from Archaic to Gibson Aspect may have taken place. In the first place, there
is continuity from Archaic to Caddoan; the artifact types persist. [All
agree on this.~ The only interpretation that I can think of, despite the
physical evidence, is that indigenous people were certainly involved
in what came later, and that some of the stimuli must have come from
Mexico. The Caddoan Area seems to be one area where certain Mexican traits got a foothold, however they may have reached this area.
Some of the same traits are found also in the Mississippi Valley, but
they are more characteristic here in the Caddoan area; and it may be
interpreted that they made a beachhead here, grew, and moved on.
[No disagreement.J
Ford: I once published a paper demonstrating that the bulk of Caddo

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ceramic characteristics moved up from Florida to the Mississippi Valley and into the Caddo area.
Borhegyi: I have been toying with the idea of diffusion by sea from
the Huastec coast. Why not think of the Huastecs coming up by boat,
regular trading boats, to Galveston or New Orleans? McGimsey: Bill
Sanders has worked on this idea; he suggested it several years ago in a
seminar, and thinks the evidence points that way. Borhegyi: We know
that in the circum-Caribbean area there were boat routes all over the
place.
]elks: But we can’t speak of a time lag by boat.
Ford: There was a time lag already in the Huasteca, since there
were unlaced mounds in Huastec III and IV. I think that polished
pottery probably came by boat, also small arrow points, and probably
religious ideas. The Mississippian people, with temple mounds and
agriculture, moved up Red River, mixed with Archaic peoples, developed, set up trade with Huasteca, and picked up the Mexican-origin
"Caddoan" traits and some Southwestern elements; and thus the Caddoan development occurred, which in turn affected Mississippi on a
late time level. The combination of 75~o Mississippian plus 25~o
Mexican produced the Caddoan tradition, which in turn affected the
Southeast.

]elks: On what horizon would you place this movement from the
Mississippi Valley? Would you connect these people with early Crenshaw, Snipes, Fourche Maline, and so forth? Ford: Yes; it would be
Late Coles Creek-early Plaquemine. This could have been a stagnant
area for centuries, preserving ideas received earlier. It remained "hillbilly" until they got a new influence from the agricultural pattern of
the Valley.
]elks: So we have influence from Mexico and from the Mississippi
Valley causing the change from Archaic to Gibson Aspect. Were there
any other factors or influences?
Phillips: What about Cahokia influences, for instance at Gahagan?
Ford: Might not the influences have gone the other way? Phillips:
Possibly; but what about the Long-nosed God? It is widely distributed
in the Southeast and in respect to that distribution Gahagan is marginal, so that it seems more likely that the influence went from east to
west. Sears: Florida is marginal too, in this respect. Borhegyi: In Mesoamerica we have all kinds of long-nosed gods; pick your type.

1P,1
Phillips: The "cloud-blower" pipe from Gahagan seems to be from
the Tennessee-Cumberland area, not native to the Caddoan context.
Ford: Why don’t we list the Caddoan traits in terms of the areas
from which they came? Let’s start with traits which probably came
directly from Mexico.
Discussion: Carinated bowls
Polishing
Greque
Zig-zag (in the Alto Focus)
Little Hayes points, 25 ram. long
Engraved shells
Ford: I am not listing temple mounds because I think the Caddoan
area got them second-hand, via the Mississippi Valley. The trait of
extended burials with quantities of grave goods could be from Mexico.
Phillips: It is common in Hopewell. Ford: But does it occur in mounds
there? Sears: In Illinois Hopewell there are graves which are like the
Caddoan graves.
Ford: Now let’s list the Caddoan traits which may be from the Mississippi Valley:
Rectangular temple mounds
Plaza orientation
Ceramic complex including: scroll design; quadration (from
Marksville-Hopewell) ; roughening of design background and negative bringing out of design; spurred lines; incised curvilinear design
(originally from Florida); concentric circles; distinction between
rim and body design (from Hopewell); stamping; incised lines
parallel to rim.
Effigies--but not all of them look like Mississippi Valley effigies.
Phillips: Rim effigies on bowls and some other effigies. Negative
painting--rare in the Caddoan area.
Ford: Pipe forms from the Mississippi Valley went to the Caddoan
area and thence to Mexico. In her study of Mesoamerican pipes,
Muriel Porter should not have accepted Willey’s and my time estimates made in 1941.
Borhegyi: Cremation probably entered Mexico and Mesoamerica
along with pipes. Pipes--Caddoan forms--appear in Mexico about
A.D. 1200. Parallel lines occur in Huastec wares.

]elks: Note that in the case of some of the traits in this list--temple

i22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mounds for instance--some of our four now-absent participants (Baerreis, Bell, Krieger, and Webb) would claim that they moved the other
way: from the Caddoan area to the Mississippi Valley.
Krieger: * As far as I am concerned, I have never said or claimed
that the temple mound idea moved from the Caddoan area to the
Mississippi Valley; yet everyone seems to think that is one of my main
ideas. Rather, I claim that all these assumptions about where, how,
and when the temple mound idea diffused in the eastern states are
highly personal, and no one actually knows the time or direction of
its diffusion.
[This was the end of the first day of the conference. Cotter, Griffin,
and Stephenson arrived in time to participate in the second day’s discussion.]
Historic Sites in the Caddoan Area
[The following statement by Williams, who was not able to be
present, was distributed by Phillips: ]
A Proposal for the Revision of Terminology for the
Historic Phases (Foci) in the Caddo Area
BY

STEPHEN WILLIAMS

(This statement is given here as it was presented at the Conference,
although both it and the manuscript cited as Williams, 1955, are being
revised for publication.--S.W.)
i. Allen Phase (after Suhm, et al., i954: 2i9-22i).
1.i Type Component: Jim Allen, Cherokee Co., Texas.
1.2 Other Components: (see reference for list).
1.3 Characteristic Traits: Patton Engraved, etc.
1.4 Trade: European Items; Avery and Simms Engraved.
i.5 Temporal Position: A.D. 1600--1835.
i.6 Ethnic Identification: Hasinai Confederacy (Griffith, i954).
i.7 Discussion: Some components of this phase were probably still
in existence in i 835, as the Kadohadacho joined with the Hasinai
in Texas when they moved out of Louisiana at that date. The
combined tribes began a westward movement toward the Brazos
late in that decade.
2. Lawton Phase (new phase, extracted from old Glendora).
2.1 Type Components: Fish Hatchery site, Natchitoches Parish, La.

FIFTH CADDOA~~ CONFERENCE

123

(VValker, 1935); Lawton, Natchitoches Parish, La., (Webb,
1945).
2.2 Other Components: Allen Plantation, Wilkinson Place, near
Natchitoches, La. (Ford, 1936).
2.3 Characteristic Traits: Natchitoches Engraved.
2.4 Trade: European items; Fatherland Incised.
2.5 Temporal Position: A.D. 1650--1805.
2.6 Ethnic Identification: Natchitoches Confederacy including the
Lower Natchitoches and Doustioni (Swanton, 1952: 205-207).
2.7 Discussion: Components of this phase were subjected to considerable European contact from around 1700, with the French post
of Natchitoches being established near them. Another Caddoan
group, which is considered slightly divergent, the Adai, had a
village near the modern town of Robeline, Natchitoches Parish,
La.. and they might be included in this phase. The Adai post has
been located, but no description of the material has been published so far as I know.
3. Little River Phase (tentative name for new phase set up on historic
documentation).
3.1 Type Components: The five major historic villages of the Kadohadacho; three located in Bowie Co., Texas, one in Little Biver
Co. and one in Hempstead Co., Ark.
3.2 Other Components: The historic villages of the Petit Caddo and
Yatasi in Caddo Parish, La.
3.3 Characteristic Traits: No archeological materials available.
3.4Trade: Considerable European trade goods; probably also
Natchitoches Engraved, and trade pottery from the Ouachita
drainage.
3.5 Temporal Position: A.D. 1542--1780.
3.6 Ethnic Identification: The tribes of the Kadohadacho Confederacy including the Kadohadacho, Petit Caddo, Upper Natchitoches, Upper Nasoni, and Nanatsoho. Probably also the Yatasi.
3.7 Discussion: La Harpe had a fort, the Nissonite Post, in this area
in 1719. Following pressure from the Osage and a severe epidemic in 1777, the major members of the Kadohadacho Confederacy left their old location in the north and moved into the
area around Caddo Lake, northwest of the modern town of
Shreveport. The Yatasi village is shown on maps of the period
1816-1839 in southwestern Caddo Parish, just west of the 94th
meridian and north of Boggy Bayou (Williams, 1955). None of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

these sites is known archeologically. Other possible components
of this phase will be discussed later. Query: Is this phase derived
from the Texarkana Focus (phase) ?
4. Glendora Phase (restricted usage of the old term).
4.1 Type Components: Glendora and Keno, Ouachita Valley, La.
(Moore, 1909).
4.2 Other Components: Douglas and Greer, lower Arkansas valley,
Arkansas (Moore, 1908).
4.3 Characteristic Traits: see above citations for details.
4.4 Trade: European items; Fatherland and Natchez Incised.
4.5 Temporal Position: 1600-1750.
4.6 Ethnic Identification: Cahinnio and Ouachita Caddo.
4.7 Discussion: The Cahinnio ioined the Kadohadacho before 1780.
This more restricted use of the term "Glendora" has been made
in an attempt to bring the historic archeology more in line with
the known ethnographic distribution of the various Caddoan
tribes in eastern Texas, northwestern Louisiana, and southwestern Arkansas.
5. Some Unplaced Historic Components.
5.1 Hunt and Clements, Cass Co., Texas (Suhm, et al., !954: 225227). These sites do not fit the historic location of any known
Caddoan villages, as has been pointed out before. Until some
components of the Little River Phase, to which they are geographically closest, are discovered and described, their phase
assignment will have to be withheld.
5.2 Kaufman, Red River Co., Texas (Harris, 1953).
An historic McCurtain focus site. Ethnohistoric identification is
uncertain, but it is probably Caddoan. Another possible Little
River Phase component in the early historic period.
5.3 Womack, Lamar Co., Texas. (Suhm, et al., 1954: 229.9,). An
historic site with more trade goods than Kaufman. A bit too
far up the Red River to be one of the named and described major
Kadohadacho villages from the documentary evidence, but quite
likely a component of the Little River phase.
6. An Unplaced Ethnographic Tribe.
6.1 The Eyeish (Swanton, 1952: 314-315). A group probably related to the Adai. Located on Ayish Bayou, a tributary of the
Angelina River. Had a Spanish mission among them from 1716
to 1773. Were on the route from the French post at Natchitoches

FIFTH CADDOA1NI CONFERENCE

125

to the Spanish Post at Nacogdoches. Not known archeologically
so far as I know.
7. Query: What does historic Wichita archeology look like? Could it be
confused with the material formerly called "Glendora Focus"?

Bell: Williams is certainly to be commended for his work in this
field.
Krieger: Williams uses the term "phase" in place of what is usually
called "focus" in the Caddoan area. I see no reason to use the term
"phase." ]elks: We will use "focus."
Williams: * I have used the term "phase" since I feel strongly that
the term "focus" is too closely associated with the rest of the McKern
system, which I feel has outlived its usefulness in the eastern United
States and in the Caddoan area especially (cf. my review of Webb’s
Belcher site report [Williams, 1960]), and I prefer the terminology
espoused by Willey and Phillips (1958).
Webb: If the Europeans had not appeared for another 200 years, so
that this material had had more time to develop, it would have appeared to us as another aspect. It is as different from the Fulton Aspect
as Fulton Aspect is from Gibson Aspect, but as it is now we can’t
separate it from Fulton Aspect. This applies to the Glendora Focus in
particular, because on the Red River the trait of mound building,
which continues from the Gibson Aspect through the Texarkana and
Belcher Foci of the Fulton Aspect, drops out in the Glendora Focus.
Also shell tempering has become important and the pottery is quite
different.
Davis: I notice Williams has a query (his paragraph 7) about the
nature of the historic Wichita materials, and whether they might be
confused with Glendora materials.
Bell: They could not be confused with Glendora Focus. Jelks: I
agree. For instance, at Spanish Fort, an established Wichita site, and
Stansbury, which also is a Wichita (Tawakoni) site. Stephenson: At
Stansbury there were a very few non-distinctive Frankston Focus
sherds, and a half-dozen Doss Redware sherds. There was no Glendora
Focus material.
Phillips: Williams wanted me to relay some queries. What was
found at Los Adais, near Robeline, La.? Davis: Fred West discussed
this at last year’s conference. Webb: There are only a few sherds, nothing definitive.

126

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Webb: I note that Williams does not place the Eyeish archeologically. ]elks: We have a historic burial at the Wylie Price site in the
McGee Bend Reservoir, in the Eyeish country. There were some glass
beads, and three pots the likes of which I have never seen before.
Webb: What is the basis of Williams’ statement that the Eyeish were
related to the Adai? I know of no data. Campbell: There is no information to relate these two groups. The Caddo regarded the Eyeish as
being very different. The Eyeish may have been hillbillies surviving
from earlier times.
Williams: * The Eyeish were listed as unplaced. Swanton was the
major source for my statement of probable relationship to the Adai.
There is admittedly little evidence of any definite nature.
Phillips: Another query from Williams: Can Mid-Ouachita Focus
be divided into prehistoric and historic loci? Webb: Not on present
evidence, but possibly it can be done after more work. If historic MidOuachita is distinguished, it will be Glendora Focus; they are so much
alike.
Phillips: Williams asks, What about the "restricted Glendora" sites
such as Douglas and Greer? [No comments.] Might the Womack site
be Wichita, plus Natchitoches Engraved as trade ware? Krieger: The
Natchitoches Engraved pottery at Womack is good Natchitoches Engraved, and is one of the main traits there. Another is Avery Engraved.
A lot of shell temper was used. It is not much like the Wichita sites
in Kansas, Oklahoma, and farther west in Texas. There were glazed
wares from the Southwest, dated as late 17th-early 18th century in the
Rio Grande valley.
]elks: I note the statement that the Womack site could not have
been Kadohadacho. King Harris, from documentary evidence, feels
that it was. Williams: * Actually, I did not state that the Womack site
could not be Kadohadacho. There is no specific documentary evidence
that I am aware of for one of the known Kadohadacho villages being
in this western location. (See the Nicholas King map of !806 in Swanton, 1942: 76, and detailed discussion in Williams, 1955). In fact, I
have noted it as a possible Little River phase component, together with
the rest of the members of the Kadohadacho Confederacy. Webb: The
historic evidence is that the Caddo were moving downstream; but they
could have had a major center as far west as Womack in early historic
times. Stephenson: Do you mean that the Caddo were undergoing a
contraction in geographical area? Webb: Yes, and an amalgamation.

FIFTH CADDOAI~ CONFERENCE

127

They were all together before they moved to Texas; the Kadohadacho,
Yatasi, Natchitoches, etc., all joined together.
Williams: * The specific details of this southern movement of the
major villages of the Kadohadacho outlined in paragraph 3.7 of my
proposal will be found in my discussion of the Kadohadacho and related tribes (Williams, 1955; revised version, in press, !961 ).
Krieger: Regarding Williams’ treatment of the Kaufman site: There
is no doubt, to me, that it is a McCurtain Focus component which extends into the historic era. It is certainly Caddoan; the pottery is very
consistent. Baerreis: How firm is the association of the trade goods
with the pots? Krieger: Two or three graves are completely different,
but they are not involved in this question. The trade goods were in the
same graves with the McCurtain Focus pottery, in good association.
Griffin: Is there any possibility that the historic material might have
been let down from a different level? Krieger: Harris excavated the
graves as they were exposed by the river. The information appears to
be all right. Baerrefs: The reason I asked about this matter is that
McCurtain Focus sites in Oklahoma have no bones in the graves; only
the tooth enamel survives; and one can find the graves only by the
soil lines, tooth enamel, and vessel clusters. Most sites have later intrusive Creek and Choctaw burials with well-preserved bones and historic
materials. In Oklahoma it is possible to separate the McCurtain Focus
components, but it is easy to have mixture of components and one has
to be very careful in digging out graves, due to their superposition.

Krieger: There is no systematic excavation in any McCurtain Focus
site in Texas.
At the Hunt and Clements cemetery sites in Cass County, Texas, as
many as 100 graves were torn out by amateurs. Jackson excavated a
number of graves in 1932. In one grave he found a badly rusted knife
blade which he thought may have been intrusive, and in four or five
graves he found glass beads at the neck. It was a messed-up situation,
but he did the best he could, and the associations seem all right. There
is some Avery Engraved pottery here.
At the Jim Allen site the situation was similar. It had been badly
disturbed. Woolsey, in 1935, did the best he could to record some information, and he dug a few undisturbed graves. The pottery complex
seems to be distinctive; it is a historic continuation from prehistoric
Frankston Focus pottery, and it can be distinguished from the latter by
changes in vessel forms, projectile points, and other traits. There are

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

five examples of shell-tempered Avery Engraved pottery associated
with European trade goods here. If you found these Avery Engraved
vessels in Red River County, where the Kaufman site is, you would not
be able to separate them from local pieces.
In short, the McCurtain Focus appears to extend into historic times.
Baerreis: It is certainly possible that you are right about that; but
it looks as if we have a good deal to learn about McCurtain Focus.
There is so much material that is poorly controlled. Some of the McCurtain Focus mounds are larger than one would expect to have been
constructed in relatively late times. Also you get deep burial shafts in
the big mounds, stone earspools, and other things which look more like
late Gibson Aspect than Fulton Aspect. It may be that we are working
with multi-component sites, and that there are several phases to McCurtain Focus, which can be worked out with careful analysis.
Krieger: * One big problem here is to determine what is meant by
"Historic Times." When European trade goods are found in an archeological site, we tend to explain and date them in terms of an expedition or trading post or mission in the immediate vicinity, but this is
not the only possible explanation. The Indians themselves could, of
course, have carried these objects respectable distances themselves,
either going after them or using them as trade objects from tribe to
tribe. In most of the Caddoan region it is not only difficult to determine
just where the first expeditions went, but when European goods could
have entered the region from far away. In my 1946 publication [Krieger, 1946], I mentioned that by the time La Salle reached the Cenis
(or Tejas) in central East Texas in 1686, he found these people already
receiving Spanish obiects from New Mexico by Indian trade, specifically through the Jumanos; that this sort of contact had probably been
going on at least a century or two before that, as shown by changes in
native pottery styles in both the Caddoan region and the Rio Grande
Valley in northern New Mexico; and that it was conceivable that
Spanish trade material had been brought into the Caddoan region
from missions or mining towns in northern Mexico as well as New
Mexico, long in advance of the Spanish in person. Later, I learned
that in the lower Rio Grande Valley, in present Tamaulipas, the Spanish town of Cerralvo had been founded in 1583 as the first capital of
the original province of Nuevo Leon, and that Spanish miners had already been at Cerralvo for some years before that.
The point is that, with the Jumanos traveling back and forth between the Tejas on the one hand, and the settlements of northern

FIFTII

CADDOA~ CONFERENCE

129

Mexico and New Mexico on the other, a few European objects could
have appeared in the Caddoan region from late in the 16th century
ore,yard. The first Spanish mission was founded in East Texas in 1691;
the French post at Natchitoches, Louisiana, in 1714; and there were
enough Europeans in the region by then so that the whole 18th century can safely be called "Historic." The De Soto expedition of 164143 comes to mind, of course, as the first entrada of Europeans in this
region. However, this expedition was not equipped for Indian trade in
the first place and the chances are about nil that the archeologist can
ever find anything to identify with it. These circumstances pose an
interesting question for the archeologist: Can he assume that the mere
physical presence of Europeans marks the beginning of "Historic
Times" even if he cannot find any material evidence of it; or conversely, can he assume that "Historic Times" begin with the presence
of European trade items even if Europeans themselves did not appear
until long afterward? Or must he have evidence of intimate contact
locally? Incidentally, it is very doubtful if glass beads or metal objects
from the Spanish can be distinguished from those of the French, but
some of the English beads are quite distinctive.
It may be well to point out here the striking scarcity of European objects in historic Caddoan sites when we consider how many
Indians and whites were involved over a period of two centuries or
more. In any one site, something like twenty beads and two bits of
iron may be all that can be found to represent perhaps a century of
contact; and this being true, there must be scores of sites actually occupied during the same "historic period" from which the archeologist
cannot recover a single European object.
Williams: * I would like to reinforce further Krieger’s statement
about the scarcity of trade goods on the historic level. Although I have
listed considerable trade goods as a trait of the Little River phase
(paragraph 3.4, of my proposal) on the basis of early accounts of gift
lists to the Kadohadacho in the eighteenth century in which many
pounds of glass beads and metal objects are included (Swanton, 1942:
! 99-202), it is a fact that none of this material has been found archeologically.
Stephenson: The scarcity of trade goods is also true in the Missouri
Valley in North and South Dakota. In big historic village sites, occupied for a century, you may get only a tiny amount of trade goods. In
Nebraska and Kansas, on the other hand, there are historic sites with
a great deal of trade material. Whiteside: * Doesn’t this reflect differ-

TEXAS

130

ARCHEOLOGIGAL

SOCIETY

ences in trading patterns? The fur trade was not important in the Caddoan Area.
Webb: McGurtain Focus and Belcher Focus are typologically quite
similar. They share the same pottery types and both have a carry-over
of Gibson Aspect traits. No trade material has been found in the five
or six Belcher Focus sites that have been examined. But from the upper
level of the Belcher mound we have recently obtained a radiocarbon
date of 200 -+ 100 years before the present. Baerreis: A.D. 1658 is very
late for such material.

Gibson Aspect Chronology
Krieger: Here is a historical resum6 of how the present classification
was worked up. C. B. Moore was the first to work in the Gaddoan Area.
Then Harrington worked in 1920 for the Heye Foundation. After that,
little was done until Webb began working around Shreveport. Then
there was some work by the University of Texas, and finally the WPA
digs at the Davis, Yarbrough, Hatchel and Spiro sites, and in central
Arkansas. Most of this work has never been published. Phillips worked
in the Arkansas plateau, but that is not published. Contrast this situation with a comparable area, the Four-Corners area in the Southwest,
where there have been innumerable expeditions. Those people once
thought they knew the history of the Puebloans~ but now, almost
every time a major site is dug they have to revise some of their opinions. By contrast, the amount of work in the Gaddoan Area is very
small. We have a large area, with complicated problems, a time span
as long as the Puebloan span, and very few workers. It stands to reason
that every new piece of work will produce new information.
[Krieger put the following chart on the blackboard:]
(
(
(
Gibson
Aspect

(
(

Glendora

Allen

(
Fulton
Aspect

Bossier

Titus

Frankston

Haley
Alto

Gahagan

Texarkana

McCurtain

Belcher

Sanders
Spiro

The above chart is the simplified preliminary scheme which was set
up in 1943. Until 1941 a great quantity of WPA materials poured in
and I could only spend a little while on the Gaddoan material. I had
met Webb and learned what he had been doing. Baerreis showed me
the Spiro material in Norman. The WPA excavations at the Davis site
provided the information on the Alto Focus. The Gahagan site was

FIFTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

131

described by Moore and by Webb and Dodd. The Sanders site was
dug by Jackson. We had some material that I first called "Shelby"
(now Bossier) Focus in central East Texas. Around Texarkana we had
WPA excavations at the Hatchel site. Moore had illustrated materials
to be found on the lower Arkansas and Ouachita rivers and several
sites on Red River. All in all there were four or five properly excavated sites, a lot of surface collections, and a number of cemeteries
excavated by Jackson, Woolsey, and amateurs, though many had been
badly looted. After several years of working over this body of information, Webb and I agreed on the above outline of the Caddoan culture
units, divided into two general aspects which were also time units.
As I said, this is a complex area in which relatively little work has
been done, and every new job will produce new information and force
revision of the old. The content of some foci has been modified and a
few new ones have been added: Fort Coffee and Turkey Bluff in Oklahoma, by Orr and Lehmer respectively; and Mid-Ouachita in Arkansas by Webb and myself. Each of us working in the area has studied
more material, testing this scheme to see how well it holds np and how
it can be improved.
In Alto Focus there is no shell temper in 97,000 sherds. There is no
brushing, no red filming, no effigy ware. At Gahagan, the few vessels
and many associated artifacts are practically identical to Alto Focus-Copena knives, long-stemmed pipes, and so forth. At Spiro, one finds
the same items. Webb and I suspected a long time ago that these three
complexes were on the same time level, and they still seem to be.
On the other hand, the Southern Cult material at Spiro is not found
at the Davis site except for one small piece of kaolin carved into a
human head with "forked-eye" motif. The ceremonial material from
Gahagan is not like that from Spiro. Hammered copper is found at
Gahagan, but it is not like what is found at the Southern Cult centers.
The Gahagan ceremonial material is quite distinctive, although it does
have grooved stone earspools like Spiro.
The Sanders site had some Southern Cult material, plain and
polished pottery, red filming, and no brushing.
At the Haley site we have ceremonial material not comparable to
the Southern Cult, effigies, red filming, brushing, handles, and applique. Moore found two Sanders vessels at the Haley site, and a Haley
Engraved bottle was found at the Sanders site.
Thus we get definite relationships from site to site, but differences
also, iustifying the setting up of separate foci. These Gibson Aspect
foci provide a distinct contrast to those of the Fulton Aspect.

132

TEXAS ARGHEOLOGICAL SOCIET%r

We have been reasonably satisfied with these loci as taxonomic
units; but dating them is another matter. The typological relationships
are supplemented by little good stratigraphic evidence.
The Hatchel mound was one site with good stratigraphic superposition: a temple mound with Haley Focus material, later covered
with a Texarkana Focus mantle. The Belcher mound had four superimposed strata: Haley Focus at the bottom, one stratum of Bossier,
and then two Belcher Focus strata at the top.
At Spiro, the WPA did not get clear stratigraphic information, although-the information was probably there. When Orr analyzed the
material, he had a difficult problem: the information was not in good
shape, notes had been lost, and so forth. Orr set up a grave sequence
based on the depth of the graves from the top of the mound. This is not
the proper basis on which to set up a sequence in a site like Spiro. For
instance, at Gahagan, Haley, and Crenshaw, which are similar sites,
there were very deep graves--at Haley they were 16 to 17 feet deep-as well as cases of later graves dug down through the earlier ones.
Thus establishing a grave sequence on the basis of depth in this sort
of site is not very trustworthy.
At the Crenshaw site, Lemley and Dickinson described two cultures
which they called "Caddo" and "pre-Caddo." The "pre-Caddo" represented the Coles Greek culture. Some years later, Webb and I looked
over the material and realized that the "Caddo" material seemed to
belong to three different complexes. Also not all of what they called
Coles Greek really belonged to that complex. It would be very valuable if someone would re-analyze the Crenshaw material. There are
probably four occupations there. If the materials were re-analyzed
grave by grave we could probably relate them to Coles Greek, Haley,
Texarkana, and Belcher Foci. For that matter, a great dea! of the material which has been dug elsewhere could stand re-analysis, grave by
grave. Our initial scheme stil! seems to work, but it stands to reason
that an initia! classification must eventually be revised.
]elks: In an earlier discussion, evidence was presented regarding
ceramic materials earlier than Gibson Aspect, from the southern end
to the northern end of the Caddoan Area. So we might put something
on the chart--a question mark--earlier than Gibson Aspect.
Griffin: There is the question of the relevance of certain Fourche
Maline elements to this problem. ]elks: And also the Yarbrough and
related sites, and the Alto-like sites on the Neches. There is no fancy
pottery in these sites; they are just small sites with simple pottery.

FIFTH CADDOAIN CONFERENCE

133

Webb:* We originally thought that the Bossier Focus fit between
Haley and Belcher Focus. Now there seems to be some overlap. For
example, Belcher Focus is quite limited in Louisiana, probably having
come down the Red River into a large area of Bossier sites; late Bossier
sites may well be contemporaneous with Belcher, even conceivably
lasting to historic times. Early Bossier may overlap late Haley, although the available evidence at that end is nebulous as yet.
Bossier Focus is most interesting. It is widespread--from the Ouachita River near Camden, ~drkansas, across to East Texas, where it was
originally called "Shelby Focus." There is some regional variation in
the percentage of pottery types, but in general the sites are similar.
Our knowledge is mainly from surface collections. I have reworked
surface collections from a number of sites in northern Louisiana,
grouping the sites depending on the relative totals of six distinctive
Bossier pottery types. These types are Maddox Engraved, Belcher
Ridged, Sinner Linear Punctated, Pease Brushed-Incised, and two
brushed wares--Karnack Brushed-Incised and Maddox Brushed, the
latter apparently identical with Plaquemine Brushed. Twenty sites,
with 100-1000 decorated sherds each, seem to fall into three groups.
In Early Bossier, with 12 to 27~o of the sherds being of definite Bossier
types, there is a significant percentage of unmistakable Alto (6-14~o)
and Coles Greek (1-8 %) sherds, and a very little Haley Focus pottery.
There are a few Marksvi!le and Troyville sherds. In Middle Bossier,
Goles Greek and Alto Focus pottery disappears almost entirely and
Plaquemine types appear. About 50~o of the pottery is of distinct Bossier types. In Late Bossier, the distinct Bossier types constitute about
755/o of the pottery; and this is fully developed Bossier Focus. Belcher
Focus types begin to appear. A little shell tempering appears--less
than 1%.

At the Belcher Mound site, there were four distinct levels. The PreMound level is Haley-Alto; this is a common combination in northwestern Louisiana. We have recently obtained a radiocarbon date on
this level from the Humble Laboratory, 1100 -+- I00 years before the
present [Sample 0-320]. The second level is Bossier Focus. The third
and fourth levels are pure Belcher Focus, including "Southern Cult"
items, the most striking of which is a serpent-eagle design engraved
on shell. From the third (Belcher Focus) level we now have a radiocarbon date of 200 --- i00 years before the present [Sample No. 0-322].
Thus there is a long time-spread of 900 years, much Of which may
represent the period of Bossier development.
The Mineral Springs site in Arkansas, first reported by Harrington,

134

TEXAS AltCI-IEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

was formerly thought to be Spiro Focus. Now we have dug two additional deep burials. They seem to relate to the Alto, Haley, and Early
Bossier and Texarkana Foci. A similar relationship between Gibson
and Fulton probably applies at Crenshaw also.
One of the Mineral Springs burials that we dug, at Mound B, had
almost pure Alto types: Hickory Fine Engraved, Crockett Curvilinear
Incised, bowls with stepped designs; but there was also a vessel of
Sinner Linear Punctated, which we have hitherto called a Bossier
Focus type. There were long-stemmed pipes, greenstone celts, and a
serrated kind of Alba projectile point, in this burial.
The other burial had pottery which we have called late Haley,
Texarkana, Bossier, and early Belcher Focus. These vessel types include Haley Complicated Incised, Haley Engraved on a bottle, three
or four bowls of Barkman or Glassell Engraved, two bowls of Hodges
Engraved, several of Pease Brushed-Incised, two of Maddox Engraved,
and one of Sinner Linear Punctated, all in one burial, with longstemmed pipes and a cluster of Hayes points.
This new information certainly confuses our ideas on chronology.
It seems to play hob with our standard sequence. We must have
thorough excavation of some of these sites, so that we will not be dependent on burial wares alone; the burial wares have thrown us off
too often and we need more extensive excavation to tie them in with
everyday wares. In all likelihood the trouble is not that we have the
wrong ideas on sequence, but that the types have longer duration in
time than we have thought in the past.
]ones: What about the other types in some of these seemingly mixed
situations? Webb: One gets Hardy Incised and pottery with zoned
punctates (Ithinehart, Dupree) in the Bossier sites. These materials
can’t be related to any one focus in particular. Fingernail-punctated
material-Wilkinson Punctated--is common in Early Bossier, less so
in Middle Bossier, and is absent in Late Bossier. Brushed ware increases as one comes up in time.
]elks: Perhaps it will help give direction to the discussion if we set
up a chart on the board comparing various ideas on chronology.
[Jelks drew three columns, labeled "Webb," "Krieger," and "Radiocarbon;" and at the left, two headings, "Fulton" above and "Gibson"
below. As soon as he began listing radiocarbon dates, the discussion
centered around them and proceeded from there. The other columns
were never filled.]
Discussion: Radiocarbon dates [Jelks at the board] :
Fulton Aspect: Belcher Focus, A.D. 1750 +--- 100 (Belcher Mound)

FIFTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

135

Gibson Aspect: Alto-Haley, A.D. 858 ~ 100 (Belcher Mound)
Spiro, 442 B.C.--A.D. 158 --- 500 (Spiro Site)
A.D. 1318 ---- 250 to 1478 --+ 250 (Spiro Site)
Alto Focus, A.D. 396 --+ 175 (Davis Site)
Griffin and Ford: A.D. 858 is tOO early for Alto-Haley.
Griffin: Let me explain the situation regarding the Spiro dates,
which were obtained at the Michigan laboratory.
442 B.C., 72 B.C., A.D. 158 ........ These were all from the same specimen,
a cedar log from the central chamber.
A.D. 13!8 --+ 250 ...................... This is from another log; the test was
made later, when the laboratory was
more mature. I think this is the most
reliable date.
A.D. 1478 -- 250
This is from shell material collected at
Spiro, and is less reliable.
We got dates of 2400 B.P. at the Angel site in Indiana. This dating,
like that on the Davis site corn, was done by the carbon-black method,
and is therefore less reliable.
Bell: From the Harlan site we have two dates, A.D. 678 --+ 300, and
A.D. 1238 -- 200. One is from charcoal in a house in the village. One is
from the mound structure, charcoal from the middle of three floors.
I cannot believe that the occupation took up a time span of this length.
The nature of the debris and of the site speak for a very short occupation.
Krieger (to Griffin): The B.c. dates for Spiro are, of course, not
possible. But I don’t see how the radiochemist can explain them. How
can dates come out falsely old--especially falsely old to the extent
which you claim. Griffin: I don’t know, but I believe it is happening.
About all we can do is to wait and let more evidence straighten the
matter out. Ford: The "plus-or-minuses" are very liberal here, and
often overlap. We are taking these dates and probabilities much too
seriously. After all, there is one chance in three that a specimen is
older or younger than the stated error. Bell: Agreed; we lack enough
consistent dates from any one site for confidence. We must have more
runs from specific sites. Ford: Both of your Harlan site dates are too
early anyhow!
Phillips: Earlier, Krieger put consistent dates on the board for Coles
Creek and Troyville. The latest date was A.D. 1300. If you put Plaquemine on top of these Lower Mississippi Valley radiocarbon dates,

136

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

it is post-1300. The Southern Cult material in the Lower Valley is
always in Plaquemine or later. There cannot be much time lag between Spiro, with its Cult material, and sites with Cult material in
the Mississippi Valley; and that is why I like the 1300 date for Spiro.
]elks: You want to correlate the entire Caddo sequence with Plaquemine. Types do change with time, even if by small increments;
and the Caddoan types do change. I understand there are no recognizable differences within Plaquemine, in contrast to those in Caddoan.
Ford: There are percentage differences with Plaquemine, as Cotter
has shown. They are minor, however, and they are changes from site
to site rather than in a direct stratigraphic sequence. And they are
minor compared to the changes in the Caddoan Area. Krieger: * You
people assume that the Southern Cult was everywhere the same. The
Spiro Cult was very different from the later Cult expressions in
Tennessee and Georgia, for example.
Webb: What was the date of the end of Marksville-Troyville? Ford:
A.D. 700. Webb: This is a good beginning date for the Caddoan sequence; I have no objection to dating Caddoan beginnings at A.D. 700-800. There seem to be five sequential periods in the Cad(!oan sequence,
at least four of them demonstrable by stratigraphy, and the total
history could well have lasted 1200 years, especially since Bossier has
as much change within it alone as Plaquemine does, in such matters
as paste characteristics.
Webb.* These five sequential periods of Caddoan culture development along Red River and its tributaries are as diagrammed here
[Fig. 6]. In the diagram, vertical arrows indicate stratigraphic demonstration in the sites indicated in parentheses. The only developmental
step which is suggested by cultural content and collateral relationships
but not proved by excavations is the suspected early Gibson-late Gibson situation (Coles Creek-Alto-Gahagan earlier than Haley-Sanders).
Horizontal arrows indicate trade or traits held in common to demonstrate contemporaneity; this is only indicated when a significant number of traits are involved.
The transitional position of Bossier is indicated not only by the
stratigraphic control in the excavations listed, but by the surface collection study previously reported; also by the carry-over of Bossier
pottery types, from Haley sites and burials at one extreme to Belcher
at the other extreme.
Coles Creek is included in the diagram because of the presence of
Coles Creek pottery or characteristic Coles Creek sherds at Crenshaw

FIFTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

137

GLENDORA

I

(Battle)

TEX AR KANA--BE LC H E R----TITUS
(Belcher,
Bryarn-A d erns)

SSIER
(Belcher)

COLE S CREEK----ALTO---GA HAGAN
(NOT CADDOAN)
Fig. 6. Periods of Caddoan Culture Development.

and Mounds Plantation, in stratigraphic relationship with Caddoan
pottery.
This Caddoan sequence could have begun at the end of MarksvilleTroyville, whenever that date may be. There is no good date for the
end of Gibson Aspect; there is no sharp break between the Gibson
and Fulton aspects in northwestern Louisiana.
]elks:

At what point does Fulton Aspect become recognizable?

Webb: There is not enough information; it certainly is recognizable
by Belcher-Texarkana-Titus times.
Ford: In the Alto Focus we have evidence of Marksville-Troyvi!le
and Coles Creek influence. !~lebb: Agreed. Ford: But in the Valley~
there is no evidence of reverse influence--no evidence of Caddoan influence before the Plaquemine. An alternative suggestion, then, is that
in the Caddoan area an explosive
veloped similar to what happened
time of its formulation. While the
were mixing in the Caddoan Area,
been rapid, while in the Valley at
been relatively static.

cultural situation was being deto the Mississippi Pattern at the
Mississippian and Mexican traits
cultural development could have
the same time things could have

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Plaquemine probably lasted 200 years. It began about A.D. 1300-1+00, and has Natchez over it.

Webb: If you have pottery with incurving rims, a line on the lip,
and subjacent triangles, would you accept it as Coles Creek? Ford: It
depends on the paste. Webb: The paste varies from one site to another,
and from one area to another, as seen at Crenshaw. Phillips: The line
on the lip continued into Plaquemine and never did entirely die out.
[Krieger put on the board the same list of dates as earlier plus this
additional column: ]
"Marksvi!le"
A.D. 1050 "+- 100

900 --- 100
792 - 250
Krieger: These dates seem to indicate that Troyville is older than
Marksville. On the other hand, Hopewell dates and the HopewellMarksville relationship support the Marksville-Troyville sequence.
Ford: I think that Marksville is about A.D. 300--500, later than northern
Hopewell. Phillips and Griffin: It is not much later.
Krieger: The trouble is that if you accept the Midwestern Hopewelt
radiocarbon dates from about 400 B.C. to just after A.D. 1, then according to what is being argued here you have a thousand years to account
for before Mississippian begins. You have to account for this great time
interval. You must account for everything after Marksville-Hopewell
and before Middle Mississippi. Why could not Troyville and temple
mounds begin as early as A.D. 500? The carbon-14 dates we have here
[on the chart] are reasonable and consistent.
Ford: This postulates a great wall between the Lower Mississippi
and the Midwest.
Griffin: The Middle Mississippi goes back to A.D. 800--900. Webb’s
date of 700-800 for the beginning of Gibson Aspect seems a little early.
Gahagan is probably somewhat later than this. Webb: I agree that
Gahagan correlates with Early Mississippi.
Krieger: You still have to account for everything after Marksville
and before Middle Mississippi. If you call Plaquemine early Mississippi, as some of you do, you are leaving too great a gap. Griffin: I
disagree; Plaquemine is late Mississippi. Krieger: * Then what is early
Mississippi?
Phillips: I think a close time correlation is shown here between

139
Alto Focus and Spiro. No one has suggested anything wrong with the
A.D. 1300 date for Spiro. How does one reconcile this with the claims
of earlier dating for Alto and other Gibson Aspect foci?
Krieger: You cannot solve these problems in the Caddoan Area until
you decide on the date of the origin of Mississippian. Phillips: I disagree; I don’t even think that Plaquemine should be called Mississippian. I think Plaquemine derives from Coles Creek, and that Mississippian comes down from the north. Ford: We are having terminological trouble here. Names change their meanings, and the term
"Mississippian" has changed its meaning. I don’t think Krieger is
taking this into account. Krieger: * How many others are aware of this
change?
Jelks: You say there are Coles Creek influences showing at the Davis
site, but not the other way. But if you equate Davis with Plaquemine,
why don’t you have two-way trade? Why don’t you have Davis site
traits showing in Plaquemine, and Plaqnemine traits at the Davis
site? Ford: You do.
Griffin: I think there were some things at the Davis site which are
not part of the Alto Focus.
Ford: Davis Incised is Coles Creek derived.
Webb (to Cotter) : At the Gordon site, Crockett and Maddox pottery
were found in a pre-mound level. Does this represent Coles Creek or
Plaquemine?
Cotter: *That was eight or nine years ago. I have left this area and
now have trouble understanding this typology tangle. The Gordon
site was origina!ly thought of as the type site for Coles Creek. The
oldest leve! we could find was Coles Creek, with circular houses. Only
a few inches above this was the evidence of rectangular Plaquemine
houses. The only clear separation was in the house types. The sherds
were so mixed that it was only through typology that I could separate
them. The most important information here was on how a continuum
of people lived, and what, if anything, changes in house type and
pottery decoration might mean.
It seems to me that we have neglected a basic economic study of
these sites. If we start on a broader footing we can see how trade,
ecology, and design types interrelate. Begin with the economic picture,
and then the rest wil! make a more connected pattern.
Krieger: We must decide what the Mississippi Pattern is before the

140

TEXAS AIICI-IEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Caddo problem can be solved. Griffin has correlated both "early" and
"late" Mississippi only with Temple Mound II. I think Temple Mound
I is the beginning of the Mississippi. If not, you must do something
terminologically with the complexes in Louisiana which you do not
call either Woodland or Mississippi.
Phillips: The "Temple Mound" terminology has outlived its usefulness. Why does the Coles Creek-Plaquemine continuity have to be
"Mississippi" or "Woodland" or anything else but Coles Creek-Plaquemine? We should not start by formulating the basic patterns in
the area and then try to fit everything into them.

Krieger: In your book with Willey [Willey and Phillips, 1958]
you now call "Mississippi" what formerly was "Middle Mississippi."
Phillips: Right. Krieger: The four-stage Burial Mound-Temple
Mound terminology was a good idea in 1941, is still useful now, and
should not be dropped. Ford: The Mississippi culture proper did not
develop until about h.U. 1200--1300. Like the Caddoan, it was a sudden
recombination of traits from various sources. Krieger: Then you have
temple mounds all over the place which are not Mississippi. Phillips
and Ford: Certainly; there is no need to equate temple mounds one-forone with Mississippi. Krieger: But you should make it clear what you
are talking about; we must be sure we are talking the same language.
If you say that Temple Mound II equals Mississippi, then there are
Temple-Mound-I’s all over the place with no desig~aation. Cotter:
Poverty Point, a temple mound, and Hopewell, a burial mound, have
no chronological relationship. We are starting in mid-air until we first
go into the economic patterns. [Phillips, Griffin, Cotter, and Ford in
additional comments to one another seem to feel that this discussion
is a relatively futile argmument over terms.]
Stephenson: Isn’t Krieger simply trying to get a name for each of
these situations? A name, for instance, for Temple Mound I? Krieger:
In the literature, including Griffin’s Archeology of Eastern United
States [Griffin, 1952], everything in the East is being divided into
either Woodland or Mississippi. Ford: No, not any longer. That was
Cole’s and Deuel’s pioneering attempt, and was all right years ago,
but not any longer. We have long since given up such neat divisions
of a!l eastern archeology. It’s a mixed-up mess now, but we like it.
[Phillips concurs.]
Krieger: What are you going to call this Coles Creek-Plaquemine
continuity? Ford: Call it the Gulf Tradition if you like, as Willey did.

FIFTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

141

Jelks: How does this discussion relate to the Caddoan Area?
Krieger: Gibson Aspect and Fulton Aspect have temple mounds.
The A.D. 510 radiocarbon date in our list applies to Temple Mound I in
Troyvi!le and to the introduction of temple mounds in the United
States. Gibson Aspect is Temple Mound I; Fulton Aspect is Temple
Mound II. Ford: This is not right; the Temple Mound I and II classification was not a chronological device.
Baerreis: We are still arguing the same old questions as years ago.
We are neglecting some of our tools. Krieger showed us the use of vessel shapes for comparisons. Ford did similarly with design elements,
but did not extend his detailed comparisons into the Caddoan Area.
We need to find other horizon markers, such as ear-spool types, to tie
in different areas such as the Lower Mississippi and the Caddoan Area.
A particular bottle shape may turn out to be a good time marker. A!though there are not many trade objects, the people were copying one
another’s vessel forms, as Krieger showed between the Southeast and
Southwest.
Webb: Ford said that bottles were late in the Mississippi Valley.
What did the Caddo use bottles for? Not to haul water. Possibly they
had some ceremonial use, since they make up such a large proportion
of Caddo graves. This might give us an idea as to why bottles are late
in the Mississippi Valley; perhaps there was a particular ceremonial
tradition which did not penetrate central Louisiana until Plaquemine
times. There must be some reason why other Caddo vessel forms appaar in central Louisiana before bottles do.
Krieger:* Archeologists are making a mistake when they regard
diffusion as an automatic process. There seems to be ample evidence
here that diffusion of many traits between the Caddo and lower Mississippi Valley, in both directions, was delayed or blocked by ethnic,
cultural, or psychological attitudes--whatever we should call them-during a substantial part of the time we are considering. Such "blocks"
would appear to have been stronger during Troyville and Coles Creek
than during Plaquemine times. The so-called "trade" relationships
might also be regarded as occasional intermarriages which can, of
course, occur between tribes who do not care particularly for one
another. In any case, these factors might be considered in future research.
[This was the end of the final discussion of the Conference. The

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Symposium on Relationship of the Caddoan Area with Neighboring
Areas, which is presented earlier in this volume, took place the following day.]

References Cited
Bell, Robert E., and David A. Baerreis
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 7-100.
Davis, E. Mott, editor
1961. Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on Caddoan Archeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archaeological Society, Vol. 30 (for 1959), pp. 1-33.
Ford, James A.
1936.
Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and Mississippi.
Anthropological

Study

No.

2,

Department of

Conservation,

Louisiana

Geological Survey.
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point, a Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 26, Part 1.

Griffin, James B., editor
1952. Archeology of Eastern United States. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Griffith, William Joyce
1954. The Hasinai Indians of East Texas as Seen by Europeans, 1687-1772.
Philological and Documentary Studies, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 41-168. Middle
American Research Institute, Tulane University.
Harris, IL K.
!953. The Sam Kaufman Site, Red River County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 24, pp. 43-68.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
Texas Publication No. 4640.
1947. The First Symposium on the Caddoan Archaeological Area. American Antiquity, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 198-207.
Moore, Clarence B.
1908. Certain Mounds of Arkansas and Mississippi. Journal of the Academy of
Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. 13, Part 4, pp. 481-557.
1909. Antiquities of the Ouachita Valley. Ibid., Vol. 14, pp. 1-170.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1952. Survey of Caddoan Area Archeology. In Griffin, 1952, pp. 259-255.
Phillips, Philip, James A. Ford, and James B. Griffin
1951. Archaeological Survey in the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley; 19401947. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Vol. 25.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.

143

FIFTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

Swanton, John R.
1942. Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 132.
1952. The Indian Tribes of North America. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 145.
Walker, W. M.
1935. A Caddo Burial Site at Natchitoches, Louisiana. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 94, No. 14.
Webb, Clarence H.
1945. A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, Louisiana. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 16, pp. 52-83.
1960. A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958), pp. 35-62.
~¥ebb, Clarence H., and Monroe Dodd, Jr.
1939. Further Excavations at the Gahagan Mound; Connections with a Florida
Culture. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. t 1, pp. 92-128.
Wilford, Lloyd A.
1955. A Revised Classification of the Prehistoric Cultures of Minnesota. American Antiquity, Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 130-142.
Willey, Gordon R., and Philip Phillips
1958. Method and Theory in American Archaeology. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Williams, Stephen
1955. The Aboriginal Location of the Kadohadacho and Related Indian Tribes.
Report prepared for the Indian Claims Commission.
1960.

Review of Clarence H. Webb, The Belcher Mound. American Journal of
Archaeology, Vo]. 64, pp. 304-305.

The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

