A Burial From the Sour Mash Site (41HI34), Hill
County, Texas
C. K. Chandler

ABSTRACT
A prehistoric human buria! was recovered from the eroding bank of
White Rock Creek in Hill County, Texas. A single dart point with broken
stem was directly associated with the burial. It was embedded in the right
tibia just below the knee. Two other dart points were recovered from the
grave fill at the same level as the top of the burial and about 15 cm from the
knees. Radiocarbon analysis of the human bones provided a radiocarbon
date of 2060 - 210 B.P.

INTRODUCTION
In November, 1964 a single human burial was found when the back of the
skull was exposed by erosion of the vertical bank of White Rock Creek in northcentral Texas near Milford (Figure 1). In addition to the natural erosional processes of creek bank collapse, the burial site area had evidence of extensive reliccollecting activity. The skull was covered with loose soil to mask and protect it
until proper excavation could take place. The burial was subsequently excavated
by C. K. Chandler, Bob Brannon and Henry Nichols on November 7, 1964.

BURIAL DESCRIPTION
The burial lay on its right side in a loosely-flexed position with both hands
before the face. The head was oriented to the west facing south. The knees were
drawn up almost to the elbows (Figure 2). The skull and most all of the remaining
bones were fragmented. Most of the vertebrae and scapula were missing, apparently decomposed. Much of the ends of the ribs and tong bones were decomposed. A dart point was embedded in the right tibia; it had a broken stem and is
unclassifiable, but it has the appearance of a Gary. The other two dart points

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56 (1985)

172

Texas Archeological Society

x._

Hill County

Figure 1. Location of Hill County, Texas and Site 41H134.

found in the grave fill near the knees were Gary. Research of the literature reveals
projectile points associated with burials are not uncommon but the vast majority
of those reported have been arrow points. For more on projectile point wounds
see Watt (1936) and Prewitt (1974).

STRATIGRAPHY
The top of the skull was 121 cm below the surface. An excavation area 210
cm x 120 cm was started from the surface. All material was passed through a 1¼_
inch screen. Four identifiable soil zones were encountered in the excavation.
Zone I, from surface to 30 cm, was black clayey loam interlaced with tree roots,
small particles of marl, a few flint flakes, one smal! pottery sherd, two flint artifacts, some animal bone refuse, and a deer ulna tool. Of the two flint artifacts,
one was an Alba arrow point and one a bifacially-worked cutting tool on a
medium-sized flake.
Zone II, 30 cm to 95 cm, was dark grayish-black clayey loam containing
numerous pieces of marl, flint flakes, broken animal bone, charcoal flecks, large
tree roots, one Gary dart point and one broken pointed biface.
Zone III, 95 cm to 125 cm, was a grayish-black clay interlaced with white

Chandler--Sour Mash Site

173

streaks that appeared to be decomposed limestone that had leached into the soil.
This zone was almost sterile of cultural debris in that there were no animal
bones, no flint flakes, and only an occasional charcoal fleck. However, three artifacts were recovered from the bottom of this zone. Two were large Gary dart
points and one a pointed biface made of petrified wood.
Zone IV began at 125 cm. It was a yellowish clay of an undetermined depth.
The burial pit had been dug into this zone approximately 15 cm. This would
place the lowest part of the burial at 140 cm below the existing surface.
The burial pit was not identified in Zone III, but the upper surface of three
large limestone slabs was encountered at 105 cm to 112 cm below surface. The
thickest of these slabs (12 cm) was placed over the upper torso and skull while
the two thinner slabs (5 to 8 cm) were over the hips and legs (Figure 3).
Forty-five centimeters of the yellowish clay (Zone IV) was excavated below
and immediately north of the burial and it was sterile of cultural debris. It appears the burial pit originated in Zone III and was dug into Zone IV.

PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
An osteological analysis of the skeleton from the Sour Mash site was carried
out by Lawrence E. Aten in April 1967. The comments that follow are derived
from his notes.

Sex Determination
The skeleton is almost certainly that of a female, based on small to medium
features of the skull, a smooth occipital region, and a delicate mandible. This set
of features is in contrast to the more rugged characteristics of the male cranium.
(cf., Brothwell 1965:51, 53).

Age at Death
Aten’s notes indicate a "rough guess" as the age of death of this individual.
His estimate is 40-45 years of age, based on several factors. He notes excessive
tooth wear, but was impressed by the "great abundance of sutures still evident."
The cranial sutures were generally obliterated on the interior, however, and this
condition had apparently not progressed very far towards the exterior cranial surface by the time of death. Brothwell (1965:38) notes that suture closure is not
very useful for age determination although sutures begin to close at about 20
years of age.

174

Texas Archeological Society

Chandler--Sour Mash Site

175

176

Texas Archeological Society

Skeletal Elements Present
Much of the skull and a complete mandible are in the collection. Postcranial
bones include: the center of two cervical vertebrae, showing marked lipping;
fragments of the sacrum; rib fragments (6 right; 13 left; 8 indeterminate fragments); four fragments of the right and left innominates; the right humerus from
just below the head to the distal end and the lower third of the left humerus to just
below the coronoid fossa; a right ulna that is complete except for the distal extremity (the left ulna is present and in a similar condition); the right and left radii,
both of which are fragmentary, extending from just below the head to near the
distal end of the shaft.
Lower limbs from this skeleton include: the right femur (fragmentary and
extending from just below the lesser trochanter to just above the patellar area);
the left femur (fragmentary, in a similar condition as the right femur); five tibia
shaft fragments, one of which exhibits a jagged osseous growth along the anterior border; the right fibula and the left fibula, both fragmentary and extending
from just below the proximal end to near the lateral malleolus); outer extremities,
including three metatarsals, four phalanges, and a fragmentary left (?) calcaneum. Finally, there were 20 unidentifiable fragments of the skeleton.
A series of cranial measurements were made by Aten. These detailed observations are on file at the Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, and are available to interested colleagues.

Pathology
A couple of observations can be made here. First, the cervical vertebrae
with marked lipping may be indicative of osteoarthritis (Brothwell 1965:144;
Ubelaker 1980: 10).
The jagged projections noted on the anterior surface of a tibia fragment may
result from some type of osteitis, or inflammation of the bone. This fragment
should probably be examined by a specialist for a more accurate assessment. The
affected area is 28 mm long and the three bony projections range in length from
2-3 mm. There appears to be postmortem or postexcavation breakage of two of
these projections.

Radiocarbon Dating of the Burial
The long bones from this burial were submitted to the Radiocarbon Laboratory, University of Texas, Austin. This radiocarbon assay yielded a date of
2060+210 B.P. This date was corrected through dendrochronology (see Klein et
al. 1982), to 520 B.C. to A.D. 245 (Sam Valastro, personal communication).

Chandler--Sour Mash Site

177

TRACE ELEMENT AND GEOLOGIC SOURCE STUDY OF OBSIDIAN
The one small obsidian flake from 41 HI 34 was subjected to X-ray fluorescence analysis at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of California,
Berkeley. This XRF analysis reveals a probable source of Malad, southeastern
Idaho. Fred Stross (letter to T. R. Hester, June 20, 1985) notes that the specimen
from 41 HI 34 actually "... fits the Malad profile quite well, but the thinness of
the sample has tended to increase the values for the abundances of diagnostic
elements." Hester et al. (1986) have noted the presence of Malad, Idaho obsidian
at a number of Late Prehistoric and Late Archaic sites in Texas, primarily along
the eastern and southern edges of the Edwards Plateau.
For future reference to interested scholars, the raw data provided through
the XRF analysis is found in Table I.

DISCUSSION

A review of two local collections from this site reveals Perdiz, Cliffton,
Alba, Cuney, Scallorn and Young arrow points, Gary, Palmillas, Ensor, Wells,
Marshall, Elam, Ellis, Yarbrough, Godley and Neches River dart points. Perdiz is
the most common arrow point type constituting 50 percent of the identifiable arrow points and Gary the most common dart point type for 37 percent of the identifiable dart points. Classification of these artifacts is derived from Suhm and
Jelks (1962) and Turner and Hester (1985). In addition to these identified types
there were 20 unidentified dart points with rectangular to slightly expanding
stems that have the general appearance of Darl or Godley. Seven of these have
strongly beveled blades with stem edge smoothing, seven others have stem edge
smoothing without beveled blades and the remaining six are somewhat smaller
without beveling or smoothing. Some have lightly serrated blade edges and some
have slightly flared shoulders. These appear to fit well within the Eliasville type
proposed by Flinn and Flinn for similar points from the High Bluff site in northern Stephens County (Flinn and Flinn 1968:98, 99, 100).
Among the unidentified dart points is a corner-notched, expanding-stem
point that is unusually long and made of a very light-gray grainy flint that is unlike any other material from this site. Dimensions are: L-9.7 cm; W-2.7 cm; T-.8
cm. This point greatly resembles an Ellis but is unusually long for this type.
Also included in the local collections from this site are several Erath Bifaces
(Story 1965), serrated flakes, flake end and side scrapers, bifacial knife forms,
scored hematite, bifacial drills, one canine tooth, one obsidian flake, one hammerstone, and one thin butterfly-shaped gorget made of Taylor shale (Prewitt,
personal communication), deer-ulna bone tools and 99 potsherds. Sixty of these

178

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. XRF Analysis of 41 HI 34 and Malad, Idaho Obsidians

Designation

LBL Run

Ba*

Zr

Rb/Zr

Sr/Zr

41 HI 34

8141-0

1493

117

1.21±.03

.74±.02

Malad,
Idaho
reference

8136-E (XRF)
8136-F
Neutron
activiation
analysis

101

1.28±.04

.71±.03

1499

Analysis performed by Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (LBL) and data provided
by F. Stross to T. Hester, June 20, 1985.
*The XRF Ba values have been calculated by a new approach and should be close to the
tree value (--+2%).

sherds are decorated with various incised, punctate, stamped, brushed or impressed designs of various unidentified Caddoan types. One sherd is Weches Fingernail Impressed. The one stamped sherd appears to be Pontchartrain Stamped
(H. Shafer, personal communication). There appear to be at least twenty different vessels represented. Several of the sherds are shell-tempered. All of these
materials reportedly came from the upper levels of the site and cannot be directly
related to the burial, but it is of interest to note that the predominate dart point
style of Gary is the same type as found in the grave-fill at the same level as the
upper part of the skeleton beneath the covering limestone slabs.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Of the 13 sites listed in Table 2, eight report burials including cremations at
two of these sites. The Stansbury site burials were historic and stone slabs were
associated with only one of these. However, it is not stated that the burial was
covered with stone slabs, but: "... Burial No. 2 was located in the midst of
eight stone slabs..." (Stephenson 1970:64) One of the Strawn Creek burials
had limestone slabs in association but was not defined as being covered with
these slabs. None of the burials from the other sites listed in this table are reported to have had limestone slabs covering.
Earlier reports (Watt t936: 10, 11) reflect a number of burials covered over
with limestone rocks and describe this as a usual feature of the 32 burials recovered from Aycock Shelter. Hughes (1942) also states Central Texas burials
"... are ordinarily flexed and stone covered." Burials covered with limestone
slabs are also reported from Horn Shelter No. 2 (Redder 1985:43) and from

Chandler--Sour Mash Site

179

Lehman Rock Shelter (Kelley 1947: 123).
An analysis of artifacts in private collections recovered from this site indicates it was intermittently occupied over a considerable span of time and that
cultural changes occurred over this time period. The earliest occupation of the
site, though intermittent, appears attributable to the Middle Archaic time period
with increased use of the site toward Late and Transitional Archaic times. The
predominant dart point styles of Gary, Yarbrough, and Palmillas indicate a strong
bond with the Archaic LaHarpe Aspect in the eastern part of the state. There is
evidence in the form of Elam points for ties with the Elam Focus of the Trinity
Aspect to the north, and the Godley points indicate either Late Archaic occupation or other contact with early Austin Focus people from Central Texas. The
presence of Scatlorn points supports the continued presence of the Austin Focus
people.
The predominant arrow point type of Perdiz with the minor occurrence of
Cliffton are diagnostic of the Toyah Focus. These point types occur over most of
the state and are well documented from the northcentral area to the Gulf Coast.
Perdiz occurred in 10 of the 13 sites researched.
The occurrence of a wide variety of Caddoan style pottery, two sherds of
Leon Plain and one sherd of Pontchartrain Stamped indicates an extensive trade
network over much of the Caddoan areas of East Texas and possibly into Oklahoma and Louisiana. The Leon Plain ware may have been locally made but
probably came from contact with Central Texas people.
Trace element analysis of the one obsidian flake from this site indicating a
tentative source of Malad, Idaho and the identification of several other obsidian
flakes and artifacts along the eastern edge of the Edwards Plateau as having their
source as Malad, Idaho indicates a far-reaching trade network to the north
and west.
The complete absence of European trade material indicates occupation of
the site terminated prior to intensive trade between white men and Central Texas
Indians.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to Lawrence Aten, Tom Hester,
Harry Shafer and Elton Prewitt for their help and guidance in the analysis of materials
from this site and to Richard McReynolds for the drawings of the burial.
Aten did the osteological analysis and Hester later prepared the physical anthropology summary from those notes. Hester also arranged for the XRF analysis of the obsidian
flake and provided additional information regarding previous work in this area. Shafer was
helpful in the classification of the pottery sherds. Prewitt was very helpful in providing
information on reference material and in the identification of the lithics. The radiocarbon
analysis of the human bone was funded by the Friends of Archaeology program, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

180

Texas Archeological Society

.£2

’,D

cq

vD
(’ 5

e-I

c-I

cq

u’~

cq

t/5

eq

c-I
¢%

O

t"-

~

1".1

(-4

(’.1

e¢5

c~

t, -)

("4

Chandler--Sour Mash Site

~ ~o~~
oJ}¢~

C’4

~2N

oo

oo

0"~

oo

~,0

c’q

=
oo

~1-

o~

_.~’~

~-,

,,0

0

m

181

182

Texas Archeological Society

REFERENCES CITED
Brothwell, D. R.
1965

Digging Up Bones. British Museum of Natural History, London.

Duffield, Lathel F.
The Strawn Creek Site: A Mixed Archaic and Neoamerican Site at Navarro
Mills Reservoir, Navarro County, Texas. Mimeographed report, Texas Archeological Salvage Project, University of Texas at Austin.
Flinn, Richard and Judy Flinn
1968

The High Bluff Site on the Clear Fork of the Brazos River. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 38:93-125.

Hester, T. R., Frank Asaro, Helen Michel, Fred Stross and Fred W. Nelson
1986
Trace Element and Geologic Sources Studies. Choke Canyon Series 10:5t0522. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

Hughes, Jack T.
1942
An Archeological Report on the Harrell Site of North Central Texas. MA thesis,
University of Texas at Austin.
Jelks, Edward B.
1953
Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 24 : 189- 207.
1962

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County, Texas.
Archaeology Series 5. Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at
Austin.

Kelley, J. Charles
1947

The Lehmann Rock Shelter. Bulletin of" the Texas Archeological Society 18:
125-128.

Klein, Jeffrey, J. C. Lerman, R E. Damon and E. K. Ralph
t982

Calibration of Radiocarbon Dates: Tables Based on the Consensus Data of
the Workshop on Calibrating the Radiocarbon Time Scale. Radiocarbon 24(2) :
103-150.

Long, Joseph K.
1961

Three Central Texas Aspect Sites in Hill County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 30 (for 1959):223-252.

Prewitt, Elton R.
1982

Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson County, Texas.
Reprints in Archeology No. 1. Prewitt and Associates, Austin. (Reprinted from
Research Report 49, Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas at Austin, 1974.)

Chandler--Sour Mash Site

183

Redder, Albert J.
1985

Horn Shelter Number 2: The South End; A Preliminary Report. The Central
Texas Archeologist 10: 37-65.

Sorrow, William M.
1966

The Pecan Springs Site, Bardwell Reservoir, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 10.

Stephenson, Robert W.
1970

Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-286.

Story, Dee Ann
1965

The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson and Kaufman Counties,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36: 163-257.

Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological Society Special Publication 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4.

Turner, Ellen Sue and Thomas R. Hester
1985

A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.

Ubelaker, D. H.
1980

Human Bones and Archaeology. Interagency Archeological Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington.

Watt, Frank H.
1936

A Prehistoric Shelter Burial in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Central Texas
Archeological Society 2 : 5-27.

