37

CADDOAN AIiEA AND THE I~<[ISSISSIPPI VALLEY

Phillips, P. James A. Ford, and James B. Griffin.
1951. Archaeological Survey in the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley~ 1940-4,7.
Papers of the Peabody Musemn of American Archaeology and Ethnology~
Vol. XXV.
Shaeffer~ James B.
1957. The Nagle Site, Ok-4. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society,
Vol. V, pp. 93-99.
Thruston, Gates P.
1890. Antiquities of Tennessee, and Adjacent States. Cincinnati.
West, George A.
1934,. Tobacco Pipes and Smoking Customs of the American Indians. Bulletin of
the Public Museum of the City of Milwaukee, Vol. XVII, Pts. 1 and 2.
~¥illiams, Stephen, and John M. Goggin
1956. The Long Nosed God Mask in Eastern United States. The Missom-i
Archaeologist, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 1-72.
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan

Discussion
By Philip Phillips
At the time of the Symposium I felt that Griffin had certainly made
his point. After re-reading his and Baerreis’ paper I still think so, but
I must admit that the questions involved are a little complicated. The
artifact types designated by Baerreis as possibly reflecting an early
"Spiro Ceremonial Complex" show considerable internal development,
presumably involving a fair amount of time. Until the details of such
development are more clearly understood, any conclusions as to
whether there is a Spiro Ceremonial Complex (as distinct from the
Southern Cult), as well as its tempora! relationships to the Cult, will
remain hypothetical, which Baerreis himself admits. The exact nature
of the Southern Cult and the tempora! relationships between the various cult centers in the Southeast are equally nebulous. As Griffin points
out, here also there is considerable development and time depth. Kneberg’s (1959) recent study of engraved shell gorgets of the Dallas
culture is an example of the kind of analysis all so.called Southern
Cult artifacts must be given before we can begin to talk about Cult
relationships with any confidence. It has long been my opinion that
if and when such studies are completed the idea of a closely knit and
rapidly disseminated complex will have undergone drastic modification and that the word "Cult" will disappear from the literature.
If we are not ready for a final showdown on the question of the
specific relationships of Spiro to other Cult centers in the Southeast,
nevertheless a good deal can be said about Spiro in the general context

38

Tt~XAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of chronological relationships between the Caddoan and Lower Mississippi areas. My remarks at the Symposium attempted to summarize in
the briefest possible way these relationships as they appear from that
portion of the Lower Mississippi that I know most about. I have taken
the liberty of deleting some of the most palpable errors and have
altered the chronological estimates in line with recent radiocarbon
dates.
Cultural sequences in the alluvial valley of the Lower Mississippi
begin with the Poverty Point culture, a number of regional phases of
which have now been dated. These range from about 1500 to 500 B.C.
Except for the Calion site on the Ouachita River in Southern Arkansas,
this culture does not seem to have penetrated the Caddoan area, where
at this time there was a relatively undifferentiated late Archaic culture
without Poverty Point elaborations. Towards the end of the period
fiber-tempered pottery appeared in the Lower Mississippi, but so far
we have not found any pure components that would lend a name to a
fiber-tempered phase.
In the succeeding Tchefuncte culture there seem to have been attenuated connections in coastal Texas and possibly here and there in
the Caddoan area. Various speakers at the Fifth Conference on Caddoan Archeology have referred to sand-tempered pottery in an otherwise East Texas Archaic context that might be related to the sandtempered assemblages that have been described as associated with the
predominantly clay-tempered Tchefuncte and Tchula complexes of
Louisiana and Mississippi.
About the time of Christ, perhaps a little earlier, we find the Marksville culture well established in the lower valley. There are almost
certainly undiscovered earlier phases. In a site on the lower Sunflower River in Mississippi, Greengo found sherds closely related to
the Havana ware of Illinois Hopewell, almost certainly older than the
classic Marksville pottery from Louisiana. In the later phases of this
culture, Troyville in Louisiana, Issaquena in Mississippi, we get the
first signs of contact with the Caddoan area. The sherds illustrated by
Krieger (Newell and Krieger, 1949: Fig. 50) as evidence of contact
between the Davis site and Marksville, in my opinion, based only on
inspection of the illustrations, bear no such interpretation. Only one
sherd out of the lot (Fig. 50, Q) looks as though it might have come
from the Lower Mississippi, and this I believe is Troyville. This sherd~
from the primary mound fill, hence Davis 1 or earlier, iust about bears
the whole weight of the Davis-Marksville equation~ upon which in
turn rests a good deal of Krieger’s contention that the Spiro florescence

CADDOAN AREA AND THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY

39

was in Troyville times. In the main, penetration of Marksville-Troyrifle pottery into the Caddoan area does not seem to have gone very
far--up the Red River to the Shreveport region (Bellevue phase) and
up the Ouachita to the vicinity of Arkadelphia (Kirkham and Cooper
sites). In this period the Caddoan area seems to be in a peripheral
situation vis-a-vis the Lower Mississippi, and the Caddoan culture has
not yet been formed.
Beginning with the onset of the Coles Creek-Plaquemine culture
(we badly need a name to express this continuity), about A.D. 500,
the picture changes. By this time the ~VVeeden Island and Caddoan
cultures must also have been developing in their respective areas and
there are signs of contact along an east-west Gulf coastal axis. There
was a considerable thrust of Coles Creek influence into the Caddoan
area, and possibly actual phases of Coles Creek culture in Crenshaw
I and ~Webb’s "Red River Alto" sites. In the earlier part of this long
continuity, i.e., the part represented by specifically Coles Creek phases
(Williams has been able to distinguish three successive Coles Creek
phases in the Lake George site dating from about A.D. 500 to I000), the
direction of influence still seems to have been from east to west. In the
later Coles Creek-Plaquemine phases, i.e., those represented by the
Plaquemine end of the continuum, there seems to have been, for the
first time perhaps, a real interchange between the two areas. Perhaps
we should say a three-way interchange, because the developing Mississippi culture, especially in its spectacular Cahokia phase, played an
important role. This was the time of big ceremonial centers, of an influx (though not the first) of Middle American elements, the time of
great emphasis on polished pottery, engraving, excising, bottle and
carinated bowls forms, etc., a most exciting moment in the Lower
Mississippi and Caddoan areas.
At the very end of the long Coles Creek-Plaquemine period, exemplified by the Mayersville phase in the Lower Yazoo and by Cotter’s
Plaquemine components in the great Natchezan sites, the first evidences of the Southern Cult appear. ~¢Villiams has Mayersville at the
Lake George site fairly well dated at A.D. 1200 to 1400. This, in my
opinion, is the time of the most intense developments at Spiro. It was
followed, in the Lower Yazoo sequence by the first fully developed
Mississippi phase (Lake George), and farther south by the Natchezan, in which, it seems to me, the element of continuity from Coles
Creek-Plaquemine was stronger than the impact of Mississippi culture. In this respect the late Caddoan cultures were more like Natchezan. They were never swamped by Mississippi.

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

It is this last point that I would emphasize in closing. I was rather
surprised at the Symposium to hear Caddoan culture so often described
as Mississippi. Perhaps this is nothing more than deference to a
revered but no longer viable system of classification. If I were laboring in the Caddoan vineyard, I would stress the individuality of
Caddoan culture, its independence of, not to say resistance to, the
spread of Mississippi culture.
If my remarks have contributed to Griffin’s assault on the priority
of Spiro over eastern centers of the Southern Cult~ they are in no sense
a disparagement of the essential integrity of Spiro as one of the most
intense and fascinating cultures of the eastern United States.
REFERENCES CITED

Kneberg, Madeline
1959. Engraved Shell Gorgets and Their Associations. Tennessee Archaeologist,
Vol. 15, No. 1, lop. 1-39.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society
for American Archaeology~ No. 5.
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts

By Stephen Williams
I shall take this opportunity to clarify some of my comments made
following Griffin’s presentation at the Symposium and to add certain
data and new ideas which Griffin’s revised article and recent developments have elicited.
Griffin certainly has presented a lot of strong evidence for the relatively late date of most of the ceremonial material at Spiro and related Caddoan sites. I find myself in complete agreement with most
of his statements on dating, and surely the time is soon coming (if it
is not already here) when absohlte dating throughout the Southeast
will make any further discussion of Hopewellian (circa 300 B.C.--A.D.
200) connections with Spiro, Craig Mound (circa A.D. 1100--1300),
as obsolete as Mr. Moorehead’s six-inch soil auger.
With regard to the "Long Nosed God," I agree with Griffin in his
suggestion that the representation on the "Big Boy" pipe is more like
the small shell forms. I also accept his suggestion that there may be a
time differential in the classic form of Long Nosed God representation
which was somewhat lost sight of in our article (Williams and Goggin, 1956), although the temporal position of the later expressions of
a long-nosed being, as on the Walls Engraved vessel (Fig. t8, B), was

CADDOAI’,7 AREA AI’~D TI-IE IVIISSISSIPPI VALLEY

41

clearly stated. However, all the copper forms (Big Mound, Gahagan,
Aztalan, Grant Mound) are certainly similar enough to suggest an
horizon marker of rather short temporal dimension. I understand that
another pair of these copper masks has recently been excavated in
Oklahoma (William H. Sears, personal communication), but I am not
certain of their cultural association. As was noted (Williams and
Goggin, 1956: 37), some of the small shell Long Nosed God masks
are surely later and may be ancestral to the large shell mask gorgets
dated by Kneberg (1959) after A.D. 1360. Further evidence for a late
date for the short-nosed form has recently been presented by Griffin
and Morse (1961).
Gregory Perino has recently excavated another pair of small shell
Long Nosed God masks from the Cahokia region in what is presumably
an Old Village context, and this evidence tends to strengthen the temporal placement of the Big Mound specimen (Williams and Goggin,
1956: Table 3).
In the volume cited above (fbfd.: 62), three alternative chronological interpretations were offered:
(1) The Long Nosed God masks and associated traits temporally
precede the inception of the Mississippian culture and its attendant
but slightly later Southern Cult.
(2) The Long Nosed God masks date from an Early Mississippi
period and precede the full development of the Cult.
(3) The masks are on a mature Mississippi time horizon during a
period of developed Southern Cult symbolism, but occur in areas not
strongly affected by the Cult, and as such are just a counterpart to the
better known Cult symbols at the major centers.
Five years later the senior author is still of the opinion that No. 2
is the best, but I feel even more strongly that No. 1 is impossible. A
full exposition and analysis of the third interpretation still awaits
detailed chronological studies in the Caddoan area and at Cahokia.
Some eleven radiocarbon dates recently obtained from the Lake
George site, Yazoo County, Mississippi, make it evident that the Classic
Southern Cult connections, which seem to be on a Plaquemine level
in the Lower Valley, must date well after A.D. 1000 and most probably
at A.D. 1300 --+ 100. A temple structure atop Mound A contained a
vessel with a late Cult rattlesnake design (A. J. Waring identification)
and dated very close to A.D. 1500.
With regard to chronology, it must be remembered that the major
sites usually discussed in relation to the "Southeastern Ceremonial

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Complex" (Cahokia, Spiro, Moundville, and Etowah) are all large villages with a considerable time span. Radiocarbon dates at Lake
George show nearly a thousand years of occupation; and certainly
Cahokia, with its various ceramic components, must encompass as
much or more time. The sherd counts from Moundville (Wimberly,
1956) indicate a long occupation of varying intensity, and Etowah
has shown appreciable time depth too, although Mound C is evidently
quite homogeneous and relatively late. Spiro is acknowledged to have
some time depth whether one accepts Orr’s three-part division of the
material or not.
My point is that while it is too easy to think of all these sites and
their associated material as on a single narrow time horizon, and
likewise too easy to wrench single undated items from these complex
situations and fit them into a convenient scheme, nonetheless I do feel
confident that certain horizon style phenomena can be used successfully. I would defend the copper Long Nosed God masks as belonging
to this category, and I feel that certain "Classic Cult" items in copper,
such as the eagle warrior and related forms, are good time markers.
However, because of the long time spans at the sites in question, I am
sure that some of the other items which we may be casually comparing
in our trait lists may be as much as 500 years too early (boat stones?)
or 200 years too late (decadent form of shell gorgets). This statement
is but an expansion of Griffin’s final point, but one which needs
emphasizing.
In terms of space rather than time, the problem of Cahokia-Caddoan
ties is vexing too. The recent discovery of Cahokia-like material in
Arkansas by Gregory Perino, coupled with some Barney Incised sherds
from the Lake George site, gives evidence of northern influence coming
rather directly down the Mississippi. The Red River connections in
these cultural transmissions are at present rather unclear, but it seems
apparent that they are not on the classic Coles Creek time horizon,
A.D. 750 -----100. It is striking that engraving, such an important Caddoan trait, does not appear in the Lower Yazoo Basin until late Plaquemine times, circa A.D. 1300--+ 100. There must have been a strong
cultural barrier preventing the diffusion of this particular trait down
the Red River, whereas highly polished plain pottery, often suggested
as a correlative treatment, appears in late Coles Creek times, or even
earlier.
Thus it appears that, although there remains a vast amount of detailed analysis and area synthesis to be done, certain broad limits can
now be set on the problems involved.

CADDOAtN AREA AND THE

MISSISSIPPI

VALLEY

43

REFERENCES CITED

Griffin, James B., and Dan F. Morse
1961.

The Short-nosed God Form from the Emmons Site, Illinois. American
Antiquity, Vol. 26, No. 4, pp. 560-563.
Kneberg, Madeline
1959. Engraved Shell Gorgets and Their Associations. Tennessee Archaeologist,
Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 1-39.
Williams, Stephen, and John M. Goggin
1956. The Long Nosed God Mask in Eastern United States. The Missouri
Archaeologist, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 1-72.
Wimberly, Steve B.
1956. A Review of Moundville Pottery. Southeastern Archaeological Conference
Newsletter, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 17-20.
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts

By Alex D. Krieger~
Yes, Griffin has proved the point that shell-tempered pottery may
occasionally turn up in a grave with artifacts typical of Spiro Focus.
The matter has been obscure, but I see no reason to question the validity of Griffin’s careful documentation of grave vessels. The occurrence
of shell-tempered Woodward Plain sherds in some of these sites (but
not in graves) is, however, of questionable meaning in connection with
Spiro Focus because these sites do give evidence of more than one
occupation. The "cloud-blower" pipe from Gahagan may also be shelltempered, but Dockstader’s statement, quoted by Griffin, suggests caution in that the shell particles are said to be infrequent. In such cases-by no means rare--it may be difficult if not impossible to prove that
such particles were intentionally added as a tempering agent. Otherwise, Griffin’s observations do not change the generality that shell
temper is completely absent or exceedingly rare in all Caddoan foci
except some which date close to the appearance of European trade
goods, or afterward, as in Fort Coffee, McCurtain, and Glendora.
At the outset, Griffin refers to his 1952 paper on the place of Spiro
in Southeastern archeology. In it, as he says, he belabored certain
views of Caddoan development "which Krieger favored at the time,"
and states that most students of the subject either failed to read it or
were so disenchanted that they made no attempt to refute it. In the first
place, this paper was largely devoted to showing that Spiro shares
1 This paper is based on some of my reactions to Griffin’s paper at the Symposium
in Norman. At the editor’s suggestion, I have reorganized and enlarged these comments to agree with Griffin’s present paper, which also has been revised and brought
up to date (March, 1961).

4+

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

many more traits with Mississippian cultures than it does with Hopewellian, which no one has ever denied; and in the second place, it was
intended to show the "impossibility" of the second of two alternative
interpretations of the relationships between Gibson Aspect foci-including Spiro--and other Southeastern cultures which I presented
in the Davis site monograph (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 219-224).
The first and more orthodox alternative was not mentioned. If a defense were needed for my !949 study, I can only say that alternative
interpretations are desirable in any situation; and if one or more of
them can be effectively disproved, no one has been hurt, and the disproving evidence (if such it is) is itself a contribution to knowledge.
Anyone interested can read or re-read pages 223-224 of the Davis site
monograph and decide whether the two alternatives were fairly stated.
I think they were and that the second, decidedly unorthodox interpretation served a purpose in stimulating some thought on the subject.
In his 1952 study of Spiro and in the present paper, Griffin has
neglected to account for a number of intriguing resemblances between
Spiro and its close affiliates in the Caddoan area on the one hand, and
Hopewell (or late Hopewell) on the other, such as burial customs,
several kinds of copper artifacts, "napkin-ring" earspools, Copena
"points" or knives, and the near-identify in facial expression as well
as knobs (representing hair-dos?) on human effigy pipes from Spiro
and on Hopewellian clay figurines. Although the ceramics of Spiro
and Hopewell are, of course, totally different, many archeologists
have recognized extensive carry-over of non-ceramic traits from Hopewell to Mississippian or Mississippian-connected cultures, which implies that the latter may have begun to germinate before Hopewell had
disappeared or at any rate that there was no great time lapse between
them. This situation was specifically predicted by Ford and Willey as
long ago as 1940, when they said that
Intensive investigations in the central part of the Mississippi Valley will
very probably show that the widespread Middle Mississippi cultures were
developing at the same time, principally from Hopewellian. One result to
be expected.., is that traits directly comparable to those of Hopewellian
will appear sporadically in peripheral Mississippian cultures and in the
adjacent Woodland cultures...

This passage was quoted in Newell and Krieger (1949: 223) and I
firmly believe it is valid today, not only in the interpretation of Spiro
and other Gibson Aspect foci, but in various situations east of the
Mississippi l~iver, if we use the term "Mississippian cultures" in a

CADDOAiXI AREA AND THE ~ISSISSIPPI VALLEY

45

very broad sense--of which, more below-. It is also borne out by radiocarbon datings, but here we are up against a very strange attitude
among many eastern archeologists, who now accept the fact that Hopewell is dated by this method at about 400 B.c. to A.D. 100 or 200 (the
ending date is by no means clear), but who fiercelv~ contend that any
datings older than A.D. 900 or even ii00 for Mississippian cultures
(again using this term in the "old" or very broad sense) cannot possibly be valid. This dilemma may, perhaps, be escaped by restricting
the term Mississippian to what has long been called "Middle ~4[ississipplan," but this still leaves us with the question of what went on in the
central parts of the eastern United States during the 800 or i000 years
between Hopewellian and "Middle Mississippian." This dilemma has
recently been pointed out by Caldwell (1958: 64) in respect to the
Southern Cult horizon, which may be taken as coeval with "Middle
Mississippian:"
Willey has recently pointed out that, in a general way, these incised
designs on Santa Rosa pottery are reminiscent of Southern Cult motifs.
The bird, the hand with symbol on or in it, and the sun are among the
three most important features of Southern Cult symbolism. But Santa Rosa
must belong to the first centuries A.D. while the cult is provisionally
datable to more than ]000 years later.

Caldwell (1958: 58) also quotes Willey regarding a fourth element,
i.e., that "the common Mississippian idea of effigy pottery forms occurred on the Florida Coast as early as Santa Rosa times..." To account
for this supposed gap of 1000 years, Caldwell (1958: 59) advances the
hypothesis that many basic "Mississippian" traits were already present
in the Southeast at an earlier time as part of the "Gulf Tradition:"
Present opinion regarding the formation of Mississippian culture is that
it arose in the central portion of the Valley sometime prior to 1000 A.D.
To judge from the cultural mixture represented, it can be proposed that
the Mississippian Tradition represents some kind of fusion of local elements of that area with other elements which had already appeared in
the Gulf Tradition immediately southward (Willey and Phillips 1955).
Temple mound and plaza, ceramic effigy vessels in animal, vegetable, and
human forms, effigy rim adornos and painted vessels are all documented
earlier in the Gulf Tradition, geographically between the Nuclear American area from which they are supposed to have been derived and the
presumptive heartland of the Mississippian area of which they later became most characteristic. That Nuclear America was the ultimate source
of these ideas seems reasonable, but we should also expect them to have

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

been in some degree modified by their residence in the Gulf Tradition

before being reformulated as Mississippian.
Under the older conception of a generalized Mississippian Pattern
or Culture we would have said that the basic traits of presumably
Middle American or Nuclear American origin appeared at some time
in the eastern United States, initiating this Pattern or Culture, and
that "Middle Mississippian" developed out of it in the central sections
of the Mississippi Valley. Now, if we follow Caldwell, these traits are
said to appear first in the Southeast as part of the "Gulf Tradition,"
from where they moved into a "Mississippian Tradition" of much
more limited scope--geographically and temporally--than the former
Mississippian Pattern (or Culture). In other words, the cultural situation is about the same, but a different set of terms is used to describe
it. Caldwell does not attempt a precise dating for the beginning of his
"Mississippian Tradition," except to say that its formation began some
time prior to A.D. 1000. He also thinks that the Southern Cult complex should date at A.D. 1200 or 1300. It is thus apparent from his
own arguments that there are at least two cultural horizons or periods
which bear the label of "Mississippian" in one way or another; one
earlier than the Southern Cult, and a later one which has this Cult.
A third might be added: Mississippian material extending into historic
times, which either has no Southern Cult material or has only greatly
attentuated expressions of it.
Returning to the Caddoan area, I can see no particular reason for
Caldwell’s placement of this entire block of archeological material in
the Gulf Tradition rather than the Mississippian; if a choice had to
be made, I would think the latter more logical. More important, we
may ask whether or not the Caddoan block might also be subdivided
into (A) a period preceding Southern Cult phenomena; (B) one with
this Cult; and (C) one extending into historic times which either lacks
Cult expressions or reveals them only in meager, attenuated form. It
is my opinion that all the analysis of Caddoan archeological material
to date does support three such subdivisions.
Griffin obiects to Baerreis’ analysis of the Spiro material into (A) a
Spiro Ceremonial Complex which has certain "Mississippian" traits
but not the specific elements of the Southern Cult; and (B) a Spiro
Focus in which the Cult is a predominating feature. This subdivision
is called "unsound and unsatisfactory" by Griffin, apparently on the
grounds that some or most of the traits listed by Baerreis for the Spiro
Ceremonial Complex can be found elsewhere in association with specific Cult traits.

CADDOAN AREA AND THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY

47

This objection seems to me to be illogical. In the first place, Baerreis
himself (1957: 34) was quite aware that the temporal isolation of the
traits defining his "Spiro Ceremonial Complex" did not preclude their
also occurring alongside of Cult traits after the Cult developed. Second,
all students of this subject have realized the urgent need for a breakdown of post-Hopewellian archeological material, widely over the
eastern United States, into traits which are of general occurrence in
the "Mississippian" and "Gulf" traditions, and those which may be
specifically assigned to a Southern Cult complex; and Baerreis is one
of the few to attempt such a breakdown or finer distinction in a local
situation. Third, Baerreis, like some other archeologists, was concerned
with reconciling the presence or continuity of Hopewellian nonceramic traits in a site like Spiro with a gap of some thousand years
that is supposed to separate them. Fourth, there are other situations in
the eastern United States which also point to at least two and probably
three periods within the Mississippian and Gulf traditions after Hopewellian times. We have already mentioned Caldwell’s thesis of 1958.
Two years previously, Williams and Goggin (1956) made an exhaustive study of eastern United States prehistory in order to establish
the temporal and cultural position of the Long Nosed God masks of
copper and shell. They likewise arrived at the conclusion (see their
Table 3) that there is evidence for two general periods, the first or
earlier one containing the Long Nosed God masks but not the Southern
Cult; and the later one containing the developed Cult. The two general
periods were called "Early" and "Late" Mississippian. In this case,
too, a third period could have been added, beginning well before historic times but extending into them, during which the Cult was absent
or greatly attenuated. The "Spiro I" phase in Williams and Goggin’s
chart (Table 3) presumably corresponds with Baerreis’ "Spiro Geremortal Complex," preceding the "Spiro II" phase with its Southern
Cult. Williams and Goggin (1956: 52-63) have also stated that
If the supposition that the Long Nosed God mask can act as a horizon
marker is accepted, then it becomes a cultural phenomenon with equivalent temporal import for the archeology of eastern North America as the
classic bird design on pottery of the Hopewellian manifestation, or the
fine repouss6 copper plates showing the human figure in rich ceremonial
paraphernalia, characteristic of the highest development of the Southern
Cult... (italics mine).

If the Long Nosed God motif is, indeed, comparable to the bird
designs of Hopewell in "temporal import," it may not be simply a
"horizon marker," implying a very short duration, but a marker for

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a cultural period which endured for some centuries. This is because
the Long Nosed God masks constitute only one trait--a very readily
recognized one--which is only a small part of the cultural assemblages
in which they have been found.
At any rate, from the time perspectives gained for all eastern United
States culture periods through radiocarbon dating, longer life-spans
for the post-Hopewe!lian periods should no longer be surprising or
combatted as unreasonable: we have only to reflect for a moment on
the many confident statements made during the 1930’s and 1940’s
about the age of eastern United States cultures, with the Archaic
"dated" at 500 B.C. to A.D. 500 (or later), Hopewell "dated" at A.D.
1000 or 1200, and so on!
The radiocarbon datings on post-Hopewellian cultures are, of course,
very confusing at present. I don’t know what can be done about it
except to obtain many more datings with all due attention to exact
associations with specific cuhural assemblages. Some of these datings
appear to support the "short" versions of Mississippian chronology,
like those cited by Griffin in his paper. Others, like the measurements
reaching into the centuries before Christ at the Spiro site, are impossibly old. A few, obtained recently, may be more reasonable if only
because they cluster around an intermediate position. In Radiocarbon
Supplement (Vol. 2, 1960: 37-38) there are four datings from sites in
eastern Oklahoma, determined by the University of Michigan laboratory, all on charcoal. These are:
Sample M-816, Craig Mound at Spiro site: 1170 --- 150 years ago
Sample M-817, Hughes site: 1050 - 150 years ago
Sample M-818, Norman site: 1050 -+ 150 years ago
Sample M-819, Reed site: 1 !00 +- !50 years ago
To these may be added an age determination of 1100 -+ 100 years
ago at Level IV of the Belcher Mound in northwestern Louisiana
(letter from C. H. Webb dated November 27, 1959). Belcher Level IV
has nothing to do with the much later Belcher Focus; it is a component
of the Haley Focus, which Webb and I have long regarded as somewhat later in time than the classic Spiro Focus with its spectacular
Southern Cult material. The four other dates just mentioned may or
may not apply specifically to the time of Southern Cult florescence in
eastern Oklahoma~ the published reports on these sites place them in
the Gibson Aspect but focal assignments present difficulties, and the
date of 1100 +-100 B.P. for the Haley component at Belcher possibly indicates that all five dates are relatively late in the Gibson

49
Aspect. The Spiro Ceremonial Complex of Baerreis may then be
earlier than the span of about A.D. 790 ± 150 to 910 ± 150 for these
five dates and thus closer to the end of Hopewellian times.
Radiocarbon dates as early as 960 -+ 250 B.P. for the Trappist Focus
and 910 +- 200 B.P. for a grave with cult objects at Etowah have also
CADDOAN AREA AIND THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY

been obtained (Radiocarbon Supplement, Vol. 1, 1959, sample M-670
on page 181 and Sample M-542 on page 188). Younger dates have
been obtained on the same cultural horizons, but I cite these two as
examples of dates which are usually discarded in favor of younger

ones.
So far in this critique I have not questioned the assumption of others
that the Southern Cult was a single, rapidly-spreading ceremonial
phenomenon of comparatively short duration in the prehistory of the
Eastern United States. However, I have long doubted that this was
true. A thorough analysis of the whole Southern Cult concept is long
overdue, not only to separate it from more generalized "Mississippian"
traits, but to define different "chapters" of this Cult, each of which
would show emphasis on different kinds of symbolism even though a
few elements might be common to all. This is not the time or place
to attempt such a study, nor am I close enough to the material any
more to attempt it myself. Williams and Goggin (1956: Table 2) have
itemized scores of culture traits at nine important Mississippian sites,
but aside from removal of the Long Nosed God motif from the Southern Cult and placing it in an earlied period, they made no attempt at
a new and more precise definition of the Cult itself. Their trait list
should, however, provide an excellent springboard for such a further
analysis. My guess is that when more complete datings are available,
significant time differences for Cult expressions will emerge in such
widely separated areas as Oklahoma, the central Mississippi and lower
Ohio valleys, Wisconsin, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, etc.
Returning for a moment to the matter of shel!-tempered pottery,
Griffin states that "it is assumed by most Mississippi Valley archeologists that shell tempering, as a characteristic of Mississippian cultures,
originated somewhere between Memphis and St. Louis and spread out
from there." He admits that this assumption "has not yet been
proved;" it is probably based on the common belief that a trait must
have originated in the area where it reached its greatest popularity:
always a possibility, of course, but never to be taken for granted.
Griffin has apparently overlooked the paper by Proctor (1957) on
the Sam Site in Le Flore County, Oklahoma, the first detailed report
on a component of the Fourche Maline complex (or culture, or focus).

50

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Orr (1952) considered Fourche Maline as most likely belonging to an
Early Woodland period, less likely to Middle Woodland (using Griffin’s terms). Krieger (!953) thought that it could only belong to the
Middle Woodland. Its pottery suggests some prototypes for Spiro Focus
but otherwise it is rather certainly pre-Caddoan. Proctor (1957: 59)
states that "Shell-tempered pottery which has been considered a
marker for the Fulton Aspect [in this area] appears in varying degrees
at all of the known Fourche Maline sites without altering the basic
trait list. At the Sam Site it occurs in the lowest pottery level and
¯ . . is roughly contemporaneous with all of the other types found at
the site." Proctor considers the alternative that shell temper may in
itself make Fourche Maline as late as Fulton Aspect, but nothing else
in the culture would support this position. If, then, as seems most
likely, Fourche Maline was pre-Spiro, the shell-tempered vessels listed
by Griffin in Spiro Focus context are not unexpected. Where, then,
did the shell tempering idea originate: in "Middle Mississippi," in
Fourche Maline, or in some other area which might be revealed by
better chronological control?
In summary, I hope I have made it clear that Griffin’s factual data
on the place of occurrence of various Mississippian traits is not being
questioned. I am, however, concerned with how this and other material is to be interpreted in terms of the whole structure of Mississippian culture. It is amazing that so little organizational progress has
been made since the excellent Burial Mound-Temple Mound scheme
of Ford and Willey in 1941. Griffin’s final paragraph shows his complete awareness of the same problems when he states that "We do not
yet have the skill and the techniques to recognize and clearly differentiate the growing complexity of the ceremonial life of the Southeastern agricultural communities .... It is difficult now to pin-point
those traits which are early and those which are clearly late." I think,
then, that we could do with fewer reassurances that so many relatively
late traits simply "originated in Middle Mississippian," and concentrate more on a general overhauling of post-Hopewellian chronology.

Baerreis, David A.
1957. The Southern Cult and the Spiro Ceremonial Complex. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 5, pp. 23-38.
Caldwell, Joseph B.
1958. Trend and Tradition in the Prehistory of the Eastern United States.
Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association, No. 88.

CADDOAIXI AREA AND THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY

51

Ford, James A., and Gordon 1~. ~rilley
1940.

Crooks Site, A Marksville Period Burial Mound in La Salle Parish, Louisiana. Louisiana Geological Survey, Anthropological Study No. 3.
1941. An Interpretation of the Prehistory of the Eastern United States. American Anthropologist, Vol. 43, No. 3, pp. 325-363.
Griffin, James B.
1952. An Interpretation of the Place of Spiro in Southeastern Prehistory. In:
Henry W. Hamilton, The Spiro Mound. The Missouri Archaeologist, Vol.
14, pp. 89-106.
Krieger, Alex D.
1953. Review: Kenneth G. Orr, Survey of Caddoan Area Archaeology. American
Antiquity, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 184-187.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society
for American Archaeology~ No. 5.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1952. Survey of Caddoan Area Archaeology. In: James B. Griffin (editor),
Archeology of Eastern United States, pp. 239-255.
Proctor, Charles
1957. The Sam Site, Lf-28, of Le Flore County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 5, pp. 45-91.
"v¥illiams, Stephen, and John M. Goggin
1956. The Long Nosed God Mask in Eastern United States. The Missouri
Archaeologist, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 1-72.
209 Lake Washington Blvd.
Seattle 22, Washington

