MESQUITE (Prosopis) POLLEN AS AN ARCHEOLOGICAL
INDICATOR OF RECENT ENVIRONMENTS
L. Mark Raab

ABSTRACT
Historical and botanical data regarding the distribution of the genus Prosopis
(mesquite) in North and north-central Texas are ambiguous. These data do not
clearly indicate whether the genus appeared at some time during the prehistoric
era or whether, as some historical accounts suggest, the present distribution of
the genus is largely a result of invasion resulting from historic land-use practices.
Pollen, archeological, and stratigraphic evidence from two prehistoric contexts
suggests that the presence of pollen assignable to the genus Prosopis may be an
indicator of the modern environment. Archeologists are alerted to the possibility that this pattern may be useful as an indicator of contamination of prehistoric strata from the modem environment, and as a marker of the stratigraphic boundary between modern and prehistoric contexts.

Modern archeologists appreciate the fact that the study of pollen (palynology) can revea! important information about past environments and cultures.
Pollen data are sometimes the best source of information about past temperature and moisture regimes, vegetation communities, and selection of economic
plant species. Less welt appreciated, perhaps, is the fact that palynology can
also be a powerful tool for evaluating the integrity of natural and archeological
stratigraphic contexts. Two recent palynological studies in north-central Texas,
for instance, suggest that pollen of the genus Prosopis (mesquite) may be a useful indicator of the following:
1. the appearance within stratigraphic sequences of modem-i.e., Euroamerican-effects on the natural environment;
2. the degree to which prehistoric archeological contexts have been contaminated by disturbances originating in historic levels; and
3. the degree to which natural site formation processes such as shrink-swell
cracking of soil clays have introduced contaminates from modern environments into prehistoric archeological deposits.
THE PAST DISTRIBUTION OF MESQUITE

Existing botanical data on Prosopis within Texas are presently of limited
value in understanding the presence, frequency, and geographic distribution of
the genus in the state’s prehistoric environments. These data contain several
ambiguities.
Although it is a common observation that Prosopis has been invading grasslands and abandoned farm fields for decades (Gould 1975:3), it is unclear
whether this trend is a true invasion of an exotic form or merely an increase in
the numbers of an indigene.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeologieal Society

53:121-129

122

Texas Archeological Society

There can be little doubt that disturbance of natural plant communities
incidental to farming and ranching has provided an avenue for the genus to
"take over" large areas (Vines 1977:272). It is not clear whether this process
began with Euroamerican land use; i.e., whether introduction of the genus into
some parts of the state for the first time came in the wake of farming and ranching. If the "take over" did begin with Euroamerican land use, that might point
to spread of the genus from arid southwestern parts of the state and adjoining
regions. Alternatively, it could be postulated that Prosopis predates Euroamerican occupation in many parts of the state, but in comparatively small numbers.
This picture would suggest perhaps that the genus, held in check within climax
vegetation communities, began an explosive territorial expansion after land
clearing and overgrazing of grasslands weakened competition from climax species.
These two possibilities (separately or combined) are difficult to evaluate
because of interrelated temporal and spatial factors. Despite disagreement
among specialists about how many varieties of Prosopis should be recognized
taxonomically in Texas (cf. Vines 1977:273; Bogusch 1950; Correll and Johnson 1970:783), there is little doubt that Prosopis (e.g., P.pubeseens, P.glandulosa vat. velutina) varieties have occupied the arid Tamaulipan and Chihuahuan
biotic provinces of southwestern Texas and Mexico (Blair 1950) for thousands
of years. Presumably, some of these forms could have recently expanded their
range into North and East Texas. Whether mesquite has been indigenous to
North and East Texas for millennia is an open question, owing to lack of data
with appreciable time depth.
Historical and archeological data on the distribution of mesquite within
Texas are scanty, unsystematic, and suggest more questions than answers.
Historical documents indicate that mesquite was much in evidence in North
Texas and southern Oklahoma as early as the 1850s. For instance, a survey
of the headwaters of the Brazos River in North Texas by Marcy in 1854 (Terry
1962:4-6) makes frequent reference to large stands of mesquite. If the presence
of mesquite is indicative of environmental "disturbances incidental to Euroamerican occupation, these data suggest that such impacts were felt quite early
during historic settlement. On the other hand, historic observations cannot rule
out the possibility that the genus was invading northern Texas prior to Euroamerican settlement.
Archeological data offer interesting clues, but are not complete enough at
present to shed light on long-term distributional trends. Hester (1981 : 120-121)
reports that mesquite has been identified from wood charcoal, along with acacia,
oak, ash, hackberry and willow, in archeological sites in the Choke Canyon
Reservoir area 130 km (80 miles) south of San Antonio. He indicates that mesquite was present in riparian environments in the project area at least as early as
1300 B.C. Thomas R. Hester (1982:personal communication) has hypothesized
that mesquite may have been indigenous to riparian habitats in southern Texas
and that it subsequently, for reasons unknown at present, became an invading
species in other habitats. These data suggest the need to correlate long-term data
about environmental effects from many regions of the state. Again, however,
the picture of the distribution of mesquite in Texas over time is far from clear.
Despite these problems, archeologists should not be deterred from seeking
data on biological and environmental phenomena. The search for such data will
certainly require interdisciplinary cooperation, but the initiative for finding data

Raab-Mesquite Pollen

123

of use in solving archeological problems probably will have to come from archeologists themselves. In that vein, we now turn to consideration of empirical data
on Prosopis in archeological contexts.
PROSOPIS AS AN ENVIRONMENTAL INDICATOR
Two recent archeological investigations in north-central Texas suggests that
Prosopis pollen may be an indicator of recent environments because it appears
to be confined to stratigraphic contexts either produced during or disturbed by
historic occupations. In both contexts mesquite pollen seems to demarcate
effectively archeological or natural deposits largely synchronous with historic
occupation of north-central Texas.
Prosopis pollen was recognized as an indicator only after it appeared in two
contrasting site contexts, suggesting that the effect is attributable not to factors
specific to the sites, but rather to forces that crosscut site types and site settings.
One of the two sites, the Cobb-Poole site (41DL148)-a Late Prehistoric (A.D.
800-1200) occupation containing ceramics and arrowpoints-is on the second
terrace of a tributary of the Trinity River (Raab, Bruseth, and McIntyre 1981:
36-58; Raab and Woosley 1982), just outside the southwestern city limit of
Dallas. Pollen samples from the Cobb-Poole site are derived from a stratigraphic
soil column taken from a large prehistoric pit feature of entirely human origin.
In contrast, the second stratigraphic soil column came from the banks of
Chambers Creek, in Navarro County, east of Corsicana. This column was recovered from sediments of the Chambers Creek flood plain during the Richland
Creek Archeological Project, undertaken by the Archaeology Research Program
of Southern Methodist University in 198!. These sites therefore contrast with
respect to human versus natural formation processes, and alluvial versus colluvial
settings, yet certain of their palynological patterns are quite similar. Examination of these patterns illustrates this point.
The Cobb-Poole site is intriguing in several respects. It is argued elsewhere
(Raab and Woosley 1982) that Cobb-Poole was a permanently or semipermanently occupied site, containing a possible pit house, and located on a terrace
that afforded access to now-extinct springs originating in the terrace. Of interest
here, however, is the vertica! column of soil samples taken from the suspected
pit house. Thirteen soil samples (Figure 1) were taken for pollen extraction
from a column nearly 2 meters in depth. A complete description of this pit
feature, the sampling procedures, and pollen-processing methods and results are
presented in Raab, Bruseth, and McIntyre (1981) and in Raab and Woosley
(1982). Suffice it to say here that these samples were expected to reflect
changes in pollen types and frequencies that might have been occasioned by
human occupation of the pit and by episodes of pit filling, following site abandonment. Figure 1, a partial listing of recovered pollen, shows that there are
several identifiable trends in pollen data connected with those events.
Of primary interest to the present discussion are the stratigraphic location
and frequency of Prosopis pollen. It is important to note that the Cobb-Poole
site is in an abandoned farm field. Not surprisingly, sample number 25 of
Figure 1, a control sample for the stratigraphic column, contains pollen of the
genera Zea (corn), Gossypium (cotton), and Cucurbita (squash-gourd). We
might well expect to find these domesticates in a habitat disturbed by recent
farming. The finding of Prosopis pollen in the same sample is also not surprising

Texas Archeological Society

124

.

i

II

i

i

0

li

B

¯

=

o

It

¯

m

m

~

m

0

=

g

m

n

m

2o

n

{o

M

\
%

v

~

%.,

%

o~

%

~K

%
~.~

oo
i

~

E

E

i

E

i

E
~’

T

T

~"

;

i

E

(

E

i

i

i

E

E

E

T

T

7

.~

Raab-Mesquite Pollen

125

in view of the fact that mesquite trees were growing on the site at the time the
sample was taken and are common in the region. What is of interest, however,
is the fact that no Prosopis pollen was found below the 78-cm level of the
sampling column, and no domesticate pollen was found below the surface.
These facts suggest, perhaps, that Prosopis pollen indicates the maximum depth
of contamination of the sampling column by modern pollen.
This interpretation is strengthened by the fact that cracks in the soil extend
from the surface to a maximum depth of about 80 cm. These cracks are the
familiar shrink-swell cracks formed in the montmorillonitic clays common to
the prairie soils in which the site is located. It seems reasonable to propose
that some surface pollen could have been transported to a depth of 78 cm
under these circumstances. In line with this expectation the frequency of
Prosopis pollen grains drops from 15 in sample 25 at the surface to 5 grains in
sample 12 at 78 cm (Figure 1) (Raab and Woosley 1982). We do not know
when Prosopis appeared in the sampling column at the Cobb-Poole site, but
present evidence argues for its appearance in or only shortly before historic
times.
The Cobb-Poole site has not yet produced material suitable for radiocarbon
dating. However, collections of Gibson aspect ceramics and arrow points (Skinner and Connors 1979:37-43), including materials from within the suspected pit
house (Raab, Bruseth, and McIntyre 1981:36-58) suggest a date of about A.D.
800 to 1200 for the site. Stratigraphically, the sediments to a depth of 78 cm
in the suspected pit house appear, on the basis of water-deposited clay-silt-sand
laminae, to represent post-abandonment deposits. These facts also argue for a
post-occupational date for the sediments containing Prosopis pollen.
The Cobb-Poole data are not an isolated case. Recent work in the area of
the proposed Richland Creek Reservoir has also produced information suggesting that Prosopis pollen is a useful indicator of the recent environment. Prior
to initiation of archeological fieldwork, a soils scientist was employed to reconstruct the depositional history of the two major streams in the project area
(Richland and Chambers creeks), and to try to correlate the terraces in the project area with those of the Trinity River in the Dallas area. These objectives were
prerequisites to the project’s announced goals of paleoenvironmental reconstruction, and of attempts to predict specific depositional settings that might
contain archeological deposits.
A reconstruction of the depositional history required the excavation of deep
stratigraphic trenches into the banks of Richland and Chambers creeks, and a
synthesis of field and lab studies of the soils to produce a coherent stratigraphy
(Pheasant 1982). At the same time, soft samples for pollen extraction were
taken from the geologically defined depositional units. Table 1 presents some
of the results of this pollen work at site 41NV139 on Chambers Creek.
A complete discussion of palynological work in the Richland Project, including integration of data with soils work, extraction techniques, and the regional paleoenvironmental picture, is presented by Raab, McGregor, and Bruseth
(1982). Attention is drawn in that report to three depositional units (Table 1)
which, together with their associated paleosols (ancient buried soils), reflect
changes in the kinds of materials that were deposited by Chambers Creek on its
flood plain over a period of 5 millennia. Table 1 was prepared by the writer to
illustrate long-term changes in the frequencies of four pollen types for compari-

126

Texas Archeological Society

o0

o

o

eo

~~~~~0
~0~0~~~

~
0
.
~0~0~0

0
0~00000000000

~0~0~0

0~00000000000

~0~0~0

0~00000000000

s

o~

° i

0~0~~0~00~

00~0~~0~0~00~

o~
~o
~000~~0~0~
~0~0~~~00~

~0~0~0~~0~

:

~~~0~0~~~

~~0~~0~0

¢)

:
~0~000

00~0~0~0~00~0

0

~O~~O0~c~~
~~~~0~

~0

~ ~ ~5
~

~

~

....

~ ~o~

.~
~o~

~o
o

~o~

%

Raab-Mesquite Pollen

127

son with work by Bryant (1977) and Bryant and Shafer (1977). Of primary
interest is the stratigraphic position of Prosopis.
We can see from Table 1 that Prosopis pollen is found from the surface of
the column to the bottom of depositional unit3 (66 cm below surface). Below that level, no Prosopis pollen was recovered. Interestingly, depositional unit
3 is clearly of historic origin. Historic materials such as glass and metal were
found within unit 3 at many localities in the banks of Richland and Chambers
creeks. Just as Prosopis is associated with modern cultigens at the Cobb-Poole
site, so Prosopis is linked here with historic-period artifacts within a well-defined
stratigraphic unit.
Another line of evidence points to a recent date for Prosopis at site 41NV
139. Table 1 presents data from one of two trenches cut into the flood-plain
sediments of Chambers Creek. After Trench 1 was cut with a backhoe,, the
machine was maneuvered onto a bench in the bottom of the creek and Trench
2 was dug downward from the level of the bottom of Trench 1. Trench 2, which
measured 6.29 meters in depth, therefore provided a continuation of the stratigraphic column begun in Trench 1. Analysis of Trench 2 suggested, however,
that its sediments represented a recent cut-and-fill episode within depositional
unit 3, which comprises the present bed of Chambers Creek (Pheasant 1982).
Correlation of the sediments in Trench 2 with those in Trench 1, makes it apparent that Trench 1 is of recent age, contemporaneous with depositional unit 3
(Pheasant 1982). Subsequent extraction of pollen from Trench 2 sediments revealed that Prosopis pollen is mixed throughout the column in Trench 2. The
geological evidence, then, reinforces the conclusion that the presence of Prosopis is an indicator of the recent environment. Prosopis pollen is found only
in the most recent flood-plain sediments (depositional unit 3) of Trench 1 or
within sediments recently laid down in the bed of Chambers Creek (Trench

2).
How recent are these deposits? Radiocarbon dates are currently available
only for depositionat unit 1 in Table 1. These span a range of 2064 B.C. +
177 years to A.D. 420 + 150 years (Raab, McGregor, and Bruseth 1982). At
present, the temporal range of depositional unit 3-or Trench 2-is not known,
but the presence of historic artifacts throughout unit 3 indicates a modern age.
CONCLUSIONS
Certainly caution is in order in drawing conclusions on the basis of two
studies. Still, good evidence exists in two cases to suggest that the presence
of Prosopis pollen can enable us to distinguish comparatively modern environments from older deposits and, by logical extension, can isolate deposits that
have not been contaminated by pollen from recent environments, as, for example, has resulted from soil cracking at the Cobb-Poole site. The study of
pollen is useful in evaluating contextual integrity. In the case of the Cobb-Poole
site, the lack of cultigen and Prosopis pollen from the lower strata of a suspected
pit house (together with the presence of artifacts) also helped to establish this
feature as being both of prehistoric origin and in an undisturbed state of preservation, to the extent that pollen data indicate. At site 41NV139 (Frossard site),
the linking of Prosopis po!len to a recent stratum containing historic artifacts,
and to recent sediments in the bottom of the stream channel (but not in stratigraphically intermediate sediments, some of which are known to be ancient on

128

Texas Archeological Society

the basis of C-14 assays) also provides reasonable assurance that Prosopis is confined to recent contexts and that certain levels in the stratigraphic column are
apparently undisturbed. The geological evidence reinforces these conclusions.
But there is still much we do not know. For example, is Prosopis pollen a
valid indicator outside of northern or north-central Texas? We do not know and
will not know until more studies are undertaken. Even if the use of Prosopis
proves to be regionalized, however, it would still serve important analytical
ends within northern and north-central Texas. Prosopis data would also, of
course, have significance for historical biogeographers. Also, we cannot tell
yet whether Prosopis pollen appeared at the time of Euroamerican settlement
or whether it entered the area prior to that time;in short, we do not have dates
for this event. This question is important and needs investigation.
Finally, and fundamental to this report, is the accuracy with which we have
identified the Prosopis pollen. This identification was made on the basis of careful comparison of fossil pollen with type collections of modern pollen. Still,
identification of the genus Prosopis is complicated by the fact that it is one of
a group of legumes (Legumenosae) in which several closely related forms are
sometimes difficult to distinguish from one another. Several independent evaluations of the data are required. But even if another form of legume were indicated in this analysis, the existing data suggest a consistency of results that
would still serve the analytical objectives set out here.
In sum, the purpose of this paper is to alert archeologists and palynologists
to the possibility of using pollen analysis to solve important environmental and
contextual problems through identification of what are in effect marker types.
With the increasingly interdisciplinary projects that are being launched today,
this task is both feasible and potentially rewarding.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Tarrant County Water District and Mr. Woody Frossard, of the District,
have my gratitude for allowing information from the Richland Creek Project to
be used here. The same debt is owed Mr. Robert Burton and the Fort Worth
District of the Army Corps of Engineers for data from the Lakeview studies.
Others who provided helpful comments include Thomas R. Hester, of the University of Texas at San Antonio; William Mahler, of the Southern Methodist
University Herbarium; and Rick Holloway, of Texas A&M University. Of
course the generosity of all of these in no way relieves the author of sole responsibility for errors of fact or interpretation.

REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The biotic provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bogusch, E.R.
1950 A bibliography on mesquite.

Texas Journal of Science 2:528-538.

Bryant, Vaughn Jr.
1977 A 16,000 year pollen record of vegetation change in Central Texas.
Palynology 1:143-155.

Raab-Mesquite Pollen

129

Bryant, Vaughn Jr., and Harry J. Shafer
1977 The late Quaternary paleo-environment of Texas: a model for the
archaeologist. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 48 : 1-25.
Correll, D.S., and M.C. Johnson
1970 Manual of the vascular plants of Texas. Contributions from the Texas
Research Foundation, No. 6.
Gould, Frank W.
1975 The grasses of Texas. Published for Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station by Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Hester, Thomas R.
1981 Tradition and diversity among the prehistoric hunters and gatherers
of southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26(92): 119-128.
Pheasant, David R.
1982 Remarks on the surficial geology and soils of the Richland Creek/
Chambers Creek Reservoir area. Appendix 1 in Settlement on the
Prairie Margin: archaeology of the Richland Creek Reservoir, Navarro
and Freestone counties, Texas, 1980-1981, pp. 217-228. Archaeology
Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Archaeological
Monographs 1.
Raab, L. Mark, Daniel McGregor, and James E. Bruseth
1982 New pollen and geological data on the paleoenvironment of the Southern Plains margin: first season results (1980-1981) of the Richland
Creek Archaeological Project. In Settlement of the prairie margin:
archaeology of the Richland Creek Reservoir, Navarro and Freestone
counties, Texas, 1980-1981, pp. 99-110. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Archaeological Monographs 1.
Raab, L. Mark, James E. Bruseth, and Allen J. McIntyre
1981 Archaeological testing at Lakeview Lake, 1979: human use of the land;
prehistoric section. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Research Report 80-1.
Raab, L. Mark and Anne I. Woosley
1982 A terrace habitat and Late Prehistoric settlement in North-Central
Texas: pollen and geological evidence. Plains Anthropologist 27(97):
185-194.
Skinner, S. Alan and Deborah T. Connors
1979 Archaeological investigations at Lakeview Lake. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University, Research Report 118.
Terry, J. Dale
1962 Explorations of the Big Waehita, etc.
Falls, Tex.

Terry Brothers Printers, Wichita

Vines, Robert A.
1977 Trees of East Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.

