TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

BONE AND SHELL ARTIFACTS
by DESSAMAE Lom~nv
BONE BEADS

No. of Specimens: 5
Provenience: Feature 1 (2), Feature 3 (2), Feature 10 (1)
IUustrations: Figure 74, a-b
These beads were made from bird limb bones by grooving and
snapping off sections and smoothing their ends. The beads have round
to oval cross sections, and their exterior surfaces are well polished.
Measurements: length, 9.8 to 48 ram.; exterior diameter, 7 to 9
mm.; interior diameter, 5 to 7 ram.
BONE

PENDANTS

No. of Specimens: 5
Provenience: Feature 1 (3), Feature 3 (2)
Illnstrations: Figtu’e 74, c-e
Two of these (Fig. 74, d-e) are flat pieces of bone with at least
two holes drilled at one end. The holes are biconical, having been
drilled from both sides. One pendant has fine vertical lines incised
on the face. Both specimens are quite fragmentary.
Measurements: thickness, 2 to 4 ram.; length and width of whole
pendants indeterminate.
One burned bone or antler pendant is circular in cross section.
It was the most carefully made of the bone artifacts but it is broken
on both ends and its original shape cannot be determined. The surface is smooth and highly polished. Three encircling grooves of even
width with almost vertical sides were cut near the top. The broken
top had a double collar with a hole of perfectly uniform diameter
through the junction between the collars and extending partially into
each of them. The hole is off-center.
Measurements: length, 32 mm.; diameter, 8 to 9 ram.
A bison incisor and a bear canine (Fig. 74, e) have holes drilled
through the root portion. Both show considerable use-polish. The
hole in the incisor is biconical. The hole in the bear canine is conical,
having been drilled from one side on!y.
ANTLER

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 1
Illustrations: Figure 75, a

HANDIJES

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

213

FIGURE 74. Bone and shell artifacts, a-b, bone beads; c, bear-tooth pendant; el-e, bone pendants; ) -h, shell disks; i, notched garfish scale; j, Olivashell pendant; k, conch-shell bead.
This segment of deer antler has a small hole hollowed out of the
larger end, evidently for the insertion of a stone or metal implement such as a knife or scraper. Oval in cross section, the segment
is i45 ram. long and has a maximum diameter of 28 ram. It was
removed from the antler by the groove-and-snap method, a process
which probably produced the transverse groove that lies athwart one
side of the handle 7 mm. from its larger end. The surface of the
antler is smooth and use-polished.

214

TEXAS

A1RCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 75. Bone artifacts, a, antler handle; b-e, awls; f-g, bird-bone
flageolets; b, bison-scapula hoe.
BONE AWLS

No. of Specimens: 6 whole, 15 fragmentary
Provenience: Feature 1 (9), Feature 3 (4), Feature 4 (2), Feature

215

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

5a (1), Feature 6 (1), Feature 7 (1), Feature 10 (1), Feature 18

(2)
Illustrations: Figure 75, b-e
Two of the awls are made of antler, the others of mammal long
bones. Because of extensive modifications including removal of articular surfaces, specific bone identification is impossible.
Segments of antler or bone wall were removed and rounded. The
proximal end has been rounded into a rough dome shape. The maximum diameter is at the proximal end which gradually tapers to a
point at the distal end. The cross section varies from triangular (18)
to oval (1) to round (9. antler awls). Patches of cancellous tissue can
be seen on one side of most of these artifacts.
Measurements: length, 65 to 142 ram.; maximum diameter at
proximal end, 7 to 10 mm.
Remarks: Three of the awls show the marks of a metal file. Although no files were found in the site, these awls indicate that the
Indians had access to such tools.
BIBD BONE FLAGEOLETS
No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Feature 6
Illustrations: Figure 75, f-g
These two objects are made from tibias of large birds, possibly
turkey. The articular ends have been removed by the groove-andsnap method. Unfortunately one end of each specimen is broken, so
that the original completed forms are unknown. One (Fig. 75, f) is
62 mm. long; the cut (unbroken) end has a maximum outside diameter
of 17 ram. and a maximum inside diameter of 12 ram. A rectangular
notch, 8 mm. wide, extends 10.5 ram. from the broken end down the
length of the bone. A band of crudely incised lines about 2.5 ram.
wide encircles the artifact about 9.2 ram. from the cut end.
The other flageolet (Fig. 75, g) is 168 ram. long; the cut (unbroken) end has a maxfinum outside diameter of 14.3 ram. and a
maximum inside diameter of 11.5 mm. There is no cut notch or opening in this specimen, but a number of crudely incised lines are cut
into one side starting at a point 45 mm. from the unbroken end and
extending to the broken end.
Remarks: These artifacts are probably flutes or flageolets with a
single stop hole near one end. Sfinilar artifacts were found with burials
at McGee Bend Reservoir (Jelks, 1965). The flageolets from McGee
Bend have oval stop holes rather than the square or rectangular one

216

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

on the shorter Gilbert specimen. Incised designs on the McGee Bend
flageolets are much better executed than those on the ones from
Gilbert.
BISON SCAPULA

HOES

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 4
IlInstrations: Figure 75, h
This artifact was made from the right scapula of a bison. The spine
was removed, and a rectangular halting notch was cut from the lateral
side, extending from the articular end down the blade of the hoe.
The original shape of the articular end cannot be determined because
a fresh diagonal cut removed most of the glenoid fossa. Originally
the hoe probably was much longer and wider but was reduced to its
present dimensions through wear.
Measurements: Notch-average width, 28 ram.; length, about 70
mm.; average depth, 10 mm. Hoe-length, 165 ram.; width at distal
end, 73.2 ram.
Bison scapula hoes are common on the Great Plains among historic
bison hunting groups and in prehistoric archeological sites. In Texas
they are found in many Henrietta Focus sites in the north-central
part of the state and less so in Wylie Focus sites slightly east of the
Henrietta Focus area. These loci represent people who apparently
combined agriculture with bison hunting-probably on a seasonal basis.
There were two methods of halting used for the scapula hoes. Either
a notch was cut out of the side, as was clone to the hoe described above,
or a hole was cut into the articular end without removing any bone
on either side of the scapula. The latter type appears to be earlier in
time, being succeeded by the notch-in-the-side type at very late prehistoric Henrietta Focus sites (R. K. Harris, personal communication).
DEER SKULL ARTrFACTS

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 4
Illustrations: Figure 76
This piece consists of parts of the frontal and parieta! bones of a
young deer with about 5 cm. of the left antler attached. The right
antler is broken just below the burr. The bones have been cut into a
crude triangular shape, and the antler has been sectioned lengthwise,
the back half being removed.
Measurements: length, 72.3 mm.; width, 84.0 ram.

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

FIGVRE 76.

217

Deer-skull artifact.

This artifact was probably part of a headdress. It is perhaps signifieant that this is the only object of a probable ceremonial nature
recovered at the Gilbert Site. It is assumed that the site represents a
historic village or eamp of one of the Wichita tribes, among whomaccording to Neweomb (1961: 173)-the deer dance was the most important eeremony. Kreiger (1946, P1. 23d, p. 327) illustrated a similar

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

artifact from the Sanders Site in Lamar County and mentioned (ibid.:
193) that four such cut skulls were found in the midden area. The
figure caption reads "Deer calvarium, inside view, showing trimmed
edge of brain case, and antler stubs. Probably fashioned to serve as
decoy or ceremonial object strapped to head." This artifact type is
also reported from the Texarkana Focus of the Fulton Aspect (Suhm,
Kreiger, & Jelks, 1954: 207-208).
MISCELLANEOUS BONE AIVI~nVACTS

No. of Specimens: 4
Provenience: Feature 1 (2), Feature 3 (1), Feature 11 (1)
One specimen is a broken rib of a smal! mammal which has been
smoothed and has a biconical hole drilled near the unbroken end.
This could have been a hair pin, a clothing ornament, or possibly a
needle.
Measurements: present length, 65 mm.; width, 5 ram.; thickness,
3 ram.
A cut piece of antler with a biconical hole has edges which were
cut and smoothed. The fiat, unnotched edge has striations left by a
metal file. The piece is broken.
Measurements: length (at present), 53.0 ram.; maximum width,
20.3 ram.
Another specimen is a cut section of the wall of a mammal long
bone. One edge is a gentle convex curve from end to end; the other
edge has two concavities with a conspicuous point between them.
One end is wider than the other. Any use for this artifact is not
immediately apparent.
Measurements: length, approximately 110 ram.; width at the narrow end, 17 to 18 mm.; width at the broad end, 29 ram.; width at the
point, 29 ram.
SHELL DISKS

No. of Specimens: 6
Provenience: Feature 1 (9,), Feature 2 (1), Feature 3 (2), Feature

5a (1)
Illustrations: Figure 74, f-h
These objects are small, thin, circular disks cut from mussel shells.
Two have a hole in the center; the other four are unperforated. Two
are too fragmentary to measure. The others have diameters of 9, 13,
14, and 18 mm.
It is possible that these disks and a small, thin, triangular piece cut

0,19

INDIAN AnTIFACTS

of shell from Feature 5 represent inlays similar to those found on
stone and wood artifacts from the Craig Mound at the Spiro Site in
Oklahoma.
SHELL PENDANTS

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Feature 1 (1), Feature 3 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 74, j
These are made from oliva shells with the apex ground off.
One specimen, nearly complete, is cone-shaped; the other was evidently of similar form although it is too fragqnentary to be certain.
Each of the pendants has a small hole drilled near the apical end,
and each is 32 mm. long.
SHELL BEADS

No. of Specimens: 1
Prooenience: Feature 2
Illustrations: Figure 74, k
This conch eolumella bead is cylindrical, 17 mm. long, 15 mm.
in diameter at the widest point, and has a longitudinal hole of
constant diameter. The surface is badly corroded except for one
small greenish spot which is probably due to copper salts which have
discolored and helped preserve the bead.

