Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three
Sites in the McGee Bend Reservoir,
San Augustine County, Texas
CURTIS

D. TUNNELL

Introduction
AN AI~CHEOLOGICAL SURVEY of the McGee Bend Reservoir, located on
the Angelina River in East Texas, was conducted in 1948 by B. L.
Stephenson of the Smithsonian Institution (Stephenson, 1948). This
survey marked the beginning of the Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program in this basin. A National Park Service field crew under
the direction of Edward B, Jelks began test excavations at several sites
in the McGee Bend Reservoir in the fall of 1956. During this season
four sites were tested, including extensive work at the Jonas Short and
Walter Bell sites. From Steptember to December, 1957, Jelks again
conducted excavations at McGee Bend, and it was during this period
that the sites covered by this report were tested.
The three sites under consideration here are the Runnells Site No.
1 (41-42D5-5), the Bunnells Site No. £ (41-42D5-4), and the Sawmill
Site (41-42D5-9).* The following classes of artifacts were present at
all three sites: dart points, arrow points, bifacially flaked blades, scrapers, pitted stones, various pottery types, and miscellaneous non-diagnostic artifacts.
There was very little depth to the midden deposit at Runnells No. 1,
and the distribution of artifact types was of no temporal significance.
The artifacts recovered from the test excavation of this site so closely
resemble those from the other two sites that they are useful primarily
for comparative and typological studies. The cultural material from
* In accordance with a new site designation system at The University of Texas,
these sites are now numbered as follows: Runnells No. 1 (41 SA87), Runnells No.
2 (41 SA86), Sawmill (41 SA89).

TEXANS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

this site will be only briefly discussed in this paper. The formal report
of these excavations, which is being prepared by Jelks, will contain a
complete discussion and analyis of each of these sites.
l~unnells Site No. 2 and the Sawmill Site produced cultural material from the surface to a maximum depth of three and one-half to
four feet. Observations i~ the field indicated a change in the artifacts
from the upper to the lower levels of the excavations at both sites. This
was a change in both quantity and kind. Cultural remains were most
numerous toward the lower levels of the excavation. Potsherds were
by far the predominant class of artifact in the upper levels, but they
were gradually replaced in numerical superiority by dart points in
the lower levels of the excavation (Figs. 9 and 14). Arrow points were
also concentrated in the upper levels of the excavations at both sites,
and their vertical distribution is similar to that of potsherds.
Apparently these sites were occupied intermittently over a relatively long period of time. There was no separation of occupations by
clear-cut stratigraphic zones, but rather a gradual change from one
stage into the other. This is perhaps due in part to soil conditions and
disturbance by rodents. Some artifact types occur throughout all
levels of the excavations, but these vary greatly in quantity according
to depth.
This paper will attempt to determine the elements which characterize the late Archaic horizon that seems to be present at three of the
excavated sites; to show how these elements fit into the later occupations of the sites; and to determine where in the occupational sequences the late Archaic stage terminates.
Statistical distribution studies were made for all three sites. The
distributions of the principal types of artifacts were computed horizontally by five-foot test squares, but the results were not conclusive
and will not be considered in this report. Vertical distribution of the
major artifact types was charted both by arbitrary six-inch levels and
by geologic zones at l~unnells No. 2 and at the Sawmill Site. The results
of these computations appear in Figures 9, 13, and 14, and will be discussed in some detail in a later section.
The archeology of this area of Texas is poorly known. This is especially true for the Archaic stage, and any correlation is difficult to
establish because of the lack of published information on comparable
material.
I wish to acknowledge the generous help of Edward B. Jelks and
Lel~oy Johnson, Jr. They have given suggestions and constructive
criticism for which I am very grateful.

I\([CGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

Description o[ the Area
l~unnells Site No. 1 (41-42D5-5}, Runnells Site No. 2 (41-42D5-4),
and the Sawmill Site (41-42D5-9) are numbered according to the system adopted by the Council of Texas Archeologists and previously in
use by The University of Texas. Unit 42D5 is located between 31 ° 10’
N. and 31020’ N., and between 94°10’ W. and 94°20’ W. It lies in
deep East Texas on the boundary between San Augustine and Angelina Counties (Fig. 1 ). This area is part of the "Piney Woods" section
of the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain. As the popular name implies, the entire area is heavily timbered. The Angelina River flows toward the
southeast in a broad shallow valley with a flood plain from one to two
miles wide. Low clay ridges capped with sand border the flood plain
on both sides. It is on these elevated areas that the sites discussed here
are located.
The average elevation of the area is some 200 to 250 feet above mean
sea-level, increasing toward the north. Various sandstones, hematite,
limonite, chert, and silicified wood are found as natural gravels and
were used by the Indians in the manufacture of artifacts. The average
annual rainfall is about 60 inches and the river bottomlands have a
heavy growth of vegetation. Most of the ridges above the flood plain
of the Angelina are in cultivation or have been in the past. As might
be expected, the animal life in the wooded sections is very abundant.
A wide variety of deer, small mammals, birds, and reptiles can be
observed today.
Description o[ Artifact Types
Not all of the artifacts recovered from the excavations are useful in
differentiating and delimiting the Archaic horizon. Both diagnostic
and atypical artifact types are described in some detail below. These
include dart points, arrow points, bifacially flaked blades, and certain
other miscellaneous stone artifacts. Minor types of artifacts which
are present at only one site will be described in the section entitled
"Site Description and Analysis." Artifact forms which make up a
homogeneous group, but do not strictly conform to previously defined
types have been assigned a distinguishing number. These te::tative
types will be referred to by number throughout this paper.
Projectile points are divided into two major groups: the small light
arrow points which occur in the upper levels of the middens, and the
larger heavier dart points which occur throughout the excavations,
but are concentrated in the lower levels.

i 26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOOICAL SOCIETY

Broaddus

N

!41-

41-4
41-42D

0

5

~-~
Scale

Fig. 1. Map of Unit 42D5 showing location of E. E.

~
in

miles

Runnells Site No. 1

E. E. Runnells Site No. 2 (41--42D5-4), and the Sawmill site (41-42D5-9).

(41--42D5-5],

MCGEE BEND ARCHAIC

127

Fig. 2. Dart points, Type I. A-D, I-L, from Sawmill site; E-H, from Runnells No. 2.

DART POINTS

Type I (Fig. 2). This homogeneous group of dart points resembles
the Kent type as defined by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 432), but
has a much larger percentage of expanding stems. These points are
generally crude, and were shaped by the removal of large irregular
flakes, although several of the smaller specimens show secondary pressure flaking. The blades are trianguloid with slightly concave or convex edges, and some examples have one edge concave and the other
convex, giving a curved appearance to these artifacts. The shoulders,
though usually poorly defined, are right-angular, and a few of the
points have weakly developed barbs. There is an even gradation of
stem shape from very slightly contracting, through parallel-sided, to
well expanded. The general appearance of the stems is rectanguloid.
Bases are either straight or convex. All of these points are made of
local stone with silicified wood and chert occurring most frequently.
Some points are fragmentary but appear to fall within the size ranges
given in the following tabulation (measurements in centimeters):

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 3. Dart points. Gary points, A-D;

Ensor point, E; Ellis point, F; Pogo point, G;

Paisano-llke point, H; Type II point, I. B from Sawmill site; all others from Runnells No. 2.

Minimum
Length
Stem length
Width at shoulders
Stem width at base
Thickness

2.7
0.8
2.0
1.0
0.5

Maximum
6.0
1.3
3.3
1.9
1.4

Average
4.2
1.0
2.6
1.4
1.1

Types II and 11I (Fig. 3, I, for Type II). These types were found
at only one site, and are described in the section entitled "Site Description and Analysis."
Gary Type (Fig. 3, A-D). These points (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks
1954: 430) were found at all three sites.
Ellis, Ensor, and Pogo Types. These types, described by Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 420, 422, and 398) are represented by one
specimen of each type (Fig. 3, F, E, and G respectively).
Miscellaneous Forms. This category is set up to include all of those
dart points which are of no diagnostic value in this report. These points

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

129

vary widely in size and shape, but all are made of locally available
stone. None of the points in this group fits any recognized type, and
many of them are fragmentary.
ARROW POINTS

Alba Type (Fig. 4, A-F). Eighteen points from the excavations are
included in this type. Most of these points conform strictly to the
type description (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 161-163). Several, however, have blades with pronounced recurred edges and reverse barbs
(A-C). All of these points are finely pressure flaked. They are similar in general appearance, fall within the same size range, and resemble points classified as Alba at other localities (Wheat, 1953: Plate
35, and Stephenson, 1952: 309).
Perdiz Type (Fig. 4, G-K). This type was recovered from t/unnells
No. 2 and the Sawmill Site. All specimens conform to the type as
described in Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 504) .....
Cliffton, Cuney, and Scallorn Types (Fig. 4, Cuney atO, Scallorn
at N). These occur in small numbers in the upper levels of the excavations. Type descriptions are to be found in Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks
(1954: 496, 498, and 506).
Miscellaneous Forms. Various additional arrow points were found
at all three sites. These specimens are either too asymmetrically shaped
or too fragmentary to classify.
STONE DRILLS

Type I (Fig. 4, L-M). These drills are long, narrow bifacially flaked
implements with parallel sides and oval cross-section. One end is
sharply pointed and the other is rounded. All specimens of this type
are made of local chert and silicified wood. Several specimens are fragmentary but appear to fall within the size ranges given in the following tabulation (measurements in centimeters) :
Minimum

Maximum

3.5
0.8
0.7

5.3
1.0
0.8

Length
Width
Thickness
BLADES

Bifacially flaked blades of various types were the most commonly
occurring class of lithic artifact at these sites. These are tentatively

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

30

¢M.
Fig. 4. Arrow points and drills. Alba points, A-F; Perdiz points, G-K; Scallorn point, N;
Cuney point, O; drills, Type I, L-M; drills, Type 11, P-Q. From Sawmill site, A, C-K, O; from
Runnells No. 2, B, L-N, P-Q.

divided into five types. All specimens are made of coarse-grained petrified wood or weathered chert pebbles.
Type I (Fig. 5, E-H). These are long, thin rectanguloid slabs of
silicified wood. One lateral edge and one or both ends are unaltered.
One of the lateral edges on each specimen has been bifacially flaked
into a straight or convex cutting edge. This easily recognized type of
blade will be named and described in detail in the final report on the
McGee Bend excavations. Several of these blades are fragmentary, but
they appear to fall within the size ranges given in the following tabulation (measurements in centimeters):

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

Length
Width
Thickness

Minimum
4.8
2.4
0.5

Maximum
17.2
6.0
2.3

Average
8.4
3.6
1.4

Type II (Fig. 5, A-D). These artifacts show a considerable range
in size, but all have a distinctive characteristic. Each blade of this
type has an unaltered base which is commonly capped with the cortex
of the stone nodule used in its manufacture. All were made from
locally occurring stones. The trianguloid blades are bifacial with
straight to convex or slightly concave edges. A few have well developed
distal tips, but most of them end in roughly rounded points. These
artifacts form a distinctive type of blade which will be named and
described in a forthcoming report by Jelks. In the following tabulation dimensions of these artifacts are given in centimeters:
Length
Width
Thickness

Minimum
4.0
2.0
0.7

Maximum
10.3
4.1
1.7

Average
7.8
3:2
.4

Fig. 5. Blades. Type I, E-H: Type II, A-D. From Runnells No. 2, A-D, F; from Sawmill
site, E, G-H.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Type III (Fig. 6, A-C). This is a group of small, trianguloid bifacial
blades that are oval to triangular in outline with straight or convex
edges. These blades are lenticular in cross-section, often have well developed points, and bases are straight or convex. Dimensions (in centimeters) are given in the following tabulation:
Average
Maximum
Minimum
5.0
7.1
3.0
Length
2.9
3.5
1.5
Width
1.3
1.8
0.7
Thickness
Type IV (Fig. 6, D-F). These blades closely resemble the group described above in shape and workmanship, but this group is considerably larger in size. These artifacts are oval in cross section, oval or
trianguloid in outline, with straight or convex edges and convex bases.
Dimensions (in centimeters) are given in the following tabulation:
Length
Width
Thickness

Minimum
8.1
2.4
1.1

Maximum
10.7
4.3
2.1

Average
9.8
3.4
1.5

Fig. 6. Blades. Type lib A-C; Type IV, D-F; Type V, G-I. All from Runnells No. 2.

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

133

Fig. 7. Pitted stones from Sawmill site.

Type V (Fig. 6, G-I). These nodular blades (or worked stone nodules) all have similar physical characteristics. They are pebbles that
are largely unaltered, but each has one end sharpened to a point by
the removal of large flakes by percussion. In the following tabulation
dimensions are given in centimeters:
Length
Width
Thickness

Minimum
3.7
2.4
1.2

Maximum
8.5
3.9
2.3

Average
5.0
3.1
:1.7

Miscellaneous Forms. Many blades and blade fragments are unclassifiable. All are made of locally available stone and none gives any
indication of wide variations of size or shape outside the types described
above.
PITTED

STONES

Many large fragments of coarse-grained, dark brown hematite have
been shaped into pitted stone implements (Fig. 7). There is much

TEX2~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

variation in size and shape, but each of these stones has one surface
ground fiat and a small circular pit pecked into the fiat surface. It is
thought that these stones were used as platforms for cracking the wild
nuts that are so abundant in these woods (the nut being placed in the
pit and struck with another stone). Dimensions (in centimeters) of
these specimens are given in the following tabulation:
Minimum
8.0
3.8
......
......

Maximum diameter
Thickness
Diameter of pit
Depth of pit

Maximum
15.9
6.3
3.0
0.8

Other minor types of lithic artifacts are described in the section entitled "Site Description and Analysis."
POTTERY

Sand-tempered Plain Pottery. This coiled pottery is tempered with
rounded quartz particles of variable size. Sherds are usually smooth
both on the inside and outside, and they are medium to coarse in texture. Some sherds are almost pure sand, and these give the appearance
of a fine-grained sandstone. Color ranges from light brown to dark
brown and dark gray. No complete vessels of this type were recovered
from the test excavations.
Clay- and Bone-tempered Pottery. This includes a large number of
types that exhibit various surface decoration techniques. These sherds
are limited primarily to the upper levels of the test excavations, and
no attempt has been made to define the types represented.

Site Descriptions and Artiiact Analyses
E. E. BUNNELLS No. 2 (41-42D5-4)
This site is located on a low sandy ridge overlooking Harvey Creek
(Fig. 1 ), which flows south and west into the Angelina River. During
floods the Angelina overflows into the basin of Harvey Creek and inundates the flood plain at the base of the ridge. The site was named
after the present land owner.
The occupation area is roughly oval in outline and has a maximum
diameter of about three hundred feet. A grid system was used with
the base stake on the southeast edge of the site and at an arbitrary
elevation of one hundred feet. A five-foot wide test trench was exca-

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

135

vated from NO-EO to N150-EO and from N150-W5 to N150-W250
(Fig. 8). The trench was excavated to a depth of one foot with cultural material recorded by six-inch levels. Five-foot square test pits
were dug every fifty feet, and were taken to a depth of three or four
feet by six-inch levels. All test pits and trenches were carefully cleaned
and profiled, but no features could be detected. Test squares number
N140-EO, N145-EO, N150-EO, N150-W5, N150-~¥10, and N150W15 were all taken to a depth of four feet, and all produced cultural
material in all levels down to three feet in depth. A compact red-mottled clay, which commonly underlies the sand on these ridges, was
found at a depth of two feet at N50-EO, but it was not encountered in
the deep test area mentioned above.
The sandy soil containing artifacts is of uncertain origin. There is
no evidence of its being transported to the ridge top by human agency.
An alluvial origin for the formation in this area would indicate considerable age for the deeply buried cultural material. At the present
time the Angelina River deposits a relatively small amount of sediment during time of flooding. At its peak flood stage the river has never
covered these ridges in historic times, if this sandy deposit is of alluvial
origin, it indicates a much higher flood stage for the Angelina River in
prehistoric times. This is a very interesting problem but one that is
beyond the scope of this paper.
This ridge has been in cultivation in the past, and it was used as a
house site by early Anglo-American settlers. At present it serves as a
cow pasture and is covered with a good growth of grass. From the surface to varying depths is a brown sand geologic member (Zone III).
Four divisions were recognized in this sandy member: humus-stained
plow zone (III D) ; a fine tan sand (III C) ; a mottled tan and white
sand (III B) ; and a whitish sand with some tan sand inclusions (III
A). Geologic Zone II is composed of red-brown clay with small pockets
of tan sand. Zone II merges with Zone I, which is a mixed red-orange
and pale blue clay with scattered sand pockets. Cultural material occurs only in zones III D, III C, and III B.
The lithic artifacts from this site are made primarily of a coarsegrained silicified wood. The next most common material is a buffcolored chert, and several specimens are made of hematite, sandstone,
and flint. The petrified wood has numerous microscopic flaws and fractures. Flaking techniques often produce irregular chips, and consequently the artifacts made of this material are usually crude. The chert
occurs in the form of small river pebbles, and some patinated cortex.
appears on most of the artifacts made of this material.

TEXANS AllCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

E.E.RUNNELLS NO.2
41-42D5-4
50
0
i-~

I00
I

contour interval 1.0’
~ area excavated

scale in feet
Fig. 8. Map of Runnells No. 2, showing area excavated.

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

137

Typological analysis of the lithic material was very time consuming.
There are many variations within each type, and identification of
individual artifacts is, in some cases, quite difficult. However, each of
the artifact groups shows a surprising homogeneity. The numerous
small variations are probably the result of poor raw materials and
careless flaking techniques.
All of the lithic artifacts were first separated into groups according
to form and supposed function (dart points, arrow points, drills, scrapers~ blades, gravers, and ground stone artifacts). Each group was then
divided into types according to stylistic variations (example: dart
points--stem shape, blade shape, barbs, notches, size, flaking technique, etc.).
Dart Points. Thirty-four Type I dart points (Fig. 2) were found at
this site. In the deep test pits (Fig. 9) these points were distributed as
follows: three points in Zone III D-III G (mixed), surface to 1.5 ft.;
three in Zone III G, i to 1.5 ft.; eight points in Zone III C-III B
(mixed), 1.5 to 2.5 ft.; and five points were recovered from Zone III
B, below 2.5 ft.
Five projectile points of the Gary type (Fig. 3, A, G-D) were recovered during the excavation of this site. Four of these points are very
similar to each other in size and shape, and al! four show fine pressure
flaking. Three are made of buff-colored chert and one of milk quartz.
The fifth Gary point is made of light brown chert and is about twice
the length of those described above. Three of the Gary points occurred
in Zone III D-III G (mixed), surface to 1 ft.; o.ne in the Zone III G, 1
to 1.5 ft.; and the third was in Zone III G-III B (mixed), 1.5 to 2.5 ft.
(Fig. 9).
One point of the Pogo type (Suhm, Krieger, and 3elks, 1954: 398)
was found in Zone III C, 1 to 1.5 ft. This point (Fig. 3, G) is made of
light gray mottled chert.
One dart point of the Ellis type (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954:
420) is made of gray-white flint (Fig. 3, F). It was found in Zone III
D, surface to 0.5 ft.
Another point (Type II) has a triangular blade with straight edges.
This point shows very careful pressure flaking and is made of silicified
wood. It has very slight shoulders and a long contracting stem with a
straight base. The edges of the stem have been ground smooth from the
shoulders to the base (Fig. 3, I). This characteristic is often associated with Paleo-Indian points. If this point is of Paleo-Indian origin,
it is probably intrusive in this site, because no other evidence of Paleo-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Depth

Zone

k. T>pe I

o.o, - o.5,)n~

~

0.5’ - l.O’~iiiC
1.o, - Z.5’J
2.0’ IIIC-IIIB

,.

.o.

z6

s

i{

5

/

2.5’ - ,.O’~IIIB.IIL~

3.5’J

~

’ ......
~/’/

,
1.5, - 2,01i) IIIC-IIIB
2.0’ - 2.5
2.5’ - 3.o, IINIIIA

.

0.5’ - 1.O’ ~iiiC

,TT/

,"

rer~p~d

56

3s

12

No.
3

V
F. T~ II
Blld.~

12

i

~7

~

\!

52

Ii

I0

2

C~y

She~.

\~/

E.E.RUNNELLS NO.2

/

X

19

t

60

:o.

/ \

[{..~i~.

Tempered
Plain Shords

/

~5

\/

s. Sand
o.o, - o.s,] nIo

"

5

,,9

/

T)

3.O, - 3.5

o. o=r~,
D~r~ Point8

No.

19

nla~o=

/ ~o

X

,=~. ,~l.~

5. TYPe i

D. ~T~ eolnr~

....... ~,},;=

°"’
LO,

26

~

B. ~i~oella~ou~

{-/

/=~

2.0’ - 2.5’
3.0’

{

D=,-~ Fo~=

41- 42D5-4

~/

i.o, - 1.5,
VERTICAL

2.0’ - 2.5

~.5’ - ] .o,~ nrB-zn*

I
l

DISTRIBUTION

OF TYPES BY ZONE
6

/

3.0’ - 3.5’

Fig. 9. Distribution of artifacts at Runnells No. 2.

Indian occupation was noted. This Type II point came from Zone III
C-III B (mixed), 1 to 1.5 ft.
Another point, strongly resembling the Ensor type (Suhm. Krieger,
and Jelks, 1954: 4P9,2) is made of dark brown silicified wood (Fig. 3,
E). Itwas recovered from Zone III B. £ to 2.5 ft.
Twenty-eight miscellaneous dart points are of no diagnostic value.
One of these points (Fig. 3. H) has a concave base and shallow side
notches. The blade edges are convex and serrated. It bears a superficial
resemblance to points of the Paisano type (Suhm, Krieger. and Jelks,
1954: 460). All of the points in this miscellaneous group are made of
coarse-grained silicified wood or of buff to gray chert. They were
evenly distributed throughout the deep test area. Three occurred in
Bone III D-III C (mixed) ; five were from Zone III C; four from Zone
III C-III B (mixed) ; and four were from the lowest artifact-producing Zone, III B. The remaining twelve dart points of miscellaneous
types were recovered from the long shallow test trenches.
Arrow Points. Only five arrow points were [ound in the test excavation of this site. One of these is a basal fragment of no diagnostic value.
This group appears insignificant when compared to the 70 dart points
and fragments. Three of the four complete arrow points are of the Alba
type with "reverse" barbs (Fig. 4, B). All of these points occurred in
the upper zones III D and III C, surface to 1.5 ft.

MCGEE BE~¢D ARCHAIC

The other complete arrow point is a finely worked specimen of
petrified wood (Fig. 4, N). This point has a narrow triangular blade,
slightly convex edges, well-developed barbs sloping downward, corner
notches which form an expanding stem, and a straight base. It resembles arrow points of the Scallorn type (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks,
1954: 506), and was located in Zone III D, surface to 0.5 ft.
Drills. Ten artifacts recovered during excavation of this site are
classified as stone drills. Seven of these are Type I drills (Fig. 4, L, M).
These artifacts occurred at various depths throughout the excavation.
The three remaining, drills are of a different type, here designated as
Type II (Fig. 4, P-Q). Each has a broad flattened base and a short
pointed bit that is oval to triangular in cross-section. The base of each
of these drills is bifacially flaked. Drills from this site have the following measurements (in centimeters) :
Minimum
Length
Bit length
Bit width
Base width
Thickness

2.4
1.0
0.5
1.4
0.4

Maximum
4.0
1.7
0.8
2.0
0.7

Gravers. Two gravers were found in Zone III D-III C (mixed). The
larger of the two, made of reddish brown chert, is trianguloid with
one straight unworked edge and two bifacially worked slightly convex
edges. The flaked edges come together and form a rounded beak. This
specimen has the following measurements (in centimeters): length
2.8, width 2.7, beak width 0.8, thickness 1.0.
The smaller of the two gravers, a pressure-retouched flake of redgray flint, is trianguloid in outline and has two unworked edges. The
third edge is bifacially pressure flaked and may have been used as a
scraping artifact. At one end of this edge is a small graver beak with
a high dorsal ridge. Its dimensions (in centimeters) are: length 5.0,
width 2.1, beak width 0.5, thickness 0.6.
Scrapers. In addition to the scraping edge on the graver described
above, there are eleven other scraping artifacts. One of these is a small
piano-convex end-scraper (scraper Type I) made from a flake of
brown chert. It has a convex bit which contracts behind the bit and
expands into the unworked flake body. Its dimensions (in centimeters)
are: length 4.0, bit width 1.4, thickness 0.4. This scraper came from
Zone III B-III A (mixed), 2.5 to 3 ft.
Six very small flakes of stone have finely retouched convex scrap-

TEXA,S

AiRCI-IEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ing edges (scraper Type If). These are of various shapes and all are
unifacially flaked. Five are made of buff to gray chert. One made of
silicified wood has two small scraping" edges. Measurements (in centimeters) are as follows:
Minimum
Length
Width
Bit width
Thickness

2.0
1.5
0.7
0.3

Maximum
2.7
2.5
2.5
0.6

Two long thin flakes (scraper Type III) have concave scraping
edges (sometimes called spokeshaves). These are unifacially flaked and
are made of buff and reddish chert. Measurements (in centimeters) on
these two specimens are given below:
Buff Scraper
Length
Width
Bit width
Thickness

2.6
1.9
3.2
0.5

Reddish Scraper
3.7
1.3
3.0
0.5

Another scraper is made from a thick flake of coarse gray chert. It
is roughly triangular in outline and has a convex scraping edge, a
notched edge, and an unworked edge. Its dimensions (in centimeters)
are: length 5.6, width 3.8, width of convex scraping edge 5.3, length
of concave scraping edge 1.7, thickness 1.5.
The last scraper in the series is a bifacially flaked petrified wood
implement which was apparently made for hafting. It is oval in outline and has two deep notches in one side that form a stem opposite
the long scraping edge. Its dimensions (in centimeters) are: length
2.4, width 2.0, thickness 0.5.
The scraping artifacts represent a very small percentage of the lithic
artifacts from this site. They occur in all levels of the test excavation.
Bifacially Flaked Blades. The blades recovered from the excavation
of this site are as follows: Type I, none; Type II, 21; Type III, 27;
Type IV, 5; Type V, 13; and 36 miscellaneous blades. The distribution of blades of Types I and II is shown in Fig. 9.
Hammerstones. Ten large fragments of stone show extensive battering along one or more edges. Six of these are long pieces of petrified
wood which are rectangular to triangular in cross section (Fig. 10).
The other four are made of assorted local stones, and all are rounded
in appearance. Most of these are battered along several edges and one

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

I~I

Fig. 10. Hammerstones from Runnells No. 2. All made of silicified wood.

shows evidence of grinding. Hammerstone dimensions

(in centi-

meters) are given below:
Length
Width
Thickness

Minimum
9.0
3.0
J.6

Maximum
14.9
7.9
5.1

Pigment. Red and orange pigment stones were found throughout
the excavation. Nine of these stones are a fine-grained hematite and
were used as a source of red pigment. Six others, fine-grained silt
stones, were used as a source of orange pigment. All of these pigment
stones show some evidence of cutting or scraping. In diameter they
range from 1.5 to 8.2 cm.
Miscellaneous Objects. Fourteen pieces of burned sandy clay were.
found. These are irregular lumps and none shows intentional shaping. Stone cores and flakes occurred throughout the excavation in
abundance.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Discussion. Runnels No. 2 seems to have been occupied intermittently during the late Archaic (pre-ceramic) stage. Evidence of this
occupation is found in the levels below two feet (Zone III B) in the
deep test area. A complete lack of perishable materials, features, and
hearths leaves the definition of this occupation primarily to speculation. Cultural remains from these levels consist of lithic artifacts
only. If bone, wood, and other perishable materials were used, they
have long since disappeared. The lithic artifacts from this zone are as
follows: Four Type I dart points; five miscellaneous dart points; seven
Type I blades; nine miscellaneous blades; one Type I scraper; two
Type II scrapers; one Type III scraper; two hammerstones; one Type
I drill; and many stone chips. Three potsherds were found in disturbed
earth near a rodent burrow in this level, and are probably intrusive
from upper levels.
These artifacts indicate that the first occupation of this site was by
small groups of nomadic hunters. These people probably erected
temporary shelters, hunted local game animals, and gathered wild
nuts and plants. The atlatl or spear thrower, used extensively by
Archaic hunters, was probably the principal weapon. No arrow points
were found in the lower levels of this site. Dart points of Type I were
the predominant type occurring in Zone III B. Seven blades of Type I
indicate that this type of artifact was a definite element of the earliest
occupation at this site. Some time after the first occupation a small
amount of sand-tempered plain pottery was made. Type II blades also
began to appear at this time. These traits apparently did not greatly
modify the pattern of life. Dart points continued to increase in number. There are no significant changes in types of dart points or classes
of artifacts in the levels from one to two feet below the surface (Zone
III C). One arrow point came from a depth of 1.5 ft., but this could
have been intrusive, as some evidence of soil disturbance by rodents
was noted in the field. Apparently the nomadic hunting peoples
adopted sand-tempered pottery and continued their pattern of existence with little other modification.
In the upper levels of the site (surface to 1 ft., zones III C and III
D) a few arrow points and some decorated, clay- and bone-tempered,
pottery appears. There are several possible explanations for the appearance of these cultural traits: the arrival of new groups of people
in the vicinity with these traits already well developed; or a gradual
diffusion of these traits into this area due to contact of the local population with other cultural centers. Dart points are still present in Zone
III D, but they have greatly decreased in popularity. A few dart points

MCGEE

BEI’~D

ARCHAIC

of the Gary type are found in the upper levels, and this would seem to
indicate that they came into the area at about the same time as the
bow and arrow and clay-tempered pottery. Gary points are found
throughout the southeastern United States.
E. E. I~UI’qt’qELLS No. 1 (41-42D5-5)
This site is located about three hundred yards west of E. E. t~unnells
No. 2 on a low sandy ridge (Fig. 1 ). The site is rectanguloid in outline
and approximately 500 feet long (north-south axis) and 150 feet wide.
The ridge was planted in corn at the time of excavation, and it was
necessary to harvest the corn before test excavations could begin. The
grid system (Fig. 11 ) was established with the base stake on the south
central edge of the site, at an arbitrary elevation of one hundred feet.
A five-foot wide test trench was excavated from NO-EO to N350-EO.
The first level was from the surface to one foot and extended below
the plow zone. Five-foot east-west test trenches were excavated from
NS0-EO to NS0-E50, and from N100-EO to N100-ES0: and to a
depth of one foot. Five-foot square test pits at fifty yard intervals in
the test trench were excavated in six-inch levels.
The stratigraphy varied considerably throughout the excavation.
Two zones were recognized. Zone II is a tan sand and extends from the
surface to depths ranging from ten inches to several feet. This zone is

wmo

~w,oo

~wmo

o z~w,o~

................. 4

J

99.

E.E,RUNNELLS NO. I
41-42D5-5

c

20

,o

eo

eo

,oo

,,,,. ,. ~.,

¯ Fig. 1 1. Map of Runnells No. 1, showing area excavated.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

macroscopically the same as Zone III of Runnells No. 2. Zone I is a
mottled red-orange and blue clay, and apparently corresponds to the
orange-blue clay (Zone I) of Runnells No. 2.
Zone II has three subdivisions: a tan, humus-stained sand, the plow
zone (II C) ; a humus-stained tan sand zone (II B) ; and a clean, light,
tan sandy zone (II A). Artifacts were found throughout Zone II.
Zone I has two recognizable subdivisions: a red-orange clay zone containing much sand (I B) ; and below this a very compact mottled clay,
red-orange and blue in color (I A). No artifacts were found in Zone I.
No trace of Zone I was found in five-foot test square N350-EO.
Further testing showed that Zone I lenses out in this area and Zone II
is underlain by a clean gray sterile sand. Little is known about this
formation; and, as it is sterile and has no bearing on the archeology
of the site, it will not be considered further in this paper.
Cultivation over a relatively long period of time has caused extensive water erosion of Zone II. Stratigraphy within this zone was of no
archeological significance. The cultural remains recovered during
excavation are very similar to those described for Runnells No. 2. For
the most part they will only be listed by type or identifying number,
but a few items are described separately.
Dart Points. Nineteen Type I dart points were found. Fifteen are
made of buff-colored chert, three of gray silicified wood, and one of
white quartzite. All of these points fall within the size range previously given for this type.
Five additional dart points are made of chert and have no diagnostic
value. Four other points are made of petrified wood. One of these
shows very fine workmanship on both faces. The blade is triangular
with convex edges. One side of the point has a weakly developed
shoulder, and the other bears no trace of a shoulder. This point has a
contracting stem with a slightly convex base. Its dimensions (in centimeters) are: length 4.4, stem length 1.6, width at shoulder 2.2, thickness 0.7. The remainder of the dart points are either fragmentary or
unclassifiable.
Arrow Points. Only seven arrow points were found at this site. One
is of Alba type, one is Perdiz, and five are unclassifiable fragments.
Three are made of petrified wood and four are made of chert.
Drills. One stone drill was uncovered by the test excavation. It is
a Type II drill and is too fragmentary to be measured.
Scrapers. One piano-convex end-scraper (Type I) is made of chert.
This is a fine specimen with a thick bit and convex scraping edge; its
dimensions (in centimeters) are: length 3.1, width 1.9, thickness 1.0.

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

Two other scraping artifacts were found. One is a Type II scraper and
the other is an unclassified form. Both are made of chert. Sizes are
similar to those previously listed for comparable types.
Bifacially Flaked Blades. These form the largest class of lithic artifacts. Fifty-three of these are made of chert and petrified wood, with
the latter material occurring more frequently. These blades are of the
following types: Type I, 3; Type II, 10; Type III, !5; Type IV, 5;
Type V, 4; and 16 miscellaneous blades. One of the miscellaneous
blades is bifacially flaked, and apparently was made for hafting. It
has a trianguloid blade with one straight edge and one concave edge;
broad, shallow side notches; and a slightly concave base. Its dimensions (in centimeters) are: length 7.3, width 3.5, thickness 1.0.
Ba~nerstorze. Only one polished stone artifact was found at this
site. This is a bannerstone fragment made of a dark brown, very finegrained hematite (Fig. 15, C). The entire fragment is highly polished.
A hole of uniform diameter was drilled through the complete width
of the stone. It is along this perforation that the bannerstone was
broken. Only half of the artifact was recovered. Its measurable dimensions (in centimeters) are: width 4.5, length of central hole 4.5, thickness 1.7, diameter of central hole 1.0.
Hammerstoues. Five large fragments of silicified wood have been
roughly battered on both ends. The largest of these is 18.9 centimeters
in length and the smallest is 7.0 centimeters.
Miscellaneous. Unaltered pigment stones, burned clay lumps, and
miscellaneous stone chips were recovered also from the test excavation. These were widely scattered and appear to have no stratigraphic
significance.
Discussion. The artifacts from Runnells No. 1 closely resemble those
from Runnells No. 2 both in number and in types. This, as well as the
close proximity of the two sites, leads to the conclusion that Runnells
No. 1 experienced the same sequence of occupation as described for
Runnells No. 2. A tabulation of the horizontal and vertical distribution
of artifacts at this site was of little value because the deposits were extensively disturbed by cultivation and subsequent erosion.

SA’vVMILL SITE

(41-42D5-9)

This was by far the most productive site tested during the field season. It is located on a low sandy ridge overlooking the Angelina River
flood plain (Fig. 1 ). Extensive testing (Fig. 12) was carried out during
much of October and November. Excavations produced evidence of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

occupation of this site at various times from the Archaic stage up to
historic times. Relatively recent cultural modifications of the ridge
top include cultivation, a deep, narrow road-cut no longer in use, and
an abandoned sawmill which accumulated a very large mound of
sawdust during the years of its operation.
The exact area covered by this site was not accurately determined.
It apparently covered most of the elevated area in this vicinity and
may have extended out onto the flood plain at times. The deep central
midden, which was extensively tested, is approximately two hundred
feet in diameter. At one time a county road was cut across the center
of the site and removed a section of the midden about twenty feet
wide. Human burials were reported to have been found along this
road-cut in the past, but none of the skeletal material could be located.
Artifacts from test excavation of this site number about 12,000. Because of time limitations it was not possible to describe and analyze
all of this material. A section was selected from the center of the concentrated midden, and an analysis of the material of this section was
made (Figs. 15 and 14). For purposes of this paper, all of the potsherds from this section have been considered as a single group. A
complete and detailed analysis of this pottery will be made by Mr.
Jelks in his forthcoming report.
Stratigraphy was relatively well defined at this site. Cultural material was recovered by arbitrary six-inch levels and separated according to the geologic zones. The basal deposit (Zone I) consists of yellow to reddish sandy clay and contained no cultural remains. Several
deep test holes in the test trenches and in the road-cut did not reveal
any change in this deposit. Zone II is a sandy member immediately
overlying Zone I. A tan unstained sand (II A) comprises the bottom
portion of this zone. The upper part (II B) of this zone is humusstained and apparently represents an old stabilized surface with a
wel!-developed soi! surface. A few flakes of stone and an occasional
artifact indicate that the first occupation occurred on this old surface.
This zone is now buried beneath Sandy deposits up to four feet thick.
i~ ~

The origin of these overlying deposits is uncertain.
A clean unconformity separates the surface of layer II B from the
overlying Zone III. Zone III is a sand member several feet thick which
covers the top of the ridge. Cultural material occurs throughout this
zone, which is divided into three partsl Layer III A is an organically
stained sand of varying thickness. This layer produced numerous lithic
artifacts but very few potsherds. Zone III B is a dark humus-stained

sand containing much cultural material. Layer III C is the plow zone

I~¢ICGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

\

SAWMILL SITE

41-42D5-9

~

200

_i..__~0
scale in feet

contour interval 2.0’
m area excavated

Fig. 12. Map of Sawmill site, showing area excavated.

148

TEXAS ARCHI[OLOGICAL SOCIETY

and is comprised of dark humus-stained sand usually indistinguishable
from Zone III B when both are dry. Potsherds occur in great quantity
in layers III B and III C. In several instances disturbance of natural
stratigraphy was detected in the form of pits and rodent runs.
The lithic artifacts from the deep test area of this site are described
according to class and type. Distributions of the dominant types are
tabulated according to both arbitrary depth and to geologic zone (Figs.
13 and 14). Pottery distribution was computed considering all sherds
as one group. Observations in the field indicate that the sand-tempered
pottery appears considerably earlier than other types. This will be
clarified in the final report on this site.
Dart Points. A total of 143 dart points was recovered from the concentrated midden area. Ninety-seven of these are Type I dart points
(Fig. 2, I-L). In this large sample certain small variations are apparent. This group was divided into four subtypes according to stem
shape. This was done primarily to emphasize the variation of stem
shape within this type. The distribution of each subtype is almost
identical (Fig. 13).
Subtype IA is represented by 24 points with poorly developed barbs
and broad, expanding stems. Bases are straight or convex. Thirty-five
points (IB) have well-developed shoulders or slight barbs and moderately expanding stems with straight or convex bases. Twenty-three
points make up subtype IC. These points have well developed Lshaped shoulders and slightly expanding stems, with straight to
slightly convex bases. Fifteen points are of Subtype ID. These points
have right-ang~flar shoulders, rectangular stems with parallel sides,
and straight or slightly concave or convex bases.
All of the above listed Type I dart points are made of silicified wood
or of chert. This group of 97 points falls within the size range previously listed for the type.
Five projectile points are of the Gary type (Suhm, Krieger, and
7elks, 1954: 430). Three are made of chert and two of petrified wood
(Fig. 3, B). The vertical distribution of the Gary points is shown in
Fig. 13.
There are 41 miscellaneous dart points. Two of these are triangular
non-stemmed rarities. One (made of chert) has a concave base,
straight edges, and is too fragmentary to measure; the other (made of
silicified wood) has slightly convex edges and a straight base; its
measurements in centimeters are: length 2.6, width 2.1, thickness 0.8.
One heavy chert point was shaped by the removal of large flakes.
It has convex edges, large side notches, and a bulbous stem with con-

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

vex base; its dimensions in centimeters are: length 4.8, stem length
3.0, width 2.0, thickness 1.0.
Twenty-one of the miscellaneous dart points are crudely fashioned
stemmed varieties of no recognizable type. Blades are triangular to
parallel-sided; edges are concave, straight, or convex; shoulders are
poorly developed; stems vary from expanding to contracting, but none

o, . . .

i.o, - 1.5’
1.5’ - 2.0’

E. gary
Dar~ Po~u~

v. Ty~ ID
Dart ~in~s

....... 5’ }iiIc

}

IIIB

2.5’ - 3.0’
3.0’ - 3.5’~ !IB
3.5’ - 6.0,

~

~o
~o

2

13

~//

!-/

21

~

13

V

63

40

2

SAWMILL SITE
41-42D5-9

J

VERTICAL

DISTRIBUTION

OF TYPES BY DEPTH
Fig. 1 3. Distribution of dart points (Type I and Gray) from Sawmill site.

~p~

zo~

To~
Dar5 Poln~

%

NO.

....... ~,)mo

s ~

o.~, - ~.o, )

9 ~

....... ~ ....

..... )
~.~, - ~.o,

~.~’
2.5’ - 3.0’
3.0, -

3.5’ - h.O’
3.5’)

ilia
I1~

~--~

1~ ~

/-/

~s

--.
--

I’/
"

t,o
18 ~6
17 2h
~ 3

B. Tot~
A~ Po~

%

/

~

No.

~9 ~
~ ~

~
\,,/

~

~

~

"

~

" ~

3

I

I

i

~

6

--

7

i

2

1

-\ /

i~

h

C. To~
~o~ ~s

\

/

\-7/
\__.
1"7

*

No.

%

~o ,~
~o ~,~
~
~
~
i

~’

~s
97
36

D. TX~ I

1.o, - 1.5,
1.5, - 2.0’

Ir~

~.5’ - 3.0’
3.O’ - 3.5’ )
lIB
3.5’ - L.0’

"~

SAWMILL SITE
41-42D5-9
VERTICAL

DISTRIBUTION

OF TYPES BY DEPTH
Fig. 14. Distribution of artifacts from Sawmill site.

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

is well shaped; and bases are concave or convex. Eleven points in this
group are made of silicified wood, nine of chert, and one of gray quartzite. The average dimensions (in centimeters) of this group are:
length 4.5. stem length 0.9, width 2.2, thickness 1.0.
Fifteen projectile point fragments are unclassifiable. The material
and workmanship of these fragments indicate that they probably represent types similar to those described above. For the purposes of tabulation, these points are considered with the miscellaneous group.
The last two dart points (Type Ill) in the miscellaneous group are
small side-notched varieties. The blades are triangular with one edge
concave and the other convex. The concave edge on each specimen is
steeply beveled. Small side notches form a broad expanding stem with
concave base. The stern is wider than the blade on each specimen. The
stem and base of these artifacts resemble the Frio type of dart point
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 428), and they are possibly reworked
points of this type. These artifacts also resemble Albany Beveled
Spokeshaves (Webb, 1948: 132). However, in this report these artifacts will be tabulated as Type Ill dart points. One is made of chert
and the other of silicified wood.
Arrow Points. Thirty-six arrow points and arrow point fragments
were recovered from the concentrated midden area. Ten of this number are of the Perdiz Type (Fig. 4, G-K), and their distribution is as
follows: Six points came from Zone III C, surface to 0.5 ft.; three from
Zone lit C-Ill B (mixed). 0.5 to I ft.; and the last came from Zone
III B-III A (mixed), 2 to 2.5 ft. This last Perdiz point may be intruslve at that depth, because several rodent burrows were noted in the
test square.
There are fourteen points of the Alba type (Fig. 4, D-F). These
points were recovered from the following zones: Seven from Zone III
C, surface to 0.5 ft.; five from Zone Ill C-III B (mixed), 0.5 to i ft.;
one from Zone lit B, i to 1.5 ft.; and one from Zone Ill B, 1.5 to 2 ft.
Three Cliffton points (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks. 1954: 496) made
of dark red chert were found in Zone III C, surface to 0.5 ft. These
three points are roughly triangular and crudely chipped. The blades
have convex edges, and the shoulders are very poorly developed. The
stems are very short and convex. All three specimens are fragmentary
and accurate measurements cannot be taken.
One point (Fig. 4, O) strongly resembles the Cuney type (Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 498). It is made of a fine-grained silicified
wood and was located in Zone III C-III B (mixed), 0.5 to 1 ft.
Eight fragmentary arrow points cannot be classified. Seven are

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

made of buff to dark brown chert, and one is made of light gray quartzite. Five show traces of a stem; the others are distal fragments. All
of these arrow point fragments came from the upper one foot of the
test excavation.
Drills. Only three artifacts can be classified as stone drills. These
Type I drills were recovered from Zone III G, surface to 0.5 ft.
Scrapers. Nine scraping artifacts (Type II) were found within the
concentrated midden area of this site. These are al! made of buffcolored chert. All are thin flakes with small, convex, pressure-retouched scraping edges. They were scattered throughout the excavation.
Bifacially Flaked Blades. A total of 83 blades forms the largest class
of lithic artifacts. There are 27 Type I blades (Fig. 5, E, G-H), all
made of thin slabs of silicified wood. Fourteen blades, all made of the
same material, are of Type II. The vertical distribution of these Type
I and Type II blades is shown in Fig. 14. Eleven small biracial blades
(cf. Fig. 6, A-G) conform to the description and sizes listed for blade
Type III. The remaining 31 blades are all bifacially chipped, and are
of various sizes and shapes. The majority of these are made of gray or
brown petrified wood. They range from 4 to 8 cm. in length. Most of
these miscellaneous blades were shaped by the removal of large flakes
by the percussion method. A few specimens show secondary pressure
retouching along one or more edges.
Polished Stone Celts. Nineteen ground and polished stone artifacts
were found in the concentrated midden area. Two of these are small
polished stone celts (Fig. 15, A-B). The smaller of the two (A) is made
of a dark, fine-grained "greenstone" pebble. The poll end of the pebble
is unaltered, and the other end has been ground down to form a wide,
sharp, well-polished cutting edge. The poll shows signs of battering.
This celt is circular in cross section. Its dimensions (in centimeters)
are: length 5.9, width 3.1, thickness 2.5.
The larger celt (B) is made of fine-grained, very dark brown hematite. It is oval in cross-section. The entire surface has been ground and
well polished. In outline the lateral edges are slightly convex. The poll
is rounded and the bit is slightly convex. It has a length of 7.4 cm., a
width of 3.2 cm., and a thickness of 1.6 cm.
A small celt fragment is made of unidentified greenstone. This is
a fragment of the bit end, 3.7 cm. in length and 2 cm. in width.
The larger celt was found in Zone III G, surface to 0.5 ft.; the small
celt and the fragment both came from Zone III C-III B (mixed), 0.5
ft. to 1 ft.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 15. Ground stone artifacts. Celts, A-B; bannerstone fragment, C. From Sawmill site,
A-B; from Runnells No. 1, C.

Abrading Stone. A small fragment of light brown coarse-grained
sandstone has a shallow groove along one side. This artifact was possibly used for sharpening points of bone, stone~ or wooden tools, or
perhaps as an arrow-shaft straightener. It came from a depth of 1.5 ft.
below the surface. Its dimensions (in centimeters) are: length 5.0,
width of groove 1.1, thickness 2.8~ depth of groove about 0.2.
Pitted Stones. Seven of these (Fig. 7, A-C) were found during the
excavation of the concentrated midden area.
Harnrnerstones. 0nly three recognizable hammerstones were found.
One of these is a small chert river pebble, another is a pebble of milk
quartz, and the third is a long fragment of silicified wood. All three
show extensive battering on several edges.
Miscellaneous Ground Stone Arti[acts. The eight remaining ground
stone artifacts are of no diagnostic value. They are of various shapes
and sizes, and all of them show evidence of grinding on one or more
sides. One is light tan quartzite, one is light gray sandstone, and six

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

are of dark brown hematite. The smallest has a maximum diameter
of 3.7 cm., the largest a maximum diameter of 8.2 cm.
Pigment and Clay Objects. Numerous small fragments of red and
orange pigment stone were found throughout the excavation. The
average diameter is about 3.5 cm. Several small (up to 4 cm.) fragments of clay daub were found scattered throughout the concentrated
midden area. A few of these show vague wattle impressions.
Stone Chips. As would be expected in a rich midden, each level excavated yielded a large quantity of stone chips. These were primarily
chert and silicified wood. Most of the stone chips were discarded in the
field, after careful examination. One hundred and sixty-six of these
stone fragments were collected and catalogued. Analysis of their stratigraphic distribution yielded no useful data.
Pottery. A tabulation of the vertical distribution of sand-tempered
sherds as opposed to clay- and bone-tempered sherds, produced the
results shown in Fig. 16. This shows that the percentage of sandtempered sherds is relatively high in the levels between two and three
feet deep, but the percentage is much smaller in the upper levels. This
appears to support the results of a similar analysis at Runnells No. 2.
Considering the small number of sherds found below two feet at Sawmill Site, these results are not very conclusive. Numerous potsherds
were found in the upper two feet of the midden, and soil disturbance
by rodents could account for small numbers of sherds in the levels
NO
SANDY

DEPTH
0.0-0.5

NO
CLAY
SHERDS
2556

SHERDS

0.5-1.0

1405

92

1,0-1.5

565

66

1.5-2.0

200

26

2.0-25

95

4

2.5-5.0

26

IO

5,0-5.5

0

91

III

PERCENTAGE

OF

SAND-TEMPERED

SHERDS

PER LEVEL

L:_

PERCENTAGE

OF

CLAY-TEMPERED

SHERDS

PER LEVEL

-:

Fig. 16. Distribution of potsherds from Sawmill site.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

immediately below. The significance of the vertical distribution of
pottery types will be covered by Mr. Jelks in his report on this site.
Discussion. The Sawmill Site has produced evidence of a series of
occupations. There is no separation of cultural levels by unconformities or sterile members, but a tabulation of artifact types by depth
gives some interesting percentages (Figs. 13 and 14). These figures are
based on a relatively large sample of artifacts. There is little evidence
of a completely non-ceramic occupation of this site. No pottery was
found below three feet (Zone II B). but the following lithic artifacts
do occur below that depth: three Type I dart points; one unclassifiable dart point; one Type I blade; one Type II blade; and a small
number of stone chips. This material is too meager for any positive
conclusions. It can only be speculated that this ridge was briefly
visited by people who did not make pottery.
Above the unconformity separating zones III A from II B cultural
material appears in greater quantity. From two to three feet in depth
(zone III A) artifacts are as follows: 90 potsherds (mostly sand-tempered plain); 34 Type I dart points; 15 miscellaneous dart points;
4 Type I blades; 3 Type II blades; 15 miscellaneous blades; 4 pitted
stones; and one Perdiz arrow point. The arrow point seems to be intrusive into this zone from the upper levels. This artifact assemblage
reflects a culture based primarily on hunting. Type I dart points were
predominant at this time. The atlatl was probably used in connection
with these dart points. A dependence on gathering is suggested by the
pitted stone artifacts found at this level. The distinctive Type I and
Type II blades were in use by this time, and the local peoples had begun to use the sand-tempered plain pottery, and perhaps some of the
clay-tempered wares as well.
From two feet in depth to the surface (Zones III B and III C) there
is a steady increase in the amount and types of pottery in use. Arrow
points appear in the upper part of Zone III B along with various types
of clay-tempered and bone-tempered pottery, as well as Gary Type
dart points. Type I dart points and Type I and II blades continue to be
used in all levels, but these types greatly decrease in popularity in the
upper part of Zone III B and in Zone III C (Figs. 15 and 14).
The Sawmill Site was occupied mainly after the appearance of sandtempered pottery and the associated blade types. The most extensive
occupation of this site came, in more recent times, after the appearance of the bow and arrow and various types of pottery. It is significant, however, that the early traits continue in diminishing quantity
throughout the midden.

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

Summary and Conclusions
An archeological survey of the McGee Bend Reservoir was conducted in 1948, and approximately 90 sites were located and classified.
Extensive test excavations were conducted at several of these sites
during 1956 and 1957 by the National Park Service (River Basin
Surveys). During the course of these excavations it was noted that the
lower levels in several of the sites seemed to produce cultural remains
of a pre-ceramic occupation, l~unnells No. 1, l~unnells No. 2, and the
Sawmill Site were selected for study to differentiate between the late
Archaic horizon and more recent occupations. This task was complicated by the fact that there is no clear-cut stratigraphic separation of
the geologic zones at any of the sites. It was determined that certain
distinctive artifact types occur at all three sites and that the quantity
of these types varies according to depth (see Table 1). Statistical distribution studies were made, and these produced evidence which can be
used as a basis for the following general conclusions,
There was a late Archaic occupation at all three of these sites. This
occupation is characterized by rather crude dart points with parallelsided or expanding stems, shaped by percussion, and made from local
stones (dart point Type I). A distinctive type of blade was commonly
manufactured from a thin slab of silicified wood, and this shows fine
pressure retouching along one edge (blade Type I). A few other scraping and cutting artifacts are associated with this occupation in small
numbers.
The Type I dart points, which occur in large numbers at these sites,
are very similar to those described as provisional types 6 and 8
(Wheat, 1955: !99) at Addicks Basin, about 125 miles to the southwest. A sand-tempered plain pottery is also present at Addicks basin.
These two traits seem to indicate definite cultural ties between these
areas. Ford and Webb (1956: 62) also illustrate dart points (Kent
type) from the Poverty Point Site in northeastern Louisiana that are
very similar to Type I dart points. This indicates an extension of this
type over a wide area from the Texas Gulf coast to northern Louisiana
(and perhaps much farther) in late Archaic and early ceramic times.
To the basic late Archaic culture at McGee Bend a sand-tempered
plain pottery was added. This was accompanied by a new type of blade
with an unworked base (blade Type II), pitted stones, and other miscellaneous lithic artifacts. These elements all increased in popularity
for a while, but declined in numbers when, in more recent time, claytempered pottery, bone-tempered pottery, and arrow points appeared.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE I
Distribution of Artifact Types by Site
Artifacts

Dart Point

41-42D5-4

41-42D5-5

I

II

III

41-42D5-9
IV

I
II
III
Ellis
Ensor
Gary
Pogo

34
1

19

97

I
I
5
I
28

9

56

3

1

1

14
3
1
10

5

8

Type

Misc.
Arrow Point Alba
Cliffton
Cuney
Perdiz
Scallorn
Misc.

1
1

Drills

I
II

7
3

Scrapers

I
II
III
Misc.

1
6
2
2

1
1

I
II
III
IV
V
Misc.

9
21
28
5
13
36

3
10
15
5
4
16

27
14
11

1

13

5

3

Blades

3

9

31

Gravers
Ground/Polished
Hammerstones

I0

290
4642

Clay Temp.

63
7

Total

70

174

4932

Pigment

15

I

31

Wattle

14

Pottery

Sand Temp.

39

The totals in columns II and IV do not represent the entire excavations, but only
the areas used for distribution studies.
The totals in column III represent the entire excavation at that site.

IVICGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

These latter traits probably entered the McGee Bend area from other
cultural centers by a slow process of diffusion.
The E. E. Runnells sites seem to have been occupied more extensively in late Archaic times than the Sawmill site. Most of the cultural
material from these two sites is assignable to the late Archaic and early
ceramic horizons (Type I dart points, Type I and II blades, and sandtempered pottery), although a small amount of later material (arrow
points, clay- and bone-tempered pottery) appears in the upper levels
of these sites.
The Sawmill site was occupied principally after the appearance of
sand-tempered pottery and its associated lithic artifacts. The most
extensive occupation of this site occurred after the appearance of the
bow and arrow and various clay-tempered and bone-tempered types
of pottery.
In my opinion, the appearance of sand-tempered pottery, Type II
blades, and a general increase in the number of lithic artifacts, marks
the end of the Archaic stage in the McGee Bend area.
It should be realized that the conclusions drawn in this paper are
based on test excavations at only three sites, and at the present time
there is very little published information on comparable material. It
is hoped that future excavations at McGee Bend and in the surrounding areas will give a more complete picture of the archeology of this
section, and of the Archaic stage in particular.

Re]erences Cited
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point: A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 4~6, Part 1.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society
for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1948. Archeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir: A Preliminary Report.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19,
pp. 57-73.
1952. The Hogge Bridge Site and the Wylie Focus. American Antiquity, Vol.
17, No. 4, pp. 299-312.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOOICAL SOCIETY
Webb, Clarence H.
1948. Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier Focus. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19, pp. 100-147.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
In: River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 4, The Addicks Dam Site. River
Basin Surveys Papers, Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 154, pp. 143-252.

The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

