European Trade Goods
Artifacts found at the Gilbert Site are here separated into two large
groups. All objects made originally by the White man are classed in
one group labeled European Trade Goods, described in this section
of the report. In the main, these are articles made of metal and glass,
although a few items- for example, gunflints- are made of other
substances. Artifaets fashioned by the Indians from gun fittings, kettle
brass, and other materials obtained from Europeans are included.
The second major artifact group, described in a later section, is designated Indian A~ifaets and comprises artifacts made by the Indians
from native materials.
The European trade goods are divided into four primary categories: tools, guns, ornaments, and miscellaneous trade goods.

TOOLS
by IL K. Harris, INUS M.

HARRIS,

and J. NED WOODALL

Subgroups described under the general heading of tools are: knives,
axes, wedges, scrapers, awls, chisels, scissors, and metal arrow points.
KNIVES

Except for metal scraps, knives constitute the largest group of
iron artifacts recovered from the Gilbert Site. Forty-one knife blades,
knife handles, and fragments of blades were found, testifying to the
popularity of metal knives among the Indians.
For classificatory purposes the knives were divided into clasp
knives, ease knives, and miscellaneous fragments. As names stamped
on some specimens could be detected after cleaning, a secondary
division into country Of origin was possible in some instanees.
French. Clasp Knives
No. of Specimens: 14
Provenience: Feature 2 (I), Feature 3 2), Feature 4 (1), Feature
5 (6), Feature 11 (1), Feature 17 (1), Feature 20 (2)
Illustrations: Fig. 21
The sample of French clasp knives comprises eight complete and

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

19

TEXAS

Fmur~ 22.

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

Case knives, a-e, Type 1; f-g, Type 2; h-i, metal handles.

six fragmentary blades. The fragments may be sorted into two groups:
(1) medial sections bearing French names, and (2) proximal sections that are similar in form to the complete specimens with French
names. The complete blades and one of the fragments can be subdivided according to shape into three types, designated Types 1, 2,
and 3 (Harris et al., 1965: 348-350).
TYPE

i.

There are five specimens of this type (Fig. 21, a-d): two from
Feature 5 and one each from Features 3, 4, and 20. The type is
characterized by (a) a cutting edge which curves upward toward
the tip and (b) a back edge which slopes downward toward the tip
for about two-thirds of its length. This form has been referred to
as "sword-shaped" by Maxwell and Binford (1961: 106); it is the most

EUROPEAN T1RADE

GOODS

21

common blade form in modem clasp,knives. The four complete Type
1 blades are stamped with the entire manufacturer’s name; the fifth
specimen-a proximal fragment-bears only two letters near the
broken edge. After meticulous cleaning and X-raying, three of the
complete blades yielded the following names: Abadion Braenve.r,
Jean Efr riol (letters reversed), Jean Ferriol. There is a name stamped
on the fourth complete blade, but it is not decipherable. The fragment bears only the letters R and T. The R reads upright when the
blade is held with the tip up, while the T is upside down in relation
to the cutting edge; a portion of a third letter is seen just at the
broken edge. All specimens have a hole near the butt end (’tO admit
a swivel pin) and a flanged projection that acted as a stop when
the blade was opened.
The four complete blades vary in length from 114 ram. to 126 mm],
and in maximum width from 18 to 22 ram.
TYPE 9,.

Three complete clasp knife blades (Fig. 9,1, e-g), ’from Features
3, 5, and 17 respectively, are classified as Type 9,. These have a
straight or nearly straight cutting edge all the way to the tip, while
the back edge curves downward to the tip. The downward curve
of the back edge begins vel7 near the tip and dbnsequently is relatively steep, especially on two of the specimens. Type 9, knife blades
have swivel pins and flanges at the proximal end similar to those
of Type 1. The only complete name found impressed on a Type 9,
blade is Gibodief OL; present on one specimen. Of the two remaining
blades, one shows the letters CHEL, evidently the end of a name,
and below these the letter T; the otherdaas only the letter H, apparently part of a complete name rather than an initial.
The largest Type 9, specimen measures 133 ram. long by 26 mm.
at its widest point; the smallest is 105 mm. long by 19 ram. wide. On
all three the hole for the swivel pin is 3.5 ram. in diameter.
TYPE

3.

This type is represented by a single complete specimen (Fig. 9,1,
h) from Feature 5. The blade edge is slightly concave near the proximal end, probably as a result of wear, and becomes convex in curving
upward toward the tip. The back is straight for about one-half the
blade length and then begins a gTadual slope toward the tip.
The Type 3 clasp knife blade differs from the other types in the
manner of attachment to the knife handle: a downward projection
near the proximal end has been punched to admit the swivel pin,

22

TEXAS ARCFIEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and a small rearward projection of the blade serves as a stop. Stamped
on the blade is the name Andre Bauer, with a crown on the left side
and a heart on the right.
The blade is 114 mm. long and 15 mm. across at the widest place.
The hole for the swivel pin is 4 mm. in diameter.
UNIDENTIFIED FRAGMENTS

Five proximal fragments of clasp knife blades were found, but all
are too small to be identified with any particular type. The attaching
arrangement on all five is similar to that of Types 1 and 2, wherein
the blade is perforated for the swivel pin and the stop is a horizontal
flange protruding above the back of the blade. The following letters
and complete names are stamped on the blade fragments: N; RA
(above) and U (below); N (above) and an unidentified letter below.
Two fragments either bore no letters or they have been obliterated
by oxidation.
On the blade with the letters BA above and U below, a cut extends
from the inside of the pin hole to the proximal end of the blade. This
cut may represent an unsuccessful attempt by Indians to alter the
broken blade.
Length of the blade fragments ranges from 29 to 49 mm., width
from 15 to 20 mm. On each fragment the hole for admitting the
swivel pin is 3 ram. in diameter. One fragment has a complete swivel
pin 18 ram. long which is bradded fiat on each end.
Remarks: Judging by the relatively large number of blades found,
clasp knives must have comprised a significant proportion of French
goods traded to the aboriginal population of the region. Beginning
about 1700 and continuing until the end of French influence in Texas,
pocket or clasp knives were included on almost eve1T trade list, often
a gross or more being the requested number (Swanton, 1942: 197203; Thwaites, 1959: 25-33).
Knife blades of the same shapes as Type 1 and Type 2 have been
recovered from Fort Michilimaekinae in Michigan. These have been
identified as French and probably date from the French occupation
of about 1715-1760, or, less likely, from the subsequent British occupation which lasted until 1781 (Maxwell and Binford, 1961:106). Similar
knife blades have also been found at other historic sites, including
Roseborough Lake (Harris et al., ms), Womaek (Harris et al., 1965:
348), and Spanish Fort.
Type 3 knife blades have been recovered from the Womaek Site
(ibid.: 349) and the Spanish Fort Site.

EUROPEAN TRADE COODS

"23

Case Knife Blades
No. of Specimens: 2 complete, 13 fragments
Provenience: Feature 2 (1 fragment), Feature 3 (1 fragment), Feature 4 il fragment), Feature 5 (7 fragments, 1 complete), Feature
6 (2 fragments), Feature 12 (1 fragment), Feature 20 (1 complete)
Ilh~strations: Figure 22, a-g
On the basis of the case knife typology set forth by Harris, Harris,
Blaine, and Blaine (1965: 348-350), the two complete specimens from
Gilbert are respectively Type 1 and Type 2.
The complete Type 1 specimen- from Feature 5- is characterized
by a straight-backed blade, a convex cutting edge curving upward to
the tip, and a method of handle attachment involving a narrowed extension of the blade that is pierced with two holes for receiving the
securing pins (Fig. 22, a). Although this type ease knife was traded
by both the French and English (ibid.: 848), the Gilbert Site specimen
bears the name Coobon- evidently French- stamped near the butt
in the form of an arc with its convex side toward the tip of the blade.
Directly above the name is an indistinct mark, possibly a cross.
The over-all length of this specimen is !6.8 cm.; the blade itself
(exclusive of the handle extension) is 1,3.1 cm. long; the widest portion of the blade, just above the handle, is 22 ram. across. The holes
for securing the handle are approximately 2.5 ram. in diameter. One
of the securing pins, complete and in place, is 12 ram. long.
The second complete specimen (Fig. 22, g), a Type 2 case knife,
has the same blade shape as the Type 2 clasp knives. It was found
in Feature 20. The back curves sharply downward near the tip, while
the cutting edge is straight, or nearly so. The handle of this knife
was attached to a long, rod-like extension jutting out from the butt
of the blade and separated from it by a flange or frog. No identifying
marks were found on this specimen, possibly because of extensive
rust damage. The origin of this type of knife is not certain, but the
authors have observed similar specimens from predominately Spanish
settlements in Texas.
The total length is 194 mm.; the blade itself is 123 mm. long and
27 mm. wide (directly below the handle frog). The handle core or
rod averages about 3 mm. in diameter.
Of the 13 case knife fragments, six median fragments are stamped
with names or initials. Although one of the six has been broken across
the letters and consequently the full inscription cannot be read, the
remaining five bear the following names: Pierre Chappelle; Claude
Gibodief (with a crown to the left of the name); EROI (letter miss-

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SO~ETY

ing) N with an emblem to the left of [he name; the initials, SK; and
the letter, E, followed by a dot or period.
Six fragments appear to be portions of the handle core that extends
from the butt end of Type I ease knife blades. Four of them have
been punched with at least two holes, averaging about 4 mm. in
diameter. The remaining two, because of their small size, have a
single hole. One specimen has the two securing pins in place. These
are respectively 195 and 182 mm. in length, with the longer pin at
the back of the attachment process. Both pins are lightly bradded on
the ends.
Remarks: Two of the case knife fragments, the one from Feature
6 stamped EROI (letter missing) N and a thick, heavy handle core
from Feature 3, are quite large. If ease knives are thought of as
comprising three varieties - the equivalent of the modern-day hunting
or sheath knife, the table knife, and the relatively large butcher knife
-these two specimens would fall in the butcher knife size range.
Miscellaneous Knife Blade Fragments
No. of Specimens: 7
Provenience: Feature 1 (1), Feature 3 (1), Feature 4 (1), Feature
5 (4)
These are blade fi’agments that could have come from either clasp
or case knives. They are so incomplete that their original lotto cannot
be reconstructed.
Knife Handles
No. of Specimens: 5
Provenience: Feature 4 (3), Feature 5 (1), Feature 11 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 22, h-i
Several fragments of cast brass are probably parts of handles for
case knives. Although no complete specimen was found at the Gilbert Site, the line-up of fragments shown at Figure 22, h, gives an
idea of the over-all appearance of the complete handles. They were
decorated with curvilinear designs. Similar fragments have been
found at the Womack Site in Lamar County, Texas (Harris et al.,
1965, Fig. 22, N) and at the Spanish Fort sites on both sides of the
Red River in Montague County, Texas, and Jefferson County, Oklahoma.
The specimen shown at Figure 22, i, is possibly part of a clasp
knife handle. It is made from sheet brass, and the feather-like design
is engraved. It is pierced by five small holes by which it evidentlv

EUROPEAN T1RADE GOODS

FIGURE 23.

~5

Axe (a) and wedges (b-c).

was pinned to a wooden knife handle or possibly to some other object.
It is 33 mm. long, and its maximum width is 14 ram.
At present it is not possible to identify the country of manufacture
of these pieces, but it is suspected that they are French.
AXES
No. of Specimens: 1 complete, 2 fragmentary
Provenience: Feature 4 (1 complete), Feature 10 (1 fragment),

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Feature 21 (1 fragment)
Illustrations: Fignre 23, a
Of the three axes, at least two were manufactured by the laminated
method wherein a piece of sheet iron was bent m’ound a form,
doubled back on itself, and forged together, leaving a halting eye
at the proximal end.
The complete specimen from Gilbert (Fig. 23, a) is unusual in
that the back of the eye (i.e., the part farthest from the bit) is composed of two distinct layers of iron which have split apart slightly.
The eye of this axe is 46 ram. high; its blade is 37 ram. high where
it joins the eye, expanding to 70 mm. across the bit. The original
thickness is difficult to determine because of heavy rest damage to
the metal, but it was at least 5 mm. around the eye and at least 10
mm. along the blade. The eye itself has been badly bent, but its
original inside diameter was approximately 45 mm.
The axe from Feature 10, consisting of a portion of the eye,
measures 155 ram. in thickness and 50 ram. in height at the back of
the eye, contracting to 44 mm. where the blade remnant joins the
eye. By projecting the curvature of the fragment, a measurement of
approximately 35 ram. for the inside diameter of the eye is obtained.
The other fragmentary axe, a blade fragment from Feature 21, is
10 ram. thick at the broken proxima! end, which must have been ve13z
near the eye. The blade, 30 mm. high at the proximal end, flares to
form a bit approximately 85 ram. wide. Over-all length of this specimen
is 90 mm.
Probably the small individual differences between the axes can be
attributed to individual hand manufacture. The laminated eye of the
complete specimen from Feature 4 is not typical of the Texas area.
The greater height of the eye in comparison to the adjoining part of
the blade is a common feature found not only on Indian trade axes
but also on modem tools.
WEDGES

No. of Specimens: 4
Provenience: Feature ! (1), Feature 4 (1), Feature 5 (2)
Illustrations: Figure 23, b-c
The iron wedges are similar to one another in shape. All have a
relatively wide, curved bit from which the lateral edges taper back
to a thick butt. The butts are greatly splayed as a result of vigorous
hammering. Two of the specimens were evidently used as small anvils as they have hundreds of small, overlapping cut marks on both

27

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

FmuI~E 24.

Iron tools, a-b, scrapers; c-e, awls; f, chisel; g, scissors.

flat blade surfaces. A third has a few such marks on one side only.
The largest wedge (Fig. 23, b) measures 90 ram. long, 15 mm. thick
just above the butt, 83 ram. wide at the bit, and 45 ram. wide just
above the butt. The original dimensions have been distorted by pounding and flattening.
Another wedge (Fig. 23, c) is 13 ram. thick just above the butt, 83
ram. wide across the bit, 58 ram. wide above the butt, and 68 ram.
long.
The smallest wedge is 63 ram. long, 13 mm. thick just above the
butt, 69 ram. wide across the bit, and 50 ram. wide just above the
butt.
The fourth wedge, thinner than the others, is distinguished by a
marked concavity of one edge. It appears to have been made from
an axe blade. This tool measures 90 ram. long, 50 ram. wide at the
butt, and about 90 ram. across the bit. Its maximum thickness, just
above the butt, is 8 ram.
S GRAPERS

No. of Specimens: 3
P’rovenience: Feature 3 (3)
llhtstrations: Figure 24, a-b

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Three thin, rectangular pieces of iron, all slightly bowed along
the long axis, are classed as scrapers. All are roughened and pitted
by rust, and the working edges are diffleult to identify; but at least
one of them has one end and one long side filed or honed to an
edge.
Length varies from 51 to 33 mm. and width from 34 to 26 mm.
Thickness of all three specimens is 1 ram. or less.
These tools presumably were used to serape animal hides but may
have served as knives also. They probably were made by the Indians
from metal scraps, perhaps barrel hoops in some instances.
AWLS

No. of Specimens: 9
Provenience: Feature 1 (2), Feature 3 (2), Feature 4 (1), Feature 5 (1), Feature 6 (1), Feature 7 (1), Feature 12 (1)
Ilhlstrations: Figure 94, c-e
This category includes those iron tools presumably used to puncture
leather, cloth or other material to permit lacing and binding. The
awls are slender and generally straight. Two specimens (Fig. 24, d),
however, show a gentle S curvature and one shows a double bend.
Although all have been honed to a rounded point at the working end,
at least four are square in medial cross section while one is rectangular
and flattened. One of the awls was found with its pointed end resting
on a small piece of grooved sandstone, leaving little doubt as to the
method of sharpening these tools.
Three of the awls wan’ant partieular attention. A straight specimen
(Fig. 24, c) presumably of European manufacture as evidenced by
its symmetrical shape and squared shaft, had been cut half way
through at a point 19 mm, from the end, and the portion between
the cut and the end removed, leaving a tip that is triangular in cross
section. The result is a tool with one end useful as an awl, the other
as a drill. This speeimen is 80 mm. long and is 3 mm. thick in the
center.
A broken awl has a double bend in the shaft with a cut 10 mm.
from the bend and a transverse section between the eut and the
broken end removed, similar to the awl described above. The opposite
end is badly damaged by rust but was probably pointed. Either the
numeral 3 or 8 has been stamped into the squared shaft. This spedmen is 56 mm. long and 3 mm. wide and is probably of European
manufacture.
On a third awl (Fig. 24, e), at a point 8 mm. from the blunt
broken end, is a deep cut extending about half way through the

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

29

shaft. Also, 25 mm. from the tip of this tool the shaft has been cut
and a transverse section removed in a manner similar to the two awls
already described. This specimen is 83 mm. long and 7 mm. thick.
It is probably of native mmmfaeture.
The remaining six awls range from 39 to 80 mm. long and from
4 to 6 ram. in diameter. Two of them were probably made as awls in
Europe while the remainder were homemade by the Indians.
Metal awls, which would hold a sharp point and resist breakage
better than either bone or stone, were probably highly valued by the
Indians. Any elongate piece of scrap metal could be honed to a sharp
tip, and such homemade forms, as well as European trade awls,
were found at the Gilbert Site.
Three of the awls were curved in the manner of modem sailmaker’s and upholsterer’s needles (Fig. 24, d). This pelxnits the application of greater pressure with the awl owing to increased leverage.
CHISELS

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 1
Illustrations: Figure 24, f
This tool was made from a short iron rod of rectangular cross
section by hammering one end to a shaft of reduced diameter and
fashioning a narrow chisel point at its extremity. The proximal end
of the implement has been splayed by pounding.
Over-all length is 58 mm., with the narrow shaft beginning approximately 35 ram. from the proximal end. The thickness of the
main squared shank varies from 5 ram. to 8 mm., tapering to 3 ram.
at the narrow shaft leading to the point.
This chisel appears too light for heavy use and may have been
employed for cutting the thin sheet iron and brass found at the site.
SCISSORS

No. o[ Specimens: 3 fragments
Provenience: Feature 4 (1), Feature 5 (1), Feature 14 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 24, g
Three pairs of scissors are represented by the three fragments. Two
are handle fragments with portions of the blade attached; one is a
right blade fragment. No identifying marks were found on any scissor
fragments, although there are four small indentations around the screw
on the inside of the blade of the largest speeimen.
The larger handle fragment (Fig. 9.4, g) is 121 mm. long. By extend-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

30

ing the curvature of the blade remnant, an approximate measurement
of 154 mm. is obtained for the over-all length of the original unbroken
scissors. Maximum blade width is 13 mm. It is beveled at the top
and slopes inward to the cutting edge. The handle is straight, 66 ram.
long, with the finger opening slanted slightly downward.
The other handle fragment measures 82 mm. in over-all length
and has a maximum blade width of 10 mm. The blade has been so
badly eorroded that reconstruction of the original outline is impossible. It appears to have been smaller than the other specimen,
however. The handle is bent at a 45-degree angle, tilting the finger
opening sharply downward. Whether this bend was present originally
could not be determined.
The blade fragment is broken off at the right side through the hole
that once held the center screw. It is 45 mm. long and 15 ram. wide,
with a screw opening 5 mm. in diameter. The top is beveled toward
the outside and slopes inward to the cutting edge; the inside surface
is flat. This speeimen represents the largest pair of scissors found.
METAL A~aROW

POINTS

No. of Specimens.: 9
Provenience: Feature 3 (1), Feature 5 (6), Feature 12 (2)
Ilhtscrations: Figure 25
All of the metal arrow points are homemade affairs fashioned by
the Indians from odd pieces of brass and iron acquired from Europeans. The arrow points of iron were probably made from flattened
sections of gun barrels. Iron arrow points made from bridle bit fragments- of relatively common occurrence at other Nortefio Focus
sites- were not found at Gilbert.
Three arrow points (Fig. 25, b-d) were made from scrap kettle
brass, while the heavier brass points (Fig. 25, a, f) were worked from
decorated gun fittings- probably side plates, trigger guard bows, or
butt plates.
Seven of the nine metal arrow points are of a form which occurs
so frequently in sites of the Nortefio Focus that its recognition as a
formal type appears warranted. Therefore, a brief description will be
given here under the name Benton Type, so designated in honor of
the late Joe Benton, a pioneer cattle and oil man of Noeona, Texas,
who, with his wife and daughter Clariee, made extensive surface collections from the Spanish Fort sites in Montague County, Texas, and
Jefferson County, Oklahoma. The type is divided into two subgroups:
Benton Type A and Benton Type B.

31
EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

FIGURE 25. Metal arrow points, b, d, e, Benton Type A; a, Benton Type B;
c, e, f, miscellaneous.

Benton Type Arrow Points
No. of Specimens: 7
Dimensions: 15 to 60 mm. long; 7 to 20 mm. wide; 0.5 to 3 mm.
thick. The thiekness varies according to the material (kettle brass,
barrel hoops, gun parts, etc.)
Provenience: Feature 3 (1), Feature 5 (4), Feature 12 (2)
Illustrations: Figure 25, a, b, d, e
TYPE A

(Fig.

25, b, d, e)

This form is diamond-shaped, with straight edges converging to
a sharp tip at the distal end and to a narrow, straight base at the
proximal end. The length of the blade approximately equals the length
of the stem. The converging edges of the blade are sharpened; the
stem edges, in most eases, are notched with irregular hack marks,
probably to facilitate halting.
TYPE B (Fig. 25, a)
Type B is similar to Type A in all significant respects except that
the lateral stem edges are slightly concave instead of straight. As

39.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

with Type A, the blade and stem tend to be of approximately equal
length and the stem edges are often crudely notched.
Cultural Affiliations and Distribution: Observations of the authors
indicate that the Benton arrow point is found in significant quantities
in Nortefio Focus sites of the southern plains on the Arkansas, Brazos,
Red, Sabine, and Trinity lClivers and their tributaries in Texas, Oklahoma, and Louisiana.
Estimated Age: Mid-18th to mid-19th century.
Miscellaneous Metal Arrow Points

Two of the metal arrow points found at Gilbert do not fit the
Benton Type. One of them (Fig. 9.5, f) is made from an engraved,
brass, butt-plate finial off a trade gun. The outline appears to approximate the shape of the original finial, the only alteration being
sharpening of the blade edges. The sides of the stem are unmodified;
the base bears a chisel mark produced when the finial was separated
from the butt plate.
The other metal arrow point (Fig. 25, e) was cut- probably with
scissors- from a piece of very thin kettle brass.
Most of the arrow points at the Gilbert Site were chipped from
stone rather than being made of metal. The stone arrow points are
dese15bed in a later section.

