An Analysis of Archaic Material from Three
Areas of North America
MARDITH K. SCHUETZ
IN IiECEt’qT years there has been a great deal of interest in the problem

of the Archaic Stage as a continent-wide manifestation in North America. There has been much concern with the relationship of the western
Desert Culture to the Archaic complexes of the eastern United States,
and the place of Texas in the Archaic scheme of things. In regard to
this last problem, when Jennings and Norbeck (1955) first defined
the Desert Culture they included the western part of Texas within
the geographical distribution of their early culture. The acceptance
of early southwest Texas foci as part of the Desert Culture has, in fact,
been widespread.
As an outgrowth of research for a report on the Pecos River Focus, I
became involved in a continent-wide study of the Archaic Stage in
North America and northern Mexico. Several matters became evident
during the course of this study, some of them substantiating certain
existing theories about Archaic cultures and others presenting arguments against other theories which are currently popular. Since the

study is to appear shortly,

I shall

not

go into

detail,

but will

only

summarize certain conclusions:
1. There is indeed ample evidence of an underlying pattern of culture
throughout North America on what is usually called the Archaic level.
However~ the simple term "Archaic" has been used in so many different
contexts that it has become too indefinite a term to be fruitfully applied.
I have found it well to differentiate between a "proto-Archaic" and a
later "Full Archaic." I use the term "proto-Archaic" to denote an early
stage~ between 8000 and 4000 B.C., in which a degree of homogeneity
existed throughout North America.
2. Within the succeeding "Full Archaic" stage there may have been at
least three areas of regional differentiation: the Great Basin and areas
geographically peripheral to it; a southern area known principally from
Trans-Pecos Texas but undoubtedly including northern Mexico as well;

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and the Eastern Woodlands area. The study has presented evidence which
differentiates these areas by an estimated date of 3000 B.C.
3. Artifacts common to both the western and eastern United States are
due to the early homogeneous culture, or proto-Archaic, and not to the
later Full Archaic stage.
4. Texas does indeed serve as a link between eastern Woodlands Archaic
and western Desert Culture, but nevertheless displays a unity of its own
and should not be considered as marginal to either one or the other.
The study to be reported in the present paper was made in an attempt to see how similar or dissimilar the areas in question are to one
another. The method used was to compare the artifacts from type sites
selected for each area. Danger Cave in Utah was selected as the type
site for the Desert Culture (Jennings, 1957). For the western edge of
¯ the Eastern Woodlands, data were combined from sites D1EvIII,
D1CaI, and D1McVIII in the Grove Focus of northeastern Oklahoma
(Baerreis, 1951). For Texas, two points of reference were used: a
group of Pecos River Focus sites in the southwestern part of the state,
and a group of sites in Williamson County, central Texas, typical of the
Edwards Plateau Aspect(Schuetz, 1956, 1957b). For the Southeast, my
observations are based on Webb’s Indian Knoll report of the Green
River culture of Kentucky (Webb, 1946).
A few" observations are in order concerning the material from these
type sites. First, after doing the research for this paper I had an opportunity to observe personally the material from Danger Cave. I
found the differences between the projectile points from Danger Cave
and those from Texas to be so great that there should never be any
confusion between the two groups. Out of the Utah material only about
half a dozen points could be mixed with Texas points and pass unnoticed. It is necessary to stress the diminutive size of Danger Cave
projectile points, which is not obvious in the written report. The small
size of the projectile points also sets Danger Cave apart from other
Great Basin sites. Clearly, I might have selected a more representative
"type site" for the Desert Culture. Unfortunately, time has not permitted analysis of another site. I can only point out the drawbacks of
using the Danger Cave material and ask the reader to bear them in
mind.
The reason for using two type sites in Texas is simply explained. A
close affinity between the Pecos River Focus and the Edwards Plateau
Aspect has been demonstrated (Schuetz, manuscript to be published).
The basic lithic inventory of the two areas is essentially the same.
However, artifact percentages differ considerably and may eventually

ARCHAIC

IN

NORTH

AMERICA

shed some light on possible patterns of diffusion. The differences are
great enough so that neither group of sites can alone be considered
typical of the Texas Archaic.
Comparisons with a type site in the Southeast, such as Indian Knoll
which I have chosen, are beset with difficulties. In most of the southeastern site reports no attempt has been made to type the artifact series
except in vague categories such as "side notched" or "corner notched"
points. Few of the publications give actual specimen counts for the
categories, being content instead with "frequent" or "rare" occurrences. I have therefore had to treat the Indian Knoll comparisons
separately from those among the other sites.
Because of the factor of preservation, comparisons of perishable
artifacts are limited to Danger Cave and the Pecos River Focus. Where
Danger Cave lacked certain artifacts which have been found elsewhere
in the Great Basin on the same time level, these other occurrences
have been noted.
Comparing artifacts from one area with those of another in terms of
typology and frequency is a chore beset with many pitfalls; it has to
be done with caution. To begin with, only small segments of each culture can be compared over large areas because of the limited preservation of perishable material. This circumstance tends to distort one’s
view of the culture, throwing one segment--the imperishables--into
the limelight and making this segment seem to be of primary importance. In addition, there are problems which the investigator must
sometimes solve arbitrarily according to his own view of things. For
example~ a type described in one area may be described as several
types in another area or by another worker, making comparisons
difficult and often unreliable.
It is also difficult to equate time levels from one part of the country
to another. I have attempted to compare only materials of similar age.
A sequence of radiocarbon dates is known for Danger Cave~ but we
have only a single date for the Pecos River Focus, and two dates for
the Green River cultures. However, the Level V date from Danger
Cave and those from the other two areas correspond favorably. The
relevant artifact types from Danger Cave are all present in Level V,
although they all appeared as early as Levels II or III. Carbon-l
dates from Level II of Danger Cave are 7010 B.C. and 7839 B.C., and
two dates from Level V are 2050 B.C. and 2950 B.C. (Jennings, 1957:
93). The one date available from the Pecos River Focus, from the next
to top level at Eagle Cave, is 2600 B.C. (Schuetz, 1957a). The artifact
types used in the present study were all present in this level. The

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Green River culture of Kentucky (culturally the same as Indian
Knoll) is dated a~ 2950 and 3350 B.C. (Libby, 1955, p. 94). A date is
not available for the northeastern Oklahoma Grove Focus material,
but this complex is a pre-ceramic focus in an area where pottery is
known to appear in the late Archaic in at least one focus, the Fourche
Maline.

Lithic ArtiJacts
PROJECTILE POINTS

Many stone tools represent forms which have persisted from earlier
levels than the levels under consideration here and are therefore of
little value in trying to establish later relationships. For purposes of
comparison here we will concern ourselves first of all with projectile
point types.
Beginning with the Danger Cave series, I should explain that I have
arrived at my percentages by comparing counts of individual categories with the total count of Jennings’ W series through form W42.
Beyond W42 I could not always be sure of the distinction between
dart points and knives. Some of Jennings’ categories have been grouped
together where several forms of his series fall within the range of a
single type in Texas. Such groupings have been explained in each case.
Danger Cave-Te:cas Archaic Comparisons. Four forms of Jennings’
W series~W5, W10, W16, and W31--show similarities to the Pedernales type in Texas (for the Danger Cave forms see Fig. !, top; for
Texas types see Suhm et al., 1954:396 ft.). Pedernales blades are
highly variable in form, but the type is distinct in its straight stem and
deeply concave or indented base. Jennings’ W5 form might be considered somewhat marginal to the Pedernales type, since the base is
more concave than indented. W10 overlaps W5 in form, and one point
illustrated in the Danger Cave report has the typical Pedernales indentation. Both W5 and W10 are carefully made with fine pressure
retouching. Pedernales points vary from hastily made crude points to
finely made specimens. W16 resembles the variant Pedernales points
with slightly expanding stems. Stems of the W16 series also bear resemblances to the Uvalde and Frio points of Texas, but the long, slim
blades are not characteristic of those two types. W31 points with indented bases are like the Pedernales type in outline but are described
as having only one surface retouched, a technique not found on
Pedernales points.

ARCHAIC

IN

NORTH

AMERICA

Jennings’ W8 point form is similar to the Kinney point type of
Texas in having a triangular or leaf-shaped blade with concave base.
However, the W8 form has fine diagonal chipping, a technique not
used on Kinney points. This difference in chipping sets the two forms
apart, and I fail to see anything but a superficial resemblance between

W6

W5

W8

WIO

W16

WI8

W19

W41
DANGER

GAVE PROJECTILE POINT FORMS

(After Jennings, 1957, Figs.75ff.)

AI

A2

A5

BI

B3

El

C

E2

GROVE FOCUS PROJECTILE POINT TYPES
(After Baerreis, 1951, Fig. 14)

Stemmed

Corner Notched

Side Notched

Expending From Base

INDIAN KNOLL PROJEOTILE POINT FORMS
(After Webb, 1946~ Fios.51152}
Fig. 1. Archaic projectile point styles.

TEXANS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

them. Furthermore, both are found only as minor types: W8 points
constitute 2 per cent of the projectile point total at Danger Gave, and
Kinney points constitute 1 per cent of the total both in the Pecos River
Focus and in the Williamson County material. For these reasons I
have not included these two categories in the table of comparisons
(Table 1).
The better-made examples of the W18 and ¥V19 forms are similar
to Marcos points. The three types can be described as triangular points
with deep, narrow corner notches. However, bases of Marcos points
are characteristically straight, whereas bases of the W18 and ~¢V19
forms may be more variable. An even more distinctive difference is
the serrated blades of the ¥V18 points. The W21 form overlaps W19,
as noted by Jennings; the first W21 point illustrated (Jennings, 1957:
118, Fig. 92a, left) would fall somewhere within the Frio-Martindale
categories in Texas. The others are like W19. The three forms
W19, and W21--are grouped together in the table.

¥V18,

The w2g category is illustrated by two points in the Danger Cave
report: one with a broad expanding stem which resembles the Castroville type, and one with a contracting stem and heavy barbs extending
below the stem, which is like the Shumla point of the Pecos River
Focus. Because this W23 form would fall into these two distinct types
in Texas, and because it occurs in very small numbers, it is not used
in Table 1.
¥V28 and W29 points are triangular with corner notches and small
basal notches. They are very much like the Montell point in Texas.
¥V30 resembles the Frio point in Texas. Both types are triangular
with fairly wide side notches and deeply recurved or indented bases,
sometimes described as "eared." The ~N30 form differs from Frio points
in being thick in cross-section.
W41 shows some overlapping with the Tortugas type. The points
are unnotched and triangular in outline, with retouched bases and
blades. However, Tortugas points are often beveled. The W41 form
accounts for 3 per cent of the points at Danger Cave. The Tortugas
type is of major importance only in southern Texas, and its frequency
is less than 1 per cent in the Pecos River material and 1 per cent in
the Williamson County sites of the Edwards Plateau. Because it is
not typical of either the Pecos River Focus or the Edwards Plateau
Aspect, it is not entered in Table 1.
Texas-Grove Focus Comparisons. Proceeding to comparisons of
Texas types with those of northeastern Oklahoma, we shall see that
ten types of dart points described by Baerreis from the Grove Focus

ARCHAIC

IN

NORTH

AMERICA

(Fig. 1, middle) have parallels in the Texas Archaic. Comparisons
are limited by lack of information on techniques of manufacture
in the Oklahoma series~ so that we are dependent primarily upon outline drawings and data on size range.
Baerreis’ A1 and A2 types are like the Gary type of Texas. These
points have triangular blades and pointed or rounded contracting
stems. The size range is about the same in Oklahoma and Texas. However, the Gary type is not characteristic of the Pecos River Focus or
the Edwards Plateau Aspect, but rather is typical of the East Texas
Archaic. It is unfortunate that we do not have a control site in east
Texas with which to make more accurate artifact percentage comparisons, since the disparity between an 18 per cent incidence of the type
in Oklahoma and a 1 per cent incidence in central Texas might assume
a different significance if the east Texas data were brought into the
picture. It is quite likely that the frequency of Gary points in east
Texas is about the same as in northeastern Oklahoma.
Baerreis’ type A5 shows similarities to the Desmuke type, but the
limited distribution of the latter in southern Texas minimizes the possibility of a direct relationship. The size range of type A5 is much
like that of types A1 and A2, and of Gary points, and type A5 might
be considered as a variant of these three.
Type B1 shows similarities to the Ellis and Ensor categories of
Texas. In outline, B1 seems more akin to the Ellis point, but its size
range is almost double that of the latter. It bears some resemblance to
the Ensor type~ although the side notches of the latter tend to be
smaller. The size ranges for the two are about the same. Ellis is a
major type in eastern Texas, but I do not have a control site in that
area, so that we are not able to make comparisons with an assemblage
in which Ellis is a major type. Therefore B1 is compared with Ensor
in Table 1.
The B2 points from the Grove Focus are similar to points of the
Marcos type both in outline and in size range. B5 seems to be most
similar to the Marshall type, which includes points with a heavy triangular blade and basal notches. B5 is also similar to the Castroville
point, but the stem is too narrow in proportion to the blade to fit into
that category.
Type C from the Grove Focus resembles the Lange point with its
wide shoulders and slightly expanding straight-sided stem. However,
Lange points have comparatively short stems in relation to blade
length~ whereas on type C points the stems constitute one-third the
total length of the point. Such long stems are within the range of the

TEX2~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Lange type, but on the Lange points a stem about one-fifth the total
length is more typical.
Baerreis’ types E1 and E2 have rectangular stemmed points corresponding to the outline of the Bulverde type. Bulverde points are
characterized by basal thinning of the stems, resulting in a wedgeshaped longitudinal section. Since we lack information as to the flaking techniques used on the E1 and E2 points, we can not tell whether
the similarity of these points to Bulverde points is limited to the outline or not.
The points of type H in the Grove Focus seem related in outline to
the Frio type, but there are evident differences. The H points have a
smaller size range than Frio points. The blades of H points are occasionally beveled. More interesting is the frequent occurrence of
ground bases and sides in the H series. This practice might be a survival from an earlier fluted-point, ground-base tradition. Several Texas
Archaic point types show the same smoothing of the bases.
Discussion. When the significant point forms from these different
areas are grouped according to appearance and their percentage frequencies in the different areas are compared (Table 1), some interesting matters .for speculation become evident. We find that seven
point forms are shared by the Oklahoma (Grove Focus) and Texas
(Pecos River-Edwards Plateau) Archaic. Four forms are shared by
Danger Cave and the Texas Archaic. Two forms are shared by all
three.
Most intriguing are the high percentages of Pedernales and Montell
points occurring in Danger Cave and the Edwards Plateau Aspect. If
we ignore the size differences that distinguish points from the two
areas, the Pedernales and Montell points constitute important types
in both areas.
The contrast between the high percentages of the A1, A2, and B1
series in the Grove Focus and their infrequency in the Edwards
Plateau sites is misleading. The A! and A2 types are comparable to
the Gary type~ and the B1 type is probably most comparable to the
Ellis type; and both Gary and Ellis points are characteristic of the
East Texas Archaic rather than of the Edwards Plateau. Close analogies can probably be established when the Grove Focus material can
be compared with material from the East Texas Archaic.
The high percentages of Marcos-like and Bulverde-like points in
the Grove Focus give rise to the speculation that the origins of these
t%,zo types lie north Of Texas.

ARCHAIC I~~ INORTH AMERICA

i~i

o
L~
v

+~

o
o

Q~

o~-~

c’q

~-

°

TEXA, S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Marcos-like points occur in high percentages at Danger Cave and
in the Grove Focus, but the Marcos point is a minor trait in Texas
sites. This distribution is puzzling in view of the fact that there seems
to be a greater affinity, in terms of point type frequency, between
Danger Cave and the Edwards Plateau than between Danger Cave and
the Grove Focus.
Frio-like points are not very significant in the Grove Focus and the
Edwards Plateau Aspect, but are prominent in the Pecos River Focus
and moderately so at Danger Cave.
A consideration of the dominance of certain point types at each
control site reveals some important differences. Predominant at Danger Cave are those points within the Pedernales range (¥¥5, ¥¥10,
W16, and W31) which account for 15 per cent of the projectile point
total, the Montell-like points (W28 and W29) which account for 11
per cent, and the Marcos-like points (W18, W19, W21) with a total
of 9 per cent. Other major point categories are: W26 with 8 per cent
and no parallel in Texas; W37 with 7 per cent and no parallel in
Texas; W30 with 4 per cent and a resemblance to the Frio type; and
W6 and W9, each of which accounts for 4 per cent and is without a
parallel in Texas. Of these last, W6 is described by 3ennings (1957:
106) as "perhaps the most characteristic artifact from the sites." It is
a lanceolate point with a deeply concave base, which would seem to
owe its form and technique of manufacture to the fluted point tradition. This point has no parallel in Texas.
Major Pecos River Focus types are: Langtry, with a frequency of
21 per cent; Ensor, 20 per cent; Abasolo, 8 per cent; Frio, 7 per cent;
and Shumla, 6 per cent. In addition there is a fair representation of
Edwards Plateau Aspect types.
A shift in the dominant point types occurs in the Edwards Plateau
Aspect of central Texas, major traits of Pecos lqiver becoming minor
and vice versa. The Pedernales point accounts for 23 per cent of the
total count, Castroville for 18 per cent, Montell for 7 per cent, Marshall for 6 per cent, and Abasolo for 4 per cent.
In the Grove Focus of Oklahoma, the Gary-like A1 and A2 points
account for 18 per cent of the total; the Ensor-Ellis-like B1 point for
18 per cent; the Marcos-like B2 point for 18 per cent, and the Bulverdelike E1 and E2 points for 16 per cent.
On the basis of the type parallels and percentage distributions presented here, we can conclude that the Archaic ]ithia complexes of
Texas and Oklahoma are more closely linked than those of Texas and
the Basin cultures. However, we can also tentatively point to possible

ARCHAIC IN

173

NORTH AMERICA

links between Texas and the Basin area on the basis of such distinctive point forms as Pedernales and Montell and their western counterparts.
Texas-Grove Focus-Indian Knoll Comparisons. It is hard to find any
great similarity in projectile point types between the Oklahoma-Texas
series and those to the east. Webb has classified the Indian Knoll points
into "stemmed," "corner notched," "side notched," and "expanding
from base" forms (Fig. 1, bottom). Otherwise the varieties are not
typed. The counts are given for "large" and "small" points, the dividing line being 6 cm., but these size categories cut across those based
on stem forms. The "stemmed" form makes up 20 per cent of the
total; "corner notched" constitutes a huge 52 per cent; "side notched"
makes up 27 per cent; and "expanding from base" (contracting stem),
which overlaps the Gary type, constitutes only 1 per cent.
The most impressive characteristic of these southeastern points is
their large size. They immediately bring to mind the East Texas Pogo
points which are regarded as possible spear points. The Pogo type of
Texas is something of a catch-a!l, encompassing large stemmed points
which display much variation in stem and blade form. The large
blades at Indian Knoll account for 24 per cent of the total point count.
These comparisons suggest that the Gary-like form was developed
somewhere in the East Texas-0klahoma-Missouri region and was
adopted as a minor addition to the eastern lithic complex, and also
that the large stemmed blade tradition originated in the southeastern
states and was adopted as a minor trait in Oklahoma and Texas.
What may prove significant in the final analysis are techniques of
corner notching, side notching, and rectangular stemming of points,
serving as criteria for regional differentiation. Major types in Texas,
Oklahoma, and the southeastern states could all logically be defined in
terms of variations of such simple ancestral traits.

OTHER LITHIC

ARTIFACTS

There are four categories of Archaic lithic artifacts found in Texas
and perhaps in Oklahoma, but which are apparently missing from the
Danger Cave complex and perhaps from the Basin generally, and
which are absent in the east. They seem to have developed within the
period under consideration here, and may afford strong indications of
links between Texas and the area immediately to the north. The distribution of these artifacts is imperfectly kno~m, hence my qualificati~m in assigning them to Oklahoma.

TEXA.S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

One artifact is the corner tang knife. Once thought to be restricted
to Texas, in recent years it has been reported from virtually all the
southern Plains states to the Rocky Mountain area and in northern
Mexico.
A second category of artifact is the Clear Fork Gouge. The type has
a distribution throughout central and southwestern Texas and has recently been described as having a distribution throughout the southern -~;wt of Oklahoma (Bell, 1957). Possibly the Clear Fork Gouge can
be correlated with the Neosho scraper pictured by Baerreis (1951),
thereby extending its distribution northward. It would appear to be
developed from the very early plano-convex keeled scraper-plane
which had a continent-wide distribution on a very early time horizon.
The third category is that of specialized knives which tend to doublepointed or lozenge-shaped forms with beveled cutting edges. They are
found through central Texas with Archaic material. An example was
reported by Baerreis from site DICaI but is suspected of being intrusive from the later Neosho Focus.
A fourth artifact type is a hand axe fashioned from a cobble with
part of the originally encrusted outer surface of the nodule retained
for grasping. There is considerable variation in the finishing of the
cutting edge, from a crude (probably hastily made) form to one of
more finished appearance. The hand axe is consistently found in small
numbers with typically Archaic material in central and southwestern
Texas. I have no information concerning its distribution outside the
state, but on the basis of other lithic artifacts common to both areas,
we might logically expect to find it as a component of the Archaic
complex of Oklahoma as well.

Perishable Arti]acts
A comparison of the inventory of perishable artifacts of the Great
Basin Desert Culture and that of the Pecos River Focus reveals many
shared traits. It also reveals a great many differences worthy of further
study when more material becomes available for analysis. The comparison is presented in Table 2; the matters of significance in connection with the comparison are summarized here.
I. Objects identified as arrow fragments were found in Level V of
Danger Cave along with atlatl parts. The provenience of probable arrows
from the Pecos River caves is as yet unknown and may represent a very
late cultural deposit overlying Pecos River Focus Archaic.

175

ARCHAIC IIN NORTH AMERICA

2. The functions of the small bows found in both areas are unknown.
Jennings suggested that his specimens might have been used as bow
drills. The bows from the Pecos River sites may have been snare parts. AII
of these specimens, from both areas, could be toys.
3. The knife handles described from Danger Cave are quite unlike
the Pecos River hafted blades. Only the trait of hafting knives is shared.
4. There seems to be a great difference in bone working between the
two areas. L-shaped and splinter awls predominate at Danger Cave. Awls
carefully fashioned of split metapodial bones predominate in the Pecos
River Focus and seem to have a more finished appearance than the Danger
Cave specimens.
TABLE 2
Comparison

WOOD
Rabbit stick
Pointed and grooved
dart foreshaft
Double pointed foreshaft
Barbed foreshaft
Tongue and groove
foreshaft
Reed shafts
Atlatl
Arrows
Small bows
Y-snare and trap trigger
Hearths and drills
Scoops
Fire tongs
Digging stick
Wedges
Stakes
Burred wood
Pins or pegs
Painted gaming sticks
Basping stick
Flageolets
Cane cigarettes,
cedar foliage
Paint brushes

Needles
Shuttle
Atlatl hock for reed
shaft
Cradles
Knife-scraper handles
Encircling-groove and
breaking technique

of Traits:

Pecos River Focus and Danger Cave

Pecos Danger

Pecos Danger

River

River

Cave

x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x

x

x
x
x
x
x

?
x
x
x

x
?
x
x
?
x

?

x
x
x

x

x

x

BONE
Awls
Flakers

x
x

x

Antler wrenches
Antler hammer-rubber
Pins
End scraper
Scapula rattles
Rasp
Grooved needles
Netting needles J
Beads
Bars of bone
"Shoe horn"
(bull-roarer?)
Horn spoons
Tubes
Grooved tooth pendant
STONE
(other than lithic
material described
in the text)
Net sinkers
Tubular pipes
Slate pendants
Other stone pendants
or beads
Single handed manos
Slab milling stones
Block milling stones
Abrading stones
Incised stones
Painted stones
Pictographs
Petroglyphs
Red and yellow ocher
SHELL
Mussel shell scrapers
Pendants
Land snail shell beads
Olivelta shell beads

Cave

x

x

x
?

?

x
x
X

x

x

?
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x

x

x

x
x
x

x

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1 76

TABLE

2--Continued

Comparison of Traits: Pecos River Focus and Danger Cave
Pecos Danger
River Cave
SKIN
Sandals
Moccasins
Blankets
Apron
CORDAGE
Fiber cordage, Z twist
Fiber cordage, S twist
Fur string
Feather string
Hair string
Carrying nets
Fish nets
Gaming nets
Knotted netting
Coil-without foundation
netting
Apron

X
X
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
?
x

x
x

CORDAGE SOURCES
]uniperus (cedar)
Apocynum (Indian hemp)
Arzemesia (common sage)
Asclepias (milkweed)
Cowania (cliff rose)
x
Linurn (flax)
Salix (sandbar willow)
Scirpus (bulrush)
Stipa (needle grass)
Agave (Lechuguilla, Sisal) x
Dasylirion (Sotol)
x
Yucca (yucca)
x
Gossypiurn (cotton)
x
TEXTILES
Headbands
Rattlesnake vertebrae
necklace

x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Pecos Danger
River
x
Bracelets
x
Carrying chain
x
Carrying "nooses"
Fish stringers
x
Fiber storage bundle
x
x
Simple twined basketry
x
Diagonal twined basketry
Twined openwork basketry x
Twined wickerwork
Unique twined (see text)
x
x
Checkerweave
x
Twilled weave
Interlocking coil stitch
x
Non-interlocking coil
stitch
Coil: bundle foundation
x
x
Coil: half-rod foundation
Coil: one rod foundation
Coil: one rod and bundle
Coil: two rod horizontal
Coil: three rod bunched
Fuegian coil
x
Unique openwork
x
(see text)
Decorated baskets: added
elements
Over one-under one cloth
Basketry patches
x
x
Sandals

Cave

x
x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x

x

MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS
Cement hafting
x
Unfired clay objects
without tempering
x
Grass lined basins
x
Burials within shelter
Evidence of peyote and
mescal cults
x
Evidence of hunting cult
x

5. Although bone flakers have not been described from Danger Cave,
they were reported from Deadman Cave, Utah (Smith, 194.1) and are
probably components of the Desert Culture.
6. Two types of bone needles have been described from southwestern
sites. Grooved needles, probably used for sewing, are known from both the
Pecos River Focus and Deadman Cave (Smith, ] 94,1) and may have been
used extensively throughout the Basin area. The netting needles from the
Pecos River Focus, together with the shuttle, are unique net-making implements.
7. The absence of net sinkers and fishing nets in Danger Cave is of no
particular significance in distinguishing differences between the two areas.

ARCHAIC

I~

NORTH

AMERICA

177

Net sinkers were recovered from Leonard Rock Shelter~ Nevada (Heizer,
1951). Fishing was practiced in the Desert Culture where conditions
permitted.
8.

String made of strips of duck skin was found in Danger Cave; the

technique of manufacture is the same as the twisted-fur string from that
site and is unlike that from the Pecos River Focus.
9. Gaming nets are used here to designate the very long stretched nets
described in the Pecos River Focus. The only examples of netting pictured
in Jennings" report are two drawstring bags which seem to be like the
carrying nets described from the Pecos River Focus. Dimensions are not
provided by Jennings and it is quite possible that large drawstring bags
could have been used for trapping. Game nets were reported from the
Leonard Rock Shelter (Heizer, 195]).
10. Although lint cotton in unspun fiber form is found at Shumla in
the Pecos River area~ there is as yet no evidence for its use as a textile
source. It is listed in the table because of its presence at a presumed early
period and because of the contact with Tamaulipas~ Mexico~ which its
presence implies (MacNeish~ 1958).
11.

Modeled artifacts of unfired gray limey clay without intentional

tempering are shared by both cultures. The forms differ completely~ however. At least one Danger Gave specimen is an effigy. Others from the site
are unidentifiable. The two specimens recovered from the Pecos River
area are cigar-shaped.

From these comparisons we recognize first of all the divergent techniques of manufacture displayed in several industries.
The Pecos River Focus appears to have achieved a higher degree of
specialization in bone working. Awls seem to be better finished in the
Pecos River sites. Flakers are not reported from Danger Cave and the
other ~¥endover sites but are found in the Pecos River sites in sufficient quantities to indicate their importance. Such highly specialized
tools as netting needles have never been reported from the Basin area.
The textile industries reveal only superfici!l resemblances. Absent
from Danger Cave and the other Wendover sites are the sandals,
checkerweave and twilled mats~ and headbands common to the Pecos
River Focus. Twined basketry predominates at Danger Cave; coiled
basketry predominates at Shumla~ a Pecos River site. Though the interlocking stitch predominates in both cultures~ the non-interlocking
stitch runs a fairly close second at Danger Cave and is not represented
at Shumla. Further~ coiled work foundations are completely different
in the two areas. Three unique basket weaves have been noted from
the Shumla material. A unique sample of wickerwork was recovered
from Danger Gave. Just what these unique basket weaves mean is

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

impossible to tell at present. The construction, particularly the selvage
finish, of twined mats at Danger Cave, appears to be more elaborate
than that used on Pecos River specimens. Danger Cave also produced
a true cloth, which is absent from Pecos River. On the other hand, the
Shumla Site displays greater specialization in its cordage, with feather
and hair string.
Only two examples of netting are shown in the Danger Cave report
and we are not told whether they were the only examples recovered,
whether they were both constructed by larkshead knotting, or what
the dimensions are. We are left with the impression that netting was
not widely used and that coiling without foundation was unknown.
Plant sources of fibers used in cordage are completely different in
the two areas with the exception of flax, which was used in both cultures. And yet, all the plant fibers used in the Danger Cave area-with the exception of Stipa (needle grass)--are available in the lower
Pecos River area or in the area immediately to the west. We can only
conclude that for some unknown reason, inhabitants of the two areas
preferred to use different sources for fibers.
Noticeably absent from Danger Cave and the other YVendover sites
are artifacts associated with fishing, baby cradles, cigarettes, and perhaps pipes. On the other hand, the Basin sites produced painted gaming
sticks which have a widespread distribution in the Southwest. Perhaps
gaming devices are a typical Basin development. Bone bars from
Dan~;~er Cave, unidentified as to function, may also be associated with
gaming.
tt is unfortunate that data on the ceremonial aspects of the Desert
Culture are lacking, for such information could help to clarify possible
relationships with other areas. Of particular interest is the practice in
the Pecos l~iver Focus of burying the dead within the dwellings. This
practice seems to have been quite foreign to the inhabitants of the
Danger Cave area, since no true burials were recovered there. There
is much evidence pointing to highly developed ceremonial aspects of
the Pecos River Focus in contrast to the Desert Culture. Outstanding
are evidences of a hunting cult, as indicated in pictographs and painted
stones. These evidences could signify that hunting was economically
more important to the inhabitants of the Pecos River region, and!or
that hunting was pervaded with magico-religious observances to a
degree not found in the hunting practices of the Desert Culture. Certain artifacts such as pipes, cigarettes, rattles, rasps, flageolets, mescal

beans, and peyote buttons are also indicative of ceremonial rites in
the Pecos River Focus. Pipes and musical instruments are not def-

ARCHAIC

IN

NORTH

AMERICA

initely identified at Danger Cave. However, two bone artifacts described from that site may represent a tubular pipe and a bull-roarer.
Narcotics (mescal or peyote) have not been reported from Danger
Cave or related sites.

Conclusions
As might be expected, Texas and Oklahoma Archaic sites are closely
linked by their ]ithic assemblages. Projectile points overlap both in
form and size. Tools such as specialized knives and gouges may provide
other links.
The size differences between Danger Cave and Texas-Oklahoma
Archaic projectile points immediately distinguish artifacts from the
two areas. However, the presence of indented-base points of several
types in both the Desert Culture and Texas-Oklahoma cannot be ignored. It is of interest that rectangularly stemmed indented base points
of the Pedernales and Montell categories occur as major types both in
the Texas Archaic and Danger Cave. The Texas Frio and Uvalde
points and the Oklahoma H series, which also fall into an indented
base category, must be considered as well. The indented base point,
often termed "Pinto" in the West, has a widespread distribution
throughout the western states and represent a development parallel
with that of a contracting stem point often called "Gypsum" in the
West. The earliest known occurrence of a contracting stem point in
Texas is the Langtry type, diagnostic of the Pecos t/iver Focus. New
evidence indicates it antedates notched points (J. F. Epstein, personal
communication). However, with the contracting stem all similarity
between Langtry and Gypsum points ends. The Gary-like points of
East Texas and Oklahoma are more akin to the western type. If the
Gary and Gypsum types represent diffused traits, where is the route
of diffusion? The small percentages of indented base points of the
Pedernales and Montell types and the absence of "Gypsum"-like
points in the Trans-Pecos seems to rule out a southern diffusion route.
The Pedernales-Montell types of indented base points are not found
in the northeastern Oklahoma series. And indented base points found
occasionally in the Eastern Woodlands are of the Frio and H series
varieties. It will be interesting to watch for a possible route of influence across the panhandle area of Texas and Oklahoma. We can be
justified in a declaration of parallel development only when all possible diffusion routes are ruled out.
There is not much overlapping in point forms between Texas-Okla-

TEXA,S A!RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

homa and the southeastern states as represented in the Indian Knoll
series. It has been suggested that the large stemmed point may have
originated in the southeastern area and introduced into Texas and
Oklahoma and that the Gary-like points found in large numbers in
East Texas and Oklahoma may have developed within that area and
been introduced into the southeast in turn.
In spite of the number of perishable artifacts shared by the Desert
Culture and the Pecos River Focus, the resemblances in this respect
are actually superficial. Manufacturing techniques vary considerably and set the two areas apart. Also, it must be borne in mind that
Archaic peoples of Oklahoma and the southeastern states were also
making baskets and cordage. The perishable materials from these
areas which have been recovered to date are probably from a later time
level, but they display many of the techniques used in the Pecos River
Focus and may have been known at an equally early date (Schuetz,
manuscript to be published).

Re]erences Cited
Baerreis, David A.
1951. The Preceramic Horizons of Northeastern Oklahoma. Anthropological
Papers, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 6.
Bell, Robert E.
1957. Clear Fork Gouges Found in Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 28, pp. 285-288.
Heizer, Robert F.
1951.

Preliminary Report on the Leonard l~ockshelter Site, Pershing County,
Nevada. American Antiquity, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 89-98.

Jennings, Jesse D.
1957.

Danger Cave. Anthropological Papers No. 27, University of Utah. (Also
published as Memoir No. 14, Society for American Archaeology.)

Jennings, Jesse D., and Edward Norbeck
1955.

Great Basin Prehistory: A Review. American Antiquity, Vol. 21, No. 1,
pp. 1-11.

Libby, W. F.
1955.

Radiocarbon Dating. 2nd ed. University of Chicago Press.

MacNeish, Richard S.
1958. Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 48, Part
6.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1956. An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 129-160.

ARCHAIC

IN

NORTH

AMERICA

1957a. A Carbon-14 Date from Trans-Pecos Texas. Ibid., Vol. 28, pp. 288-289.
1957b. A Report on Williamson County Mound Material. Ibid., Vol. 28, pp. 135~68.
Smith~ Elmer R.
1941.

The Archeology of Deadman Cave, Utah. Bulletin of the University of
Utah, Vol. 32, No. 4.

Webb, William S.
1946.

Italian Knoll, Site Oh2, Ohio County. Kentucky. University of Kentucky
]Reports in Anthropology and Archaeology, VoL 4, No. 3, Part 1.

Witte Museum
San Antonio, Texas

