THE CLEAR FORK GOUGE REVISITED*
JOEL L. SHINER
ABSTRACT
Clear Fork Gouges, their attributes and covariation of attributes are
examined in an attempt to determine morphological and functional
regularities as well as relationships with endscrapers. As might be expected, the relationships are statistical and force the archeologist to work
with relatively high numbers of specimens. The gouge is a generic entity
and any attempts to divide it into stylistic or morphological types must
procede with caution.
INTRODUCTION
After years of field work, Cyrus Ray (1941) described a stone implement and named it the Clear Fork Gouge. Considering the time and
the contemporary quality of Texas archeology, his morphological
descriptions and historical considerations of this phenomenon were
more than adequate. He defined the gouges in terms of 441 specimens.
Nearly 90% of these were triangular in outline. Nearly 60% were
made on bifaces, and practically all had bits with a "scooped-out" appearance. He related these gouges to a "Clear Fork Culture", a concept which fortunately has not been pursued. Apparently, his
placement of the gouge as later than what we now call Paleo-lndian
and earlier than arrow-points and pottery is largely supported. All in
all, his observations were very perceptive. Forty-five years after his
initial impressions of 1928, there is not much to add except for quantitative reporting and more analytical work.
The definition worked very well for the area around Abilene. but
soon collectors began to recognize the form farther east, southeast.
and northwest. The question began to arise as to whether similar
forms near Fort Worth. San Antonio, and Tyler were the same thing
as Ray’s gouge. At the same time. many students began to speculate
as to the use or uses of the gouge. Unfortunately, the questions were
not followed up with a scientific rigor, and new type names were
submitted without the proper attention paid to form, function, association, or time. Speculations as to use remained unsupported.

*About the time this paper was submitted in 1973. three studies of these subtriangular flaked stone implements were published. Hester. et al. [1973) made an
analytical study of possible functions while Howard (1973) did experimental work.
Chandler (1974) conducted an analysis of wear patterns on a sample from the Falcon
area. Hester’s findings verify my own conclusions of halting and the studies of Howard
and Chandler do not conflict with my own hypotheses.

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In 1968, I collaborated in a study of gouges from the Acton site
(Blain et al. 1968). Since we defined the class in terms of Ray’s work,
it is reasonable that we found our gouges to be very much like his.
A second collection of gouges and scrapers, over 300 in number,
was obtained from Webb County in south Texas. It was only an uncontrolled surface collection, but showed enough consistency and
regularity to permit the formulation of several initial hypotheses. For
the most part, I was interested in the question of how well the concept
of gouge fitted the concept of morphological type, and how shapes and
sizes of these artifacts varied geographically and temporally.
The third collection was made available through the courtesy of
R. K. Harris of Dallas. This group was from the McClean site near
Abilene, Texas. It is believed that these most nearly conform to Ray’s
original "type" specimens.
METHODOLOGY
Certain measurements were taken in a standard manner. Length
was understood to be the maximum distance measured from the distal
end or bit to the proximal end (Figure 1, A). The width is measured at
the bit and is always at right angles to the length (Figure 1, A).
Thickness is measured at the bit to the maximum height of the flaking
that created the bit (Figure 1, B). It is measured at right angles to the
ventral face of the tool. The edge angle is measured on the bit with
one arm of the goniometer resting on the ventral face of the tool and
the other tangent to the axis of the bottom rows of stepped retouch
flakes (Figure 1, C). If the edge is undercut by wear or resharpening,
the arm is held parallel to the bottom row. This angle is difficult to
read because each flake varies somewhat. Thus, it is registered as
70-74,75-79, or 80-84, etc.
The next set of attributes are recorded by observation. As we had
recorded in 1968 (Blaine et al. 1968), gouges and similar tools are
made on bifaces, inverse flakes with the cortex forming what we
might regard as the ventral face, and flakes (or blades). The latter
may be retouched on the ventral face by thinning or truncating the
bulb of percussion
Flakes usually curve along the striking axis so that the ventral face
is incurvate or excurvate. In addition, lateral edges of these flakes
are chipped, ground, or both.
The next series of observations concerned bit wear as an indicator
of use. No simple measurements or observations would suffice here;
neither were there guidelines in any published work on stone tools.
Within the large group of gouges and scrapers from Webb County,

CLEAR FORK REVISITED

181

\

\

C

\

l
D

FIGURE 1. A, methods of recording length and width. B, method of
recording thickness. C, method of measuring edge angle. D, Different
positions of use wear; top is scraping and bottom is planing.

there were many shapes, attributes, apparent wear patterns and,
seemingly, many regularities. The initial study consisted of examining
approximately 500 specimens under the binocular microscope until
certain ideas began to take form.
Wear could be isolated as several kinds and in several places.
Lateral edges were blunted by chipping and then ground with a
rotary-all-over motion. Facets of polish occurred either on the ventral
surface aft of the bit or at the apex of the bit and the ventral surface.
Tiny rows of flakes on the bit seem to undercut and spoil the cutting

182

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

edge. Logic seemed to demand that the lateral edges were
deliberately dulled (to aid in halting?), ventral surface polish was the
result of push-plane use, and apex wear was the result of scraping.
Such observations and logic permitted the formulation of several
hypotheses which could be partially if not rigorously tested. This was
accomplished by making replicas of the "gouge" and "scraper"
shapes, and then using them on several kinds of materials such as
woods, hide, bone, etc. The results of these preliminary tests will be
presented later.
That these scrapers and gouges were halted in some sort of handle
is almost a certainty. There is no scientific proof nor any indisputable
evidence of this but there are data that support it (Hester et al. 1973;
Howard 1973; Chandler 1974). All attempts to use these tools handheld indicate the inefficiency of that technique (Howard 1973). A
careful examination of both faces, along flake scar ridges and other
high spots revealed a few areas of light wear. but there was no
regularity to them. It is apparent to me that we have not acquired the
proper techniques of observation to determine if these tools were
halted.
In regard to attributes, both metrical and morphological, there
remains the task of matching them in search of co-variances or causeand-effect relationships. The most obvious combinations are those of
shape and wear patterns. Standard statistical tests were run on the
associations among triangular shape and "scraper" wear or "pushplane" wear; between flake curvature and wear forms; between
flake or biface and either wear or overall shape.
The last set of data needed to complete this study are distributional
in nature. The problem is to identify certain configurations of shape
and wear and where these things cluster in geographical space and in
time. This is not as easy as it sounds since not all archeological reports agree on which attributes constitute a gouge and which make
an end scraper. In addition, dating is most precarious since most
dates on artifacts are indirect and many decisions are made on the
style of points present. Jack Hughes (personal communication] believes the Clear Fork Gouge to be of early Archaic, or possibly PaleoIndian age in the Texas Panhandle. Most workers in central and
south Texas believe it to be Archaic (e.g.Hester and Kohnitz 1975].

RESULTS
i

i

.

from 26 mm. to 70 mm. The mean width is 38.7 mm. with proportionate
variations. The mean thickness is 12.3 mm. and the angle of the bit is

CLEAR FORK REVISITED

183

about 66°. These figures vary only minutely from those of Hester et al.
(1973). About 83 percent of the tools are on flakes that are either excurvate, or else have been flaked to produce a ventral face that is
longitudinally convex. Most of the ventral faces have been flaked; in
fact, 65% of the gouges have been made on bifaces.
The observations made so far might seem to be a bit premature
since I have not yet defined what a "gouge" is. It is only after running
many attribute covariance tests that enough regularities appeared to
justify using the term with any confidence, Clear,cut facets of fiat
polish on the ventral surface are closely associated with the
triangular outline, slightly convex or straight bit, thick bit which has
a "scooped,out" appearance, A series of measurements shows that
the polish is a result of movement against the abrasive agent at an
angle around 25°. Further, the movement is the result of the bit
(distal) end moving forward, If the contraption for hafting has the bit
facing the operator, then the tool is drawn toward him.
The first statistical test was made with 201 specimens that showed
wear. Of these, 74 had scraper facets and 127 had push-plane facets.
Divided another way, 88 specimens were triangular with relatively
straight bits and 113 were oval with convex bits. If the two classes in
the first division are proportional to the two classes in the second
division, then the attributes are random.

Oval outline
Triangular outline
Total

Scraper

Push-Plane

Wear

Wear

59

Total

54

15

73

88

74

127

201

X2 = 26.32

A standard chi-square test shows that at a 95% probability randomness of the variables should be rejected. In simplest words, there
is a high probability that the triangular shape is linked with pushplane wear.
A second test compared scraper wear with a concave longitudinal
ventral face and push-plane wear with a convex ventral face: The
number of specimens available for this study was 157 and the breakdown was as follows:
.....
Concave
Scraper wear
Push-plane wear
Total

Convex

Total

22
11

44
80

66
91

33

124

157

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

184

A chi-square value of 10.4 rejects the hypothesis at the .99 level
that the variables are independent.
Thus, "scraper" wear is associated with an oval shape, a convex
bit and an incurvate flake or blade. "Push-plane" wear is associated
with a nearly straight bit on a more or less triangular outline and an
excurvate flake or blade ......
The group of objects that we are calling gouges are sometimes
made on bifaces that look like preforms for projectile points,
sometimes on large flakes, and sometimes on pebbles. In the third
form, the cortex face corresponds to the ventral face of a flake. This
last form is apparently never used for scrapers. In a test to compare
flake and biface forms with wear patterns the following data were
used.
Scraper
Wear
Flake
Bfface
Total

Push-Plane
Wear

Totals

35
9

33
13

68
22

44

46

90

X2 = .92

The low value of X2 indicates a high probability of independence of
the variables. In other words, both flake and biface forms were used
randomly for scraping or planing.
In comparing flake or biface forms with triangular and oval
outlines clear associations are evident.

Triangular

Oval

Shape

Shape

Totals
101

Flake

35

66

Biface

39

6

45

74

72

146

Total

Xz = 33.6

Biface forms tend to covary with triangular outlines and flakes
with oval outlines.
A fairly simple hafting device permitted the use of either gouge
(low angle pushplane) or scraper (high angle drawing motion) with
considerable do’ward pressure and a constant angle (Figure 1, D).
Both scraping and planing motions were done, independently of
course, on scrap shoe leather, bois d’arc wood, deer antler and green
beef bone.

CLEAR

FORK REVISITED

185

The first lesson learned was that it takes more work than I had
imagined in order to produce wear on an edge. Approximately 2000
strokes of about 15 to 30 cm. in length, under heavy pressure barely
made a small polished facet on the ventral surface of a pushplane
when used on hard leather. Heavy scraping on hard leather introduced some nibbling undercutting of bits, but no polished facet. It
is believed that hides stretched in frames might produce this kind of
wear, but green hides are difficult to obtain. Ethnographic examples
are frequent (Lowie 1954: 58-9; Davis 1969: 54) .....
Both kinds of wear, pushplane polish and nibbling scraper
deterioration, appeared to be identical to forms isolated among the
hundreds of original specimens examined. At magnifications up to
600x, no apparent differences could be detected. This is not proof, but
it is infinitely better than purely inductive reasoning. Many more experiments are needed.
Moving from the area of south Texas to the north, the next major
collection of associated pushplane-scraper tools is from the Acton
site about 25 miles southwest of Fort Worth, Texas. The same general
relationships among endscrapers and gouges, length-width ratios,
shapes, and technology tend to appear in the Acton material as did in
the Webb collection. The Acton specimens are just slightly smaller in
all dimensions, have the same mean edge angle and close to the same
ratios of bifaces, flake curvature and edge grinding as were recorded
in south Texas.
The small sample of 25 gouges from the McClean site show larger
size overall. They are 50% longer, 150 wider, and i0% thicker.
Other observations do not vary significantly from means established
for Webb or Hood Counties, nor do the standard deviations.
Since there is reasonable support for the hypothesis that the Clear
Fork Gouge has regular parameters of shape, size, and use marks and
since we know its spatial and its temporal distribution, the question
arises as to its status as a type. The answer must be no. The variation
within the form is large enough that each specimen must be examined
for wear patterns, manufacturing techniques and other attributes,
designating it as a type does not make it a research tool. More importantly, we do not know anything about ethnic affiliations of this
phenomenon. At best, the Clear Fork Gouge is a generic type with a
range of shapes and varied manufacturing techniques. As such, it differs significantly from the end scraper. It is not a functional type
since it was used both as pushplane and as scraper. It is not an historic-index type since we cannot relate it to real or artificial societies
of the past. Thus, when we use the name Clear Fork Gouge, we may
think of the range of shapes reported by Ray (1941) and of two ac-

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tivities, planing and scraping. If really well designed research programs support other associations, they will add to our understanding.
From descriptive data, I will turn to speculation in hope that these
ideas may lead to directed research on the overall problem. My
feeling is that the primary use of the Clear Fork Gouge was in thinning
bison hides. I feel that the distribution in space represents the
southern area of bison exploitation during the period we call the Archaic. I am not able to visualize a group of ethnic tribes occupying all
of this area from just north of Monterrey, Mexico to southern
Oklahoma, nor do I believe this to be necessary.
Testing of the bison-gouge relationship will necessitate a more
careful reporting of artifacts and their context. The internal structure of sites, especially regarding concentrations of activity related
tools and debris, must be recorded. Presence and absence of bones
together with their context will be important. Better dating methods
are needed. Radiocarbon dating is too expensive and point styles are
not reliable except where extensive tests have been made. My feeling
is that the use of consecutive typological analyses (morphological,
functional, stylistic) reported in a statistical manner may help the
studies. Naturally, this would mean more work and a closer
cooperation among specialists in different fields.
Testing of reasons for the temporal range of Clear Fork Gouges
would be difficult. It is hard to imagine why the implement did not survive into the late prehistoric era.
Despite a few apparent temporal and areal exceptions, the form
known as the Clear Fork Gouge appears to have continuous
distribution. It is restricted to the Archaic period and tc a dumbbell
shaped area running from south central Oklahoma to north central
Mexico (Figure 2). This area is constricted in the center along the
Balcones escarpment near Austin and San Antonio. Although large
flint artifacts are exceotionallv abundant in the Hill Country around
Uvalde, Llano and Fredericksburg, Clear Fork Gouges are conspicuously rare.
Morphologically speaking, the Clear Fork Gouge is distinct from the
large endscraper of the Archaic Period. Functionally, however, only a
strong statistical probability links gouge with low-angle push-plane
activity and the end scraper with high-angle scraping. The definition
unfortunately must employ some non-metrical lerms such as "bit
.......
stralght
to shghtly convex, edges stralght to sl ightly convex , "
"
....
" These attr ibutes are
longitudinal
cross-sechon ’ usually biconvex.
the ones most frequently associated with wear patterns indicative of
the push-plane motion. In addition, the Clear Fork Gouge maybe made

CLEAR FORK REVISITED

187

/

/
/

I
\

I
/

\

/

\

/
/
/

\

/
/

|

/

I
I
I
I

\

/
J

/

/

,

I
I

I
!
I
!
/

,,’\

//

/;

I

I
\
\
\

/
\

FIGURE 2. Primary distribution
occurrences are not noted.

/

z

of Clear

Fork Gouges.

Single

on a biface or a flake. The bifaces are rarely "well finished," but instead, usually look like preforms in the percussion state. Flakes
usually have bulbs truncated or thinned by chipping. Cortex on the
dorsal face is almost non-existent. The strongest attribute is still the
isosceles triangle with the bit on the short side. Also, the bit is the
thickest portion of the tool.

188

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Blaine, Jay C., R. K. Harris, Wilson W. Crook, Jr. and Joel L. Shiner
1968 The Acton Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 39,
pp. 45-94.
Chandler, C. K.
1974 Use Wear Analysis of "Clear Fork" Tools From the Falcon Reservoir
Area, Southern Texas. La Tierra, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 15-21.
Davis, Christoper
1969 North American Indian, Hamlyn Publishing Co., London.
Hester, Thomas Roy, Delbert Gilbow and Alan D. Albee
1973 A Functional Analysis of "Clear Fork" Artifacts from the Rio Grande
Plain, Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 90-96.
Hester, Thomas R. and Harvey Kohnitz
1975 Chronological Placement of "Guadalupe" Tools. La Tierra, Vol. 2, No.
2, pp. 22-25.
Howard, Calvin D.
1973 A Study of the Clear Fork Gouge. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 44, pp. 51-60.
Lowie, R. H.
1963 Indians of the Plains. American Museum Science Books, New York.
Ray, Cyrus
1941 The Various Types of the Clear Fork Gouge. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 13, pp. 152-156.
Southern Methodist University

