247

Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions: Evidence for
Changing Territorial Size
in North Central Texas
Daniel E. McGregor

ABSTRACT
This paper examines the distribution of a spatially restricted, visually distinctive North Central Texas source of chert (Pisgah Ridge chert). Projectile points
made from this material are identified from archeological sites in the Middle
Trinity River basin and adjacent drainages. The spatial distributions of these
artifacts are interpreted as indicating a progressive reduction in group territorial
size through time.

INTRODUCTION

Recent syntheses of North Central Texas prehistory have emphasized changes
through time in the adaptive strategies of the hunter-gatherers and horticulturalists
that occupied this region (Lynott 1981; Story 1985; Bruseth et al. 1987; Prikryl
1987; Story et al. 1990). Although archeological interpretations are still hampered
by significant factual gaps, the general sequence of developments is reasonably
clear. Suggested developmental trends in the prehistoric use of North Central
Texas include: growing regional populations; increasing sedentarism; and reduction in the size of group territories.
In general outline, these same trends can be recognized for much of North
America, and, indeed, throughout much of the world’s temperate zones during the
Holocene period. Such developments can be characterized as part of an "intensification" of human adaptive strategies (Binford 1983:208-213; O’Brien 1987:182;
Ebert and Kohler 1988:132). One aspect of this intensification process is that
increased population size and "packing" (Binford 1983:210-211) of groups in a
region are accompanied by an increasing localization of resource exploitation. As
geographical regions became packed with people, group mobility was restricted
and resource exploitation was concentrated within smaller territories.
One line of evidence used to support the reduction of group territorial size in
North Central Texas has been the fact that lithic raw material use became progressively more localized during the Holocene (see McGregor 1987a). The frequent
use of presumably non-local, high-quality cherts during the earlier time periods
was replaced by an increasing dependence upon locally available quartzites.
Additional evidence for reductions in territorial size through time is provided by a
study of lithic material use reported in this paper.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64 (1993)

248

Texas Archeological Society

The geographical area of this study is centered within the Middle Trinity
River basin of North Central Texas (Figure 1). The locally available lithic resources in this region occur primarily in upland gravel deposits containing pebbles
Forl

Worth

Dallas

Sabine

Richland

River

C r ee~l

LEGEND
JTehuaeana Limestone
W
Outcrop

Figure 1. Map of the Study Area.

OKnown Source of Pisgah
Ridge Chert
\

and cobbles of quartzite, silicified wood, and chert (Byrd 1971; Menzer and
Slaughter 1971). Although some regional variability exists, the materials in these
gravels are petrologically similar across a widespread geographical area, making
it impossible to attribute artifacts made of these materials to specific source
locations. This circumstance traditionally has restricted the development of lithic
resource utilization studies in this particular region of Texas.
In contrast to most lithics in this area, a far more limited source can be
demonswated for one visually distinctive variety of chert, namely Pisgah Ridge
chert. Numerous collections from archeological sites within the study area have
been examined for artifacts made from this material. The spatial distribution of the
projectile points made from Pisgah Ridge chert is reported in this paper, and this
distribution provides a unique source of evidence about the relative extent of
prehistoric group territories.

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

249

TRENDS IN NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS PREHISTORY

Any attempt to reconstruct demographic and settlement trends in North
Central Texas prehistory must consider the fact that the major river and creek
valleys of the region have undergone significant changes during the Holocene. It
is important to determine whether recognized archeological gaps resulted from a
lack of former habitation, from erosion of coeval sediments or surfaces, or from
more recent sedimentation over large areas. In North Central Texas, geological
factors hamper our ability to locate and investigate archeological remains from
certain time periods.
Terraces along the Trinity River and its major tributaries are all Late Pleistocene (ca. 20,000 years B.P.) and older in age (Ferring 1986, 1990:261). These
stream valleys were deeply incised in the Late Pleistocene and aggraded rapidly,
though perhaps discontinuously, throughout the Holocene period. The alluvial fill
beneath the floodplains can be as much as 20 meters thick (Ferring 1986, 1990;
McGregor 1987b). Most of the natural channel cutbanks are only about six meters
deep, and expose mainly Late Holocene sediments. While the inner river and
creek valleys no doubt were occupied during earlier periods, much of this evidence is buried even more deeply under the modern floodplains and, therefore, is
not accessible to discovery by standard survey techniques.
Clearly, demographic reconstructions based only on evidence from surface
sites will be biased, especially for the earlier prehistoric periods. The terraces
along the floodplain margins are of sufficient age that site components of all time
periods could be represented. Unfortunately, these sites are most often multicomponent and mixed by bioturbation and pedoturbation processes. These special
problems need to be considered during the following discussion of North Central
Texas prehistory.
Environmental conditions during the Late Pleistocene (ca. 14,000-11,000
years B.P.) were moister and cooler than those of today, and there is evidence
for diminished seasonality with cooler summers and moister winters ~erring
1990:254). Interpretations of the pollen record indicate that grasslands were
replacing the full glacial parklands (Bryant and Holloway 1985). By the Early
Holocene period (11,~-8,000 years B.P.), grasslands dominated the Southern
Plains, although climatic conditions were still relatively moist by modern
standards.
The early Paleoindian Clovis groups entering North Central Texas near the
end of the Pleistocene apparently found a region without other human populations. Throughout the Paleoindian period (12,000-8,0~ years B.P.), high settlement mobility over very large geographical areas and rather brief stays at any one
site are thought to be indicated by the wide geographical distributions of projectile
point styles, frequent use of exotic lithic materials, and a meagerness of archeological remains at the few excavated campsites in or near the North Central Texas
region. Because population densities were very low, there most likely was a
relative lack of competition for resources.

250

Texas Archeological Society

The Middle Holocene (ca. 8,000-4,000 years B.P.) was dominated by the
Atlantic climatic period, generally believed to have been the driest and wannest
time during the Holocene (Bryson et al. 1970; Wendland 1978:278-280). This
resulted in significant shifts in species diversity and plant community composition. In general, xerophytic species proliferated and expanded their distributions.
Mesophytic flora, with limited tolerance for seasonally extreme temperatures,
declined in extent and density (Story 1985:25).
While it has been recognized that the paucity of Early Archaic period (ca.
8,000-5,000 years B.P.) sites is partly the result of the geological factors mentioned above, the available evidence indicates that population densities remained
quite low. Although the Early Archaic correlates in time with the Atlantic
climatic period, regional researchers have been slow to consider what effects the
presumably warmer and drier conditions had on human adaptive strategies. Only
Story (1985:25-39) has addressed this question explicitly, suggesting that
ecotonal areas may have been exploited more frequently during this prolonged
period of aridity.
This general failure to pursue the relationship between environment and
human adaptation is due, at least in part, to the lack of sufficiently detailed
archeological data for the Early Archaic of North Central Texas. Materials believed to date to this period have been recovered primarily from surface collections and mixed site contexts. No isolated Early Archaic site components have
been excavated, and in fact, the recognition of an Early Archaic occupation in
North Central Texas is based primarily on the presence of projectile point types
that have been dated to this time period in adjacent regions (Prikryl 1990:51-52).
Because these Early Archaic artifact types are so widely distributed, Story
(1985:35) has suggested that group mobility remained high and that territories
were large and not well defined (see also Prikryl 1990:71).
Beginning about 5,000 years B.P., the dry conditions began to ameliorate, and
by the Late Holocene (4,000 years B.P. to present) essentially modern climatic
patterns appear to have been established in North Central Texas. However, it is
likely that significant climatic fluctuations continued to occur during the Late
Holocene. After about 1,000 years B.P., evidence for another drying trend is
widely documented, apparently culminating in significant environmental changes
by 750-650 years B.P. in North Central Texas.
Although better known than the preceding period, the Middle Archaic period
(5,000-3,000 years B.P.) occupation of North Central Texas is neither well documented nor adequately dated. An increase in the number of known sites over that
of the earlier periods generally is interpreted as an increase in regional population.
At geologically stable terrace sites, Middle Archaic materials are found mixed
with remains from later periods of occupation. This is the first period for which
Holocene floodplain components are widely exposed in the cutbanks of stream
channels, although excavations at these sites have been very limited. Documented
Middle Archaic site features include substantial deposits of mussel shells in
floodplain sites and small, rock-lined hearths in both floodplain and terrace sites.

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

251

The Middle Archaic apparently correlates in time with the period of climatic
amelioration that presumably increased habitat productivity. While population
increase might be expected under these environmental conditions, demographic
reconstructions remain imprecise due to both geological factors and a lack of
temporal control. The fact that more regionally distinct artifact styles can be
identified for the Middle Archaic led Story (1985:40) to suggest the development
of smaller spheres of intensive group interaction and an increasing recognition of
territorial boundaries relative to earlier periods (see also Prikryl 1990:71-73).
The most convincing evidence related to the intensification of adaptive
strategies in North Central Texas comes from the Late Archaic period (3,0(~
1,200 years B.P.). A significant increase in population, based on marked increases
in both the numbers of sites and the occupational debris at many of them, is
recognized consistently for the Late Archaic (Lynott 1981:105; Story 1985:52;
Bruseth et al. 1987:237; Prikryl 1987:185). There is increasing evidence that the
vast majority of these sites can be attributed to the latter part (after 2,100 years
ago) of the Late Archaic period. Within the Middle Trinity drainage, the second
half of this time period (2,100-1,200 years B.P.) has been designated the Transitional Archaic (Bruseth et al. 1987:236). The large "Wylie" pits that appear
around 2,100 years B.P. in the Trinity River Basin have been interpreted to have
functioned as territorial markers in a time of increasing regional population
(Bruseth 1987:245; Bruseth and Martin 1987a:283-284).
One line of evidence that has been interpreted as indicating reductions in the
size of group territories comes from studies of lithic material utilization. The
frequent use of presumably non-local, high-quality cherts during the earlier time
periods was replaced by an increased dependence on locally available quartzites
during the Late and, in particular, the Transitional Archaic (Crook and Harris
1952:24; Grady 1978; McGregor 1987a; Prikryl 1987:185-186). This trend toward localization of lithic resource exploitation continues into the following
temporal period.
The beginning of the Late Prehistoric period (1,200-300 years B.P.) is
marked by the introduction of the bow and arrow and ceramics. Evidence for
the use of cultigens has been found throughout North Central Texas, but their
relative economic importance appears to have been quite variable in different
parts of the region and at different times during the Late Prehistoric period.
Further population increases during the early portion of the Late Prehistoric
period have been suggested for some parts of North Central Texas (Bruseth
1987:143). Increasing sedentafism is indicated by the presence of house structures dated to about 850 years B.P. in both the Middle Trinity (Bruseth and
Martin 1987b:166) and the Upper Trinity peter and McGregor 1988) River
drainages.
A drying trend beginning around 1,000 years ago appears to have affected
the distributions of vegetation and faunal resources in North Central Texas. This
environmental change can also be related to regionally significant changes in
the archeological record that occurred around 650-550 years B.P. Throughout

252

Texas Archeological Society

North Central Texas, these changes included an increase in the exploitation of
bison, and a decline in the intensity of occupation.
The drier environmental conditions are thought to have resulted in the eastward expansion of mixed-grass prairies in North Central Texas (Lynott 1979)
and South Central Oklahoma (Drass and Flynn 1990:188); the mixed-grass prairies were preferred by bison. The initial appearance of, or notable increase in,
bison remains is evident in sites dating after ca. 650 years B.P. throughout North
Central Texas (Story et al. 1990:425). However, the relative economic importance of bison is not precisely known, since these sites often contain the remains
of a variety of other animals and plants, including small amounts of maize.
A decline in the regional intensity of occupation is indicated most clearly
by evidence of a decrease in the utilization of residential sites relative to the
earlier part of the Late Prehistoric period (Bruseth et al. 1987:245-247; Peter
and McGregor 1988:367). The later sites lack evidence for substantial structures
and related domestic features, indicating a higher degree of settlement mobility
compared to that of the preceding period. Possible coeval changes in group territorial size have not been given adequate consideration to explain these indications of increased settlement mobility. That such changes may be detectable is
suggested by documented increases in the percentage of chert versus quartzite
arrow points in comparison to those diagnostic of the earlier part of the Late
Prehistoric period (McGregor 1987a:188; Prikryl 1987:148).
PISGAH ~DGE CHERT

This material is easily distinguished from other chert varieties because it
contains abundant pelecypod and gastropod shell fragments that give it a speckled appearance. The unweathered matrix is black (2.5YR2/0) in color, although
it weathers to a white (7.5YR8/0) patina. It occurs as nodules and small seams
in the Tehuacana limestone member of the Kincaid formation on Pisgah Ridge.
Pisgah Ridge is a prominent limestone-capped escarprhent located about six km
west of the town of Richland, in Navarro County, Texas (see Figure 1).
Within the area of Pisgah Ridge, the limestone is exposed discontinuously
over a distance of nine km. To the south it is present below the surface but does
not outcrop again for a distance of 15 km. North of Richland Creek the limestone is not seen again until a point approximately 75 km to the northeast. An
archeological survey of the entire Pisgah Ridge escarpment demonstrated that
outcrops of this chert are restricted to an area atop the ridge that is two km long
by 0.3 km wide.
The Tehuacana limestone member outcrops over a total distance of 200 km,
and could possibly contain chert at other locations. Reconnaissance surveys have
been made of Tehuacana limestone outcrops on both the north and south sides
of Lake Tawakoni on the Sabine River, and in the vicinity of Lake Mexia on the
upper Navasota River (McGregor 1987a). No chert outcrops were discovered in
these areas, and it seem likely that the chert outcrop on Pisgah Ridge is the only

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

253

source of this material. The fortunate combination of visual distinction, and a
highly localized area of outcrop, makes Pisgah Ridge chert extremely important
from an analytical perspective when examining variations in its use over time
and space.
DISTRIBUTIONAL STUDY
Projectile points made from Pisgah Ridge chert, diagnostic of all time periods
from Late Paleoindian (10,000-8,000 years B.P.) to Late Prehistoric (1,200-300
years B.P.), were recovered during archeological investigations at Richland/
Chambers Reservoir (Bruseth and Martin 1987c; McGregor and Bruseth 1987a).
In addition to the Richland/Chambers collections, several others have been
examined for Pisgah Ridge chert artifacts (Table 1). In many cases, only the
chipped stone tools were studied. However, the lithic debris assemblages have
been examined for the collections from Richland/Chambers Reservoir, Joe Pool
Lake, Tennessee Colony Lake, Lake Palestine, and three sites at Lake Whitney.
Three private collections from sites within the study area also were examined: the Young, Harper, and Reading collections. The Young collection remains
in the possession of Mr. Bill Young of Corsicana, Texas, and is the best documented of the three. Mr. Young’s extensive collection was made from numerous sites located primarily along the Middle Trinity River, Richland and
Chambers creeks, and Aquilla Creek. The Harper collection is curated at Southern Methodist University, and primarily includes sites in the Upper Trinity River
drainage in Dallas and Denton counties. The only Pisgah Ridge chert artifacts
in the Harper collection are from two sites, one in Ellis County and one in
Navarro County. The Reading collection is on display at Navarro College in
Corsicana, Texas. It includes artifacts from sites within both the Middle Trinity
and Upper Navasota River drainages. Unfortunately, the locations of most of
Reading’s sites are based on verbal descriptions only. The original map showing site locations was not available for study.
Most sites yielding Pisgah Ridge chert artifacts were located within the
Middle Trinity River basin, including both Richland and Chambers creeks (Figure 2). However, this material was found to be present at sites in the adjacent
Sabine, Neches, Brazos, and Navasota fiver drainages. Many of the artifacts from
these sites are lithic debris or chipped stone tools that are poor chronological
indicators. In all, 39 different sites contained one or more projectile points made
of Pisgah Ridge chert (Table 2 and Figures 3-5).
This study documented only three projectile points thought to be diagnostic
of the Late Paleoindian or Early Archaic periods. Two of these are San Patrice
points and the third is a Dalton point with the blade reworked into a drill (Figure 3a). Interestingly, two of these specimens are from sites at Lake Fork Reservoir on a tributary of the Sabine River (Figure 6) and are farther from the
known source of Pisgah Ridge chert than any other artifact documented in this
study.

254

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1
Artifact Collections Examined for Pisgah Ridge Chert Artifacts1

Sites/Lakes

Joe Pool Lake
Testing and Excavations
Lake Tawakoni
Limerick Site (41RA8) Excavation Collection
Lake Fork Reservoir
Testing and Excavation Collection
Lake Bardwell
Pecan Springs Site (41EL11) Excavation
Collection
Cedar Creek Lake
Wild Bull Site (41HE61), Lacy Site (41HE70),
and Gossett Bottoms Site (41KFT) Excavation
Collections
Lake Palestine
Testing and Excavation Collections
Lake Whitney
SMU Excavations only-Bear Creek Shelter
(41HI17), Bowling Pin (X41BQ8), and Indian
Springs (X41HI5)
Aquilla Lake
SMU Survey and Testing collections only
Navarro Mills Lake
Strawn Creek Site (41NV67) Excavation
Collection
Richland/Chambers Reservoir
Testing and Excavation Collections
Tennessee Colony Lake

Chipped
Stone
Tools

Lithic
Debris

x

X

x
x
x

X

x

x

x

x

X
X

x

x

x

x

¯ Survey and Testing Collections
1 Reservoir locations shown in Figure 2.

Because the Tehuacana limestone outcrops only about 40 km west of the
Lake Fork sites, it might be reasonable to suggest that an additional source of this
chert may exist there. However, this is unlikely because the chipped stone tool
collection from the Limerick site (Duffield 1959) at Lake Tawakoni was examined
and found to contain no Pisgah Ridge chert artifacts. The Tehuacana limestone

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

Fort Worth

255

Dallas

kilometers

LEGEND

1
2
3
4
5
6

Joe Pool Lake
Lake Tawakonl
Lake Fork Reservoir
Lake Bardwell
Cedar Creek Lake
Lake Palestine

e

Site Location

7
8
9
10
11

Lake Whitney
Aqullla Lake
Navarro Mills Reservoir
Rlehland/Chambers Reservoir
Proposed Tennesee Colony Lake
Tehuncana Limestone

A Approxlmale Site Location

Figure 2. Locations of Sites Containing Artifacts Made from Pisgah Ridge Chert.

outcrops at Lake Tawakoni (see Figure 2), and if another source of this material
was located in this part of the Tehuacana limestone, its presence in the Limerick
site assemblage would be expected.
Although several similar projectile point chronologies have been proposed
for North Central Texas (McGregor and Bruseth 1987b; Prikryl 1987:104-132;
Story 1990:214-217), it should be noted that some parts of the sequence are
neither well documented nor adequately dated. Expanding stem dart points are
thought to be generally diagnostic of the Middle Archaic (5,000-3,000 years B.P.)
and Late Archaic (3,~-2,100 years B.P.) periods in the Richland/Chambers
Reservoir area. In contrast, contracting stem dart points occur primarily in the
Transitional Archaic (2,100-1,200 years B.P.) period, while arrow points are

256

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2
Sites from which Pisgah Ridge Chert Projectile Points
Have Been Recovered
Sites

Late Paleo-Indian
41FIE03 (San Patrice)
X41WD 13 (reworked Dalton)
X41WD15 (San Patrice)
Expanding Stem Dart Points
41EL1 (Harper’s Bristol site)
41ELll (Pecan Springs site)
Young’s HE26 (Henderson Co.)
Reading’s Tom Tramel Farm site
Young’s 1-116 (Hill Co.)-Kupek site
41HI88 (MaUouf and Baskin
1976:Figure 16c)
Reading’s Site #21
Young’s FR1 (Freestone Co.)
Reading’s Rush Creek site
41NV63 (Powell site)
41NV145
41NV177 (Adams Ranch site)
41FT200 (Hardy site)
41FT201 (Bird Point Island)
Miller’s Lake Palestine site
Straight Stem Dart Points
Young’s N9 (Navarre Co.)
41NV96
41NV182
41NV184
41FT202
Contracting Stem Dart Points
Reading’s Blackhills site

41NV63 (Powell site)
Reading’s Daniel Farm site

Associated Drainage

Figure

Richland Creek
Lake Fork Creek
Lake Fork Creek

3a
3b

Trinity River
Waxahachie Creek
Trinity River
Trinity River
Aquilla Creek
(Brazos Tributary)
Brookeen Creek
(Brazos Tributary)
Navasota River
Trinity River
Rush Creek
(Richland Creek Tributary)
Chambers Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Neches River

Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek

Briar Creek
(Chambers Creek
Tributary)
Chambers Creek
Trinity River

3e

3d

3g
3i
3f, h, j

4d
4a
4e, f
4c
4b

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions
Reading’s Wolf Creek site

41NV6 (Strawn Creek site)
Reading’s Ed Carroll site
Reading’s Rush Creek site
Young’s N6 (Navarro Co.)
Young’s N107 (Navarro Co.)
41NV206 (Guy’s Garden)
41FT201 (Bird Point Island)
Young’s FR3 ~reestone Co.)
Reading’s Site #116
Arrow Points
Reading’s Tom Tramel Farm site
Young’s N33 (Navarro Co.)
Reading’s Ed Carroll Farm site
Reading’s site #113
41NV203 (Polecat Hill)
41I’rV182 (Irvine site)
41NV171
41F1201 (Bird Point Island)

Wolf Creek
(Richland Creek Tributary)
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
(Richland Creek Tributary)
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Trinity River
Navasota River

Trinity River
Rush Creek
(Trinity Tributary)
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Mesquite Creek
(Richland Creek Tributary)
Richland Creek
Chambers Creek
Richland Creek

257

4h
4i
4k
41

4j

5g

5h-j
5d, e
5f
5a-c

representative of the Late Prehistoric period (1,200-300 years B.P.). Straight stem
dart points are more difficult to place chronologically, as variations on this stem
form seem to have been present throughout the Middle Archaic, Late Archaic, and
Transitional Archaic periods.
With the exception of the San Patrice and Dalton points from Lake Fork
Reservoir, the expanding stem dart points are distributed farthest from the known
source (see Figure 6). Expanding stem dart points have been recovered from sites
along the middle Trinity River drainage, the Neches River, the Navasota River,
and tributaries of the Brazos River (Aquilla and Brookeen Creeks). Progressively
smaller clusters are formed by the sites containing contracting stem dart points
and arrow points, respectively (see Figure 6). Reductions through time in the
spatial distribution of Pisgah Ridge chert projectile points clearly are indicated by
these data.
INTERPRETATIONS
The idea that the presence of non-local lithic materials can provide an
indication of the geographical scale of hunter-gatherer settlement systems has

258

Texas Archeological Society

F

G

H

{

J

~CrP,

Figure 3. Expanding Stem Dart Points from Sites in North Central Texas Made from Pisgah
Ridge Chert: (a) X41WD13, (b) X41WD15, (c) HE26, (d) FR1, (e) 41EL1, (f, h,j) 41FI’201,
(g) 41NV145, (i) 41NV177.

been discussed recently in the archeological literature (Binford 1979; Goodyear
1979; Meltzer 1984; Binford and Stone 1985; Gould and Saggers 1985). Based on
ethnographic evidence, Binford (1979:259) suggested that mobile hunter-gatherers tend to obtain lithic materials while going about their normal subsistence tasks.
He observed that the lithic material types in a gwen site assemblage are primarily
a function of the raw materials available in the site cachment area, plus some that
had been procured from the areas of previously occupied sites (Binford 1979:260).
In such cases, the material types within a given assemblage can be seen as a
relative measure of the spatial extent of the occupying group’s territory.
Within a larger region of Texas that includes portions of the present study
area, the documentation of caches and the widespread occurrence of artifacts
made from high quality Central Texas cherts suggests that long distance trips to
quarries and/or interregional exchange activities were involved in the procurement
and distribution of those materials (e.g., Mallouf 1981; Shafer 1981; Tunnell
1979). This does not seem to have been the case for Pisgah Ridge chert. Even
within sites located very close to its source, this material constitutes only a minor
portion (less than five percent) of the chipped stone assemblages (McGregor
1987a). Its sporadic and limited occurrence in collections from sites located more
than 50 km from the source argues against significant long distance direct
procurement or exchange of Pisgah Ridge chert. To account for the regional

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

G

H

I

J

259

K

Figure 4. Straight and Contracting S tem Dart Points from Sites in North Central Texas Made
from Pisgah Ridge Chert: (a) 41NV96, (b) 41FT202, (c) 41NV184, (d) N9, (e, f) 41NV182,
(g) 41FF171B, (h) N6, (i) N107, (j) FR3, (k) 41NV206, (1) 41FT201.

distribution of Pisgah Ridge chert projectile points, it is suggested that a more
appropriate model should involve the movement of this material through huntergatherer settlement systems in the form of curated artifacts (cf. Binford 1973;
Schiffer 1975; Bamforth 1986).
For the time span for which adequate data were recovered (ca. 5,000-300
years B.P.), the investigations at Richland/Chambers Reservoir documented a
developmental sequence of hunter-gatherer adaptations to a changing local environment (Bruseth 1987; Bruseth et al. 1987). Cultigens appear in the archeological
record after 650 years B.P., but only as a supplement to a subsistence economy
based on the exploitation of wild plant and animal resources. While artifacts
diagnostic of the Paleoindian and Early Archaic periods are known from surface
collections and mixed contexts, there is currently a lack of isolable site components attributable to these periods in the Middle Trinity River basin.
The frequent use of high quality, non-local lithic materials is considered
characteristic of the Paleoindian period in North Central Texas (Lynott 1981:101),
and for North America in general (e.g., Goodyear 1979; Meltzer 1984). This
pattern of raw material use is interpreted most often as evidence that Paleoindian
adaptations were characterized by high settlement mobility over very large territories. The sample of Pisgah Ridge chert points assignable to the Late Paleoindian
period is too limited to allow definite conclusions on raw material use. However, it

260

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Arrow Points from Sites in North Central Texas Made from Pisgah Ridge Chert:
(a----c) 41FF201, (d, e) 41NV182, (f) 41NV171, (g) N33, (h--j) 41NV203.

Dallas

/
kilometers
LEGEND

P = Paleoindian Point
C = Contracting Stem Dart
S - Straight Stem Dart
E = Expanding Stem Dart
A = Arrow

f= Tehauacana Limetone Outcrops
O = Known Source of Pisgah Ridge Chert
Extent of Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributioa
Middle Archaic Period
Transitional Archaic Period
............................... Late Prehistoric Period

Figure 6. Locations of Sites Containing Projectile Points Made from Pisgah Ridge Chert
Showing Decrease in Areal Distribution Over Time.

McGregorE Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

261

probably is significant that the San Patrice and Dalton specimens from Lake Fork
Reservoir were the farthest found from the known source of all the projectile
points documented by this study. A relatively high degree of settlement mobility
may be indicated for this early time period. In addition, the reworking of Dalton
point blades is thought to be a trait common to this type (Goodyear 1974) mad
indicates a relatively long uselife for that particular Pisgah Ridge chert specimen
(see Figure 3a).
Although better known than the preceding time periods, the Middle and Late
Archaic occupation of the Middle Trinity River basin is not well documented nor
adequately dated. The features and low artifact densities at stratified alluvial sites
of this time span suggest a series of short-term occupations by small huntergatherer groups. It is suspected that the higher artifact densities found at geologically stable terrace sites represent composites of numerous, short-term occupations.
The distribution of expanding stem dart points made from Pisgah Ridge chert may
indicate that group territories were still large enough to include more than one of
the major river drainages of the region.
In contrast, the distribution of the contracting stem dart points seems to
indicate that Transitional Archaic groups confined their settlement systems to
significantly smaller territories. This evidence is consistent with the often-noted
increase in the number of sites dating to this period and to an apparent increase in
population density (Lynott 1981:105; Story 1985:52; Bruseth et al. 1987:237;
Prikryl 1987:185). The large "Wylie" pits that appear during the Transitional
Archaic period in the Trinity River Basin have been interpreted as having functioned, at least in part, as territorial markers in a time of increasing regional
population (Bruseth 1987:245; Bruseth and Martin 1987a:283-284).
The further reduction in the spatial distribution of the Pisgah Ridge chert
arrow points may indicate even smaller territories for Late Prehistoric period
peoples when compared to the Transitional Archaic period. Increasing sedentarism
is indicated by the presence of house structures at Richland/Chambers Reservoir,
dated to around 850 years B.P. (Bruseth and Martin 1987b:166), and further
population increases have been suggested for the early portion of the Late Prehistoric period 03ruseth 1987:143). Unfortunately, the Pisgah Ridge chert arrow
point sample is small and many specimens cannot be assigned to a temporally
diagnostic type. For these reasons, their distribution offers little insight into
possible variations in territorial size for the three temporal phases that have been
defined for the Late Prehistoric period in North Central Texas (Bruseth et al.
1987:240-247).
CONCLUSIONS

Pisgah Ridge chert is a lithic resource with a distinctive physical appearance
and limited source area, making it ideal for studies of its procurement, distribution, and utilization. The study presented in this paper has attempted to use the
spatial distribution of temporally diagnostic Pisgah Ridge chert projectile points

262

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

to identify changes through time in the relative size of prehistoric group territories.
It should be noted that the distributions shown in Figure 6 are not meant to
represent the actual territorial limits of any particular prehistoric social groups.
Rather, they are thought to provide only a relative measure of group territories
during the temporal periods represented.
The results of this study are interpreted as indicating a progressive reduction
in group territorial size through time. While artifacts of Paleoindian and Early
Archaic age were too limited in number to allow det’mite conclusions, it is notable
that two projectile points diagnostic of the Late Paleoindian period were located
farthest from the known source of Pisgah Ridge chert of all the artifacts documented by this study. Aside from those two specimens, expanding stem (Middle
and Late Archaic) dart points were distributed farthest from the source, circumscribing an area that includes portions of the Neches and Brazos River drainages,
along with most of the Middle Trinity River Basin. Progressively smaller clusters
were formed by the distributions of the contracting stem (Transitional Archaic)
dart points and the Late Prehistoric period arrow points, respectively. It is concluded that these later groups were confined to progressively smaller territories
through time, most likely as the result of increasing population pressures and the
intensification of adaptive slrategies.
These results are consistent with other lines of archeological evidence from
this region. Several previous studies of North Central Texas lithic assemblages
have indicated that raw material utilization became increasingly localized during
the Holocene (Crook and Harris 1952:24, 27; Grady 1978; McGregor 1987a;
Prikryl 1987:185-186), and reductions through time in territorial size have been
inferred. The results of the present study complement those of earlier studies and
provide a visual illustration of the relative changes that may have been involved in
these changes in territorial size.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Many people have helped in gathering the information reported in this paper.
Most important to me has been the continuing interest and advice of Bill Young. I
especially thank Bill for the many field trips and for the long-term loan of artifacts
from his well-documented collection. Others who provided important information
include Larry Banks, Ross Fields, Dave Jurney, Tim Perttula, Duane Peter, Joe
Saunders, Dee Ann Story, and Billy Tallant. David Meltzer and Garth Sampson
provided valuable comments on earlier versions of major parts of this paper. I
thank my wife, Bridget, for editing the manuscript and for her computer expertise.
My interest in Pisgah Ridge chert developed during my participation in Southem
Methodist University’s Richland Creek Archaeological Project. I thank the Principal Investigators of that project, Jim Bruseth and Mark Raab, for encouraging me
to pursue my research interests in a contract setting. The work at Richland/
Chambers Reservoir was funded by the Tarrant County Water Control and Improvement District, No.1.

McGregor m Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

263

REFERENCES CITED
Bamforth, D. B.
1986
Technological Efficiency and Tool Curation. Amer&an Antiquity 51(1):3850.
Binford, L. R.
Interassemblage Variability- the Mousterian and the ’Functional Argument.’
1973
In: Explanation of Culture Change: Models in Prehistory, edited bY C.
Renfrew. pp. 227-254. Duckworth, London.
1979

Organization and Formation Processes: Looking at Curated Technologies.
Journal of Anthropological Research 35:255-273.

1983

In Pursuit of the Past: Decoding the Archaeological Record. Thames and
Hudson, New York.

Binford, L. R., and N. M. Stone
1985
"Righteous Rocks" and Richard Gould: Some Observations on Misguided
Debate. American Antiquity 50:151-153.
Bruseth, J. E.
1987
Late Holocene Environmental Change and Human Adaptive Strategies in
Northeast Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University.
Bruseth, J. E., and W. A. Martin
1987a The Wylie Focus: Cultural Reality or Archaeological Myth? In: The Bird
Point Island and Adams Ranch Sites: Methodological and Theoretical Contributionsto North Central Texas Archaeology, edited by J. E. Bruseth and
W. A. Martin, pp. 267-284. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume II,
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
1987b

Chronological Assessment: the Culture-Historical Framework. In: The Bird
Point Island and Adams Ranch Sites: Methodological and Theoretical Contributions to North Central Texas Archaeology, edited by J. E. Bruseth and
W. A. Martin, pp. 159-167. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume ]],
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

1987c

(editors) The Bird Point Island and Adams Ranch Sites: Methodological and
Theoretical Contributions to North Central Texas Archaeology. Richland
Creek Technical Series, Volume II, Archaeology Research Program, Southem Methodist University, Dallas.

Bruseth, J. E, D. E. McGregor, and W. A. Martin
1987
Hunter-Gatherers of the Prairie Margin: Summary of the Prehistoric Archaeological Record. In: Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along the Prairie
Margin: Site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology, edited
by D. E. McGregor and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 229-256. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume III, Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

264

Texas Archeological Society

Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R. G. Holloway
1985
Late Quaternary paleoenvironmental Record of Texas. In: Pollen Records of
Late Quaternary North American Sediments, edited by V. M. Bryant, Jr. and
R. G. HoUoway, pp. 39-70. American Association of Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas.
Bryson, R. A., D. A. Baerreis, and W. M. Wendland
1970
The Character of Late-Glacial and Post-Glacial Climatic Changes. In: Pleistocene and Recent Enviromnents of the Central Great Plains, edited by W.
Dort, Jr. and J. K. Jones, Jr., pp. 54-74. Special Publication No. 3, Department of Geology, University of Kansas, Lawrence.
Byrd, C. L.
Origin and History of the Uvalde Gravels of Central Texas. Baylor Geologi1971
cal Studies Bulletin 20, Baylor University, Waco.
Crook, W. W., Jr., and R. K. Harris
1952
Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: Carrollton and Elam Foci. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 23:7-38.
Drass, R. R., and P. Flyrm
Temporal and Geographic Variations in Subsistence Practices for Plains
1990
Villagers in the Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 35 (128): 175-190.
Duffield, L. F.
1959
The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 30:51-116.
Ebert, J. I., and T. A. Kohler
The Theoretical Basis of Archaeological Predictive Modeling and a Consid1988
eration of Appropriate Data-Collection Methods. In: Quantifying the Present
and Predicting the Past: Theory, Method, and Application of Archaeological Predictive Modeling, edited by W. J. Judge and L. Sebastian, ]pp. 97-171.
U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management Service Center, Denver.
Ferring, C. R.
Late Quaternary Geology and Environments in the Upper Trinity Basin. In:
1986
An Assessment of the Cultural Resources of the Upper Trinity Basin, Dallas,
Tarrant, and Denton Counties, Texas, edited by B. C. Yates and C. R.
Ferring, pp. 32-112. Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.
1990

Archaeological Geology of the Southern Plains. In: Archaeological Geology
of North America, edited by N. P. Lasca and J. Donahue, pp. 253-266.
Centennial Special Volume 4, Geological Society of America, Boulder.

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

265

Goodyear, A. C.
1974
The Brand Site: A Techno-Functional Study of a Dalton Site in Northeast
Arkansas. Research Series No. 7, Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.
1979

A Hypothesis for the Use of Cryptocrystalline Raw Materials among PaleoIndian Groups of North America. Research Manuscr~vt Series No. 156,
Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of South Carolina,
Columbia.

Gould, R. A., and S. Saggers
1985
Lithic Procurement in Central Australia: a Closer Look at Binford’s Idea of
Embeddedness in Archaeology. American Antiquity 50:117-136.
Orady, M. A.
1978
Considerations of the Texas Archaic Interaction Sphere. Paper presented at
the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, Tucson.
Lynott, M. J.
1979
Prehistoric Bison Populations of Northcentral Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 50:89-101.
1981

A Model of Prehistoric Adaptation in Northern Texas. Plains Anthropologist
26(92):97-110.

Mallouf, R. J.
1981
A Case Study of Plow Damage to Chert Artifacts: the Brookeen Creek
Cache, Hill County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Reports No. 33,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
MaUouf, R. J., and B. J. Baskin
1976
Archeological Surveys in the Tehuacana Creek Watershed, Hill and
McClermen Counties, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Survey Report
No. 19, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
McGregor, D. E.
1987a Lithic Raw Material Utilization. In: Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along the
Prairie Margin: Site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology,
edited by D. E. McGregor and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 185-195, Richland Creek
Technical Series, Volume 1II, Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
1987b

Late Quaternary Geology and its Archaeological Implications. In: Introduction to the Richland Creek Project: Environmental Background and Cultural
Setting, edited by J. E. Bruseth and R. W. Moir, pp. 55-58. Richiand Creek
Technical Series, Volume I, Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

266

Texas Archeological Society

McGregor, D. E., and J. E. Bruseth
1987a (editors) Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along the Prairie Margin: Site Excarations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology. Richland Creek Technical
Series, Volume hi, Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
1987b

Artifact Chronology. In: Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along the Prairie
Margin: Site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology, edited
by D. E. McGregor and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 171-184. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume m, Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

Meltzer, D.
On Stone Tool Procurement and Settlement Mobility in Eastern Fluted Point
1984
Groups. North American Archaeologist 6(1): 1-23.
Menzer, F. J., and B. H. Slaughter
Upland Gravels in Dallas County and Their Bearing on the Former Extent of
1971
the High Plains Physiographic Province. Texas Journal of Science 22(23):217-222.
O’Brien, M. J.
1987
Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource Selection in the Woodland
Midwest: A Review of Coevolutionary Developments. Current Anthropology 28(2):177-197.
Peter, D. E., and D. E. McGregor (editors)
1988
Late Holocene Prehistory of the Mountain Creek Drainage. Joe Pool Lake
Archaeological Project, Volume I, Archaeology Research Program, Southem Methodist University, Dallas.

Prikryl, D. J.
A Synthesis of the Prehistory of the Lower Elm Fork of the Trinity River.
1987
Unpublished M.A. Thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.

1990

Lower Elm Fork Prehistory. Office of the State Archeologist Report No. 37,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Schiffer, M. B.
1975
The Effects of Occupation Span on Site Content. In: The Cache River
Project: an Experiment in Contract Archaeology, assembled by M. B.
Schiffer and J. H. House, pp. 265-269. Research Series No. 8, Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Sharer, H. J.
Archeological Investigations at the Attaway Site, Henderson County, Texas.
1981
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:147-178.
Story, D. A.
Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the ’,Vest Gulf Coastal Plain. In:
1985
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19-

McGregor m Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

267

56. Anthropological Papers 75, Museum of Anthropology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.
1990

Cultural History of the Native Americans. In" The Archeology and
Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, Volume 1, by D. A. Story, J. A.
Guy, M. D. Freeman, B. A. Bumett, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,
and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Story, D. A., J. A. Guy, D. G. Steele, B. A. Bumett, and M. D. Freeman
1990
Gulf Coastal Plain Adaptation Types: A Preliminary Statement. In: The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, Volume 2, by D.
A. Story, J. A. Guy, M. D. Freeman, B. A. Bumett, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele,
B. W. 0live, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 425-434. Research Series No. 38,
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Tunnell, C. D.
1979
The Gibson Lithic Cache from West Texas. Office of the State Archeologist
Report No. 30, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Wendland, W. M.
1978
Holocene Man in North America: The Ecological Setting and Climatic
Background. Plains Anthropologist 23(82):273-287.

