AN UNUSUAL HISTORIC INDIAN
HOUSE SITE IN WASHINGTON
COUNTY, TEXAS
By

ROBERT

A.

HASSKARL, JR.

The Landua Site (53C6-1) is situated at Long. 96° 36’ and
Lat. 30° 15’. It is 2.8 miles north of farm-to-market road number
390 and 3.5 miles north of Burton, Washington County, Texas.
The writer would like to acknowledge the help and co-operation of Mrs. Louis Landua, Kiel Landua for his help in the
excavation, and Dr. T. N. Campbell of The University of Texas,
Department of Anthropology.
Information concerning this report is from material from the
excavation and from people of the area who were contemporary
with the Indians who occupied the house. All direct quotations
in this report were given to the writer by Mrs. Louis Landua.
Mrs. Landua was a small girl when these Indians lived on their
farm, and she remembers some incidents about them. Other
ethnographic information about them was supplied by her older
sister.
The site was located by Kiel Landua and the writer in August,
1955. Evidence of occupation was easily recognized by the presence of a low mound, rectangular in shape. A controlled excavation of the entire mound was then done.
The Indians who occupied this house came to the area in 1845,
and remained there until 1884. It is known that they came from
the "west." They were "Texas Indians, Comanches." The family
consisted of a man, his wife, and a son, reported as "not walking yet," when they moved to the Landua farm. No data is available about the son after 1865.
Site Description. The house remains are located on a white,
sandy ridge overlooking the junction of three unnamed creeks,
whose waters eventually flow into Kerr creek. The ridge at the
time of its occupation by the Indians was covered by a medium

B

/

/

/

/
/

/
/
/

/
/
/
/
/

/

O
A
Fig. 56.

Plan of historic Indian house at the Landua Site.

~5
L,O

0
¢H
0

o
Q;
0

0

Z

An Unusual Histo~’ic Indian House Site

235

growth of timber, mostly cedars and oaks. Convenience to water
and game seem to have been primary factors in its selection.
House Type (Figs. 56, 57). The house was rectangular, the
sides being oriented approximately toward the cardinal directions, and the entrance was on the east. The house was a singleroom structure, 22~ feet by 16 feet. A wall approximately 15
inches high was around the base of the entire structure. This
wall was constructed of native odd-shaped stones held together
by an adobe-like mortar. Mrs. Landua states that "they dug
deep into the ground and got red clay, mixed it with creek water,
weeds, and small rocks; then put it on the stones in the heat of
the day to dry."
The only intact section of the original wall was found on the
east side, and this section had a length of 7 feet. The base line
of the north wall still exists. The top rocks have eroded away
and have been scattered. Only fragments remain of the west
and south walls.
The post molds in the floor indicate that the house had a
large center pole, approximately one foot in diameter at the
base. There were four small corner posts. Post mold diameters
were 6 inches or less. The Indians asked permission to cut timber
for these posts. This was granted "because they wanted only
small trees."
The roof and four walls above the rock wall were covered with
bison skins which the Indians had brought with them. The hides
were spread over the poles and were packed with a mixture of
wet clay and weeds. It is not clear whether some sort of latticing
supported the bison hides. "The house did not leak and it looked
like a small hill." The door was oval in shape and covered with
a hide flap. The base of the door was on top of the stone wall.
There was no smoke hole nor any storage bins. The floor was
hard-packed, natural soil and was below surface level.
Livelihood and Culture. Dependence was on hunting and food
gathering. The man had a "very strong bow" and "several
spears." The Indians had no firearms of any type. Animals
hunted were rabbits, squirrels, and small birds. They ate various

236

Texas Archeological Society

nuts, berries, and herbs. The Indians never worked on anyone’s
farm, but the man did occasionally help Mrs. Rosenbaum during
the Civil War while Mr. Rosenbaum was in the service. His help
was confined to work in her corn field. The Indian was paid in
bread. On many occasions the Landuas gave the Indians corn,
which the wife "chopped with a steel knife and made into a
corn meal bread, which was very good." Many times milk was
obtained from the Landuas for the baby. It was carried in cans
and was diluted before giving to the small child. The wife also
asked for and received a blanket for the baby.
The Indians, during their entire stay, burned a tallow candle
in their house every night, all night. No apparent reason for
this act is known to the writer.
Both adults spoke only a few words of English. They were
described as being "not afraid of white men, but were very
polite. They never stole anything; they would always ask for
everything, not just take it." From all indications they desired
to be left alone.
The interior of their house was described as "fairly clean."
All members of the family slept on the ground. The wife and
the baby slept on the south side and the husband on the north
side of the house. Their beds were made of dry weeds. The
baby’s bed was covered with a bison skin, and other kinds of
skins covered the adults’ beds. The man kept his bow and spears
by his bed. He is also reported to have had "two stone headed
axes with wooden handles."
All cooking was done out-of-doors, over an open fire. The only
cooking utensil owned was a large, heavy iron skillet that was
used for all their cooking. The fireplace was located approximately six yards east of the house door. Excavation revealed
that this fireplace was circular (3 feet, 9 inches in diameter)
and lined with native, odd-shaped hearth stones. No artifacts
were associated with the hearth.
Clothing. The child wore no clothes. The woman wore a
straight dress of ankle-length with cut-out neck and arm holes.
The dress was made of rough, tan cloth. She wore a braided

An Unusual Historic Indian House Site

237

belt made of grasses. The man wore a sleeveless shirt, breechcloth, and leggings that were tied to the breech-cloth. The breechcloth and leggings were made of tanned skin. The shirt was
made of the same rough, tan cloth as the woman’s dress. Both
adults wore home-made shoes. The soles were made from a single
piece of wood, to which cords of grass were tacked for tying to
the foot.
The adults are described as having worn their "long, black
hair braided down the back. Both adults wore feathers at all
times in their hair, but neither used paint on their bodies at
any time."
In winter the adults covered themselves with "large, black
robes." These possibly were bison skins. The Indians never wore
any type of head covering.
Artifacts (Fig. 58). All artifacts were found in the loose earth
in the center of the floor of the house. One Harrell arrow point
was excavated (Fig. 58, C). This is the second point of this type
found in this area, the other being found at 53C5-1 in Lee
County, Texas, approximately 6 miles Northwest of the Landua
site.
One Marcos point was excavated ( Fig. 58, A). This is a
common dart point, and has a wide distribution in this county.
Also one unnamed dart point was located, which is possibly a
re-chipped point (Fig. 58, B). These three projectile points vary
in workmanship, but all are fairly well chipped points. One
T-shaped drill was excavated which was very well worked and
made of white quartz (Fig. 58, D).
One bolas weight was found (Fig. 58, F). It is made of white
quartz with a groove cut around the center. The quartz of
which it is made is not native to this region. This is the first
bolas weight known to be found in Washington County. Three
sherds of pottery were excavated (Fig. "58, E). The pottery is
plain, wheelmade crockery of recent date with an external glaze.
Ten specimens of iron nails were found throughout the excavation. Several were bent, and all were badly rusted. They were
possibly used in the house construction.

Fig. 58. Artifacts from the Landua Site. A, Marcos point, B, Unnamed
point. C, Harrell point. D, drill. E, potsherd. F, Bolas weight.

An Unusual Historic Indian House Site

239

Summary and Conclusions. In 1884 the two adults (taking
down their house) left this site at night. With the exception of
their iron skillet, all possessions were moved. Since they owned
no horses or dogs, it must be assumed that all goods were
carried by themselves. "Their reason for leaving was not known,
nor did anyone know their anticipated destination."
The artifacts of this site range from Archaic to Historic. It
is entirely reasonable that the Indians that occupied this house
did not make any of these artifacts, but the Indians probably
collected the artifacts either before their arrival at the Landua
farm or during their stay there.
Due to the presence of cattle in the field in which the house
is located, the excavation was carefully covered. Nothing was
removed or destroyed in regard to the structure. The writer
does not believe that there is sufficient evidence to definitely
establish that the Indians who occupied this house were Comanches. It is safe to assume that they were the last semi-permanent Indians in Washington County; however, other Indians
are known to have been in Washington County at this time.
"A late hour last night five Comanche Indians disguised as ’cowboys’ rode up Sandy Street yelling in regular Indian war whoop
style and waking up sleeping citizens. Perpetrators of this outrage could be caught and should be fined $25 and costs, each
might then be induced to keep quiet in the future." (Brenham
Daily Banner, Brenham, Texas, September 9, 1879) "A band
of Indians are encamped near town trafficking and fortune telling with the negroes" (Ibid., August 23, 1884).
This historic site is unique because there is ethnographic
information to accompany the archaeological work done here.
The site represents a fairly complete picture of the culture of
these Indians who were in the process of acculturation, and
who were very strongly affected by the diffusion of two cultures
--their own and that of the white man.
P. O. Box 696
Brenham, Texas

