Paleo-Indian Blades From Western Oklahoma
HALLETT H.

HA~lVIATT

ABSTRACT
Two known Paleo-Indian sites in western Oklahoma have been yielding

prismatic blades from unstratified deposits. It is suggested, on the basis of
stratified parallels, that these blades and others of the same description
belong to the Paleo-Indian period. These artifacts would have been admirably suited for use as butchering tools and would have formed as important
a part of the Paleo-Indian economy as the characteristic projectile points.
It is shown that there are causal relationships between certain characteristics
of the blades, and that a substantial degree of skill and knowledge would
be required for their manufacture.

In the past few years the archaeological evidence has been disclosing, in addition to projectile points, a variety of new tool types which
must have formed an everyday part of the economy of the PaleoIndian period.
Common to all stone using hunters throughout the world is the
need for tools and weapons to kill the prey, butcher the meat and
prepare the skin for clothing. Their tool and weapon types have been
designed to meet these three basic needs. Can one assume that the
types which the Paleo-Indian hunter developed to fulfill these three
needs were any less specialized in shape and function than those of
other stone using hunting cultures? The various kinds of Paleo-Indian
proectile points compare quite favorably in specialization of manufacturing technique and form to the finest of the European Upper Paleolithic. Such points, of course, could only have been used to slay the
hunted animal. But what of the tools developed by the Paleo-Indian
hunter to butcher the meat and cut and prepare the skin? Surely, we
can assume the force of ingenuity in the deve!opment of scrapers and
butchering knives to be equal to that which produced the projectile
points.
The possibility of a solution to the problem of how and with what
the Paleo-Indian hunter butchered his prey was most dramatically
presented by the discovery of a cache of twenty-six prismatic blades
with a number of massive core chopping tools and disc shape choppers
in Caddo County, Oklahoma (Hammatt, American Antiquity: in
press). In an attempt to assign this cache of artifacts to one particular
period of American prehistory, one was struck by the obvious parallels
presented by the discovery of a similar group of blades at the Clovis
Site in New Mexico. These blades were assigned to the Llano culture
both on the evidence of the stratigraphic position of the find in the

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICALSO~ETY

Crey Sand (Bed 2) of the gravel pit, as well as on the evidence of
other stratified parallels ( Green 1963:157).
In addition, western OHahoma has yielded new evidence that these
uniformly manufactured blades belong to the Paleo-Indian period.
Two canyons in the same area, which have been known for many
years to contain Paleo-Indian deposits, have yielded prismatic blades
of exactly the same description as those mentioned above. One, Cedar
Creek, on the eastern edge of Washita County, north of the town of
Carnegie, has been yielding Paleo-Indian projectile points of varied
styles for many years and is known to contain late Pleistocene deposits. Seven of the blades illustrated (Fig. 1 a-g) were discovered by
Dan Base of Apache, Oklahoma over a period of many years of collecting in the stream bed and associated gravels. The other, Domebo
Creek, in Caddo County was the scene of a full scale excavation in
1962, of Oklahoma’s first mammoth kill site (Leonhardy 1966). Since
that time, the creek bed has been continuously yielding evidence of
Paleo-Indian occupation in the form of Mammoth bones and projectile points. One blade (Fig. 1, h) was found in the Domebo stream
channel downstream from the excavation site.
It is clear that the manufacture of prismatic blades of such description would be backed by a long tradition of well developed stone
working techniques, every bit as standardized as that required for the
production of the various styles of projectile points.
The preparation of the core is the first and most essential step. The
striking platform would have been made from the top of the core most
probably by the removal of a small horizontal flake perpendicular to
the long axis of the blade to be struck. In order to produce a blade
with parallel sides and uniform thickness, at least one ridge must be
made on the side of the core which will run the full length of the
subsequent blade. The ridge or ridges form the ’~backbone" of the
blade and determine the length, width, thickness and shape of the
finished product. In the illustrated examples, there is a definite correlation between the curve of the central ridge or ridges and the curve
of one of the sides of the blades. The lines of the sides follow the
meanderings of the central ridges. This is especially noticeable in
Figure 1 band Figure 1 f.
Without the "backbone" ridge, the force applied to the top of the
core would spread and result in a flake with non-parallel sides, whose
width would be greater than the length. Therefore, the presence of
such a ridge is the most important single characteristic in determining
the difference between a blade and a flake (Crabtree 1968:464).
Obviously, the successful extraction of each successive blade from

PALEO-INDIAN BLADES

195

121

.... .t

L

C
.... lbCM.’
’

i

h
FIG. 1. Paleo-Indian Blades £rom western Oklahoma, Washita and Caddo
Counties (all blades are illustrated with the striking platform or proximal
end at the top).

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

the core would leave straight ridges on the side of the core which
would serve as "backbones" for the removal of more blades. However, before the first blades were removed from each core, or, if
through some miscalculation, a later attempt at blade extraction went
aniiss and left eccentric side ridges on the cores, then, new ridges
would have to be carefully shaped by lateral flaking. The resulting
ridge would have a jagged, uneven appearance, very different from
the normal ridges. In spite of the unevenness, if the flaking was done
carefully the resulting blade would still have relatively parallel sides.
Figure 1 b and Figure 1 d are blades with ridges which have been
shaped with lateral flaking on the cores. The bottom segment of the
ridge of another of the blades (Fig. 1 e) has also been shaped by
lateral flaking. It is, of course, important to keep the steepness of the
ridges at a fixed angle along the whole length of the side of the core,
because the width of the blade varies in accordance with the angle
that the two longitudinal planes adjacent to the ridges make with one
another. The larger the angle of these planes, the wider will be the
resulting blade.
The main characteristics of the blades under discussion have been
recorded in table form (Table I). All of the examples have wear on
the edges of varying intensity. It is interesting to note that in the
examples with blunted sides (Fig. 1 a, b, e, f, g), the most noticeable
wear appears on the edge directly opposite the blunting. This would
indicate that the tool was not halted, but rather was used in the hand
with one finger pressed against the blunted portion of one side. Secondary retouch appears on all but one of the artifacts and varies from
light to heavy. The retouch was probably for the purpose of resharpening a dull edge for further use.
Proximal thinning, which is evidenced on all but one of the blades
seems to be a general characteristic of Paleo-Indian blades. After the
extraction of each blade from the core, a slight overhang on the
striking platform would be left by the natural swelling of the bulb
of percussion at the proximal end on the inside of the blade. Such
undercutting of the platform on the core must be removed by flaking
before the next blade is struck. This proximal thinning produces a
series of facets on the top inward face of the subsequent blade.
The bulbar sear is the slight indentation left in the inside of the
proximal end. The proximal lip is the small thin ridge running along
the inside of the segment of the striking platform left on the blade.
These two eharacteristics may bear some relation to the method of
manufacture, but their general significance is not known. There are,

PALEO-INDIAN

197

BLADES

of course, too few examples in this case to establish a causal relationship among an), of the artifact characteristics listed in Table I.
TABLE I
Characteristics of Blades
Blade

figure 1--

Provenance

b

a

e

d

e

f

g

h

Cedar
Creek

Cedar
Creek

Cedar
Creek

Cedar
Creek

Cedar
Creek

Cedar
Creek

Cedar Domebo
Creek

Length in cm.

10.2

9

i0.6

8.2

10.3

9.2

Width in cm.

4.7

3.6

3.5

2.2

3.3

2.9

3.6

3.2

Thickness in era.

1.3

1.2

1.4

1.3

1.1

1.4

1.1

1

Presence of wear
on edges
Y=yes

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

--

_

y

Y

h

1

in

1

--

in

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

--

--

--

Y

--

--

Y

11

8.6

--~---no

Blunting
Y=yes
--~no

Secondary retouch

l=light
111 = medium
h=heavy
Proximal thinning
Y=yes

y

--~-no

Bulbar sear
Y=yes
--zno

Proximal lip
Y=yes
~no

Striking platform
in degrees

128

110

115

125

105

105

In general then, the manufacture of prismatic blades such as these is
not purely the result of trial and error, but rather of an understanding
of the cause and effect relationships existing between the core, the
side ridges and the finished product. With the comprehension of these
relationships, the shape of the resulting blade can be anticipated with
a reasonable degree of accuracy, producing a form which, in its way,
is evely bit as specialized as the various kinds of Paleo-Indian projectile points.

198

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ACKNOWLEDCEMENTS
I wish to thank Mr. Dan Base of Apache, Oklahoma for his cooperation and
kindness in lending parts of his artifact collection to the Museum of the Great
Plains. I also wish to thank Mr. Marvin E. Tong, Jr. for his guidance and criticism.

REFERENCES CITED
Crabtree, D.
1968 Meso-American Polyhedral Cores and Prismatic Blades. American
Antiquity, Vol. 33, No. 4, pp. 446-478. Salt Lake City.
Green, F. E.
1963 The Clovis Blades: An hnportant Addition to the Llano Complex.
American Antiquity, Vol. 29, No. 2: 145-165. Salt Lake City.
Leonhardy, Frank
1966 Domebo: A Paleo-Indian Mammoth Kill on the Prairie-Plains. Contributions of the Museum of the Great Plains, No. 1. Lawton, Oklahoma.
Museum of the Great Plains
Lawton, Oklahoma

