Foreword
The first group dig organized by the Texas Areheologieal Society
was held in the summer of 1962 at the Gilbert Site, an 18th-eentury
Nortefio Focus site on the upper Sabine tliver in northeastern Texas.
The Dallas Areheologieal Society was a co-sponsor.
The editor of this report directed the dig. tt. K. Harris, representing the Dallas Areheologieal Society, was assistant director. The Texas
Archeologieal Society provided funds for miscellaneous expenses.
The University of Texas Department of Anthropology fmmished camp
and excavation equipment.
Professional archeologists who helped supervise the field work were:
Mardith K. Sehuetz of the Witte Memorial Museum and three University of Texas archeologists- E. Mott Davis, Lathel F. Duffield,
and Dee Ann Story. Society members who participated were: Mr.
and Mrs. Harold Akins, Mr. and Mrs. G. L. Allen, Jr., Kent Askins,
Dr. and Mrs. J. Frank Autry, Byron L. Barber, Mr. and Mrs. Jay C.
Blaine, Charles N. Bollieh, Mr. and Mrs. William P. Caskey, Mr. and
Mrs. Herschel Cobb, Mr. and Mrs. Joe F. Cochran, Robert O. Coleman,
Kathleen Gilmore, Sally Gilmore, Clyde Grauke, M. Charles Grauke,
Mr. and Mrs. Loyd Harper, Loyd Harper, Jr., Robert K. Harris, Jr.,
Mr. and Mrs. Bill L. Hayes, Dale Hoffriehter, Dawn Hoffriehter, Mr.
and Mrs. Wally B. Hoffriehter, Mark Huff, Jr., Mr. and Mrs. Griffin
King, Isabelle Lobdell, Mr. and Mrs. Paul Lon’ain, W. T. Lowthorp,
Lorraine McGraw, Mr. McMahon, J. W. MeManus, Edward Moonnan,
Charles Nemee, J. Parker Nunley, tloy Padgett, Ray Parker, Mr. and
Mrs. Mark Parsons, Charlotte Pennington, Mr. and Mrs. Herman
tlhoads, Mr. and Mrs. Win. tl. Royal, Andre Sehuetz, ttoy Schuetz,
Stuart Sehuetz, Mr. and Mrs. Dan Scurlock, Mr. and Mrs. D. J.
Smelley, C. A. Smith, Jr., Mr. and Mrs. Robert L. Tapseott, tlobert
Turner, Jr., Bobby Vance, Bob Weaver, Donny Weaver, Timmy Weaver, Mr. and Mrs. Lester Wilson, Bill Wisdom, Bill E. Yaney.
This first effort at a society-sponsored field project was planned and
conducted as a professionally directed excavation employing society
members to do the work. It was not a field school, nor was its purpose
to train amateurs how to dig: whatever was learned about field techniques by the participants was incidental to tile primal7 objective of
getting the site excavated. However, on-the-job training was provided
in excavation and recording techniques whenever possible, as well as
in cleaning and processing specimens. And everyone was invited to
participate in the discussion of field problems as they arose.

iv

TEXAS A1RCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

After the field work was completed, the specimens from the excavation were washed and cataloged at The University of Texas and were
then transferred to Dallas, where the analysis of materials and writing
of the first draft of a report were accomplished during the winter of
1962-1963, principally by members of the Dallas Areheologieal Society
but with some assistance from members of the Tan’ant County
Areheologieal Society.
In planning the report an outline comprising 10 major sections was
prepared, and the writing of each was assigned to a team of amateurs
headed by a professional who was to serve as coordinator. Some of the
people originally assigned to the teams did no work at all, while in
some instances people who were not included in the original assignments became active team members and contlSbuted substantially to
the report. But despite the shuffling of team members, the first drafts
of all sections were completed, remarkably, on schedule.
The sections of manuscript were turned in to R. K. Harris, who
made editorial changes, assembled the manuscript, and passed the
whole along to the editor who-along with the other professional
archeologists assigned to the report-was then at The University of
Texas in Austin. Each professional edited the section or sections for
which he was coordinator and returned them to the editor. This took
considerable time as the professionals, by and large, were not nearly
so punctual in meeting their deadlines as were the amateurs.
The editor, meantime, moved from Austin to Dallas, where he
joined the faculty of Southern Methodist University. In the summer
of 1966, the manuscripts of all the sections except one (which was
being revised by one of the professionals in Austin) were edited for
spelling, grannnar, and style by Mrs. Kathleen Gilmore. Finally, all
the manuscript was collected by the editor who, with the assistance
of Mrs. Norma Hoffrichter, put it in final shape for the printer.
This report, then, is truly the creation of dozens of people, and it
is the editor’s earnest desire that all who contributed to it be given
due authorship credit. Naturally some worked longer and harder than
others. Some co-authored a brief first draft in 1962 and did nothing
more; others have labored over the fn!l five years, continually adding
new data that was coming in intermittently from the site and revising
the manuscript over and over again. There were changes in the editorial staff, too, over the years; furthermore, some editors Were responsible for sections that required only minor editing while others
found it necessary to do extensive rewriting of major sections.
In eases where one person unquestionably wrote a lion’s share of a

v

FOREWORD

section, his name is listed first in the by-line and is italicized. In all
other cases the authors of a section are listed alphabetically. Where
significant additions have been made to a section by an editor, he is
included as a co-author of the section.
In all the confusion it is quite possible that someone’s name that
should have been included was left off, or that someone who by rights
should have been listed as senior author of a section will find his
name in the middle, or even at the end, of the by-line. If such a mistake
has been made, the editor, who is solely responsible, begs forgiveness
and offers assurances that the oversight was entirely inadvertent.
Special acknowledgment is due the following:
John C. Gilbert, Lennon Gilbert, J. T. Henry, C. L. Lennon, and
Jewell MeMillan, landowners who generously granted access to the
site and gave permission for the field party to excavate and to camp
on their property;
Harold Akins, who procured a large water tank for use of the field
party and kept it filled;
Hazel Gilboe, Inus Malie Harris, and Etoile Smith, who typed
most of the manuscript;
Norma Hoffrichter, Sherry Humphreys, and Linda Smith, who
photographed the artifacts;
Marcia McGee, Jay C. Blaine, Diana Lon’ain, and Paul Lorrain,
who prepared the line drawings;
Kathleen Gilmore, who identified the material from which the
stone pipes were made;
B. J. Scull and Stanley B. MeCaleb, Sun Oil Company, who identified minerals in pottery by petrographic and X-ray defraetion analysis:
1t. E. Forrester, who determined the metallic constituents of a finger
ring;
Joel Shiner, who permitted use of his unpublished data on gun
parts excavated at Fort Frederiea, St. Simons, Georgia.
EDWARD g. JELKS

July, 1967

