RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE AVOCATIONAL ARCHEOLOGIST

Jimmy L. Mitchell

ABSTRACT
The responsibilities of avocational archeologists for reporting their findings in
local, state, and regional publications are discussed, and suggestions are made for
ways in which avocational archeologists can secure assistance in report writing.

In 1980, Kathleen Gilmore, then president of the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA), asked me to serve on a special CTA committee to improve the
relationship between professional and amateur archeologists in Texas, an issue
of concern to many archeologists (cf. Hester 1981). The committee met in
early 1981 and drafted a variety of proposals, including a suggestion that the
term avocational archeologist be used in lieu of amateur or nonprofessional.
The recommendations were summarized by Kerza Prewitt and presented to the
April 1981 CTA meeting in Austin (Prewitt et al. 1981). After considerable
discussion, some of the recommendations were reported out to the CTA membership for action (Mitchell 1981; Prewitt 1981). The objectives of the project
were in large measure met, and some of the recommendations were implemented; for example, CTA invited TAS to send representatives to the 1983
CTA meetings (Spock 1983:9).
While many of the professional’s responsibilities have been spelled out in
forums such as the CTA, there has not been much discussion of the reciprocal
responsibilities of the avocational archeologist in the recent literature. However, Hester has noted that "It is thus the job of the avocational archeologist
to develop and carry out a variety of activities at the local level," some of which
include: (1) protection and preservation of sites, (2) dissemination of information about archeology to fellow laymen, (3) salvage of resources threatened by
destruction, and (4) continuing site survey programs to fill in gaps in regional
knowledge (Hester 1981:29).
Hester’s list seems to me to be incomplete. There are a number of other areas
where avocational archeologists can make significant contributions, including
report writing for regional publications, the TAS newsletter, and the annual
TAS Bulletin. Some avocational archeologists have become well known as
authors; Jim Word, for example, made major contributions to Texas archeology through his work at Baker Cave and the Floydada Country Club site.
While most of us like to dig, analyze, speculate, and read, many of us do not
like to write about what we have done. Yet, such written and published reports
are absolutely essential to expanding our knowledge of our region and of Texas
archeology in general. We need new data and reports to test our own understanding of prehistory and to help us develop new ideas. Without a continuing

Bulletin of the TexasArcheologicalSociety

5 3:199-201

200

Texas Archeological Society

flow of new information, we run the risk of becoming complacent in our thinking and smugly self-satisfied that we know all there is to know about prehistoric
Texas.
Often, avocational archeologists hesitate to write for fear that others know
more about archeology than they do. They do not want to embarrass themselves. Certainly, someone who has a formal education in archeology should
have a good, general background knowledge of the various regions of the state;
however, there is no substitute for field experience and specific knowledge of
the sites in your area. Only with such intimate knowledge of the work done can
one have any hope of fully understanding the developments in a specific county
or region. Thus, you, the avocational archeologist, are capable of analyzing and
reporting on your particular area and how it relates to other sites in the region.
Every individual has a unique perspective and understanding of local and state
archeology, and every different perspective has its own unique value.
Archeology is a science where the avocational individual can make a real
contribution (Mitchell 1982). One of the strengths of archeology as a science
is that it is perhaps the only science where one can make a very significant
contribution, regardless of specific educational background. Any one of us can
do a site report; can recognize the artifacts that are common or unusual to our
area and report them; can develop ideas about how the prehistoric people in
our area lived and worked, and offer up that idea for comment by others. Any
one of us can be sensitive to the land we live in-where the game, wood, and
water are-and figure out the best camping areas. Any one of us can have an
unusual insight or see a correlation of occurrences in the sites we know, and any
one of us can come up with some significant new understanding of what was
going on here centuries ago.
I have had the pleasure of working with a number of avocational archeologists
in recent years who have exceptional talents and archeological skills but who
were just too shy to want to be authors. With a little advice and assistance, some
have become excellent writers and have authored a variety of high-quality reports. I am convinced that almost every TAS member has one or more interesting and exciting artifacts, or concepts that they could and should report. And I
would urge every one of you to try your hand at writing up that interesting
thing you know, to share with the rest of us. Don’t be so shy; after all, you are
among friends. The Texas Archeological Society is composed mostly of people
just like you who are interested in hearing about what you have or what you
know; we would not be members of the society if we were not interested in
learning all we can about the archeology of the state!
There are plenty of people around who can and will help. Ask your friends.
What you will find is that almost everybody is willing to help in order to share
your information and understanding. If there is no one in your immediate area
who can help you, there is plenty of help available at the regional or state level.
Write to the president of the nearest archeological group, or to the editor of
your regional publication for help. In addition, every TA8 regional vice president would be willing to help you with your reports, or will find someone to
help you. These individuals will also help you decide the most appropriate
publication (local, regional, or state) for the information you have.
At any given TAS Field School or annual TAS meeting, only a relatively
small proportion of the membership participates. Thus, the main channel of
information for TAS members is the Bulletin and the newsletter. The way to

Mitchell-Avocational Archeologist

201

get the widest readership for your article is through these statewide publications;
the newsletter for short notes and the Bulletin for longer pieces. I would urge
each and every TAS member-particularly those in counties which have few
recorded sites and few published reports-to try writing a report for publication.
Try it; you may like it. And certainly those of us who get to read and share
your information will appreciate it. By doing such a report, you will be discharging one of the most important responsibilities of all archeologists, vocational and avocational, the responsibility for sharing information. After all,
sharing is what it’s all about!

REFERENCES CITED
Hester, Thomas R.
1981 Some observations on avocational archaeology in Texas. La Tierra
(quarterly journal of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association)
8(2):29-30.
Mitchell, Jimmy L.
1981 Avocational archaeology: a progress report. La Tierra, 8(2):30.
t982

Avocational archaeologists and Spanish missions research. Paper presented at the First Annual Research Conference on the San Antonio
Missions, on the occasion of the Fifth Annual Celebration of Semana
de las Missiones, Our Lady of the Lake University, San Antonio,
Texas, August 7, 1982.

Prewitt, Kerza A.
1981 Report of Committee on Avocational Archeology. Report submitted
to CTA members (2 pages), July 2, 1981.
Prewitt, K.A., Danny Fox, Jim Mitchell, and Steve Black
1981 Report of Committee on Avocational Archeologists.
submitted to the CTA (12 pages), March I981.

Draft report

Spock, Carolyn
1983 Council of Texas Archeologists. Texas Archeology (Newsletter of
the Texas Archeological Society) 27(1 ): 9.

