The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component
In Goliad County, Southern Texas
THOIv~AS RoY HESTER and ROBERT C. PARKER

ABSTRACT
The Berclair site, in southern Goliad Count?’, Texas, has yielded a number
of artifacts characteristic of the Late Prehistoric period of Central Texas.
These include contracted-stem arrow points, small end-scrapers, fragments
of beveled knives, and a large ceramic sample. Many of the bone-tempered
potsherds from the site exhibit evidence of coastal influence, particularly the
liberal use of asphaltum for decoration and vessel repair. Other manifestations
of intercultural contact with Gulf coast peoples are also present. An abundance of bison bone at the site suggests that it may have been a camping
place for Late Prehistoric bison-hunters £rom the Central Texas region.

INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this paper is to present data on a Late Prehistoric
(or Neo-American) pottery-bem’ing component recognized at the
Berclair site (41 GD 4) in southern Goliad County, Texas. The site
was found by the junior author and a fiSend (Jacky Branch of Betclair). They carefully collected all m’tifacts fi’om the surface after the
site had been root-plowed (see below). The materials include arrow
points, a Im’ge quanti~ of pottery, fragments of beveled knives, scrapers, and other artifacts.
THE SITE
The Berclair site (Fig. 1) is situated about 600 feet east-southeast
of Miller (or Miller’s ) Creek, and the site area slopes toward the creel<.
Miller Creek joins Blanco Creel< 1.75 miles downstream fi’om the site;
that creek forms the boundary between Bee and Goliad Counties.
Mesquite, mountain laurel, persfimnon, prickly pear, tasajillo, spanish
dagger, thistle, broom weed, and various native grasses are present on
the site and its finmediate envfl’ons.
The site itself is small, within an area of 100 by !00 feet, though the
current heavy brush cover makes a more accurate delimitation impossible. All of the site area has been root-plowed, revealing abundant
cultural remains, as well as large quantities of mammal bone, mainly
bison. A shallow, five-foot square test pit was dug by Parker and
Branch, and it showed the bone refuse to be definitely associated with
the archeologica! materials. The bone is distTibuted over all of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

THE BERCLAIR SITE

GOLIAD
scale:
mh

CO.p TEXASt
1:24OO~

7

FmURE 1. The Berclair Site (41 GD 4) and Vicinity. Inset shows location
of area within state. The 200-foot contours are shown.
site, but Parker observed that it seemed to be clustered in some areas.
Of course, any distinct concentrations of bone or cultural material
would have been disturbed by the root-plowing.

THE ENVIRONMENT
Goliad County is situated on the West Gulf Coastal Plain (Fenneman, 1938: 102). This area is on the boundary between the Texan and
Tamaulipan biotic provinces (Blair, 1950:Fig. 1). The Texan province
has a moist subhumid climate and the vegetation is prfinarily of a
prairie type. Blair states (Ibid.: 101) that "... there are no endemic
species of vertebrates. The outstanding biogeographie phenomenon
. . . is the interdigitation of forest and grassland associations". He goes
on to record 49 species of mammals occurring in the province, along
with nmnerous examples of snakes, lizards, and urodele and anuran
~auna.

The Tamaulipan province, on the other hand, has a semi-arid and
megathennal climate, with thorny brush dominating the vegetation.
This brushland extends southward into Mexico; 61 species of mammals, as well as several species of turtles, lizards, snakes and a few

BERCLAIR SITE

3

species of urodele and anuran fauna occur within the province (Blair,
1950:104).
The southern third of the countT (the portion in which 41 CD 4 is
situated) is prairie with sandy and mixed loams; the remainder of the
county is rolling, mostly timbered (Johnson, 1931). There is a thick
tree growth along the streams. Early travelers in Goliad County (from
the late 1600’s through the 1850’s) reported vast prairies covered with
grasses, and broken occasionally by scattered clumps of mesquite,
]iveoak, postoak, hackberry and blackjack (Inglis, 1964:33-34). This
prairie environment was no doubt frequented by bison in prehistoric
times, since Gatschet (1891:119) reports that bison were seen in
numbers on the centra! coast in the 17th century.
J
The geology of the area has been studied in some detail by Evans
(1940). He paid special attention to the terrace deposits of Blanco
Creek, of which Miller Creek is a major tributary. He describes the
Blanco Creek valley as follows (p. 1644):
The greater part of the older valley and its principal tributary valleys was
formed in and rests on the Goliad formation, but file lower reaches of the
valley extend across the outcrop belt of the Lissie. Near its head, the older
valley is entrenched 50 or 60 feet below the general level of the adjacent
divides. Downstream entrenchment decreases progressively until the valley
walls are no more than a few feet high. The older valley is approximately
30 miles long; the width, about 2000 feet near the head, gradually increases
to more than a mile in the lower reaches. The valley walls are mature, with
moderately gentle slopes, usually well-covered by grass and brush. The
bedrock of the valley contains channels and other minor irregularities but is
otherwise quite fiat. The width and flahless of the valley floor are evidence
that the ancestral streams continued for a long period to widen all parts of
their valleys by lateral migration of tile channel after it became graded or
nearly so.

Evans goes on to state (p. 1645) that one of the principal tributaa’ies,
Miller Creek, has a similarly developed, though smaller, valley.
THE ARTIFACTS
In this section, archeologieal materials from the Berclair site will
be described as follows: Ceramics, Chipped Stone Artifacts, and
Ground Stone Artifact.

In this general area of the state, pottery occurs only rarely in prehistoric contexts (Hester, 1968; Hester and Hill, ms.). Thus, the 868
sherds (and 1 partially restored vessel) from the Berclair site consfitute an unusually large ceramic sample and therefore warrant
detailed description.

4

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Since the majority of the sherds are bone-tempered, they were
grouped for analysis according to the color of the exterior sm’face.
Color standards were provided by Munsell color charts. Decorated
sherds are described separately, as are several unique sherds and a
partially-restorable vessel.
GRouP 1

No. of sherds: 179
Color
Exterior: generally shades of light red (2.5 YR: 6/6 and 6/8); a
few have gray areas resulting from uneven firing.
Interior: most are gray, brownish-gray or dark gray; some have
the same color as exterior; a few are reddish-yellow.
Paste
Temper: bone; some fragments rather large (2-3 ram. ) ; bone often
quite abundant and is often burned.
Texture: laminated to coarse
Core color: gray to black.
Surface Finish
Exterior: hard and smoothed; some are lightly burnished; light
smoothing marks often remain; bone tempering agents usually
evident on exterior.
Interior: roughly smoothed; uneven; occasionally very rough;
some light scoring; bone often shows through.
Decoration: none; occasional patches of asphaltum, probably
resulting from crack-mending.
Form
Wa!l thickness: 3.5 to 7.5 ram.
Lips: thinned from inside; rims rounded or slightly flared; slightly
flattened.
Base: unknown
Vessel shapes: unknown
No. of Vessels tlepresented: at least 9, possibly as many as 12
or 13.
Manufacture
Coiled; many sherds have broken along coil junctures; some interiors show overlapped coils not well smoothed; one sherd has a
cast of a hollow reed-like stalk in the core.
Remarks
The texture and color of the paste, as well as the exterior and
interior colors of some of the Group 1 sherds are almost identical

BERCLAIR SITE

5

to Conehos Plain sherds (a type named by J. C. Kelley; sherds
studied are in Texas Archeological Research Laboratory collections). However, Conchos Plain ware is tempered with calcareous
agents, not bone. On the whole, this sherd group most closely
compares with the Leon Plain type, as described by Suhm, Krieger
and Jelks (1954).
CROUP 2

No. of sherds: 9,2
Color
Exterior: light gray to ga-ay; most are fire-clouded and/or
smudged.
Interior: pale yellow; light gray to gray.
Paste
Temper: tiny fragments of bone, in a somewhat sandy paste.
Texture: very fine; compact; small-grained.
Core color: gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: smoothed, but rather uneven; surface generally feels
rather sandy.
Interior: much like exterior; leaf imprint on interior of one sherd;
sandy feel.
Decoration: some asphaltum on most sherds; much of this appears
to be ath’ibutable to crack-mending; a broad meandering band
decorates the exterior of a few.
Form

Wall thickness: 5 to 6.5 mm.
Lips: no rim sherds present.
Base: unknown.
-_
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels Represented: i
Manufactm’e: coiled; a number have broken along coil junctures.
GROUP 3
No. of sherds: 12
Color
Exterior: varies from a very pale brown (10 YR;8/3) to light gray
(10 YR; 7/2); some are partially fire-blackened.
Interior: generally similar to exterior.
Paste
Temper: primarily sand and grit: occasional inclusions of bone;

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

6

some sherds do show considerable bone tempering, with some of
the tempering agent burned.
Textttre: coarse; granular.
Core color: very pale brown to grayish-brown.
Surface Finish:
Exterior: feels gritty/sandy; rather rough; bone exposed on surface of a few sherds.
Interior: smoothing marks are evident; rough, uneven finish.
Deeoration: some asphaltum on a few sherds, resulting from crack
repair.
Form
Wall thickness: 6 to 11 ram.
Lips: slightly flattened; average 4 mm. thickness.
Base: one sherd may be a basal fragment, and if so, suggests a
rounded base.
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels Represented: 2, perhaps 3.
Manufacture: coiled.
G~o~Jp 4
No. of sherds: 3
Color
Exterior: reddish yellow (5 Ytt; 7/6) to light red (9,.5 Ylt; 6/8)
on 9. sherds; third is streaked, with light red and very pale brown
colors.
Interior: generally similar to exterior
Paste
Temper: 2 are heavily bone-tempered; third is similar though it
has large amounts of burned bone.
Texture: coarse; somewhat laminated.
Core color: very dark gray on 2; third is light gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: well-smoothed.
Interior: very rough; uneven.
Decoration: one sherd has some asphahum on exterior surface.
Form
Wal! thickness: 5 to 6 ram.
Lips: none
Base: unknown
Vessel shape: unknown
No. of Vessels Itepresented: 2
Manufacture: coiled.

BERCLAIR SITE

7

GRouP 5
No. of sherds: 16
Color
Exterior: pink to light gray.
Interior: generally gray.
Paste
Temper: some bone tempering, in an overall sandy paste.
Texture: very fine in general, though 2 or 3 sherds have a coarse,
granular paste. The sherds are soft, easily broken, and have
weathered considerably.
Core color: dark gray to brown.
Surface Finish
Exterior: eroded; sandy and very gritty.
Interior: similar to above.
Decoration: none.
Form
Wall thickness: 5 to 11 ram.
Lips: none.
Base: unknown.
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels Represented: 2
Manufacture: coiled.
CROUP 6

No. of sherds: 14
Color
Exterior: several are pink (7.5 YR; 7/4); others are from mottled
pink/gray to gray.
Interior: similar to exterior.
Paste
Temper: ve13~ high content of crushed bone; this is the distinguishing characteristic of this group . . . it is full of bone.
Textm’e: grainy; coarse.
Core color: pinkish brown to very dm’k gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: pitted by leaching of bone tempering agents; only
slightly smoothed.
Interior: most are like exterior, though some tool marks are evident (twigs, etc., used for smoothing); the interior of 1 sherd is
well-burnished, and the interior of another has a small amount of
asphaltum smeared on it.

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Decoration: none.
Form
Wall thickness: 6.5 to 9.5 mm.
Lip: thinned from interior; roundedi averages 5 ram. thick.
Base: unknown.
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels Represented: at least 2.
Manufacture: coiled; not as well made as previous groups.
GRouv 7
No. of sherds: 39
Color
Exterior: brown (7.5 YI~; 5/9,-5/4); some slightly reddish brown
or even grayish brown.
Interior: most often same as exterior; some are a lighter reddish
brown or pinkish.
Paste
Temper: all bone-tempered, with the bone finely crushed and
sometimes burned.
Texture: fine paste; very compact.
Core color: dark gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: very nicely smoothed; some are slightly burnished.
Interior: much rougher than exterior; uneven; sometimes coil
junctures are unsmoothed; too] marks nearly always present,
Decoration: some traces of asphaltum on exterior surface.
Form
Wall thickness: 4.5 to 8 ram.
Lips: thinned from interior; rounded; flare outward slightly.
Base: unknown.
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels l~epresented: most sherds are fi’om a single vessel;
possibly 1 or 2 others also present.
Manufacture: coiled; thin; well-made.

Giaour 8
No. of sherds: 31
Color
Exterior: quite uniform; brown (10 Ytt; 5/3); a few are light
gray.
Interior: varied; light red, pink, gray, dark gray, and brown.
Paste

BERCLAIR SITE

9

Temper: much bone tempering, though two sherds have predominately sandy pastes, with little bone.
Texture: very compact paste; hard.
Core color: dark gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: hard; well smoothed to lightly burnished; sandy/gritty

feel.
Interior: rough, with tool marks and light scoring; 2 sherds have
interiors which are lightly burnished.
Decoration: none.
Form
Wall thickness: 5 to 9 ram.
Lip: none.
Base: unknown.
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels Represented: most sherds are from 1; 2 others may
be represented.
Manufacture: coiled; well-made.
GRout 9
No. of sherds: 104
Color
Exterior: overall reddish-yellow tone; some are close to a light
brown and pinldsh.
Interior: sometimes same as exterior; remainder are varied: reddish, gray, light brown.
Paste
Temper: bone, in large quantities; only 2 o1" 3 sherds have a rather
sandy paste with a minimum of bone; bone is often bm’ned.
Texture: vm’ies from fine and laminated to granular and coarse;
hard paste.
Core color: nearly always dark gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: majority are well-smoothed to lightly burnished; 7 or 8
have a sandy/gritty feel.
Interior: rough; uneven; tool marks evident; light scoring; several
interiors, however, are highly smoothed and well finished.
Decoration: none.
Form
Wall thickness: 5 to 9 mm.
Lips: thinned from interior; one overlaps slightly on exterior side;
rounded to slightly flattened.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i0

Base: unknown.
Vessel shape: two sherds have curvatures suggesting bottle necks,
or at least a fairly constricted aperture.
No. of Vessels Represented: several; difficult to determine exact
number, but at least 3.
Manufacture: coiled; thin; well-made.

GRouP 10
No. of sherds: 110
Color
Exterior: this is a residual category consisting of sherds with very
clark (gray to black) exteriors. Some of the darkness is attributable to uneven firing, fire-clouds, or smudging.
Interior: similar to exterior.
Paste
Temper: bone is present in all sherds, though it occurs in sparse
amounts in a few.
Texture: generally fine, compact paste; a few sherds have coarse,
grainy pastes; all very hard.
Core color: very dark gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: we!l-smoothed; several are burnished; a few exhibit tool
marks.

Interior: considerably rougher than exterior; tool marks very
apparent; generally not snmdged on interior surfaces.
Decoration: some asphMtum is present on both interior and exterior sm’faces, resulting from cracl<-mending.
Form
Wall thickness: 4.5 to 7 mm.
Lips: flattened to slightly rounded; not tlfinned from interior as
in some previous groups.
Base: unknown.
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels Represented: several; obviously, some of these
may be fragments of other groups.
Manufacture: coiled; generally thin and well-made.
OTHER CERANIICS

I~OCKPOI:LT WARE. Two veL~ small sherds are present. They have thin
walls (4 ram.), pinkish cores, dull gray exteriors, asphaltum-coated
interiors, and a very fine sandy paste. The two sherds fit the Rockport
ware type very closely (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks, 1954).

FIGUR~ 2. Artifacts from the Berclair Site. a-s, contracted stem arrow
points; t-w, end scrapers; x, discoidal scraper; y-z, flake side scrapers.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

INCISED-PUNCTATED (Fig. 3, k). This is a small body sherd (approximately 24 by 23 mrn.), bearing 2 deep circular punetations and an
incised line. The punctafions were apparently formed with a blunt,
rounded instrument pressed into the plastic surface. Both punctations
are about 3 mm. in maximum diameter and approximate!y 2 to 2.5
ram. deep; they are spaced 4 ram. apart. The incised line which runs
parallel to the punctations is 1.5 ram. wide on the average, and is about
1 ram. deep. The exterior surface appears to have been lightly
smoothed after the punetations and incision were made. The interior
surface is rough and unsmoothed. The paste is coarse and granular,
with grit and sand the major tempering agents. Some bone, a little of
which is burned, is readily visible in the paste. The exterior sttrface
is brownish and the interior is somewhat lighter. The core is very dark
gray, and the sherd has a nlaximum thickness of 6 mm.
BROAD-LINE INCISED

(Fig.

3, 1). It is a small body sherd with a broad

incised line present on the exterior surface. A fragment of a parallel
incised line is present at one break. The surface of the exterior is wel!
smoothed and seems to be lightly burned. The interior surface is very
rough. The incised line averages 2.5 ram. in width and is about 1.5
mm. deep. The paste is very compact and somewhat laminated, and is
tempered with coarse sand. The color of the exterior is brown, while
the interior is a light brown with a reddish tone. Maximum thickness
is 6 mm.
FINE-LINE INCISED. This is a very small bone tempered sherd, with a
pinkish yellow exterior. On the exterior are two converging finelyincised lines. The interior sm’face is similar to the exterior. Paste is fine
and compact Maximum thickness is 5.5 ram.

BIIUSHED (Fig. 3,g). A rather sizeable body sherd, this specimen has a
grayish brown exterior ( 10 YIt; 5/2) and an interior of a similar color.
It is bone tempered (the bone is finely crushed) with some coarse
sand inclusions in the compact paste. The exterior is covered with
vertical and horizontal fine-line brushing. The interior is velN rough
and undulating. Coils are olxly slightly smoothed over. Core color is
dark gray and maxinmm thickness is 6 ram.
ASPHALT-DECORATED (Fig. 3, re,n). There are 3 sherds with clearly
discernable asphaltum decorations. One is a bone-tempered sherd,
with gray surfaces, and a compact paste. There is a line of 3 asphaltum
dots on the exterior sm’face; each dot is about 6 ram. in diameter. The
core color is gray. The second sherd is also bone-tempered and very
small. It has a dark gray exterior, with a rough, grayish interior. There

FIcVRE 3. Artifacts from the Berclair Site. a-c, beveled knife fragments;
d, biface fragment; e, flake fragment; f, fragment of stone pipe; g, brushed
sherd; h-i body sherds of partially restorable vessel; j, restored base of same
vessel; k, incised-punctated sherd; 1, broad-line incised sherd; m, n, asphaltdecorated sherds.

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

is a band of asphalt 5 to 7 nnn. wide on the exterior surface. The paste
is compact and the sherd has a maximum thickness of 7 nnn. The third
specimen is tempered with bone and coarse sand. There is a portion of
a zig-zag band painted on the exterior surface. The interior surface is
badly eroded.
WORKED SHEP~D. The specimen is half of a sherd disc, the edges of
which are roughly smoothed. The interior surface is light red, and the
exterior is somewhat darker, though most of it is covered with a thin
layer of asphaltum. The paste is coarse, and contains abundant bone,
much of which is burned. Thickness varies from 6.5 to 8.5 ram.
MISCELLANEOUS SHERDS. Sherd A is a very badly eroded sherd; its exterior ,and interior surfaces vary from reddish to gray in color. It has a
brown core and a large amount of bone temper. The surfaces have
been pitted by leaching of the tempering agents. It is interesting to
note that the clay seems to have been tempered with bone that was
old and brittle, perhaps accounting for the considerable leaching and
surface erosion. The tempering agents, when examined in a fresh
break, are very flakey and crumble easily. The paste is quite coarse,
and maximum thickness of the sherd is 8 ram.
Sherd B is quite small (18 by 9.9, ram.) and is bone tempered, with
much of the bone burned. The surfaces are pinkish yellow. The surface
finish is rough (due to erosion) but has a very silty and sandy feel. It
has a fine grained paste and a dark gray core.
Sherd C has a brown exterior and an asphaltum-coated interior. It is
tempered with bone and the bone seems to have been very similar
to that described for Sherd A. Maximum thickness of the sherd is
6 ram.
1;{ESIDUE. 326 sherds have been grouped under this heading. Due to
their extremely small size, most of these could not be placed into any
of the previously-described categories. All are bone tempered, with
surface colors varying widely (from light red to reddish brown or
gray) and have dimensions of less than 8 by 8 mm.

I~AItTIALLY-lqESTOItABLE VESSEL

(Fig.

3, h-j; Fig. 4).

A number of large, thick sherds of a single vessel were fitted together, making possible a postulated reconstruction (see Fig. 4). The
vessel is best described as a jar, with rather straight sides and a
rounded, convex base. No rim sherds from the vessel were found. A
detailed description is presented below:
Color
Exterior: gray to dark gray.

BERCLAIR

15

SITE

Interior: very pale brown to gray.
Paste
Temper: mainly grog; some sand also present.

!

!

!

!

I

I

!

I

I I

I iI
i

I
I

!I

I I
I

I

If

i I
|

I

!

I

i

I

I

|
\
\

\
\
\

\
\

\

¢mlllll[lllllllll|lllllllll[lllllllllllllI[llllllllI[lllI[llllI
~2
3
4
5
6

FIGURE 4. Postulated Reconstruction of Partially-Restorable Vessel.
on a reconstruction by Harry J. Sharer.

Based

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

a

m

d

e

n

p

o

,mlmJlm.qm~lmllmqmqmJlmllm~lmq
1

;2

.3

4

q
FIGvr~E 5. Rim Profiles from the Berclair Site. a-e, Group 1; f, Group 3;
g, Group 6; h-k, Group 7; 1-o, Group 9; p-s, Group 10. Exterior surface is
on the right.

17

BERCLAIR SITE

Texture: paste is compact, though somewhat contorted.
Core color: gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: roughly smoothed; undulating; some tool marks (twigs,
etc.) present on portions of exterior.
Interior: very rough; coils only slightly smoothed over; tool marks
evident.
Decoration: there appear to have been some bands of asphaltum
near the base which ran parallel to the rim; these are badly faded
now. Asphaltum was used liberally to repair cracks in the vessel
walls.
Form
Wall thickness: 6 to 8 nnn.
Lips: no rim sherds were recovered.
Base: rounded, rather bumpy and undulating; about 9 ram. thick
near center.

Vessel shape: jar, with straight sides and convex base; postulated
maximum diameter ca. 183 mm.
CHIPPED STONE ARTLFACTS

CONTRACa~D STEM ARROW POINTS

(Fig.

2, a-s).

This series of arrow points closely conforms to the Perdiz type as
described by Suhm, Krieger and Jelks (1954). A few specimens resemble the Cliffton type (Ibid.), but these may simply be unfinished
or poorly-made examples of Perdiz.
Thirty-three specimens were analyzed. Another 17 specimens were
too fragmentalT for study; some of these were thermal-fractured.
Measurement data for 31 studied specimens are presented in Table 1.
The entire series is characterized by triangular blades with convex
to straight lateral edges (a couple have reeurved oi" concave edges).
Blade edges are sometimes lightly serrated, and barbs we present on
some. Stems are contracted, with edges often convex. They eonverge
to pointed or, rarely, rounded bases.
All seem to have been made on thin flakes. One unfinished speehnen
is present in the collection. It is a flake on which a contracting stem
and a barb have been roughly fashioned. The remainder of the flake
is unmodified. On many specfinens, only one face of the blade is
extensively flaked, while the opposite face is unmodified. The stem on
most speeimens is bffaeially chipped.
The contracted stem series represent the only projectile pohlt form
at the Berclair site.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

18

TABLE 1
Contracted Stein Arrow Points:

Dimensions. Estimated measurenaents are

indicated by asterisks ( * ). Where esthnates were not possible, the incomplete
measurements are enclosed in parentheses. Measurements are in millimeters.
Length

Max. Width

30.5
32
30.5
20.5
29.5
22
35*
30*
31"
24
25
17.5
22*
30*
30*
30*
18
34*
33*
21

16

18.5
17.5
16
14.5
14
10.5
9.5
13
12
10.5
11.5

i0
8.5
15
14
18.5
ii
21.5
16

8
13.5

(=92)

?

21
33
22
14
19
22
24

I0
16.5

28
28
BEVELED KNIVES (Fig.

14
12
12

Max. Thickness

Stem Length

3
2.5
2
2
3.5
2
2.5
2.5
2
2.5
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
3.5
2.5
1.5

10.5
11.5
11.5
7
11
10
10
8
i0
10
5
7.5
6.5
6
9
7
1.5
8"
9.5*
2

1.5

7.5

2

8

........
........
........
........
........

............
............

( 16.5 )
18

........
........

3, a-e).

Three broken specimens are present. These specimens appear to be
fragments of diamond-shaped bifaces with alternately-beveled edges.
Two are end fragments alternately beveled along the right edge. The
third is a medial fragment beveled along one edge only. It is pianoconvex in transverse cross section, while the first 2 have rhomboidal
cross sections. The beveled edge on the medial fragment shows evidence of use. Due to the fragmentary nature of these specimens, length

19

BERCLAIR SITE

and width measurements are not possible; maximum thicknesses are
5.5, 7 and 7.5 ram.
FLAKE SIDE SCRAPERS (Fig. 2, y, z).
There are 9. specimens, both complete. One is made on a secondary
cortex flake. It is retouched unifacially along 50 ram. of one edge. The
second specimen appears to have been made on an interior flake. It,
too, is retouched unifacially along one edge (59. ram.). Lengths are
64 and 57.5 ram., and maxinmm widths are 9.4.5 and 17.5 mm. Maximum thicknesses are 8 and 4 mm.
END SCRAPERS (Fig. 2, t-w).
Four specimens are represented. One is made on a secondary cortex
flake, with steep retouch along the convex edge opposite the striking
platform. While the primary scraping edge on the other 3 is also along
the convex edge, these have slight retouch along the sides. One specimen (Fig. 2, u), which is triangu!oid, is retouched steeply along the
dista! end, and is alternately retouched along the lateral edges.
The measurements for this end scraper series are indicated below:

Length ( mm. )

Maximum Width

Maximum, Thickness

49,
36
34
26

19.5
23
26
16.5

8
3
7
4

DISCOIDAL SCRAPER (Fig. 2, x).
This specimen is discoidal in outline and is mostly unffacial, though
5 small flakes have been removed from the ventral face. Wear, in the
form of light dulling, is present around the entire circumference. It has
a maximum diameter of 35.5 ram., and a maximum thickness of 9 ram.
MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS (Fig. 3, d, e).
These specimens include: (1) a crude biface fragment, with a convex base; (2) a unfface fragment with no retouched edges; however
arrows (Fig. 3, e) indicate an area of some roughening, perhaps related to brief use; (3) a flake with some flake scars on both faces; (4)
a crudely-modified flake, with slight retouch (?) along a portion of
one edge.
GROUND STONE ARTIFACT

Stone Pipe Fragment (Fig. 3, f). This specimen is a fragment of
ground and smoothed reddish sandstone which seems to be a portion

9,0

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of a tubular stone pipe. A rounded and smoothed lip is present at one
end of the fragment. The interior bears longitudinal striations perhaps
resulting from the manufacturing process. The specimen has a coneavoconvex transverse cross section, and a maximum thickness of 9.5 nnn.
FAUNAL REMAINS
While Parker and Branch did not collect all of the faunal materials
exposed at the site, a good sample was obtained. It is characterized
by a predominance of very large bone, primarily splintered and fragmented long bones (and one astragalus). Given the prehistoric context of the site, it is assumed that these large bones are the remains
of bison. A few deer bone fragments are present as are river nmssels
and a fraganent of healt cockle (Dinocardium robustum). The river
mussels were probably eollected from Miller Creek or some other
nearby stream. But, the cockle shell is a marine species and was either
obtained by the occupants directly from the coast (about 60 miles to
the southeast) or through trade with coastal peoples.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The Berelair site (41 GD 4) has yielded a quantity of materials
attributable to Late Prehistoric (or Neo-Ameriean) peoples. The
materials appear to represent occupation(s) by a single cultural group.
The site is small in area, yet had a sizeable midden accunmlation; it
may represent a prefen’ed campsite occupied intermittently.
The cultural identification of the component at Berelair is ve13z
dfltleult, and perhaps impossible, with our present data. From the
types of artifacts found, We know that it is Late Prehistoric in age
(Suhm, Krieger and Jelks, 1954:112-117; Jelks, 1962:91-98). The contracted stem mTOW points (mainly Perdiz), plain bone tempered pottery, beveled knife fragments, and small end scrapers are all traits
of the Toyah Focus of the Central Texas Aspect (Jelks, 1962:85-88 ).
It has been suggested that this focus might represent prehistoric
Tonkawan peoples (Suhm, 1960:85), but this possibility has yet to be
substantiated.
If we were to assume for the moment that the prehistoric Tonkawan
bands are linked to the areheologieal materials represented in Toyah
Focus sites, what evidence do we have that the Berelair materials
might be attributed to these same Tonkawas? Lengthy deseriptions
of Tonkawa culture have been published by Sjoberg (1953a) and
Newcomb (1961). They were a marginal Plains culture, living a
nomadic, hunting and gathering existene9 in the central Texas region.

BERCLAIR SITE

21

For subsistence, they relied on bison, deer, smal! mammals, pecans,
Opuntia tunas, fish, and fiver mussels (Sjoberg, 1953a:284-286). They
used the bow and an’ow and made pottery, but it is bdieved that they
did not practice agriculture (Newcomb, 1961). It is known, however,
that they did range out of central Texas towards the Gulf coast from
time to time. Tonkawas were recorded on the lower Colorado and
Guadalupe Pdver in the late 17th century, (Bolton, 1916). DeLeon’s
expedition of 1690 found bands of Tonkawa in Victoria and Lavaca
Counties, the former area not far from the Berelair site. It is of significance to note that the Tonkawas encountered in that area in 1690
were on a bison-hunting expedition and had their dogs loaded with
the results of the hunt (Bolton, 1916:359). Bison was the most important economie item of the Tonkawa (Sjoberg, 1953a:284) and nmch
of their time was consumed in hunting them. Since bison were present
near the coast (they were even plentiful there in Historic times when
eliminated or scarce in areas further to the west; see Sjoberg, 1953b:8),
it could be that some Tonkawa group(s) followed herds of these
animals to the grassy prairies of southern Goliad County in Late Prehistoric times. It is likewise a possibility that they made seasonal
bison-hunting trips to this area.
If they were ranging this near the coast on theft" bison hunts, they
no doubt could have come in contaet with the coastal Karankawan
peoples. Such contacts would account for the use of asphaltum on
some of their characteristic central Texas pottery. A similar phenomenon occurred in the Historic period when Karankawas were
brought to the missions at Goliad. While at the missions, they influenced the mission Indian potte13z (Goliad ware) to the extent that it
was often decorated with asphaltum in coastal motifs (Mounger,
1959). The presence of 2 sherds of Rockport ware at Berelair seems
to further substantiate the intercultural contact between the Karankawa and the central Texans, since that particular ware has been
fairly well linked to the Karankawa (Fitzpatrick, Fitzpatrick and
Campbell, 1964). The vessel represented by the sherds might have
been obtained in trade with the Karankawa, just as the cockle shell
(mentioned in the Faunal llemains) might have been. Evidence of
Tonkawa-Karankawa contacts in the Historic era have been recorded
by Sjoberg (1953a:282) who states that some members of the Mayeye
band of the Tonkawa married into, and lived with, Karankawan
groups.
The areheo!ogieal remains at Berclafl" appear to represent a shortterm Late Prehistoric occupation or occupations oriented toward bison

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

hunting, with exploitation of other food sources such as deer and river
mussels. The amount of midden debris would suggest that the site was
a preferred camping area returned to on a number of occasions. The
arrow points, pottery and other artifacts are linked with central Texas
peoples, though the pottery definitely reveals coastal influence. There
are, however, several puzzling aspects of the site. There are a large
number of arrow points, yet very few other tools. If the site was indeed
a bison-hunters camp, might not we expect a higher ratio of tools
which would have been employed in processing the bison remains
brought to the camp? Similarly, there is a high frequency of ceramic
remains at the site. Would highly mobile bison-hunting groups from
central Texas carry pottery with them on their trips southward? Perhaps a group would take along a few vessels, either for utilitarian
purposes, or even for trade. If a group then returned to a single camp
site (such as Berclair) over a period of several years, might not a
sizeable accunmlation of potsherds result? We are also puzzled by
the punctated and deeply-incised sherds, and at present cannot safely
compare them with materials from other areas. While it is tenuous
at best to attempt to link the Berclair component to a prehistoric
Tonkawan group

(perhaps a bison-lmnting party or parties), the

traits recognized at the site compare very closely with those of the
Toyah Focus (Jelks, 1962). Jelks (p. 91-92) has stated that the Toyah
Focus extended about 100 miles south and east of the Balcones escarpment. However, the possibility remains that the materials from the
Berclair component represent a yet unidentified archeological complex
which might be present in the Goliad County vicinity. Additional
archeo!ogical research is badly needed in that region.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Drs. T. N. Campbell and Dee Ann Story (University of Texas)
examined the materials from the site and provided many helpful comments. The final draft of the paper was read by Dr. lqobert F. Heizer
(University of California). The facilities of the Texas Archeologieal
~esearch Laboratory (of which Dr. Story is Executive Director) were
used in the preparation of this paper. A sherd sample and the faunal
remains have been placed in the collections of that laboratory, along
with all notes and photographs. Mr. Harry J. Sharer (University of
Texas) gave much-needed advice and cliticisms on several aspects of
the paper, and provided a reconstruction of the partially-restorable
vessel from the site.

BERCLAIR SITE

23

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Blair, Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No.
1:93-116.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1916 Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. Charles Scribner’s
Sons, New York
Evans, Glen
1940 Notes on Geology. In: Sellards, E. H., Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils from Bee Count),, Texas. Bulletin, Geological Society of
America, Vol. 51:1627-1657.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938 Physiography of Eastern United States. McGraw Hill Book Company,
New York.
Fitzpatrick, W. S., J. Fitzpatrick and T. N. Campbell
1964 A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel from the Vicinity of Corpus Christi,
Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35:193-204.
Gatschet, Albert S.
1891 The Karankawa Indians, the Coast People of Texas. Archaeological and
Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum, Vol. 1, No. 2.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1968 Notes on Some Pottery-Bearing Sites in Southern Texas. The Bull-Roarer,
University of Texas Anthropological Society, Vol. 3, No. 2: 9-11.
Hcster, Thomas Roy and T. C. Hill, Jr.
ms.
A Prehistoric Ceramic Tradition in Southern Texas. Manuscript in
preparation, authors’ files.
Inglis, J. M.
1964 A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Bulletin, Texas Parks
and Wildlife Department, No. 45, Austin.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Archeology Series No. 5, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
Johnson, Ehner H.
1931 The Natural Regions of Texas. University of Texas Bulletin No. 3113.
Mounger, Maria A.
1959 Mission Espiritu Santo of Coastal Texas: An Example of Historic Site
Archeology. Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Sjoberg, And%e F.
1953a The Culture of the Tonkawa, A Texas Indian Tribe. Texas Journal of
Science, Voh 5, No. 3: 280-304.
1953b Lipan Apache Culture in Historical Perspective. Southwestern. Journal
of Anthropology, Vol. 9, No. 1: 76-98.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin, Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 28:63-108.
Suhm, Dee Ann, A. D. Krieger and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Inta’oductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Department of Anthropology
University of California, Berkeley
Carrizo Springs, Texas

