115

The Red River Caddos:
A Historical Overview to 1835
F. Todd Smith

ABSTRACT
For 150 years the Red River Caddos, particularly the Kadohadacho tribe, were
the dominant Native Americans on the Louisiana-Texas frontier which served
as the boundary between various Euro-American empires. As such they used
this position, and the’influence they had over the other tribes of the region, to
materially enhance themselves as well as gain prestige and respect from EuroAmericans and Native Americans alike. In doing so, however, the Red River
Caddos paid a price; they became dependent on European metal goods and they
were ravaged by disease. By the early nineteenth century, the population of the
Red River Caddos had fallen so low that the tribe had lost its position of
importance, especially with the removal of tensions between the border empires. In 1835, the tribe was forced to sign a treaty with the United States in
which they sold their ancestral teiTitory.

The Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma, which now maintains a small tribal complex
in the western part of the state, once was one of the most important native groups
of North America. For almost 150 years, the Caddos were the dominant tribe on
the border between two Euro-American empires. As such, they used this
opportunity to profit from their position, as well as influence the diplomacy of
the region by playing the various empires against one another. However, since
the Caddo lands lay on the boundary between the French and Spanish empires in
North America, they have been neglected by the Anglo-centric historians of
colonial America and have failed to receive the attention that other tribes-- such
as the Iroquois or Creeks who bordered the 13 English colonies--have received.
The Caddos also straddled other borders. Their villages were located on the
boundary between the Eastern Woodlands and the Great Plains; thus, they were
not only sedentary agriculturalists, but buffalo hunters as well. Long before the
Europeans arrived, the Caddos were middlemen in the trade that took place
between tribes of the plains and those of the forest. They eagerly continued this
trade following the European intrusion. Probably the most important historical
role the Caddos played, particularly those located on the Red River, was a
diplomatic one; their proximity to French Louisiana, Spanish Texas, and finally
the United States allowed them to act as negotiators with more numerous and
powerful tribes that lived upstream. This gained the Red River Caddos great
prestige and respect from Euro-American and Native American alike. It was not
Bulletin o.f the Texas Archeolo£ical Society 65 (1994)

116

Texas Archeological Society

until the early nineteenth century, when the borders of empire disappeared and
the tribe had been ravaged by disease, that the Red River Caddos lost their
position of importance.
The population of the entire Caddo Indian tribe stood at ten thousand when
Ren6 Robert Cavalier, Sieur de La Salle, and his party of nearly three hundred
French colonists set in motion the permanent European intrusion into Caddo
country by landing at Matagorda Bay in 1685. The Caddos lived in fixed,
permanent farming villages located along two river systems, the Red and the
Neches. The Red River Caddos were divided into two loose confederacies: the
Kadohadachos and the Natchitoches. The Kadohadacho confederacy was located around the bend of the Red River near the Arkansas, Texas, and Oklahoma
border. Three thousand five hundred Kadohadachos lived in four tribes: the
Kadohadacho proper, Nanatsohos, Upper Nasonis, and Upper Natchitoches (Williams 1964:545). Further downstream were the Yatasis, who, with the Lower
Natchitoches and Doustionis, formed the Natchitoches confederacy which consisted of perhaps two thousand tribesmen (Swanton 1942:12-13). To the west,
along the upper reaches of the Neches River in East Texas, were the nine tribes
that made up the Hasinai confederacy (Bolton 1908:249-276). Each individual
tribe was led by a hereditary chief, or caddi, who presided over a well-defined
chain of command which provided the tribe with strong, efficient government
(Newkumet and Meredith 1988:56).
Both Caddo groups on the Red and the Neches were visited by remnants of
La Salle’s "lost" colony, as well as by Frenchmen from Canada in search of the
voyaguer. Henri Joutel and seven Frenchmen passed through the Kadohadacho
and Hasinai villages in 1687 as they made their way from the Texas coast to find
help in Canada. Three years later, Henri de Tonti traveled among all three Caddo
confederacies in a vain attempt to locate La Salle. The Caddos initiated friendly
relations with the French by bartering horses in return for metal goods, including
a few muskets (Weddle 1991:33-39).
The Caddo tribes desperately needed weapons to defend themselves from
their enemies who already had access to firearms (or would soon obtain them):
Athapascan-speaking Lipan Apaches to the west, Siouan Osages to the north,
and Muskoghean Choctaws and Chickasaws east of the Mississippi River. When
Spanish parties also searching for La Salle met the Hasinais a few years later, the
natives eagerly accepted the offer to set up missions in their country for they
believed it would mean greater opportunities to obtain guns and other metal
goods (Weddle 1973:204-216).
In 1690, the Spaniards established two missions near the Neches River for
the Hasinai tribes. (The following year, Governor Domingo Ter~n de los Rfos
and Father Damian Massanet were thwarted by winter weather from establishing
a mission among the Kadohadachos.) Much to the chagrin of the Caddos, the
Franciscan priests came armed only with Jesus Christ and refused to distribute
firearms to their hosts. The missionaries did, however, introduce European
diseases to the Caddos and an epidemic swept the country in 1691 which killed

Smith n The Red River Caddos

117

perhaps three thousand tribesmen. Two years later, the Hasinais drove the few
remaining priests from their village by threatening to kill them. The Spaniards
retreated beyond the Rio Grande with all of the Caddo tribes violently opposed
to their return (John 1975:187-193).
Despite the withdrawal of the French and Spanish from their country in the
1690s, the Caddos continued to feel the detrimental effects of the European
presence in North America. All three confederacies were plagued by outbreaks
of disease. In addition, the Red River Caddos were ravaged by the British-armed
Chickasaws who attacked the Kadohadachos and Natchitoches to obtain slaves
for their suppliers. By 1720, the deadly combination of warfare and disease had
reduced the population of the Red River Caddos by more than two-thirds; only
one thousand Kadohadachos and five hundred Natchitoches remained (Smith
1958:252-254).
Therefore, the Caddos welcomed the French and the promise of European
weapons and goods back into their world in the early eighteenth century. Contact with the French was reestablished in 1700 by Louis Juchereau de St. Denis,
who had been sent up the Red River by the founders of Louisiana, the brothers
Le Moyne. Although a limited amount of trade was developed between the
French and the Caddos, the amount of firearms obtained in return for salt and
horses was not enough to stem the Chickasaw onslaught, As a result, the
Natchitoches abandoned their Red River village and took refuge on the banks of
Lake Ponchartrain to be nearer their French allies (John 1975:198).
Not until the second decade of the eighteenth century did the Red River
Caddos obtain an ample supply of arms to defend themselves. In 1713, the
Natchitoches accompanied St. Denis back to their old village, where, with the
Doustionis’ assistance, a French trading post was erected. In 1719, the Nasoni
caddi sold Ben~rd de la Harpe a piece of land near his village within the
Kadohadacho confederacy, upon which the French built a fort and trading
establishment known as the "Nassonite post" (Weddle 1991:190-211). By the
1730s, when the French established yet another trading post at the Yatasi village
halfway between the Natchitoches and the Kadohadachos, the Red River Caddos
had established themselves as the dominant tribe on the border between French
Louisiana and Spanish Texas.
The French settlements along the Red River caused the Spanish to return
once more to the Hasinai villages. Eventually the Spanish set up three permanent
missions between the Neches and the Red rivers, while at the same time establishing the capital of Texas at Los Adaes, only a few miles to the west of the
French post at Natchitoches. The Hasinais tolerated the Spanish presence in their
midst since it was minimal--less than one hundred soldiers and only a few,
unsuccessful priests (Chipman 1992:105-131). Illegal (from the Spanish viewpoint) French weapons and metal goods flowed freely into Texas from the Red
River Caddo villages and French settlements. Not only did these weapons (as
well as Frenchmen themselves) allow the Caddos to end the threats from their
Indian enemies, it also enhanced their position vis a vis the friendly tribes of the

118

Texas Archeological Society

area. The Red River Caddos became middlemen in the trade with the larger,
more warlike tribes who lived farther upstream from the Kadohadachos. These
included their fellow Caddoan-speaking kinsmen of the Wichita confederacy-namely the Taovayas, Iscanis, Tawakonis, and Kichais--as well as the most
recent newcomers to the region, the Shoshonean Comanches. These tribes
(known by the Spanish as Nortefios) used their Caddo-provided French weapons
to fight their common enemies, the Lipan Apaches and the Osages.
The trade that was maintained between the French and the Red River
Caddos gradually transformed the material culture of the tribe. By the mideighteenth century, the Kadohadachos and Natchitoches had almost completely
forsaken the traditional crafts they had produced in favor of European-manufactured goods. The items procured by the Caddos to trade with the French-buffalo skins, deer chamois, and bear fat--were articles that the tribe had
traditionally obtained for their own use. In addition to these three staples, the
Red River Caddos supplied the French with surplus corn, horses, mules, and
Indian slaves. In return for these items, the French supplied the Caddos with a
variety of goods which came to affect all aspects of tribal life.
Weapons were the most important articles the Caddos received. Rifles,
powder, and balls not only allowed the tribe to hunt more efficiently, but
enhanced their military proficiency as well. In addition to guns and ammunition,
the French supplied the natives with steel hatchets, tomahawks, and knives. The
Red River Caddos also became dependent on European shirts, cloth, and blankets. Tools, such as scissors, awls, screws, and flints for fire, also became
necessities. Beads, combs, vermillion, mirrors, copper bracelets, and strips of
scarlet were all ornamental items that the French readily kept on hand to supply
the tribe. By the mid-eighteenth century, life without the European goods had
become incomprehensible to the Red River Caddos (Bolton 1914, Volume
1:132-133)
Although trade with the French materially benefitted the Natchitoches and
the Kadohadachos, close contact with them continued to reduce the tribes numerically. Unlike the previous epidemics which had so ravaged the Caddo
confederacies, disease in the middle period of the eighteenth century was a
subtle constant which reduced the tribe gradually. By the 1770s, the
Kadohadacho population had fallen to about 750 while that of the Natchitoches
dropped to about 225. The Red River Caddos were able to overcome the terrible
loses and remain strong only through consolidation. The Kadohadachos were
reduced by two tribes, leaving only the Kadohadacho proper and a smaller
branch which the French called the Petit Caddos. The Doustionis merged into
the Natchitoches tribe and the Yatasis reformed themselves as an independent
tribe who lived halfway between the Natchitoches and the Petit Caddos (Smith
1989:107-108).
Despite the population decline, the Red River Caddos clearly recognized
their dependence upon their French allies and firearms and were willing to take
up arms against anyone, including the Spanish, who threatened to disrupt their

Smith ~ The Red River Caddos

119

intimate ties. In 1731, they rushed to the aid of the French soldiers at
Natchitoches when the post was besieged by hostile Natchez warriors (O’Neill
1977:123-124). Halfhearted attempts by the Spanish in 1750 and 1752 to halt
the flow of French trade into Texas were thwarted by the bold, aggressive stance
adopted by the Caddo tribes. Throughout the period Spanish governors not only
turned a blind eye to the illegal trade, a few engaged in it themselves (Smith
1989:115-120).
Actual~ attacks on the Spanish did not occur until 1758 when Caddo warriors joined a group of two thousand Nortetios in an assault upon the mission the
Spanish had set up for the Apaches on the San Saba River. Eight Spaniards were
killed and the mission buildings burned. Although the Comanches and Wichitas
led the attack, more than half of the warriors carried French guns obtained
through the Red River Caddos (Weddle 1964:72-78). A Spanish punitive expedition, led by Diego Ortiz Parilla, attempted to punish the Wichitas in 1759, but
met defeat at the well-defended Taovaya village on the Red River. The Taovayas
were well-armed with French weapons, and flew the French flag over their
fortified position (Allen 1939:60-70). Over the next few years, the Nortetios
continued their attacks on the Spanish presidio on the San Sab~i, as well as upon
new missions set up for the Apaches at E1 Cation on the Nueces River (John
1975:362-363).
Thus, the Red River Caddos were not only dependent upon the French for
metal goods and firearms when France abandoned North America in 1763, they
were also seen as hostile by the Spanish inheritors of Louisiana. The Caddos,
then, began to manuever to make peace with the Spanish in an effort to secure
the same trade relationship with Spain that they had enjoyed with the French.
Although the transfer of Louisiana took place in November 1762, the Spanish
moved slowly, not taking formal possession of the colony until 1767.
Spanish officials were indecisive in formulating a firm course of action
concerning the Indians of Louisiana. Initially, the Spanish governor of Texas
attempted to halt the flow of commerce that was being conducted with the
Indians of his province through the Red River Caddo villages. In response, the
Yatasi headmen, Houhan and Cocay, gathered members of the Kadohadacho
and Hasinai tribes at their village and threatened to attack the Texas capital of
Los Adaes (Bolton 1914, Volume I:128-129). This Convinced the Spanish officials-now advised by Athanase de M6zi~res, a French officer who had been
stationed at Natchitoches since the early 1740s--to allow the trade to continue
and to pursue a policy of peace in order to establish Spanish authority over the
tribes of Louisiana and the Red River Valley which had acknowledged France.
They also hoped to bar the intrusion and influence of the British, now poised on
the east bank of the Mississippi River following the Treaty of Paris in 1763
(Nasatir 1976:15-18).
De M6zi~res (appointed lieutenant governor of Natchitoches in 1769) considered the allegiance of the Kadohadachos to be of the utmost importance to
any peace plan, for the tribe occupied the "master-key of New Spain." N0t only

120

Texas Archeological Society

could the Kadohadachos serve as a buffer against British incursions on the
northeast flank of Texas, but their influence over the other Nortefios, especially
the Wichitas, might help bring about peace with those tribes as well (Bolton
1914, Volume I:130-131).
De M6zi~res opened formal relations with all of the Red River Caddos in
January 1770. To induce the allegiance of the tribes, he arranged for the
Natchitoches, Yatasis, Petit Caddos, and Kadohadachos to receive annual presents; the latter three tribes were also permitted to have licensed traders at their
village to supply them with European goods. Assured of the continuation of their
trade goods, the Red River Caddos gathered at Natchitoches in April 1770 to
establish formal ties with the Spanish. The Kadohadacho caddi, Tinhiotien, as
well as Cocay of the Yatasis, received the high distinction of being designated
medal chiefs by de M6zi~res, and both "solemly promised to show the same love
and the same respect" for Spain as they had for France (Bolton 1914, Volume
I:143-150, 157-158).
With the establishment of good relations with the Spanish, the Red River
Caddos took measures, in conjunction with their new allies, to influence the rest
of the Nortefios to end their attacks. Tinhiotien and Cocay sent messengers to the
Nortefios informing them that the French had ceded Louisiana to Spain, and both
promised to abstain from trading with the Nortefios in an effort to show the
Comanches and Wichitas that only friendly tribes would receive trade. In September 1770, Tinhiotien brought de M6ziEres and the Wichita headmen together
at his village for preliminary peace talks, which led to an actual treaty being
signed the following year (Bolton 1914, Volume I:140-142, 157-158, 204-208,
256-260).
Thus, within the first five years of Spain’s actual occupation of Louisiana,
the Red River Caddos had successfully used their important position to make
peace with the Spanish as well as assuring themselves of continued trading
privileges. They had controlled the potentially damaging effects of the transferal
of Louisiana to Spain, and it seemed as if the future relations with the Spanish
would only get better; for, in 1772 de M6ziEres, in conjunction with the governor
of Texas, offered the Caddos and the Nortefios a military alliance aimed at the
destruction of their greatest enemies, the Osages and the Lipan Apaches (Bolton
1914, Volume I:310-312, Volume II: 24-27). Not only had the Red River Caddos
successfullyreplaced France as a trading partner, it looked as if they might
acquire a military ally as well.
The relationship between the Red River Caddos and Spain, however, faltered over the next few years for a variety of reasons. First, the Spanish did not
follow up their plan for an offensive campaign against the Osages or the Lipans.
Superiors of de M6zi~res in Mexico City neither trusted the Nortefios nor wanted
to incur the expense of a costly Indian war, and the Frenchman’s plan was put on
hold (John 1975:422-430).
Second, and most important, the Red River Caddos were wracked by a
"cruel epidemic" in 1777-1778, the worst outbreak of disease since 1691. The

Smith ~ The Red River Caddos

121

Yatasis and the Natchitoches were so ravaged by the sickness in the fall of 1777
that it became uncertain whether the two tribes would survive (Bolton 1914,
Volume II:189, 231). By 1787, their numbers had declined so much that the
commander of the post at Natchitoches decided they no longer needed to receive
any presents. Five years later only two Yatasi families remained (Kinnaird 1949,
Volume II: 198, Volume III:98). By the beginning of the nineteenth century, the
total population of the Yatasis and the Natchitoches had fallen to only 64 (Sibley
1832:721-724). The Kadohadachos and the Petit Caddos were not affected by
the epidemic until the fall of 1778. The able Kadohadacho caddi, Tinhiotien,
survived the disease, but witnessed the deaths of three hundred tribal members
(Bolton 1914, Volume II:232-233).
The epidemics of 1777-1778 seriously altered the Caddo-Spanish alliance
by furthering the Red River Caddos’ dependence upon the Spanish at a time
when Spain’s weakness in North America increasingly became evident. Pressures mounted upon the tribe from all sides during the final two decades of the
eighteenth century, but Spain proved unwilling and unable to provide the Caddos
with the guidance, arms, or military protection that they desparately needed in
their fragile state. Ironically, the peace that the Caddos had arranged between the
Wichitas and the Spanish (which would be made to include the Comanches in
the next decade), had served to make them relatively unimportant to the policy
makers of Texas and Louisiana. During the last decades of the eighteenth
century, then, the Red River Caddos increasingly were neglected and left to fend
for themselves by the Spanish.
The worst pressures were brought upon the Red River Caddos by the
Osages, who began full-scale attacks upon the tribe in 1777. Due to Spain’s
involvement in the war against Great Britain being carried on by the newlyfounded United States and France, the Spanish were unable to control the
Osages or provide the Red River Caddos with weapons (Din and Nasatir
1983:137-140)i It was not until after the Treaty of Paris in 1783 that Spanish
officials were able to mediate a treaty between the Osages and the Kadohadachos.
In May 1785, Louisiana governor Estevan Mir6 had the head men of both tribes
come to New Orleans and agree to make peace. Before the year was out,
however, the Osages resumed their attacks upon the Red River Caddos. Although Governor Mir6 felt the Osages needed to be reprimanded for the attacks,
he feared that depriving them of trade would only encourage them into dealing
with the Anglo-Americans, who, following the Revolutionary War, were now
established on the east bank of the Mississippi River. The Osages might also
turn to the British and their trading station at Michihnackinac on the Great
Lakes. Thus, the Spanish governor refused to take action against the Osages
(Din and Nasatir 1983:153-155).
By 1788, the Osage onslaught forced the Kadohadachos to abandon their
ancient village and move downstream to be c!oser to the Petit Caddos (Williams
1964:551). The following summer, Tinhiotien died and was succeeded by his
son, Bicheda (Kinnaird 1949, Volume III:281). Unfortunately, the new caddi

122

Texas Archeological Society

would prove unable to stem the tide of decline that continued throughout the rest
of the century. In February 1790, five months after becoming the Kadohadacho
caddi, Bicheda moved his tribe downstream once again to take refuge in the Petit
Caddo village (Williams 1964:551). After a century of contact with the EuroAmericans, the four tribes of the Kadohadacho confederacy were finally reduced
to one.
Added to the Osage threat in the 1790s were bands of Choctaw Indians who
increasingly crossed the Mississippi River to raid the Red River Caddos and
other Louisiana tribes (Kinnaird and Kinnaird 1983:189). Once again, the Spanish failed to contain either the Choctaw or the Osage threat to the Caddos.
Although they attempted to fight back, the Kadohadachos were forced (for the
third time in twelve years) to move their village in 1800; this time they took
refuge near Caddo Lake about 35 miles west of the main branch of the Red River
(Williams 1964:553). The new century did not bring the Red River Caddos a
respite from disease either; in 1800 a smallpox epidemic ravaged the tribe,
killing the Kadohadacho caddi, Bicheda (Sibley 1922:95).
His successor, Dehahuit, was afforded the opportunity to turn the fortunes
of the Red River Caddos around. For, France reacquired Louisiana from Spain in
1800, but sold the huge expanse of land to the United States three years later
without defining its borders. All of a sudden, with a few strokes of a pen, the
Kadohadachos found themselves on a disputed boundary between empires. Both
the United States and Spain claimed the allegiance of the tribe in an attempt to
define the border more clearly. In addition, it was understood that in case of
war--which was fully expected by both sides--Indian allies might tell the
difference. The Kadohadachos, because of the great influence they had over the
rest of the Caddos, the Wichitas, and other tribes in the area, were courted by
both the United States and Spain. Realizing the situation, Dehahuit expertly
played the two powers against one another and was able to obtain conditions
favorable to the Kadohadachos’ well-being and preeminence in the area.
The emergence of the Kadohadachos’ dominance over the rest of the Caddo
tribal groups is one of the most important trends of this period. Not only did the
weak Yatasis and Natchitoches look to the Kadohadachos for guidance, the four
remaining Hasinai tribes did as well. Dehahuit and the Kadohadachos also had
influence over emigrant tribes from the southeast--such as the Apalachees,
Pascagoulas, Biloxis, and the amalgamated Alabama-Coushatta tribe--who had
begun to arrive on the Louisiana-Texas frontier in the late eighteenth century.
Most importantly, the Kadohadachos still maintained close ties with the powerful Wichita tribes--especially the Taovayas--that resided further up the Red
River (Smith 1991:178-184).
From the onset, both the United States and Spain understood that trade with
the region’s Indians would be crucial in winning their favor. The Kadohadachos
were still dependent upon trade goods and actively pursued an alliance with
whichever country could provide them with an ample amount of these necessary items. The United States, through skillful diplomacy and ample trade goods,

Smith ~ The Red River Caddos

123

quickly gained the edge over their Spanish rivals in Texas. The Americans,
through their Indian agent at Natchitoches, John Sibley, treated Dehahuit and
the Kadohadachos with great respect and showered them with presents and trade
items. Sibley also negotiated a peace treaty in 1804 between the Kadohadachos
and the Choctaws which was to be guaranteed by the Americans. Assured of
the good intentions of the United States, Dehahuit began flying an American
flag over his village in 1805, as the Spanish looked on helplessly (Smith
1991:185-188).
Spanish passivity ended the following year, however, due to an American
expedition, led by Major Thomas Freeman and Doctor Peter Custis, which was
designed to ascend the Red River to its Source. Dehahuit met Freeman and
Custis when they passed near his village in July 1806, and he provided them
with guides for the rest of their journey. The Spanish responded to the
Kadohadacho caddi’s friendly attitude toward the United States by sending a
large troop to his village which taunted him and cut down the American flag
(Smith 1991:192-194). This action caused Dehahuit to travel to Natchitoches
following the return of the American expedition--Freeman and Custis had been
turned back by the same force which had invaded the Kadohadacho village-and to proclaim his tribe’s formal allegiance to the United States (Rowland
1917, Volume IV:3-5).
Throughout the following decade the Kadohadachos and the United States
maintained a close and fruitful relationship, personified by the friendship of
Dehahuit and Agent Sibley. In the summer of 1807, Sibley not only forced the
Choctaws to pay restitution for breaking their treaty with the Kadohadachos; he
also disbanded a group of American horse thieves that had formed a camp near
the Kadohadacho village (Smith 1991:197). In return, the Kadohadacho caddi
arranged for a large group of Hasinais, Wichitas, and Comanches to travel to
Natchitoches in August 1807 for a grand council with the American agent
(Sibley 1922:48-60). This meeting proved to be mutally beneficial to both
parties; with the aid of Dehahuit, Sibley succeeded in extending his country’s
influence well into Spanish Texas; likewise, Sibley’s graciousness added to the
Kadohadacho caddi’s esteem.
Dehahuit’s diplomatic successes not only enabled him to claim jurisdiction
over the Yatasis and Natchitoches, but over the Hasinai tribes of Texas as well.
Despite his ties with the United States, the Kadohadacho caddi kept diplomatic
channels with the Spanish of Texas open and traveled to San Antonio to meet
with the governor in the summer of 1809. As spokesman for the Hasinai,
Dehahuit asked the governor to provide his kinsmen with an official trader, a
request which was granted later that year (Smith 1991:198). Over the next few
years Dehahuit continued to act as spokesman for all the Caddos in their relations with both Spain and the United States.
He also used his influence to maintain peace along the still-undefined
boundary when threats of war begain to appear in 1810. The first threat was
due to the Hidalgo revolt in Mexico which sparked a call in Texas for indepen-

124

Texas Archeological Society

dence from Spain. Dehahuit used his prestigious rank to counsel the Caddos and
Wichitas to stay out of the fray. Matters heated up along the Louisiana-Texas
frontier two years later when the United States declared war on Great Britain,
beginning the War of 1812. It was fully expected that the war would extend to
a struggle with Spain as well and that an American invasion of Texas would
result. At Agent Sibley’s request, in the fall of 1812, Dehahuit successfully
completed a mission to enjoin the Texas Indian tribes to remain neutral (Smith
1991:198-200).
A new threat to the peace materialized the following year from east of the
Mississippi River in the form of the Creek Indians who were at war with the
United States; these hostiles sent emissaries across the river to gain Indian allies by arguing that the Americans were ultimately inimical to all natives. Not
only did Dehahuit lead the tribes under his influence to resist the Creek entreaties, he also got them to offer their services against the British in case of invasion. When the threat of a British landing in Louisiana actually materialized in
late 1814, under the leadership of the Kadohadachos the tribes proved true to
their word. In December, 150 Caddo warriors answered General Andrew
Jackson’s call-to-arms and arrived in Natchitoches, where they were held in
reserve incase they were needed to secure the peace along the Spanish border
(Smith 1991:200-203).
While the Kadohadachos had clearly sided with the United States in the
southwestern border dispute with Spain, with the easing of tensions which accompanied the end of the War of 1812, Dehahuit attempted to reassume a position that was friendly to both powers. With the signing of the Adams-Ofiis
Treaty in February 1819, the boundary between Louisiana and Texas was finally officially determined as being the Sabine River from its mouth to 32 degrees longitude, then north to the Red River, and westward along the Red to the
100th meridian. However, the boundary line between the Red and the Sabine
was not immediately surveyed, thus it remained unclear upon which side of the
border the Kadohadacho villages lay. Once again, the tribe was afforded the opportunity of dealing with, and profiting from, both Spain (Mexico after 1821)
and the United States. This time, however, the circumstances were different:
with the border being calm, the Kadohadachos were not as important to the two
powers, and less attention was paid to the problems that plagued the tribe in the
1820s.
Principal among these problems was the influx of Anglo-Americans into
the area. Some were farmers who settled in the Kadohadachos’ hunting grounds
above their village on the Red River. Others were illegal traders who successfully diverted the tribe’s trade from the official United States trading post by
supplying the warriors with whiskey. Whereas Agent Sibley had acted quickly
in removing interlopers--in fact, he was removed from his post in 1815, partly
because the citizens around Natchitoches believed that he was more interested in
the Kadohadachos’ well-being than their own--his successors were far less
diligent in protecting the tribe from intruders. As a result, the area’s game was

Smith m The Red River Caddos

125

depleted, and the Kadohadachos developed a serious alcohol problem (Smith
1989:214-218).
Eastern emigrant Indian tribes also pressured the Red River Caddos after
the War of 1812. Among these tribes were the Choctaws, Kickapoos, Delawares,
Shawnees, and Cherokees. Although these tribes were most often friendly and
aided the Kadohadachos in their ongoing struggle with the Osages, ultimately
they caused Dehahuit to lose the preeminent position that he had forged among
the tribes of the Louisiana-Texas frontier (Smith 1989:224-228). By the late
1820s the Cherokees, led by their civil chief, Duwali, had become the spokesman for the region’s Indians in their relations with Mexico and the United States
(Everett 1990:73).
Thus, the Kadohadachos, plagued by alcohol and want of game, and relatively unimportant to the region’s diplomacy, became a prime candidate for
removal when the official Indian policy Of the United States shifted during the
presidency of Andrew Jackson. Whereas, the federal government had attempted
(often half-heartedly) to protect the Indians’ lands from white incursion, the
Indian Removal Act of 1830 implemented the program of buying native lands
and moving the tribes to new territory in the west. President Jackson’s appointee
for the postion of agent for the Kadohadachos, Jehiel Brooks, fully concurred
with this policy.
Brooks began pressuring the Red River Caddos to give up their land in
1833, when Captain Henry Shreve arrived in Natchitoches to begin the process
of removing the Red River raft, a natural logjam which hindered navigation on
the Red. Brooks realized that the only thing that had kept the Caddo lands from
being swamped by white settlers was the lack of access to markets. With the Red
River open to steamboats, it would only be a matter of time before cotton
growers established plantations throughout the Caddo country.
At this crucial moment when the Kadohadachos needed strong leadership
the most, their esteemed caddi, Dehahuit, died. He was replaced by Tarshar, a
much less decisive man than Dehahuit, and one who had a fondness for liquor.
In June 1835, Brooks intimidated Tarshar into gathering the entire tribe to
discuss the sale of their lands. Five hundred tribesmen, including the few remaining Natchitoches and Yatasis, met with Brooks and agreed on July 1 to sell
their lands for eighty thousand dollars. Unlike other tribes which sold their land
under the Indian Removal Act, the Red River Caddos were not offered land in
the Indian Territory, but were instead told to leave the United States and join
their Hasinai kinsmen in Texas (Lange 1974:159-322).
The Caddos did not completely abandon their ancestral Red River villages
until 1839. Eventually the Red River Caddos--now fully united under the
leadership of the Kadohadachos--settled with the Hasinais on the Brazos River
upstream from Waco. In 1859, hostile Texans forced the entire Caddo tribe to
leave Texas and seek refuge in the Indian Territory. The Civil War caused the
Caddos to take flight once more, but finally, in 1867, the tribe settled on the land
where they still reside today. Fittingly, the Caddos once again live in the Red

126

Texas Archeological Society

River Valley; however, this time their land is on a tributary, the Washita, in an
area far to the west of the region where the tribe experienced its greatest glory.

REFERENCES CITED
Allen, H. E.
1939
The Parrilla Expedition to the Red River in 1759. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly 43:53-71.
Bolton, H. E.
1908
The Native Tribes about the East Texas Missions. Texas State Historical
Association Quarterly 11: 249-276.
1914

Athanase de M~ziOres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780. 2 Vols.
Arthur H. Clark Company, Cleveland.

Chipman, D. E.
1992
Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Din, G. C., and A. P. Nasatir
1983
The Imperial Osages: Spanish-Indian Diplomacy in the Mississippi Valley.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

Everett, D.
The Texas Cherokees: A People Between Two Fires, 1819-1840. University
1990
of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
John, E. A. H.
1975
Storms Brewed in Other Men’s Worlds: The Confrontation of lndians, Spanish, and French in the Southwest, 1540-1795. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
Kinnaird, L. (Editor)
1949
Spain in the Mississippi Valley, 1765-1794. 3 Vols. Annual Report for the
Year 1945. American Historical Association, Washington, D.C.
Kinnaird, L. and L. Kinnaird
1983
The Red River Valley in 1796. Louis&na History 24: 184-193.
Lange, C. H.
1974
A Report on Data Pertaining to the Caddo Treaty of July 1, 1835: The
Historical and Anthropological Background and Aftermath. In: Caddoan
Indians, edited by D. Horr. 4 Vols. Garland Publishing, New York.
Nasatir, A. P.
Borderland in Retreat: From Spanish Louisiana to the far Southwest. Univer1976
sity of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Smith ~ The Red River Caddos

127

Newkumet, V. B. and H. L. Meredith
Hasinai: A Traditional History of tile Caddo Confederacy. Texas A&M
1988
University Press, College Station.
O’Neill, C. (Editor)
Charlevoix’ s Louisiana: Selections fronl the History and the Journal of Pierre

1977

F. X. Charlevoix. Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge.
Rowland, D. (Editor)
1917

Official Letter Book’s ofW.C.C. Claiborne. 6 Vols. Mississippi State Department of Archives and History, Jackson.

Sibley, J.
1832

1922

Historical Sketches of several Indian tribes in Louisiana, south of the Arkansas River, and between the Mississippi and River Grande. In: American State
Papers, Class II, Indian Affairs, Volume I, pp. 721-725. Gales & Seaton,
Washington, D.C.
A Reportfi’om Natchitoches in 1807. Edited by A. H. Abel. Indian Notes and
Monographs. Museum of the American Indian and the Heye Foundation,
New York.

Smith, F. T.
1989
On the Convergence of Empire: The Caddo Indian Confederacies, 15421835. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Tulane University, New Orleans.
1991

The Kadohadacho Indians and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1803-1815.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly 95:176-204.

Smith, R. A. (Editor and Translator)
1958
Account of the Journey of Benard de la Harpe. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly 62: 75-86, 246-259, 371-385, 525-541.
Swanton, J.. R.
1942
Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bulletin
132. Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, Washington,
D.C.
Weddle, R. S.
The San Sabd Mission: Spanish Pivot in Texas. University of Texas Press,
1964
Austin.
1973

WildetTzess Manhunt: Tile Spanish Search for La Salle. University of Texas
Press, Austin.

1991

The French Thorn: Rival Explorers in tile Spanish Sea, 1682-1762. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

Williams, S.
1964

The Aboriginal Locations of the Kadohadacho and Related Tribes. In: Explorations in Cultural Anthropolgy, edited by W. H. Goodenough, pp. 545-570.
Yale University Press, New Haven.

