Catfish Spines from Archeological Sites in Texas
CHARLES L.

DOUGLAS

ABSTRACT
Areheological reports containing photographs of pectoral spines of catfish,
but identified as mandibles of gar, have led other investigators to perpetuate
the error. Illustrations of pectoral spines and a gar’s mandible are presented
to aid in future identifications.

Spines from pectoral fins of catfish are among the less common items
found in archeological sites in western and southwestern Texas. Such
spines have been found, however, in Baker Cave (Douglas, in press),
the San Lorenzo Site (Curtis D. Tunnell, personal communication),
Eagle Cave (Ross, 1965), and Centipede and Damp Caves (Epstein,
1963). Pectoral spines have been considered to be awls, the evidence
for such usage hinging upon the spines showing polishing of the
surfaces.

FIGURE 1 (above) Labial view of left mandible of spotted gar, taken
in Town Lake, Austin, Texas. Original length 10.8 cm. (below)
Buccal view of the same mandible shown above. The jaw is composed
of several bones; note the simple articulation and the rounded, anterior end.

264

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIOURE 2 (above) Left pectoral spine of a channel catfish, found in
Baker Cave, Val Verde Co., Texas. Note tooth-like projections along
the long axis, and the tapering distal end. One articulating process
was broken off during excavation. (below) Right pectoral spine of
a channel catfish taken in Town Lake, Austin, Texas. Original length
54 ram. Note the complex articulations. Drawing by Hal Story.

Unfortunately, pectoral spines have not always been recognized
as such. A pectoral spine of a catfish was identified as being a gar
mandible (Epstein, 1963, Fig. 23 E), an inadvertent error that has
tended to perpetuate itself. Later, Ross (1965: 107) considered a
similar spine as being a "gar jaw-bone." The bone illustrated by Ross
(1965, Fig. 26 H) appears to me to be a pectoral spine having the
proximal, articulating end broken off. Recently I examined pectoral
spines from several other sites; all were assumed by the archeologist
to be mandibles of gar.
Figure i shows the le2t mandible of a spotted gar, Lepisosteus
productus. This fish (F228) was taken in Town Lake, Austin, Texas;
it weighed 2333 grams and was 80 cm. in length.
Figure 2 shows the left pectoral spine of a channel catfish found
in Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. One articulating process
was broken during excavation. The lower illustration in Fig. 2 is of a
spine from the right side of a channel catfish, Ictalurus punctatus,

CATFISH

265

SPINES

taken in Town Lake. This fish (F234) weighed 1127 grams and was
43 em. in length. Skeletons of the fish mentioned above (F228, F234)
are in the skeletal collection of the Areheological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin.
Mandibles of bony fish are composed of several bones, whereas
pectoral spines are composed of only one bone. The articulation of
a gar’s mandible is much simpler than the complex articulations of
a pectoral spine. Pectoral spines of catfish have bony projections
along one or both sides of the long axis, depending upon the species
involved; these projections may be mistaken for teeth, unless the
specimen is examined closely. This feature probably has contributed
to the misidentifieations of this bone and the resultant reports in
the literature.
Texas Memorial Museum
The University of Texas at Austin

tlEFERENCES CITED
Douglas, Charles L.
In Press Analysis of the faunal remains, Part II In The Archeology of Baker
Cave, by James A. Word. Texas Memorial Museum, Bulletin No. 16.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1963 Centipede and Damp Caves: Exeavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1958. B~dletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 (for 1962)
pp. 1-129.
Boss, Biehard E.
1965 The Archeology of Eagle Cave. Papers of the Texas Archeologica!
Salvage Project, No. 7, pp. 1-163.

