NOTES

ABSTRACT
Wear patterns on worked ceramic potsherds collected during a reconnaissance of the McGregor Guided Missile Range, south central New Mexico, show
that these artifacts served prehistoric potters as scraping and smoothing tools. The
wear pattern typology presents a methodology for determining patterns of use.
Ceramic types with hard paste (Chupadero Black-on-White and Mimbres Blackon-White) were preferred over other available types (mostly local El Paso
brownware) as the raw material for these scrapers. Potsherd scrapers were found
in proportionately greater quantities in village sites than in smaller, less complex
sites, indicating that villages were more often the location of pottery manufacture.
Potsherd scrapers show potential as useful indicators of ceramic manufacturing
activity on sites where archeological research is restricted to surface survey.

INTRODUCTION
Prehistoric inhabitants of the Southwest are known to have reused fragments of broken pottery vessels. These may be distinguished from ordinary
potsherds by the presence of ground edges or perforations and are usually
triangular, rectangular, or circular. These artifacts are usually refered to as
worked potsherds. Depending on their shapes, sizes, and wear patterns,
worked potsherds have been described as counters, gaming pieces, pendants, scrapers, scoops, spindle-whorls, or spoons. However, evidence to
substantiate these interpretations is often lacking or incomplete. In an effort to
bring attention to this class of artifacts, direct evidence is provided for interpreting the function of a large sample of one type of worked sherd from
McGregor Guided Missile Range, south-central New Mexico.
McGregor Range is located directly north of El Paso, Texas, in Otero
County, New Mexico (Fig. I). This range forms a large portion of the lower
Tularosa Basin. It also constitutes a large part of the southern Jornada
Branch, a prehistoric cultural area which is the southeasternmost expression
of the Mogollon sequence. The appearance of El Paso Brown marked the
beginning of the Ceramic period, around A.D. 500. The Ceramic period
developed in the Mesilla Phase (ca. A.D. 900-1100) and reached its peak,
involving a brisk ceramic trade with outside areas, in the Dona Ana Phase (ca.
A.D. 1100-1200) and the following El Paso Phase (ca. A.D. 1200-1400).

126

Texas Archeological Society

Texas Archeological Survey (TAS) performed a surface survey of McGregor Range in order to assess its archeological resource potential (Beckes and
Dibble, in press). A representative sample of nearly 22,000 ceramic sherds
and other artifacts was collected for further study. At each of 264 sites bearing
ceramics, an effort was made to collect all ceramic types present (Smiley,
1977, 1978).
Of the 126 worked sherds collected on McGregor Range, 125 appear to
have served prehistoric potters as scraping and smoothing tools. Unlike many
described specimens, these tools are rarely smoothed on all edges and usually
have only one, two, or three facets (Fig. 2). However, this characteristic may
be a result of post-use breakage.
Reusing potsherds as ceramic scrapers was a common practice in most
areas and phases of the prehistoric Southwest. Examples are abundant in
reports from the Anasazi (Morris, 1939:167; Smith, 1952:147; Judd,
1954:228) and Mogollon culture areas (Haury, 1936:28; Martin and
Rinaldo, 1950:352; Wheat, 1955:108; Martin et al., 1957:84). Evidence
from the Hohokam area is scanty (Gladwin et al., 1937:243; Haury,
1976:251).
In the immediate area of the Jornada Branch, sherd scrapers (Lehmer,
1948:31), and sherd spoons and scoops (Marshall, 1973:61), were noted.
Unfortunately, lack of information about worked sherds in reports often precludes an interpretation as to their use.

F-

N

R

20
0 5 I0
I
[ I ~
MILES

Fig. I Location map for McGregor Guided Missile Range.

50
,,]

Smiley - Worked Potsherds

127

Ethnographic information suggests that sherds were used traditionally in
the Southwest for scraping and smoothing walls of leather-hard, or sun-dried,
ceramic vessels before their final firing (Guthe, 1925:54; Colton, 1953:9).
This procedure is done in order to scrape and smooth away bumps and coil
marks and thin vessel walls. Pieces of gourd also are known to be used as
scrapers and shapers when the clay is still wet and plastic (Guthe, 1925:27;
Colton, 1953:11).

ANALYSIS OF ARTIFACTS
After determining that the 125 worked sherds were ceramic vessel scrapers, an analysis of their use was performed. In describing wear patterns, the

Ca)

Cc)

(d)

(b)
0

I,

5

I

10

I

cffl

Fig. 2 Examples of ceramic scrapers: a) and b) Chupadero Black-on-White; c) and d)
Mimbres Black-on-White.

Texas Archeological Society

128

term facet refers to the smoothed edge of a sherd as seen from either interior
or exterior surface. Bevel refers to the angle of the facet, either towards the
exterior or interior sherd surface. The basic types of ceramic scrapers found
on the McGregor Range survey and their probable pattern of use are shown in
Figure 3. These patterns are:
A.

CONVEX FACET, EXTERIOR BEVEL. This sherd has a convex
facet beveled towards the exterior surface. This condition results from
the potter holding it at an angle, fingers on the concave or interior
surface, thumb on the exterior surface. The wear pattern results from
scraping or smoothing the interior of a vessel in a motion towards the
potter’s body.

B,

CONVEX FACET, FLAT OR ROUNDED EDGE SURFACE (NO
BEVEL). The flat wear pattern is made by holding the sherd at a 90°
angle to the interior wall of a clay vessel while scraping. A rounded
surface results when the tool is used at a slight angle on both sides of
the facet.

C.

CONVEX FACET, INTERIOR BEVEL. This wear pattern is a result
of the sherd being held in a manner opposite to type A; fingers are on
the convex or exterior surface and thumb on the interior surface. This
type of sherd is used to scrape the interior of the vessel.

D. CONVEX FACET, INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR BEVEL. Both sides
of the ceramic tool are used in shaping the interior of a vessel.
E.

CONCAVE FACET, EXTERIOR BEVEL. The ceramic tool is held as
in Type A, but is used to scrape the exterior, convex surface of a clay
vessel.
Of the 125 ceramic scrapers, 54 of El Paso Brown were unavailable for
further analysis. Seventy-one scrapers of other ceramic types were carefully
examined. Of the wear patterns, Type A (convex facet, exterior bevel, used
to scrape the interior of a vessel) is by far the most common.
Chupadero Black-on-White sherds usually have steeply bevelled facets,
since they have a harder and finer grained paste than other types (Fig. 4a).
Because El Paso Polychrome is quite friable, these sherd scrapers generally
have round or flat edges with little angled bevel (Fig. 4b).
Scrapers range between 2 to 9 cm in their maximum diameter and
average 4 cm. This size is easily held between the fingers. However, some
artifacts must have been abandoned because they were worn down to an
impractically small size. Many scrapers have more than one facet~ or were
used by the potter at more than one angle (Type B). Potters probably used
several different sherd scrapers in fashioning one vessel, different surfaces
requiring variously shaped tools.
Facet shapes are either concave or convex, indicating repeated contact
with curved surfaces to produce a ground edge. They were probably prepared for use by chipping and then grinding on something hard such as a
stone or a fired ceramic surface. In ethnographic studies of the modern
pueblos, potsherd scrapers were prepared for use by rubbing on coarse sandstone (Guthe, 1925:54). These procedures would roughly shape them for
their function as a tool and usage would later produce the smooth curved
facets observed on the artifacts.

Smiley - Worked Potsherds

129

Ceramic Types Employed
Table I compares the number of scrapers of each ceramic type against the
total number of sherds of that type found on McGregor Range. This enables
one to statistically test differences in the proportion of scrapers for each type.
The G test, a statistical test much like Chi Square, was used for these compari-

(b)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 3 Types of ceramic scrapers and probable patterns of use.

130

Texas Archeological Society

sons (Sokal and Rohlf, 1973:293). By using this statistical test, unevenness in
collection techniques is rendered inconsequential.
Results indicate a preference for specific ceramic types as the raw material
for scrapers. For example, of 1,587 Chupadero Black-on-White sherds collected, 37 (.02%) were ceramic scrapers, a higher number than would be
expected if these artifacts were randomly distributed among all ceramic types.
A similar result was obtained for Mimbres Classic Black-on-White. Probably
the greater hardness and strength of these pottery types contributed to their
preference. It is also possible that because of their bright coloration, these
types were less easily misplaced and consequently were prefered.
In proportion to their total representation, El Paso Brown and El Paso
Polychrome, the local wares, are under-represented as ceramic scrapers.
This locally manufactured brownware is less than ideally suited for tools because of its friable nature and may account for its under-representation. Three
Rivers Red-on-Terracotta may or may not have been preferred for vessel
scrapers. There is too little evidence for a statistical analysis.
When scrapers of pottery types appearing in trace amounts (less than I%)
are analyzed as a group (Jornada Brown, Playas Red [Plain variety], unidentified plainware, other types), they are shown by the G test to be neither
significantly under nor over-represented.
Probably Chupadero and Mimbres Black-on-White potsherds were most
highly preferred for ceramic scrapers. In their absence, types such as Jornada
Brown, Gila Polychrome, and Playas Red were used; local El Paso
Brownware was the material of last resort.
In a situation where chronology is better controlled, as in excavation, a
more precise interpretation can be made as to popularity of various ceramic
types for scrapers at a given point in time. The analyzed types span the entire
Ceramic period for this area, approximately A.D. 500-1400. Conclusions as
to what ceramic types were employed at any given time cannot be made.
Therefore, preferences shown for particular ceramic types are general for the
entire period.

Ca)

Cb)

Hg. 4 Prof!lesofceramicscrape~:a)scraper withsteep bevel;b)scraper withshallow
bevel.

Smiley - Worked Potsherds

131

Table 1
Comparison by ceramic type of number of worked sherds with total number of
sherds collected
No. of
Worked Sherds
Ceramic Type
El Paso Brown

(A)

Comparison of (A) to (B)

(B)

54

15,395

Fewer than expected (88.13),
’p
.01

7

3,250

Fewer than expected (18.60)
p
.01

37

1,587

El Paso Polychrome

Chupadero Black on

Total No. of
Sherds Collected

More than expected (9.08)

White
Mimbres Classic Black
on White

p
22

549

2

232

Jorna Brown

p

Three Rivers Red on

.01

About the same as expected
(1.33), sample size too small

Terracotta

for G test

iI 61!

Playas Red (Plain

3

variety)

Unidentified Plainware
All other types

.01

More than expected (3.14)

90

823

Fewer than expected (4.71),
but sample size too small
for G test

226

0

446

125

12,836

"p = probability that the null hypothesis is true

Distribution of Scrapers
Table 2 shows the distribution of scrapers among various site types defined during the McGregor Range survey. Presumably, domestic tools used
for the manufacture of pottery vessels would be found in habitation sites.
Habitation sites defined on the survey are villages, complex camps, burned
rock loci, and rockshelters.
Villages show evidence of house remnants, substantial quantities of nonportable artifacts, extensive trash middens, and are at least three acres in
extent. These sites are presumed to have been permanent, residential communities. They are most abundant in the El Paso Phase (ca. A.D. 12001400). Sites of lesser size with no evidence of structures and fewer artifacts
and features are complex camps. These may have been ramada-type structures for temporary encampment.
Burned rock loci are relatively small sites (less than one acre), characterized by ring middens, large multiple use hearths, and some artifact scatter.
These sites most likely represent plant processing camps inhabited for short
periods. Evidence of habitation in rockshelters includes rock art, ceramic and
lithic scatters, hearths, and extensive ash middens (Beckes, 1977:117).
Through the use of the G-test, village sites were found to produce a
greater proportion of ceramic scrapers than would be expected if these scrapers were randomly dispersed in all site types yielding ceramic materials. Corn-

132

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2

Comparison by site type of number of worked sherds with total number of sherds
collected
No. of
Worked Sherds
Site Type

(A)

Total No. of
Sherds Collected
(B)

Comparisons of (A) to (B)
More than expected (64.88)

Villages

84

11,333

Complex Camps

32

7,995

Fewer than expected (45.77)
p
.01

8

2,014

Fewer than expected (11.53)
non-significant

1

351

Fewer than expected (2.83),
sample too small for G test

125

12,836

"p

Burned Rock Loci
(ceramic)
All other site types
(see text)

~01

"p = probability that the null hypothesis is true

plex camps show significantly fewer scrapers than expected from a purely
random distribution.
If the presence of ceramic scrapers is interpreted as direct evidence of
ceramic manufacturing, the occupants of both villages and complex camps
engaged in this activity. However, proportionately more scrapers are found in
village sites. Therefore, villages were probably habitation sites where the
greatest amount of ceramic manufacture took place. The presence of the
same ceramic types at both of these site types indicates that they were occupied in the same general period.
Burned rock loci produced fewer scrapers than expected if the distribution
was normal, but results are not statistically significant. Perhaps a very limited
amount of pottery making went on in these camps. One ceramic scraper was
found in a rockshelter, not enough evidence to create a pattern.
Ceramic site types which did not produce scrapers were isolated hearths,
ceramic/lithic scatters, and isolated ceramic scatters.

SUMMARY
Worked ceramic sherds from McGregor Range, New Mexico, were examined from a technological and functional point of view. Evidence such as
basic shape, size, wear facets, and ceramic types employed led to the conclusion that 125 out of 126 of these artifacts were used prehistorically to aid in the
scraping and smoothing of both interior and exterior surfaces of unfired
ceramic vessels. In addition, prehistoric potters in the Tularosa Basin area
probably preferred particular ceramic types to others (i.e., hard-pasted Chupadero and Mimbres Black-on-White) as the raw material for their scrapers.
An examination of the distribution of scrapers among different types of
sites showed that they appeared more frequently in village sites than in other,
smaller types of sites. If the presence of sherd scrapers on a site provides an
accurate indication of ceramic vessel manufacture, then villages were most

Smiley - Worked Potsherds

133

often the location for this activity. Because the material is readily available and
the tools easily manufactured, they would not be expected to travel long
distances from the location of their use.
Studying the spatial distribution of artifacts with known use, such as the
ceramic scrapers, can aid in determining variable prehistoric activity patterns.
For example, because the manufacture of pottery was not performed in every
type of site, presence or absence of ceramic manufacturing tools can be used
to interpret probable site specific activities. Further, the abundance of ceramic
scrapers in a site can be considered a clue to the amount of pottery making
that took place during the site’s history.
The ceramic types used for scrapers most likely changed over time. Excavation of sites containing these artifacts can bring chronological control to
this study. In addition, studies of wear patterning on ceramic scrapers can be
used to determine the sort of surfaces on which they were used, e.g., large
ollas with little curvature or small bowls with a great deal of curvature.
Ceramic scrapers possess three particular advantages that make them
potentially useful for archeological research. First, because they are ceramic,
they resist natural deterioration. A broken and weathered ceramic scraper is
still an identifiable artifact. Second, because they were abundantly made and
discarded, they are readily found in surface residues of sites which contain
them and can be found in surface surveys. Last, relic collectors will pass by all
but the most beautiful of these undistinguished artifacts. Many ceramic scrapers are distinguishable from ordinary sherds only upon close examination. As
a result of these factors, ceramic scrapers remain on the surface where discarded and provide a little disturbed source for archeological investigations.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was made possible by contracts to the Texas Archeological Survey, University of
Texas at Austin, by the Fort Worth District Corps of Engineers. Thanks also go to David S. Dibble
and Alan Dulaney of TAS. Kitty Burton and John Smiley assisted with the manuscript.

REFERENCES CITED
Beckes, Michael R.
Prehistoric Cultural Stability and Change in the Southern Tularosa Ba1977
sin. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh.
Beckes, Michael R. and David S. Dibble
in press The Prehistoric Resource. In: Michael R. Beckes, David S. Dibble, and
Martha Doty Freeman, A Cultural Resource Inventory. An Assessment
of McGregor Guided Missile Range. Part I. The Cultural Resource Base.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report, 65.
Colton, Harold S.
1953
Potsherds, an Introduction to the Study of Prehistoric Southwestern
Ceramics and Their Use in Historic Reconstruction. Bulletin of the Museum of Northern Arizona, 25:1-86.
Gladwin, H. S., Emil W. Haury, E. B. Sayles, and Nora Gladwin
1937

Excavations at Snaketown, Material Culture. Medallion Papers, 25:1305.

134

Texas Archeological Society

Guthe, Carl E.
Pueblo Pottery Making. Yale University Press, New Haven.
1925
Haury, Emil W.
The Mogollon Culture of Southwestern New Mexico. Medallion Papers,
1936
20:1-146.

1976

The Hohokam Desert Farmers and Craftsmen. Snaketown 1964-1965.
University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Judd, Neil M.
1954
The Material Culture of Pueblo Bonito. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, 124:1-398.

Lehmer, Donald J.
1948
The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. University of Arizona Bulletin,
(2):I-97.
Marshall, M. p,
Background Information on the Jornada Branch Area. In: Human Sys1973
tems Research Technical Manual, Tularosa Basin Survey. Three Rivers,
New Mexico.
Martin, P. S. and John B. Rinaldo
Turkey Foot Ridge Site, A Mogollon Village, Pine Lawn Valley, Western
1950
New Mexico. Fieldiana: Anthropology, 38(2):1-396.
Martin, P. S., John B. Rinaldo, and Eloise R. Barter
Late Mogollon Communities, Four Sites of the Tularosa Phase, Western
1957
New Mexico. Fieldiana: Anthropology, 49(1):I-144.
Morris, Earl H.
Archaeological Studies in the La Plata District. Carnegie Institution of
1939
Washington, Washington, D.C.
Smiley, Nancy Kays
1977
Prehistoric Ceramics of McGregor Range. In: Michael R. Beckes, Alan
R. Dulaney, John D. Pigott, Robert F. Scott IV, and Nancy Kays Smiley,
A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of McGregor Guided
Missile Range. Part II. Special Archeological Studies. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report, 65:129-261.
1978

Prehistoric Ceramics of the Lower Tularosa Basin, Southeastern New
Mexico. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Texas, Austin.

Sokal, Robert R. and F. James Rohlf
1973
Introduction to Biostatistics. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.
Smith, Watson
Excavations in Big Hawk Valley, Wupatki National Monument, Arizona.
1952
Bulletin of the Museum of Northern Arizona, 24:1-203.
Wheat, Joe Ben
Mogollon Culture Prior to A.D. 1000. American Anthropological Asso1955
ciation Memoir, 82:1-242.

