THE LATE QUATERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT
OF TEXAS: A MODEL FOR
THE ARCHEOLOGIST
VAUGHN M.

BRYANT JR. AND HARRY

J.

SHAFER

ABSTRACT
Archeological, paleontological, plant macrofossil, hydrological and
palynological evidence is used to construct a model of late Quaternary
vegetations in Texas. These available data sources suggest that: (1)
during the Wisconsin Interpluvial Period (33,500-22,500 BP) most of
Texas contained a scrub and grassland vegetation; (2) with the onset of
the Wisconsin Fullglacial Period (22,500-14,000 BP) a mosaic of
woodlands, parklands and scrublands replaced the earlier grasslands in
many regions of Texas north of Bexar County; (3) during the Lateglacial
Period (14,000-10,000 BP} there was a widespread loss of woodland
areas in Texas and a loss or major reduction of many Pleistocene fauna;
and (4) during the Postglacial Period (10,000 BP-present) the final
vegetational changes occurred leading to the establishment of our
present Texas flora and fauna. Also discussed are the possible
implications that this paleoenvironmental model has in examining the
sequences of human adaptation from the late Pleistocene to protohistoric
times in Texas.

INTRODUCTION
Archeologically and botanically the state of Texas is situated in
a critical location. Archeologically it stands at the lower end of the
Great Plains and north of the great civilizations that developed and
flourished in Mesoamerica. It is situated on the western fringe of
the Southeastern horticultural traditions and on the eastern fringe
of the Puebloan area.
We do not know when mankind first began to settle in Texas, but
there is enough available evidence to suggest that people were
occupying certain areas by at least the end of the Pleistocene era.
Evidence of this is seen in the deposits of late Pleistocene
archeological remains such as Bonfire Shelter (Dibble 1968), the
Lubbock Lake Site (Black 1974), the Levi Site (Alexander 1963), and
other similar locations in Texas where the faunal remains of
extinct Pleistocene animals are associated with the presence of
prehistoric man. Even earlier locations are claimed such as those
of Crook and Harris (1958), where radiocarbon dates have
recorded the suspected activities of ancient man to periods as
early as 38,000 years ago. In short, the archeological history of
much of Texas is already well documented to some degree and the

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

resources -- although rapidly and steadily diminishing -- are
presently numerous and varied.
On the other hand, our present knowledge of the botanical
record of Texas is not nearly as well documented. Deevey was one
of the first to recognize the critical location of Texas in reference
to possible ancient plant migrations when he suggested that during
the Quaternary period major plant migrations occurred across
portions of central and south Texas into Mexico (Deevey 1949).
Lucy Braun (1955) offered a counterview since she believed that
little or no vegetational or climatic changes occurred in Texas
during the entire Quaternary period. Later, Dillon (1956) and then
Martin and Harrell (1957) proposed still other phytographic
reconstructions suggesting moderate vegetational and climatic
changes in Texas during portions of the Quaternary period.
Zoologists such as Blair (1958) and paleontologists such as
Graham (1976), Lundelius (1967, 1974) and Slaughter (1963) have
also offered their interpretations of Quaternary vegetational
changes in Texas. Based upon the fossil evidence of extinct and
extant fauna these authors have suggested that more than 10,000
years ago certain regions of Texas were probably covered by large
wooded areas while in other regions there were savannas. Other
clues revealed by the fossil animal record suggest that there was
probably a north-south temperature gradient change which
undoubtedly affected the range and distribution of both plants and
animals.
The recovery and analysis of pack rat nests found in montane
areas of west Texas (Wells 1966; van Devender et. al. 1977) have
also provided data useful for the interpretation of late Quaternary
vegetational changes. Pack rats (Neotoma) make their nests from
objects they find in their environment. Often these items include
fruits, nuts and leaves which can later be identified and dated.
Using information recovered from pack rat nests in the Chisos
Mountains of west Texas Wells (1966) found that during the
Fullglacial Period (ca. 20,000 BP) yellow pine woodlands probably
covered large areas of the Chisos Mountains and may have
expanded outward into regions of lower elevation as well. In other
pack rat nests from the Guadalupe Mountain area van Devender,
et. al. (1973) found traces of spruce and Douglas Fir needles
suggesting that these plants formed part of the Fullglacial age
woodlands in that region.
Another approach to the study of Late Quaternary displacement,
migration and reconstruction of paleovegetations in Texas has been
the study of sequential changes in the fossil pollen record.

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

3

Although these types of data are difficult to obtain, they are often
more reliable as a paleoenvironmental indicator than either the
archeological or paleontological evidence. Fossil pollen grains are
considered more useful as indicators since they can be directly
linked to the plant groups which produced them whereas man and
other animals are mobile and thus their remains can sometimes be
found outside the areas of their optimum habitats.
The earliest attempts to obtain fossil pollen data and to apply
them to problems related to the paleoenvironment of Texas were
made during the 1940’s and early 1950’s by Potzger and Tharp
(1943; 1947; 1954) after they analyzed a series of peat deposits in
east and central Texas. Their analysis of the Patsche peat bog in
Lee County revealed the presence of fossil fir, spruce, pine, maple,
basswood, birch, chestnut, walnut and alder pollen in the
lowermost deposits. Variations in the pollen composition of other
deposits from that same bog were interpreted by Potzger and
Tharp to represent a late Quaternary vegetational sequence that
began with an early cool-moist period, progressed through a warmdry period, changed to a warm-moist period and finally ended in
modern times with a warm-dry interval characterized by the
establishment of the present Post Oak Savanna vegetational zone.
Potzger and Tharp (1954) later analyzed other Texas peat deposits
in nearby Milam and Robertson Counties and determined that those
pollen records were similar to the ones they had recovered at the
Patsche Bog. Although useful, these original studies by Potzger and
Tharp did not contain any information concerning the chronological
age of any of the deposits. Even so, they still suggested that their
earliest pollen records represented the Wisconsin Fullglacial time
period and that they were approximately 20,000 years old.
No additional fossil pollen studies were conducted of Texas
deposits until the 1960’s when Graham and Heimsch (1960)
discovered and sampled the Soefje peat bog in Gonzales County
located in southcentral Texas. Graham and Heimsch also
reexamined the original peat samples which were collected in the
late 1940’s by Potzger and Tharp from the Gause Bog in Milam
County. These new studies led Graham and Heimsch to construct a
new interpretation of the central Texas Late Quaternary
Paleoenvironmental history. Their study offered a more detailed
analytical survey than those conducted by Potzger and Tharp and
led Graham and Heimsch to reject the original four-stage climatic
sequence proposed by Potzger and Tharp. Instead Graham and
Heimsch proposed that central Texas environments were cool and
moist prior to 12,500 years ago and that after that time there was

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a gradual warming trend that went through several minor
fluctuations until it ended in the warm-dry conditions found in
central Texas today.
The earliest pollen studies conducted in west Texas began in
1961, when Hafsten published a pollen analytical record of
sediments collected in a series of playa lakes located on and near
the Llano Estacado. His study was significant since it provided a
dated chronology covering a time span of more than 35,000 years
and resulted in a proposed four-stage vegetational sequence for
areas of west Texas and the Llano Estacado. His sequence
consisted of: (1) an interval more than 30,000 years ago when
grasslands were common in west Texas and on the Llano Estacado,
(2) a period between 22,500-14,000 years ago when many of the
grassland regions were replaced by conifer woodlands, (3) a
transition period between 14,000-10,000 years ago when many of
the conifer woodlands decreased in area and were being replaced
by scrub grasslands and (4) the establishment of the present
grasslands in the lower elevations of west Texas and the Llano
Estacado around 10,000 years ago.
Later,
studies by Olfield and Schoenwetter (1975) of
archeological deposits and other playa lake deposits also provided
additional information concerning suspected vegetational changes
in west Texas during the past 30,000 years. Although important,
the studies by Olfield and Schoenwetter did not significantly alter
any of the major original paleoenvironmental reconstructions
proposed by Hafsten (1961).
THE PALEOENVIRONMENTAL RECORD
Prehistoric archeological research involves, either directly, or
indirectly, the study of human artifacts. Artifacts are the products
of man’s behavioral responses that are used in an attempt to adapt
to the physical and cultural environment.
Even though artifacts constitute the basic data source most often
used by American archeologists it is essential that archeologists go
beyond this level of inquiry and examine other elements such as
the present and past environmental setting before trying to trace
the evolution of cultural systems and trying to explain the process
of cultural change. Before one tries to describe or offer hypotheses to explain cultural changes, such as the adoption of
plant and/or animal domestication or a long term hunter-gatherer
continuum, one should begin such explanatory statements with a
workable model of the paleoenvironment. This type of caution is

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

5

clearly demonstrated by Clark (1960: 308) when he emphasized his
view as to the importance of the paleoenvironment in a study of
cultural process: "... it is essential that the environment and
ecological setting of cultures ... be established as accurately as
possible, for, without this knowledge, we can hardly begin to
interpret the cultural evidence."
Unfortunately, most archeologists rarely have an opportunity to
examine the cultural systems that they are studying within the
framework of an established paleoenvironmental model. However,
when such models are available they serve as a valuable known in
the examination of cultural change and the establishment of
environmental parameters which could influence the course
human adaptive responses.

of

A paleoenvironmental model for Texas covering the last 30,000
years is offered herein as a background of data against which the
changes in the cultural responses in Texas prehistory can be
measured. Our model represents a generalized view. Although
useful in the broad sense, it is not precise enough to reflect
localized or isolated changes that may have occurred in the
microenvironment of a specific locale. Also, the weakest area of
our model is the last 2000 year segment since repeated testing has
demonstrated that in these deposits the pollen is often poorly
preserved.
There are available cultural records for Texas that hint of
significant ecological and cultural changes over much of the state
during the 13th century A.D. (Dillehay 1974) yet there is little
paleoenvironmental data from Texas to suggest what the related
ecological changes may have been. These ecological changes may
be related to significant climatic fluctuations in the American
Southwest during that time interval (Dean & Robinson 1977) yet our
paleoenvironmental data for Texas is not yet precise enough to
indicate whether or not this effect carried over into Texas.
The model that we are presenting in the remainder of this paper
is offered as a beginning point and should not be viewed by the
reader as the final analysis on this subject. Instead, it should serve
as a test for new data that becomes available in the future.
Hopefully, it will undergo modifications and refinements in the
years to follow.
Fossil pollen records from lake sediments, archeological deposits,
peat bogs, and fossil pack rat middens are the sources of data used
to propose a tentative vegetational sequence for areas of Texas
covering portions of the late Quaternary period. The majority of
these data have been collected from fossil pollen records in areas

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of central, eastcentral, west and southwest Texas. Unfortunately,
no fossil pollen records are yet available for regions of northeast,
southcentral or south Texas. This lack of pollen information from
those regions is due to several factors. First, there has only been a
limited number of attempts to recover fossil pollen from deposits in
these regions and second, what few attempts have been made have
generally resulted in a failure to find fossilized pollen.
In spite of these limitations we shall devote the remainder of this
paper to a discussion of what is presently known about the
paleoenvironmental record of Texas. We shall discuss these late
Quaternary environmental changes in Texas using the time period
chronology originally proposed by Hafsten (1961).
In our paper when we refer to a "woodland" we are interpreting it to mean an open canopy forest containing an
understory of herbaceous shrubs or grasses. Likewise, ,are view a
"parkland" as consisting of a grassland which is periodically
interrupted by isolated trees and/or large clumps of trees. Our term
"savanna" refers to a grassland containing a few scattered trees
and shrubs but still indicates an area where the continuity of the
grassland is basically uninterrupted. Finally, our term "scrub
grasslands" is used to refer to a prairie-like grassland vegetation
containing large numbers of scrubby plants and an occasional tree
or small stand of trees in the more favorable locales.
In this paper we view west Texas as containing two essentially
different physiographic and habitat zones: (I) the upland plateau
areas of the Llano Estacado and (2) the rolling hills and montane
areas of far west Texas.

Wisconsin Interpluvial Period -- 33,500-22,500
The only fossil pollen evidence yet available for the Wisconsin
Interpluvial Period in Texas comes from the studies by Hafsten
(1961) and Oldfield and Schoenwetter (1975) since deposits thus far
examined in other regions of Texas do not contain fossil pollen that
far back in time. In Hafsten’s original study of playa lake deposits
located on and near the edges of the Llano Estacado he found that
the fossil pollen evidence could be interpreted to indicate that prior
to the maximum spread of the advancing Wisconsin glaciation
(30,000 years ago) the vegetation in that region of west Texas could
be characterized as a scrub grassland with trees either totally
absent or very sparce. Furthermore, he suggested that these fossil
pollen data implied a fairly stable cool-moist climate during most of
the Wisconsin Interpluvial~Period until the beginning of the
Fullglacial Period around 22,000 years ago.

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

7

Additional fossil pollen analyses of west Texas playa lake
sediments were later conducted by Oldfield and Shoenwetter
(1975). Their data led them to suggest that Hafsten’s vegetational
reconstruction for the Wisconsin Interpluvial Period was basically
correct but that it had failed to note a series of localized minor
vegetational fluctuations. Oldfield and Schoenwetter interpreted
these minor vegetational shifts to mean that during this time period
regions of the Llano Estacado may have been intermittently invaded
by areas of scattered discontinuous open parklands composed of
spruce, pine and juniper. However, their fossil pollen records, like
those of Hafsten’s, suggest that most of this region of west Texas
was probably covered by a mixed scrub and grassland prairie
vegetation during most of the Wisconsin Interpluvial Period.
Since fossil pollen records are lacking for other areas of Texas
during this same time period it is difficult to reconstruct the
precise vegetational composition for the rest of the state. On the
other hand, we would like to propose a few speculations. A fossil
pollen study of deposits in southcentral Missouri by Mehringer,
King, and Lindsay (1970), for example, revealed that that region
was dominated by an open vegetation consisting of grasses and
herbaceous plants with only a few scattered conifers around
30,000 years ago. By projecting a similar pattern for areas south of
the Ozarks we find that north and central Texas might also have
been covered by a similar scrub and grassland vegetation during
this Wisconsin Interpluvial Period. Whether or not this is an
accurate reconstruction of the central and north Texas vegetation
during this early period is unknown.
The vegetation of south and east Texas during the Wisconsin
Interpluvial Period is an even greater mystery. By extrapolating
from neighboring areas, we suspect that both south and east Texas
were composed mainly of scrubby vegetation with some areas of
grasslands present. In addition, east Texas may have represented
an ecotonal region between the proposed grasslands and scrub
areas to the west and the deciduous forests of the southeastern
United States. If so, then there were probably at least limited areas
of east Texas which remained forested throughout the entire
Wisconsin Interpluvial Period.
Wisconsin Fullglacial Period (22,500-14,000 B.P.)
As the climate grew cooler with the establishment of the
Fullglacial period, conifers and certain deciduous trees probably
began to invade the grassland regions of Texas. This assumption is

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

supported by both the pollen and faunal records of west and
central Texas.
In deposits from Rich and Arch Lake located on the Llano
Estacado Hafsten (1961} recovered a fossil pollen record showing a
steady and rapid rise in the percentages of both spruce and pine
pollen. In conjunction with this rise in conifer pollen was a
decrease in grass and herbaceous pollen. Similar pollen records
from nearby Crane Lake also reveal that by 15,000 years ago
conifer pollen completely dominated the fossil pollen rain in a large
area on and around the southern edge of the Llano Estacado. In
some cases the pine pollen accounted for over 90% of all fossil
pollen recovered in certain strata from this time period. Hafsten
interpreted this information to imply that there was a woodland
vegetation of spruce and pine covering much of the Llano Estacado
region north of the Pecos River. Hafsten also stated that he
believed most of the pines were primarily ponderosa pine and that
although spruce trees were also present, they were probably not
very abundant. In addition, Hafsten suggested that fir (Abies} trees
were probably not part of the Wisconsin Fullglacial Period
vegetation on any part of the Llano Estacado in Texas.
Oldfield and Schoenwetter (1975} examined other playa lake
deposits on the Llano Estacado and concluded that the Fullglacial
vegetation in most of west Texas (including the Llano Estacado}
probably consisted of a continuous coniferous forest composed
primarily of a mixture of ponderosa pines and spruce (either Picea
engelmannii or Picea punguns}. They also stated that they believed
the conifer forests of that time period contained approximately
40% pine trees and 60% spruce trees in the areas of higher
elevation while in the lower elevations the mixture of conifers
was about 75% pine and 25% spruce. Furthermore, like Hafsten,
they agreed that the true fir {Abies} was probably not present in
any area of west Texas during the Fullglacial Period.
It was originally believed that high conifer pollen counts, similar
to the ones discovered in ,zest Texas Fullglacial deposits, were
reliable indicators of a widespread woodland type vegetation. More
recently, this interpretation has been questioned by Martin (1964}
and Martin and Mehringer (1965} who suggest that these
Fullglacial pollen records may reflect widespread conifer
parklands rather than woodlands.
In an extensive study of the modern pollen rain in grassland and
conifer woodland areas of eastern Washington and western Idaho
Mack and Bryant (1974} noted that percentages of pine pollen as
high as 50% could be recovered in grassland areas approximately

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

9

30 miles from the nearest forest. In general, however, the average
percentage of pine pollen for most of the grassland areas, near
forested regions was only 3040%. In other studies of the modern
pollen rain in the Pacific Northwest Mack and Bryant (1978) found
that percentages of pine pollen could reach as high as 80% in
surface samples collected in conifer parklands composed primarily
of pines and grasses. They also noted that percentages of pine
pollen could reach as high as 70% in surface samples collected in
scrub grasslands where only a few isolated pine trees were
present. It should be pointed out, however, that Mack and Bryant
(1974, 1978) were examining the modern pollen rain in and around
the Columbia Basin region of Washington state which is surrounded by extensive conifer forests composed of pines, spruce,
Douglas fir and fir. Thus, long distance transport of conifer pollen
undoubtedly helped to elevate the percentages of these pollen types
in the nearby grassland and parkland regions of the Columbia
Basin. This phenomenon is easier to understand in light of some of
their other data (Mack and Bryant 1974) which show that in locales
more than 30 miles away from heavily forested areas the
percentages of pine pollen in grassland areas begin to drop below
the 30-40% mark recovered in locales closer to the forested
regions. However, conifer parkland locales were able to maintain
percentages of pine pollen as high as 70% even in areas located
more than 30 miles away from heavily forested regions.
Using the above information as a possible collary for the west
Texas Fullglacial pollen records, we would like to suggest a
modification to the interpretation proposed by Hafsten (1961) and
Oldfield and Schoenwetter (1975). The high percentages of fossil
pine pollen may, as Hafsten has suggested, represent a continuous
conifer woodland covering much of west Texas including the Llano
Estacado. On the other hand, we believe that the same pollen data
could instead be interpreted to represent a Fullglacial period
vegetation characterized by some large areas of conifer forests
(primarily confined to elevated regions in west Texas) mixed with
parklands and even some large areas of grasslands and scrub
grasslands on the Llano Estacado.
Fossil pollen records from Bonfire Shelter located in the Amistad
Reservoir area of southwest Texas also can be used to help
interpret the Fullglacial period vegetational record. Although no
radiocarbon dates are yet available from the lowermost pollen
bearing strata in Bonfire Shelter, we believe that those deposits
(which are composed entirely of thick limestone spalls) were
produced primarily by severe ice wedging that loosened spalls from

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the roof and walls of the shelter during the cold winters of the late
Fullglacial period. Very high percentages (over 80%) of mostly
haploxylon type (pinyon) pine pollen was recovered from these spall
zone deposits and suggests that during the late Fullglacial period
southwest Texas was probably covered by a mosiac of woodland,
parkland and scrub grassland vegetations composed primarily of
grasses, pinyon pines and perhaps some junipers. We believe that
junipers were a component of the southwest Texas Fullglacial
period vegetation even though its pollen was not recovered at
Bonfire Shelter. Juniper pollen, like the pollen of certain other
conifers such as Douglas fir, is fragile and does not preserve well
in akaline sediments similar to the ones found in Bonfire Shelter.
Therefore, the absence of juniper pollen in the fossil record of this
period does not necessarily mean that juniper trees were not fact
presence.
We suspect that the proposed ponderosa pine and spruce
woodlands of the higher elevations in west Texas did not invade
the Amistad region but were instead confined to areas north and
west of the region. In addition, the fossil pollen record from Bonfire
Shelter also suggests that spruce trees were not present in the
Amistad region during any portion of the Fullglacial Period.
As mentioned earlier, van Devender et el. (1978) recovered
macrofossil traces of spruce and Douglas fir (--seudotsuga) in pack
rat nests from the Guadalupe Mountains in deposits dating from
the late Fullglacial period. The presence of Douglas fir macrofossil
remains in pack rat nests of this time period and the corresponding
absence of its pollen grains in Fullglacial age deposits from all
areas of west Texas is not unexpected. Douglas fir trees produce
relatively low quantities of pollen and its pollen is often poorly
represented in areas where its trees are found in association with
heaw pollen producers such as spruce and pines (Baker 1976); this
also seems to be true even when Douglas fir is dominant.
Therefore, we suspect that Douglas fir trees were probably present
in most areas of west Texas (including the Llano Estacado) during
the Fullglacial yet it is difficult to estimate how abundant they may
have been.
Fossil pollen records from deposits in central Texas suggest that
the invastion of Fullglacial forest elements into Texas was not
restricted to regions of west Texas. Fullglacial age deposits
recovered from Boriack Bog located in Lee County, Texas, reveal a
record of spruce, poplar, birch, hazelnut, ash, maple, alder,
dogwood, hickory, basswood, oak, and pine in deposits
radiocarbon dated as older than 15,500 years ago (Bryant 1977a).

TEXAS LATEQUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

11

This suggests that at least a portion of the central Texas late
Fullglacial vegetation was composed of deciduous woodlands with
some conifers present.
Today central Texas is not represented by either a uniform soil
or vegetation composition (Gould 1975) and we suspect that some of
these same differences may well have existed as far back as the
late Fullglacial period. Fossil pollen data are lacking for the
Edwards Plateau region of central Texas west of Austin which
today represents an area of grasslands mixed with junipers, oaks
and mesquite. The eastern part of central Texas is today
represented by blackland prairies and post oak savannas yet fossil
pollen data are available and suggest that it was more heavily
forested than at present.
In Lee County at the Boriack Bog location, for example,
Fullglacial age peat deposits are dominated by high percentages of
alder pollen (Bryant 1977a). Alder plants can either be shrub
species or tree species yet their pollen look essentially identical.
Therefore, it is possible that the alder pollen found in Boriack Bog
could have come from either alder trees or from the shrub species
of this plant. Furthermore, since alder tends to produce great
quantities of airborne pollen, its pollen is often over represented in
any fossil record (Janssen 1966).
Other tree pollen types such as basswood, maple, poplar, and
spruce pollen are also present but are not as well represented in
the fossil record of Fullglacial age deposits in Boriack Bog. This
may in part be the result of under representation of their pollen in
the fossil record. Unlike alder, these plants produce either low
quantities of pollen or their pollen grains are fragile and thus easily destroyed by microorganisms and other similar mechanism of
destruction before they can become preserved and later recovered
for analysis. We suspect that each of these plant types was probably an important component in the regional vegetation of the
eastern portion of central Texas during the Fullglacial period even
though these plants are weakly represented in the fossil pollen
record.
The pine and oak pollen percentages in these early deposits from
Boriack Bog range from a low of 4% to a maximum of 15% yet in
actuality these plants may have been only weakly represented in
the vegetation in that time period. Like alder, both of these plants
produce great quantities of airborne pollen which is easily
dispersed and is capable of traveling great distances. In fact,
recent pollen studies (Bryant 1977a) demonstrated that most (if not
all) of the fossil pine pollen in Boriack Bog probably came from

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

large stands of loblolly pines located 30 miles southwest of the bog
near Bastrop. We have found no evidence to suggest that large
groups of pines were growing any nearer to Boriack Bog during the
Fullglacial period than they are today.
Implications concerning the paleoenvironmental record of the
Fullglacial period can also be based upon the presence or absence
of certain animals which are known to prefer specific types of
plant habitats. Plaeontological evidence is most useful when an
entire faunal assembledge is present and can be used to speculate
on the potential vegetational and climatic extremes that may have
been present. Often this is not possible and instead limited
interpretations must be cautiously reported and must be based
upon the isolated presence of a single faunal type. Slaughter (1963),
for example, has found the faunal remains of the giant beaver
(Castoroides) in northeast Texas Fullglacial deposits suggesting that
that region could have been forested and may have had a cool or
cold climate. Further south at Friesenhahn Cave Graham (1976)
recovered the remains of the forest dwelling long-nosed peccary
(Mylohyus), the mastodon (Mammut) -- which although not
restricted to a forest habitat preferred those areas when they were
available (Martin and Guilday, 1967) -- and the tapir (Tapirus)
which is usually associated with humid forest environments. All of
those fauna were found in deposits dating from the Fullglacial
period and which also contained a pollen record (Hall, personal
communications) suggesting a mosiac of prairie grasslands mixed
with woodland and parkland areas. Lundelius (1967, 1974) has
shown that a number of animal species such as the masked shrew
(Sorex cinereus) and the bog lemming (Synaptomys cooperi) lived in
areas of north and central Texas up through the early part of the
Postglacial period before they disappeared from Texas. Both of
these animals currently live in more northern areas of North
America and are today found in cool, wet habitats. Their earlier
presence, and their current absence, in Texas infers earlier
climatic conditions similar to those reflected by the fossil pollen
record of Boriack Bog.
Geological and hydrological studies of sediments on the Llano
Estacado by Reeves (1963) can also be used to infer cool and humid
conditions for the Fullglacial period in west Texas. Reeves has
interpreted his data to suggest that during the Fullglacial period
midsummer temperature averages were at least 9°F cooler than at
present and were accompanied by an annual precipitation rate of
approximately 33-34 inches with a maximum annual evaporation
rate no higher than 44 inches per year (this compares with present

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

13

rates of 12-20 inches of annual rainfall and an annual evaporation
rate of 60 inches). He feels that it would require at least these
estimated rates to maintain the west Texas playa lake basins at
their known Fullglacial age levels.
In summary, it appears that most of east, central, north and west
Texas was considerably cooler and more humid than today and
was covered by areas of grasslands, woodlands and parklands
during most of the Fullglacial Period. Few data are available for
south Texas during the Fullglacial Period but the pollen records
from Friesenhahn Cave do contain higher percentages of grass
pollen than pollen records of similar age deposits in central,
southwest and west Texas. Based upon that information we would
conclude that from Bexar County south, the Fullglacial period
vegetation was probably composed of larger areas of grass and
scrublands and fewer areas of parklands or woodlands.

Lateglacial Period -- 14,000-10,000
The Lateglacial period in Texas represents a time when most of
the woodland and parklands regions of Texas began to disappear
leaving behind only isolated remnants of earlier widespread areas.
This suspected vegetational shift during the Lateglacial period is
seen in the fossil pollen records of the Llano Estacado and other
regions of west Texas (Hafsten 1961; Oldfield and Schoenwetter
1975) which show a rapid decline in the percentages of pine pollen
and the almost total loss of spruce pollen by 10,000 years ago. The
Lateglacial age replacement of the west Texas mixed conifer
woodlands and parklands by large regions of scrub grasslands is
reflected in the fossil record by marked declines of pine and spruce
pollen accompanied by sharp rises in grass and herb pollen during
the entire duration of the Lateglacial period.
Fossil pollen records recovered from the Amistad Region also
reflect a widespread loss of the pinyon woodland areas during the
Lateglacial period. Lateglacial deposits at Bonfire Shelter contain a
fossil pollen record suggesting that some pinyon trees were still
present in the region but that they were probably becoming more
restricted to isolated parkland areas that were shrinking in size
and being replaced by an expansion of grass and shrub areas. This
proposed shift in the vegetational composition of the lower Pecos
River area during the Lateglacial period may have resulted from a
variety of factors including a suspected reduction in the
availability of groundwater moisture combined with increasing
evaporation rates caused by elevated summer temperatures.

14

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Central Texas also experienced vegetational changes during the
Lateglacial period even though at first these vegetational changes
were probably subtle. Lateglacial sediments the Boriack and Gause
peat bogs of central Texas (Bryant 1977a} contain a fossil pollen
record indicating a gradual reduction in the forest cover of the
area, and by inference, a gradual degeneration of the climate. The
fossil pollen records indicate that by the end of the Lateglacial
period in central Texas many of the dominant plants that once
lived in the region were now gone. These plants included taxa such
as the willow, birch, spruce, basswood, alder, tupelo and ash. In
addition, the percentages of pollen from other tree genera such as
the oaks were also slightly reduced. If fossil pollen records were
also available for regions of north, east and south Texas we
suspect that they would also indicate similar trends in vegetational
change during the Lateglacial period.
In general the available pollen evidence suggests that throughout
the Lateglacial period most regions of Texas were undoubtedly
getting warmer and drier. This assumption is supported by the
widespread loss of woodland areas and reduction in parkland
regions throughout the areas of Texas where they had thrived
during the previous Fullglacial period.
The fossil fauna records of Lateglacial Period deposits in Texas
reveal the loss of many animals suggesting that their vegetational
habitats and the accompanying climates were changing rapidly.
Graham (1976} states that, "the most significant changes in the
faunal history of central Texas occurred between Groups I and II".
His "Group I" refers to the faunal record up through the
Lateglacial Period and the significant changes that he refers to are
the sequential disappearances of animals found today only in areas
of North America where climates are considerably cooler and more
moist than the present climates of central Texas. Graham’s list of
animals in Group I that disappeared during this period include the
masked shrew (Sorex cinereus), the ermine {Mustela erminea}, the
meadow vole {Microtus pennsylvanicus}, the long-tailed shrew
{Sorex vagrans}, and the hare {Lepus townsendii}. Similar losses of
these and other Pleistocene fauna were also noted for the
Lateglacial Period from regions of north and west Texas (Lundelius
1967, 1974). In deposits at the Lubbock Lake Site (located on the
Llano Estacado} Johnson {1974) found that by the end of the
Lateglacial period the regional vegetation of that area would have
had to contain large open grassland regions in order to support the
known fauna that were living there. Missing from those terminal
Lateglacial deposits at Lubbock Lake were woodland vertebrates

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

15

whose remains had been found associated with earlier Lateglacial
deposits but which disappeared before 10,000 years ago. The
invertebrate faunal remains at the Lubbock Lake Site (Johnson,
1974) also imply a similar vegetational and climatic trend towards
drier and warmer conditions throughout the Lateglacial period.
Postglacial Period -- 10,000 Years Ago To The Present
The onset of the Postglacial period in Texas was not
accompanied by any sudden or radical changes in the regional
vegetation (Bryant 1969, 1977a; Hafsten 1961; Oldfield and
Schoenwetter 1975). In the southwest Texas area the inferred
mosiac vegetation of woodlands, parklands and scrub grasslands of
the previous Lateglacial Period were now being gradually replaced
by larger areas of scrub grasslands between 10,000-7,000 years
ago. This interpretation is based upon the fossil pollen record at
Bonfire Shelter (Bryant 1969) and Hinds Cave (Bryant 1977b) which
show gradual reductions in the percentages of fossil pollen from
’ trees such as the pinyon pine. Sufficient fossil pinyon pine was
recovered from the deposits in this 3,000 year interval to suggest
that there were still some limited areas (perhaps in protected
canyons and in some upland locales) where pinyons still flourished
in the Amistad region.
Preliminary analysis of plant remains recovered from Hinds Cave
and Baker Cave in the Amistad region (Dering 1977) demonstrates
that by 8,500 BP local aboriginal groups were already exploiting
plants such as agave, yucca, sotol and cactus which are generally
associated with fairly xeric environments. Furthermore, Dering has
not yet recovered any plant macrofossil remains of pinyon nuts in
those deposits which further suggests that perhaps the pinyons had
already retreated beyond the limits of the aboriginal’s food
gathering range at these sites by 8,500 BP. An alternate hypothesis
would be that for some reason the prehistoric peoples of the
Amistad region did not collect or use pinyon nuts even though they
were available. This alternate hypothesis is possible yet we feel it
is highly unlikely that these early groups would have ignored such
a valuable food source had it been available for exploitation
(Shafer and Bryant 1977).
There are only limited fossil pollen records available from areas
of southwest Texas during the next 3000 year interval from 7,0004,000 BP. The fossil pollen record from Centipede Cave (Johnson
1963) is incomplete and based largely upon inadequate pollen
counts of less than 200 grains per sample. In spite of these
shortcomings, it must at least be considered since it represents one

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of the few fossil pollen sequences yet available for any portion of
this 3,000 year time interval. During his analysis of these deposits
Johnson {1963} noted that there did not appear to be any dramatic
changes in either the vegetational composition or climate in the
Amistad area but that his data did suggest a progressive degeneration of the previous mesic vegetation, and by inference, an elevation of moisture evaporation rates and/or reduction in rainfall.
Johnson also noted the apparent increase in agave pollen around
the end of this 3000 year period.
Recent pollen studies of deposits in Hinds Cave (Bryant 1977b)
have produced a fossil pollen record covering a time span from
approximately 9000-3000 BP. The main characteristics of the
Hinds Cave pollen record from this time period are: (1} high
percentages of grass and herb pollen, (2} low percentages of pine
and other tree pollen and (3} significant amounts of economic pollen
from plants such as sotol and agave. Since this preliminary
analysis from Hinds Cave is based upon only eight of the more than
60 pollen samples scheduled for analysis from that site we hesitate
to place too much emphasis upon their represented data since
much of it could represent an artifact created by the activities of
man rather than a true picture of the regional paleoenvironment.
Hopefully, the analysis of additional samples from this site will help
clarify the true meaning of this first series of pollen samples. The
important feature of this information is that we now have the
prospect of obtaining an excellent series of pollen samples in the
lower Pecos area of Texas from a time period which up until now
has yielded only a very few sediment samples which contained any
fossil pollen at all.
Until more paleoenvironmental data can be utilized from the
fossil pollen record for the time span between 7000-4000 BP must
rely upon what other evidence already exists. This other evidence
consists primarily of data which suggest that areas of southwest
Texas along the Rio Grande and lower Pecos Rivers were
subjected to intervals of severe flooding during much of this 3000
year period {Patton 1977}. These periods of erosion and flooding
are clearly marked in the alluvial terraces and sediments of
archeological sites in this region such as the Devil’s Mouth Site
{Johnson 1964} located on the Rio Grande and Arenosa Shelter
(Dibble 1967} located on the Pecos River. Of the 22 major floods
identified by Patton (1977} in the deposits at Arenosa Shelter dating
from 4,500 B.P. to the present almost one half of them (ten}
occurred between 3,200-4,500 BP.

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

17

The causes of erosion and flooding during this 1,300 year period
are not fully understood. One possible explanation is that perhaps
minor rises in summer temperatures or short periods of drought
may have led to partial removal of the upland vegetation thereby
allowing increased rainfall runoff and increases in river discharge.
Another possible explanation could be increased precipitation
during the later portion of this period as suggested by Haynes
(1968). This possible increase in annual precipitation may have
been caused by a series of active frontal systems moving further
inland than usual. Although no actual climatological evidence
exists for this type of frontal system phenomenon in the past, these
storm systems do move through the area today and can release
great amounts of moisture in a short period of time. In the summer
of 1975, for example, we were in the lower Pecos River region
when such a frontal system released over five inches of rainfall in
less than eight hours. The resulting runoff filled many streams that
were normally dry and it also caused some major erosional activity
along the alluvial banks of the lower Pecos River.
Still another possibility for the widespread alluvial erosion
between 3,200-4,500 BP could have come from short periods of
intense rainfall associated with the aftermath of a hurricane that
may have moved unusually far inland from either the Pacific or
Gulf Coast areas. A recent example of that phenomenon occurred
in 1954 when Hurricane Alice moved inland over the Rio Grande
Valley and the resulting rainfall almost completely filled the Falcon
Reservoir on the Rio Grande in the span of a few days. Based upon
available records Patton (1977) calculated that at the height of that
flood Arenosa Shelter on the Pecos River was more than 30 feet
under water and that the Pecos River reached a peak depth of over
80 feet. Since a person can easily wade across the Pecos River
during low water periods this estimate has increased significance.
The last 4000 years of the Postglacial Period in southwest Texas
is represented by fossil pollen types indicating a gradual and
continual trend towards increased aridity. Only once around 2,500
years ago was this apparent trend interrupted. At Bonfire Shelter
and the Devil’s Mouth Site, fossil pollen records dating from around
2,500 years ago show marked increases in the percentages of both
pine and grass pollen suggesting a brief return of somewhat cooler
and more mesic conditions (Bryant 1969). This apparent mesic
interval, however, was short-lived and soon the trend toward
increased aridity was resumed and has continued in southwest
Texas until the present.

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The analysis of fossil pollen from playa lakes (Hafsten 1961;
Oldfield and Schoenwetter 1975} reveal a Postglacial trend towards
increased aridity and the establishment of large dry grassland
areas lacking trees except along major drainages and in areas of
higher elevation in areas of west Texas, including regions of the
Llano Estacado. Hafsten’s fossil pollen records from the several
playa lakes on the Llano Estacado also show an apparent mesic
interval occurring around 2,500 years ago. Like the fossil pollen
records of the Amistad Region in southwest Texas, the playa lake
fossil pollen records show that this brief interval was
characterized by higher percentages of both grass and pine pollen
but that it too was short-lived. Soon after it ended, the warming
and drying trend in both southwest and west Texas continued until
the present.
Peat deposits in central Texas also reveal a fossil pollen record
suggesting a continual trend towards drier and warmer conditions
following the end of the Lateglacial period {Bryant 1977a).
Sediments from a number of peat bog locations in central Texas, all
dated as being younger than 10,000 years, show declines in most
tree pollen types (with the exception of oak) and significant
increases in herb and especially grass pollen during the last 10,000
years.
The gradual, yet continual, loss of most tree pollen and the
corresponding rise in grass and herb pollen during the Postglacial
period in central Texas suggests that east of the Edwards Plateau
the Fullglacial mixed deciduous woodlands that were first reduced
to parklands during the Lateglacial period were finally reduced to
the present savanna type vegetation during the Postglacial period.
The fossil pollen records from central Texas bog deposits
covering the time span of the Altithermal Period (7,000-4,500 B.P.)
as defined by Antevs (1955), suggest a continual trend towards less
mesic conditions. During this nearly 3,000 year period there are no
indications in the fossil pollen records that the climate in central
Texas was either significantly warmer, wetter, drier or cooler than
either the interval before or after that period. What is instead
revealed is a fossil record showing a gradual, yet continual, trend
towards a more xeric vegetation and, by inference, a warmer and
drier climate. The fossil pollen record also implies that the present
widespread area of post oak savanna vegetation in central Texas
(Gould 1975) was probably more or less established in its present
form and distribution by 3,000 years ago.

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

19

USING THE PALEOENVIRONMENTAL MODEL
FOR INTERPRETING TEXAS PREHISTORY
Our presentation suggesting that there have been major
environmental changes in Texas during the last 30,000 years
should come as no new revelation to prehistorians despite the fact
that many seem to currently work in ignorance of the aboriginals’
environmental conditions. We feel that it is essential to construct a
workable framework of the paleoenvironment prior to Anglo
settlement and land utilization in any area under archeological
study. In that way the archeologist can approach his data with a
confident understanding of the biological and natural resources
that may have been available to the aborigines. After all, it was the
distribution of these natural resources together with the aboriginal
technology that constituted the major determinant factors in the
evolution, settlement and resource utilization patterns.
We suggest that the paleoenvironmental model offered above
should serve as a background for more specific regional studies
(such as the one we are currently conducting in the lower Pecos
region). More importantly, the model can serve as a known variable
in exploring the processes of culture change as they are recognized
through the study of Texas prehistory. For example, there are two
common errors that are often made by Texas archeologists in
regard to paleoenvironmental changes. The first concerns the
environmental changes that occurred at the end of the Pleistocene
and the second concerns the Big Game Hunting tradition in Texas.
It is often assumed by archeologists that the environmental
changes at the end of the Pleistocene were both sudden and
uniform throughout the state; that is, about 10,000 years ago the
ice age (and Paleo-Indian Stage) was over, the big game was gone
and a new lifeway, the Archaic, evolved. We have already tried to
demonstrate that the environmental changes that occurred during
the Lateglacial and early Postglacial periods were not uniform and
that each region was probably affected differently. Furthermore,
our records indicate that the changes were demonstrably gradual,
occurred over several thousand years and probably went
completely unnoticed by successive generations of aborigines.
These changes, however, were nonetheless manifested over time
and eventually created concomitant changes in the human adaptive
systems.
Knowledge of a gradual, regionally specific environmental
change has important implications on the second commonly
expressed assumption that a rather uniform big game hunting

20

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

tradition [symbolized in the term Paleo-Indian), existed throughout
Texas. The lingering influence of Krieger’s (1964) Stage concept as
it was used in the Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm, Krieger
and Jelks 1954) is undoubtedly largely responsible for the present
day expression of this view. If one considers the paleoenvironment,
animal behavior and habitat it is easily conceivable that the socalled Paleo-Indian or big game hunting concept may only have been
applicable to the Plains and peripheral Plains environments of
Texas -- if even there! We seriously doubt that big game hunting
would have been economically sound as a major subsistence
pattern in any of the parkland and woodland areas of eastern
Texas where the species of big game were probably dispersed or
not present in large numbers. Indeed, to our knowledge, there is no
confirmed association of artifacts of late Pleistocene age associated
with the remains of big game faunal remains in any of Texas
outside the Plains and its associated environments. Therefore, the
obvious implication of these data is that hunting and gathering
[Archaic) adaptations, in all probability, represented the initial and
the continuous prehistoric adaptive patterns in large areas of
Texas.
Part of the interpretive problem regarding the Paleo-Indian vs.
the Archaic issue is that archeologists sometimes are too often
blinded by some certain overworked assumptions such as projectile
point form. Lanceolate points are usually regarded as Paleo-Indian
forms, while stemmed points are often attributed to the Archaic
subsistance pattern. At present we know too little about form,
function and context of use to rely with any degree of certainty
upon this assumption any longer. That lanceolate shaped points are
indicative of antiquity is demonstrable but as Shafer (1975) has
pointed out, shape alone does not adequately indicate what was
actually being hunted.
Our work at Hinds Cave in the lower Pecos area is offered as an
example of how the paleoenvironmental model can be used by the
archeologist on a regional basis. The majority of the earlier
archeological research in the lower Pecos region emphasized
chronology building and identifying stylistic changes through time
[Alexander’s [1974] work at Conejo Shelter represents one of the
very few exceptions) whereas from the beginning our work at
Hinds Cave was an interdisciplinary archeological and botanical
project aimed at an intensive investigation of the paleoecology and
adaptive patterns utilized by the site’s occupants. The occupation
sequence at Hinds Cave covers approximately 9000 years of
prehistory, making it an excellent site for examining the

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

21

relationship between the
cultural
adaptive
changes
and
paleoenvironmental change that occurred through time. The
preliminary report of our findings (Shafer and Bryant 1977) is
tentative since the research is still in progress. However, even at
this stage we are finding exciting results such as the ones related
to the paleoenvironmental study that indicate a gradual dessication
of the area by an encroachment of Chihuahuan desert plants by at
least 8,500 years ago. Another aspect we are finding indicates that
chronological changes, {i.e. projectile point period markers)
evidently had little bearing on either the basic subsistence pattern
or the prehistoric economic patterns. And finally, even at this point
we feel confident in saying that at Hinds Cave there was probably
a long continuum with little significant changes in the overall
exploitative system during the past 9000 years.

SUMMARY
The paleoenvironmental model presented in this article has very
broad implications useful for the interpretation of Texas prehistory
since it provides an opportunity for archeologists to view culture
histories in a broader context beyond what is generally offered by
artifacts alone. In compiling these data we have attempted to
examine both published and unpublished works relating to fossil
pollen analyses, paleontological studies, hydrological reports,
enthnobotanical studies still in progress and archeological records.
From these data we have discovered that for the most part little is
really known about the past 30,000 year record of environmental
change in Texas. Some information does exist but when available it
is generally fragmentary or relates only to a small region of Texas.
Hopefully, as research in this area continues we will someday have
a more nearly precise image of what really happened
environmentally in Texas and how our current interpretations for
the past 30,000 year period will be affected.
We also offer this model as a basis for explaining culture change
as it is observed in the archeological record. Archeological sites
contain the behavioral products of man’s attempt to cope with the
environment. Since this is such a critical aspect of archeological
reports we present reasons why we feel an understanding of the
paleoenvironment is so essential in archeology.

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Drs. Ernest Lundelius, Eileen Johnson and
Thomas R. Hester for their review of this manuscript and the helpful
suggestions they offered. Special thanks is also given to Glenna
Williams-Dean and Phil Dering of the Texas A&M Anthropology
Research Laboratory for their assistance related to current research
still in progress in southwest Texas. Funding for a portion of this
research was derived from National Science Foundation grant
BNS76-10293.

REFERENCES CITED

Antevs, Ernst
1955 Geologic -- Climatic Dating in the West. American Antiquity, Voh
20, No. 4, pp. 317-335.
Alexander, Herbert L.
1963 The Levi Site: A Paleo-lndian Campsite In Central Texas. American
Antiquity, Voh 28, No. 4, pp. 510-527.
Alexander, Robert K.
1974 The Archeology of Conejo Shelter: A Study of Cultural Stability at
an Archaic Rockshelter Site in Southwestern Texas. Ph.D.
dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Baker, Richard G.
1976 Late Quaternary Vegetation History of the Yellowstone Lake Basin,
Wyoming. U.S. Geological Survey Paper No. 729 E., U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Black, Craig C.
1974 History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake Site. The Museum
lournal, Voh XV. Texas Tech University. Lubbock, Texas.
Blair, W. Frank
1958 Distribution Pattern of Vertebrates in the Southern States in
Relation to Past and Present Environments. Zoogeography,
American Association For the Advancement of Science, pp. 433468.
Braun, E. Lucy
1955 The Phytogeography of Unglaciated Eastern United States and its
Interpretation. Botanical Review, Vol. 21, pp. 297-375.
Bryant, Vaughn M. Jr.
1969 Late
Fultglacial and Postglacial Pollen Analysis
of Texas
Sediments. Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
1977a A 16,000 Year Pollen Record of Vegetational Change in Central
Texas. Palynology, Vol. 1, pp. 143-156.
1977b Preliminary Pollen Analysis from Hinds Cave. In: Archeological and
Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas
A&M University Anthropology Research Laboratory Special Series
No. 1, pp. 70-77.
Clark, D.
1960 Human Ecology during the Africa South of the Sahara. Current
Anthropology Vol. 1, pp. 307-324.

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

23

Crook, W. W. and R. K. Harris
1958A Pleistocene Camp Site near Lewisville, Texas. American
Antiquity, Vol. 23, No. 3, pp. 233-246.
Dean, Jeffrey S. and W. J. Robinson
1977 Dendroclimatic Variability in the American Southwest from A.D.
680-1970. (Final report to the National Park Service). Laboratory of
Tree-Ring Research Publication. Tucson, Arizona.
Deevey, E. S.
1949Biogeography of the Pleistocene. Geological Society America
Bulletin, Vol. 60, pp. 1315-1416.
Dering, J. Phil
1977 Plant Macrofossil Study: A Progress Report. In: Archeological and
Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas
A&M University Anthropology Research Laboratory Special Series
No. 1, pp. 84-102.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains.
Plains Anthropologist Vol. 19, No. 65; pp. 180-196.
Dillon, L. S.
1956 Wisconsin Climate and Life Zones in North America. Science, Vol.
123, pp. 167-176.
Dibble, David S.
1967 Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-1966. Report Submitted to
the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, Austin, Texas.
Dibble, David S. and Dessamae Lorrain
1968 Bonfire Shelter. A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val Verde County,
Texas. Texas Memorial Museum, Miscellaneous Papers, No. 1, pp.
1-78.
Gould, Frank W.
1975 Texas Plants -- A Check List and Ecological Summary. Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station Publication No. MP-585, Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas.
Graham, R. W.
1976 Pleistocene and Holocene Mammals, Taphonomy, and Paleoecology
of the Friesenhahn Cave Local Fauna, Baxer County, Texas. Ph.D.
dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Graham, Allen and Charles Heimsch
1960 Pollen Studies of Some Texas Peat Deposits. Ecology, Vol. 41, pp.
785-790.
Hafsten, Ulf
1961 Pleistocene Development of Vegetation and Climate in the Southern
High Plains as Evidenced by Pollen Analysis. Paleoecology of the
Llano Estacado. Museum of New Mexico Press, pp. 59-91.
Haynes, C. Vance
1968 Geochronology of Late Quaternary Alluvium. In: Means of
Cornolation of Quaternary Successions. University of Utah Press,
pp. 591-631.
Janssen, C. R.
1966Recent Pollen Spectra from The Deciduous and ConiferousDeciduous Forests of Northeastern Minnesota: A Study in Pollen
Dispersal. Ecology, Vol. 47, No.5, pp. 804-825.

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Johnson, Eileen
1974 Zooarcheology and the Lubbock Lake Site. In: C. C. Black (ed.)
History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake Site, Texas Tech
University, pp. 107-122. Lubbock, Texas.
Johnson, Leroy
1963 Pollen Analysis of two Archeological Sites at Amistad Reservoir,
Texas. The Texas lournal of Science, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 225-230.
1964 The Devil’s Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir
Val Verde County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 6, Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas.
Krieger, Alex D.
1964 Early Man in the New World. In: Jesse D. Jennings and Edward
Norbeck (eds.) Prehistoric Man in the New World. The University
of Chicago Press.
Lundelius, Ernest L.
1967 Late Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal History of Central Texas.
Pleistocene Extinction, The Search For a Cause. Yale University
Press, pp. 287-320 New Haven, Connecticut.
1974 The Last 15,000 Years of Faunal Change in North America. The
Museum Journal, Vol. XV, pp. 141-160.
Mack, Richard N. and V. M. Bryant Jr.
1974 Modern Pollen Spectra from the Columbia Basin, Washington.
Northwest Science, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 183-194.
1978 Modern Forest Pollen Spectra from Washington and Northern
Idaho. Botanical Gazette (in press).
Maher, L. J.
1963 Pollen Analysis of Surface Materials from the Southern San Juan
Mountains, Colorado. Geological Society America Bulletin, Vol. 74,
pp. 1485-1503.
Martin, Paul S. and John E. Guilday
1967 A Bestiary for Pleistocene Biologists. In: Pleistocene Extinctions, the
Search for a Cause. Yale University Press, pp. 1-62, New Haven,
Connecticut.
Martin, Paul S. and B. F. Harrell
1957 Pleistocene History of Temperate Biotas in Mexico and the Eastern
United States. Ecology Vol. 38, pp. 468-480.
Martin, Paul S. and P. J. Mehringer, Jr.
1965 Pleistocene Pollen Analysis and Biogeography of the Southwest. In:
The Quaternary of the United States. Princeton University Press,
pp. 433-451, Princeton, New Jersey.
Mehringer, P. J., J. E. King and E. H. Lindsay
1970 A Record of Wisconsin A Vegetation and Fauna from the Ozarks of
Western Missouri. In: Pleistocene and Recent Environments of the
Central Great Plains. University of Kansas Press, pp. 173-184,
Lawrence, Kansas.
Oldfield, Frank and James Schoenwetter
1975 Discussion of the Pollen Analytical Evidence. In: Late Pleistocene
Environments in the Southern High Plains. Fort Burgwin Research
Center Publication No. 9, pp. 149-178.
Patton, Peter C.
1977 Geomorphic Criteria for Estimating the Magnitude and Frequency
of Flooding in Central Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, ’Fhe University of
Texas at Austin.

TEXAS LATE QUARTERNARY PALEOENVIRONMENT

25

Potzger, J. E. and B. C. Tharp
1943 Pollen Record of Canadian Spruce and Fir from a Texas Bog.
Science, Vol. 98, pp. 584-585.
1947 Pollen Profile from a Texas Bog. Ecology, Vol. 35, No. 4, pp. 462466.
1954 Pollen Study of Two Bogs in Texas. Ecology, Vol. 35, No. 4, pp. 462466.
Reeves, C. C.
1963 Pleistocene Climate of the Llano Estacado, II. The lournal of
Geology, Vol. 74, No. 5, pp. 642-647.
Sellards, E. H., G. L. Evans and G. E. Meade
1947 Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainview, Texas, with
Descriptions of Artifacts by Alex D. Krieger. Bulletin of the
Geological Society of America, Vol. 58, pp. 927-954.
Sharer, Harry J.
1975 Early Lithic Assemblages in Eastern Texas. Paper presented at the
Paleo-Indian Lifeways Symposium, Lubbock, Texas.
Shafer, Harry J. and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
1977 Archeological and Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde
County, Texas. Texas A&M University Anthropology Research
Laboratory Special Series No. 1..
Slaughter, B. H.
1963 Some Observations concerning the Genus Smilodon, with Special
References to Smilodon fatalis. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol.
10, pp. 68-81.
Suhm, Dee Ann, A. D. Krieger and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society Vol. 25, pp. 1-256.
Van Devender, T. R., P. S. Martin, A. M. Phillips, III, and W. G. Spaulding
1978 Late Pleistocene Biotic Communities from the Guadalupe
Mountains, Culberson County, Texas. In: R.H. Wauer and D.H.
Riskind (ed.) Transactions of the Symposium on the Biological
Resources of the Chihuahuan Desert Region, U.S. and Mexico
Government Printed Office, Washington (in press).
Wells, Philip V.
1966 Late Pleistocene Vegetation and Degree of Pluvial Climatic Change
in the Chihauhuan Desert. Science Vol. 153, No. 3739, pp. 970-975.
Wilson, L. R.
1966 Palynology of the Domebo Site. In: Frank Leonhardy (ed.), A PaleoIndian Mammoth Kill in the Prairie-Plains. Contribution of the
Museum of the Great Plains, No. 1, pp. 44-50.

