A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE
MORTUARY CAVE OF CANDELARIA,
COAHUILA, MEXICO
PABLO MARTINEZ DEL t~IO

Introduction
The Cueva de la Candelaria lies about 55 miles northeast
of Torre6n and 30 miles north-northeast of San Pedro de las
Co!onias, in southwestern Coahuila. It is reached after a
four-hour drive across the dry bed of Laguna de Mayran
and then along the rocky bottom of Canyon de Ventanas;
a very sturdy type of vehicle is essential. This canyon connects the prosperous, agricultural Laguna bols6n (or basin),
with a smaller one, the Bols6n del Sobaco or Bols6n de las
Delicias. But whereas the Laguna is nourished by the large
Rio Nazas, Mexico’s counterpart to the Nile, which rises far
to the west in the Sierra Madre, the Bols6n de las Delicias is
nourished only with the very meager local precipitation.
The practically waterless bols6n, in consequence, is unfit
for agriculture, which today d e p e n d s u p o n irrigation
throughout the Laguna region. The bols6n contains a single
small settlement, Las Delicias, which owes its name to a
tiny permanent stream which springs from the flanks of the
adjoining sierra. The bols6n is roughly oval in shape and,
according to Maldonado-Koerdell, it is an area of subsidence
surrounded by Mesozoic sierras of moderate elevation. The
floor of the bols6n is about 3,300 feet above sea level (Plate
20, B).
The cave itself is located about 100 feet above the flat
floor of the bols6n (Plate 20, A), on a small hill which forms
part of a cluster of similar hills c!osely attached to the Sierra
de la Candelaria, in the southern section of the bols6n. These
hills, which are particularly rich in lime, abound in caves,
crevices and cracks of all sorts and have not proved too
friendly to vegetation, although the surrounding country is
clothed with yuccas, oeotillo, scrub mesquite, cactus, lechuguilla and the other members of a typical desert flora (Plate
20, B). Animal life is impressively scarce. A well, pro-

Mortuary Cave o] Candelaria, Coahuila, Mexico

209

ducing more mud than water, has been dug some two miles
away, and there is also a "poza’,, or basin, about 1,000 feet
long and full of a most untempting coffee-colored liquid, at
a slightly greater distance. This rimless "poza", with its
steep sides slanting down to about 100 feet below the level
of the plain, is the largest of several equally puzzling depressions, although the rest are now quite dry. In other
days it seems to have provided the Candelaria people with
much of their drinking-water, as attested by the large number of small flint artifacts lying within a restricted area
(no doubt a work-shop or camp-site) close to the edge of
the basin. These are mostly arrowheads and scrapers, a few
of them remarkable on account of their strange shape, as if
it had been inspired by the thumb-nail. Nowhere did we
find traces of dwellings.
The cave was originally reported by Sr. Jos~ S~nchez to
his employer, Sr. Luis Talamantes, who has proved most
helpful throughout, Sr, Talamantes promptly conveyed the
information to Lic. Federico Elizondo, the very efficient
Director of the Escuela Secundaria y Preparatoria del
Estado, at TorreSn. Soon some preliminary visits to the
cave were conducted by Lic. Elizondo himself, by Prof.
Wenceslao Rodr~guez, who is the organizer of the School
museum, a model in its way, and by other associates. They
were able to collect a great amount of material, including
many of the objects illustrated in the following pages.
Some time later news of the discovery was sent to the Departamento de Prehistoria of the Instituto Nacional de Antropologla e Historia, in Mexico City, together with a generous invitation to cooperate with the School in further
work on the cave.
In view of the above, two visits to the cave, each lasting
several days, were made by joint parties from the School
and the Department. The first visit (March-Apri! 1953) was
financed and handsomely assisted by the State and local
authorities (Sr. Roman Cepeda, Governor of Coahuila; Lic.
Rodolfo Gonz~lez Trevi~o, Mayor of TorreSn; Lic. Lucas
IIaces Gil, Chairman of the Junta de Mejoras Materiales).

210

Texas Archeo~ogical Society

The second expedition (September 1953), although largely
financed by the Department, also received a substantial
grant from the same sources. During the expeditions, the
School was represented by Sres. Elizondo and Rodriguez,
the Department by Sres. Maldonado-Koerdel!, Bernal, Aveleyra, Romano, Gonz~lez Rul and the writer. Aveleyra and
Bernal~ did not take part in the first campaign; MaldonadoKoerdell was absent from the second. The writer wishes
to express his indebtedness to several friends and confreres
from both sides of the frontier who gave him the benefit of
their personal experiences in that part of the world (notably
Dr. J. Alden Mason and Dr. Walter W. Taylor), or else
helped him in other ways. Dr. J. O. Brew, for instance,
kindly provided him with a copy of the field notes of Dr.
Palmer, who visited some other caves in this region around
1880 (Report of the Peabody Trustees, 1881) and provided
the Peabody Museum of Harvard University with a collection which, to judge from description, is almost exactly a
duplicate for our own. Further acknowledgments were all
duly set down in a previous publication (Martlnez del Rio,
1953). Special thanks, however, are due to Alex D. Krieger.
It must be stressed that it has as yet proved impossible
fully to study the material in all its aspects, including its
implications and possible correlations. A great amount of
work remains to be done with the material itself and the
early historical sources before the final Report is available.
This paper, however, is offered chiefly as an accompaniment
to the illustrations, which are reproduced through the kindness of Dr. J. Silva Herzog, Director of "Cuadernos Americanos," hoping that they may prove of interest to fellowworkers in the great Aridamerican field. The larger illustrations are from photographs by Arturo Romano: each of the
black blocks represents one centimeter. For the smaller photographs I am indebted to Lic. Elizondo and Prof. Rodriguez.
The Cave
Camp was set up close to the cave, and thanks to a small
generating plant we had the best possible lighting, both in

PLATE 20
A, Candelaria Cave mouth on hill slope where men are standing at far right, and
camp in center foreground. B, View, of bols6n and vegetation from near the camp.

PLATE

21

Interior of cave with entrance opening at top.

Mortuary Cave oi CandeZaria, Coahuila, Mexico

215

camp and also inside the cave itself. The Candelaria cave
was exclusively a burial cave: it could never have been
used for human occupation. The entrance is roughly circular
and very small, some 4 ft. across: it opens horizontally on to
a vertical shaft some 30 feet deep, so that ropes or, better
still, a rope ladder, are absolutely essential (Plate 21). At
the bottom of this shaft the floor of the cave slants in accordance with the dip of the strata. Some important rock
falls have taken place, crushing a certain amount of material; and work inside the cave is fraught with considerable danger. All the same, an almost incredible number of
bones and objects of all kinds was collected, some of them
in remarkably "fresh" condition in the archaeological sense,
though it would hardly meet with the approval of the average housewife. In fact the work inside the ill-ventilated
cave was only rendered possible by the lavish use of respirators and deodorizers as the atmosphere, owing to the
guano and the effects of human decomposition, was truly
nauseating.
The material was in a state of great disorder (Plate 22,
A, B). The dead had been placed with knees bent toward the chest and wrapped in fibre-blankets (Plate 22, D),
but as the result of decay and other ravages the bundles had
been largely torn open and the bones and other contents
scattered. Originally many of the bundles had been placed
overlying each other, with a layer of cactus leaves, sticks
and other bedding between the bundles, but owing to the
rock falls and the general confusion stratigraphic work was
clearly impossible. A few remains, in fact, had slipped down
and hung like stalactites in a sort of secondary chamber
underneath. There are other crevices, as yet unexplored.
Skeletal Material
Human remains were found, as already explained, in great
quantity, and a large proportion of these, secured during
the first expedition, has already been measured and studied
by Sra. Faulhaber, of the Department of Physical Anthropology of the 1Viuseo Nacional de Antropologla in Mexico

216

Texas Archeological Society

City. It would be impossible to reproduce her report and
tabulations but a few data, and some of her general impressions, will be of interest. It must be pointed out that
work of this nature had been carried out many years ago
(Studley, 1884, pp. 233-260) on the osteological remains taken
to the Peabody Museum by Palmer and secured, as already
pointed out, from caves in this same Laguna region (although quite far from Candelaria) in association with some
strikingly similar cultural material.
Most of the Candelaria individuals were !ong-headed: the
average breadth-length index for 11 male crania is 74.38.
The index for nine of these lies under 74.9; the remaining
two were mesocephalic. The average index for 10 female
crania was 73.29; five of them were dolicocephalic, the other
five mesocephalic.
As regards the height-length index, six males turned out
to be orthocephalic, with indices between 70.00 and 74.9.
Five proved to be hypsicephalic. The average height-length
index for all the male skulls is 74.54. Six of the females
were orthocephalic, four hypsicephalic; the average index
for the ten is 73.75. Average height-breadth index for the
males is 100.14; for the females 100.67. Average nasal index
is 49.36 and 51.29, respectively.
Sra. Faulhaber has worked out the probable average
stature of the individuals at 166.80 cm. for the males and
156.81 cm. for the females. Thus, in accordance with Martin’s classification, the Candelaria people were rather higher
than the average, although not actually tall.
The majority of the bones, according to Sra. Faulhaber,
suggest healthy individuals, although a certain proportion
reveal pathological injuries. She points out that there are
no intentionally deformed skulls. The teeth are considerably
worn, apparently due to a predominance of hard foodstuffs. There are abscesses in 13 of the crania studied.
Sra. Faulhaber remarks, in short, that the Candelaria folk
seem to have been well-developed, and that the individuals
were physically strong. Their stature was similar to that of

PLATE 22
A, B, Views of masses of artifacts and skeletal remains on
and arrow shafts. D, Wrapped infant bundle.

cave floor.

C, Bows

PLATE 23
A, Three skulls showing’ advanced syphilitic lesions on frontal and facial bones.
B, Digging sticks. C, Miscellaneous shafts, including arrowshaft (?) at bottom. D,
Grooved "rabbit clubs" or "fending stic]~s",

Mortuary Cave of Candelaria, Coahuila, Mexico

221

the Indians of northern Mexico today, although these, unlike the Candelaria folk, are on the whole mesocephalic:
They had narrow foreheads and a large face in proportion
~o the skull. For the rest, after careful comparison with
the data relating to the Peabody material, Sra. Faulhaber
thinks that she is able to affirm "that both series represent
the same Indian people, since the variations observed in the~
few crania do not appear to be in excess of normal limits;
although it is impossible to state to which particular trib~
individuals under study belonged."
More material was secured during the second campaign~
but this had not as yet been considered by Sra. Faulhaber~
For the rest, Dr. D6valos Hurtado, Professor of Palaeo~-pathology at the Escuela Nacional de Antropologia e Hi~-toria, points out that several of the skulls show impressive"
and undeniable symptoms of syphilis in the frontal region.
(Plate 23, A).
Cultural Material
It must be stressed that the cultural material is still u~dergoing study: we only returned from the second expedi-.
tion to the cave some three weeks ago, but it is hoped that the~
illustrations will afford a good genera! conspectus. The best:
collection is in the museum of the Escuela Secundaria y
Preparatoria at TorreSn, but there is an excellent duplicate’
series in the Museo Nacional de Antropo!ogia, Mexico City..
Some of the wooden artifacts are illustrated in Plates 2224. The digging-sticks in Plate 23, B of course do not attest
that the Candelaria people practiced cultivation since, as
pointed out by Mera (1938, p. 58) and others, they would
have proved useful for uprooting various plants, notably the
small agaves which, as all anthropologists are aware, were
such an essential part of the diet of the hunting and gathering peoples of Aridamerica (see Castetter, et al., 1938). It
is important to note that no traces of edibles of any sort
were found inside the cave, nor of grinding equipment of any
description.
The number of bows secured (Plate 22, C) was surpris-

222

Texas Archeological Society

ingly small, relatively speaking, and the same holds true of
arrowshafts (Plate 23, C). During the second expedition we
secured part of a fine bow with a large part of the fiber
string and a strip of leather still attached to it. The grooved
"rabbit clubs" or "fending sticks" (Plate 23, D) are like
those found widely in western Texas and the Southwest.
There was no trace cf the atlatl or dart-thrower; one is reported (wrongly, I suspect) in the Palmer collection at Peabody Museum, but we have not been able to go into the matter. Our associates had discovered a cradle frame (Plate 24,
A), and we found fragments of others.
The knives (Plates 24, B; 25, A-C) might be described as
spectacular; they are not only things of beauty in their way
but reveal excellent workmanship. A few of the wooden
handles are round; others are wide, thin, and flat. Many
are attached to the flint blades with asphaltum which may
have come from the Gulf of Mexico shores. Krieger has
suggested another and much closer source in northeastern
Chihuahua, where tar pits are known near Ojinaga. In three
cases the knife handle bears round black pits due to its being
used as a fire-drill hearth. Steward (!937, p. 75) cites this
practice for the Great Basin, where various wooden artifacts were often used as emergency material for fire-drilling. Some of the knife handles are, moreover, decorated
with incised designs. One would expect frequent use to
blacken the handles and obliterate the designs, hence one
wonders whether these knives were of ceremonial nature.
That shown in Plate 25, B, for instance, is remarkably frail,
and some of the blades are decidedly thin. The flint, of local
origin, is at times translucent.
Cotton textile was quite exceptional, a single piece being
found. Great masses of other fine textiles (Plate 26) were
found, woven with agave fibers.
The designs are often
polychrome and in assymetrical but pleasing designs, as in
Plate 26, B. The number of these "mortuary blankets" is
almost overwhelming. Sra. Johnson of the Museo Naciona!
is going carefully into the question of techniques, and has
already called our attention to two fragments (Plate 26, A,

PLATE 24
~, C~’.a.dl.e frame; note sharpened ends of cross-pieces,

B, Knives~

PLATE 25
Three of the halted knives shown in preceding plate, enlarged to about 2/3 actual
size. Length of A, about 9 inches, Note incised decoration on A and two fir~-be~r~h
pits in handle of C0

Mortuary Cave of Candelaria, Coahuila, Mexico

227

second from left and lower right corner) which are strongly
reminiscent of Peruvian weaving methods. A sash-like strip
was also found, no doubt resembling those mentioned by
Palmer from other Coahuila caves.
Cordage was found in quantity, apparently all of agave
fiber. It was present in various degrees of thickness although none of it might be described as "rope" (this point
is of importance since the question arose of how the Indians
got in or out of the cave without stout ropes), i bundle,
largely undamaged, which we opened in Mexico City, proved
that the corpse had been provided with a sort of turban.
There are also breech clouts (Plate 31, A), a trait found
throughout Aridamerica (cf. Haury, 1950, PI. 40) and some
curious tassels (Plate 31, B). Nets were found (Plate 28,
B), probably both for fishing and for carrying, although
one wonders where the Candelaria people would have fished
unless it was in the Laguna basin. Reference must also be
made to the round bags of net-like weaving (Plate 28, D).
Prof. Rodrlguez states that one of these is of a type still in use
for catching birds in that part of Mexico.

incidentally, the

turban referred to a moment ago must not be mistaken for
the grass rings (Plate 28, C) which were placed on the head
for carrying loads; a cruder type was made of cedar bark
in the Basket-Maker culture in the "Four Corners" area of
the Southwest United States (Kidder and Guernsey, 1919,
p. 175).
There were many pieces of reed matting, called "petates"
and used as sleeping mats even by the more sophisticated
tribes of Mesoamerica (Plate 28, A). The twilling is at times
diagonal, and many of the fragments are either painted red
or decorated with red and green designs. Some of these
mats, together with a different type consisting of a large
number of thin sticks closely bound together, might almost
duplicate a couple of the illustrations in Cosgrove’s work
(1947, Figs. 106-107) in caves of the Upper Gila and Hueco
areas. Similar specimens were likewise present in Tularosa
Cave (Martin, et al., 1952, p. 323) and in Murrah Cave on the
lower Pecos River in Texas (Holden, 1937, Pl. I0). In so far

228 ....

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

as the "petate" mats are concerned, these, of course, may be
found over most of Aridamerica and Mesoamerica wherever
rushes were or are available (for example, see Cressman,
1942, Figs. 89, 99 for northern Great Basin).
There are many fragments of basketry but only a few
complete ones (Plate 27). The coiling technique is clearly
shown, and a couple of the baskets had been patched, as,
for instance, in the case of Ventana Cave, Arizona (Haury,
1950, P1. 32). There were plenty of sandals, made in severa! different techniques (Plates 29, 30). They are mostly
of lechugilla fiber and merit an extensive study in view of
comparisons with other areas (in western Texas, for example, see Setzler, 1935, p. 107; Smith, 1933, pp. 57-65).
Ornaments were found in great profusion although in
many cases the kinds of material used awaits identification.
Some of the necklaces and bracelets are still threaded (Plate
33, A, B); they contain beads made of seeds, shell, bone,
and stone. The magnificent necklace made of rattlesnake
vertebrae tied tightly in place with cords (Plate 34, B),
deserves special mention; in this case as in so many others,
there are duplicates in the Palmer collection. The curious
flower-like objects (or rattles?) reproduced in Plate 32, A,
are fashioned out of tiny ringlets of bone tied into bunches
with fine cords. Bone also figures in the sharply pointed
object at the top of Plate 32, B, and in the two objects in the
center of the same photograph, which Prof. Rodr~guez ascertained are thorn cases. Some of the she!l ornaments are
shovcn in Plate 34, A; the object at bottom center of th~s
photograph is of green s_]ate. We were very fortunate as
regards shell ornaments during the second expedition, but
they resemble those in the illustrations.
The antlers in Plate 35, A, were no doubt used for ceremonial purposes, presumably dances, as occurred throughout
most of the Greater Southwestern area. The small Tart!y
mummified dog (Plate 35, B) naturally reminds one of Kidder and Guernsey’s discoveries in a Basket-Maker cave in
Arizona (Guernsey and Kidder, 1921, Pl. 15).

PLATE 26
Textiles woven with fine threads of dyed agave fibers,

PLATE 27
Coiled baskets.

Mortuary Cave O] Candelaria, Coahuila, Mexico

233

Bone tools were strangely absent, although there was an
awl. A number of pieces of deer-skin were found, of different sizes, and there was evidence that the head of a corpse
had been wrapped in one of these before being finally enclosed in the usual fiber blanket. Another piece was provided with a simple decorative motif. We found no traces
of fur, and the most remarkable piece of human hair was a
long wisp which had been coiled around a small reed splint.
There was another remarkable find: a human skull with a
fragment of fiber cloth rammed into the foramen magnum,
strongly suggestive of decapitation.
Our associates had already secured a bundle, intact, containing an infant (Plate 22, D); and during the succeeding
expeditions two more were secured, both in the same excellent condition. The bundle of an adult, which had been
well preserved down to the waist, revealed that the body
had been enclosed in two fiber-blankets, sewn together
lengthwise, then wrapped around the corpse and finally
sewn, although the part around the head had only been
fastened by means of strings. The dead man, as already
said, had been provided with a kind of fiber turban, originally dyed red. In this case there were no traces of deerskin.
As regards stone artifacts, our associates were able to
gather well over three dozen inside the cave, mostly small
arrow-heads and scrapers, during their earlier visits. During
the later expeditions only four were secured, two of them
broken. It has been impossible to illustrate these points but
Aveleyra, who has studied them closely, reports that this
deficiency can be compensated by turning to Krieger’s wellknown paper (1950, Fig. 8), since they almost always conform to his outlines D, E, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, in section V,
at the top of the illustration. Krieger considers that these
small points begin to appear from about 500 A. D.
A very large number of similar artifacts were found by
Aveleyra and other members of the party close to the
"poza" to which reference has already been made, which

234

Texas Archeological Society

also produced two large fragments of blades. These types
are reported associated with pottery (presUmably indicative
of European activity) at Finisterre, Cerro de Santiago and
other sites in this same Laguna region. There is, accordingly,
a strong suggestion that they were in use at the time of the
first contacts with the Spaniards late in the 16th or early
in the 17th centuries.
Sr. Jos~ S~nchez is said to have reported finding a piece
of pottery during his first descent into the cave, but further
information is unavailable at this moment. Aveleyra and
Gonz~lez Rul discovered a single blackened, primitive-looking potsherd under one of the bundles; they feel sure that
it was in situ, but this closes the list as far as the cave is
concerned and, for that matter, all the adjoining country.
That, however, need not surprise us, since such is the situation throughout the vast north-central Mexican area of
which the Laguna region is only a small part. Many crude,
coarse, sherds are indeed found in the Laguna itself, such
as at Cerro de Santiago, but they are apparently limited to
the early mission sites of communities that came into being
under European influence, when the missionaries attempted
to set the Laguneros on new ways of living. The single
sherd in the cave, amongst hundreds of other objects, is still
somewhat of a mystery, as is all this question in general, but
it does seem suggestive when trying to establish a date for
the Candelaria people.
Discussion
Given the evidence provided by the finds, and their relative freshness, it is tempting to consider that the Candelaria
people were flourishing at the time of the first contacts with
the Europeans, late in the sixteenth and early in the seventeenth centuries. A good deal of ethnological information
as to the tribes of al! this part of the world at that time is
to be found in the writings of the ecclesiastics who either
established missions in the region, or else embodied data,
based on earlier sources, when writing many years later
(Alegre, Arlegui, Mota y Escobar, P~rez de Ribas, etc.).
The early "Litterae Annuae" of the Jesuit missionaries,

PLATE 28
A, Twilled sleeping mat with painted designs.
B, Fine net. C, Three rings of thick
grass bundles bound with eordag’e.
D, Two round baskets of loose weave with stick:

rims.

PLATE 29
Examples of different sandal techniques.

Mortuary Cave of CandeIaria, Coahuila, Mexico

239

in other words the annual reports sent by the Jesuit missionaries to their superiors (some are transcribed in "Documentos", 1857) are of special interest, and were it not for
these devoted men, who may almost be counted on the
fingers but shirked no difficulty in their work of conversion
of the natives, our information would be of the vaguest,
although even thus it is far from complete.
Curiously enough, it can be said in brief that, generally
speaking, the written sources neither contradict nor confirm the evidence afforded by the finds. According to the
sources, the Laguna tribes (to use the term as also embracing the Delicias basin) were hunters, fishers and gatherers who, at least in part, lived in "rancher~as", mostly on
the islands in the great lagoon, although no information is
given as to the nature of their dwellings, which must have
been made of the flimsiest materials. In fact, the term
"rancherlas" might even be construed simply to imply either
a tribe or a community, although the first seems to be the
right interpretation.
Did the tribes of the Laguna region practice agriculture?
Beals (1932) favors the idea; Kirchhoff (1943, pp. 137 and
144) questions it; and the present writer, frankly, is even
more skeptical, although I would by no means refuse to
admit a certain possibility. But it seems most unlikely. As
already pointed out, the sources tell us specifically that the
Laguneros hunted different kinds of game, fished and caught
water-fowl in the great lagoon, which also supplied them
with certain edible roots which they beat into circular longlasting cakes; and that they likewise subsisted on the usual
desert products: agaves, prickly pears, "mezquitamal", and
the rest of them. In point of fact, the documents give us
quite a lot of information on this subject of diet, but I have
hitherto failed to find a single mention of maize, or for that
matter, a single unequivocal reference to agriculture in general. The few references that one encounters merely prove,
to the writer’s way of thinking, that, thanks to the missionaries, the natives took to cultivation very rapidly. Nor,
must one insist, did the cave, with the extremely doubtful

240

Texas Archeological Society

exception of the digging-sticks, provide any evidence on this
very important matter. Moreover, cultivation could never
have been practiced anywhere near the cavern.
The sources speak a good deal about the use of deer
antlers by the natives in their ceremonies, and as already
said, we found such antlers, adapted to ceremonial purposes, in the cave, but this is such a common trait that it
can hardly be classified as diagnostic. What is more significant is that the sources should make no mention of mortuary bundles or, for that matter, of mortuary caves of the
Candelaria type, an ommission that would seem almost inexplicable in the missionaries, who wrote their accounts on
the spot and give us all kinds of details regarding the life
of the natives and their different practices. This might lead
one to suspect that the people of the mortuary caves may
have antedated the period of Spanish penetration by a considerable period; in other words, that they may have flourished much earlier; and their cultural status would seem
to be in agreement.
As against this evidence, there are, however, the suggested correlations between the pottery and the artifacts,
rightly stressed by Aveleyra, and favoring a date roughly
coincident with the early contacts with the Europeans, not
so many years before !600 A. D. and a little afterwards.
There is also the relative freshness of the remains. What
is~certain is that the tribes in question cannot have flourished much later, as there would certainly have been some
clear evidence to that effect in the mortuary caverns. It
is to be hoped that C14 and further research will shed more
light on this question.
It is undeniable that in other days a great cultural continuum stretched all the way down from Oregon to Guanajuato anti even as far as Quer~taro, in Mexico. It has been
termed the "Greater Southwestern Area" by American archaeologists such as Martin and his associates (1947, map
on end papers) although, to my mind, the area spread much
further south into central Mexico than the aforesaid au-

PLAI ~ 30
Examples of different ~land~l techniques.

PLATE 31
A, Breech clout of agave-fiber cords and pelvic bone.
cords,

B,

"Tassels" of agave-flber

Mortuary Cave o] Candelaria, CoahuiIa, Mexico

245

thorities suggest. The cultures that flourished within the
continuum were strongly differentiated in accordance with
local ecological conditions, but they are basically related:
in fact, they stand to each other much as the fingers of a
single hand. They all have the same "air de famille".
A general resemblance, for instance, could easily be made
out between the Candelaria people and the Basket-Makers
in spite of what is in all probability a considerable timelag on the part of the first. Basket-Makers II were, of
course, incipient agriculturists so that one would prefer to
speak of Basket-Makers I, although these are practically
hypothetical. A Basket-Maker "mummy", apparently at the
Peabody Museum and illustrated by Miss Wormington
(!947, p. 30) might, at first sight, be taken for one from
the Candelaria cave, and the same holds true of some of the
objects shown by Kidder and Guernsey in their well known
reports.
But these first impressions have to be qualified immediately. The Candelaria blankets, unlike the Basket-Maker,
were not made of fur: in fact, I repeat that no traces at all
of fur (or of bark) were found inside our cave. The similarities, in other words, lose in sharpness of definition the
closer one studies them, and turn out to be generic rather
than specific, whereas divergences a r e o f t e n clear and
straightforward. For example, one may refer to the fundamental differences in the type of burial between the Candelaria folk and the peoples of Southwestern Texas or of
the Sierra Madre, although they did not lie so far away
geographically. In brief, notwithstanding the basic relationships to which we have referred, the culture of the
Candelaria people has a character all its own which sets
it distinctly apart:
attention.

it most certainly merits the greatest

Bibliography
Alegre, Francisco Javier
1841. Historia de la Compafiia de Jesds en Nueva Espafia. 3 Vols. Mexico, D. F. (written about !767).

246

Texas Archeological Society

Arlegui, Jose de
1851. CrSnica de la Provincia de N. S. P. S. Francisco
de Zacatecas. Mexico, D. F. (first edition 1737).
Beals, Ralph L.
1932. The Comparative Ethnology of Northern Mexico
before 1750. Ibero-Americana, No. 2. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Castetter, Edward F., Willis H. Bell, and Alvin R. Grove.
1938. The Early Utilization and the Distribution of
Agave in the American Southwest. University of New
Mexico Bulletin. Albuquerque, N. M.
Cosgrove, C. B.
1947. Caves of the Upper Gila and Hueco Areas in New
Mexico and Texas. Papers of the Peabody Museum of
American Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. XXIV, No.
2. Cambridge, Mass.
Cressman, L. S.
1942. Archaeological Researches in the Northern Great
Basin.

Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publ. 538.

Washington, D. C.

"Documentos"
1857. Documentos para la Historia de Mexico. Cuarta
serie, vol. III. Mexico, D. F.
Guernsey, Samuel James, and Alfred Vincent Kidder.
1921. Basket-Maker Caves of Northeastern Arizona. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology
and Ethnology, Vol. VIII, No. 2, Cambridge, Mass.
Guernsey, Samue! James
1931. Explorations in Northeastern Arizona. Ibid., Vol.
XII, No. 1.
Haury, Emil W.
1950.

The Stratigraphy and Archaeology of Ventana

°

o

PLATE 32
A, Ornamental objects and rattles (?) of tiny bone ringlets bound ~,vith cords.
B,
:MiscellaneQ~s objects of wood, bone, and shell ; note beads at bottom set in asphaltum,

PLATE 33
A, Necklaces and bracelets of stone and bone, including snake vertebrae.
lace of bone and stone beads,

B, Neck-

Mortuary Cave o~ Candelaria, Coahuila, Mexico

251

Cave, Arizona, University of New Mexico Press. Albuquer.que, N. M.
Holden, W. C.
1937. Excavation of Murrah Cave. Bulletin’ Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 9, pp. 4873. Abilene, Texas.
Kidder, Alfred Vincent, and Samuel James Guernsey
1919. Archaeological Explorations in Northeastern Arizona. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 65. Washington, D. C.
Kirchhoff, Paul
1943. Los Recolectores--Cazadores del Norte de Mexico.
In: E! Norte de Mexico y el Sur de los Estados Unidos,
Sociedad Mexicana de Antropo!og~a, pp. 133-!44. Mexico, D. F.
Krieger, Alex D.
1950. A Suggested General Sequence in North American Projectile Points. Proceedings of the Sixth Plains
Archeological Conference, pp. 117-124. University of
Utah Press. Salt Lake City.
Martin, Paul S., George I. Quimby, and Donald Collier
1947. Indians Before Columbus. University of Chicago
Press. Chicago, Illinois.
Martin, Paul S., et al
1952. Mogollon Cultural Continuity and Change. Fieldiana: Anthropology Papers, Vol. 40. Chicago Museum of
Natural History. Chicago, Illinois.
Martinez Del Rio, Pablo
1953. La Cueva Mortuoria de la Candelaria, Coahuila.
Cuadernos Americanos, Vol. LXX (July-August), pp.
177-204. Mexico, D. F.
Mera, H. P.
1938. Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeastern

252

~,

Texas Arcl~eo!og~cal Society ~

.... ,,~

NewMexico. Memoirs of the American Anthropological
Association, No. 5i. Menasha, Wisconsin.
Mota y Escobar, Alonso
1940. DescripciSn Geogr~fica de los Reinos de la Nueva
Galicia, Nueva Vizcaya, y Nuevo Leon. (Written about
1605?). Mexico, D. F.
Perez de Ribas, Andres
1944. Triunfos de nuestra Santa Fe entre las genres mas
b~rbaras y fieras del Nuevo Orbe. Mexico, D. F. (First
edition, Madrid, 1645).
Setzler, Frank M.
1935. A Prehistoric Cave Culture in Southwestern Texas. American Anthropologist, Vol. 37, pp. 104-1!0. Menasha, Wisconsin.
Smith, Victor J.
1933. Sandals of the Big Bend Culture with Additional
Notes Concerning Basket- Maker Evidence. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 5,
pp..57-65. Abilene, Texas.
Steward, Julian H.
1937. Ancient Caves of the Great Salt Lake Region.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 116. Washington, D. C.
Studley, Cordelie A.
1884. Notes upon Human Remains from Caves in Coahuila. Sixteenth and Seventeenth Reports of the Trustees of the Peabody Museum, Vol. III, Nos. 3 and 4, pp.
233-260. Cambridge, Mass.
Wormington, H. M.
1947. Prehistoric Indians of the Southwest. Denver Museum of Natural History. Denver, Colorado.
Departamento de Prehistoria
Museo Nacional
Moneda 13
Mexico, D. F.

PLATE 34
A, Shell ornaments; note use of asphaltum.
Object at center bottom is green slate.
B, Necklace of rattlesnake ¥ertebrae held in place with fiber cords.

PLATE 35
A, Deer antlers of ceremonial use.

B, Dried body of skinn~ed clog.

