ON FLUTING FOLSOM: NOTES ON RECENT
EXPERIMENTS

J. B. SOLLBERGER
ABSTRACT
Some of the problems and variables involved in the replication of
Folsom fluted points are presented. The differences in the more common
types of breakage patterns are described along with the possible causes.

This paper describes channel flute fracture patterns which can
occur in replicating the classic Folsom projectile point. Crabtree
(1966) has presented the only comprehensive description of
replicative experiments involving the Folsom type. Others (cf. Judge
1970) have presented analysis and production trajectories which
were not checked by replicative procedures. Questions still remain
regarding type attributes and production technology for Folsom. I
would like, therefore, to make available certain comments on the
fluting process that result from my own experiments during the
past several years.
Channel flute scars provide some information about Folsom
preforming and lateral edge retouch. I have observed three channel
flute styles on artifacts (Fig. 1A, B and C) and the technological
implications of these attributes deserve comment. The example
shown in Figure 1A has the most acute lateral edge angles and
represents the fluting of a completed preform with no additional
retouch to the edges. The example shown in Figure 1B has an
additional series of short flakes removed by lateral edge retouch;
these do not extend to the ridge crests of the flute. I use a fluting
clamp in my experiments and sometimes retouch the lateral edges
to make the preform fit the fluting clamp better (Why did the
Indians do such retouching?). The specimen illustrated in Figure 1B
has a lateral edge cross-section that is less acute than that on
Figure 1A because of this additional edge retouch. The third style
of edge flaking on artifacts (Fig. 1C) has lateral edge retouch that
was applied after the fluting. This style has the least acute (_ 90°)
edge angles. Style C retouch is done from style A or B lateral edges
and brings the edges closest to the channel scar ridges and slightly
rounds them off without penetrating into the channel scar itself. A
fellow flint-knapper, Bruce Bradley, does this replication technique
most convincingly. Since these styles represent technological
attributes, I suggest that their distribution may have regional
significance.

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

1

2

B

¢

3

d

g
FIGURE 1. Folsom point cross sections A, B, C styles -- described
in the text. Profiles E-J, illustrating break pattern types. Snap
breaks are E and F; roll-out fractures are H and I; G is a step
fracture; the common hinged fracture is J.
Bradley (personal communication) notes that aboriginal Folsom
specimens have channel scars that are virtually free of undulations
and compression rings. He suggests that perc~ssion fluting may be
the explanation for this. My fluting experiments on Folsom have
been almost exclusively by lever-pressure flaking using heat
treated Edwards Plateau cherts. Some examples, on identical
material, have unblemished channel scars and some are badly
undulated or rippled. I attribute these "blemishes" to a lack of
"fracture harmony" (Sollberger ms.) and not to pressure or
percussion flaking methods.

49

EXPERIMENTS ON FLUTING FOLSOM

Regarding preform distal end preparation for fluting, Crabtree
(1966) notes that the tip should be beveled to free the end of the
flute flake. Judge (1970) believes that the aboriginal flint-knappers
had the flutes terminating well short of the distal end, following
which the preform was then worked down to the shortest channel
scar. My experiments do not follow either of the above fabricating
trajectories. I grind the distal tip once for both flutes. Some flute
flakes break in removal and some do not. This observation brings
up the questions: what percentage of artifact points have tip
forming flakes entering the channel scar; and, what percentage of
artifact flutes were broken by the Folsom flint-knappers?

3
I
C Tll

FIGURE 2. Replications of fluted points and break patterns.

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Crabtree (1966) found that lateral edge clamping and tip support
was either necessary or at least a great aid in fluting the preform.
My experiments indicate that where both flutes extend from the
base to the tip and where each flute flake cross-section is
approximately one-sixth of the preform mass (Fig. 1D), lateral edge
clamping plus tip support is mandatory to eliminate fracture
failures like that illustrated in Figure 2, A, B, C and E. When the
lateral edge clamping failed to eliminate bending of the preform or
the flute flake was too thick (Fig. 2E), either "end snipping" moved
upward from the distal end to the mid-region of the preform (Fig.
2C), or a snap break would occur (Fig. 2A, B). Flute flakes less than
full length (Fig. 2G, H) and of a cross section less than about onesixth of the total point volume, preclude the necessity for lateral
edge clamping and tip support (Fig. 2G). However, such fluted
points sometimes lack Folsom attributes.
Experiments indicate that most aboriginal Folsom points were
fluted on very precisely contoured preforms (finishing flakes
sometimes do enter the channel scar). Any prominent facial flake
scar ridges (Fig. 2D right edge) causes the flute scar to undulate,
thicken, (Fig. 2F) and widen at the ridge points. Low spots on a
preform face allow the fracture plane to rise. This, however, is a
useful technique for terminating a flute flake short of a distal tip
(Fig. 2I). That is, both faces are thinned abruptly just above tip
grinding. The preform must then be clamped in a position vertical
to the anvil to prevent tip fractures under fluting force loads.
Fracture failures (breakage) in fluting need to be better
understood. A classic but common one is the "roll-out" (Fig. 1I and
Fig. 2C) which is commonly misclassified as being a "hinged
fracture" (Fig. 1J). Roll-out fractures may be either "reverse face"
or "front face" (Fig. 1H), and are caused by diminshed downward
flaking force. They roll to the front or rear, according to the
strength ratio between the flake volume and the mass.
True hinge fractures (Fig. 1J) represent total loss of downward
flaking compression advance. This loss is caused by flute flake
snapping, platform crushing, percussor bounce, and or mass
deflection. True hinge fractures terminate on front, or dorsal,
surfaces, not on the reverse faces.
Other unrelated fluting problems that are being confused are
"step fractures" (Fig. 1G), and "snap fractures" (Fig. 1E, F). Step
fractures are continuations of the original crack tip of fracture
advance wherein the fracture plane thins a flute flake by virtue of
stepping up (Fig. 1G) prior to termination.

EXPERIMENTS ON FLUTING FOLSOM

51

Snap fractures (Fig. 1F; improperly called a step) are not
continuations of the original fracture path but are new fractures
initiating on the previously formed ventral face. The original
fracture plane terminates in the mass (Fig. 1F). The other type of
snap fracture (Fig. IE) is a "tension snap" (bending) that occurs
when a ring crack and normal fracture is not properly formed at
the striking platform. This is sometimes accompanied with the
formation of a rudimentary flute flake attached (Fig. IB), or not
attached (Fig. 2A) to the proximal end. All snap fractures start in
tension (as opposed to between tension and compression) by
forming two essentially 90° edges (Fig. IE-F). In termination, snap
fractures form one sharp concave edge and one rolled edge.
The horizontal troughs across the channel scars and thickening
waves across the flute flake ventral face (Fig. 2F) result from
volume changes in the nascent flute flake that alter the velocity of
a fracture advance. That is, "sharp-fronted" compression advance
is being intermittently altered (see prominent ridge points on Fig.
2D) to a variable front type of advance. Ripples or fine compression
rings form on the ventral faces of flakes when sharp fronted
compression advance cannot reform to create mirror smooth
fracture surfaces.
"Lipping" alone does not indicate that artifacts were fluted by
percussion or pressure or by hard or soft hammers. Lipping is
essentially absent when the ring crack splits isolated flaking
platforms (Fig. 2D-E). Lipping is prominent when the ring crack
occurs away from the impact point of the hammer or pressure tool
(Fig. 2D).
The specimen shown in Figure 2G was fluted short of the preform
length by hand-held pressure, using no tip support, edge grinding,
or clamping device. Both flutes are materially less in volume than
one-sixth the body cross-section. The preform was random flaked
with type A lineal edge retouch. The specimens illustrated in
Figure 2H-J, were done by lever pressure with tip support, edge
grinding, and using a clamping device. Each point is progressively
thinner with longer flute flakes. The replica shown in Figure 2J had
knife-sharp edges formed by the flute flakes at both the proximal
and distal ends. Following the flute flake removal, lateral edges
were retouched to form a Style C Folsom lateral edge character.
This retouch does not extend into the channel scar and is not,
visibly at least, attributable to post-fluting activities. The ridge has
been rounded off, and it is not as sharp as type A and B channel
ridges.

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In conclusion, it must be said that none of the breakage patterns
reported in this paper are exclusive to fluting industries, but are
common to all bifacing and thinning processes.

REFERENCES CITED

Crabtree, Don E.
1966 A Stoneworkers Approach to Analyzing and Replicating The
Lindenmeier Folsom. Tebiwa Vo!. 9, No. 1, pp. 3-39.
Judge, James W.
1970 Systems Analysis and the Folsom-Midland Question. Southwestern
Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 40-51.
Sollberger, J. B.
ms. On the Conversion of Hertzian Cones into Flakes and Blades.
Manuscript submitted to Tebiwa.

