NAVACOYAN: A PRELIMINARY SURVEY
By AGNES MCCLAIN HOWARD

The Navacoyan site is on a hill situated about eight kilometers (five miles) east of the City of Durango, Mexico. It is
covered with nopal cactus and small vegetation--in fact, "Navacoyan" means no,gal. The hill stands alone and commands a
view of the entire Valley of Durango which is some miles in
extent. The Rio Tunal runs along the eastern slope and there
are permanent springs on the northern slope, one of which is
hot. There are two villages at the base of the hill, Conteras and
Navacoyan. The latter was the site of a huge hacienda in former
times and so the name has been chosen for the archeological
site as well. This hacienda was so large that the Howard ranch,
sixty miles away, was once a part of it. Foundations of structures are to be found on all sides of the hilt and archeological
materials may be found in the stone fences which surround the
present-day houses of the villagers.
An idea of the richness of the site may be formed by considering the fact that the writer has more than 650 axe-heads
--whole or broken--from the site. Spindle-whorls of all sorts
from the crudest, poorly-fired, undecorated sort to highlypolished, elaborately decorated ones may be found. Predominant
are those of the polished black engraved type.
Beads and pendants are probably of the greatest intel"est and
are very numerous. The pendants range from anthropomorphic
and zoomorphic examples to abstract triangular, circular,
square, and irregular forms. Many are skillfully carved from
stone, shell, bone, jasper, quartz, chert, turquoise, obsidian, and
even coral. Whether by intention or coincidence, most of the
turtle effigies are carved from greenstone.
One pendant (Fig. 44, F, left) depicts a long-nosed hunchback. This is of special interest in view of a recent report (Lainbert, 1957) of a hunchback figure from the Schroeder site in
Durango which is only about five miles from Navacoyan. In
this connection the statement by Parsons (1939, p. 1008) that

0¸¸¸¸¸/¸i¸ i ii:!(

Fig. 44.

il il¸

Pendants and figurines from the Navacoyan site.

centimeters.)

(Scale in

Navacoyan : A Preliminary Survey

183

"of all extant Uto-Aztecan peoples, the Cora-Huichol tribes of
the Nayarit sierra in Ja!isco are closest in culture to the Pueblo" is of interest as Navacoyan is well within the area of CoraHuichol culture. We will discuss some other possible relationships to the U. S. Southwest later.
A tiny human figurine (Fig. 44, F, right) is perfect in every
anatomical detail, though it is only about three-quarters of an
inch, or two centimeters, in length. It is apparently not intended
as a bead or pendant, as there is no hole for stringing or suspension.
It is probably unnecessary to point out the similarities in
style, and even in the basic materials used, between these
objects from Navacoyan and many from the Hohokam area. If
we add to the objects already mentioned such items as the copper
bells, projectile point types, and ceramic styles and motifs found
at Navacoyan and compare them with Hohokam and other
Southwestern United States materials, the conclusion is forced
upon us that there must have been some rather important relationships between the areas. Copper bells found at Navacoyan
appear identical with one illustrated by McGregor (1941, Fig.
59) which he notes as being "almost identical with bells found
in Mexico." However, there are still other evidences of extensive
trade between Navacoyan and other areas in Mexico and perhaps in the United States which will be noted later.
There are many figurines in stone, shell, bone, and pottery
(Figs. 44; 45, B). Many of these are beads or pendants as a!ready mentioned. These show marked differences in appearance.
Some (Fig. 44, B, C, D, E) have resemblances to U. S. Southwestern figurines and to Pima figurines (DiPeso, 1956, Fig. 11) ;
others are not unlike West Coast (Sinaloa) materials; and still
others are quite similar to some from the so-called "Tarascan"
area. In this latter connection, Carl B. Compton reports (personal communication) that the figurine shown in Fig. 45, B,
third from left, is almost identical in appearance with one which
he collected at Cerro del Chivo, a site near the city of Acambaro,
Guanajuato, Mexico. This site, incidentally, has a material culture quite aberrant from the "Chupicuaro" culture of the su~rounding area.

Texas A~’cheological Society

Spindle-whorls, already mentioned, are also of uncertain
affiliations. Some are definitely of Chalchihuites type; others
show West Coast influence. Some are quite likely of spontaneous local manufacture or, in other words, strictly utilitarian
objects made with little thought for design aside from the
purely functional design imposed by the dynamics of threadmaking. It might be remarked that the a, alacate, or spindlewhorl, was a very important object in precolumbian Mexico
and many of them are objects of considerable beauty. They
must have required great artistic ability to make as well as
painstaking craftsmanship.
Pipes are found in considerable abundance and vary widely
in form. The two shown (Fig. 45, C) are not unlike some from
the Tarascan Tsintsuntsan area, but others appear to be from
the West Coast area and are of highly polished red, black, and
white engraved ware. One example, not shown, has a squashform which is virtually identical with the squash-form vessels
of Veracruz. Even the paste seems to be similar, though thus
far no tests have been made to determine this. Still other pipes
are bird-effigy in form. Some of the pipes appear to be incipient
"platform" pipes, but this may very well have been unintentional; no actual pipes of "platform" type have been found at
Navacoyan.
Stamps made of baked clay as well as many carved from soft
stone are found in both cylinder and "block" or fiat form. One
cylinder stamp has a female figurine motif. This identical
motif was also found at Navacoyan as a design on a pottery
sherd, but this design was painted on and was definitely not
made by means of a stamp. It is probably impossible to print
a design on pottery with a clay stamp excepting in the case
of the "stamp impressed" type of pottery where the design is
pressed into the clay with a ceramic stamp. Others of the stamps
have animal motifs and some are so stylized as to be nonrepresentational in appearance. In general, the cylinder and
flat stamps have about the same motifs. These Navacoyan
stamps are practically the same, if not entirely the same, in
motif and appearance as those which are common all over the
Mesoamerican area, though of course specific motifs are not
duplicated.

Navacoyan : A Preliminary Survey

185

Pottery at Navacoyan is chiefly white-on-red (Fig. 45, C)
but Chalchihuites types are found as well as the Coastal black,
white, and red incised or engraved. The Chalchihuites pottery
is highly polished black or brown. There is some red-on-cream
pottery and an occasional polished-red sherd suggestive of the
polished-red of the "Tarascan" Chupicuaro region. Some of
the spindle-whorls are apparently of "paint-cloisonn@’ but this
pottery is relatively rare at Navacoyan, though found in sites
not far distant. Some pottery which appears to be similar to
certain Nayarit styles is found.
A considerable number of stone balls have been found at
Navacoyan. Most prehistoric peoples collect such naturally
formed spheres when they are found. People of our own culture often prize them highly as curiosities. The Museum of
Michoac6n in Morelia has many of them in the patio and General Cardenas used them as "newel posts" at his home in Patzcuaro. They have been found in huge size in the Maya area and
as small objects in Eastern United States Archaic, Hopewell,
Californian, and many other sites. For the most part, they are
either volcanic in origin or were formed in pot-holes in swiftly
running streams, though some may have been man-made. There
is nothing to indicate that these examples from Navacoyan are
man-made. They may have been used in some sort of game,
as Wedel (1941, p. 68) thought they might have been in California, or merely prized as curious objects because of their
near-perfect spherical shape.
Among the other objects of material culture are many trough
metates, two-hand manos, one-hand manos, full and three-quarter grooved axes, paint mullers, and palettes (Howard, 1955).
Polishers of onyx, basalt, jasper, and other stones are numerous and are of all sizes from one to six inches in length. A fine
obsidian cruciform also came from Navacoyan. Others have
been found in this region (Howard, 1954). [See also the article
by Car] B. Compton in the present volume.--Ed.] Polished
ceramic beads made on a straw which burned out in the firing
process are common, as are bone heads of various sorts as mentioned above.
The projectile joints (Fig. 45, A) present some interesting

Fig. 45. Specimens from the Navacoyan site. A, points and a pendant.
B, figurines and spindle whorls. C, Pipes and white-on-red vessel.

Navacoyan: A Po’elimina~’y Survey

187

problems. By far the most numerous are small, even tiny, arrow points. A very few large points are to be found--a representative large one is three inches in length--but some points
are less than one centimeter in length.
All, or nearly all, of these points are side-notched but otherwise present rather wide variation. Many of the points are
quite similar to Hohokam Colonial and Sedentary points (McGregor, 1941, Figs. 48, 58) as well as to Upper Pima (DiPeso,
1956, P1. 130, c). As an assemblage these points resemble to a
remarkable degree those called Harrell Points in Texas (Suhm
et al., 1954, p. 500, P1. 129), which also are found generally
from Canada through the Southwest and eastward to the Mississippi River. It was apparently a highly satisfactory form.
The very small serrated and rather crude points are quite
frequent among the Hohokam and among the points of West
Central and Trans-Pecos Texas where they are known as Toyah
Points (Suhm et al., 1954, p. 508, P1. 133, D, E). Similar points
are found in North Texas and in Oklahoma and elsewhere. The
Navacoyan examples are made of almost any available material
such as quartz, jasper, obsidian, and chert.
SUMMARY
The Navacoyan site is one of the richest in the entire Chalchihuites area of Mexico if we may judge from surface materials.
It seems to have been an important "crossroads" in precolumbian times. As one well-known archeologist remarked after
seeing the site and the collected material: "This must have
been a summer resort for al! Mexico."
Without stratigraphy, dating is, of course, only speculation.
However, in the light of certain pottery type-periods recently
established, at least tentatively, for the nearby Schroeder site
(Kelley, 1957) we may make certain cross-references and assumptions. From the materials collected thus far we would assume that at least the most intensive development at the site
about 1000 A.D. and later. However, and again with crossreference to the Schroeder site, we may reasonably assume that
there were earlier occupations of the site, possibly from earliest
Formative times.

188

Texas A~’cheological Society

Navacoyan is admirably situated from every point of view.
As mentioned, it even had hot and cold running water in the
form of springs. The locality commands a view of the entire
valley of Durango and would have been easily defended. The
valley is rich and ordinarily well-watered--an excellent agricultural area. The springs and the Rio Tunal would provide
ample water for irrigation if that were desired. All in all,
Navacoyan may well have been a precolumbian land of plenty
and ease.
REFERENCES CITED
DiPeso, Charles C.
1956. The Upper Pima of San Cayetano of Tumacacorf.
Amerind Foundation, Dragoon, Arizona.
Howard, Agnes McClain
1954. Cruciform artifacts of the Sierra Occidental. American Antiquity, Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 174-175.
1955. A paint palette and muller from Durango, Mexico.
Newsletter, Missouri Archaeological Society, No. 88, February 15.
Kelley, J. Charles
1957. Excavation and Reconnaissance in Durango, Mexico. Paper given at the 22nd Annual Meeting of the Society
for American Archaeology, Madison, Wisconsin, May 2.
Lambert, Marjorie F.
1957. A rare stone humpbacked figurine from Pecos
Pueblo, New Mexico. E! Palacio, Vol. 64, Nos. 3-4, pp.
93-109.
McGregor, John C.
1941. Southwestern Archaeology. John Wiley and Sons,
New York.
Parsons, Elsie Clews
1949. Pueblo Indian Religion. 2 vols. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Navacoyan : A Preli’minary Survey

189

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas archeology.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1941. Archeological investigations at Buena Vista Lake,
Kern County, California. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bull. 130.
Instituto Interamericano
Durango, Dgo., Mexico

