ABSTRACT
The Old Tom Burial (41DK16) is a prehistoric slab lined interment with associated offerings, located in southwest Dickens County, Texas. It cannot as yet be
associated with any defined archeological or cultural unit. However, the site has
considerable significance because associated artifacts reveal something of funerary
customs, trade routes, and other aspects. This paper attempts a detailed description and interpretation of the burial and its contents.

INTRODUCTION
The Old Tom Burial was discovered in 1969 by Hill and Martin (Hill, ms.)
While surface collecting, they observed a heavy conchshell pendant (Fig. 1)
eroding from the surface at the crest of a hill. The hill overlooks the central
portion of the valley formed by Red Mud Creek. A tributary of the White
River, the creek drains parts of Dickens and Kent counties (Texas). A Harrell
point (Fig. 2a) lay near the pendant. These finds were within an enclosure
formed by exposed upper edges of vertically placed sandstone slabs.
Slab lined pits containing human skeletal remains are a common type of
prehistoric burial in the area. The subsequent excavation was careful but not
scientifically recorded. At a later date, Hill (ms.), recognizing the importance
of the find, made notes of the details of the excavation as remembered. These
notes and artifacts are the basis of this paper.

ENVIRONMENT
Red Mud Creek derives its name from the extensive exposure of Permain
redbeds in its drainage area. These formations are made up largely of red
clays with frequently occurring layers of gypsum. The Old Tom Burial Iocation is situated on a prominence which represents the point of a highland
between Red Mud Creek and a tributary. It lies about 1/2 mile west of the
present stream course.
This elevation has been protected somewhat from erosional degradation
by a cap of sandstone, probably of Triassic age (John Brand, personal communication). A scattered deposit of stream-rolled gravel, consisting of a broad
range of igneous stone, occurs on the surface of the hill top.
A slight saddleback, formed by erosional isolation of the hill top, separates
the point from the main body of the upland. Today, the immediate area is
very sparsely vegetated, low shrubs and tufts of grass being the predominant
plants. On the terraces between the site and stream beds, mesquite, prickly
pear, and grasses prevail. Along the creek, tributary channels, and draws,

70

Texas Archeological Society

cottonwoods, hackberries, and wild plums are found. Thick stands of shin
oak occur in a dune area a few miles to the west.
The nearest presently reliable source of water is in a bend of Red Mud
Creek about 3/4 mile to the southeast. This bend turns against the base of a
steep Permian bluff. The bed of the creek has been deepened, presumably by
water turbulence in flood time. Water is found in this depression in all but the
very driest seasons.
Terraces in the immediate vicinity of the waterhole show considerable
evidences of prehistoric occupation. Several burials were removed from the
bluff tops and surrounding hills.

ARCHEOLOGICALBACKGROUND
The Old Tom Burial site lies near the center of the Panhandle-Plains
region (Suhm et al., 1954), one of the least studied’archeological areas of
Texas. Works such as Kelley (1964), Collins (1971), Tunnell (1977), and
Hughes and Willey (1978) give excellent general summaries of regional prehistory. Other reports include Harrison and Killen (1978), Black (1974),
Johnson et al. (1977), Sellards et al. (1947), Ray (1938), Tunnell and
Hughes (1955), Hughes (1955), Word (1963, 1965), Runkles (1964), and
Parsons (1967).
Of particular relevance to this study are reports of burial excavations.
Amongst reports directly pertinent are Holden (1929), Cochrum (1963), and
Ray (1936). Other reports of interest include Tunnell (1964), Witte (1955),
Quinn and Holden (1949), Harrison and Griffin (1973), Jokerst (1972),
Shawn (1973) and Ray (1933, 1934, 1935, 1936, 1939, 1940, 1943,
1946).
Carefully excavated and reported burials are outnumbered a hundredfold
by those which are carelessly excavated and unreported. Digging of graves
has been a major focus of non-professional archeologists and hobbists in the
region. This practice has been facilitated by the custom of at least some of the
prehistoric residents of marking or protecting their interments with certain
arrangements of stones.
Some individuals have taken advantage of these tell-tale evidences and
have located and excavated many prehistoric burials. Much information
about the prehistory of the area was destroyed in this manner; but some data
can be gleaned from artifact collections and oral reports of these persons.
In this report, generalizations were extracted from personal observations
of the authors and conversations with individuals who have made a practice
of excavating burials when they find them. These generalizations can best be
applied to the area of Dickens, Kent, Crosby, and Garza counties. Types of
prehistoric burials probably occurred that were not marked by stones and
consequently seldom have been discovered.
Most burials excavated in the area were from hills and bluffs overlooking
stream drainages. They may or may not be located on habitation sites. There
is no evidence as yet that those that are located on habitation sites are necessarily associated with them.
Graves are usually either slablined cists or covered by slabs and/or cobbles. Usually, the cists, or stone boxes, are small, less than a meter in diame-

Parsons, Hill, Parker - Old Tom Burial

71

ter. Some graves are both slab lined and covered with stones. Cairns over
graves may be two to three meters or more in diameter. Many burials are
reported to have an especially large stone covering the upper portion of the
body. Skeletons are commonly tightly flexed and often incomplete.
Burial furniture is very rare. Informant estimates of frequency of burials
with associations range from one in fifty to one in a hundred. The most
common association seems to be unmodified mussel shells. They are often
placed with concave surfaces up as if to serve as a container.
Items of personal adornment, such as Olivella shell, bone, or crinoid stem
beads, are occasionally found with burials in this area. A few, like the Old
Tom Burial, contain shell pendants or atlatl weights. Other associations reported include large, finely chipped bifaces of Edwards Formation chert, projectile points, preforms, and bone awls.

THE SITE
The prominence upon which the Old Tom Burial was located offers a
broad view from the west of the middle drainage of Red Mud Creek. It is an
ideal position for either a tactical or spiritual lookout. Evidence of human
activities at the spot, in addition to the burial, consisted of: a very sparse lithic
scatter, apparently the product of sampling of gravel deposits as a possible
source of flaking materials; and one or two tool fragments, most notable of
which is the distal end of a snubnosed end scraper.
This material indicates that the location was not used extensively for any
activity which would produce quantities of lithic detritus. There is no evidence
to connect the activities with the Old Tom Burial.

THE BURIAL
The Old Tom Burial pit was excavated through the fragmented Triassic
sandstone and into the underlying red clay Permian formation. The pit, about
60 cm in diameter and depth, was lined by sandstone slabs gathered on the
site. The mouth was effectively sealed by a layer of horizontally arranged
slabs. This plug was removed and approximately an additional 15 cm of red
clay fill was excavated before skeletal material and artifacts were encountered.
Near the center of the pit floor, a small portion of a human skeleton was
found. Four artifacts, three conch shell pendants and a polished stone object
(probably an atlatl weight) were leaning against the slab walls, at approximate
cardinal directions. The latter (Fig. 1) was standing on end at approximate
south, while the pendants were sitting on their broader ends; Specimen 1
(Fig. 3) was to the east, Specimen 2 (Fig. 4) to the north, and Specimen 3
(Fig. 5) to the west. Reported from the backdirt, but lost, was a shell bead of
the Olivella type.
Skeletal material from the Old Tom Burial represents only a small portion
of the individual. Preservation of these elements was extremely poor, probably indicating scattering and exposure of the bones prior to interment. Preliminary analysis concluded that the bones represent those of an adult individual, age and sex unknown.

72

Texas Archeological Society

Skeletal elements present were: two fragments of the proximal end of a
tibia (probably right); one mid-portion of the right femoral shaft; one midportion and part of the distal end of the right humerus; and two small fragments that are probably ribs. The femur shows a curvature greater than normal; this may indicate a disease or be evidence of malnutrition at a pre-adult
age. The humerus appears to have lesions which may indicate disease,

THE ARTIFACTS
HARRELL POINT (Fig. 2a). A small side and basally notched triangular arrow point was
found on the surface within the circle of slabs. This specimen is of Edwards Formation chert
(glossy, light grey tan). A small portion of the distal tip and one basal corner are missing. Dimensions are: estimated maximum length 18.5 mm; estimated maximum width 17.0 mm; maximum
thickness 3.1 mm; width of notches 2.0 and 2.7 mm; width of point between side notches
(approximate diameter of distal end of arrow shaft) 9.0 mm.
ATLATL WEIGHT (Fig. 2b). A polished stone object having a plano-convex outline and a
narrow, triangular cross section was found standing on one end and leaning against the south
wall of the slab lined pit. Twenty six notches were cut into the curved, thinner edge of the artifact.
These probably were produced by application from each side of a thin, rounded-edged sandstone hone or abrader. Short grooves extend down the faces from each notch.
One notch, just off-center, is slightly larger than the others. The specimen is 180.0 mm wide
at maximum width, has a maximum thickness of 11.8 mm, and weighs 145.9 gr. A few striations
left by the grinding process are visible, running in various directions on the surface.
This specimen exhibits a high glossy polish on all surfaces (except in the notches). It is made
from a dark green stone which was identified (John Brand, personal communication) as probably
Gomez rhyolite, originating in the northern Davis Mountains of western Texas. Identification was
by microscopic examination of the surface of the artifact; a thin section was not made.
SHELL PENDANTS. Four pendants, cut from the outer whorl of large conch shells, were
found associated with the Old Tom Burial. Three were sealed in the grave by a plug of sandstone
slabs. Their positions, each standing on their broad base and leaning against the slab wall,
indicate that they were not significantly moved since the time of interment. The fourth, Specimen

0

I

2

3

cnq

Fig. 2 Stone artifacts from Old Torn Burial: a) Harrell poim ~
b) cariniforrn atlatl weight (3/4 actual size).

Parsons, Hill, Parker -- Old Tom Burial

73

4, differs somewhat from the others. Its placement on the surface indicates that it was deposited
after the grave was sealed, at the end of the burial rite or at some later date. Despite its surface
provenience, the association of this pendant with the burial can hardly be fortuitous, given the
extreme rarity of this type of artifact in the region.
SPECIMEN 1 (Fig. 3). This artifact, found leaning against the eastern wall of the burial pit, is
roughly triangular in outline, 74.6 mm in length, 56.1 mm wide at the base, and ranges in
thickness from 2.2 to 4.7 mm. Five holes, ranging in diameter from 2.4 to 3.4 mm were drilled
biconically along the approximate midline of the pendant. The uppermost hole was broken out to
the edge, perhaps due to wear. The hole immediately below probably was subsequently drilled as
a replacement.

Fig. 1 Conch shell pendant, Specimen 4 (actual size).

74

Texas Archeological Society

This uppermost intact perforation does not show elongation due to wear, as do suspension
holes on some of the other pendants. Near the center of the pendant, on its inner or concave
face, and along the same midline occupied by the perforations, five drilled depressions, about
1.5-2.0 mm in diameter, persumably decorative in intent, are arranged. All edges and surfaces
are ground smooth.
SPECIMEN 2 (Fig. 4). The pendant found against the north wall is the largest of the three
included in the burial pit. Its outline is roughly that of a truncated isosceles triangle. Maximum
length is 89.2 mm and maximum width 82.4 mm. It is, overall, a heavier piece of shell than
Specimen 1, with thickness ranging from 2.7 to 3.7 mm.
Near the upper edge of the artifact, a hole, 3.3 mm in diameter, was biconically drilled. The
shell is worn thin between this perforation and the upper edge of the artifacL It is somewhat
elongated, apparently from long suspension by a cord or thong. The pendant probably was
allowed to slide freely on the thong, rather than being secured by a knot or loop as were conch
pendants found in a burial bundle from Coahuila (Taylor, 1968:Fig. 6).
Along the lower, broader edge of the specimen, an additional six holes, ranging in diameter
from 2.2 to 2.7 mm, were biconically drilled. These holes probably were for suspension of
additional decorative elements, perhaps feathers or beads. Two holes are broken out to the lower
edge. The concave face is decorated by two double rows of drilled pits. One row is immediately
above and parallel to the line of holes along the basal edge. The other row bisects the lower half of
the specimen, meeting the first row at right angles and forming an inverted T design. Diameters of
the decorative depressions range from 1.0 to 1.4 mm. All surfaces and edges are well polished.
SPECIMEN 3 (Fig. 5). The third pendant, found against the west wall of the pit, is subrectangular in outline, 77.2 mm long and 50.3 mm wide. Thickness ranges from 2.9 to 4.7 mm.
A few tiny notches are barely visible along one lateral edge. A biconically drilled suspension hole
(3".6 × 4.8 mm)> somewhat elongated by wear, occurs near the center of the upper edge of the
specimen. A second perforation, also biconically drilled, is similarly placed near the lower edge.
Three closely spaced lines of drilled depressions (1.8-2.1 mm in diameter) decorate the
lower edge of the concave face of the specimen. A single line of like depressions are along a
portion of one lateral edge. A concavity in the edge of the pendant (which may represent half of a
former suspension hole) is immediately above this feature.
Specimen 3 was apparently recycled from a broken larger pendant; or, two small ones were
made from a large one by cutting a vertical, bisecting line through a central suspension hole and
an inverted T design of drilled pits similar to that seen on Specimen 2.

Fig. 3 Conch shell pendant, Specimen 1 (actual size).

Parsons, Hill, Parker - Old Tom Burial

75

SPECIMEN 4 (Fig. 1). The pendant found on the surface differs somewhat from those found
in the burial pit. Its breadth (horizontal dimension as suspended) is greater than its length (vertical
dimension). It is made of a heavier material and has a metallic ring when struck, as if fossilized. A
drilled decoration does not occur on Specimen 4.
Two biconically drilled suspension holes occur, one at each upper corner of the pendant
(one has broken out), rather than one near the upper center of the pendant, as in Specimens i,
2, and 3. Specimen 4 metric data are: maximum vertical dimension 72.5 mm; maximum width
(at base) 96.1 mm; thickness range 2.5 to 10.2 mm; diameters of suspension holes 5.2 and 5.5
mm.
SHELL BEAD. During a follow up visit some time after excavation, a shell bead, reported to
be of the Olivella type, was recovered from the backdirt. This specimen was lost and unavailable
for study.

0

Fig. 4 Conch shell pendant, Specimen 2 (actual size).

76

Texas Archeological Society

COMPARATIVE MATERIALS
HARRELL POINT. This point represents one of the most common forms
of late Prehistoric -- early Historic arrow points found in the PanhandlePlains region of Texas. Amongst sites in the vicinity where Harrell points are
prominent in the assemblage are Pete Creek (Parsons, 1967), Garza
(Runkles, 1964), Montgomery (Word, 1965), and Floydada Country Club
(Word, 1963).
ALTATL WEIGHT. A few objects similar to the polished stone artifact
found with the Old Tom Burial were recovered from burials and surface sites
in an area extending from Briscoe County south to Mitchell County. A concentration area apparently occurs near the center of this range, in Garza,
Crosby, Kent, and Dickens counties. One outlying specimen is reported from
Jeff Davis County, Texas (Parsons, ms.). Two of these artifacts are reported
in Ray (1936:Fig. 1, 20, 21)~ one in Holden (1929:32-33)~ and a third in
Cochrum (1963).
Parsons (1960) tentatively identified these artifacts as atlatl, or spearthrower, weights. He demonstrated with a model how they might have been
bound to a spear-thrower. Parsons (1960) referred to the artifact type as
lunates, in reference to their near crescentic form.
This term was not the wisest choice. It does not accurately describe the
form of this artifact type. The term was used to designate various other crescentic artifact forms around the world. Furthermore, it was more appropriately applied to certain other atlatl weight forms, most notably the cresentic
or pick-shaped bannerstones of the eastern United States. Consequently,
Parsons (ms.) is proposing an alternate name, that of cariniform atlatl
weights. This term refers to the keel-like morphology of this artifact form.

Fig, 5 Conch shell pendant, Specimen 3 (actual size).

Parsons, Hill, Parker - Old Tom Burial

77

Parsons (ms.) gives a detailed description of all known cariniform atlatl
weights and their archeological contexts. A brief summary of the characteristics of this form is presented for comparative purposes. Ten specimens are
known from nine sites, two of which are surface localities and the remainder
burials. Four specimens are made of green stone which was identified as
rhyolite, probably from the Davis Mountains (John Brand, personal communication; David Mattison, personal communication), and another of greygreen diorite, probably from New Mexico (Cochrum, 1963).
One is of a white stone, possibly limestone; and one is of a fine grained,
mottled brown siltstone. Three are of unidentified materials, two of them
green, the other reportedly white. All are very similar in form.
Some specimens have a larger central notch on the curved edge than the
one from the Old Tom Burial. The Old Tom Burial specimen, at 18 cm, is at
the larger end of the size range; length of the smaller specimens is about 9-10
cm. One small fragment, found on a surface site in Garza County, is distinguished by grooves being cut into both faces from each dorsal notch to the
base, producing a rippled or corrugated effect.
Cariniform atlatl weights are found in a rather wide variety of archeological contexts (Parsons, ms.). One specimen was found on the surface of a site
producing only dart points (Fairy McWilliams, personal communication);
another on a site yielding only arrow points (Emmett Shedd, personal communication). Four, including the Old Tom Burial, were found in slab lined
burials; one in a slab covered inhumation (Cochrum, 1963); one from an
historic cavern burial (Parsons, ms.); and two from a slab covered crematorium (Ray, 1936).
Associated artifacts occur in all but one of the burial sites. Only one produced items which might be useful in dating the form. Three dart points (two
corner notched and one side notched) were found with a cremation (Ray,
1936).
Of four burials where reliable examinations were made of skeletal material
associated with cariniform atlatl weights, two were children (Ray, 1936;
Cochrum, 1963), one was an adult male (Holden, 1929), and the fourth, the
Old Tom Burial, was an adult of unknown sex.
SHELL PENDANTS. Conch shell ornaments with drilled designs on their
concave faces are reported from a few Texas coastal sites. Campbell (1957)
described a circular conch ornament with drilled design from the Caplen site
in Galveston County. A pendant with two intersecting double rows of drilled
pits was found at the Harris County Boys’ School Cemetery and a similar one
from the Galina Park site (Aten et al., 1976:Fig. 15). A conch pendant with
five drilled pits in a horizontal line was recovered from a burial at Shell Point
(Hole and Wilkinson, 1973:Fig. 9F).
A short distance from the coast, at the Ernest Witte site (41AU36), two
pendants bearing decorative elements of drilled pits were found (Hall,
1977:Fig. 36, form 7). One of these bears an inverted T design virtually
identical with that seen on Old Tom Burial Specimen 2. However, the Ernest
Witte site pendants are somewhat larger and lack perforations along the
broader end. Uncorrected radiocarbon assays from the group of burials which
produced these pendants indicate an age between 2460 + 70 B.P. (TX2451) and 1650 + 70 B.P. (TX-2452) (Hall, 1977:77).

78

Texas Archeological Society

Further inland, a small fragment of a conch shell artifact with drilled orna~
mental pits was reported from the Loeve-Fox site, Williamson County (Prewitt, 1974:113). Prewitt (1974) also reported decorated conch shell pendants
from the nearby Camp site (41MM19).
Forrester (1951:Fig. 5A~C) recovered a conch shell pendant very similar
in form to the Old Tom Burial specimens from a cemetery in Shackelford
County. Another grave in the same group had a mussel shell pendant of
similar form and size with what appears in the illustration to be drilled decoration, although treatment is not described in the text.
Some conch shell pendants with drilled design were found in areas far
removed from coastal waters. One fragment from Garza County is in the
Emmett Shedd collection (Post, Texas). Another such pendant is reported by
Kidder (1932:Fig. 165) from a deep crack in the limestone cliff near the
modern town of Pecos, New Mexico (Kidder, 1932:194). The latter had an
incised human figure as well as drilled pits decorating its concave face.
A series of photographs were found in the files of The Museum of Texas
Tech University. One illustrates a shell pendant very similar in form to the Old
Tom Burial specimens. This artifact was decorated with an elaborated version
of the inverted T design. The version consists of three vertical and three
horizontal lines of closely spaced drilled pits outlined by a line of larger, more
widely spaced depressions. The owner of this specimen comes from Dickens
County; neither provenience nor associational data are preserved with the
photographs.

INTERPRETATION
The Old Tom Burial is isolated from other remains of the culture that
produced it. Deductions must be based on the grave and its contents, with
some help from the study of other interments which produced stylistically
similar associations.
Materials that can be reliably dated by radiocarbon were not present in the
Old Tom Burial (quantity of skeletal material was insufficient for this purpose). Chronological estimates are based on burial associations. There is
limited temporal data available about both artifact forms found enclosed in the
grave.
Atlatl weights are usually considered hallmarks of the Archaic period.
Earliest examples in America come from the proto-Archaic, perhaps 70008000 B.P. (Hester, 1974:2; Coe, 1964; Chapman, 1975: 200). They seem
most common in Late Archaic contexts, but also were found in Woodland
sites (Neuman, 1967:51).
Despite the arrival of the bow and arrow in most areas of North America
before A.D. 1000, there are several instances of the survival of the atlatl,
perhaps for specialized purposes, into the historic era (Krieger, 1956; Nuttal,
1891; Kellar, 1955:284,286). Consequently, on the basis of the presence of
an atlatl weight alone, the burial cannot be consigned to the Archaic period.
Such objects may have passed down through subsequent generations; or
they may have been lost and recovered by later inhabitants.
The cariniform atlatl weight from the Old Tom Burial is one of several

Parsons, Hill, Parker - Old Tom Burial

79

found in burials of the region (Parsons, ms.). One of these burials, reported by
Ray (1936), contained three dart points, in addition to two cariniform atlatl
weights and a number of other artifacts. These specimens were examined,
illustrated, and described in Parsons (ms.).
One of the points (Ray, 1936:PI. 1, No. 11) is lanceolate in outline, with
broad side notches and a slightly concave base. Its length is 43.6 mm. Two
others (Ray, 1936: PI. I, No. 10 and 12) are triangular in outline, with narrow, oblique notches at the basal corners that form long barbs, and have small
expanding stems. Their lengths are 45.0 mm (estimated due to breakage)
and 57.4 mm. The side notched specimen probably can be called an Ensor
point, a Late Archaic type. The corner notched points resemble several
morphologically similar Late Archaic forms, such as Castroville, Marcos, and
Marshall.
The occurrence of Late Archaic dart points in another grave cannot date
the Old Tom Burial, but the occurrence of cariniform atlatl weights in both
interments suggest that the two may be contemporaneous. It seems safe to
say that this atlatl weight form was being made during Late Archaic times.
Expectably, stylistic analysis and dating of conch shell pendants is not as
advanced as it is in the case of projectile points. However, there are a few
examples of conch shell pendants with drilled pit decoration from sites that
have been radiocarbon dated. Aten et al. (1971:12) report such a pendant
from a burial at the Harris County Boys’ School Cemetery, a site which produced dates ranging from 3670 + 80 B.P. (TX-969) to 1500 + 70 B.P. (TX968B).
Ring (1960:317-18) reported dates of 1900 + 105 B.P. (0-911) and
3350 + 115 B.P. (0-912) from Galena Park, where a similar pendant was
found. The Ernest Witte site component, which produced the closest dated
cognates of the Old Tom Specimens, yielded dates of 2460 + 70 B.P. (TX2451) and 1650 _+_+ 70 B.P. (TX-2452) (Hall, 1977:77). These dates again
are not conclusive, but are suggestive of a Late Archaic age for the conch shell
pendants in the Old Tom Burial.
The Harrell point is of interest in discussion of the dating of the Old Tom
Burial. Because this late form is not consistent with an Archaic date for the
burial, it is tempting to dismiss it as a fortuitous association. However, as there
are few artifacts on the hilltop where the burial was located, its dismissal would
perhaps attribute too much to chance.
One possibility, if the Harrell point is not a coincidental association, is that
all artifacts from the Old Tom Burial are contemporaneous. This situation
could be explained by the survival of cariniform atlatl weights as charms,
fetishes, or keepsakes beyond the actual use of the atlatl, as suggested by
Patterson (1937:71-72).
Conversely, the atlatl may have been used along with the bow and arrow.
Perhaps specialized purposes included water bird procurement, as by the
historic Indians of Lake Patzucaro, Michoacan, Mexico (Harrington,
1933:89-92); or fishing, as may have been the case among historic Gulf
coastal tribes (Krieger, 1956:205). Cariniform atlatl weights were found in a
burial on a late occupation site (Cochrum, 1963) and on the surface of a site
where only arrow points were found (Emmett Shedd, personal communication; Parsons, ms.).
The more likely probability seems to be that the arrow point was deposited

80

Texas Archeological Society

on the grave surface at a much later date, either intentionally or by chance.
However, the close match between the surface conch shell pendant and
those within the grave is strong evidence that the person placing the surface
pendant knew of the grave’s contents. This deposition probably happened
soon after interment; but it is conceivable that considerable time might have
passed before oral tradition of the grave’s contents was lost.
Most evidence points toward a Late Archaic date, perhaps 1500-3000
B.P., for the Old Tom Burial. The possibility exists, with some supportive
evidence, that it might fall in the later Neo-American stage.
Funerary Customs
The fragmentary nature of the skeletal material from the Old Tom Burial
suggests that it represents a secondary, or bundle burial, similar to those
produced by the custom practiced on the Plains in historic times. In this practice, the corpse was exposed to the elements, often on a platform, until the
soft parts had decayed, and the remaining bones were subsequently buried
(Bushnell, 1927).
Four of the burials which yielded cariniform atlatl weights contained complete skeletons in flexed positions. One was a cremation. These means of
disposal of the dead may have occurred more commonly than bundle burial.
Lining or covering (or both) of the burial pit with stone slabs is a trait
associated with six of the seven burials that yielded cariniform atlatl weights
(Parsons, ms.). This situation indicates that the practice was an integral part of
burial custom. The placement of grave offerings in a few, but not most, slab
lined graves in the area might be taken to indicate a degree of social stratification.
Two of these burials, however, were those of small children. Social status
was probably not the criterion which determined placement of funeral offerings. Burial furniture was not solely personal property of the deceased, as
small children would be unlikely to possess atlatls or weights.
Many associations were art objects of exotic materials, suggesting that
offerings were of a sacrificial nature. Items of special value may have been
given up as an expression of grief. Of seven graves with atlatl weights, six
contained other non-perishable artifacts. When offerings were made, they
were often multiple. It is likely that many graves contained perishable items
which were not preserved.
The placement of atlatl weights with interments presents an interesting
parallel with custom across large portions of the North American continent
(Parsons, ms.). In some southeastern sites (Webb, 1946~ Webb and Haag,
1940; Webb and Dejarnette, 1942), atlatls, usually thought of as part of male
paraphennalia for hunting and warfare, often were associated with burials of
women and children (Webb, 1946:330).
Trade
Of importance are implications regarding trade of the artifacts contained
in the Old Tom Burial. The atlatl weight is of an igneous stone not native to the
area. It was tentatively identified as Gomez rhyolite, from the northern Davis
Mountain in the Big Bend region of Texas. This area is some 250 miles to the
southwest.

Parsons, Hill, Parker - Old Tom Burial

81

Of the 10 known cariniform atlatl weights, six are of green igneous stones.
The preference for stone of this color, despite the difficulty of obtaining and
with the atlatl. Blue was connected with atlatls in the Aztec culture (Nuttal,
1891:20-23; Parsons, ms.).
The conch shell pendants must have come to West Texas via a separate
trade route, perhaps up the Brazos River from the Gulf of Mexico. If obtained
directly from the coast, this would have involved a trip of over 600 miles each
way. These objects may, however, have changed hands several times along
this route. Several pendants similar to the Old Tom Burial specimens were
found in graves on the Texas coast and in areas intermediate between the
coast and the site.

Technology
Parsons (ms.) predicted that the form of the atlatl with which the cariniform weight was used can be surmised to a limited extent from the shape of
the weight itself. The base of the type is quite narrow compared to other atlatl
weight forms which were bound to the shaft, e.g., boatstones (Patterson,
1937) and bar weights (Webb, 1946; Dalley and Peterson, 1970).
Parsons (ms.) suggested that the cariniform weights would have been
more suitable for binding to narrow, rod shaped atlatls as opposed to the
broad, flat, board shaped atlatl more common to the southwest (Kellar,
1955:303). Examples of the former type include the Shumla, Texas example
(Gardner and Martin, ms.), the Ozark Bluff Dweller specimen (Harrington,
1924), and the Lake Winnemucca atlatl (Hester, 1974). Furthermore, Parsons (ms.) believed that the most efficient manner of binding a cariniform
weight to an atlatl shaft would have required a broad notch on the face of the
spear thrower opposite the weight.
The atlatl weights were probably produced by a pecking and grinding
technique. Notches along the convex edges of these specimens were possibly
made by the use of narrow edged sandstone hones.
Recycling of conch shell pendants was apparently practiced, as evidenced
by the bisected suspension hole and design on Specimen 3. Wear of suspension holes indicate that pendants were allowed to slide freely on the supporting thongs or cords.

Psychology
Not much can be said about how these people made and used their tools,
or how and when they lived. But the Old Tom Burial, like a time capsule,
carries a number of messages about subtler aspects of their lives.
Certainly, these people held their dead in great respect. The site was
carefully selected, the pit securely lined and sealed with stone. Precious objects were placed, with every appearance of reverence, propped against the
walls of the grave. The spacing of the four burial offerings at the approximate
cardinal directions may be coincidental; but the careful placement of the objects implies ritualistic behavior.
The atlatl weight and shell pendants demonstrate that value was placed
on the exotic. The shell pendants, in form and decoration, show a regard for

82

Texas Archeological Society

symmetry, as perhaps does the spacing of the artifacts in the burial pit. Gloss
and color were of prime concern to the makers of the cariniform atlatl weights.
The artifacts, in addition to being valuable due to their qualities of rarity
and beauty, may have had qualities of sacredness. Both the atlatl (Nuttal,
1891) and shell (Kidder, 1932:194) do in other places. A high regard for
conch shell pendants can be surmised from the worn suspension holes (indicating long use) and apparent recycling of one specimen.
Two cariniform atlatl weights were found with small children, This group
may have had the concept of sacrifice of valued personal possessions as an
expression of grief. Placement of such objects in a child’s grave would seem to
imply that children were held in high regard in the society.

SUMMARY
The Old Tom Burial reveals limited data about certain aspects of the lives
of an unidentified people of prehistoric western Texas. They produced slab
lined interments which were sometimes bundle burials or cremations, but
more often contained tightly flexed primary inhumations. Burial furniture was
sometimes included.
The Old Tom Burial contained an atlatl weight of distinctive form and
three conch shell pendants. These offerings may have been sacrificial in nature, rather than being personal possessions of the deceased. Dates for similar
objects in other areas of Texas tentatively place the burial in the Late Archaic
period. Direct or indirect trade routes may have been established to the Big
Bend and coastal areas of Texas. Esthetics and ritual probably played large
parts in their lives.
A strong effort should be made to record already excavated burials in
West Texas before information is further obscured by time. All of these materials should be treated with repect, both as unique cultural resources and as
the remains of thinking, feeling human beings.

AUTHORS’ NOTE
Data are still being collected concerning atlatl weights and other polished
stone objects from western Texas. Persons knowing of the location of such
artifacts are urged to contact Mark Parsons, Route #I, Ava, Missouri 65608.

ACKNOWLEDG EMENTS
The authors wish to express their gratitude to the many people who aided
in the completion of this report. If any person is neglected, it is due to our
oversight, rather than any lack of appreciation. The site was discovered by
Ronnie Hill (Spur, Texas) and Mike Martin (Snyder, Texas). Notes and artifacts are in Hill’s possession.
Our thanks: to Mike Martin, who generously donated the shell artifacts to
Ronnie Hill, in order that the Old Tom Burial collection might remain together.

Parsons, Hill, Parker - Old Torn Burial

83

To Curtis Tunnell, State Archeologist, Bob Mallouf, and LaVerne Herrington, who provided skeletal analysis, and other archeologists and staff of
the State Archeologist Office of the Texas Historical Commission, for their
innumerable contributions to this work.
To Dr. Eileen Johnson, The Museum, Texas Tech University, and her
staff for access to the Ray Collection and files of The Museum and assistance
with several other problems relating to this project; and Dr. John Brand of the
same institution, who made several key lithic identificatiom
To Ken Perry, Director, and Barbara Baskin, Archeologist, and their staff,
Museum of the Big Bend, Sul Ross State University, Alpine, Texas, for aid in
recording the cariniform atlatl weight in their collection.
To Dr. David Mattison, Geology Department, Sul Ross State University,
Alpine, Texas, for lithic identification.
To Dr. Dee Ann Story, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin, and her staff, for cooperation and assistance in searching their collections
for comparative materials.
To Archeologists Grant Hall, Center for Archeological Research at the
University of Texas at San Antonio, Elton Prewitt, Texas Archeological Survey, and Charles Johnson, Texas Highway Department, for valuable suggestions and stimulating conversation.
To Emmett Shedd, Post, Texas, and Mrs. Fairy McWilliams, Silverton,
Texas for making their collections available for study.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence E., Charles K. Chandler, AI B. Wesolowsky, and Robert M. Malina
Excavations at the Harris County Boys’ School Cemetery. Special Publi1976
cation of the Texas Archeological Society, 3:1-112.
Black, Craig (ed.)
History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake Site. The Museum Journal,
1974
15:1-160.
Bushnell, David I. Jr.
Burials of the Algonquian, Siouan, and Caddoan Tribes West of the
1927
Mississippi. Bulletin of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 83:1-160.
Campbell, T. N.
Archeological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County,
1957
Texas. Texas Journal of Science, 9(4):448-471.
Chapman, Carl H.
1975
The Archeology of Missouri, I. University of Missouri Studies, 52:1-288.
Cochrum, Dan E.
A Multiple Burial from the Caprock Area. Bulletin of the South Plains
1963
~Arc heological Society, 1:26-3 I.
Coe, J. L.
1964

The Formative Cultures of the Carolina Piedmont. Transactions of the
American Philosophical Society, 54(5):1-130.

84

Texas Archeological Society

Collins, Michael B.
A Review of Llano Estacado Archeology and Ethnohistory. Plains An1971
thropologist, 16(52):85-104.
Dalley, Gardiner F. and Kenneth L. Petersen
Additional Artifacts from Hogup Cave. Appendix X. In: Melvin Aikens,
1970
Hogup Cave. University of Utah Anthropological Papers, 93:283-286.

Forrester, Robert E. Jr.
1951
A Series of Eighteen Indian Skeletons Excavated in Shackelford County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
22:132-143.
Gardner, Fletcher and George C. Martin
ms.
A New Type of Atlatl from a Cave Shelter on the Rio Grande near
Shumla, Val Verde County, Texas. Witte Memorial Museum Big Bend
Basket Maker Papers, 2:15-18.
Hall, Grant D.
1977
Archeological Investigations at the Ernest Witte Site, Austin County,
Texas. Manuscript on file at the Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
Harrington, Mark Raymond
1924
The Ozark Bluff-Dwellers. American Anthropologist, 26(1):1-21.
1933
Gypsum Cave. Southwest Museum Papers, 8:1-197.
Harrison, Billy R. and Bob T. Griffin
1973
An Infant Burial in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin .of the Texas Archeological Society, 44:61-68.
Harrison, Billy R. and Kay L. Killen
1978
Lake Theo: A Stratified Early Man Bison Butchering and Camp Site,
Briscoe County, Texas. Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum Special
Archeological Report, 1:1-108.
Hester, Thomas R.
1974
Archeological Remains from Site NV-WA-197, Western Nevada: Atlatl
and Animal Skin Pouches. Contributions of the University of California
Research Facility, 21:1-43.
Hill, Ronnie
The Old Tom Burial. Notes in the possession of the author, Spur, Texas.
ms.
Holden, W. C.
Some Recent Explorations and Excavations in Northwest Texas. Bulletin
1929
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 1:23-35.
Hole, Frank and Richard G. Wilkinson
Shell Point: A Coastal Camp and Burial Site in Brazoria County. Bulletin
1973
of the Texas Archeologica! Society, 44:5-50.
Hughes, Jack T.
Little Sunday: An Archaic Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the
1955
Texas Archeological Society, 26:55w75.
Hughes, Jack T. and Patrick S. Willey
Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Of.
1978
rice of the State Archeologist, Archeological Survey Report, 24:1-294.

Parsons, Hill, Parker -- Old Tom Burial

85

Johnson, Eileen, Vance T. Holliday, Michael J. Kaczor, and Robert Stuckenrath
The Garza Occupation at the Lubbock Lake Site. Bulletin of the Texas
1977
Archeological Society, 48:83-110.
Jokerst, C. O.
A Floodplain Burial in Randall County, Texas. Bulletin of the Lower
1972
Plains Archeological Society, 2:1-4.
Kellar, James H.
The Atlatl in North America. Indiana Historical Society Prehistory Re1955
search Series, 3(3):279-352.
Kelley, Jane Holden
Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacado. Bulletin of the
1964
Texas Archeological Society, 35:1-18.
Kidder, Alfred V.
The Artifacts of Pecos. Robert S. Peabody Foundation for Archaeology,
1932
Andover, Massachusetts.
Krieger, Alex D.
Historic Survival of the Atlatl in the Lower Mississippi Region. Bulletin of
1956
the Texas Archeological Society, 27:195-207.
Neuman, Robert W.
Atlatl Weights from Certain Sites on the Northern and Central Great
1967
Plains. American Antiquity, 32(I):36-53.
Nuttal, Zelia
The Atlatl or Spear-Thrower of the Ancient Mexicans. Papers of the
1891
Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, I(3):173198.
Parsons, Mark L.
1960
A New Artifact Type from Northwest Texas. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Texas Archeological Society, Houston.
1967

Archeological Investigations in Crosby and Dickens Counties, Texas,
During the Winter, 1966-67. State Building Commission, Archeological
Program Report, 7:1-108.
Cariniform Atlatl Weights from Western Texas. Manuscript in preparation.

Patterson, J. T.
Boat-Shaped Artifacts of the Gulf Southwest States. The University of
1937
Texas Bulletin, 3732:1-131.
Prewitt, Elton, R.
Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson County,
1974
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report, 49:1-147.
Quinn, Jean and Jane Holden
1949
Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Borden Counties. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 20: !15-131.
Ray, Cryus N.
1933

Multiple Burials in Stone Cist Mounds of the Abeline Region. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 5:14-24.

86

Texas Archeological Society

1934

1935

Report on Two Mineralized Skeletons. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 6:116-118.
Some Unusual Cremated Burials. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, 7:130-131.

1936

Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found Near Colorado, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 8:9-16.

1938

The Clear Fork Culture Complex. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, 10:193-207.

1939

Some Unusual Abeline Region Burials. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 11:226-250.

1940

Four Sand Dune Culture Burials. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, 12:241-242.

1943

Human Burial Covered by Twenty-one Feet of Silt. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, 15:110-116.

1946

Two Buried Multiple Stone Cist Structures. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 17:104-107.

Ring, E. Raymond Jr.
1961
An Evaluation of Radio-Carbon Dates from the Galena Site, Southeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 31:317-325.
Runkles, Frank A.
The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite near Post, Texas. Bulletin of
1964
the Texas Archeological Society, 35:101-125.
Sellards, E. H., Glen L. Evans, and Grayson Meade
1947
Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainview, Texas. Bulletin of
the Geological Society of America, 58:927-954.
Shawn, Ronnie A.
Salt Lake Burial. Transactions of the Eighth Regional Archeological
1973
Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, 8:1-8.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
1954
Archeological Society, 25:1-562.
Taylor, Walter W.
A Burial Bundle from Coahuila, Mexico. Papers of the Archeological
1968
Society of New Mexico, 1:23-56.
Tunnell, Curtis D.
1964
Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, 35:83-94.
1977

Fluted Projectile Point Production as Revealed by Lithic Specimens from
the Adair-Steadman Site in Northwest Texas. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.),
Paleoindian Lifeways. The Museum Journal, 17:140-168.

Tunnell, Curtis D. and Jack T. Hughes
1955
An Archaic Bison Kill in the Texas Panhandle. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, 28:63-70.

Parsons, Hill, Parker -- Old Tom Burial

87

Webb, William S.
Indian Knoll Site Oh2, Ohio County, Kentucky. The University of Ken1946
tucky Reports in Anthropology and Archaeology, 4(3): 115-365.
Webb, William S. and David L. Dejarnette
1942
An Archaeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in the Adjacent Portions of
the States of Alabama, Mississippi and Tennessee. Bulletin of the Bureau
of American Ethnology, 129:1-536.
Webb, William S. and William G. Haag
1939

The Chiggerville Site, Site 1, Ohio County, Kentucky. The University of
Kentucky Reports in Anthropology and Archaeology, 4(1):1-62.

Witte, Adolph Henry
1955

A Double Indian Burial from Donley County, Texas. Panhandle-Plains
Historical Review, 28:82-86.

Word, James H.
1963
Floydada Country Club Site, 41-FL-1. Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, 1:37-63.
1965

The Montgomery Site in Floyd County, Texas. Bulletin of the South
Plains Archeological Society, 2:55-102.

