High Resolution Photography
for Archeology
dune Secrist
ABSTRACT
High quality photographic work is a necessity for archeological field work and
publication. Often, the cost of professional photographic assistance is prohibitive
and the archeologist must obtain these skills. During the 1978 field season at
Lubbock Lake (41LU1) (Lubbock, Texas), photographic experimentation took
place to determine films and developers which provided the most accurate black
and white 35 mm documentation under a variety of conditions.
It was found that high resolution films with extremely fine grain, high resolution, but also high contrast (Kodak High Contrast Copy, SO 115, and H&W VTE
Pan), could be developed with special low contrast developers to produce high
quality, normal contrast 35 mm negatives. Special techniques are necessary to
obtain consistant results with high resolution materials. These procedures can be
followed by a person with basic darkroom experience.

INTRODUCTION
In recent years, 35 mm photography has gradually replaced the larger
format cameras both in the field and laboratory. Unfortunately, the small size
of the 35 mm negative often produces prints which are inferior both in resolution and grain to the ones produced from a larger negative.
A photographer is faced with many variables when attempting to produce
accurate images: camera equipment, metering, water chemistry, temperature control, weather conditions, and light quality. Other specific problems
(large, detailed, stratigraphic photographs with many small details and subtle
soil tone differences; to extreme close ups of wear polish on bone) were
encountered at the Lubbock Lake site during the 1978 field season. Due to
the many variables, a great deal of original photographic experimentation
was necessary.
Because of the need for superior yet inexpensive photography, a research
program was implemented to determine if good tonal qualities and extremely
fine grain could be obtained under various photographic situations.
Many archeological projects depend on films such as Panatomic-X and
fine grain developers such as Microdol-X for most photographic applications.
Results of using Microdol-X with Panatomic film were found to be either very
flat tone quality (lack of proper tone separation, muddy grays) in shade; or
very contrasty (lack of proper mid tones, mainly blacks and whites) in open
light. If the film was over exposed and under developed, the grain in the
negative was increased significantly; the print required considerable manipulation to yield a good tonal range.
After experimentation with other commonly used developers (Kodak HC
110, D-76, and Edwal F-G7), better tonal qualities were found. However,
the grain (size of the silver particles on the developed film which affects the

142

Texas Archeological Society

amount of detail in the photograph) was increased. Negatives could not compare to larger formats.
The photographic testing was expanded to include other films and developers. Excellent results were obtained from three films: H&W VTE Pan,
Kodak High Contrast Copy, and Kodak SO 115. These products are all high
resolution, thin emulsion films normally used for high contrast, fine line copy
work, or photomicography. With special low contrast developers (H&W
Control, ethol T.E.C°, Perfection Micrograin), negatives could be enlarged
50-60 times before the grain appeared~ The grain appears in Panatomic-X
when the negative is enlarged 15-20 times (Blaker, 1976:276).

HIGH RESOLUTION PHOTOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUES
Both VTH Pan film and SO 115 have a high enough film speed rating to
hand hold the camera in some field situations. Best results occur, however,
when a sturdy tripod is used and the mirror is locked. Vibration is then kept to
a minimum.
For most field shots, a fairly slow 50 mm lens possesses fewer aberrations
in focus than a fast (f 1.2-1.8) lens. Figure 1 was photographed with a
50 mm f 2 Nikkor lens. This particular lens is extremely sharp at f 5.6. The
optimum aperture for a particular lens can be determined by obtaining the
manufacturer’s technical data or by experimenting and comparing results.
For studio artifact photography, a good flat field macro-lens, such as the
55 mm f 3.5 Micro Nikkor, should be used (Fig. 2). This lens is an excellent
black and white enlarging lens, particularly for extreme enlargements.
Another economical alternative to purchasing a macro-lens is the use of
screw-on diopters or close up lenses. These items, unfortunately, produce
distortions such as curved fields around the outside edges. The object to be
photographed must be placed in the center of the frame~
Good lenses need not be purchased new. Many camera exchanges have
guaranteed used equipment for half or less the new price.

HIGH RESOLUTION DEVELOPERS
Agitation directions must be followed very carefully while using high resolution developers, Otherwise, streaks can appear, especially in large, single
toned areas such as the sky. Use of 10 ml of acetic acid mixed with 8 oz of
water (per roll of film) for a stop bath after development prevents streaking
and produces even smaller grain.
If the developer produces negatives which are too contrasty, a pre-soak of
8 oz water with a drop or two of a wetting agent (such as Photo Flo) should be
poured over the film for one minute while in the developing tank. Agitation
every two seconds for the first 20-30 seconds will lower contrast and aid in
preventing streaks.
Negatives can be cleared with a rapid fixer within a two minute time span.
Longer than two minutes could affect the negative quality. If a hypo-clearing
solution is used for 30 seconds, wash time can be cut to two minutes. After

Secrist - High Resolution Photography

143

washing, negatives should be soaked in distilled water for a few minutes to
remove any impurities from the wash. Drying time is short due to the thin
emulsion (15-20 minutes).
These thin negatives can be more easily scratched than other film. They
should be handled only with cotton gloves. If the camera pressure plate is
scratching the film, a jeweler’s buffer with jeweler rouge will remove any
rough spot.

Fig. I Field shot (Lubbock Lake stratigraphy, strata 1-3) with gray card and tone scale.
H& W VTH Pan film developed in ethol TEC for 10 minutes at 68°F. Photographed
with a Nikkomat camera with Nikkor-H f2 lens, 1/60 sec, f5.6-8.

144

Texas Archeological Society

Developers
H&W 4.5. This developer comes in concentrated liquid form. A box of
small 10 ml vials are handy to measure and store enough developer for a
single roll of film. Used with VTH Pan film, H&W 4.5 is excellent for bright,
sunny conditions or for copy work under tungsten lights. In shade, the mid
(gray) tones are a bit muddy and indistinguishable. Unless the film is over
exposed half a stop, it is difficult to get a good white tone.
When Kodak SO 115 is developed in H&W 4.5, results are excellent,
especially for artifact studio photography. The appearance of a Kodak High
Contrast Copy negative is similar in contrast to one developed in Perfection
Micrograin.
ETHOL T.E.C. This developer is comprised of two parts which are
mixed together in equal amounts, then dilluted 1:30 for most high resolution
applications. It produced excellent results with both VTH Pan and SO 115
under varied lighting conditions.
PERFECTION MICROGRAIN. Because of the tendency of this developer to be contrasty, it should not be used in bright or mottled sunlight. It is
excellent in overcast situations or in shaded areas. Perfection Micrograin developer comes in convenient tablets. If only a few rolls are being developed at
a time, this developer is an economical choice. Long development times
(Table 1) proved to be a definite drawback unless a motorized agitator is
used.

3

0

CM
Fig. 2 Photograph of a Plainview point
(Lubbock Lake. TTU-A23935). Film used
was Kodak SO 115, developed for 91/2
minutes at 68°F in H& W developer.

Secrist - High Resolution Photography

145

Table 1
High Resolution Films and Developers: Suggested Development Times in
Minutes, at 68° F.
Perfection
Micrograin

H&W Control

ethol TEC
dilluted 1:30

(ASA 50)

20

91/2

Kodak High Contrast
Copy (ASA 12)

20

8

14

--

61/2

I0

Kodak SO 115
9

H&W VTH Pan

(ASA 32)

DEVELOPING FOR HIGH CONTRAST SLIDES, MAPS,
OR GRAPHICS
Both SO 115 and High Contrast Copy films can be developed in Kodak
D-19 for various technical purposes. SO 115 is capable of a much greater
degree of contrast than High Contrast Copy film. It is excellent for preparing
slide presentations where a dense black background is needed.

FILM SPEED AND METERING
ASA ratings vary with different situations, meters, and cameras. Data in
Table I are based on film tests which were metered with a Luna Pro meter off
a gray card. A gray card is a large neutral area of 18% reflection which is the
average reflection of a given light source. It is available in most photographic
stores. Bracketing exposures in half stop increments, two stops over and
under the correct exposure, is a good procedure to determine what is best for
the particular equipment.

PRINTING HIGH RESOLUTION NEGATIVES
Generally, high resolution negatives require shorter exposure times than
ordinary 35 mm negatives. If exposure time is too short, rather than stopping
down the enlarging lens (which may effect the overall sharpness of the print),
a dimmer switch between the timer and enlarger can be connected. The
sharpest lens aperture (usually f 5.6-8) can be used with reduced light.
Most SO 115 and VTE Pan negatives print on a number 3 or 4 paper or a
medium to contrasty paper. High Contrast Copy negatives print best on a low
contrast number 1 or 2 paper. For further information on these films and
developers, the following companies can be contacted:

146

Texas Archeological Society

Technical Department
Perfection Photographic Products Inc.
8730 Wilshire Boulevard
Beverly Hills, California 90112
The H&W Company
Box 332
St. Johnsbury, Vermont 05819
Scientific and Technical Photography
Professional and Finishing Markets Division
Eastman Kodak Company
Rochester, New York 14650
ethol Chemicals Incorporated
1808 North Damen Avenue
Chicago, lllinois 60647

ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
Use of high resolution materials is an economic alternative to large format
photography. Processing time, especially washing and drying, is much shorter than with conventional films (an exception is Perfection Micrograin developer). Costs for chemicals and films are only slightly higher or the same as
commonly used 35 mm black and white materials.

CONCLUSION
The savings in time, the superior quality obtained from high resolution
photography, and its success under various conditions make it a valuable tool
for archeological research. Directions (technical data; Anonymous, 1978,
1979) must be followed exactly to obtain the best results. However, some
testing must be done to account for variations in equipment, procedure, and
environment.

ACKNOWLEDG EMENTS
Special thanks to the Lubbock Lake Project and its Director, Dr. Eileen Johnson for support
and assistance; and to Jay Goldklang, assistant photographer for the 1978 Lubbock Lake field
season. This paper and photographic experimentation is part of the on-going research of the
Lubbock Lake Project funded through the National Science Foundation, Center for Field Research, Texas Historical Commission, City and County of Lubbock, and The Museum of Texas
Tech University.

REFERENCES CITED
Anonymous
1978
H&W Control Technical Data Sheet. H&W Company, St. Johnsbury,
Vermont.
1979

Kodak Technical Pamplet NDP-255. Eastman Kodak Company, Rochester, New York.

Blaker, Alfred A.
1976
Field Photography. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.

