Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89

1981

Cultural Chronology in
Central Texas

ABSTRACT
The development of cultural chronologies in the Central Texas region are reviewed briefly; two
major terminological problems are identified and discussed. The first problem is that of the preArchaic which was proposed for the region by SoUberger and Hester (1972); the second is the
variety of terms used to denote the groups who adopted the bow and arrow late in the prehistoric
cultural sequence. These problems are used as a springboard to review and restate a simplified
model of cultural chronology which may be applied to the region.
The model is based on an evolutionary cultural-historical developmental concept as defined by
Willey and Phillips (1958). It progresses from specific components to temporal phases to generalized stages of development. The existing defined, named, temporal phases proposed by Jelks
(1962) and Weir (1976) are refined. Where appropriate, they are divided into newly named
phases within the structure of the chronological model. Summary descriptions of 13 proposed
temporal phases which compose two of the four developmental stages within the Central Texas
region are presented.

INTRODUCTION
Chronological constructs in the Central Texas region traditionally have
relied upon the changing morphologies of projectile points as indicators of
temporal periodicity and geographic distribution of cultural expressions.
While this approach may not be the most desirable, investigations of stratified
sites in the region have shown consistently that projectile points are indeed
sensitive and reliable chronological indicators.
Despite a long and relatively well established projectile point sequence,
controversies center upon differing interpretations of how successive prehistoric manifestations should be characterized in terms of regional developmental stages and recognizable periodicity. An attempt is made to briefly review
the development of Central Texas chronological constructs and the controversies surrounding certain parts of the chronologies as they are used in the
current literature. This review is followed by a suggested chronological construct which is intended to provide a basis for the logical discussion and comparison of successive cultural manifestations in the Central Texas archeological region.

66

Texas Archeological Society

Development of Chronologies
Beginning with Pearce (1932:49), a succession of increasingly complex
chronological schemes were proposed, used, discarded, or modified as new
archeological evidence became available. Some proposed schema, such as
that of Sayles (1935:52-53), were discarded because they were too cumbersome. Others, such as Kelley (1947a, 1947b, 1959), persist but have been
modified substantially.
A comprehensive cultural and chronological framework based upon the
Midwestern Taxonomic System (McKern, 1939:301-313) was presented by
Suhm et al. (1954:16-21). Widely used for a short time, this scheme was
replaced by a modification based on four developmental stages. In the revised
version, the Archaic Stage was divided into Early, Middle, Late, and Transitional; the Neo-American Stage was divided into two formal foci (Austin and
Toyah) in keeping with the 1954 scheme; the Paleoindian and Historic stages
were left intact (Johnson et al., 1962:117-124).
The Austin and Toyah foci are separable and chronologically distinct as
conclusively demonstrated at the Kyle Site (Jelks, 1962:84-99). Still searching for a better and more manageable way to handle the stratified occupations
in Central Texas, Sorrow et al. (1967:141-145) proposed a series of Local
Phases which were based on the model presented by Willey and Phillips
(1958:22). The sequential divisions provided the first inclusive scheme
which, although terminology may differ, has had the least modification. This
scheme represents a significant achievement in the sense of obtaining a grasp
upon clearly demonstrable sequential occupations over a long period of time.
To some degree, cultural chronologies proposed after 1947 and before
1972 relied upon a four stage division of cultural manifestations. The division
is based jointly upon the systems presented by McKern (1939) and Willey and
Phillips (1958). These developmental stages were termed the Paleo-American, Archaic, Neo-American, and Historic (Suhm et al., 1954:16-21). However, Sollberger and Hester (1972:326-327) proposed a fifth developmental
stage which they termed the pre-Archaic; this stage was envisioned as a transitional period following the Paleoindian and preceding the Archaic Stage.
Shortly thereafter, Weir (1976) reviewed the Central Texas Archaic in detail. Rather than use the concept of the pre-Archaic, he presented a sequence
of phases similar to that employed by Sorrow et al. (1967:Fig. 72). Weir
(1976) took the scheme for the Archaic subdivisions a step further and proposed formal phase names for five chronological divisions. He recognized
these divisions on the basis of projectile point styles, certain other tool forms,
and occurrence of features such as burned rock middens. Prewitt (in press,
ms) divided the Archaic phases proposed by Weir (1976) into two phases
each; in addition, a phase encompassing the late Paleoindian manifestations
was proposed.
An attempt by Jelks (1978) to revamp the Central Texas chronology was
not successful in that other workers have not used his proposed model. However, his concept of projectile point series and placement of the Central Texas
region into a larger interregional scheme should certainly be considered carefully.

Prewitt - Cultural Chronology

67

The Archaic versus the pre-Archaic
The origin and development of the use of the term Archaic to denote a
cultural stage characterized by hunting and gathering exploitive strategies was
summarized by Willey and Phillips (1958:104-111). In Central Texas, the
term became firmly entrenched upon the publication of An Introductory
Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm et al., 1954) ; as defined, the Archaic
"bridges the time between Paleo-American nomadic hunting people on the
one hand, and the settled agricultural, pottery-making Indians on the other"
(Suhm et al., 1954:18). Their definition of the Archaic as a hunting and
gathering adaptation (or stage of cultural development) closely parallels the
later definitions provided by Willey and Phillips (1958).
Archeologists have viewed the Archaic Stage as both a cultural and chronological construct which sets apart hunting and gathering peoples from their
predecessors who were more dependent upon big game procurement strategies (Paleoindian Stage); and from their successors (in some regions) who
developed sedentary agricultural exploitive strategies (Neo-American Stage).
Despite a variety of chronological problems, the concept of the Archaic as a
developmental stage has been used effectively in Central Texas. Although
resolution appears to be the intent, introduction of the term pre-Archaic to
denote a 2,500 year long transition from Paleoindian to fully developed Archaic (Sollberger and Hester 1972:327) does not resolve problems surrounding early chronological successions in the Central Texas region.
Based on Caldwell (1958:8-11), Sollberger and Hester’s (1972:327) conception of the pre-Archaic is that "... it represents a transitory period following the late Paleo-lndian occupations and predates the beginning of the local
Archaic traditions." They (Sollberger and Hester, 1972:340) equate the preArchaic with the duration of an Altithermal period in the Lower Pecos region
as proposed by Bryant and Larson (1968:57-70). Bryant and Shafer
(1977:15-18) do not formally label that period as Altithermal in later discussions of the Lower Pecos paleoenvironment.
Conflicting interpretations emerge from the chronological and terminological overlap of the pre Archaic with the early Archaic San Geronimo and Clear
Fork phases. Weir (1976:119) sees the San Geronimo Phase as an Archaic
adaptation. But, it is one which precedes the development of an intensive
exploitive strategy which resulted in the accumulation of large mounds of
thermally fractured limestone cobbles. Characteristic projectile points include
Bell, Gower, and Uvalde types as well as a series of untyped early barbed
points. Weir (1976:127) includes early triangular forms (illustrated by
Sollberger and Hester, 1972) in the Clear Fork Phase. This phase follows the
San Geronimo Phase and marks the beginning of burned rock midden accumulation.
The pre-Archaic of Sollberger and Hester (1972) is proposed as a transitional period which encompasses both the San Geronimo Phase and part of
the Clear Fork Phase. In view of continuing efforts to isolate more discrete
episodes of human occupation in the region, the pre-Archaic seems a less
desirable concept than does shorter duration phases representing Archaic
adaptations.

68

Texas Archeological Society

The Neo-American versus the Late Prehistoric and other
Designations
Following coinage of the term Neo-American (Suhm et al., 1954:13), a
series of terms have been used to denote those cultures which succeeded the
basic defined Archaic. These cultures adopted the bow and arrow in preference to the atlatl, began to manufacture ceramics, and in some regions, developed an agriculturally based subsistence. Frequently used interchangeably, these terms include Neo-lndian (Hughes and Willey, 1978), Late
Prehistoric (Hester and Parker, 1970), and Post-Archaic (Prewitt, 1974).
Each of these terms possesses certain merit in that they denote a distinct
technological shift. However, the terms are used as identifiers for a chronological period which differs in the developmental stages represented in various regions. For example, any of these four terms could be used as an identifier for the agriculturally based Caddoan groups in the East Texas region or for
the nonagriculturally based bow and arrow using groups in the Lower Pecos
region. This usage seems inappropriate since the terms are applied to a Formative Stage of development (in the sense of Willey and Phillips, 1958:144147) in the East Texas region and an Archaic Stage of development (bow and
arrow present, but hunting and gathering adaptation without agriculture) in
the Lower Pecos region.
In order that this type of contradiction be eliminated, E. Mott Davis (Prewitt
and Nance, 1980:3-4) suggested that the term Neoarchaic be used to identify
those cultures wherein ceramics and/or the bow and arrow were adopted but
in which agriculture was never practiced or in which agriculture did not
emerge as a dominant economic pattern. It is proposed that the term Neoarchaic be applied to the Central Texas archeological region and that it be used
specifically to identify the Austin and Toyah phases of Central Texas.
The Neoarchaic is envisioned as a variant of the Archaic. It distinguishes
hunting and gathering cultures which adopted the bow and arrow, but never
adopted agriculture, from cultures which achieved a Formative Stage of development. Further, the term is proposed on the assumption that the technological changes which occurred appear not to have made a basic difference in
the general subsistence base.

CULTURAL CHRONOLOGY MODEL
Several sources (McKern, 1939; Krieger, 1953; Suhm et al., 1954; Willey
and Phillips, 1958) were used from which to derive concepts and a model of
regional relationships within which a modified chronological scheme may be
constructed. Definitions are taken from these sources with minor modifications:
Stage:

A segment of cultural-historical development which, in a given

area, may be characterized by a dominant economic pattern.
A chronologically and spatially limited cultural manifestation which
possesses sufficient traits to distinguish it from all other similarly
conceived units.
Component: An expression of a Phase at a single site; a Component may compose all or part of a site.
Phase:

Prewitt -- Cultural Chronology

Site:

69

A specific spatially definable locus which contains evidence of human occupation or use.

The model accepts the basic cultural-historical development concept presented by Willey and Phillips (1958:61-78) wherein specific stages of development are not dependent on time. Chronologic placement and extent of
any stage may be expected to vary from region to region. For any developmental stage within any region, it is presumed that a set of chronologically
significant cultural expressions (phases) is definable. Figure 1 illustrates this
model of regional relationships.
Recent arguments regarding chronological constructs deal with the utility,
necessity, composition, and terminological inconsistencies inherent in this
type of approach (Dunnell, 1971; Cook, 1976:1-4; Stoltman, 1978:703711). The need for regional chronologies is recognized by these writers, but
an agreement does not exist regarding an acceptable approach to the derivation of chronologies.
The dimensional phase of Cook (1976:3) expands upon the Willey and
Phillips (1958) definition of a phase. Although not clearly defined, a dimensional phase must meet two requirements:
(1) that the definition of each phase bein terms of a number of dimensions such as
style, technology, structure of segmentation, adaptation, trade, mortuary pracrices, and human biology rather than in terms of several distinctive artifact types or
a stage name; (2) that the various dimensions of each phase be directly comparable, so that analogous parts of hunting and gathering, horticultural, and agricultural societies can be directly compared. (Cook 1976:3).
This concept of a dimensional phase closely parallels the intent of phase as
used in this argument. However, it is contended that phases can be recognized on the basis of key index markers; once these sets of traits are identified,
then specific sites can be investigated in such a manner that the dimensional
aspects can be examined and defined. Cook’s (1976) dimensions are observable cultural traits in the same category as artifact styles; the relationships of
the aggregate of observed data within a given episode of occupation are the
elements necessary to understanding the lifestyles of prehistoric peoples.
It does not matter whether one labels classes of data as traits, types, styles,
or dimensions. The important point is to isolate an episode in time, define the
internal composition and relationships of the episode, and explain the cultural
system represented by the episode. Similar episodes with similar expressions
within a limited geographic area can then be classed as a phase, both in the
sense of Willey and Phillips (1958) and the modifications proposed by Cook
(1976). The full configuration of a phase need not be defined before that
phase is recognized, and key index markers are essential for such recognition.
A very real problem in dealing with the cultural-historical development
model is the misuse, through borrowing, of terms used in the model by archeologists without an evolutionary perspective of culture history. For example, Hester (1980:28-31) presents a Willey and Phillips (1958) derived definition of Paleoindian, Archaic, and Formative stages, then labels these as
periods rather than as developmental stages.
Such practice is contradictory to the meanings of stage and period as concisely expressed by Krieger (1953:247). He defines a stage as a segment of a
historical sequence in a given area which is characterized by a dominant

70

Texas Archeological Society

MODEL OF REGIONAL

DEVELOPMENTAL

CHRONOLOGICAL

expressions,

restricted in time~ oaf
necessarily chronologically
sucessive within a phase.

RELATIONSHIPS
STAGE

PHASE

COMPONENT
Individual site

8~

Chronological divisions
dependent on time
sucessive within a region.

Generalized level of
development; not dependent
on time, but related to
passage of time in o region,

Younger
I

~OMPONENT’~--~

~OMPONENT)-------’~
(COMPONENT)-------~
~OMPONENT~"-’~-’~
~OMPONENT)-------~

~OMPONENTk’-----~
~OMPONENT~------~
I

~OMPONENT.)’--’-’-’-~

1

Older
-

Specific

General

)

P~AI/BI/$HP

Fig. 1 Model of regional developmental and chronological relationships.

economic pattern and can be recognized regardless of the existence of known
dates. A period is defined as dependent upon specific chronology. As stated
by Krieger (1953:247):
¯ . . a stage may be recognized by content alone, and, in the event that accurate
dates can be obtained for it in a given area, it could be said that the stage here
existed during such-and-such a period. Further, the same stage may be said to
appear at different times or periods in different areas ....................

The proposed model is viewed as a tool which achieves the second of three
levels of scientific archeological analysis identified by Willey and Phillips
(1958:4). From lower to higher, these levels are: observation, description;
and explanation. It is intended that the descriptive treatment of observed
characteristics should serve as a basis from which meaningful explanations
can be derived.
The achievement of the chronological construct is not seen as an end in and
of itself; rather, it is the basis from which interpretations of cultural processes
can be achieved. Precise chronological control is merely a necessary step
which is required before explanation is possible. Further, explanation must
begin at the component, or specific, level and progress to more inclusive
levels of generalization. The proposed cultural-historical model provides a
system of controls from which such explanations may be achieved.

Prewitt -- Cultural Chronology

71

PROPOSED CENTRAL TEXAS CHRONOLOGY
Cultural chronologies are useful only so long as they contribute to the
understanding of past human lifeways. The primary purpose of regional
chronologies should be to identify discrete episodes of cultural expressions in
order to facilitate definition of adaptations as they change through time. It is
emphasized that chronologies should be developed on a regional basis. However, it should be expected that geographical boundaries of specific episodes
of adaptation will fluctuate within a given region. In other words, adaptive
mode A may encompass a more limited geographic extent than the succeeding adaptive mode B. As a whole, however, a series of adaptations may be
expected within a definable region.
Central Texas is the specific region under consideration. This region (Fig.
2) encompasses the eastern half of the Edwards Plateau, the Llano Uplift,
most of the Lampasas Cut Plains, the Comanche Plateau, the southern end
of the Grand Prairie, and the Blackland Prairies bordering the Balcones Escarpment from near Waco to near Uvalde.
Based upon the model (Fig. 1), it is possible to suggest a detailed chronological construct for the Central Texas archeological region. Available evidence indicates that four major stages of development are present and recognizable: Paleoindian, Archaic, Neoarchaic, and Historic. Three stages
proposed by Willey and Phillips (1958), the Formative, Classic, and PostClassic, are not included in this regional chronology. Archeological evidence
to support the existence of these stages in the Central Texas region is absent.
Problems exist with the term Paleoindian (Willey and Phillips, 1958:80).
However, in view of the entrenched nature of the term’s acceptance and use,
it is retained to denote those cultures which were oriented toward big game
procurement; food collecting was not the overriding economic pursuit. The
Paleoindian Stage has been stereotyped (somewhat erroneously) as a migratory systematic big game procurement adaptation (Johnson, 1977:65-77).
Identifiable remains of the Paleoindian Stage in Central Texas are sparse
and limited in large part to single occurrences. Segmentation of the Stage at
this time would be spurious. The discovery and investigation of more sites on
the order of 41BX52 should contribute to a better understanding of the Paleoindian stage in Central Texas (Jerry Henderson, personal communication). This site contained a distinct, isolatable component that yielded Folsom
points and related camping debris.
The Archaic Stage dominates all other remains in Central Texas. The Archaic is a term used to denote hunting and gathering (or food collecting)
cultures. Eleven phases are recognizable in the Archaic expressions in Central
Texas; each phase is assigned a formal name. Some of the phase names are
taken from Kelley (1947a), Weir (1976), and Prewitt (in press); the remainder are new terms taken from towns or communities in the Central Texas
region.
Phase distinctions are based on data from numerous sites but primarily
drawn from Johnson et al. (1962), Shafer (1963), Sorrow et al. (1967), Weir
(1976), Wesolowsky et al. (1976), and Prewitt (ms). From oldest to
youngest, proposed phases are: Circleville, San Geronimo, Jarrell, Oakalla,

72

Texas Archeological Society

CENTRAL TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL REGION
LOCATION MAP

0

I00

200

400

kilometers
0

40

80

160

miles

PaAI/81/SHP

Fig. 2 Location map showing the Central Texas Archeological Region.

Prewitt -- Cultural Chronology

73

Clear Fork, Marshall Ford, Round Rock, San Marcos, Uvalde, Twin Sisters,
and Driftwood.
An entrenched tendency exists in the literature dealing with Central Texas
in which the Archaic Stage is subdivided into periods which are cited as early,
middle, late, transitional, terminal, etc. The concept of formal periods is rejected in favor of the simplified component/phase/stage approach. However, it is not necessarily undesirable to maintain informal reference to generalized periodicity within the Archaic Stage as it developed in Central Texas. It
is strongly emphasized that these generalizations are informal and not considered to be part of the formal chronological model. They are stated for the sole
purpose of providing continuity with the previous terminology.
The first four phases (Circleville, San Geronimo, Jarrell, and Oakalla) fall
within what was previously termed Late Paleoindian and Early Archaic; the
second four (Clear Fork, Marshall Ford, Round Rock, and San Marcos) fall
within the Middle Archaic; and the last three phases (Uvalde, Twin Sisters,
and Driftwood) fall within the Late Archaic.
The Archaic begins with an apparently thinly distributed population in the
Circleville Phase. A broadly based hunting and gathering adaptation emerges
wherein there is a strong orientation toward the gathering aspect rather than
the hunting. A proliferation of projectile point styles suggests small dispersed
bands which roamed over relatively large geographical areas. This tendency
continues through the San Geronimo and Jarrell phases, but begins to alter in
the Oakalla Phase.
A less diffuse gathering economy emerges in the relatively short lived
Oakalla Phase. Burned rock middens appear and noticeably less diversity
exists in projectile point forms. These factors suggest a trend toward greater
specialization in food gathering and a greater interaction between groups in
the region.
An intensification of specialized food gathering continues into the Clear
Fork Phase when burned rock middens emerge as a dominant feature of the
Central Texas region. While there is still unquestionable diversity in the foods
collected, the burned rock middens attest to the increasing importance of
resource specific, intensive, vegetal (?) food processing. Concomitant with
this specialization, an increase occurs in terms of the ratio of projectile points
to other tools. Projectile points represent roughly 50% of the tools present.
This ratio seems to indicate that a balance is achieved in terms of exploitation
of both plant and animal resources.
An increase in population is indicated in that site frequency increases. This
increase is to be expected when a higher level of exploitation efficiency is
achieved. This trend continues through the Marshall Ford Phase and reaches
a peak of development in the Round Rock Phase. In the succeeding San
Marcos Phase, there seems to be a decrease in the intensity of burned rock
midden accumulation, a slight decrease in the importance of hunting, and a
tendency toward a more generalized gathering subsistence base.
This pattern is carried over into the Uvalde Phase. Burned rock midden
accumulations generally cease in the eastern part of Central Texas, although
they seem to persist in the western portions of the region. Bison are present in
the region during this phase. These animals appear to represent an important

74

Texas Archeological Society

economic resource, although a pattern of heavy dependence on bison procurement does not seem to have developed. Rather, there appears more of a
well balanced diversity of resources exploited which was not overly dependent on any given resource. A proliferation of projectile point styles occurs
which may indicate another episode of dispersed bands which roamed widely
over the region.
A coalescence of intensive, broadly based exploitation heavily oriented
toward gathering appears to occur during the Twin Sisters Phase. A proliferation of specialized tool types other than projectile points suggests an efficient
system of food collecting. A marked decrease in the importance of hunting is
implied in a low ratio of projectile points to other tools. This pattern continues
through the Driftwood Phase which represents the end of the Archaic Stage
occupations in the Central Texas region.
The Neoarchaic Stage follows the Archaic. It is differentiated primarily on
the basis of the appearance of arrow points, ceramics, and cemeteries. The
basic exploitive strategies do not appear to differ significantly from the preceding Archaic Stage. However, evidence exists which suggests that bison hunting became quite important during the later part of the Neoarchaic. Two
phases are recognized in the Neoarchaic of Central Texas: Austin and Toyah
(Jelks, 1962:84-99).
The Austin Phase continues the same trend as was present in the Driftwood
Phase of the Archaic. The emphasis seems to be on gathering a balanced
variety of plant foods rather than on hunting, although a slight increase occurs
in the overall importance of hunting. Another important facet of the Austin
Phase is the widespread appearance of true cemeteries.
Cemeteries carry over into the succeeding Toyah Phase, but the subsistence base shifts dramatically. Bison once again are present. The economy is
oriented heavily toward bison procurement to the point that hunting appears
to be of equal importance once more to gathering. In addition, ceramics and a
variety of flaked lithic tools oriented toward bison processing a~pear. The
occasional presence of corn cobs suggest that either the Toyah Phase peoples
actively traded with agricultural peoples; or they practiced a mixed hunting,
gathering, and nomadic horticultural subsistence pattern.
The Historic Stage follows the Neoarchaic. It is characterized by the intrusion of and subsequent domination by Europeans and European derived
economic practices and the adoption of European material culture items by
aboriginal inhabitants. Specific phases or periods probably will be recognized
and defined at some point in the future. Figure 3 illustrates the proposed
chronological scheme for the Central Texas region. The time scale is derived
from Prewitt (in press, ms; Nance, ms).

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED PHASE CHACTERISTICS
A summary of key index markers is provided in Figure 4. All traits within
each phase are not included. Those items listed represent distinguishing
characteristics which generally are reliable indicators for each specific chronological phase of occupation. Each phase is described in slightly greater detail

Prewitt -- Cultural Chronology

PROPOSED CHRONOLOGICAL

SCHEME-CENTRAL TEXAS REGION
APPROXIMATE
YEARS B.P.~

PH A S E

RE PRE SENTATIVE
COMPONENT

S TAGE

-0
1

Historic

200
Kyle Site,

41 HI I

--I

Barker Site, 41WM 71
Loeve-Fox Site, 4t WM 230
Smith Rockshelter,
41TV 42
41 HI I
Smith Roekshelteq

J

TOYAH

J

AUSTIN

650

Kyle Site,

Leave-Fox Site,
Pot Porker Site,

41 TV 42

4~ WM 230
41 TV 88

Loeve-Fox Site, 41WM 230
Smith Rockshelter, 41TV 42
Evoe Terrace Site, 41BL tO4
McConn Site, 41 LM 5

I

Neo-Ar chalc

1,250
DRIFTWOOD

1,400
Oblate Site,

41 CM I

Loeve-Fox Site,
Youngsport Site,

TWIN

41 WM 230
41 BL 78

Evoe Terrace Site,

SISTERS

41BL 104

-

Youngsport Site, 41 BL 78
Crumley Site,
41TV 86
Evoe Terrece Site.
41BL 104
John Ischy Site,
4t WM 49

"7

Loeve-Fox

-7

Site, 41 WM 250
Crumley Site, 41 TV 86
Evoe Terrace Site, 4! BL 104
John Ischy Site, 41 WM 49

/
J

Loeve-Fox Site, 41 WM 230
Rogers Springs Site,
41 TV 39
Willloms Site, 41 TV 75
John Ischy Site, 41 WM 49

t,750

UVALDE

- 2,250
SAN

M ARCOS

2,600
ROUND

ROCK

3,400
Crumley Site,

41 TV 86
MARSHALL

Greenhow Site, 41 HY 29
Rogers Springs Site, 41TV 39
John Ischy Site,
4] WM 49

FORD

Archaic

4,000
Williams Site,
Crumley Site,
McCann Site,
Greenhew Site,

41 TV 75
41 TV 86
41 LM B

CLEAR FORK

41 HY 29

4,600 .....

Landslide Site, 41 BL 85
John Ischy Site~ 41 WM 49

OAKALLA

Lo Jite SHe,
41 UV 21
Wounded Eye Site,
41 KR 107
- 5,000
Landslide Site, 41BL 85
-1
Goult Site, 41 WM I0
Tombstone Bluff Site, 41 WM 165

LO

Jita Site,

41 UV 21

J
J
J

Tombstone Bluff Site, 41 WM 165 -1
Granite Beech Site,
41 LL 2
Youngsport Site. 41 BL 78

Son

Geronimo Site.

41 BX 196

Levi RocksheRer Site, 41TV 49 -1
Loeve Site,
41 WM 13B
Tombstone Bluff Site, 41 WM 165
Strohocker Site, 41 KR 29

_

]

~Age ranges based on radiocarbon
application

of

Arizona

JARRELL
b4
6,000
SAN

GERONIMO

....

7,000

CIRCLE VILL E

1 8,500 i

_

essays assembled by

_ ?
L, Nonce (ms,);

Correction (Demon, Ferguson, Long and

] Po,oo-,od,o°
assays

have

Wollick, 1974),

Fig. 3 Proposed chronological scheme, Central Texas Region.

been

adjusted by

75

76

Texas Archeological Society

SUMMARY OF KEY INDEX MARKERS -- CENTRAL TEXAS CHRONOLOGY
STAGE

KEY

PHASE

Items

Jistoric

of

European

Toyoh

/
Perdiz

Nee-

INDEX

Ct’ff
/ ..’on

MARKERS

Manufacture

I ~

l

~Screpers ~ ~Bifoces C~’~’\cs

~
~-/ -Covlngfon

/A
/\

Austin

Mahomef
Driftwood

[

t~

Cemeteries

~.iday

cam°,°,.

\ Biface

Hare Biface

L_.

-

Erafh~777~-

’ASanGabrie/
Twin Sisters

I

[

LJ

~/

I \

8i~a~e
So°W"
A
I~
I I Gronbury

Archaic

II ~"°°el l "°’e\ / ~A A
L2f’s°r ^L__J ^
kJ_ Vl \.I\

Uvalde

Marsha/l l

\t~,l/liom$I

\ Lange/

B .... d

\

Rock

San Morcos
///~

~j~

~.__~

~_~

Middens

~ Pederno/es
Round

Burned Rock
Middens

Rock

A Bolverde
Archaic~

/

Marshall Ford

Clear Fork

Oakalla

\

.,,°e°.

Burned Rock

A

A /I
I

~olo.

I

\ /

B .... d

A,.,,, /i

k ~

Rock

Midden,

] TrOViS

//

B.rned
Rock
Middens

\

darrell

San Geronimo

Circleville

Paleo-

Clovis

.

. Folsom

"Ploinview

Indian
P S A //EP/81

Fig. 4 Summary of Key Index Markers, Central Texas Chronology.

Prewitt -- Cultural Chronology

77

in the following discussion. These discussions are summaries and additional
research should provide more detailed data for each. Not all known components of each phase are discussed; representative components are listed in
order to provide a general set of references.
Regionally specific cultural chronologies are useful if they contribute to an
understanding of past human lifeways. The proposed scheme was developed
on the premise that it is flexible and will be modified as new data become
available. In order to accomplish the objective of understanding past events in
Central Texas, the proposed chronology should be used only within the region for which it is intended to apply. Separate, similar schemes should be
constructed for adjacent regions (such as the Lower Pecos and South Texas)
in order to facilitate interregional comparisons.
Only the named proposed phases are discussed. The Archaic and Neoarchaic stages are included, but Paleoindian and Historic stages are omitted.
With the former, a detailed examination of specific adaptations within that
stage awaits accumulation of more precise data. With the latter, segmentation
into phases at this stage of archeological knowledge of the region is not warranted.

Archaic Stage
CIRCLEVILLE PHASE
(Prewitt, in press; Patterson, 1977)
Representative Components: Levi Rockshelter (41TV49; Alexander, 1963); Loeve
(41WM133; Eddy, 1973; Prewitt, ms); Tombstone Bluff (41WM165; Prewitt, ms); Strohacker
(41KR29; Sollberger and Hester, 1972); Granite Beach (41LL2; Crawford, 1965).
Site Types: rockshelter; point bar; bluff top; terrace.
Representative Artifacts: Angostura, Golondrina, Meserve, and Scottsbluff projectile points;
Clear Fork gouges; miscellaneous bifaces; drills; scrapers; gravers; hammerstones; grooved
stones (?); grinding stones; bone awls; carved bones.
Features: large and medium basin shaped, stone lined fire hearths; burned clay/charcoal pits;
mussel shell concentrations.
Mortuary Practices: data lacking.
Subsistence: hunting and gathering with an emphasis on gathering; plant food processing
indicated by grinding stones; freshwater mussels collected~ deer and other small game hunted.
External Relations: This phase represents a regional expression of a widespread adaptation
which occurred following the disappearance of Paleoindian lifeways. In the adjacent Lower
Pecos region, a concurrent expression occurred with Golondrina projectile points the dominant
key index marker. While these two areas undoubtedly are related during this phase, the overall
material culture assemblage is varied sufficiently to warrant separation of the two regions.
Estimated Age: ca 8500 B.P. to 7000 B.P. (ca 6550 B.C. to 5050 B.C.)
Discussion: The Circleville Phase continues the Paleoindian style of lithic tool production in
terms of flaking techniques and projectile point morphology. The subsistence base, however, is
Archaic in that it is a hunting and gathering adaptation. For this reason, the phase is considered to
be the earliest Archaic expression in Central Texas.
Selected References: Alexander (1963)~ Crawford (1965); Sollberger and Hester (1972);
Eddy (1973); Prewitt (ms).
SAN GERONIMO PHASE (Weir, 1976)
Representative Components: San Geronimo (41BX196; Weir, 1976); Youngsport
(41BL78; Shafer, 1963)~ Granite Beach (41LL2); Tombstone Bluff (41WM165).

78

Texas Archeological Society

Site Types: terrace; bluff top.
Representative Artifacts: Gower, Hoxie, and Wells projectile points; Clear Fork gouges;
Guadalupe gouges; miscellaneous bifaces; scrapers.
Features: data unclear; possibly large and medium basin shaped, stone lined hearths at
Granite Beach.
Mortuary Practices: data lacking.
Subsistence: hunting and gathering; available data too sparse to allow detailed statements on
specific adaptive orientations.
External Relations: It is relatively localized to the Central Texas Region although a similar
expression was noted in the Lower Pecos region at Devils Rockshelter (41VV264; Prewitt,
1966).
Estimated Age: 7000 B.P. to ca 6000 B.P. (5050 B.C. to ca 4050 B.C.)
Discussion: Although some Paleoindian lithic traits persist (particularly edge grinding and
occasional parallel flaking of projectile points), projectile point morphology differs strongly from
the preceding Circleville Phase. The subsistence base appears to be Archaic although the paucity
of available data preclude detailed examination.
Selected References: Shafer (1963); Crawford (1965); Weir (1976); Prewitt (ms).

JARRELL PHASE
(new name; Sorrow et al., 1967)
Representative Components: Landslide (41BL85; Sorrow et al., 1967); Gault (41WM10;
TARL); Site 41VT17 (Fox and Hester, 1976); Tombstone Bluff (41WM165); Merrell (41WM2;
Campbell, 1948); La Jita (41UV21; Hester, 1971); Jetta Court (41TV151; Wesolowsky et al.,
1976).
Site Types: terrace and bluff top,
Representative Artifacts: Andice, Bell, Martindale, and Uvalde projectile points; Clear Fork
gouges; miscellaneous bifaces; scrapers; hammerstones; grinding stones.
Features: large fiat hearths.
Subsistence: hunting and gathering with a probable tendency for an emphasis on gathering;
bison present and used as a food source although hunting probably not dominant; freshwater
mussels collected for food.
External Relations: This phase appears to be relatively localized to the general Central Texas
region except that Martindale dart points (and slight variants of the type) also occur in the Lower
Pecos Region. Andice and Bell types possibly are related to the same tradition represented by the
morphologically similar Calf Creek type in northeastern Oklahoma, northwestern Arkansas, and
southwestern Missouri (Perino, 1968:14-15).
Estimated Age: ca 6000 B.P. to 5000 B.P (ca 4050 B.C. to 3050 B.C.)
Discussion: Some holdovers exist from the Paleoindian lithic tradition, with frequent edge
grinding on Martindale and Uvalde points and flaking reminiscent of that tradition on Andice
points. Subsistence is thoroughly Archaic and probably tends toward an emphasis on gathering.
Selected References: Campbell (1948); Sorrow et al. (1967); Fox and Hester (1976); WesoIowsky et al. (1976); Prewitt (ms.)

OAKALLA PHASE
(new name; Sorrow et al., 1967)
Representative Components: Landslide (41BL85); John Ischy (41WM49; Sorrow, 1969);
McCann (41LM3; Preston, 1969); La Jita (41UV21); Greenhaw (41HY29; Weir, 1979);
Tombstone Bluff (41WM165); Shep (41KR109; Luke, 1980); Wounded Eye (41KR107; Luke,
1980).
Site Types: terrace; bluff top.
Representative Artifacts: Baird and Taylor projectile points; Clear Fork gouges.
Features: burned rock middens; large fiat hearths; medium basin hearths.
Mortuary Practices: data lacking.
Subsistence: hunting and gathering; however, paucity of isolated components hampers a
detailed examination of subsistence base; diagnostic projectile points rarely occur in relatively

Prewitt - Cultural Chronology

79

large numbers (Greenhaw is an exception); significant accumulations of fire cracked rocks appear to coincide with this phase (beginnings of burned rock middens) and suggests that plant food
collecting and processing important; freshwater mussels apparently collected.
External Relations: While diagnostic projectile points generally are more prevalent in Central
Texas, they also are known to occur in East Texas (e.g., George C. Davis). The many varieties of
the morphologically similar Tortugas projectile point which occur in the South Texas region may
indicate some relations with that area, although Tortugas seems to occur later in time.
Estimated Age: 5000 B.P. to ca 4600 B.P. (3050 B.C. to ca 2650 B.C.)
Discussion: The Oakalla Phase is probably the least well defined of the Central Texas phases.
This situation is due to a general lack of stratigraphically isolatable components. This lack may be
a reflection of the apparently short duration of the phase (ca 400 years).
Selected References: Hester (1971); Sorrow (1969); Sorrow et al. (1967); Preston (1969);
Luke (1980); Prewitt (ms).

CLEAR FORK PHASE (Weir, 1976)
Representative Components: Williams (41TV75; Suhm, 1959); Crumley (41TV86; Kelly,
1961); McCann (41LM3); Greenhaw (41HY29); Rogers Springs (41TV39; Prewitt, in press).
Site Types: terrace; upland.
Representative Artifacts: Nolan and Travis projectile points; Clear Fork gouges; bifaces;
scrapers; strangulated scrapers; grinding stones.
Features: burned rock middens.
Mortuary Practices: data lacking.
Subsistence: relatively even balance between hunting and gathering emerged during this
phase; burned rock middens appear to accumulate rapidly and indicates extensive plant food
processing; however, relatively large numbers of projectile points indicate that hunting also quite
important with frequency of dart points being roughly equal to frequency of all other tools.
External relations: Diagnostic projectile point styles are concentrated relatively within the
Central Texas region. However, these styles occur infrequently in the Lower Pecos region. An
extension in range to the northwest is indicated by the presence of these styles of dart points into
the general Abilene area.
Estimated Age: ca 4600 B.P. to 4000 B.P. (ca 2650 B.C. to 2050 B.C.)
Discussion: The burned rock midden tradition is well established during this phase; the
general subsistence pattern which prevails during the next two phases is set.
Selected References: Suhm (1959); Kelly (1961); Preston (1969); Weir (1979); Prewitt (in
press).

MARSHALL FORD PHASE
(new name; Weir, 1976)
Representative Components: Crumley (41TV86); Rogers Springs (41TV39); John Ischy
(41WM49); McCann (41LM3); Evoe Terrace (41BL104; Sorrow et al., 1967); Wunderlich
(41CM3; Johnson et al., 1962); Youngsport (41BL78).
Site Types: terrace; upland; rockshelter.
Representative Artifacts: Bulverde projectile points; bifaces; unifaces; grinding stones.
Features: burned rock middens.
Mortuary Practices: data lacking.
Subsistence: relatively balanced hunting and gathering system similar to preceding Clear Fork
Phase.
External Relations: This phase primarily is confined to the Central Texas region although
Bulverde type dart points occur occasionally in East Texas (Suhm and Jelks, 1962).
Estimated Age: 4000 B.P. to ca 3400 B.P. (2050 B.C. to ca 1450 B.C.)
Discussion: This phase primarily is associated with burned rock midden sites. However,
sparse materials from this phase do occur in rockshelters such as the Oblate site (41CM1; Johnson et al., 1962). There does not seem to be any dramatic shift toward the occupation of rockshelters which would indicate a significant change in camping habits.
Selected References: Kelly (1961); Weir (1979); Sorrow (1969); Preston (1969); Johnson et
al. (1962); Prewitt (in press).

80

Texas Archeological Society

ROUND ROCK PHASE (Weir, 1976)
Representative Components: Williams (41TV75); Crumley (41TV86); Greenhaw
(41HY29); John Ischy (41WM49); Youngsport (41BL78); Rogers Springs (41TV39); LoeveFox (41WM230; Prewitt, 1974, ms).
Site Types: terrace, upland; rockshelter.
Representative Artifacts: Pedernales projectile points, bifaces; unifaces; grinding stones.
Features: burned rock middens; medium and small basin hearths~ burned clay/charcoal
lenses and pits~ lithic debris concentrations.
Mortuary Practices: data lacking.
Subsistence: relatively balanced hunting and gathering system which follows in the tradition of
the preceding two phases; plant food processing indicated by burned rock middens; freshwater
mussel shells collected as food source; roughly equal ratio of projectile points to all other tools
indicates importance of hunting in the economy.
External Relations: While this phase primarily is restricted to the Central Texas region, the key
index marker (Pedernales projectile points) occurs to the northwest into the Abilene area and to
the southwest into the Lower Pecos region (Suhm and Jelks, 1962). Sparsely distributed examples of Pedernales also occur on the coastal plain to the south and southeast of the primary
distribution area.
Estimated Age: ca 3400 B.P. to 2600 B.P. (ca 1450 B.C. to 650 B.C.)
Discussion: This phase appears to represent the peak of burned rock midden use on the
Edwards Plateau and associated physiographic regions. There is not such a domination of the
region in terms of quantities of a single projectile point style and frequency of site occurrence at
any other time during the Archaic of Central Texas. Burned rock midden sites have been the
focus of investigations into this phase. Recent discovery of stratified Round Rock Phase components at Loeve-Fox (Prewitt, ms) provides a glimpse of activities not associated with a burned
rock midden.
At Loeve-Fox (Prewitt, ms), Round Rock Phase hearths (medium and small stone lined
basins) are surrounded by burned clay/charcoal lenses and pits, lithic debris concentrations, and
other scattered debris such as burned rocks, freshwater mussel shells, and tools. Spatial distribution of these features and materials provides support for the hypothesis that the middens represent the accumulated debris from hundreds or thousands of disrupted hearths. Presence of dense
lithic debris concentrations also provides an explanation of the tremendous quantities of flaking
debris frequently encountered in middens.
Selected References: Suhm (1959); Kelly (1961); Weir (1979); Sorrow (1969); Shafer
(1963)~ Prewitt (in press, ms).

SAN MARCOS PHASE (Weir, 1976)
Representative Components: Crumley (41TV86); La Jita (41UV21); Evoe Terrace
(41BLI04); John Ischy (41WM49); Youngsport (41BL78); Loeve-Fox (41WM230).
Site Types: terrace; upland; rockshelter.
Representative Artifacts: Marshall, Williams, and Lange projectile points~ bifaces; scrapers;
small concave unifaces; grinding stones; marine shell ornaments.
Features: burned rock middens; large flat hearths; medium and small basin hearths; lithic
debris concentrations; freshwater mussel shell concentrations.
Mortuary Practices: single cremation at Loeve-Fox (Prewitt, ms); cremation secondary in that
body was burned, then remains interred in a small basin shaped pit.
Subsistence: hunting and gathering with a probable slight emphasis on gathering~ freshwater
mussels collected for food~ slight decrease in ratio of projectile points to other tools indicates that
hunting not as important as in preceding phases~ burned rock middens a continuation of the
established pattern of intensive plant food processing.
External Relations: Distribution of the key index marker for this phase (Marshall dart points)
has a broad range which extends beyond the Central Texas region. However, the most intensive
occurrence of this type and its two companions (Williams and Lange) is within the region. Presence of marine shell ornaments indicates contact, probably through an extensive trade network,
with peoples or resources from a coastal environment.
Estimated Age: 2600 B.P. to ca 2250 B.P. (650 B.C. to ca 300 B.C.)

Prewitt -- Cultural Chronology

81

Discussion: This phase appears to represent the end of significant burned rock midden accumulation over most of the Central Texas region. Ring and crescent middens may continue in use
into later phases in the western portions of the region. Practices which lead to the accumulation of
these features in general wane during the San Marcos Phase. It is probable that bison once again
appear in the region either during this phase or in the succeeding Uvalde Phase.
Selected References: Shafter (1963); Kelly (1961); Hester (1971); Sorrow (1969); Sorrow et
al. (1967); Prewitt (ms).

UVALDE PHASE (new name; Kelley, 1947a)
Representative Components: Wunderlich (41CM3); Oblate (41CM1; Johnson et al., 1962);
Youngsport (41BL78); Crumley (41TV86); Evoe Terrace (41BL104); John Ischy (41WM49);
Jetta Court (41TV151); Scorpion Cave (41ME7; Highley et al., 1978); La Jita (41UV21);
McCann (41LM3).
Site Types: terrace~ upland; rockshelter.
Representative Artifacts: Castroville, Marcos, and Montell projectile points; bifaces; unifaces;
grinding stones; ulna flakers.
Features: data lacking.
Mortuary Practices: data lacking.
Subsistence: hunting and gathering with a probable slight emphasis on gathering; freshwater
mussels collected (not in large quantities); grinding stones indicate continued processing of plant
foods; bison present in region during this phase but not a primary food source.
External Relations: The key index markers for this phase (Castroville, Marcos, and Montell
dart points) also occur as horizon markers in the adjacent Lower Pecos region to the west (Dibble,
1967; Prewit~, 1970). A possibility exists that this phase represents a more widespread adaptation. Marine shell artifacts noticeably are lacking and indicates a discontinuation of the earlier
apparent trade system.
Estimated Age: ca 2250 B.P. to 1750 B.P. (ca 300 B.C. to A.D. 200)
Discussion: Artifacts diagnostic of this phase are found frequently in upper portions of burned
rock middens; middens apparently did not accumulate during this phase. A tendency exists for
diagnostic materials to occur adjacent to middens and in terraces which lack burned rock middens. This situation, in combination with the trend toward an emphasis on gathering, suggests
that intensive processing which earlier led to midden formation is not practiced and a different
adaptation existed.
Selected References: Johnson et al. (1962); Shafer (1963); Kelly (1961); Sorrow (1969);
Sorrow et aL (1967); Wesolowsky et al. (1976); Highley et al. (1978); Hester (1971); Preston
(1969).

TWIN SISTERS PHASE (Weir, 1976)
Representative Components: Oblate (41CM1); Wunderlich (41CM3); Williams (41TV75);
Youngsport (41BL78); Evoe Terrace (41BL104)~ La Jita (41UV21)~ Scorpion Cave (41ME7);
McCann (41LM3); Penny Winkle (41BL23; Shafer et al., 1964); Hoxie Bridge (41WM103;
Bond, 1978); Loeve-Fox (41WM230).
Site Types: terrace; rockshelter.
Representative Artifacts: Ensor projectile points; Erath and San Gabriel bifaces; Clear Fork
gouges; perforators; gravers; large and small concave unifaces; scrapers; crushers; grinding
stones; boatstones; stone and marine shell gorgets~ freshwater shell pendants.
Features: large, medium, and small basin hearths; arcuate hearths~ burned clay/charcoal
lenses and pits; mussel shell caches.
Mortuary Practices: isolated flexed burials.
Subsistence: hunting and gathering with a decided emphasis on gathering; projectile points in
low ratio to all other tools; freshwater mussels collected but apparently in lesser quantities than
preceding phases.
External Relations: Ensor dart points are distributed over a much larger area than the Central
Texas region and may represent a more generalized horizon marker. The existence of an extensive trade network is indicated by the occurrence of marine shell artifacts and various stone
objects fashioned from materials which are relatively limited in distribution. The presence of

82

Texas Archeological Society

boatstones suggests possible influences from the Southeastern or, less probably, Southwestern
U.S.
Estimated Age: 1750 B~P. to ca 1400 B.P. (A.D. 200 to ca A.D. 550).
Discussion: The Twin Sisters Phase appears to represent the beginning of a distinct tradition.
Emphasis of the hunting and gathering adaptation leans heavily toward gathering rather than
hunting. A proliferation of seemingly formal tool types other than projectile points appears to
reflect a diversified, yet intensive, exploitive system which was probably quite efficient.
Indications of intrasite patterning have been documented at Loeve-Fox (Prewitt, ms). At least
three episodes of site use during the Twin Sisters Phase were identified. In each episode, patterning is identical and consists of semicircular arrangements of specialized cooking features and
waste debris centered about a large basin hearth. These sets of features and debris are arranged in
a semicircle around other hearths. These latter hearths included at least one large example that
contained items (tool and ornaments) in which particular care had been taken to safeguard and
maintain them. The patterning is interpreted to reflect extended kin (or residence) units arranged
in an encampment much like the historically documented 19th Century Plains Indian groups
(Lowie, 1963:93, Fig. 29).
Selected References: Johnson et al. (1962); Suhm (1959); Shafer (1963); Sorrow et al.
(1967); Hester (1971); Preston (1969); Story and Shafer (1965); Highley et al. (1978); Bond
(1978); Prewitt (1974, ms).

DRIFTWOOD PHASE (new name; Weir, 1976)
Representative Components: Smith Rockshelter (41TV42~ Suhm, 1957); Williams
(41TV75); Baylor (41ML35; Story and Shafer, 1965); Britton (41ML37; Story and Shafer,
1965); Evoe Terrace (41BL104); Jetta Court (41TV151); McCann (41LM3); Kyle (41H11;
Jelks, 1962); Pat Parker (41TV88; Greer and Benfer, 1975); Hoxie Bridge (41WM130)~ Dobias-Vitek (41WMl18; Eddy, 1973); Loeve (41WM133); Loeve-Fox (41WM230).
Site Types: terrace; rockshelter.
Representative Artifacts: Mahomet projectile points; Hare bifaces; miscellaneous bifaces;
small concave unifaces; gravers; polished chert flakes; grinding stones; hammerstones; freshwater mussel shell pendants; bone beads; bone awls.
Features: medium and small basin hearths; burned clay/charcoal lenses and pits.
Mortuary Practices: isolated flexed burials.
Subsistence: appears to be a definite emphasis on the gathering aspect in the basic hunting
and gathering system.
External Relations: in contrast to the preceding Twin Sisters Phase and the following Austin
Phase, there seems to be a lack of exotic materials which suggests an absence of any widespread
trade networks. Distribution of the key index marker (Mahomet dart points) seems to be restricted
to the eastern half of the Central Texas region. This restriction suggests that the western portions
were occupied by peoples more closely affiliated with the Lower Pecos region during this phase.
Estimated Age: ca 1400 B.P. to 1250 B.P. (ca A.D. 550 to A.D. 700).
Discussion: This phase appears to represent a continuation of the tradition established during
the Twin Sisters Phase and signals the end of the Archaic Stage in Central Texas. This is the last
phase during which the atlatl was used. While sparse occupation of rockshelters occurred during
several of the preceding Archaic phases, there seems to be a decided shift toward the occupation
of those types of sites during the Driftwood Phase. This shift represents a noticeable change in the
overall settlement pattern. However, terrace sites still represent the major type of site occupied
during this phase.
Selected References: Suhm (1957, 1959); Story and Shafer (1965); Sorrow et al. (1967);
Jelks (1962); Preston (1969); Wesolowsky et al. (1976); Greer and Benfer (1975); Eddy
(1973); Bond (1978); Prewitt (1974, ms).

Neoarchaic Stage

AUSTIN PHASE (Jelks, 1962)
Representative Components: Smith Rockshelter (41TV42); Kyle (41H11); Oblate (41CM1);
Baylor (41ML35); Penny Winkle (41BL23); Evoe Terrace (41BL104); Pat Parker (41TV88);
Wheatley (41BCl14; Greer, 1976); Frisch Aufl (41FY42; Hester and Collins, 1969); Jetta
Court (41TV151)~ Dobias-Vitek (41WMl18); Hoxie Bridge (41WM130); Loeve-Fox
(41WM230).

Prewitt - Cultural Chronology

83

Site Types: terrace; rockshelter.
Representative Artifacts: Scallorn and Granbury projectile points; Friday bifaces; miscellaneous bifaces; Clear Fork gouges; scrapers; small concave unifaces; grinding stones; hammerstones; painted pebbles; bone awls; ulna flakers; bone beads; marine shell beads and pendants.
Features: large, medium, and small basin hearths; burned clay/charcoal lenses and pits;
cemeteries.
Mortuary Practices: Cemeteries apparently are preferred although isolated interments may
occur. Both situations occur in terrace sites and rockshelters, usually associated with habitation
sites. Noncremated and cremated interments are present. Noncremated burials usually are
flexed or semiflexed and may be placed on either the right or left side, the back, or stomach
rarely. Cremation appears to have been carried out away from the cemeteries, then charred
remains placed in shallow pits.
At Loeve-Fox (Prewitt, ms), the noncremated remains were placed in a 3 m diameter circular
area; cremated interments were placed in a 3 m wide band encircling the noncremated burials. A
fence or structure presumedly marked the cemetery locations. Grave goods include marine shell
beads, marine shell pendants, unaltered freshwater mussel shells, antler tines, and cut deer
parietals. Arrow points (Scallorn) frequently are associated; however, most of these specimens
appear to represent the cause of death rather than funeral offerings.
Subsistence: The hunting and gathering system of the two previous phases continues in the
Austin Phase and appears to be more dependent upon gathering. However, a definite slight
increase occurs in the importance of hunting as shown by an increased ratio of projectile points to
all other tools. Whether an increased frequency in the occurrence of deer bones is a reflection of
this trend or the result of differential preservation is unknown. Freshwater mussels continue to be
collected, but in relatively small numbers in comparison to the preceding Archaic phases.
External Relations: The diagnostic projectile point (Scallorn) is very widespread in distribution, extending from central Texas Gulf Coast northward into the Plains region (Bell, 1960;
Chapman, 1980). It is probable that the Central Texas region represents a localized adaptation
within a more generalized pattern. This hypothesis is supported by the apparent presence of an
extensive trade network indicated by frequent occurrence of marine shell artifacts.
Estimated Age: 1250 B.P. to 650 B.P. (A.D. 700 to A.D. 1300).
Discussion: The Austin Phase is placed within the Neoarchaic Stage primarily because of the
change in weaponry from atlatl to bow and arrow. Other changes occur, particularly in regards to
the definite selection of rockshelters as habitation sites and return to a somewhat greater dependence upon hunting. These changes characterize this phase and set it apart as a distinct cultural
expression.
Selected References: Suhm (1957)~ Jelks (1962); Johnson et al. (1962); Story and Sharer
(1965); Shafer et al. (1964); Sorrow et al. (1967); Greet and Benfer (1975); Greet (1976);
Hester and Collins (1969)~ Wesolowsky et al. (1976); Eddy (1973); Bond (1978); Watt (1936);
Prewitt (1974, ms).

TOYAH PHASE (Jelks, 1962)
Representative Components: Smith Rockshelter (41TV42); Kyle (41H11); Oblate (41CM1);
Penny Winkle (41BL23); Baylor (41ML35); Barker (41WM71; Sorrow, 1970); Berclair
(41GD4; Hester and Parker, 1970); Wheatley (41BCl14); Finis Frost (41SS20; Green and
Hester, 1973); Hoxie Bridge (41WM130); Loeve-Fox (41WM230).
Site Types: terrace; rockshelter.
Representative Artifacts: Perdiz and Cliffton projectile points; Covington bifaces; four bevel
bifaces; end scrapers; drills; grinding stones; freshwater mussel shell pendants~ bone beads~ bone
awls; ulna flakers; various bison bone tools; Leon Plain and Doss Redware ceramics, imported
ceramics; wooden arrow foreshafts~ cane arrow shafts; digging sticks; basketry; cordage; miscellaneous perishable artifacts.
Features: large flat hearths; large and medium basin hearths; burned clay/charcoal lenses;
pits; cemeteries.
Mortuary Practices: Both cemeteries and isolated interments continue in this phase, although
they do not appear to occur as frequently as in the Austin Phase. Semiflexed modes of burial
predominate but cremations also are present. The possible association of grave goods is not
conclusive. Perdiz and Cliffton arrow points frequently associated with the burials appear to
represent aggression which resulted in death rather than funeral offerings.

84

Texas Archeological Society

Subsistence: Although a hunting and gathering system appears to have been practiced during
the Toyah Phase, a radical departure exists from the preceding Austin Phase in several respects.
Perhaps most significant is the presence of bison once again in the Central Texas region. Frequence of bison bone occurrences and definite emphasis on tools which reflect bison procurement, processing, and use suggest that hunting is of equal (or possibly greater) importance than
gathering. This shift is reinforced at such sites as Loeve-Fox (Prewitt, ms) where projectile points
represent 50% of all tools associated with this phase.
The sporadic occurrence of corn cobs in Toyah Phase contexts implies that the subsistence
may have included maize horticulture as a supplement. It is equally possible, however, that these
grains could have been acquired through trade with nearby sedentary groups such as various
Caddoan (including Wichita) groups.
External Relations: The key index markers (Perdiz and Cliffton arrow points) are widespread
in distribution and not restricted to those groups which inhabited the Central Texas region. An
extensive trade system is indicated by the frequent occurrence of Caddoan ceramics in Toyah
Phase sites; presence of corn cobs may indicate trade for foodstuffs. Less certainly, trade with
coastal peoples may be indicated by Goose Creek Plain ceramics at the Smith Rockshelter
(Suhm, 1957) although there appears to be a paucity of marine shell artifacts.
Estimated Age: 650 B.P. to 200 B.P. (A.D. 1300 to A.D. 1750).
Discussion: The Toyah Phase closely follows the Austin Phase in several respects, but most
particularly in terms of settlement pattern, cemetery use, human aggression, and continuation of
a hunting and gathering subsistence system. However, definite changes occurred in terms of: an
emphasis on bison procurement; addition of appropriate tools to the inventory; addition of
ceramics (both imported trade wares and locally manufactured wares); and either addition of
maize horticulture to subsistence system or importation of maize through trade.
Selected References: Suhm (1957); Jelks (1962); Johnson et al. (1962); Shafer et al.
(1964); Story and Shafer (1965); Sorrow (1970)~ Hester and Parker (1970); Greer (1976);
Green and Hester (1973); Bond (1978); Prewitt (1974, ms).

ACKNOWLEDG EMENTS
Thanks are extended to those persons who read drafts of this paper and who provided
thoughtful, provocative critical comments: Drs. E. Mott Davis, David S. Dibble, and Dee Ann
Story of the University of Texas at Austin; Thomas R. Hester of The University of Texas at San
Antonio; and Frank A. Weir of the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation.
Numerous other people served as sounding boards for ideas and concepts presented in this
paper; all of these people, particularly the staff of Prewitt and Associates, Inc., are thanked for
their patience, understanding, and helpful criticisms.

REFERENCES CITED
Alexander, Herbert L. Jr.
The Levi Site: A Paleo-lndian Campsite in Central Texas. American An1963
tiquity, 28(4):510-528.
Bell, Robert E.
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
1960
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Special Bulletin, 2:1-105.
Bond, Clell L.
Three Archeological Sites at Hoxie Bridge, Williamson County, Texas.
1978
Texas A&M University, Anthropological Laboratory, Report, 43:1-296.

Prewitt -- Cultural Chronology

85

Bryant, V.M. Jr. and D.A. Larson
1968
Pollen Analysis of the Devil’s Mouth Site, Val Verde County, Texas.
Appendix. In: William M. Sorrow, The Devil’s Mouth Site: The Third
Season. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, 14:57-70.
Bryant, Vaughn M. Jr. and Harry J. Shafer
The Later Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas: A Model for the Ar1977
cheologist. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 48:1-25.

Caldwell, J.R.
1958
Trend and Tradition in the Prehistory of the Eastern United States.
American Anthropological Association Memoir, 88:1-88.
Campbell, Thomas N.
1948
The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, 19:7-35.
Chapman, Carl H.
1980
The Archaeology of Missouri, II. University of Missouri Press, Columbia.
Cook, Thomas Glen
1976
Koster: An Artifact Analysis of Two Archaic Phases in Westcentral lllinois.
Northwest University Archeological Program. Koster Research Reports,
3:1-218.
Crawford, Daymond D.
1965
The Granite Beach Site, Llano County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, 36:71-97.

Damon, P.E., C.W. Ferguson, A. Long, and E.I. Wallick
Dendrochronological Calibration of the Radiocarbon Time Scale. Ameri1974
can Antiquity, 39(2):350-366.
Dibble, David S.
1967
Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-66. Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Dillehay, Tom D.
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains.
1974
Plains Anthropologist, 19(65):180-196.
Dunnell, Robert C.
1971
Systematics in Prehistory. The Free Press, New York.
Eddy, Frank W.
1973
Salvage Archeology in the Laneport Reservoir District, Central Texas.
Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Fox, Anne A. and Thomas R. Hester
1976
An Archaeological Survey of Coleto Creek, Victoria and Goliad Counties, Texas, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Center for Archaeological Research, Survey Report, 18:1-85.
Green, L. M. and Thomas R° Hester
The Finis Frost Site: A Toyah Phase Occupation in San Saba County,
1973
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 44:69-88.

86

Texas Archeological Society

Greer, John W.
1976
Neo-American Occupation at the Wheatley Site, Pedernales Falls State
Park, Blanco County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 47:89-169.
Greer, John W. and Robert A. Benfer
Austin Phase Burials at the Pat Parker Site, Travis County, Texas. Bul1975
letin of the Texas Archeological Society, 46:189-216.
Hester, Thomas R.
1971
Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 42:51-148.
Digging into South Texas Prehistory. Corona Publishing Company, San
1980
Antonio.
Hester, Thomas R. and Michael B. Collins
1969
Burials from the Frisch Auf! Site: 41FY42. The Texas Journal of Science,
20(3) :261-272.
Hester, Thomas Roy and Robert C. Parker
The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in Goliad County,
1970
Southern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 41:1-23.
Highley, Lynn, Carol Graves, Carol Land, and George Judson
1978
Archeological Investigations at Scorpion Cave (41ME7), Medina
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 49:139194.
Hughes, Jack T. and Patrick S. Willey
Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Office
1978
of the State Archeologist, Archeological Survey Report, 24:1-294.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962
The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, Archaeology Series,5 : l-l l 5.
Diablo Range. In: R. E. Taylor and Clement W. Meighan (eds.),
1978
Chronologies in New World Archeology, pp. 71-111. Academic Press,
New York.
Johnson, Eileen
1977
Animal Food Resources of Paleoindians. The Museum Journal, 17:6577.
Johnson, LeRoy Jr., Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunnell
Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge,
1962
and Oblate Sites. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, 5:1-126.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947a The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and
Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 18:115-128.
1947b The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork
Focus. American Antiquity, 13(2):97-109.
The Desert Cultures and the Balcones Phase: Archaic Manifestations in
1959
the Southwest and Texas. American Antiquity, 24(3):276-288.

Prewitt - Cultural Chronology

87

Kelly, Thomas C.
The Crumley Site: A Stratified Burnt Rock Mid~len, Travis County,
1961
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 31:239-272.
Krieger, Alex D.
1953
New World Culture History: Anglo-America. In: A. L. Kroeber (ed.),
Anthropology Today, pp. 238-264. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Lowie, Robert H.
1963
Indians of the Plains. American Museum Science Books, The Natural
History Press, Garden City, New York.
Luke, Clive g.
Continuing Archeology on State Highway 16 in Kerr County, Texas: The
1980
Excavations of the Shep Site (41KR109) and the Wounded Eye Site
(41KR107). Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Publications in Archaeology, 16:1-66.
McKern, W. C.
The Midwestern Taxonomic Method as an Aid to Archeological Culture
1939
Study. American Antiquity, 4:301-313.
Nance, Linda A.
A Review of Central Texas Radiocarbon Chronologies. M.A. thesis in
ms.
preparation for The University of Texas at Austin.
Patterson, Patience E.
1977
A Lithic Reduction Sequence: A Test Case in the North Fork Reservoir
Area, Williamson County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, 48:53-82.
Pearce, J. E.
The Present Status of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo1932
logical and Paleontological Society, 4:44-54.
Perino, Gregory
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
1968
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Special Bulletin, 3:1-104.

Preston, Nolan E.
The McCann Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 40:1671969
192.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1966
A Preliminary Report on the Devil’s Rockshelter Site, Val Verde County,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, 18(2):206-224.
1970

The Piedra Del Diablo Site, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas Historical
Survey Committee, Archeological Report, 18(1):1-31.

1974

Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson County.
Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report, 49: i-

in press

The Rogers Spring Site: 1974 Investigations. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report, 54.

ms

Archeological Investigations in the Granger Lake District, Central Texas.

88

Texas Archeological Society

Prewitt, Elton R. and Linda A. Nance
1980
Archeological Survey and Assessments on the McBryde Lease, Duval
County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports of Investigations,
7:1-35.
Sayles, E. B.
1935
An Archeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers, 17:1-164.
Shafer, Harry J.
Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A S~atified Terrace Site in Bell
1963
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 34:57-81.
Shafer, Harry J., Dee Ann Suhm, and J. Dan Scurlock
1964
An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Belton
Reservoir, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas: 1962. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, Miscellaneous Papers, 1:1-113.
Sollberger, J. B. and T. R. Hester
1972
The Strohacker Site: A Review of Pre-Archaic Manifestations in Texas.
Plains Anthropologist, 17(58):326-344.
Sorrow, William M.
1969
Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site: A Burnt Rock Midden
in Williamson County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, 18:1-62.
1970

Archeological Investigations at the Barker Site. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, Research Report, 1:1-23.

Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E o Ross
Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas Arch1967
eological Salvage Project, 11:1-148.
Stoltman, James B.
1978
Temporal Models in Prehistory: An Example from Eastern North
America. Current Anthropology, 19(4):703-746.
Story, Dee Ann and Harry J. Shafer
1964 Excavations at Waco Reservoir, McLennan County, Texas: The
1965
Baylor and Britton Sites. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Miscellaneous Papers, 6:1-140.
Suhm, Dee Ann
Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. The Texas
1957
Journal of Science, 9(1):26-58.
The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology. The Texas Journal of
1959
Science, 11(2):218-250.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
1954
Archeological Society, 25:1-582.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
1962
Society Special Publication, I: 1-299.

Watt, Frank H.
A Prehistoric Shelter Burial in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Central
1936
Texas Archeological Society, 2:3-58.

Prewitt -- Cultural Chronology

89

Weir, Frank A.
1976
The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, Washington
State University, Pullman.
1979
Greenhaw: An Archaic Site in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 50:5-67.

Wesolowsky, AI B., Thomas R. Hester, and Douglas R. Brown
Archeological Investigations at the Jetta Court Site (41TV151), Travis
1976
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 47:25-87.
Willey, Gordon R. and Philip Phillips
Method and Theory in American Archaeology. The University of Chi1958
cago Press, Chicago.

