Fox - Material Evidence

271

The Material Evidence of
Texas History

ABSTRACT
A general review of historical archeology in Texas provides an introduction to the subject for
the state. Discussion is focused on selected accomplishments of archeological investigations of
historic Indian sites, shipwrecks, French occupation, Spanish Colonial establishments, early
19th Century sites, German settlements, frontier military outposts, and archeological sites of
the second half of the 19th Century and the 20th Century. Some contemporary research problems and potential contributions of historical archeology in Texas are derived from this summary.

INTRODUCTION
Numerous books have been published detailing the events of Texas
history and every community has its own folklore, written or unwritten,
about its heritage. Archeologists study the material evidence and the cultural
environmental contexts of human behavior. They have an opportunity to
verify, correct, and supplement the documentary record of Texas history
and explain why events happened.
Systematic archeological investigation of non-lndian sites of the historic
period is a recent development in the disciplines of history and archeology in
Texas. Most work has been concerned with the state’s prehistory. Historical
archeology often is restricted as well as encouraged by legal, financial, and
political aspects. As yet, historical archeology in Texas does not have an
organized system of method and theory; although more recent, intensive
historic site investigations have adopted current scientific concepts and
methods (e.g., Gilmore, 1973; A. Fox and Livingston, 1979).
The following summary is a simplified version of the historical archeology
that has been done in Texas. It is written as an inti’oduction and by no
means is exhaustive.
TEXAS ABORIGINES
The search for material evidence of historic Indian societies has long been
an important interest of Texas archeologists. Linking early explorers’ and
missionaries’ accounts with the material remains of native peoples helps to
identify prehistoric groups and reconstruct their lifeways. It also makes it
possible to study the processes involved in the acculturation of aboriginal
peoples. Few archeological sites have been found which can be attributed
with certainty to historic Indians in Texas, particularly those with a cultural

272

Texas Archeological Society

heritage of occupation in one general environmental situation. It is difficult
to affiliate known historic Indian remains with prehistoric cultural materials.
Eastern Apaches, Tonkawas, Coahuiltecans, and Karankawas
The only archeological sites that have been investigated intensively which
are known to have been occupied by various nomadic hunting and gathering peoples of Central, South, and Coastal Texas are the Spanish Colonial
missions located in those aboriginal homelands (Hester, 1975; Gilmore,
1969; Schuetz, 1969; A. Fox et al., 1976). Identification of the material
culture produced by the mission Indians is difficult. Most of the missions
were built on sites which had been occupied by prehistoric groups. Mission
Indian materials sometimes are mixed with evidence of earlier occupations,
some dating back thousands of years (D. Fox, 1979a). The probability that
mission inhabitants collected or reused artifacts of earlier peoples further
complicates the identification of mission Indian material culture (D. Fox,
1979a:33-34).
Mission converts used European tools, weapons, ornaments, and other
implements. An analysis has not been done of how dependent they were on
European technology; or of how the mission system adapted to conditions
of the Texas frontier and was supplemented by native materials and Indian
technology.
Prior to entering the missions, the native peoples of the Edwards Plateau
and the Rio Grande Plain already had undergone generations of culture
change in adaptation to population decline, territorial displacement,
segregation and ideological pressure, loss of ethnic identity, and absorption
by invading populations (Campbell, 1975:2). As mission neophytes, Indians from different cultural backgrounds were integrated into a single,
hierarchically organized mission population (Scurlock et al., 1976:24-27)
and quickly acculturated into the laboring class necessary to support the hacienda system of New Spain (Chevalier, 1966; Fehrenbach, 1968:65).
Artifacts produced from native materials identified as mission Indian include simple pottery vessels and other ceramic artifacts, triangular arrowpoints, gun flints and other flaked lithic tools, and a few ornaments and tools
of bone and shell (Scheutz, 1969:62-77; D. Fox, 1979a). This material is
only vaguely similar to Late Prehistoric material culture. The limited, standardized nature of mission Indian artifacts appears to reflect a dependence
upon European technology, an adaptation to sedentary life, and organization of the hacienda, more than a continuation of Indian cultural traditions
(D. Fox, 1979a).
Wichitas
The Wichita speaking peoples who inhabited Northcentral Texas and adjacent parts of Oklahoma during the 18th and early 19th centuries are some
of the archeologically best known Indian cultures. Artifacts of native
manufacture found in association with European trade materials at a series
of localities in Northcentral Texas were designated the Norte~o Focus.
This archeological complex was thought to be attributable to historic Wichita
tribal groups (Duffield and Jelks, 1961:69-71; Bell et al., 1967).
Material remains of the Norte~o Focus include triangular arrowpoints,
scraping tools, knives and other flaked lithic implements, types of locally

Fox - Material Evidence

273

made and trade ware pottery, ceramic and ground stone smoking pipes, ornaments and tools of bone and shell, and other artifacts of local origin;
European trade beads, knives, axes, metal arrowpoints, gun parts, ornaments, kettle fragments, and horse trappings (Duffield and Jelks, 1961;
Harris et al., 1965; Jelks, 1967).
This material represents a hunting and gathering lifeway. The extensive
size of Norte~o Focus sites, remains of substantial dwellings, and nature
of other archeological features reflect a partial dependency upon agricultural
crops necessary to support large semipermanent villages (Suhm, 1960:67).
Trade and other forms of socioeconomic interaction with neighboring Indian
groups and Europeans also must have been an important part of historic
Wichita subsistence.
Some studies of the material culture inventory of the Norte~o Focus
and historical documentation of the Wichita were applied toward an interpretation and reconstruction of Wichita culture of the Historic Period
(Newcomb and Field, 1967). Some Norte~o Focus artifacts resemble
Late Prehistoric cultural remains referred to as the Henrietta Focus of Northcentral Texas (Duffield and Jelks, 1961:73). However, Wichita peoples
probably were not native to Texas (Suhm, 1960:66; Newcomb, 1961:248;
John, 1975:338). Norte~o Focus materials have not been compared to
their prehistoric counterparts in order to study the degree to which the
Wichita had become acculturated; or in what ways Wichita culture changed
from its prehistoric antecedents.
Comanches
The aboriginal nomads of Central, South, and Coastal Texas were the
first to disappear during the Historic Period. The culture of the more
organized, semisedentary Wichita immigrants endured a while longer. The
Comanches were among the last to surrender (Newcomb, 1961:158).
Possibly because of their mobility and their late arrival in Texas, archeological evidence of the Comanches is limited (Willey et al., 1978). A
few isolated burials have been found (Suhm, 1960:67; Word and Fox,
1975). Offerings commonly associated with Comanche burials include
horse trappings (occasionally, the remains of a horse), knives, hoes and
other tools, brass bracelets, glass beads, finger rings, conchos, hair pipes
and other ornaments, leather and fabric garments, mirrors, and aboriginal
artifacts (Word and Fox, 1975:43-52).
Several Comanche burial customs reported in ethnographic accounts
have been verified from archeological evidence (Word and Fox, 1975:48,
Table 5). Among these customs, the body was flexed and bound in position,
painted with vermillion, dressed in the finest clothes, and wrapped in a robe
or blanket. The body was buried in a crevice or secluded place along with
the deceased’s possessions, including his saddle, bridle, and favorite horse.
The grave was covered with rocks and a ceremonial fire was built.
With the warrior appropriately laid to rest, the spirit of the Comanches
lived on in the perfect afterworld. "There was plenty of game for the men to
hunt, the horses were fast, pounded corn was always available, and there
was no sorrow or suffering" (Newcomb, 1961:189).

274

Texas Archeological Society

SHIPWRECKS
Archeological investigation of shipwrecks along the coast is a recent addition to historical archeology in Texas. The successes of professional treasure
hunters during the 1960’s spurred the development of a whole new system
of antiquities legislation and archeological technology.
Meticulous study of 16th Century Spanish artifacfs from Texas tidelands
confiscated by the state resulted in the thorough description of Spanish
cargo (Olds, 1976) and development of new techniques for historic artifact
analysis and conservation (Hamilton, 1976). The location, identification,
and underwater excavation of wrecks of a Spanish Flotilla off South Padre
Island resulted in technological innovations, publication of technical archeological reports and historical documentation (e.g., McDonald and Arnold, 1979), public exhibitions, a motion picture, and a book (Arnold and
Weddle, 1979).
The science of underwater archeology in Texas is developing rapidly and
is being integrated with the study of maritime archeology in the United
States and Old World (Arnold, 1978). This has created an atmosphere conducive to reducing the high cost of managing underwater cultural resources
and balancing the popular appeal with the academic values of historical archeology. Underwater archeology, particularly that concerned with 19th
Century coastal and inland shipping, will contribute to the understanding of
the history of the people of Texas.

LA SALLE’S FORT SAINT LOUIS
While historians decipher documentary sources and attempt to plot
historic places, archeologists look for material evidence left by the people
who occupied the places. The identification of the site of La Salle’s Fort
Saint Louis on the Texas coast is an example of historical research and archeological investigation applied to historic site location (Gilmore, 1973).
Rene Robert Cavelier, Sieur de la Salle, established an ill fated colony on
the coast in 1685. On hearing of French claims to this territory, the Spanish
sent several expeditions to locate and destroy Fort Saint Louis (Weddle,
1973). In 1689, when Alonso de Leon finally found La Salle’s colony, it
had been destroyed by Indians (Bolton, 1959:398-399). Determined to
protect their territories from the French, the Spanish established the presidio
of Nuestra Se~ora del Loreto (La Bahia) in 1722 on the site of Fort Saint
Louis. The Mission Espiritu Santo de Zu~iga was established nearby
among the Karankawa Indians (Hackett, 1945).
Using a Spanish map of 1691, Bolton (1924) found a possible location of
the French colony (Keeran site) on Garcitas Creek near Lavaca Bay in Victoria County. Other historians contested Bolton’s claims (Gilmore, 1973:1).
Archeological excavations at the Keeran site (Gilmore, 1973) failed to
demonstrate that this was the location of the French colony. None of the artifacts recovered were identified positively as being representative of French
occupation (Gilmore, 1973:1).
Using a methodological approach developed to demonstrate precise Iocations of other historic sites, Gilmore (1973) formulated a conceptual model
of what the location of La Salle’s Fort should look like. This model was
based on researching historical documents to reconstruct the geography,

Fox - Material Evidence

275

physiography, and topography of the site’s location and studying archeological materials from sites of the appropriate time period to determine
what material remains of the French fort and the Spanish presidio should
be.
Gilmore (1973:20-2"1) found that certain characteristic types of Mexican
made ceramic vessels, particularly decorated majolica categories, were
recovered from the Keeran site. This material indicated that it was the site of
Presidio Loreto. The geographic, physiographic, and topographic situation
of the Keeran site also corresponded relatively well to historical accounts of
the locations of the Presidio and the French colony.
Search for artifacts characteristic of French occupation was complicated
by the fact that French trade goods such as guns and gun flints were traded
and used by others than the French (Gilmore, 1973:30). Furthermore, the
main French settlement area at the Keeran site probably was not excavated
during the investigation (Gilmore, 1973:36). Concentrating on ceramics as
a more sensitive indicator of cultural traditions, Gilmore (1973:31) found
one type of French pottery in the collection which indicated that the Keeran
site probably is the site of La Salle’s Fort Saint Louis.

SPANISH

COLONIAL MATERIAL CULTURE

Federal, state, local, and private funding has encouraged considerable
amounts of historical research and archeological investigations of Spanish
Colonial sites, particularly those in or near populated areas. Archeologists
conducted a variety of intensive and short term investigations at the better
known, best preserved Spanish Colonial sites. Their research has been extended to include the location and description of the more obscure, almost
forgotten localities, such as the missions, presidios, and ranchos of East,
South, and Coastal Texas (e.g., Hester, 1975; Adams, 1976).
The Spanish Colonial sites of the San Antonio area have received the
greatest amount of attention. Missions San Antonio de Valero (the Alamo),
Concepci’on, San Jose, San Juan Capistrano and Espada, San Femando
Cathedral, the Governor’s Palace, and sections of the acequia (irrigation)
system of Spanish Colonial San Antonio have been investigated (A. Fox et
al., 1976; D. Fox, 1979a; D. Fox et al., 1977; Scheutz, 1969).
Investigations were limited primarily to salvage or cultural resource
management operations instead of well funded, problem oriented archeological programs (Scurlock et al., 1976:64). Basic information about
the remains of the Spanish Colonial peoples was recovered. However, it
has yet to be synthesized thoroughly and applied toward the explanation of
the expansion and decline of Spanish Colonial feudalism.
Eighteenth Century material remains of Spanish Colonial Texas include
goods imported from Europe, Mexico, and China and artifacts and architecture produced locally (Gilmore, 1969:45-46, 48-49, 55-56; Schuetz, 1969;
D. Fox, 1979a). Household goods include Mexican made majolica (hand
painted, tin enamelled earthenware), lead glazed wares and red burnished
earthenware, oriental procelain and mission Indian pottery vessels, knives
and other lithic tools, Mexican grinding implements, Spanish olive jars,
needles, pins and thimbles, glassware and wine bottles, metal knives, and
kettle and boiler fragments.

276

Texas Archeological Society

Building hardware is limited primarily to hand wrought nails and hinges,
perhaps because of the difficulty of transporting large quantities of metal
overland from Mexico. Agricultural implements include hoes, axes, and
picks. Horse trappings include bridle parts, saddle parts, and buckles.
Spanish and French gun parts, saber fragments, lead, European and locally
made gun flints, triangular flaked lithic arrowpoints, and occasional projectile points of glass and copper represent weapons and hunting implements.
Religious paraphernalia such as medals, crucifixes, and rosary beads occur
at missions and other sites (Gilmore, 1969; Schuetz, 1969).
Spanish Colonial architecture was fashioned in timber, adobe, and stone,
or a combination of those materials. Techniques of temporary construction
were adapted from Mexican and local traditions. More substantial, permanent edifices were patterned in the styles of Europe and Spanish Colonial
Mexico (Gilmore, 1969; Schuetz, 1969).
Vast areas separated the frontier outposts of the Spanish Colonial Empire
in Texas from the logistical support of the core cities of New Spain. This
remoteness created difficulties in dealing with French intrusion in eastern
Texas and with invasions of Indian populations from the north; it hampered
relations between the Spaniards and sometimes threatened their existence
(Tunnell and Ambler, 1967:10-16).
Spanish Colonial material culture reflects more than 18th Century occupation and Hispanization of Texas aboriginies. It is evidence of frontier
adaptation and the development of a mixture of Spanish military, settler,
and acculturated Indian elements which was destined to evolve into Mexican society as Anglo-American colonists encountered it in the early 19th
Century (Scurlock et al., 1976:41-42).

MEXICAN, ANGLO-AMERICAN,

AND

AFRO-AMERICAN TEXANS
Minimal attention has been paid to the material remains of the period
from 1836 to the Civil War in Texas. Less is known about the archeology of
Mexican Texas of the early 19th Century. Only the best known sites of early
Anglo-American Texas have been investigated. Only a few Afro-American
sites have been identified.
Recent archeological work at the Alamo has uncovered evidence of the
battle, such as remains of fortifications and weapon related artifacts (A. Fox
et al., 1976). Archeological investigations at Washington-on-the-Brazos
State Park (Davis and Corbin, 1967) found little left of the early Texas town
of Washington. Preliminary investigations recovered minimal information
about the disturbed condition and contents of Mexican and Texan Fort
Lipantitlan (1831-1842) in Nueces County (Ing, 1976).
Many of the Spanish Colonial sites in the San Antonio area were occupied before and after the Texas Revolution. However, archeological investigations at these sites have focused on Spanish Colonial evidence (A.
Fox et al., 1976; D. Fox et al., 1977; Schuetz, 1969). The material culture
of the early 19th Century occupations is difficult to identify amidst the complexity of remains of earlier and later occupations.
Intensive archeological surveys of reservoir areas and other projects have
located and identified a variety of early 19th Century Anglo-American

Fox - Material Evidence

277

homesteads, plantations, communities, and cemeteries. Many sites of
Austin’s and DeWitt’s colonists have been identified (Mallouf et al., 1973;
D. Fox et al., 1974); however, only a few of these have received additional
study. At Palmetto Bend Reservoir, archeological investigation found that
little remained of Texana, an early inland shipping port in Jackson County
(Jackson, 1977).
Even less attention has been paid to the identification and investigation of
the archeology of Mexican cultural elements of early Texas. Only
preliminary studies have been done of Mexican settlements in the areas
around Victoria, Goliad, and San Antonio (Mallouf et al., 1973; Scurlock et
al., 1976; A. Fox, 1977; D. Fox et al., 1978; Katz, 1978). Late 18th and
19th Century architecture of the Falcon Reservoir area on the Rio Grande
was recorded (George, 1975). However, the archeology of the early 19th
Century peoples along the Rio Grande virtually is unknown.
Because historical documentation and folklore pertaining to much of early
19th Century Texas is biased, inaccurate, or lacking, the archeology of this
period can be of great value to the understanding of Texas history. The
historical archeology of early Mexican and Anglo-American Texas is in the
early stages of development. Its primary objectives are concerned with the
association of dates and functions with the various types of material remains
of th~period (Schuetz, 1969; Mallouf et al., 1973:156-193; A. Fox et al.,
1976:53-78; D. Fox et al., 1978:26).
Samples of ceramics from occupations of the first half of the 19th Century
include a high percentage of decorated British white paste earthenware
(transfer printed, featheredge, blue flown, hand painted floral design, and
mocha wares). Glass bottle fragments are from free blown vessels and containers with molded bodies, pontil scarred concave bases, and hand finished
necks and rims. Metal objects include square nails, hand wrought nails and
other hardware, harness trappings, and cast iron vessel fragments. (Mallouf
et al., 1973:156-192; D. Fox et al., 1974:216-247; A. Fox et al.,
1976:53-78; Scurlock and Fox, 1977:55-135).
Dates and functions of much of the material culture of 19th Century occupation has been determined, particularly for the period after about 1830
(A. Fox et al., 1976; Scurlock and Fox, 1977; D. Fox et al., 1978).
However, the cultural or ethnic affiliation of 19th Century historic sites in
some areas is a major problem. Mexicans, Anglo-Americans, and AfroAmerican slaves in frontier Texas were dependent upon the same markets
and used many of the same imported goods. Where people of different
backgrounds settled near each other, they probably shared many
technological elements.
Similar tools, weapons, and techniques of stone, frame, and jacal construction probably were shared by different ethnic groups of early Texas.
The place of manufacture of a particular artifact does not necessarily reflect
the nationality of its user. The occurance of a sherd of Mexican made pottery in a sample of ceramics, for example, is not necessarily representative
of Mexican occupation. A sample consisting entirely of British ceramics
could be indicative of a Mexican or Afro-American slave occupation.
Ongoing archeological research at 19th Century sites needs to be aimed
at developing ways to identify ethnic or cultural affiliation and

278

Texas Archeological Society

socioeconomic status represented by the patterning of occupational
evidence. Only then can the integration of the people who settled pre-Civil
War Texas be reconstructed.

GERMAN IMMIGRANTS
Of the diversity and large numbers of European immigrants in AngloAmerican Texas, the German settlers of the 19th Century have received the
most attention from historians and archeologists (Jordan, 1975; Flach,
1974; A. Fox and Livingston, 1979; Carter and Ragsdale, 1976). The
stability of rural German settlement, based upon the stability of the German
family as the basic socioeconomic unit (Jordan, 1975:185~ Flach, 1974:6,
51), is reflected by the sturdy, enduring presence of German farm com~
plexes in the Hill Country and on the Coastal Plain of Texas. The age, integrity, and architectural distinctiveness of these 19th Century sites has attracted public interest and encouraged some of the most exhaustive archeological investigations of historic sites done in Texas.
Archeological research at the Biegel Settlement in Fayette County (Carter
and Ragsdale, 1976) and Steiner-Schob Complex in Victoria County (A.
Fox and Livingston, 1979) recovered evidence that supports historians’
generalizations about how German immigrants became Texans. An example is the cultural rebound hypothesis (Jordan, 1966:199-200) which suggests that when the Germans first arrived they adopted the frontier architecture of Anglo-American settlers. As soon as they were established, they
returned to traditional, Old World styles of construction. After 1880, later
generations began building frame houses devoid of imported methods,
reflecting their eventual assimilation.
Because German immigrants were dependent upon the same markets of
the United States and Western Europe as other Texas frontier settlers, most
of the artifacts at German sites are like those at other 19th Century
homesteads (A. Fox and Livingston, 1979; Carter and Ragsdale, 1976).
Occasional objects from Germany, such as coins, do appear. The lifestyle of
German settlers, their reuse and recycling of construction materials and
other goods (heirlooms), is reflected in the patterning in which their occupational evidence occurs. The stability of German family residence, dispersed
settlement pattern, intensity and diversity of agrarian enterprises, and
tendency toward frugality and conservatism are archeologically observable
(A. Fox and Livingston, 1979; Carter and Ragsdale, 1976).
German immigrants maintained their cultural identity while becoming
Texans. "The result was a blend of adopted and imported traits, a partial
assimilation, which caused the Texas Germans to differ not only from
southern Anglo-American farmers, but also from their countrymen back in
Europe" (Jordan, 1966:192).

FRONTIER MILITARY OUTPOSTS
In the mid-19th Century and following the Civil War, the United States
government established a chain of forts along the Texas frontier from the
Red River to the Rio Grande for the protection of settlers against Indian
depredations. Other forts were located in western Texas along the San
Antonio-Santa Fe Road. These outposts were unfortified, planned military

Fox - Material Evidence

279

communities rather than forts. It is questionable as to what degree they were
successful at controlling the activities of hostile Indians (Westbury,
1976:22).
Most of the earlier frontier military posts were abandoned during the Civil
War. Afterward, these and new forts were occupied until Indian troubles
ceased. The more isolated posts fell into ruin. Others were maintained as
military posts into the 20th Century, particularly those in strategic places

such as towns.
Historians and archeologists have researched the Texas frontier forts,

many of which are now State Historic Parks (Black, 1974; Ing, 1976; A.
Fox, 1976; Dickson, 1976). Government reports, plans, and other records
document the organization, personnel, and operation of the forts and provide some information on life style. Archeological investigation has become
an important means of verifying this documentation and obtaining specific
information about fort layouts and architecture (A. Fox, 1976; Dickson,
1976; Black, 1974). Most archeological work has been oriented toward
recovering those details necessary for historic site restoration and management. Little has been done to study how people lived at frontier military
posts.
The forts are valuable as cultural resources for the comparative information they contain. Architectural and artifactual data which can be associated
with specific function and chronology at frontier military outposts can be
used in the identification and interpretation of contemporaneous non
military frontier homesteads and settlements. Methods of stone, frame, canvas, picket, and adobe construction employed at the forts were adapted to
local conditions and sometimes involved civilian labor and expertise. Food,
household, personal goods, and other necessities were procured from many
of the same depots and markets that supplied other frontier communities.
The assemblage of material culture of Texas forts includes the typical
ceramic, glass, and metal of the period from about 1850 to the 1880’s (D.
Fox, 1979b; Black, 1974). Brightly decorated British white paste earthenware, characteristic of pre-Civil War occupation, include featheredge, hand
painted floral design, transfer printed, and blue flown wares. Other
decorated types such as mocha and sponged wares probably were used
before and for a short time after the Civil War.
After about 1860, the market became flooded with undecorated
ironstone china, the most.common ceramic wares at the forts. Sherds of
porcelain and stoneware crockery vessels also occur. Occasional tin
enamelled and lead glazed pottery sherds are found at forts near the Mexican border (Black, 1974; A. Fox, 1976; D. Fox, 1979b).
Bottle glass at the forts is indicative of the period just before and after the
invention of the snap case which superceded the use of the pontil in the
manufacture of glass vessels. Except for an occasional free blown vessel,
most bottles from the forts have molded bases and bodies and hand finished
necks and rims. Numerous cylindrical and lettered panel bottles represent
the popularity of patent medicines which occurred during and after the Civil
War (Black, 1974; A. Fox, 1976~ D. Fox, 1979b).
Square nails, agate ware door knobs, hinges and locks, and window pane
glass are common at frontier forts. Personal items include clay tobacco pipes

280

Texas Archeological Society

of various forms, coins, clothing fasteners, pen knives, pins, and thimbles.
Harness trappings and stove parts also are common. The military nature of
the outposts is reflected in the layout of structures and their standardized
nature of construction, uniform buttons and insignia, bridle parts, and
weapon related items (lead balls, percussion caps, cartridges) (Black, 1974;
A. Fox, 1976; D. Fox, 1979b).
Each kind of artifact is indicative of details about fort construction, the
function of different post structures, the way the inhabitants dressed, andwhat they ate. The relative frequencies at which different characteristic kinds
of material culture occur reflect the life style at the frontier military posts.
Perhaps the most easily recognizable past time of the inhabitants is indicated
by the large quantity and variety of alcoholic beverage bottles found at every
fort site.
At Fort Mclntosh in 1856, Colonel J.K.F. Mansfield observed (Crimmins,
1939:237):
There is a sutler at this post, and as at other posts is permitted to sell ardent spirits. The
regulations forbid the sutler to sell ardent spirits, but the disregard of it, is excused on the
ground that others would hover around in the vicinity of the post and sell liquor to the
men, and that it was better for them to obtain it of the sutler. The regulation should
either be rescinded or enforced. Beer, cheap wine or cider would be a very good
substitute for strong clrink and no doubt satisfy all the wants of the men who have been
brought up to drink habitually.
There probably was variation in the quality of accomodations at a frontier
fort based upon rank (Black, 1974; Westbury, 1976:23). However, post
personnel as a community encountered hostile Indians and endured bad
weather and other discomforts of life in desolate places. The documentary
record and material evidence seem to indicate that enlisted men at a frontier
fort lived a routine of daily duties, boredom, and liquor in an isolated place.
AMERICAN TEXAS
During the mid-19th Century, the Texas cotton industry became
established, South Texas cattle enterprises developed, and the frontier
pushed westward. Following the Civil War, Texas gradually became a part
of a socioeconomic system that removed state sovereignty over politics,
money, and social organization. The railroads came in, as did waves of immigrants who settled the vacant and unused lands. The cotton and cattle
kingdoms of Texas were made tributary to American industrialized society
(Fehrenbach, 1968:603).
The Americanization of Texas is observable in the great variety of historic
sites dating from the last half of the 19th Century. Changes in the settlement
pattern of the lower Frio River Valley reflect changes in economies based on
cattle, sheep, and oil and gas production (Lynn et al., 1977). In the Trinity
River Basin, changes in rural Anglo-American economies are being studied.
The pattern advances from cash crops, cotton plantations and a reliance on
river navigation, to tenant farming, lumbering, and establishment of railroad
transportation~ and then to an agribusiness period of urban growth,
automotive transportation, and beef and hay production (Richner and
Bagot, 1978).
Around 1873, architectural alteration of the church of the Villa de San
Fernando created the San Fernando Cathedral of downtown San Antonio.

Fox - Material Evidence

281

The patterning of material culture reflects the rapid growth of the surrounding urban area (D. Fox et al., 1977). Other sites in metropolitan areas
have been investigated (Roberson, 1974; Ivey, 1978). Archeological
evidence at the Dolores Aldrete House in San Antonio reflects changes in
the function of the site from a 19th Century household occupation to a 20th
Century commercial property (D. Fox et al., 1978).
Archeological research has been done at sites of various developing industries of 19th Century Texas. Mills in Travis County (Durrenberger, 1965;
McEachern and Ralph, 1980), pottery kilns and lime kilns in various areas
(Malone et al., 1979), commercial salt manufacturing operations of the
Neches Saline (Skinner, 1971), Chinese railroad camps in West Texas
(Briggs, 1974), and other industrial sites have been investigated.
An increasing diversity and standardization of material goods mass produced by a greater variety of manufacturers is represented at post-Civil War
archeological sites. Technological innovations are apparent in food and
beverage containers, tools, weaponry, and other goods. The material
evidence of life in Texas after the Civil War reflects varying degrees of industrialization and Americanization. Further historic archeological research
at late 19th Century and 20th Century sites will contribute to the understanding of the ways in which the peoples of Texas have adapted to ever increasing pressures toward integration into the greater American
socioeconomic system.

FUTURE OF HISTORICAL ARCHEOLOGY IN TEXAS
Historical archeology has become an established part of cultural resource
management in Texas, attracting archeologists, historians, planners,
developers, associations, and private citizens. The increasing amount of
historical archeological research rapidly is accumulating a substantial body of
comparative data and gradually contributing to the study of culture history.
Most historical archeological investigations have been short term cultural
resource management projects. They have recovered little more than
assorted bits of information about historic material culture, architecture, subsistence technology, and settlement pattern.
The promotion of a research design for historical archeology would
stimulate healthy debate and imaginative research. Some archeologists suggest that the implementation of a regional research strategy would produce
more meaningful results (Schiffer and House, 1977:250; Patterson,
1980:4-5). However, it is possible that general acceptance of a rigorously
defined framework could stifle innovation, encourage stagnation of the
discipline, and expose historical archeology to management by government
agencies and professional organizations.
At this stage in the development of historical archeology in Texas, it
seems more appropriate to suggest some pertinent problems for further
research. The following suggestions are derived from the preceding review:
Archeological investigation of the historic Indians of Texas should be coordinated with
ethnohistorical research (Campbell, 1972, 1975, 1977). An attempt should be made to compare historic Indian remains with prehistoric cultural materials so that Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric aboriginal groups can be identified and their acculturation studied.
An analysis should be done of how dependent mission Indians were on European
technology and how colonial technology was supplemented by native materials and
technology.

282

Texas Archeological Society

The remote sensing technology used for underwater archeology should be developed further
for use in terrestrial archeology. The results of underwater archeology can be used to stimulate
public interest in Texas archeology.
The nature and meaning of the material culture of French occupation should be studied.
Spanish Colonial archeology needs to be synthesized and applied toward the explanation of
18th Century feudalism and evolution of Mexican society in Texas.
The material culture of early 19th Century Texas should be identified and interpreted. There
is need to develop methods of identifying ethnicity and socioeconomic status archeologically so
that the processes of integration in different parts of 19th and 20th Century Texas can be explained.
The assimilation of Germans and other immigrants deserves further study.
The archeological manifestation of ranking can be studied at frontier military outposts and
compared to evidence of social ranking in other archeological contexts.
The industrialization and Americanization of 19th Century Texas deserves thorough
historical and archeological investigation.
The development of Texas industry and commerce can be researched at a variety of 19th
and early 20th Century sites.
The potential value of historical archeology just now is being realized. It
can contribute to the understanding and expand the meaning of history. It
can be used as a testing ground for new approaches to prehistoric archeology and provide insights into the significance of prehistoric cultural remains. It can be applied in conjunction with historical research toward the
development of public awareness in the cultural heritage of Texas.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
At first, it seemed that drafting a general review of historical archeology in Texas would be
relatively simple. However, as the project developed and more and more personalities became
involved, the author learned how difficult it is to write even a basic summary that will satisfy
everyone in the discipline. The following people helped with their constructive comments and
encouragement to make the project an interesting and introspective exercise: W. Hayden
Whitsett, Archeologist, Texas Department of Water Resources. Anne A. Fox, Dr. Thomas R.
Hester, Steve Black, and Fred Valdez, archeologists, Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio. Alton K. Briggs, Director, Cultural Resources Management, Texas Historical Commission. Dr. Eileen Johnson, Editor, and the anonymous
reviewers of the peer review process for this volume of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society. Non-archeologists (engineers and hydrologists), Construction Grants and Water
Quality Planning Division, Texas Department of Water Resources.

REFERENCES CITED
Adams, R.E.W.
1976
The Archaeology and Ethnohistory of the Gateway Area, Middle Rio
Grande of Texas, Report of the 1976 Investigations. Mimeographed
report submitted to the National Endowment for the Humanities by The
University of Texas, San Antonio.
Arnold, J. Barto III (ed)
1978
Beneath the Waters of Time: The Proceedings of the Ninth Conference
on Underwater Archaeology. Texas Antiquities Committee Publication,
6:1-244.
Arnold, J. Barto III and Robert S. Weddle
The Nautical Archeology of Padre Island: The Spanish Shipwrecks of
1979
1554. Academic Press, New York.

Bell, R.E., E.B. Jelks, and W.W. Newcomb Jr.
A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archaeology and Ethnohistory. National
1967
Science Foundation Report, Washington, D.C.

Fox - Material Evidence

Black, Art
1974

283

Fort Lancaster State Historic Site, Crockett County, Texas, Archeological Excavations. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Historic
Sites and Restoration Branch, Archeological Report, 18:1-188.

Bolton, Herbert E.
1924
The Location of La Salle’s Colony on the Gulf of Mexico. Southwestern
Historical Quarterly, 27(3):171-189.
1959
Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. 1916 Reprint.
Barnes and Noble, New York.
Briggs, Alton K.
1974
The Archeology of 1882 Labor Camps on the Southern Pacific
Railroad, Val Verde County, Texas. Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
Campbell, T.N.
1972
Systematized Ethnohistory and Prehistoric Culture Sequences in Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 43:1-11.
1975
The Payaya Indians of Southern Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological
Association Special Publication, I: 1-30.
Ethnic Identities of Extinct Coahuiltecan Populations: Case of the Juan1977
ca Indians. Texas Memorial Museum, The Pearce-Sellards Series,
26:1-76.
Carter, Emily Suzanne and Crystal Sasse Ragsdale
1976
Biegel Settlement: Historic Sites Research, Fayette Power Project,
Fayette County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin, Research Report, 59:1-132.
Chevalier, Francois
1966
Land and Society in Colonial Mexico: The Great Hacienda. University
of California Press, Berkeley.
Crimmins, M.L. (ed)
Colonel J.K.F. Mansfield’s Report of the Inspection of the Department
7939
of Texas in 1856. Southwestern Historical Quarterly, 42:215-257.
Davis, E. Mott and James E. Corbin
1967
Archeological Investigations at Washington-on-the-Brazos State Park in
1966. State Building Commission Archeological Program Report,
5:1-58.
Dickson, D. Bruce
Archaeological Research at Fort Richardson State Park, Summer 1975.
1976
Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University Report, 28:1-101.
Duffield, Lathel F. and Edward B. Jelks
1961
The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology,
Archaeology Series, 4:1-83.
Durrenberger, E. Paul
Anderson’s Mill (41TV130): A Historic Site in Travis County, Texas,
1965
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 36:1-69.
Fehrenbach, T.R.
1968
Lone Star: A History of Texas and the Texans. MacMillan, Toronto.
Flach, V.
1974

A Yankee in German America: Texas Hill Country. Naylor, San Antonio.

284

Texas Archeological Society

Fox, Anne A.
1976
Archaeological Investigations at Fort Griffin State Historic Park,
Shackelford County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report,
23:1-48.
The Archaeology and History of the Spanish Governor’s Palace Park.
1977
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report, 31:1-43.
Fox, Anne A., Feris A. Bass Jr., and Thomas R. Hester
1976
The Archaeology and History of Alamo Plaza. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report, 16:1-105.
Fox, Anne A. and Katherine Livingston
1979
Historical, Architectural and Archaeological Investigations at the
Steiner-Schob Complex, Victoria County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report, 52:1-99.
Fox, Daniel E.
1979a The Lithic Artifacts of Indians at the Spanish Colonial Missions, San Antonio, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, Special Report, 8:1-47.
1979b Archaeological Testing at Fort Mclntosh, Laredo Junior College Campus, Laredo, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report, 68:1-34.
Fox, Daniel E., Robert J. Mallouf, Nancy O’Malley, and William M. Sorrow
Archeological Resources of the Proposed Cuero I Reservoir, DeWitt and
1974
Gonzales Counties, Texas. Texas Historical Commission and Texas
Water Development Board, Archeological Survey Report, 12:1-311.
Fox, Daniel E., Dan Scurlock, and John W. Clark Jr.
1977
Archeological Excavations at San Fernando Cathedral, San Antonio,
Texas: A Preliminary Report. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Special Report, 22:1-42.
Fox, Daniel E., Fred Valdez Jr., and Lynn Osborne Bobbitt
1978
An Archaeological Assessment of the Dolores Aldrete House Property,
San Antonio, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report, 58:1-32.
George, Eugene
1975
Historic Architecture of Texas: The Falcon Reservoir. Texas Historical
Commission, Texas Historical Foundation, Austin.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1969
The San Xavier Missions: A Study in Historical Site Identification. State
Building Commission Archeological Program Report, 16:1-151.
1973
The Keeran Site: The Probable Site of La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas.
Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Report,
24:1-100.
Hackett, Charles W.
1945
The Marquis of San Miguel de Aguayo and His Recovery of Texas from
the French, 1719-1723. Southwestern Historical Quarterly,
49(2):193-214.

Fox - Material Evidence

285

Hamilton, Donald
Conservation of Metal Objects from Underwater Sites: A Study in
1976
Methods. Texas Antiquities Committee Publication, 1:1-108.
Harris, R.K., Inus Marie Harris, Jay C. Blaine, and Jerrylee Blaine
1965
A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study of the Womack
Site, Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
36:287-363.
Hester, Thomas R.
1975
Material Culture at San Bernardo: Preliminary Comments. In: R.E.W.
Adams, The Archaeology and Ethnohistory of the Gateway Area, Middle Rio Grande of Texas, pp. 23-36. Mimeographed report submitted to
the National Endowment for the Humanities by The University of Texas,
San Antonio.
Ing, J. David
1976
Fort Lipantitlan State Historic Site, Nueces County, Texas: Archeological Testing - 1974. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Historic Sites and Restoration Branch, Archeological Report, 16:1-21.
Ivey, J.E.
1978

Archaeological Investigations at the Gresser House, 41BX369, San Antonio, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report, 60:1-32.

Jackson, Marsha F.
1977
Texana: Excavations at a Nineteenth Century Inland Coastal Town,
Jackson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin, Research Report, 57:1-166.
Jelks, Edward B. (ed)
1967
The Gilbert Site: A Norte~o Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Areheological Society, 37:1-248.
John, E.A.H.
1975
Storms Brewed in Other Men’s Worlds: The Confrontation of lndians,
Spanish, and French in the Southwest, 1540-1795. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.
Jordan, T.G.
German Seed in Texas Soil: Immigrant Farmers in Nineteenth Century
1975
Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Katz, Paul R.
1978
Archaeological and Historical Investigations in the Arciniega Street
Area, Downtown San Antonio, Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research, The Univesity of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological
Survey Report, 61:1-77.
Lynn, Warren M., Daniel E. Fox, and Nancy O’Malley
1977
Cultural Resource Survey of Choke Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak and
McMullen Counties, Texas. Texas Historical Commission and Texas
Water Development Board, Archeological Survey Report, 20:1-273.
Mallouf, Robert J., Daniel E. Fox, and Alton K. Briggs
1973
An Assessment of the Cultural Resources of Palmetto Bend Reservoir,
Jackson County, Texas, Texas Historical Commission and Texas Water
Development Board, Archeological Survey Report, 11:1-218.

286

Texas Archeological Society

Malone, James M., Georgeanna H. Greer, and Helen Simmons
Kirbee Kiln: A Mid-19th Century Texas Stoneware Pottery. Office of the
1979
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Report, 31:1-60.
McDonald, David and J. Barto Arnold III
Documentary Sources for the Wreck of the New Spain Fleet of 1554.
1979
Texas Antiquities Committee Publication, 8:1-330.
McEachern, Michael and Ronald W. Ralph
1980
Archeological Investigations at the Thomas F. McKinney Homestead,
Travis County, Texas: An Experiment in Historical Archeology Part I
Bulletin of the Texas Archeologtcal Society, 51:5-208.
Newcomb, W.W. Jr.
1960
Indian Tribes of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
29:1-34.
1961
The Indians of Texas. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Newcomb, W.W. Jr. and W.T. Field
1967
An Ethnohistoric Investigation of the Wichita Indians in the Southern
Plains. In: R.E. Bell, E.B. Jelks, and W.W. Newcomb Jr., A Pilot Study
of Wichita Indian Archaeology and Ethnohistory, pp. 240-331. National Science Foundation Report, Washington, D.C.
Olds, Doris
Texas Legacy from the Gulf: A Report of Sixteenth Century Shipwreck
1976
Materials Recovered from the Texas Tidelands. Texas Memorial
Museum, Miscellaneous Papers, 5:1-204~ Texas Antiquities Committee
Publication, 2:1-204.
Patterson, L.W.
Regional Synthesis in Texas. Texas Archeology: Newsletter of the Texas
1980
Archeological Society, 24(4):4-5.
Richner, Jeffrey J. and Joe T. Bagot
1978
A Reconnaissance Survey of the Trinity River Basin, 1976-1977.
Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Archeology Research Program, Research Report, 113:1-287.
Roberson, Wayne R.
1974
The Carrington-Covert House: Archeological Investigation of a 19thCentury Residence in Austin, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, Special Report, 25:1-142.
Scheutz, Mardith K.
1969
The History and Archeology of Mission San Juan Capistrano, San Antonio, Texas. Vol. II, Description of the Artifacts and Ethno-History of
the Coahiltecan Indians. State Building Commission Archeological Program Report, 11:1-133.
Schiffer, Michael B. and John H. House
1977
An Approach to Assessing Scientific Significance. In: M.B. Schiffer and
G.J. Gumerman, Conservation Archaeology: A Guide for Cultural
Resource Management Studies, pp. 249-257. Academic Press, New
York.
Scurlock, Dan, Adan Benavides Jr., Dana Isham, and John W. Clark Jr.
1976
An Archeological and Historical Survey of the Proposed Mission
Parkway, San Antonio, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Archeological Survey Report, 17:1-351.

Fox -- Material Evidence

287

Skinner, S. Alan
Historical Archeology of the Neches Saline, Smith County, Texas.
1971
Texas Historical Survey Committee, Archeological Report, 21:1-45.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960
A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 29:63-107.
Tunnell, Curtis D. and J. Richard Ambler
Archeological Excavations at .Presidio San Agustin de Ahumada. State
1967
Building Commission Archeological Program Report, 6:1-116.
Weddle, Robert S.
1973
Wilderness Manhunt. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Westbury, William A.
Archeological Investigations at Fort Richardson State Park, 1976. Texas
1976
A&M University, Amhropology Laboratory Report, 31:1-68.
Willey, Patrick S., Billy R. Harrison, and Jack T. Hughes
1978
The Sand Pit Site. In: Jack T. Hughes and Patrick S. Willey, Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, Archeological Survey Report,
24:233-253.
Word, James H. and Anne A. Fox
The Cogdell Burial in Floyd County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas At1975
cheological Society, 46:1-63.

