347

New Data on Clay Figurines from
the Lower Pecos Area, Texas
C. K. Chandler, Thomas R. Hester,
and Harry J. Shafer

ABSTRACT
In recent years, tour clay figurines have been documented in private collections
from the Lower Pecos-Lake Amistad region of Texas. All are from the Mexican
side of the reservoir and are the first specimens to be reported from that portion
of Lake Amistad. Descriptions and measurements are provided and comparisons are made with figurines previously documented in the Lower Pecos region.

INTRODUCTION
Over the past several years, we have been made aware of four fired clay
figurines from the Lake Amistad-Lower Pecos area of Texas. A number of
unfired clay figurines have been previously reported from this area, but only one
is thought to have been fired.
Sharer (1975) synthesized all of the reported findings of anthropomorphic
clay figurines from the Lower Pecos area and illustrated some of them. Davenport (1938) reported 12 specimens from Eagle Cave and described them as all
being cigar-shaped, without temper, and probably sun-baked. Four of these are
illustrated by Shafer (1975) and one is very similar in shape and decoration to
Specimen 2 reported in this paper.

SPECIMEN DESCRIPTIONS
Specimen 1
This specimen is a nearly complete torso of a human figure and is the most
complete of the four figurines (Figure 1 and 2). It is elegantly shaped compared
to other figurines from the Lower Pecos area. Prominent breasts are clearly
shown with a hole in the center of each nipple (Figure la, 2a). The lower abdomen protudes significantly, perhaps indicative of pregnancy (Figure 1 b, 2b). The
upper legs or thighs are stylized and rounded off. The prominent buttocks are
marked with a distinct cleft 17 mm long and about 2 mm deep (Figure lc, 2c).
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65 (1994)

348

Texas Archeological Society

The back is slightly concave and slopes inward toward the shoulders, and the
upper area of the torso is largely missing (see Figure lb). Specimen t does not
seem to have had a head although this cannot be established with certainty.

A

B

C

Figure 1. Specimen 1, a fired clay figurine from the Mexican side of Lake Amistad: a,
front view; b, left side; c, back. Drawn by Richard McReynolds.

Overall, it has a nicely smoothed and rounded appearance, although it is
tabular and somewhat elongated in the upper broken area. The specimen is
various shades of gray to grayish brown, ranging from gray (5Y-6/1) on the front
to gray-dark gray (t0YR5/I-411) on the back. One spalled area on the right
abdomen and pubic area shows a tan brown interior. It appears to be untempered
but clearly has been fired.
Maximum dimensions of Specimen 1 are: length, 67 ram; width, 28 mm at
breasts; thickness, 10 mm at the waist, 15 mm at the stomach, and 20 mm in the
buttocks. Other artifacts from the rockshelter where this specimen was found
included a painted Rabdotus snail shell (Chandler 1987) and a digging stick,
broken into halves (currently being studied by Kenneth M. Brown). The figurine
was in a private collection in Del Rio when the authors studied it.
National Park Service archeologist Joseph H. Labadie has established the
location of the rockshelter on the Mexican side of Lake Amistad where this

Chandler et al. m New Data on Clay Figurines front the Lower Pecos

A

B

349

C

Figure 2. Photograph of Specimen 1 from fl’ont, left side, and back views.

figurine (and possibly the others) was found. Its location is on file with the
National Park Service and the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.

Specimen 2
This artifact represents the lower torso of a human figure (Figure 3). The leg
areas are rounded off into well-formed, protruding buttocks, and genitalia are
shown on the front. A series of rather straight but curving lines begin on the
lower front and converge above the genitalia (Figure 3a). Vertical zigzag lines
are on the sides and back (Figure 3b-d) and extend onto the bottom of the piece
(Figure 3e). The mid-back area is marked by a series of four concentric incised
lines just above the buttocks (see Figure 3c). These lines were made while the
clay was very plastic and they may represent ancient tattoing practices. The
upper portion of the torso is broken off and there is no evidence of breasts;
however, this specimen is considered to represent a feminine figure.

350

Texas Archeological Society

A

i

C

B

D

E

Figure 3. Specimen 2: a, front view; b. left side; c, back; d, right side; e, bottom. Drawn by
Richard McReynolds.
Specimen 2 is 37 mm long, 2! mm thick at the buttocks area, and 10 mm
thick at the break. Maximum width is 27 mm across the buttocks and 23 mm at
the break; it weighs 29 g. Its surface is medium to dark gray in color, and this
color is uniform throughout the paste. It has no temper.
Portions of the figurine’s surface are burnished. This may be due, however,
to recent handling after the figurine was recovered from deposits in a rockshelter
on the Mexican side of Lake Amistad. At the time of study, it was in a private
collection in San Antonio. This figurine is clearly of baked clay and is one of the
very rare baked clay specimens from the Lower Pecos-Rio Grande area.

Specimen 3
This figurine (Figure 4a, b) was brought to our attention by a private
collector in the Dallas area. It, too, was found by an untrained digger in a
Mexican side rockshelter at Lake Amistad. We have not personally examined
this specimen, but have been provided with color photographs and the dimensions of the specimen.
This specimen represents the head and upper torso of a figurine. Based on
the photographs it is a brownish color and appears to have been fired. The head
seems to have the hairline outlined, and there are three vertical rows of

Chandler et al. m New Data on Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos

351

punctations on the face. Additional punctations are found on the chest, where
they are limited within two converging V-shaped lines positioned much like a
necklace. On the back of the figurine are a series of converging straight, to
slightly curved lines. Available dimensions are: length, 31 mm; width at the
break, 27 mm; thickness, 11 ram.

B

A

Figure 4. Specimen 3: a, front view; b, back. Drawn by Richard McReynolds.

Specimen 4

This specimen (Figure 5) is a very fragmentary portion of a fired clay
figurine recovered from a damp shelter along the Mexican side of the Rio Grande
in the Lower Pecos-Rio Grande area. It is a flattish oval shape with a large
portion of the upper area broken off. One of the abbreviated legs and much of
that side and back is also broken off and missing.
It is made very much in the style of Specimen 2 but is wider and thicker. It
had two stylized legs with a deep cleft 17 mm long and 6 mm deep. This cleft
extends to the pubic and stomach area, which is depressed all across the frontal
portion. It is medium gray in color with no evidence of temper or any kind of
paste inclusions; the paste is laminar and not well-compacted. It is undecorated
and does not have defining feminine characteristics. Dimensions for Specimen 4
are: length, 51 mm; width, 41 mm; and thickness, 23 mm. It weighs 36.4 g.

DISCUSSION
A number of anthropomorphic clay figurines have been discovered and
reported over a period of many years of archeotogical work in the Lower Pecos,
Rio Grande, and Big Bend areas of Texas. All specimens from these areas

352

Texas Archeological Society

C

B

A

[mqmqmqmqmqm~pmlmIlm~imq

Or~.n

I0

~

30

40

50

Figure 5. Specimen 4: a, front view; b, left side; c, back. Drawn by Richard McReynolds.

described in the literature, with one possible exception, are identified as unfired.
The four specimens reported here, however, are fired and two of them (see
Figure 3 and 4) have incised decorations.
Shafer’s (1975:153) synthesis of all of the known anthropomorphic clay
figurines from the Lower Pecos area of Texas concluded that they "are basically
similar in that the torso is emphasized; with arms, legs, and distinguishable heads
lacking." That appears to be true for three of the fired clay specimens reported in
this paper, although one specimen (see Figure 4) has a head with face and body
decorations. Several of the earlier reported figurines have cone-shaped breasts;
thus, they are interpreted as female forms.
Some of the figurines also have incised or painted body decorations, as do
Specimens 2 and 3 described here. Shafer (1975:153) states that "where sexual
identifications are possible, linear designs are restricted to female forms." On
that basis, we conclude that two of the four fired clay figurines in our sample
represent females.
A group of 24 unfired clay figurine fragments and two complete specimens
were excavated from a large rockshelter in Bee Cave Canyon in Brewster County
by Coffin (1932). These are described as "grotesque human figures" made of
untempered and unfired clay. They have torsos and heads with long, sharp noses
and mouths defined by round punctations, and with eyes part of the black paint
decoration that covers the upper parts of the figures. One fragment had sharp
pointed breasts. Another had traces of a red, yellow, and black painted decoration.
The lower parts of the torsos are round, and they would probably not remain
upright when set on a hard surface. The backs are incurved and some have the
natural indented line down the buttocks. With their emphasis on the head and

Chandler et aL ~ New Data on Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos

353

facial characteristics, these figurines from Brewster County are markedly
different from the Lower Pecos and Lake Amistad figurines.

SUMMARY
The fired clay figurines reported in this article were dug up by relic
collectors from sites on the Mexican side of Lake Amistad and are the first
specimens reported from that side of the lake. Because of their distinctive nature,
it is important that information on them be reported in the literature. It is hoped
that the problem of illicit digging being done on the Mexican side of Lake
Amistad will be highlighted by this paper. Motorboat relic collectors are doing
untold damage to the sites on the Mexican side, ruining hopes for scientific
studies of those sites. While we can point to unique features of the specimens
recorded here, unfortunately they lack any sort of suitable context that would aid
in their further interpretation.

REFERENCES CITED
Chandler, C. K.
Preliminary Report of a Rare Form of Prehistoric Indian Art. La Tierra

1987

14(4):25-29.
Coffin, E. F.
1932

Archaeological Exploration of a Rock Shelter hz Brewster County, Texas.
Indian Notes and Monographs 48. Museum of the American Indian, Heye
Foundation, New York.

Davenport, J. W.
1938

Archaeological Explorations of Eagle Cave, Langt~, Texas. Bulletin 4. Witte
Museum, San Antonio.

Shafer, H. S.
1975

Clay figurines fiom the Lower Pecos Region, Texas. American Antiquity
40(2): 148-158.

