APPENDIX B

Preservation of Metal Artifacts
Ja es Calvert
INTRODUCTION
While it is the archeologist’s responsibility to see that all artifacts brought in
from the field are stored for future analysis, it is also important that they be
preserved so that deterioration will not take place during storage. This is
expressed in the Antiquities Code of Texas (1969).
Conservation of artifacts from historical sites, where artifact numbers reach
into the thousands, may not be financially possible. In this case, it is desirable
to stabilize a select group of diagnostic specimens.

DISCUSSION
Forty metal artifacts were selected from the homestead and mill excavations and metal detector survey collections. Primary objectives were stabilization of artifacts (thus halting future deterioration); and removal of surface
encrustations and corrosive layers as an aid to identification and analysis. The
following is a list of the artifacts that were given special treatment:
Plaque
Cut Nails
Handle (Mill Machinery)
Rack Gear (Mill Machinery)
Semicircular Leather Knife Blade
Horseshoes
Spikes
Metal Button
Toy Train
Monkey Wrench
Waffle Press
Pinion Gear (Mill Machinery)
Cleaning and preservation (Calvert, ms) were processed at the Antiquities
Conservation Facility of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL), University of Texas, Austin. A description of the general procedures
for cleaning metal artifacts at TARL is detailed in Hamilton (1973).
A preliminary investigation and evaluation was made of each artifact to
determine what method to employ in its cleaning and stabilization. The first
steps in assuring that all phases of preservation are reversible were taken. An
accurate description of the artifact was made before treatment. While a specimen underwent treatment, its appearance changed as corrosive compounds
were removed. Weights, measurements, sketches, and photographs were
taken at this time so that alteration during processing might be monitored. A
magnet was used to determine if there was sufficient metal in the iron artifacts
to allow removal of their corrosive compounds.
Specimens were cleaned and stabilized using electrolytic reduction after
preliminary mechanical cleaning (Hamilton, 1973; Plenderleith and Werner,
1971; UNESCO, 1968). Artifacts were separated into the following categories: 1) a brass artifact; 2) iron artifacts without sufficient metal for removal of

62

Texas Archeological Society

all corrosive compounds; 3) small iron artifacts that could be treated similarly
together and had a substantial metal core allowing all corrosive compounds to
be removed; and 4) large iron artifacts that needed to be treated individually
and could have all corrosive compounds removed.
The brass artifact was a collar that slides over the wooden handle of a
leather cutting tool. A low current density electrolysis removed its corrosive
compounds in 24 hours. It then was rinsed extensively in alternate containers
of hot and cold deionized water and allowed to dry with the aid of a water
miscible alcohol. As a final sealant, clear acrylic spray was used to prevent
further oxidation.
Two iron artifacts so severely were deteriorated that removal of their corrosive compounds would have seriously altered or destroyed their diagnostic
value. The metal button and a large portion of a leather cutting tool were
oxidized almost completely. Low current density electrolysis was used to remove the bulk of the chlorides without removing the corrosive layers. A small
amount of the corrosion then was removed mechanically.
Remaining artifacts were cleaned using a high current density electrolysis to
remove corrosive compounds. Some mechanical cleaning with a small
pneumatic chisel was used alternately with the electrolytic reduction to speed
up the treatment. The only variation in this treatment was with the large
monkey wrench and plaque. These artifacts were cleaned individually in separate electrolytic vats. Other artifacts were treated collectively in a single vat.
Specimens were cleaned in 7 to 14 days.
An extensive rinsing procedure then followed, using alternate hot and cold
deionized water to remove the electrolyte and any chlorides still remaining on
the objects. This procedure took I to 4 days. As a final sealant, artifacts were
submerged in a vat of synthetic microcrystalline wax (Gulf Microwax 75) at
350° F. until bubbles stopped evolving. The vat then was allowed to cool and
artifacts removed at 215°-225° F. Excessive wax was removed by wiping
with a rag.

CONCLUSION
Artifacts gained an aesthetically pleasing appearance and were stabilized
for storage. The three mill parts were cleaned sufficiently to be identified as a
rack, pinion gear, and a handle that may have been used to turn the pinion.
After removing the corrosive coating, the train passenger coach was identified
when the name of the railway line became visible. The train engine was
cleaned to the extent that it could be reconstructed to form an almost complete specimen showing considerable detail. The waffle iron was cleaned such
that it could be accurately measured and drawn. The cut nail collection remains as a preserved type collection of nails from the McKinney Homestead
for correlation with other historical sites.
These stabilized artifacts will be utilized in the proposed Smith Visitor Center as part of an interpretive display to be viewed and enjoyed by future
generations.

Calvert - Preservation

63

REFERENCES CITED
Antiquities Code of Texas
Article 6145-9, Vernons Texas Civil Statutes S.B. No. 58. Effective Sep1969
tember 10, 1969. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.
Calvert, James A.
ms
Preservation of Metal Artifacts from McKinney Falls State Park. On file at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas, Austin.
Hamilton, Donald L.
1973
Electrolytic Cleaning of Metal Articles Recovered from the Sea. In: N. C.
Flemming (ed.), Science Diving International, pp. 78-93. Proceedings of
the 3rd Scientific Symposium of the Scientific Committee of the Confederation Mondiale Des Activities Subaquatiques, London.
Plenderleith, H. J. and A. E. A. Werner
The Conservation of Antiquities and Works of Art. Oxford University
1971
Press, London.

UNESCO
1968

The Conservation of Cultural Property. Museum and Monuments Series,
11:237-249.

