Activity Analysis of a Prehistoric Site
JOEL L. SHINER
ABSTRACT
The excavation of an Archaic Site was attempted in order to test a series
of preconceived models of socio-eeonomic behavior. Typological, technological, as well as scatter pattern analyses were used to help define activities. The
method shows promise toward determining elements of behavior to supplement trait lists of artifacts.

INTRODUCTION

After a series of discussions on the concept of model testing, a number of students and interested amateurs joined the author in attempting to apply these concepts to a field situation. It was decided that an
undisturbed archaic site would be ideal for a modest beginning, and
fortunately these are stil! available in North Texas.
After a blief look at the site, I presented to the Dallas Archaeological Society a series of hypotheses which could be tested in the feld.
At the same time, it was suggested that some novel data recording
techniques would be employed. The combination of these hypotheses
and techniques permitted a laboratory analysis with the stated goal of
gaining information on group behavior.
During the fall-winter-spring of 1968-69 one concentration at the
site was clem’ed and mapped. The project proceeded slowly since
there was absolutely no budget, and all work was on a volunteer basis.
Because of the apparent success of this initial phase of the project, it
was decided to present it as a preliminary report.
We hope to continue this project so as to define the activity or
activities carried on at a number of temporally and geographically
related sites. If we can demonstrate that some of these horizontal
components (not in the McKern sense) show sufficient and significant
behavioral homogeneity, it might be possible to propose that they
represent the material remains of some kind of socio-politieal grouping.
Further, the structural and behavioral analysis should permit us to
say quite a bit about the culture of that group and not just present a
laundry list of artifacts.
The site chosen for this series of model testing is known as the
Obshner Site. It was m~ginally investigated and reported by W. W.
Crook and R. K. Harris (Crook and Harris, 1955). Their excavations

--.96

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

were limited in size and no conclusions were reached beyond description, geological position and probable cultural affiliation.
I wish to express nay appreciation to Il. K. Harris for his information
and help. The following persons regularly attended the excavation
sessions: J. B. Sollberger, Hubert Achor, Paul Steed, Ileed Ferring,
Jerry Humphfies. Other members of the Dallas Archaeological Society
helped occasionally. Mrs. William Morris aided in laboratory work and
Hubert Achor is responsible for the photography.
PIlE-EXCAVATION HYPOTHESES
Because of the complete absence of ceramics and small "arrow"
points, it was suspected that the site was not associated with the
"Neo-Ameriean" period. At the same time, there were no examples of
"typical" early projectile points that would tend to characterize the
Paleo-Indian period. We would, then, appear to be left with early, late
or middle Archaic (whatever that really means), and such a temporal
placement would seem to be supported by the stemmed projectile
points found in eroded areas and in earlier test pits on the site.
Two fm’ther observations appeared to be significant. The deep
erosional gullies all around the ten’ace showed individual concentrations and not a continuous distribution of artifacts. Fire-broken rock
could be seen in several of the thin occupational lenses, suggesting
additional kinds of activity.
We decided to test first for the kind of occupation, knowledge which
would also define, in part, the social structure. 1) Base cmnp; 2) ternporto7 hunting camp; 3) temporary foraging camp; 4) kill site; 5)
qumTy (in North Texas this would mean cobble-pebble deposits and
not bedrock); 6) ceremonial site; 7) unknown other activity.
A base emnp should reflect a number of activities through the
presence of different classes of tools as well as specialized activity
areas within the settlement. These might be detected by the internal
structure and distribution of debris, debitage and the various projectile, cutting, scraping, chopping and pounding tools.
A long occupation would probably add the problem of vertical
envelopment by sequential activities, thereby masking the internal
structure. Thus, we hoped that the site would be the remains of a
single, short lived camp.
A temporm3z hunting cmnp should reveal an isolated fire hearth
with primarily those tools and debris associated with hunting. A large
hunting party might leave more than one heath but the hemths
should be closely placed and tools other than points should be scarce.

ACTIVITY ANALYSIS

9~7

A temporary foraging camp might be difficult to identify if digging
sticks were the major tools employed, but one might expect some kind
of stone choppers or something different from the array of artifacts
remaining at a base camp or one of the specialized activity sites.
A quarry site should show the presence of the material being sought,
some considerable evidence of rough percussion flaking, broken preforms and large quantities of cortex flakes.
A kil! site would be impossible to detect in the highly acidic red soil
since this soil consumes bones without leaving obvious traces.
Since we know nothing about the ceremonial activities of the postulated period in this region, we could only predict that a ceremonial
site might lack most of the debris and specialized technological evidence of other site types.
RECORDING TECHNIQUES
Several soundings were made before a concentration was located.
We had checked the back-dirt from rodent holes without success
before resorting to random test pits. Horizontal controls were imposed
for mapping purposes only. There was no pressure to dig or think in
terms of a grid system. Instead, the concentration was cleared and
mapped as a unit.
It is not practical to clear around every single tool, flake and chip in
a concentration, while leaving each artifact in situ. Field practice
called for mapping and picking up as soon as the density of exposed
artifacts created problems in moving about and in removing the fill.
Initially, each artifact, when detected by meticulous tTowel work, was
left in place and marked with a small wooden meat skewer (Fig. 1 ).
When a small forest of skewers interfered with the work, a scale map
was made. Each square, 2 meters by 2 meters, became a temporary
universe with its own list of consecutive numbers. Each artifact was
given its own number, using felt tip pen, and the same number was
placed on the scale map in the corresponding position. Pieces too small
to write on were placed in a glassine envelope (stamp collectors supplies) and the number placed on the envelope.
The technique eliminates the necessity of identification of artifacts
in the field, an often difilcult job when clay, dirt or lime encrustations
cover surfaces. Artifacts can be cleaned at leisure and scatter-pattern
maps plotted after identifications are made.
Another advantage of the technique is that specific chips may be
matched against specific tools in an attempt to demonstrate that the
tool was or was not made at the site, ,and that homologous materials

98

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 1. Marking position of artifacts before mapping.

have not been scattered by wind, water or post-occupational disturbances.
I~ESULTS
The large concentration produced four major categories of material
objects; fire-broken rock, tools, unfinished tools, and chipping debris.
A couple of cores and a few suspected stone hammers do little to

ACTIVITY ANALYSIS

~9

elucidate the pictLtre. Two subdivisions of the concentration are hypothecated but are not totally demonstrable. They occur on opposite
sides of what appears to have been an earth oven. Each subdivision
has in it several pal~ally completed bffaces along with cortex flakes
and chips of matching materials. They also contain a random scattering of umnatched chips, cortex flakes and bifaee thinning flakes.
Each subdivision contains several broken projectile points that appear to have been finished and subsequently ruined by impact against
something solid, tleplieative experiments with stone points suggest
that the impacts might have been against soft stone, hard wood or
bone. Projectile point tips have been spalled off in a maturer slightly
reminiscent of a thinning flake.
No formal fire hearth was recovered. Instead, the fire-broken rock
appears to have been scattered at the end of the brief occupation. The
action did not materially affect the relative positions of the artifacts,
only the fire rocks. It appears that the informal scattering was not the
remains of a normal fireplace, but of a small earth oven, broken open
to recover the cooked food (Collier, et al., 1942:38). No pit, burned
lens or other such feature was recovered. The 300-odd burned rocks
were scattered over most of the area of the concentration. This informality does not seem incompatible with our explanation that the site
is a tenlporary camp.
An examination of the chipping debris did not turn up chips that
could have been removed from the broken projectiles recovered at
the site. It may be suggested that the broken points were brought to
the site still halted on their shafts. This situation has a bearing on the
length of occupation because apparently, the occupants did not manufac~u’e points, go out and break them, bring them back and remove
them from the shafts, all from or at the same camp. We cannot show
that points made at this site were returned to this site, and therefore
would suggest that the occupation may not have lasted more than
two or three days.
From incidence of incomplete points, we might imply that any of
several nlishaps occurred during the manufactm’ing. Three kinds of
errors were common. The first of these was the failure to remove the
"hump" or "knot" left when flakes hinge (Fig. 2 a). The second kind of
accident was the result of a misdirected blow which broke the bifaee
through shock. The third was the overpassed or overshot flake which
cut the unfinished bfface in half (Fig. 2 b). Other incomplete bffaees
may have been abandoned because of the inferior raw material
(usually quartzite).

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

b
FmuR~ 2. Incomplete bifaces: a, knot caused by hinged flakes; b, ruined by
overshot flake.
TYPOLOGICAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL TERMINOLOGY
The author has attempted to avoid the use of historic types since
there is little evidence that such types have been properly achieved in
this region. Functional types cannot be avoided in the case of projectile points and some scrapers, but this analysis does not concede to
any merit in analogous terms such as spokeshave and knife.
A few terms are partially functional and partly descriptive (thus
morphological). They are used as follows:
PROJECTILE POINTS: Bifacially flaked, apparently thinned by soft hammer or billet (bulbar scars show no crushing, and thinning flakes are
longer and more parallel than those on the rough preforms). Basal
and lateral grinding is observable as well as fine (pressure?) retouch.
Three specimens clearly show what is interpreted as impact breaks
(Fig. 3 a, b). One other has been resharpened, thus distorting the
distal end (Fig. 3 c).
At the risk of making a value judgment, it is my opinion that the
overall workmanship is not good, due perhaps to the grainy quartzite
used.
ImEFORMS: Bffaces in various stages of manufacture. It is believed that
these specimens offer proof as strong as we will ever find in anthropology of specific activity. Each spechnen is unfinished for one of the

ACTIVITY ANALYSIS

31

FIGURE 3. Projectile points: a, b, broken by impact; c, resharpened.

three reasons given above. Two kinds of faulty blows are evident. The
first of these overshoots and cuts the bffaee in two (Preston 1969:185,
Fig. 11 g, h, i). The second is a vibration break which occurs at a
point where there is a sudden increase in the mass (Sollberger
1968:108 ).
RETOIJCrlED FLAKES: Flakes with nibbling retouch along one part of one
edge. The retoueh is not of a kind that would permit the identification
of the artifact as a scraper or a knife (whatever that is). The retouch,
however, appears to be patterned and deliberate, thus not idiosyncratic.
BIFACE THINNING FLAKE (Fig. 4): Flakes which could only come from
the soft hammer (or billet?) stage of biface thinning. There are six

FmtJRE 4. Biface thinning flake and stylized cross-s2ction.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

39,

attributes which are nearly always present. 1) Oval platform; 2)
platform somewhere between about 40 and 60 degrees to bulbar surface; 3) faceted platform; 4) diffuse bulb without the tiny flake near
the center of the bulb; 5) a narrowing and thinning of the flake below
the bulb before it widens out and sometimes thickens again; 6) a
curvature of the flake itself, following the oval surface of the bifaee.
In addition there is a number (unknown percentage) of specimens
with obvious grinding at proximal edge of the platform opposite the
bulb. This edge represents what had been the edge of the biface itself
before the flake was removed. Grinding apparently strengthens the
edge and gives more purchase (Crabtree 1966:9).
In the judgment of the archaeologist (after an examination of all tools, debris and debitage) one or more edges of a flake or
blade shows sears, polish or other evidence of having been used without previous intentional retouch or grinding.

USE llETOUCH:

ARTIFACTS RECOVERED
The following tools were recovered from this concentration:
Points ............................................................................................ 8
Denticulates .................................................................................. 1
Notches ........................................................................................... 1
Bifaee preforms ......................................................................... 12
Biface fragnnents ........................................................................ 5
Gouges (?) .................................................................................. 1
Retouched flakes ........................................................................ 2
Other artifacts include:
Debitage ...................................................................................... 13
Cores ............................................................................................... 4
Cortex flakes .............................................................................. 104
Chips ......................................................................................... 354
Biface thinning flakes ............................................................... 9,5
Use retouch ................................................................................. 31
The result is the following distribution: Tools -- 5.3%, Debris 86.8%, Use retouch - 5.5%, Debitage - 2.3%, Points or potential points
contribute 25 of the 30 tools in the assemblage.
CONCLUSIONS
Testing of the predetermined hypothesis in no way prevented the
collection of the older desiderata in a manner at least as scientific as
might have been done under former excavation techniques. In other
words, we still recovered the tools and their vertical context.

ACTIVITY ANALYSIS

~3

If we were operating under the older methods, we would have
concluded that this concentration was a component of the Carrollton
focus of the Trinity aspect. Such a classification implies no specific
ethnic, temporal, geographical or behavioral characteristics, only the
presence of certain tools.
Instead, we are able to report that this small area is evidence of cultural behavior and that it may or may not be affiliated with other
activity areas at the site. We shall not be able to report on the whole
site until a number of the concentrations have been treated with equal
care. We may, beyond a reasonable doubt, conclude that this concentration is the remaining material evidence of definable activities. We
may also conclude that certain things did not take place within this
concentration of flaked stone.
~Te tested for the existence of a base camp, kill site, quarry, gathering camp and ceremonial site. None of these could be supported by
the evidence because the artifacts and site structure did not fit our
models.
Our inferences about the structure and artifact residue of a hunting
eanip were tested and we believe that we can demonstrate that activity
beyond any reasonable doubt. The people who were responsible for
the litter of this concentration abandoned several broken projectile
points that appear to have been hunting casualties. They worked at
producing a number of chipped stone tools, and we can identify many
of these as bifaces. Several of the attempts failed and these’incomplete specimens were left alongside the waste flakes of the work.
There may have been two persons present, but the number is not
absolutely demonstrable. At least, the scattering of chipping debris
and the matching bifaces appeared to form two distinct sub-areas of
the concentration. Figure 5 illustrates the position of broken points,
incomplete bifaees and bifaee thinning flakes. The format of this report
does not permit the illustration of all mapped debris because of size
reduction of figures. Color coded maps of debris suggest the presence
of two men.
There was one other activity carried on at the site, and this involved
the burning of a considerable amount of rock. VVe had no preparation
for finding scattered, burned rocks throughout the concentration unless
it involved site deflation. Matching of chips to partially finished tools
proved that deflation had not occurred. The burned rock was quartzite
so we believe that the people were not engaged in heat treating flint.
Thus, we could only rationalize that the scattering of fire-burned rock
was the result of opening an earth oven. This explanation is not satis-

34

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

0
X

X.

X

X

0

xX

o
Ox

I

x

o

x

-0

o

0

x
o

x

o
e

e

o

o

x
o

0

X
x

X
x

,~N
X

point
incomplete biface
biface thinning flake

®
o
x

X

FIGURE 5. Scatter pattern of certain artifacts.

factmT because it is untested, and not part of the model.
We believe that the experiment is reasonably successful and that
activities often can be pinpointed. It is necessary, in most eases, to
involve the technology of manufacturing processes in order to achieve
some degree of reliability. Debris from certain kinds of work may be
the only clues to that activity that are left at a site.
Site structure can be studied to a more intimate degree than just the

ACTIVITY ANALYSIS

35

relative positions of architecture, tools and featm’es. While it is time
consuming, there will be circumstances where the archaeologist must
work with debris and scatter patterns or else recover no usable information from the site. There are also circumstances where the precise
position of each item of debris determines the presence or absence of
disturbance. Scatter patterns can also prove that certain tools were
made at the site and identify the nature of certain activities.
Southern Methodist University
BIBLIOCIIAPHY
Collier, D., A. Hudson and A. Ford
1942

"’ArchaeologT of the Upper Colmnbia Region." University of "~Vashington
Publicatio~i in Anthropology, Vol. 9, No. 1.
Crabtree, Don E.
1966 "’A Stone Workers Approach to Analyzing and Replicating the Lindenmier Folsom." TEBIWA, The Journal of the Idaho State Museum, Vol.
9, No, 1.
Crook, ~7. W. and R. K. Harris
1955

"Scottsbluff Points in the Obshner Site Near Dallas, Texas". Bulletit~ of
the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, Abilene, Texas.
Preston, Nolan E.
1969

"The McCann Site". Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society", Vol.
40, Dallas, Texas.
Sollberger, J. B.
1968 "A Partial Report on Research Work Concerning Lithie Typology and
Teehnology". Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society, Vol. 39,
Dallas, Texas.

