A Suggested Developmental Sequence for
House Forms in the Caddoan Area
EDWIN N. WILMSEN

Introduction
EUROPEAN EXPLORERS of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth
centuries who visited the Caddoan area of northeastern Texas and adjacent Louisiana and Arkansas reported that the Indians whom they
found there were living in large houses made of poles and grass.
Joutel (1879, 1906) describes the structure and Espinosa (in Swanton, 1942) the construction of such houses.
Most reports on Cad&an archeology are justifiably vague in discussing houses beyond describing post mold patterns. The implication
is that construction methods of the early historic period extend into
the prehistoric period for some unspecified time. There is little speculation as to what went before. However, a close study of the available
material indicates that the Caddoan house of historic time is but a
late manifestation of a house type with a long and complex history
and that its sources must be sought outside the Caddoan area--indeed,
at great distances from that area.

Historical Evidence
The earliest historical reference we have in which houses are mentioned is l~anjel’s diary of the De Soto expedition. His description of
the attack on a village of the Province of Tula in southern Arkansas
includes this statement: "they [the Indians] climbed on top of the
houses, where they tried to defend themselves with arrows; and when
driven from some would climb on top of others" (in Swanton, 1942:
29). This was in 1541. In 1687 Douay (Shea, 1852: 204) and JouteI
(1879: 345), both of whom entered the Cad&an area with La Sa!le,
describe the houses they saw there as fine, large, round cabins in the
shape of beehives or haystacks, some of which reached sixty feet in_

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

diameter and fifty feet in height. These houses were built of poles set
into the ground around the circumference of the house, bent and
joined together at the top, and covered with a thatch of long coarse
grass. Subsequent writers describe similar houses: Theran (Bolton,
1915), Espinosa (Hatcher, 1927a) and M6zi~res (Bolton, 1914).
A comparison of Ranjel’s statement with the descriptions of those
who followed him seems to suggest some interesting developments in
the houses of the area during the one hundred and fifty intervening
years. If De Soto’s victims defended themselves from their housetops, it
seems highly unlikely that these houses were of the high conical type
reported by Joutel and others. Such houses could not permit rapid
ascent and at best would leave but one arm free for the manipulation
of bow-and-arrow, a feat (if performable) requiring wondrous dexterity and probably slow--not suited to the hot defense of life and
home. This suggests that at least some houses in the Caddoan area
were. when Ranjel wrote, lower, with less steeply pitched roofs than
were the majority of houses at La Salle’s time and after. I believe these
houses had rather low vertical walls and pitched pole roof structures
which may have taken the form of a low dome. Thatch may already
have been employed as covering from ground to top. Some of the
houses may have been rectangular, but most were probably round.

drcheological Evidence
The archaeological evidence for such a change is virtually nonexistant, primarily because little work has been done on this particular
problem. But there is some reason to suspect that something of the sort
occurred; indeed, the archeological record for the prehistoric period
is quite clear: successive changes in house types took place over a long
period of time. How and why these changes took place is not so clear.
Krieger (Newell and Krieger, 1949) noted such changes at the Davis
Site and C. H. Webb (1959) anticipated some of my own ideas in his
excellent coverage of the houses found at Belcher Mound. In order to
attempt a fuller understanding of the problem, I think it necessary to
summarize what is known about some of the houses found in the Mississippi drainage basin and to try to find some interrelationships among
them. This will be done by known cultural units as defined by archaeological evidence in temporal sequence from earliest to latest.
Not a great deal is known about the building practices of the
Tchefuncte culture of the Lower Mississippi Valley. The best evidence
~:omes from the Lafayette Mounds, St. Martin’s Parish, Louisiana

.37

CADDOAiN HOUSE FORMS

o

°

@

@

G

Q

@

(P

0

o

D

0
Q

t)

@
g
o
Q
0
o
o

D

,o

o
D
g

o
o

Half Section

0

g

¯

Half Elevation

Fig. 1. Earliest Caddoan area house form, through Gibson Phase 1. Figs. 1--4 drawn
to same scale.

38

TEXA.S AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Ford and Quimby, 1945). These mounds were built in two superimposed stages over a group of houses which had previously occupied
the site. The only remains of these houses were slight depressions in
the submound surface, apparently dug to reach a clay layer, and post
molds, some of which suggested circular patterns. At the time of publication, Ford and Quimby placed the Tchefuncte culture at a date
possibly earlier than Adena. Whether or not they hold the same view
in light of the revised Adena chronology brought about by radiocarbon
dating is not known to me, but Tchefuncte is certainly very early in
the Lower Mississippi area.
By contrast, the work of W. S. Webb and his associates has given
us a clear picture of Adena houses, at least with respect to the ground
plan of these houses. This information is summarized as follows
(Webb and Baby, 1957: 112) :
Early Adena circular pattern with vertical posts fairly equa!ly
spaced
Middle Adena circular pattern, probably beginning of paired posts,
outward sloping
Late Adena circular pattern with posts set in pairs, outward sloping

At the Dominion Land Company Site houses were found under
mounds with upright wall posts set singly and with outward sloping
singly set posts. The authors consider the former the earliest known
Adena House (ibid.). In another report (Webb and Snow, 1945), rectangular houses with paired posts are noted. These are not placed in
time, but according to the above outline, there is some reason to place
them in the latter half of Adena history. Nearly al! of these houses
have floor diameters within a range of forty to sixty feet, and. with
few exceptions, the post molds are within an inch of six inches in
diameter. The later houses all had four posts forming a square in the
center; these are not mentioned in the earlier houses.
Turning now to the Gibson Aspect, we find that all but one of the
houses of the first phase at the Davis Site (Cherokee County, Texas)
were round; the aberrant house was oval in plan (Newell and Krieger,
1949). These houses are twenty-one to fifty feet in diameter, with
most post molds falling within a range of four to seven inches. The
later phase 2 houses are almost all square or rounded square, ranging
in size from 24 by 24 to 37 by 37 feet with three- to five-inch post
molds. No centerpost holes were found in fifteen of the twenty-six
first phase houses; all phase 2 houses had centerposts except House
35 which seems to have been a very specialized structure.

CADDOA:N HOUSE

FORMS

~9

%
e

!
Entrance
$

1

!

#@oD@@@$ o@d"$°~

Half Section

Half Elevation

Fig. 2. Caddoan area house form, Gibson Phase 2.

Houses at Spiro, Oklahoma, may be summarized as follows (Orr,
1946) :
Early Component--square with four centerposts
Middle Component--rectangular with four centerposts
Late Component--rectangular with two centerposts

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Belcher Mound presents an interesting sequence (C. H. Webb,
1959). Of the two houses attributed to the Belcher I period, one was
rounded-rectangular with four- to six-inch posts set in trenches and
had an extended entranceway; the other was small, circular without
post trenches. Webb places this period in the late Gibson Aspect. Belcher II houses were small, circular, with three- to five-inch posts set
individually. Belcher III, which Webb states may conceivably have
existed until 1650, had circular houses thirty to forty feet in diameter
with seven- to eight-inch posts, large center post molds and extended
entranceways.

Analysis o] Evidence
Unfortunately, not all site reports give as much information on the
house forms found as do the Davis, Belcher, and Adena reports; many,
in fact, are so vague in this respect that they could not be used in this
paper. However, certain patterns can be discerned in what has been
presented above. Most obvious, perhaps, is the fact that all of the earliest houses (Tchefuncte, Early Adena, Gibson Phase 1 ) are circular in
plan with diameters close to thirty feet. They are found under mounds.
Associated post molds are set vertically, are six inches or less in diameter, and there is no apparent relationship between size of house
and size of post. Indeed, some of the largest houses have the smallest
post molds. C. H. Webb (1959: 61) has made a similar observation:
"South and west of the Red River, the earliest structures in the Gibson
period, represented by premound patterns at Davis, Hatchel, and Keith
sites, were circular, usually large, without projecting entranceway or
organized roof supports .... Centerposts were used at times .... "
Rectangular houses appear later at Adena and Gibson sites. Spiro,
which began in mid-Gibson times, apparently had this form from its
beginning, with occasional intrusions of round forms very similar to
those at Davis site. Centerposts of the Adena type appear at Spiro in
the early phases but by Late Component times this pattern had been
abandoned. Only two centerposts were used in this period.
It appears that the rectangular form was never adopted with enthusiasm below the Red River. This form never appears at some sites
in this area, and at others is more often than not only partially a rectangular form in that the corners are usually rounded. House plan
forms became round again in the Fulton Aspect, but the extended
entranceway which had accompanied the rectangular intrusion into
the area was retained, only to fade away after Belcher III-IV. Fulton

CADDOAN HOUSE FORMS

41

¢B

Q

@
o

e

G.P.
eBtoo~
e
0
D

Half Section

Half Elevation

Fig. 3. Caddoan area house form, Fulton Aspect.

42

TEXA~ ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

circular houses were usually smaller than earlier houses of this form,
but post sizes apparently remained fairly constant. Circular houses became quite large again in the Belcher III-IV period, and post sizes
apparently became significantly larger.
Historic references to houses in the Caddoan area give plan diameters up to sixty feet (Joutel, 1879) and heights of forty to fifty feet
(Douay: in Shea, 1852). These sources are perhaps not entirely accurate, yet they suggest quite large structures. No mention is made
of entranceways, other than doors, by any of the early writers.
It seems, therefore, that the following sequence obtained in the
Caddoan area and that this sequence was related to similar occurrences in other areas.
I. Earliest houses through Gibson Phase 1 (Fig. 1)
a) fairly large circular plan
b) uniformly small posts set vertically
c) centerpost sometimes present
d) no extended entranceway
II. Gibson Phase 2 (Fig. 2)
a) large rounded rectangular plan
b) usually small posts set vertically
c) centerpost usually present
d) extended entranceways
III. Fulton Aspect (Fig. 3)
a) small circular plan
b) uniformly small posts set vertically
c) centerpost present
d) extended entranceway
IV. Protohistoric-Historic (Fig. 4)
a) large circular plan
b) uniformly large posts set vertically
c) centerpost always present
d) extended entranceway present early, then disappears.
The exceptions to this are Spiro, in the northern part of the area being
considered, where rectangular forms are present throughout the occupation, and the southwestern section of Arkansas (Harrington. 1920),
where both forms seem to be present in about equal numbers. This
area is apparently a meeting ground for the two forms (Webb, 1959).
There is no need to suppose that the early houses were constructed
in the same manner as were those of historical reference. I think the
evidence I have presented gives good reason to believe that they were
not. Figure 5 illustrates the obviouslarger beehive structures require
longer poles than do smaller ones and, therefore, the lower part of the

43

CADDOA~- HOUSE FORMS

o

o

o

o

0

0

0

o

6’
0

0

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

)Centernost

0

0

o

0
0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0

Half Section

Fig.

4.

0

Half Elevation

Caddoan area house form, Protohistorlc-Historlc period.

TEXANS AtACHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tree trunks used (the part which leaves its mark as a post mold) in
larger houses must necessarily be in a size range which is generally
larger than that of smaller houses. Many structures of the early period
were of such size that, if the bent-pole construction of historic times
were used, trees forty to fifty feet tall would have to be used. The lower
trunk diameter of these trees would certainly exceed the less than sixinch diameter of post molds common to archaeological sites of this
period. I feel, therefore, that these early houses (Fig. 1) were constructed of vertical posts set into the ground and extending to a height
perhaps as little as four to five feet, or as great as ten feet above the
floor. These posts were secured by horizontal poles at their tops which,
in turn, supported a roof of poles leaned and lashed together to form
a pitched roof. Centerposts may have been used to support these roof
poles until they were securely interconnected. Roofs were probably
thatched and walls were probably wattle-and-daub. That no wall material of this type has been found with houses of this period offers no
serious objection to this hypothesis. Few early houses show evidence
of burning (therefore, no fired wall material can be expected) and
many floor areas were apparently carefully cleaned before the area
was reused.
Phase 2 houses (Fig. 2) were probably built the same way, except
that rectanguloid plans and extended entranceways were adopted.
The Fulton period saw a return to the circular pattern (Fig. 3), but
houses were frequently smaller than before. The building methods of
the previous periods were probably retained in some cases, but it is
likely that Caddoan bent-pole construction was used for the smaller
houses whose archaeological remains consistently include centerposts. Davis (1958: £8) suggests that the shallow depth of one postmold pattern atop the primary mound at the Whelan Site may indicate a type of construction different from Caddoan bent-pole. This
suggests the coexistence of vertical wall, pitched roof buildings and
bent-pole types and may indicate that the latter form was first used
for common, non-mound buildings. Theran’s map (Bolton, !915) of
a Cadodacho settlement near Texarkana in 1691 tends to support this.
The complete thatching of such a building could have been carried
over into all building forms during this period.
The Protohistoric-Historic phase probably saw the full development of Caddoan bent-pole construction (Fig. 4) described by the
early French and Spaniards. The large postmolds common to this
period (e.g., Belcher IV) suggest that this is so.

0

o

Diame~’er

of

House

(Feet)

30

40

50

60

Fig. 5. Relation of pole length to house height and diameter in Caddoan area houses.
Pole length is the height of tree required to supply the post for the house. Ten feet have
been added to the length actually needed to allow for unusable portions at top and bottom
of tree and for the two-to-three feet set into ground.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Relationship to Other Areas
I have previously shown that there appear to be some basic similarities in the house forms found in Tchefuncte, Early Adena, and Gibson Phase 1 sites. I feel that these similarities are not simply fortuitous
but, rather, that they indicate some sort of contact between these areas
at an early time and that this contact continued

perhaps with dif-

ferent centers of origin at least until protohistoric times. Phillips,
Ford, and Griffin (1951:451 ) state, in summarizing their findings in
the Mississippi Alluvial Valley, that they are "certain that the center
for development is not in the Survey Area at all. In fact, we are becoming increasingly doubtful that a single center for this development
exists anywhere." This can be extended to include the Caddoan area.
The question, then, is: what was the nature of this contact and from
whence came the house form ideas which it carried?
Griffin (ibid.) suggests that strong Meso-American influences were
felt in the Cahokia area through the Gibson Aspect in East Texas, bypassing the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley, and subsequently
diffusing down the Mississippi from Cahokia. There certainly seems
to be grounds for assuming Mexican influences in early Texas. MacNeish (1947) lists forty-two trait similarities between the Huasteca
an d Gibson Aspect. Ekholm (1944) and MacNeish (1954) have found
mounds in the Huasteca with suggestions of circular buildings similar
to those found in the earlier periods with which this paper is concerned. Ekholm suggests that these structures are the earliest round
forms in Mexico and that the trait diffused from that area. Both authors date these finds as contemporary with the Pre-Classic of the
Maya. Orr (1952: 249) is of the opinion that the Southern Cult material appears to be earlier in the Caddoan area than it is in the east.
It seems, then, that the possibility of the circular house form entering
Texas from the Huasteca and radiating into the Adena and Tchefuncte
areas is not too remote to be considered. The Gibson Aspect as now

known probably post-dates this early contact, but may be a part of its
later phases.
~vVilley (1955: 44) shows that some very interesting connections
between North. Meso, and South America existed from very early
times and suggests an interrelated rise of high cultures in Mexico and
Peru. with a major period of exchange beginning circa 800 B.C. It is
not entirely unreasonable to postulate a similar interrelationship between Mexico and the remarkably developed Adena culture at the
same time. or perhaps a bit later, and perhaps a part of the same move-

CADDOAN

47

HOUSE FORMS

ment. After all, the Adena people had corn, and that, if nothing else,
must have come from south of the United States.
Why this contact took place is beyond the scope of this paper to
establish, but some speculation might be useful here. Evangelism
does not seem to offer an answer; a group of teleconcerned priests
sitting in Mexico awaiting the excruciatingly slow news from Ohio
hardly seems likely. Military conquest seems unlikely; from the information we have there was nothing to conquer, and trade also seems
unlikely for the same reason. A migration of peoples seems to be the
best answer. It is perhaps worth considering that while such things
as pottery, corn, art forms, and tools can be spread by trade among
peoples without writing, a house must be built by someone familiar
with its construction.
The rectangular form undoubtedly stems from the north where it
is a very old established form. It is known from the earliest defined
Eskimo cultures of Alaska, and appears throughout the northern area.
Bennett (1952) describes the early houses of the northern Mississippi
Valley as mainly rectangular, made of wattle-and-daub, and bark.
The form may have diffused clown the Mississippi Valley until it met
the round form from Mexico. Bennett (1944: 21) describes the most
striking characteristic of the Lewis Culture located at the mouth of the
Ohio River as "a mingling of Southeastern and more typically Northern Cultures." Rectangular houses are attributed to this culture (Phillips, Ford, and Griffin, 1951: 445).
The sequence that emerges is this. A circular house form accompanies an early migration from Mexico to the Mississippi-Ohio Valley
region and becomes established as the dominant form. A rectangular
form enters the area from the north at a later date--probably also
carried by a migration of minor dimensions and exerts some influence, but becomes the dominant form in limited areas only (e.g.,
Spiro and later Middle Mississippi cultures). Over a period of time
these forms undergo local change and such forms as the Adena pairedpost outward slanting style and the Caddoan bent-pole style emerge.

Re]erences Cited
Bennett, John W.
1944. Archaeological Horizons in the Southern Illinois Region. American Antiquity, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 12-22.
1952. The Prehistory of the Northern Mississippi Valley. In: Griffin, 1952, pp.
108-123.

48

TEX2~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bolton, Herbert E.
1914.

Athanase

de

M~zi6res

and

the

Louisiana-Texas

Frontier,

1768-1780.

Cleveland.
1915.

Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. The University of California
Publications in History, Vol: 3.

Davis, E. Mott
1958.

The Whelan Site, A Late Caddoan Component in the Ferrell’s Bridge
Reservoir, Northeastern Texas. Report submitted to the National Park
Service. On file at Santa Fe, New Mexico, and Austin, Texas.

Ekholm, Gordon F.
1944.

Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca, Mexico. Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 38,
Part 5.

Ford, James A., and George I. Quimby, Jr.
1945.

The Tchefuncte Culture, An Early Occupation of the Lower Mississippi
Valley. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 2.

Griffin, James B.
1952.

Archaeology of Eastern United States. Chicago.

Harrington, M. R.
1920.

Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas. Indian Notes and Monographs, Museum
of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, No. 10.

Hatcher, Mattie Austin
1927.

Descriptions of the Tejas or Asinai Indians, 1691-1722. The Southwestern
Historical Quarterly, Vol. 31, pp. 150-180.

Joutel, Henri
1879.

Relation. In:

Margry, Pierre, Recherche des Bouches du Mississippi et

Voyage a Travers le Continent depuis les C6tes du Texas jusqu’a Quebec,
1669-98. Paris.
1906.

Journal of La Salle’s Last Voyage, 1684-87. Albany.

MacNeish, Richard S.
1947.

A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico. American An-

1954.

An Early Archaeological Site near Panuco, Vera Cruz. Transactions of

tiquity, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 1-15.
the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 44, Part 5.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949.

....

The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.

Orr, Kenn2th G.
1946.

The Archaeological Situation at Spiro Oklahoma: A Preliminary Report.
American Antiquity, Vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 228-256.

1952.

Survey of Caddoan Area Archeology. In: Griffin, 1952, pp. 239-255.

Phillips, Philip, James A. Ford, and James B. Griffin
1951.

Archaeological Survey in the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley, 19401947.

Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and

Ethnology, Harvard University, Vol. 25.

49

CADDOAN HOUS:E FORMS

Shea, John Gilmary
1852. Discovery and Exploration of the Mississippi. New York.
Swanton, John It.
1942. Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 132.
Vgebb, Clarence H.
1959.

The Belcher Mound: A Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 16.

IYebb, ~William S., and Raymond S. Baby
1957. The Adena People, No. 2. Columbus.
Webb, William S., and C. E. Snow
1945. The Adena People. University of Kentucky Reports in Anthropology
and Archaeology, Vol. ’6.
Willey, Gordon R.
1955. The Interrelated Rise of the Native Cultures of Middle and South America.
In: New Interpretations of Aboriginal American Culture History: 75th
Anniversary Volume, Anthropological Society of Washington, pp. 28-45.

University of Arizona
Tucson, Arizona

