185

Small Sites in Western Texas and
Southern New Mexico
Raymond Mauldin

ABSTRACT
Small sites are ubiquitous in western Texas and southern New Mexico. Because
of the low number of material culture items and the lack of diagnostic artifacts,
researchers seldom choose them for detailed study. This paper discusses the
results of recent projects that have focused on this under-studied site class. Data
from a variety of projects conducted on a portion of Fort Bliss Military Reservation suggest that features on small sites generally date between 3600 and 1050
B.P. The number of radiocarbon dated features, and by extension the number of
features, declines after 1350 B.P. While it is impossible to rule out erosion as a
contributing factor in this decline, the pattern may suggest a decline in use of the
study area for activities involving features. Other data document a continued use
of the study area after 1350 B.P. for non-feature related activities. These patterns, which are not discernible from a focus on larger sites, suggest a major
change in adaptive strategies.

INTRODUCTION
Small sites are ubiquitous in the semi-arid region of western Texas and
southern New Mexico. These sites contain few artifacts, seldom have temporally
diagnostics items, and only occasionally have more than one feature. Typically
they are less than 0.25 hectares in size, with most being less than 0.01 hectares.
The small number of artifacts present and the lack of temporally diagnostic
artifacts often leads researchers to argue that small sites are less significant than
sites that have larger artifact assemblages, more features, as well as diagnostic
artifacts. As a result, small sites are often assigned a low analytical priority, and
researchers rarely select these occupations for detailed recording, testing, or
excavation. Little is known about this class of site, although they frequently
comprise close to 90 percent of the sites identified on surveys in the region
(Carmichael 1986; Whalen 1977, 1978).
This paper discusses the results of several recent survey and excavation
projects that have focused on this small site class. Most of the data come from
projects conducted on Fort Bliss Military Reservation, a 4500 km2 training
facility located near E! Paso, Texas. Using intensive survey data, distributional
data on temporally diagnostic artifacts, over 100 radiocarbon dated features, and
numerous obsidian hydration dates, I argue that patterns in small site data suggest
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65 (1994)

186

Texas Archeological Society

significant changes in landuse strategies over time. The details of these changes
were not evident in the region where attention has previously focused on larger
sites thought to be more "significant."
In the Central Basin (Figure 1), a large expanse of mesquite stabilized
dunes, radiocarbon dates from features on small sites fall primarily between 3600
and 1050 B.P., revealing a substantial Late Archaic and Early Formative occupation in the region. From a peak at 1350 B.P., the number of dated features
declines slowly until 1050 B.P., when the rate of decline accelerates. By about
800 B.P., there are few radiocarbon dates from isolated features on the small sites
that dominate the Central Basin. These data suggest an abandonment of the
Central Basin for activities that involved features on small sites after 1050 B.P.
Yet, other data suggest that prehistoric populations continued to use the region
for non-feature activities well after 1050 B.P. (Mauldin et al. 1993).
This pattern of radiocarbon dates from small sites in the Central Basin is
distinct from the current, regional culture history sequence that suggests the
greatest occupational intensity occurs in the late Pithouse and Pueblo time frames
(post-800 B.P.). The regional culture history sequence is built on patterns detected in larger sites, and employs a framework that views sites as representing
packages of behavior that are characteristic of the norms of the entire culture
under study (see Lehmer 1948). In that perspective, large sites are deemed more
significant because they have a larger sample of artifacts that can be studied in
investigating past cultures. However, if prehistoric systems conducted disparate
activities in different areas at various times, then a site, or area within a site,
provides information on different aspects of past cultural systems. When viewed
in this perspective, the significance of an occupation must be judged not by the
absolute quantity of artifacts or features present, but by the role of that occupation in relationship to other sites, and within the overall adaptation. The data
presented here suggest that small sites may contain data which are not easily
gathered from larger occupations, data that reflect a significant component of
past cultural systems.

THESTUDY AREA
The study area is within the Mexican Highlands section of the Basin and
Range physiographic province (Hawley 1975). The Central Basin, an intermontane desert lowland that extends from central New Mexico, through far West
Texas, and into Northern Mexico, forms the primary landform in the study area.
Figure 1 outlines the region and provides relevant boundaries. Most of the
archeological data used here comes from Fort Bliss Military Reservation.
Presently, the region outlined in Figure 1 has warm to hot days, cool nights,
and low humidity. Temperatures range from a high monthly average of 35.2
degrees C in June to a low of 13.5 degrees C in January. The frost-free period,
from March through October, averages over 230 days a year.

Mauldin ~ Small sites in Western Texas and Southern New Mexico

187

?

Figure 1. The west Texas and southern New Mexico Study Area. Numbers within Fort
Bliss boundaries refer to survey projects identified in the text.

The mean annual rainfall is 20.1 cm, with more than half falling during the
months of July, August, and September (Bradley 1983; Reynolds 1956). Late
summer rainfall is often intensive and highly localized. These events saturate
soils and result in considerable runoff. On occasion, these summer thunderstorms
result in standing water in some of the playas that dot the region. The driest
months of the year are March, April, and May, with less than 3 cm of rain falling
during this period. As late spring and winter rainfall events are less intense then
those of the summer, substantial runoff does not result.

188

Texas Archeological Society

There is considerable year to year variability in rainfall, and potential evapotranspiration is high as a function of sparse vegetation and warm temperatures.
These factors result in a substantial water deficit throughout much of the year.
The major source of surface water in the region is the Rio Grande. Minor
sources of surface water in the area are present in springs in the mountains. As a
function of runoff from the mountain ranges, and the soil characteristics of the
lower alluvial fans, the mountain periphery has a higher probability of having
both standing water and higher soil moisture. The Central Basin lacks any major
water source.
As in most desert environments, soil moisture limits energy transfer within
the ecosystem. Soil moisture is a function of rainfall and runoff (Noy-Meir 1973;
Satterwhite and Ehlen 1980). So, while a variety of flora and fauna are available
in the region, the resource base is highly seasonal. Resources are primarily
available in the late spring, in the late summer, and the early fall:
The most plentiful plant food available for exploitation include mesquite,
yucca, sotol, agave, and annuals. Rabbits, rodents, deer, and antelope are the
principal animals. Many of these resources occur near the mountains. However,
mesquite, yucca, rabbits, and other rodents are present in the Central Basin in
some quantity.
We do not know the degree to which these modern environmental conditions replicate prehistoric conditions. Clearly, the environment has, since the
Middle Holocene, been characterized by desert shrub vegetation (Monger 1993;
Van Devender 1990; Van Devender and Spaulding 1979). There have, however,
been several major erosional events that suggest some level of climatic change
(Monger 1993). The most recent erosional event occurred in the late 1880s,
probably as a result of ranching activities. This appears to have resulted in a
higher density of mesquite in the area, and a decrease in grass cover (Buffington
and Herbel 1965; York and Dick-Peddie 1969).

PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH
The region has a relatively long, but spotty, history of archeological research (see Carmichael 1986). Lehmer (1948) produced the first major synthetic
report on the archeology of the region. He relied on his work at La Cueva, a rock
shelter in the Organ Mountains, Los Tules, a large pithouse site near Las Cruces,
New Mexico, and earlier studies of adobe Pueblos (e.g., Bradfield 1929) and
other rock shelters (Cosgrove 1947). Lehmer outlined a developmental sequence
for the area which he termed the Jornada. This sequence was tied to changes in
ceramics and architecture. He defined four major phases for the southern Jornada
area: a preceramic Hueco Phase (pre-A.D. 900), a brownware and pithouse
occupation (Mesilla Phase; A.D. 900-1100), a transitional Dona Ana Phase (A.D.
1100-1200), and the E1 Paso Phase (A.D. 1200-1450). The latter was marked by
adobe pueblo structures and E1 Paso Polychrome ceramics.

Mauldin ~ Small Sites in Western Texas and Southern New Mexico

189

Lehmer developed his sequence from excavations at large, dense,
occupations and was working under the culture history paradigm. Sites were seen
as representing the behavior in toto of prehistoric groups, and differences between
sites were seen as reflecting different degrees of influence exerted by other
groups. Like changes in space, changes in time were explained by reference to
differing degrees of influence. Thus, the development of the Dona Ana phase
from the Mesilla Phase, defined on the basis of new ceramic types, was "brought
about by contact with Anasazi groups to the north" along with borrowing from
the "Mimbres people already in the area" (Lehmer 1948:78). Although the
explanatory focus in the region has shifted away from a diffusionist position to
focus more on cultural ecological concerns, researchers still use Lehmer’ s culture
history sequence to describe the archeological remains of the area.
While there have been changes to th~ sequence since its publication, such as
the extension of the Mesilla phase back to A.D. 250, there was little reason to
doubt the veracity of the overall sequence before the mid-1970s. Excavations
between the 1940s and the mid-1970s continued to center primarily on pueblos
(e.g., Brook 1967), rockshelters (e.g., Human Systems Research 1973), and
larger pre-pueblo sites (e.g., Aten 1972). These sites fit easily into the basic
phase system outlined by Lehmer.
Yet, in the mid-1970s, as a result of cultural resource management legislation, Fort Bliss Military Reservation began to conduct a series of archeological
surveys of that portion of the post that the military uses for maneuvering (roughly
1500 km2). These surveys include Whalen’s (1977) work in Maneuver Area 1
(see Figure 1, Number 1) and 2 (Whalen 1978) (see Figure 1, Number 2), and
Carmichael’s (1986) survey of Maneuver Areas 3-8 (see Figure 1, Number 3). A
series of quadrant surveys have also been conducted on the northern portion of
the post (see Figure 1, Number 4) (Beckes et al. 1977). These surveys have
documented extensive cultural resources on Fort Bliss, many of which are small
occupations that do not fit well in Lehmer’s original framework.
Figure 2 documents the distribution of"small" sites as revealed by Whalen’s
Maneuver Area 1 and 2 surveys, and Carmichael’s Maneuver Area 3-8 survey.
These sites are less than 0.25 hectares in size, often lack any temporally diagnostic artifacts, and may have only one or two hearth features. Transect spacing
varied somewhat between the two projects, with the 1977 and 1978 surveys
using wider transect intervals (about 46 m) than the 1986 survey (33 m). This, in
conjunction with minor differences in the definition of what constitutes a site,
resulted in a much greater density of small sites in Carmichael’s (1986) survey.
Yet, Figure 2 clearly suggests that these early surveys recorded many small sites
that researchers could not easily fit into a temporal phase. Roughly 86 percent of
the nearly 10,000 sites recorded fell into this small site class.
The actual number of small sites in the maneuver areas, however, may be
substantially greater than even Figure 2 suggests. Figure 2 is based on wide
transect spacing that may underrepresent the actual number of small sites. Figure
3 presents data on the number of sites per km2 for the earlier surveys compared

190

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. The distribution of archeological sites that are less than 0.25 hectares in area
within the Fort Bliss maneuver area.

with several recent surveys conducted on Fort Bliss. All recent surveys used
transect spacings at 16 m or less. This is a dramatic reduction in crew member
spacing from the 46 and 33 m spacing used in the earlier inventory surveys. As
demonstrated in Figure 3, these recent surveys record substantially higher site
densities. In each case, site definitions are roughly comparable.
An overall average site density of 24/kin2 is noted for all three recent
surveys, and sites less than 0.25 hectares in size make up the majority of the
recorded sites. While concentrated in the southern portions of Fort Bliss, each
project covered a different topographic area. Yet all have roughly the same
density of small sites. An overall density of 15 to 20 small sites per km2 is not
unreasonable in the Central Basin setting. Based on this density range, the
Central Basin (see Figure 1) may contain close to 200,000 small sites.

Mauldin ~ Small Sites in Western Texas and Southern New Mexico

191

REFERENCES

PROJECTS

(Maulgln ~t al.
1993)

(Leach

18£~)

(O’Loughlin

~

LOOP

Marlin

~ ~ Ma 3-8
Ill
--4
i1"1
;:0

09
m
¢3
-t

o

-0

MA I

and

375
1989)

ili~ii!iiiii!iii!i!iiiiiii!i!iii!~iiiii!ii!i!i~
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

i :!i!;i:!i i!

(Whalen

1978)

(Whelen

197T)

g7
ra

HA 2

1o
28
NUMBER OF SITES PER SQURRE KM

30

Figure 3. The average number of sites within a km2 for six projects conducted on Fort
Bliss relative to their survey intensity.

When we combine these results with the possibility that many such
occupations are masked by reoccupation, collapsed into larger sites by erosional
processes, and obscured by deposition, the actual number of small sites is
probably much greater than even this substantial number. Whatever the true
number, it is safe to conclude that these types of occupations form a significant
component of the Fort Bliss archeological record.
The failure of these small sites to fit readily into the standard culture history
sequence has had several results. First, many researchers suggest that the extensive number of small sites represent limited activities or special purpose sites
generated from the larger "villages" (Whalen 1977, 1978) or "residential" sites
(Carmichael 1981). Others argue that small sites are the remains of a different
adaptive strategy focused on hunting and gathering in contrast to the more
sedentary agricultural sites (Carmichael 1985; Johnson and Upham 1988). Still
others argue that they represent a fluctuating settlement/subsistence strategy with
a highly mobile, hunting and gathering economic system dominating during
some periods, and a sedentary agricultural strategy dominating at other times
(Carmichael 1983). However, there were few attempts to develop ways to decide
between these alternatives, and almost no testing was conducted on any of these

192

Texas Archeological Society

small sites. As a result, almost nothing was known archeologically about these
occupations before the late 1980s.

SMALL SITE RESEARCH IN THE STUDY AREA
These small sites have been the focus of several recent projects. The bulk of
the archeological data used in this paper comes from recent efforts conducted on
Fort Bliss by the Cultural Resource Management Branch of the Directorate of
Environment.
Whalen (1980, 1986) conducted the first project to focus on small sites as a
group. He tested 79 "small camps" in the southern Central Basin. A second data
set used here comes from recent survey, testing, and excavation projects conducted in conjunction with the construction of a highway (Loop 375) through the
Military Installation. While several preliminary reports are available for the Loop
375 Project (see O’Laughlin et al. 1988; O’Laughlin and Martin 1989), no
synthetic volume has yet appeared. The third data set comes from a project
designed and conducted by Fort Bliss to generate additional archeological data
on small sites. This project (Fort Bliss Project 90-11) involved survey, surface
collection, testing, and excavation, primarily in a 3.5 km2 area in the southern
Central Basin. The work was recently completed, and a summary report is
available in draft form (Mauldin et al. 1993). This small site focus on Fort Bliss,
initiated by Whalen (1980), is ongoing. Fort Bliss is currently conducting testing
in the southeastern Central Basin near the Hueco Mountains (see Figure 1).
While no final report has been completed on this most recent effort (Fort Bliss
Project 91-07), preliminary summaries of the survey (Burgett and Leach 1993)
and aspects of the surface collection (Leach 1992) are available.
When seen in total, the data provided by these various projects suggest
several patterns regarding the role that small sites may have played in regional
landuse strategies. These patterns come from radiocarbon dates and distributional data on temporally diagnostic artifact types and obsidian hydration dates.

Occupational Patterns in Small Sites: The Radiocarbon Data
Using aspects of the projects discussed above, as well as other smaller
projects that have generated chronometric dates (e.g., Kauffman and Batcho
1988), 117 radiocarbon dated features are now available from small sites in the
Central Basin. These features are primarily small fire-cracked rock hearths,
hearth stains, and a few pit structures. Figure 4 presents a histogram of 114 of
these dated features. The three remaining dates all fal! before 5000 B.P. and are
not used in this paper.
The 114 feature dates come from over 140 individual radiocarbon assays.
All dates have been tree-ring calibrated (see Stuiver and Pearson 1986) and most

Mauldin w Small Sites in Western Texas and Southern New Mexico

F’~

HISTOR]C

EL

PRSO

PHRSE

MESILLR

PHRSE

LRTE

I~

193

RRCHRIC

n]OOLE

RRCHRIC

m

Y

E

R

R

S

BEFORE

PRESENT

Figure 4. The age distribution and phase assignments for 114 radiocarbon dated features
from the Central Basin. Intervals are 100 years.

have been corrected for different rates of carbon fractionation. Multiple dates
from the same feature were averaged when their standard deviations overlapped
at one sigma, and dates were eliminated which did not overlap, or had sigmas
larger than 100 years. The feature dates in Figure 4 are plotted using the midpoint
of the date range at two sigmas, and grouped at 100 year intervals.
The feature dates come from several projects located in different areas.
They come from sites located on the eastern and western edge of the Central
Basin, as well as. from sites in the middle of the Basin. The patterns revealed in
Figure 4, then, can be used as a measure of the timing of feature use on small
sites in the general area (see Wills 1988:58-69). The standard biases that can be
expected in a sample of dates, such as (1) a project specific focus on a given time
period or (2) a selection bias concerning which features to submit for dating, are
not significant in this sample. None of the projects focused on any single time
period, and most features with sufficient charcoal were dated. Thus, I suggest
that the data base in Figure 4 represents a reasonable sample of the underlying
population of feature production in the Fort Bliss area. While the number of dates
in specific intervals may change with new dates, these additions probably will
not significantly alter the overall temporal patterns.
An examination of Figure 4 shows that most features date within the Late
Archaic period as well as early in the Mesilla phase. There is a declining Late
Mesilla (1200-800 B.P.) occupation, and almost no E1 Paso Phase dates. This
pattern contrasts with that expected in the standard culture history framework,
which suggests that the post-800 B.P. period represents the most intensive use of
the region (Carmichael 1986; Whalen 1978). It seems that when our focus is on
larger occupations with temporally diagnostic artifacts, we fail to see the

194

Texas Archeological Society

substantial Late Archaic and Early Ceramic occupation suggested by the pattern
of feature use in the Central Basin.
The overall trend of dates in Figure 4 also suggests a fluctuating pattern of
feature use and production. There are periods when hearths are frequent, but
separated by periods when few or no features are produced. If we minimize the
smaller fluctuations, there is a general increase in the number of features between 3500-1350 B.P. After 1350 B.P. the number of feature dates then begins
to decline. This decline is rapid until 1050 B.P., after which almost no feature
dates are present in the Central Basin for these small site features. As with the
summation of the dates at a phase level, these patterns of fluctuation and the
apparent abandonment have not been considered, much less noted, in the standard culture history framework.
To further assess the date fluctuations seen in the Figure 4 sample from the
Central Basin, I compiled a region-wide sample of dated features (Figure 5).
These 471 dated features come from a variety of reports, and represent nearly
600 individual radiocarbon assays. Mauldin and Graves (1992a) provide a list of
individual dates and projects (see also Katz 1992). The-features come from all
environmental zones in the Jornada area. The Figure 5 sample also incorporates
the 114 features from the Central Basin used in Figure 4. As with the Figure 4
sample, all dates were corrected, dates with large sigmas were eliminated, and
multiple dates from a single feature were averaged when appropriate. Figure 5
plots the dates by the midpoint of the 2-sigma range. These are grouped at 150
year intervals rather than the 100 year intervals used previously (see Figure 4).
Unlike the chronological patterns seen in the Central Basin dates, the data
used in Figure 5 probably contains several project specific biases. The most
obvious of these is the generally low number of dates from the Pueblo Period
(post-750 B.P.). Pueblos have been the focus of many excavations, but these
have frequently been conducted by organizations such as the E1 Paso Archaeological Society that lack the financial resources to invest in radiocarbon dates.
Also, as the period is roughly 300 years in length, and as radiocarbon dates frequently have sigmas of + 100 years, radiocarbon dating has not been the method
of choice for the temporal placement of pueblos. The Figure 5 data come from
a variety of projects conducted by several researchers over the last 25 years and
the sample size is large. While acknowledging the potential biases, I use the
pattern of dates as a rough indication of the intensity of feature use and production as was done previously for Figure 4.
When considered as a group, the chronological patterns in Figure 5 suggest
that the greatest number of dates at the regional level, and by implication the
greatest number of features used and produced, is in the 900-750 B.P. range
(A.D. 1050-1200). The pattern revealed is a fluctuating but increasing frequency
of dates through time up to the 900 to 750 B.P. interval. As noted previously,
the rapid dropoff of dates late in time probably reflects a hesitancy to obtain
radiocarbon dates for pueblos rather than any real decline in occupation in the
region.

Mauldin m Small Sites in Western Texas and Southern New Mexico

Go

,

I

,

[

~

I

,

I

,

I

,

t

,

I

,

[

!95

Go

50

50

g
Clq

40

DATED

FROM

OUTSIDE

CENTRAL

C14
o

FROM

3O

;TI
70

FEATURES

~0

THE

o
.TI

BASIH

DRTEO

FERTURES

THE

CENTRAL

30

BASIN

o

t~
o
:27

20

2O

7D
-4

:x)

g

g
i"11
u~

z

10

10

~0

qso0
YERRS

BEFORE

m

to

0

PREBEHT

Figure 5. The age distribution of 471 radiocarbon dated features from the Jornada area.
Features within the Central Basin, used previously in Figure 4, are identified by dark
hatching. Intervals are 150 years.

Included in Figure 5 are those dates used previously in Figure 4 that come
from features associated with small sites in the Central Basin. These have a
dramaticallY different pattern than the regional sequence. While following, to
some degree, the regional pattern from 4500-1200 B.P., the production of features in the Central Basin begins a rapid decline after that time. This decline
occurs at the same time that the regional chronological pattern of feature use
mcreases.
Most of the features with dates in the 1200-1050 B.P. interval in Figure 5
are located along the alluvial fans and near the river (see Leach 1993; Mauldin
and Graves 1992b) rather than in the Central Basin. In the 900-750 B.P. interval, while there are over 50 dated features in the region, there are only four
Central Basin dates (see Figure 5). The decline in feature dates in the Central
Basin, initiated at around 1350 B.P., is continuous. After about 750 B.P., feature dates are virtually nonexistent in this area. This pattern is distinct from the
regional pattern, especially if it is recalled that the regional series probably
underrepresents the later time periods.

196

Texas Archeological Society
Occupation Patterns in Small Sites
Obsidian Hydration and Artifact Data

When examined both in isolation (see Figure 4) and in comparison to the
regional dates (see Figure 5), the chronological pattern of feature use suggests
that populations increasingly avoided the Central Basin after about 1200-1350
B.P., with an apparent abandonment during the late Mesilla and through the E1
Paso phases. The generation of features associated with small sites, then, reveals
a pattern not seen in the regional radiocarbon dates, a data set dominated by
features from larger sites. These small site feature dates produce a pattern not
expected by traditional models of regional cultural development.
Radiocarbon dates are our best temporal indicator of occupation, but they
are not the only source of dating available in the Jornada. When we consider
these additional sources, such as obsidian hydration dates and temporally
diagnostic projectile point types, the pattern of use and abandonment of the
Central Basin, seen in the radiocarbon dates, is not confirmed. These other dating
methods suggest that prehistoric populations did not abandon the Central Basin
after 1050 B.P. as indicated by the radiocarbon dates, but continued to use the
area throughout the sequence. If both data sets are accurate, these non-feature
data suggest that rather than an abandonment of the Central Basin, the type of use
may have changed. That is, the different dating techniques may be tracking
different aspects of behavior, one associated with features and another associated
with non-feature related activities.
Obsidian hydration dates form the primary non-radiocarbon data set used to
examine occupation patterns in both the region and the Central Basin. Obsidian
hydration dating in the region has a long and tattered history (see Miller 1990). A
variety of obsidian sources are present in the area, but no independently established hydration rate is available for these sources. The obsidian hydration rates
used in the region were developed using source specific experimentally induced
hydration methods (see Michels et al. 1983). While such an approach has proven
successful elsewhere (Lynch and Stevenson 1992), the results in the E1 Paso area
are difficult to interpret.
The hydration rate used for the obsidian in this study comes from a regression analysis using a small number of rim measurements on obsidian artifacts
which were recovered in association with radiocarbon dates (Mauldin et al.
1993), rather than the induced hydration method. Only eight samples, located
throughout the region, were used to develop the regression-based hydration rate.
These eight samples were selected from a larger data set by performing a series
of regressions and eliminating extreme outliers until no significant outliers remained. The resulting equation has a high coefficient of variation (.98) and there
are no extreme outtiers.
Despite the relatively good fit of the regression, the rates derived from this
procedure should be viewed with caution. The development of a hydration rim

Mauldin ~ Small Sites in Western Texas and Southern New Mexico

197

m

r-

~696

~599

~299

3989

3698

3300

3000

2?00

YEnRS

2~99

BEFORE

2190

16OO

1590

~09

909

600

360

PRESENT

Figure 6. The percentage of obsidian hydration dates (n=316) and radiocarbon dated
features (n=471) in the Jornada area. Intervals are 150 years.
on a given obsidian artifact is a complex process, dependent on the chemical
composition of a specific obsidian source, the inherent water content in a given
specimen, and the temperature and relative humidity that the artifact was exposed to after its production (Stevenson and McCurry !990; Stevenson, 1991
personal communication)2 Given the unknown Pattern of deposition and exposure of an individual piece inthe study area, and the substantial effect that
exposure has on temperature and relative humidity, the regression rim rate
should be viewed only as an estimate of chronology, subject to revision as
additional obsidian samples with associated radiocarbon dates become available.
In spite of the inherent problems associated with obsidian hydration in the
region, and the small number of radiocarbon dated obsidian rims, the regressionderived rate of hydration used here is thought to provide reasonable estimates of
time. This optimism is justified by Figure 6 which contrasts the regional radiocarbon dates with 316 obsidian dates. The obsidian dates are calibrated using the
regression-derived hydration rate mentioned above. Rim measurements come
from throughout the region, and all rims were read by Dr. Chris Stevenson of
Diffusion Labs. Only a single source of obsidian (Rio Grande Group 2) is used in
this analysis (see Stevenson and McCurry 1990) to minimize the impact of
chemical differences in the obsidian source as such.
The obsidian and radiocarbon date patterns in Figure 6 differ in that the
peak in the obsidian hydration dates is approximately 300 years earlier then the
peak in radiocarbon dates. This gap may be influenced, in part, by the "old

198

Texas Archeological Society

wood" problem (Schiffer 1987:308-321), but it is unlikely to account for all of
the temporal differences (see Mauldin et al. 1993). Despite the 300 year gap, the
regional radiocarbon and obsidian hydration curves have a similar shape, suggesting that the obsidian dates derived from the regression equation may provide
an approximation of the "true" obsidian date. While this is not too surprising
given that the obsidian regression is built on radiocarbon dates, recall that only
eight dates were used in the regression analysis.
Figure 7 provides a comparison of 143 obsidian dates with radiocarbon
dates of 61 features from the Central Basin. The obsidian dates and the radiocarbon dates are from Fort Bliss Project 90-11 (Mauldin et al. 1993). Because of the
smaller number of both obsidian and radiocarbon dates available, Figure 7
groups dates at 200 year intervals. Here, the two curves differ significantly. The
peak in obsidian dates occurs several hundred years later than the peak in
radiocarbon dates, a pattern different from the regional comparison where the
obsidian peak was earlier than the radiocarbon peak (see Figure 6).

ORTE

7:

S
LI809

4q90

"f 880

¥

369B

E

R

R

3~B0

S

2B08

2~8

BEFORE

2886

ISBI~

t2B8

886

’40B

RROIDCRRBOH
DRTES

OH

FERTURES

9

PRESENT

Figure 7. The percentage of obsidian hydration dates (n=143) and radiocarbon dated
features (n=61) from Fort Bliss project 90-11, conducted in the Central Basin (Mauldin et
al. 1993). Intervals are 200 years.

The Central Basin date pattern in Figure 7 suggests that the feature dates
and the obsidian dates may reflect different aspects of behavior. Radiocarbon
dates are necessarily limited to features, while obsidian dates are associated with
the production of lithic tools that may or may not have been discarded around
features. These two activity sets, although they may show some co-association,
are not necessarily related. That is, there is no necessary relationship between
feature dates and the production of obsidian projectile points and debitage. The
two patterns could well be telling us about the frequency of different types of

Mauldin w Small Sites in Western Texas and Southern New Mexico

199

activities: those that involve the use of features and those that involve the use of
lithics without an association with features.
Of course, the regression-derived dates on obsidian may be incorrect. Even
though they have some relationship with the radiocarbon curve at a regional
level, this may be fortuitous. Yet, if the two different dating techniques identify
different aspects of behavior, the patterns may provide evidence for a shift in the
way that prehistoric populations used the Central Basin. Early on, activities that
involve the production of features are common. These activities begin to drop out
after 1050 B.P., but populations do not abandon the Central Basin. After this
time, activities that minimally involve the deposition of obsidian artifacts, and
that probably also involve the deposition of artifacts made from other materials,
become increasingly common.
Additional support for this late, non-feature use comes from the distribution
of diagnostic projectile points. Project 90-11 recovered 30 diagnostic projectile
points (Mauldin et al. 1993). While the total sample size is small, six of these (20
percent) probably date after 800 B.P. This percentage of late points is similar to
the percentage of post-800 B.P. obsidian dates from the same project (17 percent), but radically different from the percentage of radiocarbon dated features in
this time b!ock; only 3 percent of the radiocarbon dated features fall after 800
B.P. Both the obsidian dates and the percentage of diagnostic points, then,
suggest a later use of the Central Basin that does not seem to involve the
production of features.
Several researchers, starting with Whalen (1977, 1978, 1980), have suggested that settlement patterns also change between the Mesilla and E1 Paso
phases. Mesilla sites are located throughout the region, while E1 Paso phase sites
are concentrated near the Rio Grande and along the alluvial fans. This is essentially the same pattern identified here, with a shift in sites out of the Central
Basin. However, the radiocarbon and obsidian dates indicate that this shift began
several hundred years before the close of the Mesilla Phase at 800 B.P., and that
the Central Basin was still used after the close of the Mesilla Phase, but in a
different manner. Settlement pattern data also document the presence of E1 Paso
phase ceramics in the Basin, but in much lower frequencies relative to the
alluvial fan settings. Again, a low frequency of E1 Paso phase ceramics is
consistent with the projectile point and hydration data. That is, these patterns
suggest that there was not an abandonment at 800 B.P., but a change in the way
the Central Basin was used at that date.

DISCUSSION
This shift from feature-centered activities to non-feature centered activities
may represent a significant change in the way that populations used the region.
Prior to 1350 B.P., much of the archeological record in the Central Basin is
associated with the use of features. Between about 1350-1050 B.P., the number

200

Texas Archeological Society

of features in this data set declines, while the number of obsidian dates increases.
After 1050 B.P., obsidian dates dominate the chronological record, but few
features are present. We have, then, evidence for a fundamental change in the
way that populations used the Central Basin, with a shift away from featurecentered activities to a more extensive landuse strategy.
It is possible, of course, that the patterns of declining feature dates are
unrelated to human behavior. As noted previously, the region has been subjected
to a series of erosional events, the most recent of which is probably associated
with the introduction of cattle in the late 1880s. This most recent event could
have destroyed many of the recent features, thus accounting for the decline in
dates seen in Figures 4 and 5. However, the data used here are from a variety of
projects conducted in several different geomorphic settings, and the patterns are
quite consistent with settlement pattern changes identified by other researchers
at a regional level. While, given our current data, it is impossible to rule out
historic period erosion as a contributing factor in the patterns of declining feature dates, it is unlikely to be the determining factor in the observed chronological patterns.
If these changes are the result of prehistoric behavior rather than erosional
processes, a variety of scenarios can be envisioned to account for this shift in
landuse. The critical point for this discussion is that the timing of the shift, and
the change in the nature of the adaptation, is not discernible by a focus on the
larger sites. Both the substantial nature of the Late Archaic and Early Ceramic
occupations, and the shift in landuse strategies between 1350-1050 B.P., is not
identified by reliance on traditional culture historical periods or by a focus on
large sites (see Carmichael 1990; Upham 1984 for additional perspectives on
this issue). Small sites account for the vast majority of occupations in the region. If additional work on these occupations continues to reveal a substantial
Late Archaic/Early Ceramic occupation, and confirms the changes seen here,
then the archeological record of the Jornada must be seen as dramatically different from that suggested by the traditional culture history framework.
Sites in the Jornada have traditionally been viewed as representing discrete
packages of behavior that are characteristic of the entire cultural system under
study. In that perspective, sites with large quantities of artifacts, features, and
structures are thought to be more significant than small sites because they have
a larger sample of items that can be studied in investigating past cultural patterns.
Such a position is internally consistent if a culture, and the archeological record
it produced, is viewed as an undifferentiated whole. However, if sites, and areas
within sites, are viewed as representing different aspects of a cultural system,
then the significance of any given assemblage changes. As prehistoric systems
conducted different activities in different areas at various times, the significance
of any single occupation must be judged in relationship to other sites, rather
than by reference to the absolute quantity of recovered remains. Sites, and areas
within sites, thus provide glimpses into different components of the system, and
their relevance must be evaluated by their relationship to that systemic whole.

Mauldin ~ Small Sites in Western Texas and Southern New Mexico

201

When viewed in the traditional perspective, small sites have been considered
less significant than their larger counterparts. However, when viewed in a
systemic perspective, small sites provide data that may be completely unavailable
in their larger counterparts. In the Jornada, these small site data show dramatic
changes in landuse over time that have not been revealed by the exclusive focus
on larger occupations.

SUMMARY
Small sites are the most commonly represented class of sites in the Jornada.
Yet they are the least understood. They appear to be especially common in the
Central Basin, though I suspect that they are frequent throughout the area but
have often been masked by later deposits (Linse 1993:20-26). They do not fit
into the standard culture history sequence. That sequence is built on larger sites
and rockshelter excavations. Under the culture history framework, research priority is based on the assumption that artifact quantity or uniqueness defines
significance. Here, I have attempted to place small sites in a larger systemic
framework. Radiocarbon dates on these sites suggest a substantial Late Archaic/
Early Mesilla phase occupation that the traditional culture history framework has
not identified. On Fort Bliss, the difference in the relative frequency of feature
dates on small sites seems to show that populations gradually abandoned the
basin for activities that generated features. This abandonment started around
1350 B.P. and was all but complete by about 1050 B.P. Obsidian dates, diagnostic projectile points, and the distribution of ceramics, do suggest that people still
used the basin after 1050 B.P., but used it in a different manner. While it is
impossible to rule out erosional processes as accounting for the lack of feature
dates late in the sequence, taken as a whole these changes may suggest a
dramatic shift in landuse strategies.
The sites discussed here are not pretty. They often have only a few artifacts,
no painted pottery, no recognizable architecture, and few formal tools.
Frequently, these sites are ignored in favor of more substantial sites, which, as
a function of their size, are traditionally considered to have greater significance.
The patterns identified in this paper suggest that these small occupations are a
significant component of past adaptive systems. In fact, if the chronometric
patterns identified in this paper are confirmed by additional research, the vast
majority of these sites are Late Archaic and Early Ceramic in age. To ignore
them, then, is to ignore over 3000 years of regional prehistory. While any given
small site may provide little data, when we consider small sites as a group, they
begin to form patterns that have behavioral significance. More critically, they
provide data that are either unavailable at large sites, or are masked by larger
occupations. If sites continue to be viewed as representative of the typical
behavior of a given group, rather than as differentially informative about
variability in that group, the focus on large sites to the exclusion of their smaller

202

Texas Archeological Society

counterparts will continue. This exclusion, in turn, will assure that significant
aspects of the adaptations that we strive to document and explain will be missed.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Tim Graves, who helped in compiling much of the literature on
radiocarbon dates from the area. A number of people have read and commented
on a previous draft of this paper. They include Angela Linse, Jeff Leach, Galen
Burgett, Myles Miller, Carlos Caraveo, Glen DeGarmo, and Jack Hedrick. Special thanks to Tim Perttula, David Carmichael, and Neal Ackerly for their insightful comments on the initial draft. Also, Susana and Paul Katz, Jeff Leach,
Galen Burgett, Angela Linse, Myles Miller, and Carlos Caraveo provided useful
discussions on a number of points.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1972

Evaluation of the Cultural Resources of the Northgate Site, El Paso County,
Texas. Research Report Number 5. Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
University of Texas, Austin.

Beckes, M., D. S. Dibble, and M. D. Freeman
1977
A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of McGregor Guided Missile
Range: Otero County, New Mexico. Part 1. Research Report No. 65. Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bradfield, W.
1929

Excavations in the Sacramentos. El Palacio 28:3-6.

Bradley, R. J. E.
1983

La Cabrana: A Study of Fourteenth Century Resource Utilization in Southern
New Mexico. Unpublished M. A. Thesis, The University of Texas at E1 Paso,
El Paso.

Brook, V.
1967

Adobe Steps of the E1 Paso Phase. The Artifact 4:1-5.

Buffington, L. C. and C. H. Herbel
1965

Vegetational Changes in a semi-desert grassland range from 1858 to 1963.
Ecological Monographs 35:139-164.

Mauldin m Small Sites in Western Texas and Southern New Mexico

203

Burgett, G. and J. Leach
1993

Survey Results from the Hueco Mountain Archeological Project (Project 9107). Ms. on file, Archaeology Branch, Directorate of the Environment, Fort
Bliss, Texas.

Carmichael, D. L.
1981

Non-Residential Occupation of the Prehistoric Southern Tularosa Basin, New
Mexico. The Artifact 19(3&4):51-68.

1983

Archeological Settlement Patterns in the Southern Tularosa Basin, New
Mexico: Alternative Models of Prehistoric Adaptations. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, University of Illinois, Urbana.

1985

Archeological Excavations at Two Prehistoric Campsites Near Keystone
Dam, El Paso, Texas. University Museum Occasional Papers No. 14. New
Mexico State University, Las Cruces.

t986

Archeological Survey in the Southern Tularosa Basin of New Mexico. Historic and Natural Resources Report No. 3. Environmental Management Ofrice, Directorate of Engineering and Housing, U.S. Army Air Defense Artillery Center, Fort Bliss, Texas.

1990

Patterns of Residential Mobility and Sedentism in the Jornada Mogollon
Area. In: Perspectives on Southwestern Prehistory, edited by P. E. Minnis
and C. L. Redman, pp. 122-134. Westview Press, Boulder.

Cosgrove, C. B.
1947

Caves of the Upper Gila and Hueco Areas in New Mexico and Texas. Papers
of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology 24(2): 1-181. Harvard
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Hawley, J. W.
1975

Quaternary History of Dona Ana County Region, South-Central New Mexico.
New Mexico Geological Society, Guidebook 20th Field Conference, pp. 139150. New Mexico Geological Society, Socorro, New Mexico.

Human Systems Research
Technical Manual: 1973 Survey of the Tularosa Basin. Human Systems
1973
Research, Tularosa, New Mexico.
Johnson, M. and S. Upham
!988

Approaches To Adaptive Diversity: A Preliminary Report On Archeological
Investigations In The Organ Mountains, Southern New Mexico. In: Fourth
Jornada Mogollon Conference (Oct. 1985) Collected Papers, edited by M. S.
Duran and K. W. Laumbach, pp. 65-92. Human Systems Research, Inc.,
Tularosa, New Mexico.

Katz, S.
1992

Chronometric and Relative Chronological Study, Phase 1, for Fort Bliss,
Texas (Project 90-28). Human Systems Research, Las Cruces, New Mexico.

204

Texas Archeological Society

Kauffman, B. and D. Batcho
1988

Final Report Of Archeological bzvestigations Along El Paso Electric
Company’s 345 KV Caliente-Newman-Amrad Transmission System On Fort
Bliss, Texas. Cultural Resources Report Number 40, Batcho & Kauffman
Associates, and Historic and Natural Resources Report Number 4. Directorate of Engineering and Housing, Environmental Management Office, Fort
Bliss, Texas.

Leach, J. D.
1992

Archaeological Investigations in the Eastern Hueco Bolson: Preliminary Findings from the Hueco Mountain Archaeological Project. Paper presented at the
7th Mogollon Conference, Las Cruces, New Mexico.

1993

Hot Rocks in the Sand. Paper presented at the 8th Joruada Conference,
Tularosa, New Mexico.

Lehmer, D. J.
The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. Social Science Bulletin 17. University

1948

of Arizona, Tucson.
Linse, A. R.
1993

Geoarchaeological Scale and Archaeological Interpretation: Examples from
the Central Jornada Mogollon. In: Effects of Scale on Archaeological and
Geoscientific Perspectives, edited by J. K. Stein and A. R. Linse, pp. 11-28.
The Geological Society of America, Boulder, Colorado.

Lynch, T. F. and C. M. Stevenson
1992

Obsidian Hydration Dating and Temperature Controls in the Punta Negra
Region of Northern Chile. Quaternary Research 37:117-124.

Mauldin, R. P. and T. B. Graves
1992a

Radiocarbon Dates from the Jornada Mogollon Region. Ms. on file, Archaeology Branch, Directorate of Environment, Fort Bliss, Texas.

1992b

Radiocarbon dates and changing patterns of Land Use in the Southern
Mogollon. Paper presented at the 7th Mogollon Conference, Las Cruces, New
Mexico.

Mauldin, R. P., T. B. Graves, and M. Bentley
1993

Small Sites in the Central Hueco Bolson, A Final Report on Project 90-11.
Ms. on File, Archaeology Branch, Directorate of the Environment, Fort Bliss,
Texas.

Michels, J., I. Tsong, and G. Smith
1983

Experimentally Derived Hydration Rates in Obsidian Dating. Archeomet13~
25:107-117.

Miller, M. R.
1990

Archeological hzvestigations in the North Hills Subdivision, Northeast El
Paso, Texas. Cultural Resources Report No. 100. Batcho & Kauffman Associates, Las Cruces, New Mexico.

Mauldin -- Small Sites in Western Texas and Southern New Mexico

205

Monger, H. C.
1993
Soil-Geomorphic and Paleoclimatic Characteristics of the Fort Bliss Maneuver Areas, Southern New Mexico and West Texas. Historic and Natural
Resources Report No. 10. Cultural Resources Management Program, Directorate of Environment, United States Army Air Defense Artillery Center, Fort
Bliss, Texas.
Noy-Meir, I.
1973

Desert Ecosystems: Environment and Procedures. Annual Review of Ecology
and Systematics 4:25-51.

O’Laughlin, T. C., V. L. Scarborough, T. B. Graves, and D. Martin
1988

Loop 375 Archaeological Project, Fort Bliss Maneuver Area I, El Paso
County, Texas. An Interim Report for Phase H Testing and Phase III Recommendations for Data Recovery. Report prepared for the State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation, Austin, Texas.

O’Laughlin, T. C. and D. L. Martin
1989

Loop 375 Archaeological Project, El Paso County, Texas. An bzterim Report
for Phase H Additional Testing and Recommendations for Phase III Data
Recovery. Report prepared for the State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Austin, Texas.

Reynolds, S. E.
Climatological Summary, New Mexico-Precipitation 1849-1954. Technical
1956
Report No. 6. U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C.
Satterwhite, M. B. and J. Ehlen
1980

Vegetation and Terrain Relationship bz South-Central New Mexico and Western Texas. Report ETL-0245. U.S. Army Corps Of Engineers, Topographic
Laboratories, Fort Belvoir, Virginia.

Schiffer, M. B.
Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record. University of New
1987
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Stevenson, C. M. and M. O. McCurry
Hydration Rate Development for New Mexican Obsidian Sources.
1990
Geoarchaeology 5(2): 149-170.
Stuiver, M and G. W. Pearson
1986
High-Precision Calibration of the Radiocarbon Time Scale, AD 1950-500
BC. Radiocarbon 28:805-838.

Upham, S.
Adaptive Diversity and Southwestern Abandonments. Journal of Anthropo1984
logical Research 40:235-256.

:206

Texas Archeological Society

Van Devender, T. R.
1990

Late Quaternary Vegetation and Climate of the Chihuahuan Desert, United
States and Mexico. In: Packrat Middens, The Last 40,000 Years of Biotic
Change, edited by J. L. Betancourt, T. R. Van Devender, and P. S. Martin, pp.
104-133. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Van Devender, T. R. and W. G. Spaulding
1979

Development of Vegetation and Climate in the Southwestern United States.
Science 204:701-710.

Whalen, M.

E.

1977

Settlement Patterns of the Eastern Hueco Bolson. Publications in Anthropology 4. El Paso Centennial Museum, E1 Paso, Texas.

1978

Settlement Patterns of the Western Hueco Bolson. Publications in Anthropology 6. E1 Paso Centennial Museum, E! Paso, Texas.

1980

Special Studies in the Archaeology of the Hueco Bolson. Publications in
Anthropology No. 9, E1 Paso Centennial Museum, and Cultural and Natural
Resources Report No. 2, U.S. Army, Fort Bliss Environmental Office, DFAE.
University of Texas at E1 Paso, E1 Paso, Texas.

1986

Small-Site Analysis in the Hueco Bolson of Western Texas. Journal of Field
Archaeology. 13(1):69-81.

Wills, W. H.
1988

Early Prehistoric Agriculture. School of American Research Press, Sante Fe,
New Mexico.

York, J. C. and W. A. Dick-Peddie
1969

Vegetational Changes in Southern New Mexico During the Past Hundred
Years. In: Arid Lands In Perspective, edited by W. G. McGuinnes and B. J.
Goldman, pp. 155-166. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

