NOTES

PALEOECOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND
EAST TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY
JOHN E. KELLER

ABSTRACT
Archeologists have frequently tended to generalize ecological
considerations when applied to archeological problems. An example is
presented which explains procedures and reveals some possible avenues
of interpretation. Investigations into subsistence resources, strategies,
and scheduling models are suggested and examples are presented. The
value of local as well as generalized material is stressed and the possible
consequences of such studies are indicated.

While paleoecology is, at present, in vogue in archeological
thought, there are indications that the subject is not completely
understood by all members of the archeological "fraternity" (Butzer
1975). There is often a tendency to pay only lip service to the concept
and a disinclination to utilize the information collected to its fullest
extent. The complexity of the situation is frequently blurred when
generalized works like those of Blair (1950) are utilized to the
exclusion of other sources. While the general utility of such sources is
undeniable, they often have less than adequate information to
contribute to the interpretation of localized conditions and the
examination of the interrelations existing between the site and its
environment.
The Davis site (41CE19) and the middle Neches River region
provides an example of the type of local information valuable in the
implementation of proper ecological studies. Previous information
indicated little other than the site lies within the broadly defined
Austroriparian biotic province (Blair 1950). Basically this is a source
of index species information but it supplies very little about local
conditions. For example, there is little information on the different
biotic communities making up the separate components of the
ecological system in operation, or the individual species comprising
consumable subsistence resources.
The collection of this sort of information requires investigation of
various sources. Actual on-the-ground survey can supply a great deal
of information and may be valuable for the delineation of discrete
biotic communities. However, simply tabulating the present species
and their occurrence does not provide the whole solution. Past
conditions may be examined in the light of present information but to

244

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

really evaluate the situation requires the input provided by modern
ecological theory. In this respect the concepts of vegetative
succession and climax stability (Odum 1963: 87) are particularly
important. Vegetation typically follows an identifiable progression
from initial colonization to establishment of a climax state (Odom
1963: 87-88). This progression can be predicted and as a result some
extrapolation of the past from the present is possible. There are, of
course, limits to the extent of this extrapolation. However, the
stability of the climax state and the buffering effect of the dominant
vegetation type, a mixed evergreen deciduous forest, would seem to
indicate that the same conditions have persisted for some thousands
of years (Odum 1963: 87-88). This interpretation, which receives
confirmatory evidence from historic accounts (Keller 1974) indicated
that conditions are to be expected in which various subtypes of a
mixed deciduous/evergreen forest predominate. While definition of
the biotic communities existing within this generally homogenous
climax configuration is purely arbitrary, it is possible to distinguish
some separation. On this basis four major zones, aquatic,
bottomlands, terrace, and uplands, can be defined.
All of these zones are capable of supplying some subsistence
material although some are definitely more important than others on
this basis. Of perhaps equal importance are the ecotonal areas
separating the major zones. Here, in keeping with the concept of edge
effect {Odum 1959: 278) a high degree of species diversity and individual numbers have resulted in increased productivity. In light of
these developments it seems obvious that strong ecological considerations were in operation in the selection of the Davis site
location. However, the importance of the ready availability of such a
broad range of natural subsistence materials from so diverse but adjacent communities can not be doubted. This would be especially true
if wild subsistence materials were as important as investigation indicates. Hardwood nuts, as evidenced by archeological recovery,
were indicative of this importance. Such an occurrence, especially in
the light of the dietary value of such resources (Woods 1899:74-751 is
hardly surprising (Richard Ford, personal communication). A tremendous amount of humanly consumable energy was thus available to the
inhabitants of the Davis site. Exactly how much of these potential
resources were actually used is, of course, impossible to state. Some
idea of the magnitude of caloric energy available can, however, be
gained from tl~e fact that only 5°/0 of the total could supply approximately 15,000 persons on an annual basis. Large populations
could be, tllus, a distinct possibility, even without agriculture.

PALEOECOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

245

Despite the tremendous amount of energy available for exploitation, some scheduling is implied by the seasonal availability of
subsistence resources. When dealing with floral materials, particularly those with high caloric values, scheduling is of primary importance. The problem seems particularly acute when dealing with
foods that are high in carbohydrates and fats. Since the main sources
of these materials, nuts and corn, are only seasonally collectable in
the middle Neches region, a subsistence schedule may be hypothesized based on the availability of these foods.
Thus, if scheduling is conceived of in terms of carbohydrates and
fat collection, the historic Caddoan practice (Swanton 1942: 131) of
cultivating two distinct corn crops offers a considerable advantage in
subsistence. The first or "little corn" crop might be expected to
mature in early to mid-June, depending on when it was planted and
local weather conditions (Newcomb 1961: 292). This crop would
provide an excellent source of high energy at the time when calories
were generally lacking in the natural system. A high amount of concentrated energy would also be valuable in meeting the demands of
planting and maintaining the second or "flour corn" crop. By late
August or mid-September this second crop would mature and would
offer a high quality and easily stored source of caloric energy
valuable in meeting the subsistence demands of the winter season.
Crop failure cannot be completely discounted, but there was little
chance of whole-scale failure.
It is in relation to reduced agricultural crop harvest that the basic
value of the fall nut crop can be discerned. Probably this was normally a subsistence supplement, but the nut crop would, in times of
crop failure, actually supplant agricultural products as a dietary
resource. The differential maturation and reproductive rates of the
various nut producing species (Goodrum, Reid, and Boyd 1971: 525)
are particularly important in that total mast failure is precluded.
Failures in one or even a number of species are not likely to seriously
alter this essentially stable resource configuration (Goodrum, Reid
and Boyd 1971: 525).
The concentration of naturally available carbohydrates during the
fall also has important consequences for the exploitation of faunal
resources. High population densities of such species as deer are expected to be concentrated in the areas of mast production (Smith
1974: 34). Deer population are, by virtue of their density and the onset
of breeding season, especially susceptible to human predation at this
time.
Nut collecting and hunting may then be viewed as two subsistence

246

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

activities that could be carried on nearly simultaneously in the same
geographically restricted areas. A subsistence scheduling strategy
utilizing this combination of resources would be highly successful for
a relatively sedentary population which also relied on agricultural
products.
While the models mainly incorporate what are believed to be
primary activities, it should be clear that other resources were also
utilized. Subsistence activities, particularly those involving resource
collection could have been carried on throughout the year. Some activities such as mussel collection or exploitation of spring fish runs
are incompletely understood and could well have had more importance than indicated by the models.
The projected scheduling strategy is highly viable since wholescale subsistence failure seems virtually precluded. Individual
resource failure may occur, but the effects of this situation would be
mitigated or completely nullified by recourse to other materials. An
additional advantage is the predictable nature of the resource involved. People familiar with their environment, such as the inhabitants of the Davis site surely were, would be aware sometime in advance of probable yields and plan accordingly. A considerable
amount of potential flexibility is provided to the cultural system in
operation. A knowledgeable group would be able to alter its subsistence strategy quite easily in order to take advantage of an abundance of one resource, or to recover from another’s failure. This allows for a maximization of resource potentials and the allocation of
labor to non-subsistence activities.
As an example, the Davis site and indeed the whole middle Neches
region is somewhat less than ideal in that the environmental reconstruction is more hypothetical than desirable. This is due to a variety
of uncontrollable factors. Nevertheless, this example does illustrate
the uses of ecological studies in archeology and serves to indicate
some of the sources of information that should be utilized for proper
evaluation. It certainly indicates the value of thorough as opposed to
generalized investigation.

PALEOECOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

247

REFERENCES CITED

Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas/ournal of Science, Vol. 2, pp.
93-117.
Butzer, Karl
1975 The Ecological Approach to Archaeology: Are We Really Trying?
American Antiquity, Vol. 40, pp. 106-111.
Goodrum, P. D., V. H. Reid, and C. E. Boyd
1971 Acorn Yields, Characteristics, and Management Criteria of Oaks for
Wildlife. Wildlife Society of America, lournal of Wildlife
Management, Vol. 35, pp. 522-527.
Keller, John E.
1974 Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches Region of Eastern
Texas. Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Newcomb,W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Odum, Eugene P.
1959 Fundamentals of Ecology. 2nd ed. W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
1963 Ecology. Holt, Reinhart and Winston, New York.
Smith, Bruce D.
1974 Middle Mississippi Exploitation of Animal Population: A Predictive
Model. American Antiquity, Vol. 39, pp. 274-292.
Swanton, J. R.
1942 History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bureau of American
Ethnology Bulletin, 132.
Woods, Charles P., and L. H. Merrill
1899 Nuts as Food. Maine Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin No. 54.
Orano, Maine.
Austin, Texas

