Possible Cases of Endemic Treponematosis
in a Prehistoric Hunter43atherer Population
on the Texas Coast
Barbara E. Jackson, James L. Boone,
and Maciej Henneberg

ABSTRACT
A case study of possible endemic treponematosis in a prehistoric huntergathererpopulation from the Gulf Coast of Texas is presented. A chief interest
of the study is the high incidence of skeletal lesions indicative of infectious
disease in a nonsedentary hunter-gatherer population, which may be indicative of seasonal aggregation.

INTRODUCTION
This paper describes a case study of possible endemic treponematosis in the
skeletalpopulation from Callo del Oso (41NU2) on the Central Gulf Coast of Texas.
Cultural and temporal context of the population is discussed, and a differential
diagnosis arguing for treponematosis is presented, together with an analysis of the
location and incidence of skeletal lesions. One of the chief interests of this case study
is the apparent high incidence of skeletal lesions compared to the incidence reported
for any of the recognized treponemal syndromes. Similar cases on the Texas coast
and in the eastern United States are discussed, and it is suggested that the high
incidence of infectious disease may be due to seasonal aggregations among this
population of hunter-gatherers.
The prevalence and distribution of treponemal infections has been the topic of
scholarly debate for more than a century (see Steinbock 1976:87-97 and Ortner and
Putschar 1981:200-207 for review of this debate). Formerly, much of this debate
centered around the question of whether one particular manifes tafion of this disease,
venereal syphilis, originated in the Old or the New World. Theoretical advances and
closer examination of evidence in the past two decades have changed considerably
the emphasis and character of this debate. Hudson’s Unitary hypothesis (1965)
argues that the four existing clinical manifestations: pinta, yaws, endemic syphilis
(bejel, treponarid), and venereal syphilis form a pathological continuum and are
caused by different strains of the same infectious agent, Treponema pallidum.
Differences in clinical manifestations of the infection are attributable to differences
in the mode of transmission of the infectious agent, which are in turn affected by
environmental factors such as climate and by level of sociocultural development.
Hackett’s theory (1963) emphasizes that there has been a continual coevolution of
Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society 57 (1986)

184

Texas Archeological Society

host and infectious agent. Both points of view carry the implication that the
prevalence, distribution, and specific clinical manifestations of treponemal infection in the past may have been very different from what they are now, and that the
question of geographic origin of a specific manifestation of the disease, such as
venereal syphilis, may be misplaced.
Paleopathological studies of treponematoses remain an important area of study
because they are among the [relatively] few widespread infectious diseases that
leave recognizable skeletal lesions in a consistent fashion and because varying clinical manifestations of the disease appear to be linked in part to levels of social and
demographic development. Studies of the prevalence and distribution of treponematoses in the past have the potential to tell us much about the coevolution of disease
and human populations. Such studies are complicated, however, by the fact that
different clinical manifestations of the disease can leave identical lesions (Steinbock 1972:111,139; Ortner and Putschar 1982:180, 182). Steinbock argues that a
differential diagnosis of a specific known clinical manifestation of the disease from
skeletal remains necessarily involves specification of type and location of lesions,
incidence of skeletal involvement, and a consideration of the sociocultural and
climactic context of the population in question. So, adequate descriptions of treponemal infections in the past, which may differ from those of the present, should take
the same approach. Because of the prevailing emphasis on identification of specific
cases of venereal syphilis, this population approach has not always been followed.

GEOGRAPHIC AND ARCHEOLOGICAL CONTEXT
The Callo del Oso Burial site (41NU2) is located within the present-day city
limit of Corpus Christi, [Texas] on a clay dune overlooking the Corpus Christi and
Oso Bays on the central Gulf coast of Texas. Callo del Oso has been noted as a burial
site for more than a century (Martin 1930). The skeletal sample dealt with here was
excavated in the summer of 1933 by a team from the University of Texas under the
direction of A.T. Jackson (n.d.). Jackson recorded a total of 101 burials, including
a number of partial skeletons that had been disturbed by later burials and by erosion.
Sixty-eight individuals were sufficiently intact for determination of burial
position and orientation. Many of the skeletons were recovered as groups of
interments, each of which was given a feature number. Thirty-nine such burial
features were excavated, each containing between one and fourteen individuals.
Most of the group burials were single interments that had intruded upon one another,
although there are a few multiple interments, particularly of infants together with
adult females. Due to the accessioning procedure that prevailed at the museum
where the bones were curated, individual skeletal integrity Was lost, and bones were
ultimately labeled only by feature number. This greatly complicated the rematching
of skeletal parts, a problem that was compounded by the eroded and fragmentary
nature of many of the bones. As a result, our analyses of skeletal-lesion location and
incidence are by bone element rather than by individual. The minimum number of
individuals in the existing collection is 68, based on the number of left femorae. It
was possible to rematch relatively complete skeletons for 21 of these individuals.
Attrition of the collection appears to have been the result of poor preservation and

Jackson, Boone, and Henneberg ~ Endemic Treponematosis

185

of recovery by relatively crude excavation methods.
Temporally diagnostic grave goods at Callo del Oso were scarce, but several
lines of evidence indicate that the burial site dates to late in the Archaic sequence
of the Central Gulf Coast. Cl~ronological precedence to the Rockport period
beginning some time after 1250 A.D. (Story 1968; Corbin 1974) is indicated by the
conspicuous absence ofRockport sherds in the burial fill or the dune deposit, despite
the face that more than 400 m2 of the dune was excavated (Jackson n.d.). Known
Rockport burials occur in campsites or middens where Rockport or other sherds are
among the most common artifact class recovered in the burial fill (cf. Hester and
Corbin 1975; Hole and Wilkinson 1973; Wingate and Hester 1972).
Consistency in burial positioning and orientation (Jackson n.d.) argues for a
high degree of cultural-temporal continuity within the cemetery. All 68 of the
relatively undisturbed burials were flexed, and 59 of the 68 (86.7 percent) were
placed on the left side with the head oriented in an easterly to southerly direction
(facing Oso Bay). Twenty-seven of the 68 were placed specifically in a southeasterly direction, on the left side, with the hands placed over or near the face.
It should be emphasized that Archaic settlement and subsistence patterns
persist until very late on the central and southern Texas coast, as well as in the
adjacent interior. The introduction of local pottery manufacture in the Rockport
period may indicate a degree of decreased mobility, but there is no evidence for the
development of sedentary agricultural communities such as those that existed in the
equidistant Huastecan and Caddoan regions during the same period. When Cabeza
de Vaca and his companions explored the Gulf Coast of Texas between 1527 and
1536, they met with small groups of semisedentary hunter-gatherers (Campbell and
Campbell 1981), and there is no evidence to indicate that subsistence and settlement
there had been radically different in previous centuries.

DESCRIPTION OF SKELETAL LESIONS
Analyses of stature, cranial morphology, and pathologies, which include parts
of the Callo del Oso skeletal series, have appeared in earlier publications (Goldstein
1957; Neuman 1952; Woodbury 1935). Goldstein (1957:302) suggested that
lesions on the long bones of the collection"may be due to syphilis." Recent analysis
by the authors confirms that the Callo del Oso skeletal series has a high incidence
of inflanunatory bone disease characterized by subperiosteal remodeling, cortical
thickening, expansion of trabecular bone growth, and occurrence of destructive
lesions. Periostitis is evident in all of the affected bones and is concentrated on the
metaphyses of the long bones. In the least severe cases, subperiosteal bone
apposition on the midshaft forms a thickened area defined onthe surface by a pattern
of longitudinal striations (see Figure 2, A-C). In some tibiae, subperiosteal bone
apposition on the anterior surface of the midshaft produces the saber-shin appearance characteristic of treponematosis (Figure 1, A: Steinbock 1972:102-104).
Further bone changes involve the increased growth of the endosteum to the extent
that cancellous bone sometimes entirely closes the medullary cavity (Figure 2, D).
In the most severe cases, the formation of destructive gummata occurs (Figure 2, C).
The most frequently affected bone is the tibia (23.4 percent of 94 left and right

186

Texas Archeological Society

A

B

Figure 1. Right (A) and left (B) tibiae showing saber-shin effect bone changes typical of
treponemal infection.

Jackson, Boone, and Henneberg m Endemic Treponematosis

187

D

A
B
C
Figure 2. A, Stage one: midsection of right tibia showing beginning subperiosteal remodeling characterized by striations and cortical thickening. B, Stage two: midsection of left
tibia showing extensive striations, appearance of bone lesions, and continued cortical
thickening resulting in narrowing of medullary canal. C, Stage three: left tibia with marked
deformation of bone shaft with cortical apposition and exostoses accompanied by continued
bone lesioning and cloaca formation. D, Cross section of left tibia shown in Figure 2, C, with
third-stage internal changes characterized by nearly complete closure of the medullary canal.

188

Texas Archeological Society

tibiae, see Table 1), followed by the clavicle (11.5 percent of 26 left and right, note
low sample size), fibulae (8.9 percent), ulnae and humerii (both 4.7 percent), radii
(3.8 percent), and femorae (2.3 percent). Of 21 rematched skeletons in the series,
five were affected on three or more bones. Of 29 relatively complete crania and
frontal and parietal fragments of about 40 other individuals, not a single individual
showed cranial lesions. The frontal, parietal, and nasal bones are the first or second
most frequently affected bones in venereal syphilis (Steinbock 1972:112, 113;
Ortner and Putschar 1981:188), but are much less commonly affected in endemic
syphilis or yaws (Steinbock 1972:139). Steinbock further notes that cranial lesions
are present in nonvenereal syphilis in about 4 percent of individuals involving bone
lesions, so the population analyzed here is probably too small to determine
definitively whether a low frequency appearance of cranial lesions was a characteristic of the syndrome in this population. Projecting from Steinbock’s figures, it is
clear that a sample of at least 25 affected individuals would be required before a
single case involving specifically cranial lesions could be expected due to nonvenereal treponemal infection.
No dental stigmata typical of congenital syphilis were observed among the 33
individuals with teeth. Dactylitis, frequently associated with yaws (Ortner and
Putschar 1982:180), was not observed. The nasal and palatal bones were generally
too poorly preserved to determine whether lesioning occurred there, as is noted in
venereal syphilis and less commonly, in yaws (Ortner and Putschar 1982:180-181)
Nasal lesions have been reported in a skeletal series from the nearby Palm Harbor
site (Commuzzie et al. 1984). Two infant tibiae (out of a total of eight infants in the
series) exhibited periostitis characterized by thin successive layering of bone with
pitting and formation of destructive lesions.
A scale was developed to characterize the degree of bone affectation (Figure
2, Table 1). The first stage of affectation is characterized by appearance of
longitudinal striations and cortical thickening at the midshaft. In the second stage,
cortical thickening increases and involves more of the midshaft; endosteal growth
results in the narrowing of the medullary cavity (Figure 1, B). In stage three, the
entire diaphysis is heavily involved, and there are frequently destructive gummata
(Figure 1, C). Table 1 shows that few cases reached stage three of affectation and
all of these were adults. These data suggest the disease was a chronic, progressive,
but subacute disease in this population. The markedly high stature, robusticity and
sexual dimorphism of the Callo del Oso series suggest that the population was
healthy and well nourished, except for the subacute condition described here.
DISCUSSION
The form, incidence, and location of bone lesions in the Callo del Oso skeletal
series argue for a diagnosis of a chronic, progressive, subacute form of treponematosis that was endemic to the population. The incidence of skeletal involvement
appears to be much higher than in any of the described syndromes. Steinbock
(1972:139) estimates that skeletal lesions should be present in 1 to 5 percent of a
skeletal series where nonvenereal syphilis is endemic. He arrives at a similar figure
for yaws (page 143), while the prevalence of skeletal lesions in a population where

Jackson, Boone, and Henneberg ~ Endemic Treponematosis

ca

O0

~

O0

~

~

~

o.
°~

¯ =- ~.

o
~3

ca

2:
ca

[-

~

.,.~

,

i

i

i

~<
i

I

i

189

190

Texas Archeological Society

venereal syphilis is present is estimated to be lower: .5 to 1 percent (page 110). Using
tibiae as an index (i.e. assuming that the tibia is always affected in any case with
skeletal involvement), the incidence of skeletal involvement in the Callo del Oso
population was at least 23.4 percent. So even if 100 percent of the population had
active cases of the disease, the degree of skeletal involvement would be much higher
than any of the known syndromes of treponematosis.
The level of incidence of the disease at Callo del Oso is close, however, to the
figure obtained by Cassidy (1972:89) for the Hardin Village skeletal series. This
series was associated with a sedentary agricultural population of the Fort Ancient
Tradition in Kentucky, dating to just prior to historic contact. Cassidy found evidence of varying degrees of periosteal inflammation in about 30 percent of the population. Cassidy concluded that the periostitis was due to a form of endemic treponematosis, and found similar cases of the disease in nearby cemetery sites, including
Indian Knoll. At Indian Knoll, however, which was associated with an earlier
gatherer-hunter population, the incidence was much lower: only about 2 percent.
At Callo del Oso the high incidence of an infectious disease in what appears to
be a small, dispersed hunter-gather population is worth further discussion. Endemic
treponematosis is typically associated with small populations living under primitive, unhygienic conditions (Steinbock 1972:138). It is spread by skin contact or by
common use of drinking and eating vessels and is commonly spread among
children, whereupon the disease becomes chronic, with long periods of latency, in
the adult population. With the introduction of urbanization and modem systems of
hygiene, the disease generally disappears and may be replaced by venereal syphilis
(Steinbock 1972:139). Most recognized forms ofnonvenereal endemic treponematosis are associated with primitive fanning communities or pastoral nomads.
However, Hudson (1963:22) reports that endemic treponematosis was "able to
maintain itself in nomadic aboriginal family groups [in Australia] which conjugated
into larger groups for only a few weeks a year." Such seasonal aggregations are
likely to have occurred among some of the Texas Coastal Indians (see Ricklis 1986),
so it is possible that the disease of the Callo del Oso population was maintained
through seasonal groupings.
St. Hoyme and Bass (1962:376-378; Cassidy 1972:99) cite a historical observation of what may be the syndrome in question among the Carolina Indians of the
early eighteenth century. The disease was described as a "burning of the limbs,"
which caused considerable discomfort to some of the older members of the village.
St. Hoyme and Bass suggest this affliction may have been the disease responsible
for bone lesions they observed in a skeletal population from the Clarksville site in
Virginia. The lesions they observe resemble very closely those observed by Cassidy
(1972:92-100) and in the Callo del Oso population. This syndrome, which may well
corrspond to the endemic nonvenereal syphilis of the Old World, may have been
widespread in North America before European contact. It may well account for
many of the isolated reports of Precolumbian "syphilis" in North America.
Skeletal lesions similar to those described here have been noted in other skeletal
samples from the Texas coast. In their report of the Palm Harbor burials (41AS80),
Marek, and Steele (1984) report lesions characteristic of ~eponemal infection on the

Jackson, Boone, and Henneberg ~ Endemic Treponematosis

191

tibiae and other long bones in the sample, as well as on the nasal bones of one of the
crania. Three of eight individuals recovered at the Shell Point site (41B046; Hole
and Wilkinson 1973) were afflicted with a "progressive periostitis" characteristic
of treponematosis. Interestingly, these three skeletal series have morphological
similarities in the form of marked robusticity and sexual dimorphism (Comuzzie et
al. 1984). At the same time it is worth noting that the Shell Point burials were
definitely associated with pottery, possibly making them somewhat later than the
Callo del Oso burials. The authors have noted lesions characteristic of treponematosis on many other skeletons from the coastal and inland regions of Texas during
their reinventory and reorganization of the skeletal collection at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin, although it is
beyond the scope of this paper to describe all of these. In order to trace the
development and distribution of this syndrome through time, more reports are
needed that describe the specific lesion location and incidence of osteoperiostitis.
Such studies may well provide answers to questions of more general interest
involving population dynamics and settlement patterns.
REFERENCES CITED
Campbell, T. N. and Campbell, T. J.
1981 Historic Indian groups of the Choke Canyon area, southern Texas. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Cassidy, C. M.
1973 A comparison of nutrition and health in preagricultural and agricultural Amerindian skeletal populations. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Wisconsin. Ann
Arbor: University Microfilms.
Collins, M.B., Hester, T. R. and Weir, F. A.
1969 Two prehistoric cemetery sites in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 40:119-157.
Comuzzie, A. G., Marek, M. and Steele, D. G.
1984 Analysis of human skeletal remains fromthe Palm Harbor site (41AS80): a Central
Texas coast mortuary site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55:213249.
Corbin, J. E.
1974 A model for cultural succession in the Coastal Bend area of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 45:29-55.
Elting, J.,

1984

and Starna, W.
A possible case ofpre-columbian trepanematosis from New York state. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 65:267-273.

Goldstein, M. S.
1957 Skeletal pathology of early Indians of Texas. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology, n. s., 15:299-307.

192

Texas Archeological Society

Hackett, C. J.
1963 On the origin of the human trepanematoses. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization 29:7-41.
Hester, T. R.
1969a Human bone artifacts from southern Texas. American Antiquity 34:326-328.
1969b Archeological investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy counties, Texas in August,
1967. State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report No. 15.
Hester, T. R. and Wingate, R. J.
1972 Ten burials from Green Lake, San Patricio County, Texas. Florida Anthropologist
25:119-127.
Hole, F., and Wilkinson, R. G.
1973 Shell Point: a coastal complex and burial site in Brazoria County. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 44:5-50.
Hudson, E. H.
1965 Treponematosis and man’s social evolution. American Anthropologist 67:885901.
Jackson, A. T.
Excavation of the Callo del Oso burial site. MS on file at the Texas Archeological
n.d.
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Martin, G. C.
1930 Two sites on the Callo del Oso, Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin of the Archeologi
cal and Paleontological Society 2:7-17.
Neuman, G. K.
1952

Archeology and race in the American Indian. In Archeology of the Eastern United
States, edited by J. B. Griffin. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Ortner, D. J. and W. G. J. Putschar
1981 Identification of pathological conditions in human skeletal remains. Smithsonian
Contributions to Anthropology No. 28. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washing
ton, D.C.
Powell, M. L. and Rodgers, J. D.
1980 Bioarcheology of the McCutchan-McLaughlin site. Oklahoma Archeological
Survey, Studies in Oklahoma’s Past, 5.
Ricklis, R. A.
1986 Archeological investigations at the McKinzie site (41NU221): description and
contextual interpretations. M.A. Thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Story, D. A.
1968 Archeological investigations at two Central Texas Gulf Coast sites. State Building
Commission Archeological Program Report 13.

Jackson, Boone, and Henneberg ~ Endemic Treponematosis

193

St. Hoyme, L., and Bass, W. K.
1962 Human skeletal remains from the Tolliferro and Clarksville sites, John H. Kerr
Reservoir Basin, Virginia. Bureau of American Ethnology bulletin 182:329-400.
Saul, F. P.
1972 The human skeletal remains of Alter del Scrificios. Peabody Museum Papers 63,
no. 2.
Woodbury, G., and Woodbury, E.
1935

Prehistoric skeletalremains from the Texas coast. Lancaster Press, Lancaster, Pa.

