ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT MUSK HOG CANYON,
CROCKETT COUNTY, TEXAS
A Report of the 1976 Texas Archeological Society Field School

William Edward Moore

ABSTRACT
Archeological investigations at Musk Hog Canyon, Crockett County, Texas,
cofiducted under the auspices of the 1976 Texas Archeological Society Field
School are described. Ring middens and burned rock accumulations, considered
by most researchers to represent food processing stations, provide the main
focus of this paper. Data obtained from the Musk Hog Canyon study revealed
that these unique sites probably functioned as ovens in which desert succulents
such as agave and sotol were baked for the purpose of human consumption.
Projectile point types such as Ensor and Frio suggest that the ring middens in the
study area were utilized primarily during Archaic times. Ethnohistoric accounts
indicate that similar sites were used during the Historic period. Comparisons between ring middens from Musk Hog Canyon and other areas are made, and a
brief overview of ring middens is presented.

INTRODUCTION
In June 1976, the Texas Archeological Society (TAS) conducted a field
school in the western part of Crockett County, Texas. The field school was
designed to salvage valuable archeological data from a few sites in Musk Hog
Canyon that were endangered by the proposed construction of Interstate Highway 10. The possibility that this area might be eligible for inclusion on the
National Register of Historic Places added additional importance to the archeological work conducted in Musk Hog Canyon.
The archeological objectives of the field school included (1) completing a
survey of the canyon in order to record all visible sites, (2) determining the
spatial patterning of these sites, (3) describing the sites in terms of their environmental settings, and (4) testing some of the burned rock midden sites in order
to secure data on structure, function, use of plant materials, and age of these
sites. A secondary objective was to provide TAS members with experience in
site-survey and excavation procedures (Shafer and Moore 1976:1).
The field school was divided into two groups: the excavation crews, under
the direction of Harry J. Shafer, and the survey crews, under the direction of
Gary Moore. Utilizing a specially designed site-survey form, the field school
crews surveyed about 90 percent of the Musk Hog drainage, and 435 sites were
added to the archeo!ogical record.
Sites recorded by the TAS survey include 14 chipping/quarrying locations, 22
lithic scatters (chipped stone and burned rock), 146 individual burned rock
middens, 140 hearths (circular or oval pavements of burned rock usually less
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

53:13-81

14 Texas Archeological Society
than 2 meters in diameter), 73 burned rock scatters (which may be either
scattered hearths or small burned rock middens), and 40 rock-shelters. Complementing the site survey was a rock-art recording crew supervised by John
W. Clark.
Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr., and James Phil Dering, archeobotanists from Texas
A&M University, made botanical transects in predesignated areas of the canyon
system in order to defme the distribution of modern botanical communities
whose past counterparts may have contained plants of economic importance
to the aboriginal populations of this area.
Test excavations were undertaken at five sites. The objectives of these excavations were:
¯ . . to explore the internal structure and consistency of the crescent-shaped
burned rock middens (and variations of them), to examine the culture history
and archeological potential of small rock-shelter sites which have mainly
talus deposits, and to secure botanical specimens from each site in the hopes
of delineating site function and providing some indication of the economic
use of plants in the study area (Shafer and Moore 1976:3-4).

The five sites excavated during the 1976 field school were the Pecos Terrace
site (41CX218), the Divide Windmill site (41CX241), the Eiserer Shelter site
(41CX133), the Bedrock Mortar site (41CX238), and the Children’s site
(41CX103). All five sites had burned rock middens.
Ring middens are unique to West Texas, southeastern New Mexico, and
adjoining areas but are commonly occurring archeological phenomena in that
region. Most archeologists (Greer 1968a; Word 1971; Riggs 1968a) agree that
ring middens are circular accumulations of burned rock in open-air settings,
and that they functioned primarily as pits or ovens in which desert succulents
such as sotol (Dasylirion texanum) and lechuguiUa (Agave lechuguilla) were
baked for human consumption.
There are several problems with the term ring midden and its connotations¯
One problem is the variety of names applied to ring middens. The term ring
midden implies a circular, oval, or crescent-shaped feature, but it does not imply
function. Other names, including doughnut midden, circle mound, cooking
mound, cooking pit, sotol pit, midden circle, mescal pit, and earth oven (Greer
1965:41), are more specific: two name the plant which was processed, and
three refer to function without naming what plant was cooked. The confusion
is obvious. Another problem is that factual statements regarding the function
of ring middens are sometimes presented without the support of good empirical
data. Greer (1965), for example, refers to specific sites as mescal pits, but
presents no evidence that mescal (Agave sp.) was ever processed at these sites.
Four factors that help to determine the function of ring middens are (1)
the presence of plant macrofossils, (2) physical characteristics such as burned
rock accumulations and slab-lined pits, (3) associated artifacts that relate to
plant processing activities, and (4) ethnographic analogy. However, any one of
these factors alone may not be sufficient to support a hypothesis of plant
processing as a site function. For example, the presence of a slab-lined pit
surrounded by burned rocks does not necessarily mean that sotol, mescal, or
any other plant was cooked therein. Some pits could have been built for
cooking animals instead of plants, and, without preservation of the remains of
what was being cooked, the contents of a pit cannot be determined. Although

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

15

it is known from ethnographic accounts that some historic Indian groups cooked
mescal and other desert succulents in similar pits (Sjoberg 1953; Opler 1941),
the mere presence of such a pit does not prove that it was used for the same
purpose. But it is the function of these features, not their physica! description,
that is of paramount importance to the archeologist. It has been noted above
that ring middens occur in the open, are typically circular in form-although
at least six varieties of ring middens occur (Greer 1965)-and that some of them
were used in the cooking of desert succulents (Shafer 1970).
A third problem is posed by the fact that these open-air middens are not the
only features that were used for cooking desert plants. Much of the best data we
have concerning the processing and cooking of desert succulents were obtained
from middens situated in rock-shelters. Plant macrofossils including quids and
cut leaf bases of desert succulents taken from Hinds Cave (Val Verde Co.) and
other dry rock-shelters in southwestern Texas have shown that desert succulents
constituted an essential part of the diet in the Lower Pecos region of Texas for
about 9000 years (Dering 1979). Recent studies of the stone tools from Hinds
Cave (Shafer and Bryant 1977; Shafer 1978; Shafer and Holloway 1979)have
demonstrated the value of analysis of organic residue and wear patterns in
determining tool function. Hinds Cave is a large, dry, rock-shelter with ideal
conditions for excellent preservation. Thus, it has been possible for archeologists to identify the specific organic residues on some stone tools and to apply
these data to a better understanding of edge wear patterns and their relation to
motor habits such as cutting and slicing (Shafer and Holloway 1979:385). As
a result, certain tool sets at Hinds Cave have been proven to be associated with
procurement and processing of desert succulents. This kind of analysis provides
researchers with valuable data for intersite and intrasite comparisons.
Although the ring middens found in rock-shelters are sometimes circular,
in most cases they cannot be compared morphologically with the open-air
varieties. One of the burned rock middens in Hinds Cave is an exception, and,
according to Shafer and Bryant (1977:43), "is in every way analogous to the
burned rock middens which commonly occur in open-air settings throughout
the region."
OBJECTIVES AND METHOD
The first objective of this study is to synthesize available archeological and
ethnographical data concerning ring middens in southwestern Texas as they
relate to the presumed function of these sites as plant processing stations. This
synthesis will be accomplished by a thorough review of the literature regarding
ring middens, which will provide a survey of current information on site locations, age, function, physical characteristics, associated artifacts, plant remains,
faunal remains, and ethnographic analogy that have been collected relating to
ring middens of southwestern Texas.
The second objective is to analyze archeological and botanical material from
ring midden sites excavated during the field school in order to determine the
function of these sites. The Pecos Terrace site, the Divide Windmill site, and the
Eiserer Shelter site were chosen for this study. Due to a lack of information
concerning the Children’s and Bedrock Mortar sites, they are omitted from this
study.

16

Texas Archeological Society

No field notes were available for the Children’s site, and the data that could
be located concerning the artifacts from this site are virtually meaningless without the notes. Although a brief description of the excavation procedures at the
Bedrock Mortar site was available, the data were not of sufficient quality to
facilitate analysis. The writer could not find the artifacts in the laboratory
during the analysis. According to the notes that were found, the debitage was
sorted only into large and small categories. All of the information available
concerning these sites has been placed in the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas.
Two of the excavated sites, the Pecos Terrace site and the Divide Windmill
site, contain ring middens in open-air settings. The Eiserer Shelter site is a small
rock-shelter with a burned rock midden near its talus slope. This site was included in the hope of providing additional information on plant processing
areas in rock-shelters. There are actually more than three middens involved in
this study; the Divide Windmill site encompasses at least four discernable burned
rock middens, together with at least two confirmed areas of ashy midden deposits. It is not known at this time if the different midden areas at the Divide
Windmill site represent separate site occupations, or if they are all intrasite
features resulting from a single occupation.
If these ring middens are indeed plant processing areas, the kinds of data
recovered from them should reflect those activities. Due to the scarcity of plant
remains and the overwhelming dominance of lithic artifacts, the second objective will be accomplished mainly through lithic analysis.
The lithic assemblages from each study collection are separated first into
tools and debitage. These categories are subdivided into specific artifact types
such as unifaces and dart points. Each artifact type has been examined in an
attempt to ascertain its particular function. The resulting assemblages are then
compared to collections described in the literature from other parts of the state
in order to see how the Musk Hog Canyon artifacts compare to assemblages
from other sites with ring middens. Some specimens have been examined for
wear patterns under a binocular Nikon dissecting microscope with magnification
ranging from 10X to 80X. The artifacts from the Eiserer Rock-shelter have been
examined to see if they are similar to collections from the open-air sites in the
study. If the rock-shelter site was also a plant processing area, the lithic assemblage from it should be similar to those from the open-air sites.
Proper collecting and recording of data from any archeological project is
invaluable if successful interpretations are to be made. Errors can be expected
on every project, and they must be reported to allow the reader to evaluate the
conclusions presented. The Musk Hog Canyon project is no exception. Problems in several stages of the project, from collecting to recording, have made it
difficult in some cases to present the information in an ideally accurate, objective, and professional manner.
Measurements taken during the field school were not consistent. For example, the data concerning elevation and distances and the grid designed for
surface collecting at the Divide Windmill site were expressed in the U.S. Customary (English) System, whereas at the other sites measurements were recorded
according to the International Metric System. The metric system is followed
where possible in this report. However, whenever measurements were presented
in the English system by TAS personnel, they have been converted to their
metric equivalents and follow the metric in parentheses.

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

17

Some of the artifacts listed on the TAS inventory sheets are missing from the
collections. After the lithic artifacts were examined and counted, the numbers
were checked against the specimen inventory sheets and, in many cases, the
number of specimens recorded on the sheets is greater than the number of
specimens on hand. In a few cases there are more artifacts for units or levels
than are indicated on the inventory sheets. It is possible that the missing artifacts are simply misplaced somewhere in the laboratory. It is also common for
many of the items listed as flint to be fragments of limestone or other rock.
In addition, some specimens fall into a no provenience category because of
illegible labeling or no labeling at all. All conclusions presented here are based
on the artifacts actually present in the collections, and not on the numbers
recorded on the specimen inventory sheets or the field notes.
In her laboratory report for the 1976 field school, Greer Smith (1976:personal communication), the laboratory chief, discussed some of the problems
and discrepancies in the collecting and recording of data from Musk Hog Canyon. These problems resulted from the varied backgrounds and lack of experience of the laboratory personnel. Specific discrepancies included imperfect
catalog numbering systems for the surface collections at the Divide Windmill
site and the site survey, field notes from the Pecos Terrace site and the Bedrock
Mortar site that did not cross-check against the sacks that were cataloged, and
soil samples without provenience.
The field notes for Musk Hog Canyon are often confusing and difficult to
read. This may have led to invalid statements by the writer concerning procedure and other important activities of the field school crews. Also, the field
notes for the Eiserer Shelter site were very incomplete. Much of the information
concerning this site was obtained by personal communication.
In summary, this report has been hindered by data that were in some cases
poorly collected, were often incomplete, and were sometimes inadequately
recorded. For the most part, the amount of data lost is not significant, and the
writer believes that the report has not been seriously affected.
THE STUDY AREA

Musk Hog Canyon, one of the many canyon systems dissecting the Edwards
Plateau, is about 2.9 km (1.8 miles) east of Sheffield, in western Crockett
County, Texas (Figure 1). Characterized by a broad floodplain about 3.22 km
(2 miles) wide at its mouth east of the Pecos River, the canyon drains to the
southwest, gradually narrowing at its head to a steep, rugged gully nearly 183
meters (600 feet) above the valley floor. Many smaller header canyons, extending to the north and south from both sides of Musk Hog Canyon, drain adjacent
parts of the mesa top into Musk Hog Canyon itself.
Crockett County is on the west edge of the Edwards Plateau just east of the
Stockton Plateau in southwestern Texas. The Pecos River, which winds for
about 1300 km (800 miles) from its headwaters in the Santa Fe Mountains of
New Mexico to its confluence with the Rio Grande about 50 km (30 miles)
from Del Rio, Texas, separates the two plateaus. In fact, the Stockton Plateau
is considered by Johnson (1931) an extension of the Edwards Plateau.
Geologic formations in this region are in the Comanche Series of the Cretaceous System. The limestone mantle in western Crockett County is thin, and
the local drainage systems have cut into the rock, producing a region of canyons,
rock overhangs, and wide valleys (U.S. Soil Conservation Service 1956:3-4).

18

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Map of Texas showing location of Musk Hog Canyon.

Crockett County is in what Blair (1950) defines as the Balconian Biotic
Province. The climate is warm and is classified as dry semiarid mesothermal
(Blair 1950:113). The temperature ranges from 32.2 degrees C (90 degrees F),
or higher in the summer, to an average of 11.6 degrees C (53 degrees F) in the
winter. Sudden cold fronts known as northers cause rapid and frequent temperature changes. The annual rainfall averages 46.5 cm (18.33 inches), but this
varies considerably, with a record low of 17.3 cm (6.82 inches) in !952, and a
record high of 98.89 cm (38.98 inches) in 1975 (Wiedenfeld and McAndrew
1968:30).
The most characteristic plant association of the Balconian is a scrub forest
of Mexican cedar (Juniperus mexicana), Texas Oak (Quereus texana), stunted
live oak (Quercus virginiana), and various other less numerous species. This
association occupies the more dissected parts of the area to the near exclusion
of others, and it occurs throughout the area of the Balconian. Mesquite is
distributed throughout the Balconian, and to the west, it and the live oak

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

19

become the most conspicuous woody vegetation. The floodplains of the
streams are occupied by a mesic forest of large live oaks, elms, hackberries,
and pecans (Blair 1950:113).

Tharp (1952:50-56) includes Crockett County in his Foothill-Mesa-Valley
Region of Trans-Pecos Texas. This region:
¯ . . occupies not only all of Texas west of the Pecos River but an area extending eastward beyond the Pecos. Topographica!ly it lies at elevations
below the oak savanna. Physiographically it is very diverse; and this diversity, reflected in the vegetation, renders its separation into four subregions
desirable for clarity of treatment. They are as follows: (a) the sotolqechuguilla hills; (b) the mesa slopes; (c) the intermesa valley flats; and (d) the
intermountain valleys (Tharp 1952: 50).

The vegetation in region 10a (sotol4echuguilla hills) consists mainly of sotol
(Dasylirion spp.) and lechuguilla (Agave lechuguilla). Interspersed in the sotol
and lechuguilla cover, especially east of the Pecos River, are local areas with
admixtures of guajillo (Acacia berlandieri) (Tharp 1952:50). Also present are
marble-fruit prickly pear cactus (Opuntia strigil), sacahuista (Nolina texana),
and various grasses (Glendon Weir 1980 :personal communication).
The sotol4echuguilla hills:
¯ .. comprise bold foothills with steep slopes, representing the present state
of erosional dissection of the cretaceous limestone through which the Rio
Grande and its tributaries are cutting their way. For the most part the hills
are either conical or rather sharp ridged; but an occasional one is topped by
a vestige of cap rock, a level stratum of hard, resistant limestone which
farther north is a topographic feature of the "Mesa Country" (Tharp 1952:

50).
The next region is what Tharp refers to as the mesa slopes. The mesa slopes
were undoubtedly of economic importance to the aboriginal inhabitants but
have seldom if ever been described in the archeological literature (Lorrain
1968:8). An important vegetational community exists at the base of the cap
rock where rock-shelters are commonly found¯
Scrub woody vegetation is usually impenetrably dense at the base of the
cap rock, especially on north and east exposures, where greater moisture
content in the soil, together with protection from the drying effect of winds,
results in ranker growth of mesic species and the accumulation of more
humus in a richer soil (Tharp 1952:51-52).

According to Tharp (1952:52), oak (Quercus sp.), juniper (Juniperus spp.),
hackberry (Celtis spp.), catclaw (Acacia and Mimosa spp.), Texas mountain
laurel, or mescalbean (Sophora secundiflora), shrub sparge, or candeliUa (Euphorbia antisyphilitica), shrub (or bush) Croton (Croton fruticulosus), two
sumacs (Rhus spp.), Mexican buckeye (Ungadia speciosa), Mexican (or Texas)
persimmon (Diospyros texana), white brush (Aloysia gratissima), and Condalia
(Condalia sp.) combine to form thickets so dense that they exclude all but
shade-loving herbs.
The upper slopes carry thinning stands of woody growth that become progressively scrubbier as they extend downward from the base of the cap rock,
with Pinchot’s juniper (Juniperus pinchotii) the most conspicuous species
(Tharp 1952:52).
Lower slopes become more gradual near the fiats. Here cedars are replaced
by midget buckthorn (Rhamus sp.), catclaw (Acacia sp.), ocotillo (Fouquieria

20

Texas Archeological Society

splendens), allthorn (Koeberlinia spinosa), and Condalia (Condalia sp.) (Tharp
t952:52).
Passing on to subregion 10b, the mesa slopes, a word of explanation is in
order regarding the choice of this restrictive term rather than the more inclusive term mesa. Mesa is a Spanish word meaning table, and the Mesa
Region takes its name from the abundance of flat-topped hills which rise
several hundred feet above the broad intervening valley flats. The peculiar
topography is due to a horizontal stratum of erosion-resistant limestone
twenty to thirty feet thick which "caps" the softer underlying strata. The
sides fall away from the base of the perpendicular margin of cap rock, steeply
at first, but becoming gentler lower down toward the intermesa valleys. The
sizes of the mesas vary from mere fragments, each with only a vestige of cap
rock to those whose tops comprise scores of square miles .... the smaller
mesas, true to their appearance from the valleys below, have essentially flat
tops; but the larger ones have undulating surfaces bearing considerable
residual gravelly soil which supports a vegetation very similar to that of the
intermesa valley flats (10c) (Tharp 1952:51 ).
Subregion 10c (the intermesa valley flats) is dominated by creosote bush
(Larrea divaricata) and blackbrush (Acacia rigidula) in varying combinations
and densities.
In exceptionally favorable areas, mesquite (Prosopis grandulosa), white brush (Aloysia gratissima), and other species more common
farther east, occur in stands usually sufficiently open to constitute savannas¯
On these savannas communities of buffalo grass (Buchloe dactyloides),
thrive, frequently in almost pure stands (Tharp 1952:52).
Farther removed from drainage channels, the grasses, occupying the open
spaces in the predominantly creosote-bush stand, are also thinly scattered,
none having either first-rank or second-rank importance (Tharp 1952:54).

Subregion 10d-the broad intermountain valley-is essentially grassland, but
with yucca (Yucca spp.), cholla (Opuntia imbricata), and broomweed (Xanthocephalum sp.) widely distributed and frequently conspicuous. Shrubby species
of severa! affinities are more sparsely represented, mainly along the drainage
systems; desert willow (Chilopsis linearis), walnut (Yuglans sp.), juniper (Juniperus spp.), small-leaved sumac (Schmaltzia [now Rhus] Mierophylla), ocotillo
(Fouquieria splendens), Apache plume (Fallugia), aUthorn (Koeberlinia spinosa),
Clematis, Coldenia, Aloysia, Condalia, and Viquiera stenloba are some of the
more common (Tharp 1952:54).
An abundance of fauna thrive in the Balconian Province. The following were
observed by field parties in the northwestern part of Crockett County during
the 1966 and 1967 field seasons:
¯ ¯ . ringtail, raccoon, ground squirrel, rock squirrel, jack rabbit, cottontail,
deer, beaver, skunk, several species of bats, rock wren, green heron, mourning
dove, bluebird, vulture, several hawks, lizards, rock rattlesnakes, diamondback rattlesnake, pink racer, fishes and freshwater mussel (Lorrain 1968:11).

Blair (1950:113-114) lists 57 species of mammals, 16 species of lizards, and
36 species of snakes in his discussion of the Balconian Biotic Province. Larger
mammals, including puma (Fells concolor), wolf (Canis sp.), black bear (Ursus
americanus), ante!ope (Antilocapra americana), and bison (Bison bison), probably were common in prehistoric times but have been eliminated ordrastically
reduced in numbers (Gentry Steele 1980: personal communication).
As of the 1970 census, Crockett County, with its 7237 km2 (2794 square
miles) (Moore 1975:16) and population of 3885 (Moore 1975:26), must be

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

21

considered sparsely populated. Conditions such as rainfall, sparse vegetation,
and poor soils, which have affected population density in the twentieth century,
probably influenced prehistoric populations as well. However, survival is possible, and man has done just that in this region for over 8000 years by adapting
and molding his lifeways to the environment.

ARCHEOLOGICAL AND ETHNOHISTORICAL BACKGROUND

Few systematic archeological investigations have been carried out in Crockett
County. The first scientific investigation of a prehistoric site in Crockett County
was in 1966, when the Texas Archeological Society tested two burned rock
middens and a small rock-shelter in what is referred to by Word (1971:271)
as the Dunlap complex. From this work Word concluded that during Archaic
times the west-central part of Crockett County showed a strong cultural affinity
with the Trans-Pecos region. Perishable materials such as sandals, matting, and
cordage are quite similar to those found in the Lower Pecos - Devils River areas
(Word 1971:309). Projectile point types such as Langtry, Shumla, Ensor,
Paisano, and Frio support this association, whereas the presence of Clifton and
Harrell arrow points and Daft, Ellis, Lange, Martindale, Montell, Pedernales,
Travis, Trinity, and Uvalde dart points suggest eastern influence (Word 1971:
309). "It appears that the strongest influence is from the lower Pecos - Devils
River area with lesser influences from the areas to the southwest, east, and
southeast" (WOrd 1971:309). The two burned rock middens are viewed by
Word as the result of plant processing and cooking activities, and the rock-shelter
as a camping area with a large fire hearth resembling a mescal pit that Greer
refers to as Type IV. According to Greer (1965:45), this type of pit is found
in or just inside the mouths of rock-shelters. This feature conforms in location
and description to Greer’s typology for this type of cooking pit (Word 1971 :
285). Radiocarbon dates for Midden 1 yielded ages ranging from A.D. 1010 to
A.D. 1410. Greer (1968a:41) states that the earlier date (A.D. 1010) is inconsistent with the data and that the range of dates for this complex is better
represented as A.D. 1280 to A.D. 1410.
According to Greet (1968a:39), two ring midden sites were excavated in
Crockett County between 1963 and 1968. Only one of these sites, dug by
Arnold Sommer of Midland, Texas, is discussed by Greer, and the date of excavation is not given. The presence of a small subsurface slab4ined pit suggests
an earth oven, but Greer (1968a:41) questions what was actually cooked.
In 1968, three reports concerning the prehistory of this area were published.
Findings at several rock-shelters and two burned rock middens in a salvageoriented project are described by Lorrain (1968). Aaron D. Riggs, Jr., published
four reports on shelters in Crockett County, 41CX10 (Riggs 1968a), 41CX12
(Riggs 1968b), 41CX29 (Riggs 1969), and 41CX109 (Riggs 1974).
In 1967, Riggs (1968c:79) excavated 41CXl 1, a buried midden site in northwestern Crockett County. No recognizable pattern of deposit, cooking basin,
or pit outline was discernable within the deposit. However, burned rock or heatfractured limestone in this quantity "surely was created by cooking" (Riggs
1968c:82).
Matrix samples from a thin occupation lens in Gobbler Shelter (41CX117)
were collected by the Texas Highway Department’s archeological staff. These
materials were analyzed by J. Phil Dering and Harry J. Shafer, of Texas A&M

22

Texas Archeological Society

University, in an attempt to determine seasonality of occupation. Although the
question of the seasonal occupation of this site was not satisfactorily answered,
the matrix samples provided other useful information. For example, 13 genera
of plants commonly listed as Lower Pecos food sources were identified, and
new plant identification techniques were explored. This represents the largest
compilation of potentially economic plants reported from archeological sites
in Crockett County (Dering and Shafer 1976:226). The Gobbler Shelter study
is the first systematic collection and analysis of dried plant remains in Crockett
County (Dering and Shafer 1976:210) and is one of the earliest such studies in
the greater Lower Pecos region of Texas.
More extensive archeological work has .been conducted in the Lower Pecos
region south of Crockett County. Salvage operations in the Amistad International Reservoir district and independent efforts at Hinds Cave, to name a few,
have provided important comparative data for areas such as Crockett County in
close proximity to the Lower Pecos (see references cited in Shafer and Bryant
1977:129-t37).
In all, 512 archeological sites have been documented in the Musk Hog Canyon
drainage system. The Texas Department of Highways and Transportation recorded 77 sites in a 1971 survey, and the Texas Archeological Society added 435
sites in 1976.
Musk Hog Canyon is in a peripheral part of what is known archeologically
as the Lower Pecos region of Texas. Although the prehistory of Crockett
County has not been well defined, its similarity to the Lower Pecos in terms of
environment, types of sites, and archeological materials allows an opportunity
for valuable comparative study.
The semiarid environment of southwestern Texas, with its excellent possibilities for preservation, provides the archeologist with a laboratory setting equal
to any in North America. Unfortunately the archeological record of this area
will never be complete, a result (in part) of factors such as uncontrolled relic
hunting and the unsophisticated excavation techniques of early archeologists.
"The intensity of pothunting and destruction of archeological sites is greater
than in any other area known to the writer" (Lorrain 1968:11).
Virtually every rock-shelter in West Texas has been at least partially destroyed by vandals. Archeological work in the Lower Pecos began in the 1930s,
was poorly controlled, and was conducted primarily in order to obtain specimens for museums and to build chronology. Very little of this work has been
published (Shafer and Bryant 1977:4).
In the past, major emphasis was placed on development of a cultural/chronological sequence based upon projectile point styles, sometimes to the exclusion
of other classes of artifacts. The importance of analyses of fossil pollen, coprolites, and plant macrofossils was not yet recognized. The positive result of the
emphasis on projectile point studies is a relatively sound chronology of the area
for several thousand years (Shafer 1971). The negative result, however, is the
destruction of other data that can never be recovered.
In 1965, a major change occurred in archeological tlfinking. The emphasis,
previously on chronology building, shifted to include paleoecological studies
(Shafer and Bryant 1977). Archeologists began to examine coprolites and fossil
pollen instead of discarding them. These studies have added a new dimension
to the archeological record of the region, for now variables such as prehistoric
diets and environmental changes can be measured in addition to lithics, pottery,

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

23

and other tangible artifacts traditionally studied. According to Dering and
Shafer (1976:209), archeologists, by discarding the dried plant materials, have
overlooked perhaps the largest potential source of information about the lifeways of the prehistoric inhabitants.
The sites in the Lower Pecos region of Texas vary widely. Sites considered
typical include lithic scatters, chipping/quarrying locations, hearths, burned
rock middens, burned rock scatters, and rock-shelters. Rock art is sometimes
found in sheltered localities and is described by Kirkland (1939), Kirkland and
Newcomb (1967), and Shafer (1975).
An important factor to remember is the relation of these different sites to
each other and to the environment. It is a mistake to study only a particular
site out of context with the data potential of other similar sites. For example,
rock-shelters have received the most attention because their deposits are so well
preserved. It was common in the 1930s to refer to the inhabitants of these
shelters as Texas Cave Dwellers. These sites were studied as separate entities,
apart from their context. Other sites, such as isolated hearths, were hardly
studied at all. According to Shafer (1971:44), hearths are important, although
much ignored, archeological resources. Only recently has the importance of
these single-event activity loci been recognized. Musk Hog Canyon provides
researchers with an excellent opportunity to examine these kinds of sites in
their environmental and archeological contexts. This is possible because (1)
about 90 percent of the canyon was surveyed, and (2) sites of all types mentioned above were recorded during the 1976 field school.
The current archeologlcal data suggest that Crockett County was inhabited
by small bands of hunters and gatherers who depended mainly on gathering and
processing plants such as sotol, agave, yucca, and prickly pear for their survival.
Remains of these plants are found in virtually all rock-shelters in the Lower
Pecos and Trans-Pecos regions of Texas that exhibit traces of human habitation.
The evidence from Hinds Cave (Shafer and Bryant 1977; Dering 1979; WilliamsDean 1979) positively indicates an adaptation to the resources of this area with
no major changes in subsistence strategies for about 9000 years-an unusually
long period of stability. These groups were practicing a foraging lifeway within
a restricted geographical area with limited influence from external sources.
Shafer (1978:4) has demonstrated, through his study of organic residue and
wear patterns on lithic tools from Hinds Cave, that these prehistoric Lower
Pecos populations were procuring resources from the immediate environment.
Resources from outside the Lower Pecos environment were absent. "It was a
totally self-sufficient system from a natural resource perspective" (Shafer 1978:

4).
If these groups did indeed exist on the products of their immediate environments, the sites present in each region should represent groups of interrelated
activity areas. The functions of these sites are probably directly related to the
seasonal rounds of resource procurement activities. Although these statements
may eventually be disproved, they provide the context in which Musk Hog
Canyon and other large areas must be studied if meaningful conclusions are to
be drawn from the data.
Ethnographic data relating specifically to Crockett County are virtually nonexistent. However, sources relating to the area in general do exist and can
help to provide a partial picture of the historic Indian groups who inhabited this
area.

24

Texas Archeological Society

In prehorse days (prior to the seventeenth century), this part of southwestern
Texas may have been occupied intermittently by Coahuiltecan speakers of the
Hokan-Siouan linguistic family based in Coahuila, Mexico, and by speakers of
the Concho stock of the Uto-Aztecan family (Shafer 1971:3). The Concho
speakers, especially the Chisos groups, occupied both sides of the Rio Grande
in the Big Bend (Figure 1) (Griffin 1969; Campbell 1970) and may have ranged
eastward into what is now Crockett County. It is also possible that Jumano
groups, enroute to the bison country east of the Pecos, made trips into the area
from the La Junta region, and may have camped in the area for short periods
of time (BoRon 1911:1916).
Migrant Apache bands wandered into the Lower Pecos - northern Coahuila
region in the eighteenth century and filled a void in the indigenous Indian populations created by the effect of Spanish colonization (Griffin 1969). During the
nineteenth century, Comanche raiding parties were notorious for traveling across
Texas and into Mexico, but it is doubtful that they ever settled very long in one
area.
According to Griffin (1969), the Coahuiltecan-speaking Chisos groups, who
occupied the Big Bend, were nomadic hunters and gatherers. They utilized
mesquite, prickly pear, and agaves. The major game animals hunted were
rabbits (hunted with snares, nets, and clubs), deer (taken with the bow and
arrow), and fish where obtainable.
Dwellings consisted of skin-covered and grass-covered huts, probably domeshaped and open on one side (Shafer 1971:4). The use of caves or rock-shelters
for dwellings has been reported for only one group, the Tobosos (Shafer 1971 :

4).
The individual groups were usually family-sized bands ranging in number
from about a dozen to 75 or more individuals. Until they were attracted to the
Spanish missions, Tobosos bands evidently had no fixed place in which to reside
(Griffin 1969:115). They recognized territories and harvested certain plants
seasonally. One reference to Chisos bands mentions them moving to the confluence of the Rio Grande and the Salado River in the winter and "living in a
nearby mountain where they would provision themselves with meat and hides
from the buffalo they hunted there" (Griffin 1969:93). Griffin believes that
the reference to the Salado was intended to mean the Pecos River; if so, these
Indians might have been frequenting the many large rock-shelters in the Lower
Pecos - Rio Grande region and hunting bison on the Edwards Plateau and the
adjacent plains to the north (Shafer 1971:4). Although we cannot prove at this
time that these historic Indians are descendants of those responsible for the
archeological sites in Musk Hog Canyon and southwestern Texas, knowledge of
their lifeways may give us some insight into the lifeways of prehistoric hunting
and gathering populations of this area.

RING MIDDENS: AN OVERVIEW

The purpose of this section is to provide the reader with a synthesis of current information relating to ring middens of southwest Texas and adjacent
areas, the types of data collected, and theories about the functions of certain
categories of artifacts.

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

25

Location
According to Greer (1965:41), ring middens, or midden circles, are widely
distributed in central and western Texas, the Guadalupe Mountains of southeastern New Mexico, east-central Arizona, northern Chihuahua and other parts
of northern Mexico, west-central California, and southern Colorado.
Ring middens are one of the most common types of archeological sites in
southwestern Texas. "With the exception of simple hearths, dense accumulations of crescent rings, or circular concentrations of angular fragments of burned
limestone, were the most frequent kind of open cultural deposit observed in
Sanderson Canyon" (Shafer 1971:6).
Burned rock middens make up the largest category of sites at Musk Hog
Canyon, with a total of 146 midden sites recorded. An additional 73 sites
described as burned rock scatters also were recorded, and it is possible that at
least some of these sites are small burned rock middens.
In the western part of the Lower Pecos and Trans-Pecos areas, ring middens
have been reported in the following counties: Brewster (Mallouf and Tunnell
1977), Culberson (Katz 1978), Hudspeth (Johnson 1977; Lynn and Baskin
1975; Skinner, Steed and Bearden 1973), Pecos (Shafer 1971), Presidio (Johnson 1977), Sutton (Jarvis and Crawford 1974), Terrell (Shafer 197!), E1 Paso
(Greer 1968a), and Val Verde (Shafer 1971 ; Greer 1968b).
According to Greer (1968a:39), ring middens in Crockett, Sutton, and Val
Verde counties are typically located in regions of low hills and fairly wide canyons. Another type of Texas ring midden site, located in E1 Paso County, is
on a flat, sandy desert section of the mountain and basin region east of E1 Paso
(Greer 1968a:39-40). Greer (1968a) also describes sites in Colorado and New
Mexico. A ring midden site east of Trinidad, in southeastern Colorado, "is on
the open plains and next to a large canyon" (Greer 1968a:40). The sites in
southern New Mexico are in the Guadalupe Mountains of Carlsbad Caverns
National Park, just north of Culberson County, Texas. Greer (1968a:40) states
that one site (with three tested middens) is at the base of the mountains, while
two others are on top of an escarpment (600 to 1300 feet high) which overlooks
the desert flats to the east and south.
Sites with burned rock middens have been recorded in the mouths of rockshelters as well as in open areas. One of the large burned rock middens in Hinds
Cave provides an excellent opportunity to compare a shelter midden with those
typically located in open-air settings. According to Greer (1968a:45-46), several
types of midden circles and mescal pits are commonly found in front of or inside
rock-shelters (Greer’s Type II and Type III midden circles and Type IV mescal
pits).
Age

Ring middens appear to be a relatively late prehistoric and historic cultural
innovation in southwestern Texas. Age determination of ring middens is based
on cross-dating of projectile points found in midden-bearing sites and radiocarbon dating of organic materials found in the middens.
According to Sharer (1971:7), cross-dating of projectile points such as Ensor,
Frio, and Paisano, which have been collected from crescent middens, has allowed
tentative placement of these sites in contexts ranging from late prehistoric to
historic (200 B.C. to A.D. 1600). This estimate is based on the Lower Pecos

26

Texas Archeological Society

chronology developed by Story and Bryant (1966), and it is also supported in
part by the sequence at Arenosa Shelter (Dibble 1967).
Ensor, Frio, and Paisano dart point types, as well as various unnamed sidenotched and corner-notched varieties, constitute the majority of projectile point
forms collected from crescent middens in Sanderson Canyon, with 7 of 11 dart
points falling into the above categories (Shafer 1971).
Similar evidence was found in Sutton County by Jarvis and Crawford (1974).
They tested several ring middens, and Ensor and Frio accounted for 13 of the 23
identifiable dart point types. At Musk Hog Canyon 14 of the 16 dart points
collected from the surface of several ring middens were side-notched forms
similar to Ensor, Frio, and Paisano.
Earlier projectile point forms have also been recorded. From Sutton County,
Marcos, Montell, Pedernales, Martindale, and Gower dart points were excavated
from two ring midden locations. A Langtry point was collected from the surface
of a ring midden during the Sanderson County reconnaissance (Shafer 1971).
Although the presence of these relatively early projectile point forms appears
to indicate an early beginning for ring middens, it must be remembered that
their presence alone does not lend much credence to such hypothesis. Other
factors must be considered before such a statement can be made. For example,
the Langtry point listed above was collected from the surface and cannot be
associated definitely with the midden and the activities associated with it. The
other early points listed above could have been reused and abandoned by later
groups who constructed and used the ring middens. According to Harry Shafer
(1979:personal communication), the Martindale and Gower points from Sutton
County are questionable and may actually be Ensor or Frio types. Also, such
Early and Middle Archaic points are not consistent with the radiocarbon dates
from this area (see Table 1).
An alternative function for ring middens has been suggested by Greet (1968b).
He hypothesized that a crescent midden site he tested in Val Verde County may
have been occupied more than once; the burned rock accumulations provided
convenient foundations on which temporary dwellings may have been constructed. No sound archeological or ethnographical evidence has yet been unearthed to support this statement (Harry Shafer 1980 :personal communication).
Physical Characteristics of Ring Middens
Ring middens of several varieties are found in southwestern Texas, but not
all kinds of ring middens were necessarily used for cooking or processing plants.
Ring middens in Sutton County, Texas, are accumulations of fire-cracked
rocks:
¯ . . deposited in a mounded circle with one side usually slightly higher than
the other. The center of the accumulation usually has a wide, shallow depression, often containing a dark, ashy soil mixed with a few burned rock
fragments¯ The features range in size from large, circular accumulations
measuring forty to fifty feet in diameter, to small, shallow circular or crescent-shaped, ten to twenty feet in diameter (Jarvis and Crawford 1974: 1).
Ring middens have been divided into the following types:

1. Small, low, circular middens with rock and ash rims
2. Larger, steeper circular middens with rims made almost entirely of firecracked rocks but with no ash rims

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

27

Table 1. Tentative Projectile Point Chronology for the
Lower Pecos Area (after Collins 1974)

Radiocarbon
Dates

Period
Designations

Diagnostic Projectile Point Types

A.D. 1600

Historic

A.D. 1000

I

Clifton; Perdiz; Livermore; Toyah

100 B.C.

H

Ensor; Frio; Paisano

G

Marcos

500 B.C.

F

Shumla

600 B.C.

E

Montell; Castroville; Marshall

2100 B.C.

D

Val Verde; Langtry

4000 B.C.

C

Pandale; Nolan

6000 B.C.

B

Baker; Bandy; "early barbed"

A

Plainview golondrina; Angostura;
lanceolate forms; early stemmed

PaleoIndian

Folsom ; Plainview

8000 B.C.

3.
4.
5.

Semicircular middens with wide, obvious subsurface depressions
Semicircular middens with no obvious subsurface depressions
Scattered rocks surrounding wide subsurface depressions (rarely observed

form)
6. Oval-shaped with the central depression toward one end; ash is found in
the rim and the high side is very wide (Greer 1975:5)
According to Greer (1975:6), middens sometimes contain several stone4ined,
basin-shaped hearths superimposed in the centers. Some of these exhibit single
or overlapping stone4ined hearth depressions. The hearths vary greatly in form,
and it may be difficult to distinguish between stone-lined central hearths and
stone-lined earth ovens.
Three types of concentrations of angular fragments of burned limestone rocks
were recorded in the Sanderson Canyon watershed (Shafer 1971:6-7). The most
common is a crescent-shaped accumulation with flat or depressed ashy areas
between the open ends of the crescent. A smaller, dome-shaped accumulation
often extends across the depression (or open area) from the concave part of the
crescent-shaped deposit.
One of the burned rock features from Hinds Cave described above is tentatively dated to Period B (7000 B.C. to 4000 B.C.) (Table 1) in the Lower Pecos
sequence based on the association of sma!l, thin, barbed points with fish-tail
bases. These fish-tail points are classified as Bandy points by Word and Douglas
(1970:21). This burned rock feature is not a true ring midden, and the date

28

Texas Archeological Society

assigned to it is not necessarily applicable to open-air ring middens. However,
the area in which this feature occurred apparently was used in the preparation
of desert succulents in much the same manner as were the open-air middens.
If this is true, and if this feature has been dated correctly, there is strong evidence that prehistoric populations in the Lower Pecos and Trans-Pecos areas of
Texas changed their adaptive strategy very little for at least 5000 years, and
possibly for as long as 9000 years as Dering (1979) has suggested.

Eighteen radiocarbon dates are reported by Greer (1968a:42) for ring middens in Texas, Colorado, and New Mexico. Dates for sites in Texas were obtained from Crockett, E1 Paso, Sutton, and Val Verde counties. Seven of the ten
dates for Texas sites cluster between A.D. 1240_+80 (Tx-362) and A.D. 1410+
100 (Tx-358). Three earlier dates of 610+100 B.C. (Tx-291), A.D. 990_+80
(Tx-363), and A.D. 10!0_+120 (Tx-310) years suggest that the use of ring
middens in open-air settings may be somewhat older than has been previously
believed.
Function
Among those who have studied middens, the consensus is that ring middens,
crescent middens, and other circular burned rock accumulations in southwestern
Texas and other parts of the Southwest functioned as areas of plant processing
and baking, using an earth oven principle.
Greer (!968a) divides ring middens into two categories: midden circles and
mescal pits. According to his studies (Greer 1968a:39), "midden circles are the
remains of the surface hearths from which the broken stones have been thrown
back in a circle producing a mound of rocks and ash with a central depressed
area of ash." He views mescal pits as the remains of earth ovens. The mounds
of burned rocks and ash are the result of raking back the coals and broken slabs
after plant baking.
Ring middens have also been referred to as doughnut middens, circle mounds,
cooking mounds, cooking pits, sotol pits, earth ovens, circular middens, midden
circles, and mescal pits. The association of massive charcoal deposits, together
with overcooked plant remains and cut leaf bases of processed plants, in the
burned rock midden in Hinds Cave is strong evidence that this shelter midden
was used as a plant preparation site in much the same way as open-air ring middens are believed to have functioned.
The open ends of the crescents in the middens recorded during this survey are
oriented toward the east, southeast, or south (Shafer 1975:6). This is consistent
with Greer’s (1975:7) statement that "middens with a northerly dip (wind from
the north) are exceedingly rare."
Site 41TE48 is a good example of a crescent burned rock midden. The main
burned rock concentration is facing south-southeast. The highest and thickest (in width) portion of the deposit is at the west side where the burned
rock reaches a height of approximately 4 feet. From the highest point, the
accumulation grades down to the ground level at each point of the crescent.
At the open end just beyond the two arms is a small, dome-shaped accumulation of burned rock slightly over 1 foot high and some 5 feet in diameter.
In the center of the feature between the arms of the crescent is a depression
about 10 feet in diameter. Ashy matrix occurs in the central area of the feature and around (perhaps beneath) the smaller burned rock deposit. The
diameter of the midden is about 50 feet (Shafer 1971:6).

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

29

Some variations were noted in the morphology of the crescent-shaped middens in Sanderson Canyon. Shafer (1971:7) found the following differences:
(1) the absence of the smaller burned rock deposit at some middens, (2) a
central pit (not always obvious in some middens), (3) slight variation in the
orientation of the open end and, (4) variations in height and overall size of the
accumulations.
The second type is a circular pavement of burned rock fragments 7.6 to 12.2
meters (25 to 40 feet) in diameter, which appear as oval-shaped pavements of
burned rock fragments (Shafer 1971:7). Pits or vacant areas in the center are
not obvious at these sites, and the accumulated rock fragments are not significantly thick.
Artifacts Associated with Ring Middens
Ring middens are not usually associated with numerous artifacts. Often the
central depression or pit area is completely devoid of artifacts. A typical site is
described as follows:
¯ . . other than burned rock, the occupational debris occurring on the site
may include flint flakes, chipped stone artifacts, snail and mussel shells,
fragments of animal bones, battering and grinding tools and, in some areas,
pottery sherds. In most cases lithic artifacts are absent or very sparse (Jarvis
and Crawford 1974: 1).

As noted previously, dart points typically found in ring middens are sidenotched forms such as Ensor, Frio, and Paisano. Occasionally older forms such
as Montell, Marcos, and Pedernales are recorded. Arrow points are sometimes
recovered from the upper levels and from surface collections (Jarvis and Crawford 1974:13). Other types of artifacts believed to be associated with ring
middens are burins, unifaces, gravers, battering and grinding tools, knives, end
scrapers, drills, altered flakes, projectile point preforms, and miscellaneous
bifaces.
Lithic materials in the form of debitage are consistently the largest category
in virtually every assemblage. For example, debitage from the Perro Salvaje
site (41SU2) in Sutton County included 5948 flakes but only 592 tools and
altered flakes (Jarvis and Crawford 1974).
Plant Remains A ssociated with Ring Middens

Identifiable plant remains from ring middens are typically sparse, due at
least in part to the rapid deterioration of organic materials exposed in open-air
sites. The Sanderson Canyon watershed is one of the few areas in which plant
remains have been recorded in open-air middens. At site 41TE50, for example,
charred cut leaf bases were recovered from a late crescent-shaped midden, and
these macrofossils are believed to be the remains of sotol (DasylMon sp.) and
lechuguilla (Agave sp.) (Shafer 1970).
Identifiable plant remains have also been recovered from the burned rock
midden in Hinds Cave. Plant macrofossils such as sotol and lechuguilla, in the
form of overcooked plant remains and cut leaf bases of processed plants, constituted the major part of plant remains from this feature (Dering 1976).
Faunal Remains A ssociated with Ring Middens
Faunal remains are not very common in ring midden sites. At the Perro
Salvaje site only small quantities of bone (identified as deer, cottontail rabbit,

30

Texas Archeological Society

rodent, and bird) were recovered (Jarvis and Crawford 1974:25). Fragments
of bone were also recovered from the Pecos Terrace and Divide Windmill sites
at Musk Hog Canyon, but the fragments were few in number and have not been
identified at this time.
Snail shells make up the greatest body of faunal material recovered from both
Perro Salvaje and the excailated ring middens at Musk Hog Canyon. According
to Jarvis and Crawford (1974:25), the shells found in Sutton County have been
identified as land snails (Polygyra texasiana and Rabdotus sp.). The shells from
Musk Hog Canyon have not been identified at this time. Mussel shells constituted a significant portion of the midden fill at the Pecos Terrace site; mussels
were also present at the Divide Windmill site and Eiserer Shelter but only in
small quantities.
Ethnographic A nalogy

Several historical accounts briefly describe the Lipan Apache and Yuma
Indian techniques of plant preparation in earth ovens or rock-lined pits. One
such account is by F.M. Buckelew, a captive for many years among the Lipan
Apache, who describes the preparation of sotol as follows:
In the preparation of this plant for food, large quantities of the bulb were
gathered and collected in a place suitable for a large kiln. A large circular
hole was then dug three or four feet and several feet in diameter. In this
hole they would place a large pile of wood and rock in such a way that the
rock would become thoroughly heated by the time the wood was consumed.
The rocks were then placed in such a way that the soto (sic) could be placed
on and around them. When this was completed, brush and leaves were placed
next to the soto, and the entire heap covered with dirt so as to make it airtight. This was allowed to remain several days during which time the heat
from the rocks would thoroughly cook it. When satisfied that the contents
were thoroughly cooked, they would remove the dirt and leaves, exposing a
glistening white heap of crisp soto. The bulbs were then spread out in the sun
where they could dry. When perfectly dry the flakes or thin layers would
spearate easily. This completed, the task of preparing it for food was just
begun, as it was necessary to make large holes in rocks or logs in which the
soto was placed when it was beaten and ground by large wooden pestles until
it resembled white flour. The flour was then mixed with water and made
into small cakes and baked in the ashes and embers of a fire (Dennis and
Dennis 1925:72-73).

Accounts of the processing of mescal by the Apache (Lipan?) are provided
by Opler. Apache women, unless they lived near a mescal source,
¯ . . make a long trip to obtain it, establish a temporary camp, and prepare
it there before returning home. When many crowns are to be baked, a large
pit must be dug and many rocks transported to it . . . (Opler 1941:356).
Opler (1941:357) goes on to say that when men accompany the women on
such a trip, they dig the pit while the women gather the yucca stalks. He describes the pits as follows:
¯ . . round, seven feet or more across and three or four feet deep. This hole is
lined evenly with rocks¯ Then a pile of wood is brought¯ This is put into the
hole in criss-cross layers, first a layer one way and then a second layer the
other¯ It is built up like this until the pit is just about full. Then more rocks
are put on top of this wood. Fire is touched to it (Opler 194! :356).

Another account of the preparation of mescal in an earth pit states that:

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

31

Mescal pits are usually circular depressions in the ground, a foot to 3 feet in
depth, and lined with coarse gravel. A fire was built in the pit, raked out
after the stones became hot, and the mescal plants put in and covered with
grass. After two days’ steaming the pile was opened and the mescal was ready
for consumption (Hough 1959:846).
The White Mountain and San Carlos Apache groups of east-central Arizona
also exploited mescal. Their method of gathering and processing this plant is
described below:
¯ . . a large pit is dug and filled with dry wood, on which a large quantity of
stones is piled. The wood is then ignited and when it burns down to live coals
and the stones to a white heat, wet twigs, rushes or flags are quickly placed
on them to a thickness of about a foot. The mescal roots are then hurled
on the smoking mass, wet grass and twigs placed over them, and then all the
whole is snugly covered over with a foot or more of earth. A fire is then
kindled over this pile and kept burning. The cooking continues for about
twenty-four hours¯ This pit is then opened and the tubers taken out ...
(Reagan 1930:293).

Mesquite prepared in earth ovens was also eaten by the Yuma Indians:
The mesquite pods.., were cooked in a pit 3-15 feet in diameter and 3-5 feet
deep, which was lined with mature pods, covered with arrow-weed, wetted
to facilitate sweetening, covered with dirt, and then left for generally 30 days.
Sometimes a fire was built on it to hasten the process (Lynn and Baskin
1975:16-17).

In a similar manner, corn was prepared by the earth oven principle by the
White Mountain and San Carlos Apaches:
¯ . . a pit is dug and a large quantity of wood thrown into it. On this, stones
are piled. The wood is then ignited. When it has burned down to live coat
stage, the wet grass, twigs or cornhusks are piled in and then the green corn
with the shucks on is hurriedly thrown on. The corn is covered with more
wet grass or corn fodder and about six inches of dirt is heaped over the pile.
Just before closing in the top a quantity of water is poured in, to make
steam. The cooking process is then allowed to take its course for twentyfour hours, when the dirt is removed and the corn taken out .... The abandoned pit is left as sort of a mound for the speculation of future generations
(Reagan 1930:292).

The distribution of earth ovens used in the preparation of mescal in historic
times has been discussed by several people. Probably the most prominent groups
who prepared mescal in pits were the Mescalero (Schroeder 1960) and other
Apache groups (Reagan 1930; Opler 1941), and the Navajo (Greer 1965:53).
According to Spier (1928:119), "mescal (agave) is gathered and roasted in pits
by most, if not all, the non-Puebloan peoples and perhaps by the Pueblo and
Mexican tribes as well. It is an item of some importance for the Jicarilla, Mescalero, White Mountain and San Carlos Apache, Navajo, Havasupai, Paiute, Yavapai, Pima, Cahuilla, and Huichol." The Cochimi, Sonora, Sinaloa, Culican,
Concho, and Jumano tribes are listed by Beals (1932:164) as mescal roasters.
He also reports the use of pit ovens for agave in the Mexican states of Nuevo
Leon, Jatisco, and Mexico.
The bulbs at the base of the upper leaves of the mescal were used in the
preparation of an intoxicating beverage (Reagan 1930). This practice extended
from the Fort Apache region in Arizona into northern Chihuahua (Greer 1965:

32

Texas Archeological Society

50). Greer (1965:49) also mentions that in some areas of northern Chihuahua
mescal is used in the preparation of candy.
According to Spier (1928:106), mescal was used by the Havasupai to make
paint. The paint was made by boiling the rocks at the bottom of the pit to
dissolve the mescal juices that had dried onto the stones during roasting. Red
paint was added to this juice and the mixture was boiled until it reached a
doughy consistency. Then it was rolled into a small ball which was used as a
crayon or mixed with water to form a liquid paint.
The above references are presented in order to demonstrate the varied uses of
earth ovens by Indians in historic times in Texas and the Southwest. The writer
is not postulating that the ring middens at Musk Hog Canyon were used for all
of the purposes mentioned above.
Not all cooking pits are necessarily old, as some desert succulents are still
being exploited. According to Greer (1965:50), abandoned pits used in the
modern-day production of intoxicating drinks from sotol resemble his Type I
mescal pit, and the surface features conform to his Type IB midden circles.
The techniques used by a small group of Mexican nationals processing yucca
(Yucca treculeana) in eastern Zavala County in the 1970s is described as an
activity that may closely resemble the techniques by which local prehistoric
groups harvested yucca (Hill, Holdsworth, an d Hester 1976:19-21).

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ARTIFACT COLLECTION PROCEDURES

Pecos Terrace Site (41CX218)
The Pecos Terrace site is a moderate sized ring-shaped (circular), burned
rock midden situated on a terrace of the Pecos River near the mouth of the
arroyo draining Musk Hog Canyon (Figure 2). This site was selected for testing
because of the ring-shaped feature on its surface, its proximity to the Pecos
River, and its floodplain setting.
The major component of the Pecos Terrace site is the accumulation of angular fragments of fire-cracked limestone cobbles and dark gray ashy soil containing mussel shells, snail shells, and lithic artifacts (listed in order of frequency). The mounding of discarded rock fragments around a central depression has resulted in a ring-shaped feature (Figure 3). Dimensions of the principal
midden were 12.2 meters north to south and 13.2 meters east to west. The
central depression measures about 7 meters north to south (ridge crest to ridge
crest). The height and rock mass of the midden ring are greatest on the north,
where the mounding reaches 75 cm; a secondary mounding on the south side
reaches about 50 cm. The highest point is about 80 cm. Alluvial fill postdating
midden use covers much of the outer apron of burned rock. Evidence provided
by the excavation indicates that much of the regular caliche/limestone bedrock
was exposed at the time the midden was in use.
The objectives of testing this site were (1) to expose a profile through the
center of the midden in order to examine its structure and explore for a central
pit-oven, (2) to recover charcoal for radiocarbon dating and botanical analysis,
and (3) to recover a representative artifact sample (Shafer and Moore 1976:
4). It was also hoped that this site and its artifacts could be used in a study that
might suggest a broad time frame for burned rock midden use, and that it

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

PEC(

33

34 Texas Archeological Society

-’~ N60WSO

N49W

\

hod

198Z

Figure 3. Topographic map of ring midden at Pecos Terrace site (41CX218)
showing excavation units. Elevations in meters; contour interval 10 cm.

might help to delineate activity or behavior sets associated with midden function.
EXCAVATION
E. Mott Davis supervised the test excavations at the Pecos Terrace site.
Horizontal control was maintained by establishing north-south and east-west
base lines that intersected at the approximate center of the midden (Figure 3).
Using this intersection, designated N50/W50, as the basic reference, a grid
system was established. Excavation was carried out in 1-meter squares and 1by 2-meter rectangles excavated in 10-cm levels. All loose soil was passed
through quarter-inch (6.4 mm) hardware cloth to facilitate recovery of small
artifacts and botanical and faunal materials. Most digging was with small hand
tools such as trowels and brushes.
Aside from the midden itself, the only structural feature encountered in the
excavation was a slab-lined, rubble-filled central hearth. This feature was located

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

35

beneath the approximate center of the central depression in the midden. The
hearth was in a natural depression in the bedrock and was lined with slabs of
slightly to moderately stream worn limestone rocks, possibly gathered from
walls of the nearby arroyo draining Musk Hog Canyon. The hearth measured
about 2 meters in diameter, was roughly circular, and varied in depth from
about 15 to 30 cm below the surrounding bedrock. The actual depth of the
hearth could not be determined precisely, but was probably greather than 30
cm.

The central hearth was probably the focal point for baking activities that
produced the burned rock rubble forming the midden. If so, the hearth was
used many times. Its volume, estimated at between 0.80 and 1.0 meters3
suggests a capacity adequate for processing a large quantity of plant foods
(Harry Shafer 1980:personal communication). Attempts to recover sufficient
charred plant material and charcoal for dating were not successful.
SURFACE COLLECTION
According to Davis (1976:46), intensive surface collections were conducted
in transects extending north-, east-, south-, and westward from the midden.
This strategy was not intended to produce a complete collection but was rather
intended to provide an indication of the relative distribution of debitage on the
surface (Davis 1976:48).

Divide Windmill Site (41CX241)
The Divide Windmill site is on a mesa overlooking an intermittent stream that
flows eastward draining Musk Hog Canyon (Figure 2) and contains at least four
burned rock middens and at least two confirmed areas of ashy midden deposits
(Figure 4). Jack T. Hughes supervised the excavations, which, due to the large
area of occupation, were more extensive here than at any other site in the canyon.

EXCAVA~ON
Excavations at the Divide Windmill site consisted of four excavation areas
(Figure 4). Two of the four burned rock middens on the site were tested--one
in Area 1, and one in Area 3. Both of these middens are of the crescent-shaped
variety, with the crescent-shaped burned rock deposit forming the north-northwest rims.
Excavation Area I

Excavation Area 1 was in the larger of the two middens examined. The area
yielded the remains of a large central pit and enough charcoal for dating purposes (radiocarbon analysis is not yet completed). Hughes (1976) believes this
burned rock midden is an example of a creeping midden as defined by Greer
(1975). The term creeping midden refers to the apparent gradual movement of
the mass of burned rocks that make up the outer perimeter of these features.
Its configuration is a result of the practice by the users of the midden of tossing
the burned and broken rocks from the hearth into basically the same area,
relative to the hearth, following each use. The accumulation of burned rocks
grows and as new pits are dug the middens actually do creep as the burned rocks

36

Texas Archeological Society

Midden 2

EXCAVAT|i
AREA 2

Midden4

98f

AREA

1~11

5
|l

3

IO METERS

hod t982

Figure 4. Topographic map of the Divide Windmill site (41CX241) showing
excavation areas 1-4, and a plan of the grid used for surface collection. Elevations in meters; contour interval 1 meter.

are tossed over and over again into the areas previously occupied by the hearths.
The midden in Area 1 of the Divide Windmill site shows evidence of reuse that
resulted in creep to the south (Harry Sharer 1980:personal communication).
The pit Fall consisted of sooty soil and burned rock fragments, with some
snail-shell and wood fragments. The pit was lined with limestone slabs, and the
bedrock basin was as much as 80 cm deep. Excavation Area 1 was tested by a 1by 5-meter trench that crossed the center of a probable baking pit, extending
from a small rock heap on the south to a large rock heap on the north (Figure

4).
Excavation Area 2

This is one of the ashy midden areas of Area 1. The excavation consisted of
ten alternating 1-meter squares in a 2- by 10-meter rectangle (Figure 4). The
excavation was in lo-cm levels, and all soil was passed through quarter-inch
(6.4 mm) hardware cloth. Material recovered from Area 2 included mussel
shell, snails, unidentified bone, charcoal, a few fragments of wood, and lithic
flakes.

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

37

Excavation Area 3
Area 3 consists of a small crescent-shaped midden east of Areas 1 and 2
(Figure 4), apparently built around a pit oven that was used perhaps only
twice (Shafer and Moore 1976:6). Using the volume of the burned rock in
Area 3, Hughes intends to calculate the approximate intensity of use for this
part of the site (this information is not available at this time). The crest (north
side) of the midden is 20 cm above the original ground surface. The excavation
at Area 3 was a row of four 1-meter squares (Figure 4). Vertical control was
maintained by 10-cm levels.
Excavation Area 4
The three squares dug at Area 4 bisected what Hughes (1976:4) describes as
a "high dark earth spot." Vertical control was maintained by 10-cm levels
(Figure 4).
SURFACE COLLECTION
Surface collecting was organized by superimposing a grid of 91.44-meter
(100-yard) squares over the site and the surrounding catchment area, by dividing
the grid into four 45.72-meter (50-yard) quadrants labeled NW, NE, SW, SE,
and subdividing each quadrant into four 22.86-meter (25-yard) squares to
facilitate horizontal control (Figure 4). All artifacts were collected from the
surface of each square.
Eiserer Shelter Site (41CX133)
The Eiserer Shelter site is a small rock-shelter south and west of the Divide
Windmill site (Figure 2). The drip line of the overhang is about 12 meters long,
and the shelter is 6 meters deep. The highest point in the shelter is 2.75 meters
(Alvin Lynn 1980:personal communication) (Figure 5). Along the south wall
is a highly polished rock bench about 2.5 meters long. Near and on this bench
are several mortar holes, and on the roof are some red and yellow monochrome
pictographs. The site survey form for this site lists the shelter as undisturbed
with about 1 meter of fall. The mortar holes are described as being "in various
stages of use" (that is, of various depths). Copious amounts of burned rock and
flint debitage were scattered on the steep talus slope. Jane Schweitzer (1980:
personal communication), one of the crew chiefs, stated that an aboriginal path
from the mesa top down to the rock-shelter was still visible. The center of the
shelter was littered with roof spalls and occupational fill, and a large juniper tree
was growing there. The remainder of the shelter was mainly exposed bedrock.
According to crew chiefs Jane Schweitzer (1980:personal communication) and
Jim Warren (1980:personal communication), no significant amounts of burned
rock were visible in the shelter. Most of the burned rock was scattered along
the talus slope.
EXCAVATION
Escavation at the Eiserer Shelter site was under the direction of Jim Warren
and Jane Schweitzer, with assistance from Alvin Lynn. Two groups of 1-meter
squares were excavated, four inside the shelter and four along the talus slope
(Figure 5).

38

Texas Archeological Society

2

3

I

I

METERS
N

T

--Base line

alls

Approximate limit
of shelter

!i!2..:i!!i

. :.-i:~!~

Excavated
squares
/
IE

/
N2/EO

Datum(--

Bedrock
Mortar holes

ished area
bod

Figure 5. Plan of the Eiserer Shelter (41CX133) showing excavation units.

1982

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

39

Rock Shelter Excavation

Four 1-meter squres, 1E through 4E (designated by the stakes at the southwest corners) were excavated in the south end of the shelter (Figure 5). The
datum point is at the right corner of the shelter, at the southern end of the
roughly north-south base line. Two of the excavation units were on the base
line 2 meters north of the datum point; the other two were directly east, making
an excavation area 4 meters on each side (Figure 5). This part of the shelter
was selected for excavation because it offered the best opportunity for recovery
of cultural material with the least amount of interference from roof spalls and
the large juniper tree in the center of the shelter (Harry Shafer 1980:personal
communication).
An inconsistency in the labeling of the excavation units has made it difficult
to separate the artifacts recovered from the shelter excavation from those
recovered from the surface of the talus slope. The excavation units in the rockshelter were initially referred to as 1E through 4E. Later, however, they were
changed to 1S through 4S. This is confusing because some of the surface collection units were also labeled -1S through 4S. In order to interpret the artifacts
properly, the lot number for each specimen had to be consulted before it could
be assigned to one area or the other. As a result, the artifacts with S numbers
but no lot numbers were not included in this report.
Talus Slope Excavation
The four 1-meter squares (A-D) excavated on the talus slope were set up from
the bottom to the top of the slope (west to east) (Figure 6). The datum point
for these units was fixed to the center of the juniper tree in the mouth of the
shelter, and they are designated by the stakes at the southeast corners of the
squares. Excavation unit A, for example, is called W7/NO. Because of the steepness of the slope, these units were dug to different depths. Excavation unit A
was taken to 100 cm, but excavation unit C was dug only to 60 cm. Excavation
was started at the bottom of the slope so that debris and activities associated
with the excavation procedures would not disturb any units below the one being
excavated. There was not enough time to dig more than four units. Also, cactus
and other plants growing on the slope interfered with digging operations in parts
of this trench (Alvin Lynn 1980 :personal communication).
SURFACE COLLECTION
Two separate surface collections are recorded for the Eiserer Shelter site: a
random collection taken from inside the shelter, and a controlled collection
from the talus slope.
Rock-Shelter Surface Collection
The collection from inside the shelter consists entirely of artifacts that were
found on the surface (Jim Warren 1980:personal communication). No details
of provenience were recorded for any of these materials.
Talus Slope Surface Collection
The collection from the surface of the talus slope came from eight 5- by 10meter collection units (Figure 6). The same datum point used for the talus slope

40 Texas Archeological Society

4N t

2N

Areas

2S

4S

I

I

I

Ooso,,ne !,N

Excavation units I Rock-

I

.... collection

surface

~
I S

1"6"I !

shelter

-~N~atum

2/EO

5 METERS
I I

PLAN

I

f

l

I

I

5 METERS
I

Excavation units-,-.

CROSS

SECTION

~,982

Figure 6. Plan and cross section of the Eiserer Shelter site (41CX133)showing
relation of talus slope surface-collection grid and excavation units to the shelter.

excavation was used for the surface collection. Units 1N4N and 1S4S were
laid out on both sides east of the east-west base line that extends from the
datum point at the center of the north-south base line down the middle of the
talus slope (Figure 6). The crews advanced from the bottom of the talus slope,
collecting the artifacts that were visible on the surface. The crews made only
one pass up the slope, so it cannot be assumed that all of the surface artifacts
were recovered.

ARTIFACT CATEGORIES
Except for two ground stone tools (a mano from the Divide Windmill site
and a possible grinding stone or metate from the Pecos Terrace site) all of the
lithic artifacts from the sites dug in Musk Hog Canyon are of chipped stone.
In this report the artifacts are divided into two major categories: tools and
debitage. In this part of the report the surface collections are treated separately

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

41

from the excavated artifacts, but for the formulation of conclusions and inferences the artifacts recovered from each site are grouped together, regardless
of how they were recovered.
Too!s
Tools recovered from Musk Hog Canyon include projectile points, stemless
bifaces, battered stone tools, miscellaneous graverlike implements, unifaces,
burins, manos, and ground stone tools.
Some of the specimens described below may never have been used as tools,
but it is postulated here that the flint knappers who made them envisioned
tools as the end products of their work.
Certain problems are encountered in the study of artifacts and their intended
functions. Ideally, for an artifact to be classified as a tool, some evidence of
wear should be present. When no such evidence is present, identification of
specific tools and their probable functions poses problems. For example, it is
known from ethnographic accounts that arrow points were hafted to the ends
of shafts and were used in combination with bows for hunting and warfare,
and as a result they are routinely classified as projectile points whenever they
are encountered in lithic assemblages. But in many cases the functions of artifacts cannot be ascertained from shape alone, although archeologists commonly
assign function to points solely on that basis. It is quite possible that some
artifacts that are assumed to be projectile points may have functioned as knives
or as other implements (Harry Shafer 1979 :personal communication).
A different kind of problem is posed by flakes collected from the surface,
which often appear to be marginally retouched when in reality they have been
fractured by fortuitous contact between the hooves of cows, horses, and other
large animals and rocky surfaces. For that reason, only those specimens recovered from excavations were examined for possible retouching.
BIFACE TOOLS

Biface tools are divided into the following categories: projectile points,
Group 1 stemless bifaces, battered stone, and gravers, all of which are considered manufacturing end products. The bifacially flaked artifacts that were
broken in the manufacturing process-or for some other reason represent failures
in manufacture-are included under debitage.
Projectile Points
The term projectile point is used in an effort to avoid implying the specific
functional interpretations inherent in the more descriptive terms arrow point
and dart point. Artifacts are not included in this category on the basis of shape
None. Several of the items from Musk Hog Canyon have snap fractures that are
typical on artifacts broken as a result of their use as tools. Also, in a foraging
lifeway where food procurement is the predominant activity, it is not likely
that these kinds of artifacts (thinned bifaces, both stemmed and unstemmed)
would have been manufactured for nonutilitarian purposes. Morphological
characteristics such as shape, size, and width also were considered in the classification of artifacts as projectile points. Type names, when applicable, follow
Suhm and Jelks (1962). Projectile points are divided into two categories:

42

Texas Archeological Society

Category 1, Probable Dart Points
Category 1 hlcludes those projectile point forms that are likely to have
functioned as dart points.
Category 2, Probable Arrow Points
Category 2 includes those projectile point forms that are likely to have
functioned as arrow points.
Group 1, Stemless Bifaees
This category includes biface tools that are not classified as projectile pointsfinished artifacts with both percussion and pressure flaking.
Stemless bifaces have been known to function as projectile points (Harry
Shafer 1980:personal communication), but there are no data to support the
assumption that the stemless bifaces from Musk Hog Canyon functioned in that
capacity.
Battered Stone
Artifacts in this category are derived from large flint nodules, are bifaciaUy
worked, and have many hinged flake scars characteristic of edges that have been
struck or battered against other objects. This is not a new category; similar
artifacts have been found in ring midden sites in the Sanderson Canyon watershed (Shafer 1971:31).
Gravers
In this category are small, thin flakes that have been worked bifacially and
have intentionally produced drill-like or punchlike projections.
UNI~ACE TOOLS
Uniface tools from Musk Hog Canyon are divided as follows: categories 1-4
(according to the area that has been flaked), category 5 (end scrapers), category
6 (burins), and category 7 (uniface fragments), all of which appear to represent
manufacturing end products. Items are assigned to categories 1-4 solely on the
basis of their morphological characteristics. All worked edges of these artifacts
are described in terms of the following: (1) the bulb of percussion is at the
proximal end of the artifact, (2) the artifact is viewed with its dorsal surface
at the top and its ventral surface at the bottom.
Category 1, Unifaee Tools
These specimens retain the bulb of percussion and are unifacially flaked on
both lateral margins and on the distal part of the dorsal surface.
Category 2, Uniface Tools
These specimens retain the bulb of percussion and are unifaciaUy flaked on
the right margin only of the dorsal surface.
Category 3, Uniface Tools
These specimens retain the bulb of percussion and are unifaciaUy flaked on
the left margin and distal end of the dorsal surface.

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

43

Category 4, Uniface Tools
These specimens retain the bulb of percussion and are unifacially flaked on
the left margin of the ventral surface.
Category 5, End Scrapers

End scrapers are characterized by convex and steeply beveled distal ends.
These artifacts are similar to those described by Shafer (1971:31) from Sanderson Canyon as end scrapers, and it is assumed that the specimens from Musk
Hog Canyon functioned in the same capacity.
Category 6, Burins

Burins are unifaces that cannot be placed satisfactorily into any of the above
groups. Most of the tools in this category, in addition to being unifacially
trimmed, have the broad chipped notches in one or both lateral edges that are
characteristic results of application of the burin production technique. These
steep beveled notches served as striking platforms for removal of burin spalls
from edges or ends. The resulting facets are generally found on the dorsal
edges, and the resulting sharp angles of the facets converge with the ventral
surfaces. In some cases the bulbs of percussion have been altered or entirely
removed, giving the resulting tools flat ventral surfaces. Burins both with and
without cortex are present in Musk Hog Canyon. The function of these ubiquitous tools is not clear. According to Shafer (1971:34), the burin technique may
have been used to refurbish tools. The tranchet technique described by Sharer
(1976) is similar to the techniques employed at Musk Hog Canyon (Harry Shafer
1980:personal communication). The edges created by this method can be quite
sharp and could be ideally suited for the processing of desert succulents.
Pitzer (1977:12) mentions several possible uses for burins, including woodworking, leatherworking, engraving of bone, splitting reeds for basketry, and
medical purposes. Giddings (1964:211) states that the term burin "implies a
group of instruments made by a common technique; it does not always imply
equivalence of function."
Uniface Fragments
These fragments do not retain enough of the bulb of percussion to permit
classification.

GROUND STONE TOOLS

Artifacts in this category were formed by grinding and/or abrading motions
rather than by chipping. Usually the only smooth face on a ground stone tool
is the one that has been smoothed by use.
Manos

Tools in this category are typically fashioned from locally obtained cobbles
of sandstone, limestone, and sometimes, stream-worn quartzite (Shafer 1971:
34). Manos are typically associated with plant processing activities such as
grinding corn and seeds, and are common artifacts in ring midden sites in West
Texas and the Trans-Pecos.

44

Texas Archeological Society

Grinding Stones
This category includes metates-also called grinding slabs (Katz 1978:44)and other large stones used for grinding purposes. They differ from manos in
that they are larger and are not hand-held tools.

Debitage

All of the artifacts grouped under this heading lack some of the attributes
of finished tools. In this category are some bifaces that although they could not
have been further thinned, could have been used for some purposes. In this
study, however, artifacts classified as debitage are not tools. They are residue
from specific stages of tool manufacture, and as such they indicate the kinds
of flint-knapping activities that were performed at the site. The debitage is
divided into the following categories: projectile point preforms, Group 2 stemless bifaces, cores, burin spaUs, and flakes. Flakes are further grouped as primary
cortex flakes, secondary cortex flakes, and interior flakes.
PROJECTILE POINT PREFOPdVlS
These stemmed bifaces are considered failures in the projectile point manufacturing process. They occur in the archeological record for several reasons,
including impurities in the stone and poorly struck or improperly placed blows
by the flint knapper.
GROUP 2, STEMLESS BIFACES
Stemless bifaces occur in a variety of shapes and sizes, but each is characterized by obvious percussion chipping by either hard or soft hammer. Some
specimens are apparent failures in the manufacturing process. For example,
several were broken during the removal of a flake, when the flake hinged into
the mass, thus snapping the preform. Others are the result of premature snapping-perhaps along hidden stress lines-of the intended artifact. This is primarily a catchall category, because it includes those stemless bifaces that were
spoiled before completion and thus cannot be identified as specific tools.
CORES
Cores are the nodules from which flakes are removed. The flakes that were
struck from the cores were, in this case, the products desired by the flint knappets; the depleted cores, as residue, are classified as debitage. Cores vary in size
and shape, since cores that have been subjected to extensive reduction are
naturally smaller than ones that have produced only a few flakes or blades.
BURIN SPALLS
Burin spalls are presumably the by-products of the burin retouch technique.
In classic examples the spalls were removed from cores that had unifacially
trimmed edges (Harry Shafer 1979:personal communication). The function of
the unifacial trimming may have been to establish striking platforms for spall
removal. The spalls retain remnants of the trimmed edges on the striking platforms. In cross section the spalls are typically triangular or somewhat rectangular.

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

45

FLAKES
Flakes, the residue of tool manufacture, are classified according to the
manufacturing method that produced them and their positions on the cores
from which they were removed.
Primary Cortex Flakes
The outer surfaces of tile initial flake or flakes removed from a patinated
cobble by hard hammer percussion are covered with cortex and are referred
to as primary cortex flakes.
Secondary Cortex Flakes
Secondary cortex flakes retain cortex over part of their dorsal surfaces.
Interior (or Tertiary) Flakes
Flakes with no cortex are caUed interior, or tertiary, flakes.

ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

Divide Windmill Site (41CX241)
Excavation Area 1
BIFACE TOOLS
Projectile Points
Category 1, Probable Dart Points (3 specimens, Figure 7, a, b)
One specimen is a side notched Ensor-like point with no distal tip and hingefractures on both faces (Figure 7, a).
Another specimen (Figure 7, b) has long, deep corner notches, a straight
base, and no distal tip. One of the lateral edges appears to have been smoothed
through use, but this cannot be confirmed because materials have been applied
to this edge. Evidence of crushing and grinding of the notch suggests possible
hafting.
Group 1 Stemless Bifaces (2 specimens)
One specimen, consisting only of the basal part, has parallel margins and a
concave base.
UNIFACE TOOLS (see Table 2)
GROUND STONE TOOLS
Grinding Stones (1 specimen, from Excavation Unit 1,4)
This broken specimen is made from sandstone, is about 2 cm thick, and was
probably about 13 cm long. Both faces are smooth, but one face appears to
have undergone considerably more abrading than the face opposite.
DEBITAGE
Pro]ectile Point Preforms {1 specimen, from Excavation Unit 1B)
This artifact is a small form with a concave base that is broken on both sides,
making it difficult to tell if it was ever side notched.

46

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

¢

g

e

0
0

d

I INCH

h

I CENTIMETER

Figure 7. Dart points and mano from Divide Windmill (41CX241) and Pecos
Terrace (41CX218) sites. From the Divide Windmill site: (a,b) dart points
from excavation area 1; (c,d) dart points from excavation area 2. From the
Pecos Terrace site: (e,f) dart points from excavated collection; (g) dart point
from surface collection; (h) mano from surface collection.

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

47

Table 2. Artifacts from Divide Windmill Site (41 CX241), Excavation Area 1
Artifacts

Excavation Units (see Figure 4)
1A

1B

Biface Tools
Probable Dart Points
Group 1 Stemless
faces
Uniface Tools
Category 1 Unifaces
Uniface Fragments

TOTAL

1E

Totals

1

3

1

1

2

1
--

1

1
1

--

--

--

--

1

--

--

~
1
1

2

1

1

4

1

--

3

1
t
9

22
129
154

28
56
92

60
167
232

18
9!
113

13
29
45

141
472
636

1

Debitage
Projectile Point Preforms
Group 2 Stemless
Bifaces
Cores
Burin Spalls
Secondary Cortex
Flakes
Interior Flakes

1D
1

--

Ground Stone Tools
Grinding Stones

1C

Group 2 Stemless Bifaces (see Table 2)
Cores (see Table 2}
Burin Spalls (see Table 2)
Flakes (see Table 2)

Divide Windmill Site (41CX241)
Excavation Area 2
BIFACE TOOLS
Projectile Points
Category 1, Probable Dart Points (2 specimens, Figure 7, c, d)
One specimen (Figure 7, c) is the basal fragment of a side notched form recovered from excavation unit 2E. The other specimen (Figure 7, d) is also side
notched and resembles the Ensor type. The base of the latter is beveled and
slightly concave, and one of the barbs is missing. The presence of large flake
scars near the base of the artifact and the overlapping of smaller flake scars
worked into the blade toward the distal end indicates that the point may have
been resharpened for reuse.

48

Texas Archeological Society

Table 3.

Artifacts from Divide Windmill Site (41CX241), Excavation Area 2

Artifacts

Excavation Units (see Figure 4)
2A

2C

2E

2G

2I

2L

2N

2P

2R

2T

Totals

Biface Tools
Probable Dart
Points

1

Uniface Tools
Uniface Fragments
Debitage
Group 2 Stemless
Bifaces
Cores
Burin Spalls
Primary Cortex
Flakes
Secondary Cortex
Flakes
Interior Flakes
TOTAL

-5

1
4

1
1
4

2

1

3

--

1

4

5

5

1

2

1

5
2
33
1

26
86

11
63

26
95

15
66

17
41

8
61

14
36

25
85

13
45

17
---

172
578

118

79

128

83

59

76

56

117

59

19

794

DEBITAGE
Group 2 Stemless Bifaces (5 specimens)
These five specimens are of varied shapes and sizes. One specimen is apparently the distal tip of a projectile point.
Cores (see Table 3)
Burin Spalls (see Table 3)
Flakes (see Table 3)
Divide Windmill Site (41CX241)
Excavation Area 3
DEBITAGE
Group 2 Stemless Bifaces (see Table 4)
These are the only bifacially worked items in the collection from this locality.
Flakes (see Table 4)
Divide Windmill Site (41CX241)
Excavation Area 4
UNIFACE TOOLS (see Table 5)
DEBITAGE
Group 2 Stemless Bifaces (3 specimens)
One of the three specimens is the medial section of a possible dart point or of
another kind of biface.
Flakes (see Table 5)

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

49

Table 4. Artifacts from Divide Windmill Site (41CX241), Excavation Area 3
Artifacts

Excavation Units (see Figure 4)

f

3A

De bitage
Group 2 Stemless Bifaces
Primary Cortex Flakes
Secondary Cortex Flakes
Interior Flakes

3B

3C

3D

.....
2
....
1
..........
......
1
....
3
2
....
2

TOTAL

4

2

3

2

Totals

2
1
1
7
11

Table 5. Artifacts from Divide Windmill Site (41CX241), Excavation Area 4
Artifacts

1

Uniface Tools
Category 1 Unifaces
Debitage
Group 2 Stemless Bifaces
Burin Spalls
Secondary Cortex Flakes
Interior Flakes
TOTAL

Excavation Units (see Figure 4)
4A

4B

4C

4D

Totals

2
1
28
132

....
2
19
72

1
2
10
81

--....
1
1

3
5
58
286

164

93

94

2

353

Divide Windmill Site (41CX241)
Surface Collection
BIFACETOOLS
Projectile Points

Category 1, Dart Points (14 specimens, Figure 8, a-n)
The common denominator among the 14 specimens is that side notching is
more pronounced on some than on others (Figure 8, a-m). It is difficult to
classify most of the specimens according to established types. However, all but
four appear to fit into the Ensor, Frio, or Paisano types or variants thereof.
Not all of these specimens are complete, but most retain enough of the basal
ends to enable placement in the dart point category. One additional fragmentary specimen (Figure 8, n) is most likely a dart point also. This artifact
has enou~ of its original shape to make it evident that it originally had barbs
suggestive of a side notched point. This specimen was found just outside the
grid.

50

Texas Archeological Society

k

g

h

I

m

0

o

n

lINCH

0

]

e

d

c

b

a

,

I

I CENTIMETER

q

Figure 8. Artifacts from Divide Windmill site (41CX241): (a-m) side notched
dart points from surface collection; (n) concave base dart point from excavation
area 1 ; (o,p) arrow points from surface collection; (q) Group 1 stemless biface
from surface collection.

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

51

Category 2, Arrow Points (2 specimens, Figure 8, o-p)
One of these points (Figure 8, o) has concave lateral margins, an elongated
tip (similar to an awl or drill) with short but pronounced barbs, and a contracting base. No type is ascribed to this artifact. The other point (Figure 8,
p) is a fragmented biface lacking a stem, most of its barbs, and the distal tip.
Group 1 Stemless Bifaees (1 specimen, Figure 8, q)
This biface has both percussion and pressure retouch. Pressure flaking is
especially evident along the lateral margins and the base. This artifact is complete, except for two areas near the base on each lateral margin. This specimen
is considered stemless because too much of the artifact is missing to place it in
a corner notched or stemmed category.
Battered Stone Tools (3 specimens, Figure 9, a)
These artifacts have many hinged flake facets characteristic of edges that
have been struck or battered against other objects. These tools are constructed
from large flint nodules and are bifaciaUy worked.
Gravers (2 specimens, Figure 9, b)
Both artifacts are bifacialty worked and have dril14ike or punchlike projections.
UNIFACE TOOLS

Category 1 Unifaee Tools (7specimens, Figure 9, c)
One specimen (Figure 9, c) is polished on the left margin of the ventral surface (not visible in the photograph), making it similar to artifacts from the
Lower Pecos that were used for slicing desert succulents (Shafer 1978).
Category 2 Uniface Tools {1 specimen, Figure 9, d)
The presence of cortex on the left margin and the distal end of this artifact
may have precluded retouching in those areas.
Category 3 Uniface Tools (1 specimen, Figure 9, e)
Cortex is present on the right margin and may have been a factor in the
absence of retouching on this side of the artifact.
Category 4 Uniface Tools (1 specimen, Figure 9, fJ
End Scrapers (4 specimens, Figure 9, g)
Three of the four specimens retain the striking platforms, which are opposite
the unifacially worked distal ends. The flaking on one specimen is carried to
the left margin of the dorsal surface.
Burins (162 specimens, Figure 9, h, i}
Some of the specimens have cortex. Typically, these tools are unifacially
trimmed, and sometimes the bulbs of percussion are either altered or entirely
removed, resulting in flat ventral surfaces. The large size of this sample precludes describing each specimen.
Uniface Fragments (34 specimens, Figure 10, a)

\

52

Texas Archeological Society

b
lINCH
I

I

a

C

I CENTIMETER

d
@’¯

h
g

Figure 9. Surface collected artifacts from Divide Windmill site (41CX241):
(a) battered stone tool; (b) graver; (c) Category 1 uniface; (d) Category 2
uniface; (e) Category 3 uniface; (f) Category 4 uniface; (g) end scraper; (h,i)
burins.

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

a

b

g

d
0

I
0

!ii!~ii~

53

h

lINCH
,1
I
I CENTIMETER

ii~i~ili~¸¸~¸

k

Figure 10. Surface collected artifacts from Divide Windmill site (41CX241):
(a) uniface fragment; (b) projectile point preform; (c) Group 2 stemless biface;
(d) core; (e-h) burin spalls; (i) primary cortex flake; (j) secondary cortex
flake; (k) interior flake.

54

Texas Archeological Society

DEBITAGE

Projectile Point Preforms (3 specimens, Figure 10, b)
One specimen has a contracting stem and convex base. The distal tip and a
large part of the blade are missing. Many hinge fractures on both faces of this
specimen reflect the difficulty the craftsman encountered in thinning this artifact. The break probably was due to end shock as defined by Crabtree (1972:
60).
Another specimen is side notched, broken along the medial axis, and is
missing the distal tip.
The third specimen (Figure 10, b) is an apparent failure in the manufacture of
an Ensor dart point. Deep hinge fractures on one face attest to the problems in
thinning this point. The distal tip and one of the barbs are missing. Apparently
the distal tip was broken as a result of end shock. There is no pressure flaking
on this unfinished artifact.
Group 2 Stemless Bifaees (121 specimens, Figure 10, e)
The thinness and well-defined points of some of the specimens suggest that
they might be the distal tips of projectile point manufacturing failures.
Cores (48 specimens, Figure 10, d)
This sample includes both depleted cores that have been subjected to extensive reduction and cores that have had only a few flakes removed. Some retain
part of the cortex, while others have none.

Burin Spalls (96 specimens, Figure 10, e-h)
Flakes
Primary Cortex Flakes (13 specimens, Figure 10, i)
Secondary Cortex Flakes (798 specimens, Figure 10, j)
Interior Flakes (1420 specimens, Figure 10, k)

Pecos Terrace Site (41CX218)
Excavated Collection
BIFACE TOOLS
Projectile Points
Category 1, Probable Dart Points (2 specimens, Figure 7, e-f)
One specimen (Figure 7, e) is a complete dart point with side notches and a
slightly convex base. Another specimen (Figure 7, f) is also side notched. The
distal tip is missing, and both edges are serrated.

UNIFACE TOOLS (See Table 6)
DEBITAGE (see Table 6)

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

55

Table 6. Excavated Artifacts from the Pecos Terrace site (41CX218)
Artifacts

Excavation Units (see Figure 3)
"--

"--

------ -~ ---

---

--- Totals
Z

Z

Biface Tools
Probable Dart
Points

1

Uniface Tools
Category 1
Unifaces
Burins
Unfface Fragments
Debitage
Group 2 Stemless Bifaces
Cores
Burin Spalls
Primary Cortex
Flakes
Secondary
Cortex Flakes
Interior Flakes
TOTAL

1
---

2

-1

1
1

3

1
1
4

--

Z

Z

1

1
1

1

Z

1

1
2

~
3

1
1

2

1

2

--

1

2

--

2

m

2

1

1

1
1
3

2

1

1

3

1

1

2

2

~

1

5

4
19

13
6
11
7

45
94

12
14

19
43

3
14

5
4

13
16

47
83

34
58

18
67

17
50

15
21

7
8

2
18

237
490

143

28

72

20

12

33

135

97

95

75

40

18

25

793

Pecos Terrace Site (41CX218)
Surface Collection
BIFACE TOOLS (see Table 7)
Projectile Points
Category 1, Probable Dart Points (1 specimen, Figure 7, g)
This specimen is a side notched projectile point resembling the Ensor type.
The distal tip is missing and several breaks occur in the shoulder area. The base
is slightly concave.
UNIFACE TOOLS
Uniface Fragments (see Table 7)
GROUND STONE TOOLS
Manos (1 specimen, Figure 7, h)
This sandstone mano has one rough and irregular side; the opposite side is
very smooth and worn from abrading activities. One of the comers has some

56

Texas Archeological Society
Table 7. Surface-Collected Artifacts from Pecos Terrace Site (4!CX218)

Artifacts

Collection Unit

Z

~

cr

m

m

Totals

Biface Tools
Probable Dart Points
Uniface Tools
Category 1 Unifaces
Uniface Fragments

1
----

1
1

.........
1
7

2
9

Ground Stone Tools
Manos
D e b itage
Group 2 Stemless Bifaces
Cores
Primary Cortex Flakes
Secondary Cortex Flakes
Interior Flakes
TOTAL

2
2
1
....
2

2
3
....
2
........
4
--.................
4
3
13
66
3
....
74
6

8

14

10

27

141

9
6
1
86
85
200

smoothing, suggesting that it might have been the part of the tool that was held
during use. This specimen is 12 cm long and 9.5 cm wide; its thickness tapers
from 2.5 cm to 0.5 cm.
DEBITAGE (see Table 7)
Eiserer Shelter Site (41 CX133)
Shelter Excavation
BIFACE TOOLS

Projectile Points
Category 1, Probable Dart Points (1 specimen, Figure 11, a)
This specimen is a small, side notched dart point made from gray chert and
similar to the Ensor type. Although the distal tip and one of the barbs is broken
and there are some hinge fractures, it appears to be a finished point.
Category 2, Arrow Points (1 specimen, Figure 11,1)
This specimen has long barbs and strongly recurred lateral margins. The base
is missing, but it appears that this point once had a contracting stem much like
that of a Perdiz point.
UNIFACE TOOLS (see Tabte 8)
DEBITAGE (see Table 8)

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

0

e

c

b

57

d

g

f

0

I
0

I

lINCH
I

I CENTIMETER

Figure 11. Artifacts from the Eiserer Shelter site (41CX133). From the shelter
excavation: (a) dart point; (1) arrow point. From the talus slope excavation:
(b,d,f) dart points; (k) projectile point preform; (j) Group 2 stemless biface.
From the talus slope surface collection: (c,e,g) dart points; (i) Group 1 stemless
bfface; (h) projectile point preform.

58 Texas Archeological Society

t’,l ~D
0

ttm OL’09

I

II

!

wo 09-0S

I

tuo Olz’OE

I
I

II
il

!

trio O~’OV

0

tuo OE-OE

I

o

tuo O~-OI
tuo OI-O

I
I

l

et
t~

Ii

4-J
o

II

t E OL-09
09-05

0
0

!
0
e,I

tuo O~-OV
o’5

mo 0~0~

0

tuo O~-OE
0

tuo 0~-0I

GO

tuo 0I-0

I

i

It

I
I

t
I

Io-,
~

II

I

~

il

I

~~

I

0

tuo 05-0t7
tuo 0~0~
tuo 0~’0~
0

tuo OE-OI
0

l
i
I
i

i
I
1

tuo OI-O
06

!

[tuo 0~-0;
tuo 0~’0 I

,.0
oa

!

tuo OI-O

eq

i

0

~.~
~°~

o

o

.~ ~~’~
o~’~
No’~..~o
~

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

59

Esierer Shelter (41CX133)
Talus Slope Excavation
BIFACE TOOLS

Projectile Points
Category 1, Probable Dart Points (3 specimens, Figure 11, b, d, f)
One of the specimens (Figure 11, b), made of brown chert, is a complete side
notched point with slightly concave base. The point came from Test Pit A, in
the 10 cm to 20 cm level.
Another of the points (Figure 11, d) is a corner notched type with a concave
base. One of the barbs is broken, as is the distal tip. The point came from Test
Pit A at a depth of from 70 cm to 80 cm.
Another corner notched point (Figure 11, f) resembles the Marcos type. It
is of gray chert and is complete. It came from Test Pit D, between 40 and 50
cm.

UNIFACE TOOLS (see Table 9)
DEBITAGE
Projectile Point Preforms (1 specimen, Figure 11, k)
This artifact is a failure in the manufacturing process. It is broken and has
been burned.
Group 2 Stemless Bifaces (4 specimens, Figure 11, j)
Although this artifact closely resembles a Group 1 Stemless Biface, it exhibits
too many step fractures and does not show any indication of pressure flaking or
other kinds of finishing touches. It was found in Test Pit A, from 10 to 20 cm.
Burin Spalls (see Table 9)
Flakes (see Table 9)

Eiserer Shelter Site (41CX133)
Talus Slope Surface Collection
BIFACE TOOLS

Projectile Points
Category 1, Probable Dart Points (6 specimens, Figure 11, c, e, g)
One specimen (Figure 11, c) is a side notched point with a convex base.
Another (Figure !1, e) is a corner notched point with parallel shoulders from
area 4N. The point shown in Figure 11, g is a Langtry point from area $3 with
the distal tip and one barb broken. The remaining three points are fragmentary
side notched forms.
Group 1 Stemless Bifaces (1 specimen, Figure 11, i)
This biface from area 2N has been both pressure and percussion flaked and
probably is a finished specimen.
UNIFACE TOOLS (see Table 10)
DEBITAGE

60

Texas Archeological Society

[.-,

via 08-OL

I
i
1

um OL-09
m~ 09-Og

I I I,-,
~-~ 0")

’q

kO

tu00g-Ol,
+.a

um Ot:’-O~

kO

1

o.)

1

!1

0

!

0

I
I
I

I1" ~

(13

i
tt~
0

tuo OI-O

¢/
¢3
¢,:1

o

×

o~
[-,
o

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

0

t"q
~o

~
4-1

tuo 001-06

i

tao 06-08

i

Ill

~

mo 08-OL

I

II~

~

mo OL-09

!

um 09-09

i

eq

I

’-’

~

mo 0~-0~’
mo O’lrOI;

~
¯
mo 0~-0~

o~

ko

eq

1
I

~o~

1

O~

0

×

c,.)

um 0~;-0I

I

tu~ OI-O

I

mo 09-0~

!!

mo 0~-0~’

I
i

/~ mo 01-01;
mo Ot;-O/;
o
r..-, mo 0/;-0I

i
I

I

I

! I
I ,,
I~’

I

0,,

m~ 0I-0

,:5
,r,,.,!
(1)
c~

o

.~

,..~ g:
.o~ ~;~ ~ ~

0

.’-~o

~ o_~

61

62

Texas Archeological Society

Projectile Point Preforms ( 1 specimen, Figure 11, h)
This point, from area 3N, is apparently a failure in the manufacture of a
Langtry dart point.
Group 2 Stemless Bifaces (see Table 10)
Cores (see Table 10}
Burin Spalls (see Table 10)
Flakes (see Table 10)

Summary
The artifact collections from the sites in Musk Hog Canyon are similar to
assemblages from the other ring midden sites in southwestern Texas. The presence of only chipped and ground stone artifacts at Musk Hog Canyon is consistent with the artifact inventories from Sanderson Canyon (Shafer 1971)
and Sutton County (Jarvis and Crawford 1974), and the point types are consistent with the ones found at the sites mentioned by Greer (1965, t968a).
The majority of the dart points from Musk Hog Canyon are side notched forms
resembling Ensor, Frio, and Paisano points, but at least one Langtry point and
a few corner notched varieties were found.
The small proportion of arrow points in the projectile point sample is another
similarity between Musk Hog Canyon and the Sanderson Canyon and Sutton
County sites. Shafer (1971:30) mentions only one arrow point recovered from
Sutton County excavations. Only six arrow points were recovered from Musk
Hog Canyon.
Burins and unifaces constitute the largest tool category from Musk Hog
Canyon, but these artifacts were recovered by both surface collection and
excavation and cannot be compared with Sanderson Canyon data that were recovered only by surface collection. Since Jarvis and Crawford (1974:17) record
only three burins from Sutton County and do not list a uniface category, the
artifact inventory from their excavation cannot be used for comparative purposes. However, if the 117 specimens listed as scrapers are in fact unifacial
tools, their collection is consistent with the data from Musk Hog Canyon.
Debitage, in the form of flakes, is the largest artifact category from Musk
Hog Canyon, as well as from Sanderson Canyon and Sutton County. It was not
possible to study these artifacts intensively for retouching, so a comparison cannot be made with other areas. Jarvis and Crawford (1974:18) reported 227
altered flakes from the excavation of the Perro Salvaje site (41SU2) in Sutton
County.
The artifact inventories from Eiserer Shelter and the open sites are similar.
Flakes are the largest artifact group from this site, as well as from the surfacecollected area. Thus, debitage remains the dominant category in all areas, and
the only area from which tools are present in any numbers is the surface-collected areas of the talus slope.
The ground stone tools from Musk Hog Canyon are typical of those found in
other ring midden sites in southwestern Texas. The only inconsistency with
the other collections is that only two ground stone artifacts were found at Musk
Hog Canyon. Shafer (1971:34-35), for example, reports six manos, three
"pitted hand stones," and one grinding slab collected at Sanderson Canyon.
The small number of such artifacts at Musk Hog Canyon is probably due to the

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

63

activities of relic hunters, who have known about the sites in Musk Hog Canyon
for years (Harry Shafer 1980:personal communication). It is likely that these
distinctive artifacts were removed years ago.
DISTRIBUTIONAL ANALYSIS
Lithics

Ring middens are not usually deeply stratified, a fact that precludes a long
temporal range of artifact types, making horizontal analysis a more meaningful
approach. No vertical analyses were made of the Divide Windmill and Pecos
Terrace sites for this report. Areas 3 and 4 of the Divide Windmill site are
omitted from this chapter because of the paucity of artifacts recovered. For
example, only 11 artifacts were recovered from the entire excavation of Area
3. The Eiserer Shelter site also presents special problems of artifact distribution.
Missing field notes, lost artifacts, and the ambiguous grid system for this site
make it difficult to present anything but general statements concerning artifact
distribution. The confusion of data from the two excavated areas from the
shelter was discussed in a letter from Greet Smith, laboratory chief at the field
school, to Harry Shafer. She stated that inadequacies and confusion in labeling
the grid squares in the shelter and on the talus slope made it difficult to separate
the artifacts recovered from the two areas.
The distribution of artifacts for the Eiserer Shelter site is presented here
mainly in terms of the two major collection units. For example, the artifacts
that can be identified as coming from within the rock-shelter are discussed
separately from those identified as coming from the talus slope. Statements
relating to vertical distribution are made when possible, but only general conclusions can be presented in regard to this site.
The purpose of horizontal distributional analysis is to correlate cultural
material recorded during excavation or surface collecting activities according to
its location within the site matrix. This kind of information is useful in determining the areal usage of a site. Artifact concentrations and variations from area
to area can be then used to define various activity areas.
Unfortunately, horizontal analysis often represents only a general picture of
the site area in spatial terms, particularly when the materials are collected from
large units. At the Divide Windmill site, for example, the surface collected materials were taken from a gridded area of 91.44 square meters (100 square
yards). Tt~s area was subdivided, making each collection unit 22.86 square
meters (25 square yards). These smaller collection units are still too large for
recognition of artifact concentrations, except in a general sense. Jarvis and
Crawford (1974:29), in their study of ring middens in Sutton County, Texas,
included an illustration depicting areas of large concentrations of chipping debris
around a midden at site 41SU2. This was possible because their controlled
surface collection was conducted in 3.10-meter (10-foot) squares. They (Jarvis
and Crawford 1974:30) were able to identify concentrations of chipping debitage south and east of the midden. This was correlated with wind direction and
its possible effect on certain site-related activities during cooking operations.
They were also able to correlate the relationship between chipping debris and
the horizontal scattering of other artifact types. This kind of comparison was
not possible at the Divide Windmill site due to the large size of the collection
units.

64

Texas Archeological Society

DIVIDE WINDMILL SITE (41CX241)

Surface Collection
Most of the surface collected materials were expected to cluster around the
individual features within the Divide Windmill site, and the largest concentrations are in fact in the same squares as, or adjacent squares to, the features.
Excavation Areas 1 and 2, as well as the largest concentrations of burned rock,
are in the southeast quarter of the northwest quadrant (Figure 4). This unit
consistently produced large numbers of all artifact categories. These numbers
decrease significantly to the north, but the numbers increase to the south and
east of the burned rock concentrations. No artifacts were taken from the surface of the northeast quarter of the southwest quadrant, where Excavation Area
4 is located. The increase in artifacts to the south of site areas is consistent with
the observations of Jarvis and Crawford (1974) in Sutton County, and according
to Davis (1976:47), amateur archeologists from the Musk Hog Canyon area also
say that more cultural material is typically found south of the middens in that
area. Possibly the wind, predominantly from the southwest or southeast during
prehistoric times, was a factor in determining activity areas at Musk Hog Canyon, as hypothesized by Jarvis and Crawford for Sutton County.
If the area of high chipping concentration does indeed represent some
sort of living or working zone related to the midden, there must have been
factors, natural or otherwise, that made this area more favorable than
around the midden.
Given that the midden was used for cooking with some regularity, it is
probable that smoke, soot and ash could have been of considerable importance in effecting the location of a living and/or work zone next to the
midden. One would want to be near the midden for convenience and yet
out of the smoke and soot of the cooking fires as much as possible. During
excavations at 41-SU-2, it was noted that the winds were predominantly
from the southeast. If the predominant wind direction has not changed
since the site was occupied, and there are no indications that it should have,
then the zone of highest chipping debris lies directly upwind from the midden. The area to the southeast of the midden thus would have received the
least amount of smoke and soot from any fires being burned at the midden.
It would have been the most comfortable area to occupy in close conjunction to the midden.
Related to the wind direction being the controlling factor in the location
of the living/working area, one physiological feature concerning Midden 1 is
of interest. A ring midden measuring 35 feet in diameter, Midden 1 has its
maximum height, although slight, along its northwestern curve, downwind
from the midden center. It would have been advantageous to throw used,
burnt limestone downwind when clearing an area for a hearth in order to
keep the ashes from blowing back into one’s face. If this procedure was
followed regularly, it would be expected that a larger amount or higher
piling of burnt rocks would accumulate on the downwind side of the ring
midden. In the case of Midden !, this would be the northwest portion of
the midden (Jarvis and Crawford 1974:30).

The large number and variety of artifact type’s from the surface of the
Divide Windmill site indicates a wide range of activities for the site. Flint knapping was practiced to a limited extent at the site, as evidenced by the dart point
preforms, bifaces, and large numbers of flakes. It is logical to assume that other
activities related to flint knapping were carried out also. Certainly there was

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

65

time to spend on other activities. According to Buckelew (1911:72-73), the
Lipan Apache allowed several days for sotol to become thoroughly cooked.
Other ethnographic accounts (Opler 1941) suggest that although women were
usually in charge of the preparation and cooking of plants, men often accompanied them in order to help with the more difficult tasks such as carrying
rocks for midden construction. Much of the lithic assemblage on and around
the ring middens may be the result of flint knapping activities not directly related to plant processing and cooking. It is quite possible that men would
engage in the manufacture of dart points and other tools intended for hunting
in the area near the midden while they awaited completion of baking activities.
Some of the flint knapping may be directly related to the processing of
plants. For example, the unifaces and scrapers (similar to those from Hinds
Cave found in association with cut leaf bases) may have been manufactured and
or repaired (retouched) near the site. The art of flint knapping is assumed to be
a traditional male task, and it seems logical to assume that the amount oflithic
debitage on and around the ring midden sites is the result of male groups passing
the time in procurement-related activities.
In order to prepare sotol (Dasylirion texanum) and lechuguilla (Agave
lechuguilla) for cooking, the bulbs must be separated from all leaves and stems
and the edible parts must be cut out before consumption. The hearts oflechuguilla bulbs must be removed, and the inedible leaf bases on their exteriors
must be cut away (Mallouf and Tunnell 1977:61-62). These activities require
tools, and some of the large flakes at ring midden sites could be tools for these
activities. Flakes are multipurpose tools that can be produced as needed simply
by knocking them from cores with a hammerstone. After they are used they
can be discarded with no great loss of energy.
It is unlikely that the smaller flakes found at ring midden sites were used
in the processing of plants prior to cooking; they probably represent debitage.
What is more likely is that large flakes or blades-hafted when possible-were
used to prevent damage to the hands from sharp spines and leaves. The account
of the Havasupai of northwestern Arizona and their method of trimming the
leaves from mescal (Agave sp.), using a special hatchet (see p. 42), may shed
some light on the methods used in prehistoric times. This hatchet, according to
Spier (1928:105-106), was a "broad stone blade set in a slot midway in the
length of a short handle, 30 cm long (sometimes of pinon wood), where it is held
fast with glue or pitch and by lashings."
Schuetz (1956), in her study of archeological materials recovered from caves
and rock-shelters in Va! Verde County, Texas, describes the hafted flint blades in
collections from southwestern Texas.
Several artifacts were found still hafted with wooden handles. Two
knives of the rounded-base group described above still have handles. One is
hafted on its side leaving the blade edge exposed, and the other hafted at
the base leaving the point as the cutting part. One side scraper is also
hafted, and two of the Kinney points have asphaltum at the base where this
material was used to fix the haft (Schuetz 1956:150).
Except for the Kinney points that have asphaltum on their bases, Schuetz does
not present any data to explain how these items were hafted. These artifacts
from Val Verde County may have been used for something other than plant
processing. No attempt has been made in this report to compare the hafted

66

Texas Archeological Society

tools described by Schuetz (1956) to the unifaces recovered from Musk Hog
Canyon. They have been mentioned solely to provide additional evidence of the
presence of hafted artifacts in southwestern Texas.
The few unifaces that were recovered at the Divide Windmill site consistently came from the middens or from the areas south of the middens in
roughly the same patterns as the flakes. Unifaces may possibly represent use of
a stronger, more durable tool designed for use on plants with tough stalks.
The dart points followed the same distribution pattern as the other artifacts,
occurring mainly on or south and east of the middens. It is assumed that production of these points was one of the varied flint knapping activities that, although carried out at or near the midden, was not related to plant processing.
Of course it is possible that these artifacts were simply discarded here and that
no dart point manufacture or repair was ever carried out at this site.
Burins were fairly common at the Divide Windmill site. One of the uses
suggested for these distinctive tools is the refurbishing of uniface tools (Shafer
1980:personal communication). They could have been used to repair or refurbish unifaces that were used in plant processing. Their distribution is similar
to the oth~ artifact categories.
The remainder of the debitage-burin spalls, cores, and Group 2 stemless
bifaces-follows the same pattern of distribution as the above-mentioned artifacts. That is, they occur on or to the south and east of the sites.
Excavation Area 1

Debitage is the dominant artifact category for all units in Area 1. Other
artifact types recovered include dart points, Group 1 stemless bifaces, Category
1 unifaces, and uniface fragments. The debitage inventory consists of projectile
point preforms, Group 2 stemless bifaces, cores, burin spalls, and flakes (Table
2; Figure 4). In all units, interior flakes are the dominant category. The largest
concentration of flakes (227 specimens) occurs in Unit 1C, which is part of the
slab-lined pit. Except for Unit 1C, no concentration seems apparent, inasmuch
as flakes are common in all of the excavation units. The only square with fewer
than 100 flakes is 1E, with 42 specimens. There are three possible explanations
for the dominance of flakes over other artifact categories: (1) the flakes were
used in the processing of plants cooked in the pit; (2) they represent the residue
from the manufacture of tools, such as the ones used to cut up plants, that are
directly related to plant processing activities; and (3) they represent the waste
material from the manufacture of tools, such as dart points and other tools used
for hunting, that have no connection with plant processing activities. Considering the variety of tools found at this site, it seems likely that at least some of
these flakes represent waste material from tool manufacture. There is no evidence, however, to identify the kinds of tool manufacture that produced these
flakes. The flakes probably represent material fi’om the manufacture of all
kinds of tools.
Excavation Area 2
The excavation in Area 2 was designed to test the refuse deposits closely
associated with midden 1 (Figure 4). Except for two probable dart points and
one uniface fragment, all of the artifacts recovered from area 2 are debitage,
with flakes the most numerous category, and, within that category, interior
flakes the most numerous (Table 3).

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

67

Each excavation unit produced 50 or more flakes, except for Unit 2T, which
produced only 17 specimens. Unit 2A produced the greatest number (112) of
flakes. The most logical explanation for these numbers is the closeness of
excavation Unit 2A to midden 1 in Area 1. Unit 2A is east of and almost
parallel to Units 1C and 1D (Figure 4). Unit 2A may be a separate activity
area, and the fact that it is located just east of Area 1 may be a factor of wind
direction, as discussed above. The lithic collection from Area 2 appears to
widen the range of flint knapping activities that took place at the Divide Windmill site.
Excavation Area 3
Because of the paucity of artifacts from this midden (Table 4), Area 3 is not
included in the distributional analysis.
Excavation Area 4
This area is also excluded from the distributional analysis because of the low
number of artifacts recovered (Table 5).
PECOS TERRACE SITE (41CX218)
Excavated Collection

As at the Divide Windmill site, most of the cultural materials recovered from
the Pecos Terrace site fall into the lithic debitage category. Apart from debitage,
the only sizable category is burins (20 specimens), and there are a few projectile
points, unifaces, and uniface fragments. The largest artifact category is flakes,
with interior flakes the most numerous (Table 6 ; Figure 3).
The center of the midden at the Pecos Terrace site contains the pit feature,
and in this area all of the various artifact types are present. A pattern was observed in the marginal areas of the site. The largest number of flakes (141
specimens) was obtained from unit N43/W50 (Table 6), which is the southernmost unit of the site. The easternmost unit, N50/W42, yielded !30 flakes,
while the western and northern units, N49/W55 and N53/W49, yielded only 29
flakes and 15 flakes respectively. These figures lend support to the theory that
most of the activity at ring midden sites took place to the south and east of the
pit areas, putting them upwind from the hearths and therefore out of the areas
of blowing smoke.
Surface Collection
The surface collected artifacts from the Pecos Terrace site are not included
in the distribution study because these collections represent only a random
sampling (Table 7). However, large numbers of flakes and other lithic debris
were observed to the south of the midden where no surface collection was made.
EISERER SHELTER SITE (41CXt33)
Rock-Shelter Excavation
All of the artifacts taken from the rock-shelter excavation came from an area
four meters square at the extreme south end of the shelter (Figure 5). Some
information concerning the vertical distribution is presented in an effort to
derive as much data as possible (Table 8). As in the other sites, flakes tend to

68

Texas Archeological Society

dominate in gross numbers. Here too, interior flakes are the largest category,
with representation in every level. In each square excavated, there are twice
as many interior flakes as there are either of the other kinds of flakes. The
flakes follow a definite pattern in vertical distribution. The first 20 cm are the
most productive levels, and from there they decrease as depth increases, except
for Excavation Unit 3E, where flakes do not decrease significantly until 40 cm,
indicating a deeper midden deposit in this unit (Table 8).
Talus Slope Excavation
No meaningful patterns can be developed from these excavation units (Table
9), because the talus slope materials have been displaced from inside the rockshelter. Some of the materials may have washed down the slope from the edge
of the shelter, but it is more likely that they were tossed from the cooking area
in prehistoric times as the pit was being cleaned for reuse (Harry Shafer 1980:
personal communication). If this is true, the shelter itself apparently functioned
as a cooking area on several occasions.
It is important to note, however, that here too, flakes are the most numerous
category, with interior flakes the most common. The upper levels produced
the largest number of artifacts, but, unlike the rock-shelter excavations, artifacts
were found at all levels. The only exception was in the lower 20 cm of test pit
C (Table 10).
Talus Slope Surface Collection
This surface collection was not complete, as only one pass was made over the
area, and it is probable that many artifacts were overlooked. One pattern, however, does emerge: a majority of the artifacts collected came from the southern
part of the talus slope (Figure 6).

PLANT REMAINS
The only plant remains recorded for the Musk Hog Canyon excavations came
from the Eiserer Shelter site. Although it was anticipated that plant macrofossils
would be present in some, if not most, open-air ring middens, only a meager
amount of plant data was recovered. Plant macrofossils from the Eiserer Shelter
include sotol (Dasylirion sp.), unidentified seeds and seed pods-some of which
are probably mesquite (Prosopis sp.)-and plant fragments of what are probably
various species of Agave and Yucca (Glendon Weir 1980:personal communication). These plants were found at various levels from 0 to 60 cm. Identification
of Musk Hog Canyon plant macrofossils by species was difficult due to their
fragmentary condition. However, by making use of plant data in ethnographic
accounts, prior archeological work in this part of Texas, and accounts of extant
flora, it is possible to speculate as to the kinds of plants these macrofossils
represent.
ETHNOGRAPHIC ACCOUNTS
The most common plants mentioned in the ethnographic literature are
lechuguilla and mescal (Agave spp.), sotol (Dasylirion spp.), mescal bean (probably Sophora secundiflora), and yucca (Yucca spp.). In addition, mesquite pods
(probably Prosopis glandulosa) are also mentioned in some accounts. Typically,

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

69

these plants were used as foodstuffs, although some of these species may have
been used for other purposes as well. Yucca treeuleana (trecul yucca), for example, was used for intoxicating beverages, baskets, twine, or rope (cordage),
and medicinal purposes (Vines !960:54). Yucca baeatta (datil yucca) was used
for soap (Vines 1960:53), while Yucca carnerosana (carnerosana giant yucca)
was important for roof thatch and palisade construction (Vines 1960:52).
Mats and baskets are known to have been manufactured from Dasylirion leiophyllum (smooth leaf sotol) (Vines 1960:69). These are just a few of the
representative species and some of the recorded uses for these plants.
One of the problems in dealing with ethnographic accounts is the lack of botanical knowledge of some early ethnographers. It is common, for example,
to encounter a reference to techuguilla or yucca, but due to the many species
of these plants it is sometimes impossible to ascertain which particular plant is
being discussed. Usually exhaustive checking and cross-checking of details such
as plant location and description in the ethnographic account are necessary in
order to identify the genus and occasionally the species. If it should be mentioned, for example-in a hypothetical case-that Indians in New Mexico made
sandals from lechuguilla in historic times, we cannot necessarily conclude that
all species of lechuguilla are suitable for that purpose, or which species were
actually used. Thus, the particular species of lechuguilla native to this part of
West Texas may not have been useful for sandal manufacture, so the Indians of
this part of Texas may have used other related plants that were known by the
same name.
Mescal provides another example of the problem of plant identification.
There is a mescal that is known as maguey (Agave spp.), and there is another
plant-a cactus of the Southwest (Lophophora sp.)-also known as mescal.
Thus, when an ethnographer refers to the use of mescal without specifically
identifying the plant botanically, problems arise. In addition, the end product
of cooking agave (Agave parri. A. havardiana, A. palmeri, A. neomexicana, and
A. americana), is also called mesca! (Vines 1960:79, 80, 82, 83); and mescal
sometimes refers to the common mescal bean, a small shrub or tree (Sophora
secundiflora). All of these plants are mentioned in the ethnographic accounts
for drug, food, and beverage use.
ARCHEOLOGICAL RECORD

Through the reports of dry cave and rock-shelter excavation in southwestern
Texas and adjacent areas, it has been demonstrated that sotol, lechuguilla, and
yucca were utilized by prehistoric groups for several thousand years. Typically,
these plants are preserved in caves and shelters in utilitarian forms such as sandals, matting, baskets, and cordage. The absence of these plants as apparent
foodstuffs in the archeological record could be due to a collection bias, as the
collection and identification of coprolites, quids (masses of Yucca plant and
DasylMon spp. fibers) and fossil pollen is relatively new to archeology (Glendon
Weir 1980:personal communication).
According to Dering and Shafer (1976:215), "in dry areas of southwest Texas
fibrous remains of lechuguilla, sotol, and/or yucca often comprise the bulk of
the dry midden contents." At Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas, "lechuguilla, sotol, and sachuisti (or sachuista - beargrass -Nolina sp.) were the most
common plants used" (Word and Douglas 1970:71). Products made of these

70

Texas Archeological Society

plants by prehistoric groups include matting made from sprit sotol leaves (species
not given) at Eagle Cave (Ross 1965:123), and sandals from Baker Cave (Word
and Douglas 1970:67) made, in part, with lechuguilla.
The identification of these plants in archeological deposits is not always easy.
In separating these three genera archeologists have tried to rely on differences in external appearance. However, this method has not been adequate since the altered condition of most plant remains obscures the more
obvious morphological characteristics. Recent investigations in the lower
Pecos area (Alexander 1970; Shafer 1975) have created a need for a convenient and more clearly accurate means of identifying these genera in
all stages of processing in the final product, whether it is a quid or a basket
(Dering and Shafer 1976:215).
The problems of accurate identification of these fibrous remains can be
illustrated by reviewing previous reports from the lower Pecos area. Irving
(1966:61-68) reported fibrous plant remains from six shelters in the Ami-’
stad district. He found that lechugui!la was the dominant economic plant,
yet sotol was not mentioned. This is contradictory since at Fate Bell Shelter,
one of the sites Irving studied, two sotol cooking pits with fragments of sotol
had been reported earlier by Pearce and Jackson (1933:16-17). At Baker
Cave in Val Verde County, Word and Douglas (1970:12-13) reported that
quids were present but made no attempt at identification. Remains of
lechuguitla were the most abundant midden component in Parida Cave and
Conejo Shelter (Alexander 1974:220), both in Val Verde County (Dering
and Shafer 1976:216).
In Crockett and Pecos Counties, upstream from the Val Verde County
sites, virtually no macrofossil analyses have been made. Holden (1941:33)
found many quids in McKenzie Cave in Pecos County that he said were
"perhaps sotol." Near Iraan in Crockett County, Lorraln (1968:43) reported
only a few knotted sotol leaves and Several cut lechuguilla leaves from
Meadows Shelter H and she found no perishables at the Sotol Site. At Red
Mill She!ter, Word (1971:306) identified cut leaves of sotol, sachuista (Nolina
texana) and lechuguilla. He found two types of quids which he speculated
were of sotol and lechuguilla (Word 1971:307).

None of the authors of above reports substantiates plant determinations by
detailing methods of identification, and anyone trying to synthesize prehistoric
subsistence patterns in the Lower Pecos area is faced with a mixture of conflicting data (Dering and Shafer 1976:216). Dering and Shafer (1976) also
present an excellent report of their attempts at identifying sotol, yucca, and
lechuguilla plant macrofossils using different analytical techniques, such as
comparison of the cuticular features of these genera.
EXTANT FLORA

Lechuguilla, agave, mescal, yucca, and sotol are the plants most often mentioned by ethnographers and archeologists when referring to ring middens and
their function as plant processing areas. Because it may be of help in determining which species were probably cooked by prehistoric groups in the ring
middens at Musk Hog Canyon, current knowledge of these plants is presented
below. The plants discussed in this section grow in the area today and may be
the same species that were baked in earth ovens by the aboriginal populations
of Musk Hog Canyon.
Other plants certainly were utilized by the prehistoric groups in the area.
Macrofossils recovered from Gobbler Shelter (Dering and Shafer 1976), for
example, include prickly pear (Opuntia sp.), Texas persimmon (Diospyros

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

71

texana), oak (Quercus sp.), mesquite (Prosopis sp.), onion (Allium drummondii),
and hackberry (Celtis sp.); however, these plants are not known to be associated
with ring middens and are omitted from the following discussion.
Agave lechuguiUa

This plant belongs to the Amaryllis family, or AmaryUidaceae. Lechuguilla
is a perennial that often occurs in extensive colonies and is recognizable by a
tall flower stalk that rises from a cluster of many thick basal leaves. The range
of this species covers an area about 62 km (100 miles) wide and 1130 km (700
miles) long, from southern New Mexico through western Texas and southward
in Mexico in Chihuahua, Tamaulipas, San Luis Potosi, and Zacatecas (Vines
1960:80-81).
Lechuguilla blooms only once, when it is 3 to 4 years old. The plant dies
after b!ooming, but young ones are produced at the base. The scape is 91 to 366
cm (3 to 12 feet) tall and has a spinelike panicle at the apex with very short
branches that have flowers, usually in clusters of two to three or more. The
fruit is in capsule form, usually leatherlike and black to brown in color, and is
usually 15.2 to 25.4 mm (0.6 to 1 inch) long and 12.7 to 15.2 mm (0.5 to 0.6
inches) in diameter. The leaves, which are grayish green or yellowish green, are
used to make twine and rope called istle or tampico fiber. Usually a mature
plant wil! have 10 to 30 of these leaves from 20 to 61 cm (8 to 24 inches) long.
The root, under the name amole, is extensively used as a substitute for soap
(Vines 1960:80-81).
Agave havardiana

The range of this species may not include Musk Hog Canyon. However,
according to Vines (1960:80), it is often difficult to ascertain whether Agave
havardiana or A. lechuguilla was the species being used by the Indians of western
Texas for cooking purposes, since they are closely related and very similar.
Other Agaves

Other species of the genus Agave that may have been utilized by Indian
groups in historical times and may have been used in the study area are Agave
parryi and A. neomexicana (Vines 1960:79-84).
Yucca

Two species of yucca (Yucca baccata and Y. torreyi) probably were utilized
by Musk Hog Canyon populations. There is no archeological or ethnographical
evidence that these plants were used in Crockett County. However, they are
included in this section because they occur in the area, and it is known that
yucca (Yuuca spp.) was extensively used by prehistoric and historic groups in
southwestern Texas and adjacent areas.
Yucca baccata

These plants are acaulescent, solitary, or clump forming. The leaves occur in
spreading rosettes. The range of this species extends from the open, dry plains
and mesas of Trans-Pecos Texas and New Mexico, westward to California, northward to Colorado, Utah, and Nevada, and southward to Chihuahua, Mexico, at
altitudes of 610 to 2438 meters (2000 to 8000 feet).
This yucca flowers from March through June. Its panicle is dense, upright,

72

Texas Archeological Society

30 to 91 cm (1 to 3 feet) long, usually only 10.2 to 20.3 cm (4 to 8 inches)
above the uppermost leaves. The scape is stout and heavy, glabrous or somewhat
pubescent, green to reddish or purplish, becoming woody on maturity. The
flowering branches number from 11 to 18 (Vines 1960:52-53).
The leaf fibers, which are bluish green rosettes, are used by the Indians to
make baskets. The fruit is eaten raw, dried, or roasted. A soap substitute
known as amole is made from the roots (Vines 1960:53).
Yucca torreyi
This is an arborescent plant 0.91 to 7.3 meters (3 to 24 feet) tall, with a
simple or sparsely branched trunk. The crowded radiating leaves are usually
untidy in appearance, in part because of the persistent thatch of dead reflexed
leaves on the trunk below. The species grows from the Devils River area eastward, northwestward into New Mexico and southwestward into Mexico (Vines
1960:55).
Other Yuccas
Two other species of yucca that may have been available and utilized for food
by prehistoric populations of Crockett County are Yucca faxoniana (currently
found in Culberson County) (Vines 1960:51) and Yucca treculeana (found from
San Antonio westward to the Rio Grande and Pecos rivers) (Vines 1960:54).
Sotol

Vines (1960) describes two species of the genusDasylMon (sotol) that occur
in the study area. These species (Dasylirion leiophyllum and D. texanum) are
mentioned here as sotol and are the plants most commonly cited by ethnographers and archeologists as being cooked in ring middens.
Dasylirion leiophyllum
This species of sotol is commonly found on limestone hills (Glendon Weir
1980:personal communication) in Texas in the Rio Grande region, northward
into New Mexico, and southward to central Mexico (Vines 1960:68). DasylMon
carries a clump of slender, spiny-edged basal leaves that rise from a short trunk
(Vines 1960:68, 69). The leaves of this plant are clumped at the base, rigid,
linear, and from 15.2 to 20.3 mm (0.6 to 0.8 inches) thick. They are rarely
91.5 cm (3 feet) long and are somewhat brush tipped, green or glaucous,
smooth, and with serrulated-roughened margins (Figure 12, D). The genus
name, Dasylirion, means tufted lily, and the species name, leiophyllum, refers to
the smoothness of the leaf surfaces. The leaves have been used to make mats
and baskets (Vines 1960:58).
Dasylirion texanum
This species of sotol is commonly recorded in the archeological record for
southwestern Texas. It is the only species of sotol identified at Gobbler Shelter,
where it was present in the form of leaves, caudex fragments, and quids (Dering
and Sharer 1976).
This plant grows in dry, arid, stony soil. According to Vines (1960:70), it
is known mostly from south-central Texas, where it occurs from New Braunfels,
Blanco, and Kerrville to Sanderson, Marathon, and Fort Davis. It occurs on

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

73

novaculite hills in the Trans-Pecos and Edwards Plateau regions of Texas (Glendon Weir 1980:personal communication).
This plant has slender, basal, clumped leaves with a short, woody trunk that
is often buried in the ground. Its flowers are dioecious. The scape is 2.7 to 4.6
meters (9 to 15 feet)long, with the narrow inflorescence in a spikelike panicle,
60.9 to 91.4 cm (2 to 3 feet) long.
The fruit is capsule. The leaves are clumped at the base, linear, attenuate,
and stiff. They are 10 to 15 mm (0.4 to 0.6 inches) wide, scarcely 91.4 cm (3
feet) long, and somewhat brush tipped. The base is dilated and entire. The leaf
surfaces are green, glossy, smooth, or rough-keeled (Vines 1960:70).
CONCLUSIONS
The archeological work at Musk Hog Canyon during the summer of 1976
recovered much new data concerning the prehistory of this part of Texas. The
TAS field crews surveyed virtually the entire Musk Hog Canyon watershed and
recorded 435 sites of all types in each of the various geographical settings in
the study area.
Information obtained from a survey of this magnitude has enormous potential for meaningful archeological interpretation. This is especially true in
West Texas, where the emphasis has been on synchronic studies of individual
sites. Typically, rock-shelters receive the most attention; however, in a few
cases deeply stratified sites such as the Devil’s Mouth site have been explored.
In virtually all cases, salvage operations (such as Fate Bell Shelter and Eagle
Cave in conjunction with reservoir construction, and the Perro Salvaje site in
conjunction with highway construction), have resulted in good archeological
work. Diachronic studies such as those at Hinds Cave that are independent of
any salvage projects are an exception. Equally rare are holistic studies like
Musk Hog Canyon that cover fairly large geographical areas and embrace different plant and geographical zones, and resulting varieties of archeological
sites. In this region, too little is known of site relationships in areas as large as
the Musk Hog Canyon watershed, and the importance of a data base such as
Musk Hog Canyon provides cannot be overlooked. The opportunity for another
large-scale archeological survey combined with excavation may never again be
possible in this region.
SITE FUNCTION

The three sites involved in this study area are apparently related to plant
processing and cooking activities. Admittedly, this statement is weakened by
the absence of diagnostic plant parts in the open ring midden Pecos Terrace
and Divide Windmill sites. However, the presence of sotol and other plant remains in the Eiserer Shelter tends to support this statement. Diagnostic plant
parts have been found in Sanderson Canyon (Sharer 1970), in a ring midden
similar to the ones in Musk Hog Canyon. Unifacially flaked artifacts that have
polish or wear patterns like those found in association with cut leaf bases at
Hinds Cave were recovered from the Pecos Terrace and Divide Windmill sites,
lending support to the argument for plant processing at these sites. The presence of a definite slab-lined pit at Area 1 of the Divide Windmill site also lends
support to this conclusion. Although burins and burin spaUs have not been
definitely associated with plant processing, they are commonly found at such

74

Texas Archeological Society

sites, and their presence at Musk Hog Canyon sites may be additional proof
that desert succulents were being processed there. The economic importance of
plants such as sotol (Dasylirion spp.), lechuguilla (Agave sp.), and yucca (Yucca
spp.) has been demonstrated in ethnographic accounts and the archeological
record. Too, there is no sound archeological evidence to indicate that these ring
middens were constructed for purposes other than plant processing. Other uses
have been proposed, but they have not been accepted by the archeological
community, nor are they supported by the data from this study.
TYPES OF PLANTS COOKED

According to ethnographic accounts, sotol and lechuguilla are the plants
most commonly baked in earth ovens (yucca is most typically the raw material
for utilitarian items such as sandals, cordage, and baskets). Although the ring
middens at Musk Hog Canyon could have been used to cook any number of
items, sotol (Dasylirion spp.) and lechuguilla (Agave lechuguilla) are assumed to
be the plants most likely to have been processed here. However, Yucca torryei
and Yucca baeeata must be considered because they grow in the canyon at the
present time. Of course it is entirely possible that different but related species
were growing in the Musk Hog Canyon during prehistoric times.
Sotol (Dasylirion spp.), various species of Agave, and other plants, probably
including mesquite (Prosopis sp.) and mescal bean (Sophora sp.) were recovered
from the Eiserer Shelter, but they were not found in association with a cooking
pit or an oven (Jane Schweitzer 1980:personal communication) and therefore
cannot be connected definitely to cooking operations. However, the burned
rock talus, one of the more outstanding cultural features of the Eiserer Shelter
site, is analogous to the burned rock mounds that form crescent-shaped middens.
In light of this analogy we can assume that the activities that produced the
burned rock in the midden are similar, if not identical, to the activities that
produced the burned rock on the talus slope.
AGE OF SITES
The sites in Musk Hog Canyon probably represent a relatively late cultural
manifestation in West Texas. The presence of side notched dart points such as
Ensor, Frio, and Paisano in all of the sites places them somewhere in the Late
Archaic period (200 B.C. - A.D. 1000). Two possible Langtry points were recovered from the Eiserer Shelter, which suggests an earlier date (about 600 B.C.)
for that site. However, the Langtry points were not found in direct association
with a pit or oven, and since they were not found in an open ring midden site
they do not constitute evidence for a date earlier than 200 B.C. for ring middens. The presence of arrow points could reflect the continuation of ring middens as plant processing areas into historical times, but the sample is small (3
specimens), hardly enough to support such a conclusion. Too, the Langtry and
arrow points were found on tile surface and could have been dropped by
members of groups who had nothing to do with ring middens as plant processing
activities.
ASSOCIATED ARTIFACTS
The assemblage of artifacts found at Musk Hog Canyon is overwhelmingly
dominated by lithics. Most of the lithic artifacts are of chipped stone, but a
few are of ground stone. Flakes make up the largest category at each site. It

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

75

is possible that some of these flakes may have been utilized in the harvesting and
slicing of desert succulents. The small flakes are presumed to be the results of
flint knapping activities-they are not thought to be tools. Although some of
the larger flakes could have functioned in plant preparation activities, none
appear to have wear patterns suggestive of these activities. It is possible that
further analysis of these artifacts might turn up some plant processing wear
patterns.
Indications of wear in the form of polish are visible on some unifaces from
the Pecos Terrace and Divide Windmill sites. This polish resembles that found
on specimens from Hinds Cave that have been associated definitely with the
cutting and slicing of desert succulents. This resemblance lends additional support to the hypothesis that these open-air ring middens were plant processing
areas.
It is significant too that flakes typically constitute the majority of lithic artifacts in the ring midden sites. Dart points and arrow points are present, but in
fewer numbers than are unifaces and debitage, another fact that lends support
to the theory that these sites were plant processing areas. On the other hand,
unless wear patterns that indicate cutting and slicing uses are found on dart and
arrow points, they must be considered to have been used primarily for other
purposes, such as hunting.
The artifacts in Musk Hog Canyon were concentrated in various areas within
the sites, typically to the south and east of the ring middens. This finding is
consistent with other studies of ring middens. It is suggested that these artifact
concentrations represent areas where certain activities (such as flint knapping)
may have been conducted while the plants were cooking. It is likely that these
locales were selected because they were upwind from the fires.
PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS

All of the ring middens tested at Musk Hog Canyon were built on limestone
bedrock, contained ashy fin in the pit areas, and produced few artifacts. The
open ends of the crescent-shaped middens were oriented mainly toward the
south, a fact that is consistent with other ring middens in West Texas. Apparently the wind in prehistoric times blew predominantly from the south and southeast at the locations where, and seasons when, the hearths were being used,
causing the Indians who lived in Musk Hog Canyon to produce crescent-shaped
middens that are similar to those in Sanderson Canyon and adjacent areas.
SYNTHESIS
The archeological data from Musk Hog Canyon suggests that small bands
of prehistoric hunter-gatherer groups were foraging for their existence and obtained their food by seasonal rounds of plant and animal harvests. Plants were
especially important to these people, but they were not used exclusively.
Animals were exploited, but they do not show up as well as plants in the archeological record of the sites examined. Large numbers of mussel shells in the
Musk Hog Canyon sites probably represent still another type of food exploited
during food gathering trips.
The basic subsistence pattern was practiced by similar groups for at least
5000 years and possibly for as many as 9000 years in the Lower Pecos region

76 Texas Archeological Society
and adjacent areas (Harry Sharer 1980:personal communication). Some ring
middens may have been used for food preparation activities of relatively short
duration carried out away from more permanent campsites. This is suggested by
the data from Musk Hog Canyon and by ethnographic accounts, such as Opler’s
(1941:356) account of Apache women who traveled to areas where mescal was
plentiful, established camps, and remained there until sufficient supplies were
cooked.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful to a number of people for their assistance and encouragement
during the various stages of this study. Dr. Harry J. Shafer, Dr. Glendon H.
Weir, and Dr. David J. Schmidly served on my committee and provided valuable
support throughout the project. Jim Warren, Jane Schweitzer, and Alvin Lynn
provided information in the form of personal communications.
The Cultural Resources Laboratory, Texas A&M University, and Heartfield,
Price and Greene, Inc., Monroe, Louisiana, are acknowledged for their help in
making their facilities available to me during this project.
The illustrations were drafted by Mark Bray and Beth Davis. Editing and
proofreading was conducted by Robert Mal!ouf; Beth Davis, and Helen Simons.
Special thanks go to the landowner, Henry Meadows of Midland, Texas,
for allowing the field school to be conducted on his property. Finally, I want
to thank those persons who participated in the 1976 Texas Archeotogica! Society Field School. Field schools are the result of a cumulative effort and it is
not possible to mention everyone responsible for the success of the 1976 field
school.

REFERENCES CITED
Alexander, Robert K.
Archeological excavations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas.
1970
Papers of the Texas Archeologieal Salvage Project, The University
of Texas at Austin 19.
1974

The archaeology of Cone]o Shelter: a study of stability at an
Archaic rockshelter site in southwestern Texas. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas
at Austin.

Beals, Ralph L.
The comparative ethnology of northern Mexico before 1750. lbero1932
Americana 2:92-225.
Blair, W. Frank
The biotic provinces of Texas.
1950
115.

Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-

Bolton, Herbert
1911
The Jumano Indians in Texas, 1650-1771. Quarterly of the Texas
Historical Association 15:66-84.
1916

Spanish exploration in

the Southwest.

Scribner’s, New York.

Buckelew, F.M.
1911
Buckelew, the Indian captive. Mason Herald, Mason, Texas.

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

77

Campbell, T.N.
1970
Archeological survey of Big Bend National Park. Unpublished report
submitted to National Park Service by The University of Texas at
Austin.
Collins, Michael B.
1974
A functional analysis of lithic technology among prehistoric huntergatherers of southwestern France and western Texas. Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona at Tucson.
Crabtree, Don E.
An introduction to flintworking.
1972
State University Museum 28.

Occasional Papers of the Idaho

Davis, E. Mott
1976
Field notes from the Texas Archeotogical Society field school, Musk
Hog Canyon, Crockett County, Texas (41CX218). Unpublished
notes on file, Archeological Laboratory, Texas A&M University,
College Station.
Dennis, T.X., and T.S. Dennis
Life of F.M. Buckelew, the Indian captive, as related by himself.
1925
Bandera, Texas.
Dering, James Phil
1976
Analysis of plant remains from a burned rock midden in Hinds Cave,
Val Verde County, Texas. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of
the Texas Archeological Society, Houston.
1979

Pollen and plant macrofossil vegetation record recovered from Hinds
Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, Texas
A&M University, College Station.

Dering, James P., and Herry J. Shafer
Analysis of matrix samples from a Crockett County shelter. Bulletin
1976
of the Texas Archeological Society 47:209-229.
Dibble, David S.
1967
Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-1966. Mimeographed report
submitted to National Park Service by Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Giddings, J.L.
The archeology of Cape Denbigh.
! 964
dence.

Brown University Press, Provi-

Greer, John W.
1965
A typology of midden circles and mescal pits. Southwestern Lore
31:41-55.
1968a

Notes on excavated ring midden sites, 1963-1968. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 38: 39-44.

1968b

The Cammack site: a Neo-Indian pit oven ring midden site in Val
Verde County, Texas. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, The University of
Texas at Austin.

1975

On sotol, seasonality and ring middens. Texas Archeology (Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society) 19(4):5-9.

78 Texas Archeological Society
Griffin, William B.
1969
Culture change and shifting populations in central northern Mexico.
Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona 13. University
of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Hill, T.C., J.B. Holdsworth, and T.R. Hester
1976
Yucca exploitation: a contemporary account from the Rio Grande
plain. La Tierra (Quarterly Newsletter of the Southern Texas Archaeological Society) 4(1 ): ! 9-21.
Holden, W.C.
McKenzie Cave and adjacent sites in Pecos County. Bulletin of the
1941
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 13:46-57.
Hough, Walter
1959
Mescal. In Handbook of American Indians north of Mexico, Part
I, ed. by F.W. Hodge. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin
30.
Hughes, Jack T.
1976
Excavation records from the Texas Archeological Society field
school, Musk Hog Canyon, Crockett County, Texas (41CX241).
Unpublished notes on file, Archeo!ogical Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Irving, Robert S.
1966
A preliminary analysis of plant remains from six Amistad Reservoir
sites. In A preliminary study of the paleoecology of the Amistad
area, assembled by Dee Ann Story and Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr., pp.
61-90. Nationa! Science Foundation Report of Research GS-667.
Jarvis, R. Whitby, and Daymond D. Crawford
Archeotogical excavations on Interstate Highway 10, Sutton County,
1974
Texas. Texas Highway Department Publications in Archaeology 4.
Johnson, Charles A. II
1977
A preliminary appraisal of cultural and historical resources found
along the Rio Grande between Fort Quitman and Haciendita, Texas.
El Paso Centennial Museum, The University of Texas at El Paso,
Publications in Anthropology 5.
Johnson, Elmer H.
Natural Regions of Texas.
1931
3113.

University of Texas [at Austin] Bulletin

Katz, Paul R.
1978
An inventory and assessment of archaeological sites in the high
country of Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 36.
Kirkland, Forrest
!939
Indian pictures in the dry shelters of Val Verde County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
11:47-76.
Kirkland, Forrest, and W.W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967
The rock art of Texas Indians.

University of Texas Press, Austin.

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

79

Lorrain, Dessamae
1968
Archeological excavations in northwestern Crockett County, Texas,
1966-1967. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas State Building
Commission, Archeological Program Report 12.
Lynn, Warren M., and Barbara J. Baskin
1975
An archeological reconnaissance of public free school lands, Tally
Ranch, Hudspeth County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, Archeological Survey Report 14.
Mallouf, Robert J., and Curtis Tunne!l
1977
An archeological reconnaissance in the lower canyons of the Rio
Grande. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Archeo!ogicaI Survey Report 22.
Moore, Bill
1975
A guide to Texas counties. Tejas, Houston and Huntsville.
Newcomb, W.W., Jr.
Pecos River pictographs: the development of an art form. In Cul1976
tural change and continuity: essays in honor of James Bennett
Griffin, edited by Charles E. Cleland. Academic Press, New York.
Opler, Morris
An Apache life-way: the economic, social and religious institutions
1941
of the Chiricahua Indians. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Pearce, J.E., and A.T. Jackson
1933
A prehistoric rockshelter in Val Verde County, Texas. University of
Texas [at Austin] Publication 3327 and Anthropological Papers,
The University of Texas [at Austin] 1 (3).
Pitzer, Jean M°
A guide to the identification of burins in prehistoric chipped stone
1977
assemblages. Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio, Guidebooks in Archaeology 1.
Reagan, Albert B.
Notes on the Indians of the Fort Apache region. Anthropological
1930
Papers of the American Museum of Natural History 31, pt. 5.
Riggs, Aaron D.
!968a A Crockett County shelter (41CX10). In Transaetions of the Third
Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico
and Western Texas, pp. 41-50, South Plains Archeological Society,
Lubbock.

,~, 1968b

A preliminary report on a Crockett County, Texas, shelter: 41CX12.
In Transactions of the Fourth Regional Archeological Svmt~osium
for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 2-18. Iraan
Archaeological Society, Iraan, Texas.

1968c

Excavations of a buried midden, Site 41CX11 in Crockett County,
Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 38:76-82.

1969

Rattlesnake Shelter: 41CX29. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 40:107-117.

80 Texas Archeological Society
1974

Nan’s Shelter: 41CX109. In Transactions of the Ninth Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas,
pp. 25-38. Midland Archaeo!ogical Society, Midland, Texas.

Ross, Richard E.
The archeology of Eagle Cave. Papers of the Texas Archeological
1965
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin 7.
Schroeder, Albert H.
A study of the Apache Indians, Part III: the Mescalero. Unpub1960
fished report submitted to National Park Service, Santa Fe.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
An analysis of Val Verde County cave material.
1956
Texas Archeological Society 27 : 129-160.

Bulletin of the

Shafer, Harry J.
1970
Field notes from the archeological reconnaissance of the Sanderson
Canyon watershed, Texas. Unpublished notes on file, Archeological Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
1971

An archeological reconnaissance of the Sanderson Canyon Watershed, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University
of Texas at Austin, Survey Report 7.

1975

Functional interpretations of the Lower Pecos Archaic art. Paper
presented at the Reunion Sobre Aspectos de Arqueologia e Historia
del Norteste, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon.

1976

Belize lithics: "orange peel" flakes and adze manufacture. In Maya
lithics: papers from the t976 Belize Field Symposium, edited by
Norman Hammond and Thomas R. Hester, pp. 21-34. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Special Publication 4.

1978

Technology and too! kits from Hinds Cave: toward the construction of behavior set models. Paper presented at symposium, "Human Ecology and Adaptive Technology at Hinds Cave, Val Verde
County, Texas."

Shafer, Harry J., and Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr.
1977
Archeotogical and botanical studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde County, Texas.
Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University,
Special Series 1.
Shafer, Harry J., and Richard G. Holloway
1979
Organic residue analysis in determining stone tool function. In
Lithic use-wear analysis, edited by Brian Hayden, pp. 385-399. Academic Press, New York.
Shafer, Harry J., and G.L. Moore
!976
Texas Archeological Society field school archeologist’s report.
Texas Archeology (Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society)
20(4):5-10.
Sjoberg, Andree F.
Lipan Apache culture in historical perspective. Southwestern Jour1953
nal of Anthropology 9:76-98.

Moore-Musk Hog Canyon

81

Skinner, S. Alan, Paul P. Steed, Jr., and Susan E. Bearden
Prehistory at Milehigh. Archaeology Research Program, Southern
1973
Methodist University, Dallas.
Spier, Leslie
Havasupai ethnography. Anthropological Papers of the American
1928
Museum of Natural History 29.
Story, Dee Ann, and V.M. Bryant, Jr. (assemblers)
1966
A preliminary study of the paleoecology of the Amistad Reservoir
area. National Science Foundation Report of Research GS-667.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
Handbook of Texas archeology:
type descriptions.
Texas Ar1962
eheological Society Special Publication 1 and Texas Memorial
Museum, The University of Texas at Austin, Bulletin 4.
Tharp, Benjamin C.
1952
Texas range grasses. University of Texas Press, Austin.
U.S. Soil Conservation Service
1956
Watershed work plan for watershed protection and flood prevention
of Johnson Draw watershed, Crockett County, Texas. Prepared
under the authority of the Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act.
Vines, Robert A.
Trees, shrubs, and woody vines of the Southwest.
1960
Texas Press, Austin.
Wiedenfeld, C.C. and J.D. McAndrew
Soil survey of Sutton County, Texas.
1968
culture, Washington, D.C.

University of

U.S. Department of Agri-

Williams-Dean, Glenna Joyce
1979
Ethnobotany and cultural ecology of prehistoric man in southwest
Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Texas A&M University,
College Station.
Word, James J.
The Dunlap complex in western Crockett County, Texas. Bulletin
t971
of the Texas Archeological Society 42:271-318.
Word, James J., and C.L. Douglas
Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas Me1970
morial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin, Bulletin 16.

