SPELEOTHEM AGE DATING
PHIL C. ORR

In the constant hunt for methods of determining the age
of archeological or paleontological material, little attention
has been paid to the growth of speleothem--"cave formation" including stalactites, stalagmites and dripstone, etc. A
few short papers have appeared on the rapid growth of these
forms, usually in mine tunnels, dams or concrete works, but
of these most are of material other than crystallized travertine, which is usually associated with old human bones or
those of prehistoric animals in natural caves.
Epsom salts, for instance, grows very rapidly. In the construction of a simulated mine---a life size replica in the
Nevada State Museum, we utilized epsom salts to make
crystal growth, but these later had to be removed, for their
growth could not be controlled. CaIcanthite, a copper sulphate, occurring as a secondary mineral, forms rapidly under
artificial conditions, but does not appear to occur in nature,
except in Chile. Other salts, including calcium carbonate,
form rapidly under ideal conditions, particularly in hot
springs.
The growth of fast forming minerals is little understood
and for the purpose of this paper will not be gone into, as
the present study is concerned with the growth of crystallized calcium carbonate upon human bone and is limited to
an effort to determine the relative age of archeological cave
deposits in Moaning Cave, Calaveras County, California.
The Truman Expeditions of the Western Speleologica!
Institute, excavating for the Santa BaPbara Museum of
Natural History in Moaning Cave, unearthed hundreds of
human, dog and small mammal and bird bones in the floor
of the large room, which posed a problem of determining
their age.

Bones were found to depths of eleven feet under speleothem capping interlaid with broken rocks, cave earth and
other speleothem layers. A total of 420 ram. of speleothem
lay over the oldest of the bones which are chalky white in
color inside and stained a light red on the surface (Plate I).

Texas Archeological Society

The mineralization is such that had they been the bones of
extinct mammals, there would be no hesitation in placing
them in the Pleistocene Age; but being Homo sapiens, the
ghosts of Hrdlicka and Holmes would rise up and point out
a dozen reasons why and how these human bones became
imbedded in solid rock in a matter of a few thousands of
years.
Moaning Cave was first discovered by white men some
time in the ’49er era. One of the first white visitors to the
cave left a miner’s pick and a whiskey bottle. It is believed
by some that the cave was visited by Trask, State Geologist
in 1851, but it was not entered again until 1922, when Addison Carley, the present owner, descended the 210 feet from
the surface and found a "coyote skull," the whiskey bottle
and the miner’s pick.
It seems probable in the light of the recent excavations
that the "coyote skull" may have been that of a dog, for
many bones of Indian dogs were uncovered, but no coyotes.
However, the skull has disappeared along with the whisky
bottle and only the miner’s pick has been recovered and has
been presented to the Western Speleological Institute’s collections at the Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History.
Moaning Cave is a large trap cave, with relatively small
opening of some four by ten feet, dropping down a straight
fissure about thirty feet to a small shelf and beneath this is
a huge room of 165 feet sheer drop and roughly 90 by 30 feet
at the bottom, which originally was in the form of a cone of
debris coated with speleothem.
Excavations by Mr. Carley in this cone, in an effort to find
hidden passages, led to the original discovery of human bone
beneath the cone.
In prehistoric times a second entrance to the cave existed
through another fissure and this has been reopened and is
utilized today as the main entrance to the cave. Therefore,
the prehistoric cone has been supplied from two different
entrances.

PLATE !
Cross section of human femur from Moaning Cave, Calaveras
showing growth of speleothem.

County,

White ring in center is the original bone.

California,

Speleothem Age Dating

11

Wallace (1951, p. 38), working on the side of the cone
supplied by the present artificial entrance, estimated the
age of human bone by the artifacts at 3500 years. Orr (1952,
p. 11) made a fortunate discovery of some common nails,
which it was determined entered the cave in 1922 during
the construction of the stairway and were removed in 1951,
making 29 years during which they received their coating
of speleothem in the cave. On the basis of the accumulated
speleothem on five of these nails, he postulated a minimum
age for the oldest of the human bone as 12,180 years (Orr,
1952, p. 14) and a maximum age, disregarding the several
feet of red clay deposits, as about 50,400 years.
With the discovery of the miner’s pick, which appears to
have been left in the cave between about 1850 and 1922, or
roughly seventy years, we secure an additional check against
the evidence of the nails for a period of twenty-nine years.
The iron pick (Plate 2, B) at one time was in part heavily
encrusted with speleothem. Other portions received a lighter coating. Measurements made by Mr. O. H. Truman,
President of the Institute, show a maximum deposition of
2.5146 mm. accumulated in 70 years. The minimum deposition measured was 1.016 ram., and the average of nine measurements was 1.8034 mm.
The question of which measurements are of importance
arises. The minimum deposit of speleothem will give the
maximum age in years, while the maximum deposit will
give the minimum number of years. Inasmuch as the maximum deposit and the minimum number of years is somewhat older than any Carbon-14 date for early man, we may
assume that the maximum deposit or minimum number of
years is of value as an indication of the age of the deposits.
The minimum time period for the oldest of the deposits
is indicated as being in the vicinity of 12,000 years. Depending on the method used to determine this mathematically and the number of decimal places the rate of growth
in millimeters per year is carried out, there is a variation
in the answer of a few hundred years in 12,000. For ex-

12

.

Texas Archeological Society

ample, calculating the rate of growth per year from the
accumulation of speleothem in 29 years gives us .0345 ram.
divided into the total deposition of speleothem of420 ram.
gives 12,174 years to accumulate this amount.

Yet, if we

figure as Orr did (1952, p. 14) on the number of years to
accumulate one millimeter, we get the figure 12,180 years, a
variation of six years due to the number of decimal places
the calculations are carried out. In the case of the minimum
deposits, but maximum years, there is a slight increase to a
maximum of 50,755 as against 50,400 years.
From the measurements made of the miner’s pick, which
lay in the cave some 70 years prior to the accumulated
speleothem on the nails, we secure the minimum deposition
of 1.0160 ram. or an accumulation of .0145 ram. per year for
the 70 years, which gives us a maximum age of the 420 ram.
of speleothem deposit as 28,965 years as against 50,755 years
derived from the nails.
However, the 2.5146 mm. maximum deposition on the pick
in 70 years results in a rate of growth of 0.359 ram. per year,
or 11,699 years to make the total deposition of 420 mm. This
figure agrees fairly well with the minimum age, secured
from the nails alone, of 12,174 years.
If we were to average the two sums

11,699 and 12,174

years, we get 11,961 years as represented from the data of
the past I00 years, instead of merely the last 29 years, as
reported by Orr. This is a minor difference from his estimate of 12,180 tending, on the basis of the data available, to
substantiate his original estimate of a minimum age.
On the matter of the maximum age of 50,000 years derived
from the nails, and of only about 29,000 years secured from
the pick, the difference can be explained only in the habit
of speleothem to grow on different surfaces at different
times.

One consideration must be made, and that is the condition
of the surface of the object to be deposited on. Greasy, dense,
or highly polished surfaces wi!l not hold the mineral-carry-

PLATE 2
A, stalactite growth in Cave of Skulls, Calaveras County, California.
Note new
stalactite growing from stump of one broken off in 1853, thus representing 98 years
g~’owth.
B, two views of miner’s pick from Moaning Cave, Calaveras County, California, showing amount of speleothem coating from 1850 to 1922.

Speleothera Age Dating

15

ing water long enough to make its depositions of salts. Consequently, the 1953 investigations found other nails, dropped
at the same time, but which had accumulated virtually no
speleothem in that period.
The point of the pick shows no deposition, while the region
near the eye has the heaviest deposits. This is doubtless
due in part to the condition of the pick when left in the cave.
It is usual with such tools to find that the used point is inclined to be smoother, and to have rust and other porous
conditions removed, and hence speleothem deposition could
not be started until after a coating of rust had developed.
Porous bone also accumulates more speleothem than that
found on the more dense portions, and likewise, green bone
containing grease would resist the action of the crystallization longer than dry bone subject to the same condition.
During the construction of the stairway, electric lights
were strung and the waste of the rubber insulation fell to
the floor of the cave with the discarded nails and were subject to the same conditions of humidity and mineral loaded
waters, yet the pieces of rubber insulation after 29 years
show virtually no accumulation of speleothem.
Efforts were made to compare the record of speleothem
growth to rainfall records from the area. It was hoped that,
like tree rings, a wide and narrow band might indicate
climatic changes, but so far this has not produced fruit.
Unlike tree ring growth in which climatic conditions are
reflected in the next season, there is a considerable lag in
the results in speleothem growth due to the necessity of restoring the water table after dry years, and during wet
years there is an excess of solution, not deposition, of already
existing speleothem.
It is possible, however, from a study of cross sections of
banded, crystallized speleothem, to select periods of time of
excessive rainfall as against arid conditions. Contrary to
general belief, there is a greater growth of fine rings during
the arid conditions than during the humid.

Texas Archeological Society

16

There is much to be desired about the above study of
speleothem growth as a method of dating archeological deposits.

At this time it appears reasonable to suppose that

the human remains in Moaning Cave date back at least
12,000 years, with the possibility that they may be as much
as 50,000 years. There will be many eyebrows raised at both
figures, but let us point out that from Carbon-14 determinations we know that man had already reached various parts
of America by 12,000 years ago, that man in Nevada was
trading with the Pacific Coast for sea shells as long as 9,000
years ago, and that hundreds of different cultures had developed throughout America to the southern tip of South
America before the time of Columbus.
No Carbon-14 dates have been secured from this material.
It is decidedly questionable as to whether its value would
be great for the reason that for the most part only small
specks of water-soaked charcoal are available and these, if
collected in sufficient amounts for a test, might well come
from points several thousand years apart. Furthermore, the
question arises as to what effect, if any, the carbonated
waters carrying modern Carbon-14 might have on carbon
deposited a thousand years before. This is a wonderful
opportunity for contamination, tending to give a lesser age
than the true age.
Nevertheless, it would be exceedingly interesting to secure a Carbon-14 date on any of these deposits.
That speleothem growth in the mother lode caves of California is slow is shown by a stalactite which the Western
Speleological Institute and the Stanford Grotto determined
was broken off in 1853. From it a very small stalactite has
grown about three quarters of an inch in 98 years (Plate
2, A). Another similar new stalactite occurs at the top of
the stairway in Moaning Cave, which has been growing
since 1922. Yet in this same cave we have 420 ram. of speleothem over human bone plus several feet of earth deposits.

Speleothem Age Dating

17

Bibliography
Wallace, Wm. J.
1951. Archeological Deposits in Moaning Cave, Calaveras County. Reports of the University of California
Archeological Survey, No. 12.
Orr, Phil C.
1952.

Excavation in Moaning Cave. Bulletin No. i, De-

partment of Anthropology, Santa Barbara Museum of
Natural History.
Western Speleological Institute
Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History
Santa Barbara, California

