211

Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation and Colonial
Period Acculturation: Archeologkal and
Ethnohistorkal Evidence
Robert A. Ricklis

ABSTRACT
Contrary to popular belief, the Karankawans of the central coast of Texas did
not consistently reject Euroamerican cultural influences up to the time of their
extinction in the nineteenth century as an identifiable population. A synthesis of
archeological and ethnohistorical data suggests that the Karankawans achieved
peaceful interaction with the Spanish on the colonial frontier. Archeological data
indicate that the aboriginal adaptive strategy took advantage of a broad ecotonal
enviromnent that encompassed both the coasta! estuaries and the adjacent
prairie-riverine environment. Seasonally oscillating patterns of settlement and
subsistence emphasized procurement of estuarine resources in the fall and winter,
and terrestrial game during the spring and summer, a pattern that persisted through
colonial times. As various pressures for interaction with the Spaniards intensified
in the late 1700s, the Karankawans established ongoing relations, apparently
facilitated by integrating the institution of the mission into their traditional
adaptive system at the level of a basic ecological resource. This synthesis of
long-established cultural patterns with the foreign institution of the mission helped
to lay a foundation for the incipient acculturation that took place during the early
nineteenth century among Karankawan groups.

INTRODUCTION
According to popular wisdom, the Karankawan Indians of the Texas coast were
a fierce and unfriendly people who led an extremely primitive existence and
remained intractably resistant to Euroamerican cultural influence until their final
demise in the mid-nineteenth century. In the perception of many Colonial Spanish
missionaries and military personnel, they were at best an intractable folk, and at
worst, vile and treacherous savages. Most later Anglo-Americans held them in
similar low esteem, viewing them as a dangerous impediment to progressive
settlement of the coastal prairies. These perceptions, repeated and magnified
through time in popular folklore, ultimately became the basis for a generally
negative judgment of Karankawan culture (e.g., Kilman 1959).
With anthropological hindsight, such condemnations of entire cultures are now
seen as highly suspect. In the New World, insights provided by historical distance
and decades of scholarly research, have provided less biased assessments of Native
American peoples and their cultures. It is now clear that the Precolumbian New
World was not a sparsely populated wilderness, but a settled place, inhabited by
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

212

Texas Archeological Society

many native groups who had expert knowledge of their environments, rich
mythologies and folklore, and, in many cases, highly complex and aesthetically
sophisticated societies. With an awareness of earlier ethnocentric biases, modern
researchers have extended less-perjorative attention to the Karankawans. The
notion that these coastal people represented a nadir in human societal development
has been brought into question (Gilmore 1984), and ulterior motives have been
recognized in the early denigration of this native people (Newcomb 1983).
Nonetheless, some basic facets of Karankawan culture and history have remained
obscure.
The recent archeological and historical research summarized here offers some
degree of insight into native lifeways before the Euroamerican intrusion and begins
to trace the basis for some of the processes of change that operated during the
Historic era. Archeological data point to a settlement and subsistence strategy that
took advantage of seasonal peaks in the availabilities of key resources. The
aboriginal lifeways of the Karankawans included seasonally oscillating use of
coastal, estuarine, and terrestrial resources of the prairie-riverine environment.
Historical data show that, contrary to long-held assumptions, the Karankawans
(Figure 1) experienced a significant degree of peaceful acculturation to Spanish
cultural patterns during the latter part of the Colonial era. Furthermore, there is
evidence that there was a significant linkage between aboriginal adpative patterns
and late Colonial period acculturation, and that real change was related to the
Karankawan’s ability to integrate the foreign institution of the mission strategically
into their long-established and highly traditional cultural-ecological patterns.
THE ABORIGINAL KARANKAWAN ECOSYSTEM:
ENVIRONMENT AND ARCHEOLOGY
Environmental Resource Zones: Key Spatial and Seasonal Patterns
The Karankawan homeland of the central Texas coast is a broad ecotone,
situated between the marine environment of the Gulf of Mexico and the inland
coastal plain. The area is marked by five major, nearly contiguous estuarine bay
systems, protected from the high energy wave action of the open Gulf by a long
chain of barrier islands (Figure 1). Streams of varying sizes discharge fresh water
into the bays, and the bayfiagoon estuaries are connected to the open Gulf by a series
of narrow tidal passes.
The outer mainland shoreline, parallel to the modern barrier islands, consists
geologically of the Ingleside unit of the Beaumont Formation, a sandy clay stratum
several kilometers wide that represents a Pleistocene barrier island or strandplain
(Brown et al. 1976; McGowen et al. 1976). Here, sandy soils and stable sand dunes
of the Ingleside support extensive and often dense stands of oak, predominantly live
oak and blackjack oak (Jones 1983). Just inland are the extensive Beaumont and
Lissie Formations, consisting of fluvial deltaic sediments believed to have been
deposited by extensive Pleistocene riverine distributary systems (Brown et al.
1976). The nearly flat surfaces of the Beaumont and Lissie formations were once

Ricklis m AboriginaI Karankawan Adaptation

213

Figure 1. Map of the central Texas coast, showing major rivers and approximate locations of
the five major Karankawan groups.

covered with grass prairies, and, in places, oak savannas, both of which have largely
given way to varying densities of thornbrush.
Many subparallel perennial streams flow through the Coastal Plain. Today,
floodplains of the larger streams support dense arboreal vegetation, as they
doubtless did in prehistoric times. This includes species of hackberry, elm, cottonwood, oak, and mesquite, as well as the economically useful pecan.
The shallow protected bays and lagoons lying behind the barrier islands
provided a rich variety of exploitable resources. High photosynthesis rates in
shallow waters, combined with nutrients entering the bays through riverine discharge, were the basis of a complex food chain including planktons, shellfish, and
fish. Bay-lagoon shellfish resources of economic potential include moderatesalinity bivalves such as oyster (Crassostrea virginica), bay scallop (Argopectin
irradians), southern quahog (Mercenaria campechensis), and various high-salinity
gastropods, most notably lightning whelk (Busycon perversum). In general, there is
a north-south trend of increasing salinity along the Texas estauries, due to increasingly xeric climate and concomitant reduction of freshwater discharge. As a result,
low-to-moderate salinity oysters predominate to the north, and higher salinity
bivalves and gastropods become increasingly abundant toward Corpus Christi Bay

214

Texas Archeological Society

(see Steele 1988). Baffin Bay supports none of the larger, economically useful
shellfish species, due to its hypersalinity (see Hester 1980). Found in rivers that are
heavily influenced by secondary and tertiary bay areas, and often in dense beds
along estuarine zones of rivers, is the common rangia,Rangia cuneata (La Salle and
De la Cruz 1985).
The bays and lagoons of the Texas coast abound in fish. Economically useful
species include black drum (Pogonias cromis), redfish (Sciaenops ocellata),
speckled sea trout (Cynoscion nebulosus), and Atlantic croaker (Micropogon
undulatus). Black drum and redfish are the largest species, the adults weighing
several kilograms (Beckman et al. 1988; Beckman, Wilson and Stanley 1988).
These species spawn during the winter-to-early spring and fall, respectively
(Simmons and Breuer 1962), when they aggregate in large numbers.
A rich and varied terrestrial fauna complements the estuarine species of the
Karankawan homeland. In spite of a wide range of avian and mammalian species,
archeological data indicate that by far the most economically significant terrestrial
faunal species in aboriginal times were the white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus)
and bison (Bison bison) (Ricklis 1990). Deer are, and doubtless were, abundant on
the coastal prairies, river floodplains, and m arshy areas; the density is now about one
animal in four hectares (extrapolated from data in Schmidly 1983). Bison are
abundantly documented for early historic times (e.g., West 1905:207,216; Folmer
1940:216, 219; Carroll 1983:21), and the archeological data available from the area,
and from southern Texas in general (e.g., Hester 1975; Huebner 1991; Ricklis
1990), indicate their presence after about A.D. 1250 to 1300, in accord with
Dillehay’s (1974) postulation of a significant Late Prehistoric influx of bison into
Texas.
Archeological Indications of Precontact
Karankawan Lifeways
Arecently completed program ofarcheological survey, testing, and excavation,
mainly in Nueces and San Patricio counties, has provided empirical data for a
reconstruction of basic spatial and seasonal patterns of the human ecosystem before
there was ongoing contact with Euroamericans. The pertinent information, which
is summarized here, comes from site components of the Late Prehistoric Rockport
phase, estimated to have begun about A.D. 1250/1300 (Story 1968; Ricklis 1990,
1992). Occasional finds of early historic European material in Rockport phase
contexts indicates that it persisted into early historic times, implying a direct linkage
with the region’s historically documented Karankawan peoples (Suhm et al. 1954;
Campbell 1960; Newcomb 1983).
A recurrent artifact assemblage identifies sites of the Rockport phase. Lithic
artifacts (Figure 2) consist predeminantly of Perdiz arrowpoints (see Turner and
Hester 1985:187), unifacial end scrapers, thin bifacial knives (sometimes alternately beveled), small chert drills, and a blade-core technology (see Hester and
Shafer 1975). Ceramic finds are dominated by several types of Rockport pottery
(Suhm and Jelks 1962; Ricklis 1990), a sandy paste ware often coated and/or

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

215

decorated with natural asphaltum (Figure 3). Most of the lithic material has
counterparts in Late Prehistoric assemblages in the larger Texas region, but the
highly distinctive ceramics are restricted to a narrow zone along the coast, from the
Matagorda Bay-Colorado River area on the north (Fritz 1975) to the northern shores
of Baffin Bay on the south (Hester 1969). Considering the stylistic redundancy of
ceramics in this area and the environmental correlate of the area’s five nearly
contiguous major bay systems, it is clear that the geographical extent of Rockport
pottery delineates a region of heightened internal interaction and information
exchange within a distinct environmental zone. This area is about the same as that
occupied during early historic times by the several Karankawan groups, leaving
little doubt that Rockport pottery is largely, if not exlusively, of Karankawan
manufacture.
Rockport Phase Archeological Sites as Nodal Points
of the Use of Seasonal Resources
Many Late Prehistoric sites are documented in this area; some (Figure 4) have
yielded key classes of data. A preliminary assessment of data from 26 Rockport
phase sites suggested a fundamental dichotomy, with two distinct kinds of sites
found largely in one or another of two kinds of environmental contexts (Ricklis
1988). Additional investigations (Ricklis 1990) have further supported this distinction. Group 1 sites are consistently large (several thousand square meters in area),
yield relatively large quantities of artifacts, and are characterized by large quantities
of fish and shellfish debris. Invariably, these sites are found in shoreline locations
on margins of bays or lagoons.
Group 2 sites (Ricklis 1988) present a marked contrast; they cover small areas
(usually only a few hundred square meters), yield only sparse cultural material, and
have faunal assemblages dominated mainly by bones of large game (bison, deer),
with few fish or shellfish remains. Most recorded Group 2 sites are on upland prairie
margins overlooking stream floodplains, though some are adjacent to the prairie
environment on inland bayshores (Figure 4).
Group I Sites
The author has carried out subsurface testing at four Group 1 sites (Ricklis
1990): 41SP120 and 41SP43 on the northeastern shore of Corpus Christi Bay, the
Kirchmeyer site (41NU11) on Oso Bay, and the Mustang Lake site (41CL3) on San
Antonio Bay (Figure 4). All are large sites, with high artifact yields and abundant
evidence for estuarine resource procurement.
At the Mustang Lake site, which covers at least 5,000 square meters, testing
revealed a dense shell (mostly oyster) midden more than 60 cm thick. Many fish
bones and otoliths were found throughout the deposit, which also contained
scattered deer bone fragments, a few fragments of bird long bones, canid bone, a
turtle carapace fragment, a cottontail mandible, black drum, marine catfish, redfish,
and speckled sea trout. The Rockport phase component, indicated by many

216

Texas Archeological Society

i
~11

A

D

’

E

I

F

13

J

K

N

O

Figure 2. Drawings: lithic artifacts of the Rockport phase: A-D, bifacial knives (A-C are
alternately beveled); E-I, unifacial end scrapers; J-M, Perdiz arrowpoints; N and O, trimmed
prismatic blades. Proveniences: A, 41NU1; B, 41NU193; C and G, 41SP167; D, E, F, H, I,
and J-O, 41SP120.

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

217

F
E

G

!
?

!

g
H

K
2

3,

cm

Figure 3. Asphaltum-painted Rockport Black-on-Gray potsherds. Proveniences: A and B,
41SP159; J, 41SP167; all others, 41SP120.

Rockport ware sherds, was restricted to the upper 15 cm of the deposit. Seasonality
analyses of fish otoliths, Rangia cuneata, and oysters from the Rockport level at
Mustang Lake yielded mutually supportive results that point to a predominantly
fall-through-late-winter to early spring occupation (see Ricklis 1990 for discussion
of methods of seasonality analysis).
At 41SP120 on Corpus Christi Bay, more extensive excavations yielded large
samples of artifacts and associated faunal remains. The findings indicate heavy

218

Texas Archeological Society

0

20

40

KILOMETERS

TEXAS

10

12

\
Figure 4. Map of the central Texas coast. Key to sites: 1.41CL3 (Mustang Lake); 2.41SP170;
3.41SP167; 4. 41SP160; 5.41SP159; 6. 41SP161; 7 and 8. 41SP43 and 41SP120; 9.
41NU193; 10.41NU240; 11.41NU22!; 12. 41NU255; 13.41NUll (Kirchmeyer); 14.
41NU46.

emphasis on exploitation of estuarine resources and predominantly fall-winter
seasonality. The Rockport phase component at this site consists of an extensive
midden 20 to 50 cm thick, which has produced many Perdiz arrowpoints, unifacial
end scrapers, small chert drills, bifacial knives, shell and bone tools and ornaments,
and several thousand Rockport ware sherds.
A profusion of fish bones and shell fragments was found at 41SP120; for
example, one excavation block of 8 square meters yielded 1,023 otoliths and 3,031
bivalve umbos and gastropod columellae, mostly in association with arrowpoints
and Rockport pottery. The important fish species, in order of estimated meat-weight
represented, were black drum, redfish, speckled sea trout, Atlantic croaker, and
marine catfish. Scattered fragments of deer and bison bone, as well as specimens of
bobcat, cottontail, and bird bone were also found. Analyses for minimum numbers

Ricklis M Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

219

of individuals (MNI) indicate that fish were the primary source of meat weight
consumed at the site, followed by white-tailed deer and shellfish, in that order
(Ricklis 1990:198-218).
Analysis of seasonality of fish otoliths produced results similar to those from
Mustang Lake. A sample of 79 specimens broke down into seasonal categories: 19
percent fall, 63 percent winter, 5 percent spring, and 13 percent summer, indicating
a winter or fall-winter emphasis on fishing at the site.
Excavations at nearby 41 SP43 (the Ingleside Cove site), which had been tested
by Dee Ann Story (1968), yielded similar results for use and seasonality of
resources. Excavations in 1987 recovered several hundred Rockport potsherds in
association with Perdiz arrowpoints, as well as profuse fish and shellfish remains.
The most common fish species are black drum, redfish, speckled sea trout, and
Atlantic croaker. MNI analyses indicate that fish (mainly drum, redfish, and trout)
and white-tailed deer were of major economic significance and that the procurement
of shellfish played a supplemental role. Analysis of otolith seasonality indicates a
distinct fall-winter emphasis on fishing; the sample breaks down into seasonal
categories as follows: 25 percent fall, 60 percent winter, 4 percent spring, and 10
percent summer.
Intensive surface inspection and subsurface testing were carried out during the
summer of 1987 at the Kirchmeyer site (41NU11), on a clay dune on the western
shore ofOso Bay--a secondary bay connected to Corpus Christi Bay. This large site
(some 10,000 square meters) has been a source of surface-collected Rockport phase
materials since the early decades of this century, and a large sample of lithic,
ceramic, and shell artifacts from the site is housed at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL; see Headrick 1991). Particularly abundant are Perdiz
and triangular arrowpoints, small unifacial end scrapers, and sherds of Rockport
ware. Thomas R. Hester and James E. Corbin conducted subsurface testing at
Kirchmeyer in 1969, which revealed localized concentrations of cultural debris that
included fish, shellfish, and mammalian remains (field notes on file at TARL).
Workers at Kirchmeyer in 1987 recovered Rockport ware sherds, chert
debitage, shell fragments (oyster, scallop, and whelk), deer bone, and fish bones and
otoliths. The otoliths consisted of 27 drum, three croaker, two redfish, and two
speckled sea trout. Though only 11 specimens were large enough for reliable
seasonality readings, a distinct winter emphasis on fishing is strongly suggested.
The seasonality breakdown is 9 percent fa!l, 82 percent winter, and 9 percent spring.
Group 2 sites
Artifacts and faunal and seasonality samples have been analyzed for 11
Rockport phase components from twenty-nine Group 2 sites that have been
identified in the Corpus Christi and Copano Bay areas (Ricklis 1988, 1990). These
sites are treated as a group here, since there are close similarities in their salient
charactersitics (see Ricklis 1988, 1990).
As already noted, most Group 2 sites are on upland margins along stream
floodplains (Figure 4). Relative to Group 1 sites, the areas covered by these sites are

220

Texas Archeological Society

small, on the order of a few hundred square meters. Subsurface excavations at
several sites (41NU46, 41NU221, 41NU255, 41SP159, 41SP160, 41SP161,
41SP167, and 41SP170) confirm impressions gained during surface survey that
cultural debris is sparse and vertically restricted to narrow zones, usually somewhere between 10 and 25 cm below ground surface. Lithic and ceramic artifacts are
of the Rockport phase, and the overall assemblages of Group 2 and Group 1 sites
are essentially identical. Particularly significant is the persistent presence of the
technologically and stylistically unique Rockport pottery, which permits a confident distinction between Group 2 Rockport phase sites and sites referrable to the
contemporaneous Toyah phase or horizon of the coastal prairie. In fact, the
geographical distribution of sites yielding predominantly Rockport ware, as opposed to the bone-tempered plainware of the Toyah phase or horizon, makes it
possible to define a boundary between the two contemporaneous archeological
cultures at about 40 km from the outer mainland shoreline (Ricklis 1990:358-425).
Faunal samples from Group 2 sites are dominated by bones of bison and whitetailed deer, with occasional smaller animals such as turtle and rabbit. In contrast to
Group 1 sites, estuarine resources are only scantily represented and consist mainly
of the occasional fish bone or otolith and, usually, a light scatter ofRangia cuneata
clamshells. MNI analysis of relatively complete faunal samples from 41NU221 and
41SP167 indicate that, based on meat weight, bison and deer comprised, respectively, about 85 to 90 percent and 8 to 12 percen~ of the meat diet; fish and rangia
clams combined constituted less than 2 percent of the useable meat at each site
(Ricklis 1990:Table 17). The proportions of taxa represented at other Group 2 sites
are basically the same, clearly indicating that ungulate game, most notably bison,
was the primary source of meat for residents of these sites.
Seasonality at Group 2 has a consistent spring-summer pattern. Analyses of
Rangia cuneata samples from all 11 sites on the Nueces and Aransas rivers
produced seasonality histograms (see Aten 1981) that point to clam gathering
during these seasons. In the light of a recent assessment of the accuracy of rangia
seasonality (Carlson 1988), these can be expressed as ranges, with a margin of error
of+l.5 months. When so expressed, the seasonality ranges for the various Group
2 sites fall between March and August.
Importantly, the seasonality of the combined sample of fish otoliths from
Group 2 sites is in accordance with the aforementioned results of the rangia
analyses. The composite sample of 25 readable otoliths from several Group 2 sites
(41NU46, 41NU255, 41SP167, and 41SP170) breaks down into seasonal categories as follows: 8 percent fall, 0 percent winter, 20 percent spring and 72 percent
summer. Since this is exactly the reverse of the otolith seasonality at Group 1 sites
(Figure 5), it supports the theory that Group 2 sites do reflect actual spring-summer
occupations, rather than a merely seasonal emphasis on rangia clam-gathering.
Discussion
Though all sites were found within 40 km of the mainland shoreline, and all
pertain to the Rockport phase, Group 1 and Group 2 sites contrast basically in size,

Ricklis m Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

221

lOO%
90
8o
70
6o

/
/

/’/

5o

\

\\
/

40
////////

3o
2o

\\\\\\\
/

i i’/

io
Fal I

Winter

Spring

Summer

Figure 5. Graph showing seasonality ranges of composite fish otolith samples from Group
1 (dashed line; N=123) and Group 2 (solid line; N=25) Rockport phase sites.

density of cultural debris, kinds of faunal remains, and season of occupation. Group
1 sites are large, yield much cultural material and large quantities of estuarine fish
and shellfish remains. Group 2 sites are much smaller, have thin and sparse deposits
of cultural material, and yield primarily bison and deer bone, with few fish or
shellfish remains. Group 1 sites show predominantly fall-winter seasonality; Group
2 sites consistently show spring-summer seasonality (Figure 6).
Significantly, the two groups of sites can be contrasted in terms of their
environmental locations. All Group 1 sites are on bay/lagoon shorelines, in keeping
with their major focus on estuarine resource procurement, whereas Group 2 sites are
mostly in the upland prairie environment near stream floodplains. Such locations
would have been well suited to wide-ranging procurement of deer and bison and to
the collection of a wide range of prairie and floodplain plant foods (e.g., greens,
mesquite pods, and prickly pear pads and tunas).
The data therefore point to a seasonally oscillating pattern of resource use and
residence. During the fall and winter months, subsistence was focused primarily on
the region’s abundant estuarine fish resources. Also readily available at this time of
year was an abundance of acorns from the dense oak motts growing on the sandy
soils developed on the Ingleside strandplain. Acorns, a documented food resource
of the historic Karankawans (see Carroll 1983:22) would have provided a high

222

Texas Archeological Society

J

i
L

.J

i,

!
!

--r

~m
~mg
Mira

S

O

N

D

J

F

M

A

M

J

J

A

I

Shoreline sites
u Riverine sites

Figure 6. Graph showing estimated seasonality ranges of Group 1 and Group 2 Rockport
phase sites, based variously on analyses of fish otoliths, Rangia cuneata clamshells, and
oyster shells.

carbohydrate supplement to theprotein-rich fish and shellfish diet at shoreline sites.
On the other hand, the seasonality data strongly suggest that by spring, the focus on
estuarine resources gave way to an emphasis on hunting large terrestrial game and
the shoreline camps were largely abandoned in favor of the prairie-riverine Group
2 sites.
Though they are difficult to quantify, the patterns of relative site size and
abundance indicate that the seasonal shift in subsistence and residential location
involved an attendant cycle of population aggregation and dispersal. Group 1
sites are large but relatively few in number compared with Group 2 sites. In the
Corpus Christi Bay area, six Group 1 sites have been documented, whereas along
the bay’s feeder streams--the Nueces River and Oso Creek 22 Group 2 sites
have been identified (Ricklis 1988, 1990). Since the Group 2 sites have low
archeological visibility, they are probably even more when abundant relative to
Group 1 sites.
These differences in site size and abundance by group suggest that Group 1
sites saw seasonally recurrent occupation by relatively large numbers of people, and
that Group 2 sites were occupied by more but smaller groups. Recurrent occupation
of Group 1 sites is also suggested by their relatively thick, dense midden deposits;
the thin debris scatters at Group 2 sites point to short-term, dispersed occupations
within the riverine-prairie zone. A seasonal pattern of groups coming together on

Ricklis w Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

223

the shoreline during the fall to winter months and often dispersing during the spring
to summer months is apparent (Figure 7).

co
O

@

¯~ Fall-winter fishing camp
¯ Spring-summer camps
> Residence moves

Figure 7. Schematic diagram of Rockport phase settlement pattern. Large shoreline sites
(Group 1) represents fall-winter population aggregation supported by focus on fishing.
Smaller and more numerous prairie-riverine sites (Group 2) represent spring-summer
population dispersal and primary reliance on terrestrial resources.

This adaptive strategy made good ecological sense in view of the spatial and
seasonal patterns of resource availabilities in the region. The largest economically
useful fish--black drum and redfish--are most predictably available in large
concentrations in the bays and lagoons during their respective fall and winter-early
spring spawning seasons (Simmons and Breuer 1962; Parker et al. 1988; Wilson et
al. 1988; Texas Parks and Wildlife Department n.d.). At these times of the year, a
predictable and concentrated supply of fish could have supported relatively large
human groups at optimal shoreline locations with minimal risk of subsistence
failure.
In the spring, after the breakup of the spawning-related aggregations of the
largest fish species, groups tended to respond with dispersal of population. This

224

Texas Archeological Society

strategy of dispersal would have had distinct advantages in the hunting of dispersed
and/or highly mobile game animals such as deer and bison, many of which would
have become particularly desirable during the spring, when abundant food supplies
increased their body weight and fat content. Small, dispersed socioeconomic groups
probably were advantageous at this time of year; it would have been difficult in other
seasons to count on enough game at any one location to support large populations.
At the same time, a wide range of greens and, by summer, fruits, was available on
both floodplains and prairie uplands; these would have been readily obtainable from
camps along the upland prairie margins.
Such patterns of seasonal hunter-gatherer aggregation and dispersal, according to the predictability and spatial concentration/dispersal of key resources, are
both documented ethnographically and strongly indicated archeologically (e.g.,
Birdsell 1953; Lee and De Vore 1968; Harpending and Davis 1977; Hassan 1981;
Butzer 1982). Indeed, periodic population aggregates were necessary for maintenance of mating networks and as contexts for socially integrative ritual and
information exchange (e.g., Wobst 1974; Hassan 1981:180-186).
The spatial and seasonal patterns of the Rockport phase ecosystem modeled
here probably should not be viewed in rigid terms. Although the seasonality data
strongly suggest that much, if not most, of the population abandoned shoreline
locations during the spring, small numbers of spring or summer otoliths found on
Group 1 sites may reflect limited or occasional use of these locations during the
spring and summer months. Also, small Rockport phase sites such as 41SP103 on
Corpus Christi Bay (Ricklis 1988) and the Swan Lake site (41 AS 16) on Copano Bay
are on the shoreline (Prewitt and Paine 1988). These may be essentially Group 2
sites, despite their locations, since they are adjacent to prairie environments and
have yielded bison bone and relatively few fish or shellfish. On the other hand, they
could just as well have been hunting camps that functioned to supply red meat to
large populations at Group 1 fishing sites. Ongoing research is needed for better
definition of such details of Rockport phase settlement and subsistence patterns.
However, the consistency in the evidence reviewed here does point to a pattern of
seasonal residence and subsistence, in which resources were used according to the
sequential phases of greatest seasonal abundance.
CONTINUITY AND CHANGE DURING COLONIAL TIMES:
THE ETHNOHISTORICAL RECORD
Documentary Evidence for Native Settlement Patterns
Eyewitness accounts of Karankawan camp locations and group sizes agree
with the settlement and subsitence patterns previously inferred from archeological
findings (only actual eyewitness accounts of residential locations are deemed
reliable here, due to the Spaniards’ imprecise knowledge of coastal geography
during early historic times; see Ricklis 1990:482-483). The earliest first-hand
account was made by Cabeza de Vaca in the early sixteenth century. Though it is
uncertain that the coastal group among whom he spent a year was Karankawan,

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

225

Cabeza de Vaca described a seasonal pattern of use of resources and location of
camps that is remarkably close to that inferred archeologically for the Rockport
phase:
From October through February every year, which is the season these
Indians live on the Island, they subsist on the roots I have mentioned, which
the women get from under the water in November and December. Only in
these two months, too, do they take fish in the cane wiers. When the fish
is consumed, the roots furnish the staple. At the end of February, the
islanders go to other parts to seek sustenance, for the root is beginning to
grow and is not edible [Covey 1983:61].
Cabeza de Vaca was clearly describing a fall to winter emphasis on shoreline
fishing, supplemented by the gathering of roots that probably supplied a high-starch
complement to the protein-rich fish diet. He also noted that his islanders moved to
the mainland during the spring, where they consumed a mix of shellfish and
terrestrial fauna and flora. The fall to winter island camp probably involved a
sizeable number of people, since the Indians were able to field more than 100
warriors at short notice (Newcomb 1983). Applying a ratio of four persons per adult
male (as indicated by historic data for the Karankawa; see Ricklis 1990:504), a total
of about 400 people is suggested for Cabeza de Vaca’s islanders.
Later first-hand observations agree with those of Cabeza de Vaca, inasmuch as
all of the largest groups were in bay/lagoon shoreline locations during the fall or
winter. In Febraury 1685, the French expedition led by Rend-Robert Cavelier, Sieur
de La Salle, saw a large shoreline Karankawan encampment near Matagorda Bay
at the north end of Matagorda Island, where at least 400 persons occupied some 50
cabanes (Joutel 1713:77; Minet 1987:109). French navigator Jean Beranger made
a similar observation at Aransas pass near Corpus Christi Bay in late October 1720,
noting, "I was surprised, since I least expected to see in a moment a large market
town built of these kinds of houses [hide-covered huts] and five hundred persons,
at least, well sheltered" (Carroll 1983:22). Beranger stated that the dietary staples
at this camp were fish, oysters, and a breadlike food made from crushed acorns; red
meat was eaten, but "not plentiful" (ibid).
The next observation of shoreline occupation dates to 1768, when an Indian
"spy" for the Spaniards at Presidio La Bah fa noted that"very numerous" Karankawans
were camped at the north end of Matagorda Island, apparently in March (Tovar
1768). Later, in late October 1791, Fray Juan Garza and Captain Juan Cortes visited
a group of 111 Karankawans at a place referred to as Las Conchitas (Silva 1792,
cited in Oberste 1942:36-37). The place name suggests a shoreline location, and Las
Conchitas’s position 9 or 10 leagues (36-40 km) east of the mouth of the Guadalupe
River places the camp on or near the southeast shore of Matagorda Bay.
Available documentation indicates that there were other large Karankawan
camps on the shore of Guadalupe Bay, an arm of San Antonio Bay. Fray Juan Garza
reported a group of 186 Karankawans camped here in December 1791 (Garza
1791a), and a year later, in January 1793, Garza again reported a sizeable group of

226

Texas Archeological Society

161 Karankawans at the same location, occupying two closely spaced camps (Garza
1793). Garza also noted that just before he arrived at the camp, there had been as
many as 208 occupants, but that a group of 47 people had splintered off and left the
camp. Though, in Garza’s perception, these groups had congregated in anticipation
of the founding of Refugio Mission, the fact that the site was chosen by the
Karankawans themselves suggests that it was a favored locale; this is further
indicated by a large and apparently intensively occupied Rockport phase site,
41CL2, in this same area (see Weinstein 1992).
In marked contrast to the evidence for fall-winter occupation of bay/lagoon
shorelines by large groups are documentary indications of much smaller camps
during the spring-summer, mostly at riverine campsites. The earliest observation
comes from the De Lern expedition to Matagorda Bay in 1689 (West 1905). De
Le6n noted scattered rancherias of apparently coastal Indians along Garcitas Creek
in mid-April. These presumably were small encampments, since several were
scattered along the creek, and since De Le6n made no mention of the numbers of
occupants, as he had with the large camps in the interior. It is also significant that,
in exploring nearly the entire southern shoreline of Matagorda Bay, De Le6n
explicitly mentioned the complete absence of Indians, suggesting that by mid-April
the shoreline zone was abandoned. A similar observation had been made tin April
1687 by Enrique Barroto during six clays of reconnoitering of the Matagorda Bay
shoreline (Barroto 1987).
Later eighteenth century observations also place small spring-summer camps
in riverine areas, or in back-bay areas adjacent to the coastal prairie environment. Fr. Manuel de Silva noted a group of 86 Karankawans on the lower Lavaca
River in April 1791, and he was told of another rancheria of related people farther upstream (Silva 1791). Later in the month, a rancheria of 69 people was
visited on the inland shore of Copano Bay (ibid; see also discussion of the location in Ricklis 1990:487). In mid-June 1791, Fr. Garza reported visiting a group
of 41 Karankawans who, under the "chief" Frasada Pinta, were camped on San
Miguel Creek, which empties into Lavaca Bay (Oberste 1942:32). It is particularly noteworthy that by the following October, Frasada Pinta and his people
were camped on or near the shoreline of Matagorda Bay at the place called Las
Conchitas, mentioned above, and that the number of people involved had increased to 111 (Silva 1792, cited in Oberste 1942:36-37), suggesting that there
was a fall aggregation of smaller groups, the kind of seasonal pattern inferred
from the archeological record.
Another source of relevant information is the record left by Simars De
Bellisle, a Frenchman marooned on the Texas coast from 1719 to 1720. Though
De Bellisle’s observations probably pertain to Akokisan or Atakapan peoples
farther up the coast in the Galveston Bay area, they illustrate a pattern of seasonal settlement and subsistence remarkably similar to the one indicated for the
central coast. De Bellisle’s native people spent the summer on the coastal prairies hunting and gathering plants, then joined with a related group on the bay
shore during the winter.

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

227

I passed the entire summer with them in this country with them going
everywhere in search of food because they possess no cabins or fields. That
is why they travel in this manner the entire summer. The men kill a few deer
and a few buffaloes and the women search for wild potatoes.When the
beginning of winter came we all left to join a band of their people who were
waiting for us at the end of the bay [Folmer 1940:216-217].
These bits of historical information (Table 1) document a basic pattern of
seasonal subsistence and mobility that agrees essentially with the archeological
evidence. The time span represented--from initial contact with Europeans to the
end of the eighteenth century--suggests that there was a significant degree of
continuity in basic adpative patterns that were deeply rooted in prehistory, despite
the various pressures of European contact and colonization.
Table 1. Historically Documented Karankawan Encampments
with Size of Resident Group, Environmental Context,
and Season.
Size of
Group

Environment
Shore
Riverine

Source
(See text)

Season
SpringFallSummer
Winter

400

X

X

Cabeza de Vaca

400-500

X

X

Joutel/Minet

500

X

X

Beranger

"Numerous"

X

X

Tovar

186

X

X

Garza

111

X

X

Oberst/Silva

Small
Rancherias

X

X

De Le6n

86

X

X

Silva

X

Silva

X

Oberst/Garza

69
41

X

X

The Effects of European Contact and Colonization
More or less ongoing contact between Europeans and the Karankawans began
in 1685 with the French exploration and settlement in the Matagorda Bay area led

228

Texas Archeological Society

by La Salle. Subsequently, there were sporadic contacts with Europeans, and the
first Spanish mission on the coastal prairie, Nuestra Sefiora del Espfritu Santo,
together with Presido La Bahfa, was established in 1722 on the site of the old French
settlement. Archeological and documentary evidence places this location a few
kilometers inland from Matagorda Bay, on Garcitas Creek (Gilmore 1986).
At first, the Karankawans showed interest in the mission, but relations with the
Spaniards deteriorated, and Captain Diego Ram6n, impatient with the Indians,
ordered his soldiers to ambush them. In the ensuing fray, Ram6n was fatally
wounded, two Indians were killed, and the Karankawans fled the site (Bolton
1906:117; Castafieda 1936, Volume II: 182). This event initiated decades of reciprocal hostilities, as Fray Santa Ana wrote to the Viceroy of New Spain some years
later that
near the Bahfa del Espfritu Santo there have been some Indians called
Cujanes [the mid-eighteenth century generic term for the Karankawans],
those same who used to be associated with the mission of La Bahfa. The
past twenty years they have been living in heathendom and with mortal
hostilities between the Indians and the soldiers.
The Cujanes were reputed to be irreducible for some thirty years, and
this came to be (according to reports filed with the secretary of the
government) the primary hindrance to the Presidio of La Bah fa, preventing
further goals [Fray Santa Ana 1751, author’s translation].
In 1726, the mission and presidio were moved inland to the lower Guadalupe
River, and missionary attention was shifted to inland native groups such as the
Tamiques and Jaranames. The mission and presidio were moved to their final
locations on the San Antonio River at modern Goliad in 1749.
In the 1750s, the Spaniards made a fresh attempt to establish workable relations
with the Karankawans. In the spring of 1751, a group of Cujanes had approached
La Bahfa, showing considerable interest in entering the mission of Espfritu Santo
(Piszina 1751). However, the situation again did not work out amicably, and, by the
fall, all of the Indians had abandoned the mission, having found "strong new reasons
for their old war" (Altamira 1752, author’s translation).
Nontheless, the new mission of Nuestra Sefiora del Rosario was established in
1754, specifically for conversion of the coastal Indians (see Bolton 1906; Gilmore
1984). At the end of four years, however, only 21 souls had been baptized at Rosario,
and these were in articulo morris. Over the next three decades, the Karankawans
maintained only a tenuous and discontinous link with Rosario and the Spanish
colony at La Bahfa, and, by 1785, Rosario was completely abandoned (see Bolton
1906, 1915; Gilmore 1984).
By the 1780s, hostilities between Karankawans and Spaniards had become
chronic. Perhaps due in part to displacement of the native bison by introduced cattle
(Ricklis 1990:540-545), the Karankawans repeatedly raided the mission herds. The
situation was probably not unlike that described by Campbell for the northeastern
frontier of New Spain in general:

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

229

They [the Spaniards] brought livestock that competed with wild grazing
and browsing animals. Game animals were thinned or driven away by
Spanish hunters with firearms. The Indians turned to livestock as a
substitute for game animals, and loss of livestock brought punitive action
by Spaniards [Campbell 1988:42].
The Spaniards’ perception of the Karankawans during this period is apparently
represented by an assessment made by Fr. Agustin Morfi, who wrote that the
"Carancaguases or Carancagues nation [was] vile, cowardly, treacherous and very
cruel .... Many of them speak Spanish with great fluency, being, in many instances,
apostates from our missions" (Morfi 1935:79-80).
Exasperation with the situation is reflected in a letter of 1788, written by Don
Luis Cazorla, commander at La Bahfa, in which he writes,
I am of the opinion--modifying the opinion of our commandant [but]
without acting contrary to it in any manner whatsoever--that [we] could
receive them [the Indians] in peace and put them in missions, sending them
all the corresponding guarantees for this purpose. In this way, since at any
time they will create provocations, at the first which is committed [we]
could make a reprisal and expel them once and for all. With this, without
violating our treaties with them (for which I can see no justification in
humanity, hospitality or natural law), we would achieve their extermination. And though some would remain in the woods, their surrender would
be less difficult [to achieve].
This is the view which I have developed of the aforesaid coastal
Indians--with no other purpose than that of serving God and the King and
the public interest--based on experience which I have [in the matter]
[Cazorla 1788].
The End of Hostilities and Aeculturative Change
Cazorla’s fatalism was to prove unwarranted. In October 1789, the
Karankawans expressed the desire for a treaty of peace. For their part, the Spaniards, at the insistence of the provincial governor at San Antonio de Bejar, followed the Crown’s policy, with its demand for "gentleness and encouragement
that they [the Indians] should give up their heathen life" [Mufioz 1793, author’s
translation). Despite some tensions and sporadic instances of conflict, the overall trend during the 1790s was toward peaceful interaction, and the groundwork
was laid for a significant degree of Karankawan acculturation to Spanish colonial cultural patterns. A new mission, Nuestra Sefiora del Refugio, was founded
at the request of the Karankawa themselves (Oberste 1942:29). This mission
enjoyed a limited degree of success in converting and acculturating Karankawans.
By 1797, Juan Bautista Elquezabal, interim commander at La Bahfa, was able
to write an assessment of Karankawan character that was in marked contrast to
that of earlier statements.

230

Texas Archeological Society

From what I have seen of their manners and ways of doing things, there
does not appear to be any bad intention, or anything that one could find
suspicious, or any artfulness in their thinking [Elquezabal 1797, author’s
translation].
By 1806, Manuel Antonio Cordero, Governor of the Province of Tejas, was
able to state that
west of the Colorado River, roving along the coast, southward as far as the
San Antonio River, were the Karankawa. These fierce tribes had been
cannabalistic, but they are now civilized and report regularly to the
commander at La Bahfa and the missionary at Refugio everything that
occurs on the coast [Cordero 1806].
In his reminiscences, John Linn, an early Anglo-American settler, wrote that
Father Diaz, who was the last of the missionaries, gave me quite a history
of the different Texas missions. He stated that in the year 1808 the mission
of Refugio possessed fully five thousand head of livestock of various
kinds; the "flat" in front of the church was their cultivated field. Up to this
period they had all the necessaries.., and were making rapid progress in
the path of civilization, when the war of Mexican Independence came and
destroyed.., the work and fruits of many years of arduous toils... The
Carankua women, too, learned the use of the spinning wheel, and manufactured a very good article of cotton cloth, and also blankets of superior
quality [Linn 1883:334].
Despite the setback resulting from the Mexican War of Independence, the
lasting effect of the acculturative processes described by Fray Df~ is indicated by
the first-hand observations made by Jean Berlandier in the late 1820s.
The Carancahuases of today are less ferocious than those of the past
century. They can be considered as mission Indians, half-tamed. Transformed into mariners on the bays, they lead an itiophage [fishing] life,
hunting and more often fishing for their needs. Before the wars of
independence, when Mex ico was flourish i ng, alm ost all the Carancahuases
lived at their mission. Now living most of the time on the coast, they come
only occasionally to visit the presidio, where the authorities sometimes
give them small presents. Following the example of other indigines, they
have some horses, although their travels are much more frequently over the
bays than over the land .... Although vagabonds, all call themselves
Christians. Some wear a cross hung around their neck, and all their
newborn are carried with ceremony to the Franciscan father who leads
them, in order to receive the waters of baptism from him. I have questioned
several of them on the religion of their ancestors, but they never wished to
answer [Berlandier 1980:381-382].

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

231

The Role of Traditional Human Ecology in Adaptive Change
These passages indicate that rapid change in intercultural relations and
Karankawan attitudes took place after 1790. Peaceful relations, some degree of
Christianization, and even the practice of cottage industries such as weaving and
spinning, were underway by about 1800 or shortly thereafter. These new patterns
contrasted so with earlier relations that they were readily apparent to contemporary
non-Indian observers.
The immediate causes for change are difficult to identify precisely. The
Karankawans may have been weary of decades of conflict, and may have been
reluctant to engage in hostilities on two fronts, between both the Spaniards and the
intrusive Comanches, who were perceived as enemies and a serious threat by the late
eighteenth century (e.g., Elquezabal 1797; Berlandier 1980).
Also, by 1790 most of the interior native groups had been displaced or
drastically reduced in numbers by disease, and many of the survivors had entered
missions (Campbell 1988). In this context, the Karankawans may have felt that
important buffer groups had been removed and that it was in their best interests to
come to an understanding with the Spaniards.
Whatever the precise motivations for change, the fact that it did take place by
the end of the century should not be seen as the final option available to a desperate
or defeated people. Karankawan population had been more or less stable at around
2,500 since about 1750 (Ricklis 1990:499-522), and in 1790 it was at least twice that
of the combined Indian and Spanish population at La Bahfa (cf. Ricklis 1990; Tjarks
1974). Traditional economic patterns, and even patterns of group organization,
were still intact, though the latter probably persisted in modified form (Ricklis
1990:522-531). When threatened, the Karankawans could still lose themselves in
the maze of marshes and lagoons of the coastline, in accordance with their
traditional defensive strategy (Kress and Hatcher 1931:44; Elquezabal 1797;
Garavito 1798a). It is unlikely, therefore, that they were attracted to the missions as
a place of last refuge, as was the case with many interior groups, who in effect had
no other place to go when they were threatened by marauding Apaches and
Comanches (Campbell 1988:43). In the light of these factors, the change in attitudes
toward the Spaniards probably should be viewed as an adaptive strategy on the part
of a people who were adjusting to the pressures of fundamental changes in their
world.
Considering that this period of peaceful acculturation followed decades of
hostilities and conflict, it is rather remarkable that change took place so rapidly. In
view of their previously volatile relations with the Spaniards and their adherence to
traditional socioceonomic patterns, it is natural to ask how the Karankawans were
able to effect viable change within only a single decade.
Part of the answer appears to be that the Karankawans did not, at least
initially, passively conform to Spanish colonial culture as embodied in the
mission, but rather brought the mission-presido complex into the behavioral
sphere of their own traditional lifeway. As already discussed, the native adaptive

232

Texas Archeological Society

system included a seasonally shifting emphasis in resource use and settlement
pattern, with aggregations of large groups at optimal shoreline fishing stations
in the fall-winter, and dispersal of smaller groups during the spring-summer,
when subsistence shifted to an increased reliance on terrestrial resources. It is
not likely that it was mere coincidence, therefore, that the time of year when the
Karankawans most often showed interest in the missions was between March
and May, just the time when both archeology and ethnohistory point to a seasonal
shift in settlement and subsistence.
Documentary research has yielded a total of 16 recorded dates when
Karankawans came to the missions (Table 2). The greater part of these---11, or 69
percent--fall in the spring season. The dates of Karankawan mission arrivals tend
to cluster, therefore, at that time of year estimated on archeological grounds to
represent the initial occupation of the Group 2 sites of the prairie-riverine environmental zone (Figure 8). The apparently strong Karankawan interest in the missions
during the spring suggests that the mission was, in effect, perceived as a potential
ecological resource, in the sense that it could fulfill the subsistence needs traditionally met by procuring the native foods of the coastal prairies.
The mission provided subsistence items that were quite analogous to those
traditionally procured during the spring and summer months. Cattle, the mainstay
of the mission diet (e.g., Oberste 1942), would have substituted readily for the bison
that had been traditionally hunted on the coastal prairies during the spring and
summer (as repeatedly indicated by findings at Group 2 sites). Maize, a necessary
high-starch dietary supplement to the protein provided by beef, doubtless had
traditional counterparts in the plant foods available in the prairie-riverine environment (e.g., mesquite beans, or tubers such as the "wild potatoes" described by De
Bellisle [Folmer 1940:216]).
It is interesting to note, too, that whereas most of the instances of Karankawans
coming to the mission were in the spring, the next most frequent time of the year was
the fall (four, or 25 percent of the cases). According to the model of settlement/
subsistence mobility presented here, this was the time when groups would have
been returning to favored shoreline fishing stations from summers spent in the
prairie-riverine environment. The fall season, therefore, would have required
decisions concerning seasonal residential locations, as did the spring, and some
groups may have opted occasionally for spending the winter at the mission. As noted
earlier, a group of 47 people split off from the large winter camp on Guadalupe Bay
in January 1793, suggesting that shoreline locations did not invariably support all
of the population that might otherwise have congregated at a given fishing camp.
Some groups, perhaps anticipating this kind of situation--or possibly perceiving
other, less tangible problems such as social tensions--may have seen the mission
as an acceptable winter residence.
The Karankawan mission arrivals involved (a) leading individuals who came
to determine whether provisions were adequate to support their people, (b) family
groups, or (c) bands of as many as several dozen people. When provisions were
plentiful, the Indians entered the mission and stayed for indefinite periods of time.

Ricklis m Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

233

Table 2. Data Pertaining to Documented Instances of Karankawans
Coming to Coastal Prairie Missions.
Year

Arrival
Time

1722

About
May4

1722

Number of People
and Circumstances

Source

Several Coco families come to
new site of Espfritu Santo, leave
soon after due to lack of food.

Castafieda
1936,
Vol. Ih 167.

Late May

Chiefs of Coco and Cujane nations
come to new Espfritu Santo
mission with their families, again
leave due to inadequate provisions.

Ibid.

1722

March 16

Many coastal Indians had arrived
at Espfritu Santo with their families,
stayed for indefinite period.

Ibid.:168

1751

End of
March

Group of 54 Cujanes arrive at Mission
Espfritu Santo, stay about 10 weeks.

Piszina
1751

1789

Oct./Nov.

Karankawans come to Rosario
Mission for indifinite stay.

Espada
1789

1791

April 7

Silva
1792

1791

April 20

Chief Frasada Pinta arrives at
Rosario with some of his people.
Chief Manuel Allegre and family
come to Rosario Mission.

1791

November

Five families come to Rosario Mission.

Jaudenes 1791

1793

March

Garza
1793

1793

April

Chief Frasada Pinta arrives at
Refugio Mission with eight Coco
men, representing 55 people. They
leave because of inadequate provisions.
Frasada Pinta returns to Refugio;
again leaves because of low provisions.

1793

Feb. 10

Frasada Pinta and five of his men
arrive at Refugio Mission, promise to bring their people "when
weather improves."

Oberste
1942:67

1794

April 28

Frasada Pinta and his people arrive
at Refugio Mission to receive
meat and maize.

Mufioz
1794

1795

September

Frasada Pinta arrives at Refugio
Mission.

1796

April 5

Combined group of Cocos and
Carancaguases arrive at Rosario.

Silva
1795
Castafieda
1942, Vol
V:191

1797

LamMarch

Combined groups of Cocos and
Carancaguases arrive at Rosario

Cortez
1797

Indians who had left Refugio in
March because of lack of provisions
return to Mission.

Moral
1798,
1799

17981799

Nov.Jan.

Silva
1791

Ibid.

234

Texas Archeological Society

TTV
TffT

T

T
I

I ....

!

t::iiii,:

1

t’

I
]

(’?"
i
!
l

mm
iw!
mR
wm

;
S

O

[

=
N

D

l

I
J

F

!
M

p

¯

A

M

=

J

I

J

=

A

m

Shoreline sites
Riverine sites
Documented date of Karankawans
coming to missions

Figure 8. Diagram showing documented dates of Karankawan arrivals at missions and their
relation to estimated seasonality of Group 1 and Group 2 Rockport phase sites.

When provisions ran out, they left to seek sustenance in their traditional manner
(e.g., Elquezabal 1798; Garavito 1798b).
In effect, the mission, when well stocked, would have served well as a substitute
for the traditional spring-summer hunting/plant-gathering camps. This was probably particularly true in the case of Refugio Mission, which the Karankawans
themselves indicated should be established within their traditional territory if it was
to succeed (Garza 179 lb, cited in Oberste, 1942:29). At the request of the Indians,
Refugio was thus originally located near the head of Guadalupe Bay, near the mouth
of the Guadalupe River. Though it was moved to the Mission River in 1795, the new
location was only 38 km from the mainland shoreline, still within the bounds of the
traditional operational area of the Karankawan groups as suggested by archeological and historical data ~icklis 1990). The Karankawans apparently were agreeable
to establishment of Refugio Mission only if it would be readily accessible, and

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

235

susceptible to integration within the framework of long-established adaptive
strategies.
The incorporation of the mission into the spatial and seasonal parameters of the
traditional human ecosystem facilitated its acceptance within the context of known
and accepted ways of doing things. With a relationship toward the mission that was
nondisruptive to traditional native culture, the stage was set for peaceful interaction,
and a context emerged that was conducive to the acculturation that followed in the
early nineteenth century.
CONCLUSIONS
The information reviewed here counters the long-held, popular assumption that
the Karankawans were a people incorrigibly resistant to change and lacking in the
adaptive flexibility necessary for sustained interaction with Euro-American culture.
Quite the contrary, they appear to have ultimately made a workable adjustment to
late Spanish colonial frontier culture, one that was proably based in large part upon
a synthesis of traditional behavioral patterns and foreign cultural elements. Once the
Karankawans clearly perceived the need for change in sociopolitical relations,
peaceful interaction and incipient acculturation quickly followed. Change, though
rapid, was not culturally disruptive, since foreign cultural patterns were to some
extent synthesized with traditional lifeways in a way that complemented, rather than
disrupted, established and long-accepted modes of behavior.
The Karankawan ability to reformulate the nature of intercultural relations was
doubtless also facilitated by the general Spanish colonial policy of acculturation and
religious conversion of aboriginal peoples, which contrasted markedly with an
Anglo-American predilection for expulsion of native groups (Butzer 1991). On the
one hand, the Karankawans appear to have synthesized tradition and novelty; on the
other, the Spanish colonial policy was sufficiently flexible to permit such a
synthesis to take place. Indeed, the late Colon ial period of Karankawan-Euroamerican
relations should be clearly separated from the period of initial Anglo-American
occupation of the coastal praries that began in the 1820s. Whereas New Spain
sought to maintain its northeastern frontier by gradually bringing native groups into
the sphere of colonial culture, the later Anglo-Americans were bent on permanent
settlement. Interaction with native groups was not on the agenda, and within three
decades of initial Anglo-American settlement, the Karankawans were either killed
off or forced to flee their traditional homeland, probably to merge with native
peoples living to the south in northeastern Mexico. Additional archival research in
Texas and Mexico may further elucidate and amplify the complex details of these
cultural-historical processes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many individuals gave of their time and energy to help with the archeological
fieldwork summarized here. My thanks are extended especially to those people who
helped for extended periods of time: Kim Cox, Susan Pape, Nancy and Larry

236

Texas Archeological Society

Beaman, Jim and Marion Craft, Jerry Bauman, John French, John and Arlene
McGee, Le Anne Vaillette, and Gregg Willman. Special thanks are extended to Karl
W. Butzer, who pointed me in the direction of archival research as an important test
of, and/or complement to, archeological interpretation.

REFERENCES CITED
Altamira, Marques de
1752
Letter of E1 Marques de Altamira to the Viceroy, February 29, 1752. Archivo
General de la Naci6n (Mexico), Bolton Transcriptions, Vot. 287. Barker Texas
History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1981
Determining Seasonality of Rangia Cuneata from Gulf Coast Shell Middens.
Bulletin of the Texas ArcheologicaI Society 52:179-200.
Barroto, Enrique
1987
The Enrique Barroto Diary (Robert S. Weddle, translator). In: La SaUe, the
Mississippi and the Gulf, edited by Robert S. Weddle, pp. 149-171.Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.
Beckmann, D. W., A. L. Stanley, J. H. Render, and C. A. Wilson
1988
Age and Growth of Black Drum in Louisiana Gulf of Mexico Waters. Coastal
Fisheries Institute, Center for Wetland Resources, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge.
Beckman, D. W., C. A. Wilson, and A. L. Stanley
1988
Age and Growth Structure of Red Drum, Sciaenops oceUatus, From Offshore
Waters of the Northern Gulf of Mexico. Coastal Fisheries Institute, Center for
Wetland Resources, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge.
Berlandier, Jean L.
1980
Journey to Mexico During the Years 1826 to 1834.2 vols. Translated by S. M.
Ohlendorf, J. M. Bigelow, and M. M. Standifer. The Texas State Historical
Association and the Center for Studies in Texas History, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Birdsell, J. B.
1953
Some Environmental and Cultural Factors Influencing the Structuring of
Aboriginal Australian Populations. American Naturalist 87:171-207.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1906
The Founding of Mission Rosario: A Chapter in the History of the Gulf Coast.
Quarterly of the Texas State Historical Association 10(2):113-139.
1915

Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century: Studies in Spanbh Colonial History
and Administration. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Ricklis-- Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

237

Brown, L. F., J. L. Brewton, J. H. McGowen, T. J. Evans, William L. Fisher, and Charles G.
Groat
1976
Environmental GeoIogic Atlas ofthe Texas Coast: Corpus Christi Area. Bureau
of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Butzer, Karl W.
1982
Archaeology as Human Ecology: Method and Theory for a Contextual Approach. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
1991

Spanish Colonization of the New World: Cultural Continuity and Change in
Mexico. Erdkunde. In press.

Campbell, Thomas N.
1960
Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 29 (for 1958): 145-175.
1988

The Coahuiltecans and Their Neighbors. In: The Indians ofSouthern Texas and
Northeastern Mexico: Selected Writings ofThomas Nolan Campbell, pp. 39-60.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Carlson, David L.
1988

Rangia Cuneata as A Seasonal Indicator for Coastal Archeological Sites in
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (for 1987):201-214.

Carroll, William (translator)
1983
Beranger’sDiscoveryof AransasPass.OccasionalPapersoftheCorpusChristi
Museum, Volume 8. Corpus Christi.
Castafieda, Carlos E.
1936
TheMissionEra:TheWinningofTexas, 1692-1731.OurCatholicHeritagein
Texas, 1519-1936, Vol. II. Von Boeckman-Jones Company, Austin.
1942

The Mission Era: The End of the Spanish Regime, 1780-1810. Our Catholic
tleritage in Texas, 1519-1936, Vol. V. Von Boeckman-Jones Co., Austin.

Cazorla, Luis
1788
Letter of Don Luis C~orla, commander of Presidio La Bahfa, to Governor Don
Raphael Martinez Pacheco, May 2, 1788. Bdxar Archives Translations, Series
I. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
Cordero, Manuel A.
1806
Letter of Manuel Antonio Cordero, Governor of the Province of Texas, to
Nemesio Salcedo, Commandant General of the Interior Provinces, June 16,
1806. Bdxar Archives, General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History
Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
Cortes, Juan
1797

Letter of Juan Cortes to Manuel Munoz, March 24, 1797. Bdxar Archives,
General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of
Texas at Austin.

238

Texas Archeological Society

Covey, Cyclone (editor)
Adventures in the Interior of America by Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca.
1983
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Dillehay, Tom D.
1974
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19:180-196.
ElquezabN, Juan Bautista
1797

Letter of Juan Bautista Elquezabal, Interim Commander at Presidio La Batffa,
to Governor Don Manuel Mufioz, Including Census of Indians at Mission
Nuestra Senora del Refugio, July 3, 1797. BdxarArchives, GeneralManuscript
Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

1798

Letter of Juan Bautista Elquezabal, interim commander at Presidio La Bahfa, to
Governor Don Manuel Munoz, January 17, 1798. Bdxar Archives, General
Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Espadas, Manuel
1789

Letter of Manuel Espadas, commander at Presidio La Bahfa, to Governor
Martfnez Pacheco, December 29, 1789. Bdxar Archives, General Manuscript
Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

Folmer, Henry
1940
DeBellisleontheTexasCoast.Southwes’ternIIistoricalQuarterly44(2):204-231.
Fritz, Gayle
1975

Matagorda Bay Area, Texas: A Survey of the Archeological and Historical
Resources. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No. 45. The University of Texas at Austin,

Garavito, Antonio
1798b

Letter of Fr. Antonio Garavito to Juan Elquezabal, interim commander at
Presidio La Bahfa, March 25, 1798.BdxarArchives, GeneralManuscriptSeries.
Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

1798a

Letter of Fr. Antonio Garavito to Jose Moral, October13,1798.Bdxar Archives,
General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Garza, Juan
1791a

Letter of Fr. Juan Garza to Don Manuel Mufioz, Governor of the Province of
Tejas, June 13, 1791. Bdxar Archives, Barker Texas History Center, The
University of Texas at Austin.

1791b

Letter of Fr. Juan Garza to Don Manuel Mufioz, Governor of the Province of
Tejas, December 15, 1791. Bdxar Archives, Barker Texas History Center, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation
1793

239

Letter of Fr. Juan Garza to Don Manuel Mufioz, Governor of the Province of
Tejas, January 18, 1793. B~xar Archives, General Manuscript Series. Barker
Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

Gilmore, Kathleen
1984
The Indians of Mission Rosario. In: The Scope of Historical Archaeology:
Essays in Honor of John L. Cotter, edited by D. G. Orr and D. G. Corzier, pp.
163-191. Occasional Publications of the Department of Anthropology, Temple
University, Philadelphia.
1986

La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
55:61-72.

Harpending, H. and H. Davis
1977
Some Implications for Hunter-Gatherer Ecology Derived from the Spatial
Structure of Resources. Worm Archaeology 8:275-286.
Hassan, Fekri A.
1981
Demographic Archaeology. Academic Press, New York.
Headrick, Pamela
1991
The Archaeology of 41NU11, the Kirchmeyer Site, Nueces County, Texas:
Long-Term Utilization of a Coastal Clay Dune. M.A. thesis, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hester, Thomas R.
1969
Archeological Investigations in Kenedy and Kleberg Counties, Texas, in
August 1967. Texas Historical Commission, @rice of the State Archeologist
Report 15. Austin.
1975

Late Prehistoric Cultural Patterns Along the Lower Rio Grande of Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 46:107-125.

1980

Changing Salinity in Baffin Bay, Texas, and its Possible Effects on Prehistoric
Occupation. In: Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by L.
Highley and T. R. Hester, pp. 105-108. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 11.

Hester, Thomas R. and Harry J. Shafer
An Initial Study of Blade Technology on the Central and Southern Texas Coast.
1975
Plains AnthropoIgist 20(69): 175-185.
Huebner, Jeffrey A.
1991

Late Prehistoric Bison Populations in Central and Southern Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 36(137):343-358.

Jaudenes, Francisco
1791
Letter of Fr. Francisco Jaudenes to Manuel Mufioz, November 30, 1791. Bdxar
Archives, General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

240

Texas Archeological Society

Jones, Fred B.
1983

The Flora of the Texas Coastal Bend. Welder Wildlife Foundation, Sinton,
Texas.

Joutel, H.
1713

JournalHistorique d’ un Voyage de l’Amerique. M. Michel, Paris. On file, Rare
books collection, Corpus Christi State University Library, Corpus Christi.

Kilman, E.
1959
Cannibal Coast. The Naylor Co., San Antonio.
Kress, M. K and M. A. Hatcher (translators)
Diary of a Visit of Inspection of the Texas Missions made by Fray Gaspar Jose
1931
de Solis in the year 1767-68. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 35(1):28-76.
La Salle, M. W. and A. A. de la Cruz
1985
Common Rangia. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Biological Report No. 82,
Department of the Interior.
Lee, Richard B. and I. De Vote (editors)
1968

Man the Hunter. Aldine, Chicago.

Linn, John J.
1883

Reminiscences of Fifty years in Texas. Sadlier, New York.

McGowen, J. H., C. V. Procter, Jr., T. J. Evans, William L. Fisher, and Charles G. Groat
1976

Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coastal Zone: Port Lavaca Area.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Minet
1987

Journal of Our Voyage to the Gul f of Mexico. Translated by L. Bell, annotated
by Robert S. Weddle. In: La Salle, the Mississippi and the Gulf" Three Primary
Documents’, edited by Robert S. Weddle, pp. 83-126. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.

Moral, Jose
1798
Letter of Jose Moral to Manuel Mufioz, November 21, 1798. B~xar Archives,
General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of
Texas at Austin.
1799

Letter of Jose Moral to Manuel Mufioz, January 18, 1799. Bdxar Archives,
General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Morfi, Juan A.
History of Texas, 1673-1779. Translated by C. E. Castafieda. Quivira Society
1935
Publications No. 6. Albuquerque.

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

241

Mufioz, Manuel
1793

Letter of Don Manuel Mufioz, Governor of the Province of Tejas, to Captain
Juan Cortes, commander of Presidio La Bahfa, December 13, 1793. Bdxar
Archives, General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

1794

LetterofManuelMufioztoJuanCortes, June10,1794.BgxarArchives, General
Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1983
Karankawa. In: Handbook of North American Indians, Southwest, Volume 10,
edited by A. Ortiz, pp. 359-367. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.
C.
Oberste, William H.
1942
ttistory of Refitgio Mission. Refugio Timely Remarks, Refugio, Texas.
Parker, R. M., D. L. Neiland, D. W. Beckman, and C. A. Wilson
1988
Reproductive Biology of Black Drum Pogonias cromis in the Northern Gulf of
Mexico. Coastal Fisheries Institute, Louisiana State University. Baton Rouge.
Piszina, Manuel R.
1751

Letter of Manuel Ramirez de la Piszina to the Viceroy, December 26, 1751.
Archivo General de la Nacidn, Vol. 287 (Bolton transcription). Barker Texas
History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R. and J. G. Paine
1988

The Swan Lake Site (41AS16) on Copano Bay, Aransas County, Texas:
Settlement, Subsistence and Sea Level. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 58 (for 1987):147-174.

Ricklis, Robert A.
1988

ArcheologicalInvestigations at the McKinzie Site (41NU221), Nueces County,
Texas: Description and Contextual Interpretations. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (for 1987): 1-76.

1990

A Historical Cultural Ecology of the Karankawan Indians of the Central Texas
Coast: A Case Study in the Roots of Adaptive Change. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Geography, The University of Texas at Austin.

1992

The Spread of a Late Prehistoric Bison Hunting Complex: Evidence from the
South-Central Coastal Prairie of Texas. Plains Anthropologist, in press.

Santa Ana, Benito
1751

Letter of Fr. Benito de Santa Ana to the Viceroy, written shortly prior to
December 20, 1751. Archivo General de la Nacidn (Bolton transcription), Vol.
287. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

242

Texas Archeological Society

Schmidly, D. J.
1983
Texas Mammals East of the Balcones Fault Zone. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
Silva, Manue!
1791
Letter of Fr. Manuel Silva to Governor Mufioz, April 26, 1791. BdxarArchives,
General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of
Texas at Austin.
1792

Letter of Fr. Manuel Silva to the Viceroy, March 10, 1792. Archivo Generalde
Indias, DunnTrar~cripts 104-1 - 1. B arker Tex as History Center, The University
of Texas at Austin.

1795

Letter of Ft. Manuel de Silva to Manuel Mufioz, September 30, 1795. Bdxar
Archives, General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

Simmons, E. G. and J. P. Breuer
1962

A Study of Redfish, Sciaenops ocellata Linnaeus, and Black Drum, Pogonias
cromis Linnaeus. Contributions in Marine Science 8:184-211.

Steele, D. Gentry
1988
UtilizationofMarineMollusksbyInhabitantsoftheTexasCoast.Bulletinofthe
TexasArcheologicalSociety 58 (1987):215-248.
Story, Dee Ann
1968

Archeological Investigations at Two Central Gulf Coast Sites. State Building
Commission, Archeological Program, Report No. 13. Austin.

Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 4.
Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 25.

Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
n.d.
Saltwater Fishes of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Bulletin No.
52. Austin.

Tjarks, A. V.
1974
Comparative Demographic Analysis of Texas 1777-1793. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 77:291-338.
Tovar, Francisco
1768
Letter of Captain Francisco Tovar, Commander at Presidio La Bahfa, to
Governor Don Hugo Oconor, June 6, 1768. BdxarArchives Translations, Series
L Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

243

Turner, Ellen Sue and Thomas R. Hester
1985
Stone Artifacts of the Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Weinstein, Richard A.
1992
Archaeology and Paleogeography of the Lower Guadalupe R&er/San Antonio
Bay Region: Cultural Resources Investigations Along the Channel to Victoria,
Calhoun and Victoria Counties, Texas. Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton
Rouge, Louisiana.
West, E. H. (translator and annotator)
1905
DeLe6n’sExpeditionof1689, anAnnotatedTranslation.QuarterlyoftheTexas
State Historical Association 8(3):203-224.
Wilson, C. A., D. W. Beckman, D. L. Neiland, and L. A. Stanley
1988
Age, GrowthRateandReproductiveBiologyofRedDrumLandedinLouisiana.
Coastal Fisheries Institute, Center for Wetland Resources, Louisiana State
University. Baton Rouge.
Wobst, H. M.
Boundary Conditions for Paleolithic Social Systems: A Simulation Approach.
1974
American Antiquity 39(2): 147-178.

