NOTES
CLEAR FORK GOUGES FOUND IN OKLAHOMA

One distinctive and common artifact found throughout many
areas in Texas is known as the Clear Fork gouge. It has been
studied and described by Cyrus N. Ray, who named it after
the Clear Fork River near Abilene, Texas, where he had collected a large number of specimens (Ray, 1941). In our survey
of Oklahoma archeology (Bell and Baerreis, 1951), this artifact was not recognized as being found in Oklahoma. Since that
date, however, several examples have been collected, and it is
now evident that the Clear Fork gouge does occur in some
sections of the state.
Examples of the Clear Fork gouge have been collected by
James Mayfield of Norman, Oklahoma, at several sites along
the north shore of Lake Texoma in Marshall County. Three
specimens have also been noted from sites close to Lake Murray
in Love County, Oklahoma. Mr. Elmer Craft of Eldorado,
Oklahoma, has collected several specimens from certain sites in
Greer County, southwestern Oklahoma. No specimens have thus
far been noted from the eastern or northern sections of the
state. From our present knowledge, the Clear Fork gouge appears to have a distribution throughout the southern part of the
state, extending from the central area westward as far as Greer
County.
Fig. 66 illustrates examples of the Clear Fork gouge found
in Oklahoma. All of the specimens have been collected on the
surface, and the associated assemblage cannot now be demonstrated. Most of the specimens are made from some variety
of quartzite, usually fairly fine grained, and they exhibit relatively coarse workmanship. Some specimens have a worn cutting edge and one (Fig. 66, I) has grinding on the back or
flattened surface. Medium sized specimens (Fig. 66, E) are the
most commonly represented.
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954) report the presence of Clear
Fork gouges in the following complexes throughout Texas:

¯ ! ~ ~ ~ ~ ~: ili~ ~i¸ ~i~ ~:~ ’,~p~:’ ~~:¸,,~........
~ ~:~.......:
~ : ~’ !i~ ~ :.~ i~!

Fig. 66. Examples of the Clear Fork gouge found in Oklahoma. A-G,
K, Greer County; H, I, J, Marshall County.

Texas Archeological Society
Southern Methodist University
Box 165
Dallas~ Texas 75222
Notes

287

Carrollton Focus, Elam Focus, Edwards Plateau Aspect, Falcon
Focus and the East Texas Aspect. Thus, in Texas the gouge
appears to be distributed throughout most of central Texas
from the Rio Grande in the south to the Red River in the north.
The finds in Oklahoma extend this area northward beyond the
Red River.
The age of the Clear Fork gouge is not clearly established.
The estimated age based upon the associated complex as suggested by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954) would give a long
time span from around 4000 or 5000 B. C. to about 1000 A. D.
Certainly the gouge is more characteristic of the early hunting
and gathering peoples designated as Archaic than the later
more sedentary, pottery manufacturing cultures. The scattered
finds made in Oklahoma do not aid materially in answering
questions concerning chronology. The Clear Fork gouge, however, is not an integral part of any Oklahoma complex that has
been described up to this date. From other surface materials,
such as large projectile points, heavy scrapers, choppers, rough
knives, etc., found on sites containing the gouge, one would suspect it to be associated with some sort of a non-pottery Archaic
complex resembling those found in Texas.
The finding of Clear Fork gouges in Oklahoma adds to
knowledge of artifact distribution in the southern Plains
points toward cultural relationships within that area. In
dition, their existence directs attention to undefined and
studied complexes of the region.

our
and
adun-

References Cited
Bell, Robert E., and David A. Baerreis
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archeology. Bulletin, Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vot. 22, pp.
7-100.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr., and R. K. Harris
1952. Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carrollton and Elam Foci. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 7-38.

