Two Prehistoric Cemetery Sites in the
Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas
ABSTRACT
Under this heading, data from two prehistoric cemetery sites in Cameron
and Hidalgo Counties, Texas, are presented. The papers were written separately. Part I deals with salvage archeology conducted at the Floyd Morris
Site (41 CF 2) in Cameron County; this paper was authored by Michael
B. Collins, Thomas Roy Hester and Frank A. Weir. The second paper
reports additional materials recovered from tbe Ayala Site (41 HG 1) in
Hidalgo County-; an earlier report on this site was published by Campbell
and Frizzell (1949), while the present paper (Part II) was prepared by
Thomas Roy Hester and Frederick Ruecking, Jr. Part III was written by
Hester; it discusses the Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites in relation to the known
prehistoric burial practices along the lower Texas coast and in the Rio
Grande Valley.

PART I:
THE FLOYD MORRIS SITE
(41 Cr 2)
A PREHISTOmC CEMETERY SITE
IN CAMERON COUNTY, TEXAS
MICHAEL B.

COLLINS, THOMAS ROY HESTER, AND FRANK A. WEIR

INTRODUCTION AND SITE DESCRIPTION
In June of 1966, while leveling his field to improve irrigation, Mr.
Floyd A. Morris of Harlingen exposed several human bones, and
recognizing their possible importance, notified Mr. Bob Diekson of
KGBT-TV, Harlingen. Mr. Diekson informed the Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas, of the finds, and a crew of
three students (Frank A. Weir, Gentry Steele, and Michael B. Collins) was dispatched under the auspices of the Texas Areheological
Research Laboratory to salvage a portion of the site. Excavations
were conducted from June 8 through June 12, during which time 11
burials were salvaged, 7 highly disturbed burials were investigated,
and 7 miscellaneous features were recorded.
It is the feeling of the authors that in southern Texas the oversimplified scheme whieh proposes an Archaic stage eharacterized by
the use of dart points followed by a Neo-American stage characterized
by the use of arrowpoints is in need of revision. However, it would be
inappropriate to initiate such revision in the present deseriptive paper,
and therefore we have adhered to the cultural definitions for southern
Texas as presented by Suhm and others (1954) and MaeNeish (1958).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Cemeteries seem to be an important element in certain prehistoric
cultures of the Texas coast and the lower l~io Grande Valley. Some of
these sites include Ayala (Campbell and Frizzell, 1959; Hester and
tluecking, this issue), Caplen (Campbell, 1957), Oso (A. T. Jackson,
field notes), Odem (Jack Hughes, field notes), Jamaica Beach (excavated by the Houston Museum of Natural Science), Dietz (Hester,
1969a), and one on Matagorda Island (Martin, 1929). Unfortunately,
most of these sites had been badly disturbed before subsequent
investigation and research could be carried out by professional archeologists. Additionally, few of these sites have produced much areheological data. Only through the investigation of several additional
such sites will it eventually be possible to place this burial practice
into some cultural perspective. As this paper indicates, many of the
preferred locations of cemeteries are the slight elevations that will
be destroyed by future land-leveling. We feel that there is a need for
a systematic archeologieal survey and testing program in those areas of
the lower Rio Crande Valley where extensive irrigation improvements
are planned.
The Floyd Morris site is located 2 miles north of Harlingen (in
Cameron County) on the Briggs-Coleman tract. It occupies a portion
of a low, sandy-clay ridge about one-fourth mile long (north-south)
and 500 feet wide. Originally, the ridge extended perhaps six feet
above the surrounding land surface, but at present, it has been
lowered about three or three and one-half feet. An elongate, shallow
depression extends from southeast of the ridge past the south end
and along the east side; evidently this depression is a remnant of an
old stream meander and the ridge is an associated dune. At the present time, the ridge is under cultivation and an irrigation canal follows
the course of the depression. A north-south property line at the top
of the ridge divides it into two halves; only the eastern half was being
leveled and evidence of aboriginal use of the locality was exposed in
the lowered area for a distance of about 600 feet north-south and
from 100 to 300 east-west.
In order to level the eastern portion of the ridge, Mr. Morris was
removin~ fill from the higher (west) side of his field and spreading
some of it over the lower (east) side and disposing of the remainder in
a depression west of the ridge. In the west half of the field, where
more fill had been removed, the exposed soil consisted of dark-colored
clay with a limited amount of sand, but in the east half of the field,
the exposed deposits were light-colored sandy clays. No bedding was
evident in the excavation walls, suggesting that the material was of
aeolian derivation.

PIIEHISTOIIIC CEMETERY SITES

121

The occupational features, particularly the burials, were completely
disturbed in the west half of the field due to the removal of more
overburden and only one burial on the east was entirely below the
level of the disturbance. The machinery used in leveling included a
"chisel" and a "buggy." The chisel was the ground-breaking device,
and consisted of several narrow, chisel-like teeth spaced about one
foot apart. The buggy was a large scoop which removed the broken
top soil. The field was broken by two right-angle passes with the
chisel which resulted in severe disturbance of those features in the
plow zone, but, as can be seen in Figure 1 b, small undisturbed
sections of the features remained in blocks of soil outside the path
of the blades. From these undisturbed blocks, we were able to
determine orientation of the skeletons in several of the disturbed
burials.
Certain of the recovered human bones exhibited various degrees
of mineralization and encrustation with calcium carbonate. Although
it is possible that irrigation has contributed to the mineralization and
precipitation of the enerustation, field observations led to the formulation of an hypothesis that the bones with the greater amount of
adhering calcium carbonate were of greater age. The field observations were as follows: (1) within a given burial, each bone exhibited
about the same amount of mineralization and encrustation; (2) horizontal location within the site seemed to have no correlation with
mineralization and encrustation; and, (3) one feature, Burial 11, consisted of the well-preserved, non-mineralized, skeletons of three individuals buried at the same time; the interment of these individuals
caused the disturbance of a previous burial, the bones of which were
heavily mineralized and entrusted. If this hypothesis is tenable, then
perhaps a considerable period of time is represented by the recovered
burials, and intermittent use of the cemetery is implied. It is conceivable that an elevation such as the ridge at the Floyd Morris site was
a preferred burial area that maintained its desirability over a long
period of time.

FEATUIIES
The features are grouped below into three categories: burials, disturbed burials, and miscellaneous features. Burials are those accumulations of human bone for which at least some burial data could be
recorded. Disturbed burials are those accumulations of human bone
that seem to represent burials but from which no burial data could
be derived. Miscellaneous features include accumulations of anima!
bone, a possible midden, and other evidences of occupation. The

FIc. 1. A, general view (to the southwest) of the Floyd Morris Site. The
planted field in the background has not been lowered to the extent that
the broken ground in the foreground has. The nature of the ground after
breaking and prior to removal can be seen in the foreground. B, Burial 7,
looking west. Note furrows left by chisel; scale is one foot.

PREHISTORIC

CEMETERY

SITES

19,3

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

recovered skeletal material was badly fragmented and otherwise
poorly preserved. For this reason, few osteometric data were obtained,
and only general osteological observations are reported for each
burial. See Fig. 3 for sketches of burial positions and Fig. 2 for location of features within the site.
THE BURIALS
BURIAL 1. This badly disturbed feature consisted of a fragmentary
right femur shaft, a humerus shaft, and skull fragments, plus a few
miscellaneous bone fragments. Those bones found in place were in
a light-colored sandy clay and suggested that the skeleton had been
flexed (the humerus was near the femur), but the exact position was
not determined. These bones were moderately mineralized and encrusted.
BUR~r. 2. This fairly complete burial (Fig. 3 a) occurred in lightcolored sandy-clay soil. Dark-colored soil immediately surrounded
the bones, and delineated the lower portion of the burial pit. Evidently, the burial pit was oval and measured about 1.1 feet, east to
west, at the elevation of the bones. The skeleton was complete except
for the skull and fragments of the long bones which were removed by
the chisel. The body had been tightly flexed and rested on its right side
with the head to the north; the left arm was folded around the left
leg such that the humerus was above the femur and tibia and the
radius and ulna were beneath the leg bones, that is, between the legs.
Skull fragments and small unidentified bone fragments were found
in the loose soil above the skeleton. None of the bones in Burial 2
were mineralized or coated with calcium carbonate.
The individual was an adolescent, approximately 15 years old at
the time of death, no deciduous teeth are present. Sex was not determined, however, the bones appear to be moderately robust for an
individual of age 15.
BURIAL 3. This multiple grave contained 9. adult individuals in a fair
state of preservation (Fig. 3 b). Individual 3 A lay east of and
slightly beneath individual 3 B. Both were very tightly flexed on their
left sides with pelves to the north and skulls to the south. The skull
of 3 A was removed, and that of 3 B was severely damaged, by the
machinery. The pelvis of each individual was at a slightly lower elevation than the skull; evidently, the bodies originally rested at a
slight inclination. The soil in the vicinity of Burial 3 was dark clay
whereas that immediately surrounding the bones was darker, ahnost
black. These bones were not mineralized and lacked mineral encrustation. There were no associated artifacts. Due to accidental mixture of

PREHISTORIC CEMETERY SITES

19,5

A

B

¢

D

?

E
F
Fro. 3. Various burial positions at the Floyd Morris Site. a, Burial 2; b,
Burial 3; c, Burial 6; d, Burial 5; e, Burial 8; f, Burial 11.

126

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the bones in the laboratoly, individuals 3 A and 3 B were not kept
separate, however, it was possible to determine that each was an
adult and that one was male and one was probably female. The
posterior, distal right humerus shaft of one individual exhibits an
area of cortical thickening approximately 7 em. in length.
BurmaL 4. This poorly preserved skeleton of an infant lay 3 feet north
of Burial 3 at approximately the same elevation. It was 2 feet west of
Disturbed Burial 1 and at a slightly lower elevation. Fill was dark
clay. Only shaft and rib fragments were present and these were in
such bad condition that burial orientation and details about age
(other than infancy) and other characteristics of the individual could
not be determined. The bones lacked mineralization and enerustation.
A complex artifact or artifacts accompanied these bones. Present were
perforated canine teeth and Oliva tinklers in a semicircular pattern
suggestive of a necklace (see Fig. 4). These objects were on top of and
between the bones as though they had been placed on top of the body
at the time of burial.
BURIAL 5. This poorly preserved burial (Fig. 3 d) occurred in lightcolored, clayey sand. A slightly darker fill around the bones in an
area 2.0 feet north-south by 1.5 feet east-west apparently represented
the lower portion of the burial pit. The skeleton rested on its left side
and was very tightly flexed with the skull to the north, facing east.
The bones were completely crushed by the land-leveling equipment,
and skeletal data are lacking. There were no associated objects.
BURIAL 6. This burial (Fig. 3 e) occurred in light-colored clayey
sand, no burial pit visible. The skeleton was tightly flexed and rested
on its back but was twisted slightly to the left, giving the impression
of having been placed on its left side. The head was to the south and
faced west. There were no associated artifacts. The heavily mineralized bones were badly disturbed by the chisel and no restoration was
possible. The individual was an adult, cranial synostosis in a stage
indicating an age of 20 years at death; robusticity is suggestive of a
male, but determination was impossible. The partially restored calvaria yielded a maximum length measurement of 181 ram. and a
maximum width of 139, ram., (cranial index, 72.1-doliehoeranic).
Pathology inetudes cortical thickening of the anterior, distal left tibia
shaft and of the anterior distal right tibia shaft as well as near the
midpoint of the medial right tibia shaft.
BURIAL 7. This badly damaged burial (see Fig. 2 b) occurred in lightcolored clayey sand; no burial pit was visible. The skeleton was flexed
with the head to the north and appeared to be resting on its right
side. The bones were heavily mineralized and encrusted with calcium

PREHISTO1%IC CEMETERY SITES

19,7

FIG. 4. Burial 4, with associated tinkler and perforated canine teeth. North
is to the right.

carbonate. Two tubular bone beads were recovered from soil matrix
around the bones, and, although their exact position in the grave
remains unknown, they are considered valid associations. The individual was an adult and appeared to be a male.
BURIAL 8. This burial (Fig. 3 e) occurred in light-colored clayey sand
just beneath the depth reached by the chisel blades; however, the
skull was crushed and the long bones slightly displaced by the weight
of tractors. The skeleton, that of an adult female, was tightly flexed
on its back and partly twisted to the right. The skull was to the east
and was facing up. There were no grave associations.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

BURIAL 9. This badly preserved burial occurred in light-colored, clayey
sand. The bones were heavily coated with calcium carbonate and
mineralized. The skeleton appeared to have been flexed and seems to
be that of a young adult, probably female.
BURIAL 10. This accumulation of very fragmented human bone was
almost entirely removed from plow-loosened soil, however, a few
fragments remained in undisturbed light-colored fill. The bones were
badly fragmented and scattered, precluding observations on burial
form and osteological determination of the individual’s characteristics.
The bones were heavily mineralized and entrusted with calcium
carbonate. Two large disc beads (one of stone and one of shell) were
found with the small bone fragments that lay immediately above
the in situ fragnients and probably were associated with the skeleton.
BURIAL II. This complex feature consisted of two interments at lhe
same location (Figs. 3 f, 5). The first interment was that of one individual (designated 11 A) and the second interment, which caused
the disturbance of the first, involved three individuals (11 B, 11 C,
and 11 D). The skeletal remains of individual 11 A were highly mineralized and consisted of a frontal bone and a few fragmentary postcranial bones, most of which were disinterred by the land leveling
operation. The cranial fragment and some of the post-cranial flagments were found in the undisturbed soil between chisel marks, but
were observed to be out of proper anatomical relationship. In removing fill ffoni around these fragments in an attempt to determine something more about 11 A, the skull of individual 11 B was encountered
at a depth of 0.5 feet below the deepest penetration of the chisel
blades. The bones of individual 11 B were not mineralized or encrusted. As this constituted the only opportunity to investigate a
burial which had escaped destruction by the plow, an attempt was
made to locate the burial pit by scraping a level surface at the base
of the plow zone and another at the level of the skul! of 11 B. Neither
of these scraped surfaces revealed any change in the homogeneous,
light-colored clayey sand which might be construed as indicating the
burial pit. However, the knee joints of individual 11 B were ]ocated
and found to extend up to the plow zone near the in situ bones of
11 A. The spatial relationship of the bones of individual 11 A to those
of 11 B, the greater amount of mineralization and encrustation of the
bones of 11 A, and the fact that 11 A seemed to have been disturbed
prior to the land-leveling, would seem best to be explained by the
proposal that interment of individual 11 B postdated that of 11 h
and that it caused the disturbance of 11 A.
Also interred with individual 11 B were a bundle burial and either

PREHISTORIC CEMETERY SITES

129

FIG. 5. Burial 11. Skull of individual 11 B is at top of picture, bundle burial
11 C can be seen resting on the abdominal region of 11 B, and three skull
fragments of individual 11 A are at the bottom of the picture near the
right knee of 11 B.

a newborn child or a fetus. Individual 11 B (a young female) rested
on the back with the shoulders and upper back slightly elevated and

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

with the legs loosely flexed and spread apart. The skull was to the
southwest and was inclined forward and turned to the left, facing
west; the arms were placed along the sides of the body and were
slightly flexed at the elbows such that the hands rested between the
thighs and above the pelvis.
Resting on the abdominal region and between the arms of 11 B
were the closely spaced, disartieulated bones of an adult male (11 C).
Present were the ealva, severed right and left distal radii, left clavicle,
several rib fragments, and shafts of the following bones: right and
left femora, right and left humeri, right and left fibulae, right and left
ulnae, and left and right radii severed at the distal ends (it is not
certain whether these radii shafts belong with the two distal radii,
but probably they do). All of these bones were coated with a dark
substance and a red pigment. The long bones of 11 C were arranged
in a general east-west pattern and rested directly on the ribs of 11 B.
The ealva and mandible rested on the long bones. Numerous shell
and bone beads rested among the bones of this bundle burial.
Beneath the skull of 11 C and between the innominates of 11 B
were the remains of either a newborn or a fetus (11 D). The position
of the bones did not offer a solution to the problem of whether or not
the individual was unborn-the body may have been inter-uterine
or laid on the abdomen of 11 B at the time of burial and settled
between the innominates (see below).
Individua! 11 A, represented by a fragmentary frontal bone, a distal
humerus shaft, rib fragments, and miscellaneous shaft fragments,
appears to have been an adult; robustieity of certain long bone fragments and the massiveness of the supra-orbita! torus indicates the
male sex. The distal humerus shaft is slightly smaller than would be
expected from the apparent robustieitv of the other bones, and is
possibly of an additional individual, although it and the other bones
of 11 A are all equally heavily mineralized and coated with calcium
carbonate.
Individual 11 B consists of the well-preserved remains of a young
female. Although the various age criteria are not consistent, the age
at death appears to have been between 14 and 18 years, probably
about 15 or 16 (all skeletal maturation other than complete eruption
of the 3rd molars indicates an age of about 15 years). As none of the
long bones exhibits fusion of both epiphyses, length measurements
were not made. The bones are graeile and delicate. Abnormalities
include the following: (1) loss in life of the first right mandibular
molar and subsequent resorption of the alveolous; (9,) extensive apical
caries of the first left mandibular molar; and (3) caries of the maxil-

PREHISTORIC CEMETERY SITES

131

lary right first molar crown, left canine, and left first molar. Also, the
root sections of the third maxillary molars are not fully developed.
Individual 11 C, the bundle burial, was an adult male exhibiting
complete synostosis of all vault sutures; age probably exceeded forty
years. The long bones are robust (see above for list of recovered
bones) as are the ealva and mandible. Skeletal anomalies include a
lesion (cortical thickening without visible periostitis) near the midpoint of the medial side of the right tibia shaft, and slight osteoporosis
in the ealva in the vicinity of bregma. As mentioned, definite human
alteration of the radii in the form of grooving and snapping was
observed. Also~ all of the bones are coated with a dark substance
(asphaltum?) and red pigment and there is a small burned area at
the proxinlal fracture of the right ulna. There are eertain other attributes of the skeletal material that are probably the result of human
alteration, but the evidence is less concrete. The two recovered severed distal radii are well-preserved which gives evidence that the
immediate burial environment would allow survival of bone extremities. Also, the basal and facial regions of the skull include bones
(particularly the temporals) whose absence is not explainable as
non-preservation (see Fig. 6 a). It is not known what treatment these
bones received, but it appears that some activity prior to burial has
resulted in destruction of the lower and facial portion of the skull
as well as the ends of the long bones. The mandible also exhibits
post-mortem alteration which may include intentional, hunlan activities. All teeth, except the roots of the right second premolar and
first molar, have been extracted and there is no evidence of alveolar
resorption. The anterior alveoli from the left premolar to the right
second prenIolar have been destroyed by the removal of a large seetion of bone; the resulting depression is scooped-out and slopes anteriorly (Fig. 6 b). The cause of this alteration of the mandible is
uncertain-it may have been aboriginal or it may have occurred during
excavation. The altered surface is fresher in appearance than the rest
of the bone, but not as fresh as one or two other bones broken at the
time of excavation.
Individual ll D was represented by skull fragments, ineludin~
orbital segments, distal and proximal femur fragments, right and left
distal tibias, distal humerus, rib fragments~ vertebral bodies and proeesses, ealeaneus, fragmentary clavicle, incomplete innominate and incomplete scapula.
This skeletal material was studied by Dr. Robert M. Malina, physical anthropologist at The University of Texas at Austin. His statement follows:

132

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

G

b

FIG. 6. Skeletal materials from Burial 11 C. a, Skull, possibly altered postmortem (length: 188 mm.); b, mandible, with possible post-mortem
modification (maximum width: 128 ram.).

PREHISTORIC

CEMETERY

SITES

133

Based upon estimated orbital size and estimated femoral and tibial lengths,
the burial appears to represent an individual in the age range of birth to
six months, perhaps eloser to the lower end of the range.
1.

estimated femoral length, 75-80 mm.; X 78.84, s.d. 7.23 for 64
Indian Knoll infants, newborn to 0.5 years.

2.

estimated tibial length, 65~70 mm.; X 69.28, s.d. 6.33 for 65 Indian
Knoll infants, newborn to 0.5 years (.Johnston, 1962).

The possibility that individual 11 D might represent a newborn
infant coupled with the unusual burial situation in which it was found
presents an intriguing question. Ruecking (1955: 132) has noted that
if a Coahuiltecan mother (the Carrizo cluster of the Coahuilteean
linguistic group was present in Cameron County in early historic
times) died during childbirth, the woman’s body "was buried along
with the child, even if the child were alive and well." While no concrete evidence exists that the burials at this site are Coahuilteean, it
is possible that this tradition (of interring a newborn infant with its
dead mother) may have been present in prehistoric times.
Associated with Burial 11 were 402 bone and shell artifacts (in addition to the altered human bones of 1t C described above). These
included 299 tubular bone beads, 18 Marginella shell beads, and 85
Noetia shell beads. The exact provenience of each of these specimens
was not recorded, however, certain beads were in positions which
would indieate something of their placement at the time of burial.
These placements could either reflect locations of individual adornment during life or represent the placement of offerings in the grave.
Both tubular bone and Noetia shell beads were found in the waist
region of individual 11 B, possibly indicative of an ornamented waist
band. One of the tubular bone beads was of hmnan bone and was
found resting on the crest of the right innominate along with 6
Noetia shell beads. Among the bones of 11 C were 29 tubular bone,
1 Marginella shell, and 17 Noetia shell beads. Beneath the skul! of
i1 B was a concentration of tubular bone beads including 4 which
were in line as though strung; evidently, these represent a necklace.
Among the bones of individuals 11 B and 11 C were 265 tubular bone
beads, 17 MarginelIa shell beads and 69. Noetia shell beads for which
specific locations were not recorded.
DISTURBED BURIALS
DISTURBED BURIAL 1. This feature consisted of the bones of an adult
collected from a small area of disturbed soil 9,,5 feet south of Burial
4 and 2 feet east of Burial 3. The skeleton rested at a slightly higher
elevation than those of Burials 3 and 4 and was completely disturbed.
No burial position was determined and no artifaets seem to have been

134

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

associated. The bones were flee of mineral replacement and encrustation.
DISTURBED BURIAL 2. This feature was 14 small fragments of human
bone found in the plow zone; one complete phalange was also collected.
DISTURBED BUBIAL 3. A few fragmentary bones of an adult human plus
some animal bone fragments and a lump of burned clay were collected from the loose soil of the plow zone. All bone was heavily
mineralized and encrusted. Evidently, there were no objects assodiated with the skeleton.
DISTURBED BUltIAL 4. This feature consisted of heavily mineralized and
encrusted human bone fragments, evidently of one adult, found in
the plow-loosened soil; no associated artifacts were found.
DISTURBED BUltlAL 5. A very few heavily mineralized and enerusted
hmnan bones which had been badly scattered by the plow were
collected from this disturbed feature. No skeletal data were derived,
nor were any associations noted.
DISTUI1BED BURIAL 6. This feature consisted of a few fragments of
human bone found in disturbed soil. The bones were moderately
mineralized and seemed to be of an adult.
DISTURBED BURIAL 7. a few small scattered human bone fragments
occurred at this location in the loosened soil; none yielded any
osteologieal data.
MISCELLANEOUS FEATURES
In Fig. 1, the locations of seven miscellaneous features are indicated. Most of these consist of localized concentrations of burned
and/or mineralized animal bone fragments (mainly deer). At Miscellaneous Feature 7, a considerable quantity of ash and charcoal were
mixed with loose soil and a small shell disc bead was collected from
the surface.
CHIPPED STONE AtlTIFACTS
TOBTUGAS DABT POINT (Fig. 7 b: 1 specimen)
Description: The specimen is triangular, with convex lateral edges
and a straight base; it is not beveled. Length is 42.5 ram., maximum
width (at the base) is 94 ram., and it is approximately 7 ram. in
maximum thickness. This specimen was co!lected from the site by
the landowner, and its exact provenience is uncertain.
Discussion: While the Tortugas type is generally considered Archaic
in age (Suhm and others, 1954: 489.), it is possible that projectile
points of this size persisted in southern Texas until the Neo-American

I’IREHISTORIC

CE~IETERY

135

SITES

b
¢

I

f

d
e

g

FIc. 7. Miscellaneous stone and shell artifacts, a, Matamoros dart point; b,
Tortugas dart point; c, triangular knife; d, unifacial end scraper; e,
tubular jadeite bead; f, stone bead; g, shell bead.

136

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL sOCIETY

period. There are numerous specimens of this size in collections from
large Brownsville complex sites in Cameron County (A. E. Anderson
Collection, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory).
I~([ATA1VIOIqOS

DAwr POINT (Fig. 7 a: 1 specimen)

Description: A small, triangular dart point made from a light gray
transluceni flint; the base of this specimen is slightly concave, and
the lateral edges are slightly convex. The left blade edge is alternately
beveled. It is 9.3 mm. in length, with a maximum width of 19 ram.
(at the base), and a maximum thickness of 6 ram. The specimen was
recovered from the plow zone above Burial 9.
Discussion: Matamoros and other triangular projectile points are
common on sites of the Brownsville and Barril complexes (MacNeish, 1958: 189). They are also found on sites of the South Texas
Archaic, present in adjoining counties (Weir, 1956: 66).
TBIANGULAII "KNIFE" (Fig. 7 c: 1 specimen)
Description: This crude trianguloid biface was found by the landowner at the site, and the exact provenience is uncertain. It has
convex blade edges, and a straight base (one corner of which is
damaged); it measures 70 ram. long, with a maximum width (near
midsection) of 43 mm., and a maximum thickness of about 8 ram.
Discussion: Specimens of this sort have not previously been reported from Brownsville complex sites, and are not found in the
Brownsville complex collections of A. E. Anderson (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory). However, Anderson did collect from several Archaic sites in the Cameron County area (which he termed
the "Cayo Culture") and a few specimens similar to the one described here were found. Triangular knives are a common feature
in South Texas Archaic sites found in adjacent counties (Weir,
1956: 65).
END-SCRAPER (Fig. 7 d: 1 specimen)
Description: The specimen is a roughly trianguloid biface thinning
flake, with a piano-convex cross section. The distal end is convex,
while the striking platform remains at the proximal end. The distal
end has been slightly retouched, producing a cutting or scraping edge
on the convex face; the flat face is unmodified. The specimen is 39.5
ram. long, with a maximum width of 9,1 ram. and a maximum thickness of 3.5 mm. It was found on the surface.
Discussion: Similar specimens are present in the A. E. Anderson

PREHISTORIC

CEIVIETERY

SITES

137

collection of Brownsville complex artifacts (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory). Hester (1969a) has reported unifacia! endscrapers from Kleberg and Kenedy Counties further up the Texas
coast but they are usually smaller than the specimen described here.
GROUND STONE ARTIFACTS
7 e: 1 specimen)
Description: A large tubular bead, fashioned from gray-green
jadeite, was found at the site by the landowner. Burial 1 and Miscellaneous Feature 1 were later removed by heavy machinery from
the area where the jadeite specimen was found. It is 43 ram. long,
with the perforation extending the entire length and averaging 5 ram.
in diameter. The maximum thickness of the specimen is about 15
mm. The maxinmm width of 22 ram. occurs at each end and the minimum width of about 20 ram. occurs at midsection. The specimen is
highly polished.
Discussion: Both jade and jadeite beads occur in the Huasteean area
of Mexico. Ekhohn (1944: Fig. 54) has illustrated a number of jade
beads found with burials at the Las Flores site. Most of these are less
than an inch long, though one is almost one and one-half inches in
length. Ekholm (p. 487) states: "’All of the 132 jade beads . . . were
found with burials at Las Flores. They usually accompanied a greater
number of shell beads in combination with which they had apparently
formed necklaces. They are made of jade of various colors and
qualities .... "
MacNeish has reported jadeite objects from the Brownsville complex (1947: 7): "Two jadeite objects have also turned up in Brownsville complex sites one, a large spherical bead 1 inch in diameter; the
other, a small celt-like object 1 inch long. These undoubtedly came
from Mexico, and probably from the Huasteea . . . Pavon informs
me that they are seen in the Huasteea sites. This contact, moreover,
does not seem to have been entirely from the Huasteca to the Brownsville people since the finding of Oliva shell beads, the shell disc beads
and discs, and the typical Brownsville variant 1 type of projectile
point in Huasteea sites may indicate the reverse as well."
JADITE BEAD (Fig.

DIsc-SHAPED STONE

BEAD

Description: This specimen is described in the section on Shell
Artifacts (below). It was found with a similar disc-shaped bead
(made of conch shell) and was associated with Burial 10.

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

BONE ARTIFACTS
HUMAN BONE ARTIFACTS (Figs. 8, a-d, w-x: 4 specimens)
Description: Under this heading, four artifacts made from human
bone are described. A number of tubular bone beads, many of which
appear to be fashioned from human bone, are discussed in the following section.
All four specimens occurred with Burial 11 C (bundle burial). One
is a human radius, with the distal and proximal ends missing (Fig. 8,
w-x). It is 153 ram. long, with a maximum diameter of 15 ram. The
distal end shows evidence of having been severed and smoothed,
while the proximal end is broken. There is an asphaltum "plug" in
the distal end of the specimen, and the exterior surface exhibits remnants of red and black pigments. Another radius shaft fragment was
also found. It, too, is fragmentary (95 ram. long); the proximal end
is broken, while the distal end has been severed, and the cancellous
interior reamed out. The two modified radii appear to represent one
individual.
Two severed distal ends of radii were found, as well. Though they
have clearly been cut from the shaft, the cut ends have not been
smoothed. One specimen is the distal end of a right radius; it is 54 ram.
long, with a maxinauna diameter of 33 ram. The other specimen is
from a left radius, and is 53.5 ram. long (estimated), and has a maximum diameter of 32 mm. It is suggested that both specimens are
from the radii of a single individual, and that they are probably the
distal ends of the modified radii described above. Traces of a reddish
pigment are present on the exterior surfaces of both artifacts.
Discussion: Hester (1969a; 1969b) has described in detail numerous
human bone artifacts from the southern Texas coast (Kleberg and
Nueces Counties). Most were fashioned from long bone shafts, and
were generally recovered with burials; the specimens described above
were briefly noted. Isolated specimens were also reported from Zapata
County (near the Rio Grande) and from the northeastern coast of
Tamaulipas, just below Brownsville.
TUBULAR BONE BEADS (Fig. 8, e-v: 301 specimens)
Description: A large quantity of tubular bone beads were recovered
from several burials; these are discussed below by burial.
A total of 9,99 tubular bone beads were associated with the skeletons in Burial 11. Twenty-nine bone beads were found with Burial
11 C. One was quite large (29.5 mm. long, with a maximum diameter
of 21 mm.), and is made from human bone. The interior has been
reamed out, and the walls average about 3 mm. in thickness. Twenty-

PREHISTORIC CEMETERY

139

SITES

d

g

m

i
w

!

n

o

p

q

,
x

FIc. 8. Bone artifacts, a-d, severed human distal radii (both sides of each
are shown) ; e-g, tubular beads made from human bone; h-v, miscellaneous
tubular bone beads; w-x, human radius, severed at the distal end, and
plugged with asphaltum (both sides are illustrated).

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

three others are made from mammal long bone (some of them may be
of human bone), and most of these bear traces of a blackish substance,
perhaps asphaltmn. Transverse cross-seetions vary from almost round
to ovate, and a number have trianguloid eross sections. None is deeorated, though two have shallow transverse notches near one end,
where initial attempts to sever the bone may have been made. These
9,3 specimens range in length from 7.5 mm. to 19 mm., and in maximum diameter from 8 mm. to 14 mm. One other bone bead from the
burial is made from bird bone; it is 11 ram. long, with a maxinmm
diameter of 6 mm.
Two hundred and sixty-five bone beads were found with Burials
11 B and 11 C (together). Four of these are definitely made from
human bone; the interiors have been reamed out and smoothed.
Length ranges from 24 mm. to 33.5 ram., maximum diameter is from
18.5 mm. to 22 mm., and wall thickness varies from 4.5 mm. to 5.5
mm. Two hundred and fifteen others appear to be sections of mammal
long bones, and a number of them may be of human bone. Cross
sections are often oval, though trianguloid transverse cross sections
are also common. Most are undecorated, but several bear remnants
of black and red pigments. The exterior surfaces are usually wellpolished, although some are now badly eroded. "False starts" (initial
attempts at cutting the bone), in the form of slight transverse notches
near one end, are present on several. Length varies from 10 mm. to
19 ram., while the maxinmm diameter is from 8.5 mm. to 14 ram. and
the wall thickness is from 1.5 ram. to 3.5 mm. (the interiors are often
enlarged and smoothed). Most of these specimens are around 13 mm.
long, with maximum diameter of 11 mm.
One group of 46 bone beads with Burials 11 B-11 C are noticeably
smaller than the remainder. These are probably fashioned from the
long bones of birds or very small mammals. Transverse cross sections
are generally oval; a few are trianguloid. There is a range in length
from 8.5 ram. to 14 ram., in maximum diameter from 4 mm. to 8 mm.,
and in wall thickness from 0.5 mm. to 9. mm. None is decorated.
There were five bone beads found scattered through Burial 11;
two of them may be made of human bone. Two have trianguloid
transverse cross sections, and the others have ovate cross sections.
Length ranges from 10 ram. to 15 mm., and maximum diameter is
from 9.5 ram. to 14 mm.; they are undecorated.
Two bone beads were recovered from Burial 7. One has an elliptical cross section, while the other is triangular. The first specimen is
13.5 mm. long, with a maximum diameter of 11 mm., and the second
is 11.5 ram. long, and 9.5 mm. in maximum diameter.

PREHISTORIC CEMETERY

SITES

141

Discussion: Tubular bone beads have been found associated with
burials in Cameron County (A. E. Anderson Collection, Texas Archeological Heseareh Laboratory) and at the Ayala Site in adjoining
Hidalgo County (Campbell and Frizze!l, 1949: P1. 19.). They are
also occasionally found at other localities along the Texas coast
(Campbell, 1956: 15, 35; 1957: 460; and Hester, 1969a).
PERFORATED CANINE TEETH (Fig. 9, e-f: 18 specimens)
Description: These are canine teeth of the coyote (?) which have
been biconically perforated near the root end. All of the specimens
oecurred with Burial 4, and al! but two were arranged in a circular
pattern (Fig. 4). It is probable that these were components of a necklace. Two of the perforated canines were found in situ within Oliva
sayana shell tinklers, where they apparently functioned as clappers
(Fig. 9 b-e).
Length ranges from 9,7 mm. to 3.5 mm., and maximum width averages around 19 ram.
Discussion: Perforated canine teeth have been noted previously in
the Brownsville complex (Anderson, 1939,: 9,0; A. E. Anderson Collection, Texas Areheologieal Research Laboratory) and have been
found at sites along the central and southern Texas coast (Suhm and
others, 1954: 19.7; Hester, 1969a). At the Ayala Site (initially described
by Campbell and Frizzell, 1949), Frederick Rueeking, Jr. found 12
perforated canines associated with a burial; other artifacts found
with the burial include OIi~a saya~a beads, conch shell disc beads, and
rectangular bone pendants. Data gathered on the other burials at the
site suggests that the interments were made by peoples of the Brownsville complex (Hester and Ruecking, this issue).

SHELL ARTIFACTS
DISC-SHAPED BEADS (Fig. 7 f-g: 2 specimens)
Description: Both of these specimens are rather large, thick, discshaped beads; one is fashioned from conch shell, and the other is made
from a hard, white limestone. The eonch shell specimen has a maximmn diameter of 31 ram. and a maximuna thickness of 7.5 mm. The
biconical perforation is near the center and is about 4 ram. wide. The
other bead (limestone) has a maximum diameter of 9,7 ram. and a
maximum thickness of 8 ram.; the perforation (biconical) is about 8.5
ram. in diameter. Both specimens were found with Burial 10.
Diseussion: Disc-shaped beads (made from con& shell) are found
on both Brownsville and Barril complex sites (MacNeish, 1958: 190).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Some are also found further up the Texas coast, though they are
generally smaller (Campbell, 1956: 34; Hester, 1969a).
Marginella Apicina SHELL BEADS (Fig. 9 r-w: 18 specimens)
Description: These are tiny univalves (Marginella apicina), the
spires of which have been removed to facilitate stringing. Most of the
specimens are badly fragmented, and two or three bear faint traces
of a reddish pigment.
Sixteen were found with Burials 11 B- 11 C (together), and single,
isolated specimens were found with Burial 11 B and with Burial 11 C.
They range in length from 9.5 ram. to 19. ram., and in maximum diameter from 7 ram. to 9.5 ram.
Discussion: A. E. Anderson found Marginella apicina shell beads
with several burials in Cameron County (Texas Archeologieal I~esear& Laboratory collections). Hester (1969a) has reported a burial
at site 41 KL 45 (in Kleberg County) which was accompanied by 180
Marginella apicina beads, two of which were stained with a reddish
pigment. Cecil Calhoun, who found the site, recovered artifacts attributable to both the Brownsville and tloekport complexes.
Noetia Ponderosa SHELL BEADS (Fig. 9 i-q: 85 specimens)
Description: Most of these small pelecypods (Noetia Ponderosa)
are rather badly eroded; a few bear remnants of a reddish pigment.
Sixty were found with Burials 11 B and 1i C (together). Forty-two
of these bear perforations at the beak (umbo); 16 others are perforated about 2 mm. to 5 mm. behind the umbo, and two have perforations at the umbo as well as single perforations further back on
the shell.
Eight of these shell beads were found with Burial 11 B; six were
found on the right innominate. Five of these were perforated at the
umbo, and the other three were perforated just behind it.
Burial 11 C yielded 17 Noetia ponderosa beads, some of which
were inside the cranium, while others were near the fetus cranium.
Thirteen of these are perforated at the umbo, three were drilled just
behind the umbo, and one has two perforations.
The shell beads from these burials range in length from 9.5 ram.
to 19.5 ram., and in maximum width from i1.5 ram. to 23 ram.
Discussion: Perforated Noetia ponderosa are present in the A. E.
Anderson collection of Brownsville complex artifacts (Texas Areheological tlesearch Laboratory). Hester (1969a) has noted Noetia
ponderosa beads from site 41 KL 13 in Kleberg County, also on the
southern Texas coast.

h
d

s

k

u

I

m

n

D

W

o

P
50

0

[-

r~m

I

i~IG. 9. Shell and bone artifacts, a, Oliva sayana tinkler; b, c, Oliva sayana
tinklers, with in sih~ canine teeth; d, fragment of Oliva sayana; e-f, perforated canine teeth; g, human tooth, possibly modified; h, shell bead;
i-q, Noetia pol~derosa shell beads; r-w, Marginella apicina shell beads.

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Oliva Sayan SHELL ARTIFACTS (Fig. 9 a-d: 5 specimens)
Description: All of the specimens are fragmentary, and no measurements were possible. Four of the specimens are tinklers which bear
single perforations near the anterior end of the shell. As already mentioned, within two of the tinklers, perforated canine teeth (which functioned as clappers) are still in place. The fifth specimen is a longitudinal fragment of an Oliva sayana shell; it, too, may have been a tinkler.
It was found in place with Burial 4; a perforated canine lay on part
of the fragment. However, it is believed that this is an accidental association, since this particular canine was one of several forming a
circular pattern around the upper part of the burial.
All of the specimens were found with Burial 4.
Discussion: Oliva shell tinklers are common in the Brownsville
complex (Anderson, 1932: P1. 7; MacNeish, 1958: 191). In nearby
Hidalgo County, Oliva sayana tinklers were found associated with a
burial at the Ayala Site (Hester and tluecking, this issue).
MISCELLANEOUS tlEFUSE
During the course of the work at the site, several forms of nonartifactual debris, as well as some historic Anglo-American artifacts,
were recovered from the surface. The non-artifactual debris includes
scattered snail shells, a few mussel shell fragments, several burned
clay lumps, two small shark’s teeth, and the tooth of a peccary. The
peccary has ranged into the area in only very recent times (Ernest
Lundelius, personal communication). The recent historic artifacts
include glass and crockery fragments.

SUMMARY
Salvage excavations were carried out at the Floyd Morris Site
(41 CF 9.) in Cameron County in June, 1966. The investigations at
the site, conducted by students from the Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin, revealed a number of burials and
miscellaneous features (most of which had been damaged by landleveling processes). Several of the burials were accompanied by grave
goods, including tubular bone beads, shell beads, shell tinklers, perforated canine teeth, disc-shaped beads, and modified human bones;
also, the bones in a bundle burial exhibited coatings of black and red
pigments. Most of these artifacts are attributable to what has been
termed the Brownsville complex (MacNeish, 1958: 191). Several
artifacts (none of which was in place) were found that may represent
earlier, Archaic activities at the site. Of particular interest was the
recovery of a tubular jadeite bead, which may be intrusive from the
Huasteean area of Mexico.

PREHISTORIC

CEMETERY

SITES

145

Apparently, the high elevation (35 feet above sea level) on which
the site is located, was favored for burials at different periods in time.
Burial was probably intermittent, since the internIents differ from
one another in skeletal orientation and position, and sinee various
degrees of bone mineralization are present. Although less clear, the
presence of various artifact forms seems eonsistent with this proposal.
Additional evidence for intermittent burial is the non-patterned
arrangement of the burials; i.e., they are apparently scattered randomly over the elevation, and are not ga’ouped in a particular area.
This site is the second cemetery site to be reported for the lower
Rio Grande valley (the Ayala eemetery was reported by Campbel!
and Frizzell, 1949). Though the burial goods at these two sites are
suggestive of Brownsville affliation, MaeNeish (1947, 1958) has not
mentioned the use of eemetery areas by this culture. While the
investigators noted some indistinct patches of midden debris at the
site, no concentrated occupational area was located. Evidently, if local
groups responsible for the burials resided nearby, their burial and
habitation areas were separate; or, if the burials were associated with
migratory groups, the groups apparently occasionally took advantage
of the elevation for interment but did not reside at the site for any
length of time.
By the time the University of Texas crew arrived at the Floyd
Morris site, much of it had been disturbed. Only 18 burials (and disturbed burials) were recorded, but widely separated occurrences of
human bone on the surface indicated the presence of many more
skeletons, leading the senior author to believe that perhaps as many as
7,5 to 100 burials were once present in the site area. Many of these had
been nearly totally destroyed, and lack of time did not permit investigation of other known burials. Also, the land owner reported that in a
previous leveling of this same field, a few human bones had been

removed.
Two cemeteries have thus far been reported in this region, Floyd
Morris and Ayala. As we have already stated, the Floyd Morris site
was badly disturbed, and lack of time and funds prevented more
extensive salvage operations. The other cemetery, Ayala, was investigated twice (Campbell and Frizzell, 1949; Hester and Iluecking, this
volume), but unfortunate eiremnstances prevented extensive, careful
work. It is evident, therefore, that other cemetery sites in the area
need to be located and systematieally excavated. Only then will it be
possible to determine the eultural affiliations and temporal positions
of the peoples responsible for these sites.

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, A. E.
1932 Artifacts of the Rio Crande Delta Region. BuUetin, Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 3: 29-31.
Campbell, T. N.
i956 Archeologieal Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas
Coast. Bulletin, Texas Archeo!ogical Society, Vol. 27: 7-46.
Archeologieal Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County, Texas.
Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 9: 448-471.
Campbell, T. N. and Jack Q. Frizzell
1949 Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas. Bulletin,
Texas Archeologieal and Paleontological Society, Vol. 20: 63-72.
Ekhohn, Gordon F.
1944 Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteea, Mexico. Anthro1957

pological Papers, American Museum of Natural Itistory, Vol. 38, No. 5.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1969a Areheological hwestigations in Kleberg and Kenedy Counties, Texas,
August, 1967. ArcheoIogical Program, State Building Commission, Report No. 15 (in press).
1969b Hmnan Bone Artifacts from Southern Texas. Manuscript accepted for
publication, American Antiquity.
Hughes, Jack T.
Field notes on the Odem Site, San Patricio County, Texas. On file at
ms
the Texas Archeologieal Research Laboratory, Austin.
Jackson, A. T.
ms
Excavation of the Callo del Oso Burial Site, in Nueces County, Texas.
Notes on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
Johnston, F. E.
1962 Growth of the Long Bones of Infants and Young Children at Indian
Knoll. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, Vol. 20: 249-254.
MaeNeish, Richard S.
1947 A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. I: 1-15.
1958 Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. T~zmsactions of the American Philosophical Society, n.s., Vo!.
48, Pt. 6.
Martin, George C.
1929 Notes on Some Texas Coast Campsites and Other Remains. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. i: 50-57.
Ruecking, Frederick, Jr.
The Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northwestern Mexico.
ms
Unpublished Master’s Thesis, University of Texas at Austin, Library.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and E. B. Ielks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas" Archeology. Bulletin, Texas Areheological Society, Vol. 9.5.
Weir, Frank A1.
1956 Surface Artifacts from La Perdida, Starr County, Texas. Bulletin, Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 27: 59-78.
Tucson, Arizona.
Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, University of
Texas at Austin.
Pullman, Washington.

147

PREHISTORIC CEMETERY SITES

PART II
ADDITIONAL MATERIALS FROM THE AYALA SITE,
A PREHISTORIC CEMETERY SITE
IN HIDALGO COUNTY, TEXAS
THOMAS ROY HESTER AND FREDERICK RUECKINC, JR.

INTRODUCTION
In 1949, T. N. Campbell and J. Q. Frizzell reported a number of
burials and associated artifacts from the Ayala Site (University of
Texas designation: 41 HG 1) near MeAllen in Hidalgo County, Texas
(Fig. 1). They described 11 burials (containing 15 individuals) from
the site, noting that most of the skeletons appeared to have been in
a flexed position, though good orientation data were lacking. Numerous artifacts were associated with the burials, including Oliva sayar~a
shell beads, disc-shaped beads made from conch shell and tubular
bone beads, some of which had encircling grooves. The association of
these artifacts with the burials suggested that the interments were
made by peoples of the Brownsville culture (MacNeish, 1947: 6) during the Neo-American period. However, the burials had intruded into
a thick midden which apparently represented earlier, Archaic occupations. Gouges, a triangular knife, a trianguloid dal~ point, and other
Archaic-style materials were found in the midden debris surrounding
the burial pits.
In June and December of 1952, Frederick Ruecking, Jr., then a
student at The University of Texas, returned to the Ayala Site to
obtain additional data. He conducted limited excavations at the site,
and the artifacts and field notes resulting from this work are stored at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at Austin. The purpose
of this brief paper is to present the data obtained by Ruecking in 1959..
Then, by utilizing the information provided by Campbell and Frizzell
(1949), the archeology of the Ayala Site is summarized.
THE SITE
The Ayala Site has previously been described by Campbell and
Frizzell and a portion of their description is presented here: "The
Ayala site has a distinctive physiographic location. It lies on high
ground which rises about 15 feet above a former channel of the Rio
Crande (the Sardinas Resaca, Fig. 1 ). This old channel has a width of
approximately 2,500 feet at the Ayala locality, and it is now used as
a floodway. According to Mr. Ayala, the records show that the Rio
Crande occupied this channel in the latter part of the eighteenth

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

corrals

corrals

J
THE AYALA
-~ """

/....

?

~,.i

SITE
1oo

z

FIG. 1. Plan of the Ayala Site, showing the location of burials. Burials 1-7
are numbered, while the other burials are indicated by darkened triangles.
century, when the area was first settled by Europeans. Today the
Rio Grande is six miles south of the Ayala site. The site is now
sparsely covered by large mesquite trees, and there is no record of its
ever having been under cultivation." Ruecking’s maps of the site area
show that a number of farm buildings and other structures occupy
much of the site area. The main concentration of burials seems to be
on the Ayala property, though Mr. Ayala told Ruecking that a few
burials had been found on the property just north of his.

BURIALS AND ASSOCIATED ARTIFACTS
Burials were first discovered at the site in July of 1945, when a
sewer trench was dug by the Ayalas. These burials were subsequently
investigated by Jack Frizzell. In 1952, Ruecking returned to the site
for further excavations. A grid was established, and several units
were opened. However, Ruecking’s endeavors were seriously hampered by workmen employed by the landowner. They were digging
haphazardly in the hope of finding a "treasure cave" which was believed to exist on the property and Ruecking spent much of his time

PREHISTORIC CEMETERY SITES

149

trying to document many of the discoveries made by the untrained
laborers.
In discussing the burials recorded by Ituecking, it should be pointed
out that it is difficult to determine the exact number of burials excavated, either by llueeking or by the untrained workmen. Itueeking’s
specimen catalog lists five burials (Burials 1, 2, g, 4, and 6), yet a
sketch of a "Burial 7" also appears in the notes. Complieating the situation further are plans of the Ayala Site on whieh the locations of 44
burials are indicated (Fig. 1). Apparently, Itueeking was unable to
correlate the burial data obtained by Campbell and Frizzell with his
own. Furthermore, no horizontal plan of burials appears in the 1949
report by Campbell and Frizzell, so again we cannot tell if some of the
burials noted by Ituecking duplicate those recorded in 1949.
Ituecking’s Burial 1 (an adult) was discovered by untrained workmen and was badly disturbed before it was recorded. It was located
about five feet below the surface (see Fig. 1). A number of artifacts
were associated. An antler beam fragment (Fig. 4, c), 230 ram. long
and with a maxinmm diameter of 27 mm., was present though it
exhibits no apparent modification. A large trianguloid pendant was
also found (Fig. 4 a-b). It is fashioned from conch body whorl, and is
163.5 ram. in length. The proximal end is 108 mm. wide, while the
distal end is 31 ram. in width. Two perforations, about 5 mm. in diameter and spaced 10 mm. apart, are present g ram. from the distal end.
One lateral edge is convex and the other is slightly concave and
recurve& Numerous tiny, closely-spaced notches (averaging 1.5 mm.
in length) are present along both lateral edges, and the proximal
edge. Specimens similar to this have been noted by MaeNeish
(1958: 191).
Two Oliva sayana tinklers (Fig. 2 n-o) were associated with Burial
1. About one-third of the shell (posterior or spire end) has been
removed, and the edges have been smoothed; they range in length
from 49. to 49 ram., and in maximum diameter from 21.5 to 23 ram.
At the anterior end of each specimen, a transverse notch has been cut
and a single perforation made near the center of the notch. On one
specimen, two closely-spaced perforations are present on the body
whorl about 31 mm. from the anterior end. These tinklers are common
in the Brownsville eomp!ex (MacNeish, 1958: 191). A carnivore
eanine (coyote), with a hole at the root end, was also found. It is
38 nnn. long, with a maximum diameter of 9 mm. At the Floyd Morris
Site (41 CF 2) in nearby Cameron County, tinklers have been found
with what are probably Brownsville culture burials; carnivore eanines

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

150

¢

@

g

h

d

m

k

n

~
o

r

?

u

t

s
,
mm

,

q

5[0

FIc. 2. Shell Artifacts. a-l, disc-shaped conch shell beads; m, p-u, Oliva
sayana shell beads; n-o, Oliva sayana shell tinklers.
were found in situ within two of the tinklers, where they apparently
served as clappers (Collins, Hester and Weir, this issue).

PREHISTORIC

CEMETERY

SITES

151

Other bone artifacts were also found with Burial 1. These include
22 small tubular bone beads (animal or bird bone), averaging 10
mm. in length, and about 5 ram. in maximum diameter. All are undecorated, though slight cut marks are present on several. A rectangular
bone object (possibly a pendant) was also recovered. It is 69, mm.
long, with a maximum width Of 23 mm. and a maximum thickness of
1.5 mm. There is a small bieonical perforation at one corner and one
face is decorated with incised lines (see Fig. 3 x). These incised
lines contain remnants of a black pigment, which under microscopic
examination appears to be asphaltum. A "ladder" motif, composed of
two parallel incised lines crossed transversely by short incised lines,
is the basic part of the design. Using this ladder motif, two rectanguloid figures (with one long side missing from both) have been executed. One of these figures has been placed with the other (see Fig.
3 x). This design element (one rectangle with an open side fitting
within an identical, but larger rectangle) occupies approximately twothirds of one face. Just above it is another incised line design, much
more poorly executed, and part of which seems to be missing since
the specimen is broken at that end. This design is box-like (almost
square) with the ladder motif employed on three sides. Within this
is a similar parallel-line design, though the short transverse notches
are missing. While not apparent to the naked eye, microscopic examination revealed faint traces of asphaltum within the incisions. We
would like to point out that a search of the literature failed to yield
other specimens from the Texas coast exhibiting asphaltum placed
in incised designs. However, Cecil Calhoun (1967, personal communication) has recently found an antler tine fragment at 41 NU 11
(Nueces County) which bears an incised zig-zag line filled with
asphaltum.
A trianguloid dart point (Fig. 3 a) was found at the same level as
the burial (No. 1), though it seems to have been associated with the
Archaic midden surrounding the interment. It is crudely made from a
gray flint and has a concave basal edge and concave lateral edges. It
measures 34 ram. in length, has a basal width of 9,7 mm. and a maximum thickness of 6.6 ram. Another projectile point was noted by
1queeking as having been found at the same location, but it is not now
available for study.
Burial 9. was found just south of Burial 1 at a depth of about 5 feet.
It, too, was removed by untrained workmen, and no other data are
available. No artifacts seem to have been associated with it.
Burial 3 was excavated carefully by lqueeking. It was located just
west of Burial 1 about 40 to 49 inches below the surface. Though the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

159,

b

j

i

h

n

d

p

o

o
I

,
mm

g

e

k

cl

5o
l

m

r

s

x

FIc. 3. Stone and Bone Artifacts. a, trianguloid dart point; b-g, tubular
bone beads; h-s, perforated canine teeth; t-v, rectangular bone pendants,
undecorated; w, rectangular bone pendant, incised; x, rectangular bone
pendant, incised lines filled with asphaltum.

PREHISTOI~IC

o

J

CEMETERY

153

SITES

1oo

t

FIo. 4. Antler and Shell Artifacts. a-b, both sides of conch whorl pendant;
c, antler beam fragment.

154

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

skeleton (that of an adult) was fragmentary, it seems to have been
flexed, and oriented east-west, with the head to the west. Seventy-six
tubular animal bone beads (Fig. 3 b-g) were associated with the
burial; they average 10 ram. in length, and 5 mm. in maximum diameter, with the bone wall about .5 ram. thick. Slight cut marks are
present on several of them, while on one specimen there are two
encircling grooves (see Campbell and Frizzell, !949: Plate 12, I). Five
disc-shaped beads (probably of conch shell) were also found with the
burial. They vary in diameter from 9 mm. to 11 mm. and in maxinmm
thickness from 2 mm. to 4 mm. (Fig. 2 a-l). At a depth of 59 inches,
well below the burial, and within the Archaic midden, a projectile
point (evidently a triangular dart point) was recovered, but is not
available for study.
Burial 4 was located just north of Burial 1 at a depth of about 5
feet below the surface. Apparently, the skeletal material was not
articulated, but the burial may have been disturbed since it was
uncovered by the untrained laborers.
Burial 5 is also quite perplexing. Skeletal fragments of an adult and
a juvenile are present but no sketch map or other documentation
exist for the burial, and therefore the relationship of the two individuals within the grave is unknown. The burial is said to have been
found about 5 feet below the surface, circa 75 feet southwest of
Burial 1. It is possible that this burial (like several others at the site)
was uncovered by the laborers workin~ for the landowner; it may
have been so badly disturbed that Ilueeking was unable to accurately
record it.
A number of artifacts were apparently associated with Burial 5.
Seven Oliva sayana shell beads (with the spire tips removed) were
found (Fig. 9. m, p-u). They range in length from 37 ram. to 50 mm.,
and in maximum width from 16 mm. to 9.7 mm. Also found were 19.
carnivore canines (coyote), all of which had been perforated at the
root end (Fig. 3 h-s). Six disc-shaped shell beads (conch) ranging
from 10 ram. to 18 mm. in maximum diameter and from 2 ram. to 3.5
ram. in maximum thickness, were also associated (Fig. 9. a-l). Four
reetanguloid bone pendants were among the grave goods with Burial
5. Three of the specimens (Fig. 3 t-v) are nicely shaped and polished,
but are undecorated. They range in length from 9.3 mm. to 45 mm.,
in maximum width from 9 ram. to 15 ram., and in maximum thickness
from 1.5 ram. to 9..0 ram. The fourth bone pendant (Fig. 3 w) bears
two incised "X"-shaped designs on one-half of one face, while two
parallel meandering incised lines extend the entire length of the oppo-

PREHISTORIC

CEMETERY

SITES

15~

site half of the face. This specimen is 42 mm. long, 13 ram. at maximum width, and is 2.5 mm. thick.
Burial 6 was found about 25 feet northeast of Burial 1 at a depth of
about 39, inches below the surface. Adult cranial and p0stcranial
materials are present, but the orientation of the skeleton(s) is unknown. A sketch does exist for Burial 7, which was excavated by
Ruecking. It was found about 125 feet east of Burial 1, in a garden.
It, too, seems to have been !ocated about 32 inches below the surface.
According to Rueeking’s notes, no grave goods were found; a grave
pit could not be delineated. Near the burial, though probably not
associated with it, a mostly complete turtle shell was found. While it
seems most probable that the turtle remains represent food refuse in
the midden, it should be noted that Campbell has recorded a turtle
shell rattle found with a burial at the Caplen Site on the northern
coast of Texas (1957: 461).
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
During 1952, Frederick Ruecking, Jr., carried out limited investigations at the Ayala Site in Hidalgo County, Texas. Several burials
were excavated and/or recorded by Ruecking. His plan of the site and
its environs (Fig. 1) shows the location of 44 burials, but descriptive
data concerning most of these are lacking. Burial goods accompanying
the skeletons included: Oliva sayana beads and tniklers, tubular bone
beads, disc-shaped conch shell beads, a large triangular conch whorl
pendant, a large antler beam fragment, incised bone pendants and
perforated carnivore canines. Combining these and other data with
the information recorded by Campbell and Frizze!l (1949), the following table has been prepared to summarize the burial traits manifested at the Ayala Site:
Two reports have now been contributed concerning the archeology
of the Ayala Site, but even more work should be done at this important site. Though laborers employed by the landowner damaged
much of the site, a good deal of it is apparently stil! intact, and careful, methodical work is desperately needed at the site.
Most of the burial goods listed in Table 1 are common in the
Brownsville culture (MaeNeish, 1958: 190-199,; A. E. Anderson Collection, Texas Areheological Research Laboratory), but such items as
rectangular bone pendants (especially with incised decorations) and
the association of red ochre with burials are heretofore unrecognized
traits.
The burial goods at the Ayala Site are clearly suggestive of Brownsville affiliation. However, we still do not know the exact temporal

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

156
TABLE 1.

Burial Traits at the Ayala Site. Names in parentheses indicate the
persons who recorded each trait.
I. BURIAL PITS: circular in outline, 4 to 5 feet deep; single or nmltiple
interments. (Campbell and Frizzell; Ruecking)
II. BURIAL POSITION: flexed, with forearms crossed or hands adjacent to
face; some may represent secondary interments (Campbell and Frizzell;
Ruecking)
III. BURIAL COODS:
a) red ochre (Campbell and Frizzell)
b) Oliva sayana tinklers (Ruecking)
c) Oliva sayana beads (Campbell and Frizzell; Rueeking)
d) disc-shaped conch shell beads (Campbell and Frizzell; Rueeking)
e) tubular bone beads, some decorated with encircling grooves (Campbell
and Frizzell; Ruecking)
f) deer antler beam fragment (Ruecking)
g) large trianguloid con& whorl pendant (Ruecking)
h) perforated carnivore canines (Ruecking)
i) incised rectangular bone pendants (Ruecking)
j) undecorated rectangular bone pendants (Ruecking)

range of some of the shell and bone artifacts charactelistic of that
culture. It is conceivable (and probable) that shell and bone artifacts
used in Neo-Ameriean (Brownsville) times in this area could have
also been present during the Archaic. So it is tenuous at best to say
flatly that the Ayala cemetery is entirely attributable to the Brownsville culture. While it is possible that these peoples took advantage of
the high elevation now known as the Ayala Site for interments, it is
also quite possible that the Archaic peoples to whom is attributed
most of the midden at the site (Campbell and Frizzell, 1949) may be
responsible for some of the burials. There is no evidence of any historic aboriginal groups using the site for burial purposes. It is probably accurate to say that several stages of burial activity, occurring
at different periods in time, are represented at the site. Unfortunately,
we have such meager data from the site that we can say little more.
l:tueeking believes that the lower levels of the midden are attributable
to Archaic occupations, based on the small quantities of artifacts
(none now available for study) that he saw from these levels. He
does not recall seeing any artifactual debris in the upper parts of the
midden which would indicate a Brownsvillean occupation. This suggests that if most of the burials are attributable to the Brownsville
complex (as indicated by associated grave goods), then the habitational area is located somewhere away from the cemetery.

PREHISTORIC

CEMETERY

SITES

157

REFERENCES CITED
Campbell, T. N.
1957

Areheological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County, Texas.
Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4: 448-471.

Campbell, T. N. and j. Q. Frizzell
1949

Notes on the Aya]a Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 20: 63-72.

Collins, Michael B., Thomas Roy Hester and Frank Weir
1969

The Floyd Morris Site: A Prehistoric Cemetery Site in Cameron
County, Texas. Bulletin Texas Archeological Society] Vol. 40 (this issue).

MacNeish, Richard S.
1947 A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico. American
Antiquity, Vol~. 13, No. 1: 1-15.
1958 Preliminary Areheo!ogical Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions American Philosophical Society, Vol. 48, Part 6.
Texas Areheo!ogical Research Lahoratory
University of Texas at Austin
Fondren Library, Rice University
Houston, Texas

PART III
THE FLOYD MORRIS AND AYALA SITES:
A DISCUSSION OF BURIAL PRACTICES
IN THE RIO GRANDE VALLEY
AND THE LOWER TEXAS COAST
THOMAS ROY HESTER

In Parts I and II, burials and associated artifacts fi’om the Floyd
Morris Site and the Ayala Site have been described in detail. Both
sites are large cemeteries; the burial goods are suggestive of the
Brownsville complex (MacNeish, 1947, 1958), but occupational areas
attributable to this complex were not found. The similarities of the
burial goods and other burial traits at the two sites are pointed out
in Table 1.
I would like to thank Dr. Dee Ann Story, Executive Director, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, and Mr. Harry J. Sharer, of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, for reading various drafts of this
paper, and for providing helpful and constructive criticisms regarding it.
Appreciation is also expressed to Dr. T. N. Campbell and Mr.
James E. Corbin of The University of Texas, and Mr. Michael B.
Collins, of the University of Arizona, for information and suggestions
supplied by them on certain aspects of this paper. Mrs. Lynda Hester
typed the manuscript.

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

CEMETERIES ON THE LOWER TEXAS COAST
Other cemeteries are known on the lower Texas coast from the
Corpus Christi area southward. In Kleberg County, the Dietz Site
cemetery has been known for several decades, having first been excavated by Clyde T. Reed in 199,,7 (1937: 9,18-9,9,1). The site is located
near Cayo del Grullo southeast of Kingsville. Reed excavated 9,1
skeletons, one of which was accompanied by two tubular stone pipes.
Also associated with naany of the burials were segments of human
long bone which had been made into tube-like artifacts. E. B. Sayles,
in his archeological survey of Texas, found other human bone artifacts at the site (collections stored at Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory). These unusual human bone artifacts have been described in detail (Hester, 1969a; 1969b). No occupational area was
found around the cemetery, though several are in the general vicinity
(Hester, 1969a).
In Nueces County, several cemeteries are known. Site 41 NU 9, (on
Oso Creek) was investigated by The University of Texas in 1939’
(Jackson, 1933); 39 burials containing 93 individuals were excavated
but burial goods, mainly traingular mussel shell pendants and a bone
tube made fi’om a human femur, were rare. Several areas of occupation were noted around the perimeter of the cemetery. Upstream
from 41 NU 9‘, William Stanton (personal communication) has located
two additional cemeteries. One of these, 41 NU 29, has yielded over
65 burials; occasional burial goods were found, including a stone
pendant, three large triangular objects made fi’om bison scapula and
decorated with drilled pits, and a multi-perforated bone flageolet-like
object. Across the creek from this site, Stanton and others have found
several burials at site 41 NU 37. The cemetery area is almost totally
devoid of occupational refuse, though a large campsite is adjacent
to it on the north.
In San Patricio County, Jack Hughes (1951) excavated a cemetery
site near Odem. Prior to his work, nearly 50 burials had been removed
from the site. He found at least 10 poorly-preserved skeletons, but
again burial goods were rare. Associated with one of the burials was
a corner-notched arrow point with a finely-serrated blade; the landowner found two Scallorn arrow points and a small side-notched dart
point with burials he unearthed at the site. There was no midden
debris in the cemetery area, but a large campsite is located a few
hundred yards to the north.
With this brief examination of cemetery sites on the lower coast,
it is quite evident that the Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites have very
little in common with them. While bone beads of human bone were

PREHISTORIC

CEMETERY

SITES

159

found at Floyd Morris, they bear little resemblance to the hmnan
bone tubes found at the Dietz Site; but, the fact that this unusual
trait is present at both sites may be significant.
BURIAL PRACTICES IN THE INTERIOR OF SOUTHERN TEXAS
A number of burials have been excavated in the interior of southern
Texas, but in most reported eases these have been single interments
without associated artifacts (Cason, 1959.: 239; Davis, 1961: 5; Hester,
1964a: 2; 1964b: 1, 2; Nunley and Hester, 1966: 244; Mardith Schuetz,
personal communication). The burial reported by Cason (1952: 9,39,
240) was found at the Castillo Site in Zapata County, and was accompanied by numerous tubular bone beads, and a bone tube fashioned
from a human ulna. A cremation has been briefly noted by Hester
(1964a: 2) from the Minus Site in Dimmit County; a disc-shaped
stone bead and fragments of an engraved mussel shell were associated.
In mid-western Coahuila, Avelyra Arroyo de Anda and others
(1956) have reported the site of Cueva de la Candelaria, a shaft cave
in which numerous burials have been placed. The burials were accompanied by a variety of flint, bone, antler, shell and wooden artifacts.
Artifact forms shared by Cueva de la Candelaria with the Floyd
Morris and Ayala Sites include: (1) Oliva sayana tinklers (2) a triangular conch whorl pendant (3) numerous tubular bone beads (4)
Marginella apicina shell beads; and, (5) disc-shaped conch shell
beads. Many of the disc-shaped conch shell and Marginella apicina
"beads" were bound together with cordage into rattle-like objects.
We have seen that in southern Texas, large cemetery sites are
located along or relatively near the coastline, while inland, single
random burials are generally found. An exception to this is the shaft
cave of Cueva de la Candelaria, where the roving bands in midwest
Coahuila seem to have returned fi’equently to dispose of their dead.
The presence of Brownsville-like artifacts at this site would seem to
indicate some trade contact between the Brownsville peoples and the
groups in midwest Coahuila, perhaps through intermediary groups.
It has been previously suggested (MacNeish, 1958: 190), based on
data supplied mainly by Sayles (1935: Table 5) and Ekholm (1944:
Fig. 52), that the peoples of the Brownsville complex traded their
abundant shell artifacts rather widely.
BURIAL PRACTICES IN THE RIO GRANDE VALLEY
Earlier reports have only briefly mentioned the burial practices
in the Cameron and Hidalgo Counties area. In 1933, A. E. Anderson
of Brownsville prepared a brief manuscript (unpublished: on file at

160

TEXAS ARCIIEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Texas Archeological Ilesearch Laboratory) on the burial customs
of the Rio Grande delta. He prefaced his report by indicating that
his data were unsatisfactory, due to his "neglect in making intelligent
observations . . . and in part to the usually scattered and fragmentary
nature of the burials." Anderson distinguished two types of burials,
which he termed "bone burials" (secondary or bundle burials) and
"body burials" (primary inhumations). In the "bone burials" only the
skull, mandible, long bones (and sometimes the pelvis) were interred.
The arrangement of the bones varied; in some instances, the skull was
placed on top of the other bones, while other times, the skull was set
on the bottom of the grave pit, and the long bones were placed
vertically around it.
His "body burials" were often found lying on the back extended
full length, or flexed on the side. Anderson also states (p. 2) that
"group burial, of two or three individuals in one grave, is not uncommoll."

Two cremations were also noted by Anderson. In each instance, the
postcranial skeleton was thoroughly charred, but the skull was not.
As for the placement of the burials, Anderson observed that "lone
burials seem to have been the custom, or at least they predominate
. . . the point of a hill commanding a good view seems to have been
desirable" (p. 3). Banks of old river channels (resacas) were also
favored burial areas.
Anderson found only one possible cemetery during his long collecting activities. This was located on the banks of a horseshoe-shaped
resaea on the Iteparo Banch in Cameron County. Some eight or nine
individuals were buried in an area about 9.5 to 30 feet square. One
incised shell ornament, circular and perforated near the center, was
found.
Only about ten percent of the interments excavated by Anderson
contained burial goods. He describes these only in general terms:
"Shell, stone, and occasionally bone [tempered?] pottery and asphalt
are the lasting materials encountered in the graves. Ornaments are
more likely to be found in a child’s grave than in an adult’s."
Though not mentioned in his manuscript, Anderson did uncover
a burial exposed by ditch-digging on 14th Street in Brownsville (Texas
Archeological tlesearch Laboratory collections). The burial, which
seems to have been that of a child, was accompanied by numerous
Marginella apicina shell beads. Briefly, other burials of note that were
found by Anderson in the area include: (1) a burial on the Fresnos
Itesaca in Cameron County which contained a perforated shell ornament with a human face (?) carved on it in low relief; and (90 a

PREHISTORIC

CEMETERY

SITES

161

C

D
E

"’
F

B

Fro. 1. Artifacts from the Rio Hondo Cemetery Site. a, Stemmed obsidian
projectile point; b, Triangular projectile point; c, d, Conch shell discshaped beads; e, f, Perforated canine teeth. (artifacts drawn from sketches
by T. N. Campbell, 1956).

burial containing two individuals (a female and a juvenile) in which
the skeletons were flexed on the left side, with the skulls directed to
the south, and the hands placed on front of the faces.
In 1935, J. Alden Mason reported burials excavated by Anderson
which contained intrusive Huasteean-like pottery. Also in 1935, a
local newspaper (the Harlingen Valley Morning Star) reported that
a number of skeletons were uncovered by road construction near the
Hidalgo and Cameron Counties boundary, north of the Arroyo Colorado. The article states "Bones, many of which are in a semi-petrified
state, are being unearthed by a big plow pulled by a tractor. Plowing
thus far has covered about half an acre. Groups of bones are scattered over this area. One fairly complete skeleton has been uncovered, and a large number of stray bones, including several skulls and
other separate bones. The burial ground is located on a large knoll,
and graves are about one to two feet deep."
In 1956, a local school teacher, Dick Harris, investigated a cemetery
near l~io Hondo uncovered by land-leveling operations. Unfortunately,
we know very little about the site, but Harris was able to salvage several burials (letter to T. N. Campbell, August 8, 1956). Assoeiated
with these burials (see Fig. 1) were conch shell disc-shaped beads,
perforated canine teeth, and one or two shell gorgers. The landowner
excavated one burial and found a triangular projectile point associated
with it. A stemmed obsidian dart point was collected from the surface
of the site. Harris estimated that 20 to 40 burials were present at the
site. From these indieations, the site seems quite similar to Floyd
Morris and Ayala.
While we have this data on burial practices in the Rio Crande delta
area, there is little evidenee with any of the burials to firmly link

162

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

them to any defined cultural unit; some, like the burials reported
by Mason (1935: 38), a couple mentioned by Anderson and the Rio
Hondo cemetery, may be attributable to the Brownsville complex,
but this has not been convincingly demonstrated. MacNeish (1947,
1958) has described and defined the Brownsville complex, which is
characterized by the extensive use of marine shell in the production
of tools and ornaments. Though MacNeish believes the complex to
be primarily Neo-American (and extending into the historic era) in
age, his assmnptions are based exclusively on surface collections. In
his 1958 paper, MacNeish has summarized his impressions of the
Brownsville complex (and the neighboring Barril complex) burial
customs: "Burials of these complexes are usually flexed and in shallow
pits near or in campsites. For the most part they are without grave
goods. However, several have with them a few beads or pendants,
and a number have whole Huastec pots . . 7 (p. 199.).
This very generalized summary by MaeNeish, as well as the sketchy
data compiled by Anderson and others, does not help us very much
in trying to fit the Floyd Morris and Ayala cemeteries into the local
archeologieal picture. Similarly, the data on the burial customs of the
historic Coahuiltecan groups in the area is also very unsatisfactory.
ttuecking (1955: 139) cites Leon, who stated that the dead were
buried away from the village, and that cremation was sometimes
practiced.
Prior to the reporting of the Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites, this
previous research in the Rio Crande delta provided the following
burial characteristics which were later to be recognized at Floyd
Morris and Ayala: (1) flexed burials; (2) multiple burials; (3) primary and secondary burials; (4) associated shell artifacts; (5) location of burials on high elevations and along resaca banks; (6) placement of some burials away from campsite areas; and (7) presence of
other cemeteries.
That the Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites do not conform neatly to
the previously reported burial patterns in the area should not be surprising. There has never been any extensive excavation program
carried out at sites in the delta region; most of what is known about
the area is based on the large surface collections of A. E. Anderson.
He (unpublished notes) has said that the only times he found burials
was when they were eroding out (or were completely exposed), or
when ditch-digging operations had uncovered them. Since he apparently rarely excavated the area around the eroded burials, he may
have missed many additional burials.
Although we can suggest that the Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites

PREHISTORIC

CEMETERY

SITES

163

are attributable to the Brownsville complex because of the associated
burial goods, this conjecture has to be tentative because of the apparent complexity of burial patterns within this complex and in the
whole south Texas region.

HYPOTHESES
It is known that the historic groups in the Rio Grande delta area and
in all of southern Texas were affiliated with the Coahuiltecan linguistic
stock (Newcomb, 1961; T. N. Campbell, personal communication);
and, from the available data, all of the many groups appear to have
shared a simple, nomadic, hunting and gathering Archaic lifeway. It
has also been assumed that the ancestors of the Coahuiltecans probably
inhabited the same area in prehistoric times, practicing a very similar
forni of subsistence (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks, 1954: 138). It has already been noted in this paper that cemetery sites are concentrated on
or near the coast, while in the interior, single burials are found. If the
coastal and interior groups were ancestral to the Coahuiltecans (as
our historic evidence indicates) then what accounts for the difference
in burial customs in the two regions? Three hypotheses are suggested:
1, The readily available and more dependable resources of the
Gulf of Mexico made it possible for groups living along or near the
coast to range over a much smaller area to obtain their subsistence.
Their inland relatives had to be continually on the move in search of
food in semi-arid southern Texas and northeastern Mexico. Perhaps
the coastal groups, traveling only within a small area, repeatedly
buried their dead at one or more conveniently located cemeteries.
The interior groups, always ranging over large areas, disposed of their
dead at random, without elaborate burial goods.
2. Southern Texas groups near the coast lived in one place during
certain parts of the year (perhaps foraging inland during the rest of
the year), taking advantage of marine and/or riverine resources. These
cemeteries then might represent the burials of people who died during
these seasonal encampments.
3. It is possible that the varying burial patterns reflect differing
religious, social or governmental modes among individual groups,
though their subsistence patterns were quite similar. Our historic
data on the Coahuilteeans is meager, though tlueeking (1955) has
cited one example of differing governmental traditions among them.
He notes that Escandon found "incipient tribal or eonfederational organization" present among the Coahuilteean bands in the Rio Grande
delta around 1750 (p. 42), while most other Coahuiltecan groups in
other areas purportedly were very loose-knit governmentally. Per-

164

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE i
A Comparison of Burial Traits at the Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites.
x: indicates presence of trait.
BURIAL PITS

Floyd Morris

Ayala

circular-oval
BURIAL TYPES

x

x

single interments
multiple interments
secondary interments

X

x

X

X

X

probably

BURIAL POSITIONS
flexed
fl~xed On right side
flexed on left side
flexed on back
head to north
head to south
head to east
head to southwest
head to west

X
x
x

9

x

9

x

9

x

9

x

9

x

9

x

BURIAL GOODS
tubular bone beads
perforated canine teeth
disc shaped conch shel! beads
disc shaped stone beads
OIiva sayana tinklers
Olica sa~lana beads
Marginella apicina shell beads
Noetia ponderosa shell beads
incised rectangular bone pendants
undecorated rectangular bone pendants
red ochre
bones coated with pigments
deer antler beams
large conch whorl pendant
human bone artifacts

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x
x
x

haps the incipient confederational organization would be reflected
in more uniform burial customs among the groups, but this is impossible to ascertain with our present data.
However, these hypotheses are constructed on the assumption that
cemeteries are the modal form of burial along the coast and in the
llio Grande delta, but the data of Anderson and others has shown
that other types are present. A systematic study of burial practices is
needed on the coast, and the careful excavation and recording of
future burials is essential. Continued land-leveling and other forms

PREHISTORIC

CEMETERY

SITES

165

of progress wilt undoubtedly uncover other cemeteries in the future;
persons engaged in salvage efforts at these sites should obtain a
nIaximum amount of documentation, and where feasible, attempt
to locate adjaeent oeeupation areas. Furthermore, the eemeteries
present on the eentral and upper eoast should be carefully analyzed;
perhaps the key to our understanding of the Rio Grande delta cemeteries can be found there.
REFERENCES CITED
Anonymous
1935 "Ancient Burial Ground Unearthed in Valley by Workers on Highway."
Harlingen (Texas) Valley Morning Star, for November i.
Anderson, A. E.
1932 Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin, Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
ms
Rio Grande Delta Archaeology: Burial Customs. Unpublished manuscript, on file at Texas Areheologieal Research Laboratory, Austin.
Aveleyra Arroya de Anda, Luis, M. Maldonado-Koerdell, and P. Martinez del Rio
1956 Cueva de la Candelaria. Volumen I. Memorias de! Instituto National de
Antropologia e Historia, V. Mexico, D.F.
Cason, Joe F.
1952 Report on Archaeological Salvage in Falcon Reservoir, Season of 1952.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp.
218-259.
Davis, E. Mott (Editor)
1961 Report of a Buria!. Texas Archeology, Vol. 5, No. 4: p. 5.
Ekholm, Gordon F.
1944 Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca, Mexico. Anthropological Papers, American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 38, No. 5.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1964a Group Uncovers Skeleton. The Pena Pow-Wow, newsletter, Carrizo
Springs (Texas) Archeological Society, Vol. 2, No. 9, p. 1-2.
1964b Two Dimmit Count, Skeletons Found. The Pena Pow-Wow, newsletter, Carrizo Springs (Texas) Areheological Society, Vol. 2, No.
11, p. 2.
1969a Archeological Investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy Counties, Texas,
in August, 1967. Archeological Program, State Building Commission,
Report No. 15.
1969b Human Bone Artifacts from Southern Texas. American Antiquity (in
press ).
Hughes, .lack T.
ms
Field Notes on the Odem Site, San Patricio County, Texas. On file,
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
Jackson, A. T.
ms
Excavation of the Callo del Oso Burial Site, in Nueees County, Texas.
Notes on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
MaeNeish, Richard S.
1947 A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 1-15.
1958 Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions, American Philosophical Society, Vol. 48, Pt. 6.

166
Mason, J.
1935

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Alden
The Place of Texas in Pre-Columbian Relationships Between the United
States and Mexico. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 7, pp. 29-46.

Neweomb, W. W., Jr.
196i The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Nunley, Parker and Thomas R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit
Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 18, No. 3, p. 233-253.

County,

Texas.

Reed, Clyde T.
1937 A Carankawa Fire Implement. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 9, pp. 218-29.1.
Ruecking, Frederick, Jr.
1955 The Coahuiltecan Indians o£ Southern Texas and Nortbeastem Mexico.
Unpublished Master’s Thesis, University of Texas at Austin, Library.
Sayles, E. 13.
1935 An Archaeological Survey o£ Texas. Medallion Papers, No. 17.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin, Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
University of Texas at Austin

