ALVIN THOMAS JACKSON, 1895-1974
Alvin Thomas Jackson; better known as A. T. Jackson, died in
Austin on January 27, 1974 at the age of 79 years. He was very close to
being a charter member of the Texas Archeological Society, held
various offices in the society, and recently was made a Fellow in
recognition of his contributions to Texas archeology, particularly his
pioneering volume entitled Picture-Writing of Texas Indians. He is
survived by his second wife, Sue Settle Jackson; two children, Craig
and Celestine, by his first wife, Kathleen Cowan Jackson, who died in
the 1950’s; and five grandchildren.

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Jackson was born at Bagdad, a now extinct community near Leander in Williamson County, Texas. His father, Thomas Jackson, died a
few weeks before A. T. was born, and his mother, Lucretia Jackson,
took the family westward to live with her father, William L. Lewis, a
physician and pharmacist who had migrated from England to
Alabama and had later moved to Llano County, Texas, because of
severe economic losses connected with the Civil War. It seems that
Grandfather Lewis, who was also serving as a Methodist minister, had
considerable influence on the fatherless boy.
In due time A. T. went to the nearest school, a one-room structure,
in which he shared a desk with a 200-pound, 18-year-old boy who was
in the third grade. Later Jackson went to larger rural schools and
eventually to the high school in Llano. Biographical sources indicate
that in school he was very good in mathematics and English literature
and that he particularly enjoyed writing. This seems to be borne out
by his later varied career as accountant, free-lance journalist, and
self-made archeologist.
After high school Jackson worked for Wells Fargo, the well-known
express company, at offices in Corpus Christi and Robstown. He saved
his money and subsequently left for two years of study in a business
college at Tyler. From there he went to work for the Bryan Eagle as
both bookkeeper and reporter. At this time the Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station at nearby College Station was expanding and he
was offered a position as statistician. When World War I came, he
volunteered for military service, entering the U.S. Army as a buck
private and emerging as a first lieutenant. The war over, he became an
accountant for Texaco in Houston, but after five years developed
tuberculosis and was advised by physicians to work outdoors in a
drier climate.
Jackson returned to Llano and used it as a base for travel and
free-lance writing. His feature stories on Texas history and archeology
were regularly bought by the Dallas News, the Fort Worth
Star-Telegram, and the Houston Chronicle. He also sold feature articles to various magazines. His health regained, he married, and then
came another sharp turn in his career. This developed through J. E.
Pearce, who in the late 1920’s was trying to establish a department of
anthropology at the University of Texas and was actively promoting
the idea of a state museum through emphasis on Texas archeology
and history. Pearce had read Jackson’s newspaper stories and noted
his objectivity and evident skill in collecting information. He offered
Jackson a job as field archeologist.
The period of 1930-1940 was Jackson’s decade in archeology. He
supervised most of Pearce’s archeotogical field parties and produced

A. T. JACKSON
most of the articles, reports, and books cited below. Jackson turned
out to be just the person Pearce needed-- a practical man who could
get things done and knew the state of Texas first-hand, and who also
had the necessary self-discipline to finish any manuscript he began.
But late in the 1930’s Pearce died, and Jackson faced a new regime that
emphasized college degrees. At the beginning of World War II Jackson tried to get himself reinstated in the U.S. Army, but his age was
against him. Since the war brought an end to all archeological field
work, Jackson returned to his former profession, accounting. From
that time until his retirement he was connected with various finance
divisions of the Austin municipal government. However, through the
years he continued his writing, and shortly before death his book on
the flour mills of pioneer Texas, Miils of Yesteryear, was published by
the Texas Western Press at the University of Texas at E1 Paso.
Members of this society who knew Jackson personally will probably remember him as a quiet, courteous man who wasted little time
talking when he had nothing worthwhile to say. He had a strong sense
of personal integrity, and he was uncommonly tenacious in the pursuit of objective fact. In his archeo!ogical writing he was cautious in
generalizing and was obviously impatient with theorists, since he
ignored them, but he was very successful in accumulating substantive
data at a time when such data were badly needed. His writing was
clear and effective, but tended to be in a style favored by journalists -short but varied sentences, no long paragraphs, and frequent topical
subheadings. Since so much of his life was concerned with records of
one kind or another, it is perhaps not surprising to learn that Jackson
kept copies of nearly everything he wrote. His family has deposited
these papers in The University of Texas Archives at Austin. The
collection contains many of his original, hand-written field
notebooks, including those on rock art sites. These will undoubtedly
be helpful to future archeologists who have need to check the primary
written records.

Principal Archeological Publications

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
1933 Indian Pipes of East Texas. Vol. 5: 69-86.
1934 Types of East Texas Pottery. Vol. 6: 38-57.
1935 Ornaments of East Texas Indians. Vol. 7: 11-28.
1936 A "Perpetual Fire" Site. Vol. 8: 134-173.
1937 Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas. Vol.
9: 146-192.

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
1938 Fire in East Texas Burial Rites. Vol. 10: 77-113.
1939 A Deep Archaeological Site in Travis County, Texas. Vol. 11:
203-225.
1940 Tubular Pipes and Other Tubes in Texas. Vol. 12: 99-137.
1941 Pendants and Their Uses. Vol. 13: 9-45.
1943 Indian Arrow and Lance Wounds. Vol. 15: 38-65.

The University of Texas Publications
1933 (with J. E. Pearce) A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde
County, Texas. No. 3327.
1938 Picture-Writing of Texas Indians. No. 3809.
1938 The Fall Creek Sites. No. 3802: 11-118.

T. N. Campbell
The University of Texas at Austin

