27

Coronado’s American Legacy:
An Overview of Possible Entrada Artifacts
and Site Types,
and a Discussion of Texas Sites
Diane Lee Rhodes

ABSTRACT
Archeological research done in conjunction with the National Park Service’s
1990-1991 Coronado Trail study, supports an in-depth analysis of site features and
artifacts that might be considered characteristic of a "Coronado" archeological
site. No Coronado sites have been definitively identified for Texas, but this brief
overview of Texas Panhandle Protohistoric period sites highlights the need for
additional site-specific research. Further analyses of artifacts held in area repositories are needed to determine their age, provenience, and cultural associations.

INTRODUCTION

In 1988 Congress authorized the National Park Service to conduct a study of
Coronado’s 1540 entrada through the states of Arizona, New Mexico, Texas,
Oklahoma, and Kansas to evaluate the route for possible inclusion in the National
Trails System. The legislation directed researchers to (a) review all original Spanish
documentation on the entrada route, (b) continue the search for new primary
documentation, and (c) examine all information on the archeological sites along the
"trail" (National Park Service 1991).
ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH

Beginning in the spring of 1990, the author carried out research in archeological
records seeking information on sites that may be related to Coronado’s 1540s
entrada. Archeological research was focused on (1) the sites that show a Spanish
presence during the sixteenth century, (2) American Indian sites that may have been
occupied during Coronado’s entrada, and (3) abandoned sites such as Chichilticalli
that were mentioned in the Spanish accounts. Research was limited to the routes
Coronado himself would have traversed.
It was assumed that Coronado’s expedition was led by Indian guides who
probably followed pre-existing trails. Although many of the indigenous plants,
animals, and peoples of the area may have changed since Coronado’s time, it was
assumed that the general topography has not changed significantly.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

28

Texas Archeological Society
The Study Area

At first glance, the search for archeological sites seemed fairly straightforward.
However, for a variety of reasons, definition of the study area was difficult. The
entrada was a one-time event that left behind no clearly defined trail; rather, much
of the entrada followed a series of intersecting routes that were traveled by different
members of the expedition at different times, as they explored the country from key
points along the way. The vague and contradictory Spanish accounts of the
expedition have led to a great deal of speculation, and scholars have not been able
to reach agreement on a route, instead, proposing various routes as many as 200
miles apart.
To help refine the geographical area of study, the primary documents--the
entrada letters, journals, and accounts--were researched, and a matrix was developed that included the time of travel, place, distance, direction, and composition of
the group the Spanish writer was accompanying. The composition of the group was
important, for it influenced the rate of travel, the route, and the type of archeological
sites left behind. Ethnohistoric accounts were also collected and analyzed to see if
correlations could be made between the expedition and American Indian oral
history, or between cultural attributes and descriptions of native peoples given in the
narratives.
Next, the major historical and archeological studies of the route were collected and analyzed. Many contemporary archeologists, cultural geographers,
and historians were consulted, and their research efforts were factored into the
analysis. The proposed routes that appeared to be the most historically feasible
and accurate were transcribed onto topographic maps of the states to outline a
broad study corridor.
Types of Coronado Sites
The next step in the process was to define some of the characteristics expected
in a hypothetical Coronado entrada site, and list and describe artifacts that might be
representative and/or diagnostic of this entrada. Information was collected on what
a Spanish site of this time might look like, who the explorers were, and what they
would have brought along or lost along the way. S tudies of Spanish material culture
and sites of the period were examined to help with the identification of salient clues
to the route. Reports on the de Soto sites and those excavated at Santa Elena (the
colonial capital of Spanish Florida from 1566 to 1587, located on Parris Island,
South Carolina), as well as sixteenth century Spanish shipwreck sites off the coast
of Texas, were particularly useful. Experts on fifteenth- and sixteenth century
archeological sites were also consulted.
Problems with Site Definition
There are, however, some basic differences between the Coronado expedition
and other Spanish entradas. Coronado never made connections with his supply
ships; his expedition was a long journey overland, often through desolate terrain.

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

29

After an initial foray in Mexico, Coronado’s army traveled light, apparently
planning to live off the land (except for domestic livestock brought along for food).
Except for the food and arms, which they carried on their backs, each member of the
advance group took only a few necessary items that weighed no more than a pound
(Coronado 1940:163), so the types of artifacts associated with architecture and
special activities found at other sixteenth century sites would not be expected in
Coronado expedition sites.
Other sixteenth- and early seventeenth century Spanish explorations and
colonization efforts surely left behind many of the same types of artifacts, still
further obscuring the diagnostic nature of the archeological remains from Coronado’s
entrada. In addition, most of the archeological work in the West has not focused on
the Coronado period, but rather on prehistoric sites or on sites of the later Spanish
Colonial period.
Several other factors make it difficult to identify potential Coronado sites. A
large contingent of Indians from what is now Mexico, and Indian guides from the
various Pueblo and Plains groups, accompanied the expedition and brought their
own equipment and supplies. Food (presumably stored in native pottery vessels),
clothing, and other subsistence goods were also procured along the route from
various Mexican and American Indian groups, so the physical remains from the
Coronado expedition could include native pottery, weaponry, and personal items,
as well as game animals, fire hearths, and other items--an assemblage of features
and artifacts virtually identical to thousands of prehistoric sites across the Southwest. Camping areas for each of the groups accompanying the expedition might
contain diagnostic artifacts and features, but subtle differences between the Spaniards and their Indian guides in distributions of artifacts and arrangement of
campsites probably would not be easy to detect.
The narratives describe Coronado’s group as an army. To twentieth century
America, the term army implies a hierarchical organization whose equipment,
personal gear, and camping patterns are fairly well prescribed and uniform.
Coronado’s group included soldiers, priests, women, and dilettantes, each with his
own baggage. These individuals and various small groups were privately funded,
came from varying backgrounds, and used different weaponry and equipment.
Because the frontier of New Spain was a long way from the European continent and
from Spanish supply bases, equipment was often antique or makeshift. For these
reasons the Coronado expedition would not be expected to leave behind the orderly,
stereotypical pattern of archeological features that would characterize a modern
army.
Location of sixteenth century Spanish artifacts at a site also does not necessarily mean that Coronado was in the area. American Indian groups occasionally
obtained Spanish equipment and weaponry, which they may then have transported
hundreds of miles, especially on the plains. Because of its rarity, the weaponry or
equipment, probably obsolete in European terms, may have been treated as
heirlooms to be passed down in families. Perhaps a century or more later, these
treasured objects would become part of the grave goods interred with the owner in

30

Texas Archeological Society

areas far removed from the place of acquisition, or reworked into practicable
weapons and tools such as metal arrowpoints.1
Probable Characteristics of Coronado Campsites
Because the geography of the area probably influenced the location of campsites, the Spanish narratives describing landscape features can be used to focus upon
potential site locations. For example, the flat, trackless region described by the
Spaniards is almost certainly the Llano Estacado of the Southern Plains, and the
barrancas seen by the expedition bear a strong resemblance to those cut by the major
river systems in the Texas Panhandle--perhaps the Canadian or, most likely, the
Palo Duro river system.
The Spanish narratives also specifically mention both salt and fresh water
sources along the route. Salt water playa lakes appear to be generally south of the
border between Parmer and Bailey counties, so if we assume that the playa lakes
have changed little over the past four centuries, this line can provide additional
information regarding possible locations of sites that, presumably, would be near
water.
Additionally, the narratives describe a mound of bison bone piled along the
shores of one of the playa lakes. There are many reports of bison bone deposits-and many playa lakes--in the Texas Panhandle, but one of the largest deposits of
prehistoric bone is at Silver Lake in the far northeast corner of Cochran County.
Some historians suggest that this may have been one of the sites visited by the army
on its return to Cicuye (Kiser 1978).
On a more specific level, it is expected that campsites would probably be on
fairly level ground near the water and forage necessary for the livestock. Sites
associated with the army would probably cover a relatively large area (because of
the size of the group), but it is expected that artifacts and traces of the camp would
be scattered and shallow (excepting the winter encampment). Unfortunately, in the
Texas Panhandle where soil formation is slow, it may be difficult to differentiate
between a prehistoric site created by repeated visits to an area by small groups of
Indians, and a single short visit by Coronado’s group to a large temporary Indian
encampment. It is clear, however, that many hearths would be needed to provide
food for this large group, so radiocarbon dating, thermoluminescence dating, or
obsidian hydration dating of samples from a large site could help date components
in the site.
At a large campsite there could be some clustering of different camping patterns
and artifacts throughout the area, because each of the different ethnic and class
groups would probably tend to camp together. Again, careful analysis of the features
and assemblages on large sites could prove productive. This site clustering was
apparently true of the winter encampment along the Rio Grande where it is thought
lIn their manuscript on Comanchero activities in the Texas Panhandle, Frances Levine
and Martha Freeman (1982) describe several historic Indian burials that contain both native
and Euro-American artifacts.

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

31

that Coronado and his men occupied one of the pueblos, while the herders, Indian
guides, and the rank and file of the army camped nearby.
Vierra (1989:3) suggests that the Coronado winter campsite is New Mexico site
LA54147, and "represents a series of contemporaneous campsites associated in
some way with the occupation of the pueblo [Santiago Pueblo (LA326)]." The
campsites at LA54147 consisted of a series of shallow dugouts about 10 cm deep
and ranging from 2 to 5 meters in diameter with both interior and exterior hearths
(Vierra 1989:223). Distance between the dugouts ranged between about 1 and 5
meters (Vierra 1989:Figure 11). The dugouts, which were surrounded by a surface
scatter of artifacts, may have been covered by brush shelters and/or tents; postholes
were found around one of the dugouts, suggesting some sort of superstructure.
Shortly after their abandonment, the dugouts were filled with soil mixed with
burned com, beans, wild plants, and bones (i.e., game species, birds, and domesticated sheep), potsherds, bits of charcoal, ground stone, burned adobe, and metal
artifacts including nails, clothing attachments, and armorL Radiocarbon dating of
corn samples from the site gave a mean date of A.D. 1527 (Vierra 1989:225).
Most of the lithic debitage found at LA54147 was from activities related to core
reduction and was of local raw materials. However, the artifact assemblage included
a Mesoamerican blade fragment of Pachuca obsidian from the Valley of Mexico.
Other nonlocal materials include comal (griddle) fragments, which "appear to be
made of a thin tabular sandstone exposed in the Placitas area" a few miles northeast
of the site (Vierra 1989:223).
The ceramic assemblage at this site was dominated by Rio Grande Glaze E
pottery. No majolica, Glaze D, Glaze F, or European vessel forms were identified.
This suggests that the "ceramic assemblage is precolonial, dating to ca. A.D. 15251625" (Vierra 1989:72). Almost all of the utility wares were of local manufacture;
the glaze wares came primarily from the Pajarito Plateau, the upper and middle Rio
Grande, and the Galisteo Basin. The few intrusive trade wares appeared to be typical
of area pueblo sites for this time period. The ratio of bowls to jars is 1:1, which is
in contrast to a bowl:jar ratio of 4:6 from the nearby Santiago Pueblo (Vierra
1989:223).
Although the winter encampment site---because of its relatively long occupancy during the winter months--probably would not be typical of the remains left
behind by Coronado’s group on much of the entrada, full examination of site data
for LA54147 provides some insights into site patterning and material culture of a
possible Spanish expeditionary site. In summary, this site includes both Indian and
Euro-American artifacts, game and domesticated animal bone, an atypical distribution of vessel types, and obsidian imported from Mexico. Glaze E pottery can be
considered a hallmark of this time period in New Mexico, and the absence of other
glazed pottery suggests an event of a fairly short, discrete time span. The distribution

2During the 1930s, crossbow boltheads were recovered from Santiago Pueblo, which is
adj acent to LA54147. One of the boltheads was recovered from the body of an individual who
had apparently died of his wounds.

32

Texas Archeological Society

and type of features within the site--especially the dugouts--do not appear to be
characteristic of either the indigenous Pueblo groups nor of the Plains traders who
may have visited the site.
Campsites left by scouting parties and the advance guard would probably be
much more difficult to identify, since they would be small and ephemeral. However,
the narratives suggest that cairns and other markers were left behind by the scouts
to identify the route for the more slowly moving army. The Spaniards left other
markers behind as well. Wooden crosses set into piles of stone were placed at
strategic areas along the route to claim the land for Spain and as part of the
expedition’s mis sionary efforts (Niza 1940:79). Wooden stakes were driven into the
ground for tethering the horses (Mendoza 1940:157) and temporary corrals or
stock-containment features of stone or wood may have been left along the route as
the expedition moved towards Quivira; other traces might be remains of the bridge
across the Cicuye River and graffiti carved into rocks.
The narratives indicate that the Spaniards encountered two different Indian
groups--the Teyas and the Querechos--on their trek across the Plains. Sites of the
late Prehistoric and Protohistoric period in the Texas Panhandle include those
associated with the Tierra Blanca and Gavza complexes (see Hughes 1991). These
complexes may be the remains of the Indian groups Coronado encountered en route
to Quivira from the Rio Grande. Delineation of a common boundary or contact zone
between these two groups could help focus research activities upon specific areas
and sites.
It is clear from the narratives that Coronado’s group followed their Indian
guides along pre-existing trails for much of the route. Some prehistoric trails were
documented by early explorers; indeed, occasional traces of prehistoric routes are
still visible on the Plains, and, because prehistoric trails probably led through the
gentlest topography and along water sources, later historic trails may have followed
the same routes across the landscape. It has been suggested by Blakeslee (personal
communication, May 1991) that Comanchero trails that are visible today, or have
been documented historically, followed earlier prehistoric routes across the Texas
Panhandle. If so, these identifiable trails may provide clues to the route followed by
Coronado’ s party. On the other hand, Coronado’s letter to the King suggests that the
army was for a time lost on the vast Llano Estacado, lacking any sort of landmark
or identifiable trail (Coronado 1990:201).
Considering all these factors, some possible indicators of the Coronado
expedition would be traces of campfires, crude rock walls or other temporary corrals
for livestock, cairns, crosses, bridges, and graffiti. These would be expected in areas
where wood or buffalo chips, water, and forage were available.
ARTIFACTS OF THE CORONADO EXPEDITION
Lists have been compiled from the Spanish narratives of the specific items that
were brought along by Coronado’s expedition. Other specialty items--although

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

33

they were not mentionS---may have been taken on the expedition by clerics and
craftsmen (see also Hoyt and Bruseth, both in this volume).
Spanish or Mexican ceramics may have been brought along to serve for storage
or tableware. For example, on his journey to Hawaikuh, Estevan took a variety of
trade items and "green plates" (Alarc6n 1990:141). The origin of these plates is
unknown, but it is possible that they were of green lead-glazed coarse earthenware
similar to those found at Santa Elena (Skowronek et al. 1988:253-258). The Santa
Elena green lead-glazed earthenwares have a pinkish paste, and are found in several
forms, including a pie-plate variety. This ware may be representative of the
sixteenth century French ceramic tradition (Skowronek et al. 1988:258). The green
plates also may have been a variety of green-glazed Lebrillo ware, a cream-tan
earthenware with noticeable mineral inclusions that was produced predominantly
from A.D. 1490 to 1600 (Deagan 1987:48-50).
Coronado’s men--particularly the officers--probably carried some ceramic
items in their mess kits, and several authors describe the Old and New World
majolicas, porcelains, and coarse earthenwares available to the Spanish conquistadors (see Deagan 1987; Lister and Lister 1987; Olds 1976; South et al. 1988).
The ubiquitous olive jars common in the Spanish empire during this period
could have been used to transport some of the foodstuffs--including wine, raisins,
sugar, and oil (Coronado 1940:176). Olive jars were amphora-shaped ceramic
vessels with restricted necks, stoppered with cork and often sealed with pitch
(Deagan 1987:31). These ceramic jars were used primarily to store and transport
goods, especially liquids, overland. Some of the storage vessels found at Santa
Elena were of a majolica-like buff paste with lead glaze on both surfaces, and some
were decorated with incised marks (Skowronek et al. 1988:283).
It is also likely that some of the ceramics used to transport the subsistence items
carried by Coronado’s group were made by indigenous Indian groups. The narratives report that by the time Coronado and the advance guard reached the Zuni area,
the men and horses were in "such great need of food that I thought we should all die
of hunger... [for] altogether we did not have two bushels of maize" (Coronado
1940:167). This passage from Coronado’s letter to Mendoza could suggest that
since the storage containers brought with the small group from Mexico had been
discarded as the grain was used, we would not expect to find them in Texas. Food
procured from the Zuni pueblos might have been carried eastward in native ceramic
vessels of Zuni origin.
During the winter of 1540 to 1541, the Spaniards seized grain from local Pueblo
groups along the Rio Grande, and almost certainly these foodstuffs were acquired,
transported, and stored in jars of local manufacture. The excavations at campsite
LA54147 yielded an atypically high frequency of glazeware jars (Marshall
1989:93),which can be explained in several ways. Almost certainly some of the high
proportion of storage vessel sherds result from Spanish consumption of stored
foodstuffs during the winter of 1541, followed by on-site disposal of the jars.
However, if the Spaniards used metal cooking pots rather than ceramic vessels to

34

Texas Archeological Society

prepare their meals, the proportion of cooking to storage vessels would also be
skewed)
Mobility may be another factor causing a high ratio of service wares, i.e.,
ceramic samples from along Chacoan roads "reveal a configuration similar to that
of LA54147" (Marshall 1989:93). Marshall also suggests that differences in dietary
and cooking habits may have influenced the comparative data for LA54147; groups
who rely on roasted or baked foodstuffs require fewer cooking vessels than do
groups who boil their food.
Castafieda (1940:238) noted that pottery and gourds used for cooking and food
storage were broken by a hailstorm that caught the Spaniards in a steep-sided
canyon. This may have been one of the canyons of the Canadian River system, or
more likely, the Palo Duro system somewhere in the north central part of the Texas
Panhandle. This verifies that when the army left Tiguex (and/or Pecos) in search of
Quivira, they were transporting ceramics with them, and it is likely that these
ceramics were made by native potters. However, the narratives fail to mention the
source of the Spaniards’ supplies as they left for Quivira. Supplies may have been
acquired from the pueblos along the Rio Grande. However, it is possible that the
food stored by the residents of Tiguex was virtually exhausted by the spring of 1541,
forcing the Spaniards to seek subsistence goods from other areas such as Taos,
Pecos, or the pueblos of the Galisteo Basin.
There is also another question; were these locally made wares the Glaze E
wares of the time or were they the anomalous "bean pot" wares common to the
pueblos (Waldo Wedel, personal communication, February 1992)? It is possible too
that some containers or ceramics brought from Mexico, including Sonoran burnished wares, were also lost in the Plains hailstorm.
The Spaniards took dogs with them on the entrada, together with goats, mules,
sheep, horses, and cows. Castafieda (1896:542) remarked that the arm y’s livestock
on the Plains east of Pecos consisted of 1,000 horses, 500 cattle, and 5,000 sheep:
In addition, there were many pack-mules carrying extra supplies and a few pieces
of artillery (Winship 1896:379). Coronado (1940:43) took pigs along on his 1539
expedition to Topira, but there is no mention of these animals in the narratives of

3Few of the sherds found at LA54147 have the blackening of the exterior surface that
would be expected if the vessels had been used for cooking. Yet "it is clear that culinary
activities were frequently conducted in the site area" (Marshall 1989:93).
4 These numbers have been questioned by some authorities who suggest that Castafieda
exaggerated or perhaps estimated the number of livestock leaving Culiacan, rather than the
size of the herd taken onto the Plains. It is evident, however, that at least some of the animals
survived the journey, for sheep, mules, and a horse were given to Father Padilla on his
departure for Quivira in the fall of 1541 (Jaramillo 1990:212). Also, Castafieda notes that
some sheep were left with Fray Luis at Cicuye in the spring of 1542 (Castafieda 1940:271).
Of the seven sixteenth century Spanish entradas into New Mexico, it appears that only
Coronado and Ofiate brought domesticated animals into the Rio Grande Valley (Vierra
1989:226).

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

35

the 1540-1542 expedition. Several of the horses, together with their saddles and
equipment, were lost in a buffalo stampede on the Plains. So it is clear that in the
appropriate context (as at LA54147), the finding of bone from domestic animals in
good association with sixteenth century American Indian sites could be an important clue in establishing the route of Coronado’s entrada.
Items taken by Coronado for trade with the Indians included pearls, glassware,
paternosters, jingle bells, and cloaks and other items of clothing (Castafieda
1940:217)5, but it is not clear just what sort of glassware Castafieda was referring
to. Glass sherds found in the sixteenth century deposits at Santa Elena were from
fancy decorated Venetian glass containers (South et al. 1988). Since these items
probably were too bulky and fragile to survive Coronado’s long journey overland,
the glassware items taken for trade may have been smaller and of heavier glass.
It is not clear what Castafieda meant by paternosters taken to give to the Indians,
but these items were probably either special beads in rosaries used to say the Pater
Noster, or the rosaries themselves (Ox ford English Dictionary 1971: 551). Paternosters are beads of Venetian drawn glass that are individually finished and decorated
(Francis 1979:13).
In addition to wine and oil carried in some sort of containers, the friars
accompanying the expedition might have carried kits containing all of the items
needed for the celebration of mass and the other sacraments. These kits may have
included items such as a crucifix, chalice, a palette containing a holy relic, a book
of prayers or orders, and some vestments.
Selected trade beads, like the paternosters and Nueva Cadiz beads, provide
potentially diagnostic artifacts that can be dated to the Coronado time period. Nueva
Cadiz beads are
cane beads of square cross-section, with or without a twist; most commonly they are in various shades of blue.., these square cross-section cane
beads have only been found in the New World, in Spanish contact sites
[Liu and Harris 1982:1-6].
Nueva Cadiz beads are thought to have been produced and traded between 1500
and 1550, and had probably gone out of fashion by about 1560. The shorter varieties
of the Nueva Cadiz beads may also have been used in association with spherical
beads until the latter part of the century (Smith and Good 1982:10-11).
These beads evidently were introduced to the New World as trade items shortly
after Pizarro conquered Peru in 1532-1533. The author did not find any specific
references to early sixteenth century trade beads in the Texas Panhandle, but
Spanish trade beads in sites in Oklahoma and Kansas suggests contact between
native peoples and early Spanish explorers elsewhere on the High Plains. For

5Kessell (1979:7) suggests that these were"artificial pearls." However, it appears that
Fray Marcos--and perhaps Coronado after him--took samples of real pearls to show the
Indians what the Spaniards were looking for (Niza 1940:64).

36

Texas Archeological Society

example, a single glass trade bead found at the Goodwin-Baker site in western
Oklahoma (34RM14) has been identified as an example of the Nueva Cadiz Plain
type (Sudbury 1984:32). This small, square glass bead has a thin exterior glass layer
of translucent Independence Blue and a thicker inner core of transparent turquoise
glass. Both layers have drawn air bubbles "suggestive of manufacture by the hollow
cane technique" (Sudbury 1984:31). The inner and outer layers of this 4.9-by-6.2mm bead are separated by a thin white layer. Similar beads found in the southeastern
United States are thought to date to the period of initial Spanish exploration (see
Hoyt and Bruseth, both in this volume).
Bells were common trade items during this period in parts of the southeastern
United States. For example, bells were documented for Indian trade in the 1528
Narv~iez expedition, and were "well known from sixteenth century contexts,
particularly the De Soto expedition" (South et al. 1988:142). The"jingle bells" may
have been the small Clarksdale variety (Figure 1) commonly known for their use on
horse harnesses, or they may have been small and bell-shaped, designed for use on
clothing like priests’ robes.

1 INCH

Figure 1. Clarksdale Bells (adapted from South et al. 1988:143, 144).

Because parts of clothing fasteners and decorations--large and small wire
hooks and eyes, brass and iron buckles, bordado trim, metal stars, and aglets--have
been recovered from several mid-sixteenth-century Spanish sites, apossible Coronado
site might contain such artifacts. Since the wire hooks and eyes and the buckles from
this period so closely resemble modern fasteners, readers are referred to South et al.
(1988:121-142) and Vierra (1989:134-137) for further information on these types
of artifacts.
We have no details on the type of clothing worn by Coronado’s group, but,
judging from the inventory and the speed with which troops were mustered, it is
unlikely that the force had uniforms (Byron A. Johnson, personal communication,
July 27, 1992). Ball buttons were, however, used by both soldiers and the upper
classes in sixteenth century New Spain (South et al. 1988:132-135). Because the
most common fasteners found in the excavations at Santa Elena were metal ball
buttons (Figure 2), it is possible that this sort of artifact would be found in a
Coronado site. The small round ball buttons found at Santa Elena and Fort San
Felipe averaged about 10 mm in diameter, excluding the heavy extended loops used
for attachment. These buttons were made of plain brass or a gray alloy and came in
two styles--atauxia or acero buttons. The term atauxia refers to gilded or painted

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

37

buttons generally used on Spanish cloth; the plain ungilded acero buttons-commonly but misleadingly known as damascene buttons--were used on English
cloth (South et al. 1988:132-135).

10 MILLIMETERS

Figure 2. Metal ball buttons (adapted from South et al. 1988:134).

Bordado trim generally consists of coiled copper or gold wire or embroidered
strands of string used as an ornamental braid on clothing of the upper classes. Small
metal bordado stars, usually copper or silver, were used as decorations on horse gear
and clothing (South et al. 1988:147). These handmade stars varied in their general
configuration and in size, style, and number of points (Figure 3).

10 MILLIMETERS

Figure 3. Metal stars (adapted from South et al. 1988:146, 147).

Aglets, also known as aiglet or aiguillette, or copper lacing tips, were commonly
attached to leather thongs or ribbons used to fasten parts of clothing or half-armor
together (Figure 4). These small tips were about an inch long, with "a seam from
folding sheet copper into a slightly tapered tube" (South et al. 1988:135). Sometimes
gold aglets used by the wealthy were decorated with pearls or other jewels.

38

Texas Archeological Society

1

CENTIMETER

Figure 4. Copper aglets (lace tips) (after South et al. 1988:138).
No doubt additional supplies and equipment were taken by the expedition’s
tailor, doctor, and priests. Metal artifacts from Santa Elena and from the New
Mexico Expeditionary site include thimbles, pins, and scissors--all of surprisingly
modem looking design (Vierra 1989:134-137; South et al. 1988:151-155).
Crude medical instruments and small vials or containers for medicinal potions
may well have been taken by the "incompetent newsmonger" who went along to
"watch over the health of the army and tend its wounds" (Hammond and Rey
1940:8). Commonly, medicinal vials of this period were "tall and cylindrical with
slightly restricted necks and either bulbous or everted rims" (Deagan 1987:137).
A variety of tools would have been needed for various tasks such as wood
cutting, harness repair, or blacksmithing. For example, early Spanish tools found in
New Mexico include knife blades, an axe, and sheep shears (Vierra 1989:147-149).
A bugle was certainly taken along by the army bugler (Hammond and Rey 1940:13),
and, because some women accompanied the army, feminine clothing fasteners,
decorations, and jewelry might also be expected among the archeological remains.
Horses were critical to the success of the expedition, so supplies brought with
the army surely must have included equipment for shoeing the horses, together with
a supply of iron and nails. It is also assumed that items of horse gear including
stirrups, spurs, and bits may have been lost along the way; archeologists have found
a cinch ring, a bit, a horseshoe, and a variety of nails at early Spanish sites along the
Rio Grande. Horseshoe nails and nails used in small wooden boxes or saddles might
also be expected in a Coronado site (Vierra 1989:131-134).
The expedition’s muster roll suggests that a wide variety of weaponry was
taken along on the journey, including armor of Castille and arma de la tierra. Aiton
(1939:11) translates this phrase as arms of the country, but Hammond and Rey
(1940:88) read this as native arms or native weapons. The ethnocentric Spaniards
may have been making a distinction between arms produced by Old World
craftsmen and weapons made in Mexico or other parts of the New World that were
thought to be poorer in quality (Byron A. Johnson, personal communication, July
1992). Alternatively, arma de la tierra may have been used to describe American

Rhodes -- Coronado’s American Legacy

39

Indian weaponry such as the bow and arrow, which some Spaniards had by this time
adopted for their own use.
The muster roll for the expedition lists weapons such as crossbows, arquebuses,
one- and two-handed swords, daggers, lances, and other odd pieces. Types of armor
taken by the expedition include horse armor, coat of mail, appurtines, head armor,
heavy hide or mail breeches (zaragiielles), plate armor, mail loin guards, gorget
armor for the throat, head armor of the country, gauntlet, corselet (armor for the
upper body), helmet or casco, casque with chin piece, a form of helmet known as
a sallet with beaver, and an army helmet to cover the head 0Zigure 5).Coronado’s
personal armor was gilded and included a "fine helmet ornamented with plumes"
(Hammond and Rey 1940:8).
Several types of helmets were in use during Coronado’s time, including an
escofia (a metal skullcap favored by archers), a borgofiota (a helmet derived from
the French, known in Spain before 1520), a morri6n (a boat-shaped open-faced
helmet generally popular in the latter part of the sixteenth century), and a "war hat,"
or capiello defierro, which was the predecessor to the morri6n but with a turneddown brim. Casco or celada was a generic term used for several types of helmets
that either fully or nearly fully enclosed the face and head (Byron A. Johnson,
personal communication, July 27, 1992).

Collar
/
Idron

uard
or Skirt

\

Cuisse-j

Greave i-

i)

Figure 5. Composite drawing with names of parts of armor.

40

Texas Archeological Society

The expedition also had six or seven bronze pedreros, or stone mortars. By the
time the Spanish reached Tiguex, the mortars were in poor condition, and four of
them were left at ZiaPueblo for safekeeping (Hammond and Rey 1940:8; Castafieda
1940:233). The fate of the other pedreros is unknown.
It is unclear just how many of the items listed in the muster roll were actually
brought as far as Quivira. Some unnecessary items apparently were discarded
before the expedition reached what is now Arizona. Johnson (1988: 8) suggests that
heavy armor was too "ungainly and too confining for long or rapid marches," so
armor may have been primarily chain mail, padded vests, or other chest and arm
protection, plus some sort of helmet. Jack plates--small rectilinear brass or iron
plates from flexible armor (Figure 6)--were found at both Santa Elena and along
the Rio Grande (South et al. 1988:115; Vierra 1989:135). The irregularity and
hammered appearance of these metal plates suggests local manufacture in the New
World. Generally, the jack plates were fastened in an overlapping pattern by rivets
between two folds of coarse canvas to create "the conquistador’s version of a
modem-day policeman’s ’flak jacket’" (Vierra 1989:135). Other metal artifacts
found on Expeditionary sites include buckles and hinges of various types that may
have been used with armor for both men and horses. Bits of chain mail have been
found along the Rio Grande, as well as in sites in Kansas, Texas, and Arizona.
However, at present no determination has been made of the exact date or source of
this chain mail, so none of it can be linked with any certainty to the Coronado
expedition.

¯,

1

-J

INCH

Figure 6. Jack plates from armor (adapted from South et al. 1988: l 16 and Vierra 1989:135).
The narratives also document the presence of the ballestas or crossbows, and
arcabuces on the journey. The Spanish used three types of crossbows-- the ballesta
de gafa, the ballesta de armatoste, and the ballesta de cranequin (Johnson 1988:9).
These types were differentiated by the way the bow was armed. The most common
military crossbow, the ballesta de gafa, utilized a detachable "goat’s foot" lever to
ann the bow (Johnson 1988; Figure 7).
Crossbow bolt points (quarrels) varied in shape, size, and material (iron or
copper), depending upon their specific function and place of manufacture (Figure
8, a). Crossbow bolt points found along the Rio Grande and at the Spanish colonial
capital of Santa Elena, at Pecos, and at Hawikuh, generally resemble metal pen
points between 3.5 and 5.0 cm long (Ellis 1957:209; Vierra 1989:145; South et al.

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

41

1988:103-108). To make the bolt tips, flat pieces of metal were rolled and
hammered into shape, which annealed the tips and left the bases open for inserting
the bolts (Figure 8, b).

Figure 7. Drawing of a typical crossbow, showing the goat’s foot lever (adapted from South
et al. 1988:104).

Some authors believe crossbow parts and bolts may be diagnostic of the
Coronado expedition (Vierra 1989:227). Crossbows were used at one of the Zuni
towns, at Pecos, and at pueblos along the Rio Grande. Possibly some of the crossbow
bolts were made of a ferrous material, but the majority of those found along the Rio
Grande were made of copper by native craftsmen. By the time of the next Spanish
entrada, the arquebus had begun to replace the crossbow. In this frontier region,
however, use of the crossbow may have persisted well into the seventeenth century
(Williams 1991:2).
Unfortunately, crossbow bolts were not always correctly identified by early
archeologists. Moreover, past archeological excavations often lacked good stratigraphic controls or in-depth reports that would have allowed researchers to
distinguish the remains of the Coronado expedition from those of later entradas.
It is possible that parts such as triggers, serpentines, or matchcord guide
tubes could have been lost from the arcabuces taken along by Coronado’s group.
The Spaniards were the acknowledged experts in the use of the arquebus--a
matchlock weapon developed by the Spanish during the fifteenth century--and
a surprisingly accurate weapon. South, Skowronek, and Johnson (1988:96) suggest that the "Spaniards were the acknowledged experts, replacing English bowmen as the most feared infantry in Europe." Coronado’s men may have carried
the light caliver type of arquebus rather than the longer musket, but in either
case, it is quite likely that lead shot from this weapon could be found in
Coronado-era archeological sites, especially on those where hunting or a battle
had taken place.

42

Texas Archeological Society

A

1 INCH
B
Figure 8. Several types of crossbow bolts, a (adapted from South et al. 1988:106, 108, and
Ellis 1957:209), and crossbow bolt tips, b (adapted from South et al. 1988:106, 108, and Ellis
1957:209).

The weapons and armor carried by Coronado and his men appear to be similar
to those described in early Spanish manuals that discuss ways to outfit an expedition. The manuals cover such details as health and medicines, recruitment of priests,
and types of weapons and armor to bring along. For example, the Milicia y
Descripcion de las Indias (Vargas Machuca 1892) states that

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

43

in the Indies, Spani~ds principally used cross-bows, chain mail, plate
armor (breast plates), small muskets, rodelas (oval or heart-shaped leather
shields).., after much experience the best and most advantageous were
muskets, quilted cotton vests, broad swords, cotton helments [sic] (headgear) and visors, rodelas, partial horse armor, leather jackets, and mail
coats.6

In summary, artifacts that might have been left by the Coronado expedition
include horse gear (horseshoe nails and pieces of bridles and stirrups), metal tools
for fitting horseshoes and repairing leather goods and clothing, clothing parts (rolled
copper aglets, and fasteners like hooks and ball buttons), personal and religious
items (ceramic mess kits, jet Rosary beads, and simple lead and brass crosses),
domestic animal bone (horse, sheep, and cattle) and other food refuse, pottery,
gourds, and other storage and cooking vessels, trade goods (beads, small bells, glass
dishes, metal knives, and pearls), and weapons, particularly crossbow bolts and lead
shot.
OVERVIEW OF SOME TEXAS PANHANDLE SITES
Several factors limited the scope of this paper and contributed to some
unintentional biases. For example, the research, which focused on site forms and
published reports, was completed about two years ago, so data presented here do not
include more recent findings. Also, the terminology used on site forms to describe
artifacts varied widely, for example, Puebloan ware, Glazeware, Rio Grande ware,
Glaze IV, Glaze E, black pueblo pottery, and on virtually all site forms, temporal
assignments such as Late Prehistoric or Protohistoric lacked specific dates.
Coronado’s Entry into Texas
It is very likely that geographical factors had a strong influence on the route
chosen by Coronado’s guides in their eastward march from Pecos. Jaramillo
(1896:588) wrote that the expedition forces had been traveling in a generally
northeast direction along "those streams which are among the cows [bison]" for
eight or 10 days. This suggests that the early part of their route paralleled a major
drainage, possibly the Canadian River. However, within a short time after reaching
the first Querecho camp, the group apparently left the drainage and struck out across
plains that are believed by most authors to be the Llano Estacado.
Although the imposing facade of the Llano Estacado presents a physical
barrier to travel, there are several places on the south side of the Canadian River
where Coronado’s group could have ascended the caprock with relative ease

°translation of the original Spanish contained in a letter from Byron A. Johnson, of the
Albuquerque Museum, to the author. Typescript in National Park Service files at the Denver
Service Center.

44

Texas Archeological Society

(Jack Hughes, personal communication, Spring 1990; Waldo Wedel, personal
communication, February 1992). The explorers could have followed the
Canadian River drainage for a short distance into Texas, possibly ascending onto
the Llano Estacado somewhere near Alamosa Creek. Another access point could
have been along the old east-west route from Santa Fe that ascended the scarp on
the Bridwell Ranch near Sand Point, due west of Simms, Texas (Speer 1981).
The Apache Canyon route, which approximates New Mexico Highway 80, also
provides feasible access. Further south, the drainages of Tierra Blanca Creek,
Frio Draw, and Running Water Draw not only provide water and grazing, but
also a natural pathway eastward through gentle slopes onto the vast plains of the
Llano Estacado (Figure 9).

0
~,’~

~AMARILLO

~Pa,o Duro Canyon

Tierra

\

~Caprock Canyon State Park

I

I
50 MILES

I
I
_!

Figure 9. Map of the Texas Panhandle, showing the Llano Estacado and the Canadian River.

Rhodes-- Coronado’s American Legacy

45

We would expect to find at least some of the archeological sites left behind by
the Querecho and Teya bison hunters who were visited by the Spaniards. Descriptions of the Indian camps suggest too that they should contain evidence of many
hearths, traces of activities associated with lithic procurement, manufacture, and
use, tipi rings, and signs of procurement and processing of food, especially bison.
These Plains hunters probably were using such items as small end scrapers,
triangular arrowpoints, alternately beveled four-edged knives, and oval basin
metates (Hughes 1991).
Several small side-notched and triangular arrowpoints, including Garza, Washita,
Harrell, Fresno, and Lott types, were commonly used by Plains groups during the
Protohistoric period. Manufacture of these arrowpoints generally began after about
A.D. 1000, and continued to around A.D. 1600 or, for Fresno points, A.D. 1800
(Bell 1958; Suhm and Jelks 1962).
Coarse-tempered and micaceous ceramics are also thought to be associated
with these Protohistoric peoples. The Coronado narratives make it clear that these
Plains groups traded with the Puebloan groups along the Rio Grande, so Glazeware
ceramics (especially Glaze E wares), Puebloan utility wares, obsidian, and other
nonlocal materials might also be found in their encampments.
No early Spanish sites are reported for the northern Texas Panhandle, but many
Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric sites fitting this general profile of the Querecho
and Teya encampments are known from along the Canadian River in the northwestern Panhandle. For example, research of site files for the western parts of Oldham
and Hartley counties indicates that there are some Apachean or Late Prehistoric
(after about A.D. 1400) sites on bluffs or ridges overlooking the Canadian River.
Site 41OL225, south of the fiver near its confluence with Horse Creek, has buried
hearths and probable tipi rings7. Other such campsites north of the Canadian River
are 41OL157, with its slab-lined hearths and possible Mogollon ceramics, and site
41OL150 in the Punta de Agua Creek drainage. Southwestern obsidian, cordmarked pottery, and mano and metate fragments have been found at the latter site,
together with a stone gorget and micaceous plain sherds.
Some scrap metal, reportedly the residue of manufacture of historic metal
arrowpoints, was found at site 41HT1, a multicomponent campsite along Punta de
Agua Creek. Other sites along this same drainage (41HT3 and 41HT4) have
extensive evidence of quarrying, hearths, and many artifacts, including abrownware
sherd with a possible exterior slip.
Sites 41HF8 and 41HF86, in the vicinity ofPalo Duro Reservoir near Spearman,
have components that date to the Protohistoric period (Christopher Lintz, personal
communication, April 22, 1992 ). Radiocarbon dates for these sites generally range

7The site numbers preceded by A are from Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum site
records. Numbers beginning with D are from the Gila Pueblo system used by E. B. Sayles to
catalog sites. The numbers beginning with 41 are the trinomials used by the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.

46

Texas Archeological Society

between 320!-_25 years and 46~_75 years B.P. In these two sites there were metal
artifacts, Olivella shell beads, and possible Apachean ceramics.
Many Protohistoric period sites are documented for the Lake Meredith area
~igure 9). For example, a metal arrowpoint was found at 41PT114, Puebloan
ceramics were found at 41MO96, and possible tipi rings and Apachean wares were
found at 41MO21,41 MO55, and 41PT73. According to files at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, a metal breastplate was reportedly found in 1947 in
Carson County, but its exact description and location were not recorded. Another
unauthenticated find includes glass trade beads and metal cone danglers from near
Red Deer Creek.
A polished, burnished ceramic ware, tentatively identified as Mogollon, was
found at a large site (41OL200) on Agua de Piedra Creek in Oldham County.
However, because burnished ceramic wares were also known from Protohistoric
Sonoran sites, these ceramics may merit further examination. Farther away from the
Canadian River on Agua de Piedra Creek, the Rocky Dell site (410L4) has remains
of mortar holes, tipi rings, and ceramics. Prehistoric and historic pictographs and
petroglyphs at this site depict Puebloan characteristics, as well as horses, a church,
and tipis. These drawings are often superimposed over earlier styles of rock art,
suggesting a long continuum of use.
Several sites in the headwater canyons of the Alamosa drainage appear to
postdate the Panhandle aspect (after about A.D. 1500), based on the presence of
micaceous or pyrite-tempered brownwares. These include sites A 1146 and 41 OL24,
as well as 41OL36 where brownware is found in association with large hearths.
These three sites are close to a possible entry point onto the Llano Estacado--an
upper canyon of Middle Alamosa Creek northeast of Landergin.
Many tipi ring sites have been reported along the Tierra Blanca drainage from
east of Hereford to the vicinity of Buffalo Lake. Site A1140 is a possible Late
Prehistoric, Apachean, or Comanche, structure of caliche slabs. Site A1139 nearby,
where the pottery includes black micaceous and redware sherds, is a possible
Apachean village of slab houses or tipi rings. Other concentrations of tipi rings are
at Texas D:4:1 and D:4:2, east of Hereford. The nearby Tierra Blanca site (41DF3)
appears to be a Plains hunter-gatherer base camp whose artifacts include obsidian,
bison bones, and Puebloan ceramics (primarily Glaze D wares dating to about A.D.
1500).
Obsidian flakes, Rio Grande Glaze Polychrome, rock features, and a great deal
of burned rock were found at the Ivy Ranch site, A264/41DF12, along Tierra Blanca
Creek, and, in the vicinity of Buffalo Lake, site 41RD35 appears to be a multicomponent site containing possible pit houses, Mogollon brown ware, and Washita
points. Northwest of the lake a contact period site (41RD24) contains abundant
burned rock, Rio Grande Glaze ware, and a blank for an iron point.
Several Floyd County campsites have Apachean and Puebloan pottery, glass
trade beads, and metal artifacts. One of the better-known sites, the Floydada
Country Club site (41FL1), has a mixture of prehistoric and historic materials,
including Eastern Pueblo, utility, polychrome, and micaceous ceramics, turquoise,

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

47

metal projectile points, glass beads, and Olivella beads (Word 1991). Fresno,
Perdiz, Harrell, Lott, and Washita arrowpoints and metal tinklers are also reported
from this site.
Rock art with a Spanish motif is found along the Double Mountain Fork of the
Brazos at site 41GR414, and Southwestern style rock art is found at 41GR57.
Southeast of Lubbock in the Justiceburg Reservoir area, sites 41KT53 and 41KT51
have majolica wares, features resembling tipi rings, possible lead sprue and other
metal fragments, a horse tooth, and a Longhorn horn core (Douglas Boyd, personal
communication, April 22, 1992). Both Southwestern and Plains ceramics are
represented in these sites, together with trade goods such as turquoise, Olivella, and
glass beads. Radiocarbon dates for these sites suggest an occupation period between
the late 1400s and 1600s.
Unfortunately, the site data were not sufficiently specific to make it possible to
pinpoint Coronado sites in Texas. Site forms for contact period sites might carry the
notation metal point or glass beads or Pueblo pottery, but almost always they have
no further description of the type of material, the morphology of the artifact, its age,
or its technology. Most of these artifacts were collected by local landowners, many
of whom are no longer living.
Additional research is clearly needed to verify the present locations of these
artifacts and to identify them properly. Virtually all of the Spanish artifacts found
throughout the Southwest and in the Plains lack specific proveniences, and many of
the items held by collectors or exhibited in museums are identified only by the ranch
or county where they were found. For these reasons, sites and collections in Texas
hold great promise--but equally great challenges--for future investigation of
Coronado’s trek to Quivira.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Unfortunately, there is neither time nor space to list the many, many archeologists, librarians, cultural geographers, and historians who took time from their busy
schedules to help me find information on Coronado’s entrada. I hope they understand the deep gratitude I feel for their help. I especially thank Dr. Waldo Wedel and
Mildred Mott Wedel for their patience and thoughtful assistance during the entire
project. Dr. Jack T. Hughes shared his extensive knowledge of Panhandle archeology with me, and any fault in the transliteration of the vast quantities of information
he gave me is mine alone. Richard and Shirley Flint have unselfishly shared
bibliographies and information, as did Dr. Byron A. Johnson, of the Albuquerque
Museum. Dr. Russell Skowronek pointed out the excellent Santa Elena studies as
well as several other important works dealing with Spanish artifacts. The staff
members of the Panhandle-Plains Museum, West Texas State University, the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, the Office of the State Archeologist, the Texas
Historical Commission, and the several libraries at The University of Texas were
unfailingly patient and helpful, and artist David Hesker produced the excellent
drawings. Lastly, I dedicate this paper to the memory of Margaret Harper, whose

48

Texas Archeological Society

keen zest for life and integrity made the research on Coronado’s route such an
exciting venture.
REFERENCES CITED
Aitort, Arthur S.
1939
The Muster Roll and Equipment of the Expedition of Francisco Vazquez de
Coronado. The William L. Clements Library, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Alarc6n, Hernando de
1990
Report of Alarc6n’s expedition. In: The Journey of Coronado 1540-1542,
translated and edited by George P. Winship, pp. 124-155. Fulcrum, Golden,
Colorado.
Bell, Robert E.
1958
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Special Bulletin No. 1. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Oklahoma City.
Castafieda, Pedro de
Relacion de la Jornada de Cibola Conpuesta por Pedro de Castafieda de Nacera
1896
(translated by George P. Winship). In: The Fourteenth Annual Report of the
Bureau of Ethnology, Smithsonian h~titution, 1892-1893, Part L pp. 414-469
(Spanish text) and pp. 470-546 (English translation). Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.
1940

Castafieda’s History of the Expedition. In: Narratives of the Coronado Expedition 1540-1542, edited by George P. Hammond and Agapito Rey, pp. 181-283.
The University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Coronado, Francisco Vfizquez de
1940
Letter of Coronado to Mendoza, August 3, 1540. In: Narratives ofthe Coronado
Expedition 1540-1542, translated and edited by George P. Hammond and
Agapito Rey, pp. 162-! 78. The University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
1990

Translation of a Letter from Coronado to the King, October 20, 1541. In: The
Journey of Coronado 1540-1542, translated and edited by George P. Winship,
pp. 200-204. Fulcrum, Golden, Colorado.

Deagan, Kathleen
1987
Artifacts of the Spanish Colonies of Florida and the Caribbean 1500-1800,
Volume I: Ceramics, Glassware, and Beads. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.
Ellis, Bruce T.
1957
Crossbow Boltheads from Historic Pueblo Sites. El Palacio 64:209-214.

Rhodes -- Coronado’s American Legacy

49

Francis, Peter, Jr.
1979
The Story of Venetian Beads. The World of Beads Monograph Series 1.
Pamphlet published by Lapis Route Books and distributed in the United States
by Comerless Cube, Lake Placid, New York.
Hammond, George P. and Agapito Rey (editors)
1940

The Narratives of the Coronado Expedition 1540-1542. The University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Hughes, Jack T.
1991
Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the Texas High Plains. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 60:1-55.
Ivey, James E., Diane Lee Rhodes, and Joseph P. Sanchez
1991
The Coronado Expedition of 1540-1542: A Special History Report prepared for
the Coronado Trail Study. U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park
Service, Santa Fe and Denver.
Jaramillo, Juan
1896
Narrative of Jaramillo (translated by George P. Winship). In: The Fourteenth
AnnuaI Report ofthe Bureau ofEthnology, Smithsonian Institution, 1892-1893,
Part I, pp. 584-593. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
1990

The Narrative of Jaramillo. In: The Journey of Coronado 1540-1542, translated
and edited by George P. Winship. Fulcrum, Golden, Colorado.

Johnson, Byron A.
1988
Arms and Armor of the Spanish Conquest: A Brief Description. Manuscript on
file, Albuquerque Museum, Albuquerque.
Kessell, John L.
1979
Kiva, Cross, and Crown: The Pecos Indians and New Mexico 1540-1840.
National Park Service, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Kiser, Edwin L.
1978
The Re-examination of Pedro de Castafieda’s Bone Bed by Geological
Investigations. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:331-339.
Levine, Frances and Martha Doty Freeman
1982
A Study of Documentary and Archeological Evidence for Comanchero Activities in the Texas Panhandle. Manuscript on file, West Texas State University,
Canyon.
Lister, Florence C. and Robert H. Lister
Andalusian Ceramics in Spain and New Spain: A Cultural Register from the
1987
Third Century B.C. to 1700. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Liu, Robert K. and Elizabeth Harris
NuevaCadiz and Associated Beads. Pamphlet copyrighted by G. B. Fenstermaker,
1982
Lancaster, Pennsylvania.

50

Texas Archeological Society

Marshall, Michael P.
1989
The Ceramic Assemblage. In: A Sixteenth-Century Spanish Campsite in the
Tiguex Province, by Bradley J. Vierra. Museum of New Mexico, Laboratory of
Anthropology Note No. 475:75-115, Santa Fe.
Mendoza, Antonio de
1940
Instructions to Fray Marcos de Niza. In: Narratives of the Coronado Expedition
1540-1542, edited by George P. Hammond and Agapito Rey, pp. 58-62. The
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
National Park Service
1992
National Trail Study and Environmental Assessment, Coronado Expedition:
Arizona/New Mexicoffexas/Oklahoma/Kansas. National Park Service, Denver Service Center, Denver.
Niza, Fray Marcos de
1940
Report of Fray Marcos de Niza, August 26, 1539.In:NarrativesoftheCoronado
Expedition 1540-1542, edited by George P. Hammond and Agapito Rey, pp.
63-82. The University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Olds, Dorris L.
1976
Texas Legacy From the Gulf." A Report on Sixteenth Century Shipwreck
Materials Recovered From the Texas Tidelands. Texas Memorial Museum
Miscellaneous Papers No. 5, and Texas Antiquities Committee Publication No.
2. Austin.
The Oxford English Dictionary
1971
The Compact Edition of the Oxford English Dictionary. The Oxford English
Dictionary, Volume 2, P-Z. Oxford, England.
Skowronek, Russell K., Richard E. Johnson, and Stanley South
1988
The Sixteenth Century Spanish Imported Ceramics at Santa Elena: A Formal
Analysis. In: Spanish Artifacts from Santa Elena, by Stanley South, Russell K.
Skowronek, and Richard E. Johnson, pp. 205-305. University ofSouth Carolina
Anthropological Studies No. 7, University of South Carolina, and South
Carolina Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology, Columbia.
Smith, Marvin T. and Elizabeth Good
EarlySixteenthCenturyGlassBeadsintheSpanishColonialTrade.Cottonlandia
1982
Museum Publications, Greenwood, Mississippi.
South, Stanley, Russell K. Skowronek, and Richard E. Johnson
1988
Spanish Artifacts from Santa Elena. University ofSouth CarolinaAnthropological Studies No. 7, University of South Carolina, and South Carolina Institute of
Archaeology and Anthropology, Columbia.
Speer, Roberta D.
Field Trip Record, Bridwell Ranch, October 2, 1981. On file, Texas Historical
1981
Commission, Austin.

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

51

Sudbury, Byron
1984
A Sixteenth-Century Spanish Colonial Trade Bead from Western Oklahoma.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 33:31-36.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks (editors)
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Joint Publication, Texas
Archeological Society Special Publication No. 1, and Texas Memorial Museum
Bulletin No. 4. Austin.
Vargas Machuca, D. Bernardo de
1892
Milicia y Descripcion de las lndias, escrita por El Capitan D. Bemardo de
Vargas Machuca. Volumen Primo and Segundo, Liberia de Victoriano Suarez,
Madrid.
Vierra, Bradley J.
1989
A Sixteenth-Century Spanish Campsite in the Tiguex Province. Museum ofNew
Mexico, Laboratory of Anthropology Note 475. Santa Fe.
Williams, Jack S.
Comments on the Draft Coronado Trail History Study. Manuscript on file,
1991
Southwest Regional Office, National Park Service, Santa Fe.
Winship, George P.
1896
The Coronado Expedition. In: The Fourteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, 1892-1893,Part l, pp. 329-613. Smithsonian
Institution, Washington, D.C.
Word, James H.
1991
The 1975 Field School of the Texas Archeological Society. Bulletin ofthe Texas
Archeological Society 60:57-106.

