APPENDIX A

INTRODUCTION
The site survey segment of the 1974 Texas Archeological Society field
school was charged with appraising the park area for archeological resources
and recording archeological sites. The northern one third of McKinney Falls
State Park was surveyed during the eight day field school; 12 sites were
recorded. Sites were defined as those areas holding a significantly high concentration of artifacts or features. Some lithic or historic scatters were not
recorded for lack of good focal points. For each site, a University of Texas at
Austin Site Survey Form was completed, and the location plotted on aerial
photographic maps and topographical maps of the park.
Site types range from prehistoric lithic scatters and rock shelters to historic
house sites.

(41TV302) Description: House Site
Remnants of an historic house are located near the top of a hill overlooking
a spring fed meadow. Dates of occupation should lie somewhere within the
range of 1850-1900. A dirt road east of the site runs north northeast and may
have been used as the entrance to the complex. Other road indications were
not found. The road leads to the McKinney home complex (41TV289), indicating a connection between the two sites.
Remains consist of a large cut stone (perhaps a corner stone) and a high
concentration of debris in the surrounding area. Metal door hinges, latches,
and a door handle were found. The house probably was made of wood
although remains of wood or other building materials were not found.
A clearing a few meters north of the house contained artifact types indicative of an outbuilding, perhaps a barn. Scattered chert flakes, unifacially
worked flakes, and bifaces were observed in the area; significant concentrations were not found. A random metal detector survey covered a portion of
the site area. Areas of concentration were determined and a representative
sample of datable artifacts collected.

(41TV303) Description: House Site
Structural remains and historic artifacts lie 230 m north of 41TV302. The
site appears to be more recent than 41TV302, dating sometime after 1900
and probably not extending beyond the mid-1904’s. The quantity of surface
material is greater than at 41TV302.

Calvert -- Site Survey

57

A garbage dump containing bedsprings, a washtub, and other discarded
household items lay nearby. Barbed wire was collected and found to be contemporaneous with a standing fence nearby. It appears the occupants lived
there for a long time period, raised chickens and horses, did some fencing,
had a garden, and farmed.
A random metal detector survey was conducted. Concentrations of material were noted and datable artifacts collected. A concentration of cut nails,
wire nails, and dimensional lumber was associated with a rockpile that might
represent a structural corner.
Glass artifacts include a McCormick & Co. panel bottle, J. R. Watkins Co.
panel bottle, Chattanooga Medicine Co. bottle, milk emulsion bottle, and two
snuff bottles. Prehistoric material included chert nodules with removed flakes
and concentrations of bifacially worked chert flakes.
(41TV304) Description: Picnic Table Site
A stone picnic table rests on the rock surface about 100 m west of
41TV302 and 120 m downstream from the mill on the left bank of Onion
Creek. It consists of a concrete slab table top resting on two rectangular pillars.
Each pillar is composed of several irregularly shaped fractured limestone
blocks. These blocks have been plastered or cemented together forming massive but uniform table supports.
Benches flanking the table are chiseled limestone in the McKinney house
style. A three wall fireplace composed mostly of hand cut stone was plastered
together forming an open ended rectangle. These stones are irregular in
shape, although some have been well formed by cutting or chiseling. Notches
are cut in the stones probably for a grill. A small rock quarry is located a few
meters away in the Upper portion of a rock ledge adjacent to the fireplace.
Measurements and computed volume compares favorably with the volume
of stone used for construction in the picnic area.
(41TV305) Description: Habitation Scatter
Another occupation site located 230 m downstream from 41TV304 was
recorded as 41TV305. It is characterized by having both historic and prehistoric material scattered in a wash. The foca! point was not located. Several
chert flakes and bifaces were observed.

(41TV306) Description: Prehistoric Chipping Station
A prehistoric locale containing numerous large, bifacially worked chert
flakes and nodules was recorded on a hilltop across from the mill and 160 m
south of Onion Creek. Several cores and concentrations of small flakes and
chips were noted. This site tentatively is defined as a chipping station. Dating
is not possible from field observations. Shovel tests did not indicate significant
subsurface deposits.

58

Texas Archeological Society

(41TV307) Description: Horse Trainer’s Cabin
A site that historical reports indicate is the house of Thomas F. McKinney’s
horse trainer is on the right bank of Rinard Creek about 350 m above Onion
Creek. Several rock fences leading away from the site appear to be of construction similar to the cabin, i.e., they have double stone walls. House structure is of cut and chiseled stone; the fence consists of irregularly fractured

stone.
More than 50% of the cabin structure is still standing. The cabin is a one
room structure house with two doors and at least one window. Remnants of a
stone corral located a short way downstream and adjacent to Rinard Creek
may be associated with this complex. The corral may have been used to trap,
hold, or shunt horses to different pastures.
(41TV308) Description: Prehistoric Midden Deposit (Rockwall Site)
A Texas Parks and Wildlife Department construction supervisor described
a burned rock midden that had been disturbed by machinery during road
construction in an area about 40 m south of 41TV306. The amount of
burned rock fragments do not support this description. Numerous chips,
flakes, several bifaces, and two projectile point fragments were found in the
disturbed areas. One point fragment has a Pedernales like form.
A small sewer line ditch adjacent to the disturbed area showed a prehistoric
midden deposit in profile. The midden lens is about 20 cm thick with an 8 to
10 cm alluvial fill above it. Materials noted in the cultural deposit include a
high number of snail shell fragments, chert chips and flakes, some charcoal,
and one mussel shell fragment. Midden is a darker color than the sediment
above and below.
A 1 x 1 m test pit was excavated adjacent to the sewer ditch. Very little
additional data were recovered although chert flakes and chips were plentiful.
A few bifaces were found but diagnostic tools were not recovered. One occupation of long duration during the Archaic period is assumed. The area of
occupation was not determined. Surface material was noted in a broad area.
(41TV309) Description: Rock Shelters
Two shallow rock shelters were observed in a bluff on the right bank of
Onion Creek across from 41TV305. One probably never was occupied (it
may have been used as a water source) ; the other was used during prehistoric
and historic times. Chert chips and flakes were collected while profiling two
pot holes located beneath signs painted on the ceiling which read "NO DIGGING BY LAW."
Projectile point fragments found in the profiles indicate small arrow technology. The occupation dates to late prehistoric times. Testing was limited to
the site surface; earlier occupation might be present in lower levels. The shelter is dry, but a spring seeps from the middle of the back wall, providing a
constant water supply. The shelter is about 40 m from Onion Creek.
The site’s historic component shows utilization of the spring. A pipe was
placed into the back wall bringing spring water to a small metal trough located
near the middle of the shelter. There is a very thick mineral deposit on the

Calvert -- Site Survey

59

trough and log support caused by overflow from the trough. This deposit may
indicate a considerable antiquity.
A metal detector survey revealed very recent tin cans and a large spike.
Sediment analysis showed a high pH count; phosphate analysis measured
medium to strong within the shelter.

(41TV310) Description: Prehistoric Chipping Station with Historic
Pits
A small scatter of lithic debris is located 75 m southwest of 41TV309. A
portion of the site displays a layer of chips, flakes, cores, and bifaces exposed
on a bare rock surface. The main site is covered with alluvium.
The historical component consists of two pits. The smaller has field limestone piled around it. The stone could have been either removed from the pit
or be the remains of a structure. Window glass eroding from the side wall a
few centimeters from the surface may indicate further a small structure. Chips
and chert flakes are scattered near the pit and may have been removed from a
lower prehistoric component. The larger pit located to the southeast utilized
wooden crossposts to support a sheetmetal covering. This pit may be a small
storage pit.
The site is located immediately above shelter site 41TV309; the two locales
could be components of the same site, both prehistorically and historically.
(41TV311) Description: Prehistoric Site
Numerous chert chips and flakes, a core, and projectile point base were
observed 200 m south of 41TV307 immediately west of a rock wall. The site
may be either a chipping station or habitation site. Chert nodules were exposed during park road constructions. Depth and lateral extent are unknown;
the site appears to be undisturbed.
(41TV312) Description: House Site
A wood frame house with wood siding and shingles overlaid by tin is Iocated near the proposed park main entrance about 450 m east of 41TV311.
The house consists of one main and two small lean-to rooms. A rock fence is
located adjacent to the house on the west side. The site is of fairly recent
origin, probably dating from the 1930’s-1940’s.
(41TV313) Description: Rock Shelters
Three rock shelters, one found below the picnic table site (41TV304) and
the other two farther to the south, occur on the left bank of Onion Creek. The
first two upstream shelters are wet with water constantly dripping from the
ceiling. The third is relatively dry but has an erosion area where water at times
pours over the upper shelter ledge. A small drainage leads down to Onion
Creek. The shelters would have been adequate for prehistoric occupation but
evidence to support this hypothesis was not found. A biface was observed at

60

Texas Archeological Society

the south end of the middle shelter. The middle shelter contains two square
excavation units or pot holes, but cultural debris was not located.
The shelter below 41TV304 shows utilization during modern times. A rock
hearth with ashes and modern wine bottles are of recent origin.
The small downstream shelter shows the greatest potential for prehistoric
habitation. It is dry, has a lower ceiling, and is better protected from the
weather. The surface was devoid of artifacts and testing was not initiated.
Reasons for recording these shelters as a site derives from sediment tests.
Collected sediment samples were tested for phosphate and pH content. All
samples showed a high pH. This situation can be explained by limestone in
the sediment. All but one sediment sample (14 total) showed strong to medium phosphate content. The shelters possess a sandy loam derived from
creek flooding and natural rock deterioration. The phosphate is assumed to
have come from occupation by man or animal.

CONCLUSIONS
Although historical document research was not performed, the earlier historical park sites might be compared in the future. Sites 41TV289, 41TV307,
41TV302, and 41TV304 are connected by a dirt road and contain similar
artifacts and building materials. Their cultural affinity requires more exploration. The horse trainer’s cabin (41TV307) and the rock fences were constructed during Thomas F. McKinney’s occupation at 41TV289. Herds of
cattle, sheep, horses, and mules could have been maintained by McKinney in
the large complex of rock fences on the south side of Onion Creek.
The field north of 41TV289 may have been the farming aspect of the
complex. If the barbed wire fences containing square nails are contemporaneous with the late occupation of McKinney, then perhaps the occupants of
41TV302 were overseers of this pasture. Additional historic document research, minimal site testing, and protection from both natural and anthropogenic agents are warranted for these fragile, nonrenewable resources belonging to the State of Texas and administered by the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department.

