The Crumley Site: A Stratified Burnt
Rock Midden, Travis County, Texas
COL. THOMAS C. KELLY

Introduction
The central drainage areas of the Guadalupe, Colorado, and Brazos
rivers of Texas abound in prehistoric camp sites. Many are characterized by accumulations of burnt limestone rock, cooking and flint workshop debris and, generally, considerable quantities of flint projectile
points, knives, scrapers, manos, and other tools of a hunting and gathering people. These are especially numerous in the "hill country" of
the Edwards Plateau. Hundreds of them have been explored, poked
into, and "pot-holed" by curious individuals, but relatively few have
been scientifically excavated and published (see "Inventory of Excavated Sites in Central Texas" in Suhm, 1960:89-103).
These burnt rock middens are ascribed to the Edwards Plateau and
Central Texas aspects. The long-lived Edwards Plateau Aspect (Archaic Stage) is supposed to have existed from about 5000 B.c. to A.D.
1200 (Kelley and Campbell, 1942; Suhm et al., 1954). The main outlines of the Edwards Plateau Aspect are fairly well known, but the
local variations (foci) and their temporal placement have long been
controversial (Suhm, 1960). This is largely because so few stratified
Edwards Plateau sites have been extensively excavated and properly
published.
Excavation at the Crumley site revealed that it had been occupied
for a long period of time by Edwards Plateau Aspect peoples, and also
that there had been significant changes in artifact styles, particularly
in projectile points, throughout this occupation. The information accumulated helps to resolve a number of questions that have been under
discussion for the past two decades.

Site Description
The Crumley site (41TV86) is located 17 airline miles west of Aus-

240

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

tin on the Ewell Crumley ranch in Cedar Valley. It consists of a midden that lies at the base of a steep limestone hill adjacent to Long
Branch Creek, a tributary of Barton Creek. Some two hundred yards
downstream from the midden the creek encounters a sheer limestone
bluff and bends sharply to the south. Here in the Edwards formation
is a deep pool (Fig. 1) that is fed by springs that rarely dry up even

Fig. 1. Spring-fed pool near Crumley slte.

in drought years. The area is still a game paradise. Deer, turkeys, rabbits, raccoons, and squirrels are plentiful, and skunks, armadillos,
rattlesnakes, foxes, coyotes, and wildcats are occasionally seen. Bass
and perch from the pool augmented the digging camp diet.
The hill above the midden is well covered with live oak, cedar, and
juniper trees, and along the stream are pecan, hackberry, chinaberry,
persimmon, and cottonwood trees. The steep hillside with its outcropping limestone ledges seems to have been crudely mined for the limestone and flint that make up so large a part of the midden. Reconnaissance of the immediate area failed to reveal any other sources of flint,
and its availabilky may have been a factor in the original selection of
this site. Enough tools and cores with limestone on one or both faces
were found in the midden to lend credence to this interpretation.
This site was noted by Mr. Bill Belk of Austin after Mr. Crumley

GRUMLEY SITE

241

had a bulldozer clear an area of heavy brush and timber in order to
increase the size of his bottom-land corn field in the fall of 1959. Burnt
limestone rock, which originally was covered by alluvium, had been
spread by the bulldozer over an area of about 25 by 50 yards. Mr. Belk
had collected dart points from the surface of this field for more than
20 years, but was not aware of a buried midden. In January, i960, Mr.
Belk introduced me to Mr. Grumley and assisted me in securing entry
rights to the site.
Gonsiderable damage had been done to the midden by bulldozer and
plow, for flint artifacts were scattered through the dispersed burnt
rock. However, two test pits (D-4 and D-5 in Fig. 2) revealed that a
large portion of the midden was undisturbed, contained artifacts in
abundance, was stratified, and showed changes in artifact styles.
Mr. Grumley pointed out an area beginning approximately 20 feet
south of the east-west fence (later used as a zero reference line for
north-south measurements) that had risen as a mound about four
feet above the surface. This mound area had been removed for 20
feet south and 10 feet east and west of the arbitrary line that we used
for east-west measurements (Fig. 2). For 15 feet south of this fence
there was no disturbance of the very rich, black, top soil. For the next
r

A-I

A-3

A-4

Ol
B-4

C-[

I

sl

C-4

C~3

(S-2

-°’° ! "

\

Ifil

\q
F-I

I

G-I

I

F-B

I

"<1

/

3ol

o
20

15

{I

~1

SP~2STT
E 0

a~

5

~

I0

3~

15

4c

Fig. 2. Contour map of Crumley site, showing grid system and area excavated.

45|

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

five feet south only the top soil had been disturbed, generally leaving
a very thin layer of top soil over burned rock. From 20 to 40 feet south
large quantities of burned rock from the mound were spread out over
the field.
It was on this northersl 20 feet, or approximately one-half of the
original midden, that excavation was concentrated. The only surface
feature in this area was a block of limestone in Square B-7. North of
the fence limestone rose out of the top soil steeply to form the hillside.
Excavation
An arbitrary grid system of 5-foot squares was established about a
key point, the staple holding the bottom barbed wire on a centrally
located fence post on the north edge of the midden. E. Mott Davis and
Curtis Tunnell provided transit, stadia rod, tapes, and most of the
labor in establishing the grid system. Squares were identified by
number and letter. Three squares were excavated by six-inch levels
and screened through one-third inch mesh screen. Extreme difficulty
was encountered in digging by this method because of the irregular
rocks in a hard matrix. It was also noted that the stratigraphic picture
was confused when all artifacts from a given level in a square were
thrown together.
It was far more rewarding to dig by the vertical face method. Artifacts were located in situ, immediately assigned a catalogue number,
and recorded precisely within the grid and by depth below the surface
of the square. Several checks in which back dirt from a square was
screened indicated a loss of less than 5 per cent of the artifacts by this
method. For the man hours expended, a far larger sampling was obtained than would have been possible by using other methods. On
two week-ends, when the work force totaled 21, square number and
depth of artifact only were recorded. Less satisfactory data were
obtained.
Flint flakes that were not readily identifiable in the field as artifacts were saved in milk cartons by square number only. Portions of
dart points and knives that could not be classified were treated in the
same way. Bone was handled in separate cartons.
Accurate profiles were drawn, using line level measurements for
every five feet of progress of the vertical face. A total of 4 five-foot
squares and four sections 5 by 3 feet were excavated to an average
depth of 36 inches, or approximately 3,500 cubic feet. Occupational
debris was found from a minimum of 12 inches on the southern
disturbed edge of the midden to a maximum of 62 inches in the north-

ern undisturbed section. Four undisturbed check squares were left at
the western end of the site. Artifacts were still being found at the east
end on the last day of excavation, but these were beyond the area of
stratified burned rock. It is estimated that the original volume of the
midden was about 8,000 cubic feet.
No hearths or other features were noted, except for an area of extremely black, greasy earth, comparatively free of burned rock, in
Squares F-8, G-8, and H-8. A limestone block (2.5 by 2.5 by 5 feet)
occurred in Square B-7. It was suspected that the black soil may have
been an area of human cremation, and a sample was tested at the
Lackland Hospital Laboratory. No determination could be reached
as to whether or not human materials were present (Dr. Mayble, personal communication).
The block of limestone in Square B-7 (which nearly terminated the
project early by falling on the author) must have been used as a seat
or back rest by a flint-knapper. Within a semicircle with a radius of
six feet was a concentration of Pedernales projectile points. These
points varied from perfectly chipped to crude, unfinished specimens.
A heavy concentration of workshop debris also occurred in this semicircular area.
Three charcoal samples were obtained from the lowest occupational
layer, but no carbon samples were obtained from the upper layers.
Twenty week-ends and 21 days of military leave were spent on the
Crumley site, with a work force varying from one to 22, mostly members of the University of Texas Archeological Society. Photography
for publication was done by Master Sergeant Paul Ambrico of Lackland Air Force Base.
Stratigraphy
Throughout most of the excavated undisturbed area of the site five
strata could be observed (Fig. 3). Stratum l, the lowest, was a layer
of yellow-orange sand and clay ranging in thickness from 10 to 24
inches. It rested on limestone bedrock. In the northern section (0 to 5
feet south) clay was present in greater quantity than in the southern
section, which was rather sandy. The original fires were built on top
of Stratum 1, as evidenced by areas of day baked brick-hard, from
which the only adequate charcoal samples were obtained. Artifacts
were only occasionally found in Stratum l, and rarely more than

four inches below its surface.
Stratum 2, the first midden accumulation, was rather sharply demarked from Stratum i. It was composed of burned limestone in

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Stratum 4b

Stratum 4a

Stratum

3~

Stratum 2

Bed

Rock

Fig. 3. Profile from Square D-11 (10 to 15 south and 35 east), showing stratigraphy at
Crumley site.

angular slabs and fragments, prodigious quantities of burned snail
shells, gray-black earth, workshop flint debris, and artifacts. In thickness it varied from 8 to 20 inches.
Overlying Stratum 2 was Stratum 3, an almost sterile layer varying
from 5 to 18 inches in thickness. It contained a slightly lighter shade
of soil, fewer burned rock fragments (also a shade lighter), very few
snail shells, and almost no artifacts. Its demarcation from Stratum 2
below and Stratum 4 above was not always pronounced. However, it
could be traced by careful examination.
Stratum 4 was similar to Stratum 2, containing grayish-black earth,
large quantities of burned limestone, snail shells, flint debris, and
artifacts. In thickness it ranged from 9 to 15 inches. Although physically homogeneous, it has been divided into two parts, 4a and 4b,
because of differences in artifact content.
Stratum 5 was a layer of very black top soil, free of burned rocks~
snail she!ls, and it yielded less than a dozen artifacts.

Analysis
Catalogue numbers were assigned to i,300 artifacts serially as
found. These were separated first by class (knives, dart points, scrapers, etc.) and then by style within the class (stemmed knives, circular
knives, ovate knives, etc.). Artifacts were then separated by stratum
(2, 4a, 4b, and 5). Artifacts whose stratigraphic position was not clear
were separated, as were those collected from the surface or from back
dirt. Dart points were typed by reference to the Handbook (Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks, 1955) and were also compared with the type specimens on file at The University of Texas. Valuable assistance in typology was rendered by T. N. Campbell, E. Mott Davis, Edward B.
Jelks, and Mrs. Mardith K. Schuetz.
As very little has been published on the typology of tools, a special
effort was made to determine tool types and associate them with particular styles of dart points. The horizontal distribution of dart points
was studied by plotting specimens on overlays of the excavation plan.
Bulverde and Pedernales points were plotted separately on profiles
to determine if any significance could be attached to presence or
absence of barbs. The average depth of each type of dart point was
computed (see Table i) to determine if there was any possibility of
determining relative chronology of different types of points by average depth irrespective of horizontal distribution.
Flint flakes (2951 or approximately half of the specimens collected)
were merely identified as knife and dart fragments, spokeshaves, gravers, cutting tools, and unworked flakes. No analysis was made of their
provenience. Nor was any special analysis made of 162 specimens
found in one day’s screening of midden material scattered by the
bulldozer.
A total of 4251 artifacts was examined, but this is by no means the
total that this site has yielded or could yield. Toward the end of our
excavation the Crumley site was badly cannibalized by misguided
cMlectors.

Artiiacts irom the Crumley Site
Dart Points. Of the 557 projectile points complete enough for classification, not a single specimen can be identified as an arrow point. All
are dart points, and they include 24 recognizable types (Fig. 4) linked
with the Edwards Plateau Aspect. In addition there are three distinctive forms that are here designated as "Trolan," "Crumley," and

Fig. 4. Projectile points from Crumley site. A-C, Pandora type; D-F, "Crumley;" G-H,
Wells; I, Frio; J-K, Refuglo; L-N, Martlndale; O-R, Langtry; S-W, Kinney.

TABLE 1
Provenience of Projectile Points From Crumley Site
Stratum 2

Type
Abasolo
Angostura
Bulverde
Castroville
"Crumley"

No.
%
1 100
2 100
5i
58
..
3 t00
Darl
. ,
Ellis
50
1
Frio
, .
Kinney
.
Lange
4
15
Langtry
4
80
Marcos
..
Marshall
22
2
Martindale
. .
Meserve
2 100
Montell
. .
Nolan
41
93
Pandora
2
67
Palmillas
1
100
Pedernales
2
3
Refugio
.
Tortugas
. .
Travis
54
89
"Trolan"
5
71
Williams
. .
Wells
1
50
"Unid. Concave
Base"
75
6

Stratum 4a

No.

Stratum 4b

%

No.

%

33 37.5
. .

4
2

4.5
100

100
..

1

.
50

1

3
22
1
4
4

100
81
20
50
44

4
3

4
..
50
34

4
3
1

23

13

77

146
2
7
2
8
1

95
¯ .
67
11
29
80
50

2

25

1

7

. ,

33

..
4
2
1

2

3
100
33
..
,.
20
.,

Stratum
A verage
5
UndeterDepth
No.
mined Total
1
2
32
2
24*
23
111
5
15.5
3
3
35
1
19"
2
21.7"
1
4
2
5
18.3
35
8
21.1
5
23.8*
1
18.5
9
10
1
17.7
1
2
3
8
2
27.5
1
18
15.5
51
7
30.3
3
22*
1
27
182
29
21.2
2
12.5
6
17
3
29.5
8
69
7
27
li
21.9
i
2
23*
1

9

33.3

Total
Classified 183
40
244
52
37
8
2
557
91
Unclassified
.
53
Total dart points represented
610
* Average depth does not agree with profile data or association; sample to small.

"unidentified concave base." Paleo-Indian dart points are represented
by two specimens of Angostura type and two of Meserve type.
The Pandora type is represented by three specimens (Fig. 4. A-C),
two of which (A-B) are from Stratum 2 and the third (C) from
Stratum 4a. They were found near Bulverde and Tortugas points.
Three points (Fig. 4, D-F), here designated "Crumley," are uniform in size and shape. Their bases bear shallow notches, their
shoulders are poorly developed, and the lateral edges of their blades
are serrated. Al! three were found in the transition zone between

~Z~8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig 5. Projectile points from Crumley site. A, Abasolo type; B, Darl; C, Palmillas; D-E,
Ellis; F-K, Tortugas; L-Q, Lange; R-X, Williams.

CRUMLEY SITE

249

Stratum 1 and Stratum 2, where they were associated with Nolan
points. They are among the earliest points represented at the Crumley
site.
The Wells type is represented by only two specimens (Fig. 4, G-H),
one (G) from Stratum 2, the other (H) from Stratum 4a. The specimen at H resembles the Langtry point, but it is much thicker and
heavier than most Langtry points.
Only one Frio point was found at the Crumley site. This specimen
(Fig. 4, I) was found at a depth of 4 inches below the surface in
Stratum 5, which was practically sterile of artifacts. It would appear
that the Frio point was very late in the Archaic occupation of this site.
Two Refugio points (Fig. 4, J-K) occurred in Stratum 4b, well above
the nearest Pedernales points in Stratum 4. They were most closely
associated with Montell points.
The Martindale type is represented by three specimens (Fig. 4,
L-N). One was found in Stratum 5 at a depth of 8 inches, but the
remaining specimens were not found in situ. Such evidence as there
is indicates that both Martindale and Frio points are late at the Crumley site.
Five Langtry points (Fig. 4, O-R) were recovered, four in Stratum
2 and one in Stratum 4a. Their average depth (23.8 inches) is not
significant because four of them were found near the thin edge of the
midden. What is more significant is their horizontal clustering in one
area of the midden, suggesting a short-lived, possibly one-time occupation. These Langtry points occurred m Squares A-8, B-9, D-9, E-8.
and E-10. Their main associations were with Nolan and Travis points.
Kinney points, five in number (Fig. 4, S-W), were closely associated with Pedernales points in Stratum 4a. Only three of the five
Kinney points were found in situ.
One Abasolo point (Fig. 5, A) was associated with Nolan points at
a depth of 32 inches in Stratum 2. This specimen is alternately beveled
on the left.
One Darl point (Fig. 5, B) was found at a depth of 19 inches in
Stratum 4a, where it was associated with Pedernales points. It is made
of glossy black flint and its blade is strongly beveled on the right side
of each face.
A single Palmillas point (Fig. 5, C) was associated with Travis
points at a depth of 27 inches in Stratum 2.
Two Ellis points (Fig. 5, D-E) were found, one (E) associated with
Travis points at a depth of 33 inches in Stratum 2, the other (D)
associated with the Montell point at a depth of 10 inches in Stratum 4b.
Of the six Tortugas points found (Fig. 5. F-K), only three have

Fig. 6. Projectile points from Crumley site. A-D, Castreville type; E-K, Montell; L-Q,
Marshall; R-V, Marcos.

CRUMLEY SITE

251

reliable provenience data. Two were in Stratum 4a at a depth of 19
inches, and the third was in Stratum 4b at a depth of 17 inches. The
specimen at F is alternately beveled on the left; the specimen at O is
alternately beveled on the right. The remainder (H-K) are beveled
on both sides of both faces. All are finely made except K, which is
heavily patinated. It is thought to have come from Stratum 2, but the
provenience is doubtful.
Lange points at the Crumley site are rather numerous, 27 specimens being recovered in situ. Of these, 81~o were associated with
Pedernales points in Stratum 4a. Six examples are shown in Fig. 5,

L-Q.
The Williams point (Fig. 5, B-X), represented by 11 specimens,
was also associated with Pedernales points in Stratum 4a, 80~o of the
specimens being so associated.
Castroville points (Fig. 6, A-D), five in number, but only two in
situ, were associated with the Montell point in Stratum 4b. Castroville
points occurred only in Squares B-7 and C-7.
Montell (Fig. 6, E-K) was the principal type of Stratum 4, where
17 specimens were located at an average depth of 15.5 inches. Four of
these were associated with the uppermost Pedernales points in Stratum
4a, and 13 were associated with Castroville, Befugio, Marshall, Williams, and Marcos points in Stratum 4b. All specimens are either
broken or unfinished. The horizontal distribution of the Montell points
appears to be significant. Twelve points were spread along the northern boundary of the site, suggesting a late "up hill" occupation. The
squares involved are A-5 (! specimen), B-6 (1), B-7 (2), C-7 (1),
B-8 (3), B-9 (1), C-10 (2), and C-ll (1). Six more occur in Squares
D-9, D-11, E-9, E-10, and E-l!, suggesting another occupation.
Of the 10 Marshall points (Fig. 6, L-Q), four were associated with
Pedernales points in Stratum 4a and three with Montell points in
Stratum 4b.
The Marcos type, represented by 8 in situ specimens (Fig. 6, B-V),
appeared in Stratum 4a (4 specimens) and Stratum 4b (4).* The
main associations are with Montell and Pedernales points.
A total of 182 Pedernales points (Fig. 7, A-K) was collected at the
Crumley site, and it was the dominant type in Stratum IVa (146 in
situ specimens). It was most closely associated with Kinney, Williams,
and Lange points. While there was no natural stratigraphic separation
between Stratum 4a and Stratum 4b, there is positive artifact stratigra* The horizontal distributions of Marcos, Marshall, and Castroville closely followed that of Montelt--along the northern edge of the site, Six Marshall points were
clustered with Montell in Squares D-9, D-10, D-I i, E-10, and E-11.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

Fig.
Nolan.

7. Projectile points

from

Crumley site. A-K, Pedernales type;

SOCIETY

L-S, Travis; T-Z,

CtlUMLEY SITE

253

phy, with Montell, Marshall, Marcos, and Castroville points associated
with and also overlying Pedernales points. A check was made to determine if there was any chronological significance in the presence or
absence of barbs in the Pedernales point. No significant vertical distributions were noted.
The Traufs point (Fig. 7, L-S), represented by 69 specimens, was
the most popular style in Stratum 2 (54 irz situ). Several Travis points
(as Fig. 7, M-N) are heavily patinated and resemble Angostura points,
but they lack the parallel flaking and basal grinding of Angostura
points. Specimens M and N and the Angostura point shown in Fig. 9,
P, were found closely associated. At the Crumley site Travis points
are closely associated with Nolan points.
The Nolan point (Fig. 7, T-Z), represented by 42 in situ specimens,
was almost as popular as the Travis point in Stratum 2. All the Nolan
points are alternately beveled on the stem, and one (Y) is also alternately beveled on the blade. Nearly all of these points have stems
beveled on the right.
A total of 111 Bulverde points (Fig. 8, A-G) was found in the various artifact-bearing strata, where they were associated with all the
major projectile point types. It was the longest-lived style in the midden. However, it was most popular in Stratum 2 (58%), decreased in
Stratum 4a (to 37.5%), and was very rare in Stratum 4b (4.5%).
Because of wide variation in the Bulverde points at the Crumley site,
as well as in the type as defined by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954:
404), several analyses were made. First, all Bulverde points were carefully profiled in Stratum 2 and Stratum 4. A check was made to see if
there was any stratigraphic segregation of the barbed (C, D, and E)
and the shouldered varieties (A, B, F, and G). Both forms were found
to be closely associated in all levels. A check was also made on variations in basal outline. It was found that concave-based Bulverde
points, which resemble some variants of the Pedernales type, were
about evenly distributed in Stratum 2 and Stratum 4. A final check
was made on the stratigraphic position of the square-shouldered,
straight-based Bulverde points, which resemble Travis points in all
features except the shoulders. It was found that 22 out of 23 such
specimens occurred in Stratum 2, where they were closely associated
with the Travis points they resemble. This relationship should be
checked at other stratified sites, for this may lead to modification of
the Bulverde type.
"Trolal~" is a term that has been coined for seven specimens (Fig.
8, H-M) whose characteristics indicate an intermediate position between types Travis and Nolan, hence the hybrid term "Trolan." These

Fig. 8. Projectile points from Crumley site. A-G, Bulverde type; H-M, "Trolan;" N-T,
"unidentified concave base;" U, Shumla (?); V-Z, unclassified.

CRUMLEY SITE

265

have the stem and shoulder outlines of the Travis-Nolan range but
lack alternately beveled stems. Five of these are from Stratum 2, where
they were associated with both Travis and Nolan points, and two are
from Stratum 4a.
Nine specimens are here designated by the term "unidentified concave base" (Fig. 8, N-T). These occur in Stratum 2 for the most part
(6 specimens) and are quite deep in the midden. N and Q may be
Bulverde variants.
The remaining 63 specimens cannot be classified (some are in too
fragmentary a condition for classification). Fig. 8, U, may be a Shumla point. Fig. 8, V is very thin and finely chipped, but lacks provenience data. W through Z are all forms that occur in Stratum 2. Z, which
lacks basal grinding, is probably a Travis variant.
As for Paleo-Indian points, the Meserve type is represented by two
specimens (Fig. 9, N-O), both from Stratum 2, one at a depth of 2!
inches and the other at a depth of 36 inches. In both specimens the
blade is alternately beveled on the left, and specimen 0 is lightly
ground at the base. Two Arzgostura points were also found (Fig. 9,
P-Q). Specimen P was found at a depth of 25 inches in Square B-7 and
was associated with two Travis points. Specimen Q occurred at a depth
of 23 inches in Square F-8, but was not closely associated with any
other artifacts. Both Angostura points are from Stratum 2 and bear a
heavy white patina. Q has been rechipped at the distal end, as indicated
by the absence of patina. This appears to support the theory of Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks (1964: 10~) that Archaic peoples in central Texas
sometimes picked up projectile points from Paleo-Indian sites and used
them. A prolific Angostura site, the Levi Rocksheher, is located only
10 miles north of the Crumley site.
The point illustrated in Fig. 9, R, was found at a depth of 18 inches
in Square E-8 (Stratum 2) near a Nolan point. It lacks basal grinding,
and may be a local copy of Angostura or possibly a knife.
The large point in Fig. 9, S, resembles a Clovis point but lacks fluting. It occurred in Stratum 2 (Square D-!0, depth 28 inches) closely
associated with Travis and "Trolan" points. It also lacks basal grinding.
Drills. Sixteen artifacts have been classified as drills. Of these, 13
have lenticular cross sections and three have diamond-shaped cross
sections. Experimentation indicated that specimens with lenticular
cross sections at the distal end could not have been used very well as
drills on anything as hard as wood or soft stone. As with a knife point,
the sharp edges bind and snap off. Four drills (unlabeled surface finds
from elsewhere) were expended in demonstrating this limitation. The

Fig.

9.

Stone

artifacts

from

Crumley

site.

A-L,

drills;

points; P-Q, Angostura points; R-S, unclassified dart points.

M,

gorget;

N-O,

Meserve

CRUMLEY SITE

~5

drills with diamond-shaped cross sections have twice as much bearing
surface and remain centered in the work. Consideration should be
given to identifying all chipped stone perforators as awls if they have
thin, lenticular cross sections. Such specimens were probably used in
sewing skins together.
In line with this argument, I would classify only three specimens
from the Crumley site as drills, the specimens shown in Fig. 9 at E, F,
and H. Specimens E and F are from Stratum 4a, and specimen H is
from Stratum 4b.
Of the remaining specimens, Fig. 9, A and B, are from Stratum 2;
C and D are closely associated with Pedernales points in Stratum 4a
(both have Pedernales type stems)~ and G, I, K, and L are from
Stratum 4b, associated with Marshall, Montell, and Castroville points.
Specimen I has a Williams type stem, and K and L have Marshall type
stems. G is the only key-shaped specimen found at the Crumley site.
Knives. These are defined as cutting tools that have been bifacially
worked from cores or heavy flakes. They are generally larger than dart
points. A few asymmetrical reshaped dart points are included because
they appear to have been modified for cutting purposes.
The classification of knives and the study of their associations with
specific projectile point types has been largely neglected in Texas
archeology. The 210 specimens considered here have been arbitrarily
classified, and significance is attached only to those represented by adequate samples and predominantly confined to one stratum.
Characteristic of Stratum 4 are stemmed knives (Fig. 10, A-F; Fig.
l l, L), five being associated with 4a and three with 4b. Specimen B,
which has a Williams type stem, is from Stratum 2 and is probably
intrusive, as no Williams points were found in Stratum 2. An additional stemmed knife was not found in place. Specimen A, an
asymmetrical knife with indented base, is closely associated with
Pedernales points. Specimen D, with a Williams type stem, was associated with Montell points in Stratum 4b. Specimen E, with a
slightly indented rudimentary stem, was associated with Bulverde
points in Stratum 4b; and specimen F, an asymmetrically rechipped
Bulverde point, was closely associated with Pedernales pofnts in Stratum 4a. Fig. 11, L, is the largest stemmed knife (length 10.8 cm.) and
is associated with Pedernales points. It could also be classified as a
Marshall dart point.
Twelve thin pear-shaped knives (Fig. 10, G-L) were associated
with Pedernales points in Stratum 4a. An additional specimen lacks
provenience data. All have thinned bases and could have been hafted;

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig.

10. Knives from Crumley site. A-F, stemmed knives; G-L, thin pear-shaped knives.

CRUMLEY SITE

259

most of them are somewhat asymmetrical. In length they vary from
7 to 9.5 cm.
Twenty-five knives are here referred to as "odd shapes." Only one
or a few of each kind were found. Included in this category are two
singled-shouldered knives (Fig. i l, J-K) that were associated with
points of Pedernales type in Stratum 4a (cf. Patterson, !936; Plate 2,
Fig. 6). A back-tang knife, different from forms described by Patterson (op. cir.), was associated with Pedernales points in Stratum 4a.
This odd specimen (Fig. 12, A) is 8.3 cm. long and 5 cm. wide and al!
of its edges are sharpened without benefit of pressure flaking. Another
oddity is a kni[e shaped like a shoe last (Fig. 12, G) that was associated
with Travis and Nolan points in Stratum 2. It has a length of 13 cm., a
width of 8 cm., and its edges were formed by pressure flaking. A single
convex-based triangular knife (Fig. 11, A) was associated with Bulverde and Nolan points in Stratum 2. Another unique specimen was
a concave-based triangular knife (Fig. 12, B), associated with Travis
and Nolan points in Stratum 2. Of these various odd-shaped knives,
&3~ were found in Stratum 2, 57~ in Stratum 4a; none was found
in Stratum 4b.

Thin lanceolate knives (Fig. 11, B-C) are represented by eight
specimens that are about evenly divided among the artifact-bearing
strata (2 in Stratum 2; 2 in 4a; 1 in 4b; 1 with no provenience record.)
Asymmetrical knives (Fig. 11, D, I; Fig. 12, D) are characteristic
of Stratum 2, where six specimens were associated with Travis and
Nolan points. All are finely percussion flaked. Three more asymmetrical knives lack records.
Thin, pressure-flaked knives (Fig. 11, E-H) occur in Stratum 4a,
where two specimens were associated with Pedernales points, and in
Stratum 4b, where five specimens were closely associated with Monte!l
points. The thinnest and most neatly flaked knife at the Crumley site
is Fig. 11, E. It is not broken at the base as appears in the illustration.
This base is a flat striking platform covered with calcium carbonate,
which contrasts sharply with the glossy black flint. This material is
rare at the Crumley site. The thin edges of this knife are translucent.
It has a maximum thickness of 3 mm.
Large, thin, ovate knives (Fig. 12, C, E, F, H), all finely percussion
flaked and ranging" in length from 8.5 to 16 cm., occurred in Stratum
2. As all four specimens were found in Squares C-4, C-6, and C-7 at
depths ranging from 25 to 33 inches, they probably represent a single
occupational period.

Circular knives (Fig. 13, A-G, I) were closely associated with Peder-

Fig. 1 1. Knives from Crumley site. A, odd form; B-C, thin lanceolate; D, I, asymmetrical;
E-H, miscellaneous thin, pressure-flaked knives; J-K, single-shouldered; L, stemmed.

CRUMLEY SITE

26t

nales points in Stratum 4a (6 specimens). In maximum diameter they
range from 5 to 8 cm. They are usually sharp all around except for a
finger-sized space, which may be a fracture surface (F, G, I) or pecked
smooth (A, B, E). Three additional specimens lack provenience records.
The remaining knives consist of fragments. Five basal fragments
from Stratum 2 are similar to the large knives shown in Fig. 12, C-E.
Nineteen fragments have convex bases like Fig. 11, D, but are not so
well made. Of these, seven are from Stratum 2, nine from Stratum 4a,
and two from Stratum 4b. Horizontally they are well scattered over
the site. An additional 26 basal fragments show considerable variation, but most of them have bases nearly at right angles to straight
lateral edges (!1 in Stratum 2; 12 in 4a; 3 with no provenience records).
In a final special category are heavy, thick, ovate knives (Fig. 16,
H-J), also frequently called heavy bifaces. Of 2! complete specimens,
17 were found in situ: four in Stratum 2, nine in Stratum 4a, and four
in Stratum 4b. In length these ranged from 9.6 to !3 cm., in width
from 4.5 to 6.3 cm., and in thickness from 1.5 to 2.5 cm. Generally
the base and distal point are sharp, but the lateral edges are rather
crudely chipped. Several show evidence of considerable wear at the
base, suggesting that this was the business end. Others have fiat bases
and worn distal points (see I) ; these may have been used as wedges.
Two (see J) are constricted at the mid-section and may have been
hafted.
Clear Fork Gouges. Five of these (Fig. 13, H, J-K) were found at
the Crumley site, one from Stratum 1 at a depth of 53 inches, three
from Stratum 2 associated with Travis points, and one from Stratum
4a associated with Bulverde points. All have steeply beveled bits.
Gravers. Four gravers were recovered from Stratum 4a, two being
modifications of knife fragments. The others (Fig. 16, A-B) are more
carefully shaped, and one of them (B) is an end-scraper with a graver
beak on one lateral edge. An additional 33 gravers were recovered
from miscellaneous flint debris collected at the site.
Choppers. These artifacts, 51 in number, with 46 in situ, are heavy
core tools with one edge sharpened and the opposed edge left unworked to fit the hand comfortably. Of these, 13 are unifacial choppers
(Fig. 14, E), consisting of split pebbles with one convex edge chipped
(6 specimens in Strautm 4a, 5 in Stratum 4b, 2 not in situ). Biracial
choppers (Fig. 14, C) are much more numerous, 33 specimens, seven
in Stratum 2, 99,0 in Stratum 4a, three in Stratum 4b, and three not
in situ. Five additional specimens that are better chipped and more

Fig. 12. Knives from Crumley site. A, stemmed; B, triangular; C-E, large, thin knives;
F, H, ovate; G, shoe-last form.

uniform in shape are designated as fist axes (Fig. 14, D, F, G). Three
of these are from Stratum 4a and two from Stratum 4b. They are
associated with Pedernales, Montell, Castroville, and Marcos points.
Flake Tools and Flint Flakes. Flake tools with rechipped concave
edges are designated as spokeshaves (Fig. 15, A-C, E, G-I, L, O-Q).
In situ specimens total 67, but 92 additional spokeshaves were found
in the miscellaneous flint debris collected from the site. Most of the
in situ specimens (56) are chipped on only one face, the remainder
(11) on both faces. They were widely distributed in all layers. In
length these concave-edge scraping tools range from 5 to 13 cm. The
retouched concavity varies from slightly concave to deeply concave,
and a number of specimens bear two such concavities (Fig. 15, E).
Other scraping tools were not carefully studied, although they were
sorted into five categories--uniface, biface, unifacial beveled, flake,
and chisel. A total of 174 scrapers was catalogued, and reliable provenience data show the following distribution: 49_, in Stratum 2, 55 in
Stratum 4a (associated with Pedernales points), and 12 in Stratum
4b. It seems that when a scraper was needed, it was made on the spot
from available material and probably to suit the particular piece of
business at hand.
Thin, elongated flakes with one or both lateral edges retouched
(sometimes apparently only from use) are designated as flake knives.
Sorted from the miscellaneous flint debris were 624 such specimens.
From the same source 1782 flint flakes were also sorted, apparently
the residue of too! manufacture at this site.
Stone Gorget. A single polished stone gorget (Fig. 9, M) was found
in the top soil at a depth of 5 inches. It was not associated with any
dart points, the closest being a Martindale point several feet away
and at a depth of 8 inches. This ornament is made of dolomite, possibly
from the Boquillas formation of western Texas, but it could also be
local limestone that has been burned (John A. Wilson, personal communication). Some of our bonfire experiments in cooking on limestone
and extracting flint from limestone produced colors similar to those
in the gorget (yellow, pink, and cream bands). This specimen has a
length of 7.8 cm., a maximum width of 3.8 cm, and an average thickness of 1 cm. The two holes are biconically drilled, each cone having
an outer diameter of about 8 ram. and an inner diameter of about
3ram.

Hand Stones. Seven one-hand manos were recovered, but only one
of these was found in situ (Fig. 14, B). This specimen is made of very
abrasive pumice and was found in Stratum 9%. The hand stone shown

Fig. 13. Knives and gouges from Crumley site. A-G, I, circular knives; H, J-K, Clear
Fork gouges.

CRUNILEY SITE

265

Fig. 14. Grinding and chopping tools from Crumley site. A-B, hand stones; C, blface
chopper; D, F-G, hand axes; E, uniface chopper.

266

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in Fig. 14, A, is made of an unidentified dense stone and is covered
with red ochre.
Clay Lumps. Five lumps of dense white clay or kaolin were scattered
in both Stratum 2 and Stratum 4. Four of these ~re roughly spherical
in form, but the fifth (Fig. 16, C) is shaped like a modern cake of soap
and shows evidence of abrasion. No white clay was observed in the
vicinity of the Crumley site.
Bone Artifacts. Twelve sections of antler were recovered, and several
appear to have served as handles for tools (Fig. 16, F-G). O.ne eroded
piece of bone appears to have been used as a flaking too! (Fig. 16, E).
Faunal Remains
Bone was poorly preserved at the Crumley site, and every long-bone
appears to have been split for extraction of marrow. The 105 bone
specimens have been filed at the Vertebrate Paleontology Laboratory,
The University of Texas, Austin. The mammals represented include
deer, bison (tooth illustrated in Fig. 16, D), and wolf, coyote, or dog
(Curtis D. Tunnell, personal communication).
Literally hundreds of thousands of snai! shells were found in the
midden, frequently in layers up to 9 inches thick, particularly in
Stratum 2 and Stratum 4. Snails must have been used for food by the
peoples who occupied this site. The principal species represented is
Bulimulus dealbatus (Say), but Helicina orbiculata tropica (Pfeiffer)
and Polygyra texasiana (Moricand) occur as minor types (Don Allen,
personal communication).

Radiocarbon Dating
Three samples of charcoal from the Crumley site were submitted
to the Geochemical Laboratory of the Humble Oil and Refining Company, Houston, Texas. Only one of the three samples was large enough
for dating purposes. This sample, O-1315, consists of charcoal enclosed
by baked clay in the transition zone between Stratum 1 and Stratum 2
(Square B-4) and represents the initial occupation at the Crumley
site. It was collected in 1960 and dated in May, 1961, at 3275 - 125
years ago or 1315 - 125 B.c.

Summary and Conclusions
The stratigraphy and artifacts from the Crumley site indicate a
series of intermittent occupations by human groups who shared the
same basic culture. This culture is commonly referred to as the Edwards Plateau Aspect of the Archaic Stage in Texas. Significant facts

Fig. 15. Flake tools from Crumley site. A-C, E, G-I, L, O-Q, spokeshaves; D, F, J-K,
M-N, R, flake knives,

268

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

concerning these occupations may be summarized as follows.
Stratum 1. The first occupants of the site built their fires on top of
an almost sterile accumulation of orange-yellow sand and red clay
that rests on limestone bedrock. The uppermost part of Stratum 1 probably represents the end of a dry, erosional period when sand was
moved by both wind and water. A few dart points (Nolan, Travis, and
"Crumley"), although charted as occurring in the base of Stratum 2,
actually occurred in the top of Stratum 1; but none was more than a
few inches below the very top of Stratum 1. A Clear Fork gouge also
occurred in the uppermost part of Stratum 1. The three charcoal samples were collected from this transitional zone, and the single dated
sample yielded an age determination of 1315 +-125 B.C. This date
appears to represent the beginning of human occupation at the Crumley site.
Stratum 2. This is a midden deposit attributable to groups of Edwards Plateau peoples who favored certain types of dart points, particularly Bulverde, Nolan, and Travis. Nolan and Travis points were
rarely used after the period represented by Stratum 2, but Bulverde
points continued to be popular afterward. Two Paleo-Indian types,
Angostura and Meserve, which were confined to Stratum 2, probably
represent survivals from earlier occupations in the surrounding area.
A few other dart point types were in use only during the period represented by Stratum 2, notably Abasolo, Palmillas, and "Crumley."
Sparingly represented, but also used in later occupational phases, were
such types as Ellis, Lange, Langtry, Marshall, Pandora, Pedernales,
"Trolan," Wells, and "unidentified concave base."
A study of Nolan and Travis horizontal distributions in Stratum 2
indicates at least three temporary occupations of the site. Among Bulverde points (second most popular type in Stratum 2), a variety with
square shoulders and straight base was almost entirely confined to
this stratum.
Asymmetrical and large, thin ovate knives were used only during
the period represented by Stratum 2, but various other knife forms
were present and most of these, especially those occurring in quantity,
continued in use during later occupational phases. This is true of other
classes of artifacts, but it appears to be significant that the Clear Fork
gouge at the Crumley site is largely confined to Stratum 2.
The peoples represented by Stratum 2 evidently ate snails in great
quantity, and fragments of deer and bison bone indicate heavy use of
these mammals for food. The abundance of heat-fractured limestone
indicates extensive use of limestone slabs around fires, presumably for
cooking purposes.

Fig. 16. Flint, bone, and antler objects from Crumley site. A-B, gravers; C, white clay
lump; D, bison tooth; E, bone flakinq tool; F-G, antler handles; H-K, thick ovate knives
or heavy bifaces.

270

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Stratum 3. The Crumley site was abandoned for a considerable time,
for the alluvial materials forming this layer are essentially sterile of
artifacts.
Stratum 4. This stratum indicates that the site was again occupied,
and by groups having virtually the same type of economy. Analysis
revealed changes in artifact styles during this phase of occupation. For
convenience in presentation, Stratum 4 was arbitrarily subdivided into
4a and 4b. No physical break could be observed in Stratum 4.
(1) Stratum 4a. In this substratum the Pedernales point was predominant, with Bulverde, Lange, Williams, and Marcos next most frequent in the order named. Darl and Kinney points were confined to
this substratum. A number of dart point types that appeared in Stratum 2 continued into Stratum 4a but not into 4b, these being Langtry,
Nolan, Pandora, Travis, "Trolan," Wells, and "unidentified concave
base." A few types appeared for the first time in Stratum 4a and continued into 4b, namely, Marcos, Montell, Tortugas, and Williams.
During this phase drills were made principally from dart points, the
points used being of types also used at this time. Circular, singleshouldered, pear-shaped, and back-tang knives, as well as gravers,
were in use only during the period represented by Stratum 4a. Choppers, particularly biracial choppers, were most popular at this time,
and finely made fist axes appeared for the first time.
In terms of artifacts the heaviest occupation of the Crumley site
occurred during the period represented by Stratum 4a. This could be
a matter of more individuals living at the site or of various groups remaining longer each time the site was used.
(2) Stratum 4b. During the period represented by this substratum
there were changes in artifact styles and frequencies. Montell was the
dominant projectile point type. Bulverde, Marcos, and Pedernales tie
for second place in frequency, and Marshall is in third place. Castroville and Refugio points were in use only during this occupational
phase. Other points that were infrequently used include Ellis, Lange,
Tortugas, and Williams. It is of interest to note that Refugio and Ellis
points occurred only in the uppermost part of Stratum 4b. Horizontal
clustering of certain point types was noted, particularly of Marshall
and Montell.
Unifacial choppers were more popular than biracial choppers, but
fist axes continued to be used.
Stratum 4b was low in artifact yield, only about 10 % of the Crumley series occurring here. The site was used less frequently or else was
occupied for a shorter span of time.

271

CRUI~LEY SITE

Stratum 5. After the occupations of Stratum 4 the Crumley site was
abandoned. Some 9 to 12 inches of dark soil accumulated, and this
contained no fire-fractured rock or flint debris, and very few snail
shells. Casual visitors to the site probably left the few artifacts recovered--a Frio point, a Martindale point, and a stone gorget.
As no identifiable Central Texas Aspect artifacts were found at the
Crumley site, it was probably abandoned well before A.D. 1200, the
latest date that anyone has assigned to the inception of the Central
Texas Aspect. The absence of certain dart point types, such as Ensor
and Edgewood, believed to be late in the Edwards Plateau Aspect,
suggests abandonment of the site before the close of Edwards Plateau
Aspect occupation in this area. Thus the Crumley site may be referred
to a time period between about 1300 B.C. and sometime in the early
part of the Christian Era.

Speculations
The physical size of the midden suggests that the Crumley site was
occupied by a few families at the most. Campers today would probably not burn more than three fires at one time in this area, and it is
hard to conceive of Archaic peoples, with all outdoors to live in, crowding even that much. Why then so many tons of burned rock? And
why so many flint artifacts in such a small area?
No flint is now readily available in this immediate area. What was
the source of the thousand pounds or so of flint found at this site? My
theory is that flint was extracted in lenses and nodules from limestone
slabs and boulders from the hillside by heating in fires and possibly
quenching in water. Several campfire experiments indicated the
feasibility of this method. Experiments also indicated that cooking
meat on heated limestone slabs is practical and efficient.
One final question cannot be answered satisfactorily, namely, why
was the Crumley site not occupied by the later Central Texas Aspect
peoples? Possibly it was occupied and the remains lie buried nearby,
but there are no surface indications.

Acknowledgments
The excavation of the Crumley site and the preparation of this report were made possible by assistance from a large number of individuals. I would like to express appreciation to each of the following:
to Mr. Ewell Crumley, for permission to excavate the site; to Master
Sergeant Gordon L. Mack, for aid in both excavation and laboratory
work; to Master Sergeant Paul J. Ambrico for professional photogra-

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

phy; to my wife, Genie, for her tolerance during the period when our
house was cluttered with archeological specimens; to staff members of
the Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas, namely,
T. N. Campbell, E. Mott Davis, Dale Givens, Edward B. Jelks, and
Curtiss Tunne!l, for advice and assistance; to members of the University of Texas Archeological Society and others from Austin whose
labor in the field is deeply appreciated---Jake Bergolofsky, Mr. and
Mrs. Bill Belk, Claud Bramblett, Marilyn Clark, Rosemary Clark,
Tom Cook, Douglas Dashiell, Jim Davig, Gary Crow, Jules Gipson,
Martha Gould, Johnny Greer, Molly Hays, Frances Hemphill, Phil
Kendall, Glen Lockhart, Jackie McKinney, Buddy Miller, Parker Nunley, Leslie Pennington, Jane Phelps, Ed Power, Bernie Richert, Dan
Scurlock, Iteggie Sheffield, Sharon Stanfield, Billy Taylor, Alice Valentine, Frank Weir, and Jane Williams; and the following individuals
from San Antonio also rendered valuable assistance: Merrilea and
Tommy Kelly, Jimmy McCabe, and Mrs. Mardith K. Schuetz.

U. S. Air Force

References Cited
Kelley, J. Charles, and T. N. Campbell
1942. What are the Burnt Rock Mounds of Texas? American Antiquity, Vol. 7,
No. 3, pp. 319-322.
Patterson, J. T.
1936. The Corner-tang Artifacts of Texas. The University of Texas Bulletin, No.
3618.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960. A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958), pp. 63-107.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.

