An Archeologlcal Survey in
the South Concho River Area,
West Central Texas
DARRELL CREEL

ABSTRACT
A small area along the South Concho River in west central
Texas was surveyed in an effort to correlate different archeological
remains with microenvironmental zones. The recovered data suggest
a subsistence-settlement pattern in which occupation and most of the
food procurement occurred in the riparian zone. Exploitation of the
flatlands or outwash plains probably was restricted to procurement
of animal foods, while the most apparent use of upland areas was
procurement of lithic raw materials

INTRODUCTION
West Central Texas is rich in cultural remains, though poorly
understood archeologically. In an effort to learn more about prehistoric resource use in the region, a small area along the South
Concho River (Tom Green County) was systematically surveyed by
the author for archeological sites on several occasions in 1975 and
1976. To protect these sites, all locational references herein are
nonspecific; persons should contact the author for more detailed
information.
Prior to this study, it was known that the study area contained
abundant archeological remains, including most notably, burned
rock middens. The area was also known to have been essentially a
prairie until perhaps 75-100 years ago when widespread expansion of mesquite, juniper, and oak began (Figs. 1-3). This naturally

242

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

raised the question of what resource(s) had been exploited that
resulted in the large accumulations of burned rock and other
cultural debris. None of the plants whose processing produced the
burned rock middens of west and southwest Texas presently occur
in the region (Greer 1965: Shafer 1970). Were the oaks and pecan
now found near the streams present in prehistoric times and were
these the resources that were utilized? These questions led to
further speculation concerning the overall nature of prehistoric
resource use, and this speculation in turn led to the investigation
reported here. With the abovementioned questions as stimuli, a
general objective was set forth for the study.
The objective of the investigation was to determine the relationships between the distribution of resources and the
distribution of the various types of archeological remains. As a
primary objective, this aim is founded on the concept that "... the
determination of resource use tends to precede and condition the
site placements and demographic arrangements of a huntergatherer group" (Jochim 1976: 12). Assuming that all archeological
remains are those of hunting and gathering populations, the focus
of the investigation can be directed toward the general resource
exploitation patterns characteristic of aboriginal populations in
the area.
This objective required a standard survey of the archeological
remains to determine the number of sites present and the nature of
their content. From the survey, preliminary concepts of site type,
size, condition, and, whenever possible, age were to be developed
as necessary antecedants to further investigation. These kinds of
information certainly must be gathered as a broad data base
before specific questions can be answered or hypotheses t~sted.
Perhaps appropriately mentioned at this early point is the
particularly flexible nature of the investigation, in as much as it
has influenced the appraisal of the archeological remains. The
relative lack of time restraints on the survey is the most significant
aspect of the flexibility, for it made possible at least two visits to
nearly every site, each during a different time of the year. In many
cases, the overall appearance of sites changed considerably from
one visit to the next and often influenced the determination of site
structure and content. Not only were the archeological remains
seen in differing conditions, but their environmental situations
were observed as they varied with seasonal change. As will be
explained later, these observations on environmental changes

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

243

b
FIGURE 1. Riparian Microenvironment. a, view of partiallydammed South Concho River; bottom, wooded area.

FIGURE 2. Flatlands Microenvironment.
mesquite; b, uncleared mesquite brush ara.

a,

area

cleared of

244

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

frequently provided important bits of data for understanding the
differential availability of certain resources. Repeated visits to any
research area during all seasons of the year appear to be essential
for adequate investigation into environmental relationships; the
investigator in effect gains a greater appreciation of the subtle
peculiarities of his research area.

FIGURE 3. Upland Microenvironment. a, view of uplands in study
area; b, closer view of typical upland are.

RESEARCH DESIGN
A research design that would fulfill the previously mentioned objective, had to be based on two assumptions. Foremost,
is the already noted assumption that the population(s), whose
relationships with the environment are the subject of the investigation, were hunters and gatherers. The second assumption, as
implied, is that patterned relationships between the environment
and culture as an adaptive system do in fact exist and are
amenable to observation and analysis.

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

245

Assumption I
All available evidence indicates that the prehistoric and
historic aboriginal groups who inhabited the region surrounding
the research area were hunters and gatherers (Suhm 1960: 73;
Shafer 1971: 131; Weir 1976). The archeological remains investigated in west central Texas clearly are similar to those of
adjacent regions where the peoples were hunters and gatherers
(Shafer 1969: 95; Green 1961: 194-196). Similarly, groups known
to have been in the area during historic times--Jumano, Lipan
Apache, Comanche, and perhaps the Tonkawa--were also
hunting and gathering peoples, although some of the Lipan
Apache occasionally gardened (Newcomb 1961: 113).
Assumption II
According to Struever (1968: 136), a population’s articulation with its environment through patterned relationships occurs
within two milieus, one biophysical, the other social. Archeological investigation generally is restricted to evidence from the
biophysical realm. In this respect,
The most accessible and direct relationship between a culture and its
environment is expressed in its technological and economic adaptations, and those cultural forms most closely related with these
pursuits (Fitzhugh 1972: 7).

Expressions of these relationships are most evident in a population’s subsistence-settlement pattern.
Subsistence can be defined as the extraction of biological
energy from the environment and in hunting-gathering societies is
basically determined by technology and resource potential. Given
that a population’s environment contains sufficient exploitable
resources, extraction of biological energy at predetermined levels
requires an adequate technology. Thus, a population must not only
possess the techniques for procuring energy, it must also be capable of processing the energy into a consumable form.
With an adequate technology, extraction of energy (in contrast with production) is largely dependent on resource potential,
which is itself a function of distribution in both time and space.
Energy harvest at predefined levels is necessarily adapted to
temporal and geographical variation in potential; therefore,
evidence of this adaptation in terms of procurement, processing,

246

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and consumption should be reflected in the patterned remains of
the archeological record. Similar extractive activities can be
expected to produce patterned remains indicative of those activities. Essentially then, a correlation must exist between the
archeological remains and the patterned structure of the biophysical environment as influenced to a varying extent by the social
environment. This configuration is observable as a population’s
subsistence-settlement pattern, with the different settlement types
exhibiting different material remains.

RESEARCH STRATEGY
Predicated on the objective of this investigation and the two
assumptions discussed above, the research strategy and the
presentation in this report logically involve four phases.
I. A brief review of general patterns in hunter-gatherer subsistence-settlement systems is presented. The focus is on
those patterned relationships between populations and
their environment that lend themselves to archeological
investigation.
II. With the background data and expectations derived from
the first phase of research, the strategy shifts to actual
investigation of the study area. Phase II, then, is the investigation of the biophysical environment of both the research
area and the surrounding region. Intensive analysis of the
survey area must necessarily be complemented by a more
general regional analysis since the ecosystem of which it is
part is certainly not delimited by the arbitrary survey
boundaries. Investigation includes past and present environments, as well as the nature of their differences.
III. Phase III is the archeological investigation and analysis of
the recovered data. Consideration is given the nature of the
data, including the sites, features, artifacts, and other
remains. From the analysis, hopefully, qualitative and
quantitative differences among site types can be demonstrated.
IV. The final phase synthesizes the information gathered
during the preceding phases and essentially is an attempt
at correlation of the environmental and archeological data
in terms of resource exploitation. In addition, Phase IV, as
an overall synthesis, will be a measure of this investiga-

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

247

tion’s contribution toward an understanding of prehistoric
resource utilization systems in Texas and adjoining areas.

HUNTER-GATHERER SUBSISTENCE AND SETTLEMENT
Making the assumption that the archeological remains in the
reserach area are those of hunting and gathering peoples,
certain generalizations on subsistence-settlement patterns of
such populations must be borne in mind in an investigation of
resource utilization. Several such regularities have been ethnographically observed in many hunting-gathering societies and are
generally assumed to apply as well to societies known only
through archeological remains. Recognizing, of course, that the
arbitrarily delineated research area cannot be expected to
correspond to any prehistoric group’s concept of "its territory,"
the focus of this review is necessarily directed away from
comments on territoriality and toward characteristics of group
composition, subsistence, and settlement.
Typical of all known hunting and gathering societies is a
social unit composed of those individuals, generally related, who
interact with one another on a day-to-day basis (Murdock 1949:
79}. Known by several names, in this report, such a group is
termed a band. It is the basic exploitation unit whose flexibility
in composition allows for variable response to environmental
conditions, both social and biophysical.
... the fluid organization of recent hunters has certain adaptive
advantages, including the adjustment of group size to resources, the
leveling out of demographic variance, and the resolution of conflict
by fission (Lee and DeVore 1968: 8).

When resources permit, two or more bands frequently congregate
to take advantage of the surplus as well as the opportunity for
social interaction. Coahuiltecan bands, for example, came together
for "tuna fests" in areas where prickly pear (Opuntia sp.) fruit was
especially abundant (Hodge 1907).
Another social unit characteristic of hunting and gathering
peoples is that known as the "dialectal tribe"; it is the largest
group having face-to-face contact at some point in the yearly
round. "In short, the dialectal tribe can be defined as a collection
of interacting groups.., sharing a linguistic dialect and forming a

248

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

territory-specific cultural and genetic unit" (Nunley 1973:25).
When studying the archeological record of hunter-gatherers
for information about social organization, one should keep in mind
certain concepts set forth by Jochim (1976). He found five objectives that guide decisions about population aggregation:
1. Provision of food for the population.
2. Resource procurement in the predetermined proportions at low cost.
3. Resource procurement in the predetermined proportions with high
security.
4. Insurance of reproductive viability.
5. Provision of social interaction {Jochim 1976: 70).

The first three, perhaps, lend themselves most directly to observation and interpretation in archeological research, for they
are often discernible from intra- and extrasite evidence. Intrasite
evidence can consist of faunal and floral remains as well as artifacts. Extrasite evidence is derived from environmental studies,
both qualitative and quantitative, and can be most useful in
studying resource procurement at low cost and with high security.
Inferences may then be possible about potential and probable
group size.
Jochim has proposed that two major goals guide resource use
decisions among hunter-gatherer groups:
1. The attainment of a secure level of food and manufacturing needs.
2. The maintenance of energy expenditure within a predefined range,
determined partly by the need for population aggregation (1976: 19).

Certainly, cultural definition of what constitutes a "secure level"
and the acceptable range of energy expenditure must be conditioned by resource availability or potential. Fortunately, availability can be studied in modern environments and frequently can
be estimated to varying degrees for paleoenvironments. Resources
commonly considered include water, food, fuel, and raw materials
for manufacture of tools and other needed or desired items.
Although procurement of food at a secure level is clearly a
primary concern, the desire and perhaps nutritional necessity
for variety in the diet is also a strong influence.
Whenever two or more kinds of natural foods are available, one
would predict that the population exploiting them would emphasize
the more reliable source. We would also expect, however, that the

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

249

people would not neglect the alternative means of subsistence (Lee
1968: 41).

In this respect, gathering generally functions as the economic
backbone of hunting and gathering societies, even though it may be
considered by them to supply supplementary foods and is avoided
when possible (Nunley 1973: 23-240. Conversely, while hunting
and/or fishing may provide only a fraction of the diet, they tend to
be held more important.
The more secure a resource, the greater is its attraction for
settlement. Typically, settlements are located nearer denser and
less mobile resources. Food, fuel, water, view, and provision for
shelter appear to determine immediate location of camp sites.
Again following ]ochim (1976: 50),
The primary goals which operate in settlement placement among
hunter-gatherers, then, may be summarized as follows:
1. Proximity of economic resources
2. Shelter and protection from the elements.
3. View for observation of game and strangers.

With the seasonal and geographic variation in resource availability characteristic of most areas, occupation of a particular location
usually can be expected to coincide with the availability of the economically important resources. Degree of permanency of a settlement is partly a function of this restricted availability; thus,
hunter-gatherer groups typically change location in order to take
advantage of the variation.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS
An ecologically oriented archeological investigation must of
necessity include analysis of the structure of the biophysical environment and should consider both temporal and spatial variation
not only of the study area itself but of the surrounding region as
well. For this project, environmental data were gathered in two
ways: field investigation and literature research. Only through a
combination of the two was it possible to prepare a data set for
correlation with the archeological findings.
The actual field investigation was carried out by the author
while surveying for archeological remains. The data gathered are

250

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

primarily spatial in nature although important information on
seasonal change was also obtained. Significantly, the numerous
trips to the research area during all seasons of the year are felt to
have provided a more nearly complete assessment of the present
environment.
The data gleaned from the literature supplement that from the
field investigation and represent the major present source of information on the paleoenvironment. As a result of having to rely
primarily on tentative paleoenvironmental reconstructions of
somewhat distant regions, the temporal data are necessarily
generalized. It should be noted however, that the research area is
centrally located among three regions whose environmental
histories are better known though based in part on relatively
limited data, and therefore, generalizations derived from them are
considered reasonably applicable.
The following discussion of the environment will begin with
consideration of the analytical unit used in describing the ecological history of the research area and surrounding regions. With the
least known environments first, the discussion proceeds from the
end of the most recent glacial period to the better known present,
attention being focused on resource potential (insofar as the data
permit).
Because of its arbitrary boundaries and small size, the
research area in all probability does not correspond as a whole to
any aboriginally conceived cultural-spatial unit such as a band
territory. Therfore, in this study, the only spatial unit employed,
the microenvironment, is defined primarily, but not solely, on
ecological terms. The working definition used herein is taken from
Fitzhugh (1972: 138):
A minimal ecological unit of the environment usually with a distinct
faunal and floral signature. When defined in terms of culture it may
be a small portion of a local environment. Cultural adaptations are
generally geared to exploit the microenvironment including its varied
resources, rather than individual resource areas since in the microenvironment there are several resources available.

Given the gradient nature of the environment, it is clearly
recognized that actual boundaries separating microenvironments
are often difficult to delineate, if in fact they do exist as such;
characteristically, microenvironments interdigitate with one
another in a transitional zone known as an "ecotone" (Odum 1959:

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

251

278). Thus, the boundaries shown in Fig. 4 are approximate only
and in general reflect solely the linear extent of ecotones.
ECOLOGICAL HISTORY
Before describing in detail the recognized research area
microenvironments, it is necessary to consider the proposed development since 10,000 B.P. of the regional environment. As noted
previously, no study has yet been made of the paleoenvironment of
the research area itself, yet hypothesized reconstructions are
available for the LLano Estacado (north and northwest), the Lower
Pecos region (south and southwest), and the eastern part of central
Texas (southeast). These reconstructions are based on pollen
records from both archeological and non-archeological sties and
have synthesized the bulk of the available data.
Widespread climatic and vegetational transition in all three
regions is implied for the time following the end of the last glacial
(Bryant 1969: 145; Oldfield and Schoenwetter 1975: 167-168;
Bryant and Shafer 1977). Mesophytic parklands predominated
over the whole area before the shift toward savanna-like
vegetation. On the Llano Estacado, the pollen record for the Yellow
House Interval from 10,000-9000 B.P. suggests a gradual decrease
in pine frequency; that is, herb and scrub communities were
replacing the pinyon pine parkland, probably through declining
effective moisture. Pinyon was still common in the San Jon Subpluvial, 9000-7000 B.P., with no really drastic shift in vegetation
zones; "... mixed prairie communities are indicated over most of
the LLano between scattered stands of pinyon parkland in the most
favorable area" (Oldfield and Schoenwetter 1975: 168). As a
whole, the trend was generally toward a less mesic environment.
A similar progression is suggested by the pollen evidence for
the same time periods in both central Texas and the Lower Pecos
region. Bryant (1969: 118, 120) proposes that in the Lower Pecos,
the predominantly pinyon parklands of 10,000-7000 B.P. remained
relatively stable, though the climate was tending toward increasing aridity and the vegetation toward savanna-like conditions. Similarly, the mixed deciduous parklands of central Texas
were gradually being replaced by savanna vegetations of grasses,
oak, and hickory (Bryant 1969: 130).
Apparently inhabiting during this time both central and west
Texsa, as well as the Llano Estacado, were now-extinct species of

252

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

bison; this is implied by the presence of their bones in several
archeological sites dated between 12,000 and 8000-7000 B.P.
(Dillehay 1974: 181-182).
The trend toward less mesic conditions continues from 70004500 B.P. in all three regions. On the Llano Estacado, the vegetation had by about 7000 B.P. already approximated that of the
present as indicated by the pollen record; Oldfield and Schoenwetter (1975: 169) suggest that the region was an essentially
treeless prairie. With minor differences, a similar situation is
thought to have prevailed in central Texas. According to Bryant
(1969: 130-131), grasses increase, while the percentage of arboreal
vegetation is, with the exception of oak, generally low. Significantly, Bryant further proposes that, in at least one locality (South
Soefje Bog), a relatively high availability of water may have supported a restricted oak-ash-hickory parkland.
In the Lower Pecos region, the period from 7000-4500 B.P. is
characterized by erosional contacts in the alluvial sediments.
Analysis of pollen from pre- and post-erosional deposits indicates
a general trend toward less mesic conditions, with mesquite,
acacia, and agave first appearing in the pollen record in the
post-erosional deposits (Bryant 1969: 119-120). This observed or
suggested trend toward a less mesic environment in the Lower
Pecos, as well as central Texas and the Llano Estacado, may
perhaps partially explain the general absence of bison remains
in archeological sites in these regions (Dillehay 1974: 185). It is
at least arguable that the bison inhabiting the woodlands and
parklands of the Southern Plains prior to about 7000 B.P.
became extinct possibly as a result of their inability to adapt to
the changing environment.
The bones of modern bison occur widely in components from
about 4500 to 1500 B.P., but are not found from 1500 to 700-800
B.P. (Dillehay 1974: 182, 184). Their presence after 700-800 B.P.
is noted both by the occurrence of bone in archeological sites
and later by firsthand observation; they were documented as far
south as the Texas coastal plain by Cabeza de Vaca in 1533
(Hodge 1907: 68). The bison inhabiting these regions was clearly
a creature adapted to a prairie environment.
Such prairie conditions are clearly indicated by the pollen
record from about 4500 B.P. until the present in both the Llano
Estacado and the Lower Pecos region, less clearly in central
Texas (Oldfield and Schoenwetter 1975: 169; Bryant 1969: 145-

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

253

146). The general trend toward less mesic environments was
interrupted by a short period of more mesic conditions around
2500 B.P., but all regions are considered to have remained
essentially prairies and/or savannas composed primarily of oaks,
hickories, and grasses.
An incomplete survey of the literature suggests that since
perhaps as early as 4500 B.P., the faunal composition of these
regions--mammals at least--was remarkably similar to that
reported in historic times (Davis 1974}. This similarity is, as a
result of the inherent biases of the data, observable on a
qualitative basis only. More specifically, faunal lists from central
Texas archeological sites reveal that modern deer, bison, and
smaller mammals, reptiles, birds, mussels, and snails have all
been present during this period (Tunnell 1962; Sorrow et el.
1967). Likewise, the data from the Lower Pecos region indicate a
relatively unchanged species configuration in the last 7000-8000
years (Ruben 1968; Raun and Eck 1967; Word and Douglas 1970;
Prewitt 1970; Ken Lord, personal communication 1977). In
general, much the same can be said for the Llano Estacado
(Johnson 1976).
Summarizing then, the pollen records from the Llano
Estacado, the Lower Pecos region, and central Texas indicate a
general trend toward increased aridity after 10,000 B.P. By
about 7000 B.P., the vegetation was approximating that existent
100-200 years ago; as will be discussed subsequently, changes
since then appear to be more of degree than of kind. Because of
its intimate systemic relationships with the vegetation, the fauna
predictably appear to have concurrently developed a configuration similar to that of 100-200 years ago. Given, (1) the relatively
minor overall differences in physiography between these three
regions, (2) their rather similar ecological histories, and (3) the
gradient nature of environmental conditions, it seems reasonable
to infer that the centrally located research area experienced an
environmental evolution generally paralleling that of adjacent
regions. Therefore, it is suggested that the microenvironmental
structure of west central Texas since about 7000-8000 B.P. probably did not differ appreciably from that observable a century or
two ago, or, with certain modifications, that observable at the
present time.

254

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Modern Environment
In addition to providing general information on the region,
this section deals primarily with the microenvironmental configuration in the research area over the past 200-300 years. To a
large extent, the microenvironments defined in this study are
detectable in descriptions written before changes were brought
about by Anglo-American land-use practices; observed differences are discussed more fully below.

Climate
Climatically, the region is classified as semi-arid, that is,
predominantly warm and dry (Wiedenfeld and Flores 1976: 55).
Precipitation, mainly in the form of rainshowers and thunderstorms, averages about 18-19 inches per year, most of it from
April through October (Mount et al. 1967: 12); documented
variation in annual total ranges from 7.41 to 40.40 inches. The
average number of days between the last freeze of the spring
and the first in the fall is 232, the mean dates being March 24
and November 13, respectively. Freezes have, however, occurred
as late as April 18 and as early as October 16 (Wiedenfeld and
Flores 1976: 55).
Physiography
The regional context of the research area has been
described in several ways. Fenneman (1931) places the region in
the Edwards Plateau Section of the Great Plains Province; in
southern Tom Green County, it is characterized by rolling hills
formed by erosion of the once-flat plateau surface. Elevation
differences between the river bottoms and the hilltops often are
as much as 100-125 meters. Along some stretches of the streams,
steep bluffs are common and occasionally contain small rockshelters.
Biota
In terms of now present flora and fauna, Blair (1950) includes the research area in the Balconian Biotic Province. It is
characterized by an intermixture of plants and animals from
adjacent provinces, though, as a whole, the biotic composition is
rather distinctive. In similarly broad terms, Thomas (1975)
considers the locality to be part of the Edwards Plateau
Vegetational Area, which is largely grassland or open savanna.
More specifically, Eckhardt (1975) has defined for southern Tom

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

255

Green County two contrasting vegetation types: juniper and oak
savannas and stream riparian. While the species list has
remained the same, the change in relative abundance of several
plants and animals over the past century has appreciably
altered the environmental appearance. Of particular concern
are certain species known through ethnographic documentation
to have been economically important to aboriginal groups
inhabiting the area. Thus, it seems appropriate at this point to
use early observations of the region as a beginning of the
description of that microenvironmental configuration proposed to
be characteristic of the past 7000-8000 years.
Historical Descriptions of the Region
If the route proposed by Williams (1962; see also Coimor
1969) is accepted, then Mendoza in 1684 travelled south from
about present San Angelo to the headwaters of the Llano River,
possibly up the South Concho itself. Mendoza noted several times
the lush vegetation along the streams, particularly the pecans;
he also mentioned the abundance of bison, fish, "wild hens,"
mussels, and good pasturage (Bolton 1908: 336-337). Similarly, in
1808, the Spaniard Amangual described sparsely wooded
uplands and plains, with woods (pecans and others) along the
streams (Haggard 1939: 9-12).
About 40 years later, John Russell Bartlett passed near the
research area. The streams were said to contain an abundance
of fish, with large oak and pecan trees growing along the banks
(Bartlett 1854). Looking in the general direction of the research
area, he noted, "To the south were hills within a few miles, quite
barren in appearance" (Bartlett 1854: 73-74). The prairies,
described as deficient in wood except for oaks and mesquites
kept few and small by frequent grassfires, were inhabited by
large numbers of prairie dogs, as well as "jackass-rabbits."
One of the more explicit accounts is that of Lloyd (1887),
whose descriptions were introductory to his bird list. He noted
that the hills were not timbered though they often were covered
with "shin-oak," and that the head draws of the creeks were full
of cedar groves. In addition, he wrote that:
The creeks are well timbered with pecan, elm, hackberry, a species
of walnut, and willow, etc., and have well defined bottoms of an
average width of about fifty yards, but frequently are half a mile
wide, densely grown with scrub mesquite, small groves of hackberry,
wild china, and other small trees, overrun with poison iw], and laden
with parasitic mistletoe (Lloyd 1887: 182).

256

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Thus, a synthesis of these early descriptions suggests a
general configuration of three microenvironments in the region:
the hills, the more nearly level flatlands, and the riparian zone.
All three are presently recognizable in the research area, though
certainly somewhat changed. Most noticeable is the tremendous
increase in brushy plants, cedar and mesquite in particular, and,
to a lesser extent perhaps, the live oak. A hypothesized
elimination of bison, priarie dogs, and possibly antelope is based
on faunal remains from archeological sites. Thus, to varying
degrees, the horizontal distribution of the microenvironments
illustrated in Fig. 4, while considered to be a relatively accurate
representation of that existent 100 years ago, is only that recognized during this research.
The Research Area
As noted, the three microenvironments observable on a
regional basis are present within the research area (Fig. 4). For
convenience, the riprian, flatland, and upland microenvironments are designated I, II, and III respectively. In approximate
terms, of the 20.0 square kilometer study area, the riparian zone
occupies 23% (4.7 kin2), the flatlands 43% (8.7 kin2), and the
uplands 34% (6.3 km~). This coverage results from the fact that
the survey more or less transected the South Concho valley and
adjacent uplands. It is important to note here, though, that the
microenvironmental configuration of the research area, viewed
in. terms of proportional size, is not necessarily representative of
the surrounding region, however delineated.
I. Riparian Microenvironment. As implied by the name, this
zone encompasses the streams and their alluvial floodplains. In
general, the extent is defined by interrelated physical characteristics and is reflected--in some areas, less clearly than
others--by the presence or absence of certain plants and
animals. The most important factor is the greater amount of
moisture, either in the form of surface water or available soil
moisture.
The floodplain deposits of Quaternary alluvium are classed
in the Rio-concho-Spur association of deep, nearly level,
calcareous soils with high available water capacity (Wiedenfeld
and Flores 1976: 38, 18). Where not cultivated, these fertile
soils with their greater moisture availability support a vegetation
dominated, in appearance at least, by huge live oaks (Quercus
virginianus var. fusiformis), bur oaks (Quercus macrocarpa),

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

257

and pecan (Carya illinoensis) (see Figure 1). Also common are
hackberry (Celtis sp.), persimmon (Diospyros texana), mesquite
(Prosopsis glandulosa), and numerous other edible or useful
plants. In many places, almost impenetrable thickets of trees,
shrubs, and green briar (Smilax bona-nox) occur, making survey
somewhat difficult. Along the intermittent streams, this dense
vegetation begins to thin until, generally restricted to a narrow
strip along the stream banks, it too becomes intermittent.
In the riparian microenvironment, floral resources are
particularly abundant, especially in terms of fuel and edible
plants. Fruits, berries, and forbs occur widely but are perhaps
overshadowed by the tremendous amounts of acorns and pecans.
Some of the berries and forbs are available in the spring; yet, as
a rule, the vegetal foods are most abundant in late summer and
fall. This is most notably true of the acorns and pecans, though
there is a great deal of variation in annual yield resulting from
the interplay of species differences, insect damage, precipitation,
temperature, and wind. A particular bur oak, for example, may
bear acorns every other year but often it bears only once in
four, five, or more years. Thus, in a certain year in any one
area, these resources might be scarce, when other years they
might be unusually bountiful.
The fauna of the riparian microenvironment (determined by
personal observation and by faunal remains) is readily separable
into two groups: those species spending most or all of their time
in the water and the terrestrial species which generally restrict
themselves to the floodplain. Included in the former group are
the fishes, turtles, mussels, muskrat, and numerous species of
waterfowl. In the second group are deer, turkey, squirrels,
cottontail rabbits, skunks, raccoons, and a variety of other small
animals; occasionally, animals such as bison which generally
occupied the other microenvironments probably came to this
zone to get water.
Flint is available in certain parts of this zone but is not
abundant in any one place. In and along the streams, good
quality cobbles of varying sizes occasionally occur; other sources
generally are at the periphery of this zone and may extend into
adjoining microenvironments. Much the same can be said of the
distribution of limestone, although it certainly is more common
than flint in all areas.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

258

[]

SITE

/~ BURNED ROCK ACCUMULATION
and/or MIDDEN
(~

LITHtC SCATTER with BURNED ROCK

3

LITHIC SCATTER

4

LITHIC PROCUREMENT SITE

[]

LITHIC PROCUREMENT-BURNED ROCK
ACCUMULATION and/or MIDDEN

~7 ROCKSHELTER

I-FLATLAN

I-FLATLANDS

I-RIPARIAN

I
KILOMETERS

SITE DISTRIBUTION AND MICROENVlRONMENTS

i

LLH/1977

FIGURE 4. Site Distribution and Microenvironments.

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

259

II. Flatlands Microenvironment. Generally speaking, this
microewAronment is defined by the extent of the Angelo association of deep, nearly level, calcareous soils on outwash plains
(Wiedenfeld and Flores 1976: 3). In present appearance, it is distinguishable mainly by its relatively heavy grass cover and in
certain areas by an abundance of mesquite (Figure 2). Prickly
pear (Opuntia sp.) and small "mottes" of live oak also occasionally occur, but like the mesquite, were probably not as
widespread 100-200 years ago.
The fauna, as well, appears to have changed in the last century. While not visually observed, the past presence of badger,
prairie dog, bison, and possibly antelope is suggested by the
occurrence of their bones in archeological sites (TG 40 and TG
41). Assuming that these animals did inhabit the survey area,
they most likely were to be found in the flatlands and/or the
uplands. The prairie dog, at least, probably was restricted to the
flatlands because it could not burrow in the uplands nor would it
live in the riparian zone where the vegetation limits visibility. This
requirement of visibility probably made the prairie dog an agent
in maintaining the integrity of the flatlands microenvironment.
Prior to its extermination and modern land-use practices, the
prairie dog, fire, and bison all contributed to a check on the
growth and spread of brush plants such as mesquite and live oak
(Maxwell n.d.; Davis 1974; Smith 1967). They, in effect, maintained the prairie conditions.
As a microenvironment then, the flatlands are differentiated
from the riparian by the drier soils, their resultant prairie flora,
and fauna. Lithic resources are less abundant and tend to be
localized in light concentrations on low rises.
III. Upland Microenvironment. In some ways, the uplands
resemble the flatlands, though their respective resource arrays
provide the nonphysiographic criteria for separating them. The
rolling limestone hills typically have a very rocky surface and
are in the Tarrant-Ector association of very shallow, well
drained, calcareous soils (Wiedenfeld and Flores 1976: 3).
Throughout the uplands at a certain elevation is a continuous
outcropping of flint of varying quality in both ledge and nodule
form; this and other outcroppings contain large amounts of
eroded flint.
Like the flatlands, the upland flora is dominated by grasses,
although trees and shrubs are common (Figure 3). In some parts,

260

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cedar (luniprus pinchotii) has over the last 100-200 years expanded considerably from the steeper slopes. Live oak, mesquite,
hackberry, and prickly pear also are widespread now but probably were less so in the past; persimmon and beargrass (Nolina
texana) are less abundant and tend to be more localized. While
found throughout this microenvironment, persimmon is especially
common on the steeper slopes. Beargrass, today, is almost
completely restricted to the hills in the eastern portion of the
survey area.
Animals observed by the author to be presently inhabiting
the uplands include the whitetail deer, turkey, cottontail rabbit,
jackrabbit, rock squirrel, and various other small mammals,
reptiles, and birds. When present in the region, bison probably
were frequent on the more gentle slopes as well as in the
flatlands; the same may also be true of the antelope.
The previously mentioned historical descriptions of the area
indicate that the uplands, in general, were predominantly grassland with restricted growths of woody plants. This condition
appears to be a function of several factors including physical
conditions, herbivore control, and fire.
In terms of resource potential, then, the three research area
microenvironments appears to differ qualitatively and quantitatively, especially as they are hypothetically reconstructed
(see Table I). Each offers a unique set of resources. The riparian
zone is the only one where surface water is available. It also has
by far the greatest amount of plant foods, particularly the easily
procurable and storable acorns and pecans, though they are
generally only seasonally available. The vegetation, in addition,
provides a large fuel supply as well as protection from the
elements. Its faunal resources as a whole probably offer a yearround contribution to human diet. In one respect, the riparian
zone is relatively deficient; that is, it has no large, concentrated
sources of good quality lithic (flint) raw material.
Generally speaking, this scarcity of flint raw material is also
characteristic of the flatlands. This microenvironment is,
however, mostly lacking in plant foods that are procurable in
large amounts with low cost. On the other hand, the hypothesized fauna could provide significant amounts of meat and
nonfood materials such as bone and hides, depending though on
temporal availability.

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

261

TABLE 1
HYPOTHESIZED RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

Zone

lI

Resource

III

Water

VA,L

Wood

VA

0

A,L

Flint
Fish
Turtles
Waterfowl
Mussels
Cottontail

S,L
A,L
O,L
O-A,L
A,L
A

O,L

VA,L

Jackrabbit
Squirrels
Prairie Dog
Other small
mammals
Antelope
Deer
Bison
Turkey

S
A

A

Acorns
Pecans
Mesquite

VA
VA
0

Persimmon
Prickly Pear
Berries
Beargrass

0
S
0

A

Use
Drinking,
cooking

Availability
Year-round

Fuel, shelter,
implements
Tools
Food

r,
r,

Mostly winter
Year-round
0

A

A

A
S

A
0
A

VA
A

Food, raw
materials
i,
iI

A

ii

O-A
0
A
0

S

A,L

S

S

S
0

O,L
0
A,L

Mostly winter
Year-round
Food

Fall
Late summer,
fall

Basketmaking

Summer
Spring
Year-round

VA -- Very Abundant
A
0
S
L

-----

Abundant
Occasional
Scarce
Localized

With the exception of the prairie dog, the uplands likely
shared many of the animal populations (for example, bison and
perhaps antelope) found in the adjacent flatlands. In contrast, they
offer, in localized situations, relatively substantial sources of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

262

easily gathered plant foods (acorns and persimmons), as well as
manufacturing raw materials (the leaves of beargrass for use in
construction of baskets). The uplands, moreover, contain what the
other microenvironments lack: extensive and heavy concentrations
of readily usable flint.
Thus, it is apparent that economic resources are differentially
available in the research area; their distribution probably strongly
influenced subsistence-settlement patterns. Movement between
microenvironments is easy and the resources of each are readily
accessible from the others.

ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA
Survey Methodology

As previously noted, the survey area comprises approximately 20 square kilometers in the drainage of the South
Concho River. No special significance is attached to this size; it
merely represents the area that had been covered when the
decision was made to terminate the field work. The boundaries,
however, are almost exclusively delimited by private property
lines, with the exceptions being determined primarily by the
extent of survey coverage at the cut-off date. Although these
limits are indeed rather arbitrary, they are not considered to
have restrictively biased the data.
In terms of logistics, the primary objective of the survey was
to completely cover a large block of land that reflected the environmental variation of the vicinity. Through such a 100%
coverage procedure, it was expected that a representative
sample of site types from the region would be observed. Total
coverage was accomplished with a maximum of consistency by
the author personally walking over the entire area. This survey,
being basically documentary, was to be supplemented by subsequent controlled surface collections. It was felt that such a
procedure should produce data that would allow for projections
over a much larger region. In actual fact though, circumstances
of site discovery suggest that as yet undetected archeological
remains may lie buried in the alluvium of the riparian microenvironment; this, however, is not felt to affect significantly the
overall results of the project.
Procedure in the field consisted of systematically covering

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

263

the area in order to locate and assess any archeological
remains. When evidence was discovered, its surface extent was
determined; as a rule, a site designation was given only to
locations subjectively perceived as exhibiting an aggregation of
artifacts or other evidence of human activity. To explain further,
it is important to note that large areas, particularly along the
streams, contain cultural debris throughout, but with certain
spots having a higher frequency. While these spots received site
designations, the more or less isolated artifacts are not
represented in the inventory, though their distribution has been
noted. Because of factors such as heavy ground vegetation or
thick mantles of fallen leaves, the observed frequencies are in
many instances perhaps more apparent than real; therefore,
partly in order to compensate for these limitations, nearly every
site was visited at least twice during different seasons of the
year. The uplands in the eastern portion of the survey area
presented a somewhat different problem. They are "belted" by a
continuous flint outcropping which exhibits abundant evidence of
aborigina! use; in these cases, drainages were employed as
arbitrary site boundaries.
Designated sites were numbered according to the University
of Texas system: 41, for Texas; TG, for Tom Green County; and a
number for that specific site. When a site was found, it was
thoroughly and carefully examined to define its extent and
content, at least so far as could be determined from surface
evidence. Sketch maps were made for most sites. However, all
were plotted on USGS 7.5 minute topographical maps in such a
manner as to reflect their horizontal extent. Notes taken at each
site included information on features, numbers and kinds of
artifacts, site size, environment, condition, and other factors
affecting assessment.
Consistent with the plans of possible controlled collection,
the practice was merely to observe the archeological remains at
each site, thereby preserving the integrity of provenience and
context. In some cases where part of a site had been disturbed
and/or displaced material was clearly in danger of damage or
loss, collections of artifacts were made. This is most notably true
of 41 TG 41, where erosion is causing material to slip down the
steep stream bank. In a very few instances, individual artifacts
were taken from apparently undisturbed contexts.
Appropriately mentioned here are the first four sites in

264

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Table II; these had been known to the author for several years
prior to the survey. Uncontrolled collections of varying size had
been made from each, three (41 TG 38, 39, and 41) by surface
collection and the other (41 TG 40) by excavation. These early
collections from 41 TG 38 and 41 TG 39 consist almost entirely
of projectile points, while that from 41 TG 41 contains all bone
and lithics observed in the eroded context described above.
Of special concern is 41 TG 40, a small cave containing dry
fill. The front part, approximately 4 x 2 meters, was essentially
completely excavated, with all of the fill put through a 1/~-inch
mesh screen. All flint, nearly all of the faunal remains, and
certain other material were saved. Since all flint from within the
excavated portion was collected, the lithic assemblage as a
whole has some utility for comparative purposes. The value of
the recovered faunal remains, as well as of the observed and
noted botanical remains, lies in making one acutely aware of the
interpretive limitations of data from open sites, especially those
known only from their surface manifestations.
Table II presents an inventory of sites located during the
survey with brief descriptions of each and with comments on
factors that are felt to have affected assessment of the archeological remains. In addition, the microenvironmental location and
a descriptive site type are noted for each site; these site types
are defined in the final part of this section.
In the brief description of each site, the amount and
diversity of observed and/or collected cultural material is noted.
An assemblage described as "diverse" is one observed to
contain a variety of artifacts of different kinds, i.e. projectile
points, bifaces, unifaces, cores, flakes, etc.; one of medium
diversity, on the other hand, contains only a few kinds, while an
assemblage of little diversity contains only one or two kinds.
These distinctions certainly are subjective, yet in many cases,
this is perhaps partly a function of conditions, such as heavy
ground cover, which limited assessment.
These data on the observed assemblages are presented in
qualitative terms in Table IV; it should be made explicit,
however, that the categories represent a condensed version of
the more detailed classification that was employed only for the
collected artifacts (see Tables V, VI, and VII). In other words,
the categories in Table IV are those which, as a general rule,
were used in the field notes. Of primary concern are the

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

265

o

o

co

co

co

co

~

CO

~D

g
ca

o

-~
m

;>

co

>

co

o

~

co

0

mZ

~ >-~g

ca~

~

co
o

CO
~o.~

o

.~’~

;>,

..~

~ o3 o
cO

.~co
o

~.~’~ ~

.i-~ o

CO

~

m

~~

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

266

O

O

O

O

O

o

O

"5

o

b3

03

CONCHO RIVER

ARCHEOLOGY

267

o

~

o

¢

S

"~

~

S
0~

o
o

o

>
o
o

o

¢¢
O

m
o

~g

&

~ .~ .~ o

~

cr
o.0

>

g~

"5

o

>

~s~5

o~

o
o
o

o

g

o~
o~

©

~

~

0

0

r~

0~

o
C~

0

©

©

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

268

~~
o~

~’~

~.~

~

~~

~o
~

~

~

o

~

~ .~

269

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

o

.an

ca

Ca

~

Ca

~3

Ca

g
Ca

¢¢

{D

t..,
¢13

,x:
o

o
Ca

o

~o

°
o

o

:~~
o

Ca

~~

~ ~
~

o

;>&

b3

m&

o~

°

×.~

;>

©

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

270

o

o

o

oN=

N

N~

~

o=~

CD

O~

o

O ~

rTl

O

~

O
~

.7

.

~ .N "o

271

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

°
¢0

~

>

oo
g
oa

¯-g-~

sg

_

~

og

go
=

o

m

odo~

=eg~>

g-= ~g

g=a

°="
>’~=

o~
co

©
o~

~g

O ~

~

.~

oa
co

g

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

272

o

o

o
o

R
o

~;~
~.~
~
~
~o
~
0

~.~
"~

~’~

.~
0
0

~= =

=-~ .~-~ ~.~
"~, ,.~

~

"~

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

273

groupings of bifaces and unifaces. In general, "thin bifaces" in
Table IV correspond to the Group I bifaces and the "thick
bifaces" to Groups II and III. The group of "side scrapers and
other unifaces" merely includes all unifaces that are not end
scrapers (the end scraper group is the same in both versions).
Similarly, all observed utilized flakes are grouped together in
Table IV, while those that were collected are put into two
separate categories. These additional data biases further make
the assemblage diversity designations in Table II subjective.

ARCHEOLOGICAL REMAINS
The Features
Several kinds of features were observed during the course
of the survey: hearths, burned rock middens, burned rock accumulations, bedrock mortar holes, pictographs, and a pile of
boulders with a central pit. In addition, the landowners report
the excavation and removal of bones and antler artifacts from a
burial situated on the top of the hill at 41 TG 46.
HEARTHS. Hearths consisted of small, typically circular
concentra{ions of burned limestone rocks, generally no more
than a meter or two in diameter. Cultural material was rather
common around some hearths, especially if a burned rock
midden or accumulation was associated, while at others,
material was quite infrequent. At several sites, small numbers of
these burned rocks are distributed in such a way as to suggest
that they are scattered remnants of once intact hearths.
BURNED ROCK MIDDENS. These are generally circular,
mounded accumulations of burned limestone rocks, ranging in
diameter from 5 or 6 meters to as much as 10. Only the midden
at 41 TG 87 was observed as having a central depression; the
remainder do not exhibit such a characteristic, though it is
certainly possible that some may in fact possess one. This group
includes Type 1 and Type 2 burned rock middens as described
by Weir (1976: 34-40). When ground cover conditions were
favorable, an abundant and diverse assemblage of cultural
material was typically observed in, on, and surrounding these
features. However, at least one midden was almost devoid of
associated debris.
BURNED ROCK ACCUMULATIONS. This is somewhat of a
catchall group and includes those accumulations whose con-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

274

ditions at the time of the survey prevented more specific descriptions, including unmounded surface concentrations of burned
rock, Weir’s Type 4 burned rock midden (1976: 40). Perhaps as a
function of the buried nature of some remains and/or heavy
ground cover, associated material was observed to vary considerably in both abundance and diversity.
BEDROCK MORTAR HOLES. These occur singly and in
groups of as many as six, but were not commonly observed in
the survey area. Diameter ranges from about 10 to 20 centimeters, and maximum depths were noted to as much as 20 or 30
centimeters.
PICTOGRAPHS. Red monochrome pictographs are present
on the cave walls at 41 TG 40. Most are linear designs and are
rather faded; however, the one handprint is in good condition.
MISCELLANEOUS. Centrally located on the flat top of a high
hill (41 TG 88), is a 30-40 centimeter high, 4 meter diameter pile
of small, unburned limestone boulders with a pit in the center;
its cultural affinity and function are unknown.

The Artifacts: Chipped Stone
In this group are all objects of chipped stone as well as the
byproduct material resulting from their manufacture; with the
exception of six quart items, all are of flint material. Unless
otherwise noted, the projectile point classification generally
follows that in the Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions (Suhm and Jelks: 1962), as well as utilizing subsequent
individual type descriptions. The other artifacts are classified
into broad categories used by Sorrow et el. (1967) and Shafer
(1967, 1969, 1971). It should be emphasized that the following descriptions are based on collected artifacts as well as those
observed but not collected. Provenience of collected specimens is
presented in Tables V, VI, and VII.
Arrow Points
Washita (1 specimen, Fig. 5, d). The single specimen has shallow side notches
and concave base.
Perdiz (3 specimens, Fig. 5 a-c). Small specimens with contracting stems. Two
specimens are strongly barbed.
Unclassified I (1 specimen, Fig. 5, e). The single specimen is triangular with a
very slightly concave base. Blade edges are slightly recurred.
Unclassified II (1 specimen, Fig. 5, f). This unstemmed specimen has essen-

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

275

tially parallel edges for about two-thirds of the blade; the edges converge rather
abruptly on the distal one-third. Base concave.
Fragments (2 specimens). One bifacia!!y flaked distal fragment and one
strongly barbed point with the stem broken off.

Dart Points
Angostura (1 specimen, Fig. 5, g). One basal fragment with straight to slightly
concave edges; base also concave. Edges not ground.
Bulverde (17 specimens; Fig. 5, h-l). Two subgroups are recognized: I. (8
specimens, Fig. 5, h-j). Stem edges parallel; base straight. Shoulders squared,
blades triangular. II. (9 specimens, Fig. 5, k, 1). Similar to others except for slightly
concave base.
Castroville (7 specimens, Fig. 5, m-n). Triangular blade with strong to weak
barbs. Expanding stem, edges straight, base straight to slightly convex.
Conejo (Johnson 1964: 37; specimens, Fig. 6, a, b). All specimens fragmentary, but characterized by a short, broad, straight to slightly expanding stem with
a concave base. Shoulders prominent.
Ensor (3 specimens, Fig. 6, c, d). Basically triangular points with side notches,
bases straight or convex.
Fairland (2 specimens, Fig. 6, e, f}. These points have long shallow side
notches and strongly flaring stems with concave bases.
Frio (15 specimens, Fig. 6, g-j). Corner-notched stems, with notched base.
Have either prominent shoulders or strong barbs.
Martindale (2 specimens, Fig. 6, k, 1). These two specimens are distinguished
by an expanding stem with the double-convex "fishtail" base. One has strong
barbs; the other is too fragmentary to determine further characteristics.
Monte!! (4 specimens, Fig. 6, m, n). Characterized by an expanding stem with
a V-notched bifurcated base; complete specimens are barbed. One specimen has
been reworked, possibly into an awl (Fig. 6, m). Another is an unfinished specimen
{Fig. 6, n).
Nolan (4 specimens, Fig. 7, a-c). This group includes specimens with beveled
stem edges. One is beveled along both edges on one face (Fig. 7, c); the others are
bifacially beveled. One is made of quartz, the others of flint.
Pedernales (3 specimens, Fig. 7, d). All are fragmentary specimens having
straight stems with indented bases. Slightly barbed. The blades on two are rather
broad.
Plainview (1 specimen, Fig. 7, e). A single fragmentary specimen with a
concave base. At least one of the basal edges is ground. This artifact was an isolated find near 41 TG 86.
Val Verde (Ross 1965: 37; 2 specimens, Fig. 7, f, g). Both specimens have
slightly concave blade edges and prominent shoulders. Stem is expanding, base
slightly concave.
Williams (1 specimen, Fig. 7, h). The single specimen has prominent barbs
and an expanding, somewhat bulbous stem with a convex base.
Miscellaneous A (1 specimen, Fig. 7, i). This group of fragmentary dart points
is characterized by a contracting stem with bases straight or slightly convex.
Shoulders are weak to prominent. Similar to Langtry points.
Miscellaneous B (3 specimens, Fig. 7, j, k). These specimens have expanding

276

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

stems with slightly concave bases. Have prominent shoulders or may be barbed.
Miscellaneous C (3 specimens, Fig. 7, 1). This group has straight stems with
rounded bases; shoulders are prominent.
Miscellaneous D (2 specimens, Fig. 8, a). These fragmentary points have
expanding stems with slightly convex bases. On the more nearly complete
specimen, barbs appear to have been rather strong. Those are in many respects
similar to Marcos points, but are so fragmentary that they could not confidently
be so classified.
Miscellaneous E (2 specimens, Fig. 8, b). These very fragmentary specimens
have straight stems with very slightly concave bases. Barbed.
Miscellaneous F (2 specimens, Fig. 8, c). Short, broad points with very short
but wide stems. Stem edges parallel, base straight. Prominent shoulders.
Miscellaneous G (1 specimen, Fig. 8, d). The single specimen is basically
triangular with two basal notches which create strong barbs and a very short
rounded stem.
Miscellaneous H (1 specimen, Fig. 8, e). The single specimen is short with
prominent shoulders and an expanding stem with a straight base.
Miscellaneous I (1 specimen, Fig. 8, f). The single specimen has weak
shoulders with a contracting stem; the base is notched similar to a Montell point.
Miscellaneous I (1 specimen, Fig. 8, g). These long slender specimens have
almost non-existent shoulders and a weakly defined stem with a rounded base.
Miscellaneous K (1 specimen, 8, h). This specimen is basically lanceolate in
form with a deeply indented base. It is not fluted, though two narrow longitudinal
flakes have been removed to thin the base.
Dart point fragments. Fifty-five specimens are so fragmentary that they are
unidentifiable.
Remarks: Taking into consideration the typological limitations resulting from
the surface provenience, it appears that, on a qualitative basis only, the projectile
points suggest occasional occupation of the survey area from about 9000-10000
B.P. to historic times. This is suggested by the chronological positions of similar
types in both central Texas and the Lower Pecos region.

Bifaces
As distinguished from the projectile points, the artifacts in
this broad grouping are those bifacially chipped artifacts
without stems. Three categories are recognized:
Group I (16): These bifaces have been thinned presumably by soft hammer
retouch and, in the majority of cases, they exhibit pressure retouch along the
edges. Three subgroups are recognized.
IA (11 specimens, Fig. 9, a, b). These well-made specimens typically have
triangular shapes with straight to convex bases.
IB (4 specimens, Fig. 9, c). This group is distinguished by alternate beveling of
the edges, giving them a twisted appearance. Also known as 4-edged beveled
knives.
IC (1 specimen, Fig. 9, d). The single specimen is significantly smaller than
any other Group I bifaces and may be a finished or unfinished projectile point.
The base is rounded, edges convex.

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

a

277

d

c

b

e

.,+~

m

0
I

I

I

I

I

n

5
I

cm
FIGURE 5. Projectile Points. Arrow points: a-c, Perdiz; d, Washita;
e, Unclassified I; f, Unclassified II; Dart points: g, Angostura; h-j,
Bulverde I; k,1, Bulverde II; re,n, Castroville.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

278

a

b

d

@

k
m

n

FIGURE 6. Dart Points. a,b, Conejo; c,d, Ensor; e,f, Fairland; g-j,
Frio; k,1, Martindale; re,n, Montell.

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

279

a

C

d

b

e

f

g

h

k

0
I,

!

I

!
Cm

5
!

I

FIGURE 7. Dart Points. a-c, Nolan; d, Pedernales; e, Plainview; f,g,
Val Verde; h, Williams; i, Misc. A; j,k, Misc. B; 1, Misc. C.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

280

d

d

d~
d
-d
~2
d

3

d
d

d

E
i~i!i~i

’~VI ~%

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

281

d

e

b

o

I.....

I

C

I

I

I

5
I

cm

FIGURE 9. Bifaces. a,b, Group IA; c, Group IB; d, Group IC; e, Group
III; f-h; Group II.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

282

Group I Fragments (48 specimens). These specimens are grouped together as
a result of their having the general Group I technological characteristics; that is,
they have been thinned by presumed soft hammer flaking and often exhibit
pressure retouch.
Group II (17 specimens, Fig. 9, f-h). These bifaces generally are more or less
triangular and are relatively thick; many show some flake scars presumably indicating soft hammer percussion. None exhibits pressure retouch.
Group III (42 specimens, Figs 9, e and 10, g, h). The specimens in this group
are rather heterogeneous in form and in extent of reduction, though all flaking is
restricted to hard hammer percussion. In addition, these bifaces, are, as a rule,
rather thick and have sinuous edges. Many of these appear to be failures in the
biface reduction process (Shafer and Baxter 1975: 50). One specimen (Fig. 9, e) is
of quartz.
Groups II-III Fragments (169 specimens). This group contains those fragments
possessing the flaking attributes and thickness characteristic of Groups II and III.

Unifaces
This broad category contains all those unifacially chipped
artifacts, with the exception of uniface retouch flakes which are
described in the section on burin spells.
End scrapers (Fig. I0, a-c). On these artifacts, the chipped edge is the dorsal
surface on the end of the flake opposite the bulb of percussion; this edge typically
is steeply beveled and convex. In cross-section, these are plano-convex. Cortex
may or may not be present on the dorsal surface.
Side scrapers (Fig. I0, d-f). Chipping on these specimens is on one or both
edges lateral to the axis of flake removal and is also on the dorsal flake surface.
The straight to convex edges generally are not steeply beveled. Cortex may or
may not be present.
Concave Edge Unifaces (Fig. 11, a, b). These specimens have one or more
concave edges formed by removal of a few flakes; the edges, furthermore, are
characteristically rather steep.
Miscellaneous Unifaces. These unifacially flaked artifacts do not fall within
the range of variation of any of the other groups. One specimen (Fig. 11, c) has a
serrated edge.

Utilized Flakes
Group I (33 specimens, Fig. 11, d, e). This group contains those flakes having
one or more edges very lightly pressure retouched, almost always unifacially.
Group II (34 specimens, Fig. II, f, g). These specimens exhibit nicking or
nibbling along one or more edges; none has retouched edges. Edge modification on
these artifacts appears to result from use only.

Drill
The single specimen (Fig. I0, i) has an unmodified flake base with a bifacially
flaked bit. It is possible that one of the Montell dart points (Fig. 6, m) is a drill
refashioned from a projectile point.

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

283

Burin-faceted Bifaces
This group of eight specimens (Fig. 11, n, o} contains biface fragments that
exhibit one or more burin facets.

Burin Spalls
Group I (3 specimens, Fig. 11, j, k}. These spa[Is originated from bifacially
flaked artifacts.
Group II (3 specimens, Fig. 11, h, i}. These spalls originated from unifacially
flaked artifacts.
Group III (25 specimens, Fig. 11, l, m}. These are spalls showing no evidence
of originating from previously retouched artifacts.

Hammerstone
A single specimen is here designated a hammerstone. It is a thick bifacially
flaked artifact, probably an exhausted core, which exhibits battering on the two
ends.

Ground Stone
Manos (2 specimens, Fig. 12, e). These two specimens are circular to oval
sandstone cobbles, shaped by pecking, with one well defined grinding facet.

Ceramics
The seven undecorated potsherds (Fig. 12, a-c) collected from 41 TG 38
represent all that are presently known from the research area. The paste of each
contains much crushed bone, some of which is burned. Exterior surfaces are all
buff colored and range from smoothed to rough; interior surfaces range from buff
to gray color and are all rough. The cores of some are gray. At least two vessels
are represented, both apparently built by the coil technique.

Bone Artifact
A single bone artifact fragment (Fig. 12, d) was recovered from 41 TG 40. It
is a greatly modified long bone fragment, flattened and highly polished. Overall
form could not be determined.

Lithic Manufacturing Debris
The categories used in this analysis are essentially those of
Shafer (1969: 3-5}. Within the following seven categories are
materials representing the waste debris from lithic reduction as
well as natural, unmodified flint.
Cores (175 specimens}. These are nodules or cobbles of ledge flint from which
flakes have been removed, presumably with the intent of using these flakes as

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

284

C

d

o
I

I

I

I

I

5

, ,I

cm

FIGURE 10. Lithics. a-c, end scrapers; d-f, side scrapers; g,h, Group
III bifaces; I, drill.

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

285

d

9
h

m

o
I

I

I

(2

I

I

5
I

cm

FICURE 11. Lithics. a,b, concave edge unifaces; c, misc. uniface;
d,e, utilized flakes I; f,g, utilized flakes If; h,i, burin spalls If; j,k,
burin spalls I; l,m, burin spalls Ill; n-o, burin-faceted bifaces.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

286

C

b
a

d
e

O

5
I

cm

FIGURE 12. Other Artifacts. a-c, potsherds; d, bone artifact; e,
mano.

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

287

tools, either unmodified or modified. No effort has been made to separate further
the cores into subgroups.
Hard Hammer Flakes. These flakes typically possess a rather prominent bulb
of percussion and are relatively thick, particularly at the bulbar end. The striking
platform usually is large and fiat, and may or may not be faceted. Three subgroups are recognized:

1. (57 specimens). Initial cortex flakes are those whose dorsal surface is
covered by cortex.
2. (365 specimens). Secondary cortex flakes are those with some cortex on
the dorsal surface.
3. (538 specimens). Interior flakes are those with no cortex on the dorsal
surface, though they as well as initial secondary cortex flakes may have cortex on
the striking platforms. All ledge flint hard hammer flakes are in this group.
Soft Hammer Flakes (441 specimens). In this category are those flakes usually
possessing a diffuse bulb of percussion and a lip on the ventral surface at a right
angle to the axis of flake removal. Striking platforms are usually faceted and are
bifacially prepared, though in some cases, the platform appears almost
nonexistent. Generally, these flakes are thin and may be arched.
Miscellaneous Flakes (239 specimens). These could not confidently be
categorized as either hard hammer or soft hammer flakes.
Chips (2655 specimens). These are fragments possessing neither a striking
platform nor a bulb of percussion.
Naturally Fractured Specimens (850 specimens). These specimens show no
evidence of having been produced by human flaking activity, presumably having
been created by natural processes such as frost action. At some sites, this group
constitutes the greatest amount of observed and collected material.

Faunal Remains
Table III presents the taxa and minimum number of individuals of each for the faunal remains from 41 TG 40. All are
well preserved as a result of having been in the dry cave
deposits.

CONTROLLED COLLECTIONS
To

elucidate

suspected

and/or

observed

qualitative

and

quantitative differences between assemblages from kinds of sites
perceived to be "different," controlled surface collections were
made at five selected loctions at three sites: 41 TG 38, 41 TG 46,
and 41 TG 86. These collections were made only when additional
personnel and equipment were available, and as a result, they
vary considerably in extent of coverage. Unfortunately, these
limited collections have not sampled all of the combinations of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

288

site types and microenvironments; in fact, only three are
represented. Ideally, at least one each of the possible combinations should have been sampled.

41 TG 46
Site 41 TG 46 was the first site where controlled surface
collections were made. Two separate areas within the upland site,
designated A and B, were selected for the collections. Area A
includes a small burned rock midden and adjacent area, for a total
of 700 square meters; recovery was from 28 contiguous 5 by 5
meter squares. Area B consists of 16 contiguous 5 by 5 meter
squares (400 square meters) adjacent to but not including a small
burned rock accumulation. Together, these collections represent
approximately 0.7°/~ of the estimated 15 hectare site area. In both
these areas, ground vegetation was quite sparse and thus, visibility
TABLE m
FAUNAL REMAINS FROM 41 TG 40

Taxa
Silvilgus sp.
Lepus californicus
Taxidea taxus
Ondatra zibethica
Didelphis marsupialis
Procyon lotor
Mephitis mephitis
Felis concolor
Odoicoileus virginianus
Neotoma sp.
Cynomys sp.
Sigmodon sp.
Geomys sp.
Thomomys sp.
Canis sp.

Trionyx sp.

Amblema plicata perplicata
Lampsilis tampicoensis berlandieri

Common Name
Cottontail
Jackrabbit
Badger
Muskrat
Opossum
Raccoon
Striped skunk
Mountain Lion
Whitetail Deer
Packrat
Prairie Dog
Cotton Rat
Gopher
Gopher
Coyote or Domestic Dog
Goat or Sheep
Bison or Cow
Softshell Turtle
Unidentified Turtle
Unidentified Fish
Unidentified Bird
Mussel
Mussel

Minimum Number
of Individuals
4
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
5
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
2
1
1

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

289

was not impaired. For these and the other three subsequent
collections, an effort was made to pick up even the smallest objects, many of which are less than i centimeter in maximum
dimensions.

41 TG 86
Like 41 TG 46, site 41 TG 86 is an upland site located in an
area of natural flint sources. Here, too, separate, but in this case
rather small controlled collections were made at two locations in
an effort to recover a useful sample of both modified and unmodified lithic material. Both collections concentrated on the outcropping of flint in places where plant cover was minimal, and
thus, these restrictions in addition to those of time and personnel
resulted in the small area coverage. Unlike the procedure at 41
TG 46, collection at 41 TG 86 was made in 1 by 1 meter grid
squares because it was felt that use of 5 by 5 meter squares
might impair the possibility of detecting horizontal clusters of
cultural materials. The first collection was the smaller of the
two, comprising 7 square meters, the second, 16 square meters.
Although these represent considerably less than a 1% sample, it
is felt that they generally reflect the nature of the site’s remains.
41 TG 38
The collection at 41 TG 38, a riparian zone site, also was
small, totaling 52 contiguous 1 by 1 meter squares which encompassed part of a burned rock accumulation and adjacent
area. With the total site area conservatively estimated at 3
hectares, this collection constitutes less than a 1% sample.
Table VI presents the occurrence and density, expressed as
number per square meter, of material from the 5 controlled
collections, as well as occurrence only for the uncontrolled
collections from 41 TG 40 and 41 TG 41. In terms of presence/absence and density of the artifact categories previously
described, several differences among the sites are noted.
Initially, both collections from 41 TG 86 stand out in their
general lack of artifacts, though Area A did contain a few
unifacially modified tools. However, as can be seen in Table IV,
thick bifaces are present in other areas of the site. Significant
also are the relatively high numbers and/or densities of cores,
hard hammer flakes, and unmodified flint, in contrast to the complete absence of soft hammer flakes (see Table VI).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

290

TABLE IV
PRESENCE/ABSENCE OF OBSERVED OR COLLECTED ARTIFACTS

~ ~’~ ~ ~

X

38

X

41

x

X

X

x

X

X

X

X

x

x

x

x

X

43
48

Burned Rock
Accumulation
and/or
Midden

x

x

45

x

x

49

X

X

X

X

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x

50

x

51

x
x

x

65
68

x

x

52
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

78

x

x

x

x
x

82

Lithic
Scatter
with
Burned
Rock

83

x

95

x

39

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

61

x

x

x

x

64

x

x

x

x

70

x

x

x

x

73

x

x

x

x

74

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

75

x

77

x
x

x

88

x

44

x

69

x

x

72
x

76
x

x

x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

B9
93

x

x

x

67

x

x

60

80

Lithic
Scatter

x

x

x

53
62

Lithic

x

66

x

x

x

x

71

x

x

x

x

79

x

x

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

Procurement
Site

Lithic ProcurementBurned Rock
Accumulation
and/or Midden

Rockshelter

291

81

x

x

84
85

x

86

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

90

x

92

x

x

x

94

x

x

x

x
x

x
x

x

x
x

46
87

x

40
63

x

x
x

x

x
x

x

x

x
x

x
x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Strictly in terms of presence/absence of artifact categories
and features, the other four sites generally appear quite similar,
but when frequencies are compared, differences are readily
apparent. These differences, though, may be more a function of
sampling biases than of real variation. For example, in Table VI,
the densities for collections 41 TG 38, 41 TG 46A, and 41 TG 46B
indicate that most categories of cultural debris were relatively
more common in 41 TG 38. If, however, sample sizes are made
more nearly equal by determining densities for various sets of 2
continguous 5 by 5 meter squares in both Areas of 41 TG 46,
then these differences disappear or, in some cases, are amplified. Even when comparisons were made between sets of
squares which included or were near the burned rock midden in
Area A and the accumulation in Area B, differences between
these collections and that from 41 TG 38 were not consistently
demonstrable. Thus, for these total samples, density, when
expressed as the number per square meter, is not necessarily a
reliable measure of differences between sites. It appears then,
that, given the data base, the most valid way to compare the
archeological remains from various sites is presence/absence.

Because of the lack of chronological indicators from 81% (39)
of the sites and the fact that all but one of the collections are
surface samples, the possibility of temporal differences overall
cannot be considered with any degree of confidence.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

292

TABLE V
PROJECTILE POINT PROVENIENCE

Iso-

38 38 39 40 41 46A 46B 46 48 68 69 83 lated
cc rc rc rc rc cc
cc
rc rc rc rc rc Find Total
Arrow Points
1

Washita
Perdiz
Unclassified I
Unclassified II
Arrow point
fragments

1

1

1
1

3
1

1

1
1

1

Dart Points
Angostura
Bulverde I
Bulverde II

1

1
1

1
2

6

8

1

1

9

1

2

Castroville
Conejo
Ensor
Fairland
Frio
Martindale

2

5

7

4

4

Montell
Nolan
Pedernales

2

1

15

2

12

1

1

2

1

1

4
1

1

1

4
3

3

Plainview
Val Verde
Williams
Misc. A
Misc. B
Misc. C
Misc. D
Misc. E
Misc. F
Misc. G
Misc. H
Misc. I
Misc. J
Misc. K
Fragments
TOTAL

3

1

1
2
!
1

1

1

2

3

2

3

2

2

2

2

2

2
1

1
1

1

1

1

1

1
1

1
1

3

cc -- controlled collection
rc -- random collection

37

16 90

3

3

7

8

1

1

10

12

2

3

55

1

2

1

1

147

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

293

DESCRIPTIVE SITE TYPES
From the data summarized in Tables II, IV-Vl, six descriptive
site types have been recognized: burned rock accumulation and/or

midden, lithic scatter with burned, rock, lithic scatter, lithic
resource site, lithic resource site with burned rock accumulation
and/or midden, and rockshelter. These are discussed below.
Burned Rock Accumulation and/or Midden (15 sites). These sites are distinguished primarily by one or more sizeable accumulations of burned limestone rock
with surrounding cultural debris. Because conditions of site assessment often
limited the determination of morphological type, all of the middens and other accumulations are here grouped together. Characteristically, but not always, assemblages are quite diverse and include, in the better known cases, projectile points,
projectile point bases, thin bifaces (Group I), end scrapers, a variety of other
unifacial artifacts, grinding implements or features, burin spells (including uniface
retouch flakes), cores, soft hammer flakes, hard hammer flakes, and chips. Mussel
shell was observed in low frequency at nearly every one of these sites, bone at far
fewer.
Lithic Scatter with Burned Rock (11 sites). These sites generally are poorly
known, with no systematically recovered artifacts from any. For all but one site,
data are’restricted to observation, the exception being 41 TG 39 where collections
made years before the survey emphasized projectile points and bifaces. As implied in the name, these sites all contained small amounts of burned limestone,
either in recognizable hearths or merely scattered about. Though the most consistently observed artifacts were thin bifaces (Group I), side scrapers, cores and
chipping debris, these and other cultural materials were generally observed in the
field to be considerably less frequent at these sites than at Burned Rock Accumulation and/or Midden sites. Perhaps as a result of having been more extensively
investigated, site 41 TG 39 stands out in containing a rather diverse assemblage,
quite similar to those of Burned Rock Accumulation and/or Midden sites. Also
somewhat aberrant is site 41 TG 88, which has the circular feature of unburned
limestone boulders and in which no unifacial artifacts were noted.
Lithic Scatter (7 sites). Like Lithic Scatters with Burned Rock, these sites are
incompletely known, none having been systematically sampled. They are distinguished from the other site types by having: (1) no recognizable burned rock; (2) no
natural sources of flint; (3] infrequently occurring material; and (4) little diversity
in assemblages. While chipping debris was observed at all Lithic Scatters,
unifacial artifacts of one kind or another were noted at five, bifaces at two. More
specifically, these sites, unlike Lithic Scatters with Burned Rock, generally were
not observed to contain thin bifaces (Group I).
Lithic Procurement Site (12 sites]. Based on data from both observation and
controlled collections, these sites are characterized by the presence of naturally
occurring flint and relatively large numbers of cores and hard hammer flakes.
Primary chipping debris was noted at every site, thick bifaces (Groups II and III)
and unifaces at most. In contrast, there was an observed complete absence of soft
hammer flakes and scarcity of thin bifaces (Group I). Overall, the most commonly
occurring artifacts show little diversity and typically seem related to procurement

294

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of lithic raw material and to primary reduction to thick bifaces and perhaps
occasionally to various types of unifaces and thin bifaces.
Lithic Procurement -- Burned Rock Accumulation and/or Midden (2 sites).
Although these sites have the same basic characteristics as Lithic Procurement
sites, they contain much more diverse assemblages as well as burned rock accumulations and middens. As previously described, large controlled collections were
made at 41 TG 46, and include projectile points, Group I, II, and III bifaces, all
types of unifaces, utilized flakes, and all types of chipping debris. Mortar holes
and mussel shells were also present.
Rockshelter (2 sites). Both of these sites are small; the larger, 41 TG 40,
having an area of approximately 20 square meters. 41 TG 63 is apparently undisturbed and thus essentially unknown. The assemblage recovered by excavation
at 41 TG 40 is quite diverse and includes projectile points, Group I, II, and III
bifaces, all types of unifaces, utilized flakes, chipping debris, a bone artifact, and
faunal remains. Acorns. pecans, and prickly pear fruits also occurred in the dry
deposits associated with the cultural material.

INTERPRETATIONS
One of the basic assumptions on which this study is based is
that hunter-gatherer populations articulate with their environment through patterned relationships and that these relationships can be studied and analyzed. More particularly, since
similar subsistence activities can be expected in like environmental situations, one may predict a correlation between the
patterned distribution of specific resources and the patterned
distribution of specific archeological remains. It appears reasonable, therefore, to infer that important clues to site function may
be found in the environmental context in which a specific site
occurs. If proximity to economic resources is a primary goal
operating in settlement placement, then investigation of resource
potential should provide evidence complementing that from
within a site. From these two sets of data, it should be possible
to determine what attracted people to a particular place and
possibly even during which season(s) of the year. The archeological remains should reveal which activities, in terms of
resource procurement, processing, and consumption, took place in
or near the site, and perhaps how extensive these activities were.
From the research reported here, there is a body of data on
the distribution of archeological remains and a body of data on
the distribution of certain naturally occurring resources which
must be analyzed for patterned correlations. From the data
presented in Fig. 4, Table VIII was drawn up to present the

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

295

I

I

i

I

I

I

I I

I

I

I

I I

I

I

I

i

I

I

o

~J

I

I

Z

0

I

I

i

F.

cO

o

o

i

.

0

~

~

.O.

~

I

o~

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

296

l

l

~.
I

I

I

I

t

I

I

t

I

I

I

l

I

I

cO

.

o

~

I

q

¢q

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

c.,]

kO
CO

~D

t

l

I

I

I
r-~

(~.

I

t-.

o’~

,¢t¢

297

TEXAS

298

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

distribution of each of the six descriptive site types in each of
the three microenvironments and in contact areas between (1)
the Riparian and (2) the Flatland and Upland microenvironments;
these particular contact areas are considered because they
contain 31% of the research area sites.
TABLE VII
SITE DISTRIBUTION
Microenvironmental Location

Site Types
Burned Rock Accumulation
and/or Midden

I-II

I

I-m

n

m

Total
15

15

Lithic Scatter with
Burned Rock

5

2

1

1

2

11

Lithic Scatter

1

1

1

3

1

7

6

12

9

49

4

Lithic Procurement
Site
Lithic Procurement -Burned Rock Accumulation
and/or Midden
Rockshelter

TOTALS

21

5

10

4

It is important to note again that temporal control is, for all
practical purposes, non-existent, and that as a result, the following
analysis does not consider possible long-term change in resource
use patterns.
Site Types

Looking first at the Burned Rock Accumulation and/or Midden
sites, we see that they occur exclusively in the Riparian microenvironment. Lithic Scatters with Burned Rock .mostly occur within the
Riparian or in zones transitional between it and the other two
microenvironments (73°/’o or 8 of 11), though they also occur in the

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

299

Flatlands (9% or 1 of 11) and the Uplands (18% or 2 of 11).
Similarly, Lithic Scatters are found in all three of the microenvironments, not showing a restricted patterned distribution. The distribution of Lithic Procurement sites, on the other hand,
corresponds not to microenvironments, but to the occurrence of the
raw material sources; most are, however, in the Uplands along the
extensive flint outcrops. In two instances where these sources are
extensive and are in upland areas immediately adjacent to the
Riparian zone, combination Lithic Procurement -- Burned Rock Accumulation and/or Midden sites occur. Finally, the two Rockshelters are located in the limestone bluffs of the Riparian-Upland
transition.
On closer examination of the data, it is apparent that the
distribution of burned rock accumulations and middens covaries
with the Riparian microenvironment or immediately adjacent
areas. More specifically, however, these features are at the
present time always in close association with stands of oak
and/or pecan trees, and also with water sources of presently
varying permanence. Although definitive paleoenvironmental
data are lacking, the reconstructions mentioned earlier suggest
that this relationship is more than a recent fortuitous development. As has been proposed by Weir (1976: 125}, I submit that
these burned rock features are associated with the exploitation
of mast crops, and that this association is supported by the data
from this study.
According to Jochim [1976}, proximity of economic resources
is a primary goal in hunter-gatherer settlement placement, settlements usually being located nearer the denser and less mobile of
these resources. This results from the desire to attain a secure
level of food and manufacturing needs by means of energy expenditure within a predefined range. The acorn and pecan
resources certainly are among the densest and least mobile of
those observed in the research area, and it is with them that the
burned rock accumulations and middens are inferred to be associated. Furthermore, procurement and processing of these
particular resources would require relatively little effort if the
activities required were carried out near the sources. Thus, I
argue that these features are connected with the exploitation of
acorns and/or pecans, probably with processing.
Energy expenditure in this exploitation could be minimized
by living near the resources, but this is probable only if other

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

300

needed or desired resources, wherever located, are also exploitable by means of a predefined amount of effort. Water and
fuel, as well as a variety of other food and nonfood resources,
are available in the Riparian or in neighboring microenvironments. Therefore, if acorns and/or pecans were primary
resources, groups exploiting them could remain in the area of
their occurrence for periods corresponding to natural availability and storability (as determined by size of surplus, if any).
One could expect, then, that a buildup of archeological remains
would result from extensive occupation of a particular locus
and, moreover, that this assemblage of remains is likely to be a
diverse one reflecting a variety of activities.
If for some reason
nature, material might
perhaps somewhat less
Burned Rock in or near

occupation was of a more temporary
be expected to be less frequent and
diverse. Thus, the Lithic Scatters with
the Riparian microenvironment possibly

reflect less intensive exploitation of these acorn and/or pecan
resources or perhaps others of differing availability.
Regarding the Lithic Procurement Sites, these occur only
where the raw material is available, with most of these sites
conforming to outcrop areas in the Uplands. As implied in the
name, the primary activitiy presumably was procurement of flint
raw material and preliminary reduction to desired forms. At
some of these sites the presence of unifaces and thin bifaces
may indicate tool finishing, though debitage presumed to reflect
finishing (small hard hammer flakes and soft hammer flakes) was
not recovered or observed. In short, then, these are activityspecific sites with no evidence of anything other than brief,
intermittent visits.
At the present time, I see no pattern in the locations of
Lithic Scatters; but since these are some of the least known
sites, it may well be that they have not been appropriately
grouped. In any event, the range of archeological remains at
these sites suggests that only a relatively few, presently undetermined, activities took place.
Study Area
According to Fitzhugh (1972: 138):
Cultural adaptations are generally greared to exploit the microenvironment including its varied resources, rather than individual

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

301

resource areas since in the microenvironment there are several
resources available.

With this concept as a basis, I offer the following interpretations of
the archeological data from the research area, presented in terms
of procurement, processing, and consumption of resources.
The most extensive occupation of the research area as
determinable from the archeological data is suggested to have
coincided with the seasonal (fall) availability of the acorn and
pecan crops, while other occupation, if any, was limited by the
comparative lack of abundant, easily procurable subsistence
resources.
As revealed in Table I, various economically important
resources are differentially available in the three microenvironments. Assuming that these resources are unequally valued and
that priority is normally given to resources required to sustain
life (water and food), we recall that the more secure a resource
in terms of its density and mobility, the greater is its attraction
for settlement. In general, then, the Riparian microenvironment
is the only one where such a resource situation occurs; and thus,
I suggest that at least during the fall, hunter-gatherer groups
occupied this zone primarily to procure, process, and consume
the acorn and pecan crops. I also propose that the duration of
this occupation could have been extended for two, three, or
perhaps several months since these foods can be stored for long
periods of time. Extensive processing of these and probably other
foods likely resulted in the formation of burned rock middens
and accumulations.
While gathering of acorns and pecans is presumed to have
been a major food procurement activity in Zone I, the presence
of mussel shell at most sites containing burned rock features,
and the presence of bone and projectile points in the better
known sites reveals that hunting and gathering of animal foods
also contributed to the diet. The presence of bison bone at 41 TG
41 and the array of faunal remains from 41 TG 40 clearly indicate that hunters based in the Riparian microenvironment
exploited animals populations within this zone and outside of it.
The large proportion of soft hammer flakes suggests that the
tools used in processing plant and animal foods as well as other
resources were generally manufactured at occupation sites in or

302

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

near the Riparian microenvironment from material obtained at
various Lithic Procurement sites. Short procurement trips probably were made from these occupation sites.
As noted above, I propose that occupation was in general
restricted to the Riparian microenvironment where the most
important and secure food sources, as well as water, fuel, and
protection from the elements were all available. In terms of
resource use, activities in Zone I included processing and
consumption of plant and animal foods that were procured in all
three microenvironments, and manufacture of needed or desired
lithic and non-lithic implements. Evidence for this variety of
activities, can be found in the specific types of remains and their
overall diversity.
The nature of the available resources and the relative
scarcity of archeological remains in the Flatlands microenvironment (4 of 49 sites) suggest that activity here was generally
restricted to procurement primarily of animal resources and
secondarily of flint and perhaps plant resources. This is confirmed somewhat by the presence of Flatland faunal remains,
particularly the priarie dog, in presumed Riparian occupation
sites.
Resource exploitation in the Uplands is most evident in the
procurement and preliminary processing of flint raw material.
Significant, though, are the localized present associations of extensive stands of oaks and burned rock middens and accumulations adjacent to the Riparian microenvironment. In these areas,
the archeological remains imply the occurrence of the same
array of exploitation activities that took place in similar
Riparian occupation sites.
The number and distribution of occupation sites in or adjacent to the Riparian microenvironment suggest that the exploitation model proposed by Prewitt (1976: 73-74) for the central
San Gabriel River valley applies quite well to the South Concho
research area in Tom Green County. Specifically, Prewitt
predicts (1) that temporary depletion of resources at one site to a
point where further energy expenditure would exceed
predefined limits prompted movement to another site, and (2)
that this has over long periods of time resulted in numerous sites
reflecting repeated use. This, I suggest, is one explanation for
the pattern observable in the study area.
Thus, we have occupation sites, where processing and

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

303

consumption of food and non-food resources took place, present
in or very near the zone (the Riparian microenvironment) where
the most important of these resources naturally occur in great
abundance. Exploitation of those not so important resources
which occur outside this area would have required brief procurement trips from the occupation sites.

CONCLUSIONS
Two general conclusions are derived from this study. First, I
believe that in spite of the data limitations, this study has
demonstrated the interpretive potential of correlating types of
archeological remains with the distribution of certain economically important resources. Thus, this procedure brings to bear
another line of evidence in hunter-gatherer subsistence-settlement studies. Depending on the quantity and quality of the data,
however, its results probably will vary from convincing explanation of patterns to mere speculation.
This variable relationship between the primary data and
interpretations brings me to the second general conclusion. I
believe that the data reported here simply are not sufficient for
convincingly demonstrating the proposed patterns of resource
use. Moreover, the temporal data probably present in the
research area have not been adquately sampled, nor for that
matter have subsistence remains. Nonetheless, this study has
provided a very useful base for subsequent work both in the
research area and in other regions, and has done so in such a
way that the bulk of the primary data retains its context for
future analysis.
REFERENCES CITED

Bartlett, John Russell
1854
Personal Narrative of Explorations and Incidents in Texas,
New Mexico, California, Sonora, and Chihuahua. Vo!. I,
Reprinted 1965. Rio Grande Press, Chicago.
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol.
2, No. 1, pp. 93-116.
Bolton, Herbert Eugene
Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706.
1908
Reprint. Barnes and Noble, Inc., New York.

1959

304

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bryant, Vaughn
Late Full-Glacial and Postglacial Pollen Analysis of Texas
1969
Sediments. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Texas at Austin.
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr., and Harry J. Shafer
1977
The Late Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas: A Model
for the Archeologist. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 48, pp. 126.
Connor, Seymour V.
1969
The Mendoza-Lopez Expedition and Location of San
Clemente. West Texas Historical Association Yearbook, Vol.
XLV, pp. 3-29.
Davis, William B.
1974
The Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife, Bulletin
No. 41.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes of the Southern
Plains. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 19, No. 65, pp. 180-196.
Eckhardt, Robert F.
Vascular Flora of Tom Green County, Texas. Masters thesis,
1975
Angelo State University, San Angelo.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
Physiography of the Western United States. McGraw-Hill
1931
Book Co., Inc., New York.
Fitzhugh, William W.
1972
Environmental Archeology and Cultural Systems in Hamilton
Inlet, Labrador. Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology,
No. 16.
Green, F. E.
1961
Archeological Salvage in the Twin Buttes Reservoir Area,
San Ang~lo, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 30, pp. 183-198.
Greer, John W.
1965
A Typology of Midden Circles and Mescal Pits. Southwestern
Lore. Vol. 3.1, No. 3, pp. 41-55.
Haggard, J. Villasana (translator)
1939
Diary of the Incidents and Operations Which Took Place on
the Expedition Made from the Province of Texas to the
Province of New Mexico in Compliance with Superior Orders.
By Capt. Don Francisco Amangual, 1808. Typescript in
Bexar Archives, University of Texas at Austin.
Hodge, Frederick W. (editor)
1907
The Narrative of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, Spanish
Explorers in the Southern United States, 1528-1543. Barnes
and Noble Co., New York.

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

305

Jochim, Michael A.
1976
Hunter-Gatherer Subsistence and Settlement, A Predictive
Model. Academic Press, New York.
Johnson, Eileen
1976
Investigations into the Zooarcheology of the Lubbock Lake
Site. Manuscript on file at the Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
Johnson, LeRoy Jr.
1964
The Devils Mouth Site, A Stratified Campsite at Amistad
Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas. Anthropology Series,
No. 6, Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at
Austin.
Lee, Richard B.
1968
What Hunters Do for a Living, or, How to Make Out on
Scarce Resources, in Man the Hunter. Edited by Richard Lee
and Irven DeVore. Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago.
Lee, Richard B. and Irven DeVore (editors)
1968
Problems in the Study of Hunters and Gatherers, in Man the
Hunter. Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago.
Lloyd, William
1887

Birds of Tom Green and Concho Counties, Texas. The Auk.
Vol. IV, No. 4, pp. 181-193.

Maxwell, Terry C.
n.d.

Ecological History of the Rolling Plains in Texas. Manuscript
in the author’s files.

Mount, J. Russel, Frank Rawer, Victor M. Shamburger, Richard
Peckham, and Fred L. Osborne, Jr.
1967
Reconnaissence Investigation of the Ground Water Resources
of the Colorado River Basin, Texas. Texas Water Development Board, Report 51.
Murdock, George Peter
1949
Social Structure. MacMillan Co., New York.
Newcomb, W. W.
1961
The Indians of Texas. UnNersity of Texas Press, Austin.
Nunley, Parker
1973

Toward a Generalized Model of Hunting and Gathering
Societies. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
43, pp. 13-32.
Odum, Eugene
1959
Fundamentals of Ecology, W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
Oldfield, Frank and James Schoenwetter
1975
Discussion of the Pollen-Analytical Evidence. Later Pleistocene Environments of the Southern High Plains. Edited by
Fred Wendorf and James Hester, Fort Burgwin Research
Center, Southern Methodist University.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

306

Prewitt, Elton R.
1970
The Piedra Del Diablo Site, Val Verde County, Texas, and
Notes on Some Trans-Pecos Texas Archeological Material in
the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. Texas
Historical Survey Committee, Archeological Report, No. 18.
1974
Archeological Investigation at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research
Report, No. 49.
Late Archaic Occupations at the Loeve-Fox Site: The San
1976
Marcos and Twin Sisters Phases. The Texas Archaic: A
Symposium. Edited by Thomas R. Hester. Center for Archeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio, Special
Report, No. 2.
Raun, G. G. and L. J. Eck
1967
Vertebrate Remains from Four Archeological Sites in the
Amistad Reservoir Area, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. XIX, No. 2, pp. 138-150.
Ross, Richard E.
1965
The Archeology of Eagle Cave. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 7.
Ruben, Frank
1968
Identification of Miscellaneous Faunal Remains from Bonfire
Shelter, Appendix in Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill
Site, Val Verde County, Texas, by David S. Dibble and
Dessamce Lorrain. Texas Memorial Museum, Miscellaneous
Papers, No. 1.
Shafer, Harry J.
1967
An Archeological Survey of Robert Lee Reservoir, Coke
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Survey
Reports, No. 4.
1969

Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir
Basin. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
No. 17.

1970

An Archeological Reconnaissance of the Sanderson Canyon
Watershed, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
Survey Report, No. 7.

Investigations into South Plains Prehistory, West Central
Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
No. 20.
Shafer, Harry J. and Edward P. Baxter
1975
An Archeological Survey of the Lignite Project, Atascosa and
McMullen Counties, Texas. Anthropology Laboratory, Texas
A&M University, Report, No. 7.
1971

Smith, Ronald E.
1967
Natural History of the Prairie Dog in Kansas. University of
Kansas Museum of Natural History, and State Biological

CONCHO RIVER ARCHEOLOGY

307

Survey, Miscellaneous Publication, No. 49.
Sorrow, William B., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the
1967
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 11.
Struever, Stuart
1968
Problems, Methods and Organization: A Disparity in the
Growth of Archeology. Anthropological Archeology in the
Americas. The Anthropological Society of Washington.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960
A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society. Vol. 29, pp. 63-108.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas
Archeological Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas
Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 4.
Thomas, Gerald W.
1975
Texas Plants -- An Ecological Summary. Texas Plants, A
Checklist and Ecological Summary. In, F. W. Gould, Texas
A&M University, Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Tunnell, Curtis D.
1962
Oblate: A Rockshelter Site, in Salvage Archeology of Canyon
Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge and Oblate Sites.
Texas Memorial Museum, Bulletin, No. 5.
Weir, Frank A.
The Central Texas Archaic. Ph.D. dissertation, Washington
1976
State University.
Wiedenfeld, C. G. and P. H. Flores
1976
Soil Survey of Tom Green County, Texas. U. S. Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Williams, J. W.
1962
New Conclusions on the Route of Mendoza, 1683-84, West
Texas Historical Association Year Book, Vol. 38, pp. 111-134.
Word, James H. and Charles L. Douglas
Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas
1907
Memorial Museum, Bulletin, No. 16.

