188

FIcui~ 66.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Tobacco pipes, a-e, stone; f-j, ceramic.

189

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

TOBACCO PIPES
by 1~. K.

B. JELKS,
and LESTER

HARP,IS, EDWARD

CHARLES

NEMEC, BOBBY VANCE,

WILSON

There were 205 pipes and pipe fragments found at the Gilbert Site,
193 of them made of pottery and 19. carved of stone. All are native
made; no European ones were found. They vary considerably in size,
but their form is remarkably consistent (Fig. 66).
All the pipes, both ceramic and stone, are of the elbow variety.
They have flaring bowls, many with burned cake sti!l inside, and
stems that are usually shorter and of smaller diameter than the
bowls. A reed evidently was inserted into the stem section before the
pipe was smoked. The angle between bowl and stem is near 90 degrees in most eases but sometimes is slightly acute or obtuse. At the
opening of both the bowl and the stem there is usually a flat lip;
occasionally, however, a lip is rounded or even sharp, especially
on the bowls. The flat stem lips are generally wider than those of
the bowls. Most of the pipes have a small spur at the heel.
Seven small ceramic pipe fragments (Fig. 66, c-f) show portions
of designs that were engraved (5 examples) or incised (2 examples) on the exterior surface of the bowl, or perhaps of the
stem. The designs are made up of straight lines, the most common
elements being triangles, frequently filled with hachuring or crosshatching. Pipes with similar decorations have been reported from
the Pearson Site (Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 72-73) and from the
Womaek Site (Harris et al., 1965: 303; Fig. 6, F). The designs on
these pipes closely resembles those on certain Womack Engraved
pottery vessels. Furthermore, the paste of the ceramic pipes is the
same as that of Womack Engraved pottery.
The stone pipes are made of a soft, limey marl containing fossil
foraminifers. Kathleen Gilmore examined them and identified the marl
as of Cretaceous age, probably from the Eagle Ford Fo~Tnation
specifically. While of the same basic shape as the ceramic pipes,
they tend to have more slender proportions than the ceramic ones.
The stem of one stone pipe (Fig. 66, b) is completely covered with
an elaborate incised decoration reminiscent of the decorated ceramic
pipes. The design includes triangles, hachuring, and crosshatching.
Measurements were made of the relatively complete ceramic pipes.
The bowls are from 28 to 59 ram. high and from 24 to 47 ram. across
at the mouth (all outside measurements). The stems are 24 to 66 ram.
long (measured from the lip to the end of the spur at the heel)

190

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

and 17 to 44 mm. wide at the orifice. Flat bowl lips are 2 to 8 mm.
wide, flat stem lips 5 to 12 mm. wide.
The following measurements were obtained for the stone pipes:
bowl height, 40 and 60 mm. (2 specimens); bowl diameter at mouth,
33 mm. (1 specimen); stem length (measured from lip to end of spur
at heel), 37 and 49. mm. (2 specimens); stem diameter at orifice, 23
and 9.6 mm. (2 specimens); width of flat stem lips, 5 to 7 mm. (2
specimens). Only two stone pipes retain portions of the upper bowl,
and on both specimens the lip is rounded.

