257

The Galena Sites (41HR61-41HR70):
A Late Archaic to Late Prehistoric Complex
in Harris County, Texas

E. Raymond Ring, Jr.

ABSTRACT

The Galena sites on the upper Texas coast were occupied from the Late
Archaic into the Late Prehistoric period, with major use in the Clear Lake
Period (ca. A.D. 100-425). These sites were explored over thirty years ago,
but are officially reported now in order to preserve for posterity their interesting archeological record.

INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
This report presents a summary of the archeological findings at the Galena
shell midden (41HR61) and nine adjacent campsites (41HR62-41HR70) located
near the mouth of Hunting Bayou in the incorporated city of Galena Park, Harris
County, Texas. This is approximately ten miles east of the central downtown
Houston business district (Figure 1).
The shell midden was discovered in 1956 by a 12-year old boy, Millard M.
Smith, Jr. and his friends: They found several chert dart points and numerous
pottery sherds in a small erosional gully at the site. These youngsters kept the site
location secret until knowledge of it leaked into a Houston newspaper in the
latter part of 1957. The boys obligingly showed the author the midden and also a
small collection of artifacts derived from the site. Because of the author’s interest
in investigating the site further, the site owner (the Houston Port Commission)
and leasee (Mr. Troy Allison) were contacted; they graciously permitted the
excavations to be conducted.
It was feared that the Houston newspaper story might attract site looters.
Also, the small erosional gully, however narrow, had cut rather deeply into and
below the important shell layer and was destined, ultimately, to dump the entire
midden down a sharp embankment into a freshwater pond 5.5 meters below it
(Figure 2). These two factors weighed heavily in the author’s decision to excavate the shell midden.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65 (1994)

258

Texas Archeological Society

FIGURE I

Figure 1. Map of Harris County, Texas, showing the location of the Galena sites.

The shell midden excavation and a full preliminary report were completed
in December 1958 (Ring i 958) with a copy being presented to the Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin. The author later returned to the site
with a Brunton compass and tape to recheck certain data, and detected a Small,
barely discernible rise some 150 meters northeast of the midden.
A shovel test brought up a Goose Creek sherd, and a four square foot (1.2
square meter) test pit identified Galena campsite "A" (41HR62). Ultimately a
total of eight other sites were discovered ca. 107-350 meters from the shell
midden (see Figure 2), and these were explored by 27 test pits. The testing of the
nine Galena campsites was completed in early 1959, with a separate report of
these investigations also presented to the University of Texas in February 1959
(Ring 1959). In JUne 1959, Humble Oil and Refining Co. completed two radiocarbon tests of Rangia cuneata shell in the Galena shell midden (Ring 196!a).
In September 1963, the author delivered the entire Galena collection; ineluding site notes, maps, profiles, and diagrams tO the Department of Anthropology at the University of Texas to be retained in perpetuity. The purpose of this
paper, after more than three deca~des, is to consolidate the findings in the Galena
shell midden report of 1958 with the findings from the nine adjacent sites and,
hopefully, to establish s0me possible temporal Correlations between these archeological sites.

Ring -- The Galena Sites

FIGURE

CAMPSITE

G

O

41HR68

NOT
SURVEYED

SHELL
MIDDEN

FRESH - wATER
POND

KNOLL

Figure 2. Galena sites map.

259

260

Texas Archeological Society

Perhaps the extreme tardiness of this paper could be likened to the Rip Van
Winkle legend. But in this case, Rip Van Ring dozed off in 1959 and awakened
33 years later With a craving to finalize some unfinished business--in a world
filled with newer archeological and technological discoveries.

REGIONAL TOPOGRAPHIC AND GEOLOGIC FEATURES
The area of investigation lies in the West Gulf Coastal Plain, a vast region
of topographic flatness following the present shoreline of the Gulf of Mexico
from the mouth of the Mississippi River to the Republic of Mexico. The monotonous flatness of the coastal plain is interrupted only by the valleys and floodplains of the various rivers and tributaries that flow across them.
The basement sediments of c!ay, silt, and sand that today lie in a monoclinal
attitude have been deposited since early Tertiary period time by fluviomarine
action during periods of fluctuation between shoreline emergence and submergence. In the late Tertiary period, the landmass experienced extended emergence
that caused sediments to be laid down by fluvial action. The present coastal plain
is covered by a soil of clay and sandy clay of Quaternary age and of river origin,
with the exception of the shoreline itself that has formed through the combined
forces of fluviomarine action and wind deposition. The youngest Quaternary
sediments contain an appreciable amount of calcium carbonate in the form of
calcareous concretions and platy caliche.

DRAINAGE
The older and larger rivers in the southeast Texas portion of the Gulf
Coastal plain, such as the Sabine, Neches, Trinity, Brazos, and Colorado, head
considerably north of the coastal plain area, but cut deeply into and completly
across it. The newer rivers formed since late Tertiary land emergence, such as
Oyster Bayou, Cedar Bayou, Clear Creek, the San Jacinto River, Buffalo Bayou,
and its tributary Hunting Bayou, find their headwaters within the coastal plain.
They have shallow and less extensive valley cutting. In general, the entire region
around the Galena sites is poorly drained.

FLORA AND FAUNA
Due to the sluggish drainage, to heavy rainfall, and to climatic conditions,
the area supports an abundant growth of vegetation and, in the drainage systems,
fairly heavy stands of trees. The Galena site is quite densely forested, principally
with oak and pine.
In 1958, an elder informant stated that, some 40 years before, the Hunting
Bayou area supported considerable animal life, principally deer, wolves,

Ring ~ The Galena Sites

261

raccoon, opossum, armadillo, rabbit, fox, and other small animals. He further
stated that the mouth of Hunting Bayou was considered a good fishing spot,
particularly in dry seasons when the salinity of the water increased. During these
times good catches of redfish and trout were taken along with an occasional
flounder.

GALENA SITES:LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION
The Galena shell midden (41HR61) is located on the east bank of Hunting
Bayou 3.2 km from where it joins Buffalo Bayou. The elevation of the site is
approximately 34 feet amsl.
s
The site is situated on the edge of a Beaumont Formation clay knoll that
overlooks the relatively narrow Hunting Bayou floodplain (Figure 3). A shallow freshwater pond is 5.5 meters below the site; it parallels Hunting Bayou for
about 180 meters. Hunting Bayou runs its southerly course 61 meters from the
midden site. Its brackish water flows sluggishly in a channel 1.8 meters below
the pond water level. A natural levee, somewhat bolstered by dredging in 1948,
separates the two bodies of water. It is partially breached in three places, forming spill troughs from pond to bayou. Thus, the waters of the two bodies join
during very heavy rainfall when the pond spills over, and comingle during times
of extreme flood.
The shell midden is essentially elliptical in shape, with its long axis running
southwest-northwest. The southwest end of the site, near a steep edge of the

Figure 3. Galena Shell Midden (41HR61).

262

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Galena Campsite "A" (41HR62).

knoll, was breached by a narrow erosional gully that had cut into the loam
midden mantle and the two layers below.
The site’s upper loam layer covers the entire site, measuring 22.9 by 18.3
meters, comprising some 410 square meters. Its middle zone of shell extends
16.8 meters by 14 meters, an area of 235 square meters. The lower clay layer,
probably a reworked Beaumont Formation deposit, covers an area comparable to
the upper loam deposit. In aggregate, the three layers average about 0.61 meters
in thickness at the center of the site, gradually diminishing on the flanks and
perimeter of the site.
As previously mentioned, the nine Galena campsites (41HR62 through
41HR70) were located on both banks of Hunting Bayou 106.7 to 350 meters
from the shell midden (see Figure 2). As with the midden, all campsites rested
on the Beaumont clay. These sites ranged in shape from roughly round to ovate
and oblong. Lengths varied from about 10.7 meters to 35 meters, with widths
from about 7.6-15.2 meters. Surface expressions of these features were barely
discernible to the eye (Figure 4). None of the nine Galena campsites showed
stratigraphic layering, due to the mixing and redeposition of materials of
different ages.

Mapping and Excavation
For a number of reasons, the Galena shell midden was not excavated by the
metric grid system, principal among them being opportunity, time, and the

Ring ~ The Galena Sites

263

difficulty of maintaining broad vertical control in the principal cultural layer of
compacted shell valves. The site was excavated, mapped, and profiled employing
a Brunton compass and steel tapes. Coincidentally, a large tree near the center of
the midden served as a temporary datum for lateral measurements. While much
of the midden was screened, the large volume of compact shell made this method
difficult. A blow sufficient to dislodge shell valves tended to break bone, antler,
pottery, and chert artifacts. Thus, it was found more satisfactory to excavate
cautiously with small picks, trowels, and brushes. Records of artifacts and stratigraphic findings were kept in a field notebook and then transferred to a larger file
after each dig.
The nine Galena campsites were explored by 27 test pits, either four or
five square feet (1.2 or 1.5 square meters) in size, excavated in 6-inch (15.2 cm)
levels from the surface. The lowest level was always from 30.5 cm below surface (bs) to whatever depths the sterile Beaumont Formation was reached-whether at 40.6 cm or at 53.3 cm. The clean, homogeneous, very sandy clay
passed easily through l/4-inch screens. Most of the exploratory work was first
done with small tools. All test pits were backfilled immediately, by agreement
with the land leasee, but even this proved a cattle hazard because the backfill
took the character of quicksand after a heavy rain. This brought the test excavations to an end in 1959.

Galena Site Stratigraphy
At site 41HR61, numerous stratigraphic pits and occasional section trenches
were dug to examine and measure the shell midden layers and to record their
contents. The midden accumulation consisted of three layers, the upper two of
which were very distinctive (Figure 5). These are described below, with brief
mention of artifact content; thicknesses are those in the central area of the site
except as otherwise designated.
Upper Loam: A dark brown to almost black, sandy, unconsolidated organic
loam. This layer was 15.2 cm thick over most of the midden; however, it
thickened considerably on the flanks. This was probably caused by gradual
erosion and redeposition of the knoll’s soil matrix. The upper 7.6 cm of the
upper loam contained only a fewartifacts, but the lower 7.6 cm (particularly
at the contact with the shell layer below) contained considerable animal
bone, antler, pottery sherds, and occasional shellfish valves. Some chert
debris, two hammerstones, and an occasional calcareous concretion were
also present.
Middle Shell: A fairly compact layer of shell in a matrix of very dark brown,
organic, sandy loam. This shell layer averaged about 30.5 cm in thickness
over the central midden area, but diminished along the flanks of the knoll.

264

Texas Archeological Society

t~

"0

o~

o l~
L~

o]o
o
r~

Ring ~ The Galena Sites

265

The shell interstices were filled not only with loam, but also with animal
bones, antler, chert debris, pottery sherds, calcareous concretions, sandstone
fragments, and probable pigment stones. The shellfish valves, the principal
constituent of this layer, ranged in environment from freshwater mussels to
marine organisms.

Lower Clay: A fairly compact brown to reddish brown, slightly sandy,
sticky clay--not entirely dissimilar to the underlying Beaumont clay. This
layer (?) measured from 7.6 to 15.2 cm in thickness, but appeared to wedge
out on or near the perimeter of the upper loam layer. It is also possible that it
may have merely blended into the original Beaumont Formation subsoil,
This lower clay contained a scattering of fragmented animal bones, turtle
carapaces, and shellfish valves, along with chert dart points and an abundance of calcareous concretions. While the shell valves were few and scattered, two areas that were 0.6 to 0.9 meters in diameter were found where
shell valves were found in 2.5 to 5 cm thick layers. Both "patches" were at
the base of the layer. This lower clay rather resembled the underlying
Beaumont clay except that it was less sticky and more reddish in color, this
being perhaps the result of ancient oxidation. This is to say, the lower clay
layer may represent the weathered top of the natural Beaumont Formation
on which the first Galena residents camped.
Beaumont Clay: A reddish brown to locally gray, sticky, sandy clay; completely devoid of artifacts. This is the Quaternary age Beaumont Formation.

The nine Galena campsites (41HR62-41HR70) completely lacked discernible stratification. The cultural deposits were a light tan-brown sand mixed with
clay; they were homogeneous in texture and easy to excavate and screen. The
upper 2.5-5 cm of the deposits showed some organic staining from the decay of
modern forest material. Of 27 test pits excavated in these nine sites, most
encountered the sterile Beaumont clay at ca. 46 cm bs; depths ranged from 40.6
cm to 53.3 cm. Although the contact with the Beaumont clay was flat, there were
narrow, shallow furrows and gullies within it that contained an occasional artifact to as deep as 66 cm bs.

SHELL REFUSE
The Galena shell midden is estimated to have contained some 457 cubic
meters of shellfish valves, most being in the middle layer of shell. The lower clay
contained randomly scattered Rangia cuneata shells, except for the two or three
"patches" mentioned above. These appeared to be evidence of either a large meal
or a short stay. The upper loam layer contained very little shell, and this was
found at or near the contact with the middle shell layer.

266

Texas Archeological Society

The different shell species from the site ranged from freshwater mussels to
marine organisms (Figure 6):

D

Figure 6. Raw Shell and Shell Artifacts from the Galena Shell Midden: a, Glebula
rotundata; b, Quadrula speciosa; c, Rangia cuneata; d, Crassostrea virginica; e,
Dinocardium robustum; f, pert’orated conch shell pendant, probably Busycon pelversum;
g, a notched and decorated Glebula valve.

Rangia cuneata, an edible brackish water, hard-shelled clam found in inlets
between bays and fresh water; represents 98 percent of the total midden shell
accumulation.
Quadrula speciosa, an edible, soft, pearly-shelled freshwater mussel found
in creeks, rivers, bayous, and lakes of the Gulf Coast; represents about one
percent of the midden shell.
Glebula rotundata, an edible, soft, pearly-shelled freshwater mussel of the
same environment as Quadrula; represents about one percent of the midden
shell.
Crassostrea virginica, an edible, medium hard-shelled oyster found in midsalinity environments in or near bays; represented by only 58 total valves, all
found in the midden. Uncommonly, Crassostrea will grow and mature in

Ring ~ The Galena Sites

267

low-salinity waters so long as it is not suddenly exposed to heavy rains and
freshwater floods.
Dhzocardium robustum, a large, edible, high-salinity environment hardshelled clam found in ocean waters or occasionally in a bay near a pass or
ocean inlet; represented by ! 0 valve fragments.
Busycon perversum say, an edible, high-salinity, hard-shelled conch (whelk)
found in ocean waters; represented by a single specimen which was cut,
drilled, and polished into a pendant (see Figure 6f).
The freshwater mussels, Glebula and Quadrula, could have been obtained
from the nearby freshwater pond. The low-salinity Rangia would have been
obtained from Hunting Bayou, only 61 meters away.
It is difficult to know where the Crassostrea, the common table oyster of
today, was gathered. It would have been present in Galveston Bay during the
occupation of the Galena sites, whose closest point is at present Morgan Point, at
the mouth of the San Jacinto River, some 27 km by land and 34 km by water. In
view of the fact that two of the recovered oyster shells had Rangia valves in
growth attachment, and that only 58 oyster shells were found, it seems more
reasonable to assume that the oysters were gathered near the mouth of Hunting
Bayou in Buffalo Bayou about 3.2 km away. This might have been during an
uncommon period of less rainfall that permitted Crassostrea to reach maturity in
a locale normally of lower salinity water. The Dinocardium clam and the Busycon
conch pendant might have been obtained at Bolivar Pass, the eastern inlet on
Galveston Island, some 66 km as the crow flies, but double the distance by
walking water courses. These species were surely transported such great distances for their ornamental value.
The foregoing comments regarding the mussel shell pertain exclusively to
the Galena shell midden. The 27 test pits in the nine Galena campsites found only
285 shell valves, mostly fragmented; 280 brackish water Rangia valves and five
freshwater Glebula and Quadrula shells. Most of these were found on one rare
pocket at the depth of 40.6-45.7 cm; pottery sherds and a few animal bone
fragments were found in association.

SHELL ARTIFACTS

Despite the fact that the shell refuse accumulation in the Galena shell
midden was substantial, shell artifacts were scarce. A number of smooth, pearly
Glebula valves were broken roughly in half either by accident or intent; in some
cases the broken edges appeares to have been used as tools. A broken Glebula
shell (measuring 3.8 by 6.4 cm), its exterior surface removed to make both sides
pearly, was found with a hole in it. If intentionally perforated, this was prob-

268

Texas Archeological Society

ably a pendant. Another broken Glebula fragment (see Figure 6g) measured 4.4
by 2.5 cm in size. It was delicately notched around the shell lip. Parallel fineline incisions were cut from the lip notching inward toward the crown. It may
have been used as either jewelry or as a pottery-impressing tool.
It is possible that the 10 Dinocardium ocean clam shells were carried to
the site either to decorate pottery or to manufacture ornaments; however, none
of these pieces were worked. An undamaged, perforated, and polished Busycon
conch shell pendant (see Figure 6f) was excavated from the Galena shell midden
at 35.6 cm bs in the middle shell layer. It was either carried in raw and fabricated, or traded in from the Gulf of Mexico. None of the 58 oyster valves were
used as tools or ornaments. Similarly, none of the 285 shellfish valves from the
nine Galena campsites showed human modification.

ANIMAL BONE REFUSE
An abundance of animal bone from a variety of species were found in the
Galena shell midden. Deer represented the major mammal species hunted by
the site occupants, and the bones from no fewer than 66 individuals were present
at the site. This is based on the recovery of 132 deer astragalus bones of which
there is one in each hind leg of all ungulates such as deer.
A number of well-preserved muskrat mandibles were also recovered from
the shell midden. Other small animals present included rabbit, raccoon, skunk,
opossum, and possibly badger. Parts of a bear were found, and a well-preserved
mandible of a member of the Canidae family showed the presence of either a
coyote, a wolf, or a dog.
The shell midden also produced a number of unidentified bird bones. Three
large fish vertebrae and two catfish fin spines were also identified. A great deal
of turtle plastron and carapace was recovered from all midden layers. While the
principal use of turtle was probably for food, the notable absence of "rib" structure inside the fragmented carapaces suggest these were ground out to render
the shell suitable for use as cups, dishes, or rattles.
Several thousand animal bones were recovered from the Galena shell
midden while only 324 bones, 29 deer teeth, and four small antler fragments
were recovered from the nine adjacent Galena campsites. Most of this bone was
found at 41HR62 in one deep pocket or narrow gully in the otherwise sterile
Beaumont clay.
Eighty percent of the animal bones in the Galena campsites were recovered between 30.5-53.3 cm bs. Another 15 percent derived from 15.2-30.5 cm
bs, but only 4 percent of the animal bone came from the top 15 cm of the sites.
All animal bones at the Galena sites which contained recoverable amounts
of marrow were broken and splintered as if for marrow extraction. Both the
uneven, conchoidal breakage of bone ends, and the irregular scattering of pieces,

Ring n The Galena Sites

269

show that these marrow bones were broken when fresh rather than by later
ground pressure.
At 41HR61, animal bone and turtle shell were found distributed throughout
all the midden layers. Fish and bird bones were not present in the lower clay,
perhaps due to poor preservation. The heaviest concentration of animal bone
refuse extended from the top to the middle of the shell layer.
The Galena occupants were skilled hunters as inferred by the heavy bone
refuse in the midden. The degree of wear seen on the mammal teeth showed
that the hunters were most adept at killing the very young and the very old game,
while the prime individuals may often have escaped the stalk and chase.

BONE ARTIFACTS
Only one bone implement was found in all the nine Galena campsites. This
was a socketed bone projectile point packed with asphaltum recovered from
41HR62 at the depth of 43 cm.
A number of bone artifacts were found in the Galena shell midden (Figure
7): eight cut awls (four incised), two cracked awls, 14 spatulate awls, one deer
ulna spatulate tool, 18 socketed projectile points, one polished fish spine or pin,
three rectanguloiud cut pieces, and one cut spatulate end piece.
The cut awls were prepared by cutting and/or splitting long bones and then
shaped and smoothed with abraders. Four were incised with a simple pattern of
parallel horizontal lines and/or parallel incised lines. As suggested by Walley
(1955), this type of bone incising bears a striking resemblance to some of the
decoration patterns found on Goose Creek Incised pottery rimsherds. Two fragmentary awls were highly polished and fire-hardened (see Figure 7o).
Three small rectanguloid, polished, cut bone objects were found of uncertain function (Figure 7f-h). Carved from three distinct pieces of split deer bone,
two measured 2.24 cm in length; the other was 2.46 cm long. Widths ranged
from 1.69-1.90 cm. Figure 7f’ and g’ show abraded and polished lengths of split
bone from which this type of item was taken.
Dr. T. N. Campbell (1959 personal communication) suggested that these
three problematical objects might have been gaming pieces had they been marked
in any way by incisions, pits, or paint, but they were not. The Galena pieces do
resemble unfinished bone dice similar to those from the Harris County Boy’s
School Cemetery (Aten et al. 1976:Figure 1 le-j) that had been neatly marked by
incised and/or punctated marks. One (see Figure 7g) had a black, shapeless, twopronged stain on one side that appeared to be a splash of spilled asphaltum. Two
animal bone fragments found nearby also showed spilled asphaltum.
One flat bone piece is unquestionably the broken tip (or sawed-off end?)
of a spatulate deer ulna awl or flintknapper (see Figure 7d). Its cut end had been
carefully abraded to a smooth, polished finish and the hollow interior of the bone

270

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 7. Bone Artifacts from the Galena Shell Midden: a-b, deer spatulate awls; c, deer
ulna spatulate knapper; d, spatulate ulna end, asphaltum-packed; e, polished catfish spine
(pin?); f-h, bone plates with cutting stock; i, graphite schist; j, ornamental shell; k-n,
socketed bone projectile points; o-q, cut bone awls; r-s, cracked bone awls.

Ring ~ The Galena Sites

271

had been packed with asphaltum. One edge near the abraded end showed five
thinly incised notches that did not extend to the flat part of the bone.
No bone tools were found in the lower clay layer of the midden. No clear
evidence of bone implements was seen below the middle of the shell strata. As
with the antler artifacts, the bone tools were heavily concentrated at the contact
between the upper loam layer and the middle shell layer.

ANTLER MATERIALS
The nine Galena campsites produced only four small deer antler fragments
in the lowest level (30.5-45.7 cm) of the 41HR62 deposits. The Galena shell
midden, however, yielded 101 pieces of antler, 60 of which were used as tools:
33 flaking tools, 26 antler tines, and one socketed projectile (bunting) point.
The socketed antler point was packed with asphaltum; Figure 8i shows the
packed asphaltum at the antler stem. All antler implements were smoothly
abraded; however, they generally lacked the polish of the bone artifacts. It is
speculated that the antler smoothing may have come principally from human
skin friction whereas the bone tools may have been stone-honed. The chertknapping antler tools ranged in length from 6.48-14.35 cm; maximum handle
thicknesses varied from 1.27 cm to 2.41 cm. The tips of most of the antler tools
were somewhat rounded and blunted from use.
Fourteen of the 26 antler tines were fire-hardened. The non-fired antler was
tan-brown in color, soft, soggy in situ, and surficially powdery when dried. The
fire-hardened tines ranged in color from light to dark gray and rarely black.
These were hard, brittle, and shiny. Several showed what appeared to be thermal shrinkage fractures (see Figure 8a-d, g). When tested with a penknife, the
non-fired antler were easily gouged, while the fired tines could not be penetrated
with any reasonable amount of pressure.
The antler tines in the total collection were 2.8-4.6 cm in length, 0.8 cm to
1.3 cm in basal width, and were rather pointed. The curvature of most Galena
antler tines would seem to render them rather unwieldy as projectile tips; however, Ford and Quimby (1945:42 and Figure 12g, j) show curved-tip antler
projectiles from Tchefuncte Culture sites in South Louisiana. The Galena firehardenening of antler tines would improve their usefulness for flesh penetration
as projectile points, however awkward they were, but would render the antler too
brittle for knapping chert.
At the Galena shell midden, a single piece of raw antler was recovered from
the lower clay layer where a small scattering of deer bone was also noted. Antler
was most common from the base of the middle shell layer to the middle of the
upper loam layer. The heaviest concentration of both raw and tooled antler was
in the loam deposit overlying the shell layer.

272

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Antler Artifacts from the Galena Shell Midden: a-h, antler tines (all firehardened except e, f, and h); i, socketed antler bunting projectile point (socket opened to
show packed asphaltum); j, thin sandstone saw; k-l, sandstone abraders; m, sandstone
shaft abrader; n-s, antler knapping tools.

Ring m The Galena Sites

273

CHERT ARTIFACTS

The Galena shell midden excavations produced 291 chert and two quartzite
artifacts, of which 41 were utilized. The other 250 pieces consisted of three
unworked chert cobbles, two cores of chert and quartzite, 20 chert core fragments, and 225 pieces of chert debris.
The provenience of projectile points and other chert artifacts from the
Galena shell midden is listed in Table 1. The five unprovenienced dart points
were found by the youngsters who found the site. These probably washed out of
the middle shell layer into the small erosion gully on the southwest flank of the
site.
The chert projectile types from the Galena shell midden were first identified
using Suhm et al. (1954). Later revisions were checked using Turner and Hester
(1985). Figure 9 shows a sample of projectile points from the shell midden.

Table 1.
Galena Shell Midden Lithic Artifacts

Upper Loam

Middle Shell

Lower Clay Unprovenienced

5

1

2

6

2

2

3

Arrowpoints
Perdiz
Dart Points
Gary
Kent
Palmillas
Morhiss

1

1

1
1

Lange
Unidentified

2

Gravers
Drills
Stemmed End Scraper
Knives
Choppers

2

Chert cobbles
Cores & fragments
Chert debris

1
2

2
1
1

1

1

1
3
22
225

274

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 9. Projectile Points and Stone Tools from the Galena Shell Midden: a, Perdiz; c, f,
m, s-u, Gary; b, d-e, k-l, q-r, v-y, Kent; h-j, aa-bb, Palmillas; o-p, Morhiss; g, Lange (?); n,
ee, unclassified dart points; z, cc, drills; dd, stemmed end scraper; if, knife/flesher.

Ring -- The Galena Sites

275

The 27 test pits in the nine Galena campsites produced 35 identifiable
arrowpoints, 95 dart points (78 identifiable to type), a variety of lithic tools, 39
unidentifiable chert artifacts (mainly dart point fragments), and 1139 pieces of
chert debris (Table 2). Samples of projectile points from the Galena campsites
are illustrated in Figure 10.

Figure 10. Projectile Points and Stone Tools from the Galena Campsites: a-k, Perdiz; 1,
Alba; m, Catahoula; q, v, x, z, aa, cc, Gary; n-o, w, ee, ff, Kent; s, bb, ii, Morhiss; y, dd,
Yarbrough (?); p, Ellis; gg, unidentified dart point; r, t, u, knives; hh, retouched flake.

276

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2.
Chert Artifacts from the Nine Galena Campsites
0-15 cm

15-31 cm

31-46 cm

Total

2

1
1
9

3
1
8

6
3
25
1

5
3

22
24
7

36

28
29
7
4
3
2
3
1
1
56
5
6
3
3
1139

Arrowpoints
Alba
Catahoula
Perdiz
Scallorn

Dart Points
Gary
Kent
Palmillas
Morhiss
Williams
Ellis
Yarbrough
Scottsbluff
Clovis
Fragments

1
8
1

1
2

1
3
2
2

1
17

Knives
Side scrapers

1

End scrapers
Gravers

1

5
5
3
2

341

537

Debris

261

Two Paleoindian projectile points were excavated from two different
Galena campsites. A Clovis point was found at the depth of 28 cm in campsite
41HR64 (Figure 1 lb), and a Scottsbluff was recovered at the depth of 12.7 cm
in campsite 41HR69 (Figure 1 lc).
The medial length of the Clovis point is 8.05 cm while its maximum width
is 3.43 cm; thickness is 0.69 cm in blade mid-section and 0.51 cm in stem midsection. Fluting occurs on one side, the stem is heavily ground, and the base is
moderately ground. The entire blade is finely resharpened. Its color is a two-tone
lustrous brown with a light orange tint and a white crystalline quartz inclusion
near the tip. The chert is definitely exotic and a Texas source can likely be ruled
out; its true source, however, has not been determined.

Rhlg ~ The Galena Sites

277

Figure 11. Selected Stone Tools: a, knife later found in the upper half of the middle shell
layer (depth of 26 cm) of the Galena Shell Midden; b, Scottsbluff point from 41HR69,
found at depth of 13 cm; c, Clovis point from 41HR64, 29 cm.

The Galena Clovis point bears a strong resemblance to the so-called Ross
County (Ohio) Clovis point style seen in surface and cave collections in Ohio,
Illinois, Iowa, Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, Arkansas, and Louisiana. Waldorf
and Waldorf (1987:32) state that the "Ross County Clovis type is said to have a
distribution from Ohio southward to Florida and even into Texas (Prufer and
Baby 1963 and Perino 1971)."
The Galena Scottsbluff point bears a small notch high on the stem (see
Figure 1 lb) caused by a reckless shovel. All other features are natural. The
artifact is 5.46 cm long and 2.92 cm wide; stem width is 2.16 cm and stem depth
is 1.22 cm. The stem, if ground at all, may be slightly abraded, but the base
shows no grinding. The color is a lustrous pale yellow-brown or tan-yellow. This
chert too is exotic, and not from Texas. Like the Clovis point, its rock source has
not been determined. Current dating places the Scottsbluff at about 8400-9500
years B.P. and the Clovis at about 11000-11500 years B.P. But here both
Paleoindian points were found mixed with lithic materials dating from the Late
Archaic, Early Ceramic, and Late Prehistoric periods.
The single Perdiz arrowpoint found in the Galena shell midden upper loam
layer (at a depth of 13 cm) represents the only chert tool dating to the Late
Prehistoric period. The various dart points from the middle shell layer of the
midden reflect an occupational span from the Late Archaic through the Early
Ceramic period.

278

Texas Archeological Society

The nine Galena campsites evidence stratigraphic mixing. The arrowpoints,
representing the Late Prehistoric period (the Alba, Perdiz, Catahoula, and
Scallorn types), were found in equal amounts in each of the 15.2 cm levels from
the surface to the top of the sterile Beaumont clay formation. The dart point
distribution (excluding the two Paleoindian points) listed in Table 2 indicates
that 61 darts were recovered from the lowest levels, 12 from the middle level,
and three from the uppermost level; potsherds were distributed throughout these
levels. This surely indicates that Late Prehistoric and Early Ceramic period
occupations are mixed stratigraphically. There was no visible evidence, however, that burrowing animals had moved arrowpoints from shallow to deeper
positions in the Galena campsites. The nine Galena campsites had the same
general dart point types as the shell midden, and thus they were occupied contemporaneously at least from the Late Archaic.
Setting aside the unknown chert source of the two Paleoindian points, the
rock types of most of the other Galena artifacts were chert, along with a very
small amount of quartzite. These materials are typically found in area archeological sites. Colors ranged from brown, tan, red-brown, to gray-brown. Petrified wood was present in low frequencies at all 10 Galena sites. These rock types
can be found in river gravels of the West San Jacinto River.
A few of the finished artifacts were a gray to gray-brown, sometimes speckled, chert commonly known as Edwards chert. It has its source on the Edwards
Plateau of Central Texas but is sometimes found in gravels downstream on the
lower courses of both the Colorado and Guadalupe rivers.
One Edwards chert artifact, a medium-gray, speckled, ovate knife or
flesher, provide a clue to possible contemporaneity between the Galena shell
midden and the nine adjacent campsites. This knife had been thermo-fractured
into three pieces, perhaps from accidental fire exposure, although it was neither
darkened nor reddened. The first two conjoins were found (many weeks apart)
in the middle shell layer of the midden at depths of 35.6 cm and 40.6 cm, and
were separated by 16.2 meters. Months later, a third piece was found at the
depth of 45.7 cm in Galena campsite 41HR62, some 152.4 meters distant. It
was not a conjoined piece but the chert type, color, flaking pattern, and thermofracture angle indicates that it is a third part of the artifact. The three pieces
represent some 60-70 percent of the original artifact, but the breakage pattern
indicates that at least two more pieces were missing.

SANDSTONE ARTIFACTS
The nine Galena campsites had only five sandstone implements, al! in
41HR62. Two thin sandstone saws were found between 30.5-45.7 cm below
surface. Three sandstone abraders were also recovered, one in the 15.2-30.5 cm
level, and the others in the aforementioned lower level.

Ring m The Galena Sites

279

Figure 12. Sandstone Abraders and Saws: a-d, thin saws; e-f, thin-edged abraders; g,
grooved abrader. Unlabelled others are thick abraders. All are from Galena Shell Midden,
except b from 41HR62.

A total of 90 sandstone implements were recovered from the Galena shell
midden. The majority of the sandstone implements were generally flat; however,
a few were rather massive and rounded. Most were used for abrading and cutting
activities since they had smooth and worn areas, grooves, cut-shaped depressions, channels, and cutting edges (Figure 12).
About a dozen small, delicate pieces were classified as sandstone saws (see
Figure 12a-d). These were thin, flat, and had sharp working edges. They ranged
from 2.49 cm to 8.26 cm in length and from 0.42-1.27 cm in thickness. Another
group is identified as finger-size abraders. These also were about the same length
as the saws (2.5-7.6 cm) but were considerably thicker and more rounded than
the saws. A few of these stones had sharp honed cutting edges (see Figure 12e-t).
Many were rounded, sometime grooved, and sometimes cupped for rather delicate shaping work. A single fragmented sandstone piece bore the deep, rounded
channel of a shaft abrader (see Figure 8m).
A third group of about 50 sandstone implements ranged up to 17.8 cm in
length. Some were large enough to have been placed on the ground to use. A
number of these had grooves and cup-shaped depressions, and some were distinctly plate-shaped.

280

Texas Archeological Society

Chronologically, a single shell midden sandstone tool was found at the base
of the middle shell layer. Only a few sandstone pieces were recovered from the
middle of the shell layer. The heaviest concentration of sandstone implements
was found in the uppermost part of the middle shell layer.

MISCELLANEOUS STONE ARTIFACTS
Two oblong, stream-rounded quartzite cobbles, one 11.7 cm in length and
the other 6.7 cm in length, were recovered near the base of the upper loam layer
of the Galena shell midden. Both had smoothly worn surfaces over part of the
circumference, and showed spall marks on or near the ends, and to some extent,
in the middle of the cobbles. The wear patterns may have been a result of milling
activities, however, it was possible these stones were also used for honing a fine
polish on bone and antler implements. The spall marks on these tools are also
indicative of hammerstone use.

PIGMENT (?) STONES
The Galena shell midden yielded about 35 pieces of red to orange-red
nodules containing limonite and/or low-grade hematite. Six of the pieces were
clearly a red, ferruginous fine-grained sandstone. The nine Galena campsites
produced only a few of these possible pigment stones. Despite a generally rough
texture, these pieces when moist or wet created a red coloration on the skin;
when dry, the pieces ground to a gritty red powder.
In archeological sites the evidence of raw, unapplied pigments is usually
seen where "paint" pouches have decayed or where stained mortar and pestle
grinding pots are found. No such evidence was seen at the Galena sites,
however.
A small, flat, thin, and partially abraded black metamorphic rock, measuring 2.72 cm by 1.57 cm, was found in the middle shell layer at 41HR61 (see
Figure 7i). Stephen E. Clabaugh (1959 personal communication) of the Department of Geology at the University of Texas identified this as graphite schist
"exactly like some of that in the Packsaddle schist in the Llano uplift, central
Texas." He further stated that "no rock of this type occurs closer to Houston
than southeastern Llano County, but fragments of it are carried by the Colorado
River and probably can be found with enough searching in any of the present or
older river gravel deposits." The closest old river is the Brazos River; however,
the nearest point of the Brazos River to the Galena sites is the big south bend in
Fort Bend County some 50 km to the southwest. Thus, the graphite schist piece
may have been carried by human hands at least this distance to reach the Galena midden.
Wheat (1953:228) found % lump of black, micaceous schist" in one

Ring ~ The Galena Sites

281

Addicks Reservoir site. It had been "abraded into a somewhat cupped shape,
perhaps to obtain a low-grade black pigment."

FIRED CONCRETIONS
More than 1,000 calcareous concretions, many of them fire-burned, were
recovered from the Galena shell midden. Only 16 of these concretions were
found in the 27 test pits completed in the nine adjacent Galena campsites. The
size of these specimens ranged from marble-sized to 8.9 cm in diameter, with the
majority around 5.0 cm. The shapes were generally amorphous, although many
were roughly ovate or potato-shaped (Figure 13). The color of these specimens
ranged from light gray to very dark gray, and differences in color appear to be a
function of the frequency of fire exposure.

Figure 13. Calcareous Concretions from 41HR61 used as cooking stones.

These stones were natural calcareous concretions. The carbonate content in
the stones was sufficient to cause active effervescence when hydrochloric acid
was applied to them. Calcium carbonate was probably the principal cementing
agent holding the rock together, as evidenced by the fact that when a piece of the

282

Texas Archeological Society

stone was pulverized and bathed in acid until bubbling had long ceased, the dried
residue exceeded more than half the original rock volume; the residue consisted
of insoluble clay. Fire-scorching on many specimens suggested these had been
used as roasting stones for cooking; perhaps in some instances they were immersed in ceramic cooking vessels.
Calcareous concretions occur naturally in the Beaumont clay formation
(Aten 1983:134), as does caliche, a chemically comparable substance. Both are
the result of leaching and oxidation, being mobilized by groundwaters during
cycles of fluctuation between meteorological drought and high precipitation.
Concretions "grow" around a nucleus; caliche is a flat, platy, crustal precipitate.
The Galena sites contained no flat, calcareous plates.
It is certainly a significant difference that over 1,000 concretions, many firedarkened, were found in the Galena shell midden, the only distinct kitchen or
cooking deposit in the complex, whereas a mere 16 were excavated from the nine
Galena campsites. These sites also had no organic staining and few shell concentrations.
In addition to the many fired calcareous concretions in the Galena shell
midden, a few fire-darkened, rounded, argillaceous sandstone pieces were also
found in association. These had seen heavy use as evidenced by fire-scorching,
desiccation, and occasional networks of thermo-shrinkage fractures over the
surface. Presumably these too were cooking/roasting stones.

POTTERY
The ten Galena sites produced 11,636 Goose Creek pottery sherds (Table
3). A very few of the incised rim sherds also had punctated marks. Three
unprovenienced cord-impressed rim sherds (Figure 14a), probably from a single
vessel, were detected by Thomas N. Campbell, E. Mott Davis, and Edward B.
Jelks in March 1959 at the University of Texas at Austin. Based on temper,
texture, and lip incisions, all three concluded these were also Goose Creek wares.
A fourth cord-impressed rim sherd from a second vessel was recovered from the
upper half of the midden shell layer (between 20-30 cm) in secondary radiocarbon sample A-7. As far as the author is aware, these four cord-impressed sherds
were the first ever reported in the area.
Characteristics of the ceramics from the Galena sites are described below:

Method of Manufacture: Coiled. A single, straight, rod-shaped length of
pottery coil (Figure 14b) was found that measured 48.2 cm in length and
0.80 cm in diameter. It was in the upper part of the midden shell layer
associated with ceramics of similar temper and texture. One end of this sandtempered clay rod was pointed, the other was rounded; the object appeared
unbroken. It is not known whether this coil was fired accidentally or intentionally; if intentional, its purpose is unknown. Wheat (1953:190) found four
of these pottery coils at the Addicks sites.

Ring ~ The Galena Sites

283

Table 3.
Galena Site Ceramics
Sherd Types

Galena Shell Midden

Nine Galena Campsites

Body Sherds

5234

5398

Plain Rims

386

228

Incised Rims*

145

157

4

0

Pointed & Rounded Bases

28

34

Flat Bases

17

4

Clay Coil

1

0

Cord-Impressed Rims

* Includes other types of decoration as well

Temper: Sand or sand combined with clay; rarely pulverized bone. A few
sherds showed a white to light gray mineral temper on the exterior, perhaps a
calcium phosphate also noted by Wheat (1953:184) for some of the Addicks
Reservoir ceramics.
Texture: Fine to fairly coarse; the latter generally being sandy and somewhat friable like a loosely-cemented sandstone. Those sherds of fine texture
appeared to be siltstone particles embedded in clay.
Color: Ranges from orange-red to reddish-brown; from light brown through
gray-brown to dark brown; and from light gray through dark gray to essentially black.

Surface Finish: Generally smooth on both interiors and exteriors. A few
sherds had been smoothed sufficiently to resemble a semi-glazed surface.
Occasional interior surfaces were striated with parallel lines, generally parallel to the vertical axis, probably as the result of using grasses for smoothing. One midden sherd was grass brushed on both the interior and exterior
surfaces.
Wall Thickness: Ranges from 0.267 cm to 1.316 cm; wall thickness average
is 0.625 cm, but wall thicknesses generally were not uniform on any single
sherd.
Rim: Usually vertical, but quite a few were slight to fairly pronounced
outcurving or everted.

284

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 14. Incised Rim Sherds from Galena Shell Midden: a, cord-impressed; b, firehardened pottery coil; c, rim with drilled suspension hole; d-e, rims with incised lips.

Lip: Normally a fairly sharp edge, sometimes flat, or sometimes rounded,
and rarely interior beveled to a sharp edge. A few specimens had lips turned
diagonally outward, and one had been pinched to form a scalloped lip (see
Figure 17b). Lip notching is a very common trait, mostly on the interior,
sometimes on the exterior, but occasionally completely across the lip.

Ring m The Galena Sites

285

Body: No whole vessels were encountered, but several sherd groups could
be conjoined to allow partial vessel reconstructions. Five basic vessel styles
(Figure 15) are present in the site’s ceramic assemblage.

A

10 cm
Figure 15. Galena Midden Vessel Shapes.

Size: Projected rim curvatures indicate a minimum diameter of 7.6 cm and a
maximum diameter of 35.6 cm. Vessel heights range from 12.7 cm for a
single small diameter bowl to 25.4 cm for a large hemispherical bowl.
Bases: Most common base forms (Figure 15a-c and Figure 16) varied from
pointed to round and these usually showed thickening at the center; some
had a nodal form (see Figure 15e). A number of flat-bottomed bases (Figure

286

Texas Archeological Society
16a, b) were also identified in the Galena sites, particularly from the
midden.

Perforations: Drilled holes, sometimes in pairs, appeared just below the lip
on a number of sherds (see Figure 14c and Figure 17c). This may have been
done in some cases for suspension and in other instances for the repair of
vessel cracks.
Decoration: Aside from lip notching (see Figure 14d, e), which was associated equally with both plain and decorated rim sherds, incised decorations
occurred on about 33 percent of all recovered rim sherds (see Figures 14 and
17). Decoration consisted of simple horizontal designs incised into wet clay
with a sharp instrument. These incisions were confined to the upper margins
of the rim, generally within 1.27 cm of the lip; however, a few were found to
extend 2.54 cm below the lip, and one sherd was incised to 3.17 cm below
the lip. A few sherds showed horizontal incisions coupled with punctation,
the latter being small solid triangles that may have been made by blunted
catfish spines (see Figure 17d).
The common incised design was from one to 11 lines running parallel to the
lip of the vessel. From this basic design the incised element also included vertical
cross-hatching, both upright and inverted lineal triangles, diagonal crossed lines,
parallel zig-zag lines, parallel wavy lines, cross-hatching between parallel lines
and within lineal triangles, and other combinations of these various elements (see
Figure 14 and 17). Generally the incisions were rather thin, delicate, and shallowly cut.
Provenience: No pottery sherds could be clearly associated with the lower
clay layer at the Galena shell midden. Sherds were, however, found at the
immediate contact of this stratum with the overlying middle shell layer.
Goose Creek pottery occurred throughout the middle shell layer, but the
heaviest ceramic concentrations were noted in the upper part of this shell
layer. Pottery sherds were found throughout the upper loam layer, however,
the majority of the sherds occurred in the lower half of this layer.
Table 4 depicts the vertical provenience of ceramic sherds from the nine
Galena campsites. This does not include 624 sherds that came from a wide,
irregular excavation to expose the human burial encountered in campsite 41HR62.
No cord-impressed sherds were found in any of the nine Galena campsites. An
occasional sherd was impressed with serrated shell lips in both the midden and
campsites; otherwise, the decorated sherds from the midden and campsites were
indistinguishable (see Figures 14 and 17).

Distribution of Goose Creek Ceramics: The geographic distribution of
Goose Creek wares is fairly well established today. It is known to be very
widespread along the upper Texas coast and inland to an appreciable extent

Ring M The Galena Sites

287

©

©

2

L~

288

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 17. Incised Ceramics from the Nine Galena Campsites: a, vessel with incurving
wall; b, scalloped rim sherd; c, incised rim with suspension hole; d, incised-punctated rim
sherd.

(Aten 1983:231-237). Aten (1983:237-238) also describes the distribution of
Mandeville and Techefuncte wares in the area.
The two preliminary Galena site manuscripts were filed in December 1958
and February 1959; the first covered the Galena shell midden findings and the
latter the excavations at the nine Galena campsites (Ring 1958, 1959). In both

Ring -- The Galena Sites

289

Table 4.
Provenience of Pottery from the Galena Campsites

Sherd Type

0-6" level

6-12" level

Body

988

1879

1967

4834

Plain Rims

40

70

77

187

Decorated Rims

30

48

62

140

Round and Pointed Base

5

15

12

32

Flat Base

1

0

3

4

1064

2012

2121

5197

SUM

12-18" level Total

manuscripts, all pottery was described as Goose Creek ceramics of the Galveston
Bay Focus. Today, over three decades later, with knowledge gained in the upper
Texas coast from new archeological investigations, scores of published reports,
and from over 50 times as many radiocarbon dates, different ceramic concepts
have been developed by current researchers. In updating conclusions regarding
the Galena ceramics, the author accepts the findings of Lawrence E. Aten (1983),
who has not only done exhaustive field work on the upper Texas coast but has
incorporated the observations of a multitude of others in his writings.
Aten (1983:192 and Figure 14.2) examined the Galena site pottery sherds,
now curated at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at Austin. He
concluded that the collection consists of Goose Creek Stamped, Tchefuncte
Plain, and Mandeville Plain, all types characteristic of the Clear Lake period. The
Clear Lake period extends from about A.D. 100 to about A.D. 425, and represents the period when pottery is introduced in the Galveston Bay area (Aten
1983:275, 284, 291).
It is not necessary here to thoroughly discuss the physical similarities and
differences of the Goose Creek, Tchefuncte, and Mandeville ceramics. Aten
(1983:219-220, 231-238, and Figure 12.1) has described them adequately and
judged them to be generally contemporaneous.
Pottery sherds were found in direct contact with both Rangia cuneata
radiocarbon samples from the Galena shell midden. The upper sample, Humble
0-911, taken at the very top of the middle shell layer, yielded an uncorrected date
of t900 _+ 105 years B.P. (A.D. 50 + 105). The lower sample, Humble O-912,
came from the very base of the middle shell layer and yielded the date of 3350 +_
115 years B.P. (1400 +_ 115 B.C.). Aten (1983:275) corrects the O-911 sample

290

Texas Archeological Society

date to A.D. 285 _+ 103, still within the Clear Lake period. He offers no correction
factor for the O-912 radiocarbon sample date as this sample was in contact with
the Beaumont Formation and would have been permeated with "dead carbon"
mobilized by groundwaters (Aten 1983:193, 341).

CORDAGE
The use of twisted cord was noted from the Galena shell midden as four
cord-impressed pottery rims from two different vessels were recovered. The one
provenienced sherd came from the upper half of the middle shell layer.

ASPHALTUM
The presence of asphaltum was observed among the artifacts recovered
from the Galena sites. It was used principally as a glue for hafting chert, bone,
and antler projectile points. In the nine Galena campsites, asphaltum was noted
on the stem of a Kent dart point, on a Catahoula arrowpoint stem, and inside a
socketed-bone projectile point from 41HR62; these artifacts were all found in the
basal cultural deposits. Additionally, a rounded asphaltum pellet was found in
the uppermost 15.2 cm in one of the Galena campsites.
In the Galena shell midden, asphaltum occurred primarily in the middle
shell layer, but was also present in the upper loam layer. A socketed-antler
bunting point was heavily packed with asphaltum (see Figure 8i), leaving the
tapered impression of the former shaft. A socketed-bone projectile point
contained a film of asphaltum inside the socket (see Figure 7n). Three dart points
recovered from the middle shell layer, two Kent and one Gary (see Figure 8qs), contained numerous asphaltum specks that were the remains of heavy
coatings.
The middle shell layer also yielded a deer ulna spatulate awl tip (see Figure
7d) that was cut off and smoothly abraded on the cut end, notched on the edge,
and then packed with asphaltum in its natural-hollow center. The processing of
this artifact would have taken considerable time and care but the practical use of
this object is not presently understood.
A few other artifacts from the Galena shell midden evidenced use of asphaltum. Several bone fragments and shellfish valves had asphaltum patches, and an
asphaltum splash was also seen on a polished cut-bone artifact (see Figure 7g).
A stout gray pottery sherd contained several thick asphaltum globules attached to the exterior, as confirmed by carbon-tetrachloride testing. Two of
seven conjoined pottery rim sherds had splotches of asphaltum on their exteriors,
in part covering the decoration.
The distribution of asphaltum in archeological sites along the Gulf Coast
shoreline, extending from Louisiana to Mexico, is quite widespread. The source

Ring m The Galena Sites

291

of this asphaltum is undoubtedly the prehistoric black oil seeps from fractured
Cretaceous limestones in the Tampico-Tuxpan Embayment (Ring 1960).

FEATURES: PITS AND HEARTHS
Several features were found in the Galena site investigations. These include
fire pits and a possible hearth.
The three fire pits were uncovered in the Galena shell midden. The most
prominent, in the site’s north quadrant, originated in the upper loam layer. It was
noted that darker and ashy deposits were common in the upper loam layer for a
few feet away from the pit. The pit had a cylindrical form, 52 cm in diameter, that
was rounded at the bottom. The pit’s vertical walls pierced the shell and lower
clay layers where the rounding of the base began, and it bottomed out 2.5-5 cm
into the sterile Beaumont Formation.
No stones were present as a pit lining. Rather, the pit fill consisted of a
loosely consolidated loam intermingled with gray ash. Few artifacts were observed in the upper part of the pit; however, the lower part contained seven
darkly scorched Rangia shells, about an equal number of carbonized bone fragments, and a number of charcoal particles and pieces.
A second pit was found in the south quadrant. It was shaped the same as the
first fire pit, and was 38.1 cm in diameter and 48.3 cm in depth. It appears to have
originated at or near the top of the middle shell layer, and extended into the lower
clay layer. The pit fill was a mass of debris consisting of shell, bone, and pottery
sherds, along with ash and carbonized remains. The walls of the pit could be
distinguished by the alignment of the debris in the pit. Instead of being layered
horizontally, the shellfish valves and other artifacts were cross-bedded, and in
some instances were vertically aligned. This pit may have been used briefly as a
fire pit before it was later filled with garbage.
A third fire pit was found in the extreme northeast edge of the shell midden.
At the depth of 15.2 cm below surface, in the upper loam layer, a fairly substantial layer of charcoal was identified over a 45.7 cm diameter area. Some lightly
carbonized pieces of charcoal in the pit indicated the wood might have been
cypress. The charcoal was completly enveloped in the upper loam’s root system,
and appeared to rest in the loam layer.
In the nine Galena campsites, only one possible hearth or fireplace was
identified in site 41HR62. This consisted of a fairly dense and ovate accumulation of charcoal about 20.3 cm by 30.5 cm in size and between 2.5-5.0 cm in
thickness. No evidence of a pit was noted, however.
About 770 charcoal fragments were found scattered throughout the soils at
the nine Galena campsites. Approximately 50 percent of the charcoal pieces were
recovered in the 0-15.2 cm level, another 27 percent in the 15.2-30.5 cm level,
and the remainder below 30.5 cm+. Since the charcoal fragments occulted
throughout the campsite soils, forest fires or burned housing does not appear to

292

Texas Archeological Society

be responsible for their distribution. Rather, undergrowth fires seem more
plausible as charcoal producers in this dense forest of large trees and small
undergrowth.

EVIDENCE OF HOUSES
No post molds were seen at the Galena shell midden. Due to the very dark
color of all organic soil in the cultural deposits, they are probably not readily
discernible.
At the approximate center of Galena campsite 41HR67, a clearly identifiable post mold was encountered. The extremely dark organic color of the post
mold was detected at five cm bs after the organic deposits of more recent forest
material had been cleared from the surface. The post mold formed an oval
measuring 22.9 cm by 30.5 cm to the base of the cultural deposit (ca. 41 cm bs).
The post mold began to taper just below this point and was 15.2 cm by 20.3 cm in
dimension at 91.4 cm in depth. At 119.4 cm below the surface the mold ended in
an abrupt point. The depth of the post mold was 78.7 cm below the top of the
Beaumont clay surface into which it was anchored.
The post mold fill at its base was a very dark, finely-divided, sandy material
entirely unlike the light gray-brown, dense, sticky Beaumont clay enveloping it.
The margins of the post mold contained considerable charcoal. At the depth of 66
cm bs in the post mold, or 25.4 cm into the sterile Beaumont Formation clay, two
large Goose Creek plain rim sherds and one small Goose Creek body sherd were
recovered.
This large post hole was apparently dug into the ground by hand, the post
placed in it, and then dirt was thrown in and packed around it. The presence of
pottery sherds far below the cultural deposits supports this. The charcoal at the
circumference of the post mold may represent the original firing of the post to
thin and taper it. A post of such large dimension is suggested to have been the
center post of a structure. Unfortunately, the author was not able to excavate
further at the site to locate other possible structural post molds.
Two adjacent test pits in campsite 41HR64 had possible small post molds
measuring 10.2 cm in diameter. One extended to at least a depth of 91.4 cm bs.
Neither mold was fully investigated, however.

HUMAN REMAINS
The only human skeletal remains found in the ten Galena sites consisted of
a burial excavated from campsite 41HR62 in March 1960. Due to the
homogeneous character of the campsite soil, the level at which the grave was
excavated was not discernible, but the base of the grave extended into the
Beaumont Formation. In fact, except for a portion of the skull, all bones lay in
the Beaumont clay.

Ring ~ The Galena Sites

293

The skeletal material was oriented approximately true north-south, with the
head facing to the north (Figure 18). The individual was buried face down with
the remainder of bones beneath the head. This burial may be a bundle burial, or
perhaps a tightly laced burial with the head placed face down. Since the burial
was in the Beaumont clay, the skeletal remains were not well preserved. Photographs were taken by Alan R. Duke under adverse lighting conditions and a
torrential downpour during the night put an end to any further photography. No
burial offerings were found with the burial.
Dr. T. W. McKern, a forensic anthropologist at the University of Texas,
identified the individual as a "robust, fairly short male, an old adult probably in
his early fifties. From all indications, the remains were tightly flexed. It simply
does not look like the secondary disarticulated burials I have seen elsewhere"
(Dr. T. W. McKern, November 1960 personal communication).

RADIOCARBON DATING
In May 1959, the Geochemical Laboratory, Exploration Department, of the
Humble Oil and Refining Company (now Exxon) agreed to conduct two radiocarbon tests on Rangia cuneata shells from the Galena shell midden. The results
were:
Humble Run No. 911

1900 -+ 105 years B.P.
(A.D. 50 _+ 105)

Humble Run No. 912

3350 + 115 years B.P.
(1400_+ 115 B.C.)

The specific radiocarbon samples came from pit A-7-A about 3.1 meters
east of the approximate center of the Galena shell midden. The vertical strata in
the pit were as follows: Upper Loam Layer, 0-17.8 cm, Middle Shell Layer, 17.843.2 cm, Lower Clay Layer, 43.2-53.3 cm, and the Beaumont Formation below
53.3 cm. The shells from Humble Run No. 911 were gathered from the top three
cm (17.8-20.3 cm) of the middle shell layer. In direct association with the Rangia
sample were six Goose Creek pottery sherds, chert debris, bone refuse, and the
distal tip of a socketed bone projectile point. Humble Run No. 912 shells were
collected at the depth of 40.6-43.2 cm at the base of the middle shell layer.
Artifacts associated with this Rangia sample included chert debris, bone refuse,
and six Goose Creek pottery sherds, one the base of a flat-bottomed vessel.
These two radiocarbon samples do not necessarily represent either the
oldest or the youngest occupations in the shell midden because a small amount of
scattered cultural material was observed below the oldest sample and a considerable amount of cultural material was found above the youngest sample. The
samples were purposely selected to try to obtain the oldest and youngest dates of

294

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 18. Burial from 41HR62. Brunton compass points true north.

Ring m The Galena Sites

295

intensive shellfish consumption at the site, and also to obtain information on the
temporal span of Goose Creek ceramics.
Both the great antiquity, and the long time span the radiocarbon dates
indicated for Goose Creek pottery at the Galena shell midden, compelled the
author to make an exhaustive search of the coastal archeological literature covering pottery types and dates (Ring 196 l b). The 0-912 sample date of 3350 years
B.P. led to the speculation that southeastern Woodland pottery might have been
adopted on the upper Texas coast much earlier than then believed. In 1959, the
two Galena radiocarbon dates of 1900 and 3350 years B.P. were the only existing
radiocarbon dates from the upper Texas coast. Today there are more than 100
radiocarbon dates (Aten 1983:273-281) and the considerable age of Rangia
sample 0-912 has since been reassessed by Aten ( 1983:192-193, 275, 341).
As previously mentioned, Sample 0-912 was gathered at the base of the
middle shell layer at its contact with the lower clay layer. This layer was often
suspected of being the extreme top of the Beaumont Formation that had perhaps
been reworked by precipitation or human feet; it seemed to be a cultural "zone"
rather than a distinctive natural depositional layer. Aten (1983:341 and Table
14.1) shows that all of the seven Rangia samples tested in the upper Texas coast
that were in contact with the Beaumont Formation, including Galena sample O912, have produced abnormally ancient dates. He attributes this to the "dead"
carbon of this geological formation having permeated the Rangia shells after the
carbon has been mobilized by groundwaters (Aten 1983:193, 341). Consequently,
Aten did not propose a correction factor for sample 0-912.
Now, some three decades later, the illusion of 3350 year old Goose Creek
pottery is dispelled; however, the upper Galena Rangia sample O-911, at 1900
years B.P., comfortably equates with the initial introduction of ceramics in the
Clear Lake period on the upper Texas coast. Aten (1983:275) has corrected this
radiocarbon date to A.D. 285 + 103.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
When the Humble Oil and Refining Company radiocarbon dates were received in June 1959, dating the upper and lower cultural layers in the Galena
shell midden at 1900 years B.P. and 3350 years B.P., respectively, the author was
startled by both the great antiquity of their dates and their long time span. Then,
too, sand-tempered Goose Creek pottery sherds had been found in direct contact
with both Rangia cuneata samples, thus apparently sharing in both the apparent
antiquity and cultural longevity shown by the radiocarbon results.
During research for this paper (Ring 1961a, b), the author found that sandtempered pottery had been around for a very long time in the southeastern U.S.
woodlands. Webb and DeJarnette (1948a-d) had investigated four fabulously
thick shell middens along the Tennessee River in northern Alabama. They found
fiber-tempered and sand-tempered pottery sherds so thoroughly mixed above

296

Texas Archeological Society

pre-ceramic levels that it was not possible to clearly distinguish which type of
pottery antedated the other. Later, however, fiber-tempered pottery was established as the older ceramic ware, but the 1940s observations of Webb and
DeJarnette for these Tennessee River shell middens led the author to wonder if
Goose Creek pottery might have been used at the Galena sites some 3000 years
or so ago as suggested by the Humble radiocarbon sample O-912 (Ring 1961b).
Today in the upper Texas coastal region, three more decades of research
have led to a better understanding of pottery chronology than at the time of the
Galena site investigations. As to the Galena shell midden sherds having been in
direct contact with both Rangia radiocarbon samples, reassessments are necessary because of technological developments. The older Humble radiocarbon
sample O-912 has been set aside because it was in contact with the Beaumont
Formation that has been found to contaminate Rangia shell due to infiltration
of "dead" carbon in the groundwater (Aten 1983:193, 341). Also, a certain
amount of stratigraphic mixing was indicated at the base of the middle shell
layer at its contact with either natural or reworked Beaumont clay.
Humble radiocarbon sample O-911 has been adjusted to A.D. 285 _+ 103
by Aten (1983:275). This indicates that the Goose Creek, Tchefuncte, and
Mandeville pottery found in association with sample O-911 falls into the Clear
Lake period defined in the Galveston Bay area (Aten 1983:285 and Figure 14.4).
Aten (1983:233) also shows that Goose Creek sherds extend from the Clear Lake
period to the Old River period (dated about A.D. 1350-1725), and possibly into
the later Orcoquisac period (A.D. 1725-1810).
The author has purposely refrained from discussing the later San Jacinto
(grog-tempered) pottery because of uncertainties about its presence at the Galena
sites. The San Jacinto pottery type was proposed by Richard B. Worthington
(1959) shortly after the final preliminary Galena site report was prepared (Ring
1959). It is perhaps significant that Aten (1983:192) does not specifically
mention the presence of San Jacinto sherds in his examination of the Galena
ceramics at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. Even more significantly, Aten et al. (1976:78) state that in their examination of the Galena
shell midden that "ceramics were common but grog-tempered wares were
conspicuously absent."
Other artifacts recovered from the Galena shell midden, particularly the
chert tool assemblage, do not contradict the radiocarbon dates of 1900 and 3350
years B.P., even though the latter date has since been set aside. The dart points
fall into Aten’s pre-ceramic period, dating from ca. 1600 B.C.-A.D. 100, and
the single Perdiz arrowpoint probably equates with the Round Lake or Old River
periods of the Late Cultures (Aten 1983).
In general, the nine adjacent Galena campsites, 41 HR62-41HR70, seemed
to be "younger" in age than the shell midden because of the presence of equal
numbers of arrowpoints in all levels. These were intermingled with dart points,
however. In the final reckoning, the chert tools in the campsites paralleled that
of the Galena shell midden, as was the case with the pottery assemblage. Based

Ring ~ The Galena Sites

297

on the chert tools, the nine Galena campsites spanned the same time as the shell
midden, from ca. 1600 B.C. to ca. A.D. 1600.
In terms of stratigraphy, all 10 Galena sites were established atop the
Beaumont Formation clay; for all practical purposes, the deposits averaged 46
cm in thickness. The lower clay layer in the midden was perplexing. At times, the
layer seemed to represent the original Beaumont Formation clay with occasional
episodes of a few shells, bones, and dart points having been stomped into a
"gummy" surface, but it contained sufficient materials suggestive of being a
distinctive cultural deposit. In any case, the base of the middle shell layer
represented the first intensive occupation of the midden.
Pottery use was well established when the nine Galena campsites were
occupied. The sherds at the lowest depths were found with both dart points and
arrowpoints, signifying some soil/artifact mixing. In the shell midden, pottery
first occurred at the base of the middle shell layer, dominated by dart points, and
became more common through time. This, too, tends to suggest that the intensive
occupancy of the Galena shell midden began at the base of the lower shell layer,
with scattered episodes of pre-ceramic occupation below the shell layer. In all 10
Galena sites, pottery continued to be used until the last occupants permanently
abandoned them.
Although a Rangia cuneata shellfish sample was gathered from the lowest
cultural deposits at campsite 41HR62 for radiocarbon dating by an agency other
than Humble Oil Company, the sample was lost. In all likelihood, it would have
been contaminated from having been in direct contact with the Beaumont
Formation’s "dead" carbon. Thus, there is no radiocarbon dating from any of the
Galena campsites for comparison with the shell midden dates. The conjoined
Edwards chert knife or flesher from the shell midden (the middle shell layer) and
41HR62 suggest that the latter was also occupied during the Clear Lake period.
The Galena shell midden and the adjacent campsites may represent an
associated but functionally distinct group of settlements. There may have been
more campsites in the immediate area but no other shell midden is known. An
apparent house center-post mold was identified at campsite 41HR67. It is suggested that the post was planted in Late Prehistoric times since it became apparent almost immediately below the mantle of modern forest debris.
As to the human interment at 41HR62, no direct evidence was found to
indicate when the body was introduced to the grave, due principally to the
homogeneous character of the cultural deposits. The tightly-flexed, face-down
burial was entombed in sterile Beaumont clay except at the back of the head. The
head lay above the rest of the body, and this means that the grave cavity was
located near the middle or top of the deposits. This suggests the burial may date
to Late Prehistoric times (cf. Aten 1983:155).
The chert tool assemblage reflects a period of occupation from ca. 1600
B.C. to after A.D. 1000. The significant recovery of dart points at pre-ceramic
depths in the Galena sites suggests occasional episodes of short visits in Late
Archaic times. It appears the sites were intermittently occupied over a fairly long

298

Texas Archeological Society

time span, perhaps for as many as 2500 years, possibly between 1500 B.C. and
A.D. 1000. These nomads probably departed the sites as game and shellfish
resources diminshed along Hunting Bayou.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A complex archeological report such as this can only be accomplished
through the cooperative efforts of a multitude of persons in many walks of life. I
take this opportunity to express my gratitude to: Millard M. Smith, Jr., the 12year old youth who discovered the Galena shell midden and told the author; Troy
Allison, who permitted excavation of the Galena sites despite a fear of danger to
his livestock; E. C. Brinkley, petroleum chemist with Coastal Laboratories who
provided valuable information about surface water conditions in the area; Mrs.
Martha Look, Houston Public Library Reference section, who willingly tracked
down references; Houston Archeological Society members W. B. Neyland, R. B.
Worthington, A. R. Duke, and Norvil Wilson, for providing a wealth of information about many archeological sites in the Houston-Galveston Bay area;
Geochemical Laboratory, Exploration Department, Humble Oil and Refining
Company, Houston, for two radiocarbon dates; T. N. Campbell, E. M. Davis, and
E. B. Jelks for imparting a volume of information, references, and guidance
throughout the project; T. W. McKern for consultation on human skeletal remains; H. J. Sawin, Department of Geology, Rice University, who identified the
animal bone; S. E. Clabaugh, Department of Geology, University of Texas, who
identified and sourced a metamorphic rock found in the shell midden; Paul
Weaver, Department of Geology, Texas A&M University, for providing a vast
amount of geological information covering both the Galena site area and the
Tampico-Tuxpan region of Mexico; T. E. Pulley, marine biologist and director of
the Houston Museum of Natural History who identified marine shellfish; and
Joseph P. E. Morrison, Division of Mollusks, U.S. National Museum,
Smithsonian Institute, who identified freshwater shellfish species.
I also thank Frank H. H. Roberts and Waldo Wedel, Bureau of Ethnology,
Smithsonian Institute, who provided answers to archeological questions, identifications, and references; William G. McIntire and William G. Haag, Department
of Geology and Anthropology, Louisiana State University, for searching and
providing answers to archeological investigations in the Louisiana coastal area;
Clarence H. Webb of Shreveport, Louisiana, for valuable discussions on chert
and pottery characteristics in the Caddoan and surrounding areas; Robert E. Bell,
Department of Anthropology, University of Oklahoma, for several informative
contributions; Timothy K. Perttula, Publications Editor of the Texas Archeological Society, and two anonymous peer reviewers, who piloted the author across
the intimidating ocean that separates the archeological findings and conclusions
of 1958-1959 from the updated concepts of 1994; and to my family of yesteryear
who devoted countless hours in the field and behind a typewriter.

Ring m The Galena Sites

299

Finally, the writer was most fortunate to be able to meet with E. H. Sellards
to discuss the two Galena Paleoindian projectile points, and to correspond in this
regard, and on other matters, with H. Marie Wormington of the Denver Museum
of Natural History and with Thomas M. N. Lewis and Madeline Kneberg of the
University of Tennessee.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
Aten, L. E., C. K. Chandler, A. B. Wesolowsky, and R. A. Malina
Excavations at the Harris County Boy’s School Cemetery. Special Publica1976
tion No. 3. Texas Archeological Society, San Antonio.
Ford, J. A. and G. I. Quimby
The Tchefimcte Culture, An Early Occupation in the Lower Mississippi Valt 945
ley. Memoirs of the Society of American Archaeology, No. 2.
Perino, G.
1971

Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Special Bulletin No. 4. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Norman.

Prufer, O. H. and R. S. Baby
1963
Paleo Indians of Ohio. Archeological Society of Ohio, Columbus.
Ring, E. R., Jr.
1958
The Galena Shell-Midden Site, An Archeological Investigation in Harris
County, Texas. Unpublished MS on file with the author.
1959

The Galena Campsites, A Further Investigation. Unpublished MS on file with
the author.

1960

The Distribution, Usage, and the Suggested Source of Asphaltum on the West
Gulf Coastal Plain. Unpublished MS on file with the author.

1961 a

Two Radiocarbon Dates from the Galena Site of Southeastern Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeologica! Society 31:329.

1961b

An Evaluation of Radiocarbon Dates from the Galena Site, Southeastern
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 31:317-325.

Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Ar1954
cheological Society 25 (whole volume).

Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press,
1985
Austin.

300

Texas Archeological Society

Waldorf, D. C. and V. Waldorf
StoJy in Stone: Flint Types of the Central and Southern United States. Mound
1987
Builder Books, Branson, Missouri.
Walley, R.
1955

A Preliminary Report of the Albert George Site in Fort Bend County. Bulletin
of the Texas Areheological Society 26:218-234.

Webb, W. S. and D. L. DeJarnette
1948a

The Flint River Site. Alabama Museum of Natural History, Museum Paper
23, Moundville.

1948b

The Whitesburg Site. Alabama Museum of Natural History, Museum Paper
24, Moundville.

t948c

The Perty Site, Lauderdale County, Alabama. Alabama Museum of Natural

1948d

Little Bear Creek Site, Colbert County, Alabama. Alabama Museum of Natu-

History, Museum Paper 25, Moundville.

ral History, Museum Paper 26, Moundville.
Wheat, J. B.
1953

The Addicks Dam Site: An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin,
Southeast Texas. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 154:143-252.
Washington, D.C.

Worthington, R. B.
1959

San Jacinto Wares, A Proposed Pottery Type. Paper presented at the Houston
Archeological Society Pottery Symposium, December 6, 1959.

