Relationships Between the Caddoan Area
and Texas1
EDWARD B. JELKS

This discussion will consider relations between the Caddoan Area
and certain archeological complexes to the west, southwest, and south
in Texas.
On the Archaic level there are three neighboring complexes which,
because of their geographical proximity, might be expected to show
some relationship with the Gaddoan Area. These are the Trinity Aspect
of north-central Texas, the Edwards Plateau Aspect of central and
west-central Texas, and an unnamed Archaic manifestation of the
southeastern Texas Gulf coast.
While Archaic components have been reported in the Caddoan Area,
none of them has been properly excavated, and consequently they are
known almost entirely from surface collections. Small campsites with
no visible evidence of permanent structures are typical. Sites tend to
be on the crests of hills overlooking stream valleys. Traits include
milling stones, pitted stones, grooved and polished stone axes, gouges,
and dart point types Gary, Yarbrough, Wells, Kent, and Ellis.
The Trinity Aspect is centered in the upper Trinity River area,
two loci, Carrollton and Elam, having been recognized. Several distinctive types of dart points are associated with the Trinity Aspect, including three principal dart point types of the Caddoan Area--Gary,
Ellis, and Yarbrough. Certain other types diagnostic of the Trinity
Aspect (types Carrollton and Elam are the most distinctive) seem to
be of local distribution, however, and are absent or extremely rare in
Caddoan Area sites. Other traits of the two areas are not shared; consequently the only apparent evidence of inter-area contact lies in the
sharing of the three dart point types.
This paper was presented at a symposium entitled "Itelationships between the
Caddoan Area and Neighboring Areas," which was part of the program of the £3rd
Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, held at the University
of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma, May 1-3, 1958.

66

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Edwards Plateau Aspect of central and west-central Texas
features an impressive variety of chipped stone implements. Some
Edwards Plateau dart point types have been reported from postArchaic sites in the Caddoan area, and they may occur as trade items
in Archaic sites there as well. Caddoan Area artifacts, including arrow points, knives, and ceramics of both the Gibson and Fulton Aspects, have been found in central Texas sites; but in all cases these
trade items appear to have been associated with the later Central
Texas Aspect rather than with the Edwards Plateau Aspect. Several
of the sites involved contain components of both complexes: however,
and although it does not appear too likely at this time, the possibility
remains that there may have been active trade from the Caddoan Area
into central Texas on the Archaic level.
Manifestations of an Archaic occupation south of the Caddoan Area
along the Gulf coast were recognized by Joe Ben Wheat as a result of
excavations at the Addicks Reservoir near Houston. Because of insufficient data the complex has not yet been clearly defined, but it is apparent that considerable mixture of types obtains, some from central
Texas, some from the coast, and others from the Caddoan Area or related complexes in southwestern Louisiana.
In summary, it may be stated that, by and large, Archaic complexes
in north-central, central, and southeastern Texas are quite distinct
from the known complexes of the Caddoan Area. It is true that some
inter-areal contacts are indicated by sharing of certain dart point types
with north-central and southeastern Texas and by occasional trade
items which occur in all the complexes concerned. But there is certainly no evidence to suggest intensive contacts between the Caddoan Area and any of these neighboring Archaic complexes. Unfortunately, the Archaic of the Caddoan Area is little known, and it is to
be hoped that future research will clarify its present obscurity. Despite the incomplete data, however, it is clear that its affiliations lie for
the most part with what may be broadly termed the Southeastern
Archaic to the east.
Caddoan Area complexes of the Neo-American, or Neo-Indian,
Stage, like those of the Archaic, are largely oriented toward the southeast. Nonetheless, there are also strong ties between some of the Caddoan loci and certain complexes to the west, southwest, and south.
These complexes are the Henrietta Focus, the Central Texas Aspect,
and the Galveston Bay Focus.
The Henrietta Focus of north-central Texas is known from a series
of components which seem to represent temporary or semi-permanent

CADDOA£’~ AREA AND TEXAS

67

habitation sites. Traits include hoes made from bison scapulae and
skulls; 4-edge beveled knives; small snub-nosed end-scrapers; a plaint
shell-tempered pottery (Nocona Plain) ; and arrow point types Hattell, Young, Gliffton, Fresno, Scallorn, and Perdiz. Trade items from
the Gaddoan Area (or possibly from some other related southeastern
area) include celts and Alba arrow points.
The Gentral Texas Aspect, as its name implies, is located in the
central portion of the state. Most components of this complex are small
campsites with no evidence of permanent structures. Some of the more
significant traits of the Central Texas Aspect are: a plain, bonetempered pottery (Doss Red Ware); snub-nosed end-scrapers; 4edge beveled knives; and arrow point types Scallorn, Eddy, Perdiz,
Gliffton, and Fresno. Trade material from the Caddoan Area occurs
in small quantity at many sites. Potsherds of Sanders, Alto, and
Frankston Focus types have been found in addition to Copena type
knives and Alba and Bonham arrow points. All excavated and reported
sites of the Gentral Texas Aspect lie along or west of the Balcones
Escarpment and therefore are at least 100 miles removed from the
Gaddoan Area proper. Many sites have been recorded, however, in
the strip of intervening territory between the Balcones Escarpment
and the Gaddoan Area, especially to the east and northeast of Waco.
Surface collections from these sites frequently contain more or less
equal quantities of Gaddoan and Gentral Texas Aspect artifact types,
and it is quite possible that very strong ties between central and eastern Texas may be revealed when some of these intermediate sites
have been excavated and studied.
To the south of the Caddoan Area, on the Texas Gulf coast, are
found archeological remains of what has been termed the Galveston
Bay Focus. This complex is distinguished by a unique kind of pottery
of Woodland shape, with conoidal or rounded base, some vessels being plain while others have simple incised designs around the rim.
These pottery forms have been described by Joe Ben Wheat under
the type names Goose Creek Plain and Goose Creek Incised. Chipped
stone traits of the Galveston Bay Focus include 4-edge alternately
beveled knives, small snub-nosed end-scrapers, and arrow point types
Perdiz, Scallorn, Gliffton, Fresno, and Alba. Like Henrietta Focus
and Gentral Texas Aspect sites, components of the Galveston Bay
Focus seem to represent temporary campsites with no permanent
houses or other structures. An occasional sherd of Gaddoan Area pottery occurs as trade material in components of the Galveston Bay
Focus, both Gibson and Fulton Aspect types being represented. The

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Alba arrow points, which could have derived either from the Caddoan Area or from southwestern Louisiana, appear to be indigenous
rather than an indication of trade, however, since Alba is one of the
dominant types in Galveston Bay Focus sites.
The three Neo-American complexes described above certainly are
closely inter-related. All are characterized by temporary habitation
sites with small midden accumulations, and specific artifact traits are
shared between the three. All possess such generalized Plains Area
traits as small snub-nosed end-scrapers, 4-edge alternately beveled
knives, and triangular arrow points, and such specific traits as arrow
point types Scallorn, Perdiz, Cliffton, and Fresno. Yet each of the
complexes has its own pottery, distinct from that of the others, as well
as other peculiar, unshared traits. In order to make the picture complete, it should be pointed out that the Rockport Focus, which adjoins
the Galveston Bay Focus on the west, also shares the same generalized
Plains traits except for 4-edge alternately beveled knives and has the
same arrow point types. But it has its own distinctive pottery and
other unshared traits. The same assemblage of types, except arrow
point type Scallorn, extends westward from central Texas into the
Trans-Pecos area where, again, it occurs in association with traits
peculiar to that region.
In view of this general situation, one would appear to be on reasonably firm ground in hypothecating the diffusion of certain distinctive traits, at a definite period in time, over a large portion of Texas.
These traits are of a generalized Plains character and include 4-edge
alternately beveled knives, snub-nosed end-scrapers, and triangular arrow points. Diffusion, rather than replacement of the incumbent populations by invaders, must have been responsible, since distinctive local traits survive in all sub-areas from the underlying Archaic complexes into the subsequent period. The regional differences in pottery
types and other traits also suggest that local groups adopted the new
traits and added them to their cultural inventories. This development,
which swept over the entire central and much of the western portions
of the state, extended from Red River to the Gulf coast and westward
well beyond the Pecos River. Its impact was also felt along the western
edge of the southeastern pine belt, but it did not extend farther to the
east.
Turning finally to the Caddoan Area specifically, we find these
same generalized Plains traits appearing in Caddoan contexts. The
Sanders Focus, for example, has 4-edge alternately beveled knives
and snub-nosed end-scrapers, as well as bison scapula hoes similar to

CADDOAIXT AREA AND TEXAS

69

those of the I-Ienrietta Focus. Snub-nosed end-.scrapers are also reported from the Davis site, type site for the Alto Focus. Frankston
Focus, of the later Fulton Aspect, has 4-edge alternately beveled
knives, snub-nosed end-scrapers, and Perdiz arrow points, and most
other loci of the Fulton Aspect include triangular arrow points among
their traits. Plains accretions to the northern part of the Caddoan Area
probably derived from Plains groups in Oklahoma, or possibly Kansas.
But accretions to the Frankston Focus undoubtedly came from central Texas, since that is the nearest possible source not only for the
generalized Plains traits, but also for the Perdiz arrow points which
accompany them in the Frankston Focus. In addition, Frankston Focus
sherds are commonly found as trade items in central Texas Aspect
components. The Toyah Focus (the later of the two loci of the Central Texas Aspect) is thought to be ancestral to the historic Tonkawa
while the Frankston Focus is believed to be the prehistoric equivalent
of the Hasinai Caddo group. Four-edge beveled knives and snub-nosed
end-scrapers are common to both complexes, and Perdiz is the domiinant arrow point type of each. Of considerable interest, then, is
the recently discovered resemblance between the kinship terminology
of the Tonkawa and Hasinai Caddo groups of the post-contact period.
Rudulph C. Troike, who made a detailed linguistic study of the two kinship systems, has pointed out that the Tonkawa kinship terminology
is virtually identical to that of the Hasinai, although their languages
are otherwise dissimilar. He also presents documentary and linguistic
evidence to demonstrate rather conclusively that the adoption of the
I-lasinai terminology by the Tonkawa took place prior to the period
of European contact. This suggests that the Tonkawa and Hasinai
had more than a nodding acquaintanceship in prehistoric times~ a con~ecture which is supported by the archeology.
The development sequence in the Caddoan Area paralleled, in a
general sort of way, that of the three neighboring sub-areas under
consideration. In each case a rather distinctive local Archaic complex
preceded a subsequent Neo-American complex, with carryovers of specific types showing that the Archaic populations were at least partially ancestral to the Neo-American ones. In the Caddoan Area and
in the central Texas area two temporal divisions within the NeoAmerican stage have been recognized: the earlier Austin Focus and
the later Toyah Focus in central Texas, and the Gibson Aspect followed by the Fulton Aspect in the Caddoan Area. Similar divisions
may exist in the north-central and southeastern Texas sub-areas but,
if so, they have not yet been recognized. In the Gibson Aspect and

70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

also in the Austin Focus the earliest stemmed arrow points have expanded or rectangular stems, while later arrow points in both areas
have contracting stems. Such parallel development may indicate that
contacts between the areas were established at a relatively early date.
As was pointed out previously, there is an intermediate zone between central Texas and the Caddoan Area where amalgamations of
traits from both areas are suspected. Farther north a similar situation
exists, exemplified by the Wylie, Fort Coffee, and Turkey Bluff foci,
each of which exhibits a more or less equal mixture of Plains and
Caddoan Area traits. Recent salvage excavations at McGee Bend
Reservoir, on the southern margin of the Caddoan Area, revealed several sites where Fulton Aspect material is mixed with artifacts similar
to those of the Galveston Bay Focus. Thus there is a curved strip of
territory skirting the western and southern edges of the Caddoan Area
where Caddoan Area traits are combined with traits of complexes to
the west and south.
In summary, it is clear that Caddoan Area peoples were influenced
prehistorically by neighboring peoples to the west and south. The intensity and duration of the influences are not yet fully known, a defect which may be remedied by additional research. It is suggested
that investigation of the "buffer" territory along the western and
southern margins of the Caddoan Area may hold much of the key data
for tracing these influences as well as for correlating the Caddoan Area
complexes culturally and chronologically with neighboring complexes
to the west and south. Strangely, little evidence of influences in the
other direction--that is, from the Caddoan Area into the neighboring areas-has been detected. Intensive, comprehensive studies of all
facets of the inter-areal relationships should do much to clarify the
picture.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

Discussion
By T. N. Campbell
Jelks’ paper on cultural relationships between the Caddoan area
and adjoining areas in Texas is a straightforward, compact, clearly
expressed statement of the status of current knowledge, the main problems that can be recognized today, and what is essential for further
progress in this particular sector. I find little that I can disagree with,

