ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY ON THE
GULF COAST OF YUCATAN, MEXICO
JACK D. EATON
ABSTRACT
Except for the introduction of metals and plastics, modern fishing
technology on the coast of Yucatan has apparently changed little since
ancient times. Handlines with baited hooks, and weighted nets, are still the
most common implements used by individual fishermen on the Gulf coast
today.
Notched stones and potsherds, interpreted as fishing line sinkers and net
weights, have been found at several ancient sites along the Yucatan coast.
A comparison in weight range with modern fishing sinkers favorably
support the interpretation. Association of these notched objects with
coastal settlements dating from the Formative period lend material
evidence for a fishing technology which can be traced to the earliest known
occupation of the Yucatan coast.

INTRODUCTION
Man has lived beside the sea and obtained much of his subsistence
from it since very early times. The practice of fishing, probably as a
supplementary source of subsistence, evidently dates to at least the
Upper Paleolithic. Fishing societies can be traced back to the
Mesolithic and were contemporary with advanced hunting and
gathering societies (Lenski and Lenski 1974). Fishing societies, like
hunting or agrarian societies, are environmentally specialized; and
therefore specialized equipment and techniques were developed to
effectively exploit the environment. It appears to have been during
the Mesolithic that true fish hooks, nets, traps, and boats with
paddles were first used.
Fishing technology was well developed in ancient Egypt, Assyria,
China, and by the Greeks and Romans (Radcliffe 1974). In the New
World, fishing was practiced by some of the earliest known Americans who arrived during the Pleistocene, and subsequently through
all later periods (Willey 1966).
The sea coast in many parts of the world is a rich and varied
ecological zone well suited for subsistence exploitation by man. One
such zone settled by early man is the Gulf Coast of North America and
Mexico. Although sites earlier than the Archaic stage have not been
commonly identified on the Gulf Coast, man was almost certainly
there much earlier.
During the Pleistocene the sea level was considerably lower than
today because of the vast amount of the earth’s surface water being

232

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

trapped in gigantic ice caps. Subsequent melting of the ice due to
warming of the earth’s atmosphere caused the sea level to rise, thus
flooding and covering the earlier coastal habitation sites, and by
about 3500-4000 years ago the rising water reached the approximate
level at where it is today (Coleman and Smith 1964). This, of course, is
an over-simplification of the events, but serves to explain why
Pleistocene fishing community sites have not been found on the
present coast.
On the Texas Gulf Coast the earliest sites recorded which were
associated with marine exploitation belonging to the Archaic stage,
possibly as early as around 3000 B.C. and continuing much later in
time (Campbell 1956, 1958; Fritz 1972; Hester 1971; Story 1968). There
are also later sites occupied into the historic era. Essentially these
are shell middens representing the habitation sites of coastal people
who subsisted, at least to a large degree, upon marine resources.
Little in the artifact collections from the Texas coastal sites clearly
demonstrate the actual technology used in fishing, although the
faunal remains indicate that fishing techniques were used.
Perforated oyster shells, described as possible net weights, are
reported from certain Archaic sites (Campbell 1958; Story 1968) and
might indicate the use of fish nets or weighted lines. Also reported
(Story 1968: 57) are fragments of worked bone which might have been
compound fish hooks.
Fishing community sites belonging to the late pre-ceramic period
(Archaic) have been reported on the Gulf Coast in the Mexican State
of Veracruz (Wilkerson 1975). Included in the artifact collections is
an object (not illustrated) described as a net sinker, suggesting the
use of fishing nets.
On the Yucatan coast the earliest occupation so far uncovered
belongs to the Middle to Late Formative period (ca. 400 B.C.). Not all
sites found on the coast were communities dependent upon a fishing
economy. Some were established to collect salt, and there were trade
ports, but it would seem reasonable to expect that all seashore
communities derived at least part of their subsistence through
fishing. This would probably include the use of spears and arrows,
nets and traps, and weighted lines with hooks.
This report deals with small notched stones and notched potsherds
believed to have been used to weight fishing lines and nets. These
were found at several ancient village sites along the north coast of
Yucatan (Fig. 1), dating from the Formative until the Colonial period,
and which appear to represent a fishing technology of long tradition
(Eaton 1974, 1976). The coastal collections include 168 samples of
notched stones from four sites, and 58 samples of notched potsherds

233

ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY OF YUCATAN

from four other sites. The collections, which were the result of
selective sampling, do not necessarily represent a comprehensive
distribution pattern for the coast, as they are undoubtedly to be found
at other coastal sites. The notched stones and sherds will be
described separately, although their basic functions were probably
the same.

o

QUINTANA
RO0

d

CAMPECHE

Che.~u~

GUATEMALA

.o ....
/’7

d. ~’,= ~o ~

I

I

I

F

I

FIGURE 1. Yucatan peninsula. Location of archaeological sites where
fishing weights were found.

234

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIMENS
Notched stones (Fig. 2).
These are essentially small flat stones of roughly square to rectangular
forms and have notches chipped, and occasionally cut, into two opposing
sides. Most of the stones tend to be slightly rectangular, or oblul~g, in
outline, and notching is about equally found at the ends or at the midsections. Essentially, the stones appear to have been selected for their
natural forms; however, there are a few samples which might have been
chipped and ground to desired shape. Although some of the edges appear
to have been intentionally ground, this may have actually been the result of
use-wear. The notches had been chipped in most samples, but there are at
least three specimens in which the notches were clearly cut with a sharp
blade. The notching of the stones was evidently done to facilitate tying
securely to a line, and the notches are always positioned in-line with the
long or short axis to provide balanced tying (Fig. 4).
Most of the samples collected are medium to coarse grained local
limestone. Some of the smaller ones, however, are beach pebbles, and
there are some fashioned from small flint nodules and core flakes. There is
one specimen which is fine-grained limestone, and another which is coarse
volcanic stone. These appear to be reused fragments of imported stone
implements.
The stones in the collection range in size from 1.7 by 1.7 cm and 0.2 cm in
thickness, to 5.6 by 7.4 cm and 2.2 cm in thickness. They range in weight
from I gram to 128 grams.
Notched potsherds (Fig. 3).
In the collection are six rim sherds and the rest are body sherds.
Unfortunately, most of the sherds are too eroded to identify the wares. Five
specimens are fragments of Colonial period Spanish olive jars, but the rest
appear to be precolumbian wares of unidentified types.
The sherds are worked to an ovoid, square, or rectangular form,
apparently by breaking and grinding. Each has a notch cut in two opposing
sides as described for the notched stones. The notches are usually Vshaped, were obviously cut with a sharp blade, and with only one
exception all rectangular and ovoid forms are notched on the ends.
The sherds range in size from roughly 2.0 by 2.0 cm square, to
rectangular form 8.5 cm long and 4.5 cm in width. The average thickness is
around 1.0 cm. The weights of the notched sherds in the collection range
from 5 grams to 51 grams.

PROVENIENCE
A total of 168 notched stones was collected from middens of four
coastal village sites which span the Maya Late Formative to Modified
Florescent periods (Ball and Eaton 1972; Eaton 1976). Six samples
were collected from Chicxulub site, an early phase Late Formative
occupation dating somewhere between 50 B.C. to A.D. 150. One
hundred and ten samples were collected from Yapak site, a later
phase Late Formative into Early Period I occupation dating sometime

ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY OF YUCATAN

235

FIGURE 2. Notched stones. Upper row (l-r): 1, 10, 20, 30 and 40 grams.
Lower row (l-r): 50, 68, 90 and 128 grams.

FIGURE 3. Notched potsherds. (l-r): 6, 11, 13, 22 and 46 grams.

236

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

during A.D. 150 to 250. Five samples are from Chuburna site, an Early
Period I village occupied between A.D. 450 to 550. And, 47 samples
were collected from Xcopte site which was occupied during the
Modified Florescent period of around A.D. 900 to 1200.
The relatively large collections from Yapak and Xcopte sites were
the result of more intensive search for notched stones to establish a
larger type collection and should not be interpreted as relative size of
sites or occupations.
A total of 58 notched potsherds was collected from four coastal
middens and from the shallow water of a lagoon. One notched sherd
was recovered from San Crisanto I site which was occupied during
the Late Formative into Early Period I. One was recovered from
Dolores site, a village also occupied during the Late Formative into
the Early Period. Four were found at Tambo site which was occupied
during the Pure Florescent period (roughly A.D. 800). Nine notched
sherds were found at Rfo Copul site, which has not been dated
securely but is probably Decadent period, just before Spanish
contact. The remaining 43 notched sherds were found scattered along
the edge of Laguna Chuburna. In the Laguna collectiotl are sherds of
eroded precolumbian wares, and there are sherds of Spanish Colonial
ware.
Table I lists the locations, quantities, weight sizes, and
chronological setting for both notched stones and notched sherds
collected from the coast of Yucatan.

COMPARATIVE MATERIALS
Notched stones, as opposed to grooved stones (and there may be
functional differences here), are relatively rare, or simply reported
less frequent than notched potsherds in the Maya area. One endnotched stone is reported from Barton Ramie (Willey et al 1965: 484)
and is probably Late Classic. A small end-notched stone is also
reported from La Victoria (Coe 1961: 106) and is Late Formative.
Andrews (personal communication) reported notched stones from
Dzibilchultun in early context.
Notched potsherds in abundance are reported from Tulum and
other Decadent period sites on the Quintana Roo coast (Sanders 1960:
261). Andrews (personal communication) mentioned finding notched
sherds which might be Late Formative period on Isla Cancun, at
Decadent period Xcaret, and many at Dzililchultun. Proskouriakoff
(1962: 402) reports them from Decadent period Mayapan. They are
reported from Barton Ramie (Willey et al 1965: 408-409) in Late
Classic to Postclassic context, and Coe (1961: 101,105) reports them

ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY OF YUCATAN

Qi~Z~

~

~

o

o

~--~

.e~

r..O

0

>

0~

.o

.o

+.,
¢0

,
03

,
0

uo

o

o,,!

~

LeO

237

o

~

¢,,,1

03

¢0

¢0
tO

[’.,.

CO

Z~
;-D

z~
mO
gT4

CO

0
co
03

CO

zz

¢0

×
¯ ,~
,..c:l

0

~4
cO
¢0

~
cO

0

r.D

0

0
,.0

O~
"~

0

:I

c~

0
~

o

¢0
¢0
~
~
_o

;=
4:3
4:::1

238

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

from La Victoria during Early and Middle Formative stages. Matheny
(1970: 98,100) reports eight notched sherds which range in weight
from 1.5 to 99 grams from the Campeche coast, but the dating is
unknown. Notched sherds are also reported from Altar de Sacrificios
(Willey 1972: 84) which are Late Classic to Early Postclassic.
All of the above mentioned archeological sites, which are located in
widely separated places in the Maya lowlands, and beyond, are
situated on or near the sea coast or major river drainages.

DISCUSSION
The probable use of the notched stones and sherds was for fishing
line sinkers and net weights. It has not been determined if there were
functional differences between those notched in-line with the long
axis and those notched in the short axis. The smaller weights, for
example those weighing under 20 grams, were probably used to
weight fishing lines in shallow water. The heavier weights could have
been used for sinkers on lines to be dropped in deeper water, or for
weighting small nets. Seine and cast nets were probably in common
use on the coast of Yucatan since very early times as they are well
suited to shallow water fishing. Tozzer (1941: 156) mentions the use of
"trammel" nets by the Indians around the time of the conquest, and
these might also have been used much earlier.
Seine nets, cast nets, and hand lines with baited hooks are the most
common implements for fishing the shallow coastal waters of Yucatan
by individual fishermen today. Hand lines are frequently cotton, but
synthetic lines are also used, most notably for leaders. Cotton lines
are easier to handle and do not cut the hands as the synthetics all too
often do. By contrast, most cast nets and some seine nets noted today
are made of synthetic lines, usually nylon, and occasionally
monofilament, while cotton cord nets are becoming increasingly rare.
Nets made with synthetic lines last much longer than cotton. A cotton
net will rot and is usually not dependable for more than one or two
years. A synthetic net will not rot and will give good service for
several years, providing it is rinsed after each use and maintained. In
ancient times lines and nets were probably of cotton cord or other
spun fibers. Yucatan produced a great deal of cotton which was
exported in quantity in pre-conquest times (Roys 1972:53).
For weighting nets and lines today, lead is used almost exclusively.
This, of course, refers to equipment used by those whose livelihood is
fishing, and does not take into account the occasional small boys seen
fishing in the lagoons and off the side of piers with a hand full of
string, a bent pin for a hook, and an old rusty machine screw for a
sinker.

ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY OF YUCATAN

239

The collection of notched stones and sherds, considered as sinkers,
is remarkably similar in weight range to the lead sinkers I carry in my
own fishing tackle box. I have split-shot which weigh 1 gram each,
and hollow leads that weigh 3 grams and 14 grams. These are for
weighting lines in shallow water, for example to fish for Gray
Snapper in the mangrove waterways. There are also heavier lead
weights of around 54 grams and 117 grams to weight drop lines into
deeper water. It is not unlikely that fishermen in ancient times kept
and maintained a fishing kit which included sinkers of various
weights. As any fisherman knows, when you get a snag and the tackle
is lost, you are out of business unless you have replacement gear.
Modern cast nets are weighted with lead. For a net of around 2 to 3
meters in diameter, the lead weights are usually 2-4 cm long, weigh
20-30 grams each, and are spaced about 5 cm apart on the lead line
(Dahlem 1968: 14-15). These are usually hollow weights which are
slipped onto the lead line and tied or crimped in place. There are, of
course, a variety of other weight sizes and spacing used by individual
net makers who are frequently required to make do with what is
available. The weighting of cast nets varies not only with the size of
the net used, but also with the depth of the water fished. Nets for
fishing shallow water close inshore are lightly weighted compared to
nets used in deeper water. Heavy weighting is not necessary when
casting into shallow water. Also, when a fisherman is wading up to
his waist, perhaps working with a weighted net that has to be held
high, making the cast becomes very tiring. Working deeper water
from a dock or boat allows a heavier net to be used, and the net can
hang down before the cast, thus reducing fatigue. The heavier the
net, the faster it will sink in any given depth of water; and rate of
descent becomes important when casting into a school of fish. All of
these factors are taken into consideration by the experienced
fisherman and his equipment is generally designed for his specific
method of fishing.
There are basically two kinds of casting nets used on the Yucatan
coast. One, the most frequently used, is the English style net that has
brails and a hand line allowing the net to be pulled in after each cast.
This causes the net to close up trapping the fish within. It can be used
in any depth of water since it closes over the fish as it is pulled in.
The other type is the Spanish net. It does not have brails to close the
net into a pouch as it is pulled in. This kind of net is cast into shallow
water and left there until the fisherman wades to it and takes the fish
out by hand, reaching under the net.
Seine nets, which hang vertically in the water, having floats at the
upper edge and sinkers at the lower, were probably also used by the

240

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ancient coastal fishermen of Yucatan. A perforated thick disk
fashioned from buoyant light volcanic pumice was collected from a
Formative site (Alegria 1) on the coast and appears to have been a net
float. Fragments of light pumice were found at other sites along the
coast and many of these might have served as floats. Most floats,
however, were likely fashioned from a light wood, as modern
fishermen often do, but these would not survive for any great length
of time.
The construction and weighting of the seine nets are essentially the
same as for cast nets, only the form differs. Seine nets are
constructed to foul the fish in the netting, whereas cast nets are
usually of tighter weave and totally capture the fish. Both net types
have their uses for specific fishing. The cast net is generally thrown
into schools of fish and captures all but the tiniest fish. The seine net
is hung, frequently at waterway entrances, but also used for sweep
netting, and catches only the fish of certain minimum size, depending
upon the spacing of the netting.
The notched stones and sherds collected from ancient sites along
the coast might well have served as weights for lines and nets much in
the manner of modern usage as described above.

FIGURE 4. Suggested use of notched stones and sherds as fishing
weights.

ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY OF YUCATAN

241

CONCLUSIONS
The collection of notched stones and sherds from the Yucatan coast
seem best described as weights for fishing lines and nets. The
notching of the objects is placed in direct line with the long or short
axis which provides for best in-line balanced attachment to a linear
cord, as suggested in Fig. 3. The sizes and weights of the notched
stones and sherds fall within a usable range, as compared with
modern sinkers, and the finding of these objects at seaside habitation
sites helps to support this view.
The size and weight range of the notched stones and sherds suggest
that they could be used equally well and interchangeable as sinkers
for drop lines or nets. The actual material used by the fishermen,
whether small stones or potsherds might have simply been
preference. Sherd material might be easier to work, but stone would
be much more durable, particularly considering the rough handling to
which the weights would be subjected. It is interesting to note,
however, that although both notched stones and notched sherds were
found at sites representing occupations ranging from the Formative to
the Colonial period, no individual site sampled had both worked
materials represented. At Yapak site, for example, the collection
included 110 notched stones, yet not a single notched sherd was
noted. This is surprising since the site contains a large amount of
pottery fragments. The same was true for Xcopte site where a
relatively large collection of notched stones was made.
In the total collections from the coast there are nearly three times
the number of notched stones compared to notched sherds. This
contrasts with the overall pattern as noted for the greater Maya area
where, in general, far more notched sherds are reported than
notched stones. The actual significance this may have regards
ancient fishing technology on the Yucatan coast is not apparent to me
at this time.
Fiber cord has not survived at the sites, and there is only meager
evidence remaining of net floats. No fish hooks were identified in the
coastal collections (although shell hooks reported to be from Isla
Jaina are on display in the Campeche museum) and this possibly
suggests that they were mostly made from perishable materials, such
as small pointed sticks, bone, or thorns. The notched weights
described in this report do, however, provide us with some tangeable
evidence of a fishing technology that can be traced back to at least
the Formative period in Yucatan.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

242

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The objects described as fishing weights in this report were collected by
me during an archaeological reconnaissance of the west and north coasts
of Yucatan in 1968. The survey was part of a research program being
carried out in Yucatan by the Middle American Research Institute of
Tulane University and under the general supervision of the late Dr. E.
Wyllys

Andrews IV.

I express my gratitude

for all of the

aid and

encouragement received from Dr. Andrews during a long and demanding
field season.
Dr. Joseph W. Ball is thanked for his review and identification of the
coastal pottery which supplies the chronological background.
Funds to do the

coastal

survey were

provided by

the

American

Philosophical Society, to whom I express gratitude,

REFERENCES CITED
Ball, J. W. and J. D. Eaton
1972 Marine Resources and the Prehistoric Lowland Maya: A Comment.
American Anthropologist, Vol. 74, No. 3, pp. 773-776.
Campbell, T. N.
1956 Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre,
Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp.
7-46.
1958 Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 423-442.
Coe, Michael D.
1961 La Victoria, An Early Site on the Pacific Coast of Guatemala. Peabody
Museum, Vol. 53. Harvard University.
Coleman, James M. and William G. Smith
1964 Late Recent Rise of Sea Level. Bulletin of the Geological Society of
America, Vol. 75, pp. 833-840.
Dahlem, Ted
1968 How to Make and Mend Cast Nets. Great Outdoors. St. Petersburg,
Florida.
Eaton, Jack D.
1974 Shell Celts from Coastal Yucatan, Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 45, pp. 197-208.
1976 Archaeological Reconnaissance of the Coasts of Yucatan, Mexico.
Middle American Research Institute, Tulane University (Manuscript
submitted for publication}.
Fritz, Gayle
1972 Pilot Archeological Field Survey of Cox Bay, Calhoun County, Texas.
Texas General Land Office, Austin.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1971 Loyola Beach: An Example of Aboriginal Adaptation to the Maritime
Environment of the Lower Texas Coast. Florida Anthropologist, Vol.
24, No. 3, pp. 91-106.

ANCIENT FISHING TECHNOLOGY OF YUCATAN

243

Lenski, Gerhard and Jean Lenski
1974 Human Societies: An Introduction to Macrosociology. McGraw-Hill,
New York.
Matheny, Ray T.
1970 The Ceramics of Aguacatal, Campeche, Mexico. Papers of the New
World Archaeological Foundation, No. 27.
Proskouriakoff, Tatiana
1962 The Artifacts of Mayapan. Carnegie Institution of Washington,
Publication 619, pp. 321-442.
Radcliffe, William
1974 Fishing from the Earliest Times. Ares Publishers, Chicago.
Roys, Ralph L.
1972 The Indian Background of Colonial Yucatan. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman.
Sanders, William T.
1960 Prehistoric Ceramics and Settlement Patterns in Quintana Roo,
Mexico. Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publication 606, Contribution 60.
Story, Dee Ann
1968 Archaeological Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf Coast Sites.
State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report No. 13.
Tozzer, Alfred M.
1941 Landa’s Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan: A Translation. Peabody
Museum, Vol. 18. Harvard University.
Wilkerson, S. Jeffrey K.
1975Pre-Agricultural Village Life: The Late Prehistoric Period in
Veracruz. Studies in Ancient Mesoamerica, II. Contributions of the
University of California Archaeological Research Facility, No. 27, pp.
111-122. Berkeley.
Willey, Gordon R.
1966 An Introduction to American Archaeology. Vol. 1, North and Middle
America. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Willey, Gordon R. et al
1965 Prehistoric Maya Settlement in the Belize Valley. Peabody Museum,
Vol. 54. Harvard University.
1972 The Artifacts of Altar de Sacrificios. Peabody Museum, Vol. 64, No. 1.
Harvard University.

