The High Bluff Site on the Clear Fork

of the Brazos River
RICHAI~D AND JUDY FLINN

ABSTRACT
The High Bluff Site near the Young and Stephens County line in
north-central Texas was excavated on week ends and holidays from
1961 to 1964. The occupation zone extended from the surface to an
average depth of 12 inches. The projectile points recovered indicate a
transitional occupation of the late Edwards Plateau Aspect followed
by a briefer occupation of the Austin Focus of the Central Texas
Aspect.

INTRODUCTION
As early as 1958, the writers noticed flint and broken projectile
points each time a sandy road near High Bluff was graded. Upon
closer investigation, a fiat midden area of concentrated material near
the edge of the bluff was found. In 1961 a three-by-five foot test pit
was excavated in the midden which revealed ample cultural material
to warrant further work. A small grid consisting of five-foot squares
was laid out and dug as week-end time and holidays permitted.
Special thanks and appreciation are due Han’y J. Shafer of the University of Texas for his "lessons in archeology" and for encouragement
and answers to endless questions. Our thanks are also extended to the
land owner for allowing us to work on his property.
THE SITE
The High Bluff Site is located on the Clear Fork of the Brazos
River in the extreme northern part of Stephens County near the small
town of Eliasville. Seven miles north-east of Eliasville, the Clear Fork
flows into the Brazos River. Historically, the Brazos River Indian Reservation was located in this vicinity in the 1850"s.
The natural foods available in the area today were probably available during earlier times as well. Prickly pear cactus, with its fruit
ripening in smmner, is very abundant. Post oaks and live oaks, which
predominated in the days when the first settlers arrived, provided a
good source of acorns. Today, large numbers of mesquite trees and
underbnlsh cover the once open areas. Cottonwood, elm, hackbenT,
pecan, and grapes al! occur along the streams.
The wild game present in the area today are deer, opossums, rac-

94

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

1,"

/""

V’1, \
THE
H|GH BLUFF
SITE

a

.....-"~x

~4

~.

"

II

~

.

/

a

/,,1,~2)/}2/

[] Excavated Area
[] Test Pits
--- Midden Extent
.,¢7 Bluff Edge
O Hearth
@ Datum

FIGURE 1.

Sketch map of the site. Not to scale.

coons, ringtails, foxes, wolves, bobcats, squirrels, and occasional
mountain lions. Wild turkeys, doves, and quail are also abundant.
The site extends about 150 feet along the bluff edge and back from
the edge to a maximum distance of about 50 feet. A grove of live
oaks covers a considerable portion of the site.
The grass-covered midden area is almost completely level except for
a slight slope near the bluff edge. The site showed no recent disturbanee other than one charcoal-filled surface depression which had been
a recent campfire.
The site was apparently ideally suited for occupation. A large area
of shoals in the river directly below provided an abundant supply of
fl’esh water mussels. From the bluff edge, there is a commanding view
of the sulTounding countryside across the river, and it is possible to
see for miles from this point. Access to the river can be gained by
winding one’s way down between large rocks and boulders to the bottom of the bluff. An eroded gully runs from the top of the bluff,
where the site is located, down to the river bottom. This could possibly be the remainder of a well-worn trail of earlier times.
The plateau area behind the site is covered with heavy grass and

95

THE HIGH BLUFF SITE

must have been an ideal hunting area. The heavily wooded area
along the river below would also have been excellent for hunting.
The soil is hard, black and ashy, and contains burned fragments of
limestone and mussel shells in vm’ying amounts. All the burned rock
was in small to medium fragments-no slabs or large pieces were
found.
Only two soil zones were evident-a black midden soil and a yellowish-orange clay and gravel below. The clay and gravel zone rested
directly on bed rock.
The depth of the midden deposit varied from as little as 8 to as
much as 15 inches; over most of the site it varied between 10 and 12
inches. Almost all the cultural material came from the black soil although an occasional flint chip or mussel shell fragment was found
in the very upper pat± of the clay and g~’avel. Most of the projectile
points and many of the tools came from the uppermost 6 to 8 inches
of midden soil. Tremendous quantities of mussel shells occurred
throughout the black, ashy soil, and at some points solid masses of
shells extended from the surface level down to depths of 12 to 15
inches.

EXCAVATION
Using a large mesquite h’ee as a datum point, a small grid of fivefoot squares was laid out. All the lines were oriented in directions of
north-south and east-west The east-west rows were lettered and the
north-south rows were numbered. Each square was identified by the
coordinate of its south-east corner, as A-l, B-2, C-3, etc.
Sifting the soil soon proved to be impossible. The soil was either a
black gumbo or rock-hard depending upon rains or the lack of them.
During rare, damp periods between rains, the soil was vel7 crumbly
and easy to work.
A shovel was used for loosening the soil, and a knife was used for
closer work. The firmness of the soil made it possible for one to go
almost to the bottom of the deposit for a large shovelful. The entire
load of dirt could be carefully loosened and removed intact to a large
piece of plywood. This over-sized clod of dirt was then placed gn’ass
side down on the boat’d, and the dirt was removed working from the
bottom of the deposit towards the grass or soil surface. As each tool
was discovered, its measurement from the grass surface could quickly
be determined.
The location of each specimen within the squat’e was also noted on
a sketched square which was included with the field notes for each
respective square.

96

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

OCCUPATIONAL FEATURES
Several fireplaces or hem’ths were encountered. All were shallow,
saucer-like depressions containing burned rock, ash, and charcoal.
Some consisted of concentrated heaps of ash. None were lined.
Hearth No. I was a circular concentration of burned rock about 30
inches in diameter. It began at a depth of four inches and extended
down to about 8 to 9 inches. The soil in the immediate area of the
rock was extremely ashy, and bits of charcoal occurred throughout.
Many split bones, some of deer, and mussel shells were present southeast of the hearth stones for a distance of 5 feet. Heat scarred flint
predominated in this area. Some of the bones and mussel shells were
burned.
Hearth No. 2 was roughly triangular shaped and consisted of a
concentration of very ashy soil and charcoal fragments. It began at a
depth of two inches and extended down to about 6 inches. It was
about two feet long and 10 inches wide.
Hearth No. 3 was another concentrated group of burned rocks in
an elongated oval pattern which was about 24 inches in length and 15
inches in width. There was a large quantity of split bone on the western side of it extending several feet.
Hearth No. 4 was a small ch’cular area of burned rock and ash, 10
inches in diameter, which was roughly dish shaped. It ranged from
a depth of about 3 inches to 8 inches. Within a foot and a half to the
northeast of the hearth, there was a concentration of core tools, hammerstones and scrapers.
Hearth No. 5 was a large egg-shaped concentration of charcoal and
ashy soil ranging from a depth of 4 to 8 inches. It was 36 inches long
and about 29 inches wide. The charcoal was extremely concentrated
in the center area of this one. There was no burned rock. About 2,~’
feet to the west of the lower end of this hearth there was another concentration of charcoal about 6 inches in diameter. There were occasional burned rock fragments in no particular pattern or concentration in this area.
Hearth No. 6 was a roughly circular group of burned rock and charcoal about 16 inches in diameter. It ranged in depth from two inches
below the surface to about 6 inches. There was a very heavy concentration of mussel shells and flint in this area. At certain points, the
mussel shells were present in such great numbers that there was little
soil visible among them. About 3 feet to the southeast of the hearth
at a depth of 5 inches, there was a cache of about a quart and a half
of unworked flint flakes. All were of a rather uniform size and thickhess.

THE

HIGH BLUFF

SITE

97

DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS
The 1101 tools from High Bluff included tools of chipped stone,
chipped and polished stone, ground stone, miscellaneous stone, worked
shell, and worked bone.
PROJECTILE POINTS
Da~ Points
Ninety dart points were recovered from the High Bluff Site. Of this
group, 27 fragments were unidentifiable as types. Many of these were
stems that resembled those of the Darl type. The remaining 62 spedmens were divided into several recognized types and some miscellaneous groups. The flint used for manufacturing these specimens was,
for the most part, local.
Points have been classified into types as defned in the Handbook
of Texas Archeology unless otherwise noted (Suhm and Jelks 1969.).
DARL

TYPE

(33

specimens, Fig. 2, a-o, Fig. 3, a-j)

This group of medium to long, slender points vary somewhat; however, as a group, they all have the same general chm’acteristies and
fit into Darl type.
Twenty-four specimens are beveled on the right on both faces, one
specimen is beveled on the right on one face only, and another (Fig.
2, a) is slightly beveled on the left side of one face. Four remaining
specimens are not beveled on either face.
The stem edges are parallel to slightly expanding. On most specimens the stem edges have been ground slightly; others show heavy
grinding. Stems are beveled on the left on one face on 5 specimens
and on both faces on 5 others.
The bases are concave to straight on the majority of the group; they
are convex on 4 examples (Fig. 2, d). Seven have been ground.
One specimen with a short stubby body that is beveled on the right
edge of each face appears to be a reworked DarI point (Fig. 2, m).
Range of dimensions: length 3.7 cm. to 7.5 era., width 1.6 cm. to
2.1 cm., thickness 0.6 era.

specimens, Fig. 3, k-l)
Two specimens with expanding stems, concave bases, triangular
bodies, and prominent shoulders are classified as Edgewood points.
Both distal tips are missing. The largest specimen is lightly beveled
on the right lateral edge of each face (Fig. 3, k).
Dimensions of larger specimen: length 3.8 m., width 2.2 cm., thickness 0.5 em. Smaller specimen: length 3.5 era., width 2.3 era., thickness 0.5 em.
EDGEWOOD TYPE (9,

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

98

e

1

j

_/3

o

f

m

0

I

2
I

cm.

./
FmuRE 2.
grinding.

Projectile points. Darl points. Dots denote stem and/or basal

ELIASVILLE PIROVISIONAL

TYPE

(10

speciments, Fig. 3, m-o, Fig. 4, a-f)

A group of 10 points from the High Bluff Site are classified tentatively as Eliasville points. In addition one fragment and two stems

THE HIGH BLUFF SITE

99

~il

FI6URE 3.

:

Projectile points, a-j, Darl points, k, 1, Edgewood points, m-o,

Eliasville provisional points. Dots indicate area of griding.

i00

TEXAS

AIRCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

belong in this group. The points are characterized by medium to long
triangular, serrated bodies and weakly expanding stems with concave edges and convex bases. Bevelling occurs on three specimens.
The shoulders flare slightly, terminating in short angular projections in
many eases. The stem edges and bases are ground as indicated in the
illustrations.
Although certain specimens from the EliasviUe group resemble the
Darl type and also resemble the Godley Type in general outline, considerable differences are evident from either type (Jelks 1962: 40, Fig.
16; Forrester 1964: 9, 41-49., P1. 5-6, Fig. 20). These specimens with
the convex base may represent a local variation of DarI since they do
occur in combination with classic examples of the Darl type. When
members of the EliasviUe group are compared with Darl points, their
differences as well as their similarities are rather pronounced.
Range of dimensions: length 3.0 era. to 6.2 era., width 1.6 era. to
2.2 em., thickness 0.4 em. to 1.2 em.
ENSOIt TYPE (4 specimens, Fig. 4, g-j)
These four points, characterized by triangular shaped bodies with
lightly serrated edges (3 examples), stems demarked by shallow
notches, and straight to concave bases, correspond to the Ensor type.
Three of these points have beveled lateral edges on the right of each
face. The other is beveled on the right on one face only and steeply
chipped across the base on the same face (Fig. 4, j).
Range of dimensions: length 3.0 era. to 4.0 em., width across base
1.9 em. to 2.2 em.
MABCOS TYPE (4 specimens, Fig. 4, k-n)
These points are smaller than the Marcos type shown in the Handbook and except for their small barbs bear a much closer resemblance
to the ones from the Ham Creek Site (Forrester, 1964: 10, P1. 4).
Dimensions: length 4.7 era., width 2.2 era.
specimen, Fig. 4, o)
One small specimen appears to be a Meserve point. It has a slightly expanding stem with a deep concave base which has been thinned
by the removal of several flakes, giving the appearance of a short flute
on one face. Both stem edges are ground and the base is heavily
ground. It is beveled to the right on both faces.
MESEI/VE ( ? ) TYPE ( 1

(1 specimen, Fig. 5, a)
This triangular point has one straight lateral edge and the other
retouched to a thick convex edge.
Dimensions: length 3.6, width 2.1 cm.
MISCELLANEOUS TRIANGULAI~ POINT

THE HIGH

BLUFF

101

SITE

Fr~

1

k

0

I
,

2
icm.

0

FIcur, E 4. Projectile points, a-f, Eliasville provisional points, g-j, Ensor
points, k-n, Marcos points, o, Meserve(?) point. Dots denote area of grinding.

102

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

d

0

e

k

]
o

’-

i

’

2

J cm.

J

m

FmuR~ 5. Projectile points, a, Miscellaneous triangular point, b-d, Miscellaneous group I points, e-g, Miscellaneous group II points, h, i, Miscellaneous stemmed points, j, Pahnillas point, k, Pedernales point. 1, m, Williams
points. Dots indicate area of grinding.
MISCELLANEOUS

GBOUP I

(3

specimens, Fig. 5, b-d)

Three points are characterized by their approximately straight
stems and mildly concave bases. The bodies on two examples are of

THE

HIGH

BLUFF

SITE

103

medium length, but that on the third is large with convex edges. The
shoulders are prominent but not barbed. The stem edges and the bases
are ground on the two smaller specimens.
specimens, Fig. 5, e-g)
Members of this group are characterized by slightly expanding
stems, concave to pronounced concave bases, moderate shoulders,
and bodies with serrated edges. The stem edges are beveled to the left
on both faces, the beveling more pronounced on one face than on the
other.

N~ISCELLANEOUS GROUP II (3

MISCELLANEOUS STENI5’IED POINTS (2 specimens, Fig. 5, h, i)
Two points do not fit into a recognizable type. One, similar to
Darl and Eliasville, has triangular body with bevel to the right, straight
lateral edges, straight stem and base (Fig. 5, h). The other point,
though broken, appears long with retouched lateral edges, expanding
stem and straight base (Fig. 5, i). The stem is ground on one lateral
edge.
TYPE (1 specimen, Fig. 5, j)
A slender point with a bulb-shaped stem is made from a ve~7 lightweight tan flint which contains small fossils. The body has a shallow
sloping bevel on the right lateral edge of each face which is snore
pronounced on one face than the other.
Dimensions: length 4.5 era., width 1.7 era.
PALhlILLAS

PEDEI~NALES TYPE (1 specimen, Fig. 5, k)
The thickest projectile point has a leaf-shaped body, weak shoulders, and an indented base.
Dimensions: length 5.3 cm., width 9..5 cm., thickness 1.2 cm.
WILLIAN~[S TYPE (9, specimens, Fig. 5, 1, m)
One large point has a long heavy body with a broad, blunt, oval
point (Fig. 5, 1). The stein is convex on one lateral edge and eoncave on the other. The base is slightly convex. In size and general appearance it resembles the Williams type even though the shoulders are
not as pronounced as on many examples. The second specimen has a
slightly convex base (Fig. 5, m).
Dimensions: Specimen 1: length 7 cm., width 9..3 cm. Specimen 9.:
length 6 cm., width 3.9. cm.
Arrow Points

A total of 34 specimens-9.3 identifiable arrow points and 11 flagments-were recovered. Thirteen are subtriangular and 10 arestemmed.

FIGUR~ 6. Arrow points, a-d, Scallorn coryell points, e-g, Scallorn sattler
points, h, Scallorn miscellaneous point, i, j, Miscellaneous stemmed points.
k, Young point, 1, m, Granbm’y par[¢er points, n-q, Granbury variants, r-t,
Granbury joshua points, u-w, Miscellaneous subtriangular points.

THE InCH BLUFF SITE

105

YOUNG TYPE (1 specimen, Fig. 6, k)
This point is unworked on the concave, bulbar face except for
some faint retouching along some portions of the edges. The dorsM
face is crndely chipped over the entire surface. Its lateral edges are
convex, and the base is convex to irregular in outline.
Dimensions: length 2.9 era. (tip missing), width 1.8 cm., thickness
4 mm.
GtlANBUI/Y TYPE (9 specimens, Fig. 6, l-t)
Members of this group of subtriangular arrow points are characterized by slight to strongly convex bases and bifacial chipping. They
fit into the Granbury type described from the Kyle Shelter, Hill County (Jelks 1962: 35-36, Fig. 14).
Four of the specimens have bases that terminate in rounded to
shall) points. This may represent a local variation in design. All except one of these are well worked across both faces.
Range of dimensions: length 3.0 era. to 3.8 era., width 1.3 em.,
thickness 0.3 em. to 0.5 cm.
joshua variety (3 specimens, Fig. 6, r-t)
Tln’ee of the subtriangulm" points are worked across both faces and
have very mildly convex bases. Al! are missing their distal portions.
Range of dimensions: length (broken) 2.0 era. to 3.3 era., width 1.4
to 1.8 era., thickness 0.3 cm. to 0.5 em.
parker variety (2 specimens, Fig. 6, 1, m)
Two long, narrow specimens are worked across both faces and
have pronounced convex bases. The larger point is longer than the
maximum length of 4 cm. of the Kyle Site specimens. The lightness of
this point, which is made from a very thin flat flake and displays excellent workmanship on both faces, seems to indicate that it was intended for use as an arrow point.
Dimensions of lm’ger point: length 5.0 cm., width 2.3 cm., thickness
0.3 cm. Smaller point: length 4.1 cm., width 2.9, cm., thickness 0.4 em.
MISCELLANEOUS

SUBTIRIANCULA1R

ARROW

POINTS

(3

specimens, Fig. 6,

U-W )

One of these 3 specimens has a concave base (Fig. 6, u). Another
has a convex base, is irregular in outline, and is crudely chipped
across one face and partially across the remaining face (Fig. 6, v).
The remaining example is partially worked on both faces and bears
some resemblance to the Cli~ton type.
l~ange of dimensions: length 3.0 era., width 2.2 cm. to 2.5 em.,
thickness 0.4 em. to 0.6 era.

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SCALLORN TYPE (8 specimens, Fig. 6, a-h)
The bodies of this type point are triangular in shape with straight
lateral edges which are sen’ated on several specimens. The stems
range from slightly expanding to strongly expanding examples. One
ScaUorn has a long slender serrated body, a wide thin concave base,
and is deeply notched to form a stem which is as wide as the body.
Four of these 8 points fit into the ScaIlorn coryelI variety and thi’ee
fit into the Scallorn sattler variety (Jelks 1962: 28, Fig. 13, a-l).
coryell variety (4 specimens, Fig. 6, a-d)
These have slight to moderately expanding stems with straight
bases and long serrated bodies. Two of the specimens have long barbs
while the others have rather short ones.
sattler variety (3 specimens, Fig. 6, e-g)
These have strongly expanding stems and short barbs. Two have
straight bases, and one has a convex, slighlty irregular base.
Range of dimensions: length 2.1 cm. to 3.5 cm., width 1.0 cm. to 1.7
cm., thickness 0.2 cm. to 0.3 cm.
(2 specimens, Fig. 6, i-j)
One specimen with asymmetrical shoulder, base, and stem area, is
dripped only around the edges on both faces (Fig. 6, i). The other
point is of black flint and is worked across both faces (Fig. 6, j).
MISCELLANEOUS STEMMED ARROW POINTS

KNIVES

Unstemmed, relatively well-worked bifaces with sharp cutting
edges are classified here as knives. Bifacially chipped tools of the
same shape but lacking sharp cutting edges were recovered in a variety of thicknesses and degrees of workmanship. Possibly some of
these pieces were blanks intended for later modification into knives,
but will not be included as such in this description.
There were 20 complete (unbroken) specimens, 85 fragments.
tlECTANGULAt/ KNIVES (4 specimens, Fig. 7, a-c)
One complete specimen and four basal fragments make up this
group. They are roughly rectangular and have straight bases. They
are all thin and the workmanship is generally good.
Range of dimensions: length 5.8 cm., width of bases 9..0 cm. to 2.2
cm., thickness 0.6 cm. to 0.8 cm.
BEVELED KNIVES (2 specimens, Fig 7, d)
A rectangular-shaped fragment has parallel edges and straight base.
The base is steeply chipped on one side. The left side of the body is
beveled on the same side as that on which the basal chipping occurs.

THE HIGH BLUFF

SITE

107

!

FIct~r~E 7. Knives. a-c, Rectangular knives, d, Beveled knife, e, Curved
knife, f-h, Triangular knives, i-l, Miscellaneous knives.
The second fragment has a wide bevel down the right edge. The
side with the bevel expands in width up to the point of the break.
The opposite side is straight and the base is straight.

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Dimensions of first knife: basal width 2.7 cm., thickness 0.7 cm.
Second knife: width at base 2.0 cm., width at break 3.8 cm., thickness 0.9 cm.
CURVED KNIFE (Fig. 7, e)
This knife has a curved outline and a pointed tip at the distal end
and resembles a knife from the Kyle Site (Jelks 1962: fig. 19). It is
difficult to tell whether the uneven base is simply unworked or partially broken.
Dimensions: length 5.1 cm., width 2.5 cm., thickness 0.6 cm.
TIIIANGULAlt KNIVES (5 specimens, Fig. 7, f-h)
Two of these triangular-shaped knives are broken at the distal tip.
Bases range from straight to irregular. One with a concave base retains a small portion of cortex on the base.
These knives are shaped by percussion chipping. One is bifacially
retouched along one lateral edge, another has use retouch along one
edge, and a third has a serrated lateral edge.
Range of dimensions: length 4.0 em. to 5.7 em., width 2.5 era. to
3.8 cm., thickness 0.4 cm. to 1.0 em.
SMALL OVAL KNIFE (1 specimen, Fig. 8, a)
This broad specimen is constricted towards the tiny straight base.
It is well made by percussion chipping with some retouching at points
along the blade edges. The constricted area near the base shows fine
retouching along the edges on one side. The tip of this knife shows a
small outer portion of the original flint nodule.
Dimensions: length 4.8 cm., maximum width 2.7 cm., width at base
1.2 cm., thickness 0.6 cm.
SUBREC~ANOULAe KNIFE ( 1 specimen)
A small knife has a convex base and a distal end which tapers to a
rounded point. Both lateral edges are convex and it is concavo-concave
in cross section. Percussion chipping on one face has produced a ridge
at the mid-section. Edges on one face have some retouch.
Dimensions: length 4.5 cm., width 2.3 cm., thickness 0.9 cm.
CLEBUtlNE TYPE (Q,9, specimens, Fig. 8, b-l)
This type of knife is the best represented knife from High Bluff
Site (Jelks 1969,: 44-45). Some examples of this subrectangular knife
are long and slender while others are short and broad, but all have
slight to pronounced convex bases. Some have convex lateral edges
and others have lower lateral edges parallel to one another. The lateral edges are retouched on most examples and the bases of some
are retouched.
The two smallest members of this group could possibly have been

THE

HIGH

BLUFF

109

SITE

Q

d

h
e

£

1
0

I

J
FIcURIZ 8.

2
1 cm,

Knives. a, Small oval knife, b-l, Cleburne knives.

dart points instead of knives. They would have been suitable for
either purpose.

Ii0

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

d

!

£

FmURE 9. Miscellaneous tools, a, b, Drills. c, Spokeshave. d, Gunflint. e-l,
Gravers. m-q, Burins. Broken arrows indicate graver beaks and solid arrows
indicate number and direction of burin blows.

Range of dimensions: length 4.0 cm. to 8.0 cm., width 1.5 cm. to 3.5
cm., thickness 0.4 cm. to 1.2 cm.
MISCELLANEOUS KNIVES (6 specimens, Fig. 7, i-l)
The lower lateral edges of these knives have a distinct inward curve

THE

HIGH

BLUFF

SITE

111

or taper near the base. The inward curve begins at the approximate
midsection of the knife on one example and on three other fragments
it begins closer to the base. Bases are straight to concave.
On one knife a chipped indented area occurs just below the midpoint of the knife. The edge below this is lightly smoothed. The indention is 1.6 em. wide and 0.1 era. deep.
Range of dimensions: length 6.6 era. to 7.4 em., thickness 0.6 em. to
0.8 cm. Width at base 2.2 era., maximum width 3.2 em.
DRILLS

(5 specimens, Fig. 9, a-b)
Five fragmentary drills were discovered-a complete bit portion, a
base and part of a bit, a rectangular base with broken bit, and two
fragments of large drill bits.
An ahnost complete bit portion, 3.5 cm. long, is steeply beveled
on both faces (Fig. 9, a). Viewed in cross section at the thickest
point, it has two bevels 0.8 cm. wide that are parallel and two bevels
less than 0.6 cm. wide running in alternate directions.
Two-thirds of the base and 2.1 em. of the bit length remain of a
badly heat-scalTed drill of black flint (Fig. 9, b). Beveling on all four
edges has produced a fiat center ridge on both faces. The bit is 1.2 cm.
wide where it joins the base. The base is shaped like the base of a
Darl point.
Another specimen with a broken bit has a bifacially worked, rectangular base. The bit is 0.6 cm. long and 0.8 cm. wide. The base is
2.5 cm. long and 1.8 cm. wide.
SPOKESHAVES

(4 specimens, Fig. 9, c)
These are rather small concave depressions chipped onto flint
flakes. The concave area would have been suitable for smoothing a
small arrow shaft.
Two are semicircular notches chipped onto a small, otherwise unworked flint flake, one is chipped onto a flint spall from one face, and
the fourth is a thick, rectangular cortex flake which also has a straight
scraper edge.
Range of dimensions: width 0.6 era. to 0.7 era., depth 0.2 cm. to
0.3 era.
GUN FLINT

(1 specimen, Fig. 9, d)
A gunflint of smoky-gray translucent flint was discovered eroding
from one edge of the dirt road near the site. It is square in outline

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and worked only on one face except for some flaking at one edge. The
worked face is flat with steep chipping or beveling on all four edges.
Three of the edges are finely retouched and the fourth edge is vel7
heavily worn with one corner worn blunt. The one chipped edge on
the other face is on this heavily worn edge.
Dimensions: length 2.1 cm. and 2.2 cm., width 1.9 era. and 1.7 era.
(heavily worn edge ).
GRAVING TOOLS

CRAVERS (23 specimens, Fig. 9, e-l)
Gravers were among the most common artifacts recovered. They
were consistently present at all depths and in all parts of the site.
These tools could have been used for engraving shell, bone, wood,
and soft stone and possibly for tatooing.
Eleven of the gravers are points worked onto thick flakes which
have been only slightly modified (Fig. 9, e, j, ]), and they fit into
Wright’s Type IA (1940: 35, P1. 7). The remaining 19. gravers are
worked onto the ends of long oval or rectangular flint flakes which
show fine chipping on either side of the graver point and down the
sides of the flint flake (Fig. 9, f-i, k). They fit into Wright’s Type I B.
The graver end on some examples is snubbed or steeply chipped, and
the undersides of these gravers are generally unworked. Ahnost all of
these graver points are curved inward and have a hooked, beak-like
appearance.
BURINS (5 specimens, Fig. 9, m-q)
The following description of the burins is by Han’y J. sharer.
All of the burins from High Bluff fit into Form B of Epstein’s
(1963: 72) classification: "points formed by the intersection of a burin
facet with a broken or flake edge."
One specimen is manufactured from the basal end of a broken bifacially chipped knife by the removal of several spalls along one
edge (Fig. 9, m). A corner of the transverse break was used as a
striking platform. A tiny negative bulb of percussion is present at the
point where the blow was delivered, leaving a concave cutting edge.
Portions of the cutting edge are smooth from use.
Dimensions: length of faceted edge 4.3 cm., maximum length of
facets 2.2 cm., width of cutting edge or striking platform 0.3 cm.
The second specimen is made from a biface fragment broken in a
way that two broken edges intersect at an approximate right angle
(Fig. 9, n). One of these edges was used as the striking platform.
The surface of the adjacent edge is marked with tiny facets. The restilting cutting edge is convex and is worn smooth from use.

THE

HIGH

BLUFF

113

SITE

a

G

i

0

I

2
Icm.

Ficur~E 10. Miscellaneous artifacts, a, b, Side scrapers, c, End and side
scraper, d, Utilized flake, e, Spall scraper, f, Hematite celt. g, Scratched
limonite, h, Stone ball. i, Bone bead.

Dimensions: length of faeeted edge 2.4 em., maximum length of
facet 0.9 em., width of cutting edge or striking platform 0.7 em.
A third specimen has several tiny burin facets at the pointed end

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

(Fig. 9, o). This end has been worn from use, and this wear can
readily be seen without the aid of a microscope.
Dimensions: length of faeeted edge 4.4 cm., width of bit 0.2 em.
The fourth burin has several tiny facets at the pointed end and is
burinated from the opposite end as well (Fig. 9, p). There is no visible sign of use.
Dimensions: length of faceted edge "2.8 cni., width of bit 0.1 em.
The last specimen probably represents an exhausted burin (Fig.
9, q). It is made from a fragment of a bifacial implement and has
a series of hinge fractures down one side.
Dimensions: length of faceted edge 3.4 em.
SCtlAPEItS

SIDE SCRAPPEI~S (5 specimens, Fig. 10, a, b)
One fragment and four complete specimens have been chipped
down one lateral edge of one face to form a working edge. The scraping edges are straight on three specimens, convex on one, and concave
on the broken one. The chipped surfaces range from a velN faintly
worked edge to a steeply chipped one. The example with convex
scraping edge is lightly serrated (Fig. 10, a).
Range of dimensions: length 4.6 era. to 6.3 era., width 1.6 cm to
3.3 era., thickness 0.5 era. to 0.9 era.
END SCRAPPER (1 specimen, Fig 10, e)
This end scraper was fashioned out of a long, thick flint flake. It
has a curved, unworked ventral side and a very high convex dorsal
side. A large portion of the original outer core of the flint nodule remains on this specimen. Steep chipping extends from the bit down
both lateral sides. The bit end shows heavy use.
Dimensions: length 4.8 em., width across bit 1.5 em.
SPALL SCIIAPEtRS AND UTILIZED

FLAKES

(327

specimens, Fig. 10, d, e)

This group is made up of flakes which show small areas of chipping from use. They show little to no modification other than the
small chipped or battered areas. Many retain a pollion of the original
flint nodular surface. Their shapes are generally irregular. Some have
straight chipped areas (Fig. 10, e) while others have convex or small
shallow concave working surfaces.

TOOLS
(56 specimens, Fig. II)
All the implements from this group were made by means of percussion flaking. Several were also retouched along the lateral edges
CRUDE

BIFACIAL

THE

HIGH

BLUFF

115

SITE

d
f
e

o
I

FIGURE

1 1.

I

I

2

I cm.

Crude bifacial tools.

but usually only on one face. Some show heavy use at the distal end,
and others show wear on portions of their blade edges. Many of these
resemble the knives in outline but not in workmanship-all of these
tools are much thicker and cruder. Shapes most often are oval and
subtriangular, but range to circular and irregular.

116

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

CHOPPERS
(7 specimens, Fig. 12, a-b)
One chopper, or hand axe, was fashioned by striking off large
flakes at one end of a stream-worn quartzite pebble. It has steep
chipping on one face only.
Dimensions: length 6 em., width 5.2 era., thickness 1.8 cm.
A second chopper has been fashioned by steeply chipping one end
of an oval stream-worn limestone pebble on one face.
Dimensions: length 6.5 era., width 4.5 era., thickness 1.4 cm.
Two choppers were fashioned from quartzite cobbles. On both of
these, steep chipping from both faces forms a sharp jagged edge
which shows battered areas. One of these choppers is chipped across
the distal end; the other is chipped halfway across the distal end and
on down one side.
A chopping implement was formed by chipping both faces of the
distal end of a large thick flint nodule. The working end shows very
heavy weed’. This chopper fits perfectly into either hand-on one side
a flat surface has been chipped back from the chopping end leaving
a place for the ends of the fingers to rest. When grasped in the hand,
the chopping end extends out about 3 era. past the ends of the fingers.
A specimen is chipped from both faces out of a flat flint nodule. It
has a working edge on pedt of the distal end and part way down one
side.
The last example is fashioned onto a smooth, large stream-worn
pebble (Fig. 12, a). It is bifacially chipped on one end and shows evidence of heavy use. One face is unaltered except at the chopper end.
The other face is chipped to leave an end which fits the fingers when
it is gripped.
HAMMERSTONES

(26 specimens, Fig. 12, d-e)
Twenty-six nodules and stream-worn pebbles have been battered
along the edges or over the enth’e pebble in some eases. Some are
battered from use. Others have been chipped from both faces to
form convex edges which show evidence of light to heavy battering.
Material: 14 quartzite, 9 chert, 2 quartz, 1 limestone.
COKES

( 160 specimens )
One hundred sixty medium to large cores seem to have been used
as sources for small and large flint flakes. Some of these also have

THE

HICH

BLUFF

117

SITE

b

a

FIGURE 12. Miscellaneous artifacts, a, b, Choppers. c, Smoothed fossil, d,
e, Hammerstones. Dots indicate area of smoothing.

small a’eas of edge retouching or weal’, and some have small battered
areas. It is likely that pieces from this gn’oup were used both as flint
sources and as handy, quickly discarded tools when convenient.
Material: 158 flint, 9. quartzite.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

118

CHIPPED AND POLISHED STONE

(2 specimens, Fig. 10, f)
A fragmentary heat fractured celt was discovered in close association with a hearth area. Three of the four fragments which were scattered over a five-foot square area have been glued together to form a
large portion of one face. The portions sloping down to the bit edge
are heavily polished and are very smooth.
The second specimen was flaked on both faces to the desired shape.
It decreases in thickness towards both the halting end and the bit
end. When viewed in cross section, the bid end somewhat resembles
the bifacially-chipped bit end on a gouge. This celt is constricted
somewhat at the end opposite the bit to facilitate halting. It is probably only partially finished as it does not exhibit the heavy polish that
is typical of so many of these artifacts. The halting-end edge is
ground smooth.
Dimensions: length 4 cm., width at end of bit 2.5 cm., width at hafting end 1.7 cm., thickness 1.1 cm.
GROUND STONE

OCHER

FRAGiX’IENTS (21

small and 1 large specimen, Fig. 10, g)

Twenty-one red ocher fragments, none larger than ~ inch, were recovered from all areas of the site. Many of these had scratched depressions where pigment had been scraped off for use.
A larger flat tablet-like piece of yellow limonite was ground smooth
down both sides and around the ends (Fig. 10, g). Both faces are
woru smooth. There is a shallow depression with deep scratch marks
across it on one face, and there are also deep scratch marks on the
opposite face. Upon close examination, tiny scratches running in
every direction over every surface can be seen.
Dimensions: length 4.5 cm., thickness 0.7 era.
GRINDING SLABS ( 8

specimens )

All of the grinding slabs were of sandstone and had been pecked
preparatory to grinding. Seven showed evidence of peeking and
grinding on one side. One of these was mainly a sill fragment. The
eighth fragment had been pecked and worn down on both faces, one
face more extensively than the other.
~ANOS (9 specimens, Fig. 13, a)
The one complete mano recovered is of fine-grained sandstone and
shows heavy usage on one side (Fig. 13, a). The broken manos, all
made of sandstone, showed moderate to heavy wear. Three of these
showed grinding facets at different angles along the sides and ends.

THE HICH

BLUFF

119

SITE

2

i cm.

b
FIGURE 13.

Ground stone, a, Manos. b, Grooved stone.

The other six were oval to rectangular in shape. One battered fragment was probably used as a hammerstone.
An oval stream-worn limestone pebble was perhaps intended for
use as a mano, but it showed no evidenee of wear.

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

19,0

Dimensions of complete mano: length 14.0 era., width 9.0 cm.,
width 3.5 cm.
GROOVED STONE (1 specimen, Fig. 13, b)
A piece of sandstone has four V-shaped grooves running across the
stone, possible evidence that it had been used as a hone for sharpening bone tools. Below these V-shaped grooves, there is a short, wide,
somewhat rounded groove which possibly was used as a shaft abrader.
Fainter grooves bisect the larger grooves at an angle. One edge of
this sandstone piece has one short V-shaped groove extending down
it at an angle.
Dimensions: length 10.5 cm., width 9.5 era., thickness 3.0 cm. Typica! groove: width 0.3 era., depth 0.1 era. Rounded groove: width at
each end 0.5 cm. and 1.5 era., depth 0.2 cm.
A small limestone object about the size of an average marble is
almost a perfect sphere except for a slight flat area on one side (Fig.
10, h). It is 1.4 era. in diameter and has a rough surface with no
evidence of smoothing. Its puq?ose is unknown.
One fossil was evidently picked up and brought into the camp site
as an object of interest or for other purposes. A smoothed area on the
edge at one end extends on around one side (Fig. 12, c). It seems unlikely that this is natural since the other side and end of the fossil
show no evidence of this wear. Dots at the upper part of the illustration indicate worn area.
A flint flake, showing some modification at one end, still retains a
large portion of its orighlal outer cortex. This flat brown cortex is covered with red ocher-colored marks. Most are faint, and it is apparent
that some have worn away. Others are almost invisible. It is impossible to discern an apparent pattern except that many are roughly parallel and others form a zig-zag appearance.
WORKED

UTILIZED N’IUSSEL SI-[ELLS

(8

SHELL

specimens, Fig. 14, a-d)

One mussel shel! has a battered or chipped section worn down to a
dull edge on the upper edge opposite the hinge (Fig. 14, b). Another
shell also has a portion removed at the end fartherest away from the
hinge (Fig. 14, a). The shell is broken alongside this area, leaving
two concave areas side by side. The broken area is worn to a dull
edge leaving no sharpness. A third shell is heavily smoothed along a
broken edge on one side of the shell.
A fourth shell shows light smoothing extending from the upper
area neat" the hinge around to about the half-way point on the oppo-

THE

HICH

]BLUFF

121

SITE

h

1
FIGURE 14. Shell artifacts, a-d, Utilized shells, e-g, Notched shells, h-l,
Perforated shells. Arrow indicates perforation begun on exterior surface of
the shell.

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

19,9.

site side. A perforation near the hinge has been damaged by a break
in the upper area near the hinge. This specimen was probably used
as a scraper.
Two shells have a notch removed along one edge (Fig. 14, c, d).
The notch on example c, which is 1.0 em. wide and 0.5 cm. deep, is
V-shaped and shows heavy smoothing or wear. The notch on example
d, which is 0.9 cm. wide and 0.6 cm. deep, is rounded and smooth. It
resembles a spokeshave in outline.
Two additional shells appear to have smoothed areas around their
outer long edges indicating use as scrapers. The wear is very light.
(5 specimens, Fig. 14, e-g)
Five shells show notched areas on their outer edges. One shell has
a broad chipped area (slightly worn) to one side of the notches (Fig.
14, f). A second shell is perforated at the hinge in addition to being
notched.
NOTCHED MUSSEL SHELLS

specimens, Fig. 14, h-l)
This rather large group of perforated mussel shells are in various
stages of disintegration. In almost every case, perforations occur near
the hinge, although some of the holes are closer to it than others. Almost all the perforated shells were small mussels, however, large
mussels were uncommon in the midden.
One large broken mussel has a large circular perforation near the
center intersected by another perforation. This leaves a hole with
the appearance of a figure-eight.
Most of the shells had circular perforations, some had elongated
oval ones, and one example had a definite well-made triangular perforation. The circular perforations ranged in size from 0.9. em. to 1.0
cm. Other perforated mussels were discovered during the course of
the digging, but these had crumbled beyond all possibility of removal.
Careful checking of all mussel shells for evidence of alteration and
use revealed thirteen shells that seemed to show the first steps in
making perforations. These shells had the beginnings of tiny drilled
holes in the hinge areas. The deeper these holes went the larger they
became. They appear to have been made with an object with a very
small sharp point.
Two of these shells have the holes punctured from the outside of
the shell, and the outer layers of the shell have flaked off around the
hinge area (Fig. 14, i). The other 11 had these tiny perforations on
the inside. One shell had three of these-a very small one, another
larger one beside it, and a larger one below these two. It would seem
PEtlFOltATED MUSSEL SHELLS

(54

THE

HIGH

BLUFF

123

SITE

that at times there was a bit of indecision as to just where the shells
should be perforated.
Two shells each have one attempted perforation and one completed one (Fig. 14, i). The remaining shells have only one beginning
of a hole.
Attempted perforations which almost puncture the shell range in
size from about the size of a pin head to 0.2 cm.
The perforated mussels were most common in areas in which mussel shells were most numerous. This may or may not be of significance
since the greatest concentration of other artifacts was here also.
BONE ARTIFACTS

(4 specimens, Fig. 10, i)
Bone in any form was very scarce throughout the midden soil. No
complete bone tools were found.
Four burned fragments of one tool included the basal end of a
mammal long bone with part of the articular surface present, a portion which fitted onto this, and two mid-section fragments. Two other
mid-sections from other tools were found.
One cylindrical bone tube bead was also recovered. It is smoothed
at each end and the outer area is smooth except where it is slightly
pitted. It has no decoration. It has been fashioned from what appears
to be a bird bone oz" the long bone of a small mammal. It is 2.7 cm.
long and 1.3 cm. in diameter.
FOODS
As already stated, bone material was extremely scarce at High
Bluff. However, in most cases that which was discovered was well
preserved, so the scarcity is probably not accountable to lack of preservation. Deer, one squirrel jaw bone, and turtle carapace fragments
were recognizable. Bison bones were not present. Snails were almost
non-existent
Mussels seem to have been the principal staple (at least during
the seasons when they were available) in the diet as attested by the
tremendous quantities of shells. Presumably, most were either eaten
raw or boiled as the only shells which were burned or charred were
associated with hearth areas.
A few badly decomposed pecan shells were present, but these were
probably introduced by burrowing rodents.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The High Bluff Site material appears to represent intmwnittent occupations of the Transitional Edwards Plateau Aspect (Johnson et al.

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1962: 122). The dart point styles indicate a late placement of the
material within the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
The Darl point was by far the most favored dart point style. They
were common in every portion of the site. Four specimens of En.sor
were also present. Both Darl and Ensor have been found to occur late
stratigraphieally in several Edwards Plateau Aspect sites (Miller and
Jelks 1952; Suhm 1955) and were found just below Scallorn arrow
points at the Smith Rock Shelter (Suhm 1957). Their presence at High
Bluff along with Pahnillas (1 specimen), which occurred at the bottom of the Austin Focus zone at Kyle (Jelks 1962: 39), and Edgewood, which is regarded as occurring during the latter part of the
Archaic period (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954: 418), adds fnrther to
this transitional placement. The four Marcos points from High Bluff
resemble Marcos points found in the upper levels at Ham Creek, an
Edwards Plateau Aspect site in Johnson County (Forrester 1964: 10,
P1. 4). The Eliasville dart points with their resemblances to both the
Darl and Godley types seem to further indicate this late transitional
placement.
The only projectile point with any Paleo-Indian attributes is the
one Meserve point. It was possibly picked up and brought into the
site by the inhabitants.
The Austin Focus of the Centra! Texas Aspect is represented at
High Bluff by a small number of arrow points. It appeared at first
that there would be vertical separation with arrow points overlying
dart points. However, it soon became obvious that most of the dart
points and the arrow points were coming from identically the same
levels, namely, from between 3 to 5 inches below the surface. For
some reason the majority of the projectile points were confined to
this 3 to 5 inch zone although the midden soil and other cultural
material extended on down to depths of i0 to 15 inches at some points.
Some arrow point fragments (mostly tips) were found very close to
the soil surface, whereas no dal! points were present in the upper 3
inches of the deposit.
The arrow points ScaUorn and Grandbu.ry, both diagnostic of the
Austin Focus at the Kyle Site, indicate an Austin Focus occupation
following the principle Edwards Plateau occupation.
Diagnostic markers of the Toyah Focus, which follows the Austin
Focus, are not present. Absent are arrow point types Perdiz and Cliffton, small snub-nosed scrapers, small drills worked onto flint flakes,
and pottery.
The gunflint, which was the only historic item present, was likely
dropped or lost in the vicinity long after the main occupation of the site.

THE I~IIGH

BLUFF

125

SITE

In summary, the High Bluff material appears to represent occupations during the Edwards Plateau Aspect and the Austin Focus. The
site was inhabited intermittently by hunting and gathering peoples
with the later occupants using the bow and arrow.
REFERENCES CITED
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1963 Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 (for 1962),
pp. 1-125.
Forrester, Robert E.
1964 The Ham Creek Site: An .Edwards Plateau Aspect Site in Johnson County, Texas. Tarrant County Archeological Society, pp. 1-46.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Archaeology Series No. 5, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962 Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge,
and Oblate Sites. Texas Memorial Museum, Bulletin No. 5.
Miller, E. O., and Edward B. Jelks
1952 Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,

Vol. 23, pp. 168-217.
Suhm, Dee Arm
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25, pp. 7-54.
1957 Excavations at the Smith Roekshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 26-58.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks (editors)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. The Texas Archeological Society, Special Publication No. 1, and The Texas Memorial
Museum Bulletin No. 4.
Wright, Welty
1940 The Type, Distribution, and Occurrence of Flint Gravers in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 12,
pp. 31-47.
Scott, Louisiana

