Relationships Between the Caddoan Area
and the Plains1
ROBERT E. BELL

It is my purpose to discuss the interrelationships between the
Caddoan Area and the Plains, focusing attention primarily upon Oklahoma and the states to the north, leaving the Texas side of the story
to my associates. Since Oklahoma lies in a strategic position, being
partly within the Caddoan Area and partly within the Southern
Plains, it is only natural that I should become interested in the relationships between these two areas. I would like to emphasize, however,
that many of the ideas suggested here are speculations based upon
occasional hints or on familiarity with the archeological materials.
Nevertheless, I think it worth while, perhaps an obligation, to occasionally evaluate what has been done, and to reconstruct from
available data something that may help in building an archeological
history. Later, after additional research, such ideas can be evaluated
and accepted, modified, or rejected. With this introduction, then, I
would like to comment upon Plains-Caddoan Area relationships as
I see them at this time.
In this discussion of the Caddoan Area I am referring essentially to
the time periods represented by the Gibson and Fulton aspects. The
Caddoan area is the territory formerly occupied by these peoples. Although earlier occupations are apparently represented in all parts of
this region, they do not become recognizable units until Gibson times.
Moreover, the areas occupied by the Gibson and Fulton groups do not
remain static and are not always identical.
Within eastern Oklahoma there are two nuclear areas: one centering along the Arkansas River and its tributaries, such as the Canadian,
Grand, Poteau, and Illinois in east-central Oklahoma, and another
centering along the Red River valley and its tributaries in southeastern
1 This paper was presented at a symposium entitled "Relationships between the
Caddoan Area and Neighboring Areas," which was a part of the program of the
23rd Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, held at the University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma, May 1-3, 1958.

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Oklahoma. The rough, wooded country of the Ouachita Mountains
functioned as a natural divide between these two nuclear areas and
was apparently a more sparsely occupied frontier region.
As one moves westward across Oklahoma, the common archeological
materials represent a relatively late prehistoric occupation reflecting
a typical Plains gardening and bison-hunting economy. The Washita
River Focus (Bell and Baerreis, 1961), which is widespread in central
Oklahoma, would be a typical example. Farther to the west, the Custer
Focus (Bell and Baerreis, 1951; Brighton, 1961; Gallaher, 1951) is
found in the area around Clinton, and the Optima Focus (Watson,
1950; Bell and Baerreis, 1961) is found in the Oklahoma Panhandle.
All of these loci share a large number of traits and must be related to
one another in some way. The Optima Focus, by virtue of its proximity to the Southwest, has a number of features, one of which is
architecture, which must be ultimately derived from that region. As
a result of these influences, the Optima materials are the most divergent.
If one examines materials from a continuous series of sites, however,
starting with the Washita l~iver Focus in central Oklahoma and continning westward up the river valleys to the Custer and Optima areas,
there is a gradual transition from one locality to the other. My impression is one of an expansion of peoples moving into the Plains area,
originating in the east and following the main river valleys westward
ultimately to occupy their respective areas of the state. Differences
which occur throughout these areas are a reflection of borrowed ideas,
local specializations, or a taxonomic failure to consider the transitional
intervening areas.
The Washita River Focus is perhaps best known, and several sites
have been described in the literature (Schmitt, 1960; Bell and Baerreis, 1961; Schmitt and Toldan, 1953; Oakes, 1953; Lawton, 1958).
There are many other sites represented by test pit material or surface
collections that have not been published on as yet. The area of distribution and depth of occupation in the sites suggest that some lapse
of time is represented. Moreover, the occasional sherd, projectile point,
or stone artifact representing the Gibson period suggests an origin
from the east during late Gibson times. This eastern origin is further
supported by the lack of older, possibly ancestral, occupations in the
central Oklahoma area. Closely related manifestations in other localities are the Henrietta Focus along l~ed ]~iver in north-central Texas
(Krieger, 1946) and the Great Bend Aspect along the Arkansas River
in central Kansas (Wedel, 1947). These three cultural complexes are

CADDOAI~ AREA AI~D THE PLAII~S

55

closely related to one another and constitute a broad grouping of late
prehistoric peoples that occupied the Southern Plains.
The cultural identification of the Washita River peoples remains to
be proven by further study and excavation. I believe, however, that
all present evidence points to an identification as prehistoric Wichita.
The Wichita are an example of the Caddoan stock who are now"
residents of Oklahoma, located primarily in the region around Anadarko. Their history is not well known, but Harper (1953a, 1953b,
1953c) has been able to trace their movements throughout the last
250 years.
In 1834 the main villages were located at the mouth of Devil’s
Canyon in southwestern Oklahoma (Harper, 1953c). Prior to this
time, their villages were located in the area around Spanish Fort on
Red River, and they are known to have occupied this area during the
latter part of the 18th century, from 1757 to perhaps 1820 (Harper,
1953b). During the period prior to 1757, the Wichita were to be found
along the Arkansas River in Kay County, Oklahoma (Harper, 1953a).
Contact materials from these sites suggest an occupation for at least
the period from !700 to 1750 (Steen, 1953). Wedel (1947) has suggested identification of the Paint Greek culture (Great Bend Aspect)
with Quivira, or the historic Wichita location for the period around
1540. Prior to this date we must rely upon archeological evidence.
For historic times our present evidence suggests that the Wichita
were living in the Great Bend area of the Arkansas around 1540.
Apparently they gradually moved eastward, down the Arkansas River,
to be found living in what is now Kay County, Oklahoma, as early as
1700. As a result of shifting trade interests and Osage pressures, they
moved from their Arkansas River location in 1757 to settle near Spanish Fort on Red River. Although remaining in this area for an indefinite
period of time, they were located in southwestern Oklahoma by 1834.
By 1859 these villages were abandoned, and the tribe moved into the
Wichita Mountains area and ultimately settled on a reservation in the
vicinity of Anadarko, Oklahoma. Thus during a period of over 400
years the Wichita are known to have occupied the southern Plains
area from the Great Bend area of the Arkansas River in Kansas on the
north to the Red River valley on the south.
The archeological materials indicate that the Paint Greek (Great
Bend), Washita River, and Henrietta peoples are closely related. With
the identification of Paint Greek as Wichita, it seems reasonable to
identify the Washita River and Henrietta loci as prehistoric Wichita.
I therefore suggest that in late prehistoric times there was a movement

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of peoples westward out of the Caddoan area, following the main river
valleys, such as Red, YVashita, Canadian, and Arkansas. These peoples
occupied the Plains area and became well adjusted to a Plains semihunting and semi-gardening economy, such as that represented by the
archeological manifestations known as Henrietta, Washita River, and
Paint Creek. In historic times these peoples were represented by the
Wichita or associated bands.
As to when this population began its westward movement out onto
the Plains, we need to look back at the Caddoan Area once again. The
Gibson period is not characterized by traits which we think of as typically Plains. The features which are so typical of the YVashita River
Focus are generally lacking. Nevertheless, some familiarity with and
knowledge of the Plains is manifest in flint specimens at Spiro and
other sites which were derived from quarries considerably westward
beyond the traditional limits of the Caddoan Area. On the other hand;
during the Fulton period, there is a number of traits which reflect
Plains culture--the diamond-shaped beveled flint knife, bison bones
and artifacts made of bison bone, such as the scapula hoe, and storage
pits. There are also similarities in projectile points and other artifact
typology. In short, the southern Plains cultures (Washita River, Henrietta, and Paint Creek) share more features with the Fulton Aspect
than with the Gibson Aspect. Yet the occasional Gibson trait, such as
potsherds and specific projectile point types, suggest a late Gibson association for at least some part of this Plains assemblage.
Thus it appears that a critical time period for Caddoan Area relationships with the Plains is the transitional period from Gibson to
Fulton times. This is, however, a poorly understood phase of Caddoan
Area prehistory. Yet it is perfectly clear that during this transitional
period something happens within the Caddoan Area that is not understood. Bell and Baerreis (1951), in their summary of Oklahoma archeology, comment as follows:
¯ . . features of the Gibson Aspect are in marked contrast to the Fulton
Aspect, which follows it. While the marked superiority in some technological processes, particularly ceramics, continues and perhaps is even
surpassed, in general the Fulton Aspect is marked by a decrease in cultural
complexity. The discovery of the factors responsible for this decline, at
least for this transition, constitutes one of the most interesting problems
of the Caddoan Area. The Fulton Aspect appears to be marked by the
decline in importance of the older ceremonial centers and the gradual
disappearance of both burial and temple mounds, with the latter persisting
for a longer period. As a positive contribution to this problem, it may be
noted that in Oklahoma there is a marked shrinkage in the Caddoan Area

CADDOAIX$

AI~Ii;A

AI~D THE PLAINS

57

during the Fulton Aspect period. Such cultures as the Neosho focus of
Upper Mississippi affiliation appear in the northeastern portion of the
state taking the place of an earlier Gibson Aspect occupation. Complexes
in the east-central portion of the state, such as the Fort Coffee, can no
longer be regarded as "pure" Caddoan units but show strong influences
from the Plains area .... It would appear that during Fulton Aspect
times the Caddoan Area on its northern frontier had been subjected to
increasing external pressure which resulted in both the decrease in actual
size occupied and the dilution of the culture through the acceptance of
many foreign innovations.

Orr (1952:251) also comments upon this transitional period.
"The great change between Gibson and Fulton is especially due to the
disappearance of the Gibson burial complex and associated ceremonialism.
At the same time new elements begin to come in mainly from the Plains
area: triangular proiectile points, scapula hoes, L-shaped pipes, perhaps
derived from some unit like the Great Bend Aspect of central Kansas.
However sharp the changes from Gibson to Fulton, they can be explained
as a rapid change of ceremonialism and the introduction of a relatively
few new items rather than by wholesale cultural replacement.

Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 171) consider the Haley Focus as
representing a late Gibson period occupation perhaps evolving directly
into Fulton times. They comment as follows:
Elsewhere in the Caddoan Area, the changes from Gibson to Fulton
Aspect units are on the whole quite radical, indicating not only a break
in continuity but perhaps a period of depopulation. Thus the continuities
from one Aspect to the other appear to have been centered about the
great bend of Red River in the Haley focus, and after a time of lapse in
the surrounding areas, new influences emanated from this center, establishing the Fulton Aspect units in the four states.

I would suggest, then, that the southern Plains groups, such as the
Henrietta, ~rashita River, and Great Bend manifestations, are prehistoric representatives of the Wichita group who split off from the
main Caddoan stock toward the end of Gibson times. The movement
of these peoples out onto the Plains at this time would not only be
compatible with their appearance on the southern Plains but would
help to explain the transition from Gibson to Fulton times within
the Caddoan Area. These people were obliged to adjust to a new way
of life on the Plains, thus sacrificing some of their earlier Gibson
traditions but replacing them with a Plains way of life which had
repercussions within the Caddoan Area homeland during Fulton times.
Manifestations such as the Sanders Focus (Krieger, 1946) may well

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

represent an example of one such Gibson group moving out into the
Plains and reflecting this transitional adjustment. Manifestations such
as the Turkey Bluff Focus (Lehmer, 1952) may represent a later
group with Fulton-Plains blending.
The reasons behind this movement out onto the Plains are not
especially clear at this time, although one or two possible factors can
be suggested. One of these would be the developing population pressures brought to bear upon the northern limits of the Caddoan Area
in northeastern Oklahoma. Perhaps other groups to the east were impinging upon the Caddoan Area and forcing an expansion westward.
Another factor, and one which I consider perhaps more important, is
the possible role occupied by the bison. Throughout the Gibson period,
bison bones are rare, often completely lacking, and obviously unimportant to the economy. On the other hand, during Fulton times or its
equivalent, the bison becomes more plentiful and more important. It
would seem quite possible that the bison was of primary importance
in attracting these peoples onto the Plains. The abundance of bison to
the west and increasing competition and population pressures in the
homelands area could well stimulate such a movement westward.
The approximate date for this westward expansion out of the Caddoan Area is not clear. The dating of the Gibson and Fulton aspects
remains unsettled and controversial at this time. Suhm, Krieger, and
:[elks (1954) suggest a range for the Gibson period from around A.D.
500 to 1200; for the Fulton period from around A.D. 1200 into historic
times, although most of the Fulton foci lacks historic materials. Utilizing only the youngest of conflicting radiocarbon dates for two Gibson
sites in Oklahoma, a span from A.D. 1150 to 1350 is suggested. Possible
dates for the Southern Plains cultures (Schmitt, 1950; Suhm et al.,
1954) range from A.D. 1300 to 1600. Thus the period around A.D. 1300
appears as a critical time, and I would suggest that the transition from
Gibson to Fulton times, as well as the accompanying westward movement onto the Plains, took place sometime between A.D. 1200 and
1400.*
Not only did the Wichita move westward out of the Caddoan Area
at this time, but I would also suggest that the related Caddoan tribes,
such as the Pawnee and Arikara, are derived from this locality. These
* We now have one radiocarbon date available from a house post at the Lacy site,
which is an example of the Washita River Focus. This date of 800 _ 150 (Specimen
M-820, Michigan Memorial Phoenix Proiect Radiocarbon Laboratory, University
of Michigan), giving a range from A.D. 1009 to 1309, suggests that my estimates
given above are perhaps a century too late (R. E. Bell, Feb. 1, 1961).

CADDOAN AREA AND THE PLAINS

59

later groups were derived from the Caddoan nuclear area centering
along the Arkansas River in eastern Oklahoma toward the end of Gibson times, roughly between A.D. 1200 and 1400.
As a summary working hypothesis. I would suggest that the Gibson
Aspect within the Caddoan Area was terminated by a movement of
Gibson peoples out onto the Plains, where they later became identified
as the historic Wichita, Pawnee, and Arikara. This westward movement probably took place sometime between A.D. 1200 and 1400. The
Pawnee and Arikara moved westward and northward ultimately to
occupy the Central and Northern Plains, whereas the Wichita re~
mained in the Southern Plains. This latter group maintained contact
with the Caddo groups remaining in the homeland, and these peoples
were responsible for the Fulton Aspect, which is prehistoric Caddo
proper. Differences which exist between the Pawnee and Arikara in
the Central and Northern Plains and the Wichita in the Southern
Plains may in part be a reflection of different sources from within the
Caddoan Area, the Pawnee-Arikara being derived from the nuclear
area centering along the Arkansas River in eastern Oklahoma, and the
Wichita being derived from the Red River valley in southeastern
Oklahoma.

Re]erences Cited
Bell, Robert E., and David A. Baerreis
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 7-100.
Brighton~ Harold D.
1951. Archaeological Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 164-187.
Gallaher, Art
1951. The Goodman I Site, Custer County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 187-216.
Harper, Elizabeth Ann
1953a. The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1719 to 1768.
The Chronicles of Oklahoma, Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 268-289.
1953b. The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1769-1779. The
Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. 57, No. 2, pp. 181-291.
1953c. The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1779-1835. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, Vol. 23, pp. 1-32.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The University
of Texas Publications, No. 46¢0.
Lawton, Sherman P.
1958. The Max Thomas Site~ Gd-4. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological
Society, Vol. VI, pp. 83-88.

60

TEXAS AIICIIEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Lehmer, Donald J.
1952. The Turkey Bluff Focus of the Fulton Aspect. American Antiquity, Voh
17, No. 4, pp. 313-318.
Oakes, John Underhitl
1953. The Lacy Site, Garvin County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Voh I, pp. 17-24.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1952. Survey of Caddoan Area Archaeology. In James B. Griffin
Archaeology of Eastern United States, pp. 239-255.

(editor),

Schmitt, Karl
1950. The Lee Site, Gv-3, of Garvin County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Voh 21, pp. 69-89.
Schmitt, Karl, and Raymond Toldan
1953. The Brown Site, Gd-1, Grady County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Voh 24, pp. 141-176.
Steen, Charlie R.
1953. Two Early Historic Sites on the Southern Plains. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 24, pp. 177-188.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Voh 25.
Watson, Virginia D.
1950. The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Voh 21,
pp. 7-68.
’%¥edel, Waldo ll.
1947. Cultural Chronology in the Central Great Plains. American Antiquity,
Voh 12, No. 3, pp. 148-156.
University of Oklahoma
Norman, Oklahoma
May 1, 1958

Discussion
By David A. Baerreis
Robert E. Bell’s stimulating paper provides us with a broad interpretation of southern Plains history which in part differs sharply with
other studies of this area that rank among our early major contributions. Basically we are presented with a picture of steady movement
westward of Caddoan peoples, derived from a Gibson Aspect horizon,
and gradually modified in this western habitat. This split from the
main Gibson stock is postulated as taking place at the end of Gibson
times and culminating in the historic Wichita, Pawnee, and Arikara.
Among the representatives of this group, as prehistoric Wichita, is the
Henrietta Focus described by Alex D. Krieger in his 1946 monograph,

