MORE CRUCIFORMS AND SOME
PROBLEMATICAL OBJECTS
By CARL B. COMPTON

Cruciform artifacts have recently been reported both by
Research Associates of the Instituto Interamericano (Howard,
1954; Fay, 1956) and by others (Hughes, 1956). Since the
most recent of these reports numerous other examples have
come to our attention, as well as some other objects vaguely
similar to the cruciforms but which can only be described as
"reel-shaped" objects. In one case, to be cited more specifically
below, the form is virtually identical with "reel-shaped" objects
from the eastern United States (Griffin, 1952), although of
different material and found far west of that region.
"Reel-shaped" objects indistinguishable in form from those
we wil! discuss were found in considerable number in Kern
County, California (Fig. 30, E, F, G; Wedel, 1941). Wedel discusses some rather far-fetched possibilities as to the use or
purpose of these objects and finally concludes that they are
"problematical" (Ibid., p. 57). Another "reel-shaped" object
was found in Pickwick Basin on the Tennessee River (Webb
and DeJarnette, 1942). This example (Fig. 30, D) is notable
for not having been pierced for use as a gorget, as nearly all
of the Eastern United States "reels" are. Only one of the
Sonora-Arizona "reels" or cruciforms reported in the present
paper is pierced (Fig. 29, B), and this was probably done by
some latter-day Indian antiquarian.
The use or purpose of the cruciform artifacts has not been
determined as yet. The campesinos of Mexico call them "stars"
when they find them. They bear a strong resemblance to the
petroglyph and pictograph forms in the Southwest which also
are assumed to represent stars. The Seri represent their gods
and goddesses as having crosses at the sides and top of the
head (Coolidge and Coolidge, 1939, p. 96). A sherd from near
Durango, Mexico, in the collection of Mrs. Howard of that city,
shows what seems to be a shaman with a cross in one hand
(Fig. 30, C).

128

Texas Archeological Society

While fully realizing that hearsay evidence is of little value,
we should like to mention two occurrences which are sufficiently
well vouched for to be taken seriously. They may contribute
something toward an eventual understanding of the purposes
of the cruciforms. Federico Schroeder R. of Durango, a Research Associate of the Instituto Interamericano, states that
a rancher near Mezquital found an "idol" on his ranch with a
cruciform buried or embedded in the stomach. The rancher
broke the "idol" and took the cruciform home as a plaything
for his children and it was, of course, soon lost. This same
rancher, while engaged in the popular pastime of treasurehunting in the caves of the nearby mountains, found a skeleton
in dorsally extended position with five cruciforms on it from
the throat to the pelvis. These objects suffered the same fate
as did that of the "idol." However, attention is called to the
similarity between this "burial"--actually the corpse was not
interred and that of Cuicuilco reported by Hughes (1956).
Though the cross motif is very common in many parts of the
the world, and particularly in the Americas, stone cruciforms
apparently do not have such wide distribution. Though we have
been told of a cruciform from the U. S. East Coast and of a
number found in the Ohio River drainage near Cincinnati, we
have not seen these specimens and if they have been reported
in print we cannot locate the paper. There seem to be certain
concentrations of them. Many are found in Durango, and now
in this paper we are able to report a concentration in Sonora,
Mexico, and lower Arizona.
Summarizing all of the evidence thus far reviewed, we might
conclude, without any undue strain on logical process, that the
cruciforms are sacred or ceremonial objects. About some of
the gods of the Serf, Coolidge and Coolidge (1939, p. 101) say,
"Ahnt Kai is the goddess of women and children and the four
crosses show that she is holy." We have been told of a burial
at Tiburon Island of a woman with a cruciform at each side
of the head, but this statement cannot be satisfactorily corroborated. In the case of the "reel-shaped" objects, we still have
no shred of real evidence as to their use or purpose.
Over a period of years, several persons in southern Arizona

More Cruciforms and Some Problematical Objects

129

have from time to time encountered cruciforms of various materials as well as "reel-shaped" objects and problematic objects.
It is these specimens which are now reported here. In addition,
William J. Schaldach, who made most of the drawings in Figs.
29 and 30, has seen and examined some fifteen other cruciforms
from the same area, but these specimens are not available at
the present time for examination.
The Cruciforms of Fig. 29:
A. Pitchstone. Carefully ground; smooth finish; ridges run
from corners or points to center; slightly rounded central platform. From Otero Ranch 25 miles north of Sasabe, Arizona.
B. Mudstone. Brick red; slightly pebbled surface; rather
crude workmanship; same thickness throughout with rounded
edges; shows signs of erosion. The suspension was probably put
in by a later Indian antiquarian as no other such forms with
holes are reported from the region. From the Gill Ranch 2
miles east of Sasabe, Arizona.
C. Grey chert. Well made; shallow table at center; rounded
edges. From 2 miles west of Jaynes Station just north of
Tucson, Arizona.
D. Light grey chert. Apparently roughed out by chipping
and then ground somewhat. Workmanship rather crude ; slightly
polished; one prong broken. From La Playa, Sonora, Mexico.
E. Grey quartzite. Crude workmanship; entirely chipped,
not ground; rather fiat on one face. From San Jos~ de Guaymas, Sonora, Mexico.
F. Grey-pink chert. Well-made; good craftsmanship; wel!
polished; similar to C and found near C.
G. Variegated chert. Light grey background with dark grey
and terra cotta mottling. Edges narrow and flat, not rounded.
From Arivaca, Arizona.
H. Quartzite.

Very crude; chipped. Provenience same as G.

I. Quartzite.

Problematica! as a cruciform but appears to

F...
C l’,.,x

\

\

~..
Ct~

i

More Crucif orms and Some Problematical Objects

131

be a very crudely chipped one; one prong missing. Same provenience as G.
J. Dark grey shale or slate. Rather crudely chipped. From
Old Village of La Ventana, Magdalena River, Sonora, Mexico.
K. Dark grey basalt (?). Very symmetrical; dull polish
with just a trace of shine; edges flat, not rounded, and ends of
arms or prongs are squared; the whole surface is gently rounded. From La Playa, Sonora, Mexico.
L. Obsidian. Matte surface; definite ridges lead to center
with no table left. Provenience same as K.
M. Brick red argillite with dark brown mottlings. Very
similar to L and same provenience.
N. Yellow ochre sandstone. Well made but eroded. From
Federico Ranch, Los Molinos, Sonora, Mexico.
O. "Sugar quartz"; off-white. Crudely chipped with no sign
of grinding. From Garcia Ranch about 2 miles east of Sasabe,
Arizona.
The Objects in. Fig. 30:
A. Obsidian. Well made; matte surface; completely smooth.
From about 10 miles east of E1 Paso, Texas.
B. Flint. A problematical object; probably coincidentally
cruciform; may have been a flint drill, the long point having
been broken off. From the East Fork of the Huron River, Ohio.
C. Figure from a potsherd from Durango, Mexico.
D. Limestone. "Reel-shaped" object from the Pickwick Basin. (Webb and DeJarnette, 1942.)
E, F, G. Stone objects from Kern County, California. (Wedel,
1941.)
H. Obsidian.

From Empalme, Sonora, Mexico.

I. Pitchstone. Very well ground and polished; ridged toward
center; variant of cruciform (?). Provenience same as H.

,il

%

G

.

z

A

cM

t,-,.

C~4

K
I

N

©
c~
Fig. 30.

c\~

More Cruciforms and Some P~’oblematical Objects

133

J. Obsidian. Crude and shows generally poor craftsmanship.
Provenience same as H.
K. Obsidian. Very well chipped. From San Jos~ de Guaymas, Sonora, Mexico.
L. Obsidian.
M. Obsidian.
N.

Well chipped. From Empalme, Sonora, Mexico.
Good workmanship. Provenience same as L.

Same as M.

O. Obsidian. Another problematical object. May have been
a drill or variant cruciform. From Molinos, Sonora, Mexico.
P. Obsidian. Still another problematical object. Could have
been intended as a cruciform; very crudely chipped. From San
Jos~ de Guaymas, Sonora, Mexico.
Collectors of fhe Objects Shown:
Fig. 29: A, B, D, Mrs. Walter Freeman; C, F, Mrs. Carll
Winn; E, Walter Freeman; G, H, I, Carll Winn; J, Mrs. Carlos
Escalante; K, L, William J. Schaldach; M, Mrs. Jo Schaldach;
N, Mrs. John Murchison; O, John Murchison.
Fig. 30: A, Dr. Raymond H. Tull, Jr.; B, A. G. Smith; C,
Agnes McClain Howard; D, William S. Webb; E, F, G, Waldo
R. Wedel; H, I, J, Walter Freeman; K, P, Carll Winn; L, Mrs.
Jo Schaldach; M, N, O, William S. Schaldach.

REFERENCES CITED
Coolidge, Dane, and Mary R. Coolidge
1939. The Last of the Seris. A. P. Dutton, New York.
Fay, George E.
1956. Another Cruciform Artifact from Sonora. Amer.
Antiquity, Vol. 21, No. 4, pp. 410-411.
Griffin, James B., ed.
1952. Archeology of Eastern United States. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

134

Texas Archeological Society

Howard, Agnes McClain
1954. Cruciform Artifacts of the Sierra Occidental. Amer.
Antiquity, Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 174-175.
Hughes, Jack T.
1956. Stone Crosses with a Cuicuilco Burial. Amer. Antiquity, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 80-82.
Webb, William S., and David L. DeJarnette
1942. An Archeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in the
Adjacent Portions of the States of Alabama, Mississippi,
and Tennessee. Bur. Amer. Ethnoh, Bull. 129.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1941. Archeological Investigations at Buena Vista Lake,
Kern County, California. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bull. 130.
Instituto Interamericano
5133 NT, Denton, Texas

