128

Texas Archeological Society

INTRODUCTION
The immediate environs of the McKinney Homestead may be described
in terms of five polymorphic and somewhat intergrading plant communities.
The contemporary plant communities at McKinney Falls State Park have
been significantly altered from the natural prehistoric vegetation. Nevertheless, the landscape is characterized in terms of potential natural vegetation. Anthropogenic influences upon the plant communities, however, are
briefly mentioned.
The McKinney Homestead is included within the Blackland Prairies
Vegetational Area (Tharp, 1952; Kuchler, 1964; Thomas, 1969). Such
small scale vegetation mapping has obvious and understandable limitations.
Detailed analysis of a grassland relict was published by Lynch (1962, 1971)
for an area several kilometers to the west of the McKinney Homestead.
Anderson (1904) presented the only detailed map of the plant associations
in the immediate vicinity of the McKinney Homestead. He classified the area
as: Chalk Prairie (including a Chalk Hill type) of the Grand Prairie Society;
Black Prairie of the Black Prairie Society; and a riparian community subsumed within the Colorado Drainage System Society (including the Stream
Margin, Gravel Terrace, and Alluvial Bottom Associations).
Lynch (1968) developed a checklist of the flora for the region but did not
include community type descriptions. Collins et al. (1975) recently described the community types of the Blackland Prairie north of the Colorado
River. Their discussion applies to the McKinney Homestead as well.
The Homestead is located east of the Balcones fault and the Edwards
Plateau, within the Balcones fault zone. The physiography is reminiscent of
the hilly, dissected margins of the Edwards Plateau. In large measure, the
site is ecotonal between the true prairie grasslands of the Western Gulf
Coastal Plains and the evergreen woodlands of the Edwards Escarpment.
East and north of Onion Creek, the relatively level uplands are
characteristic of the southern and western portion of the Blackland Prairies.

Riskind -- Vegetation of McKinney Homestead

129

Blacklands also occupy approximately 40% of the upland terrain west and
south of Onion Creek. The permanently flowing Onion and Williamson
creeks and their associated geomorphological features add a third major
dimension to the biotic communities of the area. This dimension is a riparian
woodland (or forest if the overstory canopy is closed).

DOMINANT PLANT COMMUNITIES
The dominant plant communities of the site can best be discussed and
delineated within the framework of the recently completed soils survey of
Travis County (Werchan et al., 1974). A generalized soils and potential
vegetation type map is presented in Figure 1.
Houston, Lewisville, Altoga, and Heiden clayey soils of the level to gently
rolling uplands (0-8% slope) surrounding the McKinney Homestead supported climax plant communities which can be included within the
Blackland Prairie. The binding dominant for this variable true prairie community was little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium). Co-dominants were
such species as big bluestem (Andropogon gerardii), Indiangrass
(Sorghastrum avenaceum), Canada wildrye (Elymus canadensis), Texas
wintergrass (Stipa leuchotrica), tall dropseed (Sporobolus asper), silver
bluestem (Bothriochloa saccaroides), side oats grama (Bouteloua curtipendula), and numerous other less conspicuous grasses and forbs. In prehistoric
times, woody plants would have been unimportant community components.
Most of these upland soils were highly productive, relatively deep, and
arable. The native prairie vegetation was grazed off at an early date and
replaced either by pasturage or by food or fiber crops. Most of the former
prairielands are heavily invaded by: mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa var.
glandulosa), especially on deeper soils; cacti (Opuntia spp.), Ashe juniper
(duniperus ashei); broomweed (Xanthocephalum sp.); seepwillow (Baccahris neglecta); annual grasses and forbs; and weedy perennial grasses
such as Texas wintergrass, Johnson grass (Sorghum halapensis), purple
threeawn (Aristida purpurea), buffalo grass (Buchloe dactyloides), curley
mesquite (Hilaria belangeri), hairy grama (Bouteloua hirsuta), and silver
bluestem. They can be categorized as old field, successional communities.
The large alluvial terrace adjacent to the McKinney Homestead is included within this community. Due to a more favorable moisture regime, this site
may have been an open cedar elm woodland. The slope due east of the
McKinney Homestead is badly eroded and choked with dense stands of
mesquite, snakewood (Col~rina texensis), algerita (Berberis trifoliolata),
Texas persimmon (Diospyro~ texana), prickly ash (Zanthoxylum hirsutum),
Iotebush (Zizyphus obtusifolia), prickly pear, and pencil cactus (Opuntia leptocaulis). Ashe juniper is included as a faciation of the Blacklands community. However, in former times, a woody component was probably well
represented on this site, especially on the steep slopes (> 10%).
Shallow, rocky uplands generally characterized as having Tarrant soils
were vegetated by open savannahs (with up to 20-30% canopy cover) with
live oak (Quercus fusiformis), cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia), and netleaf
hackberry (Celtis reticulata) as overstory dominants and with mid and tall
grasses as the dominant ground cover. Cedar, bumelia (Bumelia

130

AgB
AgC2
BtB
FhF3
Fo
Fr
HeC2
HeD2
LcA
LcB

Md
PaC

PaC2

?aE

TaD

Texas Archeological Society

HnA

Altoga silty clay,
i to 3 percent slopes
Altoga silty clay, 3 to 6
percent slopes, eroded
Burleson gravelly clay
i to 3 percent slopes
Ferris-Heiden complex, 8 ~o 20
percent slopes, severely eroded
Frio silty clay loam
Frio silty clay loam, frequently
flooded
Heiden clay, 3 to 5 percent
slopes, eroded
Heiden clay, 5 to 8 percent
slopes, eroded
Lewisville silty clay,
0 to i percent slopes
Lewlsville silty clay,
i to 2 percent
slopes
Mixed alluvial
land
Patrick soils,
2 to 5 percent
slopes
Patrick soils,
2 to 5 percent
slopes, eroded
Patrick soils,
5 to i0
percent
slopes
Tarrant
soils,
rolling

HnB
HoD2

Houston Black clay,
0 to i percent slopes
Hourton Black clay,
I to 3 percent slopes
Houston Black
gravelly clay,
2 to 8 percent slopes,
eroded

PaC2-,

TaD

gC2

/

SOl LS
HcKinney Fal is

j~

State Park

¯ HeC2

I True
3000

HeC2"
.~.FhF3

I FEET
0t

i000

L

......

2000

Fig. 1 Soil and vegetation types at McKinney Falls State Park (base map and soils
courtesy of USDA).

Riskind - Vegetation of McKinney Homestead

131

lanuginosa), netlead hackberry, hog plum (Prunus rivularis), shin oak
(Quercus sinuata var. breviloba), persimmon, spring herald (Forestiera
pubescens), fragrant suma (Rhus aromatica var. flabelliformis), poison ivy
(Rhus toxicodendron), soapberry (Sapindus saponaria var. drummondii),
Virginia and plateau creeper (Parthenocissus virginiana and heptaphylla),
mustang grape (Vitis mustangenis), greenbrier (Smilax bona-nox), turk’s
cap (Malvaviscus drummondii), and others would have been and are present in this community.
Due to heavy exploitation of the grasses in this upland community and
subsequent overgrazing, the woody plants, especially the brushy species,
have migrated onto sites formerly dominated by the perennial grasses. The
contemporary landscape, formerly open savannah, is composed of thickets
with spring herald, algerita, Mimosa borealis, snakewood, Iotebush, prickly
pear, pencil cactus, netleaf hackberry, and greater densities of live oak and
cedar elm and of woody vegetation in general. What was formerly savannah
is now a woodland with a dense, brushy understory.
Upland areas of Tarrant soils where the woody vegetation has been entirely removed in order to increase grazing potential is also within this community type (in terms of potential vegetation). These grassland openings are
dominated by grasses such as buffalograss, side oats grama, curley mesquite, tall dropseed, Johnson grass, and silver bluestem. Prickly pear, pencil
cactus, twisted-leaf yucca (Yucca rupicola), and numerous annual and
perennial forbs are conspicuous. The majority of this upland plant community is located south of the McKinney Homestead on the south side of
Onion Creek.
Adjacent to Onion Creek, especially to the east of the creek on the upper
slopes upstream from the upper falls, there is a distinct plant community
which occupies the shallow Patrick soils of the chalky ridges. Formerly, this
location was occupied by a savannah community with plateau live oak and
mid and tall grasses as dominant (little bluestem, Indiangrass, big bluestem,
etc). Today, Ashe juniper is dominant as is a brushy component including
the rare Texas peach bush (Prunus minutiflora).
This community is typical of the Edwards Plateau. Twisted-leaf yucca, a
plateau endemic, is a conspicuous component of the chalky ridge plant
community. Juniper and live oak are considered indigenous as should
Texas kidneywood (Eysenhardtia texana), algerita, snakewood, skunkbush,
spring herald, Texas persimmon, and Prunus rivularis. Contemporary densities of these species, particularly Ashe juniper, have increased manyfold as
a consequence of exploitative land use practices. Little bluestem and side
oats grama formerly dominated the grassy vegetation, whereas today Texas
needlegrass (Stipa leucotricha) is dominant. This community is considered
as aspect of the uplands savannah.
Upland gravel deposits, usually mapped as Quaternary gravel terraces,
are represented due west of the McKinney Homestead. Soil designation has
not been assigned to the deposit since the soil along with the gravel has long
since been removed. Anderson (1904) includes the gravel terraces within
his Colorado Drainage System Society. However, the distinctly upland
community was vegetated with post oak (Quercus stellata), cedar elm, and
hackberry as the overstory dominants of an open woodland. Bumelia was

132

Texas Archeological Society

also a component of the overstory in this community.
In the climax potential, mid grasses, especially little bluestem, would have
dominated the herbaceous community. Included would have been species
such as purpletop (Tridens flavus), big bluestem, Indian grass, and a variety
of forbs and other grasses. In climax conditions, this community was, most
likely, the least diverse of all community types represented in the environs of
the McKinney Homestead.
The remaining dominant plant communities can best be described within
a generalized and broadly interpreted riparian category. The riparian community fluctuates in composition and physiognomy along a gradient of
available moisture, substrate depth and texture, and exposure. Minimum
development of this community is found within intermittent drainages on
the uplands. Maximum development occurs along the banks, floodplain,
and lower talus slopes of the entrenched-Oaion-,- Rinard,~ and Williamson
creeks. It is delineated on soils maps as either Frio soils or as Mixed Alluvial
lands (Werchan et al., 1974). Soils of small, intermittent drainages are not
mapped due to limitations of the graphic scale.
Intermittent upland drainages can best be described as cedar elmhackberry-live oak-woodlands. Facies of this community include hackberry
woodlands and/or cedar elm woodlands. As the available moisture, soil
depth (fertility), and/or stream gradient increases, the density and species
diversity of the woodland increases to the point that a closed canopy
develops and more mesic species are included.
These species include: American elm (Ulmus americana); pecan (Carya
illinoinensis); Arizona walnut (Juglans major)~ red mulberry (Morus rubra);
elderberry (Sambucus canadensis); Eve’s necklace (Sophora affinis); cottonwood (Populus deltoides); Mexican plum (Prunus mexicana); deciduous
holly (flex decidua); mustang grape; roughleaf dogwood (Comus drummonddii)~ Virginia creeper (Parthenocissus quinquefolia); plateau creeper;
hawthorne (Crataegus sp.); redbud (Cercis canadensis var. texensis);
bumelia~ Texas ash (Fraxinus texensis); eastern red cedar (Juniperus virginiana); red haw (Viburnum rufidulum); buckeye (Aesculus pavia var.
pavia); Mexican buckeye (Ungnadia speciosa); wafer ash (Ptelea trifoliata);
poison ivy; dewberry (Rubus trivialis); clematis (Clematis texensis). Other
mesic indicators are: green dragon (Arisaema dracontium); white avens
(Geum canadense); and inland sea oats (Chasmanthium latifolium).
Osage orange (Maclura pomifera), privet (Ligustrum sp.), chinaberry
(Melia azedarach), and Japanese honeysuckle (Lonicera japonica) are recent introductions to this community. The dominant species of the intermittent drainage community grade into and are often indistinguishable from the
dominants present in the scarp woodland community.
A distinctive variant of the riparian community, a scarp woodland, is
found on the slopes of the entrenched drainages, especially Onion and
Rinard creeks. Oaks (Quercus texana, Q. fusiformis), cedar elm, hackberry
(Celtis laevigata), Texas ash, red buckeye, wafer ash, redbud, beargrass
(Nolina lindheimeriana), Texas persimmon, Mexican buckeye, roughleaf
dogwood, Arizona walnut, beautyberry (Callicarpa americana), boneset
(Eupatorium havanense), and redhaw~dominate. Ashe juniper and eastern
red cedar occur in this assemblage. Brambles (Smilax spp.), plateau

Riskind -- Vegetation of McKinney Homestead

133

creeper, peppervine (Ampelopsis arborea), mustang grape, and poison ivy
are conspicuous members of this community. Dominant grasses found in
this community are Canada wildrye, melic (Melica nitens), side oats grama,
little bluestem, Indiangrass, and occasionally eastern gamagrass (Tripsacum
dactyloides) .
At the more xeric extremes, this community grades into the cedar elmhackberry-live oak community of the intermittent drainages. At more mesic
sites, this community intergrades with the mixed hardwood (cedar elm
dominated) floodplain community.
The best development of the riparian community is on the deeper, frequently flooded, floodplain or alluvial soils of Onion Creek (Frio soils) where
the community changes slightly to become a cedar elm-hackberry gallery
forest. Eastern cottonwood, pecan, bumelia, box elder (Acer negundo),
American elm, Osage orange, chinaberry, elderberry, redhaw, mustang
grape, Virginia creeper, deciduous holly, and roughleaf dogwood are some
of the more conspicuous associates. Occasionally, such xeric species as
mesquite, Texas persimmon, and Ashe juniper occur, usually in forest
openings.
Dominant grasses in the floodplain community, depending on microenvironmental conditions, are Canada wildrye, vine mesquite (Panicum obtusum), eastern gamagrass, little bluestem, inland sea oats, bushy bluestem
(Andropogon glomeratus), several species of Panicum, and a variety of
other less conspicuous grasses, sedges, and forbs.
The streamside community which occurs along the margins of Onion
Creek is perhaps the central feature of the McKinney landscape. This bald
cypress (Taxodium distichum) community occupies only a narrow band
along Onion Creek. Green ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica), sycamore (Plantanus occidentalis), and black willow (Salix nigra) are the dominant
overstgry associates. Buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis) and lead tree
(Amorpha ~uticosa) are dominant in the shrub stratum. In terms of importance, the community is characterized as Fraxinus-Salix-Taxodium-Plan.
tanus although at any one point Taxodium or others may be dominant.
Substrate variation accounts for dominance variation.
The streamside community extends a short distance up Rinard Creek but,
for the most part, is lacking along the lower portion of WiUiamson Creek.
Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) and eastern gamagrass are potential tall
grass associates of the streamside riparian community. Only relict stands remain at present.
The remaining aspect of the riparian community is mapped as mixed
alluvial land (Fig. 1). In the site area, this zone is confined to the very lowest
portion of the entrenched Williamson Creek and to Onion Creek
downstream from the upper falls. From the upper falls downstream, the
valley fill is composed of transported limestone gravels; there are situations
wherein typical floodplain terraces with deep alluvial (Frio) soils and
associated vegetation have developed.
Deep gravel deposits support a distinctive, and, for the most part, seral
community which is characterized not only by species composition but by
large areas of bare gravel and open canopy. This community is composed of
a plant assemblage capable of adapting to dynamic, oftimes destructive, tur-

134

Texas Archeological Society

bulent flooding, i.e., severe environmental/habitat stresses. The degree of
turbulent flooding and the extent and dimension of the gravel deposits have
probably increased in recent years. This increase is due, in large measure, to
an increase in water runoff and subsequent increased stream discharge
associated with urbanization. Nevertheless, the environment within which
the contemporary plant communities exist was present, probably to a lesser
extent, in earlier times.
Dominant arborescent species in the mixed alluvial mapping unit are
sycamore, green ash, bald cypress, black willow, and pecan. The community may be characterized as Plantanus-Fraxinus-Taxodium. Few trees or
shrubs survive to maturity. Continual regeneration and even aged stands of
saplings are expected. Both cedar elm and American elm are unimportant
community components of the tree stratum.
Dominant shrubs are those species best adapted to the harsh, dynamic
habitats of the gravel shoals. Little walnut (Juglans microcarpa), buttonbush, indigobush (Amorpha fruiticosa), seepwillow (Baccharis neglecta),
leafy brickellbush (Brickellia dentata), and sesbanias (S. drummondii and S.
macrocarpa) occur.
Conspicuous vines, brambles, and subshrubs include mustang grape,
peppervine, dewberry, and orange xexmenia (Xexmenia hispida). Important grasses and forbs include switchgrass, maximilian sunflower (Helianth us
maximiliani), American waterwillow (Justicia americana), frogfruit (Phyla
incisa), and numerous other grasses, forbs, and sedges. Johnson grass,
chinaberry, and Jerusalem thorn (Parkinsonia aculeata) are exotics which
are now community components but which were absent in former times.
As vegetation stabilizes the gravel bars and as sediments accumulate, the
successional trend proceeds toward the development of a more mesic
floodplain community. Scouring floods that erode as well as deposit gravel
bars maintain a dynamic successional community.
It is difficult to evaluate the prehistoric plant community composition at
the streamside because the community was continually disturbed by
flooding (a natural agent) as well as by harvesting of bald cypress and hardwoods during historic (industrial) times. There remain few analogues for
comparison.
SUMMARY
Notwithstanding several additional minor plant communities not described, the McKinney Homestead is generally characterized in terms of the
dominant terrestrial plant communities. All of the communities except those
found on the steep slopes were influenced and profoundly modified by
humans (particularly the once productive grasslands) to the extent that the
community composition and infrastructure was changed to a remarkable
degree. Although both the prehistoric and historic Amerindians did their
part to modify their environment, it was not until the time of McKinney and
his Anglo precursors of the 19th Century that environmental modifications
could be described as deleterious to environmental quality.
The McKinney site is juxtaposed upon a varied and, in former times, a
highly productive natural environment. The site is ecotonal between the Edwards Plateau to the west and the Blackland Prairies to the east. A distinc-

Riskind -- Vegetation of ]VlcKinney Homestead

135

tive streamside/riparian community traverses the site adding a diverse mesic
component to the environmental setting. Anthropogenic influences from
prehistoric times to the present, but most remarkable during McKinney’s
era, have dramatically changed the composition, structure, and distribution
of the dominant plant communities at the McKinney Homestead.

REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, Ernest
The Plant Societies of the Austin Quadrangle. Unpublished Master of
1904
Science thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
Collins, O.B., F.E. Smeins, and D.H. Riskind
1975
Plant Communities of the Blackland Prairie of Texas. In: M.K. Wall
(ed.), Prairie: A Multiple View. University of North Dakota Press, Grand
Forks.
Kuchler, A.W.
1964

Potential Natural Vegetation of the Coterminous United States.
American Geographical Society Special Publication, 36:1-116.

Lynch, Brothe~ Daniel, C.S.C.
1962
Study of Grassland Mosaic at Austin, Texas. Ecology, 43(4):679-686.
1968
Plants of Austin, Texas. St. Edwards University Press, Austin.
1971
Phenology, Community Composition and Soil Moisture in a Relict at
Austin, Texas. Ecology, 52(5):890-897.
Tharp, B.C.
1952
Texas Range Grasses. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Thomas, Gerald W.
1969
Texas Plants--An Ecological Summary. In: F.W. Gould, Texas Plants:
A Checklist and Ecological Study. Texas A&M University,
Miscellaneous Papers, 585p/revised:7-14.
Werchan, L.E., A.C. Lowther, and Robert N. Ramsey
1969

Soils Survey of Travis County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.

