A Clovis Fluted Point From Hood County, Texas
8. ALAN SKINNER AND RANDLE RASH

In October of 1968, Scott James, a second grade student in Granbury, Texas, found a Clovis fluted point in a pile of gravel which had
been brought to his home from a gravel quarry located on the Brazos
River in Hood County. Being curious about this large projectile he
reported the find to Mr. Rash
who subsequently relayed the
information to the Anthropology
Research Center at Southern
Methodist University through
Mr. Charles A. Smith, Jr., then
secretary for the Texas Archeological Society.
The exact location of the
gravel wash is uncertain but it
was on the east side of the
Brazos River in the vicinity of
Granbury. The point appears to
have been manufactured from
locally available flint. In this
particular vicinity, flint occurs
as cobbles within bands of conglomerate which are present in
the Cretaceous age lfinestone
bluffs which border the river.
The point (Fig. 1) is made of
a tan to light gray mottled flint.
There is no evidence of stream
smoothing of the flake scars or
the edges. The tip, one corner of
the base, and a notch on the left
edge are recent and expose the
unpatinated gray flint in the
center of the point. Before the
Fic. 1. Clovis fluted point from Hood point was broken, Rash observed
that there was a finely chipped
County, Texas. Dots indicate the
extent of lateral grinding. Full size. notch present in the same location as the recent notch. The
broken length of the point is 113 ram., the maximum width is 36 ram.,
and the maximum thickness is 9 ram. The point weighs 53.8 grams.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Primary flaking was carried out in a transverse manner to prepare
the blank and is evidenced by the large sears on the upper three quarters of the body. The flake platforms were removed by subsequent
chipping.
Secondary chipping is generally in an oblique manner directed
toward the base from the lateral edges and usually does not extend
over half of the facial span. The point was retouched before the flutes
were removed. Ttn’ee flakes were removed to create the flute on each
face and in all eases the fluting flakes end in a hinge fracture. The
lateral edges of the base are ground as indicated in the drawing. The
butt of the base may have been ground but this is uncertain due to
recent battering.
Although the point is not in a primary areheologieal context, it
lends further support to a long period of occupation within the area.
This find and recent work in the De Cordova Bend Reservoir area,
particularly by Blaine, HalTis, Crook and Shiner (1969) point to the
presence of groups of Paleo-Indian peoples at the end of the Pleistocene. We now have to begin looking for sites where we can test to
see just what life was like for these central Texas Paleo-Indians.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Blaine, J. C., R. K. Harris, W. Crook, and J. L. Shiner
1969 The Aeton Site, Hood County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 39.
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, Texas
Granbury, Texas

