The Distribution and Character of Sites,
Arroyo Los Olmos,
Starr County, Texas
MILTON B. NEWTON, JR.

ABSTRACT
The characteristic morphology of Southwest Texas prehistoric sites
is examined in the area of Start County revealing a typical banded, or
gallery, arrangement. No particular point may be called a site, but
strips of occupancy follow the banks of streams--a band of campsite
debris lies near the stream and a zone of foraging lies some distance out
from the stream bank.
Surface collections and initial excavations suggest a slowly evolving
projectile point inventory. These points, along with associated choppers,
gouges, knives, and so forth, chronicle a history of at least 9,000 years
from Lerma times through the Falcon Focus (5000 B.c. to 500 A.D.)
to the Mier Focus (500 A.D. to 1750 A.D.). This entire period seems to be
marked by slow evolution of one form of Desert, or Archaic, Culture.

The prehistory of Southwest Texas is so rich in problems and interesting material that it is strange that it has attracted the attention of
so few archeologists. As a logical beginning some indication of the
distribution and eharacter of the sites, or in short, the settlement
geography of the area will be described. In reporting these observations, An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm, Krieger, & Jelks 1954: 134-43) will be used as a basis for descriptions.
The area discussed in this report is limited to the middle drainage
of the Arroyo Los Olmos, the name of whieh refers to the haekberry
(Celtis laevigata L., Uhnus family) which is characteristic of the
lower course. This stream joins the Rio Grande after following a
south-to-southeasterly route from Jim Hogg County across the middle
of Start County. It is near the village of E! Sauz that the Coahuiltecan
campsites described here are located. They occur along both sides of
the Arroyo Los Olmos about ten to fifteen miles north of Rio Grande
City, the county seat of Starr County (Fig. 1).
The landscape is dominated by mesquite and cactus which go under
the collective term "monte," "chaparral," or brush, but many other
plants fill in the cover. These include members of the Leguminosae
such as mesquite (Prosopis juliflora) and Texas ebony (Pithecolobium
fleicaule); members of the acacias such as retama (Parkinsonia
aculeata) and huisache (Acacia farnesiana) ; many Compositae; and
nmnerous Cacti.

SITES, STAlql:t COUNTY, TEXAS

19

FIGURE 1. The locations of sites involved in this study.
Although the Arroyo Los Olmos is intermittent, most of the time
water can be found either in pools or by digging into the sands of
the bed. The climate has been elassified as one marked by dryness
with steppe vegetation-called "mesquite savannah" (Suhm et al.
1954: 134)-with mild, dry winters, and hot summers. Under these
conditions life in prehistoric and early historic times was confined to
narrow bands along the stream. Several early Spanish ranches were
located along the Los Olmos in the same areas where most abundant
prehistoric remains are found. In addition, main lines of communication in both prehistoric and historic times followed the Los Olmos.
Additional physical features to be borne in mind when examining
prehistoric occupation along the Los Olmos are the charaeteristies of
the soils and the erosion working over these soils. There are, in general, two main layers of earth in most of these occupation areas. The
lower member is a stratum of at least several feet eonsisting of a
dense pink clay that is studded throughout by snail shells and nodules
of caliche.
Cason (1952) remarked on the cultural sterility of a similar clay
and on the difficulty of excavating it at Falcon Reservoir some 25
miles west of the Arroyo Los Olmos. It must be noted in passing,
however, that excavation connected with the present investigations

TEXAS

20

FIGURE

2. The lowering

of

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

artifacts to a common surface.

revealed cultural material lying upon the clay and slightly intruded
into it. These materials consisted of two Lerma points (one unfinished), choppers, gravers, knives, utilized flakes, and what probably should be called a hoe or grabber (chopper). Nevertheless, the
pink clay mentioned here and by Cason is, in general, culturally
sterile.
Immediately above the pink clay is a bed of gray-tan, clayey sand
of very fine texture which becomes comparatively hard and brittle
when undisturbed and exposed to the sun. When disturbed, however, it
is easily eroded. This fine sand is the culturally fertile zone. Significant
here, it also is the stratum most subject to both sheet and headward
erosion. In areas of active erosion the sand is quickly removed exposing wide expanses of clay littered with artifacts. These areas may
be mistaken for sites, but are in reality the debris of sites deriving
from the removal of the sand and the lowering of the artifacts to a
common surface (Fig. 2). The casual observer is likely to think that
he has come upon the site of an intensive or prolonged habitation.
The concentration upon a common surface of the artifacts from
what appears to be 9,000 years of human occupation has led to very
Iarge local collections which often run into the tens of thousands of
artifacts. The only value of such surface collections-aside from the

SITES~ STAI:~ COUNTY~ TEXAS

MIER

_roc us

F OC U S

9’1

m nA--A

.......

PANDORA ~ii: ::: :~

5000 ..............
?

EVOLUTION
OF TYPES
0

1

2

~!~i:;!

~)::P

2:%~!REFUGIO

-

ASOLOi;::~ :i:~i ~,~
~’ ~ili~i~]/],~t

:~ii~ ~

FIGURE 3. The evolution of local types, Starr County, Texas.
establishing the ranges of variation in the artifact types-lies in their
helping to determine the former location and orientation of a site.
The first human occupation of the "monte"-if indeed it was a
"monte" at that time-consisted of frequently shifting, generalized
food gatherers who manufactured the ubiquitous Lerrna point along
with a variety of similar generalized tools. (Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda
1964: 390, suggests with others that the Lerrna phase is primarily a
hunting culture). These people were followed by, or developed into,
the group defined as the Falcon Focus which was followed in turn by
the Mier Focus (Suhm et al. 1954: 136-138). However, the Falcon and
Mier foci may be the same culture at different stages.
It is here suggested that there was indeed an unbroken continuity
from Lerma to Start points (Fig. 3). This assumption is based on the
absence of any clear-cut break in tool types other than the few nonlocal types (Table 1) and on overall morphological similarity among
the characteristic points. This homogeneity was noted both in surface
collections and in limited excavations carried out at La Perdida Site
(Fig. 1) where two trenches showed overlapping sequences of LermaFalcon and Falcon-Mier foci. It is here suggested that since about
7000 ~.c. (Lerma C14 date of 7312--+500 ~.c.; MacNeish 1958:
194-99) until historic occupation by Spanish culture in 1749, there
was one basic lifeway developing in Southwest Texas. This con-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 1
Percentages of Selected Point Types
Falcon &
Earlier
LERMA
ABASOLO
TORTUGAS
PANDORA
REFUGIO
DESMUKE
MATAMOROS
CATAN
STARR
TOTAL LOCAL TYPES
NON-LOCAL TYPES

Mier &
Later

All Types
Together

70.00
18.18
5.45
93.63
6.36

9.05
12.32
31.98
5.30
5.30
2.18
12.01
3.1"2
.94
81.90
17.78

99.99~;

99.68%

10.92
14.88
38.61
6.40
6.40
2.64

79.85
20.15

100.00~
TOTAL SPECIMENS COUNTED
TOTAL MIER FOCUS & LATER
TOTAL FALCON FOCUS & EARLIER

641
110
531

tinuity is evidenced by the gradual shift in form through the following
types of projectile points: Lerma, Abasolo, Tortugas, Pandora, Refugio, Desmuke, Catan, Matamoros, and Start. These nine local types
make up the overwhelming bulk (81.9~) of collections in the area
and each single local type is represented by a strikingly larger portion
of the total than any non-local types (Table 1).
Because of the shifting of prehistoric inhabitants through their range
as the resources they desired varied, their cultural remains are to be
found at almost any site where erosion has not stripped such artifacts
away, but rather has exposed them to view. Apparently the considerations pertaining to camp location included:
1. proximity to water-generally the Arroyo Los Olmos
2. access to new crops of wild foods such as mesquite beans, cactus
pears and pads, yucca blooms and roots ("camotes"), and various
berries. (It must be bonae in mind that it is more economical to
move the camp to the food than to carry food any great distance
to the camp. )
3. likelihood of taking at least some game
4. availability of fish, crayfish, and mussel
5. the presence of suitable topographic situation (relief, cover, exposure, drainage, etc.)
The flexibility of these considerations, the demands of primitive conservation, and the scattering of bands in the area all operated to dis-

SITES, STAI:II:/ COUNTY, TEXAS

NO ARTIFACTS

FLOOD ZONE

CAMPSITE DEBRIS

9,3

FORAGING AREA

ARROW POINTS
DART POINTS
}
CHOPPERS
~-----I
KNIVES
SCRAPERS
,,,,.___[
~
"
BEADS
ABRAIDING STONES
GOUGES
SPALL PILES

i

ARROYO-

FIGUI~ 4. A generalized profile intersecting the Arroyo Los Olmos, Starr
County, Texas.

tribute sites more or less evenly over flats and small rises along both
banks of the Los Olmos.
At almost any point along the arroyo, either bank would exhibit a
profile much like that illustrated in Figure 4. First, in the immediate
vicinity of the stream, sharp erosion has cut below the culturally fertile
sand, through the sterile clay, and in some places down to a sandstone
bedrock. No artifacts are found in this thickly wooded flood zone of
the arroyo. This strip of "chaparral," frequently disturbed by floods,
varies in width from 10 to 100 yards.
Immediately back of the "ehaparral"-eovered bottom, evidence of
prehistoric occupation usually begins to appear in the "monte." This
second zone along the arroyo is usually a slightly eroded, plain-like
surface marked at intervals by low, indistinct hills. In the lightlyeroded areas and on the flanks of the hills appears the bulk of the undisturbed deposits which are being gradually exposed. At some places
such as the La Mulada and E1 Burrito Sites, wide clay flats intervene
between the wooded bottoms and the relatively undisturbed areas.
These relatively undisturbed areas of lightly eroded flats and hill
flanks are culturally fertile as are, of course, the areas of the fine graytan sand described above.

24

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Artifacts are concentrated in a band following the arroyo, and in
this area of sandy soil are to be found a group of artifacts which are
uncommon or nonexistent at greater distances from the stream. These
include stone and shell beads, abrading stones, gouges, and spall piles,
along with general camp refuse such as hearth stones, mussel shells,
and-rarely-bits of bone. Found primarily in this same band, but
diminishing sharply with distance from the stream, are knives, scrapers, and projectile points. Arrow points, dart points, and especially
choppers are widespread and may be found a great distance from any
hearth stones or other signs of camp life. Thus, we have two cultural
zones paralleling each bank of the Arroyo Los Olmos: nearer the
stream, an area of concentrated camping, gathering, and hunting
refuse, and farther back from the stream, an area of scattered hunting
and digging tools. There is no absolute difference in kind between the
materials of the two enltural zones, and the proportions blend into a
continuum.
In summary then, it must be kept in mind while considering the culture of Southwest Texas that this area was inhabited for a very long
period by a group or groups resembling the historic Coahuiltecans and
whose material culture evolved slowly as may be inferred from a
gradual proliferation of aa’tifact forms based on a few generalized
models. Further, the shifting exploitation of a broad spectrum of resources as dictated by this culture failed to establish campsites in
exactly the same geographic location upon every visit to an area. Instead, artifacts-the only evidence of former occupation with the possible exception of certain alterations of the "natural" vegetation-are
widely scattered along the An’royo Los Olmos in topographic situations
as generalized as the culture which was seeking these temporary homes.
REFERENCES CITED
Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis
1964 The Primitive Hunters in Robert Wauehope (General Editor), Robert
C. West (Volume Editor) Handbook of Middle American Indians, Vol.
I. University of Texas Press.
Cason, Joe F.
1952 Report on Archaeological Salvage in Falcon Reservoir, Season of 1952.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 218-259.
MaeNeish, R. S.
1958 Preliminary Areheologieal Investigation in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, n.s. VoI. 48,
Part 6.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Alex D. Krieger
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Ardaeologieal Society, Vol. 25.
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana

