An Unusual Hollow Reed
HA1WEY P, SMITH,

JR.

An interesting and unusual hollow reed was found in a small cave
during a recent survey of cave shelters in Brewster County, Texas (Fig.
1 ). Use of this type of native, jointed reed by the ancient cave dwellers of this region has been reported by many previous explorers. However, this particular artifact is rather unique.
It was found in a comparatively small cave which is approximately
3 feet wide and 3,~ feet high at the entrance, diminishing through a
depth of about 30 feet. An occupational deposit occurred 15 feet back
from the entrance in an irregular depression in the rock floor. A ~ inch
hard surface crust had to be broken and removed to expose the occupation stratum. A triangular flint knife, a polished bone awl, an unidentified bone tool, a short piece of twisted cordage, and a quantity
of bone fragments as well as the hollow reed shaft were recovered.
The reed shaft, which is 22 cm. long and 1.1 em. in diameter, consists of one section of hollow reed tube with closed joint sections at
both ends. It was unusual in the fact that it was fitted at one end with
a long, slender, hardwood, needle-like point. This hardwood point was
placed into the hollow reed in a perforation in the solid joint section.
The point extended into the reed approximately 4/5 inch and was
carefully fitted with the distal end to the interior. The projection of

FIGURE 1.

The hollow reed and needle-like point.

HOLLOW :REED

91

the proximal end of the point was partially concealed by an irregular
extension of the side walls of the reed beyond the joint. The opposite
end of the reed shaft also has an irregular projection of the side walls
of the tube beyond the joint section. These jagged projections may
imply that the hollow reed is a fragment of a longer original shaft.
The opposite end has a similar perforation of the same size through
the solid portion. The wood point appears to fit into this second perforation equally well. Nothing was found in the hollow portion of the
reed.
The hardwood point is 8.4 era. in length with a maximum diameter
of 0.5 era. Sharp cuts are appm’ent at the proximal end where the
piece was finished off to a blunt end. The distal end tapers to a very
sharp point.
When removed from the reed shaft, the hardwood point could be
reversed and refitted into the perforated joint, but it is slightly too
large at its proximal end for a proper fit.
Whether the hollow reed served only as a container for the wood
point or was part of a longer shaft is not known. However, the perforations of similar size in both joint ends seem to rule out the possibility of the reed having an original length much beyond the two
joints. The two joints have been smoothed by abrasion. Similar reeds
with smoothed joints have been reported in the Trans-Peeos by
Martin (1933).
It would have been possible for a wood point to have been placed
in each end of the reed judging by the similarity of the two joint section perforations. This would imply the possible use of the reed as a
carrying device or container for two such needle-like points. If it were
true that the reed shaft was used for carrying one or more wood
points, then the use of poison on the wood points would be plausible.
Otherwise, protection of the point pl~or to use would not have been
so necessary or important. Wood points which show evidence of clark
staining have been reported in the Trans-Pecos area (Martin 1933)
which may indicate possible use of poison by the early cave dwelling
people. These latter points were not found in relation to a reed or
other container. Other wood points, "fore shafts", and blunt wood
points previously referred to from this area appear to be considerably
larger and are designed for attachment to a reed shaft by inserting into
the hollow section (Cardner and Martin 1931).
The relatively small size of the wood point, fitted to an apparent
carrying device of hollow reed suggests the use of a poison dart technique by Trans-Pecos cave-dwellers.

99.

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Members of the survey party were Jimmy Zintgraff, Clarence Zintgraft, Don White, Ed. Smyth, Jimmey Smith, and the author.

REFERENCES CITED
Martin, George C.
1933 The Big Bend Basket Maker. Witte Memorial Museum Bulletin.
Gardner, Fletcher and George C. Martin
1931 A New Type of Atlatl from a Cave Shelter on the Rio Grande near
Shumla, Val Verde County, Texas. Witte Memorial Museum Bulletin
2.
San Antonio, Texas

