EXCAVATIONS AT LA VENTA, 19551
By

ROBERT F. HEIZER

Between February 1, and June 1, 1955, Philip Drucker of the
Smithsonian Institution and I, representing the University of
California, carried out extensive excavation at the Olmec site
of La Venta in northern Tabasco. The major financing was
provided by the National Geographic Society and to this organization must go the major credit for the party’s success. We
were assisted in the field by Sr. Eduardo Contreras of the Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Mexico, and Robert
J. Squier, graduate student from Berkeley.
Vaillant in 1932 first used the term "Ohnec" to refer to the
distinctive jaguar and baby-face carvings from the VeracruzTabasco gulf coast lowland region, but not until 1938 did serious
investigation start with the first of M. W. Stirling’s Geographic
Society-Smithsonian expeditions to the Olmec area when the site
of Tres Zapotes was dug. In 1940 and 1942 the La Venta site
was tested and ceramic stratipits were dug by Drucker in the
vicinity. In 1943 Stirling and Wedel cleared the site, dug along
the main centerline where they recovered many jade offerings
and monuments, and exposed, at a depth of fifteen feet below
the surface in a pit dug inside a stone-columned enclosure, a
large stone mosaic mask of the Olmec jaguar god. The 1940,
1942, and 1943 findings form the basis of Drucker’s monograph
on La Venta (Drucker, 1952). After the war Stirling and
Drucker exposed colossal heads and dug ceramic column tests
at a nearby Olmec site, San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan. These collections, which probably refer to the same period as the La Venta
site, will be analyzed and published by Robert Squier.
Slowly the picture of the distribution and development of
Olmec culture is becoming known. Sites attributable to this pattern were shown by Drucker’s 1953 survey to be restricted to
the Gulf coastal area from the Papaloapan River in the north to
1Notes, indicated by superscript numerals, are at the end of the article.
--ED.

0
o
J
<I:
{D
J
<I:
0
o

ToNALA

ii
0

¯ ~: ~!~ .~ ~: ~ :i~

:i~ ,~:~ ~ ~ ? 13

~¯ ! ¯ ~/~¸ ¸¸’ ¯/i

~:: ~¯i: ~; ¯; ~

Texas Archeological Society

the Tonal6 and Blasillo Rivers on the south (Fig. 12). Strong
cultural connections, usually distinguishable on the basis of the
distinctive art style in carved stone, occur as far south as E1
Salvador (Boggs, 1950) and Guatemala (Thompson, 1943).
Chalcatzingo in Morelos (Pifia Chan, 1955a) and Tlatilco near
Mexico City (Porter, 1953; Pifia Chan, 1952, 1955b) show such
strong Olmec influence that it has been suggested that these
may have been highland outposts or colonies2 One central fact
is also clear, and this is the non-Maya origin of Olmec culture.
Olmec is one of several major Mesoamerican cultures which presumably derive from one or more ancestral patterns. These
derived growths are in the main localized and the product of
essentially self-contained developments. Inter-influencing be-

COPYRIGHT NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

Fig. 13. Surface of Southwestern Platform with upper drift sand cleared
away to expose rectangle of basalt columns. Workmen at rear are working
surface drift sands.

tween regional culture types did occur, and it is these connections and relationships from which will ultimately be extracted
the key synchronisms so necessary for the establishment of a
sound comparative chronology of Mesoamerican cultures.
The Island of La Venta, which is formed by the main course
and sloughs of the Tonal6 River, comprises only 2.1 square
miles of dry surface land (see Fig. 24 in the following paper
by Squier). There are at least three separate mound groups on
the island, the largest of which is named for the island and
runs for about a half-mile in a north-south line on the top of a
clay and sand ridge. The central feature of the site is a rectangular truncated earth pyramid rising 103 feet high and measuring 450 by 330 feet at the base. To the south of the pyramid

COPYRIGHT NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

Fig. 14. Southwestern Platform showing upper brickwork and clay fill
overlying mosaic jaguar mask. Central wall is for stratigraphic control.

Texas Archeological Society

102

are a number of stone altars and monuments, and to the north
of the pyramid is a series of precisely positioned low mounds
and a stone column enclosed rectangular court measuring 135
by 187 feet. A barely perceptible mound whose perimeter just
touched the line of columns at the north edge of the Court
yielded, in 1942, a tomb structure made of stone columns used
like logs; and one of two 21 by 27 foot columned rectangles
sitting astride the southern line of the court yielded, in 1943,
a jaguar mosiac mask. As of 1955, none of the excavations at
La Venta had, with absolute certainty, reached the subsoil of
the site, and although it was determined that there were numerous sand and clay fill layers and flooring levels, no clear or com-

COPYRIGHT NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

Fig. 15.

Jaguar mask of dressed serpentine blocks.

Excaw~ons at La Venta, 1955

103

plete picture of internal stratigraphy or tying together of the
relative chronology of the major features of the site had been
accomplished. Our main tasks in 1955 were, therefore, to carry
out extensive stratigraphic excavations in order to trace the
constructional history of La Venta, to make an accurate map
survey of the whole site complex, and to add as much as possible
to the corpus of cultural data illustrating the activities of the
occupants of the site.
The 1955 digging started with the exploration of the second
21 by 27 foot stone columned rectangle (Fig. 13). The columns
were set around the edge of a sloping-sided unfired adobe brick
platform eight feet thick. Beneath this platform was a clay fill
seven feet thick resting upon the jaguar mosaic mask which
measured 15 feet square and was made of about 450 beautifully
dressed serpentine blocks (Figs. 14, 15, 16).~ Below the mask

COPYRIGHT NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

Fig. 16.
man’s head.

The mosaic mask cleared. Note base of brickwork at level of

104

Texas Archeological Society

was a feature which can be described but defies explanation. A
rectangular construction measuring 29 by 40 feet and 20 feet
thick, consisting of 28 layers of closely laid rough quarry blocks
of green serpentine set in clay mortar had been laid in as a base
for the mask (Fig. 17). The entire structure, from columns on
top to bottom layer of rough stone fill was built in a 40 by 50
foot pit dug to a depth of 35 feet. What is most remarkable
about this whole feature is that it was a one-shot job--once
begun it was carried straight through without interruption to
its conclusion.
Low fiat-topped platforms within the enclosure yielded a number of lots of well-executed jade objects and pottery. These, and
similar finds elsewhere in the site, we interpret as ritual offerings. One outstanding offering took the form of 16 small serpentine and jadeite figurines of purest Olmec style arranged
upright in such fashion as to strongly suggest the re-enactment
of some ritual ceremony (Fig. 22). Near the center of the court
we encountered a square pit 70 feet on a side which was dug to
a depth of over 25 feet from the surface. On the bottom of this
pit were six superimposed layers of closely fitted squared serpentine blocks covering an area 63 by 66 feet (Figs. 18, 19).
The cubic content of this single pit is over 60,000 cubic feet.
This extensive project again was a single-phase job which had
been carried straight through to its completion once it had
begun.
To the north of the deeply buried six-layer pavement-like
offering was a similar but smaller one measuring 44 by 16 feet
and consisting of a single layer of large well-dressed and closelyfitted serpentine blocks laid in a clay mortar.
The developmental history of the court area is divisible into
four building phases. To these we have assigned numbers: I,
earliest, to IV, latest. The evidence shows that each major construction phase began with the placing of one of the deeply
buried stone pavement-offerings. There is strongly suggested
by the fact of a major ritual marking the beginning of each
renovation, some regular periodicity, though whether these periods marked completion of calendric cycles is not known. Stela
C from Tres Zapotes which bears the date 291 B.C. (Spinden

Excavations at La Venta, 1955

105

correlation) is of Olmec authorship, but no clear evidence of
calendrical glyphs or numbers has been found at La Venta. The
La Venta site was laid out with great exactness with reference
to a centerline running now 8 degrees west of true north. It
seems possible that originally the centerline may have been
oriented to Polaris or true north and if so, this would indicate
some knowledge and application of simple astronomy. Thus the
common Mesoamerican features of pyramid-mound-plaza ceremonial center plan, erection of monumental stone carvings or
stelae, astronomically aligned site layouts and cyclical renovation of structures are present at La Venta.
The magnitude of the site itself, the massiveness of clay constructions such as the Ceremonial Court, mounds and pyramids,

COPYRIGHT NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

Fig. 17. Progress in excavating the 29-layer "foundation" of rough
quarry blocks of serpentine below the mosaic mask. This mask lay at level
marked by top of stratigraphic control wall running from front to back
in center of picture.

106

Texas Archeological Society

and the sheer bulk of imported stone columns, altars, stetae and
colossal heads undoubtedly required the labor of great numbers
of persons. The earlier proposal by Drucker that the island was
too small to support sufficient permanent population to build
the site is fully supported by the 1955 findings. For certain
constructions we have made calculations of probable time and
number of laborers involved, and these indicate labor forces of
several hundred persons working at long periods.
La Venta was a major ceremonial center which was built and
maintained for the several centuries of its life by labor recruiteo
from rancherias some distance away. The impressive size of the
site features, distant sources of the multi-ton stone columns and

COPYRIGHT NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

Fig. 18. Surface of six-layer serpentine block "pavement" offering in
center of Ceremonial Court, at depth of more than 20 feet below present
surface. Note batter of trench walls to prevent slumping.

Fig. 19. Dissection of six-layer
"pavement" offering’.
Fig. 20. One of the colossal
heads at the south end of the
great pyramid at La Venta.
Fig. 21. Sculpture of plumed
serpent with priest (?) sitting inside body curve holding in right
hand a bag (of copal?).
Fig. 22. The offering of 16 jade
and serpentine figurines found on
the edge of the Northeastern Offering Platform buried under the
floor of the Ceremonial Court.
Fig. 23. Offering of 56 jade
celts found along the centerline of
the site in the Ceremonial Court.
Photos copyright National Geographical Society

108

Texas Archeological Society

monuments, problems of logistics for a labor force involved in
such getting and making activities, and maintenance of the
center for several centuries argues forcefully for a smoothly
functioning class society with priests, who may have also been
temporal leaders, at the top, supported by the peasant population which contributed its energies in return for the benefits
received from the religion which functioned for the society as
a whole.

Eight radiocarbon dates for the La Venta site~ range from
3110 ÷ 300 to 2130 ÷ 300 years old. Phase I is dated by five
samples which have an average age of 2770 ÷ 134 years or
814 B.C. ÷ 134 years. Phase II is dated by a single sample at
804 B.C. There are no radiocarbon dates for Phases III and IV,
but two post-Phase IV dates average 2265 years old or 309 B.C.
From these last two dates we estimate the end of Phase IV at
somewhere between 450 and 325 B.C. The La Venta site, therefore, was built and used during the four centuries 800 to 400
B.C. As a group these radiocarbon dates form a homogeneous
block, and for this reason acquire a reliability which would no~
obtain if we had only one or two radiocarbon dates (Drucker,
Heizer and Squier, 1957). Accepting them as accurate, we may
note that the La Venta site fits into the Formative or Pre-Classic
period, and that the chronological position to which it is assigned
by Pifia Chan (1952, 1955a, 1955b) is correct. Further, Stela C
at Tres Zapotes, which bears a calendrical date read in the
Goodman-Martinez-Thompson scheme as 31 B.C., or 291 B.C.
in the Spinden correlation, can hardly now be said to be too
early, as Morley and Thompson have claimed (Morley, 1946,
pp. 40 ft. ; Thompson, 1941), but rather is too late, as Wauchope
anticipated (Wauchope, 1954, pp. 29-30; see also Drucker, 1952,
p. 208, and Coe, 1957). Stela C from Tres Zapotes is not firmly
associated with any stratigraphic level or ceramic horizon
(Drucker, 1943, p. 118; Stirling, 1940, p. 5) and its inscribed
date cannot by itself, therefore, date any part of the site.
The final report on the 1955 findings at La Venta is completed
and will appear as Bulletin No. 170 of the Bureau of );merican
Ethnology.

Excavations at La. Venta, 1955

109

NOTES
1. Paper re~t at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association, Santa
Monica, December 30, 1955. Published wlth permission of the National Geographic Society.
A popular account of the 1955 La Yenta expedition has been published (Drucker ~<nd
Helzer, 1956).
2. Opinions differ on this point. Pifia Chan (1955b, p. 106) has advanced the proposal
that the Olmec culture is of highland origin and that its home probably is in the area of
the junction of the states of Guerrero, Puebla and Morelos. The radiocarbon dates for the
La Venta site indicate this theory to be not necessarily correct. The lowland (VeracruzTabasco) sites of the Olmec culture do not look like secondary florescences but rather llke
local peak developments in the hearth area. That formative Olmec culture remains unknown
is a result of limited archeology and lack of data, but the indications are clear that the
culture is of lowland origin and development. Otmec traits at Chalcatzingo and Tlatilco
appear to be additions to local Pre-classic highland cultures and derived, presumably, from
local Olmec settlements or outposts (cf. Drucker, 1952, pp. 227-229).
3. The jaguar god is the strongest element in the Olmec art complex (Drucker, 1952, see
"Jaguar," pp. 252-253). Although Drucker (Ibld., p. 219) notes the absence of the plumed
serpent in Olmec art, the 1955 expedition to La Venta recovered a beautifully sculptured
monument showing this motif.
4. These dates were determined by the Memorial-Phoenix Project Radiocarbon Laboratory
at the University of Michigan. The National Geographic Society furnished the funds for
the dating. Dr. James B. Griffin acted as intermediary, and the actual dating was performed
under the direction of Dr. H. R. Crane.

REFERENCES CITED
Boggs, S.
1950. "Ohnec" Pictographs in the Las Victorias Group,
Chalchuapa Archaeological Zone, E1 Salvador. Carnegie
Inst. of Washington, Div. of Hist. Research, Notes on Middle American Archaeology and Ethnology, No. 99.
Coe, M. D.
1957. Cycle 7 Monuments in Middle America: a Reconsideration. American Anthropologist, Vol. 59, pp. 597-611.
Drucker, P.
1943. Ceramic Sequences at Tres Zapotes, Veracruz, Mexico. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bulletin 140.
1952. La Venta, Tabasco; a Study of Olmec Ceramics and
Art. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bulletin 153.
Drucker, P., and R. Heizer
1956. Gifts for the Jaguar God. National Geographic Magazine, Vol. 110, No. 3, pp. 366-375.
Drucker, P., R. F. Heizer and R. J. Squier
1957. Radiocarbon Dates from La Venta, Tabasco. Science,
VoI. 126, pp. 72-73.
Morley, S. G.
1946. The Ancient Maya. Stanford University Press, Palo
Alto, Calif.

ii0

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

Pifia Chan, R.
1952. Tlatilco y la Cultura Preclasica del Valle de M~xico.
Anales del Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia,
Vol. 4, pp. 34-43.
1955a. Chalcatzingo, Moretos. Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Informes No. 4. Mexico City.
1955b. Las Culturas Preclasicas de la Cuenca de M~xico.
Fondo de Cultura Economica, M~xico.
Porter, M.
1953. Tlatilco and the Pre-Classic Cultures of the New
World. Viking Fund Publs. in Anthropology, No. 19.
Stifling, M. W.
1940. An Initial Series from Tres Zapotes, Vera Cruz, Mexico. National Geographic Society, Contributed Technical
Papers, Mexican Archaeology Series, Vot. 1, No. 1.
Thompson, J. E. S.
1941. Dating of Certain Inscriptions of non-Maya Origin.
Carnegie Inst. of Washington, Div. of Hist. Research, Theoretical Approaches to Problems, No. 1.
1943. Some Sculptures from Southeastern Quetzaltenango,
Guatemala. Carnegie Inst. of Washington, Div. of Hist.
Research, Notes on Middle American Archaeology and Ethnology, No. 17.
Wauchope, R.
1954. Implications of Radiocarbon Dates from Middle and
South America. Tulane Univ., Middle American Research
Records, Vol. 2, No. 2.
Department of Anthropology,
University of California,
Berkeley, California

