The Paleo Type Flake Knife
J. B. SOLI-~ERCER
ABSTRACT
The absence of biface knives at early kill sites might be explained
in terms o£ practical economy of stone working. Bifaces, especially
fluted points, have extremely short useful lives as butchering tools because of the tendency to become dull in a short time. Logically, then,
the Paleo knife was the flake kni£e.

One problem that has bothered many of us is the apparent absence
of a type knife at Paleo elephant and bison kills. This has led some to
assume that fluted points were used for butchering tools. Others fail
to identify knives, but assume that they should have been present.
Aside from perishable artifacts about which we know next to
nothing, two tools must have been indispensable to the Paleo Indian
hunter. One of these is apparatus with which the animal was killed
and the other is the device with which the carcass was butchered.
Hide scraping tools, however important, m’e not as essential as the
weapon and the knife.
Since only stone and bone artifacts survive at butchering/kill sites,
there is no positive proof as to identification of knives. A certain
amount of experience and experiment, however, permits the application of some logic to the problem.
First, it is absolutely impractical to make fluted points, Folsom or
Clovis, for use as knives. Anyone who has done extensive research in
flint working must admit that the difficulties in producing a Folsom
point are substantial (Crabtree 1966). A large amount of time and
labor is involved. Numerous experiments in grinding or smoothing
basal and lateral edges have shown me that sharp edges can be completely dulled in less than 60 seconds. Thirty or 40 strokes, rubbing the
edge through sandy clay, will produce a "typical" gn’ound edge. It is
my belief that thick-skinned, haiDz animals that wallow would have
large amounts of abrasive dirt on their hides. The biface fluted point
would be quickly dulled and could be sharpened only by considerable
effort. A few resharpenings and the tool would be used up. Certainly,
the labor required in producing a fluted point would not be wasted
on usage that would consume the tool in a few minutes. Fluting appears to be solely designed to reduce the bulk for hafting. Channel
flakes are obviously too small and fragile to be used as knives.
If, then, the fluted biface is impractical, what was the knife type?
It has been common practice to classify flakes with beveled edges or

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ends as scrapers. A fresh flake with a thin edge is sharp, but dulls
quickly. However, it can be produced easily. A thin edge can be
straightened and strengthened by beveling (shearing or raking).
When it becomes dull, it is easily resharpened. When it wears out,
there is no loss of an investment of time and labor. When the edge
becomes too thick for cutting, the tool can be retained as a readymade scraper, if needed.
To classify all beveled edged flakes as scrapers is unwarranted and
suggests that man killed bison and mammoth, scraped the hides, but
did not butcher. On the contrary, I suggest that the thin edged flakes
with beveling are the real Paleo knives. They can be produced easily
and economically and they can be resharpened. Fluted bifaces require
a large expenditure of effort to produce and would dull quickly.
REFERENCES CITED
Crabtree, Don E.
1966 A Stoneworker’s Approach to Analyzing and Replicating The Lindenmeier Folsum. Tebiwa, The Journal of the Idaho State University Museum. Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 3-9.
Dallas, Texas

