The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir,
Rains County, Texas1
LATHEL F.

DUFFIELD

Introduction
ABOUT 50 miles east of Dallas, Texas, on the Sabine River is the site
of Iron Bridge Dam and Reservoir, now under construction by the
Sabine River Authority. This, the first dam on the main stream of the
Sabine, will flood lands located in Hunt, Rains, and Van Zandt counties, Texas. Its primary purpose is to provide a supplementary water
supply for Dallas and other nearby cities.
A preliminary archeological survey of the Iron Bridge area was
carried out in April, 1957, by the National Park Service (Johnson,
1957). Of the 22 sites located during the survey, 10 appear to be
Archaic or non-ceramic sites and 10 are ceramic sites. The nature of
the other two sites has not been determined. In his report of the survey, Johnson (1957) recommended that four of the sites be excavated
or extensively tested.
Under a co6perative agreement with the National Park Service, a
field party of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project was sent to
Iron Bridge early in August, 1958, to begin the recommended salvage
excavations. Three sites, all situated on the east bank of Hooker Creek
near its mouth, were selected for investigation. These are the Limerick
Site (41RA8), a small but relatively rich ceramic site of the prehistoric
period; the Harkey Site (41RAIl), also a small prehistoric ceramic
site; and the Pearson Site (41RA5), thought to be the location of a vili The archeological investigation of the Limerick Site was carried out by the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project as a coSperative project of the National~Park
Service and The University of Texas. The following report was accepted by the
National Park Service in September, 1959, in partial fulfillment of the terms of
Contract No. 14-10-333-422 between The University of Texas and the National
Park Service.

~2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

lage of Tawakoni and Yscanis Indians mentioned in 18th century
Spanish documents (Johnson and Jelks, 1958).
Brief testing at the Harkey Site produced practically no cultural
material; consequently, it was decided that intensive excavation of
the site was unwarranted. An attempt to sink test pits at the Pearson
Site proved impractical since the black gumbo soil there was dry, extremely compact, and virtually impenetrable at that season of the
year. Therefore, excavation of the Pearson Site was rescheduled for
the fall of 1959 when field conditions should be at an optimum.
With the Harkey and Pearson Sites eliminated from consideration,
the full season at Iron Bridge--from August 4 to September 1--was
devoted to work at the Limerick Site. The site was not completely excavated, but a number of squares and short trenches were dug in the
four major areas of concentrated cultural material, and it is believed
that a representative sample of archeological data was obtained for
the site as a whole. The excavations were supervised in the field by the
writer under the general direction of Edward B. Jelks.
The following report describes the Limerick Site, the extent of the
excavations, the artifacts recovered, and the provenience of the
artifacts. Analysis of the data has revealed that the site was occupied
over a considerable period of time, first by pre-ceramic peoples of the
Archaic Stage and later by a Neo-American culture closely related to
the Sanders Focus.

Acknowledgments
From its inception to the final report, this investigation has been
aided by the coSperation of many individuals and organizations. While
it is impossible to give specific acknowledgment to all, their coSperation and participation are greatly appreciated. For those who more
frequently were burdened with the problems which constantly arose,
special mention is due.
The assistance of various officials of the Sabine Biver Authority was
invaluable. They granted permission to dig on land under their jurisdiction, gave access to aerial photographs and maps of the area, and
did many favors, both large and small, for which they receive my
deepest appreciation. Members of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project gave much time, service, and advice to the study. Chief among
these was Edward B. Jelks, in charge of the project, whose aid in the
way of suggestions, discussions and encouragement in all phases of
the study has been especially helpful. Lel~oy Johnson, Jr., provided unpublished information regarding related sites in the Iron Bridge area

LIMERICK SITE

53

that has been of great value. My thanks also extend to William A.
Davis, field foreman, whose supervisory ability and technical skill
contributed substantially to the successful completion of the dig.

PreviOus IVork in the Area
The absence of published material on the archeology of the area
immediately surrounding the Iron Bridge Reservoir does not reflect a
lack of previous excavations in the area. The Yarbrough Site, located
near Grand Saline, about twenty miles southeast of the Limerick Site,
was completely excavated by a University of Texas-Works Progress
Administration crew in 1940, but no report of this work has been
published. This site yielded a large sample of artifacts which are very
similar to those from the Limerick Site (LeRoy Johnson, Jr., personal
communication}.
Major excavations to the north and west of the Iron Bridge Reservoir
have been published. Krieger (1946) defined the Henrietta Focus,
with the type site, the M. D. Harrell Site, in Young County approximately 160 miles to the west of the Iron Bridge area. In the same publication he described the Sanders Focus, with the type site, the r. M.
Sanders Site, located in Lamar County, about 65 miles to the north
of the Limerick Site. Bell (1958a) reported the Boat Dock Site in Marshall County, Oklahoma, northwest of the reservoir. Stephenson
(1952) defined the Wylie Focus with sites located in Collin, Rockwall,
and Kaufman counties immediately to the west of the Limerick Site,
while Crook and Harris (1952, 1954) defined the Carrolhon and Elam
loci, sites of which are located primarily along the upper Trinity
I~iver in Dallas County. Suhm, Krieger and/[elks (1954: 74-98) presented a summary of the general area.
Major reports of work to the east of the reservoir area have been
published. Krieger (1946) discussed pottery found in various East
Texas foci of the Gibson and Fulton Aspects. Newell and Krieger
(i 949) reported on the Davis mound of the Gibson Aspect in Cherokee
County to the southeast of Iron Bridge Reservoir. Tentative identification of an East Texas Aspect of the Archaic Stage was published by
Suhm, Krieger, and/[elks (1954:148-151 ).

Environment
Cowleach Fork and Cedar Creek, with their headwaters respectively
in Collin and Fannin Counties, Texas, join in Hunt County to form

54

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Sabine River. Hooker Creek, on which the Limerick Site is located, empties into the Sabine in Rains County. The Sabine from its
origin flows in a wide arc across eastern Texas and eventually empties
into the Gulf of Mexico. The waters begin their flow in a southeasterly
direction, then gradually trend toward a more southerly direction as
they progress downstream. From the southeast corner of Panola
County, Texas, to its mouth the Sabine forms the boundary between
Texas and Louisiana, and from Panola County to the Gulf of Mexico
its course is generally southward Along its headwaters, where the
Iron Bridge Reservoir is under construction, the Sabine is a small
stream with a broad floodplain composed for the most part of arable,
black gumbo soil. Gullies of various sizes dissect the land. and aerial
photographs of the area show scars left by gullies which were incised
in the floodplain and later filled by alluviation. At the outer edge of
the floodplain the ground rises slowly to form !ow, rolling hills which
provide a border for the floodplain and create the characteristic upland
topography of the area.
The Iron Bridge region is included in the West Gulf Coastal Plain
physiographic province of Fenneman (1938) and in the Gulf Coastal
Plain of Atwood (1940). In general, the Gulf Coastal Plain is characterized by Atwood as follows:
Low ridges parallel the coast line in Alabama, Mississippi and Texas,
and each ridge is bordered on the landward side by a lowland belt. (Atwood, 1940: 25)

The Limerick Site lies just within the eastern edge of the Black
Prairie district, one of the lowland belts which is bordered on the
southeast by the Nacogdoches Escarpment and on the northwest by
the White Rock Escarpment (Fermeman, 1938: Fig. 27).
The rolling hills bordering the floodplains of Hooker Creek and the
Sabine River are covered with prairie grasses and, in some areas, deciduous trees. The grasses and trees are characteristic of the Texan
Biotic Province of Dice (1943: 24"1. within which the Limerick Site is
located. Dice describes the Texan Biotic Province as follows:
Gently rolling plains are characteristic of all the Texan. Forests of oak and
hickory often grow on sandy soils here, whereas the heavier soils are
usually covered by prairie.
The prairies of the Texan province are dominated by various grasses

. .

Perennial flowering plants are also abundant. The trees of the province
are chiefly oaks and hickories of which the most important are post oak

55

LIMERICK SITE

(Quercus stellata), black jack oak (Q. marilandica), and Texas hickory
( Carya buckleyi).
The winters are short and relatively mild, the summers, long and hot. The
precipitation is considerable and falls mostly during the !ong growing
season (Dice, 1943: 24).

The geology in the vicinity of the Limerick Site is complicated by
the fact that there are two outcrops of the Midway group in that part
of Rains County. One outcrop, the Kincaid formation, underlies the
second, the Wills Point formation (Sellards, Adkins, and Plummer
(1932: 532, Fig. 32). According to Sellards, Adkins, and Plummer
( 1932: 546) the soils of the Kincaid formation are
¯ . . yellowish green at the base and grade upward into black at the surface .... They are yellower, darker, and more calcareous than the Wills
Point .... Small black nodules streaked with gray lines characterize certain parts of the Kincaid beds and do not occur in adjacent beds.

Concerning the Wills Point formation they state,
The soils of the Wills Point formation are lighter in color, more silty,
much less calcareous, and less colloidal than those of the Kincaid . . . outcrops. (Sellards, Adkins, Plummer, 1932: 564.)
The profile data from the Limerick Site indicate that the soil in the
upper areas was a dark gray, sandy soil which overlay a light gray
sandy soil. The latter was mottled with light gray and/or whitish sand.
Generally, a sandy clay, yellowish in color and containing small dark
orangish and gray nodules, underlay the grayish soils.
A comparison of the characteristic soils of the Kincaid formation
and Wills Point formation with soil profile data from the Limerick
Site suggests that the site is probably situated on the Kincaid formation of the Lower Eocene. This identification is tentative and a detailed analysis of the soils in the vicinity would be required for positive
identification of the formation.

Description o/the Site
The Limerick Site is located on the floodplain of Hooker Creek,
about 2.5 miles above its point of juncture with the Sabine River and
about 8.5 miles south of the town of Lone Oak, Texas (Fig. 1 ). The site
was named for the landowner, Mrs. Adine Limerick. Formerly trees
characteristic of the bottom lands grew on the site, but in the 1920’s

56

TEXANS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the land was cleared and put into cultivation except for a small area
consisting of two small knolls connected by a low saddle. In 1955,
the trees on the knolls were cleared and the entire field was used for
farming.
IRON BRIDGE

COUNTY

COUNTY
~L~

Fig. 1. Iron Bridge Reservoir. The Limerick site is designated 4 1 RA8.

The site is large, and cultural debris is found on the surface over
an area of approximately 75 acres on and around the knolls. There
are, however, several distinct locations within the site where the cultural materials are concentrated. These areas of concentration constitute a distinctive feature of the site.
The two main areas of concentration are on the two adjacent knolls.
The knolls are in the form of slightly irregular ovals with gradually
sloping sides. In the fields surrounding these knolls are many grayish
or tan-brown sandy spots, irregular in shape and size, which contrast
distinctly with the surrounding black gumbo soil of the floodplain.
Cultural debris is concentrated in and on these sandy areas, but the
black gumbo soil between the sandy spots is virtually devoid of
cultural remains.
Since the cultural materials were concentrated in areas and had a
discontinuous distribution, various portions of the site were given
letter designations. Thus A and B were assigned to the two knolls, and
C and D were assigned to two of the larger sandy areas located to the
southwest of the knolls (Fig. 2). All of the test excavations at the
Limerick Site were carried out in those four areas.

57

LIMERICK SITE

©

©

j~

13
0

O

%

0

%
0

._o

C~

w

o

¯

9
°-

c,i
~r

58

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Soil profiles of the site reveal a superficial zone of gray, humusstained sand overlying a zone of yellowish, sandy clay. The top few
inches of the sand member has been disturbed by plowing. In the
lower part of the humus zone the soil tends to be mixed with clay from
the underlying zone and is relatively compact. The clay member is
very compact and contains many small, dark, orangish nodules. The
black gumbo was encountered occasionally below the surface at the
edges of the areas of occupation. Occupational debris tended to be in
the plow and humus zones, but was generally absent in the clay and
gumbo soils.

Excavation and Recording Methods
A grid system using a basic unit of five-foot squares was superimposed on the site. In order to keep the major part of the site within
the western half of the grid, a zero line or base line, oriented on magnetic north and south, was laid out on the east side of the site. An
arbitrary datum point on this line was designated as the north zero
west zero (N0-W0) point. All stakes were numbered with a north or
south designation expressed as the direction and distance (in feet)
from the zero stake. For example: a point 150 feet north of the
N0-W0 stake and 25 feet west of the north-south base line was designated as N150-W25. Test squares were labeled with the co6rdinates
of the stake located at the southeast corner of the square. All elevations were related to the N0-W0 datum point, which was given an
arbitrary elevation of 100.0 feet at the top of the stake.
Areas A, B, C, and D were tested by sinking five-foot squares
spaced at varying intervals. Profiles were recorded at each square
excavated and these were later combined to obtain an overall profile.
In recording profiles, the elevation at the ground level of the stakes
involved was used in plotting the surface contour on the profile sheet
and this line served as a reference line.
In order to gain quick comprehension of the subsurface structure
of the site as a whole, a post hole digger was used to determine soil
stratigraphy. Surface elevation and profile data were recorded for
each hole excavated in this manner. Use of the post hole data enabled
the profiles to be extended horizontally as well as vertically and also
helped in locating areas where there seemed to be the greatest chance
for cultural stratigraphy.
In order to obtain a representative sample of materials from the
site, a series of exploratory five-foot squares was dug in each of the

LIMERICK SITE

59

tested areas, no extensive trenching being attempted. When a test pit
indicated that possible features might lie in an adjoining square, it
was excavated also. If the material found in a test pit suggested that it
was in an area of concentration, adjoining squares were opened. Test
pits were excavated either to the underlying sandy subsoil or to soil
which was sterile of cultural remains. Since the testing in Area B
promised to provide the best stratigraphic sequence at the site, the
majority of the work was conducted in that area,
Generally, excavations were by six-inch levels; however, in some
cases three-inch levels were used in order to gain a closer stratigraphic
control. Occasionally levels of less than six inches were used when the
bottom level of the soil containing cultural debris rested on extra hard
sterile clay. The topmost level, from ground surface to one-half foot
below the ground surface, was designated as level one; from one-half
foot to one foot below ground surface, level two, etc.
Excavations were carried out by a crew of six men including the
field archeologist. All dirt was shoveled from the test pits onto a halfinch mesh screen. The dirt was sifted and the cultural debris removed
and sacked. On each sack were recorded the site number and name,
square designation, level number, distance below the surface, date,
and excavations. In addition to the artifact provenience, field data
were recorded in the form of photographic records, daily log, site
journal, square and level reports, profiles, contour maps, and maps
showing areas of excavation. The excavations carried out in each of
the areas are described in detail in the following sections.

Arti[act Description
A total of 853 artifacts was recovered from the excavations at the
Limerick Site. Sherds comprise slightly more than half of this total
and chipped stone specimens make up the rest. Most of the specimens
were concentrated in Areas A and B where nearly all the sherds
were found.
The specimens were first sorted according to the areas in which
they were found. They then were divided into two classes--chipped
stone and ceramic. These classes were further subdivided into groups
--projectile points, scrapers, knives, drills, etc.--and in many cases
these groups were further subdivided into still smaller categories.
After the final sorting into sma!l groups--each group containing only
those specimens which closely resembled one another in form indi-

6o

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

vidual groups were identified with previously defined types wherever
possible.
After the division of the specimens into classes, the criteria progressively became more arbitrary with each further subdivision. As a
result, if other investigators should classify the same material separately by this system, the end groups would probably be somewhat
different from those resulting from the present analysis. This approach to classification of artifacts from a site attempts to minimize
the use of previously established type descriptions in the initial sorting. There are several interrelated reasons for this.
(1) An analysis based on published descriptions assumes that the
types are valid, an assumption which is not always well founded.
Many types have been established, published, and later revised or
completely dropped. As a result, the validity of any analysis based on
~reconceived types would be dependent upon the continued acceptance of those types.
(2) An overdependence on previously established types in the
initial sorting may result in an initial "pigeonholing" of a group of
artifacts which actually has significant variations of form within the
group; in such a case the variations might not be recognized because
the typological classification used was based on other criteria.
(3) Since the Archaic Stage in East Texas has only been tentatively defined, specific artifact forms associated with the stage are
vaguely known. Rather than impose a preconceived typology on an
undefined culture complex, it was considered better methodology to
sort the artifacts into small groups of closely related specimens, and to
avoid typological assignment of any such group unless it conformed
in detail to published definitions of a recognized type.
One artifact "type" which had been affected by "pigeonholing"
analysis is the Gary dart point. Recently Gary has been redefined on
the basis of variations within the group, and sub-groups or varieties
have been described by several investigators. Baerreis, Freeman, and
Wright (1958) have divided Gary points from sites in Oklahoma into
three varieties, Gary A, B, and C, and have demonstrated that these
varieties indicate temporal changes within the type. Ford and Webb
(1956: 59_,-53) in refining the Gary classification, classified Gary
points from the Poverty Point Site as Gary Typical, Gary Small,
Gary Large, and Gary Long. A special study made by Webb using
length as a criterion, suggested that Gary points in Louisiana decrease
in size from early to late archeological horizons (Ford and Webb,
1956: 53-54).

LIMERICK

SITE

6i

PROJECTILE POINTS

On the basis of size and manufacturing techniques, projectile points
recovered in the excavations at the Limerick Site were divided into
two groups--dart points and arrow points. The dart points, which are
generally larger than the arrow points, were made primarily by
percussion chipping or by a combination of percussion and pressure
techniques. The arrow points were made by pressure chipping. The
usual practice in making arrow points was to shape them from small
thin flakes, while dart points were manufactured predominantly from
thicker flakes or small cores.
Using these criteria as a basis, the points were divided into the two
groups~ using only those specimens which were whole or complete
enough to enable them to be further subdivided. A total of 152 specimens was placed in the dart point group, while 80 specimens were
classified as arrow points. For the most part, only those artifacts found
during the excavation are included in the analysis, since those recovered by the initial survey were not designated according to the area of
the site in which they were found.
Each group was then further subdivided on the basis of similarity
of base, stem, and/or blade forms. Since only a small number of the
points fit well into previously defined typological categories, the
points will be described in the following pages on the basis of shape
and will be given letter and number designations for convenience in
reference. For dart points, the letter "D" is assigned and for arrow
points, the letter "A" is used. When a shape is the same as that of an
established type, this will be noted. The term "shape" is used to
describe an empirical grouping based on the overall appearance and
dimensions of the points. Groupings of this nature are intended to be
purely descriptive categories and are not on the same level as types.
Dart Points

Dart points were first classified by stem shape. The majority have
contracting stems characteristic, in a general way, of the Gary type.
This group, however, lacks internal consistency, and clusters of points
with consistent, distinctive features could be segregated within this
general category. These clusters were described as individual subgroups of the general Gary tradition.
The criteria used in segregating the subgroups were based on
similarities of (1) the point as a whole, (2) similarity of the component parts and (3) their relationships. Characteristics of the point

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

as a whole include overall shape, size, workmanship, etc., while the
component parts and their relationships include the shapes of the
edges of the blade, shape of base and stem, and the proportions and
dimensions of various parts of the point.
Of the 28 categories of dart points, five were assigned previously
defined type names, while the others were designated by the letter
"D" followed by a number designation for each separate category. For
the first 15 categories the letter "D" is preceded by "Gary", indicating
that each of the categories fits into the Gary tradition. The following
dart point forms are included as part of the Gary series.

Gary D1 (Fig. 3), 62 specimens, from all areas of the site.
LeRoy Johnson, Jr., when conducting the site survey of the Iron
Bridge Reservoir. recognized this form as being a distinctive one and
described it as follows:

This type includes points similar to the Gary type except that they are
much smaller than allowed in the definition of Gary points by Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks (less than 4 centimeters m length), yet are too thick
and heavy to be considered arrow points. These artifacts likewise resemble
Wells points strongly in that the stem is often half the length of the entire point. Here again, however, these points fall below the defined length
range for Wells points (Johnson, 1957: 7).

The average point of this shape is about 3.2 cm. long, 1.7 cm. wide.
and has a stem length of 1.2 cm. The length may vary from about 1.9
to 5.0 cm., while the maximum width at the shoulders ranges from
1.2 to 2.3 cm. Stem length varies from .8 to 1.7 cm. Generally this
form has well defined shoulders and a tapering stem characteristic of
the Gary type. Some have tapering stems which terminate in a flat
base, others have somewhat bulb-shaped stems with a slightly rounded
base, while others have tapering stems with pointed bases. It is not
known whether these variations in the base and stem are culturally
significant or merely a result of minor variations in the stone and/or
workmanship. Similar forms were found in Wylie Focus sites (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, A, second and third from the left) and at the
Boat Dock Site in Marshall County, Oklahoma (Bell, 1958a: P1. 1 t. E).
The proportions of these points are different from the Gary Small
group as illustrated in the Poverty Point report (Ford and ~¥ebb,
1956: Fig. 17, n, o, p).

Fig. 3. Gary D1 dart points from the Limerick site.

64

TEXANS A!RCI-IEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Gary D2 (Fig. 4, A-E). 11 specimens, from Areas A, B, and C.
This Gary form has a triangular blade with edges that are generally
straight but may be concave or convex. The stem contracts to a
rounded or, occasionally, a pointed base. The shoulders are prominent.
The dimensions of this form vary considerably--the length ranging
from 3.9 to 5.5 cm., the width varying from 2.1 to 3.4 cm., and the
stem length measuring from .9 to 1.7 cm. The majority have stems
which are about 1.35 cm. long. This form appears to be the same as
Gary variant A of Baerreis, Freeman and Wright (1958); however,
the Limerick Site specimens are generally smaller than the ones
reported from Oklahoma. Specimens of this form have been found in
the Addicks Basin about 20 miles west of Houston (Wheat, 1953:

pl. 36, j).
Gary D3 (Fig. 4, F-H). 10 specimens, from Areas B and C.
The stem on this form, which is broader than that of Gary D2,
tapers gradually to a roundedbase. Pointed bases do not occur in this
form. The shoulders are usually slight but distinct, although on some
specimens the shoulders merge with the stem. The blade is triangular
with more or less straight edges. The length of the Gary D3 points is
between 4.3 and 4.7 cm. with the width of the majority ranging from
1.8 to 2.2 cm. The length of the stem varies from 1.2 to 1.7 cm. While
this form resembles the Gary B variant of Baerreis, Freeman and
Wright (1958), it is generally smaller than those defined as Gary B.
Similar points have been found in Wylie Focus sites (Stephenson,
1952; Fig: 95, A, fifth from left), in the Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1953:
P1. 36, b, f, g,) and at the Boat Dock Site (Bell, 1958a: PI. 11, F).
Gary D4 (Fig. 4, I-J). 6 specimens, from Areas A and C.
These points have triangular blades with straight to slightly convex
edges; the bases are rounded to pointed and the stems are relatively
broad and short (average length 1.5 cm.) on all except two of the
specimens. The pointed bases occur on those specimens which have
the narrow stems. This group as a whole seems to be consistent on
the basis of size (overall length ranges from 4.1 to 5 cm., and the
average width is 5 cm.) and crude chipping techniques. They resemble points found at Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1955: P1. 56, a, c, k, 1,
m) and at the Boat Dock Site (Bell, 1958a: P1. i 1, A).
Gary D5 (Fig. 5, A-B). 15 specimens~ from all areas.
This form is distinctive, although there is considerable variation
within the sample. In general, the entire point is an elongated oval

LIMERICK SITE

Fi9. 4. Gary dar~ forms from the Limerick site. D2: A-E; D3: F-H; D4: ~-J.

65

66

TEXA,S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

shape with an average length of 4.0 am. Some of the specimens are
widened in the shoulder area. creating a lozenge shape. The average
width of this form at the shoulders is 2.2 am. The stems are tapering
and are not distinctly differentiated from the blades except on those
specimens with widened shoulder areas. On this form the stem tapers
sharply and terminates in a rounded base, which is also one of the
characteristics of the form. Gary D5 resembles in general shape, but
definitely not in size. the Gary C variety as defined by Baerreis.
Freeman and Wright (1958: 69). It also has certain characteristics in
common with the Desmuke point (Suhm, Krieger. and Jelks, 1954:
416) but differs from Desmuke in that the edges of the blade are
commonly convex rather than straight and the blade is never beveled.

Gary D6 (Fig. 5, C-D). 7 specimens, all from Area C.
This form includes a series of small (2.8 to 3.7 cm. long) dart
points with triangular blades and well-defined shoulders, The stem
varies from a narrow, slightly tapering shape to one having parallel
sides. The base is straight, slightly rounded, or convex. These may be
variations of the small Gary Di form, but they have narrower stems.
This form is similar to the Wells type (Suhm, Krieger, and :[elks.
1954: 488) but is much smaller. Similar points have been found at the
Whelan Site in Marion County, Texas (Davis, 1958: P1. III, A,

29,20).
Gary D7 (Fig. 5, E). 2 specimens, both from Area C.
Gary D7 closely resembles Gary D6 except that this form has
barbed shoulders, These points are about 3.3 cm. long and 2.3 cm.
wide.
Gary D8 (Fig. 5, F). 3 specimens, all from Area B.
The Gary D8 form has a long, tapering stem which terminates in
a pointed base, and has well-defined shoulders on a basically triangular blade. The one complete specimen is 4.1 cm. long, 2.3 cm.
wide and has a stem length of 1.6 cm. The general shape is the same
as that of points associated with Wylie Focus sites to the west of the
Iron Bridge Reservoir (Stephenson. 1952: Fig. 95, A, second from
right and first from left).
Gary D9 (Fig. 5, G). 3 specimens, all from Area A.
These points have relatively long, narrow blades and slightly protruding shoulders. Overall length ranges from 4.8 to 5.0 cm. and the

LIMERICK SITE

Fig. 5. Gary dart point forms from the Limerick site.

67

Gary DS: A-B; Gary D6: C-D;

Gary D7: E; Gary D8: F; Gary Dg: G; Gary D10: H; Gary Dl1: I; Gary D12: J; Gary"
D13: K; Gary D14: L; Gary D15: M.

68

TEXA,S

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

width varies from 1.7 to 1.9 cm. The long, narrow stem tapers slightly
and terminates in a round or straight base.
Gary DIO (Fig. 5, H). 1 specimen, from Area A.
An asymmetrically shaped blade and a long stem give this point a
distinctive appearance. The shoulders are prominent (2.7 cm. wide)
and the base is rounded. This point resembles Gary D6 and Gary D7,
differing from them in the relatively long stem (1.9 cm.), the total
length (5.9 cm. ), and the long, asymmetrical blade.
Gary Dll (Fig. 5, I). 1 specimen, from Area B.
The short, stubby blade of this specimen suggests that it may be a
reworked Gary. Only one shoulder is present, and the width in the
shoulder area is 2.4 cm. The tapering stem, which terminates in a
convex base, is much longer than the blade, comprising about twothirds of the length of the entire point. The total length of the point is
3.1 cm.
Gary DI2 (Fig. 5, J). 1 specimen from Area B.
This form has a short, pointed stem and recurved edges on the
blade. The point is 4.0 cm. long and the prominent shoulders are 2.2
cm. wide.
Gary D13 (Fig. 5, K). 1 specimen, from Area C.
The narrow, slightly tapering stem of this specimen terminates in
a rounded base. The prominent shoulders (2,8 cm. wide) are slightly
barbed. Most of the blade is missing, but the remaining portion suggests the original blade was triangular with straight edges.
Gary D14 (Fig. 5, L). 1 specimen, from Area C.
This point, which features a tapering stem and rounded base, appears to be a reworked Gary. The well defined shoulders measure
1.8 cm. across. The total length of the point is 4.2 cm. This specimen
may have been used as a drill.
Gary D15 (Fig. 5, M). 1 specimen, from Area C.
This point has a crudely chipped, irregular shaped blade. The edges
of the blade grade imperceptibly into a tapering stem, no definite
shoulders being present. The length of the point is 5.2 cm. and the
width is 2.1 cm. The base on this form is slightly pointed.
The following dart point forms are either unstemmed or have stems
which differ from the Gary contracting stem series.

LIMERICt~ SITE

69

D16 (Fig. 6, A). 1 specimen, from Area A.
This point, 4.4 cm. long and 1.4 cm. wide, has a long, narrow blade
with straight edges. The stem is undifferentiated from the blade on one
lateral edge of the point, and on the other edge a small notch located
a short distance above the rounded base sets the stem area apart from
the blade. The base is rounded. The point, in some characteristics, resembles the form defined as Palmillas (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks,
1954: P1. !10).
D17 (Fig. 6, B). 1 specimen, from Area A.
This form is triangular with slightly convex sides and a straight
base. It is 4.3 cm. long and the maximum width is 2.6 cm. This specimen could possibly be classified as a triangular knife.
D18 (Fig. 6, C). 1 specimen, from Area A.
The surviving portion of this fragmentary specimen suggests that
it had a triangular blade with straight edges. The prominent shoulders are 5.1 cm. wide and have very slight barbs. The stem expands
and the base is slightly rounded.
Di9 (Fig. 6, D). 1 specimen, from Area A.
This relatively long point (6.5 cm.) has one straight and one slightly
convex side. The shoulders, while well defined, are 2.3 cm. wide--only
slightly wider than the stem, which expands slightly. The base is convex. Similar points have been reported from the Boat Dock Site (Bell,
1958a: P1. 11, H-J).
D20 (Fig. 6, E). 1 specimen, from Area B.
The short, stubby blade has strongly convex edges, the basic blade
shape being that of a short, broad leaf. No shoulders are indicated. Side
notches create a stem area which is quite short and widely expanded
so that the base (2.2 cm. in width) is wider than the maximum width
of the blade. The base is concave. The length of the point is 2.7 cm.
This form is reminiscent of the Ensor type as defined by Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 422, P1.90).
D21 (Fig. 6, F). 1 specimen, from Area B.
The blade is triangular with straight edges. The shoulders are.
prominent and the parallel-sided stem terminates in a slightly convex
base. The point is 4.7 cm. long, and 2.2 cm. wide.
D22 (Fig. 6, I). 1 specimen, from Area B.
This stemless, asymmetrical point has one strongly concave edge
and one edge which is slightly convex. The length of the point is 4.7

7o

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 6. Dart points from the Limerick site that lack contracting stems. D16: A;
D18:

C; D19: D; D20: E; D21: F; Trinity point: G;

point: K; Edgewood point: L; Yarbrough point: M.

Elam point: H; D22:

I;

D17: B;

D23: J;

Ellis

LIMERICK SITE

71

cm. and the width is 1.7 cm. The base is rounded. This specimen
slightly resembles certain forms recovered from the Boat Dock Site
(Bell, 1958a: P1. 11, O, P).
D23 (Fig. 6, J). 1 specimen, from Area C.
The original shape of this point is difficult to determine since it is
badly fire pitted and cracked. The portion of the point recovered suggests that it had a short, slightly expanding stem with a straight base.
The blade was long with slightly convex edges.
Elam point (Fig. 6, H). 1 specimen, from Area C.
The short, stubby blade and the wide stem give this specimen a distinctive shape. The length is 2.8 cm. and the width 2.1 cm. The edges
of the blade are convex and the shoulders are only slightly differentiated. The sides of the stem are parallel and the base is straight. This
specimen is made of fossil wood and part of the outer patina of the
original core i~ present. Similar points are illustrated and described
as the Elam type--a diagnostic of the Elam Focus, Trinity Aspect-by Crook and Harris (1952: P1.4, No. 27).
Ellis point (Fig. 6, K). 1 specimen, from Area A.
The blade of this point, while basically triangular, has slightly convex edges. The shoulders, which are 2.2 cm. wide, are barbed and the
expanding stem terminates in a straight base. The length of the point
is 3.5 cm. Ellis is one of the more common dart point types found at
the Davis Site, Alto Focus (Newell and Krieger, 1949:166, Table 18),
and has also been reported as a minor type in the Behon Reservoir on
the Leon River (Miller and Jelks, 1952:172).
Trinity points (Fig. 6, G). 6 specimens from Areas B and C.
Most specimens of this type are made of fossil wood. Each has side
notches in the blade which set off the stem area. The notches vary in
depth within the group. The stem is short and expands just above the
base, which is commonly convex but in some instances is fiat. The point
of juncture between the base and the stem is rounded, forming "ears."
The length of these points ranges from 2.8 to 4.9 cm. with the majority
being approximately 3.8 cm. long. The width varies from 1.7 to 2.0
cm., and averages about 1.9 cm. The width of Trinity points as de,
fined by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 484) varies from 2.0 to 2.5
cm. Since the modal width of the Trinity points from the Limerick
Site is 1.9 cm., the Limerick sample indicates a slightly narrower
form. In Area C they occurred principally in the lower levels. Points
of this type are illustrated by Crook and Harris (1952: P1. 1, Nos. 17,
18; also P1.4, Nos. 2, 3, 4).

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Yarbrough point (Fig. 6, M). 1 specimen, from Area A.
This point seems to be an average example of the Yarbrough type.
The overall length is 5 cm.~ the maximum width is 2.3 cm. and the
stem length is 1.5 cm. The triangular blade has slightly convex edges.
Concave side notches iust above the base define the stem area which
flares out to terminate in a faintly concave base. This point, although
made of local reddish quartzite, has been finely chipped.

Edgewood point (Fig. 6, L). 1 specimen, from the surface of Area D.
This point has a length of 4.4 cm. and a width of 2.3 cm. The triangular blade has the right edge beveled on both faces. The shoulders
are barbed and the stem expands so that the width across the base is
equal to the width across the shoulders. The base is slightly concave.
Arrow Points

The arrow points from the Limerick Site were diversified and no
one form dominated the arrow point category as the small Gary forms
did the dart point category. Furthermore, only a few of the forms
could be identified with previously established types. Some arrow
points had some characteristics in common with established types but
did not fit the type descriptions completely and consequently were
not given type names.
The classification method employed on the Limerick Site artifacts
tends to minimize the "lumping" effect that often results from the
more direct typology approach. One arrow point type which has been
affected by "lumping" in typological analysis is the Alba type. Some
publications illustrate arrow points identified as Alba, but which differ
considerably from the original type description in total length, in stem
length, in base-stem form and in barb-shoulder form. Some variation in
total length is to be expected, but according to the definition (Newell
and Krieger, 1949: 161) the stem length is ¼ to ¼ the total length of
the point. In this context, the overall length is of considerable importance. In one case an arrow point with a stem 1/13 as long as the tota!
length of the point was identified as an Alba point (Wheat, 1953: P1.
35, a). Variation in the base-stem form is to be expected also, but some
series of "Alba" points have parallel-sided stems, widely expanded
stems, and bulb-shaped stems--all in one series. The parallel side and
bulb-shaped stem forms conform to the definition of Alba as it was described (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 161) and as it was subsequently
revised (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 494; Bell, 1958b: 8). Never
was the form described as having widely expanding stems. These forms

termed "Alba" are probably a consistent group within the sites in
which they were found, and certain arrow points in the group may
conform to the definition of the Alba type. Generally, however, it is
not known whether the arrow points which are of the standard Alba
types are the dominant forms in the group or if they represent variants of the group and serve only to give it a name. These discrepancies
and inconsistencies in the use of the term "Alba" indicate a need for
further refinement of the term and/or a more discreet application of
the term.
In the process of classification, the arrow points were divided into
two groups--those with expanding stems and those with non-expanding stems. The following arrow point forms can be included in the expanding stem tradition.
A1 (Fig. 7, A). 5 specimens, from Areas A and B.
The distinguishing feature of this shape is a strongly expanding
stem with a slightly convex base. The shoulders are well defined but
not sharply barbed, and the triangular blade has slightly convex
edges. These points average about 2 cm. long and !.3 cm. wide, while
the stem length is frequently .4 cm. Similar points from the Addicks
Basin were identified as the Sca!lorn type* by Wheat (!953: P1. 34,
q, r), and others from the Hogge Bridge Site were classified as Alba
by Stephenson (1952: Fig. 95, e, second from the right).
A2 (Fig. 7, B). 3 specimens, from Areas A, B, and C.
Expanding stems with slightly convex bases and barbed shoulders
are the characteristic feature of this form. The blades are triangular
and have slightly concave to slightly convex edges. Since the tips of all
three specimens are broken, their length can not be determined~ but
the width is about 2.2 cm. and the stems are all about .6 cm. long. Similar forms at the Addicks Basin have been called Eddy Stemmed
(Wheat~ 1953: P1.34, w and x).
A3 (Fig. 7, C). 1 specimen, from Area A.
The single specimen of form A3 has a triangular blade with one
well-defined shoulder~ the other evidently having been broken off. The
short narrow stem expands very slightly and the base is straight. The
width of this point is about 1.7 cm. and the length is 2.5 cm. This form
is possibly a variant of the Alba type.
A4 (Fig. 7, D-E). 8 specimens, from all areas.
This form has a triangular blade with concave edges and barbed
* Spelled "Scalhorn" by Wheat.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

Fig. 7. Arrow point forms from the Limerick site. Form AI: A; A2: B; A3: C;
AS: F; A6: G; A7: H-K; A8: L-N; A9: O; A10: P; A1 I:Q; A12: R,

SOCIETY

A4: D-E;

LI~IERICK SITE

75

shoulders. The short expanding stem tends to have a straight base,
although on some specimens the base is slightly convex. The average
dimensions of this form are 2.0 cm. long and 1.6 cm. wide, with a stem
that averages .4 cm. long.
A5 (Fig. 7, F). 2 specimens, from Area B.
These two specimens have serrated, recurred edges, and prominent
shoulders. The stems are short and expanding and have slightly convex bases. The length of the one complete specimen is 3.4 cm., and the
width is about 2 cm. The stem length is about .4 cm. Points with recurved edges that resemble this shape have been found in Wylie Focus
sites (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, g, third from right).
A6 (Fig. 7, G). i specimen, from Area B.
This point is 2.2 cm. long and has a triangular blade with serrated,
concave edges. The shoulders are 1.5 cm. wide and are barbed. The
stem expands and has a rounded base. This form, while reminiscent
of the bulb-shaped stem or rounded stem variety of Alba, has a shorter
stem.
A7 (Fig. 7, H-K). 11 specimens, from all areas.
The characteristic trait of this form is the very short, broad stem
which in some cases is barely differentiated from the blade. The shoulders tend to be wide (average width !.7 cm.) in relation to the overall length (average 2.1 cm.) of the point. The edges of the basically
triangular blade are slightly concave to slightly convex. Generally
these points are made from thin flakes with the chipping confined to
the edges.
A8 (Fig. 7, L-N). 3 specimens, all from Area A.
These small points (1.5 to 2.0 cm. long) are characterized by unusually wide shoulders (1.4 to 1.8 cm.), so that the width of the blade
is as great or nearly as great as the length of the point. The short stem,
which is parallel sided to slightly tapering, terminates in a slightly
convex base. Similar forms have been typed as Alba in the Wylie Focus
(Stephenson, 1952; Fig. 95, e, first from left).
A9 (Fig. 7, 0). 2 specimens, from Areas A and B.
The tapering stem of this form strongly resembles the stem shape
of the Gary dart point. Both specimens have concave blade edges and
prominent shoulders. The base of each has been broken off but the
major part of the stem remains in each case. The dimensions of this
form are approximately 2.8 cm. long by 1.6 cm. wide.
AIO (Fig. 7, P). 1 specimen, from Area C.
The triangular blade has slightly concave edges and is laterally

76

TEXA,S AI/CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

barbed. The contracting stem is very short and the base is pointed. The
length of this point is 2.3 cm. and the width is 1.6 cm. Points of this
general shape have been described under the type name of Cliffton
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: P1. 127, d, first from left) and also as
Perdiz (Wheat, 1953: P1.34, k, 1).
Al! (Fig. 7, Q). 3 specimens, from Areas A, B, and C.
The blades of these specimens have convex edges and the shoulders, which protrude at right angles to the blade, are prominent. One
shoulder on each of the specimens is lower than the other, and the
short, rounded stem has a convex base. The average size of this point
form is 2.4 cm. long and 1.7 cm. wide, with a stem length of .5 cm.
AI2 (Figl 7, t/). 1 specimen, from Area A.
This point, which is 2.3 cm. long and 1.1 cm. wide, has a blade with
concave edges. The shoulders, which are well defined, appear to have
had sharp barbs that have been broken off. The stem is bulb-shaped
and has a well rounded base. Possibly this form could be included in
the Alba type.
A13 (Fig. 8, A). 1 specimen, from Area C.
The triangular blade with serrated edges has barbed shoulders, the
base is rounded, and the stem is short: This specimen is 2.7 cm. long.
Points similar to this have been reported from Addicks Basin and typed
as Alba by Wheat (1953: P1. 35, c, d).
A14 (Fig. 8, B). 1 specimen, from Area C.
The stem on this point is short and has a rounded base. The shoulders are barbed and are 1.6 cm. wide. The portion of the blade which
remains suggests that the edges were serrated.
A15 (Fig. 8, C). 1 specimen, from Area B.
This stemless specimen is 1.8 cm. long and is roughly leaf-shaped
with a fiat base. The point is 1.5 cm. wide. It resembles somewhat the
Young type (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: P1. 134); however, it
differs from that type in that it falls below the defined dimensions for
Young.

A16 (Fig. 8, D). 2 specimens, from Areas A and C.
This form is a stemless triangular point which is 2.4 cm. long and
1.6 cm. wide. It has a concave base.
A!7 (Fig. 8, E-F). 3 specimens, all from Area B.
These stemless points have triangular blades with slightly concave

Fig. 8. Arrowpoints (A-G, L-R) and drills (H-K) from
A13: A; A14: B: A15: C: A16: D; A17: E-F; A18: G;
Drill

Ill

form:

K;

arrow

point form A19:

poln:: O; Alba points: P-R.

L;

the Limerick si~e. Arrowpoln? form
Drill | forms: H-I;

Perdiz point:

M;

Bonham

Drillll form: J;

point:

N;

Clifftort

78

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

edges or, in one case, convex edges. The bases are slightly convex. The
average dimensions are 2.0 cm. long by 1.3 cm. wide. This form is
similar to some found in Wylie Focus sites (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95,
c, second from right).
A18 (Fig. 8, G). 1 specimen, from Area C.
Although the stem is missing this point is included in the analysis
because of its distinctive blade form which has serrated, recurved
edges and prominent shoulders. The width of this specimen is 1.8 cm.,
and the length is 2.0 cm. This blade, while similar in outline to arrow
point form A5, varies from it in size.

A19 (Fig. 8, L). 1 specimen, from the surface of Area A.
This stemless point which is 3.1 am. long and 1.8 cm. wide has a
triangular blade with one concave and one convex edge. The base is
slightly convex. This specimen may be an aberrant form of the Fresno
type (Suhm, Krieger, and/[elks, 1954: 498, P1. 128}.
Alba points (Fig. 8, P-R). 7 specimens, from Areas B, C, and D.
The stems of these specimens have an average length of .44 cm. and
have parallel sides with straight bases. The shoulders, with an average
width of 1.3 cm.. are prominent and frequently barbed. The blade
lengths vary within the group and are basically triangular in shape
with slightly concave edges. Most of the specimens have serrated blade
edges. The average length of the points is 2 cm. These points as a group
are consistently smaller than the average form of the Alba type
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 494) and, in addition, have serrated
blade edges. Points of this form have been found in Wylie Focus sites
(Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, E, second and seventh from the left); at
Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1953: P1.35, e, g) ; at the Davis Site, Cherokee
County (Newell and Krieger, 1949: Fig. 56, d and h) ; in sites at Belton Reservoir (Miller and Jelks, 1952: P1. 25, No. 2. second and third
from right) ; and at the Blum Rockshelter, (Jelks, 1953: P1. 19, g, h).
Bonham points (Fig. 8, N). 4 specimens, from Area B.
This form, with an average length of 2.55 cm., has a triangular
blade with straight to slightly concave edges. The shoulders are barbed
(average width 1.36 cm.) and the stems relatively elongated (average length .7 cm.). There is a slightly expanded area in the stem about
halfway between the base and the blade. The base is rounded or
slightly pointed. Points of this type were found at the Sanders Site in
Lamar County (Krieger, 1946: 185, P!. 22, e).

LIMERICK SITE

79

Cliffton points (Fig. 8, O). 2 specimens, both from Area B.
These two points are only slightly more than modified flakes. One
specimen exhibits flaking on only one face; the other is flaked on both
faces. The points are crude in appearance, but basically they have a
short, tapering stem with a rounded base and a triangular-shaped
blade. Both specimens are about 2.2 cm. long and 1.6 cm. wide. Points
similar to these were found at the I-Iarrell Site in Young County (Krieger, 19 6: Fig. 7, r, s) and at the Belton Reservoir on the Leon River
(Miller and ffelks, 1952: P1.24, No. 3, first on left).
Perdiz points (Fig. 8, M). 3 specimens, from Area A and B.
The narrow, pointed stem of this form is a characteristic trait. The
blade has a relatively elongated, triangular shape with prominent
shoulders. The length of the one complete specimen is 2.8 cm. and the
average width is 1.4 cm. The average stem length is .5 cm., which is
in the lower limits defined for the Perdiz type (Suhm, Krieger and
Jelks, 1954: 504). The Limerick specimens have some characteristics
of both the Perdiz and Bonham types; however, they seem to be closer
to Perdiz. Similar points were found at the Boat Dock SiLe (Bell, 1958a:
P1. 12, U) and in the Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1953: P1. 34, e, g, i).

MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS

Knives
The term knife as used herein refers to an implement which appears
to have been used for cutting purposes, the blade of which is worked
on both faces. A knife form shows some tendency toward a definite,
elongated shape. Several knife varieties were found at the Limerick
Site. These forms are designated with Roman numerals to facilitate
reference.
Kmfe I (Fig. 9, C-D). 4 specimens, from Areas A and B.
These specimens, which vary from 4.7 to 6.9 cm. long, have convex
bases and triangular blades with slightly convex edges.
Knife H (Fig. 9, A). 6 specimens, from Areas A and B.
These knives are triangular and quite similar in shape to Knife I.
However, smaller flake scars and better workmanship are apparent in
the manufacture of this form: In addition, they are smaller and range
in length from 3.8 to 5.2 cm. These could be classified as projectile
points.

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 9. Knives, gouges, and a pecking pebble from the Limerick site. Knife I forms: C-D;
Knife II form: A; Knife III form: B; Gouge I form: F; Gouge II form: G; pecking pebble: E.

Knife III (Fig. 9, B). 1 specimen, from Area B.
This specimen is a thick implement with a tapering stem and a
rounded, almost pointed base. It resembles a heavy, crude, Gary type
dart point. It is 5.7 cm. long.
Knife IV (Fig. 10, K). 5 specimens, from Area C.
This knife form has a rounded base and an elongated blade with
convex edges which taper to a rotmded point. It is thin and lenticular
in cross section and small flakes were removed in its manufacture. The
complete specimens of this knife form range in length from 3.1 to 4.1
cm., but the broken ones suggest that some may be slightly longer.
Corner-tang Kl~ife (Fig. 10, L). i specimen, from Area B.
This corner-tang knife is basically a triangular form with one corner worked to form a stem or a "tang." It was fashioned from a thin

LIMERICK SITE

81

flake by delicate flaking around the edges, the major portion of both
faces being unflaked. The knife is 5 cm. long. The stone is a pale brown
chert which appears to be foreign to the Iron Bridge area.
Scrapers
In this classification the term "scraper" refers to those implements
which are basically piano-convex and are chipped on one or both faces.
Thus the term is strictly denotative and does not necessarily bear any
functional connotation. Using this definition as a basis, the scrapers
from the Limerick Site may be separated into several form groups.
Scraper I (Fig. 10, A-B). 7 specimens, from Areas A, B, and C.
This form is characterized by its oval to circular shape, with flakes
removed all around the edges from one face. Scrapers of this form have
been found in the YVylie Focus (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 96, a, Nos.
12-15) and in Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1953: P1. 42, d, e).
Scraper II (Fig. 10, C). 1 specimen, from Area B.
This form of scraper is made from a thick flake, one edge of which
has been worked. In longitudinal cross section the top and bottom are
fiat and the top curves down to form the working edge of the implement. The flakes removed from the working edge are smaller than the
other flakes used in shaping the tool. Similar scrapers have been illustrated for the Trinity Aspect (Crook and Harris, 1952: P1. 2, Nos.

s-5).
Scraper III (Fig. 10, D, F). 29 specimens, from Areas A, B, and C.
These specimens are made from irregular-shaped flakes. Generally
only one edge of the flake was worked but occasionally more than one
edge shows evidence of working.
Scraper IV (Fig. 10, E, G). 2 specimens, from Area B.
This small scraper form is roughly ova! in shape and is made from
a thin flake. One face of the scraper is the unmodified flake scar. All
edges have been worked.
Scraper V (Fig. 10, H-J). 8 specimens, from Areas C and D.
These scrapers, while basically triangular in shape, have strongly
convex edges and base. The blade has one relatively flat face and the
other often exhibits some of the core patina.
Biracial Implements
The characteristic feature of the biface is that it has been worked on
both faces and any edge of the tool could have been used for cutting

82

TEXANS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 10. Scrapers and knives from the Limerick site. Scraper I forms: A-B; Scraper II form:
C; Scraper Ill forms: D, F; Scraper IV forms: E, G;
K; corner-tang knife: L.

Scraper V

forms:

I-t-J; KnKe iV form:

LIMERICK SITE

83

and/or scraping. They generally are lenticular in longitudinal and
lateral cross section and they tend to be thicker than most of the other
artifacts which are bifacially chipped. The form varies sufficiently
so that three categories may be used in describing them.
Biface I (Fig. 11, A-B). 47 specimens, from Areas B, C, and D with a
heavy concentration in Area C:
These relatively small artifacts vary from roughly circular to oval
in outline. In longitudinal and lateral cross section they generally
have a thin lenticular shape. Basically the flaking is of the crude
percussion type, but many have small flake scars resulting from pressure chipping. Some of these specimens closely resemble implements
categorized as Scraper V, the difference between Biface I and Scraper
V being the scraper has one face unmodified. Some of the biface specimens, although both faces have been worked, have one relatively fiat
face. Similar artifacts have been found in the Wylie Focus (Stephenson, 1953: Fig. 96, Nos. 2, 4, 6, 7) and in the Trinity Aspect (Crook
and Harris, 1952: Pl. 2, Nos. 12, 13, 15; also P1.5, Nos. 4~9).
Biface II (Fig. 11, C-H). 15 specimens, from Areas A and C.
This form is represented by miscellaneous cores which have been
chipped on both faces. They tend to be elongated and worked on all
edges.

Bi[ace Ili (Fig. 11, I). 3 specimens, all from Area A.
These specimens, larger than the other bifaces, were manufactured
by the removal of flakes from all edges of a pebble. On some areas of
the specimen patches of the original patina remain. The flake scars
are large and irregular, suggesting that the flakes were removed by a
percussion method. Two of the implements are roughly circular in
shape, but the third has a rounded base and edges which taper to form
a rounded point.
Drills
An artifact was classified as a drill when one portion was either
noticeably longer and narrower than the rest of the implement and/or
had indications of wear which could have resulted from use as a drill.
No ensiform, T-shaped, or reworked projectile point drills were found.
Three different forms of drills were recognized.

Drill I (Fig. 8, H-I). 2 specimens, both from Area A.
This form consists of a narrow, needle-shaped blade with a base

84

Fig.

TEXAS AttCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

11. Biface forms from the Limerick site. Biface I forms: A-B; Biface II forms: C-H;

Biface III form: I.

LIMERICK SITE

85

which is an unmodified portion of a flake. Drills of this form were
found in Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1953: P!. 44, c).
Drill II (Fig. 8, J). 4 specimens, from Areas B and C.
This drill shape has a narrow blade and--in contrast to Drill I--a
rounded base which has been chipped to shape. This form has been
found at the Boat Dock Site (Bell, 1958a: P1. 12, k) and in Wylie
Focus sites (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, h, first and third from left,
second and third from right).
Drill III (Fig. 8, K). 1 specimen, from Area B.
While this form does not show evidence of having been made intentionally for use as a drill, it does appear to have been used for that
purpose. Just above the point of the blade are two slight indentations
where very small flakes have been removed or knocked off in use.
Similar drills have been found in Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1953: P1.
44, e, f) and at the Boat Dock Site (Bell, 1958a: P1. 12, n).
Gouges
Gouges are probably specialized forms of scrapers. Those recovered
from the Limerick Site are oblong or roughly triangular with a cutting
edge at the broader end. The blade at the broad end has one relatively
steep side sloping to the leading or cutting edge of the tool. Generally
one face of the implement tends to be flatter than the other. The four
gouges found at the Limerick Site can be divided into two groups.
’Gouge I (Fig. 9, F). 3 specimens, from Areas A, C, and D.
This form is small and made of quartzite or petrified wood. The
working edge is either concave or straight and the sides taper to a
pointed end. These forms have been reported from Wylie Focus sites
(Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 96, A, 17), the Boat Dock Site (Bell, 1958a:
P1. 12, c, d), and Trinity Aspect sites (Crook and Harris, 1952: P1. 2,
Nos. 7, 10).
Gouge II (Fig. 9, G). 1 specimen, from Area A.
The gouge II form is an elongated implement made of ferruginous
sandstone with the convex working edge at one end. The edges of the
blade are relatively smooth. The shape and materials suggest that this
:specimen was made from a sandstone concretion. Ferruginous sandstone gouges have been found at the Yarbrough Site (LeRoy Johnson,
Jr., personal communication) and also have been reported from
Archaic sites on the upper Trinity River (E. B. Jelks, personal corn-

TEX2.S AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

munication). This form has been included as a trait of the tentative
East Texas Aspect (Suhm, Krieger. and Jelks. 1954: 150).
PECKED Oil GIIOUND STONE ARTIFACTS

Pecking Pebbles
Three specimens, from Areas B. C, and D. (Fig. 9. E). These are
stream pebbles which were utilized without preliminary modification.
Use marks are present on one or more sides of the stone.
HalTtlnerstol2es

Four specimens, from Areas A and B Hammerstones are larger
than pecking pebbles and are cobbles which have been utilized without previous modification. Usage is indicated by marks or battered
areas on various portions of the stone.
Hand Stone

Two specimens, both from Area B. These fragments indicate
that two forms of the hand stone were known to the people at the Limerick Site. One fragment has a squared end and the other specimen has
a rounded end. Both specimens have small fire cracks on the surface.
Grinding Slab
One specimen, from Area C. This quartzite conglomerate fragment
has one smooth side and possibly is part of a grinding slab.
Pitted Stone

One specimen, from Area B. (Fig. 12). This piece of laminated
sandstone is pitted on both sides. The pits appear to have been pecked
into the surface of the stone. They are located directly opposite each
other and, had they been slightly deeper, would have penetrated the
stone.
Pottery
A total of 1095 sherds, including the 516 found on the initial survey,
was recovered at the Limerick Site. The sherds found on the preliminary survey of the site are not included in the present analysis since
the area in which they were found is not known. They are, however,
essentially the same as those recovered from the excavations; there-

Fig. 12. Pitted stone from the Limerick site.

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fore they are useful in complementing the analysis of the excavated
material.
While 155 decorated sherds were found, only 57 of them have a
known provenience. The decorative techniques consist of incising, engraving, red filming, trailing, punctating and appliqueing. Some of
the sherds found on the surface have trailing or broad line incising.
Most of the incised and engraved wares were identified as Sanders
Focus types Canton Incised and Sanders Engraved (Fig. 13). Some
engraved sherds, because of their small size, could not be included in
these categories with certainty; however, they probably are of these
same types.
Sanders Plain (Fig. 13, D). 520 sherds.
The plain wares recovered are characteristic of type Sanders Plain
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 350). They have clay-grit tempering, but some sherds are partially or completely tempered with bone.
Wall thickness ranges from .2 to 1.3 cm. ; however, the majority of the
sherds average from .6 to .7 cm. The color varies from buff to brown
or gray° sometimes with a mixture of the latter two. The lips are
rounded and some are slightly flattened. One rim sherd has shallow
notches incised at right angles to the lip. This same sherd also has a
distinctive profile in that it is thickened on the interior of the vessel
by the application of a thin strip of clay. At the lip area this strip
merges with the exterior of the vessel, but the lower face of the clay
stri~ protrudes on the interior and a slnall groove nnder the e3~,e of t}’e
strip is present where it is imperfectly joined with the interior wall.
The resulting rim profile is hook-shaped. Other decoration on the
sherds includes red slipping. Although no complete vessels are present,
the sherds indicate that carinated bowls, bottles, and forms with
slightly out-turned rims (barrel shape.9) are present. Some sherds
indicate tall cylindrical forms which may be "goblets," or possibly the
cylindrical vessel forms characteristic of type Canton Incised.’ Plain
sherds from decorated types could be included easily in this plain
ware category since the pottery characteristics (tempering, surface
finish, etc.) for all the types found at the site are the same, except for
the decorating techniques.

Canton Incised (Fig. 13, A, C, E-G). 37 sherds.
The sherds grouped as Canton Incised have clay-grit temper with
some mixture of crushed bone. The lip of this form tends to be fiat but
in some cases is rounded. The wall thickness ranges from .4 to .8 cm.
The color is predominantly brown with some gray-brown. The ex-

Fig. 13. Pottery from the Limerick site. Canton incised: A(?), C, E-G; finger-nail puncta~ed:
B; sanders Plain rim: D; Sanders type pipe fragments: H (stem), I (bowl).

9°

TEXAS ARCHEOLOOICAL SOCIETY

terior appears to be smoothed better than the interior, although neither
surface is polished. The designs show parallel diagonal lines incised
around the rim. These are incised in the same direction; in alternating
directions; or crossed to form diamond-shaped elements. Some sherds
found on the surface have punctations in conjunction with the incising. The only form indicated by the sherds is a cylindrical vessel.
These pottery characteristics are included in the type Canton Incised
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 254).
Sanders Engraved. 8 sherds.
The sherds classified as Sanders Engraved are in the minority and.
as in the Canton Incised, only one vessel form is indicated the carihated bowl. The majority of the Sanders Engraved lips are flat. but
some are rounded. The tempering as the same as that present in the
other pottery types at the site-~-clay-grit with a small amount of bone
mixture. The designs are engraved parallel diagonal lines oriented in
the same direction; excised triangular areas; and parallel diagonal
lines oriented in opposite directions. Except for the presence of only
one vessel form and the excised decoration, these sherds are characteristic of the type Sanders Engraved.
Punctated Sherds. 11 sherds.
The punctated sherds are of two types stick punctates and fingernail punctates. These sherds have the same tempering characteristics
as the other sherds from the site. No sherds were found which were
indicative of vessel forms, and the rim sherds show that the lips are
flattened. The punctations are randomly impressed over the surface
of the sherds; no designs are present.
Applique Sherd. 1 sherd.
One sherd was found which had applique in conjunction with stick
punctating. The temper, similar to the other sherds at the site, is claygrit and bone. The surface is smoothed but not polished.
Pipe (Fig. 13, H-I). 2 fragments.
A pipe with a conical clay bowl similar to the elbow pottery pipes
found at the Sanders Site was recovered in Area B of the Limerick Site.
Clay pipe stem fragments were found in Area A and on the surface
of the site. The sherds of the pipe are clay-grit tempered and the undecorated surface is poorly smoothed. The interior of the bowl is blackened and, in small areas, patches of carbonized material adhere to the
inside of the bowl.

LIMERICK SITE

9i

Area A
The knoll, designated as Area A, consists of a low, circular, clay
hill capped by a thin mantle o£ sandy soil. It is approximately 325 feet
in diameter and its highest point stands eight feet aboYe the surrounding floodplain (Fig. 14). Although the flanks of the knoll had much
J

\

\
\

\
LIMERICK SITE
41RA 8
AREAs A AND B
contour interval = 0.S feet
¯ excavated area

scale

Fig. 14.

in

feet

Contour map of a portion of the Limerick slfe, showing Areas A and B.

TEXA,S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

92

cultural debris on the surface, the depth of the soil on the flanks was
very shallow, being six inches or less to the underlying sterile clay. On
top of the knoll the sandy soil was deeper and, consequently, most of
the test pits were confined to the summit of the knoll.
The clay hill (Fig. 15) is probably a remnant of the sandy clay
bedrock left isolated on the Sabine floodplain as a result of erosion.
The origin of the sand on top of this clay knoll is uncertain. Cultural
debris was found throughout the sand and on top of the clay suggesting that the sand was deposited on the knoll during the period of
human occupation. However, the surrounding floodplain is composed
principally of black, stream-deposited gumbo soil, which suggests
that the sand on the knoll is not the result of alluvial deposition. It is
possible that the sand derived by leaching or weathering processes
out of the sandy clay bedrock. But in that case it is difficult to explain
the presence of artifacts throughout the sandy zone. There is no evidence to suggest that the sand was carried in by man.
A total of 18 test pits, with depths varying from 6 inches to two
feet below the surface, was excavated in Area A. Each pit was 5 feet
square. In the majority of the squares two or three six-inch levels were
excavated. The top 5 or 6 inches represented a disturbed p!ow zone
consisting of light gray, sandy soil. Below this, the sandy soil was
darker gray with flecks of charcoal and other occupational detritus.
This zone varied in thickness from 0 to 18 inches but for the most part
was 6 to 8 inches thick. Below this stratum lay a transitional zone
where the dark gray, sandy humus soil of the overlying zone was
mixed with the yellow sandy clay of the underlying bedrock formation. This was a more compact zone than those above it, and it varied
from 0 to 8 inches in thickness. Beneath the transitional zone the yellow clay bedrock formation was encountered. This clay, which contained small orange-colored stains, was sandy but very compact. Cultural material was encountered in all the zones except the bedrock
formation.
The cultural litter on the surface of Area A indicated that it might
have a greater artifact yield than the other areas of the site; however,
the excavations produced few artifacts and no occupational features.

DART POINTS
The majority (79~o) of the dart point forms recovered from Area
A are of the Gary contracting stem tradition. In addition, one Ellis and

93

LIMERICK SITE

one Yarbrough point were recovered in the excavations. The dart
points are concentrated in levels 2 and 3, where 69% of them are
found.

A~ow POINTS
Of the 24 arrow points found in Area A, only one could be identified
as a previously defined type. This was a Perdiz point found in level 1.
The arrow point forms at Area A are quite similar, by and large, to
those found at the other three areas. In general, it can be stated that
the arrow points, in contrast to the dart points, were concentrated in
the upper two levels (Fig. 17, A) with 75% occurring in level 1 and
21% in level 2.
"
TABLE 1
Vertical Distribution of Dart Point Forms in Area A
Forms

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

(0-6")

(6-12")

( 12M 8")

Gary DI
Gary D2

3
....

6
3

1
1

Gary D4

1

1

1

Gary D5
Gary D9
Gary D10

1
1
1
1

D16
D17

....

D18
D19
Ellis
Yarbrough

....
....
....

Total
Percentages

1
....
2
....
........
........
1

....

1

1
....
1
....
1
....
........

9

17

31%

59%

3
10%

SHERDS

Area A yielded more sherds than any other class of artifacts. When
analyzed according to temper, three main groups are indicated--clay
(sherd?) and clay-grit, bone and clay, and bone tempering. A few
sherds could not be grouped with certainty into any of these categories.
A horizontal distribution analysis of the various groups of tempering
revealed no particular area of concentration for any one group.
Of the 158 sherds recovered, only 9 are rim sherds and 3 are base
sherds. Generally the sherds are ~mall and vessel shapes difficult to
determine. Twenty-two sherds show evidence of decoration including

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

WSO

W250

W

WLSO

WlO0

SOCIETY

W300

I04

o
[]

Yellow cloy

o

,,

~

Fig. 15. Diagrammatic profiles at the Limerick site, Areas A and B.

TABLE 2
Vertical Distribution of Arrow Point Forms in Area A
Forms
Expanding stem
A1
A3
A4
Non-expanding stem
A7
A8
A9
All
A12
A16
Perdiz
Fragments
Total
Percentages

Level 1

Level 2

1

1

Level 3
....

l
1

........
........

2
1
1
....

1
....
2
....
........
1
....
........
....
........

1
1
1
8
18

75 %

........
1
5
4%
21%

engraving, red filming (both inside and outside), punctating (in conjunction with appliqueing and incising), and incising. The small number and the small size of many of the decorated sherds hinders extensive comment on the designs present. However, more sherds of in-

95

LIMERICK SITE

cised ware with designs which appear to be typical of the type Canton
Incised were found than ally other decorated type. Recognized types
include Sanders Plain, Sanders Engraved, and Canton Incised. In addition to the vessel sherds, a pottery pipe stein fragment was found.
Vertical analysis of the sherd distribution revealed that they were
concentrated in the upper levels of Area A with 86.7% being in the first
level and 12.7% in the second.
MISCELLA1WEOUS

ARTIFACTS

The miscellaneous artifacts--drills, knives, scrapers, bifaces, etc.-had a relatively general vertical distribution, with no indication of significant clustering in either the upper or the lower levels.

TABLE 3
Vertical Distribution of Sherds at Area A
Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Surface

....
....

80
28

Clay and grit tempered

68

8

Bone and clay tempered

60

7

Bone tempered

7

4

1

Unknown

2

I

....

137

20

1

Totals

12.7%

86.7%

Percentages

TABLE

108

.6%

4

Vertical Distribution of Miscellaneous Artifacts from Area A

Biface III
Gouge I
Gouge II
I-Iammerstones
Knife I
Knife II

Level 2
Level i
1
1
1
....
........
1
1
2
....
2
....

Level 3
Surface
2
1
........
1

....

I
....
1
....
........

1

2

1

6

Scraper III
Scraper V
Biface II
Drill I
Miscellaneous chipped objects

4
....
2
1
12

3

4

2

Total

22

21

13

16

Percentages

39%

38%

23%

....

Scraper I

3

1
1
7

2
3
........
2
....

96

TEXAS A1RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PAINT PIGMENTS

During excavation many small fragments of limonite and hematite
were found. Initially these were thought to have been imported into
the area but, as excavation continued, the number and irregular shape
of the fragments suggested that they occurred naturally in the area.
No evidence of their having been used as pigments was recovered in
Area A.
NEGATIVE FEATURES

No artifacts of bone, antler, shell, and polished stone were found in
Area A, nor were there any features such as burials, pits, post molds,
hearths, and other indications of sedentary occupation. The only evidence of a structure was the presence of a few fragments of clay daub
and a baked mud-dauber’s nest.

SUBSISTENCE

A lack of evidence for agricultural activities of the people who occupied Area A of the Limerick Site implies a hunting and gathering
mode of existence. There is, however, a general scarcity of animal
bone, possibly due to poor conditions of preservation. Of the bones
recovered, deer bones were the most abundant, suggesting that the
deer was the chief source of animal food.* In addition to deer bones,
a few raccoon teeth were found, as well as a beaver mandible fragment. The evidence for gathering is even more scarce. No mussel shells
were encountered in this area and only one charred nut (?) was
found.
Discussion

Since there was no well-defined stratigraphic separation of materials
at Area A, a percentage analysis by artificial levels of each major artifact class was undertaken in order to determine any general trends in
vertical distribution that might be present (Fig. 17, A, B, C, D). Graphing these percentages, a summary picture is obtained which indicates
a diminishing incidence of dart points and an increasing incidence of
arrow points and of pottery from the lower to the upper levels (Fig.
18).
; Identification of the animal bones was generously made by Dr. John A. Wilson,
Professor of Geology, The University of Texas.

LIMERICK SITE

97

In the upper level, the materials are representative of the NeoAmerican stage when pottery of types Sanders Plain, Sanders Engraved, and Canton Incised--as well as long-stemmed clay pipes typical of the Sanders Focus--were in use. Other traits characteristic of
the Sanders Focus are absent. As the Sanders Focus has been defined
primarily on the basis of burials, this difference may be partially
reconciled, since the Limerick Site was probably only a temporary
hunting camp used intermittently by a group with Sanders Focus cultural affiliations.
In the lower levels, the large number of dart points as opposed to
arrow points and pottery sherds, indicates an occupation by a group
with Archaic affiliations. The small sample of materials from these
levels prohibits a precise classification.
The few sherds and arrow points in the lower levels of Area A
could possibly be attributed to natural disturbances and/or to the artificial levels used in the excavations. However, criteria on which these
materials could be shown to be intrusive in the lower levels are lacking.

Area B
Area B is an irregularly-shaped knoll, approximately 225 ft. in diameter, situated about 300 ft. northwest of Area A. Between the two
knolls is a low connecting saddle. Topographically Area B has the
same characteristics as Area A, but its point of maximum elevation
is only six feet above the floodplain level as compared to a maximum
elevation of eight feet for Area A (Fig. 14). Structurally, however,
Area B differs from Area A (Fig. 15). It is a low sand hill which appears to rest in a shallow basin in the sandy clay subsoil. From all
indications the knoll is a natural formation, but the geologic origin of
a structure of this nature is uncertain. It is an intriguing problem,
however, considering that cultural debris was found in the lower excavated levels, up to four feet deep. Several feet of sand containing
occupational debris must have accumulated on the knoll subsequent to.
the deposition of the earliest cultural remains.
Twenty test pits, each five feet square, were excavated in this area.
In an attempt to obtain a representative sample and as much information as possible in the short time available for work at the site, the test
pits were spaced at intervals over the entire area (Fig. 14). The deepest levels of the excavation, level 7 or 3.5 to 4.0 feet below the ground
surface, revealed few cultural materials--only one scraper and a few
flint chips. The excavations were terminated at this depth.

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The profiles of the knoll (Fig. 15) indicate a lack of natural stratigraphy such as soil lines or other indications of a hiatus in the knoll
formation. The plow zone, in the top 5 or 6 inches of Area B, was a
light gray, sandy soil in which there were numerous grass roots. Below
this lay a dark, sandy, humus soil that contained bone scraps, charcoal
flecks, stone flakes, and other cultural residue. This zone varied in
thickness from .5 to 2.0 feet but averaged about 1.5 feet. Beneath the
dark gray, sandy soil a zone of lighter gray sand, frequently mottled
with a whiter sand, was encountered. Work was stopped when this
zone failed to yield sufficient materials to warrant continued excavadon. The post-hole digger revealed that this zone was about 3 feet
thick, and excavations were generally confined to the upper one foot
of the zone. This light gray sandy soil rested on yellow clay bedrock
that contained orange-colored stains. This clay zone appears to be the
same as that which underlies Area A.
While cultural debris was recovered throughout the knoll, a horizontal distribution analysis of the material revealed two areas of occupation concentration

one on the north side of the knoll and one on

the south side. In comparing the material from these two areas on a
typological basis, no differences were noted. A vertical distribution
study of the materials from the two areas also failed to reveal any differences; therefore, the two areas were lumped as a unit in the final
analysis.
Area B, in contrast to Area A, had little evidence of occupation exposed on the surface. Only 27 sherds, 2 fragments of ochre, 1 worked
stone object, and one scraper of the Scraper II form were found on
the surface.
DART POINTS

Few of the dart points from Area B could be identified with previously defined types. The majority (88 ~o ) of the points have contracting stems and probably are related to the Gary tradition. The dart
points were concentrated in levels three and five, but this does not
necessarily indicate heavier occupation in those two levels because of
the small sample and the possibility of sampling error (Table 5).
Sherds, arrow points, and other artifacts do not indicate a concentradan in any specific level.
ARROW

POINTS

Although four arrow points from Area B were found in the fourth
and fifth levels (1.5 to 2.5 feet below the surface) the big majority

LIMEI~ICK SITE

99
TABLE 5
Vertical Distribution of Dart Points at Area B

Forms
Gary D1
Gary D2
Gary D3
Gary D5
Gary D8
Gary Dll
Gary D12
D20
D21
D22
Trinity
Totals
Percentages

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Level 4

Level 5

Level d

4
2
5
1
....
1
3
....
........
2
2
........
3
....
............
1
................
................

2
5
1
....
....
1
1
....
2
....
1
....
1
....
....
1
................
................
1
....
........
1
............
2
....................
6
14%

4

14

4

12

3

9%

33%

9%

28%

7%

were concentrated in the top three levels. Those found below the upper
three levels may be the result of rodent or other disturbances. No definnite stratigraphic differences within the arrow point category could be
determined, but the expanded stem arrow points, in all except one
case, were found in the deeper levels from level two to level five. In
level three they comprise over half the total number recovered.
Whether these differences are meaningful is uncertain since the
sample of arrow points from Area B is small. The overall distribution
of the arrow points, in any case, shows a significant increase from the
lower to the upper levels (Table 6).

SHERDS

As in Area A, sherds were the most abundant of all artifacts recovered in the excavations at Area B. They include types Canton
Incised, Sanders Plain, and Sanders Engraved. In all, 290 sherds were
found, having a vertical distribution as follows: Level 1, 81; Level 2,
95; Level 3, 61; Level 4, 35; Level 5, 13; and Level 6, 5. The small.
number of sherds in Levels 5 and 6 suggest that these may have been
a result of disturbances which resulted in the displacement of the
sherds from higher levels.
Of the 290 sherds, only 31 or 11% were decorated. The decoration
was in the form of slipping, polishing (only on slipped vessels), incising, engraving, and punctating of both the fingernail and stick varieties. Incising was the most popular form of decoration with 17 of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

lOO

TABLE 6
Vertical Distribution of Arrow Points in Area B

Forms

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

1

1

Level 4

Level 5

Level 6

~Expanding stem
....

i

....

A1

....

A2
A4
A5
A6

1
............
........
1
....
1
....
........
I
i
............
....
1
....................

Non-expanding stem
A7
A9
All

A.15
A17
A1ba
Bonham
Cliffton
Perfliz

2
1
1

I .............
I
....................
1

................

1
........
............
1
2
................
....
3
2
............
1
........
2
1
....
2
1

....................
1
................

Totals

11

11

Percentages

33%

33%

7
21%

2

2

6%

~%

0
....

the 31 decorated sherds showing incised designs. Most of the designs
consist of cross hatching spaced so as to create large or small diamondshaped elements. These are common on type Canton Incised as described by Krieger (1946: 185-190).
The engraved designs are the same linear cross hatched designs
found on the incised sherds. The work on both the engraving and incising is careless and occasionally "parallel" lines nearly touch.
Three vessel forms are suggested by the sherds found at Area B-bottles (Sanders Plain type), carinated bowls (Sanders Plain type),
and deep bowls with slightly flaring sides (Canton Incised type). The
.one base sherd recovered is of the flat disc form.

MISCELLANEOUS ARTIFACTS

An analysis of the vertical distribution of artifacts other than sherds,
arrow points, and dart points, shows that they were concentrated in
the upper levels (one through four) of Area B, with a scarcity of miscellaneous implements in levels five, six, and seven.

101

LIMERICK SITE

TABLE 7
Vertical Distribution of Miscellaneous Artifacts From Area B
Forms
Knife I
Knife II
Knife III
Corner-tang knife
Scraper I
Scraper II
Scraper III
Scraper IV
Biface I
Drill II
Drill III
Hammerstone
Hand stone frags.
Pecking pebble
Pitted stone
Pitted paintstone
Totals
Percentages

Level I Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5
....
1
....
1
........
........

1
....
1
I*
1
1
....
............

....
1
....
....
....
1
1
....
1
....
1
1
........
2
3
2
3
....
1
........
................
....
2
........
1
....
l
............
............
............

Level 5 Level 7
2

....

1

1

........

....
I
1
1

6

8

8

8

18%

23%

23%

23%

1

2

I

3%

6%

3%

PAINT PIGMENTS

One hematite specimen was found with indications of use as paint
pigment. It is a thick piece with a pit hollowed out on one side. The
interior of the pit shows evidence of heavy scratching.

NEGATIVE FEATURES

No artifacts of bone, antler, shell, and polished stone were found in
Area B, nor were there burials, pits, post molds, and other evidence
of a sedentary occupation of the area.
Area B failed to produce any evidence of agricultural activities by
the people who occupied the site. The presence of a small amount of
bone and a few mussel shell fragments suggests that the subsistence
pattern of these people was one concerned primarily with hunting and
gathering. Identified bones were mostly of the deer, although several
fragments of opossum and raccoon mandibles were also found.
*Although in level three, this specimen was on the flank of the knoll and next to
the clay subsoil.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

102

DISCUSSION

Area B had a few sherds and arrow points in the lower levels, but
because of extensive disturbance by rodents it appears likely that some
or all of these are intrusive from the upper levels. While the general
trend toward increasing use of pottery and the bow and arrow is
obvious, it cannot be determined with absolute certainty whether or
not the earliest occupants of Area B had one or both of these traits as
minor items of their cultural inventory.
The sequence and trend of events at Area B are basically the same
as those of Area A, but the thickness of the deposit suggests that the
time span at Area B may have been longer. There was a time at Area B
when the people who occupied the area used many dart points and few
if any arrow points or pottery vessels; subsequently, however, the dart
points gradually lost in popularity as pottery and arrow points became
increasingly more popular (Fig. 17, E, F, G, H, and Fig. 18).
Some of the pottery from the upper levels can be typed as Sanders
Plain, Sanders Engraved, and Canton Incised. The clay pipe and clay
pipe stem from these levels are also characteristic of the same pottery
tradition. The presence of these pottery forms suggests that the materials from the upper levels of Area B resulted from a Sanders Focus
occupation, while the materials from the lower levels are representative of peoples of the Archaic Stage.

Area C
Area

C

is a large, flat, sandy area located in the floodplain about

1250 feet south and slightly west of Area B (Fig. 2). This spot is an
"island" of grayish, sandy soil completely surrounded by the black
gumbo soil characteristic of the region. It is oval in shape and on the
southwest edge merges with another sandy area. Area C is approximately 125 feet long and 75 feet wide. The center of the area is approximately one half a foot higher than the edges of the area. The profiles (Fig. 16) show that this sandy soil rests in a shallow depression
in the underlying clay subsoil. Again, as in Areas A and B, the geologic
history and the origin of the sandy soil in Area C is unknown, but as
the sandy fill accumulated in the depression there was intermittent
prehistoric occupation of the spot.
The presence of cultural debris on the surface of Area C, plus the
initial check with a post-hole digger indicating that the deposit had
depth, prompted the excavation at that location.

103

LIMERICK SITE

"*~o

wrl)°

we~

--9e’

"-- ~~;i~l[filllTI]]lllTlflltffl~ffflifrlrilfMfrllrrtrnirlllnlmfm --~
Diagrammatic Profile of Line
=

¯

scale
,,

in feet
,,
,o

S950

[] Gray sandy humus

,,

~]~ Yellow clay

s,~o

Sg~Z5

S975

Diagrammatic Profile of Line W675
scale

in

feet

-o<

[] Gray sandy humus
[]

Yellow clay

.....ff

,,yo

9~,~-- I

¯ ~

S 000

--97’

AREA D
Diagrammatic Profile of Line
scale

LIMERICK SITE,

in

feet

41RA8

$675

[] Gray sandy
[]

Profiles - based on test

humus

Yellow cloy

pits

and post holes

Fig. 16. Diagrammatic profiles at the Limerick site, Areas C and D.

Ten five-foot test squares were excavated (Fig. 2). At those preliminary test squares where cultural debris was heaviest, adjacent
squares were excavated. In some pits the excavation went down to and
included the sixth level, or 2.5 to 3.0 feet below the ground surface;
in others the excavations were terminated with the first level.
In terms of classes of artifacts, Area C differs significantly from
Areas A and B. Sherds, which were abundant in Areas A and B, were
exceedingly rare in Area C, only 2 small ones being found. Area C,
however, yielded many dart points as well as a few arrow points.
DART POI]~TS

Dart points were found in all of the excavated levels of Area C, increasing in frequency from the lower to the upper levels. The Gary
D1 form was by far the most common. In general, the majority of
the dart points found in Area C were of the contracting stem tradition.
However~ there were some points characteristic of the Elam Focus of
the Trinity Aspect, and these tended to be concentrated in the lower
levels (Table 8).
ARROW POII’~TS

The arrow points found in Area C were concentrated in the upper
three levels. None were encountered be!ow the bottom of the third

I04

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

level. The small sample was far from homogeneous and several forms
were represented.
MISCELLANEOUS ARTIFACTS
An analysis of the vertical distribution of the miscellaneous artifacts
indicates a clustering of artifacts in level five and a concentration of
artifacts in levels one, two and three (Table I0).
TABLE 8
Vertical Distribution of Dart Point Forms
Forms

Level i

Gary D1
Gary D2
Gary D3
Gary D4
Gary D5
Gary D6
Gary D7
Gary D13
Gary D14
Gary D15

Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5 Level 6 Level 7

13
4
6
1
........
i
2
1
1
1
1
1
3
....
4
1
....
....
1
1
............
........
1
....
........
1
........
1
............

5

1

....

1

1

............

i

............

2
2
1

1
....

D25
Elam
Trinity
Point frags.
Totals
Percentages

4
27

I
13

4,
15

....
1
13

2
1
4

1
1
2

36%

17%

20%

17%

5%

2%

1
....
2

2%

TABLE 9
Vertical Distribution of Arrow Points in Area C

Forms

Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5 Level 6 Level 7 Surface

Expanding stem
A2
1
A4
2
Non-expanding stem
A7
1
A10
....
All
....

A13
A14
A16
A18
Alba
Bonham
I~ragments
Total
Percentages

............................
1
........................

1
........................
1
........................
1
1
....................
1
............................
1
............................
....
1
........................
1
............................
............................
1
............................
1
2
2
I
....................
7
9
2
0
0
0
0
2
50%
39%
11%
....................

105

LIMERICK SITE

TABLE 10
Vertical Distribution of Miscellaneous Artifacts from Area C

Forms

Level 2

Level 1
’

Level 3

Level 4

Level 5

Level 6

1
................
....................

I
Scraper III

2
2
1
5

U

2

5

3

1

Scraper V

2

....

1

....

3

....

Biface I
Biface II

5
2

4
3

6
2

1
1

9
1

2
....

Gouge I

................

1

....

Knife IV
Pecking pebble
Grinding slab

1
1
2
1
........
1
....................
................
1
....

Totals

21

11

]3

6

18

3

Percentages

29%

15%

18%

8%

25%

4%

Drill II
Sherds
Scraper

....................

NEGATIVE FEATURES

No evidence of any feature such as pits, post molds, burials, and
hearths, was found, nor were there artifacts of polished stone, shell or
bone.
SUBSISTENCE

A small number of animal bones was recovered in Area C. These
consisted primarily of teeth caps of deer.
DISCUSSION

The lower levels of Area C are characterized by the absence of arrow
points and by the presence of dart points which may definitely be
ascribed to the Archaic. Several traits of this occupation are similar to
those which are characteristic of the Elam Focus of the Trinity Aspect.
In the upper levels arrow points appear, suggesting that this Archaic
culture acquired the bow and arrow and began to integrate it into a
hunting pattern. The scarcity of materials recovered in Area C and
the small amount of bone refuse imply that this area, like Areas A and
B, was used as a temporary hunting camp.

Area D
Area D is another sandy "island" in the black gumbo floodplain
similar to Area C. It is approximately 400 feet northwest of Area C
and 1200 feet southwest of Area B (Fig. 2). This area is a larger ver-

TEXA,S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

siGn of Area C, consisting of a zone of sandy soil resting in a shallow
depression formed in the sandy clay subsoil (Fig. 16). Area D’s center,
like that of Area C, is about one half a foot higher than the edges, and
the area measures 160 feet long and 100 feet wide.
Area D was selected for excavation on the basis of the artifacts on
the surface and the depth of the sandy soil as determined by preliminary testing with a post-hole digger. Three five-foot test squares
were excavated along the W960 line to a depth of 2.0 feet. but since
these tests produced only a small number of artifacts, no further
testing was attempted. A total of only 22 artifacts was recovered and
all except two specimens were found in the upper two levels. No features were encountered and no artifacts of polished stone, shell, or bone
were found. The area lacked evidence of pottery.
It is felt that the sample from Area D is too small to be of much significance. The graphs, however~ indicate that the same general trend
is present at Area D as at the other areas: arrow points increase in frequency through time as dart points decrease (Fig. 18).

TABLE 11
Vertical Distribution of Artifacts in Area D
Level I
Dart points
Gary D1
Gary D5
Edgewood

-- ....

Dart point fragments

....

Arrow points
A4
A5
A6
A7

....
....
2

Alba
Arrow point fragments

Level 2

Level 3

2

1

Level 4

1

Surface

....

1
1
(2

4
2

1

1

1

1

....

1
2

Scraper V
Biface I

4

Gouge ]

1

4

Pecking pebble

....

1

Total

11

9

Percentages

50%

40%

1

1

1

5%

5%

12

LIMERICK SITE

I07

Comparison of Areas A, B, C, and D
When the materials from the various areas of the site are compared,
they seem to be typologically similar in the main. Some dart point
forms in the lower levels of Area C were different, but the other artifacts were much the same throughout the site. As a result of the typological similarities, the intra-site analysis was based on percentages
and/or frequencies of the three principal artifact classes. For each
area, the number of artifacts in each class was computed. Considering
the small sample, a level by level comparison probably would not be
valid; however, the general trend from the lower to the upper levels
of each area is probably significant.
TABLE 12
Relative Percentages of Pottery, Arrow Points, Dart Points

Pottery
Area
Level
Level
Level
Level
Level
Level

A
1
2
3
4
5
6

84%
48%
20%

B
83%
86%
74%
85%
48%
63%

Dart Points
A
B
5%
40%
60%

I

6%
4%
17%
10%
45%
37%

Arrow Point~

A

B

n%

n%

~2%
20%

lo%
9%
5%
7%
0%

For Areas A and B, the comparison was based on three classes--pottery, dart points and arrow points (Table 12). When comparing Areas
A and B, the lowest level in each area should not be given full statistical weight because of the small size of the samples. The lines in Table
12 indicate marked percentage changes and the approximate division
between the Archaic and Neo-American occupations.
For Areas C and D, where no pottery was recovered, the intra-site
comparison has to be on the basis of arrow points and dart points only
because--except for two sherds at Area C--pottery was not found in
these areas. Table 13 compares the vertical distribution of dart points
and arrow points for all of the areas. This may be an unwarranted
comparison if the people responsible for the cultural debris in Area
C and D were pre-pottery groups.
INTERPRETATION OF THE TABLES

The percentage Figures in Table 12 indicate that level 1 of Area A
and levels 1 through 4 of Area B are possibly the result of occupation
by the same people. This relationship is also indicated by typological

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

108

No. %

Leve!s

I

~

r

Is 75
5

Arrow

21

i

t distribution
Area

A

L~iels
Sherd -distribution
Area A

A

B

No. %
Levels

9

31

Ills

tee 70
65 23

Dart p

Levels

No. %

I
’

2 1
3

lmlmml

It

35

II

3
t distribution

D

Levels

No. %

I

~
m

2
3

lm

2

6

4

.5

met

2

6

5
6

III

IlW

I

No. %

4

Levels

No. %

I

I

el

2

95 33

2

lllllll

61 2t

3

llllll

4

,

4

llll

35 12

4

lll

49 12

5

m

13

4

5

ml

28

7

3

6

.

5

2

6

.

I0

3

7

Area B

Area B

Area B

F

G

H

Levels
I

1

7 39

2

I

2

3

No %
27 36

Levels

No

1

I

15 20

3

4

1

t3

17

5

5

l=

4

6

6

.

2

7

.

2

4

Arrow poin! distribution

13

J

Levels

NO. %

4

57 35
2

I

31

I

6 20

3

1

30

18

4

1

5

17

4

Ill

19

II

5

5

.

I

3

5

~

22

14

2

6

6

.

5

3

2

7

Dart point distribution
Area C

%

13 43
13

Area C
l

29

90 23

Overall distribution

9 50

II

~118

t2 28

2

ll

I04 26

3

17

3

No. %

t

9

/

lmmlll

Levels

14 33

I

2

28

Sherd distribution

B

III

14

Dart poinl distribution

E

Levels

6

7

istribution

Area A

4

Area

al-~d

C

33

Arrow point distribution

is
Over

Area A

721

6

I0

Gary

.

t

3

Overall

distribulion

Area
DI distribution
Area

Q

K

Fig. 17. Artifact distribution according to level at the Limerick site.

19

L

C.~__

TABLE 13
Relative Percentages of Dart Points and Arrow Points
Dart Points
Area
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5

Level 6

A

B

33%
77%
75%

35%
27%
67%
67%

I

86%
lOO%

Arrow Points

C
[
I

75%
65%
88%
100%

D
]

33%
50%
100%

A
67%
23%
25%

lOO%
loo%

B
I

65%
73%

C
I
I

D

25%
35%

[ 67%
50%

33%
33%

12%
0%

0%

14%
0%

0%
0%

comparison. The ratio of pottery to dart points and arrow points in
these levels is similar for both areas. Levels 3 and 4 of Area B, however, have more dart points than arrow points, a reverse of the situation in the upper levels of Area B and Area A.
As noted previously, Table 13 is open to question. If it is a valid
comparison, then certain intra-site relations are suggested. It can be
noted that using this method of comparison only levels 1 and £ of
Area B equate well with level 1 of Area A.
The figures for Area C indicate a high ratio of dart points to arrow
points in the top 3 levels, a relationship that in the other areas of the
site exists only in levels 2 and 3 of Area A and levels 3, 4, and 5 of
Area B.
While the exact relationship of the various areas of the site remains
uncertain, some relationships are indicated by the general trend which
is basically the same in each area. This trend is toward the diminished
use through time of dart points and the increased use of arrow points.
In Areas A and B, the increased use of the arrow point is in conjunction with the increased use of pottery (Fig. 18).

Cultural Affiliations
In Areas B and C the artifacts, their provenience, and their associations indicate that two different groups of Archaic people once occupied the Limerick Site. While there are some typological similarities, there are also some differences. In both areas the contracting
stem dart point was found, but the lower levels of Area C has, in addition, a concentration of other distinctive dart point forms. In the
same levels with these dart points are other artifacts which have been
found in association with these same dart point forms at other sites.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i 10

LEVEL5

Area A

Area h

Area B

Area B

L£VEL~

2

3

4

5

6

Area D

Area C
LEVELIS

i i i! i !i i i !i i! il

5

¯ ::::.’:: :.7.’::::::::::: :::.’::,

fi i iLi i i i i i
[] Pottery

...:..::: :::::::::::::::..::...,¢:::

[] Arrow points

..::..::..::.,:..::::::::::::.,::..,-:.
,:::::..::::::::::::::::::,7:.’:."

[] Dart points

Comparative Relationship
of Pottery, Arrow points, and

’

Fig.

18,

3o

Dart points

,"

Comparative relationships of pottery, arrow points, and dart points at the

Limerick site.

F_,LAtVi FOCUS I~.ELATIOiXISHIPS

The cultural affiliations suggested by the assemblage of dart points
and other artifacts in the lower levels of Area C are primarily with the
Elam Focus of the Trinity Aspect. In order to differentiate the Elam

LIMERICI~ SITE

111

Focus from the preceding Carrolhon Focus, the Elam Focus, in its
definitive description by Crook and Harris (1952: 7-38), was partially
defined on the basis of negative traits or traits which were absent in
Elam but generally present in Carrollton. However, one of the major
negative traits shared by Garrolhon and Elam was the absence of
arrow points. Arrow points are lacking in the lower levels of Area C.
Other traits characteristic of Elam Focus are the presence of Elam
dart points, a few Gary dart points, leaf-shaped knives, scraping flakes,
straight-edged gouges, and "turtle back" scrapers. This assemblage
of traits is present in the lower levels of Area C.
Although there are several similarities, there are some differences
between the lower levels of Area C and Elam Focus. Some of these differences may be due to the small sample of materials from Area G,
which may account for the absence of the following Elam Focus traits:
Ellis, Yarbrough, and Wells dart points, choppers, hammerstones, and
manos. Also, the incidence of contracting stem dart points relative to
other forms is much higher than has been previously reported for
Elam Focus components.
Since the contracting stem dart point is more common eastward
from the Limerick Site, and also since it evidently appeared later than
some non-contracting stem forms (Wheat, 1953:215; Tunnell, 1961),
its presence in Area G’s material culture configuration may be the
result of the marginal location of the Limerick Site with respect to
other Elam Focus sites; or it may be that the culture of these people
existed slightly earlier or later than that of the Elam Focus proper.

WYLIE FOCUS ~ELATIOINSHIPS

A comparison of traits between the Limerick Site and the Wylie
Focus shows distinct differences, although there are several traits
which are common to both. Some of the traits shared with Wylie Focus
are certain arrow point forms (A3, AS, A8, and A17) ; the Gary dart
point forms 131, D3, and D8; some scraper, gouge, and drill forms; and
Sanders type pottery. More significantly, those traits which are considered especially diagnostic of the Wylie Focus--large basin-shaped
pits, bone artifacts, agricultural implements, Fresno and Harrell arrow
point types, shell tempered pottery, and T-shaped drills,--are absent
at the Limerick Site. The absence of Wylie Focus diagnostic traits indicates no major cultural relationship existed between the Wylie Focus
and the Limerick Site.

TEXA~ ARCIKEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i i2

EAST TEXAS ASPECT RELATIONSHIPS

Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954:148-151 ) presented a provisional
trait list for the East Texas Aspect of the Archaic Stage. A comparison
of traits from the Limerick Site with this list shows marked similarity.
The provisional East Texas Aspect is characterized by the following
traits: abundance of Gary type dart points, presence of Yarbrough
and Edgewood points, Alba and other arrow points, T-shaped drills,
fist axes, heavy end scrapers (gouges), sandstone nut stones, small
milling stones, small manos, and pigments of hematite and limonite.
Of these traits only the T-shaped drill is absent at the Limerick Site.
Other traits in the provisional trait list stated to be rare or almost unknown were not found in the small sample of materials recovered from
the Limerick Site.
A major difference is the presence of some pottery in what is generally a basic Archaic complex. Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 150)
comment that arrow points seem to have entered the East Texas area
somewhat in advance of pottery. To the south, however, near Houston,
Texas, Wheat (1955: Fig. 25) found in the Addicks Basin that pottery was introduced first into that area. To the southeast in San Augustine County, Texas, pottery appears before arrow points (Tunnell,
1961). To the north in eastern Oklahoma, Bell’s data from the Scott
Site (!955) indicates that granular clay tempered pottery was introduced into the Wister Reservoir area before arrow points. The Limerick Site data, while insufficient to permit comment on which was
introduced first in the East Texas area in general, suggests that pottery and arrow points appeared at the site at approximately the same
time.
The only evidence suggesting a prepottery-arrow point occupation
is present in the upper levels of Area C. It will be recalled that the
two top levels of Area C contained arrow points and a relatively
scarcity (only 2) of potsherds, together with a relatively large number of dart points. In addition, the proportional percentages of the
dart points and arrow points are different for this area. It is possible
that these differences are the result of the use of the area as a temporary

hunting camp.
Conjectures
The sample of materials from the Limerick Site is small and any
conclusions reached herein are tentative. They are based, however, on
the premise that the sample was representative unless otherwise noted.

LIMERICK SITE

i i3

The data from the Limerick Site suggest that there was an early
Elam Focus occupation followed by a later Sanders Focus occupation
showing some relationships with the Wylie Focus. A period of occupation, as used herein, is not a continual or specific occupation
but rather it is a time span during which the site was probably
occupied intermittently by groups of people having the same material
culture.
The early occupation was by a pre-ceramic, pre-arrow point group
with Elam Focus cultural affiliations. The evidence for this occupation was recovered in the lower levels of Area C.
The late occupation occurred at a time when pottery was well integrated into the material culture and when the bow and arrow complex
was replacing the atlatl and dart. The arrow points were diversified in
form and no one type seems to have dominated the arrow point category. The basic core tradition used in Archaic times was still present.
The materials representative of this period were found in the upper
level of Area A and the upper levels of Area B. The pottery tradition-including Sanders Plain, Sanders Engraved, Canton Incised and the
Sanders clay pipe form--suggest that these people are culturally
closely related to the people responsible for the Sanders Focus. Considering the number of dart points relative to arrow points, and the
absence of "Plains" traits (alternate beveled knives, buffalo scapula
hoes, etc.) as well as the ceremonial traits, the Sanders occupation at
the Limerick Site may represent an early period of the Focus.
After categorizing some of the materials into these two periods, there
remain some artifacts which can not be ascribed to either period. The
materials from the lower levels of Area A and Area B do not appear
to be closely related to either the Elam Focus or the Sanders Focus.
This group possessed the small arrow point and Sanders type pottery
tempered with bone and/or clay-grit. These traits, however, seem to
be superimposed on a basically Archaic tradition because the dart
point was the more popular projectile point form, and the other implements of this group, which included drills with unmodified bases,
gouges, hammerstones, knives and blades, core implements and scrapers, etc., are basically the same as those used by Archaic groups. The
materials and their relative percentages suggest that the people who
made them could be included in the Archaic Stage of the East Texas
Aspect. They do, however, probably represent a late component--possibly a group which was transitional. That is, they were basically
Archaic and in the process of integrating the bow and arrow and pottery into their cultural system.

114

T~XA~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Other explanations of the Limerick Site are possible. A more categorical explanation follows the same general line as the above interpretation. The materials from the lower levels of Area C could belong to the Elam Focus and the lower levels of Area A and Area B
could be components of the East Texas Aspect. The pottery and arrow
points in these levels would, in this case, be attributed to natural disturbances and the artificial levels used in the excavations. As a result, all the arrow points and pottery found on the site would have
been made by the people with Sanders Focus cultural affiliations. A
new problem is created by this interpretation. Which Archaic group
occupied the site first or did both groups occupy it concurrently? There
is no evidence that the Archaic occupations of the site were contemporaneous, and there is insufficient data to determine which group was
there first.
These are only tentative conjectures, and undoubtedly further excavations and analysis of materials from the areas surrounding the
Iron Bridge Reservoir will provide a more stable frame of reference for
the integration and interpretation of the archeology of the region.

Summary
The Limerick Site, on the Sabine River in Rains County, Texas is
one of several sites to be inundated by the Iron Bridge Reservoir. The
site consists of two knolls and several large sandy spots. Excavations
were conducted in the knolls and on two of the sandy spots.
The materials were analyzed and classified by first grouping them
according to material used in manufacture, e.g., clay, stone. The groups
were further subdivided into smaller groups based on general characteristics, e.g., decorated and undecorated sherds, projectile points.
scrapers, etc. These groups were further subdivided on the basis of
similarity of forms, e.g., engraved or incised sherds, expanding or contracting stems on proiectile points, and in many cases these groups
were again broken into smaller groups. This method of analysis differs
from analysis by previously defined types where the materials are
pigeonholed into previously established categories. In the present
analysis groups of artifacts initially sorted on the basis of similarity
in form within the site were assigned to previously established types
only when all the necessary requirements for the type were fulfilled
by the whole group.
The materials recovered indicate that there were at least two periods

LIMERICK SITE

I 15

of occupation at the Limerick Site. These two occupations had evidence of influences from two defined foci---Elam and Sanders. In addition to these occupations, a third group lived on the site prior to the
Sanders Focus people. It is suggested that the material culture of this
third group represents a component of the East Texas Aspect. Whether
these people possessed pottery and arrow points is a matter of interpretation of the data. Two possible explanations were offered, but because
of the small size of the sample plus the tack of data from related sites,
final conclusions must be withheld until further data become available.

Re/erences Cited
Atwood, Wallace W.
1940. The Physiographic Provinces of North America. Boston.
Baerreis, David A., Joan E. Freeman, and James V. Wright
1958. The Contracting Stem Projectile Point in Eastern Oklahoma. Bulletin of
the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 6, pp. 61-81.
Bell, Robert E.
1953. The Scott Site, Leflore County, Oklahoma. American Antiquity, Vol. 18,
No. 4, pp. 314-331.
1958a. Archaeological Investigations at the Boat Dock Site, Ma-1, in the Lake
Texoma Area, Marshall County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. 6, pp. 37--47.
1958b. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Special Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, No. 1.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr., and tl. K. Harris.
1952. Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carrollton and Elam Foci.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 7-38.
1954. Traits of the Trinity Aspect Archaic: Carrollton and Elam Foci. The
Record, Vol, 12, No. 1, pp. £~-16.
Davis, E. Mott
1958. The Whelan Site, A Late Caddoan Component in the Ferrell’s Bridge
Reservoir, Northeastern Texas. Unpublished report to the National Park
Service, on file at the Regional Office of the National Park Service, Santa
Fe, New Mexico, and at the Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Austin.
Dice, Lee !l.
1943. The Biotic Provinces of North America. Ann Arbor.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938. Physiography of Eastern United States. New York.
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 46, Part 1.

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Jelks, Edward B.
1953. Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeologicat
Society, Vol. 24, pp. 189-207.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1957. Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Iron Bridge Reservoir, Hunt,
Rains, and Van Zandt counties Texas. Unpublished report to the NationaI
Park Service, on file at the regional office of the National Park Service,
Santa Fe, New Mexico, and at the Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Johnson, LeBoy, Jr., and Edward B. Jelks
1958. The Tawakoni-Yscani Village, 1760: A Study in Archeological Site
Identification. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 405-422.
Kreiger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The University of
Texas Publication 4640.
Miller, E. 0., and Edward B. Jelks
1952. Archaeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 168-217.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Patterson, J. T.
1936. The Corner-tang Flint Artifacts of Texas. The University of Texas Publication 3618.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932. The Geology of Texas. Vol. 1: Stratigraphy. The University of Texas
Bulletin 3232.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1952. The Hogge Bridge Site and the Wylie Focus. American Antiquity, Vol. 17,
No. 4, pp. 299-312.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Tunnell, Curtis D.
1961. Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three Sites in the McGee Bend
Reservoir, San Augustine County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30 (this issue).
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
In: River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 4, The Addicks Dam Site. River
Basin Surveys Papers, Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 154, pp. 143-252.

The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

