Excavation of a Buried Midden, Site 41CXll
in Crockett County, Texas
AARON D. t/raGS, JR.
ABSTRACT
A site in northwestern Crockett County was discovered exposed in the
banks of an intermittent stream. Burned rocks, ash, and other occupational debris were underneath ten feet of sterile overburden. Limited
excavations made in 1967 recovered Langtry projectile points and other
artifacts which suggest that the site may be assigned to the Period 2
Pecos River Focus.

INTRODUCTION
Site 41CXll is visible in the east bank of an intermittent stream for
a distance of 94 feet in a north-south direction. In the bank opposite
it is only 54 feet in length. The creek bed is approximately 12 feet
wide. This suggests a circular or oval outline for the midden dissected
to the west of center by the stream. The occupation layer varies from
9 to 30 inches in thickness on the east bank and is thicker-3 feet-in
the west bank. Overburden made up of sands and gravels covers the
occupation level to a maximum of 10 feet.
On the present surface there are two nearby burned rock middens.
The first is some 40 feet in diameter and lies nearly 400 feet to the
north-northeast. The second, only 10 feet in diameter, is about 300 feet
to the south. These middens and adjacent surfaces have been arrowhead hunted for years, but only an occasional find can be made today.
The smal! stream that cuts through the site derives from the Edwards Plateau and empties into the Pecos River a short distance below
the site. The creek bed contains water only following the infrequent
rainfalls.
Most of the vegetation in the area is in the form of cacti or brush
and includes barrel cactus, hedgehog, prickly pear, yucca, mescal,
leehugilla, sotol, allthorn, eatelaw, and creosote. Deer, rabbit, coyote,
and javelina are abundant in the area today. Smaller animals include
pocket gopher, raccoon, skunk, snake, lizard, frog, turtle, and bird.
The author is indebted to J. M. Barkes of Midland for his horn’s of
work on the contour map and to Colten S. Parker of Lubbock and
Arnold E. Sommer of Midland for their companionship and assistance
during the excavation.

77

SITE 41CXII, CROCKETT COUNTY, TEXAS

41 CX II

FmuR~ 1.

Topographic map of Site 41CXll.

EXCAVATION
A datum was established for vertical control, and the site was
mapped with plane table and alidade (Fig. 1 ). Horizontal control was
maintained by referring to a base point 9.5 feet west of the top edge
of the east bank. This point was selected because it offered the opportunity to reach the largest area of the burned-rock stratum by the
removal of a minimum of sterile overbui’den. A grid system of five
foot squares was superimposed, one of which would permit a stratatest through overburden, midden, and all other layers (Fig. 2). Within each stratum records were kept by 6 inch levels.
Six of these squares were excavated through the burned-rock layer.
tloeks were removed by hand, but all other excavated material was
passed over a 3-i-inch hardware cloth.
Although bedrock was exposed on the west wall of the creek some
9.0 feet upstream, it was not reached in the area of excavation. Several
soundings to 3 feet below the midden found only pea gravel. A narrow

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

78

o

o
~0

*~I) ~ ~ ~ ~ i ~o~-J.~:.li--~:::::::::~:..%~_~.~:6:~:.-~£-’-~::::::::
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~, ’ ¯ -~ .’:’:’:’:.:.:.:.:.’-’~.Y~n::P.{~::r~:.~.:c~.~;:;:;:;:;:::
~.......
:.:.:.:.:.
.......0..
.:.:.:.:.:
:.:.:.:.:.
.°%°..,.
:.:.:.:.:
°%...°,°
.:.:.:.:.

FIGURE 2.

Profile of the south wall.

O--

SITE 41CXII, CROCKETT ¢OVNTY, TEXAS

79

cut, 6 inches in width, was made in the opposite (west) bank, and it
conformed to the sequence of strata disclosed in the east bank.
The thickness of the midden deposit varied from 9 to 36 inches.
The mass of the midden was made up of thousands of densely-packed
angular fragments of limestone which averaged from 2 to 5 inches in
diameter. The limestone is derived from outcrops of the Cretaceous
formation found extensively over the Edwards Plateau. On contact
with fire limestone fractures in angular fragments and becomes a dark
gray color.
The space between the stones was filled with greasy ash. Bits of
fresh-water mussel shells, dirt, and various artifacts occurred throughout the unstratified mass of rocks.
Study of the area of burned rock exposed in the banks and the excavated area revealed no recognizable pattern of deposit. The midden
does not appear to be doughnut-shaped as there were no peaks on
either end in the bank profile. No cooking basin or pit outline was
recognized within the burned-rock deposit.
TOOLS
Twenty tools of chipped stone were recovered from the six excavated squares, nearly half of these coming fi’om one square on the
south-central pro± of the excavated area. Some of the squares had
been truncated by erosion down into the artifact-bearing zone, there,
fore, measurements were also taken upward from the bottom of this
zone. Most of the tools were in the lowest levels of the midden zone:
half of the tools were in the lower 6 inches and three-quarters were
in the lower 19, inches. The same frequencies applied to the projectile
points. The latter are identified according to the Hi~ndbook of Texas
Archeology (Suhm and Jelks 1969,).
One broken, stemmed dart point, apparently of the type Marshall,
was recovered from within the overburden, 5 feet above the base of
the burned-rock layer (Fig. 3 A). The broken blade is broad and
asymmetrical. Shoulders are barbed. The stem is parallel-sided and the
base is slightly convex. Maximum width across the barbs is 3.9 cm.
and stem width is 1.4 cm.
A crudely flaked projectile point with a contracting stem was classified as an Almag~’e (Fig. 3 B ). The tip is missing, so the blade shape
is unknown, but one edge appears to be straighter than the other.
Shoulders are weak and the thick base is almost pointed. It also resembles a variety of Langtry with crude workmanship.
Six projectile points from among the five squares that yielded artifacts are classified as Langtry (Fig. 3 C-H). More than one sub-type

80

FIGURE 3.

TEXAS A1RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Projectile points. A, Marshall point. B, Almagre point. C-H,
Langtry points.

may be represented, but features intergrade and separation is difficult. These have triangular blades with edges that are straight (D, G,
H), or concave (E, F), or reeurved (C). All are finely chipped and
have prominent shoulders. Stems vary from contracting (E, F) to
parallel-edges (D, H) to slightly expanding (C, G). Bases are concave on four specimens (C, D, E, F) and straight on two (G, H).
Two specimens have a noticeable bevel on the base (D, E). Lengths
vary from a minimum of 5.4 cm. to a maximum of 8 cm. Shoulder
width of the Langtry type varies from 2.9. cm. (E) to 2.9 cm. (D).
Nine knives, the most numerous artifact class, are made of the local
gray and tan flint (Fig. 4). They may be divided into five groups
based on the shape Of the base, the thickness, or the manufacture:
(1) Two bifaces, one a basal fragment, have thin well-worked
blades with straight bases (Fig. 4 A, B ). The complete specimen has
one convex edge and one recurved edge.
(2) One specimen with a convex base is very thick (Fig. 4 C).
Workmanship is not as good on this knife as on other specimens, however, it is of a more coarse grade of chel±. It is 9.0 cm. long, 5.1 cm.
wide, and 2.5 cm. thick.
(3) Two specimens are triangular to leaf-shaped blades with con-

SITE

41CXII,

FIGURE 4.

FIGURE

5.

CROCKETT COUNTY, TEXAS

Knives.

81

8~,

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

vex bases (Fig. 4 D, E ). They are very thin and of fine chipping. One
(D) was the artifact found highest in the burned-rock layer. It is
10.4 cm. long and 4.4 cm. wide. The other (E) was found lowest in
the burned-rock layer. It is 5.0 cm. long and 2.8 cm. wide.
(4) Two parallel-sided specimens with convex bases are triangular in cross-section (Fig. 4 F, C). The complete specimen is 9.9 cm.
long, 2.6 cm. wide, and 0.7 cm. thick.
(5) Two unifacial specimens are actually triangular flakes retouched on a small area of one edge to provide a cutting or scraping
edge (Fig. 4 H, I).
Two scrapers, one on a cortex flake, were recovered. (Fig. 5, A, B ).
They are worked on one edge of one face. The underface is the flat,
original, unmodified cleavage of the flake.
A chopper produced from a thin core of tan flint has a cortex layer
present on both faces (Fig. 5 C). It is oval in outline. All except 3.1
cm. of the edge has been thinned. It is 9.1 cm. long, 7.3 cm. wide,
and 2.5 cm. thick.
CONCLUSIONS
A limited excavation serves as a means of testing a site to learn the
natnre of the deposit and to determine the need for a larger excavation. This goal was reached. The consistent distribution of Lan~ry
projectile points in each square suggests a pure Period 2 Pecos River
Focus as described by Epstein (1969,: 116).
No cooking basin or pit outline could be recognized within the
burned-rock layer. Burned rock or heat fractured limestone of this
quantity surely was created by cooking. More excavations are needed
to better understand the burned-rock midden and its relationship to
cooking methods.
I:~EFERENCES CITED
Epstein, J. F.
1969. Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1958. Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society, Vol. 33, pp. 1-19.9.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Ielks (editors)
1969. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 4.
Midland, Texas

