The Site
by E. Mo’rT DAvis, KATHLEEN
EDWARD B. JELKS, C.

GILMORE, LOYD HARPER,

A.

SI’VZITH, JR.,

and

R. K.

HARRIS,

BILL YANCY

SETTING
The Gilbert Site (41 RA 13) is in Rains County, Texas, some 70
miles east of Dallas, at the southena edge of the valley of Lake Fork
Creek, a tributary of the upper reaches of the Sabine River. This
location is near the western margin of the forested m’ea of eastern
Texas, and hence of the southeastern United States. The local uplands
consist of broad fields and meadows interspersed with wooded areas,
while the stream valleys characteristically are thickly wooded. A few
miles to the west rolling prairie begins.

¯ ¯<

\

a,,t,

s....

I

;
:,,

7

~h

7

t~

/

,

’

.lo

\\

~,20

fill

~o

\<

/

/
J

/..,
/¯

s

GILBERT

TE

41 RA i3

PLAN

SITE
o

oo

zoo

~oo

/
FmuR]~ 1. Sketch map of the Gilbert Site and environs, showing the distribution of the features.

TEXAS AItCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGUKE 2.

Briefing session preparatory to digging Feature 7. The field di-

rector is putting the finger on the assistant field director while the shovel
hands look pensive.
Trees in the immediate area are mostly hardwoods- pecan, prickly
ash, locust, water elm, hackberry, several varieties of oak, and persimmon. The underbrush consists of Indian currant, poison ivy, wild dewberries, blackberries, haw, and Cherokee rose. The countryside is relatively rich in wild plant and animal food; catfish and other fish are
to be caught in Lake Fork Creek. (Charlie Bollich, in fact, caught
several catfish in the creek during the field school using - improbably
-longitudinally split frankfurters for bait.)
The subsoil in the vicinity of the site comprises red and yellow
clays of the Wilcox Group of the East Texas Eocene (Oetking, 1959).
No in situ cultural material is to be found, of course, in these clays.
Overlying the clays is a thin layer of fine sand comprising the topsoil.
Once loosened by the plow or by erosion, the sand is rather quiekly
removed by wind and water, exposing the clay subsoil. All cultural
materials and features at the Gilbert Site were in the sand layer
except for some pits that had been dug down into the clay.
SITE DESCRIPTION
Superficially the site consists of a series of small mounds on a low,
sandy hill about 500 yards from Lake Fork Creek (Fig. 1). Much of

3

THE SITE

FIGURE

3.

Excavating Feature 7. Charlie Smith showing open-mouthed

wonder at the dexterity of Bill Caskey.
the hill has been under cultivation in the past, but it is now in pasture.
The western part of the hill, and of the site, lies in thick woods. A
small amount of cultural debris- glass beads, metal scraps, flint
spalls, and the like- may be found on the surface of the ground.
The mounds, actually middens, are circular to oval in outline, 20
to 30 feet in diameter, and about a foot high on an average. There are
more than 9,0 of them scattered over an area of some 50 acres.
Stretching between Lake Fork Creek and the elevated ground on
which the site lies is the flood plain of the creek.

HISTORY OF INVESTIGATION
The site was first noted by Mr. and Mrs. Harold Akins of Sulphur
Springs in 1962. They sent metal artifacts and pottery sherds found
at the site to the University of Texas for identification. Recognizing
that the metal artifacts were parts of 18th-century flintlock muskets,
Jelks requested R. K. Harris to investigate. Harris visited the site
and collected enough material to verify that it was the location of an
Indian village or encampment probably dating from before 1800.
It was named the Gilbert Site after the principal landowners, Messrs.
John C. Gilbert and Lennon Gilbert.
Early in 1962, preliminary tests were made at two of the middens,

4

FIGURE

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

4.

Meanwhile, back at the cookhouse, Louise Caskey and Dessamae

Lorrain start supper.
Features i and 2, by members of the Dallas Areheological Society
under the supervision of tl. K. Harris. Matel~al found in the tests
indicated that the Gilbert Site was a component of the Nortefio Focus,
an areheological manifestation identified with Wichita tribes of the
1700-1850 period. The focus had been defined not long before on
the basis of data from a series of sites in Texas and Oklahoma, ineluding the Spanish Fort Site, the Womack Site, a late occupation
at the Sanders Site, the StansbulT Site, the Vinson Site, and the

~E SITE

5

FIGURE 5. Screening crew at Feature 6. Left to right: Bill Yancy, Mardith
Schuetz, D. J. Smelley, Griffin King. In right foreground are bags of dirt
collected under the screen for processing at the bead mine.

FIGURE 6. The bead mine in operation. Bob Turner pumping with left
hand while Loyd Harper hoses water through fine screen.

TEXAS A1RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Scratching for beads. The residue left behind after washing the
bead dirt through the fine screen has been dried out on a tarpaulin. Scratch-

FIGURE 7.

ers, left to right: Bill Caskey, Loyd Harper, Byron Barber, Louise Caskey,
two unidentified straw-hatted pickers.
Pearson Site (Duffield and Jelks, 1961).
It was clear from the tests in Features 1 and 2 that the Gilbert Site
merited intensive investigation, and it was decided to hold the group
dig planned by the Texas Areheological Society there that summer.
The dig began on June 22 and continued through July 15. During
that period the number of participants present at any time varied
h’om 6 or 7 to 25 or 30.
WORK DONE
Seventeen middens (designated as features) were located and recorded (Fig. 1). Four of them (Nos. 8, 4, 6, and 7) were tested
extensively. Four others (Nos. 1, 5, 10, and 16) were tested briefly.
The only occupational features discovered besides the middens were
two pits that were evidently used for storing grain or other products.
No house floors, post-mold patterns, burials, hearths, or other such
structural remains were found. The middens did, however, yield a rich
harvest of artifacts, both European trade items and objects of native
manufacture.

TTIE

7

SITE

Fmnl~u 8. Blading the Feature 5 area. Harold Akins driving, blade riders
unidentified.

TECHNIQUES OF INVESTIGATION
At each feature that was excavated, an independent reference system was established for horizontal and vertical control. All the systems were ultimately tied together in the course of a plane table
survey of the site.
Vertical control at each feature was based on a nail driven into a
nearby tree or post, or on a stake driven into the ground. This base
point was assigned an arbitrary elevation of 100 ft. Horizontal control
at each feature was achieved through a system of cardinal-direction
coordinates based on magnetic north. The first step in establishing a
coordinate system was to put a stake in the approximate center of
the feature and assign that point the value N100/E100 (that is, North
100 ft., East 100 ft.). This placed the center (NO/EO) point of the
system at a spot southwest of the feature and placed the feature itself
entirely within the northeast quadrant of the system. All measurements
were in feet and tenths of feet.
The basic excavation technique was to dig by five-foot squares, a
half-foot at a time, passing the earth through a screen of one-fourth
inch mesh and putting the specimens in paper bags labeled by feature, square, and level. Most of the digging was done with shovels.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL

GILBERT

SITE

(41RA

13)

FEATURE
APPROXIMATE

SOCIETY

AREA

3
OF

MIDDEN

N

GILBERT

SITE

41

RA 13

FEATURE

3

] ZONE C (HUMUS STAINED MIDDEN SOIL}
--) W
] ZONE S (GRAY MiOOEN SOiL,MUCH CULTURAL MATERIAL}
]

FIGUR~ 9.

ZONE

A (RED

CLAY

SUBSOIL,STERILE)

Feature 3. Plan

of

o

2
sc=E

~

4
~E~T

midden above, profile through midden below.

When each half-foot level was finished, the floor and walls were
scraped with trowels and examined for significant soil changes. The
exact location of impo1~ant finds, such as pits or significant artifacts,
was recorded. Materials found on the surface away from features
were sacked under the general label sub’face random.

THE SITE

9

FIGURE 10. Feature 3 under excavation. The approximate depth of the
midden soil is shown by the height of the standing pedestals of earth.

Modifications of the basic excavation technique were implemented
to suit particular circumstances. For instanee, Feature 7, a relatively
large clay-capped midden which had discernible strata, was excavated by zones rather than by half-foot levels.
Samples of earth from each midden were washed through window
screen to check for glass beads and other wee objects that would pass
through the one-fourth-inch mesh sereens being used generally. In
some areas- Feature 3, for example- large numbers of beads were
found; consequently a fairly sizable bead-washing operation (fondly
known at the time as the bead mine) was set up for washing the
midden soil through window sereens, using water pumped from a
nearby slough (Fig. 6). After the fine soil had been washed through,
the material remaining on the screens was spread out and dried, and
the tiny beads were picked out (Fig. 7).
A tractor and blade were employed at Features 1, 3, and 5 to
scrape Off the sod and plow zone in a search for burial pits, post
molds, or other intrusions into the subsoil. In certain areas between
and beyond the middens, a tractor and plow were used to cut long
single furrows in the surface of the ground as a means of testing
for signs of occupation not visible superficially. The use of machinery,
although not productive of abundant evidence, nevertheless did turn
up information which otherwise would have gone undiscovered.
The written record of the work consisted of detailed notes and
sketches of each feature, of the levels in each square, and in some

10

TEXAS ARCTIEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

GILBERT
(41

SITE

RA

15)

FEATURE

7

CONTOUR INTERVAL

0.5 ft.

.....

I0 ft.
j

GILBERT

FmuR~

SITE

41RAI3

FEATURE

] ZONE C (RED AND YELLOW CLAY, VIRTUALLY

STERILE)

]

ZONE

B

(GRAY MIODEN

MATERIAL)

]

ZONE

A

(RED

11.

CLAY

SOIL, MUCH

CULTURAL

7

SUBSOIL, STERILE)

Feature 7. Topography above, profile through midden below.

cases of individual finds, on standgrdxecord forms used by the University of Texas Department of Anthropology. Scale drawings were
made of significant profiles and excavation floors. In addition, a field
journal was kept during the entire project, and a record was maintained of the photographs taken at the site. Contour maps were made
of Features 3 and 7, and a master site plan was prepared with alidade
and plane table on which the feature locations were plotted.

THE

11

SITE

FIGURE 12. Starting the first test at Feature 7. Charlie Smith seated at extreme left; in background are Louise Caskey, Bill Caskey (crouching, with
hat), Isabelle Lobdell (leaning forward over Bill’s head), Bob Turner, and
Charlie Bollich (crouching, with bald spot shining); Dessamae Lorrain and
Jo Ann Parsons at transit.

In the five years that have passed since the Gilbert Site dig, several
society members have continued to work at the site intermittently.
They have located several middens that were not found in 1969. and
have calmed out additional excavation both at the old and at the newly
discovered middens. The approximate positions of the recently found
middens have been added to the site plan (Fig. 1), but their precise
locations have not been surveyed in. Much of the artifactual material
found since 1969. has been included with that from the group dig in
the descriptions and discussions of artifacts that follow.
OCCUPATIONAL FEATURES
The individual midden areas previously mentioned were the primary units of excavation at the Gilbert Site. They were termed features. A total of 16 such features had been recorded by the end of the
field work in the summer of 1962; five more have been located since.
During the 1969. summer dig, Features 3, 4, 6, and 7 were excavated
extensively, and Features 10 and 16 were tested briefly. The Feature
1 and Feature 5 areas were bladed with machinery in a search for
post molds or other evidence of structures. The blading produced no
house remains but did expose a small pit at Feature 5.
Features 1 and 2 had been dug rather completely by various per-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIcUr~E 13.
den.

Profile at Feature 7. Clay cap resting unconformably on mid-

FIGURz 14. Midden soil at Feature 7. The richness of the midden is indicated by the garbage bones.

THE SiTE

13

FmuR~ 15. Gathering for supper. Lester Wilson seated at left, Charlie
Smith seated at right; standing around table, left to right, are Dessamae Lorrain, Bob Turner, the Griffin Kings, and Loyd Harper; seated people in background unidentified.

sons before the summer of 1962. Material collected from those two
features by 1~. K. Harris is included in the present study. Since 1962,
Harris and Jay C. Blaine have continued to work at the site on occasion
and have dug tests in Features 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, and
21. Their artifacts h’om those features are also ineluded in the m’tifact
analysis here.
The features were small, individual midden areas, oval to roughly
eircular in outline. As far as could be determined, they were all between 20 and 35 feet in diameter. Maximum thickness of the middens
ranged from 5 or 6 to about 19, inches. The midden soil, gray and
sandy, contained varying amounts of bone scrap, charcoal, ash, and
other debris resulting from human habitation. Features 4, 6, 7, 8, and
11 were covered by layers of elay from about 5 to about 18 inches
thick. The reason for capping the middens with clay is unknown, but
the same trait occurred at the Vinson Site in Limestone County, a
Nortefio Focus site partially excavated by a Texas Archeological Soeie-

14

FIGURE

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

16.

Pit filled with midden dirt at Feature 5, before excavating.

ty dig in the summer of 1964. Illustrations showing the appearance and
structural details of a typical uncapped midden (Feature 3) and a
typical capped midden (Feature 7) are shown in Fig~lres 9 and 11
respectively.
The only structural remains found besides the middens themselves
were an as’h lens- perhaps a fireplace- in the middle of Feature
3 and two small, shallow pits dug into the clay subsoil at Features 5
and 6 (Fig. 17). The latter were probably storage pits. Features 1, 2,
and 10 are reported by R. K. Harris to have had centrally located
fireplaces too.
It was thought that each midden probably marked the location of
a house, and a special effort was made to locate post-mold patterns
or other physical evidence of houses. But none was found. Similar
middens have been excavated at two other Nortefio Focus sitesVinson and Spanish Fort - and they proved to be abandoned pit-house
depressions that were filled with trash. A slight offset in the floor of
Feature 7 at Gilbert (Figs. 11 and 13) may be the edge of a very
shallow pit-house depression, but this is by no means certain. With
that one possible exception, there was no indication of pit houses at
the features excavated. Bits of wattle-impressed clay daub which evidently came from clay-plastered houses were found at Features 1,

15

THE SITE

~ ~=~.

PIT

OF

FEATURE 5

PIT

FIGURE 17.

OF

FEATURE 6

Plans and profiles of storage (?) pits at Features 5 and 6.

3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, but it is uncertain whether they derived from houses
standing at the features or merely happened to be included in trash
that was dumped there.
In short, the way in which the Gilbert middens came to bedeposited
is not clear. Were they originally pit-house depressions that’ became
filled with trash like those at Vinson and Spanish Foi’~? If: ~o, the
house depressions could not be detected. It has been conjectured
that the whole surface of the site may have been lowered through
erosion over the past 9.00 years, removing all traces of the house
depressions in the process. But it is difficult to see how this could
have happened without the middens being scattered far and wide at
the same time. Did the middens accumulate inside honses built at
ground level? Or were they formed through the dumping of trash
at favored spots on the ground surface? We cannot be certain of
the correct answer to these questions.

16

FIGURE 1 8.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bob Turner dressed for a trip to town.

THE SiTE

17

FIcvR~ 19. Mapping crew. Short shorts, Norma Hoffrichter; Bermuda
shorts, Kathleen Gilmore; baggy britches, Dessamae Lorrain.

Ficui~ 20. Happy hour. Left to right: Ed Jelks, Bob Turner, Dessamae
Lorrain, Kathleen Gilmore.

