An Archeological Reconnaissance Behind
the Diablo Dam, Coahuila, Mexico
WALTER W. TAYLOR AND FRANCISCO GONZALEZ RUL

In the winter of 1958, as part of a coordinated effort by Mexican
and United States agencies, the archeological reconnaissance to be
reported here was conducted along the Rio Grande and its tributary
canyons, in the State of Coahuila, Mexico. The area of investigation
was that which will be flooded by the proposed Diablo International
Dam, now re-named the Friendship International Dam, to be constructed immediately below the point at which the Devils River enters
the Rio Grande (Fig. 1). The reservoir thus created is to have an extension of some 75 miles (125 km.) along the main river and a floodpool elevation of 1140.4 feet (347 m.) above sea level. Our task was
to assess the archeological resources of this area and to make recommendations for a program of salvage which would preserve the important cultural and historical heritage about to be physically destroyed by the rising waters. We were also directed to take note of
remains which might lie above the flood-pool but which will be in
danger of the vandalism inevitably to follow the opening of this heretofore virtually inaccessible and quite unexplored region.
Early in January, the authors of the present report were commissioned by the National Institute of Anthropology and History of
Mexico: Taylor as Director charged with the planning and direction
of the work and with co6rdinating investigations on our side with those
on the United States side, and Rul as Inspector charged with the actual
field operations and the later study and analysis of the collections. The
following report, then, is a composite one: the empirical data and
analysis coming largely from Rul and the synthesis from both of us.~
1 The substantive details of this report have been abstracted from the thesis submitted by co-author Rul in partial fulfillment of the requirements for his professional degree in archaeology from the Escuela Nacional de Antropologia e Historia.
We wish to thank the authorities of the Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e
Historia for permission to publish these data. For a brief, preliminary account of
this work, see Taylor, 1958: 87-89.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Soon after being commissioned, Taylor went to Del Rio, Texas, to
meet with those in charge of operations on the United States side. In
addition to making plans and preparations, it was possible to make a
brief aerial flight over the region of our future work. This short trip
and a subsequent longer one were a revelation as to the value of aerial
survey: such preliminary flights can save many a harsh day of foot
travel, much time and, prosaically, much money. It is amazing what
sites can be located using topographic maps and a pilot who will fly
"low and slow." A comparably broad over-view of human occupation
and its relation to the natural landscape can be had in no other way.’-’
By the end of January, both of us were in Coahuila, and fieldwork
started on 3 February. Taylor worked for 11 days and then returned
to Mexico City. Rul continued alone, except for a hired assistant, until
26 March, at which time Taylor returned in order to visit the more
important sites preparatory to making final recommendations for excavation and other salvage. All work terminated on 30 MarchY
In the area of our survey, the Rio Grande and its tributaries flow
through nearly horizontal beds of Cretaceous limestone. The greater
volume of water and the perennial nature of the stream have caused
the l~io Grande to entrench itself more rapidly than its intermittent
tributaries. The result has been that the tributaries break into the main
canyon at elevations considerably above the present stream, forming.
below their hanging mouths, an almost unbroken line of cliffs which
isolate the Rio Grande and its flood plain from the tributary canyon
systems and from the uplands from which they emerge. Only perennial streams and a few" broad, shallow arroyos enter the I~io Grande
at water level. But on the Mexican side, there are no perennial streams
and but few arroyos of sufficient size to have kept pace with the entrenchment of the main stream. These geological facts have had important effects upon aboriginal life in this region.
Available water supply has probably also been an important factor
2 We wish to thank Edward B. Jelks, of the U. S. National Park Service, for help
and advice in regard to these aerial survey flights and for other courtesies in regard
to the coordination of our two projects (Graham and Davis, 1958: 8).
:~ We wish to thank John Alien Graham and his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Thomas
Graham, of Det Rio, Texas, for their many kindnesses and their considerable help
in furthering our work. We also wish to thank Sr. don Valeriano Diego, and his
sons, owner and heirs, respectively, of the Rancho Santa Rosa on which our work
was largely concentrated, for their most generous hospitality during our stay on
their lands. We also wish to thank Sr. don Juan Quiroz, owner of the Rancho La
Chuparrosa, for his kind permission to work on his lands and to use the facilities
of the ranch itself.

DIABL0 RESERVOIR IN COAHUILA

GENERAL AREA OF PROPOSED DIABLO RESERVOIR
COAHUILA, MEXICO -- TEXAS, U.SA
Fig. 1.

]5~

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in the aboriginal occupation. For both the Mexican and United States
sides, the Rio Grande itself is a constant, its waters being equally available or, perhaps better, unavailable because of the line of unscalable
cliffs. Although exact statement is impossible, it is probable that there
is equality also in the number of tina]as, natural potholes in the bedrock, in which rainwater collects and endures sometimes from year
to year. However, when it comes to "live" water, either in the form
of perennial streams or springs, the difference is great and easily
stated: there is no live water on the Mexican side. On the United States
side, in contrast, there are two perennial tributaries (the Pecos and the
Devils River), a considerable number of small springs along these two
water courses, and two extremely large springs which provide great
quantities of localized but never-failing water at Comstock and Del
Rio, Texas.
Climatologically, the area is semiarid, having an annual rainfall
averaging about 15 inches (405 ram.) which falls mostly in the summer. Apart from the flood plain of the Rio Grande, which supports a
dense growth of cottonwood, willow, cane, and grass, the vegetation is
sparse and has been designated by Bray (1905) as that of "the sotol
country." Animal life, while probably never either varied or abundant, was evidently enough in the past to provide a modicum of food
and basic materials to the aborigines. Of course, both flora and fauna
have changed through the years, and paleobotanical and paleoclimatological studies have demonstrated that from the times of the earliest
human occupation the climate and biota have deteriorated, making
the present conditions probably the least hospitable of any (Johnson,
1960: 169-70; W. W. Taylor, 1956: 224).
However, it should be pointed out most emphatically that, for people accustomed to subsist largely upon coarse plant foods, the region,
far from being an area of scarcity, is really one of considerable abundance. If we look upon the situation objectively, and not from our own
ethno-dietary point of view, and if we remember that human tastes
are matters of custom derived at least in part from necessity and
availability, then we must admit that arid lands such as these are not
wastes with respect to human subsistence. They often can be made to
provide a living, such as it may seem to us, that is abundant and sometimes a lot easier to come by than that in the more humid regions
where we might choose to live. In other words, if one has grown up
eating desert food, the desert has a lot of it to offer. One is reminded
of the old cowboy story about the hungry hired hand who said after
his first meal at the ranch: "That sure was good food, re’am.., what
there was of it. I mean there was a lot of it, re’am.., such as it was."

DIABLO RF~SERVOIR IN COAHUILA

157

Sites
Our survey recorded 68 numbered sites and five general localities in
which no habitations were found but from which artifacts were collected. These sites are grouped and quantified in Table 1.
TABLE I
Number Percentage
Open sites (rock middens or "mezcaleros")

..............

16

24

Rockshehers
...........................................

4

6

Medium .........................................

Large

12

18

Small

...........................................

10

15

Small and without sign of human occupation .........

11

16
21

Unclassified ......................................

14

Pictograph site .......................................

1

..

Totals ...............................

68

100

In regard to size, it should be stated that the designations "large,"
"medium," and "small" cannot be equated with the same designations
in the report on the United States side (Graham and Davis, 1958:
39-74) ; our large and medium sites are not nearly as big as the ones
so designated on the other side. For example, on the Mexican side the
widths at the mouths of the "large" sites range from 81 to 113 feet,
while on the other side they run from 170 to 500; depths range from
26 to 97 feet on the Mexican side, from 40 to 140 on the other. On the
other hand, the small ones are of about equal size. Compared to the
United States side, there is little vandalism evident in the sites, although there has been enough to destroy the value of several.
The distribution of utilized rockshehers shows marked localization,
68~ clustering around the mouth of the Pecos River, that is, between
Parida Canyon and the river-bend lying south-southwest and upstream of the town of Shumla, Texas. It is true that, because of the
location of the flood-pool contour at this point, our intensive survey
did not extend farther upstream. But aerial flights and local information told us that there were inconsequentially few sites above that
point, and evidently no large ones. Of the twenty-two sites downstream from Parida Canyon, exactly one-half are open sites (rock
middens), and only three of the other eleven (which are all small rockshelters) appear to have been occupied consistently enough to contain
any appreciable depth of cultural deposit.
It is obvious that this distribution is due, in a large part, to the differential occurrence of rockshelters brought about by strictly geologi-

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

zal causes, specifically the greater dissection and the more massive
character of the limestone in the upstream sector and the more open,
rolling character of the downstream sector. However, these cannot be
the only factors. For one thing, of the rockshelters available outside
the mouth-of-the-Pecos area, a considerable number were not occupied.
Furthermore, in the downstream sector, the open sites, although more
abundant than in the Pecos l~iver sector, are neither numerous enough
nor large enough to indicate an occupation even approaching the intensity of that around the mouth of the Pecos. Finally, accessibility to
the perennial waters of the Rio Grande cannot be considered a differentiating factor because, except for the relatively easy descent
immediately opposite the mouth of the Pecos, the rest of the mouth-ofthe-Pecos sector has no easier descents than the peripheral sectors; in
fact, the reverse is probably true. It seems obvious to us, therefore, that
the occupation of the Mexican side was conditioned by three factors:
I) availability of rockshehers, 2) relative accessibility to the United
States side of the Rio Grande, and 3) the fact that the Pecos l~iver
drainage was the center of occupational gravity for the entire region.
Compared to that of the United States, the Mexican side has fewer
rockshehers. This is undoubtedly a geologic matter and one for which,
at the moment, we have not been able to find any satisfactory explanation. The culturally significant facts, however, are that not all
the Mexican shelters were occupied and that the total amount of cultural refuse is very much less there than on the United States side. To
us, this indicates either a less intensive or a briefer occupation, or both.
This problem of relative length of occupation is, of course, very difficult to attack at present because the chronological facts and the cultural relationships between the deposits on the two sides are unknown.
Our guess at the moment is that the occupations of the two sides were
roughly contemporaneous and of equal duration and that any difference in amount of cultural deposits is a matter of the numbers of
people involved, i.e., the "intensity" of occupation.
While there are more shelters and more occupied shelters on the
United States side, there appears to be a greater number of open sites
on the Mexican side, if one takes into consideration the amount of
terrain surveyed and the total number of sites encountered. If we
weight the Mexican open-site frequency according to the proportion of
all United States sites represented by all Mexican sites, we find that
the weighted ratio is approximately 40/34 in favor of the Mexican
side. In view of other information, this seems to be significant and to
fit into the general pattern of occupation, as will be discussed below.

IN

DIABLO RESERVOIR

159

COAHUILA

Another difference between the two sides is in the amount of parietal art. In our work, we encountered only one pictograph site,
although three habitation sites contained a few traces of paint on their
walls. On the other hand, the United States side produced 49 sites with
pictographs, 19 of which, if we interpret the report correctly, were
strictly pictographic and non-occupation (Graham and Davis, !958:
77-81 ). Furthermore, the typical "Pecos River style" of rock painting
was not found by us on the Mexican side, although H. C. Taylor
(1948: 79) reported some Pecos River style pictographs at sites to the
west of the area of our investigation. The few discernible pictures we
did find are monochrome (red) and very crude: one figure represents
a man holding what is probably a bow and arrow, another may show
a detached rack of deer antlers (trophy?).

Collections
During the course of our survey, 184 artifacts (see Table 2) were
collected from the surfaces of the sites, the "localities," and the general
countryside traversed. Observations on a number of other cultural
traits were recorded. No excavation was done.

TABLE

2

Chipped Stone Artifacts .....................................
Choppers, large, monofacial, limestone ...............

3

Choppers, small, bifacial, limestone, chert ............

3

"Hand axes" (?), small, bifacial, chert ..............

6

Scrapers, elongated, retouched ......................

28

Scrapers, rounded, retouched .......................

58

Knives, flake, retouched ............................

2

Knives, bifacial, large, triangular ...................

3

Clear Fork gouges ................................

3

Perforator

.......................................

Total

...............................

Projectile points
............................

4

Abasolo (?) ............................

Almagre (?)

5

Channeled
Catan

(?)

..........................

1

..................................

4

Dar] (?) .............................

I

Desmuke

...........................

i

..................................

2

Ensor

(?)

Fairland (?)
Frio
Gary

............................

6

..................................

3

..................................

1

1

107

179

160

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

Palmillas (?) ...........................
Pandale (1) ............................

4
1
2
3
8
4

Pandora (1)

............................

5

Shumla ................................

7
3
1
I
1
2
2

Langtry ................................
Lerma .................................
Matamoros
Paisano

Tortugas

...........................

................................

...............................

Yarbrough ..............................
Bassett (1) ..............................
Fresno .................................
Livermore (1) ..........................
Perdiz (1) ..............................
Total .....................................

SOCIETY

72

Ground and/or Polished Stone Artifacts
Limestone bars
Amulet (?), highly polished black stone, bar form
Manos (two of igneous rock non-native to area)
tVIetates
Non-movable "Stone" Artifacts
Bedrock mortar holes (in 14. sites)
Pictographs (in 4 sites)
Grooves (often misnamed "sharpening grooves") (in 1 site)

Non-lithie Artifacts
Bone awl, proximal end cannon bone of deer (?) .................
Bone awl, distal end cannon bone of deer (?) ....................
Bone awl, cannon bone deer (?), fragmentary point ..............
Fiber matting, twilled 2/2, small fragment ......................
Fire drill, hardwood, fragmentary .............................
Total ..........................................

1
1
1
1
1
5

Without going into more detail than the material warrants or space
permits, there is little use in providing individual descriptions or proveniences for these specimens.4 Nor would there be value in quantifying such artifacts as the limestone bars, manos, or metates, because
only a few were collected and no record was kept of the many others
that were present, but left behind, on the surfaces of the sites. However, in regard to certain of these artifacts, it seems important to say
a few words.
The classification of projectile points has been made according to
the data contained in An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954). However~ because l~ul, who made
4 These data may be obtained from the Direcci6n de tVIonumentos Prehispanicos,
Instituto Nacional de Antropologi~ e Historic, C6rdoba 45, M~xico 7, D. F., M6xico.

DIABLO RESERVOIR IN COAHUILA

161

the identifications, has not worked in Texas archaeology and had no
comparative collections to aid him, both of us feel some doubt as to
certain of these identifications. Where doubt exists, a query has been
placed following the type name. Furthermore, it has been Taylor’s
contention for a long time that elaborate cross-cultural and chronological inferences drawn from the simple and generalized forms subsumed
under types such as Almagre, Abasolo, Catan, Gary, Lerma, Matamoros, and Tortugas are very dubious in the absence of other supporting evidence. It seems safer to regard such types as being descriptive,
rather than having cultural or temporal implications, until corroborative evidence is adduced, discussed, and accepted.
Although complete quantitative data have not been published in the
report on the United States side, it seems to us, from our own data and
from personal communication with members of the other team, that
many fewer (both proportionately and absolutely) of the small, late
projectile points commonly attributed to use on arrows were found on
the Mexican side. Of the larger "dart" points about whose identification we are reasonably certain, the number of types is evenly divided
in the Mexican collection between those which are early (Frio~ Langtry, Shumla) and those which are probably somewhat more recent
(Ensor, Paisano, Yarbrough). These types are characteristic of the
Pecos l~iver Focus,5 with the exception of Paisano and Yarbrough
whose centers of distribution are in the Big Bend and East Texas respectively-although Yarbrough is also found in late Edwards Plateau
sites. Paisano is characteristic of the Chisos Focus which is said to
overlap, but be generally later than, the Pecos l~iver Focus (Kelley,
Campbel!, Lehmer, 1940: 162; Suhm, Krieger, Jelks, 1954: 57). Both
Ensor and Frio are common in sites of the Edwards Plateau Aspect,
while Langtry and Shumla are present but rare there. In other words,
with the exception of Yarbrough, all of the solidly identified points
are native to both the Edwards Plateau and the Trans-Pecos regions.
This fact throws some doubt upon the validity of any distant relationships which might be claimed for some of the less certain types. On
the other hand, both Shumla and Langtry points are said to have been
found in the area around the Falcon Dam, where some of the less
certainly identified types have also been identified (Aveleyra, 1951:
There is not the space here, nor is it appropriate in this survey report, to discuss
the many points raised by Epstein (1960: 136-144, inter alia) in regard to the validity of the Pecos River Focus and the Chisos Focus concepts. We believe that he has
made some cogent points but, since any meaningful discussion of these points would
involve a much wider perspective and many more data than are directly pertinent
to our present report, we feel that such discussion should await a more complete and
broader publication than is our purpose here.

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

48-50). In addition, McNeish (1958: 193) has suggested a cultural
and chronological connection between his Tamaulipas material and
that of the Pecos River Focus based on like projectile point similarities.
There may be something in all of this, but at the present we feel it
better to be skeptical until more, and more certain and supported evidence is to hand.
Examples of the type called "limestone bar" were remarkably common in the sites of our survey, particularly those along the Rio Grande.
These are arroyo-worn bars and small, thin, flat, oblong plates with
well rounded and smoothed edges. They show no signs of having been
worked into shape. Certain of them do, however, show signs of having
been utilized: fine scratches, rubbed spots, high polish in restricted
areas. The flat ones are very similar in form to the painted pebbles of
the Pecos River Focus, and it is entirely possible that some of our examples at one time bore painted markings. At present, however, none
of our specimens retains any paint. Whatever their use and function,
their presence in the sites is not natural: they were selected for shape
and brought there by human action. Finally, it should be noted that
identical stones have been found in other sites in Coahuila and in the
United States (Pearce and Jackson, 1935: 83~ Taylor, personal records
of Coahuila sites~ Epstein, 1960: 99-100).
The absence from both the Mexican and United States sites of the
notched snub-nosed end scrapers made on a small flake is noteworthy.
Two unnotched specimens of this type (?) were found on the United
States side (Graham and Davis, 1958: 21) but none at al! on the
Mexican. While this particular quantftative representation is quite
certainly a matter of chance, nevertheless, when other distributional
data are taken into account, it appears that the region of our survey
may be the peripheral edge of a distribution which centers in Mexico
further to the south. Personal communication (Beatriz Braniff, 1961)
indicates that there is a heavy concentration of these notched end
scrapers in the State of San Luis Potosi. Aveleyra (1956: 75, 84, 172)
found 11 in sites of the Laguna District, southwestern Coahuila, and
W. W. Taylor’s excavations
tral Coahuila, produced two
tion of a negative gradient
through the arid country of

(personal notes) at Cuatro Cienegas, censites. In other words~ there is the suggesfor these artifacts from south to north
east-central Mexico.

Summary and Conclusions
There can be no doubt that the aboriginal culture in the area of our
survey was closely related, possibly identical, with that on the United

DIABLO RESERVOIR IN COAHUILA

163

States side. An analysis of present information about the latter region
certainly indicates that the center of population was in the vicinity of
the mouth of the Pecos River (see maps in: Graham and Davis, 1958).
The same can be said of the Mexican side. At the same time, there
can be no doubt about the existence, particularly during the days of
the Pecos River Focus, of a marked differential in the intensity of occupation on the two sides of the Rio Grande. This may have been, at
least in part, a reflection of differing natural resources, particular living water. But that could not have been the whole story. The Mexican
area was not occupied as intensively as it could have been, and the
center of population there seems to have been more strongly influenced
by accessibility to/from the other side of the Rio Grande than by any
other factor or set of factors.
Without excavation, of course, the character of the Mexican occupation cannot be known precisely. But for one thing, the scarcity of
pictographs, suggesting relatively less leisure and a more purposeful
way of life and/or possibly less concern with religious matters, may
indicate that the people occupied the Mexican side for some special
purpose of an occasional and temporary nature. This purposive pattern of occupation may have been due to pressures having cultural,
rather than natural, causes. Water certainly could not have been a
determining factor, although it most probably was a contributing one.
Periodic scarcity of foodstuffs, either plant or animal, or seasonal
forays for special foods would be more likely, but our present information, from either side, is not capable of supporting inferences on this
subject.
Two hypotheses, among not a few possible ones, present themselves
as leads for future testing. The first is that the occupation of the Mexican side was just an expectable and somewhat less intensive but permanent expansion stemming from pressures in a homeland where food
resources were finite and seasonal and where population was increasing. In this event, we would expect to find the cultural inventories of
each side virtually identical--and this would include quantitative and
proportional attributes as well as trait lists and type specifications. The

second hypothesis is that the Mexican side was used for intermittent
and purposive occupation by people with more permanent homes elsewhere. In this event, there should be differences in cultural inventories, the interpretation of which might expectably lead us to an
understanding of the purpose(s) of these temporary visitations.
Thus it becomes very apparent that any reasonably full understanding of the historical facts and cultural implications of human life

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in the area bordering the Rio Grande in Texas and Coahuila is dependent upon investigations on both sides of the river, not merely on
one side. To study one and not the other would produce an only
partial, and therefore warped, picture, if we are interested in more
than taxonomic conclusions. The fact that the cultural remains on the
two sides are alike does not mean that one is a mere repetition of the
other. Each carries significance for the other, and each is therefore
incomplete without the other. It is true that the cultural expressions
are "similar," but we want to know how similar and in what ways.
And, if possible, we want to know why.

References Cited
Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis
1951. Reconocimiento Arqueoldgico en la Zona de la Presa Internacional Falcdn,
Tamaulipas y Texas. Revista Mexicana de Estudios Antropologicos, Tomo
12, pp. 31-59.
Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis, Manuel Maldonado-KoerdeU, y Pablo Martinez
del Rio
1956. Cueva de la Candelaria. Volumen I. Memorias del Instituto Nacional de
Antropologia e Historia.
Bray, W. L.
1905. Vegetation of the Sotol Country in Texas. The University of Texas Bulletin, No. 60, Science Series No. 6.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1960. Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas, 1958.
Mimeographed report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas.
Graham, John Alien, and William A. Davis
1958. Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Diablo Reservoir, Val Verde
County, Texas. Mimeographed report prepared by: Archeological Salvage
Program Field Office, National Park Service, Austin, Texas.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1960. Preliminary Pollen Analysis of Damp and Centipede Rock Shelters. In:
Epstein, 1960, pp. 167-171.
Kelley, J. C., T. N. Campbell, and D. J. Lehmer
1940. The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological Deposits in
the Big Bend Region of Texas. West Texas Historical and Scientific Society
Publication No. 10.
MacNeish, R. S.
1958. Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 48, Pt. 6.
Pearce, J. E., and A. T. Jackson
1933. A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde County, Texas. The University of
Texas Bulletin, No. 3327.

165

DIABLO RESERVOIR IN COAHUILA

Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. 5elks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Taylor, H. C.
19 8. An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Northern Coahuila. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19, pp. 7,$-87.
Taylor, W. W.
1956. Some Implications of the Carbon-14 Dates from a Cave in Coahuila Mexico.
1958.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 215-23 .
Archeological Survey of the Mexican Part of Diablo Reservoir. In: Graham and Davis, 1958, pp. 87-89.

Southern Illinois University
Carbondale, Illinois

