Analysis of Ceramic Function:
a Late Caddoan Example
Anna J. Taylor

ABSTRACT
Using as a model Shafer’s ceramic-distribution study of the Late Caddoan Attaway site in Henderson County, Texas, it is shown that ceramic usewear studies can be used effectively to provide data about site activities and
functions. Ceramic use-wear studies should be planned before collecting ceramics in the field to avoid destroying evidence of use-wear during recovery
and processing. (A revision of a paper presented at the 1982 Caddo Conference in Fayetteville, Arkansas)

INTRODUCTION
Recent archeological and ethnographic studies of the uses and disposal of
ceramics have indicated that there is a strong potential in ceramic studies for
yielding information about the activities and organization of past cultures. Ceramic function analysis includes all stages of a vessel’s existence, from its manufacture through its use and eventual disposal, and deals with interrelations between vessel form and design, with utilitarian uses such as storage, cooking, or
serving; and ceremonial activities.
Several aspects of ceramic function analysis will be explored, using information from Shafer’s (1981) analysis of the Late Caddoan Attaway site. These are
the potential of ceramic function analysis for detecting patterned human behavior by focusing upon vessel forms found in different discard contexts, the techniques that can be used for ceramic function analysis, problems connected with
recovery of data, and problems connected with preservation of data in the field
and laboratory.

THE ATTAWAY SITE (41HEll4)
The Attaway site was a badly disturbed Late Caddoan (Frankston focus)
settlement that was eroding into Lake Palestine in Henderson County, Texas. The
site was investigated in 1975 by anthropology students from Texas A&M University (Shafer 1981), who found that two distinct contemporaneous activity
areas--a midden and a cemetery--had been exposed by wave action. Test excavations in the cemetery area revealed about seven burial pits. No undisturbed

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986for 1984)

116

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

midden deposits were found, but ceramics from the eroded midden area were
collected and used in the analysis (Shafer 1981 : 147-152; 157, 158; 166, 167).
Ceramic analysis of the Attaway site was directed toward determining if
functionally separate areas such as the midden and the cemetery could be distinguished solely by their associated ceramics. It was hypothesized that ceramics
from the midden area would come from vessels used and discarded during domestic activities, and ceramics from the cemetery area--mortuary ceramics-would come from vessels used and discarded during ceremonial activities. The
midden ceramics, most of which were small, eroded sherds, were sorted into formal types and vessel forms on the basis of rim form and mode of decoration. The
mortuary ceramics, most of which were whole or partial vessels, were also
sorted into formal types and forms (Shafer 1981:166-168).
From the midden area 2,452 sherds were collected, and after the badly
eroded sherds were excluded, 2,215 midden sherds remained in the sample.
About 60 percent of the midden sherds were jar sherds, characterized by wet
paste decorations. Only about 5 percent of the midden sherds were from bowls or
bottles, characterized by engraved designs. Vessel forms of the remaining midden sherds could not be identified with confidence (Shafer 1981:168-170).
The mortuary ceramic sample consisted of sherds representing 21 vessels
and one smoking pipe; 71.4 percent (N= 15) of the vessels were bowls; 14.3 percent (N=3) were jars; and 14.3 percent (N=3) were bottles (Shafer 1981 : 170,
173, Table 3).
This analysis indicates that there are qualitative differences between the ceramic assemblages from the midden and the cemetery. Predominant forms in the
midden sample were jars; the predominant forms among the mortuary vessels
were bowls (Shafer 1981 : 168-175). But, as Shafer notes, the differences in frequencies of jars, bottles, and bowls in the midden and mortuary samples cannot
be interpreted as meaning that the ceramic assemblage in particular households
consisted mostly of jars and a few bowls and bottles, or that bowls were made
mainly to serve as grave goods. Different frequencies among ceramic forms and
decorative techniques in the midden sample can be attributed to the use of particular kinds of vessels for specific domestic purposes and, in the mortuary
sample, to the selection of specific mortuary items by the villagers (Shafer
1981 : 175; cf. Braun 1980, 1982; David 1972; DeBoer 1974; Foster 1960).
The high frequency of jar sherds and the low frequency of bowl and bottle
sherds in the midden sample is mainly a result of (1) differing frequencies of
different kinds of vessels, i.e., jars, bowls, and bottles, in the original domestic
assemblage; (2) differing life spans (or breakage rates) of the vessels, i.e., jars,
bowls, and bottles, (3) the different methods of disposal used for different kinds
of broken vessels, i.e., some kinds of broken vessels may have been discarded
where they broke, other kinds may have been carried to the midden, or perhaps
all broken pottery was taken to the midden for disposal (David 1972; Foster
1960). If all broken ceramics were indeed taken to the midden for disposal, the
proportion of jars, sherds of bowls, and bottles recovered from the midden at the
Attaway site would indicate that jars were broken more frequently than were
bowls and bottles. But comparison of frequencies of sherds from different vessel

Taylor--Ceramic Function

117

forms (or from different sized vessels) do not take into account the fact that
breakage of large vessels can result in more sherds than breakage of small vessels. More accurate counts of vessels of different forms and sizes can be obtained
by recording and comparing the percentages of total vessel orifices represented
by individual rim sherds; these data can provide the approximate numbers of vessels of different forms and sizes in a sherd assemblage (Braun 1980: 176-177;
Egloff 1973). The mortuary vessel sample from the Attaway site is considered a
valid representation of a Late Caddoan mortuary assemblage, since every vessel
in the sample was deliberately selected to be placed with a burial.
Ethnographic studies of the manufacture and use of ceramics have demonstrated that certain vessel forms are used consistently for certain tasks; jars are
generally used for food storage and cooking, and bowls for food preparation and
serving (Braun 1980, 1982; Ericson, Read, and Burke 1971; Fontana et al. 1962;
Stanislawski 1978). Ethnographic accounts of the Caddo support these findings.
One account reported that "the Indians fashioned large vessels for the storage of
water and for cooking and serving" (Griffith 1954: 104; cf. Swanton 1942).
Although ethnographic descriptions of vessel use are helpful to archeologists, there are other ways to determine how vessels were used, for example investigation of sooting, of organic or mineral residue or stains, of pollen from
domestic and wild plants on the surfaces of vessels, of abrasions or cuts on surfaces, of differences in the paste, temper, surface treatment, and of other technological features (Braun 1980, 1982; Ericson, Read, and Burke 1971; Griffiths
1978; Lischka 1978; Shafer and Taylor 1980; Smith 1982; Steponaitis 1980;
Usrey 1982). Vessel size, as determined from curvatures of rim sherds or by
measurement of whole and incomplete vessels, also can be an indicator not only
of vessel function, but also of distance of sites from water sources and of size of
household groups (Linton 1944; Nelson 1980, 1981; Turner and Lofgren 1966).
Preservation of organic materials in the moist environment of East Texas is
generally poor, but the extent to which organic residues are preserved on ceramic
surfaces has yet to be investigated. Sooty deposits on the exteriors of cooking
vessels that were used extensively for liquids are preserved in most regions, but
often are scrubbed off in the laboratory and usually are not considered in archeological analyses. These layers of soot are indicators of vessel function. At least
one vessel, a mortuary jar recovered from the Attaway site, has some sooty residue (Shafer 1981 : 163, Figure 9, D) that may indicate either that the vessel, selected from the household vessels, had already been used for cooking, or that
food was ceremonially cooked in it before it was placed in the grave. Detailed
study of sooty mortuary vessels might yield more information about their functions and about the ceremonial activities of the Late Caddo.

RECOVERY OF CERAMIC FUNCTION DATA
It is important that field recovery methods and laboratory processing be
planned so as to preserve information needed for ceramic function analysis. Although ceramic types, ceramic technology, and vessel form can be determined

Texas Archeological Society

118

from scrubbed and acid-treated ceramics, data that could provide information
about vessel function--impossible to recognize during excavation--can be literally washed away during processing in the laboratory (Charnela 1969). Excavators should avoid scraping or scratching soft surfaces of vessels during excavation, and they should preserve residues, use-marks, and signs of wear on
vessels and sherds. Tools of bamboo, plastic, or wood are recommended; metal
excavating tools should not be used. Ceramics to be examined for staining, sooting, abrasion, and other signs of wear should undergo minimal handling in the
field and should be bagged separately from other ceramics specimens.
Traces of slip and paint, abrasions, and other use-marks, residues, and pollen can be easily lost during laboratory processing. Caddo ceramics, for example, are often quite fragile due to low-temperature firing and subsequent inundation by ground water, which causes deterioration of bone and shell temper. It
is especially difficult to process such pottery without destroying data that pertain
to vessel function. In such situations, washing and permanent labeling of the
pottery to be examined for function data should be postponed until analysis is
completed.
In the field care should be taken to record the contexts of whole vessels,
partial vessels, and sherds. Pottery from different contexts can be compared only
if contexts are carefully and consistently recorded (Lischka 1978).
SUMMARY
Ceramic-function analysis has great promise for yielding information about
cultural activities in which ceramics have been used, and factors such as context,
differential breakage, and conditions of deposition are important in such analysis. Other evidences of vessel function such as residue and wear are easily lost
during recovery and processing, so field and laboratory methods should be designed to prevent accidental destruction of these kinds of perishable evidence.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Special thanks are given to Harry J. Shafer, of Texas A&M University, who encouraged this study and allowed the writer free access to his data on the Attaway site and to his
knowledge of Texas ceramics. Jean M. Christiansen also helped by providing information
and direction concerning field and laboratory techniques.

REFERENCES CITED
Braun, David P.
1980

Experimental interpretation of ceramic vessel use on the basis of rim and neck
formal attributes. In The Navajo Project: Archaeological investigations, Page to
Phoenix 500 KV southern transmission line, by Donald C. Fiero, R. W. Munson, M. T. McClach, S. M. Wilson, and Anne H. Zier, pp. 170-231. Museum
of Northern Arizona Research Paper, (11).

Taylor--Ceramic Function

1983

119

Pots as tools. In Archaeological hammers and theories, edited by James A.
Moore and Arthur S. Keene, pp. 107-134. Academic Press, New York.

Chernela, Janel
1969

In praise of the scratch: The importance of aboriginal abrasion on museum ceramic ware. Curator 12(3): 174-179.

David, Nicolas
1972

Comment: On the life span of pottery, type frequencies, and archaeological inference. American Antiquity 37: 141-142.

DeBoer, Warren R.
1974

Ceramic longevity and archaeological interpretation: An example from the
upper Ucayali, Peru. American Antiquity 39: 335-343.

Egloff, B. J.
1973

Comment: A method for counting ceramic rim sherds. American Antiquity
38 : 351-353.

Ericson, Jonathan E., D. W. Read, and C. Burke
1971

The relationships between the primary functions and the physical properties of
ceramic vessels and their implications for distributions on an archaeological
site. Anthropology UCLA 3 : 84-95.

Fontana, Bernard L., William Robison, Charles Cormack, and Ernest Leavitt, Jr.
1962
Papago Indian pottery. University of Washington Press, Seattle.
Foster, George M.
1960
Life expectancy of utilitarian pottery in Tzintzuntzan, Michoacan, Mexico.
American Antiquity 25:606-609.
Griffith, William J.
1954

The Hasinai Indians of East Texas as seen by Europeans, 1687-1772. Middle
American Research Institute, Publication 12(41-168): 1 - 165.

Griffiths, Dorothy M.
1978

Use-marks on Historic ceramics: A preliminary study. Historical Archaeology
12:68-81.

Linton, Ralph
1944

North American cooking pots. American Antiquity 9:369-380.

Lischka, Joseph J.
1978

A functional analysis of Middle Classic ceramics at Kaminaljuyu, Guatemala.
In The ceramics of Kaminaljuyu, edited by Ronald W. Wetherington, pp. 223278. Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park.

120

Texas Archeological Society

Nelson, Ben A.
1980

Cultural responses to population change: A comparison of two prehistoric occupations of the Mimbres Valley, New Mexico. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Anthropology, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale.

1981

Ethnoarchaeotogy and paleodemography: A test of Turner and Lofgren’s hypothesis. Journal of Anthropological Research 37(2): 107-129.

Shafer, Harry J.
1981

Archeo!ogical investigations at the Attaway site, Henderson County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52: 147-178.

Shafer, Harry J. and Anna J. Taylor
1980

Form and uses of Mimbres Classic Black-on-White ceramics from the NAN
Ranch ruin, Grant County, New Mexico. Paper presented at the 45th Meeting of
the Society for American Archaeology, Philadelphia.

Smith, Marion F., Jr.
Economic interpretation of the size and shape of archaeological ceramics. Grant
1982
proposal submitted to the National Science Foundation.

Stanislawski, Michael B.
1978

If pots were mortal. In Explorations in ethnoarchaeology, edited by Richard A.
Gould, pp. 201-228. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Steponaitis, Vincas E
1980

Ceramics, chronology, and community patterns at Moundville, a Late Prehistoric site in Alabama. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Swanton, John R.
Source material on the history and ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Smith1942
sonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 132: 1-332.

Turner, Christy G., II, and L. Lofgren
1966

Household size of prehistoric western pueblo Indians. Southwestern Journal of
Anthropology 22(1): 117-132.

Usrey, Steven J.
1982

A preliminary pollen analysis of the NAN Ranch ruin. In NAN Ranch ruin: A
collection of papers on the archaeology of the NAN Ranch ruin, Mimbres Valley, Grant County, New Mexico, edited by Harry J. Shafer, pp. VI: 1 - 11. Texas
A&M University Anthropology Laboratory, Special Series. College Station.

Taylor--Ceramic Function

121

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Anna J. Taylor obtained her M.A. from the Department of Anthropology at Texas
A&M University. She did her undergraduate work at Wayland Baptist College, Plainview,
Texas. She has worked in Texas, New Mexico, and Belize. Her research interests include
ceramic function analysis, spatial distribution of metal arrowpoints, New Mexican comanchero and pastore involvement in the Texas Panhandle-Plains, and the Mimbres
Mogollon culture of New Mexico. She is a Research Associate at the Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78285.

