MAGNETIC DELINEATION OF INDIVIDUAL
SHIPWRECK SITES:
A NEW CONTROL TECHNIQUE
CARL J. CLAUSEN AND J. BARTO ARNOLD

III

ABSTRACT
This report describes an efficient though low-cost means of controlling a
magnetic survey to delineate the localized distortions created in the earth’s
magnetic field by the ferrous components of a Colonial period shipwreck
site. The results of the application of this survey technique to a small mid16th-century Spanish shipwreck located off the Texas coast in the western
Gulf of Mexico are presented in computer-drawn magnetic contour map
form and in a three-dimensional perspective rendition.
Following the magnetic survey the wreck site, which lay entirely hidden
below unconsolidated bottom sediments near shore, was completely excavated utilizing underwater archeological techniques. The preliminary
results of this excavation -- in terms of the identification, mass and
distribution of the artifactual remains creating the localized distortions
recorded during the survey and their relationsihp to the rest of the artifact
assemblage at this site -- are discussed. In areas where shipwreck
remains lie below sediments or are otherwise concealed from visual detection. the guidance provided by these in-site surveys can be of inestimable
value to the archeologist in conducting efficient underwater excavations.
Finally, the design of the cultural resource surveys the United States
government currently requires of private companies leasing outer continental shelf lands for oil and gas exploration is criticized in light of the
results of this survey. Recommendations are made for increasing the effectiveness of these outer continental shelf surveys in terms of discovering
wreck sites of these small, though culturally quite significant ships typical
of nawgation in the Western Hemisphere during the periods of exploration,
colonization and early development.

INTRODUCTION
Experience has proven that the magnetometer, an electronic instrument capable of remote detection and measurement of localized
distortions in the earth’s magnetic field caused by ferrous artifacts, is
the single most useful tool so far utilized for locating historical period
shipwreck sites. The customary magnetometer survey, in a search
mode with relatively widely spaced tracks -- whether employed in
the search for sunken ships by persons interested in the recovery of
valuables (Potter 1972: 31-33; Meylach 1971: 227-228) or by those with
an interest in the recovery of historical objects (Link 1959: 71-75), or
more recently, for scientific investigation of shipwrecks as ar-

7O

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cheological targets (Breiner and MacNaughton 1965; Clausen 1966;
Hall 1966; Green, Hall and Katzev 1967; Green 1970; Hays and Herrin
1970; Arnold 1974; Lenihan 1974; and Arnold and Clausen 1975) -- is
designed simply to locate sites. However, the contribution of the
magnetometer in obtaining data useful to the archeologist need not
end there. A survey with closely spaced parallel tracks confined to
the general locale of an already discovered site, referred to in this
report as an "in-site delineation survey", can provide a detailed
preview of the site in the form of a magnetic contour map before excavation commences. In areas where shipwreck remains lie below
sediments or otherwise are concealed from visual detection, the
guidance provided by these in-site surveys can be of inestimable
value to the archologist in conducting excavations at the site (Clausen
1966).
As always, in magnetic surveying and in archeology generally, the
key to the value of the data and their full exploitation is the careful
control of their acquisition. Radio and radar-based electronic
positioning systems now exist which admirably fulfill the control
requirements of both search mode and in-site delineation mode
magnetic surveys (Arnold and Clausen 1975). These sophisticated
systems are expensive but are available for use through lease or
lease-purchase agreements.
A survey set up with optical surveying instruments and controlled
visually and with the assistance of radio communications requires
more input in man-hours, but costs far less. The subject of this report
is a recently developed, simply executed, and inexpensive method for
controlling the closely spaced tracks necessary for the production of
a detailed contour map of the magnetic phenomena created by a shipwreck site situated close to a shoreline. Most important, accuracy is
not sacrificed if care and judgment are exercised both in acquiring
the data and in selecting sites to be surveyed in this manner.
We successfully utilized the method described in this report during
the summer of 1972 for the in-site delineation of two of the three
Spanish ships of the flora of 1554 wrecked in the Gulf of Mexico off
Padre Island in April of that year. The wrecks -- designated sites 41
KN 10(UW) and 41 WY 3(UW) -- are located 600-700 m offshore in
water depths ranging from 5 to 7 m. The total area covered by these
two in-site delineation surveys was 55,000 m2 and 80,000 m2 respectively. The report also will reveal new means of treatment and
utilization of these data and will comment upon both the results and
their implication in the effective design of surveys to locate similar
sites.

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

71

SURVEY TECHNIQUE
The survey is set up and run in essentially the following manner. A
base line is established, more or less parallel to the shore, alon~
which two sets of evently spaced, paired ranges are erected (Fig. I).
The first set, which is designated by letters, is established at right
angles to the base line directly opposite the wreck site extending in
both directions slightly beyond the width of the site. Further up the
base line, the second set of ranges, designated by numbers, is
established at an appropriate angle to the base line to guide the survey vessel obliquely over the site toward shore. As is typical of ranges
in maritime use, the front member of the pair is shorter than the rear
member so that both are visible from the water and can be lined up to
maintain a true course. The survey tracks controlled by the second
set of ranges mentioned above were spaced at 5-m intervals and run
at a 45° angle both to the base line, and in this instance, to the shore.
The letter ranges were spaced at 15 m for the wreck covering the
smaller area and at 30 m for the largest site.
During the survey, the helmsman of the research vessel towing the
sensor of the magnetometer simply keeps the track ranges visually
aligned as he guides the vessel across the survey area toward the
shore. During the traverse of the site along each of the numbered
tracks, an observer equipped with binoculars stationed at a
designated point near the magnetometer operator carefully watches
the letter ranges on shore. As each pair of letter ranges comes into
alignment the observer notifies the operator who indexes with an appropriately lettered event mark the chart recording of the
magnetometer data being acquired. If desired, and if the sea state is
anything other than calm, we recommend that the shore party set up
a transit bet~veen the track ranges at the points designated "x" in
Figure i, and observe the course of the vessel as it approaches them.
Using this instrument with the aid of two-way radio, the helmsman
can be both checked for accuracy and given assistance in guiding the
vessel along the track.
Because of the nature of the control system, a helmsman usually
can maintain a course more accurately while conning a vessel toward
the ranges. For this reason, but also because it was quickly
discovered that considerable "noise" (up to seven gammas} was introduced in the magnetic record when running a reciprocal track
seaward against the wave and swell action, all runs for data were
made from southeast to northwest toward shore. The noise observed
was apparently the result of several factors. In the area in which the
surveys were undertaken, the coast trends generally north and
south, and in the summer the predominant waves and swells ap-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

72

x

I

x

i--

2

I’-

3
4
x

5
x

b

xi

7

x

I

A

D

¯

o_
F

°

¯

G

¯

¯

!

.

PAIR OF: RANGE MARKERS

c)

TRANSIT STATION FOR SHORE
ASSISTED COURSE GUIDANCE
VIA RADIO
SURVEY VESSEL TRACK

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

73

proach from the southeast. Taking these seas almost "bow on" while
heading away from the ranges introduced greater inconsistencies in
the velocity of the vessel along the track and appreciably increased
pitching, yawing and rolling of the vessel. These motions had an adverse effect particularly on the mechanical pens of the strip chart
recorder used with the magnetometer and very possibly on the
magnetometer. The sensor of that instrument "porpoised" somewhat
at the end of the tow cable, alternately approaching the mineral
sands of the bottom as the vessel was slowed by a wave and then
rising toward the slight field generated at the air/water interface.
Acquiring all the magnetic data on courses run on the same heading
also seemed to minimize unwanted local magnetic variation attributable to geological sources. The turn-around time {i.e., the time
between the completion of a successful run and the return of the
vessel to a point outside the seaward boundary of the survey area, in
a position and on a course to begin a new run} can also be utilized by
the shore party in moving to and setting up the survey instrument on
the next station.
It is, of course, the association of the magnetometer readings obtained in the above surveys with the coordinates of a grid system
which makes possible the production of the contour map of the
magnetic distortions created by the wreck. In reducing the magnetic
data from the strip chart record in preparation for contouring, one
grid axis is provided by the numbered vessel tracks. The lettered
event marks along each track provide the second axis. Along this
second axis the spacing of the data sample extracted for contouring
should be reduced by interpolation of the distance between event
marks. In the two surveys described in this report, this distance -- 15
m in one instance and 30 m in the other -- was divided into units
closely approximating, at that angle of interception, the 5-m spacing
of the numbered tracks.
It should be noted that the matrix produced by this survey system is
not a right-angle grid forming squares or rectangles, but a grid
forming parallelograms. This factor creates no difficulty for the investigator confined to manually contouring a site, but if the data are
to be handled by a computer, the matrix must be corrected to a rightangle grid. Also, all positioning information acquired in these surveys
relates to a station within the vessel and not to the sensor of the
magnetometer which is the point from which the magnetic data are
being collected. In our surveys the difference between these two points was approximately 50 m. This delay must be corrected for in the
data prepared for entry into the computer, or the position of the
wreck in reference to the survey points along the shore will be

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

displaced by the same distance. Computer programs already exist
which will take these data and plot both two-dimensional (Fig. 2) and,
for interpretive purposes, three-dimensional perspective renditions
(Fig. 3).
An additional dimension can be added to the survey by running a
high-resolution, recording fathometer concomitantly with the
magnetometer during the traverses of the site and indexing its chart
record in the same manner events are recorded on the magnetometer
strip chart. These data may be used to produce a bathymetric map of
the bottom in the area of the site.
Subsequent to the surveys described above, the first and smaller
site surveyed
41 KN IO(UW) located at Universal Transverse Mercator grid coordinates 669, 518mE and 947,480mN, Zone 14 -- was
completely excavated by the Underwater Archeological Research
Section of the Texas Antiquities Committee during the summers of
1972 and 1973. On the basis of both archeological and archival
evidence, this wreck now is believed to represent the remains of the
vessel San Esteban, a nao, or possibly a Castillian rigged carabela of
probably 150-250 tons, a vessel typical of the early periods of exploration and colonization in the Western Hemisphere. With the exception of the large quantities of rock ballast carried by this ship, all

and crew were recovered -- in all, a total of almost 12,000 kilos of encrusted metal and other material.
The surviving artifactual materials and the rock ballast at this site
had migrated downward through the sediment and lay scattered atop
a dense, level substratum of gray Pleistocene Age clay. The loose unconsolidated sediments overlying this clay in the immediate area of
the wreck were approximately 1.5 m deep and consisted primarily of
sand containing scattered lenses of soft silts and shell "hashes."
Since the greatest elevation of any of the remains of the wreck was

vocated {Peterson 1965: 26, 41, 42, 44, and Plates 2-4).
Great precision could be achieved in guiding the excavations by
utilizing two surveying stations on the base line ashore and simple

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

\

LJ

75

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

trigonometry, in conjunction with the magnetic contour map. In fact,
on the first day of excavations during the 1972 field season, the
project team was able
within minutes -- to locate and identify the
first target selected for examination. This was a somewhat isolated
anomaly of approximately 30 gammas (Fig. 2,a) and identified as a
large, mid-16th-century, forged4ron ship’s anchor.
In addition, the same two stations on the survey line can be utilized
as base points for establishing the provenience of artifacts and
features encountered during excavation of the site. A web of subbase points, consisting of 0.7-m lengths of serially numbered,
aluminum rods driven securely into the basement clay, was
established across the site as excavations progressed. The location of
the sub-base points in this network was accurately determined,
initially by standard surveying techniques (i.e., triangulation by
theodolite sightings from the survey stations to special range rods extending vertically through the air/water interface from the sub-base
point on the bottom) and by trilateration underwater, using metric
tapes, from two or more already established points. The locations of
all artifacts and features encountered in the wreck site were
established by trilateration from two, preferably more, of these subbase points. The position of the features was recorded both on the
master site plan and in the requisite field notes. A report detailing the
results of t~he archeological investigations carried out at this site,
believed to be the earliest verified shipwreck yet found in the
Western Hemisphere, and the analysis of the concomitant archival
research dealing with the historical background of the 1554 fleet, is
currently under preparation and is ......... to be ready for
publication sometime in 1976.

DISCUSSION
Virtually complete excavation and removal of all artifactual
material associated with the wreck at site 41 KN 10(UW) followed the
in-site delineation survey described above. The excavations per-

this site.
All intensive distortions, up to 125 gammas, revealed by the
magnetic survey, proved to represent concentrations of out-of-se trice

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

77

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and/or unserviceable, forged-iron ships’ anchors and armament, in
various combinations {Fig. 2, c and d). These artifacts had been
stored in the top few decimeters of the rock ballast in the hold of the
vessel with their long axis apparently laid parallel with the keel. Less
intense distortions, on the order of 15-35 gammas, were found in this
wreck to be created by these same categories of artifacts but usually
singly as in the case of Fig. 2, a or in pairs (Fig. 2, e). Distortions of 1015 gammas were created by concentrations of iron ship’s fastenings
such as spikes, throughbolts, or small fittings such as deadeye or
main brace frames and short lengths of brace chain, barrel hoops or
other small iron artifacts. Flattened or gently rounded plateaus such
as that existing along the southwest edge of the wreck (Fig. 2, b) were
the result of a more or less even scattering of these same types of
smaller iron artifacts in densities of approximately 0.34 to 1.5 artifacts per m2 interspersed, in some instances, with scattered ballast
stone in densities of 5 to 11 stones per m2 (Clausen ms.}.
The results of the survey were not faultless, however. An apparently spurious anomaly of approximately 25 gammas located just
east of the anomaly {Fig. 2, a) created by the intact anchor at the
northwest end of the wreck, did not directly correspond to an artifact
or concentration of artifacts. So little is understood regarding the
nature of the magnetic signatures created by multicomponent forgediron anchors and cannon of the type found in these early sites, that
we cannot dismiss the possibility that this anomaly was a bona fide
magnetic phenomenon related to a nearby artifact. The image may
also have been the result of a slight course deviation on the part of the
survey vessel which went unnoticed. Another anomaly of some 30
gammas, corresponding to a second large anchor found seaward and
isolated from the main body of the wreck, was displaced some 20 m to
the northwest on the survey map, due to an error on the part of the observer in identifying a letter range.
From the survey and excavation of this relatively small, mid-16thcentury vessel and others of later centuries with which the senior
author has been involved both in Florida (Clausen 1965, 1966) and
elsewhere, we find that the typical magnetic signature of a wreck of a
Colonial or later sailing vessel of wooden or composite construction
will consist of a central area of magnetic distortion characterized by
a number of intense and generally localized anomalies surrounded
and, depending upon the depth and dispersion of the wreck in some
instances, interspersed by scattered smaller magnetic disturbances.
In the typical pre-1850s shipwreck, especially those earlier than the
19th century, the more massive distortions, for the most part, will
represent individual cannon and anchors or groups of these artifacts.

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

79

In later vessels of this period, iron winches, anchor chain, iron
ballast, and the larger elements of the ship’s construction (such as
iron knees, breast hooks, steering gear, and heaw elements of the
rigging, including cranse irons and parrels), as well as surviving
industrial cargo (e.g., machinery), will contribute to, or in some cases
replace, armament in these intense distortions. Throughout the entire
period, the less intense distortions will represent both concentrations
and scatterings of smaller iron artifacts such as ship’s fastenings,
spikes and throughbolts, and more minor elements of the ship’s gear
and rigging.
The final plan of the distribution of the artifacts recovered in the
excavation of the site was unfinished at the time this report was
prepared. However, a comparison of the field plan prepared during
excavation of the site with the two-dimensional magnetic map
provided by the in-site delineation survey represented by Figure 2,
suggests that fewer than 10 of the 1,500+ individual artifacts
recovered were found outside the 5-gamma magnetic contour line encompassing the main and satellite parts of the site. Furthermore, with
the single exception of one large ceramic fragment, an olive jar sherd
found a dozen or so meters north of the main part of the wreck, the
remainder of the few artifacts found outside the 5-gamma contour
were all located within a few meters of this zone, which suggests that
if more accurate data could have been acquired, permitting contouring at one- or two-gamma intervals, many of these artifacts might
have been encompassed within the area of magnetic disturbance.
The senior author suggested in an earlier publication that the
correlation between the distribution of the ferrous components of a
Colonial period vessel lost under these conditions and the remainder
of the artifact assemblage at the site would prove to be very close
(Clausen 1966: 79-80). However, we do not believe that this relationship is normally as close as the results of the preliminary analysis of
the excavation of this mid-16th-century site suggest. Our reservations
are based chiefly on two points. First, the remains of colonies of the
benthic organisms Ostrea equestris and Crassostrea virginica, as
well as other species of bivalves and gastropods, were discovered
adhering to the upper two-thirds of the large conglomerates raised
from the site, unassailable evidence that the depth of the unconsolidated sediment in the area of the wreck has varied markedly.
At least once in the past the conglomerates were largely or perhaps
entirely exposed long enough to permit these organisms to flourish
(I. S. Holland and N. I. Maciolek, the University of Texas Marine
Science Institute at Port Aransas, personal communication, 1973}.
Second, during excavation of the site, depressions which appeared to

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

be the result of scouring rather than compression, were noted in the
dense gray clay on which the artifacts rested. These depressions
were particularly noticeable, reaching a depth of 10-20 cm about the
contact points, the flukes and rings, of the large anchors.
The evidence of variable sediment depth and scouring suggests that
during hurricanes, and perhaps other intense storms, greatly accelerated alongshore transport of sediments occurs off Padre Island.
Once, during a hurricane, the senior author, using scuba, dived in the
surf zone near a wreck lost in 1715 off the geologically similar Florida
East Coast Barrier Island system to observe the effects of the storm on
bottom sediments. While observations certainly were difficult in such
a situation, it was noted that the alongshore transport of sediment
was remarkably accelerated. So much sand and shell was in motion
along the bottom, that it was impossible to determine where solid bottom started. Approaching the bottom during the storm was analogous
to swimming in the slurry created in the pipeline of a giant dredge.
Under similar conditions at this 1554 wreck site it is difficult to
believe that isolated ceramic and glass sherds with specific gravities
not greatly unlike shells and shell fragments would not have been
swept away, particularly in this area where the basement clay is
level, almost featureless, and slick, and hence offers little impediment
to tumbling or sliding materials. Secondly, the position of more than
850 of the artifacts recovered at this site was permanently fixed,
through encasement in conglomerates weighing approximately I001,000 kg. These large conglomerates iypicallyform about the iron anchors, cannon, and larger fastenings at a site as the corrosion
products from these artifacts migrate out and downward through the
enveloping sediment and adjacent wreck remains. This process traps
sand, shell, ballast stone, and artifacts alike in a cementlike,
irregularly shaped mass with the parent artifact at the core. At
present, our knowledge of how rapidly this envelopment process occurs is vague. However, current estimates by experts in the field of
preservation of artifactual remains recovered from shipwreck sites
indicate that iron and steel artifacts begin to react rapidly and that
most if not all of the formation of these conglomerates probably takes
place within 10 to 20 years of the introduction of the items to the environment (Don Hamilton, Antiquities Conservation Laboratory, the
University of Texas at Austin personal communication, 1975). For
example, the steel axles of a child’s plastic toy automobile recovered
in 1967 from near a more than 250-year-old ship in the Atlantic off
Florida were completely overlain with an encrustation composed of
sand, shell, and the corrosion products of the steel which was identical in make-up and even color to that encasing the iron artifacts

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

81

from the nearby wreck.
It is significant that with the exception of perhaps three ceramic
sherds, the remaining 15% of the artifacts recovered from the site
which were not entrapped in clongomerates were objects of high
specific gravity fabricated of metal -- either iron, bronze, silver, lead
or gold. The remainder of the sample of ceramics from the site, some
160-170 sherds representing a wide variety of types, were discovered
in the preservation laboratory during the dissection of the large
conglomerates. It is of interest here to note that the only means
through which a representative sample of ceramic types and articles
fabricated of glass could be secured at this site was by recovering the
conglomerates in which they were entrapped.
Typically in shipwrecks, the artifact sample is heavily selective
toward inorganic and/or inactive items capable of surviving the
biological and chemical ravages of the marine environment (Clausen
1967: 44-46). All the above evidence at this site indicates a further
bias toward articles fabricated of material of greater specific gravity
than glass or ceramics which could not easily be moved away by
storm-generated currents and concomitant sediment flow. Also, this
site was discovered by treasure hunters prior to passage into law in
1969 of the Texas Antiquities Code, which now protects such cultural
resources. What effect the activities of this group may have had on
the artifact sample at the site is unknown.
Consequently, we urge caution in accepting the evidence of the
very close relationship of the ferrous components to the rest of the artifactual remains found at this particular 16th-century wreck site, as
typical for sites near shore except perhaps in this general area of the
western Gulf of Mexico. The senior author has examined many wreck
sites elsewhere in the Gulf of Mexico, the Atlantic, and the Caribbean
where, because of different bottom and sediment types and current
characteristics, even tiny sherds of glass and ceramic fragments not
bound up in encrustations were present in great abundance.
Another important conclusion can be drawn from th e survey data.
It is commonly held that the effective strength of dipolar magnetic
distortions, the type represented by most shipwreck materials, is inversely proportional to the cube of the distance. A formula for expressing this is given in Breiner (1973: 42) as T = M

r3 ,

"T" being the

anomaly in gauss, "M", the dipole moment in centimeter-gramsecond, and "r", the distance in centimeters. Taking into consideration water and sediment depth over the wreck, less sensor
depth below the surface, we determined that the average sensorto-target range during the survey of Site 41KNI0(UW) was ap-

82

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

proximately 6.5 m. The largest distortion in the local earth’s magnetic
field measured during the survey was 125 + gammas created by the
mass of wrought iron near the center of the wreck (Fig. 2) which consisted of the ship’s sheet anchor and miscellaneous armament and
fastenings. Using the above formula with these values, 125 + gammas
at a sensor-to-target range of 6.5 m, we calculate that the strength of
the distortion created by these remains would have diminished to approximately three gammas at a range of 22.5 m. At that point, the
anomaly created by this wreck very likely would be indistinguishable
from the "noise" level present in even the most sophisticated
magnetometers typically in use for offshore surveys. In short, in
deeper water, at sensor-to-target ranges in excess of 25-30 m, this
wreck, for all practical purposes, would become undetectable.
The small size of the 1554 wreck which was the subject of this survey, is not at all unusual for a vessel of the periods of exploration,
colonization and early development in the Western Hemisphere. Our
archival research indicates that these early vessels in many instances, especially during the first century after discovery, were
quite small. Morrison [1942: 120), for example, estimates the
displacement of Columbus’ Capitana, the Santa Maria, to have been
less than 100 tons. English, Spanish, and French archival records
throughout the 16th and 17th centuries clearly indicate that vessels of
less than 100 tons displacement often sailed to and about the New
World, and that vessels of only 200 tons displacement were common.
Lacking specific historical context, it may be said that from the point
of view of cultural analysis and history, the most valuable shipwrecks
are those dating from the first centuries after discovery (Clausen
1967: 44-46).
COMMENT
Recently the Bureau of Land Management and the United States
Geological Survey, both agencies of the Department of the Interior,
have tried to formulate regulations to protect and preserve such
cultural resources as shipwrecks and drowned prehistoric habitation
sites in areas of the outer continental shelf under their jurisdiction.
Cultural resources in these areas are considered endangered by accelerated efforts of petroleum interests to exploit the abundant fuel
resources of the shelf area in response to increasing national and
world energy demands.
The number of shipwreck sites on the outer continental sheld is admittedly very limited in terms of the total population of shipwrecks in
the Western Hemisphere. We estimate now on the basis of both our

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

83

archival research and survey experience that less than 9% of the
total number of shipwrecks lost in the New World between 1492 and
1900 are located more than 5 km from land or from submerged
navigational hazard (Clausen ms.}. Nevertheless, those few wrecks
which are located in the deeper colder waters on the outer shelf
should be less scattered and the materials in them better preserved
than those sites found in shallow coastal waters; hence, when
technology of recovery has advanced sufficiently, they may present
archeological targets of prime importance.
In view of the economic realities of the problem, these agencies
have elected to satisfy their obligations to protect these sites by
requiring that the corporations responsible for disrupting the sea
floor conduct surveys to locate and protect through simple avoidance
these cultural resources prior to well-drilling, pipeline-laying, and
related activities which would endanger the sites (U.S. Department of
the Interior 1974, 1975). The most recent publication on this subject,
subtitled "Minimum Geophysical Survey Requirements to Protect
Cultural Resources," requires exposure of the survey area to the
array of instrumentation aboard the survey vessel in parallel tracks
spaced at 150-m intervals, and recommends that the sensor of the
magnetometer be 6 m or less above the water bottom interface (U.S.
Department of the Interior 1975].
On the basis of the findings presented in this paper, we submit that
the 150-m track spacing presently required in these offshore surveys
even under the most ideal conditions (i.e., adequate functioning,
accurate positioning system with programmable track plotter,
magnetometer sensor altitude 6 m or less above the bottom, and a
moderate sea state) -- results, at best, in sampling only some 25O/o 30% of the lease areas in terms of detecting these smaller, though
culturally more significant early wreck sites. It is true that this
assessment is based solely on the capabilities of the magnetometer,
but this instrument, if properly applied, has proven over many years
of application to be the only remote sensing device capable of detecting all Colonial and later period wreck sites. The other principal instrumentation the government requires in the surveys (i.e., the sidescan sonar and sub-bottom profiler) will very likely prove to be of
very limited use in detecting these early sites, or for that matter,
probably any wrecks of wooden construction lost for longer than 100
years. The sub-bottom profiler is employed in this instance to reveal
sub-bottom features such as sediment horizons and possible disconfortuities which might be related to drowned land forms (former
drainages of rivers and streams and perhaps former barrier island
systems and associated lagoon and other embayments -- prime

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ecotone areas) where the probability of association with prehistoric
camps or the hunting-and-gathering activities of early man would be
high. Unless, by chance, the survey vessel passes directly over a
buried or semiburied wreck site, or unless the survey party purposely
directs the vessel over an anomaly already detected by the
magnetometer, the probability is very low that this instrument would
detect a wreck of the nature we are concerned about here.
The side-scan sonar also will prove of little use in detecting these
older wrecks of wooden construction. At depths of 200 m or less, the
structure (at least above the turn of the bilge) can be expected to
have collapsed through biological and chemical action and would be
scattered to some degree by currents, unless the site happens to be
located in an area of very limited or no loose sedimentation. The principal use of this instrument in the present surveys is to provide an additional perspective in identifying topographic features which might
relate to drowned land forms. Conventional side-scan sonar systems
do not have a sub-bottom capability. Hence, like the sub-bottom
profiler, it is used in this instance to determine possible areas of
prehistoric occupation. Its application to shipwrecks in these surveys
is limited almost solely to identifying whether magnetic or acoustical
anomalies are nonburied, steel-hulled wrecks.
Consequently, we recommend dropping the ineffective blanket surveys of large areas now undertaken which, through faulty design, are
missing an estimated three out of four of the important early sites (except perhaps in areas crossed by present or historically documented
sea lanes, where the probability of sites presumably would be higher)
in favor of more concentrated surveys. These should be made with
parallel tracks spaced not more than 50 m apart and confined to the
general area of disturbance the well site (plus an additional area or
buffer zone of potential physical and/or magnetic disturbance
around the area to be disrupted) and along pipeline routes. We also
recommend that the notice stipulate that the height off the bottom of
the magnetometer sensor be no greater than 6 m, and that a separate
record of sensor altitude either off the bottom or below the surface
(or both) be maintained during the survey (Clausen 1974]. Otherwise,
we predict that a disproportionate number of steel-hulled, recent
shipwreck sites of limited archeological value will be discovered in
these surveys at the expense of the scientifically more valuable early
wrecks.
Finally, in areas where the remains of Colonial period wrecks
either lie partially, or, as in the case of the 1554 site described in this
report, totally buried in unconsolidated sediments, or are
camouflaged by marine growth such as corals on reef areas in the

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

85

tropics or the many varieties of benthic algae common off rocky
coasts at higher latitudes, the guidance afforded the archeologist by
an in-site delineation survey can be of inestimable value in
maximizing the cultural data collected and in raising the efficiency of
the underwater operations in general. In fact, so successful has this
approach proven, that we now believe it to be an essential
preliminary step to the thorough and efficient excavation of virtually
any Colonial period shipwreck.

REFERENCES CITED

Arnold, J. Barto, III
1974a A Magnetometer Survey of the Nineteenth-Century Steamboat Black
Cloud. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol, 45, pp. 225230.
1974b The Archeological Applications of Computerized Contour and
Perspective Plotting. Newsletter of Computer Arhcaeology, Vol. 10,
pp. 1-7.
Arnold, J. Barto, III, and Carl J. Clausen
1975 A Magnetometer Survey with Electronic Positioning Control and
Calculator Plotter System. Paper presented to the Sixth
International Conference on Underwater Archeology. Charleston,
S.C.
Breiner, Sheldon
1973 Applications Manual for Portable Magnetometers. Geometrics, Palo
Alto, California.
Breiner, Sheldon, and Michael D. Coe
1972 Magnetic Exploration of the Olmec Civilization. American Scientist,
Vol. 60, pp. 556-575.
Breiner, Sheldon, and K.G. MacNaughton
1965 The Applications of Magnetometers to Underwater Archeology.
Paper presented at the Second Conference on Underwater
Archeology. Toronto.
Clausen, Carl J.
1965 A 1715 Spanish Treasure Ship. Contributions of the Florida State
Museum. Social Sciences, No. 12 ....
1966 The Proton Magnetometer: Its Use in Plotting and Distribution of
Ferrous Components of a Shipwreck Site as an Aid to Archeological
Interpretation. Florida Anthropologist, Vol. 19, pp. 77-84,
1967 Some Comments on Pre-1800 Sites: Maritime. Historical Archeology,
Vol. 1, pp. 44-46.
1974 Letter to the directors of the Bureau of Land Management and
United States Geological Survey regarding Notice 74-10, dated May
10, 1974, on file in the records of the Texas Historic Commission.
Ms. Site report on the Texas Antiquities Committee’s underwater

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
archeological research project: The Excavation of a Spanish Wreck
of 1554, manuscript in preparation.

Green, J.N,
1970 A New Sea-Going Magnetometer Detector Head. Archaeometry, Vol.
12, pp. 167-172.
Green, J.N., E.T. Hall, and M.L. Katzev
1967 Survey of a Greek Shipwreck Off Kyrenia, Cyprus. Archaeometry,
Vol. 10, pp. 46-56.
Hall, E.T.
1966 The Use of the Proton Magnetometer in Underwater Archaeology.
Archaeometry, Vol. 9, pp, 32-44.
Hays, T.R., and Eugene Herrin
1970 Padre Island Pro)ect: Report to the Texas Antiquities Committee.
Institute for Underwater Research, Dallas.
Lenihan, Daniel
1974 Preliminary Archeological Survey of the Offshore Lands of Gulf
Islands National Seashore. In Underwater Archeology in the
National Park Service, edited by Daniel Lenihan. Division of
Archeology, Southwest Region. National Park Service, Department
of the Interior.
Link, Marion Clayton
1959 Sea Diver. Rinehart and Co., New York.
Meylach, Martin, and Charles Whited
1971 Diving to a Flash of Gold. Doubleday and Co.. Garden City, N,J.
Peterson, Mendel
1965 History Under the Sea. Smithsonian Institution Publication 4538.
Washington, D.C.
Morrison. Samuel Elliot
1942 Admiral of the Ocean Sea. Little, Brown and Co., Waltham, Mass.
Potter, John S., Jr.
1972 The Treasure Diver’s Guide. Rev. ed. (first printed in 1960).
Doubleday and Co., Garden City, N.J.
U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management and U,S.
Geological Survey
1974 Notice to lessees and operators of federal oil and gas leases in the
Outer Continental Shelf, Gulf of Mexico area: minimum geophysical
survey requirements to protect cultural resources. No. 74-10.
1975 Notice to lessees and operators of federal oil and gas leases in the
Outer Continental Shelf, Gulf of Mexico area: minimum geophysical
survey requirements to protect cultural resources. No. 75-3
(supersedes No. 74-10),
Texas Antiquities Committee
Austin, Texas

