Diet and Medicinal Plant Usage of a Late Archaic
Population from Culberson County, Texas
Richard G. Holloway

ABSTRACT
Eight coprolites, recovered from a test excavation at Caldwell Cave (41CU1),
Culberson County, Texas, were analyzed for their fossil pollen and macrobiological remains. Based on the results of the analyses, a warm season of occupation of the site is
suggested. Evidence obtained from the coprolites indicates that some of the material was
probably parched prior to consumption. A preliminary analysis of area water quality indicates that this prehistoric population may have suffered from a condition of chronic diarrhea. Evidence is presented for medicinal plant use in an apparent attempt to alleviate this
condition.

INTRODUCTION
Caldwell Cave (41CU1) is a sinkhole shelter located in east-central Culberson County, Texas. The site was initially excavated by Jackson (1937) and reported on by Tanner (1949) in his study of several sites in the area. Caldwell Cave
yielded a large number of perishable artifacts, including baskets, ropes, sandals,
and wooden artifacts. During the summer of 1979, 20 human coprolites were
recovered from an exposed wall profile by D. L. Hamilton (personal communication, 1982).
Coprolite analyses are important sources of data that are not normally recovered from archeological sites. Coprolites can reveal direct evidence of diet,
nutrition, and methods of food preparation. In early archeological studies and
until the mid-1960s, most coprolite studies examined only the macrofossil remains such as seeds, bone, and fibers. Martin and Sharrock (1964), in their study
of the Glen Canyon area of Arizona, introduced the concept of examining coprolites for their fossil pollen content.
With the new analytical techniques advanced by Martin and Sharrock (1964)
and by Callen (1963, 1965, 1967), other investigators soon realized the importance of coprolite evidence. Heizer (1967, 1969), Heizer and Napton (1969), and
Napton and Kelso (1969) reported on the analysis of coprolites recovered from
several sites in the Great Basin of Utah and Nevada. Williams-Dean and Bryant
(1975) reported on coprolites recovered from Antelope House, Arizona. Coprolite materials recovered from sites in Southwest Texas, all in Val Verde County,
also have been reported: Riskind (1970) analyzed coprolites from Parida Cave;

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985for 1983)

320

Texas Archeological Society

Bryant (1974a) analyzed coprolites from the Conejo Shelter site; and WilliamsDean (1978) analyzed coprolites from Hinds Cave. The present analysis of coprolites from Caldwell Cave represents the first analysis of such materials from
Culberson County, Texas, and emphasizes the need for additional sources of data.
METHODS AND MATERIALS
The 20 coprolites were initially divided into four groups based on specimen
morphology (Table 1). Morphological categorization of coprolites usually has
not been reported but may be significant as an indication of general health. Eight
specimens were selected for further analysis (these are denoted in Table 1 by an
asterisk) and were chosen to represent all four morphological groups as well as
degrees of specimen completeness.
Each specimen was initially cleaned by brushing the surface and was then
weighed. Smaller subsamples consisting of approximately one-half of the original specimen were removed by cutting the specimen lengthwise (where possible). These subsamples were then reweighed. Table 2 presents these data and
the computed fraction used in analysis. Cutting the coprolites lengthwise ensured
that the entire contents of the specimen would be sampled and reduced the potential for bias due to differential migration of materials through the digestive system (Bryant 1974a). The subsamples were placed in an airtight container and
covered with a 0.5 percent solution of trisodium phosphate (Na,PO,) for several
weeks prior to analysis. Trisodium phosphate acts as a reconstituting agent and
often produces an offensive fecal odor (Callen 1967). Compounds such as hydrogen sulfide, which form from bacterial decomposition (Oser 1965:530), also
contribute to this fecal odor.
Within a period of 72 hours, the supernatant liquid in all eight samples
turned a dark, opaque black. At the same time, an unusually strong, pungent
fecal odor was noted. The combination of coloration, strong fecal odor, and
overall morphology indicated that these coprolites are most likely human in origin (Bryant 1974a; Williams-Dean 1978).
The samples were retained in the solution for a period of several weeks, and
the softened material was then passed through a series of screens, the smallest
being 200 um mesh. All material remaining on the screens was saved for later
macrolossil analysis, while the materials passing through were subjected to the
following procedure for the removal of fossil pollen.
The residue was treated with 10 percent HC1 in order to remove the carbonate material, and silicates and other inorganic materials were removed through
use of a heavy density separation. The samples were treated with zinc chloride
(ZnC12, specific gravity 1.99-2.00) and were centrifuged at 1950 rpm for 30
minutes. The light polleniferous fraction was removed by pipet and then concentrated into 12 ml centrifuge tubes. The extraneous organic material was removed
by acetolysis (Erdtman 1960), and the residue was dehydrated by an ethanol series and transferred to 1000 cs silicon oil with butanol (TBA). A minimum of
200 grains per sample were counted where possible (Barkley 1934), and the entire slide was scanned at 1 mm intervals to avoid nonrandom distribution of the
pollen grains on the slide (Brooks and Thomas 1967).
The macrobotanical remains were dried, and a stereomicroscope was used
in sorting these remains. Identifications were based on comparisons with ma-

Holloway--Late Archaic Plant Usage

321

Table 1. Morphological Descriptions of Coprolites
Coprol ite
No. *
2*
3*
4*
5*
6*
7
8
9
10

Typet

Condition

Coprol ite
No. *

I
I
I I
V
V

partial
complete
partial
complete
complete
partial
partial
partial
complete
complete

II*
12"
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

1

I
I
I
I I

Type~
III
IV
Ill/iV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
II

Condition
complete
complete
complete
complete
complete
complete
partial
partial
complete
partial

* = subjected to intensive analysis.

tType I: solid, firm, well formed; Type II: soft, well formed;
Type III: soft, not well formed; Type IV: soft, paddy-like,
apparently runny.

Table 2. Weight and Percent of Sample Used

Coprolite No.
and Type
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.

I, Type I
2, Type II
3, Type III
4, Type IV
5, Type IV
6, Type I
II, Type III
12, Type IV

Sample
Weiqht
30.4
68.2
44.5
83.3
182.8
36.7
133.0
153.8

g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g

Subsample
Weiaht
17.0
38.7
24.1
30.8
86.9
18.9
64.9
54.7

g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g

% Weight
Sampled
55.9
56.7
54.1
36.9
47.5
51.4
48.7
35.6

terial in the Texas A&M University Anthropology Department reference collections. When necessary, specimens were sent to other specialists for positive
identification.
ANALYTICAL RESULTS
Results of the palynological analyses are.presented in Table 3. Both raw pollen counts and calculated pollen percentages are included for each taxon. Macrofossil data are presented in Table 4.
Coprolite No. 1: Type I. The pollen spectra recovered from this coprolite
were dominated by Gramineae pollen, with only trace occurrences of other pollen taxa. Gramineae seeds also dominated the macrobotanical remains. No identifiable fragments of bone were recovered from this specimen.
Coprolite No. 2: Type II. The pollen spectra were again dominated by
Gramineae pollen, with only traces of other pollen taxa. The taxa represented by

322

Texas Archeological Society

the trace occurrences were very similar to those recovered from Coprolite No. 1.
The macroremains again were dominated by Gramineae seeds. In addition, 2
seeds identified as Prosopsis sp., a single rodent hair, 2 bones of Sylvilagus
cf. auduboni (rabbit), and 11 fragmentary pieces of unidentifiable bone were
recovered.
Coprolite No. 3: Type III. A total of only 126 pollen grains from two slides
were recovered from this specimen. Again, Gramineae pollen dominated. Other
taxa represented included Cactaceae, Cheno-Ams, Quercus (oak), Artemisia
(sage brush), Larrea (Creosote bush), and Lamiaceae. The macrobotanical remains consisted almost entirely of Opuntia (prickly pear) seeds, which were
identified by Donald J. Pinkava (Arizona State University Herbarium) as O.
lindheimeri. No identifiable bone material was recovered from this specimen.
Coprolite No. 4: Type IV. Gramineae pollen dominated, but there were
somewhat larger percentages of Pinus, Quercus, and Compositae pollen than
previously encountered. In addition, a more diverse pollen flora was recovered,
and Gramineae seeds were numerous. Evidence of Sylvilagus cf. auduboni was
present, as were 34 unidentified bone fragments.
Coprolite No. 5: Type IV. Gramineae pollen clearly dominated the pollen
spectra. Also recovered were significant percentages of Cheno-Ams, low-spine
and high-spine Compositae, and Artemisia. Several seeds of O. lindheimeri,
stems of Gramineae, and epidermal tissues of Liliaceae were recovered. The
Liliaceae specimen was most likely Allium sp. (onion), but positive identification was not possible. Fragments of an insect exoskeleton, 105 unidentifiable
bone fragments, and a large amount of mammalian hair (as yet unidentified) also
were recovered.
Coprolite No. 6: Type I. The pollen spectra were completely dominated by
Gramineae pollen, with Ephedra pollen being the next most common type. This
coprolite contained a large quantity of Gramineae seeds and two bone fragments
of Neotoma cf. albigula (packrat).
Coprolite No. 11: Type III. The pollen assemblage was again dominated by
Gramineae pollen. Relatively large quantities of low-spine Compositae and Artemisia pollen also were present. The macroplant remains from this coprolite,
which were somewhat meager in quantity, included some Liliaceae epidermal
fragments (possibly Allium sp. but not positively identified) and a portion of the
lower bracts of Allium. This coprolite also contained a number of bone fragments
identified as Sylvilagus cf. auduboni.
Coprolite No. 12: Type IV. The pollen spectra from this specimen were
clearly dominated by pollen of the Hydrophyllaceae (water leaf) family. In addition, there was a good representation of fossil pollen taxa. with Larrea and
Gramineae the next most common taxa. Numerous fibrous bracts of Allium sp.
were present, as were numerous grass stems, several of which were singed.
A small number of fragments of both Sylvilagus cf. auduboni and Neotoma
albigula also were recovered.
DISCUSSION
Seasonality
Only one coprolite (No. 3) failed to produce a statistically valid pollen
count of 200 grains (Barkely 1934). A total of only 126 grains was counted in

Holloway--Late Archaic Plant Usage

o co ,.o

L~

CO

O’~

~rh CN CN ’~"

r-- ’m"

cO-~~-

(’4O--

~

O

CW

wT----O

cO~’~

OO

~D~
--r~wh

mo

~
~F

co
co

~o

00o

--

Lo

o

~

~

o

co~
--o

~’~o
oN--

c~
o

-~.~ ~o ~oo

oh
o

323

co

r~

r--

-

_o

oo-

m

o~

o_

o]
oqJO

c
~L~

%4-

Igh

’m"
0

0

~0

0

0

0

L

O--

II

*<t
0

C

r~

Z

o

--

--

o

o

I°

o4

m

~

::n "-1 "~

O.m

o

o.m
0

.f_

}0 C

.

L

o~,o

....

~

~

~+-c

.--

M

~¢O000---L

tn rO U
OC

-

0
0

kl

o

¯ --

o~

L

~)

"t~ X:

0

000

C~ ~a

.

+m
0~--

z o
z

324

Texas Archeological Society

ssuew6eJ3
euo8 pe!~!¢uep!uN

-- t~4 ~t

.P
E

m

y-~
~.~
~->
,,eTnSTqTe

"~o

.-

o.
.o

emo~oeN

to
¯ --

m+--- C
O.C--

--

D

r~
©

**TUOqnpne
"@o snSeTTATTS

-~

%k

~__;~’-o_~
-- -- ~q (-4

a!eH Ue!lewweN
Pe!~!#uep!uN

x

J!eH #uepoU

x

s%Jed #oesul

x

O!UeSJOUl
leO~aeqO

xx

ds mnTTT~

"~0

speeS

x

x

x

x

x

"ds

g

x

x
x

x

waTTT~

"ds STdOso~d

x

y

s!wJep!d3

"~o s!wJep!d3

s%oeJ8

0

g

(se!~eds #ueld pece!#
-ueJe~!pun) s!wJep!d3
eT~undo

--

..NX

x

d
x

.2

spees
TZe~TeffPUTT

eT~und0

¯ -- 4in ¯ -

Jeq!j SUeld

XX

s!qoeu eeeu!weJ9

X

X

spees eeeu!weJ9

XX

X

X

Jeq~nN e%!loJdo0

--{’4

r-~ ’~"

~xO

X

X

X

X

~-<
m "X

--

04

Holloway--Late Archaic Plant Usage

325

two slides, or an average of only 60+ grains per slide. This could be interpreted
as being indicative of a winter or cold-season occupation, or alternatively, as the
result of ingestion of primarily nonpolteniferous food items (Williams-Dean
1978). I believe that the latter is a more defensible interpretation. As seen in
Table 4, very few macrobiological remains were recovered from this coprolite. These remains were dominated by whole and broken pieces of Opuntia
linheimeri L. seeds, and some plant fibrous material and a small number of mammalian bone fragments were recovered. This may indicate a meal consisting almost entirely of Opuntia or, alternatively, the remains of several meals. The paucity of bone fragments recovered may indicate a small amount of meat ingested
or possibly the remains of an earlier meal.
Many of the coprolites (Nos. 1,2, 4, 5, and 12) contained evidence of direct
ingestion of Gramineae seeds. Coprolite No. 5 contained no Gramineae seeds
but did contain a grass rachis. Three coprolites (Nos. 1, 2, and 6; see Table 3)
contained grass pollen in excess of 75 percent, and two others contained grass
pollen in excess of 50 percent. These high percentages of Gramineae pollen indicate direct ingestion of the pollen along with the seeds.
High percentages of Artemisia (12.1 and 8.8 percent) occurred in two
coprolites, and low-spine Compositae pollen (9.0 and 10.7 percent) also occurred
in two specimens. These percentages may suggest a late summer occupation
when these plants were flowering. Coprolite No. 11 contained 10.7 percent lowspine Compositae pollen and also contained the fibrous bracts of Allium sp. A1lium will flower at any time dt~ring the summer if the correct moisture conditions
are present, but the accompanying Compositae pollen indicate a late summer
time period. Coprolite No. 12, however, may indicate a late spring/early summer
period occupation, based on the large percentage of Hydrophyllaceae pollen
(45 percent); these plants normally flower from March through May or perhaps
into June.
As Williams-Dean (1978) has observed, seasonality is extremely difficult to
determine on the basis of coprolite data. Taken together, these eight coprolites
suggest occupation during a warm season, possibly extending from February or
March until August or perhaps into the early fall. None of the coprolite contents
indicate occupation during a cold season.
The consistent presence of some botanical materials described above do not
support the inferred occupation of Caldwell Cave during periods when plants
were not flowering. The best interpretation of the existing data is that the occupants of the site left at the end of the warm season. This same pattern of seasonal
occupation is noted from Hinds Cave (Williams-Dean 1978) and from Parida
Cave (Riskind 1970) in Val Verde County.
Food Preparation
Coprolite No. 3 contained a very large amount of Opuntia lindheimeri L.
seeds, both broken and whole. The whole seeds suggest that entire tunas were
being consumed. A small amount of charred seeds were present, suggesting that
some tunas were parched prior to consumption. It is unlikely that the tunas were
being stored for long periods of time, and the evidence suggests that the tunas
were consumed soon after the fruit ripened. The seed fragments may indicate an
alternative method of food preparation. Opuntia seed coats are very hard, and it

326

Texas Archeological Society

is unlikely that they were broken by chewing. Also, the frequency of charring is
much greater among the broken seeds, substantiating the interpretation that these
remains reflect more than one meal.
None of the grass seeds examined revealed direct evidence of parching, but
some of the grass stems or rachis were charred. This indicates that the entire
grass inflorescences were picked, and these were then charred, possibly to remove the chaff. D. L. Hamilton (personal communication, n.d.) reports the recovery of baskets charred on the inside, which suggests their use in tbod preparation. Parching probably was done by adding fire-heated rocks or coals into the
baskets containing the food items.
Dietary Habits and General Health
Of the 20 coprolites recovered during the excavation of Caldwell Cave, 13
(65 percent) were placed in categories Ill or IV. Coprolites in these categories
were not well formed and may have been loosely formed as the result of digestive
and/or alimentary disorders.
According to water-chemical analysis of local water sources (Table 5), magnesium content is very high (105 mg/1). While the site’s water source might have
varied with time in the exact reading of this element, a typically high proportion
of magnesium in local water sources could be expected due to the presence of
local gypsum deposits. Magnesium is known to have laxative properties and is a
major component of commercially available laxatives. Therefore, the high concentration of magnesium in the water may account in part for the high percentage
of loosely formed, amorphously shaped copr01ites recovered in the sample.
Examination of the botanical remains revealed several interesting correlations. Coprolite No. 6 contained 10.7 percent Ephedra pollen, which has been
used to consolidate stools as a treatment for diarrhea by the Tewa Indians of New
Mexico (Robbins, Harrington, and Freire-Marreco 19t6). In several coprolites
from Granado Cave, frequencies of greater than 85 percent Ephedra pollen were
noted. Since pollen often remains in the digestive system for several days after
ingestion (Bryant 1974b; Williams-Dean 1978), the frequency of 10.7 percent in
coprolite No. 6 may reflect residual pollen remaining after a treatment designed
to cure diarrhea. Conversely, the percentage of Ephedra pollen in these coprolites
may reflect nothing more than background pollen inhaled during the ingestion of
a meal.
Larrea pollen was present in specimens No. 3, 11, and 12. All three
coprolites were either Type III or Type IV, which may indicate diarrhea. Larrea,
boiled in a tea and ingested, has been used to aid in problems in urinating as well
as to remove calcium deposits in the kidneys (Martinez 1959; Ford 1975). Lewis
and Elvin-Lewis (1977) also report the use of a hot decoction of Larrea as a
treatment for diarrhea.
The coprolite evidence from Caldwell Cave is sufficiently different from
other reported analyses to warrant a few comments. Bryant (1974b), in his study
of coprolites from Conejo Shelter in Val Verde County, interpreted the presence
of entomophilous (insect-pollinated) pollen in frequencies greater than 2 percent
as evidence of direct ingestion of a variety of flowers. Evidence from Caldwell
Cave, on the other hand, does not indicate a similar use of local flowering plants.
Williams-Dean (1978:222) identified 25 percent of the coprolites from

Holloway--Late Archaic Plant Usage

327

Table 5. Water Chemical Analysis of Local Spring:::

Element

Dissolved Solids
(mq/l)

Na+
K+
Mg++

91.2
43.1
105
981
1,400
0.280
114

Ca++
S04
Fe
CI-

Element
FSiO2
BrNO3
NH3
Ba
HCO3

Total Dissolved Solids

Dissolved Solids
(mq/l)
2.6
27.6
0.7
31.0
O. I 0
O. 040
80.5
2,877.12

pH = 7.8
*Analysis by Clara L. Ho, Chemist-in-Charge, and Cynthia Mahan,
Chemist, Mineral Studies Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Hinds Cave as being "amorphous or diarrheic specimens" and attributed this to
diarrhea-toxin-producing algae. However, no algal taxa were recovered in these
coprolites. Although the sample is small, it is interesting to note the higher frequency of amorphous coprolites from Caldwetl Cave than from other sites.
Riskind (1970) reported on the analysis of coprolites from Parida Cave,
Val Verde County. Many of those specimens contained high percentages of
Gramineae pollen, which Riskind attributed to economic importance, Of greater
interest to the Caldwell Cave sample, however, is the high percentage of Ephedra
and Hydrophyllaceae pollen in certain coprolites. At Parida Cave, Riskind (1970)
observed that members of the Hydrophyllaceae family were eaten as greens.
Similar high percentages of Hydrophyllaceae pollen at Caldwell Cave suggest
that members of this plant family had economic importance for the local prehistoric population.
SUMMARY
Of the eight coprolites chosen for intensive analysis from Caldwell Cave,
only one specimen did not produce a statistically valid count, and this was probably the result of ingestion of nonpolleniferous materials. Evidence from all eight
coprolites indicates that occupation of the cave occurred during the warm season
of the year. In addition, many of the food items may have been parched prior to
ingestion.
Analysis of springs in the area suggests that the occupants may have suffered from a condition of diarrhea induced by high magnesium content in the
local water supply. The presence of Larrea and Ephedra pollen in some of the
Caldwe!l Cave coprolites may indicate that these plants were used medicinally.
The evidence for medicinal use, however, is not conclusive. Further analysis of
local spring deposits and analyses of additional coprolites from all four morphological types will be necessary before substantive conclusions can be made.

328

Texas Archeological Society
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I wish to thank Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr., Don Hamilton, and Thomas Stearns, all of
the Anthropology Program at Texas A&M University, for their critical reviews of early
drafts of this report.
REFERENCES CITED
Barkley, W. A.
1934 The statistical theory of pollen analysis. Ecology 15:283-289.
Brooks, D., and K. W. Thomas
1967 The distribution of pollen grains on microscope slides, Part I: the non-randomness
of the distribution. Pollen et Spores 9:621-629.
Bryant, Vaughn M. Jr.
1969 Late fullglacial and postglacial pollen analysis of Texas sediments. Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
1974a The role of coprolite analysis in archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 45:1-28.
1974b Prehistoric diet in Southwest Texas: the coprolite evidence. American Antiquity
39:407-420.
Callen, E. O.
1963 Diet as revealed by coprolites. In Science in archaeology, edited by D. Brothwell
and E. Higgs, pp. 186-194. 1st ed. Basic Books, New York.
1965

Food habits of some pre-Columbian Indians. Economic Botany 19:335-343.

1967

Analysis of the Tehuacan coprolites. In The prehistory of the Tehuacan Valley,
Vol. 1: Environment and subsistence, edited by D. S. Byers, pp. 261-289. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Erdtman, G.
1960 The acetolysis method: a revised description. Svensk. Bot. Tidskr. 54:561.
Ford, K. C.
1975 Las yerbes de la gente: a study of Hispano-American medicinal plants. University
of Michigan Anthropological Papers 60. Ann Arbor.
Heizer, R. E
1967 Analysis of human coprolites from a dry Nevada cave. University of California
Archaeological Survey Reports 70:1-20. Berkeley.
1969

The anthropology of prehistoric Great Basin coprolites. In Science in archaeology, edited by D. Brothwell and E. Higgs, pp. 244-250. 2nd ed. Praeger, New
York.

Jackson, A. T.
1937 Explanation of certain sites in Culberson County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 9:146-192.
Lewis, W. H., and M. P. F. Elvin-Lewis
1977 Medical botany: plants affecting man’s health. Wiley Interscience, New York.
Martin, P. S., and F. W. Sharrock
1964 Pollen analysis of prehistoric human feces: a new approach to ethnobotany.
American Antiquity 30:168-180.
Martinez, M.
1959 Las plantas medicinales de Mexico. Mexico.

Holloway--Late Archaic Plant Usage

329

Napton, L. K., and G. Kelso
!969 Preliminary palynological analysis of Lovelock Cave coprolites. In Archaeological and paleobiological investigations in Love!ock Cave, Nevada, pp. 19-27.
Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers, Special Publication 2.
Oser, B. L.
1965 Hawk’s physiological chemistry. 14th ed. New York.
Riskind, D. H.
1970 Pollen analysis of human coprolites from Parida Cave. In Archeological investigations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas, by R. K. Alexander,
pp. 89-101. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at
Austin, Papers 19.
Robbins, W. W., J. P. Harrington, and B. Freire-Marreco
1916 Ethnobotany of the Tewa Indians. Bureau of Americah Ethnology, Smithsonian
Institution, Bulletin 55.
Tanner, R. W.
1949 The Caldwell Ranch sites: a distinctive culture complex in the northeastern
Trans-Pecos. Unpublished M.A. thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Williams-Dean, Glenna
1978 Ethnobotany and cultural ecology of prehistoric man in Southwest Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Williams-Dean, Glenna, and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
1975 Pollen analysis of human coprolites from Antelope House. The Kiva 4l :97-111.

