NOTES
BIFACING PATTERNS ON PRISMATIC FLAKES
J.

B. SOLLBERGER

ABSTRACT
The bifacing of prismatic flakes and blades provides a constraint to
pressure flaking that results in various predictable diagonal flake scar
patterns. These flake scar patterns, together with cross sectional studios
of flakes, generally identify prismatic blade production for the purpose of
biface manufacture. Diagonal flaking removes longitudinal ridges,
permitting complete bifacing, and also produces a superior cutting edge for
use against soft materials. It is proposed that diagonal flaking patterns are
the result of technological considerations, rather than simply being a
matter of esthetics on the part of individual craftsmen.

INTRODUCTION
Various patterns in pressure flaking to produce thin bifaces for
knives and projectile points have been recognized for some time (e.g.
Crabtree 1972:87) and these patterns have generally been attributed
to cultural traditions and choices by individual craftsmen, rather
than to technological considerations. While specific flaking patterns
may have esthetic relationships, this report will discuss the
technological Considerations for using diagonal flaking and the
resulting patterns such as chevron, half chevron, opposed oblique,
and diagonal ribbon flaking.
Experiments by the writer have shown that longitudinal dorsal face
ridges on flakes impose a restraint to bifacing the dorsal faces, if
economically-sized flakes are being used. "Economically-sized"
flakes are ones that have been produced to maximize yield from raw
material and minimize labor in producing finished tools. In other
words, these flakes are of minimum size to produce desired finished
biface sizes. It will be shown that the presence of diagonal flaked
bifaces and unfinished prismatic flakes on an archeological site can
serve as an index that the lithic technology was oriented toward the
production of bifaces selectively from prismatic flakes, rather than
the bifaces being random reductions of irregular shaped flakes and
cores. It is generally recognized that prismatic blades make ideal
blanks for the production of lithic tools (Bordaz 1970).

262

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

DISCUSSION
Prismatic blades and flakes have one or more, usually prominent,
parallel longitudinally oriented dorsal face ridges, with the ridges
sometimes called "arrisses" (Crabtree 1972:34), as shown in Fig. 1.
The term "blade" is generally reserved for flakes with lengths at
least twice widths. Horizontally, dorsal face surfaces are concave
between lateral edges and ridges (Fig. 1,c). Such faces cannot be
initially flaked in a random style or directly across the dorsal ridges
to accomplish complete bifacing if minimum reduction in blank size is
desired.
In complete bifacing of a prismatic blade, there is a technological
constraint on initial flake removal from the dorsal face. A conchoidalshaped flake always results from flaking into a planar surface, with
little control of flake width expansion. This problem is greatly
amplified in flaking across the concave surfaces of ridged flakes. Fig.
1,a illustrates the general expansion in flake width, when flaking
directly across a blade lateral edge from a platform location such as
points 1 and 2. In cross section, such a flake removal would start at a

G

¢

FIGURE 1. Prismatic flake attributes. See text for explanation.

BIFACINC PATTERNS ON PRISMATIC FLAKES

263

thin fragile platform and then become even thinner as the fracture
proceeded from the lateral edge to the dorsal ridge. The flake would
be required to thicken if a portion of the dorsal ridge were to be
successfully removed. Finally, the bifacing flake would be required to
thin again to terminate. With flake removals having rapidly
expanding widths, this fracture sequence is not possible. In actual
practice, flaking directly across the unscarred original surface of a
prismatic blade will result in flake removals stopping short of the
dorsal ridge, or in the worst case, ruinous snapping of the prismatic
blade.
As shown by the side view of a prismatic blade (Fig. 1,b) dorsal
ridges and corresponding concave face surfaces are longitudinally
straight or convex. Complete bifacing of economically-sized prismatic
flakes is possible if: (1) the diagonal flaking angle is sufficiently acute
to the dorsal ridge line that individual flakes removed will not be
concave dorsally except immediately short of the dorsal ridge, and (2)
the individual bifacing flakes are narrow elongates, where each flake
removal establishes a ridge to strengthen and guide the next flake
removal to and beyond the dorsal ridge. If the individual craftsman is
willing to have a greater loss in original prismatic blade dimensions, a
more random flaking pattern can be used to produce bifaces.
Diagonal flaking becomes patterned according to the location of the
dorsal ridge in relation to flake center. Some of these patterns are
shown in Fig. 2,a-c. In all such diagonal flaking patterns, the first
series of oblique flakes from one lateral edge of a flake tool blank
must extend beyond, and remove a portion of, the dorsal ridge. Flake
direction from the opposite lateral edge then determines the flaking
pattern type.
The half chevron flaking pattern (Fig. 2,a) is diagonally flaked first
from the lateral edge nearest to an off-center dorsal ridge. It is
usually necessary to execute this series of flakes first, because this
short face surface is more horizontally concave than the wider dorsal
surface on the other side of the ridge. These narrow oblique flakes
remove and round off the dorsal ridge. Termination of these flakes
occur at the near-edge of the "far side" concave face surface,
thereby flattening the concave face surface on the other side of the
ridge. It is then possible for flake removals from the wider opposite
face surface to be made horizontal, directly across the dorsal ridge
axis. These final bifacing flakes from the opposite side of the original
flake blank can be both longer and wider than the first series of flakes
that removed the dorsal ridge.
This flaking description is confined to prismatic blades having one
dorsal ridge. Half chevron flaking patterns are therefore one method

264

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of identifying bifacing of economically-sized prismatic flakes. The
writer has seen large numbers of this type of artifact that are
commonly not completely flaked on the ventral surface. The cross
section of the biface will be a flat triangle.
In producing a stemmed biface from a prismatic blade, the bulbar
proximal end can be flaked first to thin and straighten the blank.
Diagonal and then other random flakes are used to remove the dorsal
ridge and then thin and shape the basal stern area. Diagonal flaking
proceeds on the middle and distal portions of the still ridged blank to
obtain complete bifacing.
The chevron pattern of flaking results from the use of a prismatic
blade with an isosceles triangle cross section, therefore having a
well-centered dorsal ridge. This flaking system can also be used on
prismatic blades having two dorsal ridges, and a trapezoidal cross
section. The chevron pattern is identified by oblique flakes from both
lateral edges that are directed toward the stem end of the biface. This
pattern can be executed in two sequences: (i) a complete series of
flakes is removed from the lateral edge on one side, with each flake

b

d

FIGURE 2. The dorsal face of bifaced prismatic flakes showing normal
cross sections and flake scar pattern, a, Half Chevron; b, Chevron; c,
Diagonal Ribbon. The point shown as d cannot be the normal for
initial bifacing of an economically-sized prismatic flake.

BIFACING PATTERNS ON PRISMATIC FLAKES

265

removing some of the dorsal ridge, and then the flaking process is
repeated on the opposite lateral edge; or, (2) one flake removal from
one lateral edge is followed by a flake removal from the opposite
lateral edge to consecutively remove portions of the dorsal ridge until
bifacing is complete. If two dorsal ridges are present, a series of
consecutive flakes must be detached from each lateral edge to remove
portions of each ridge.
Oblique opposed and diagonal ribbon flaking are two other
variations in diagonal flaking patterns that can be used to biface
prismatic flakes with a minimum in overall size reduction. In both
cases a series of diagonal flakes is removed from a lateral edge, and
diagonal flaking from the opposite lateral edge is done in a parallel
opposed manner. Oblique opposed flaking generally results in a
biface with a central ridge. In diagonal ribbon flaking, wider and
thinner flake removals are obtained. The wider flakes give
terminations farther beyond the dorsal ridge, and the resulting cross
section of the biface is more gently convex than with oblique opposed
flaking.
Ventral faces of prismatic blades and flakes are typically flat to
slightly convex. Such a surface is easily flaked by any desired scar
pattern, and results in a slightly convex surface. If a strong ridge is
present on both faces of a biface, this means that more material than
necessary was removed from the ventral face to effect bifacing, and
size reduction of the original raw material piece was more than
minimal; or that the original biface has been resharpened along the
lateral edges (Sollberger 1971). Economically-sized prismatic flakes
do not have the necessary thickness along the lateral edges to
sacrifice in order to form a ridge on the ventral face.
The technological constraints in bifacing of economically-sized
prismatic flakes described in this report are the result of actual lithic
flaking experiments by the writer, and demonstrate the usefulness of
replicative experimentation, now recognized as an important
archeological method (Hester and Heizer 1973; Coles 1973}. A number
of references are available in the literature where archeological
lithic assemblages are described with use of diagonal flaking
methods, with wide distribution in space and time.
Frison (1970: 36-38) has described a lithic industry that produced
half chevron patterned arrow points:
"Most are made on percussion flakes of prismatic cross section. The
median ridge of the flake was removed by careful pressure flaking. The
flake scar pattern is usually such that the flakes extend toward the center
at right angles from one blade edge; on the opposite side the flake scars
extend downward towards the center at less than a right angle with the
blade edge."

266

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Except for the name and actual flaking sequence, Frison has
described half chevron flaking technology.
King (1969: 78) made the following observation for the Sam
Kaufman site in Red River County, Texas: "There are two categories
of arrow points--those made on flakes and those made on flake
blades". From King’s illustrations and from personal examination of
some of these points, I would comment that of those made on blades,
ventral face flaking is largely limited to the proximal and distal ends
of the points. The dorsal faces of these points have chevron, half
chevron, opposed oblique, and diagonal ribbon flake scar patterns.
Chard (1956: Figs. 133,134) illustrates clearly for Siberian
examples that dorsal faces of prismatic blades were not completely
bifaced by horizontal flaking. The original blade cross sections and
ridges are essentially unaltered, except for the projectile point tips
and tapered stems. The only illustrated dorsal face that approaches
being completely flaked has oblique opposed flaking.
Giddings (1951) illustrates weapon tips made on prismatic blades
for the Denbigh Flint Complex where complete bifacing was usually
obtained. In his Fig. 64,1,5,6,7 he shows half chevron flake scar
patterns. Fig. 64,2 illustrates opposed oblique, and Fig. 63,b shows the
diagonal ribbon pattern. Chard’s Fig. 61,a-5 is a poorly executed
example of the full chevron pattern. Fig. 60,b-3 illustrates a fine
example of converting true blades to diagonal ribbon pattern bifaces.
From the foregoing discussion, it is evident that flake scar patterns
for completed bifaces on prismatic blades are not so much a matter of
choice, but rather a flint knapper’s set of required flaking techniques.
These techniques were not developed solely for esthetic purposes, but
to overcome constraints inherent to various blank forms produced for
bifacing. The constraints examined here are those that apply to
prismatic flakes, that due to economical size, have a greater reliance
on pressure flaking than on percussion. Flakes without prismatic
cross sections can be, and were, bifaced with wide flake removals in
random direction and sequence. Economically sized prismatic flakes
must be bifaced with some diagonal flaking pattern, to remove dorsal
ridges without undue sacrifice of artifact size. Thus, diagonal flaking
patterns are diagnostic attributes for the bifacing of prismatic blades
and flakes.
By inference from the above, fine horizontal opposed flaking (Fig.
2,d) that forms ridged cross sections also probably does not represent
an esthetic choice by the craftsman, but instead may represent
economical multiple edge resharpenings. Repeated edge
resharpenings on this bifaces, where flakes extend beyond midwidth, rapidly convert the biface to be too thin and fragile for utility.

BIFACING PATTERNS ON PRISMATIC FLAKES

267

Either ridges must be formed, or beveling resorted to, for repeated
economical usage (Sollberger 1971).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I am grateful to Leland W. Patterson for his interest and organizational
help in the preparation of this paper.

REFERENCES CITED
Bordaz, J.
1970 Tools of the Old and New Stone Age. Natural History Press, Garden
City, New York.
Chard, Chester S.
1956 The Oldest Sites of Southeast Siberia. American Antiquity, Vol. 15,
No. 4, pp. 405-409.
Coles, J.
1973 Archaeology by Experiment. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York.
Crabtree, Don E.
1972 An Introduction to Flintworking. Occasional Papers Idaho State
University Museum, No. 28.
Frison, George
1970 The Glenrock Buffalo Jump. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 15, No. 50, Pt.
2, pp. 1-66.
Giddings, J. L., Jr.
1951 The Denbigh Flint Complex. American Antiquity, Vol. 16, No. 3, pp.
193-203.
Hester, Thomas R. and Robert F. Heizer
1973 Bibliography of Archaeology I: Experiments, Lithic Technology and
Petrography. Addison-Wesley Module in Anthropology, No. 29.
King, H. Gill
1969 Chipped Stone. In: Archeological Investigations at the Sam Kaufman
Site, Red River County, Texas. Southern Methodist University,
Contributions to Anthropology, No. 5.
Sollberger, J. B.
1971 A Technological Study of Beveled Knives. Plains Anthropologist, Vol.
16, No. 53, pp. 203-218.

