BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VOLUME 37, for 1966

THE GILBERT SITE
A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas
Edward B. Jelks, Editor
Assistant Editors:
Kathleen Cihnore
R. K. Harris
Norma HMfrichter
Dessamae Lorrain

Contributors:
Lathel F. Duffield

G. L. Allen, Jr.
Pauline Allen
Byron Barber
Estalee Barber
Jay C. Blaine
Evelyn Cobb
Herschel Cobb
Joe F. Cochran
Robert O. Coleman
E. Mott Davis

R. E. Forrester, Jr.
Kathleen Gilmore
Inus Marie Harris
R. K. Harris
Loyd Harper
Ruby Harper
Elbert D. Hehn
Norma Hoffriehter
Edward B. Jelks
Isabelle R. Lobdell

Dessamae Lorrain
David Lubell
Charles Nemec
Roy E. Padgett
Dee Ann Story
Robert L. Tapseott
Curtis D. Tunnell
Bobby Vance
Lester Wilson
J. Ned Woodall

Published by flae Society at Dallas, Texas, 1967

Foreword
The first group dig organized by the Texas Areheologieal Society
was held in the summer of 1962 at the Gilbert Site, an 18th-eentury
Nortefio Focus site on the upper Sabine tliver in northeastern Texas.
The Dallas Areheologieal Society was a co-sponsor.
The editor of this report directed the dig. tt. K. Harris, representing the Dallas Areheologieal Society, was assistant director. The Texas
Archeologieal Society provided funds for miscellaneous expenses.
The University of Texas Department of Anthropology fmmished camp
and excavation equipment.
Professional archeologists who helped supervise the field work were:
Mardith K. Sehuetz of the Witte Memorial Museum and three University of Texas archeologists- E. Mott Davis, Lathel F. Duffield,
and Dee Ann Story. Society members who participated were: Mr.
and Mrs. Harold Akins, Mr. and Mrs. G. L. Allen, Jr., Kent Askins,
Dr. and Mrs. J. Frank Autry, Byron L. Barber, Mr. and Mrs. Jay C.
Blaine, Charles N. Bollieh, Mr. and Mrs. William P. Caskey, Mr. and
Mrs. Herschel Cobb, Mr. and Mrs. Joe F. Cochran, Robert O. Coleman,
Kathleen Gilmore, Sally Gilmore, Clyde Grauke, M. Charles Grauke,
Mr. and Mrs. Loyd Harper, Loyd Harper, Jr., Robert K. Harris, Jr.,
Mr. and Mrs. Bill L. Hayes, Dale Hoffriehter, Dawn Hoffriehter, Mr.
and Mrs. Wally B. Hoffriehter, Mark Huff, Jr., Mr. and Mrs. Griffin
King, Isabelle Lobdell, Mr. and Mrs. Paul Lon’ain, W. T. Lowthorp,
Lorraine McGraw, Mr. McMahon, J. W. MeManus, Edward Moonnan,
Charles Nemee, J. Parker Nunley, tloy Padgett, Ray Parker, Mr. and
Mrs. Mark Parsons, Charlotte Pennington, Mr. and Mrs. Herman
tlhoads, Mr. and Mrs. Win. tl. Royal, Andre Sehuetz, ttoy Schuetz,
Stuart Sehuetz, Mr. and Mrs. Dan Scurlock, Mr. and Mrs. D. J.
Smelley, C. A. Smith, Jr., Mr. and Mrs. Robert L. Tapseott, tlobert
Turner, Jr., Bobby Vance, Bob Weaver, Donny Weaver, Timmy Weaver, Mr. and Mrs. Lester Wilson, Bill Wisdom, Bill E. Yaney.
This first effort at a society-sponsored field project was planned and
conducted as a professionally directed excavation employing society
members to do the work. It was not a field school, nor was its purpose
to train amateurs how to dig: whatever was learned about field techniques by the participants was incidental to tile primal7 objective of
getting the site excavated. However, on-the-job training was provided
in excavation and recording techniques whenever possible, as well as
in cleaning and processing specimens. And everyone was invited to
participate in the discussion of field problems as they arose.

iv

TEXAS A1RCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

After the field work was completed, the specimens from the excavation were washed and cataloged at The University of Texas and were
then transferred to Dallas, where the analysis of materials and writing
of the first draft of a report were accomplished during the winter of
1962-1963, principally by members of the Dallas Areheologieal Society
but with some assistance from members of the Tan’ant County
Areheologieal Society.
In planning the report an outline comprising 10 major sections was
prepared, and the writing of each was assigned to a team of amateurs
headed by a professional who was to serve as coordinator. Some of the
people originally assigned to the teams did no work at all, while in
some instances people who were not included in the original assignments became active team members and contlSbuted substantially to
the report. But despite the shuffling of team members, the first drafts
of all sections were completed, remarkably, on schedule.
The sections of manuscript were turned in to R. K. Harris, who
made editorial changes, assembled the manuscript, and passed the
whole along to the editor who-along with the other professional
archeologists assigned to the report-was then at The University of
Texas in Austin. Each professional edited the section or sections for
which he was coordinator and returned them to the editor. This took
considerable time as the professionals, by and large, were not nearly
so punctual in meeting their deadlines as were the amateurs.
The editor, meantime, moved from Austin to Dallas, where he
joined the faculty of Southern Methodist University. In the summer
of 1966, the manuscripts of all the sections except one (which was
being revised by one of the professionals in Austin) were edited for
spelling, grannnar, and style by Mrs. Kathleen Gilmore. Finally, all
the manuscript was collected by the editor who, with the assistance
of Mrs. Norma Hoffrichter, put it in final shape for the printer.
This report, then, is truly the creation of dozens of people, and it
is the editor’s earnest desire that all who contributed to it be given
due authorship credit. Naturally some worked longer and harder than
others. Some co-authored a brief first draft in 1962 and did nothing
more; others have labored over the fn!l five years, continually adding
new data that was coming in intermittently from the site and revising
the manuscript over and over again. There were changes in the editorial staff, too, over the years; furthermore, some editors Were responsible for sections that required only minor editing while others
found it necessary to do extensive rewriting of major sections.
In eases where one person unquestionably wrote a lion’s share of a

v

FOREWORD

section, his name is listed first in the by-line and is italicized. In all
other cases the authors of a section are listed alphabetically. Where
significant additions have been made to a section by an editor, he is
included as a co-author of the section.
In all the confusion it is quite possible that someone’s name that
should have been included was left off, or that someone who by rights
should have been listed as senior author of a section will find his
name in the middle, or even at the end, of the by-line. If such a mistake
has been made, the editor, who is solely responsible, begs forgiveness
and offers assurances that the oversight was entirely inadvertent.
Special acknowledgment is due the following:
John C. Gilbert, Lennon Gilbert, J. T. Henry, C. L. Lennon, and
Jewell MeMillan, landowners who generously granted access to the
site and gave permission for the field party to excavate and to camp
on their property;
Harold Akins, who procured a large water tank for use of the field
party and kept it filled;
Hazel Gilboe, Inus Malie Harris, and Etoile Smith, who typed
most of the manuscript;
Norma Hoffrichter, Sherry Humphreys, and Linda Smith, who
photographed the artifacts;
Marcia McGee, Jay C. Blaine, Diana Lon’ain, and Paul Lorrain,
who prepared the line drawings;
Kathleen Gilmore, who identified the material from which the
stone pipes were made;
B. J. Scull and Stanley B. MeCaleb, Sun Oil Company, who identified minerals in pottery by petrographic and X-ray defraetion analysis:
1t. E. Forrester, who determined the metallic constituents of a finger
ring;
Joel Shiner, who permitted use of his unpublished data on gun
parts excavated at Fort Frederiea, St. Simons, Georgia.
EDWARD g. JELKS

July, 1967

The Site
by E. Mo’rT DAvis, KATHLEEN
EDWARD B. JELKS, C.

GILMORE, LOYD HARPER,

A.

SI’VZITH, JR.,

and

R. K.

HARRIS,

BILL YANCY

SETTING
The Gilbert Site (41 RA 13) is in Rains County, Texas, some 70
miles east of Dallas, at the southena edge of the valley of Lake Fork
Creek, a tributary of the upper reaches of the Sabine River. This
location is near the western margin of the forested m’ea of eastern
Texas, and hence of the southeastern United States. The local uplands
consist of broad fields and meadows interspersed with wooded areas,
while the stream valleys characteristically are thickly wooded. A few
miles to the west rolling prairie begins.

¯ ¯<

\

a,,t,

s....

I

;
:,,

7

~h

7

t~

/

,

’

.lo

\\

~,20

fill

~o

\<

/

/
J

/..,
/¯

s

GILBERT

TE

41 RA i3

PLAN

SITE
o

oo

zoo

~oo

/
FmuR]~ 1. Sketch map of the Gilbert Site and environs, showing the distribution of the features.

TEXAS AItCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGUKE 2.

Briefing session preparatory to digging Feature 7. The field di-

rector is putting the finger on the assistant field director while the shovel
hands look pensive.
Trees in the immediate area are mostly hardwoods- pecan, prickly
ash, locust, water elm, hackberry, several varieties of oak, and persimmon. The underbrush consists of Indian currant, poison ivy, wild dewberries, blackberries, haw, and Cherokee rose. The countryside is relatively rich in wild plant and animal food; catfish and other fish are
to be caught in Lake Fork Creek. (Charlie Bollich, in fact, caught
several catfish in the creek during the field school using - improbably
-longitudinally split frankfurters for bait.)
The subsoil in the vicinity of the site comprises red and yellow
clays of the Wilcox Group of the East Texas Eocene (Oetking, 1959).
No in situ cultural material is to be found, of course, in these clays.
Overlying the clays is a thin layer of fine sand comprising the topsoil.
Once loosened by the plow or by erosion, the sand is rather quiekly
removed by wind and water, exposing the clay subsoil. All cultural
materials and features at the Gilbert Site were in the sand layer
except for some pits that had been dug down into the clay.
SITE DESCRIPTION
Superficially the site consists of a series of small mounds on a low,
sandy hill about 500 yards from Lake Fork Creek (Fig. 1). Much of

3

THE SITE

FIGURE

3.

Excavating Feature 7. Charlie Smith showing open-mouthed

wonder at the dexterity of Bill Caskey.
the hill has been under cultivation in the past, but it is now in pasture.
The western part of the hill, and of the site, lies in thick woods. A
small amount of cultural debris- glass beads, metal scraps, flint
spalls, and the like- may be found on the surface of the ground.
The mounds, actually middens, are circular to oval in outline, 20
to 30 feet in diameter, and about a foot high on an average. There are
more than 9,0 of them scattered over an area of some 50 acres.
Stretching between Lake Fork Creek and the elevated ground on
which the site lies is the flood plain of the creek.

HISTORY OF INVESTIGATION
The site was first noted by Mr. and Mrs. Harold Akins of Sulphur
Springs in 1962. They sent metal artifacts and pottery sherds found
at the site to the University of Texas for identification. Recognizing
that the metal artifacts were parts of 18th-century flintlock muskets,
Jelks requested R. K. Harris to investigate. Harris visited the site
and collected enough material to verify that it was the location of an
Indian village or encampment probably dating from before 1800.
It was named the Gilbert Site after the principal landowners, Messrs.
John C. Gilbert and Lennon Gilbert.
Early in 1962, preliminary tests were made at two of the middens,

4

FIGURE

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

4.

Meanwhile, back at the cookhouse, Louise Caskey and Dessamae

Lorrain start supper.
Features i and 2, by members of the Dallas Areheological Society
under the supervision of tl. K. Harris. Matel~al found in the tests
indicated that the Gilbert Site was a component of the Nortefio Focus,
an areheological manifestation identified with Wichita tribes of the
1700-1850 period. The focus had been defined not long before on
the basis of data from a series of sites in Texas and Oklahoma, ineluding the Spanish Fort Site, the Womack Site, a late occupation
at the Sanders Site, the StansbulT Site, the Vinson Site, and the

~E SITE

5

FIGURE 5. Screening crew at Feature 6. Left to right: Bill Yancy, Mardith
Schuetz, D. J. Smelley, Griffin King. In right foreground are bags of dirt
collected under the screen for processing at the bead mine.

FIGURE 6. The bead mine in operation. Bob Turner pumping with left
hand while Loyd Harper hoses water through fine screen.

TEXAS A1RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Scratching for beads. The residue left behind after washing the
bead dirt through the fine screen has been dried out on a tarpaulin. Scratch-

FIGURE 7.

ers, left to right: Bill Caskey, Loyd Harper, Byron Barber, Louise Caskey,
two unidentified straw-hatted pickers.
Pearson Site (Duffield and Jelks, 1961).
It was clear from the tests in Features 1 and 2 that the Gilbert Site
merited intensive investigation, and it was decided to hold the group
dig planned by the Texas Areheological Society there that summer.
The dig began on June 22 and continued through July 15. During
that period the number of participants present at any time varied
h’om 6 or 7 to 25 or 30.
WORK DONE
Seventeen middens (designated as features) were located and recorded (Fig. 1). Four of them (Nos. 8, 4, 6, and 7) were tested
extensively. Four others (Nos. 1, 5, 10, and 16) were tested briefly.
The only occupational features discovered besides the middens were
two pits that were evidently used for storing grain or other products.
No house floors, post-mold patterns, burials, hearths, or other such
structural remains were found. The middens did, however, yield a rich
harvest of artifacts, both European trade items and objects of native
manufacture.

TTIE

7

SITE

Fmnl~u 8. Blading the Feature 5 area. Harold Akins driving, blade riders
unidentified.

TECHNIQUES OF INVESTIGATION
At each feature that was excavated, an independent reference system was established for horizontal and vertical control. All the systems were ultimately tied together in the course of a plane table
survey of the site.
Vertical control at each feature was based on a nail driven into a
nearby tree or post, or on a stake driven into the ground. This base
point was assigned an arbitrary elevation of 100 ft. Horizontal control
at each feature was achieved through a system of cardinal-direction
coordinates based on magnetic north. The first step in establishing a
coordinate system was to put a stake in the approximate center of
the feature and assign that point the value N100/E100 (that is, North
100 ft., East 100 ft.). This placed the center (NO/EO) point of the
system at a spot southwest of the feature and placed the feature itself
entirely within the northeast quadrant of the system. All measurements
were in feet and tenths of feet.
The basic excavation technique was to dig by five-foot squares, a
half-foot at a time, passing the earth through a screen of one-fourth
inch mesh and putting the specimens in paper bags labeled by feature, square, and level. Most of the digging was done with shovels.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL

GILBERT

SITE

(41RA

13)

FEATURE
APPROXIMATE

SOCIETY

AREA

3
OF

MIDDEN

N

GILBERT

SITE

41

RA 13

FEATURE

3

] ZONE C (HUMUS STAINED MIDDEN SOIL}
--) W
] ZONE S (GRAY MiOOEN SOiL,MUCH CULTURAL MATERIAL}
]

FIGUR~ 9.

ZONE

A (RED

CLAY

SUBSOIL,STERILE)

Feature 3. Plan

of

o

2
sc=E

~

4
~E~T

midden above, profile through midden below.

When each half-foot level was finished, the floor and walls were
scraped with trowels and examined for significant soil changes. The
exact location of impo1~ant finds, such as pits or significant artifacts,
was recorded. Materials found on the surface away from features
were sacked under the general label sub’face random.

THE SITE

9

FIGURE 10. Feature 3 under excavation. The approximate depth of the
midden soil is shown by the height of the standing pedestals of earth.

Modifications of the basic excavation technique were implemented
to suit particular circumstances. For instanee, Feature 7, a relatively
large clay-capped midden which had discernible strata, was excavated by zones rather than by half-foot levels.
Samples of earth from each midden were washed through window
screen to check for glass beads and other wee objects that would pass
through the one-fourth-inch mesh sereens being used generally. In
some areas- Feature 3, for example- large numbers of beads were
found; consequently a fairly sizable bead-washing operation (fondly
known at the time as the bead mine) was set up for washing the
midden soil through window sereens, using water pumped from a
nearby slough (Fig. 6). After the fine soil had been washed through,
the material remaining on the screens was spread out and dried, and
the tiny beads were picked out (Fig. 7).
A tractor and blade were employed at Features 1, 3, and 5 to
scrape Off the sod and plow zone in a search for burial pits, post
molds, or other intrusions into the subsoil. In certain areas between
and beyond the middens, a tractor and plow were used to cut long
single furrows in the surface of the ground as a means of testing
for signs of occupation not visible superficially. The use of machinery,
although not productive of abundant evidence, nevertheless did turn
up information which otherwise would have gone undiscovered.
The written record of the work consisted of detailed notes and
sketches of each feature, of the levels in each square, and in some

10

TEXAS ARCTIEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

GILBERT
(41

SITE

RA

15)

FEATURE

7

CONTOUR INTERVAL

0.5 ft.

.....

I0 ft.
j

GILBERT

FmuR~

SITE

41RAI3

FEATURE

] ZONE C (RED AND YELLOW CLAY, VIRTUALLY

STERILE)

]

ZONE

B

(GRAY MIODEN

MATERIAL)

]

ZONE

A

(RED

11.

CLAY

SOIL, MUCH

CULTURAL

7

SUBSOIL, STERILE)

Feature 7. Topography above, profile through midden below.

cases of individual finds, on standgrdxecord forms used by the University of Texas Department of Anthropology. Scale drawings were
made of significant profiles and excavation floors. In addition, a field
journal was kept during the entire project, and a record was maintained of the photographs taken at the site. Contour maps were made
of Features 3 and 7, and a master site plan was prepared with alidade
and plane table on which the feature locations were plotted.

THE

11

SITE

FIGURE 12. Starting the first test at Feature 7. Charlie Smith seated at extreme left; in background are Louise Caskey, Bill Caskey (crouching, with
hat), Isabelle Lobdell (leaning forward over Bill’s head), Bob Turner, and
Charlie Bollich (crouching, with bald spot shining); Dessamae Lorrain and
Jo Ann Parsons at transit.

In the five years that have passed since the Gilbert Site dig, several
society members have continued to work at the site intermittently.
They have located several middens that were not found in 1969. and
have calmed out additional excavation both at the old and at the newly
discovered middens. The approximate positions of the recently found
middens have been added to the site plan (Fig. 1), but their precise
locations have not been surveyed in. Much of the artifactual material
found since 1969. has been included with that from the group dig in
the descriptions and discussions of artifacts that follow.
OCCUPATIONAL FEATURES
The individual midden areas previously mentioned were the primary units of excavation at the Gilbert Site. They were termed features. A total of 16 such features had been recorded by the end of the
field work in the summer of 1962; five more have been located since.
During the 1969. summer dig, Features 3, 4, 6, and 7 were excavated
extensively, and Features 10 and 16 were tested briefly. The Feature
1 and Feature 5 areas were bladed with machinery in a search for
post molds or other evidence of structures. The blading produced no
house remains but did expose a small pit at Feature 5.
Features 1 and 2 had been dug rather completely by various per-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIcUr~E 13.
den.

Profile at Feature 7. Clay cap resting unconformably on mid-

FIGURz 14. Midden soil at Feature 7. The richness of the midden is indicated by the garbage bones.

THE SiTE

13

FmuR~ 15. Gathering for supper. Lester Wilson seated at left, Charlie
Smith seated at right; standing around table, left to right, are Dessamae Lorrain, Bob Turner, the Griffin Kings, and Loyd Harper; seated people in background unidentified.

sons before the summer of 1962. Material collected from those two
features by 1~. K. Harris is included in the present study. Since 1962,
Harris and Jay C. Blaine have continued to work at the site on occasion
and have dug tests in Features 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, and
21. Their artifacts h’om those features are also ineluded in the m’tifact
analysis here.
The features were small, individual midden areas, oval to roughly
eircular in outline. As far as could be determined, they were all between 20 and 35 feet in diameter. Maximum thickness of the middens
ranged from 5 or 6 to about 19, inches. The midden soil, gray and
sandy, contained varying amounts of bone scrap, charcoal, ash, and
other debris resulting from human habitation. Features 4, 6, 7, 8, and
11 were covered by layers of elay from about 5 to about 18 inches
thick. The reason for capping the middens with clay is unknown, but
the same trait occurred at the Vinson Site in Limestone County, a
Nortefio Focus site partially excavated by a Texas Archeological Soeie-

14

FIGURE

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

16.

Pit filled with midden dirt at Feature 5, before excavating.

ty dig in the summer of 1964. Illustrations showing the appearance and
structural details of a typical uncapped midden (Feature 3) and a
typical capped midden (Feature 7) are shown in Fig~lres 9 and 11
respectively.
The only structural remains found besides the middens themselves
were an as’h lens- perhaps a fireplace- in the middle of Feature
3 and two small, shallow pits dug into the clay subsoil at Features 5
and 6 (Fig. 17). The latter were probably storage pits. Features 1, 2,
and 10 are reported by R. K. Harris to have had centrally located
fireplaces too.
It was thought that each midden probably marked the location of
a house, and a special effort was made to locate post-mold patterns
or other physical evidence of houses. But none was found. Similar
middens have been excavated at two other Nortefio Focus sitesVinson and Spanish Fort - and they proved to be abandoned pit-house
depressions that were filled with trash. A slight offset in the floor of
Feature 7 at Gilbert (Figs. 11 and 13) may be the edge of a very
shallow pit-house depression, but this is by no means certain. With
that one possible exception, there was no indication of pit houses at
the features excavated. Bits of wattle-impressed clay daub which evidently came from clay-plastered houses were found at Features 1,

15

THE SITE

~ ~=~.

PIT

OF

FEATURE 5

PIT

FIGURE 17.

OF

FEATURE 6

Plans and profiles of storage (?) pits at Features 5 and 6.

3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, but it is uncertain whether they derived from houses
standing at the features or merely happened to be included in trash
that was dumped there.
In short, the way in which the Gilbert middens came to bedeposited
is not clear. Were they originally pit-house depressions that’ became
filled with trash like those at Vinson and Spanish Foi’~? If: ~o, the
house depressions could not be detected. It has been conjectured
that the whole surface of the site may have been lowered through
erosion over the past 9.00 years, removing all traces of the house
depressions in the process. But it is difficult to see how this could
have happened without the middens being scattered far and wide at
the same time. Did the middens accumulate inside honses built at
ground level? Or were they formed through the dumping of trash
at favored spots on the ground surface? We cannot be certain of
the correct answer to these questions.

16

FIGURE 1 8.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bob Turner dressed for a trip to town.

THE SiTE

17

FIcvR~ 19. Mapping crew. Short shorts, Norma Hoffrichter; Bermuda
shorts, Kathleen Gilmore; baggy britches, Dessamae Lorrain.

Ficui~ 20. Happy hour. Left to right: Ed Jelks, Bob Turner, Dessamae
Lorrain, Kathleen Gilmore.

European Trade Goods
Artifacts found at the Gilbert Site are here separated into two large
groups. All objects made originally by the White man are classed in
one group labeled European Trade Goods, described in this section
of the report. In the main, these are articles made of metal and glass,
although a few items- for example, gunflints- are made of other
substances. Artifaets fashioned by the Indians from gun fittings, kettle
brass, and other materials obtained from Europeans are included.
The second major artifact group, described in a later section, is designated Indian A~ifaets and comprises artifacts made by the Indians
from native materials.
The European trade goods are divided into four primary categories: tools, guns, ornaments, and miscellaneous trade goods.

TOOLS
by IL K. Harris, INUS M.

HARRIS,

and J. NED WOODALL

Subgroups described under the general heading of tools are: knives,
axes, wedges, scrapers, awls, chisels, scissors, and metal arrow points.
KNIVES

Except for metal scraps, knives constitute the largest group of
iron artifacts recovered from the Gilbert Site. Forty-one knife blades,
knife handles, and fragments of blades were found, testifying to the
popularity of metal knives among the Indians.
For classificatory purposes the knives were divided into clasp
knives, ease knives, and miscellaneous fragments. As names stamped
on some specimens could be detected after cleaning, a secondary
division into country Of origin was possible in some instanees.
French. Clasp Knives
No. of Specimens: 14
Provenience: Feature 2 (I), Feature 3 2), Feature 4 (1), Feature
5 (6), Feature 11 (1), Feature 17 (1), Feature 20 (2)
Illustrations: Fig. 21
The sample of French clasp knives comprises eight complete and

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

19

TEXAS

Fmur~ 22.

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

Case knives, a-e, Type 1; f-g, Type 2; h-i, metal handles.

six fragmentary blades. The fragments may be sorted into two groups:
(1) medial sections bearing French names, and (2) proximal sections that are similar in form to the complete specimens with French
names. The complete blades and one of the fragments can be subdivided according to shape into three types, designated Types 1, 2,
and 3 (Harris et al., 1965: 348-350).
TYPE

i.

There are five specimens of this type (Fig. 21, a-d): two from
Feature 5 and one each from Features 3, 4, and 20. The type is
characterized by (a) a cutting edge which curves upward toward
the tip and (b) a back edge which slopes downward toward the tip
for about two-thirds of its length. This form has been referred to
as "sword-shaped" by Maxwell and Binford (1961: 106); it is the most

EUROPEAN T1RADE

GOODS

21

common blade form in modem clasp,knives. The four complete Type
1 blades are stamped with the entire manufacturer’s name; the fifth
specimen-a proximal fragment-bears only two letters near the
broken edge. After meticulous cleaning and X-raying, three of the
complete blades yielded the following names: Abadion Braenve.r,
Jean Efr riol (letters reversed), Jean Ferriol. There is a name stamped
on the fourth complete blade, but it is not decipherable. The fragment bears only the letters R and T. The R reads upright when the
blade is held with the tip up, while the T is upside down in relation
to the cutting edge; a portion of a third letter is seen just at the
broken edge. All specimens have a hole near the butt end (’tO admit
a swivel pin) and a flanged projection that acted as a stop when
the blade was opened.
The four complete blades vary in length from 114 ram. to 126 mm],
and in maximum width from 18 to 22 ram.
TYPE 9,.

Three complete clasp knife blades (Fig. 9,1, e-g), ’from Features
3, 5, and 17 respectively, are classified as Type 9,. These have a
straight or nearly straight cutting edge all the way to the tip, while
the back edge curves downward to the tip. The downward curve
of the back edge begins vel7 near the tip and dbnsequently is relatively steep, especially on two of the specimens. Type 9, knife blades
have swivel pins and flanges at the proximal end similar to those
of Type 1. The only complete name found impressed on a Type 9,
blade is Gibodief OL; present on one specimen. Of the two remaining
blades, one shows the letters CHEL, evidently the end of a name,
and below these the letter T; the otherdaas only the letter H, apparently part of a complete name rather than an initial.
The largest Type 9, specimen measures 133 ram. long by 26 mm.
at its widest point; the smallest is 105 mm. long by 19 ram. wide. On
all three the hole for the swivel pin is 3.5 ram. in diameter.
TYPE

3.

This type is represented by a single complete specimen (Fig. 9,1,
h) from Feature 5. The blade edge is slightly concave near the proximal end, probably as a result of wear, and becomes convex in curving
upward toward the tip. The back is straight for about one-half the
blade length and then begins a gTadual slope toward the tip.
The Type 3 clasp knife blade differs from the other types in the
manner of attachment to the knife handle: a downward projection
near the proximal end has been punched to admit the swivel pin,

22

TEXAS ARCFIEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and a small rearward projection of the blade serves as a stop. Stamped
on the blade is the name Andre Bauer, with a crown on the left side
and a heart on the right.
The blade is 114 mm. long and 15 mm. across at the widest place.
The hole for the swivel pin is 4 mm. in diameter.
UNIDENTIFIED FRAGMENTS

Five proximal fragments of clasp knife blades were found, but all
are too small to be identified with any particular type. The attaching
arrangement on all five is similar to that of Types 1 and 2, wherein
the blade is perforated for the swivel pin and the stop is a horizontal
flange protruding above the back of the blade. The following letters
and complete names are stamped on the blade fragments: N; RA
(above) and U (below); N (above) and an unidentified letter below.
Two fragments either bore no letters or they have been obliterated
by oxidation.
On the blade with the letters BA above and U below, a cut extends
from the inside of the pin hole to the proximal end of the blade. This
cut may represent an unsuccessful attempt by Indians to alter the
broken blade.
Length of the blade fragments ranges from 29 to 49 mm., width
from 15 to 20 mm. On each fragment the hole for admitting the
swivel pin is 3 ram. in diameter. One fragment has a complete swivel
pin 18 ram. long which is bradded fiat on each end.
Remarks: Judging by the relatively large number of blades found,
clasp knives must have comprised a significant proportion of French
goods traded to the aboriginal population of the region. Beginning
about 1700 and continuing until the end of French influence in Texas,
pocket or clasp knives were included on almost eve1T trade list, often
a gross or more being the requested number (Swanton, 1942: 197203; Thwaites, 1959: 25-33).
Knife blades of the same shapes as Type 1 and Type 2 have been
recovered from Fort Michilimaekinae in Michigan. These have been
identified as French and probably date from the French occupation
of about 1715-1760, or, less likely, from the subsequent British occupation which lasted until 1781 (Maxwell and Binford, 1961:106). Similar
knife blades have also been found at other historic sites, including
Roseborough Lake (Harris et al., ms), Womaek (Harris et al., 1965:
348), and Spanish Fort.
Type 3 knife blades have been recovered from the Womaek Site
(ibid.: 349) and the Spanish Fort Site.

EUROPEAN TRADE COODS

"23

Case Knife Blades
No. of Specimens: 2 complete, 13 fragments
Provenience: Feature 2 (1 fragment), Feature 3 (1 fragment), Feature 4 il fragment), Feature 5 (7 fragments, 1 complete), Feature
6 (2 fragments), Feature 12 (1 fragment), Feature 20 (1 complete)
Ilh~strations: Figure 22, a-g
On the basis of the case knife typology set forth by Harris, Harris,
Blaine, and Blaine (1965: 348-350), the two complete specimens from
Gilbert are respectively Type 1 and Type 2.
The complete Type 1 specimen- from Feature 5- is characterized
by a straight-backed blade, a convex cutting edge curving upward to
the tip, and a method of handle attachment involving a narrowed extension of the blade that is pierced with two holes for receiving the
securing pins (Fig. 22, a). Although this type ease knife was traded
by both the French and English (ibid.: 848), the Gilbert Site specimen
bears the name Coobon- evidently French- stamped near the butt
in the form of an arc with its convex side toward the tip of the blade.
Directly above the name is an indistinct mark, possibly a cross.
The over-all length of this specimen is !6.8 cm.; the blade itself
(exclusive of the handle extension) is 1,3.1 cm. long; the widest portion of the blade, just above the handle, is 22 ram. across. The holes
for securing the handle are approximately 2.5 ram. in diameter. One
of the securing pins, complete and in place, is 12 ram. long.
The second complete specimen (Fig. 22, g), a Type 2 case knife,
has the same blade shape as the Type 2 clasp knives. It was found
in Feature 20. The back curves sharply downward near the tip, while
the cutting edge is straight, or nearly so. The handle of this knife
was attached to a long, rod-like extension jutting out from the butt
of the blade and separated from it by a flange or frog. No identifying
marks were found on this specimen, possibly because of extensive
rust damage. The origin of this type of knife is not certain, but the
authors have observed similar specimens from predominately Spanish
settlements in Texas.
The total length is 194 mm.; the blade itself is 123 mm. long and
27 mm. wide (directly below the handle frog). The handle core or
rod averages about 3 mm. in diameter.
Of the 13 case knife fragments, six median fragments are stamped
with names or initials. Although one of the six has been broken across
the letters and consequently the full inscription cannot be read, the
remaining five bear the following names: Pierre Chappelle; Claude
Gibodief (with a crown to the left of the name); EROI (letter miss-

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SO~ETY

ing) N with an emblem to the left of [he name; the initials, SK; and
the letter, E, followed by a dot or period.
Six fragments appear to be portions of the handle core that extends
from the butt end of Type I ease knife blades. Four of them have
been punched with at least two holes, averaging about 4 mm. in
diameter. The remaining two, because of their small size, have a
single hole. One specimen has the two securing pins in place. These
are respectively 195 and 182 mm. in length, with the longer pin at
the back of the attachment process. Both pins are lightly bradded on
the ends.
Remarks: Two of the case knife fragments, the one from Feature
6 stamped EROI (letter missing) N and a thick, heavy handle core
from Feature 3, are quite large. If ease knives are thought of as
comprising three varieties - the equivalent of the modern-day hunting
or sheath knife, the table knife, and the relatively large butcher knife
-these two specimens would fall in the butcher knife size range.
Miscellaneous Knife Blade Fragments
No. of Specimens: 7
Provenience: Feature 1 (1), Feature 3 (1), Feature 4 (1), Feature
5 (4)
These are blade fi’agments that could have come from either clasp
or case knives. They are so incomplete that their original lotto cannot
be reconstructed.
Knife Handles
No. of Specimens: 5
Provenience: Feature 4 (3), Feature 5 (1), Feature 11 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 22, h-i
Several fragments of cast brass are probably parts of handles for
case knives. Although no complete specimen was found at the Gilbert Site, the line-up of fragments shown at Figure 22, h, gives an
idea of the over-all appearance of the complete handles. They were
decorated with curvilinear designs. Similar fragments have been
found at the Womack Site in Lamar County, Texas (Harris et al.,
1965, Fig. 22, N) and at the Spanish Fort sites on both sides of the
Red River in Montague County, Texas, and Jefferson County, Oklahoma.
The specimen shown at Figure 22, i, is possibly part of a clasp
knife handle. It is made from sheet brass, and the feather-like design
is engraved. It is pierced by five small holes by which it evidentlv

EUROPEAN T1RADE GOODS

FIGURE 23.

~5

Axe (a) and wedges (b-c).

was pinned to a wooden knife handle or possibly to some other object.
It is 33 mm. long, and its maximum width is 14 ram.
At present it is not possible to identify the country of manufacture
of these pieces, but it is suspected that they are French.
AXES
No. of Specimens: 1 complete, 2 fragmentary
Provenience: Feature 4 (1 complete), Feature 10 (1 fragment),

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Feature 21 (1 fragment)
Illustrations: Fignre 23, a
Of the three axes, at least two were manufactured by the laminated
method wherein a piece of sheet iron was bent m’ound a form,
doubled back on itself, and forged together, leaving a halting eye
at the proximal end.
The complete specimen from Gilbert (Fig. 23, a) is unusual in
that the back of the eye (i.e., the part farthest from the bit) is composed of two distinct layers of iron which have split apart slightly.
The eye of this axe is 46 ram. high; its blade is 37 ram. high where
it joins the eye, expanding to 70 mm. across the bit. The original
thickness is difficult to determine because of heavy rest damage to
the metal, but it was at least 5 mm. around the eye and at least 10
mm. along the blade. The eye itself has been badly bent, but its
original inside diameter was approximately 45 mm.
The axe from Feature 10, consisting of a portion of the eye,
measures 155 ram. in thickness and 50 ram. in height at the back of
the eye, contracting to 44 mm. where the blade remnant joins the
eye. By projecting the curvature of the fragment, a measurement of
approximately 35 ram. for the inside diameter of the eye is obtained.
The other fragmentary axe, a blade fragment from Feature 21, is
10 ram. thick at the broken proxima! end, which must have been ve13z
near the eye. The blade, 30 mm. high at the proximal end, flares to
form a bit approximately 85 ram. wide. Over-all length of this specimen
is 90 mm.
Probably the small individual differences between the axes can be
attributed to individual hand manufacture. The laminated eye of the
complete specimen from Feature 4 is not typical of the Texas area.
The greater height of the eye in comparison to the adjoining part of
the blade is a common feature found not only on Indian trade axes
but also on modem tools.
WEDGES

No. of Specimens: 4
Provenience: Feature ! (1), Feature 4 (1), Feature 5 (2)
Illustrations: Figure 23, b-c
The iron wedges are similar to one another in shape. All have a
relatively wide, curved bit from which the lateral edges taper back
to a thick butt. The butts are greatly splayed as a result of vigorous
hammering. Two of the specimens were evidently used as small anvils as they have hundreds of small, overlapping cut marks on both

27

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

FmuI~E 24.

Iron tools, a-b, scrapers; c-e, awls; f, chisel; g, scissors.

flat blade surfaces. A third has a few such marks on one side only.
The largest wedge (Fig. 23, b) measures 90 ram. long, 15 mm. thick
just above the butt, 83 ram. wide at the bit, and 45 ram. wide just
above the butt. The original dimensions have been distorted by pounding and flattening.
Another wedge (Fig. 23, c) is 13 ram. thick just above the butt, 83
ram. wide across the bit, 58 ram. wide above the butt, and 68 ram.
long.
The smallest wedge is 63 ram. long, 13 mm. thick just above the
butt, 69 ram. wide across the bit, and 50 ram. wide just above the
butt.
The fourth wedge, thinner than the others, is distinguished by a
marked concavity of one edge. It appears to have been made from
an axe blade. This tool measures 90 ram. long, 50 ram. wide at the
butt, and about 90 ram. across the bit. Its maximum thickness, just
above the butt, is 8 ram.
S GRAPERS

No. of Specimens: 3
P’rovenience: Feature 3 (3)
llhtstrations: Figure 24, a-b

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Three thin, rectangular pieces of iron, all slightly bowed along
the long axis, are classed as scrapers. All are roughened and pitted
by rust, and the working edges are diffleult to identify; but at least
one of them has one end and one long side filed or honed to an
edge.
Length varies from 51 to 33 mm. and width from 34 to 26 mm.
Thickness of all three specimens is 1 ram. or less.
These tools presumably were used to serape animal hides but may
have served as knives also. They probably were made by the Indians
from metal scraps, perhaps barrel hoops in some instances.
AWLS

No. of Specimens: 9
Provenience: Feature 1 (2), Feature 3 (2), Feature 4 (1), Feature 5 (1), Feature 6 (1), Feature 7 (1), Feature 12 (1)
Ilhlstrations: Figure 94, c-e
This category includes those iron tools presumably used to puncture
leather, cloth or other material to permit lacing and binding. The
awls are slender and generally straight. Two specimens (Fig. 24, d),
however, show a gentle S curvature and one shows a double bend.
Although all have been honed to a rounded point at the working end,
at least four are square in medial cross section while one is rectangular
and flattened. One of the awls was found with its pointed end resting
on a small piece of grooved sandstone, leaving little doubt as to the
method of sharpening these tools.
Three of the awls wan’ant partieular attention. A straight specimen
(Fig. 24, c) presumably of European manufacture as evidenced by
its symmetrical shape and squared shaft, had been cut half way
through at a point 19 mm, from the end, and the portion between
the cut and the end removed, leaving a tip that is triangular in cross
section. The result is a tool with one end useful as an awl, the other
as a drill. This speeimen is 80 mm. long and is 3 mm. thick in the
center.
A broken awl has a double bend in the shaft with a cut 10 mm.
from the bend and a transverse section between the eut and the
broken end removed, similar to the awl described above. The opposite
end is badly damaged by rust but was probably pointed. Either the
numeral 3 or 8 has been stamped into the squared shaft. This spedmen is 56 mm. long and 3 mm. wide and is probably of European
manufacture.
On a third awl (Fig. 24, e), at a point 8 mm. from the blunt
broken end, is a deep cut extending about half way through the

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

29

shaft. Also, 25 mm. from the tip of this tool the shaft has been cut
and a transverse section removed in a manner similar to the two awls
already described. This specimen is 83 mm. long and 7 mm. thick.
It is probably of native mmmfaeture.
The remaining six awls range from 39 to 80 mm. long and from
4 to 6 ram. in diameter. Two of them were probably made as awls in
Europe while the remainder were homemade by the Indians.
Metal awls, which would hold a sharp point and resist breakage
better than either bone or stone, were probably highly valued by the
Indians. Any elongate piece of scrap metal could be honed to a sharp
tip, and such homemade forms, as well as European trade awls,
were found at the Gilbert Site.
Three of the awls were curved in the manner of modem sailmaker’s and upholsterer’s needles (Fig. 24, d). This pelxnits the application of greater pressure with the awl owing to increased leverage.
CHISELS

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 1
Illustrations: Figure 24, f
This tool was made from a short iron rod of rectangular cross
section by hammering one end to a shaft of reduced diameter and
fashioning a narrow chisel point at its extremity. The proximal end
of the implement has been splayed by pounding.
Over-all length is 58 mm., with the narrow shaft beginning approximately 35 ram. from the proximal end. The thickness of the
main squared shank varies from 5 ram. to 8 mm., tapering to 3 ram.
at the narrow shaft leading to the point.
This chisel appears too light for heavy use and may have been
employed for cutting the thin sheet iron and brass found at the site.
SCISSORS

No. o[ Specimens: 3 fragments
Provenience: Feature 4 (1), Feature 5 (1), Feature 14 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 24, g
Three pairs of scissors are represented by the three fragments. Two
are handle fragments with portions of the blade attached; one is a
right blade fragment. No identifying marks were found on any scissor
fragments, although there are four small indentations around the screw
on the inside of the blade of the largest speeimen.
The larger handle fragment (Fig. 9.4, g) is 121 mm. long. By extend-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

30

ing the curvature of the blade remnant, an approximate measurement
of 154 mm. is obtained for the over-all length of the original unbroken
scissors. Maximum blade width is 13 mm. It is beveled at the top
and slopes inward to the cutting edge. The handle is straight, 66 ram.
long, with the finger opening slanted slightly downward.
The other handle fragment measures 82 mm. in over-all length
and has a maximum blade width of 10 mm. The blade has been so
badly eorroded that reconstruction of the original outline is impossible. It appears to have been smaller than the other specimen,
however. The handle is bent at a 45-degree angle, tilting the finger
opening sharply downward. Whether this bend was present originally
could not be determined.
The blade fragment is broken off at the right side through the hole
that once held the center screw. It is 45 mm. long and 15 ram. wide,
with a screw opening 5 mm. in diameter. The top is beveled toward
the outside and slopes inward to the cutting edge; the inside surface
is flat. This speeimen represents the largest pair of scissors found.
METAL A~aROW

POINTS

No. of Specimens.: 9
Provenience: Feature 3 (1), Feature 5 (6), Feature 12 (2)
Ilhtscrations: Figure 25
All of the metal arrow points are homemade affairs fashioned by
the Indians from odd pieces of brass and iron acquired from Europeans. The arrow points of iron were probably made from flattened
sections of gun barrels. Iron arrow points made from bridle bit fragments- of relatively common occurrence at other Nortefio Focus
sites- were not found at Gilbert.
Three arrow points (Fig. 25, b-d) were made from scrap kettle
brass, while the heavier brass points (Fig. 25, a, f) were worked from
decorated gun fittings- probably side plates, trigger guard bows, or
butt plates.
Seven of the nine metal arrow points are of a form which occurs
so frequently in sites of the Nortefio Focus that its recognition as a
formal type appears warranted. Therefore, a brief description will be
given here under the name Benton Type, so designated in honor of
the late Joe Benton, a pioneer cattle and oil man of Noeona, Texas,
who, with his wife and daughter Clariee, made extensive surface collections from the Spanish Fort sites in Montague County, Texas, and
Jefferson County, Oklahoma. The type is divided into two subgroups:
Benton Type A and Benton Type B.

31
EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

FIGURE 25. Metal arrow points, b, d, e, Benton Type A; a, Benton Type B;
c, e, f, miscellaneous.

Benton Type Arrow Points
No. of Specimens: 7
Dimensions: 15 to 60 mm. long; 7 to 20 mm. wide; 0.5 to 3 mm.
thick. The thiekness varies according to the material (kettle brass,
barrel hoops, gun parts, etc.)
Provenience: Feature 3 (1), Feature 5 (4), Feature 12 (2)
Illustrations: Figure 25, a, b, d, e
TYPE A

(Fig.

25, b, d, e)

This form is diamond-shaped, with straight edges converging to
a sharp tip at the distal end and to a narrow, straight base at the
proximal end. The length of the blade approximately equals the length
of the stem. The converging edges of the blade are sharpened; the
stem edges, in most eases, are notched with irregular hack marks,
probably to facilitate halting.
TYPE B (Fig. 25, a)
Type B is similar to Type A in all significant respects except that
the lateral stem edges are slightly concave instead of straight. As

39.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

with Type A, the blade and stem tend to be of approximately equal
length and the stem edges are often crudely notched.
Cultural Affiliations and Distribution: Observations of the authors
indicate that the Benton arrow point is found in significant quantities
in Nortefio Focus sites of the southern plains on the Arkansas, Brazos,
Red, Sabine, and Trinity lClivers and their tributaries in Texas, Oklahoma, and Louisiana.
Estimated Age: Mid-18th to mid-19th century.
Miscellaneous Metal Arrow Points

Two of the metal arrow points found at Gilbert do not fit the
Benton Type. One of them (Fig. 9.5, f) is made from an engraved,
brass, butt-plate finial off a trade gun. The outline appears to approximate the shape of the original finial, the only alteration being
sharpening of the blade edges. The sides of the stem are unmodified;
the base bears a chisel mark produced when the finial was separated
from the butt plate.
The other metal arrow point (Fig. 25, e) was cut- probably with
scissors- from a piece of very thin kettle brass.
Most of the arrow points at the Gilbert Site were chipped from
stone rather than being made of metal. The stone arrow points are
dese15bed in a later section.

33

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

GUNS
by Jay C. Blaine and R. K. HARriS

Most of the features at the Gilbert Site produced parts of flintlock
guns and gunflints. The gun parts were made from iron or brass and
were manufactured in Europe as fro" as can be determined. Some of
the gunflints were European made, but most of them by far were
native made.
In the study of the firearms, authorative literature was used in an
attempt to search out reliably identified fusils (light muskets) and to
determine characteristics typical of given periods in England, France,
and Spain. Not all of the opinions published by authorities could be
used because contradictions were noted, sometimes within the work
of a single anthor. The observations used are those which seem
to hold true after examination of material from archeological sites,
independent research, and comparisons with published opinions.
The weapon parts described here all appear to be from smoothbore
flintlocks, the fusil or light musket (Figs. 26, 27) apparently being
the major class represented. The pa1~s were identified by comparison
with gun parts of known origin.
In some of the conclusions, reference will be made to the French
trade gun. No gun part described in this report can be positively said
to be of French manufacture, but both the historical record and
present typological knowledge suggest that many of them are of
French origin.
Many of the gun parts were cleaned of rust to look for makers’
marks or to attempt to determine original measurements; in some
eases, however, oxidation was so great that major cleaning was not
possible. Measurements made where extensive cleaning was done are
believed to be nearer to the original ones than those taken from parts
which could not be cleaned of rust.
Some of the gun parts were found in four caches as follows:
Cache No. 1, Feature 5: Cocks No. i, 2, 3, and 4, a sear, a mainspring, and a frizzen spring;
Cache No. 2, Feature 4: a cock, a ffizzen, and a frizzen spring;
Cache No. 3, Feature 4: a breech, a breech plug, and a frizzen;
Cache No. 4, Feature 8: Gunlocks No. 1, 2, and 3.
LOCK PLATES

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Features 4 and 5
Illustrations: Figure 28, e-f

34

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

2

"0

c

L

3

Y:

0

e,l

35

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

t:rlzze rl
/~

Fllishplln

coverg~7’°’;~iz:;~/~ock

plcLte

C
JCB

?IGURE 27.

Sketch showing the parts of a flintlock mechanism.

Lock Plate No. 1 (Fig. 28, f). This distal section of a lock plate
is broken at the mainspring screw hole, is flat in cross section, and
has a beveled edge. The ffizzen spring screw hole is countersunk on
the inside of the lock plate and shows no screw threads, indicating
the use of a hidden ffizzen screw. The lock plate is designed for a
removable flash pan.

36

FIGURE 28.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

Gun parts, a-d, £rizzens; e-f, lockplate.

Measurements were taken after major cleaning. The maximum width
of the lock plate fore section is 25 mm.
Lock Plate No. 2 (Fig. 28, e). This is a proximal section, broken
at the rear screw hole where a removable pan was once attached. It
is flat in cross section and has ronnded edges, the lower edge being
moderately curved.
It was attached with two screws. A screw hole for a tumbler bridle

EUROPEAN TRADE

37

GOODS

is present. There is no ledge, the tail of the pan having served as a
ledge. There is a center or upper lock screw hole where the pan tail
would be located inside the lock plate. No marking is visible on the
plate surface.
Measurements after major cleaning: maximum width, 27 ram.;
diameter of tumbler axle hole, 10 mm.
Remarks: Lock plate No. 2, probably manufactured between 1690
and 1740, is a rear section from a flintlock gunlock plate of good
quality. It does not fol!ow Hudson’s Bay Company’s specifications
for their "trade gun" gunlock.
The bridle lock was in use in England by 1660 on fine arms and
came into general use after 1700 except for lowest quality arms
(George, 1947: 12, 103). According to Gooding (1960: 93), "bridle
locks" were ordered in 1697 by Hudson’s Bay Company. The curvature of Lock Plate No. 2 would indicate it probably was manufactured
between 1690 and 1740 according to Peterson (1956: 36, PI. 38). The
lock plate is flat in cross section, and Gooding (1960: 85) states that
English trade guns used the "oval or rounded" form of lock plate from
the end of the 17th century on. Though the lock plate is broken at
the rear, the profile remaining doesn’t seem to allow room for a third
lock screw. By 1683 English civilian guns were using two screws to
attach the flint lock to the stock and Hudson’s Bay Company had to
specify three-hole round locks at that time (ibid.: 85, 93). Some feel
the use of a hidden frizzen-spring screw is an indication of a French
gun lock, but this trait by itself is not proof of origin (Hamilton,
1960a: 6-7).
FIIIZZENS

No. of Specimens: 8
Provenience: Feature t (3), Feature 2 (2), Feature 3 (1), Feature
4 (1), Feature 18 (1)
IUustrations: Figure 28, a-d
All of the frizzens are of the type with combined striking surface,
or "steel," and flashpan cover. The loci of measurements are shown
in Figure 28.
Frizzen No. 1 (Fig. 28, c). The steel is curved and has a rounded
top. There was no major cleaning.
Measurements: A, 38 mm.; B, 23 mm.; C, 9.4 mm.; D, 8 ram.
Frizzen No. 2. The steel is curved and has a rounded top. The
frizzen is broken at the pivot ann. The corners are eroded.
Measurements: A, 39 mm.; B, 23 mm.; C, 23q- mm.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Frizzen No. 3. The steel is curved (originally) and has a rounded
top. It appears that the fi’izzen screw had broken off in the fi’izzen
pivot arm, and punch marks indicate that an attempt to drive out the
broken screw was unsuccessful. Distortation of the frizzen suggests
that the exasperated repairman might finally have hit the pesky thing
a resounding whack in the middle and thrown it away.
Measurements made after major cleaning: A, 40 mm.; B, 23 ram.; C,
25 lnIn.; D, 7 mm.
Frizzen No. 4 (Fig. 28, a). The steel is curved and has a rounded
top. In general appearance this specimen resembles the three described
above but is heavier and would suggest a military frizzen. There was
no major cleaning.
Measurements: A, 46 ram.; B, 25 ram.; C, 27 mm.; D, 9 ram.
Frizzen No. 5 (Fig. 28, d). The steel is straight with partly
rounded top and is battered and eroded. The front of the frizzen
(opposite the striking surface) was formed fiat and has wide bevels.
It is trapezoidal in cross section. Traces of longitudinal grooves can
be seen on the striking surface. This fi’izzen appears to be fi’om a
miquelet type flintlock and is most likely of Spanish origin.
There was no major cleaning. Measurements: A, 33 mm.; B, 29 mm.;
C, 31 ram.; D, 13 ram.
Frizzen No. 6. The steel is curved with rounded top. There has
been no major cleaning.
Measurements: A, 38 ram.; B, 22 mm.; C, 24 ram.; D, 7 mm.
Frizzen No. 7 (Fig. 28, b). The steel is curved and has a rounded
top.
Measurements after major cleaning: A, 38 ram.; B, 24 mm.; C, 26
ram.; D, 8 mm.
Frizzen No. 8. The steel is curved and has a rounded top.
Measurements after major cleaning: A, 46 mm.; B, 25 mm.; C, 25
mm.; D, 7 ram.
Remarks: Three of the frizzens- Nos. 1, 2, and 6- are virtually
alike in size and form. According to the manufacturing standards of
the day, they probably would have been considered interchangeable.
They all may well have been made by the same manufacturer. Two
others- Nos. 3 and 7- are only slightly larger than the foregoing
and may have been used on the same size and type of weapon.
FRIZZEN SPRINGS

No. of Specimens: 6
Provenience: Feature 3 (1), Feature 4 (2), Feature 5 (1), Feature
17 (1), Feature 20 (1)

39

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

d

FmURE 29. Gun parts, a-b, tumblers; c, tumbler bridle; d, sear spring;
e-f, sears; g-i, frizzen springs; j-],~, mainsprings; l-m, flashpans.
Illustrations: Figure 29, g-i
Frizzen Springs No. 1, 2, 4, and 5. These (Fig. 29, g, i) are not
notched for a bridle link and show no indication of use with an
antifriction device. They are designed for an exposed frizzen-spring
screw.
Frizzen Spring No. 3 (Fig. 29, h). Designed for a hidden frizzen-

40

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

spring screw, this specimen shows no indication of use with an
antifrietion device. Details indicate good quality workmanship.
Frizzen Spring No. 6. This spring, which had a hidden screw, shows
no evidence of use with an antifriction device.
Loci of frizzen sp~qng measurements:
A. Lower leaf: straight line distance from center of screw hole to
apex of outside bend.
B. Upper leaf: straight line distance from frizzen end of spring to
apex of outside bend.
C. Maximum width.
Measurements for the frizzen springs are as follows:
Spring No.
1
9,
3
4
5
6

33
35
38
33
33
33

A
mm..
ram.
ram.
ram.
ram.
mm.

B
43 mm.
43 mm.
49 ram.
43 mm.
42 ram.
43 mm.

10
9
10
10
9
10

C
mm.
ram.
ram.
ram.
ram.
mm.

Remarks: Frizzen Springs No. 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6 are comparable
in size and probably came from locks of similar size. Frizzen Spring
No. 3 is longer and may be from a larger lock or from one of higher
quality. Frizzen springs such as these evidently were in use prior
to 1785, and they continued to be used for several years after that
date, especially on military and poor quality locks (Held and Jenkins,
1957: 136; George, 1947: 116).
FLASHPANS

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Features 4 and 5
Illustrations: Figure 29, 1-m
Flashpan No. I (Fig. 29, 1 ). This specimen is iron, is flat or shallow
V-shaped, and was removable from the lock plate. The flashpan was
secured to the lock plate by a tail with a screw hole at the rear
and by an oblique key surface at the front, with a flange on the
underside of the pan to contact the lock plate surface. There is no
provision on the pan for a frizzen bridle (or pan strap). The powder
trough has parallel sides, and there is a low flash shield, or fence, at
the rear of the pan.
Measurements after major cleaning: width (same as frizzen dimension "e"), 26 ram.; length from end of tail, or tang, to key surface,
37 mm.

41
EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

Flashpan No. 2 (Fig. 29, m). The description of this specimen is
generally the same as above. The tang screw is broken off in its
hole.
Measurements after major cleaning: width (same as frizzen dimension "c’), "24 ram.; length from end of tang to key surface, 40 ram.
Remarks: These flashpans exhibit none of the refinements that
were in general use on good quality flintlocks by 1785 (George, 1947:
114-115; Held and Jenkins, 1957: 136). Such refinements did not
usually appear on trade guns or military locks.
The Gilbert flashpans probably are from French trade guns. This
is in agreement with Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine (1965: 39.139.3) who describe similar flashpans from the Womack Site and believe
them to be from French trade guns of a style in major use between
about 1720 and 1750.
TUMBLERS

No. of Specimens: g
Provenience: Features 1 and 5
Illustrations: Figure g9, a-b
Tumbler No. 1 (Fig. 29, a). This is an unbridled tumbler with
half: and full-cock notches. It was designed for use with a vertical
action sear and was keyed into the base of the cock. There is no
provision for a stirrup.
Measurements were made after major cleaning: tumbler axle
diameter, 7 mm.; squared end of tumbler axle across flats, 6 mm.;
length of squared end, 6 ram.
Tumbler No. 2 (Fig. 29, b). This specimen is the same shape as
the one described above. Its face is stamped VIII.
Measurements were made after major cleaning: tumbler axle
diameter, 7 mm.; squared end of tumbler axle across flats, 6 ram.;
length of squared end, 4 mm.
Remarks: These tumblers could be from good grade English guns
made prior to 1700, or they could be the unbridled form common to
lower quality locks made later than 1700 (George, 1947: 103). The
length of the squared portion of Tumbler No. 1 indicates that the cock
probably had a thick, round faee on the base.
TUMBLER BRIDLES

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 1
IUusCrations: Figure 29, c

42

TEXAS

ARCTIEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

This tumbler bridle has a graceful design which may be a clue to
French origin. One of the same style is shown in Denis Diderot’s
Encyclopedia, 1751-1765, illustrated in the article "Arquebusier" (Held
and Jenkins, 1957: Fig. 243).
MAINSPRINGS

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Both from Feature 5
Illustrations: Figure 29, j-k
Mainspring No. 1 (Fig. 29, j). This specimen is an internal mainspring which is broken at the end of the lower leaf. The external
edges are beveled.
Measurements made after major cleaning: length of upper leaf
(straight-line distance from center of screw hole to apex of outside
bend), 39 mm.; maximum width, 11 m.; length of lower leaf to break,
72 mm.
Mainspring No. 2 (Fig. 29, k). This internal main spring has flat
edges. It is not designed for use with a tumbler stirrup.
Measurements after major cleaning: length of upper leaf, 33 mm.;
length of lower leaf, 73 mm.; maximum width, 10 mm.
NEAI/S

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Features 1 and 5
Illustrations: Figure 29, e-f
Sear No. 1 (Fig. 2.9, e). This is a horizontal pivot (vertical action)
sear with a pronounced back-rake on the trigger arm. The size and
shape indicate possible use in the same lock as Tumbler No. 1.
Sear No. 2 (Fig. 29, f). This is a horizontal pivot (vertical action)
sear with a pronounced back-rake on the trigger arm.
SEAtt

SPRINGS

No. of Specimens: 1
Prouenience: Feature 12
Illustrations: Figure 29, d
This sear spring was used with a vertical action sear.
Measurements: length of upper leaf (straight line distance from
center of screw hole to outside apex of bend), 22 ram.; length of
lower leaf (straight line distance from free end of spring to outside
apex of bend), 18 mm.

43

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

COCKS

No. of Specimens: 10
Provenience: Feature 1 (1), Feature 3 (1), Feature 4 (1), Feature
5 (5), Feature 6 (2)
Illustrations: Figures 30; 31, e-i
Except where noted, measurements were made after major cleaning.
Cock No. 1 (Fig. 30, a). This pistol-size cock has a wide comb
that is grooved for a tenon which projected from the missing upper
vise jaw. The cock base is flat and has beveled edges. The general
eurvature is sharp. The gooseneck is not reinforced. There was no
major cleaning. A single engraved line borders the flat base of the
cock.
Measurements: A, 33 ram.; B, 64 mm.; comb width, 10 mm.
Cock No. 2 (Fig. 30, b). This cock has a wide, grooved comb and
a flat-faced base with beveled edges. The general curvature is
sharp. The gooseneck is not reinforced. There was no major cleaning.
Measurements: A, 39 mm.; B, 72 mm.; comb width, 12 mm.
Cock No. 3 (Fig. 30, c). The comb is wide and grooved, the cock
base has a flat face with beveled edges; the gooseneek is not reinforeed. The general curvature is sharp, and a single engraved line
borders the flat base of the cock.
Measurements: A, 37 mm.; B, 71 ram.; comb width, 11 ram.
Cock No. 4 (Fig. 30, d). This cock has a narrow comb and a flatfaced base with beveled edges. The base is engraved with a singleline border, and there is a dim foliate design in the lower neck
area. The general curvature is sharp. The gooseneck is not reinforced.
Measurements: A, 38 ram.; B, 73 mm.; comb width, 7 mm.
Cock No. 5 (Fig. 30, e). The only complete cock found at Gilbert,
this specimen has a narrow, tapered comb, a slotted upper vise jaw
that fits around the comb, and a vise screw with a slotted head. The
base has a flat face with beveled edges. The general curvature is
sharp, and the gooseneck is not reinforced.
Measurements: A, 37 mm.; B, 71 mm.; comb width, 7 mm.
Cock No. 6 (Fig. 31, e). The comb is wide and grooved. The
cock base has a flat face with beveled edges and is engraved with a
single-line border. The general curvature is sharp. The gooseneck is
not reinforced.
Measurements: A, 39 mm.; B, 73 mm.; comb width, 11 mm.
Cock No. 7 (Fig. 31, f). There is a slight step on the face of the
wide, grooved comb. The base has a flat face with beveled edges.

44

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 3 0. Gun cocks. In top row are front views, in bottom row side
views of the same specimens. Measurement loci shown at a.

The general curvature is sharp. The gooseneck is not reinforced.
Measurements: A, 37 ram.; B, 70 ram.; comb width, 10 ram.
Cock No. 8 (Fig. 31, g). This cock has a wide, grooved comb and
a flat-faced base with beveled edges. The general curvature is extreme. The gooseneck is not reinforced. A single engraved line borders
the flat base of the cock.
Measurements: A, 34 mm.; B, 66 mm.; comb width, 14 mm.
Cock No. 9 (Fig. 31, h). The comb is wide and grooved. The cock
base has a flat face with beveled edges. The general curvature is
sharp. The gooseneck is not reinforced.

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

45

FmuR~ 31. Gun cocks, a-c, upper vise jaws; d, vise screw; e-i, cocks. Second and bottom rows are front and side views respectively of the same specimens.
Measurements: A, 39 mm.; B, 76 mm.; comb width, 9 mm.
Cock No. 10 (Fig. 31, i). This cock has a wide comb but it is
not grooved. The base is flat-faced with beveled edges. The general
curvature is sharp. The gooseneck is not reinforced.
Measurements: A, 38 mm.; B, 66 mm.; comb width, 11 ram.
Iternarks: Hamilton (1960d: 154), quoting A. N. Kennard, states

46

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

that his cock types 1 and 9. (illustrated in his Figure 70) are typical
of the English cocks of the late 18th century. These cocks have a
flat face on the base with beveled edges, sharply curved necks, and
narrow combs. Cocks 4 and 5 from Gilbert appear to fit this description. However, it must be noted that no late 18th-eentury material
has been identified at this site. If they are English in origin they
apparently do not represent the English trade gun, for Gooding ( 1960:
85) states that locks for English trade guns were round from the end
of the 17th century to the end of the 19th century. Since it was
customary to use rounded base cocks on round locks, it would appear
that none of the cocks from Gilbert represents the English trade gun.
It is also unlikely that high grade late 18th-century English weapons
are present, for none of the ornamentation held to be typical of the
etass can be identified. For these reasons it is doubtful that Cocks
4 and 5 should be classed as late 18th century or as of English origin.
The balance of the disassembled cocks (Cock No. 10 is included
despite the absence of a groove) appear to fit Hamilton’s (1960d:
Fig. 71), eoek types, 4, 5, and 6, which are stated to be most popular
in this form in the mid-18th century. Hamilton also notes they can be
English, French, or from the European !ow countries.
It appears unlikely that the cocks from this site were manufactured
in England. As noted, the typical English trade gun is not represented in either group of cocks because the piano-convex co& base
is absent. Concerning better grade English locks and cocks, Hayward
(1963: 9,00) notes that the rounded surface was used by the English
.makers beginning in the last quarter of the 17th century and was not
generally superseded by the flat-faced units until the 1770’s. This persistence in English style is also confirmed by Joel Shiner’s research
at Fort Frederiea on St. Simons Island, Georgia (Shiner, ms.) The
thirteen fusil- and pistol-size cocks found there are all piano-convex.
They can be dated at approximately 1743 by Manuey’s (1959: 49, 51)
description of the blacksmith shop where this type was found, and
they are evidently of English origin. Hayward (1963: 49) has stated
that the French style in fashionable guns called for the flat cock between about 1700 and about 1750. Later, between about 1750 and
the French Revolution, high style accommodated both flat and convex
forms. ¯
Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine (1965: 318-39.0, 332) have stated
a ease for the reflection of high French fashion in the design of guns
used in the French trade. They have also noted the influence of
French design on continental European gunsmiths, an influence which
apparently did not extend so strongly to the 18th-century English gun-

47

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

smiths, including those producing conimon-grade guns.
The group of cocks from Gilbert conforms to French fashion in gun
design of the mid-18th century, and they appear most likely to represent guns used in the French trade of that period.
Cock UrPER VISE JAws

No. of Specimens: 3
Provenience: All from Feature 5
Illustrations: Figure 31, a-e
Upper Vise ]ate No. 1 (Fig. 31, a). This jaw is notched to fit
around the comb, and the notch contains a step.
Upper Vise Jaw No. 2 (Fig. 31, b). The ventral face is slightly concave. A shallow notch designed to fit around the comb has a step in it.
Upper Vise Jaw No. 3 (Fig. 31, c). This specimen is so badly
eroded that details of its original form cannot be determined.
COCK

VISE

SCREWS

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Features 5 and 7
Illustrations: Figure 31, d
Specimen No. 1. This screw has a slotted head. The threads have
been stripped.
Measurements: length, 44 ram.
Specimen No. 2. This specimen consists of the slotted head portion
only, the threaded part of the screw having broken off.
FLINTLOCK

GUNLOCKS

No. of Specimens: 3
,Provenience: Feature 8 (all three found together in a cache)
Illustrations: Figures 32, 33, 34
Because of severe oxidation only limited cleaning was attempted on
the gunlocks. Some areas were cleaned of the major rust build-up
where pertinent details and measurements were needed, but such
cleaning was halted at the estimated original surface. Measurements
and descriptive information for the gunlocks are given in Table 1.
Gunlock No. I (Fig. 32). The upper cock jaw, cock-jaw screw, frizzen, and frizzen screw are missing from this specimen. There is a
brass shim in the lower jaw screw hole. This consists of a half
cylinder of thin brass and appears to be an attempt by an Indian
to repair a stripped jaw screw or screw hole. The front lock screw
is broken off in its hole.

48

FIcue.~ 32.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Gunlock No. 1. Top, interior, and exterior views.

The tumbler has half- and full-cock notches and is engaged by a
vertically acting sear. There are no antifrietion devices on the frizzen spring or between mainspring and tumbler. The general description of the flashpan is the same as for Flashpan No. 1. The sear arm
does not angle back (no ’q3aekrake").

EUROPEAN TBADE GOODS

FIGURE 33.

49

Gunlock No. 2. Top, interior, and exterior views.

Gunlock No. 2 (Fig. 33). The upper cock jaw and cock-jaw screw
are missing from this gunlock as is the upper tumbler bridle screw.
The tumbler has half- and full-cock notches and is engaged by a
vertically acting sear. The sear arm has no backrake. The lock has no
antifriction devices between the frizzen and frizzen spring or between
the mainspring and the tumbler. Bridles are present on both frizzen
and tumbler. The frizzen "steel" is curved and has a rounded top with

50

FI~uRz 34.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Gunlock No. 3. Top, interior, and exterior views.

the front formed in two major longitudinal facets. Some traces of
brass appear in the rust on the upper front of the "steel." The tumbler
bridle resembles Bridle No. 1 but is larger and has a brace extending
from the inside surface of the lower extension to the lock plate.
Gunlock No. 3 (Fig. 34). The frizzen, frizzen screw, and cock-jaw
screw are missing from this gunlock. An upper cock jaw placed inside

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

51

the lock has been hung over the sear trigger arm by means of the
cock-jaw screw hole. This upper cock jaw is badly rusted and no tongue
can be detected on the back edge, but it is definitely intended for
use with a wide-comb cock. The upper jaw is concave on the under
surface as viewed from the side. The upper part of the cock is bent
toward the inside of the lock.
The mechanical details of this lock are the same as those for Lock
No. i.

Remarks: Side Plates No. 1, 2, and 10 have the same side, or lock,
screw hole measurements as Gunlock No. 1. Frizzen No. 3 would
probably fit Gunlock No. 1. Frizzen No. 7 would fit Gunlock No. 3.
Flashpan No. 1 would fit either of those gunlocks as would Flashpan
No. 2. Cocks No. 2, 6, 9, and 10 would fit either lock. Sear Spring
No. 1 would fit Lock No. 3. Various other parts would fit Locks 1 and
3 with only minor modification. In short, we have many parts apparently stripped from gunlocks similar in size and style to Gunlocks
No. 1 and 3.
The curvature of the lockplates would appear to indicate a pre1770 date for Gunlocks No. 1 and 3, according to Peterson (1956: 36,
pl. 88). The lockplates and cock bases are flat with beveled edges;
the combs are wide with central grooves; the flashplans are shallow
and faeeted underneath. Only two lock or side screws were used. These
details and others have been discussed previously in this report, and
at present it appears that Gunlocks i and 3 are typical of fusils used
in the French trade about 1750.
Gunlock No. 2 presents an enigma. The cock seems a bit short
for the gunlock and may be a replacement. As noted, the cock has a
narrow ungrooved comb, and the base has a flat face with beveled
edges. In the section on cocks, two generally similar specimens, Nos.
5 and 4, are discussed and reasons given for not automatically accepting a late 18th centreT English origin for them at this site. In fact,
except for the lack of a slight "step" on the front of the comb, these
three cocks can also be said to resemble those of French military guns
dating as early as 1728 (Boudriot, 1963: Modele 1728, Modele 1733,
ModeIe 1746). It appears quite possible that some nonmilitary locks
may also have been manufactured with this simplified comb; possibly
some of them appeared in the French trade during this and later
periods. Also arguing against a late 18th century date is the fact that
the curve of the bottom edge of the lock plate indicates a pre-1770
date (Peterson, 1956: pl. 38). The presence of a pan strap (frizzen
bridle) as well as a tmnbler bridle, generally indicates a post-1700

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

52

date (ibid.: 35). We know that the English trade gunlock was fastened
to the gunstock by three screws during this period (Hanson, 1955:
36). However, such gunlocks were round in cross section (Gooding,
1960: 85) and Gunlock No. 3, while it does have three side screw
holes, is flat in cross section. In addition, it would be uncommon for
a pan strap to appear on an English trade gun-lock until about 1820
(Hanson, 1955: 36).
In short, it is the third screw hole that appears to be the major
crux of our problem. Without it, this gunlock could be considered
as generally best reflecting French design of good to high quality
during the period assigned. However, we have not thus far been able
to detect use of the third side screw in connection with 18th century
French gun design.
TABLE 1.
Characteristics of gunlocks.
Gunlock
No. 1
Lock plate proper
Cross section
Flat with beveled edges
Bottom edge-moderate curve
Two lockscrew holes
Three lockscrew holes
Location of center (or upper) hole behind
mainspring ledge
Location of center (or upper) hole in
mainspring ledge
Frizzen spring screw hole exposed
Flashpan: Flat "V"
Pan removable from lock plate
Frizzen
Curved
Bridled (strap on pan)
Not bridled
Frizzen Spring
Notched for frizzen bridle
(or pan strap)
Not notched for bridle link
Frizzen spring screw hidden
Frizzen spring screw exposed
Tumbler
Bridled
Not bridled
Cocks
Wide comb with groove
Narrow comb with no groove
Base: flat face with beveled edges
General curvature: sharp
Neck style: gooseneck (not reinforced)

Gunlock Gunlock
No. 3
No. 2

x
x
x
-

x
x
x

x
x
x
-

X

--

X

x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x

--

X

--

x

x
-

x

x
x

x
x

x
x
-

x

x
-

x

x
x
x
x

"--

X

x
x
x
x

x
x
x

53

EUROPEAN TIRADE GOODS

FIGURE 35. Gun parts, a-d, screws; e-f, lugs; g-J/~, ramrod guides; o, trigger; p, trigger plate; q, trigger assembly.
TRIGGER

ASSEMBLIES

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 7
Illnstrations: Figure 35, q
This complete trigger assembly, including the trigger, tligger plate,
and trigger pin, is intact and maintains the same relationship of one
part to another as when it was mounted in the stock. The trigger plate
is iron, with the trigger slot centered laterally. Without major cleaning, the muzzle (upper) end is 4 turn. thick. It has a lip projecting

TEXAS

54

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

from the bottom, or ventral, surface forward and a threaded hole
12 ram. from the lip edge. This plate tapers to 2 mm. in thickness at
the butt (lower) end.
Measurements: length, 61 mm.; width, 18 ram.
TRIGGERS

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 5
Illustrations: Figure 35, o
This trigger is similar to the one in the assembly described above.
TRIGGER PLATES

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 6
Illustrations: Figure 35, p
This trigger plate is made of iron. The trigger slot is offset laterally
to the left in ventral view with muzzle end up. A threaded hole is
present in the upper, or muzzle, end. The plate is beveled toward the
inner surface.
Measurements were made after major cleaning: length, 62 ram.;
width, 14 mm. This specimen is 3 mm. thick at the muzzle end and
tapers to 1 ram. at the butt end. The hole is 6 ram. from the end.
SCREWS

No. of Specimens: 11
Provenience: Feature 1 (2), Feature 2 (2), Feature 3 (2), Feature
4 (1), Feature 5 (2), Feature 6 (1), Feature 20 (1)
Ilhtstrations: Figure 35, a-d
Screw No. 1. This is a side- or lock-plate screw which was used to
fasten the gunlock to the stock. It was not cleaned.
Measurements: length, 44 ram.; head diameter, 11 mm.
Screw No. 2. This side- or lock-plate screw was not cleaned.
Measurements: length, 42 ram.; head diameter, 11 ram.
Screw No. 3. This is a side- or lock-plate screw with a wedge-shaped,
threaded end. It was cleaned.
Measurements: length, 47 ram.; head diameter, 12 ram.
Screw No. 4 (Fig. 35, a). This tang screw is beveled under the head
and was countersunk into the tang. It passed down into a trigger plate
like the one described above and like the one on the complete trigger
assembly.

55

EUBOPEAN TRADE GOODS

Measurements: length, 46 mm.; head diameter, 10 ram.
Scret~, No. 5. This is a side- or lock-plate screw.
Measurements: length, 44 ram.; head diameter, 11 mm.
Scrmv No. 6. This lock screw was for securing a sear, an unbridled
frizzen, or a tumbler blidle.
Scretv No. 7. This lock screw probably was used on an unbridled
frizzen or a bridled tumbler.
Screw No. 8 (Fig. 35, d). This wood screw has the upper head surface rounded and the lower head surface beveled for countersinking.
This screw is suitable for securing a butt plate (George, 1947: 104).
Measurements: length, 28 ram.; head diameter, 11 mm.
Screw No. 9 (Fig. 35, c). This wood screw has a rounded upper
head surface.
Measurements: length, 25 ram.; head diameter, 8 mm.
Scrmv No. 10 (Fig. 35, b). This is a wood screw with rounded upper
head surface and beveled lower head surface. It is suitable for securing a butt plate to the stock.
Measurements: length, 36 ram.; head diameter, 9 ram.
Screw No. I1. This is a side- or lock-plate screw.
Measurements: length, 42 mm.; head diameter, 12 mm.
PINS

No. of Specimens: 2
Prouen.ience: Feature 1 (2)
Pin No. 1. This specfinen is cylindrical and has one end flattened.
It is bent. It probably was used to fasten a fitting (trigger guard,
barrel, etc.) to the stock by insertion through a perforated tongue, or
it may have been a pivot pin for a trigger.
Pin No. 2. This pin is cylindrical and was probably used to fasten a
fitting to the stock or to serve as pivot pin for a trigger.
Measurements: length, 38 ram.
LUGS
No. of Specimens: 4
Provenience: Feature 1 (2), Feature 4 ( 1 ), Feature 12 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 35, e-f
Two or three of these lugs (also called pin loops or wire loops)
were soldered onto, or set into, the lower surface of a barrel. Iron pins
passed through the holes in the lugs-and through the wood of the
stock on either side-fastened barrel and stock together.

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

RAI~IIAOD GUIDES

No. of Specimens: 16
Provenience: Feature 1 (1), Feature 2 (2), Feature 3 (4), Feature
4 (4), Feature 6 (1), Feature 7 (2), Feature 17 (1), Feature 18 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 35, g-n
Ramrod Guide No. 1. This is a lateral half of an intermediate or
upper guide made of sheet brass. In the center of the flange area is a
hole for pinning the guide to the stock.
Measurements: length, 28 ram.; thickness, less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 2. This guide is similar to the one described
above.

Measurements: length, 24 ram.; thickness, less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 3. This intermediate or upper ramrod guide is
made of iron and is flanged at the upper edges. There was no major
cleaning.
Measurements: length, 36 mm.; outside diameter, 13 mm.; thickness,
1 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 4 (Fig. 35, g). This is an intermediate or upper
ramrod guide made of brass. It is tubular with two grooves filed, or
stamped, parallel to the edges on each end. There is a flange with a
centrally located hole for pinning to the stock.
Measurements: length, 20 mm.; outside diameter, 12 mm.; thickness,
less than 0.5 mm.
Ramrod Guide No. 5 (Fig. 35, i). This is an intermediate or upper
ramrod guide made of brass which may be described in the same way
as No. 4.
Measurements: length, 25 ram.; outside diameter, 11 ram.; thickness,
less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 6. This guide of sheet brass is broken and flattened. There is a pinning hole in the one remaining lip.
Measurements: length, 23 ram.; thickness, less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 7 (Fig. 35, m). Tubular and made of iron, this
guide is the terminal or lower guide used at the ramrod point of entry
to the stock, having a tail or finial on the lower end. Triple grooves
parallel the edges on each end. It has a flange with a centrally located
hole for pinning to the stock.
Measurements after major cleaning: length, 87 rnm.; outside diameter, 12 mm.; average thickness, 1 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 8 (Fig. 35, n). Made of cast brass and tubular,
this is a terminal, or lower, guide used at the ramrod point of entry
to the stock. The finial is broken off. The flange is pierced for pinning.

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

57

Four longitudinal facets extend 20 mm. downward from the upper, or
muzzle, end. Grooves are present at both ends of the faceted area.
Measurements: length to break, 32 ram.; outside diameter, 10 ram.;
average thickness, 1 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 9 (Fig. 35, h). Tubular and formed from thin
sheet brass, this is an upper or intermediate guide. Five small (2 ram.
wide), longitudinal, flat surfaces on the lower tube body extending to
within 1 ram. of the ends are apparently a result of the filing technique used on the tube. The upper edges are flanged and pierced for
pin fastening to the gun stock.
Measurements: length, 24 ram.; outside diameter, 11 mm.; thickness,
less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. I0. This upper or intermediate guide, originally
tubular but now flattened, was formed from thin sheet brass with
the upper edges brought together in a flange and centrally pierced
for pinning. A double groove parallels each end.
Measurements: length, 25 mm.; thickness, less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 11 (Fig. 35, k). This complete specimen is
virtually identical to No. 8. The plain finial tapers evenly to a point.
Measurements: length, 61 ram.; outside diameter, 11 rnm.; average
thickness, 1 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 12. This fragment, made of iron, is probably
half of an upper or intermediate guide.
Measurements after no major cleaning: length, 34 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 13 (Fig. 35, 1). This complete terminal, or
lower, guide made of cast brass is flanged and centrally pierced for
pinning, l~emains of the iron pin are still in place. This guide is
similar to Guides No. 8 and 11 except that it is shorter in the tubular
portion.
Measurements: length, 62 ram.; outside diameter, 10 ram.; average
thickness, 1 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 14. Tubular and formed from thin sheet brass,
this is an upper or intermediate guide. The upper edges are flanged
and pierced for pinning. There is a groove parallel to each end.
Measurements: length, 24 mm.; outside diameter, 11 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 15. Flanged and pierced for pinning, this is an
upper or intermediate guide formed from sheet brass. It has been
flattened.
Measurements: length, 22 ram.; thickness, less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 16 (Fig. 35, j). Made of iron, this intermediate
or upper guide is tubular with the upper edges flanged and centrally
pierced for pinning.

58

TEXAS

a

At/CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

I

FI6URE 36. Gun parts, a, b, d, e, barrels (total length of d not shown);
c, breech plug.

Measurements after no major cleaning: length, 30 ram.; approximate thickness, 1 ram.
Remarks: The ramrod guides found at Gilbert were probably
used in a combination of three to the gun- one upper guide, one
intermediate guide, and one lower or terminal guide. None of the
guides is "fluted," "ribbed," or marked in the manner of those used
on later Northwest guns.

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

59
BARRELS

No. of Specimens: 23 fragments
Provenience: Feature 1 (1), Feature 2 (3), Feature 3 (7), Feature
4 (4), Feature 5 (3), Feature 12 (2), Feature 14 (1), Feature 1S
(1), Feature 20 (1)
Illuscrations: Figure 36, a, b, d, e
Four of the barrel fragments are octagonal, 18 are round, and
one is of indeterminate shape. Most have been battered or flattened,
and one appears to have been reshaped into a stake. Only those
fragments which retain significant features are described in detail.
Barrel No. I (Fig. 36, a). This round muzzle section has a perforated fi’ont barrel lug soldered or sweated to it. The base of the
fi’ont sight blade, apparently silver-soldered iron, is set two inches
back from the nmzzle. The location of the barrel lug-centered 1.63
in. from the muzzle- indicates a full-stocked weapon.
Measurements were made after major cleaning: caliber at muzzle
approximately .60, or 20 gauge.
Barrel No. 2 (Fig. 36, d). This is an octagonal breech section
with the breech plug intact. The flats extend approximately 190 mm.
then merge gradually with the round part of the barrel. An exception
is the flat on top of the breech which extends the entire length of the
remaining barrel section. There is a sighting groove two inches long
on the breech-plug tang and rear of the breech. A slightly undercut
flat for a barrel mounting lug is filed into the undersurface of the
barrel, centered 195 mm. forward of the back of the breech. The end
of the breech-plug tang is triangular with convex sides, and the tang
screw hole is countersunk into the external surface. A touch hole is
present on the right side of the breech.
No major cleaning was attempted.
Measurements: diameter across breech at flats, 30 ram.; bore caliber .55, or 20 gauge.
Barrel No. 3 (Fig. 36, e). This breech section is octagonal in cross
section, with the bottom three flats poorly defined. Straight lines have
been engraved adjacent to, and parallel to, the four ridges bordering
the upper three flats. The touchhole is brass-lined.
Measurements were made after major cleaning: diameter across
breech at flats, 29 ram.; bore caliber .58, or 24 gauge.
Barrel No. 4 (Fig. 36, b). The barrel section which was originally
round has been partly flattened. A barrel mounting lug is in place on
the underside. One end of the section is slightly smaller in diameter

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

60

than the rest of the barrel. The smaller area is bordered by a welldefined shoulder.
BI~EECH PLUGS

No. of Specimens: 6
Provenience: Feature 3 (2), Feature 4 (1), Feature 5 (2), Feature

ii (i)
Illustrations: Figure 36, c
Breech Plug No. 1. This is the tang end of a breech plug broken
across the tang screw hole. The screw hole is countersunk and has no
threads. The tang end is square.
Breech Plug No. 2 (Fig. 36, e). This piece has a lateral hole through
the rear body behind the screw portion. The screw hole in the tang
is countersunk and shows no threads. The tang is battered on one
upper edge and is bent at an angle, apparently the result of hammering to loosen and unscrew it from the breech. The tang terminates in a small, narrow-necked, simple finial.
Measurements made after major cleaning: overall length, 69 ram.;
maximum diameter, 29 mm. The threaded portion indicates use in a
bore of approximately .58 caliber, or 24 gauge.
Breech Plug No. 3. This specimen is broken across the tang at the
screw hole, which is countersunk and shows no threads. There is a
lateral hole through the rear body behind the screw portion.
Measurements were made after major cleaning. Maximum diameter
indicates use with a breech of approximately 9 mm. diameter. The
threaded portion indicates use in a bore of approximately .58 caliber,
or 24 gauge.
Breech Plug No. 4. This is the tang end of a breech plug that is
broken across the countersunk, unthreaded tang screw hole. It is
triangular with the lateral edges convex.
Breech Plug No. 5. This tang end of a breech plug, broken across
the screw hole, is of the same shape as - though slightly larger than Breech Plug No. 4. Its screw hole is not countersunk.
Breech Plug No. 6. This breech plug is broken across the tang at
the screw hole. The screw hole has no evidence of threads or of being
countersunk. The top of the tang is covered with a brass plate on
which some engraved design can be discerned despite considerable
battering and corrosion. There are three straight lines parallel to each
side of the tang, and between the two outer lines are remnants of a
cyma-like pattern. The tang has been hammered on one upper edge
and is bent in the direction that this part rotates to unscrew from
the breech.

EU~OPEANTRADE GOODS

61

Measurements were made after major cleaning. The threaded
portion indicates use in a bore of approximately .55 caliber, or 28
gauge.
Remarks: Breech sections No. 1, 9., 12, and 13 all measure more
than an inch in diameter across the thickest part, from flat to flat.
According to Hamilton (1960c: 126) breeches of that diameter
might be either from 18th-century trade guns or from 18th- or 19thcentury military muskets. None of the bores measured match those
of flintlock French or English military muskets, or of Colonial smoothbores (Hamilton, 1960e: 208). Typical Spanish guns have characteristics which identify them rather easily, and only one part of such
a weapon, a ffizzen, has been found at the Gilbert Site.
If these are, indeed, 18th-century trade guns, it seems likely they
were manufactured after the earlier part of the century. The smaller
bores (.44, .50, and .53 caliber) which Hamilton believes may characterize French trade guns of the late 17th and early 18th centuries are
not present here. Bores of .55 caliber are present, and Hamilton
(1960c: 129; 1960e: 208) believes this caliber may represent progression towards the .58 caliber and .62 caliber bores common to
trade guns by the 19th century. The 25 mm. diameters of the breech
areas would also appear to rule out the 19th-century Northwest
gun which has not been found, thus far, to exceed one inch across
the flats. (Hamilton, 1960c: 127)
These breech sections would seem to be from French or English
trade guns, probably dating near 1750. The breech plugs indicate by
their measurements that they were used with breeches of the same
dimensions and bores as those previously described, and the same
conclusions should hold true except for Breech Plug No. 5, which is
probably from a pistol. All of the tangs are designed to receive a
screw that passed downward into the trigger plate. Hanson (1955:
16) states that all early Northwest guns have the tang screws coming
from below.
Blna"

PLATES

No. of Specimens: 20
Provenience: Feature 1 (4), Feature 2 (3), Feature 3 (2), Feature
4 (1), Feature 5 (6), Feature 7 (1), Feature 8 (1), Feature i2 (1),
Feature 18 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 37
All the butt plates found at the Gilbert Site are made of cast brass
except Nos. 18 and 20 which are made of wrought iron.

62

FIGURE 37.

TEXAS

Butt plates.

ARCHEOLq)CICAL

SOCIETY

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

Butt Plate No. 1

63

(Fig. 37, h). This specimen is broken at the

toe of the plate and in the final section. The edges of the plate proper
are beveled; the plate is convex on the exterior surface and concave
on the interior, the interior surface showing marks that indicate
hammering was used to aid in contouring the plate. The portion of
the tang remaining is engraved with three parallel lines and a row
of marks resembling tiny arrowheads. A series of triangular marks
is based upon the center line. The center portion of the plate is engraved with an unstrung bow, arrow, quiver, and club. This type of
butt plate was usually attached to the stock by a countersunk screw
in the toe and a tongue and pin in the finial pol~ion. Both of these
sections are missing. The treatment of the edges indicates that the
finial was probably inlaid flush with the top of the stock, or comb.
Measurements: maximmn width, 46 mm.
Butt Plate No. 2 (Fig. 37, n). This toe section was partially cut
through from each lateral edge and then broken off. The exterior is
convex, the interior concave. The edges are beveled. Contouring hammer marks are present on the inside surface. The piece has oxidized
until it is ahnost black. It is stamped with a crown over an 1~.
Butt Plate No. 3 (Fig. 37, b). This finial, with a tongue for pin
fastening, is broken at the tang. The exterior surface is convex, the
interior surface concave.
Butt Plate No. 4 (Fig. 37, g). This finial, with a perforated tongue
for pin fastening, is broken at the tang. Engraved parallel lines along
the borders end in scrolls.
Butt Plate No. 5 (Fig. 37, e). This plate is broken at the tang
and below a beveled screw hole in the corner of the right angle bend
between the tang and the plate proper. The plate is convex on the
exterior sin-face and concave on the interior. The interior surface
shows marks that indicate hammering to aid in contouring the plate.
The edges of the plate are beveled. The tang was probably inlaid
flush with the comb of the stock. Three parallel engraved lines border
the tang, and an unstrung bow, arrow, quiver, and clnb are engraved
in the center of the tang. This plate was probably fastened with a
tongue and pin on the finial, a screw set flush in the heel, and probably
a second flush screw in the missing toe.
Measurements: width, 44 mm.; screw hole diameter, 10 ram.
Butt Plate No. 6. This toe section is broken through the lower screw
hole. The screw hole is beveled. The section is convex on the exterior surface and concave on the interior surface; the edges are
beveled. Hammer marks are present on the interior surface.
Butt Plate No. 7. This section of a butt plate has the heel and toe

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sections missing. It has beveled edges, is convex on the exterior,
and is concave on the interior. On the interior are marks which
indicate hammering to form.
Measurements: width, 46 ram.
Butt Plate No. 8 (Fig. 37, i, m). This plate is broken at the finial
on the tang. It is concavo-convex with beveled edges, and the exterior
concave surface shows the effects of hammering to aid in contouring
the plate. Engraved parallel lines which terminate in scrolls decorate
the border of the tang, and in the center is engraved an unstrung bow,
a quiver, and two dubs. There is a countersunk screw hole in the
toe of the plate. The plate was probably fastened with a flush or
round-head screw at the hole and a tongue and pin on the missing
finial. The toe is stamped with a crown over an R.
Measurements: width, 44 mm.; screw hole diameter, 10 mm.
Butt Plate No. 9 (Fig. 37, c). This finial is broken at the tang.
The interior is flat, the exterior convex. A tongue pierced by a single
hole is molded onto the undersurface. The finial is similar in form
and engraved design to Finial No. 3.
Butt Plate No. I0 (Fig. 37, 1). This finial is broken across the midsection of the plate proper. The edges are beveled, and the plate is
concavo-convex with hammer marks on the interior concave surface.
The toe section contains a crude, five-sided hole in the proper location
for a fastening screw.
Measurements: width, 44 ram.
Butt Plate No. 11 (Fig. 37, f). This finial is broken at the tang.
Convex on the exterior and concave on the interior, it is engraved
with a design similar to the one on Butt Plate No. 3.
Butt Plate No. 12. This finial is cut and broken at midsection.
The edges are beveled. Part of a countersunk screw hole is present.
Butt Plate No. 13 (Fig. 37, j). Broken at the base of the finial and
across the plate, this butt plate is concavo-convex and has beveled
edges. The tang is engraved with three single lines paralleling each
border that terminate in scrolls at the upper end. There is a double
set of triangular marks along the inner lines. The central element
consists of a quiver, an unstrung bow, an arrow, and a club. The
lower plate area is covered with light peck marks.
Measurements: width, 44 mm.
Butt Plate No. I4. This engTaved finial section is broken off at
one end and has been bifacially filed to a point at the other so as to
produce an arrow point.
Butt Plate No. 15. This piece is broken in the tang and in the body

EUROPEAN TI~ADE GOODS

65

below the heel. It is eoncavo-eonvex, and its edges are beveled. Corrosion is severe, but faint elements of an engraved design can be discerned. An engraved single line upon which is based a row of
triangular marks parallels each edge of the tang. Engraved in the
center of the tang are a quiver, an arrow, a bow, and perhaps a club.
Measurements: width, 41 mm.
Butt Prate No. i6 (Fig. 37, k). This is a piano-convex finial section
broken across the neck of the finial. A tongue molded on the under
surface is broken through the pin hole. The end of the finial was engraved with a design which is probably a simplified acanthus leaf.
Butt Plate No. I7. This is a finial section that is broken at both
ends. A tongue with a hole for pin fastening is present on the lower
surface. Each side is bordered by three engraved straight lines with
an elliptical form engraved in the center.
Butt Plate No. 18. This tang section, broken at the finial and in
the heel, is made of iron. It is convex on the exterior surface and
concave on the interior. A slightly raised ridge crosses the tang just
below the break at the finial. Rust damage has obliterated any engraving that may have been present
Measurements: width, 39 ram.
Butt Plate No. 19 (Fig. 37, d). This is a tang and finial section
that is broken at each end. The finial area is shaped and engraved i~
a fashion similar to Butt Plate No. 3. A double set of parallel lines
borders each edge, and, in the finial neck and tang area, a line of
triangular marks is strung along the inside line. The central tang area
was engraved with a military trophy design of drum and banners.
A molded tongue under the neck of the finial is broken through
the pin hole. The tang is concavo-convex and the lateral edges are
slightly undercut.
Butt Plate No. 20 (Fig. 37, a). A tang and finial section made of
iron, this specimen is broken or rusted through across the heel area.
The entire section is eoneavo-convex. There is a countersunk screw
hole in the tang.
Measurements: width, 46 ram.; screw hole diameter, 8 mm.
Remarks: In regard to decoration it is tempting to assume that
the engraved designs of bows, arrows, quivers, and elubs always have
a special connotation where encountered on gun parts from Indian
sites. Russell (1957: 113, 114) illustrates an early 19th-eentury English
trade gun by P. Bond with two such designs (one appears to incorporate a pipe). Hamilton (1960e: 140, item 3, row 1) shows a
design of bow, arrow, and quiver on a butt plate from a Little Osage

66

TEXAS AlqCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

site occupied from 1730 to 1775. Maxwell and Binford (1961: 101,
109,) illustrate a lock plate and a side plate from Fort Michilimackinac that are engraved with bow, arrow, and quiver. During the
first half of the 18th century some English sporting guns were deeorated with the huntsman’s bow, a sheaf of arrows, and sometimes a
club (George, 1947: 108, 153). Concerning the use of this general
motif by the French, a bow and quiver form part of the decoration
illustrated on Plate No. 6 of a French pattern book engraved by
Claude Simonin and published in Paris in 1685 (Hayward, 1963: P1.
91). The French pattern book of De Lacollombe, first published
about 1705 and again in 1730, shows a design combining an unstrung
bow, an arrow, and a club (,ibid.: P1. 93). Harris, Harris, Blaine, and
Blaine (1965: Fig. 16E) illustrate a bow, quiver, and clubs on a
butt plate from the Womack Site.
These data suggest that the earlier use of such decoration was not
dictated by demands of the Indian trade and, furthermore, that both
English and French gunmakers utilized the design. The design does
appear, however, on five butt plates and two side plates from the
Gilbert Site, which suggests that it was a major decorative motif oll
guns used in the French trade around the mid-18th centreT.
The butt-plate finials No. 3, 9, 11, and 13 all show a definite similarity to one in the pattern book of De Laeollombe (Hayward, 1963:
P1. 93). Although this particular finial pattern was available as early
as about 1705, there are no specimens of this design noted from
either the Angola Site or the Womack Site, both of which have
yielded gun parts thought to date before 1730 as well as later trade
material (Harris et al., 1965: 338, 340). All this suggests that buttplate finials bearing a bow-arrow-club design were rarely, if ever, put
on French trade guns prior to 1730. The pre-1730 butt plates from
the Angola Site, incidentally, are 6 or 7 ram. wider in the lower section
of the plate than the butt plates from Gilbert.
A strong resemblance in outline may be noted between the buttplate finials from the Gilbert Site and those of the 1733 model French
cavalry musketoon (Boudriot, 1963: Modele 1773). Hamilton (1960c:
120, Fig. 52)illustrates a similar finial from a Little Osage site in
Missouri known to have been occupied between 1730 and 1775. This
tang and finial section is also engraved with a military trophy as is
specimen No. 19 from the Gilbert Site. A butt-plate finial similar
to the ones under discussion has been reported from Fort Miehilimackinac by Maxwell and Binford (1961: 104, Fig. 18a).
Butt-plate finials of this style, then, appear regularly around the

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

67

mid-18th century on sites where French trade is indicated. Designs
of military trophies and scenes of the chase were commonly used as
gun decorations in Continental Europe and England and do not by
themselves offer good evidence of origin.
Butt Plate No. 20 may be English. The finial itself resembles in
outline some of those from Fort Frederica on St. Simon’s Island,
Georgia, illustrated and described by Shiner (ms.). A butt-plate
tang from the Vinson Site in Limestone County, Texas- similar to
the Fort Frederica specimens- is believed to be fi’om an English
fusil dating from the 1740-1770 period. The English light service
smoothbore of the mid-18th century apparently shared some
characteristics with the Northwest gun intended for Indian ta’ade. It
must be noted, however, that the only resemblance the specimen
fi’om Gilbert bears to the foregoing is in the outline shape of the
finial. Comparison on such a limited basis offers at most only a
possible indication of origin and age.
Finial No. 4 resembles that on a complete brass butt plate from
the Spanish Fort Site as well as on a finial from the same site. The
complete plate has what is best interpreted as a shell-like design engraved below the finial neck. This particular design element often
appears as part of a rococo style that first appeared on French guns
in the 1730’s (Hayward, 1963: 48). Also, the narrow width of the
complete plate from Spanish Fol± would seem to place it in a post1730 time period (Harris et al., 1965: 341). The same conclusions
may be true for the finial from the Gilbert Site. Of rare occurrence
in Nortefio Focus sites, this design possibly represents either a minor
type or one which occurs late in the French gun trade.
Conclusions: Most of the brass butt plates are probably fi’om
French trade guns dating from about 1750. One finial section, No. 18,
could represent a somewhat earlier period. The method of securing
the butt plate to the stock by means of a tongue and pin on the finial
and with one or two countersunk screws (one in the heel, and/or
one in the toe) was employed on better grade English fusils fi’om
about 1700 onward (George, 1947: 104). This general form of butt
plate is also similar to that of the French style in 1724 (Neal, 1955:
17, Fig. 8). This style may also be found on various other types of
shoulder arms from England and the low countries. In contrast,
Spanish traditional style stocks of the period were square underneath
(Neal, 1955: 17). Such stocks usually employed a small right angled
plate on the heel of the butt.

TEXAS

68

FIGURE

38.

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Side plates.
SIDE PLATES

No. of Specimens: 9
Provenience: Feature 2 (1), Feature 3 (2), Features 3 and 18 (1)
(two pieces that may fit together: one from Feature 3, the other
from Feature 18), Feature 5 (i), Feature 6 (2), Feature 12 (1),
Feature 14 (1)
IllusCrations: Figure 38
In describing side plates, the term "upper screw hole" is used to
indicate the hole in the upper area of the side plate at the point of
greatest width. In measuring the thickness of the side plates, measurements were taken at each end of the long axis of the part. All the
side plates are of east brass and are essentially flat-surfaced.
Side Plate No. 1 (Fig. 38, i). This is the front portion of a flat
side plate, extending from the upper screw hole to the front end.

EUROPEAN TIRADE GOODS

69

The edges are slightly undercut (i.e., beveled on the bottom surface), leaving the bottom surface smaller in area than the uppqr surface. This would simplify inlaying. The plate is decorated with a
single-line border and two opposed leaf-scroll designs, one of which
is interrupted by the break. The extreme front part of the plate
is engn’aved with two double-line elliptical forms and a ribbon-like
design.
Measurements: thickness, 1 to 2 mm.
Side Plate No. 2 (Fig. 38, d-e). This flat side plate consists of two
fragments that seem to fit together, one found in Feature 3, the
other in Feature 18. The plate is broken across the front screw
hole and in the area of the upper screw hole. An eng,’areal design
portrays a curl-tailed, collared dog on the left that is chasing an
impossibly large hare or rabbit on the right. The upper border of the
plate has an engraved scalloped line.
Measurements: thickness, 1 mm. to 3 mm.
Side Plate No. 3 (Fig. 38, c). This fragment is the proximal end of
a two-screw side plate with undercut edges. A single engraved line
strung with triangular marks borders the edges. Two parallel, vertical,
engraved lines transect the plate some 20 ram. from its proximal end.
Measurements: thickness, approximately 1 ram.
Side Plate No. 4 (Fig. 38, j). This specimen comprises a section
of flat side plate between the front and upper screw holes. The
edges are slightly undercut. It has an engraved leaf-scroll design
toward the front part; an unstrung bow with an arrow appear at the
proximal break, which interrupts the design. Along the upper and
lower borders are single engraved lines made up of tiny, closely
spaced triangles.
Measurements: thickness, approximately 1 ram.
Side Plate No. 5 (Fig. 38, h). This side-plate rear section, broken
at the upper screw hole, is flat with undercut edges. It was definitely
used with a two-screw lock. An engraved design, within a single-line
border, consists of what appears to be a basket containing a plant
and a blossom or bud. There is a small notch in the lower edge.
Measurements: thickness, approximately 2 ram.
Side Plate No. 6 (Fig. 38, g). In cross section this side plate is
slightly convex on the exterior surface and concave on the interior
surface. The edges are slightly undercut. Both ends are missing. The
borders are engraved with what are basically scalloped lines. The
break at the front end apparently interrupted a design or scene; in
the center is engraved an unstrung bow, a quiver, and two clubs. A
ribbon-like design was engraved across the plate between the center

70

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

design and the interrupted scene at the front end.
Measurements: thickness, approximately 1 ram.
Side Plate No. 7 (Fig. 38, f). This proximal end of an apparent
two-hole side plate is slightly convex on the extel~or surface and
concave on the interior surface. The edges are weakly undercut. Engraved double lines parallel the upper and lower edges, and there is
an engraved leaf-scroll design in the center.
Measurements: thickness, approximately 1 ram.
Side Plate No. 8 (Fig. 38, b). This is the front section of a side
plate shaped and engraved to resemble a dragon or serpent. The
edges are undercut. There are five round punch marks near the
broken end. The specimen has oxidized to a dark color.
Measurements: thickness, 1 mm.
Side Plate No. 9 (Fig. 38, a). This is a fragment of a flat brass
side plate shaped in a manner suggestive of a dragon or serpent.
Details of the engraving are difficult to interpret meaningfully.
Measurements: thickness, approximately 1 to 9, mm.
Bemarks: Side Plate No. 9 (Fig. 38, a) is definitely zoomorphic in
outline. Its profile is relatively complex with both the upper and lower
edges outlining a serpent or dragon shape. The engraved details
supplement this theme. Side Plate No. 8 (Fig. 38, b) possibly represents a highly stylized version of a zoomorphie outline. This is uncertain because the specimen is too incomplete. While "dragon" side
plates usually have an opening through a circular coil in the proximal
end, they are not considered as truly pierced for decoration.
The first flat plates of the "dragon" or "serpent" type began to
appear in the late 17th century and seem to have gone out of style
in general usage shortly thereafter, for by 179.0 the foliated side
plate was in fashion in English higher quality guns (George, 1947:
106-107). Hanson (1955: 57, P1. 1, B) i!lustrates a flat "serpent" or
"dragon" side plate from a 1700 period British all-purpose musket.
Hamilton (1960c: 135-136) illustrates flat, engraved dragon plate sections from a site known to have been occupied from 1730 to 1775
and assigns a tentative date of 1750 to this type dragon plate. The
examp!e from the Gilbert Site is of flat east brass. The outline was
produced in the casting and dressed by filing, but the surface is flat
and details are engraved.
In later versions, detai! was produced by casting in low relief, not
by engraving. Hanson (1955: 15-16) describes one of the earliest
known examples of a molded detai! dragon side plate on a Northwest
gun by Grice who was active from 1770 to 1780.

71

EUROPEAN T~ADE GOODS

Side Plate No. 9 from Gilbert does not match any of the more
common versions of dragon side plates.
Dragon Side Plate No. 8 shows a definite similarity to both the
1700 version (Hanson, 1955: 57, P!. 1, B) and the one assigned the
tentative 1750 date (Hamilton, 1960e: 135-136). It should date prior
to 1770 according to Blaine’s unpublished analysis of such side plates
from the Vinson Site.
The outlines of the other side plates exhibit gentle curves and
smal! steps and generally refleet the functional shape of a lock plate
but in decorative form. These plates also are solid- not pierced for
decorative purposes. Their engraving themes vary, primarily suggesting the hunt, floral, or foliate designs. According to George ( 1947:
111), this general type of side plate for English guns was in style
from approximately 1750 to 1775 on weapons such as the blunderbusses, fusils, and fowling pieces of "seeond quality." George (ibid.:
112) also points out that between 1790 and 1800 the side plate, as
such, was replaced by screw cups in the side of the English sporting
gain.
French use of the flat unpierced side plate of relatively simple outline began about 1715-20 on fashionable weapons. These early plates
were decorated in low relief by cast o1" chiseled designs (Hayward,
1963: 45).
Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine (1965: 332) hypothesize that
fashionable French designs were often reproduced in an inexpensive
manner on weapons used in the French trade. A plate of designs by
Guerard shows decoration for flat side plates that appears intended, or
most suitable, for reproduction by engraving (Hayward, 1963: P1.
99.). Because of the apparent absence of flat unpierced side plates
at the Angola Farm Site, Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine (1965:
331) believe it unlikely that they were commonly used on guns in
the French trade prior to 1730. Such side plates appear to have been
current in the French trade around 1750.
TttlGGEt/

GUARDS

No. of Specimens: 9.9
Provenience: Feature 1 (4), Feature 2 (2), Feature 3 (5), Feature
4 (4), Feature 5 (6), Feature 6 (2), Feature 7 (1), Feature 11 (1),
Feature 12 (1), Feature 17 (1), Feature 18 (1), Feature 9.1 (1)
IUustratior~: Figures 39, 40
All measurements of thickness were made at the point of maximum
width of the guard section being described. Thickness measurements

79

FIcURE 39.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Trigger guards.

marked with an asterisk are for fragmentary, badly rusted, or battered specimens and do not reflect true maximum dimensions of the

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

73

original, complete trigger guard. All the trigger guards are made of
east brass except Nos. 2, 7, 10, 11, and 19 which are made of iron.
Trigger Guard No. I (Fig. 39, i). This trigger guard, broken in
the bow section, bears part of an engraved design on the bow which
has single-line borders and a leaf-scroll design in the center. The
fore tang, or forestoek plate, ends with a finial. In cross section the
shape of the tang is trapezoidal. It has a wide bevel on each side, the
unbeveled under surface being mounted next to the stock. A projecting
tongue with a hole through it is molded onto the under surface; the
tongue was inserted into a slot in the wooden stock, and a pin was
passed through the stock and the perforation in the tongue, thus
securing the front end of the trigger guard to the gun. A similar
perforated tongue or more commonly a hooked projection served to
secure the rear trigger guard tang to the stock.
Measurements: Front finial- maximum width, 19, ram.; maximum
thickness, 9. mm. Front tang-maximum width, 15 mm.; width at
base of bow, 12 mm.; maximum thickness, 2 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 2. This specimen is broken in the bow section
and in the rear tang. The borders of the bow are molded with a
slight ridge along each edge. The tang has wide bevels along the
edges, producing a trapezoidal cross section. This guard section is of
the same pattern as No. 1 but is made of iron rather than brass.
Measurements: Rear tang-maximum width, 13 ram.; maximum
thickness, 2 mm.; width at base of bow, 19. ram.
Trigger Guard No. 3. This trigger guard is broken at the front
base of the bow and in the forestock plate immediately before and
after the base of the bow. A tongue for pin fastening is present. The
forestock plate remnant is trapezoidal in cross section and has wide
bevels.
Measurements: Front tang-width at base of bow, 11 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 4. This tang fragment is round on one end
and broken at a screw hole on the other end. It is badly bent and is
semi-round in cross section.
Measurements: maximum width, 11 ram.
Trigger Guard No. 5. Broken at the neck of the bow and at the
rear tang, this specimen is trapezoidal in cross section.
Measurements: Width at base of bow, 19. ram.; maximum width
at break, 9 mm.~; maximum thickness, 2 ram.
Trigger Guard No. 6 (Fig. 39, a). This specimen is broken in the
bow and in the rear tang. The bow is engraved with single-line
borders and a simple, rather formal, design in the center.
Measurements: Bow-maximum width, 19 mm.; maximum thick-

74

Ficur~ 40.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

Trigger guards.

ness, 2 mm. Rear tang-width at base of bow, 12 mm.; width at
break, i0 mm.; maximum thickness, 2 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 7 (Fig. 40, f). This iron trigger guard is broken

EUROPEAN

TRADE GOODS

75

in the tangs before and after the bow proper. The bow and both
tangs are beveled, and the cross section is flatter than that of the
brass guards, although the pattern is similar. A tongue for pin
fastening is present.
Measurements: Front tang-maximum width (widened by battering), 15 ram.; maximum thickness, 2 ram.; width at base of bow, 13
ram. Bow-maximum width, 20 mm.; maximum thickness, 2 ram.
Rear tang-width at base of bow, 15 mm.; width at break, 11 mm.;
maximum thickness, 2 ram.
Trigger Guard No. 8. Broken in the rear tang at both ends, this
trigger guard is trapezoidal in cross section and has wide bevels. A
break on one end is at a narrow spot which was probably the neck
of a rear finial. A tongue for pin fastening is present.
Measurements: maximum width, 13 ram.; maximum thickness, 2
lnln.

Trigger Guard No. 9 (Fig. 39, f). This center section of a bow" is
broken at both ends. It is trapezoidal in cross section, has wide bevels,
and is engraved with a single-line border.
Measurements: maximum width, 17 mm.; maximum thickness, 9.
mm.
Trigger Guard No. I0. This is an iron forestock plate with a simple
round finial. It is broken at a beveled screw hole.
Measurements: Maximmn width of finial, 14 mm.; maximum thickness, 9, 1Tlln.
Trigger Guard No. 11. This is a front tang and finial section made
of iron.
Measurements: Finial- maximmn width, 11 ram.; maximum thickness, 9, mm. Tang--maximmn width, 15 ram.; maximum thickness,
9, ram.
Trigger Guard No. 19, (Fig. 40, d). This complete forestoek plate
and bow is broken in the rear tang. It is trapezoidal in cross section
and has wide bevels. A tongue for pin fastening is present in the
front section. The bow is engraved with a single-line border and
with an embellished leaf-scroll design in the center.
Measurements: Front finial-maximum width, 14 ram.; maxinmm
thickness, 3 mm. Front tang- maximum width, 15 mm.; maximum
thickness, 3 ram.; width at base of bow, 13 mm. Bow-maximum
width, 19 ram.; maximum thickness, 2 ram. Rear tang-width at
base of bow, 14 ram.; width at break, 11 mm.~; maximum thickness,
2 ram.
Trigger Guard No. 13 (Fig. 39, c). This specimen is broken in

76

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

the bow and in the rear tang. It is trapezoidal in cross section and has
wide bevels. The bow is engraved with single-line borders and with
a formal design in the center.
Measurements: Bow-maximum width, 18 mm.; maximmn thickness, 2 ram. Rear tang-width at base of bow, 12 ram.; width at
break, 11 mm.; maximum thickness, 2 ram.
Trigger Guard No. 14 (Fig. 39, g). A rear finial section that is
broken in the tang, this specimen is trapezoidal in cross section and
has wide bevels.
Measurements: Tang-width across shoulders, 13 mm.; maximum
thickness, 2 ram. Finial- maximum width, 12 ram.; maximum thickness, 2 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 15. This trigger gnard, broken in the rear tang
and at the rear finial, is trapezoidal in cross section and has wide
bevels. A hooked tongue for pin fastening into the stock is present.
Measurements: maximum width, i2 mm.; maximum thickness, 2
into.

Trigger Guard No. 16 (Fig. 40, a). This center section of a trigger
guard bow is broken at both ends. Piano-convex in cross section, the
bow was expertly engraved with a leaf-scroll design enclosed in a
single-line border.
Measurements: maximum width, 19 mm.; maximum thickness, 2 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 17 (Fig. 40, b). This specimen is almost identical to No. 16, including measurements, but the scroll design is
slightly varied.
Trigger Guard No. 18. This center section of a guard bow was
filed bifacially into an arrow point. There is an engraved floral design
in the center. Triangular engraved marks are aligned along the singleline border.
Trigger Guard No. 19. This is probably a forestock plate section
including the finial, but it may be a butt plate finial instead. It is
made of iron and has rounded edges. It was designed for mounting
on the surface of the stock rather than for inlaying.
Measurements: maximum width, 13 ram.; maximum thickness, 2
inln.

Trigger Guard No. 20. This oxidized finial section of a forestock
plate is engraved and filed to produce the effect of acanthus foliage.
M easurements: maximum width, ii mm.; maximum thickness, 2
lnm.

Trigger Guard No. 21 (Fig. 39, e). This forestock plate, broken in
the plate and at the base of the finial, has a trapezoidal cross section

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

77

and wide bevels. Around the edges of the flat area between the bevels
is an engraved line with triangular marks spaced along it.
Measurements: maximum width, 15 mm.; maximum thickness, 2
mnl.

Trigger Guard No. 22 (Fig. 39, d). This trigger guard comprises
the bow and major portions of front and back tangs. The bow is engraved with single-line borders and with the same formal design in
the center as on Trigger Guard No. 13. The tangs are trapezoidal in
cross section and have wide bevels. The front tang has a perforated
tongue for pin fastening while the rear tang has a hook-shaped tongue.
Measurements: Front finial- maximum width, 11 ram. Front tangmaximum width, 15 ram.; width at base of bow, 12 mm. Bowmaximum width, 19 ram.; maximum thickness, 2 mm. Rear tangwidth at base of bow, 12 ram.; width across shoulders, 12 ram.;
maximum thickness, 2 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 23 (Fig. 39, b). Broken in the bow and at the
front tang finial, this piece has the same design on the bow as Nos.
13 and 22.
Measurements: Front tang-maximum width, 16 mm.; maximum
thickness, 2 ram.; width at base of bow, 12 ram. Bow- maximum
width, 19 mm.; maximum thickness, 2 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 24 (Fig. 39, h). This piece is broken at the tip
of the front tang finial and at the beginning of the bow proper. Its
cross section is trapezoidal, and it has wide bevels. The pin is still
present in the tongue.
Measurements: Finial-maxinmm width, 11 ram.; maximum thickness, 2 mm. Tang- maximum width, 14 mm.; maximum thickness, 2
mm.; width at base of bow, 11 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 25. This specimen comprises a finial section only.
It has wide bevels and is trapezoidal in cross section.
Measurements: maximum width, 10 ram.; maximum thickness, 2
mm.
Trigger Guard No. 26. Broken in the plate and at the finial, this
forestock plate has a trapezoidal cross section. A tiny fish-like figure is
engraved on the piece and a hole has been drilled through the center
after the piece was manufactured. The plate has oxidized to a black
color.
Measurements: maximum width, 15 ram.; maximum thickness, 3
n’lm.

Trigger Guard No. 27 (Fig. 40, e). This piece is broken in the
bow and in the rear tang. In cross section the bow is plane-convex,

TEXAS

78

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

while the tang- having wide bevels- is trapezoidal. Each edge of
the bow is bordered with a double set of parallel engraved lines. A
small section of an engraved design surviving on the bow bears a
strong resemblance to the corresponding section of the design on
Guard No. 26.
Measurements: Bow-maximum width, 18 ram.*; maximum thickness,

4 Inln.~

Trigger Guard No. 28. This specimen is broken in the bow and in
the rear tang. The small surviving section of the bow indicates that
the original bow was engraved with single-line borders. The rear
tang has wide bevels and is trapezoidal in cross section.
Measurements: Tang-width at base of bow, 11 ram.; width at
break, 10 ram.*; maximum thickness, 2 ram.
Trigger Guard No. 29 (Fig. 40, c). This piece, consisting of a complete forestock plate and bow, is broken in the rear tang. The forestock plate and the rear tang have wide bevels, and both are trapezoidal in cross section. The forestock plate has a tongue, pierced by a
pin hole, molded on its inner surface. The bow section, piano-convex
in cross section, has been partially cut through on the external (convex) surface and is bent in two places. There are double engraved
lines paralleling each edge of the bow, and an opposed leaf-scroll
design is engraved in the center. Each bevel on the front tang is
engraved with a double set of parallel lines, and a small obscure
design is engraved in the center panel of the tang. The design of
the finial may represent a formalized acanthus leaf.
Measurements: Front finial-maximum width, 13 mm.; maximum
thickness, 2 mm. Front tang-maximum width, 15 mm.; maximum
thickness, 2 mm.; width at base of bow, 12 ram. Bow-maximum
width, 19 mm.; maximum thickness, 3 mm. Rear tang - width at base
of bow, 19. mm.; width at break, 11 mm.*; maximum thickness, 9.
Film.

Remarks: One iron forestock plate and finial section (Trigger
Guard No. 10) resembles one described by Hanson (1955: 16, 77, P1.
XXI, A) from an early Northwest gun sold by the Montreal independents and dated approximately 1770. The iron finials of Trigger
Guards No. 11 and 19 resemble finials illustrated by Hamilton
(1960c: 138, Fig. 51) from sites dated between 1730 and 1775.
One trigger guard bow section (No. 18) is considerably wider
than corresponding sections of other bows from the site. The center
element of an engraved floral design on this specimen is enigmatic, but
it may represent a flower or a wicker-type basket as seen from below.

EUHOPEAN TRADE GOODS

79

If the engraver set forth to represent a flower blossom, he took the
long way around and got lost along the way.
A trigger-gnard finial section (No. 20) with an acanthus design
has some resemblance to a finial illustrated by Hamilton (1960e: 140
and Fig. 52, second item) of the 1730-1775 period. There is also
some resemblance to two finials from Fort Miehilimaekinae illustrated
by Maxwell and Binford (1961: 122, P1. VI) and to those on a pair of
complete brass trigger gnards from the Angola Farm Site near Shreveport, Louisiana (personal observation of the authors). This may be
an earlier form than the plainer finials such as that on Trigger Guard
No. 12.
One rear tang finial (No. 25) is virtually identical in form to that
of the fusil de dragon French milital), model of 1733-34 (Boudriot,
1963: Modele 1733-34). The only major difference is that the military
model has a screw hole and the Gilbert specimen has none.
One forestoek plate section (No. 26) is decorated with a small
engraved figure having a fish-like head and a tail resembling that of
a sting ray, or perhaps, a serpent. The small size of the design, 4
ram. by 12 mm., suggests that this is an identifying insigDia rather
than merely a decoration. If that is true, it is quite likely that the gun
from which it came was not a common trade gun.
The trigger-guard sections may be classed into two groups: a group
comprising 21 stylistically similar specimens and a smaller group of
seven atypical ones. In the former group are portions of at least !1
individual trigger guards, two of iron and nine of east brass, that are
all of the same basic form. These were attached to the wooden stock
by means of a hook at one end and a perforated tongue at the other,
both molded on the inner surface of the guard. It is believed that
this form of trigger guard is characteristic of 18th-eentury guns.
On English fowling pieces of the early 18th century, one method
of securing the trigger guard in a groove on the stock was by passing
pins through perforated tongues molded on the inner surface of the
guard (George, 1947: 104). On a French trigger guard illustrated
in 1751-65 are a perforated tongue and a hook like those on the
Gilbert specimens (Held and Jenkins, 1957: 115). A Spanish stock
made in the "French style" in 1724 exhibits the style of trigger guard
-and butt plate, too- most eonnnon at the Gilbert Site (Neal, 1955:
17, Figs. 8, 10, 11). Another trigger guard of similar style dates
from 1706 (ibid.: 12, Fig. 1). Guards of this style seem to occur
more frequently on fusils or fowling pieces from the Continent
than on guns of the same period from England (George, 1947: PI.
IV, 3; P1. V, 2; P1. VII, 2, 3; P1. VIII, 1, 2, 3).

80

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

The trigger-guard finials from the Gilbert Site do not resemble
those on standard English sporting guns from approximately 1720
through 1800 (George, 1947: 107, 111, 112). They also do not resemble those on presumably English fusil trigger guards of about
1742 unearthed at Fort Frederica, Georgia (Shiner, ms.).
The Gilbert Site trigger guards are slighter than those of military
muskets of the 18th century. The designs engraved on the bows vary.
On three (Nos. 13, 22, and 23) appears an identical design, while
on another (No. 6) is a simpler version of the same. This design,
in its simplest form, somewhat resembles the Chevrolet automobile
trademark. A basically similar design occurs on two brass guard
bows from the Angola Farm Site and on two brass guard bows from
the Womack Site (Harris et al., 1965: 327). Similar design elements
appear in a book of French gunsmith patterns which was initially
printed around 1705 and reprinted in 1730 (Hayward, 1963: 297, P1.
93). Unfortunately for our study, the use of patterns from such books
was not confined to France: they were copied throughout Continental Europe. However, it appears that during the 18th century
the English did not make significant use of such design books except
on fine-grade guns (Harris et al., 1965: 320). The English trade
gun at that time was assuming characteristics of its own which do not
reflect the French decorative preferences.
What appears to be an earlier version of the typical trigger guard
at Gilbert occurs at the Angola Farm Site and at the Womack Site.
The Angola Fmxn Site evidently was occupied from about 1709 to
1729 (Swanton, 1911: 311, 314). The Womack Site has been tentatively identified as a Kichai village of 1719 (Halxis et al., 1965: 357360). The only complete specimens are two from the Angola Farm
Site.
Comparisons have been made of the thickness and width of some
corresponding sections of trigger guards from the Gilbert, Womack,
and Angola Farm Sites. These comparisons were based on the maximum width of the front tang, of the bow, and of the rear tang, together with thickness measured at the same points. These points of
maximum width were selected because they can be recognized, when
present, on fragmentary specimens. At the Womack and Angola Farm
Sites the dimensions are, on the average, wider and thicker than at
tile Gilbert Site. This factor, together with variations in decoration,
offers a possible method of separating trigger guards from French
trade guns of about 1720 from those of about 1750. Unfortunately,
the samples- particularly those from Womack and Angola Farmare too small for complete reliability.

EUROPEAN TIIADE

GOODS

81

Three of the Cilbert guard bows (Nos. 16, 17, and 29) are engraved with an opposed pair of leaf-scroll designs. This design appears also on a Gilbert side plate (No. 5) as well as on a side plate
from the Womack Site (Harris et al., 1965: Fig. 13, C) and quite
possibly is adapted from the pattern book of De Lacollombe (Hayward, 1963: P1. 93).
One guard bow (No. 12) has an engraved leaf-scroll design with
an incorporated shell-like element. The asymmetrical form of decoration in rococo style first appeared on French firearms in the 1730’s
(Hayward, 1963: 48). De Marteau added sheets to De Laco!lombe’s
book of designs, and one, dated 1749, includes leaf scrolls combined with shell-like forms much like that the Gilbert specimen
(ibid.: 94).
There is a definite resemblance in shape between the typical trigger guard from Gilbert and the trigger guards of the French cavalry
and ch-agoon model pistol, fusil, and musketoon of 1733-34. However,
the treatment of the finials on the Gilbert specimens is slightly different from that of the French military models; also the French military version used two screws to secure the rein" tang instead of a
molded hook as at Gilbert (Boudriot, 1963: Modele 1733-34).
Thus the evidence strongly suggests that the typical trigger guard
from the Gilbert Site portrays the style used on French trade guns
about 1750. Finial No. 20 could well be h’om an earlier period. The
trigger guards seem to emerge as the most reliable single indicator of
18th-eentury French trade guns.
CUNFLINTS

The 114 gunflints can be divided into three categories: spall flints,
conventional flints, and native-made flints. Some specimens of European origin had been reworked by the Indians; these were classed on
the basis of original form whenever possible.

Spall Gunflints
No. of Specimens: 32
Provenien, ce: Feature 1 (4), Feature 9. (1), Feature 3 (9), Feature
4 (3), Feature 5 (5), Feature 6 (2), Feature 7 1), Feature 10 (2),
Feature 12 (3), Feature 16 (1), Feature 20 (1
Illustrations: Figure 41, a
The 32 spall gunflints are wedge-shaped. They are thick on the
back side and taper to a thin edge along the fi’ont. The back, or heel,
and the sides have been trimmed with secondary chipping. The front

TEXAS

FIGURE 41.
flints.

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Gunflints. a, spall type; b, conventional type; c, native-made

edge also was trimmed straight across when necessary. Except for
one black specimen, the spall gunflints are of light-colored chert and
flint, ranging from buff to light gray.
Hamilton (1960d: 73-79) has described a kind of spall gunflint
that was produced by a blow on a rounded cobble of chert or flint.
The spall flints from the Gilbert Site, however, were struck from prepared cores, not directly from cobbles. The major preparation of the
cores consisted of producing two planes or surfaces which intersected
at an angle of about 60 degrees. One of these prepared surfaces
served as the striking platform for removing the desired spall; the
other surface became the dorsal surface of the spall. (The terms
dorsal and ventral are used here in the usual archeological sense,
the ventral face being the surface of a flake or blade having the positive
bulb of percussion, the dorsal face the opposite one.)

EUROPEAN~ADE GOODS

83

Fourteen of the Gilbert spall flints exhibit a striking platform in
the heel area, prepared before the spall was struck from the core.
Secondary flaking has removed direct evidence of the striking platform from the rest of the specimens. Eleven of the spall flints,
including 9 of the 14 described above, clearly show the dorsal surface, the flatness of which together with the absence of a negative
bulb of percussion indicate that it was produced before the striking
platform was prepared for detachment of the spall flint. Secondary
and use flaking has obscured evidence of knapping technique on 21
of the spell flints.
According to Witthoft (cited in Hamilton, 1964: 52), the spall
gunflint is the predominant European form found in Indian sites
dating between 1650 and 1750.
Measurements: (size range based on complete specimens) length,
19 to 28 mm.; width across striking surface, 22 to 35 ram.; thickness,
6 to 11 ram.
Conventional Gunflints’
No. of Specimens: 13
Prover~ience: Feature 1 (3), Feature 3 (2), Feature 4 (2), Feature
5 (2), Feature 6 (1), Feature 8 (1), Feature 10 (1), Feature 12

(1)
Illustrations: Figure 41, b
Conventional gunflints were produced by sectioning specially prepared blades of flint. Such a section usually exhibits two or three
major facets on the dorsal side and one major facet on the ventral
side. The dorsal facets are segments of blade scars.
The longest bevel is trimmed in a straight edge where it meets
the opposite side. Opposite this straight edge is the back. The back
and adjacent sides were blunted by secondary chipping.
Of the 13 conventional gunflints found at Gilbert, all appear to be
French and all are made of honey-yellow flint, probably from such
sources as Loir-et-Cher or Indre, France.
The conventional gunflints all appear to be of the "French" type.
They exhibit the well rounded and closely flaked heel described as
characteristic of the type by C. S. Smith (1960: 46). The conventional gunflint was probably introduced to this country about 1680
(Hamilton, 1964: 55) but did not begin to displace the spall gunflint
until about 1750 (Witthoft, cited in Hamilton, 1964: 52).
It is important to note that the identification of French gunflints in
Indian sites cannot be taken as a reliable indication of French trade.

84

TEXAS

AI~CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

As the French exported quantities of gunflints to other countriesincluding Holland, Spain, and England-traders from those countries must have sometimes distributed French-made flints to Indians
(Hamilton, 1960d: 74-75).
Native-made Gunflints
No. of Specimens: 69
Provenience: Feature 1 (10), Feature 2 (1), Feature 3 (19), Feature 4 (13), Feature 5 (12), Feature 6 (5), Feature 7 (2), Feature
12 (2), Feature 15 (1), Feature 18 (3), Feature 20 (1).
Ilhtstrations: Figure 41, c
The Indian gunflints were produced from flakes by secondary
flaking. Specimens of good workmanship are generally square to rectangular, thin, and bi-convex in cross section; all four sides are usually
worked to a fine edge. The material used is chert and flint, including
two specimens made of Kay County, Oklahoma, flint.
One specimen has a thin sheet of lead wrapped around it, leaving
one striking edge and the adjacent sides uncovered. A lead "cap" or
"grip" was sometimes used to aid in securing the gunflint firmly in
the jaws of the cock. Leather pads, however, were most commonly
used for that purpose (Caldwell, 1960: 198).
Indians produced rectangular, bifaeially chipped gunflints like
those from the Gilbert Site from the 17th century on according to
Witthoft (cited in Hamilton, 1960d: 73).
Measurements: (Range based on complete specimens) length, 12
to 30 mm.; width, 22 to 31 mm.; thickness, 4 to 10 mm.
LEAD BULLETS

No. of Specimens: 10
Provenience: Feature 3 (1), Feature 5 (3), Feature 12 (1), Feature 14 (1), Feature 18 (1), Feature 20 (1), Feature 21 (2)
This category of spherical lead bullets includes all specimens over
"Large Buck" shot size. Large Buck shot at 5/oz. is the largest size
shot listed in an early table (George, 1947: 211). Of the 10 bullets
found at Gilbert, only three are unfired and suitable for measuring.
All the bullets, however, were weighed to provide a basis for the
estimates of their caliber. Of course, the weights of any two balls
of the same caliber may vary somewhat because of such factors as differences in lead purity, sprue cutting, and bullet molds. In addition,
fired balls can be subject to weight loss because of bore and impact

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

85

abrasion. Hamilton’s system (1960c: !28-129, 132) was used as the
basis for the following estimates of bullet caliber and gauge, and
the probable bore they were meant for. The weight scale used is in
grains.
TABLE 2.
Specifications of lead bullets.
Feature
3
5
5
5
12
14
18
20
20
21

Specimen
Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Weight in
Grains

Caliber

203.1
234.5
252.4
268.5
143.5
243.0
131.0
228.5
196.0
255.6

.50-.53"
.53-.55*
.55*
.58*
.44-.45*
.55
.44
.53-.55*
.50-.53*
.55

gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.

Caliper
Probable Gun Bore Measurement
.55
.58
.58
.60

(32
(28
(28
(24

gauge)
gauge)
gauge)
gauge)

.58 (28 gauge)
.58 (28 gauge) "
.55 (32 gauge)
.58 (28 gauge)

9/16"**
7/16"**

9/16"**

* Fired, distorted
** Caliper measurement to nearest 1/32 inch
The .44 caliber bullets from Features 12 and 18 could be for a
rifle. However, no rifle barrel sections were found at the Gilbert Site.
LEAD

SHOT

No. of Specimens: 23
Provenience: Feature 1 (5), Feature 3 (11), Feature 4 (2), Feature 5 (5)
Of the 23 lead shot recovered, two deserve individual comment.
One had been fired in company with a loading of smaller shot which
left deep impressions on it. The closeness of the pattern indicates
that they were probably still in the bore during impact and suggests
a loose loading. The large shot was abraded against the inside of the
bore, and the resulting contour suggests a caliber of approximately
.69 for the bore.
The other shot singled out for special comment has been flattened
on one side and has a hole drilled through it. Evidently it was intended for use as a bead.
All of the shot were weighed in grains and assigned size designations in accordance with the early table of Ezekial Baker given in
George (1947: 211). Since the shot were sized by screening, shot
of the same "size" may vary somewhat in weight. In many instances
the sizes assigned do not correspond to modern tables. It is quite

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

86

possible that some of the lead shot were left at the site after the
Indian occupation as a result of later hunting. Data on shot size are
given in the following table, Table 3.
TABLE 3.
Specifications of lead shot.
Feature
1
1
i
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
5
5
5
5
5

Grains
3.5
4.3
7.4
10.3
60.0
0.9
2.0
2.2
3.0
3.3
4.3
4.5
4.8
5.5
5.9
48.5
4.8
10.2
1.2
3,7
8.8
80.7

No. of Shot per
Ounce (AVG.)
125
102
59
42
7
486
219
199
146
133
102
97
91
8O
74
9
91
43
365
118
50
5

Shot Size
No. 3
No. 2
B
BB
Small Buck
No. 8
No. 5
No. 5
No, 4
No. 3
No. 2
No. 2

No. 1
No. 1
No. 1
Musket Crape
No. 1
BB
No. 8
No. 2
BB
Large Buck
Drilled "bead"

87

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

ORNAMENTS
by

K. HAI~IS, INUS M.
and J. NED WOODALL

LOYD HARPER, RUBY HARPER, R.

HAm, S, EDWAnD B.

JELKS,

Classified as ornaments are these: hawk bells, tinklers, pendants,
sheet-brass cylinders, finger rings, buttons, bracelets, lead beads, and
glass beads.
HAWK BELLS

No. of Specimens: 1 complete, 12 fragmentary
Provenience: Feature 1 (5), Feature 2 (1), Feature 3 (3), Feature
5 (3), Feature 6 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 42
These were made by joining together two cupped hemispheres of
sheet brass so as to form a hollow, approximately spherical "jingle"
bell. At least three different methods are known by which the two
hemispheres were joined together. One method was simply to solder
the two halves together with their edges flush. A second method was
to turn the edges of both halves outward and then solder them together under pressure so that a narrow flange was produced which
encircled the equatorial circumference of the bell. The third method
was to lap the edges of one half over the edges of the other half
and to crimp and/or solder them in place. A pellet of iron or other
substance was usually enclosed within the bell to make it tinkle.
The smallest bell (Fig. 42, a), and the only complete specimen, is
of the flanged-edge form with an iron pellet inside; the largest bell
(Fig. 42, g), represented by the reverse half only, is to all appearances
of the lapped-edge form. The other 11 specimens (Fig. 42, b-f) are all
of flush-edge construction.
Seven of the Gilbert hawk bells include all or part of the obverse
face. On all seven there are two round holes cut through the sheet
brass and a slit connecting the two holes. The slit was made by slicing
through the wall of the bell, without a strip of metal being removed
in the process. The seven specimens that include the reverse portions
of the bells all have an eye fastened at the back by which the bell was
attached to clothing or accouterment. The eyes are made of narrow
strips of brass bent into loops, with the two ends of the strip
inserted through a small hole and bradded on the inside of the bell in
the same way that the ends of a cotter pin are bradded down. A drop
of solder holds the bradded ends securely in place.
The 11 flush-edged specimens are all in the same general size range

88

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FICURE 42. Hawk bells, a, flanged-edge form; b-f, flush-edge form; g,
probably lapped-edge form.

(see dimensions below) and all have two or three parallel lines impressed into the surface, just back from the edge, on both the obverse
and reverse faces. One of them, in addition, has the letter D stamped
into the obverse face, evidently a maker’s mark.
The largest specimen consists of a reverse body half which is 38
ram. in diameter and has a maximum thickness of 15 ram.; the attachment eye is made of a heavy strip of brass about 3 mm. wide by 1.5
mm. thick formed into a loop that is 11 ram. in diameter. The sheet

EU~OPEANTIRADE GOODS

89

brass from which this bell was made is appreciably thicker than that
of the smaller bells.
The body of the smallest specimen (the only complete one) is 12
ram. in diameter and 7 mm. thick. The attachment eye, approximately
3 mm. in diameter, is made of a brass strip about 1 mm. wide and perhaps 0.5 mm. thick. The flange where the two halves are joined is
about 1 mm. wide. The two round holes on the obverse face are 2 mm.
in diameter and 6 mm. apart.
There appear to be several slightly different sizes represented by the
11 fragmentary flush-edge hawk bells. Diameters range from 16 to 21
mm.; attachment eyes are relatively uniform at 4 to 5 mm. in diameter,
with the strips from which they are formed all being between 1 and
2 mm. wide by about .5 mm. thick. The obverse holes are 3 to 4 ram.
in diameter and they aa’e set from 7 to 11 mm. apart.
Remarks: Hawk bells are known from many sites in the southern
plains, but few have been described in sufficient detail for close comparisons. Twenty-five lapped-edge and two flanged-edge hawk bells
made of sheet brass were recovered from the White Site, a historie
burial in Yoakum County, Texas (Suhm, 1962b: 87-89). The flangededge specimens are too fragmentary for full deseription, but they have
attachment eyes like those from the Gilbert Site: that is, they were
made of narrow strips cut from sheet brass. The lapped-edge bells,
however, have wire eyes and differ further from the Gilbert specimens
in being almost perfectly spherical and in having two crossed slots in
the obverse face rather than a single slot with round holes at each end.
The slots, instead of being just sliced through, were made by removing narrow strips from the bell wall.
Newcomb (1955: 188) reports bells from the Yellowhouse Canyon
burial in Lubbock County, Texas, but he does not describe or illustrate
them. The editor of this report examined one of the Yellowhouse Canyon bells and found it to be identical with the lapped-edge bells
from the White Site. The Yellowhouse Canyon burial certainly
dates after 1858 as it contained an 1858 model pistol (Neweomb,
1955: 187), and the White Site probably dates between 1860 and 1875
(Suhm, 1962b: 116).
The Watson Site, a historic burial in Fisher County, Texas, has
been estimated to date between 189.0 and 1840 (Bay and Jelks, 1964:
139). It contained 39 flanged-edge and 6 flush-edge hawk bells, both
forms similar structurally to those from the Gilbert Site. A flangededge bell that is apparently identical to those from the Watson Site
has been reported from Kipp’s Post, South Dakota, a trading station
of the 1890’s (Woolworth and Wood, 1960: 9.89, and PI. 60, n).

90

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Hawk bells comparable to those from the Gilbert Site have been
found at two pre-19th century sites: the Spanish Mission of San
Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz in Ileal County, Texas, and the Fanning
Site in Doniphan County, Kansas. The San Lorenzo Mission, which
was excavated in tile fall of 1962 by Curtis D. Tunnell of the Texas
Memorial Museum, is well documented and can be dated precisely
between 1760 and 1769 (Castafieda, 1939: 158-199)~ One hawk bell
(not yet described in print but examined by the editor) was found
there, a flush-edge specimen with a strip eye, paired grooves along
the equatorial seam, and hole-and-slit treatment of the obverse
face. It is essentially identical to the flush-edge specimens from the
Gilbert Site, the only difference being that along the paired gn’ooves
are tiny, closely spaced tick marks.
The Fanning Site in Kansas is estimated by Wedel (1959: 170-171)
to date prior to 1724 and perhaps earlier than 1700. Two hawk bells
found there appear to be of the flush-edge form, with strip eyes,
paired grooves along the equatorial seam, and hole-and-slit piercing
of the obverse face (ibid: 166 and P1. 13, g). Since one of them is 1.6
era. in diameter and the other is slightly larger, they are evidently
identical in al! respects, including size, to the flush-edge bells from
the Gilbert Site.
On the basis of the foregoing meager data, the following inferences
may be made as to stylistic changes in hawk bells traded into the
southern plains during the 18th and 19th centuries:
1. Hawk bells of tile 18th and early 19th centuries were of oblate
spheroid shape. Most were made with a hole-and-slit design cut
through the obverse face, and the attachment eye was made from a
narrow strip of sheet metal. The two halves of the body were joined
by either a flanged-edge or a flush-edge seam.
2. The most common kind of hawk bell during the latter half of the
19th century was approximately spherical and had an attachment eye
made of wire; there were two simple, crossed slots cut out of the obverse face; the body halves were joined by a lapped-edge seam.
Needless to say, these inferences cannot be proved or disproved
until more data have been compiled. It is believed, nevertheless, that
they are probably indicative of general trends in hawk bell styles, and
it is hoped that from this feeble beginning a useful, accurate typology
for hawk bells will develop. In any ease, this suggested chronology,
even though tentative and quite general, is all we have to go on at
present, and it leads us to estimate that the Gilbert Site hawk bells,
when considered strictly on the basis of typology, date somewhere between 1700 and 1850.

91

EU14OPEAN TRADE GOODS

Tinklers. a-e, pointed-base form; f-i, straight-base form; j-n,

TINKLEHS

No. of Specimens: 46 completed tinklers and 12 flat blanks that were
never rolled into shape.
Provenience: Feature 1 (18), Feature 2 (3), Feature 3 (11), Feature 4 (4), Feature 5 (4), Feature 6 (4), Feature 7 (2). All 19, blanks
are from Feature 5.

99,

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Illustrations: Figure 43
Tinklers were made by rolling into cones pieces of sheet brass which
had been cut to the desired shape and size. There are two basic forms:
(1) a cone with a point projecting downward from one side of the
base (Fig. 43, a-e), and (2) a cone with a base which is in a single
plane, or approximately so (Fig. 43, f-i). On all specimens a small
opening was left at the top of the cone through which a string or thong
could be passed for attachment. Most of the blanks from which the
tinklers were made were approximately rectangular or of isosceles
trapezoid shape. Interestingly, there is no apparent correlation between blank shape and cone shape: that is, both forms of blanks were
used for both the plane-base and the pointed-base forms of cones.
Some of the cones are slender, others are "fat". Most are between
20 and 40 mm. long, but the largest one measures 66 mm. in length
and the shortest one 16 mm. The sheet brass of which the tinklers
were made is of variable thickness, the thinnest being approximately
0.2 mm. thick, the thickest about 0.5 mm. thick, and most falling into
the intermediate range between those two figures.
The blanks, the presence of sheet-metal trimming scraps, and the
general appearance of the tinklers themselves indicate that these
ornaments were made by the Indians, not traded to them in finished
form. The source of the sheet metal is unknown, but probably discarded kettles and other containers acquired from the French and
Spanish provided a major portion. Several bail ears from sheet brass
kettles were recovered from the site (Fig. 46).
Tinklers similar to these are common to historic Indian sites
throughout most or all of the plains, including sites of the Nortefio
Focus. They were attached to garments or other articles by passing a
thong or cord through the opening at the small end of the cone and
knotting the end so that the cone would not slip off. Thus an Indian
clad in tinkler-trimmed garments would have, like the lady from Banbury Cross, music wherever he went.
PENDANTS

No. of Specimens: 3
Provenience: Features 4, 5, and 10
IUustrations: Figure 44, a, b, g
One pendant (Fig. 44, a) is a small piece of sheet silver cut into
the shape of an isosceles triangle with a suspension hole at the apex
and four notches spaced along the base. The edges of the triangle
are slightly convex and the corners are rounded. One face has a

EUROPEAN T1R.ADE GOODS

93

FIGuluz 44. Ornaments. a-b, g, pendants; c, finger ring; d-e, buttons; [,
sheet brass cylinders.

simple crosshatched design that appears to have been made by
placing the edge of a knife on the pendant and tapping it in with
a hammer. Since some of the lines were cut across the suspension
hole after its edges had been smoothed down, it is certain that the
crosshatching did not just happen to be on the piece of metal from
which the pendant was made but was intentionally put on the pendant

94

TEXAS

ABCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

itself as a decoration. Across one corner, however, are two faint rows
of tiny triangular punctations that probably are a small surviving
remnant of some decoration that was on the piece of metal before
it was fashioned into the pendant. The notches appear to have been
made with a file.
A second pendant (Fig. 44, b), made of sheet brass, is also an
isosceles triangle perforated at the apex and notched along the base.
The apex has been squared off and the basal corners are slightly
rounded. The nine notches on the base are approximately equally
spaced, but they are much smaller than those on the silver pendant;
also, they seem to have been made with a sharp knife rather than by
filing. There is no decoration other than the basal notches.
The former specimen is 21 ram. high by 24 ram. wide at the base.
The latter is 25 ram. high, 19 mm. wide at the base, and about 0.5
ram. thick, somewhat thinner than the other.
Similar triangular pendants have been observed by the editor
in collections from other Nortefio Focus sites, but none of them has
been described in print.
The third pendant (Fig. 44, g) is made from a coin identified as
a French ecu (Reinfeld, 1955: 67). The obverse side of the coin is
decorated with the left profile of the head of Louis XV, and encircling the head appear the letters LUD ¯ XV ¯ D ¯ FR ET ¯ NAV
¯ REX. On the reverse side the letters BENEDICTUM ¯ 1749 SIT
NOMEN DOMINI W encircle a design consisting of a crown above
an oval containing three fleur de lis. Around the oval and extending
to the crown is a wreath of leaves:
Two holes were made in the coin above the profile of Louis XV.
Measurements: diameter, 32 ram.; thickness, 2 ram. The holes are
2 mm. in diameter and 8 mm. apart.
SHEET-BRASS CYLINDERS

No. of Specimens: 5
Provenience: Feature 1 (1), Feature 4 (1), Feature 5 (1), Feature
6 ( 1 ), provenience unknown ( 1 )
IUustrations: Figure 44, f
These are small cylinders made by rolling up pieces of sheet brass.
They range in length from 8 to 30 mm., and all are near 5 ram. in
maximum diameter. Like the cone-shaped tinklers, these were probably made by the Indians from discarded sheet-brass vessels. They
could have been used as beads, or possibly they were used on cloth-

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

95

ing or other articles for clamping the ends of fringe strands to prevent
fraying.
FINGER

RINGS

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Both from Feature 3
Illustrations: Figure 44, c
One of the finger rings (not illustrated) is a fiat metal strip bent
into a circle with a 3 mm. gap left between the ends. This plain, undecorated ring has an iron core that has been plated with brass.
The second ring (Fig. 44, c), cast in brass, has a heart-shaped area
on top which is bordered with a dashed line and has the Roman
numeral X in the center. Both the border and the X are stamped into
the surface of the metal rather than being molded or etched. The
sides of the ring, as they extend from the heart-shaped area, are
progressively narrower and thinner, the point opposite the heart
being quite slender and fragile.
The iron-cored specimen averages about 20 ram. in diameter, and
the strip from which it is formed is between 3 and 4 ram. wide by
approximately i mm. thick. The other ring averages about 19 ram.
in diameter, and the sides vary from a maximum of 3 mm. to a
minimum of 1 ram. wide and from less than 0.5 ram. to slightly
more than i ram. thick. The heart design is 19 ram. tall by 20 ram.
maximum breadth and is approximately 1.0 ram. thick.
The ring with the heart design can be readily identified as a style
which was formerly worn by Jesuits, although members of that order
are not allowed to wear rings of any kind today. The design is
intended to portray a bleeding heart, the dashed lines representing
drops of blood. Similar Jesuit rings, many with slashed or bleeding
heart designs and one with the Roman numeral XX, have been reported by Maxwell and Binford (1961:105 and P1. IX, e-r) from the
site of Fort Michilimackinac in Michigan, a historically documented
site dating from about 1715 to 1781, occupied first by French and
later by English troops.
The Jesuit ring from the Gilbert Site is surely of French origin;
therefore, it probably reached the Indians of the upper Trinity River
region via the French trading post of Natchitoches, Louisiana. Since
the first Jesuit priest regularly assigned to Natchitoches arrived there
in 1730 (Nardini, 1961: 43), and as the French Jesuit priests were
generally replaced tba’oughout Louisiana by Spanish Franciscans after
the Treaty of Paris in 1763, those two dates (that is, 1730 and 1763)

TEXAS

96

AI~CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

may be considered to bracket, generally, the most likely period of
time during which a Jesuit ring might have reached the vicinity of
the Gilbert Site.
This specimen was analyzed spectographieally by R. E. Forrester
who reported the following metals to be present, in order of quantity:
copper, tin, zinc and lead (equal proportions), and silver.
BU~-rONS

No. of Specimens: 9.
Provenience: Features 9. and 4
Illustrations: Figure 44, d-e
A plain brass button (Fig. 44, d), from Feature 2, is an example
of the spun-back variety pictured by Olsen (1963: Fig. 1, D). The
body is 17 mm. in diameter and about 1 mm. thick; the eye is 4 mm.
across. According to Olsen (ibid.: 552), spun-back buttons were in
use by both civilians and the militalT throughout the 1760-1785
period.
The other button (Fig. 44, e) is represented by a plain obverse
part of a two-piece form. It is made of sheet brass in the shape of a
flattened hemisphere, and its edges are bent inward where they were
at one time crimped around the backing piece, which presumably
was made of wood, bone, or metal. The diameter is 16 ram., the
maximum thickness 5 mm. The sheet metal, by estimate, is less than
0.5 mm. thick. According to Olsen (1963:552 and Fig. 1, F, I) the
first two-piece, all metal buttons were made about 1812, and the
earliest ones shaped like the specimen in question here appeared
about 1830. Two-piece bone- or wood-backed buttons, however, are
said by Olsen (ibid.: 552) to have been in use as early as 1700. We
are unable to tell from the Gilbert specimen what kind of back
it had.
BRACELETS

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 5
Illustrations: Figure 46, a
This bracelet was made from a length of brass wire 5 mm. in
diameter (between 4 and 5 gauge on the American scale) by bending
it into an incomplete oval, leaving a gap 30 ram. wide between the
two ends of the wire. There is no decoration.
Measurements: long axis, 79 mm.; maximum width, about 55 ram.

EUIROF’EAN TIRADE GOODS

97

FIGvR~ 45. Glass beads. This sample is selected to show the range o£ shapes
and sizes, a-c, necklace beads; d-g, garter beads, a-c, Type 10; d-f, Type 11;
g, Type 46; h, Type 14; i, Type 13; j, Type 40; ]¢, Type 26; l, Type 68;
m, Type 62; n, Type 57; o, Type 59; p, Type 53; q, Type 54; r, Type 1;
s, Type 2.

98

TEXAS AttCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

LEAD

BEADS

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 5
This imperfectly spherical lead ball is perforated through the approximate center. It is battered and flattened on one end.
The perforation is round, diminishing in diameter from 2.2 mm.
at one end to 1 mm. at the other, thus producing a hole with the
shape of a truncated cone. The hole may have been made by hammering a sharp implement into the ball, thus producing the flattened
end of the bead, or the hole may have been produced by drilling.
Measurements: diameter parallel to perforation, 10.2 mm.; diameter
perpendicular to perforation, 10.6 mm.
GLASS BEADS

No. of Specimens’: 3,453
Provenience: see Table 4
Illustrations: Figure 45
Glass beads constituted an important item of trade on the southern
plains in the 18th century. A large sample was collected from the
Gilbert Site, mainly by washing midden soil from the features through
fine-mesh screen.
The beads were classified according to a system originally worked
out by Duflqeld and Jelks (1961: 40-51) and later modified by Harris,
Harris, Blaine, and Blaine (1965: 307-315). Under this system beads
are classified on the basis of size, color, shape, use, and structure.
Beads are graded by size as follows (all measurements are outside
diameter): small (0 to 4 ram.), medium (4 to 6 ram.), and large
(more than 6 mm.). A color chart (Bustanoby, 1947: 28-29) was used
to designate the color of the beads. The various shapes are described
with the same terms used by Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine ( 1965:
307-315) in their report on the Womack Site. Use is indicated by
the terms necldace and garter. Documentary evidence (Du Pratz,
quoted in Swanton, 1911: 56) states that larger beads were used
mainly for necklaces, while medium and small ones were used mostly
for making colorful designs on skins, garters, and the like.
As to structure, beads were classified as simplo (one homogeneous
piece of glass), compound (formed of two or more different-colored
concentric layers of glass), and complex (decorated with stripes, dots,
or other designs). Techniques of manufacture are: hollow-cane,
faceted, and mandrel- or wire-wound. At the Gilbert Site, bead types
40, 41, 53, and 54 are mandrel-wound; types 40 and 41 have facets

EU~OPEANTI~ADE GOODS

99

that were pressed while the glass was molten; all the others were
made by the hollow-cane method. The terms tumbled, untumbled,
and twisted have the following meanings: tumbled-after breaking
the hollow canes to the desired length, the broken sections were
placed in a heated drum which was rotated, a process that rounded
the broken edges; untumbled-the beads were not tumbled but
were used with their edges sharp; twisted- the hollow canes were
twisted as they were drawn out.
Descriptions of the bead types from Gilbert follow. The type
numbers refer to specific types in a general system of bead classification that has been worked out by R. K. Hart% and is soon to be
published in its entirety.
TYPE 1:(1 speeimen) Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace
bead of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture.
Tumbled.
TYPE 2:(1 specimen) Large, white, opaque, elongate olive-shaped
necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in
texture. Tumbled.
TYPE 3:(1 specimen) Large, white, opaque, round necklaee bead
of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. Tumbled.
TYPE 4:(38 speeimens) Large, white, opaque, barrel-shaped necklace bead of compound eonstruetion. The inner layer of glass has a
porcelain-like texture, while the outer layer has a slightly frosted appearance. Tumbled.
TYPE 5: (79 specimens) Medium, white, opaque, barrel-shaped
garter bead of compound construction. The inner layer of glass has a
porcelain-like texture, while the outer layer has a slightly frosted
appearance. Tumbled.
TYPE 6:(4 specimens) Medium, white, opaque, olive-shaped garter
bead of simple construction. The glass is poreelain-like in texture.
Tumbled.
TYPE 7:(2 specimens) Large, grayish-white, semitranslucent, oliveshaped necklace bead of simple eonstruetion. The glass has a frosted
appearance. Tumbled.
TYPE 8:(12 specimens) Large, light grayish-white, semitranslucent,
donut-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass has a
frosted appearance similar to No. 7. Tumbled.
TYPE 9: (3 specimens) Large, Peacock Blue, opaque, elongate
olive-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass has fine
lines running lengthwise with the bead, giving it a texture reminiscent
of stripped sugarcane. Tumbled.
TYPE 10:(56 specimens) Large, Peacock Blue, opaque, barrel-

i00

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is the same
as No. 9. Tumbled.
TYPE 11:(44 specimens) Medium, Peacock Blue, opaque, barre!shaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass is the same as
No. 9. Tumbled.
TYPE 12:(2 specimens) Large, Turquoise Blue, opaque, oliveshaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is porcelainlike in texture. Tumbled.
TYPE 13:(2 specimens) Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent,
olive-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. Tumbled.
TYPE 14:(2 specimens) Medium, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent,
olive-shaped garter bead of simple construction. Tumbled.
TYPE 15:(5 specimens) Medium, Cobelin Blue, opaque, bah’elshaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like
in texture. Tumbled.
TYPE 26: (1 specimen) Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace
bead of complex construction. The bead surface is covered with three
sets of three blue shipes which are twisted in an S-shape around the
bead. The white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. Twisted.
Tumbled.
TYPE 40:(1 specimen) Large, Bluebird Blue, translucent, eightfaceted necklace bead of mandrel-wound, pressed facet, simple construction. The surface of the glass sometimes appears to be frosted,
probably due to age.
TYPE 41:(1 specimen) Large, milk-glass, eight-faeeted necklace
bead of mandrel-wound, pressed facet, simple construction. The surface of thfs bead sometimes appears frosted, probably due to age.
TYPE 44:(1,013 specimens) Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped
garter bead of simple construction. The glass has a porcelain-like
texture. Tumbled.
TYPE 45: (196 specimens) Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped
garter bead of compound construction. The two layers of glass in this
bead are the same as those in bead Type 4. Tumbled.
TYPE 46:(511 specimens) Small, Peacock Blue, opaque, donutshaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass of this bead has
the sugarcane-like texture of bead Types 9, 10, and 11. Tumbled.
TYPE 47: (23 specimens) Small, Cobelin Blue, opaque, donutshaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass has a porcelainlike texture, and is the same glass as No. 15. Tumbled.
TYPE 48:(255 specimens) Small, dark Bluebh’d Blue, translucent,
donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass in this
bead is the same as Nos. 13 and 14. Tumbled.

EUROPEAN TIRADE GOODS

i01

TYPE 49:(69 specimens) Small, clear, donut-shaped garter bead
of simple construction. The glass of this bead is the same as that
of Nos. 16, 35, 36, 41, 42 and 48, in which specimens the surface
is frosted, apparently due to age. Tumbled.
TYPE 50: (891 specimens) Small, black, opaque, donut-shaped
garter bead of simple construction. The glass of this bead is porcelainlike in texture. Tumbled.
TYPE 51:(202 specimens) Small, red, opaque (outer layer), donutshaped garter bead of compound construction. The outer layer of
opaque glass is brick red, and the inner layer is a translucent light
green. This bead is generally referred to as "Comaline d’Aleppo."
Tumbled.
TYPE 58:(1 specimen) Large, milk-glass, translucent, round necklace bead of mandrel- or wire-wound, simple construction.
TYPE 54:(1 specimen) Large, milk-glass, translucent, olive-shaped
necklace bead of wire-wound simple construction.
TYPE 56:(10 specimens) Small, but long (bugle type, 9 mm. long
and 4 mm. in diameter), Brittany Blue, opaque, tube-shaped, probably a necklace bead, of simple construction. The glass of this bead
is porcelain-like in texture. Tumbled.
TYPE 57:(178 specimens) Small, red, opaque (outer layer), tubeshaped necklace bead of compound construction. The outer layer of
opaque glass is brick red and the inner layer is a translucent light
green. Tumbled.
TYPE 59:(1 specimen) Large, red, opaque (outer layer), tubeshaped necklace bead of compound construction. The outer layer of
opaque glass is brick red and the inner layer is a translucent light
green. Tumbled.
TYPE 60:(6 specimens) Small, Gobelin Blue, opaque, tube-shaped
necklace bead of simple construction. The glass has a porcelain-like
texture and is the same glass as No. 15 and No. 47. Tumbled.
TYPE 61:(89 specimens) Small, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent,
tube-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. Tumbled.
TYPE 62:(1 specimen) Small, Fern Green, opaque, tube-shaped
necklace bead of simple construction. Tumbled.
TYPE 66:(2 specimens) Small, black, opaque, tube-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass of this bead is porcelainlike in texture. Untumbled.
TYPE 67:(3 specimens) Small, red, opaque (outer layer), tubeshaped necklace bead of complex construct4on. The surface of the
bead is covered with three evenly spaced sets of stripes, each of

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

which is composed of two white stripes and, between these, a red
stripe. The inner layer is translucent light green. Tumbled.
TYPE 68:(1 specimen) Small, red, opaque (outer layer), tubeshaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the
bead is covered with three evenly spaced sets of stripes, each of
which is composed of two white stripes and, between these, a
chocolate brown shSpe. The inner layer is translucent light green.
Tumbled.
TYrE 69:(1 specimen) Small, dark amber, opaque, tube-shaped
necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is
TABLE 4.
Provenience of glass beads.
FEATURE
Bead
Type
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
26
40
41
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
53
54
56
57
59
60
61
62
66

1

3

2

4

5

6

7

8

1o

11

12

l~

~6~ ~2

1
1
11
36
2
1

1
1
11
2

12
14

3
2

5
2

4
7

1
8
2

11
1
1
3

1

1

1
1

1
9
16

2
4

31
10

3
2
1
2
1
1

4
4

3
5

1

1
1

1

1
1

1
361
48
176
10
112
40
198
58

79
19
54
6
28
11
55
23

335
67
193
5
74
12
111
72
1

3
47

i
9

16

7

2
30
1
3
2

1

1

42 105
5 37
16 47
1
8 24
5
4 15
5 22

78
13
21
1
7

13
3
4

!

1

1
1

6
18

2
3

1
!

1

2

i

i
7

2
62

i
6

6

2

24

11

2
1

1

1

3
1

2

1

6

21

2

1
1
1
38
79
4
2
12
3
56
44
2
2
2
5
1
1
1
1013
196
511
23
255
69
391
202
1
1
10
178
1
6
89
1
2

103

EUROPEAN T!~ADE GOODS

TABLE 4.
TABLE 4 (Continued)
Provenience of glass beads.
FEATURE

Bead
Type

1

67

68
69
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
164
TOTAL

2

3

4

5

2

6

7

8

10

11

12

15

~ ~
26 ~ ~
3

1

i

i
4
6
3
10
9
7
2
27
2

1
2
1
1
3
1
3
1

7
6
1
12
4
2
18

1
1
5
1
3

2
1
2
1

1
2
1
1

1

1
1
1

6
3
1

2
1
1
1
1
6 18
14
3 11
3
1229 354 1038 110 395 203

1
1
3
61

2
10

1
1
10

1

6
33

3

1

1
16
20
8
30
11
15
6
56
6
1
4
4
67
5 3453

covered with nine alternating red and white stripes which run
parallel to the long axis of the bead. Tumbled.
TYPE 76:(16 specimens) Large, black, opaque, donut-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture.
Tumbled.
TYPE 77:(20 specimens) Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent,
donut-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass of this
bead is the same as Type No. 13. Tumbled.
TYPE 78: (8 specimens) Medium, pearly-white, opaque, donutshaped necklace or garter bead of simple construction. Tumbled.
TYPE 79:(30 specimens) Small, Sky Blue, opaque, donut-shaped
garter bead of simple construction. Tumbled.
TYrE 80:(11 specimens) Small, Peacock Blue, translucent, donutto barrel-shaped garter bead of simple construction. Tumbled.
TYrE 81:(15 specimens) Small, Colonial Yellow to Brass colored,
opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The bead
has a sugar cane-like texture. Tumbled.
TYPE 82:(6 specimens) Small, Colonial Yellow to Brass colored,
translucent, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. Tumbled.
TYPE 83:(56 specimens) Small, Emerald Green, translucent, donutshaped garter bead of simple construction. Tumbled.
TYPE 84:(6 specimens) Small, Emerald Green, opaque, donut-

104

TEXAS

AIRCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

shaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass of this bead
sometimes has a cane-like texture. Tumbled.
TYPE 85:(1 specimen) Large, Emerald Green, translucent, barrelshaped necklace bead of simple construction. Tumbled.
TYPE 86:(4 specimens) Large, brick red, opaque, donut-shaped
necklace bead of compound construction. The outer layer of glass is
brick red, and the inner layer is translucent light green. This bead is
generally referred to as "Cornaline d’Aleppo." Tumbled.
TYPE 87:(4 specimens) Small, brick red over red, opaque, donutshaped garter bead of compound construction. Tumbled.
TYPE 164: (67 specimens) Medium, Bluebird Blue, translucent,
barrel-shaped garter bead of simple construction. Tumbled.
Remarks: The 51 bead types found at the Gilbert Site exhibit a
style range thought to be characteristic of 18th-century trade beads
in the southern plains. More specifically, it may be estimated on a
basis of bead styles that the major occupation of the Gilbert Site
was between 1740 and 1770.

105

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

MISCELLANEOUS EUROPEAN GOODS
by R. K. HARRIS and Curms D. TUNNELL
In addition to the tools, guns, and ornaments described above,
several other objects of European provenance were found at the
Gilbert Site. Grouped under the heading Miscellaneous European
Goods, these include a bail and several bail ears from brass kettles,
some horse trappings, metal scraps, and fragments of glass.
KETTLE BAIL EARS

No. of Specimens: 7
Provenience: Feature 1 (3), Feature 3 (2), Feature 7 (’2)
Illustrations: Figure 46, b-g
The heaviest bail ear (Fig. 46, g) is of cast brass. The lower end
consists of three lobes, each lobe pierced by a copper rivet. On the
interior a remnant of the sheet-brass body of the kettle is still
attached by the rivets. Above the three-lobed lower portion is a
rectangular extension with rounded corners which is perforated to
receive one end of the bail. Between the bail perforation and the
three-lobed lower part the body of the ear bulges outward so as toe
create a broad channel on the inside. Presumably the rim of the kettle
fitted into this channel. Maximum length of this specimen is 79 mm.;
maximum width of the lower portion is 80 mm.; maximum width of
the upper, rectangular part is 45 ram. The thickness is variable,
ranging from 9. mm. to slightly more than 3 mm. The attached sheetbrass remnant of the kettle body is approximately 0.2 mm. thick.
Two other large bail ears (Fig. 46, b, f) resemble one another.
Each is composed of five or six thicknesses of thin sheet brass (about
0.9. mm, thick) folded together into a rectangle. They are respectively 58 and 79 mm. high by 58 and 65 ram. wide. Each was
fastened to its kettle by two large copper rivets (these are still in
place in both specimens), and each has an oval perforation at the
top for insertion of the bail end. The two lower corners of both ears
are trimmed across, but their upper corners are bent over and
hammered down in "dog-ear" fashion. A similar bail ear from a
19th century site, 14 PO 9.4, in Kansas has been described and
illustrated by Wedel (1959: 195, P1. 19b), but it was attached with
iron, rather than copper, rivets.
A fragment consists of a dog-eared corner and part of the perforation for the bail. Made of four layers of sheet brass, it appears to
have come from a bail ear that was ahnost identical to the two
specimens described immediately above.

106

FIGURE 46.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Metal artifacts, a, bracelet; b-g, kettle bail ears.

Two small bail ears (Fig. 46, d-e), both from Feature 7, probably
are from the same vessel. They are made from a single thickness
of sheet brass and are rectangular in shape with the lower corners
trimmed off and the upper ones dog-eared. At the lower end of each

107

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

specimen are two small copper rivets for attachment to the vessel
wall, but in place of the usual perforation for insertion of the bail
end, there is a deep notch. From appearances these ears were mounted
in an upside down manner (in comparison with the others) as the
notches would not engage the ends of the bail if mounted in the
orthodox way. However, their exact position is not known. These
specimens are from 26 to 28 ram. wide; if straightened out (both
are bent) they would be slightly more than 40 mm. long.
The remaining bail ear (Fig. 46, e) was made by bending a
small iron rod into a loop and then hammering the two ends flat.
The rod is approximately square in cross section and is from 6 mm.
to 8 ram. wide. The flattened ends are spatulate in shape with pointed
tips; both ends are between 1 and 2 mm. thick with maximum width
of about 25 ram. Between the loop and the flattened ends the rod
sections bulge toward the outside, evidently to fit snugly around
the rim of the vessel. The bail ear of east brass described above is
bent in similar fashion.
KE2TLE

BAILS

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 3
This is a length of heavy iron wire about 5 ram. in diameter (approximately 4 gauge) that originally had a small loop bent into each
end. One of the loops is now missing.
Total length, from the bottom of the loops, was 44.0 era., from
which it can be calculated that the diameter of the kettle (or pail?)
to which the bail was attached was probably between 30 and 35 em.
HORSE

TRAPPINGS

No. of Specimens: 9 bridle fragments, 1 eoncho
Provenience: Feature 3 (9.), Feature 4 (2), Feature 5 (4), Feature
11 (coneho and 1 bridle fragment)
Illustrations: Figure 47
Included in the bridle trappings are two large chin-piece fragments, four pieces of cheek plate, one higo, or decorative jingler, and
one unidentifiable fragment from either a headstall or cheek plate.
The two chin-piece fragments (Fig. 47, a, d), which originally"
connected the cheek plates and were suspended below the horse’s
mouth, are rather elaborately formed. They are pierced with holes,
apparently for the attachment of the small decorative higos (Di Peso,

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

FmuR~ 47. Horse trappings, a, d, bridle headstalls; b, f, g, bridle cheek
plates; c, hJgo; e, bridle cannon; h, concho. The higo (c) is double scale.

1953: 194). On one (Fig. 47, d) a series of straight engraved lines
radiate downward from the upper border of the plate and bracket
each perforation along the bottom. The decorated side of this plate
undoubtedly faced outward when the bridle was in place. The other
chin-piece fragment (Fig. 47, a) is a crescent-shaped, flattened bar
of iron with a center flange projecting downward. The flange is

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

109

pierced with several holes arranged in a decorative pattern. This
specimen measures 100 mm. between the center of the holes for the
cheek-plate connection, at least 32 mm. wide at the center, and
approximatly 80 mm. in width near the cheek plate hole. Another
crescent-shaped fragment, 33 mm. wide, is pierced with holes spaced
at 9 mm. intervals. This plate has been cut and its exact length cannot
be determined, but judging from the curvature the size must have
been close to that of the specimen described above.
Four fragments of cheek plates (Fig. 47, b, e, f, g) were found,
two with the cannon still attached. Cheek plates are those portions
of the Spanish bridle which were alongside the lower jaw of the
bridled horse. The cheek plates, like the chin pieces, are provided
with means of attaching the higos. On three of the fragments, these
consist of holes punched in a flange extending downward from a
transverse bar, the latter connecting to the chin piece at one end
and to the cannon at the other.
Only one cheek plate (Fig. 47, g) is intact enough for measurement, and it is distorted. It is 68 mm. from the center of the hole for
admitting the chin piece to the cannon, which normally meets the
cheek plate at a right angle. The width is 29 mm. at the flange, and
6 ram. near the chin piece. The flange is perforated with four holes,
each approximately 4 mm. in diameter, spaced at about 7 mm. intervals along the crescent-shaped border of the extension.
The single higo (Fig. 47, e) found at Gilbert is a stylized representation of the fica or clasped human hand, a symbol employed
to ward off the evil eye (Di Peso, 1953: 210-211). This amulet was
extremely popular among colonial Spaniards and later among Mexicans for ornamental purposes. The specimen measures 23 mm. long
and 7 mm. wide at the "fist." Apparently it was attached by bending
the upper part to form a loop which passed through the holes of the
bridle plates.
One piece of bridle trapping cannot be positively identified. It is
probably a fragment of either a chin piece or a cheek plate. There
are three holes, 4 mm. in diameter, which are spaced along a lunate
border at 8 mm. intervals. This is characteristic of both plates as
described above.
A round brass coneho (Fig. 47, h), probably off a saddle, was evidently attached by passing a strap through two broad slits in its
center. A series of short, widely spaced lines provides additional
decoration. This concho is 44 mm. in diameter.

110

FIC.URE 48.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Sheet brass patch (a), rivets (b), and chipped glass (c).
METAL SCRAPS

Scraps of metal were found at all the features. It is apparent that
the inhabitants of the Gilbert Site placed a high value on metal and
that any piece they obtained was likely to be used and reused until
it became too small for further alteration. Over 300 scraps of copper,
approximately 100 fragments of iron, several pieces of lead, and two
fragments of sheet silver were found, most of it at Features 1, 3,
and 5.
Almost all of the brass scraps appear to have come from kettles
made of thin sheet brass. Many are evidently trimmings cut with
scissors, presumably residue, from making arrow points and other
artifacts from kettle brass. A number of sheet-brass fragments were
found with rivets or rivet holes in them (Fig. 48, a-b). The rivets
were made of thin strips of sheet brass. Evidently kettles with holes
in them were repaired by rivetting sheet-brass patches over the holes,
using homemade rivets.
Among the iron scraps are pieces of flattened gun barrels, kettle
bail fragments, and what is perhaps a medial section of a sword blade.
The two scraps of thin sheet silver both bear engraved scroll designs
reminiscent of the decoration on snuff boxes. The lead scraps are
nondescript.
GLASS FRAGMENTS

Flat Gl~s
No. of Specimens: 44
Provenience: Feature 1 (16), Feature 2 (3), Feature 3 (5), Fea-

111

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

ture 4 (4), Feature 5 (8), Feature 6 (1), Feature 7 (1), Feature 10
(2), Feature 19 (1), Feature 18 (2), Feature 20 (1)
Sherds of flat clear glass are probably pieces of mirrors traded to
the Indians by the French. On two fragments, what appears to be
silvering covered over with shellac adheres to one side of the glass.
One small sherd has the two numbers, 1 and 3, scratched into the
surface of one side. The flat glass sherds vary in thickness.
Bottle Glass
No. of Specimens: 24 green, 1 brown
Provenience: Feature 1 (6), Feature 2 (1), Feature 3 (9), Feature 4 (1), Feature 5 (3), Feature 17 (5)
Since most of the bottle sherds are small, bottle shapes cannot be
determined. The necks seem to have tapered toward the top, and the
bodies were straight for a distance of at least 65 mm. from the base.
Body diameter was about 100 ram. The bases were indented. The
bottles were almost certainly hand blown since the use of molds
was not common until after A.D. 1800. One neck sherd has stress
marks, a condition which results from reheating and stretching the
glass when a rim is hand finished.

Chipped Glass Fragments
No. of Specimens: 10
Provenience: Feature 1 (8), Feature 3 (1), Feature 7 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 48, c
Seven pieces of clear flat glass have been bifacially retouched into
points or knives. One sherd of clear, fiat glass and two green bottle
fragments have unifacial flaking along one edge which may be intentional retouch or wear from use as scrapers.

Indian Artifacts
Artifacts made by the Indians from metal and glass are described
in the preceding section. Except for gunflints, which are described
with the gun parts, all the artifacts made by Indians from native
materials are treated in this section. The major categories are: pottery
vessels, pipes, stone tools, and bone and shell artifacts.
POTTERY VESSELS
by Dee Ann Story,

BYRON BA1RBER, ESTALEE BABBER,

EVELYN

COBB,

HERSCHEL COBB, ROBERT COLEMAN, KATHLEEN GILIVlO1RE, R. K. HAP~IS,

and

NOBMA HOFFRICHTER

The Gilbert Site has yielded 2,221 fragments of native-made earthenware, most of which compare favorably with the ceramics described
for components of the Nortefio Focus (Duffield and Jelks, 1961:
36-40; Harris et al., 1965: 299-303). Indeed, the size of the collection
and the reasonably good associational data accompanying it (see
description of the features) provide an excellent opportunity for a
close study of pottery from a Nortefio Focus site. Since the Gilbert
pottery does represent such a valuable corpus of information, considerable time has been invested in the restoration of vessels because
of the conviction that vessels are more meaninghfl units of analysis
than sherds. Of the 2,221 sherds, 810 have been assigned to 47 vessels (Table 6). These vessels, however, represent varying degrees of
completeness, and the term has been applied to essentially whole
specimens (such as Fig. 63, a) as well as to interesting rim sherds
(such as Fig. 50, d). The remaining 1,411 sherds, mainly undecorated
fragments, surely represent many more vessels, but it has been impossible to accomplish their restoration or even to assign individual
sherds to particular vessels.
Both the vessels and the sherds have been divided into two
broad categories, decorated and undecorated. Within these (admittedly at times artificial) groupings, finer sortings have been made on
the basis of differences in the mode and style of decoration, in surface
finish, in paste characteristics, and, whenever possible, in vessel
shape. Decorative techniques represented in the collection are (in
descending order of frequency) engraving, incising, brushing, punctating, combing, pinching, and appliqu6ing. Surface finish varies
from well polished to poorly smoothed; slipping is quite rare. Paste
and temper show a great deal of variation and have entered prominently into the analysis. The two most common tempering agents are

113

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

~A AA AAA A,A A~
0

b

d
FIOISRE 49.

Womack Engraved designs A, B, C, and D.

TEXAS

114

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

shell and bone. These have been distinguished from one another
largely on the basis of their differing morphological characteristics
as revealed by microscopic examination. In addition, tests were sometimes made with a dilute solution of muriatic acid. While such tests
should be viewed with caution, it is significant that clearly recognizable examples of she!l temper from the site did consistently react to
the acid, while obvious examples of bone did not. Grog, the third
most common temper occurring in the collection, "includes any fired
day-product that is crushed and utilized as an aplastie in the potter’s
clay" (Porter, 1964: 521). In most eases this appears to be crushed
sherds. Fine sand particles appear in the paste of a good many sherds,
often without the presence of any other aplastic. Since it is not
clear whether or not the sand was intentionally added, these specimens are simply said to have a sandy paste. Vessel shapes, particularly as revealed in the restorations, have provided yet another useful
attribute for analysis. Included are at least two distinctive bowl forms
and a wide variety of jars.
Most of the descriptive groups resulting from an analysis of the
above-mentioned attributes are difficult to identify with established
types. The major exception is the engraved pottery, a large percentage
of which can be related to types Womack Engraved, Simms Engraved,
and Natchitoches Engraved. In addition, two tentative new types,
Womack Plain and Emory Punctated, along with a more inclusive categolT, Womack Ware, are introduced.
In the descriptions of these various groups there has been some
lumping, but an effort has been made to organize the collection in
such a manner that individual attributes can be studied. The distributional data are detailed in Tables 5 and 6 and generalized in
Tables 7 and 8.
DECORATED

CERAMICS

Engraved
WOMACK ENGI/AVED (Figures 50, 51, and 52, a-h)
Six vessels and 80 sherds are identifiable as Womack Engraved.
Conforming closely to the original definition of the type (Duffield
and Jelks, 1961: 36-39), these comprise exclusively small to mediumsized bowls with rounded shoulders and incurved rims. The one basal
fragment is disk-shaped and concave. Decoration in all instances is
confined to the upper portion of the vessel and consists of engraved
designs delimited by two (very rarely one) horizontal lines. The
upper line consistently appears just below the lip and the lower

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

115

one just below the shoulder. Four major design variations (Fig. 49)
have been previously recognized (ibid.: 37; Harris et al., 1965: 304).
Design A, the most common at Gilbert, consists of opposing, crosshatched triangles; Design B is a negative meandering scroll motif
with a ticked line running through the center of the scroll; Design C,
typically crude in execution, features sets of parallel, curved lines; and
Design D, similar in many ways to Design B, is a negative scroll with
crosshatched triangles as well as ticks suspended from the medial line.
It is difficult to be certain, but in many cases the decoration appears
to have been applied before firing, presumably after the vessel had
been hardened by sun-drying. In their initial definition of Wornack
Engraved, Duffield and Jelks included infrequent incising as charaeteristic of the type. Here these, along with one specimen deviating
in vessel form, have been placed in a separate category, termed
"Womack Engraved variants". The typical Womack E~graved of the
Gilbert Site, represented by six vessels and eight sherd groups, is described below.
Vessel I (Fig. 50, a). Fifteen sherds ( 1 from Feature 1 and 14 from
Feature 4) have been fitted together to restore almost half of this
vessel, the most nearly complete Womack Engraved bow! recovered
from the site. Two additional sherds, both from Feature 4, cannot be
affixed but are confidently attributed to this specimen. When complete, Vessel 1 had an inside oral diameter of approximately 9_,4 cm.,
an outside maximum diameter (at the shoulders) of about 26 cm., and
a height of between 13 and 15 cm. Thickness ranged from 0.5 cm. at
the lip to 1.0 era. at the base. The lip was flat to slightly rounded and
flush with the rim.
Identifiable as Design D, the engraved decoration on Vessel 1 begins about 1.0 cm. below the lip and continues downward some 5.0
em. to just beyond the evenly rounded shoulder. Flanking each scroll
are crosshatched areas each of which contains three blank, doublelined (i.e., concentric) circles. Each scroll is partitioned by a line running longitudinally through the middle. Suspended from the bottom
margin of this line are six (in one instance, seven) crosshatched triangles (apexes pointing downward) which alternate with a series of
upward-pointing tick marks. Judging from the surviving pol~ions of
the vessel, the scroll motif was repeated six times. Possibly the number
three, and multiples thereof, had particular importance to the potter
who man\fractured Vessel 1.
Fire clouds appear on both the exterior and interior surfaces. The
former varies in color from reddish buff to very dark brown with the
darker hue prevailing. By contrast, the interior surface is a rich red-

116

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FmUR~ 50. Womac/~ Engraved. a, Vessel 1; b, c, Vessel 2; d, Vessel 3;
e-h, Vessel 4. Exterior to left on profiles.

dish buff color showing an occasional dark fire cloud. The core is
gray, turning a burnt orange toward the edges. Neither surface is

INDIAN AI~TIFACTS

117

particularly well finished, and marks left by tools used to scrape and
smooth the vessel are common. Weathering out of shell particles has
further marred the vessel’s finish.
In addition to pulverized shell, the hard and compact paste contains an occasional piece of hematite and gn’og. Shell appears in sufficient abundance to suggest that it is an intentional additive.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 50 b-c). Heavily tempered with pulverized mussel
shell, this bowl is represented by 10 sherds, al! from Feature 1.
Roughly half of the rim has been restored, and there are five loose
body sherds but no basal fragments. Vessel 2 was rather small, perhaps about 10 cm. in height and 12 cm. wide at the mouth. Its wall
thickness ranged from 0.5 to 0.8 cm.
The Design A decoration of Vessel 2 consists of opposing, crosshatched triangles bounded by two horizontal lines which encircle the
upper portion of the vessel. Apexes of the upper set of tliangles point
downward and those of the lower set point upward. By and large, the
opposing triangles are offset, although on occasion the apexes match.
On this particular vessel, and on a complete Design A vessel from the
Womack Site (Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 35, Fig. 9, c) there is a tendency for every fourth lower triangle to align with an upper one. In
addition, the lower set of triangles on both vessels is slightly larger
than the upper set. The significance of these features is uncertain,
though the difference in size of the triangles could be related to the
sequence of decoration. That is, it suggests that the lower row may
have been applied before the upper one.
Both the exterior and interior surfaces of Vessel 2 are dark grayish
black. The core is dark gray-black occasionally changing to orangeish
toward the exterior. The outside surface is fairly well smoothed, but
scraping scars are stil! apparent on the interior surface. Paste texture
is smooth and compact with fine sand, bits of mica, and moderate
amounts of shell being present. Depressions left by leaching of the
shell temper are visible in the paste and on the surface.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 50, d). Consisting of 17 sherds from Feature 1, this
partially restored bowl now includes portions of the rim, shoulder,
and upper body. Two of the sherds, both from the shoulder area,
could not be attached but can be assigned with assurance to Vessel 3
on the basis of paste, design, and surface finish. Accurate size measurements of the original bowl cannot be given although it is apparent
that Vessel 3 had approximately the same dimensions as Vessel 1. The
existing wall fragments vary in thickness from 0.5 to 0.8 cm. The lip is
essentially flat and flush with the rim.
The engraved decoration, of Design A style, begins 0.6 era. below

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SO~ETY

the lip and continues downward for a distance of 5.0 cm. below the
lip. There is no discernible pattern in the matching of the triangles,
and the upper and lower rows are about the same size. The color of
both surfaces is predominately dark grayish brown with some firemottled areas appearing on the exterior. The paste is basically gray
and contains dark to light gray particles (evidently grog) as well as a
few reddish (probably hematite or siltstone) fragments. Some shell
appears to have leached out, perhaps coming from sherds used as
temper. On the whole, the paste of this vessel is coarse and moderately
compact. The exterior surface is eroded in places but appears to have
once been fairly well smoothed; the interior was less well finished and
has a sandy texture.
Vessel 4 (Fig. 50, e-h). This bowl, when complete, was perhaps
only slightly smaller than Vessels 1 and 3. It now consists of 17 sherds,
all from Feature 12. One of the sherds has not been attached; the remainder have been restored to form three rim fragments and a section
of the shoulder. Wall thickness varies between 0.6 and 0.8 em.; the
lip is flat to slightly rounded and flush with the rim. In one of the rim
sections (Fig. 50, e) is a small, round hole and, opposite this, traces
of a second hole. Both were drilled from the exterior surface and
probably were for crack lacing.
The Design A decoration on Vessel 4 begins 0.8 to 1.1 cm. below
the lip and continues downward 4.0 to 5.5 cm. It is rather crudely
done and, unlike the other examples of this design, the apexes of the
opposing triangles are matched. Dark brownish gray is the predominating surface color with fire clouds being most prominent on the
exterior. The center of the core is generally gray, bleeding out on the
edges to a bufflsh gray. Fine-grained sand and shell (most of the
latter having leached out) are major constituents of the paste. Both
the outside and the inside surfaces have been smoothed, and both
have a sandy texture.
Vessel 5 (Fig. 51, a-b). Three small body sherds and two larger
rim/shoulder fragments from: this Womack Engraved bowl were found
in Feature 3. This was evidently a rather small vessel, probably less
than 10 cm. high. Wall thickness varies from 0.5 era. at the lip to 0.7
cm. at the shoulder. The lip is flat and flush with the rim.
Undoubtedly a variation of Design A, the decoration consists of a
single row of small triangles whose apexes point toward the lip. Both
the bases and the tips of the triangles touch the lines which encircle
the vessel. The surface colors range from dark gray to black and the
core is a uniform dark gray. Finely pulverized shell has been added
as a tempering agent, and the paste on the whole is smooth, compact,

INDIAN AIRTIFACTS

119

FIGURE 51. Womac]~ Engraved. a, b, Vessel 5; c-e, Vessel 6; f-j, Sherd
Group 1; l~, l, Sherd Group 2; m-o, Sherd Group 3; p-r, Sherd Group 4; s-u,
Sherd Group 5; v, w, Sherd Group 6; x, Sherd Group 7. Exterior to left on
profiles.

and somewhat sandy. The exterior surface is well finished, the intenor surface much less so.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Vessel 6 (Fig. 51, c-e). Twelve sherds from Feature 3 appear to be
fragments of one vessel despite the fact that only limited restoration
was achieved. Their identification as Womack Engraved, however, is
somewhat tentative as the original lip is missing and a new one has
been formed by grinding. Most of the sherds attributed to Vessel 6
are from the rim/shoulder area and they display the characteristic
Womack shape. The flat, reformed rfin has interrupted the decoration,
making it difficult to identify the original design. Crosshatching appears
as the major element, and the layout suggests Design B or D. Certainly, it is not Design A. Surface colors are buff to gray-brown while
the core is gray-buff with many darkened areas. The origin of the
darkened areas-which sometimes appear as distinct particles and at
other times as discolored splotches-is unknown. Included in the paste
are fine grains of sand, bits of soft hematite, and, rarely, pieces of
bone.
Sherd Group 1 (Fig. 51, f-j). Finely pulverized shell temper and
Design A are the attributes common to this group of 22 Womack
Engraved sherds. They are typically small rim and/or shoulder fragments which cannot be assigned to individual vessels without fear of
duplication. In addition to the shell, some have tiny hematite pellets
or possible pieces of grog in the paste. Surface colors are gray-buff
to black, while the cores tend to be light to dark gray. Approximately
half of the specimens have a slightly sandy surface texture and paste.
The interior and exterior surface finish varies from poorly to well
smoothed.
Sherd Group 2 (Fig. 51, k-l). The 12 sherds included in this group
differ from the above only in that they lack shell temper. In each ease
the paste has a fine to medium-coarse, sandy texture. No other aplastic
can be recognized.
Sherd Group 3 (Fig. 51, m-o). Each of the 18 fragments included
in this category has traces of a Design A decoration and grog temper.
Six are rim pieces with the lip intact; the remainder are shoulder/body
sherds. Included in the paste of a few specimens are tiny white particles, probably shell or bone derived from crushed sherds used as
temper.
Sherd Group 4 (Fig. 51, p-r). Like the Group 1 sherds, these four
rim pieces are shell tempered. However, the engraved decoration on
each consists of a single row of triangles, apexes pointed upward toward the lip-a modification of Design A much like that described for
Womack Engrat~ed Vessel 5. Two of the Group 5 sherds (Fig. 51, p, r)
lack the upper horizontal line, while a third (Fig. 51, q) lacks crosshatching within the engraved triangles. All four are small sherds but

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

19,1

appear to be from vessels less than 10 cm. high. Perhaps the condensing of the design is related to the vessel size. If so, it would indicate
that the proportional area of decoration was of greater importance to
the potter than uniform representation of the motif.
Sherd Group 5 (Fig. 51, s-u). Quite nondeseript, these six sherds
cannot to clearly assigned to any of the four Womack Engraved designs even though each has some crosshatching. In addition, the
temper is uncertain. Three have paste characteristics quite similar to
those described for Vesse! 6 but cannot definitely be assigned to that
vessel. The other three have a fine, sandy paste. All are from the
shoulder area and display the distinctive curve of Womack bowls.
Sherd Group 6 (Fig. 51, v-w). The two sherds included in this
group are rim/shoulder fragments that appear to have a Design B or,
less likely, Design D deeoration, and which may be grog tempered.
Positive temper identification is made difficult by the very black cores.
In spite of their common features, it is probable that these sherds are
from different vessels.
Sherd Group 7 (Fig. 51, x). Represented by only one sherd apparently having a Design B decoration, this group is differentiated from
Group 6 primarily on the basis of the presence of shell temper. Additionally, the paste is somewhat less compact than that of the Group 6
sherds, and the interior and exterior surfaces are lighter (a mottled
gray-buff) in color.
Sherd Group 8 (Fig. 52, a-h). The 15 rim, shoulder, and upper body
sherds eomprising this group are identified as Wornack Engraved
prineipalty because each appears to have been derived from bowls
with rounded shoulders and ineurved rims. Moreover, each is shell
tempered and has remnants of an engraved design. Two of the sherds
seem to have crosshatching which could represent Design A, and four
could be from Design B or D vessels. The majority, however, have
decorative motifs which cannot be linked with any of the recognized
Womack designs. The paste is generally smooth and compact and
often somewhat sandy. Two of the Group 8 sherds (Fig. 52, c-d) have
a crack-lacing hole drilled from the exterior surface. The one intact
hole (Fig. 59., c) appears 1.2 em. below the lip and has a maximum
diameter of 0.8 em.
WO~ACK ENGRAVED VAmANTS (Figure 52, i-r)
Sixty sherds clearly representing four vessels are provisionally
labeled as variants of the Womack Er~graved type. Since the significance of these variations is not presently known, this category is
established primarily for descriptive convenienee.

1"22

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 52. Womac]~ Engraved and Womac]~ Engraved variants, a-h,
Womac]~ Engraved, Sherd Group 8; i, Womac]~ Engraved variant, Vessel 1;
j-o, Womac]~ Engraved variant, Vessel 2; p, Womac]~ Engraved varianl~,
Vessel 3; q, r, Womacl~ Engraved variant, Vessel 4. Exterior to left on profile.

Vessel 1 (Fig. 52, i). The most complete of the four vessels now
consists of 25 sherds, 18 of which have been fitted together. With one
exception, the fragments were recovered from Feature 2. The sole
specimen from Feature 5 could not be fitted to the others, but it can

INDIAN AIRTIFACTS

123

confidently be assigned to Vessel 1, nevertheless. When complete, this
bqwl was roughly 9 em. high, had an inside oral diameter of about 11
or 19. cm. and a maximum diameter (at the shoulder) of approximately 14 em. Unlike the typical Womack bowl the base is flat and the
shoulder is quite angular. All other characteristics are within the range
described for the type (Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 36-39). The design
is readily recognizable as type C, and the compact paste is tempered
with abundant, fairly coarse fragments of mussel shell. Surface colors
are from light to very dark reddish brown, while the core is generally
black, becoming reddish toward the exterior. The upper portion of the
bowl exterior has been well smoothed, but the lower part and much of
the interior are poorly finished. Thickness just below the lip is 0.5 cm.,
at the shoulder 1.0 era., at the midpoint on the body 0.7 ern., and at
the base 0.8 cm. The lip is very slightly rounded and flush with the
rim.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 52, j-o). This vessel, like the one described above,
appears to have been a small carinated bowl with an incurred rim
and angular shoulder. It now consists of 25 rim and body sherds, most
of which could not be fitted together. In addition to the rather unusual
shoulder area, the paste is atypically bone tempered, the interior surface is not smoothed (Fig. 52, o), and the engraved rim decoration,
while similar to Design A, is aberrant. Bounded by two horizontal
lines, this decoration consists of a single row of crosshatched ta’iangles,
the apexes of some pointed upward, others downward. Unexpectedly,
the triangles are arranged into groups or sets, with an undecorated
area at least 3 cm. wide separating each set. Probably the apexes of
the triangles comprising each set were alternately pointed toward the
lip and away from the lip. The exterior surface is welt to poorly
smoothed and quite strikingly fire-mottled, varying in color from black
to reddish buff. The interior and the core are of more uniform coloration, being brownish gray to black. Wall thickness varies from 0.4 to
0.8 cm.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 52, p). Eight sherds from Feature 7 have been joined
to form the upper portion of a vessel which displays the characteristic
Wornack rim and shoulder profile but which has an incised rather
than an engraved decoration. While easily identified as Design A, the
motif is somewhat unusual in that the apexes of the upper and lower
triangles are joined. Vessel 3 is too fragmentary for close measurement
although the oral diameter was probably between 13 and 14 cm., and
the over-all bowl height about 10 cm. Exterior and interior surfaces
are light tan and the core is a uniform gray-black. The fine, smooth
paste contains numerous cavities formed by weathered-out temper.

19,4

TEXAS

0

ARCHEOLOGICAL

2

4
=

SOCIETY

6
_

cm.

FIGURE 53.

Simms Engraved. a, b, Vessel 1; c, Vessel 2; d, e, rim sherds.

Similar leaching scars mar the vessel’s surfaces, neither one of which
has been well finished.
Vessel 4 (Fig. 52, q-r). Two sherds from Feature 1 are from the
shoulder area of a Womack-shaped bowl. Both bear remnants of a
boldly incised Design A. They have a fine, sandy paste containing tiny
bits of shell and an occasional piece of grog, and their surface coloration is tan to black. Their cores are a uniform dark gray-black. Vessel
size is impossible to approximate, but the wail thickness varies from
0.7 to 0.9 cm,
SIRIMS ENGRAVED (

Figure 53 )

This type, with its highly distinctive carinated bowl form, is represented at the Gilbert Site by two restored Vessels and two rim sherds
which are from two additional vessels.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 58, a-b). Twenty-eight potsherds from Feature 2
have been joined to form approximately two thirds of this small bowl;
the remaining one third has been filled in with plaster. Its evenly convex base, narrow (0.9 era.) rim and upward-pointing, diagonally

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

19,5

notched lip are characteristic of the Simms Engraved type. The interior
oral diameter is 14.5 cm., the maximum diameter (at the juncture of
the rim and the body) is 16.5 cm., and the height is 6.7 cm. The engraved decoration is confined to the rim zone and consists of two
opposing, slightly curved, ticked lines (Fig. 53, b). This motif is repeated four times with each set of curved lines being separated by
three nearly parallel lines. Interior and exterior surfaces are well
polished and a fairly uniform dark brownish black in color. The paste
is also dark, has a fine, compact texture, and is tempered with finely
pulverized shell.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 53, c). Comprised of 9.9 sherds from Feature 1, this
vessel is a less striking example of the Simms bow! form. The rim does
not turn inward as sharply as that of Vessel 1, nor is the juncture with
the lip as abrupt. Other features, including fine shell temper, shallow
lip notching, a slightly convex base, and a characteristic engraved design, are typical. Though less compressed, the rim decoration is re1T
similar to that described for Vessel 1. It is confined to a space between
1.7 and 3.0 cm. below the lip. Both surfaces are polished, although
the interior is less well finished than the exterior. Surface color is predominantly brownish gray with some mottled reddish and blackbrown hues.
Sherds (Fig. 53, d-e). Two small sherds clearly represent two more
Simms Engraved bowls. Each displays a sharply bent inward rim
which merges with an inward-pointing lip. Notching is not present and
both lips are thin and rounded. The curvature and wall thickness suggest that these sherds are from bowls considerably larger than either
Vessel 1 or 2. The decoration in each ease consists of two horizontal
ticked lines (0.6 cm. apm~ on both sherds) which either encircled the
rim or, more probably, were divided into four(?) sets. One sherd (Fig.
53, e) is a light tan color with a black core; the other (Fig. 53, d) is
dark brownish black with a black core. Both have a fine, compact
paste with possible grog and shell (the shell may be from crushed
sherds) temper. Exterior surfaces are well smoothed, interior ones
less so.
NATCHITOCHES ENGRAVED (Fignre 54, a-b)
Natchitoches Engraved, generally regarded as one of the diagnostic
pottery types of the historic Caddo Indians (Webb, 1945: 63-64; Suhm
and Jelks, 1962: 113-114), is known at the Gilbert Site fi’om nine
sherds, eight of which have been fitted together to form the lower
portion of a rather large-bodied bottle (Vessel 1). It appears to have

19,6

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 54.
Natchitoches Engraved and Natchitoches Engraved variants.
a, b, Natchitochcs Engraved, Vessel 1; c-g, Natchitoches Engraved variant,
Vessel 1; h-k, Natchitoches Engraved variant, Vessel 2; l, NatchiLoches En.graved variant, Vessel 3; m-aa, Natchitocbes Engraved variant, Vessel 4;
bb, Natchitoches Engraved variant, Vessel 5. Exteriors to left on profiles.

127

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

been similar in both shape and decoration to one illustrated in Suhm
and Jelks (1962: P1. 57, A).
Folded scrolls bisected by ticked medial lines and flanked by crosshatched areas, as well as by negative disks, make up the surviving engraved design. The temper is finely pulverized shell, although tiny
bits of hematite and perhaps some grog can also be recognized in the
paste. Surface colors vary from reddish to grayish brown while the
Core is a uniform light gray. The interior surface is smoothed and the
exterior one is fairly well polished. Wall thickness ranges from 0.5 to
0.8 cm.
NATCHITOCHES VARIANTS

(Figure

54, c-bb)

An interesting group of 69 sherds from five vessels are quite relniniscent of Natchitoches Engraved; however, when examined closely
they differ from that type in design layout and execution as well as in
some paste characteristics. The significance of these seemingly minor
differences is not clear, but perhaps these vessels represent local copies
0f Natehitoches Engraved, or variations not yet recognized for the
type.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 54, c-g). Found scattered over Features 1, 3, and 4
are 9.0 sherds assignable to one vessel, evidently a small bowl or very
wide-mouthed jar. Although a nmnber of these sherds could be ftted
together, the lower and upper portions of the vessel could not be
joined. None of the lip is intact, but the outflaring rim appears to have
been low (between 2.0 and 2.5 cm.) and to have formed an almost
continuous recurve with the body wall which in turn gradually merged
with the slightly flattened base. Juncture of the rim and body is emphasized by a narrow (0.3 to 0.4 cm. wide) band or fillet formed
between two deeply engraved, ticked lines. The oral diameter is
estimated at about 13 cm. and the vessel height is less confidently
approximated at between 8 and 9 cm.
Though incompletely preserved, the rather crude, engraved decoration clearly differs from the scroll motif typical of Natchitoches Engraved. It extends over all of the body and consists primarily of panels
comprised of a series of blank disks outlined by both hachuring and
crosshatching. A vertical ticked line evidently separated each panel.
Unlike Natchitoches Engraved bowls (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 57, D,
F-K)-and, indeed, at least two of the variant forms at Gilbert-the
rim is not extensively decorated. Curiously, the lip is fractured (by
percussion chipping?) and somewhat worn. In addition to the fillet
mentioned above, there is a single engraved line encircling the vessel
just below the lip. Small triangles extend upward from this line.

19,8

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

The compact, but rather coarse paste of Vessel 1 contains a number
of white, gray, and black particles-possibly pulverized bone. A petrographic analysis made by B. J. Scull and Stanley B. McCaleb of
the Sun Oil Company Laboratory, Richardson, Texas, revealed the
mineral content of one sherd to be, in descending order of abundance,
montmorillinite, quartz, orthoclase, collophane, hematite, and limonite.
Fire clouds are quite evident on the exterior which varies in color
from grayish brown to black. The interior is a uniform gray-brovcn and
the core is light to dark gray. The exterior is eroded in places but appears to have been polished; by contrast, the interior is poorly
smoothed.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 54, h-k). Eighteen sherds from Feature 3 comprise
this vessel, apparently a large bottle similar in shape to the one good
example of Natchitoches recovered from the site. Restored portions inelude a large section of the body and about half of the base. One of
the unattached sherds (Fig. 54, h) has a narrow fillet which is presumed to mark the juncture of the rim and body. No over-all vessel
dimensions can be given, but the wall thickness is between 0.4 and 0.6
era. while the base reaches a maximum thickness of 1.3 era.
The engraved decoration covers all of the body and consists of
folded scrolls flanked by blank disks and hachured areas. In concept
it is close to that of the Natchitoches type, falling short only in execution and failure to convey fully the negative design effect. Traees of a
white substance, possibly intentional pigment, can be seen in a few of
the engraved lines. Both the exterior and interior surfaces are polished
and vary in color from light to dark gray, almost black. The core is
gray, and the paste is very firm with fine sand and perhaps a few tiny
bits of shell.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 54, 1). This vessel is represented by nine sherds (eight
from Feature 7 and one from Feature 4) which have been fitted together to form a section of the rim and a small portion of the upper
body. The lip is badly damaged (perhaps intentionally chipped) but
appears to have been rounded and turned outward while the rim is
markedly concave. Since so little of the body was recovered, the overall shape and size are uncertain, except that the rim form suggests a
wide-mouthed jar or bowl.
The engraved rim decoration deviates from that described for the
Natchitoches type (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 113). Instead of the typical
rectilinear pattern with horizontal ticked lines, there are alternating
sets of chevrons filled with blank disks and hachured areas. Faint
traces of what seems to be red pigment are present in and about several of the engraved lines. All that remains of the body decoration are

129

INDIAN At/TIFACTS

several blank disks flanked by hachured lines-possibly remnants of a
design similar to that described for Vessel 2.
Surface colors range from black to gray and the core is a uniform
dark gray. No obvious tempering material can be recognized, although
unidentified dark particles are abundant in the compact, slightly sandy
paste. Both the exterior and interior surfaces are well smoothed, and
the wall thickness is between 0.6 and 0.8 em.
Vessel 4 (Fig. 54, m-aa). Twenty-one rim and body sherds seem to
belong to Vessel 4, a small bowl with an outflaring rim. Itim diameter
is estimated at between 12 and 14 em. and the over-all height at between 10 and 11 era. A narrow (0.3 to 0.4 cm. wide) fillet formed
between two deeply engraved lines appears at the juncture of the
rim and body. The lip, like that of Vessel i and Vessel g, is badly
damaged but was probably rounded and outturned. For reasons not
readily apparent, the broken edges of the lip of this vessel, as well as
that of Vessel 1, are worn smooth.
Engraved ehew’ons outlined by crosshatching decorate the rim
while scrolls flanked by crosshatched areas and blank disks adorn the
body. The body decoration was apparently divided into panels each
of which was separated from one another by a wide (generally 0.8
em.), vertical band which tapers to a point just below the rim. Surface colors vary from black to gray-brown and the core is uniformly
black. A rather thick, sooty substance appears on the interior surface
of the rim and suggests that this bowl, unlike any of the other engraved vessels found at Gilbert, was used in cooking. The exterior
surface is polished and the interior one is well smoothed. Numerous
fragments of grog appear as the major tempering agent. Wall thickness is 0.6 era. just below the lip, 0.5 era. at about midpoint on the
body, and 0.9 era. near the juncture of the body and the base.
Vessel 5 ( Fig. 54, bb ). One body sherd with portions of an engraved
scroll motif outlined by hachuring is tentatively identified as a variant
of the Natchitoches Engraved type. An occasional piece of grog and
fine shell may be present in the compact, slight sandy paste. The well
smoothed exterior and interior surfaces are dark gray in color and the
core is a lighter shade of the stone hue. Wall thickness is 0.8 em.
N’IISCELLANEOUS

ENGRAVED

(Figures

55 and 56, a-q)

Included in this category are four very incompletely restored vessels
and 37 small rim and body sherds, all of which bear traces of an engraved decoration. The sherds are typically nondescript and do not
preserve much of the design nor the vessel form. While more can be

130

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 55. Miscellaneous engraved, a-g, Vessel 1; h-q, Vesse! 2; r, Vessel
3; s-w, Vessel 4. Exterior to left on profiles.

discerned from the partial vessels, none possesses a combination of
attributes readily identifiable with an established type.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 55, a-g). This vessel is known from 17 sherd~, 11
(10 from Feature 3 and one from Feature 4) of which have been
joined to form a portion of the rim and upper body. It appears to have

INDIAN A]RTIFACTS

131

been a large bowl (oral diameter of about 20 era. ) with a convex rim
and body which merge to form an even curve. The lip is flat and flush
with the rim. The deeply engraved decoration, evidently restricted to
the upper part of the bowl and repeated several times, consists of
concentric, sometimes ticked, eireles. In addition, a ticked line encircles the rim just below the lip. Both surfaces are well smoothed and
vary in color from light, reddish brown to brownish black. Dark fire
clouds are particularly apparent on the exterior. The paste is dark to
light gray in color, very hard and moderately fine in texture, and
tempered with finely pulverized bone. Wall thickness is from 0.4 to
0.6 era.
In general shape and decoration this vessel is similar to Patton
Engraved (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 117). However, it lacks the characteristic sandy feeling of Patton vessels and has a somewhat unusual design layout for that type.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 55, h-q). Although represented by 29 sherds (one
from Feature 1, 10 from Feature 3, one from Feature 4, and 17 from
Feature 6), very little of this vessel could be pieced together. Consequently, the shape is uncertain; however, the convexity of the sherds
suggests a small vessel. The lip is thinned and flush with the rim. Two
deeply engraved, ticked lines appear below the lip (Fig. 55, h); the
remainder of the design seems to have consisted of ticked horizontal(?) bands and perhaps widely shaped concentric circles. Vesse!
9. is quite well polished on both surfaces and has a hard, compact
paste which contains finely pulverized shell and an occasional piece
of siltstone. The exterior surface varies in color from black to reddish
brown while the interior one is a uniform reddish buff. Wall thickness
is between 0.5 and 0.6 cm.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 55, r). Four sherds from Feature 3 have been joined
to restore a portion of the rim and upper body of this shell-tempered
vessel. It appears to have been a small jar with an outflaring rim, constricted neck, and, less certainly, a globular body. The lip is slightly
rounded and flush with the rim, and the oral diameter is estimated at
about 8 cm. Remnants of an engraved decoration, including a concentric, ticked circle, appear just below the neck. Surface and core
colors are various shades of gray, and the wall thickness is between
0.8 and 1.0 cm. Vessel 3 is thick and poorly finished.
Vessel 4 (Fig. 55, s-w). This vessel also appears to have been a
small, poorly made jar. It now consists of two rim sherds, two body
sherds, and one large base sherd, all from Feature 2. The lip is
essentially fiat and flush with the rim and a raised fillet marks the
juncture of the rim and body. The base (Fig. 55, w), is disk-shaped,

132

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 56. Miscellaneous engraved and incised sherds, a-j, engraved Sherd
Group 1; k, engraved Sherd Group 2; l-o, engraved Sherd Group 3; p-q,
engraved Sherd Group 4; r-w, incised Sherd Group 1; x-z, incised Sherd
Group 2; a¢, bb, incised Sherd Group 3. Exterior to left on profiles.

concave, and slightly thicker than the vessel walls. Very crudely engraved vertical, horizontal, and diagonal lines seem to have covered

133

INDIAN AIRTIFACTS

all of the rim and body. Numerous dark particles, perhaps hematite
pellets, appear in the paste which, on the whole, is rather sandy. The
interior surface is quite irregular while the exterior one is poorly
smoothed. Surface colors are from gray-black to gray-brown.
Sherd Group 1 (Fig. 56, a-j). Eighteen rim and body sherds with
traces of engraved designs are shell tempered. Three of the rim pieces
(Fig. 56, a, b) are possibly from one carinated bowl with a vertical
rim and everted, slightly thickened lip. Two horizontal lines, one just
below the lip and the other just above the shoulder, are present on
each of these sherds. A fourth rim fragment (Fig. 56, e) possibly from
a spool-necked bottle has hachured triangles suspended downward
from two engraved lines. A fifth, much smaller rim sherd (Fig. 56, d)
has traces of red pigment in a ticked line. The remaining 13 sherds are
nondistinctive and may even include some fragments from Womack
Engraved vessels.
Sherd Group 2, (Fig. 56, k). Each of the two small sherds included
in this group is heavily tempered with grog. One has remnants of a
crosshatched design and the other has portions of a ticked scroll motif.
Sherd Group 3 (Fig. 56, 1-o). The 10 engraved sherds comprising
this group have sandy pastes containing some grog as well as unidentified dark particles. The edge of one is worn and may represent
portions of a reformed rim. Another (Fig. 56, n) is a small rim fragment which has a deeply engraved design consisting of a wavy band
and, below this, a series of vertical lines. None of the remaining sherds
exhibits any feature of particular interest.
Sherd Group 4 (Fig. 56, p-q). The six sherds making up this category also have a sandy paste, but, unlike the above, they contain some
hematite particles. None is very large and little can be said of vesseJ
shape or design.
Incised

Ninety-eight sherds from the site have portions of incised decorations. No significant restoration could be accomplished, and the majority of the incised sherds are miscellaneous body fragments. Three
groups, however, can be recognized on the basis of differences in the
aplastie used as temper.
Sherd Group 1 (Fig. 56, r-w). The 80 sherds included in this group
are tempered with crushed mussel shell. In general the paste is contorted and the shell is coarse and moderately abundant. Two of the
sherds are basal fragments (Fig. 56, w), one is a rim piece, and one
(Fig. 56, r) is a fragment of a rivet type handle; the remainder are

134

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

body sherds. Although no particulars of vessel shape can be discerned,
it is quite probable that most Group 1 sherds are from jars. The incised decorations appear to have been simple, consisting principally
of more or less parallel lines arranged into straight, slightly concentric,
diagonal, and radiating patterns. There are four examples of crosshatching (for example, Fig. 56, s) and the incised lines on the handle
fragment form a crude chevron motif. Width of the incised lines varies
from rather narrow (Fig. 56, s, v) to moderately broad (Fig. 56, t, u).
On several of the sherds the decoration has been smoothed over; however, on most the slightly mounded margins of the incised lines are
preserved. The exterior surfaces are from poorly to well smoothed.
Surface colors range from buff to dark gray and a number of the
shex’ds show indications of having come from vessels used in cooking.
Sherd Group 2 (Fig. 56, x-z). Fifteen of the incised sherds seem to
be tempered with pulverized bone. Of these, nine are body fragments
(Fig. 56, z) quite similar in decoration and other details to the Group
1 incised sherds. The remaining six Group 2 sherds, all from Feature
5, are small rim and shoulder fragments evidently from carinated
bowls with incurving rims (Fig. 56, x, y). At least two vessels appear
to be represented. Very little of the over-all design can be determined,
but specific decorative elements include a concentric circle ( Fig. 56, x),
horizontal lines flanking a blank disk (Fig. 56, y), and crosshatching.
Sherd Group 3 (Fig. 56, aa-bb). This group is comprised of three
sherds with grog temper. Two (Fig. 56, aa, bb) are rim fragments;
one (Fig. 56, aa) with the lip intact appears to have been a vessel
with a high, slightly outflaring rim. Both rim sherds bear traces of very
widely spaced crosshatched lines. Their surfaces are rather poorly
smoothed and buffish in color. The third Group 3 sherd is a tiny body
fragment with a single incised line.
Punctated
The 18 punctated sherds recovered from the Gilbert Site are rim
fragments, most with the lip intact. It is probable that these sherds
are from jars, the bodies of which may have been decorated by other
techniques, particularly incising. Like the incised sherds, they can be
subdivided into several groups on the basis of variations in temper.
Sherd Group 1 (Fig. 57, a-d). Crushed shell temper is the most distinctive attribute of this group of 13 sherds. Ten are slightly outflaring
rim fragments having one row of diagonal, gash-like punctations 1.7
era. below the rounded lip (Fig. 57, a, b). On two of these the punctations have been smoothed over, while on the others the clay is

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

135

FIGURE 57. Punctated, punctated-incised, and brushed-punctated pottery.
a-d, punctated Sherd Group 1; e, punctated Sherd Group 2; f, punctated
Sherd Group 4; g, Emory Punctated, Vessel 1; h, Emory Punctated, Vessel
2; i, Emory Punctated, Vessel 3; j-o, brushed-punctated vessel. Exterior to
left on profiles.

mounded about one or, less often, both sides of punetations. Two of
the remaining three sherds lack the lip. Each has a single row of short,

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

closely spaced punctations formed by forcing an implement into the
plastic clay at a slight angle (Fig. 57, e). When viewed in cross seetion the punetated areas on both sherds are coneavo-eonvex, the concavity being on the exterior, the convexity on the interior. The well
defined, groove-like concavity, is 0.8 cm. wide and must have encircled
the vessel. The exterior bulge is less easily delineated but is approximately l0 cm. wide.
The last of the Group i sherds (Fig. 57, d) is also from the lower
portion of a rim. It has two small, almost square punetations which
have been smoothed over. In general, all of the Group 1 sherds are
rather poorly finished and vary in surface color from buff to nearly
black. The interior surface of five have carbonaceous encrustrations
suggesting that they are from vessels used to cook foods.
Sherd Group 2 (Fig. 57, e). The two Group 2 punctated sherds
are bone tempered and possibly from the same vessel-evidently
a jar with a high vertical rim and a slightly outflafing, rounded lip.
Both have a single row of punctations formed by pressing a blunt
implement into the clay at a sharp angle, 0.8 cm. below the lip. The
interior surfaces are black and sooty, while the exterior ones vary in
color from black to buff.
Sherd Group 3. Only one of the punctated sherds, apparently a
body fragment, is definitely grog tempered. It is covered with small,
randomly placed punctations which have been smoothed over.
Sherd Group 4 (Fig. 57, f). The fourth and last group of punctated
sherds included two small rim pieces with everted and crudely
thickened lips and a row of squarish punetations 1.9 em. below the
lip. Probably from the same vessel, both have a very black core
which makes temper identification difficult. However, some quartz
sand and tiny pellets of hematite, along with a few light particles
which may be pieces of grog and/or bone, can be recognized in the
paste. On the larger of the two Group 4 sherds (Fig. 57, f) an
exterior bulge and an interior groove-like concavity coincide with
the row of punetations.
Punctated-Incised
EMORY

PUNCrATED

(Figure

57, g-i)

Twelve sherds from the site have one or two rows of punctations
at the juncture of the rim and body and, on the body and suspended
from the punctations, a series of essentially vertical, incised lines.
These sherds and, less certainly, some of the incised, punctated, and
brushed specimens described elsewhere, seem to fall well within the

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

137

range of a tentative new type Emory Punctated. Although the name
has appeared in print (Harris et al., 1965: 299), no detailed description has yet been published for the type. R. K. Harris, the first to
recognize the type, has provided the following definition for Emory.
PASTE
Temper: Sand, sand and shell, sand and clay, or sand and bone
in varying quantities.
Texture: Varies with the tempering agent used; when the temper
is sand or when sand is dominant, the paste is smooth and
compact; when clay is dominant, the texture tends to be
rough and compact.
Color: Generally black to gray cores, and tan, brown or grayish
buff exteriors. Fire clouds appear on some vessels.
Surface finish: On vessels with only rows of punctations below
the rim, the exterior body is usually smoothed. On others the
body is partially or entirely covered with brushing or incising.
Interiors vary from poorly to moderately well smoothed.
FORM
Wall thickness: Ranges from 3 to 12 mm., average 5 or 6 mm.
Lip: Rounded, bent outward slightly.
Base: Convex on small vessels and flat on large ones.
Vessel shape and size: Occurs only in the form of jars. Some
bodies are globular, others squat. Vessel capaeity varies from
an estimated one-half gallon to one gallon.
DECORATION
Treatment: Punetating, incising, and brushing.
Designs: Some vessels have only punctations arranged into One
to four rows around the vessel, usually just below the lip. If
brushing is present, it may occur ahnost anywhere on the vessel, from the lip to the base. If incising is present, it usually
consists of straight to slightly curved lines extending from below
the rim to the base or to about the middle of the body. Punetations are often combined with either incising or brushing, and
on some vessels all three decorative techniques are utilized.

CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION
Emory Punctated vessels and sherds have been found primarily
at Nortefio Focus sites but occur less frequently at late Caddo
sites. Known occurrences presently include the Womack Site
in Lamar County, the historic component at the Sanders. Site
in Lamar County, the Sam Coffman Site in Red River County,

138

TEXAS

AI~CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

and the Roseborough Lake Site (Fort St. Louis de Kadohadacho?) in Bowie County. In addition, it is probable that
some of the small punetated, incised, and brushed sherds
found at the Pearson Site (Duffleld and Jelks, 1961: 39) belong
to this type.
ESTIMATED ACE
This eeramie type is protohistoric and historic in time and appears to have lasted until at least the middle or latter part of
the 18th century.
Since Emory Punctated is a new type and the authors are not
so eonversant with the pertinent comparative material as might be
desired, only the punetated-ineised sherds from Gilbert are definitely identified as Emory. These ceramies, from three vessels, make up a
discrete group in terms of temper, mode, style of deeoration, and,
less certainly, shape. Although quite ineomplete, eaeh of the Emory
vessels is briefly deseribed below.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 57, g). This vessel is represented by a single sherd,
a small pieee from the lower rim and upper body area. It has a
single row of small, diagonal punetations which eneireled the vessel at the juneture of the rim and body. Suspended h’om this row
is a series of slightly curved, incised lines. The paste is quite friable
and contains many eavities, holes left when the shell temper leached
out. Both surfaees are poorly smoothed. The exterior is light gray in
color and the interior is dark gray. Wall thickness is 0.6 em.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 57, h). The second Emory vessel from the site is
known from two sherds whieh have been fitted together to form a portion of the rim and upper body of a jar. The rim is markedly outflaring while the lip is flat and somewhat everted. Two rows of
small, diagona! punetations appear between 1.3 and 2.3 em. below
the lip. Deeply ineised, slightly curved lines extend from these punetations down the vessel body for an undetermined distance. Coineident
with the punctated area is an exterior bulge about 1.2 era. wide and
an exterior groove 1.1 era. wide. The paste of Vessel 2 is compact,
slightly sandy, and tempered with a moderate amount of erushed
shell. A thiek, sooty substance blankets the interior surface and appears as small patches on the exterior surface. Wall thickness varies
from 0.5 to 0.6 em.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 57, i). Nine rim and body sherds have been joined
to form a section of the upper part of this vessel, a jar with low,
outflaring rim and weakly tapered, everted lip. Two centimeters below the lip, where the body and rim curve join, there is a horizontal

139

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

row of lightly smoothed-over punctations. Beginning at different
points below this row are downward-radiating lines which only partially covered the vessel body (a minimum of 5.6 era. below the
punctations). The smooth, compact paste has finely pulverized shell
temper. Both surfaces are gTayish buff in color with fire clouds and
carbonaceous staining being present on the exterior. Neither surface
is well finished and numerous horizontal striations can be observed. A
slight, rounded depression on the interior provides a quite tenuous
suggestion of the paddle and anvil technique. Interestingly, there is
a large, shell-tempered body sherd (Fig. 62, 1) from the same feature
as these sherds which could possibly be from the lower undecorated
portion of Vesse! 3. This sherd displays more definitive paddle and
anvil sears.
Brushed-Punctated
The 19 brushed-punctated sherds recovered from the site were
found in two features (13 in Feature 1, 6 in Feature 4) and can be
assigned to a single vessel (Fig. 57, j-o). Although no base sherds
are included, it is evident that this vessel was a medium-sized jar
with a high outflaring rim, a flat lip, and a somewhat squat body. Its
oral diameter is estimated at 16 era. and its height at 18 era. The
exterior of the rim and body are covered with horizontal brush marks
presumably made by dragging grass or small twigs across the plastic
clay. Where the rim and body join, approximately 3.7 era. below the
lip, there m’e two rows of horizontal stick punctations, clearly made
after the vessel had been brushed. The interior surface has been
rather well smoothed but is lumpy, apparently reflecting the coarseness of the underlying paste particles. The identity of these particles
is difficult because of the darkness of the core; however, they may
be pieces of grog. In addition, the paste contains fine quartz sand and
is quite compact. Wall thickness is 0.7 em. and surface colors range
from gray-buff to black with the latter hue resulting from cooking
stains.
While this vessel is within the range of variation of Emory Punctared, it is not so typed. Iteasons for this reservation include the differences between this vessel and three from Gilbert that are called
Emory, as well as its similarity with a previously defined type,
Boothe Brushed (Suhm, 1955: 16-20).
Brushed-Combed
One of the most unusua! vessels recovered from the site is a partially restored jar (Fig. 58, a-b) which is covered with brush marks

140

TEXAS

ARCHEOLO~CAL

SOCIETY

FIc~F,~ 5 8. Brushed-combed and brushed pottery, a, b, brushed-combed
Vessel 1; c, brushed Vessel 1; d-h, brushed Sherd Group 1; i, j, brushed
Sherd Group 2. Exterior to left on profiles.

141

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

as well as small, sometimes overlapping, incised lines. The brushing
is random, at times being horizontal and at other times diagonal and
vertical, and appears to have extended from the shoulder area over
most of the body. From immediately above the brushing to approximately 1.5 cm. below the lip the jar is covered with innumerable
small striations (generally about 0.4 cm. long) possibly made by a
fine-toothed or selTated implement. Hesitantly, this technique is referred to as combing as the short incisions are far too narrow and
numerous to be labeled punctations. At first glance the "comb" marks
appear to be cordmarks; however, upon close inspection it is clear
that they are not cordmarks nor any other textured decoration made
with a wrapped or carved paddle.
Approximately one fourth of the jar has been restored, with 36 of
the 46 sherds representing this vessel having been fitted together. It
has a constricted neck, a high, outflaring rim, and an irregular, though
essentially flat and flush, lip. A prominent bulge marks the shoulder
area and the body seems to have tapered rather sharply toward the
base. The outside oral diameter was 32 cm. and the over-all height
was probably in excess of 35 cm. In view of the size of this vessel,
the wall thickness is a surprisingly thin 0.5 to 0.6 cm. The smooth
but friable paste is tempered with moderate amounts of mussel shell.
Black, sooty, cooking stains blanket the interior surface and are fairly
common on the exterior surface. Where free of these discolorations
the exterior varies from grayish to reddish buff. Being light to dark
gray, the core is more uniform in color. The interior is smoothed
while the exterior is covered with decoration except for just below
the lip where the vesse! has been poorly smoothed.
Brushed
Eighty-five sherds in the collection are brushed only. Some, of
course, could be from vessels also decorated by other techniques,
while others are probably from vessels with all-over brushing. Ineluded are one partially restored vessel and three sherd groups.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 58, c). Seven rim and body sherds have been joined
to form roughly one third of this vessel, a rather deep, earinated-like
bowl. It has a gently rounded shoulder, a rather low inward- then
upward- pointing rim, and a tapered, slightly everted lip. The body
wall appears to have formed an even curve with the base. Outside
oral diameter is estimated at between 13 and 14 cm., height at between 11 and 12 cm. Diagonal and vertical brush marks cover all of
the body exterior. The rim and shoulder area, as well as much of the
inner surface, are badly eroded but appear to have once been well

142

TEXAS AI/CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

smoothed. Numerous, rather coarse particles of crushed mussel shell
appear in the contorted, compact paste. Surface colors range from
black to a deep orangeish red while the core is reddish black. Wall
thickness is 0.5 cm. at midpoint on the body, 0.7 cm. at the shoulder,
and 0.2 cm. at the lip.
Sherd Group 1 (Fig. 58, d-h). Comprised of 45 specimens, this
sherd group is distinguished by the presence of shell temper. Included are 36 body fi’agments (Fig. 58, d-g). The largest and most
interesting of the Group i specimens (actually five sherds glued together, Fig. 58, d) is from the rim of what appears to have been
a rather wide-mouthed jar with a high, outturned rim and a fiat,
flush lip. Deep, slightly diagonal brush marks appear about 1.5
cm. below the lip and probably covered all of the body of this jar.
None of the remaining Group 1 sherds displays any feature of particular interest.
Sherd Group 2 (Fig. 58, i-j ). This group of 29 sherds is differentiated
from the other brushed specimens solely on the basis of the presence
of bone temper. All but one - a base fi/agment - are from body areas
so that little can be determined of vessel shape or orientation and
extent of the brushing. Five sherds, all possibly from the same pot,
do merit special mention. In addition to what appear to be crude,
partially obliterated brush tam’ks, each of these sherds has an occasional impression suggestive of cordmaking (Fig. 58, j). Positive
identification, however, is not possible.
Sherd Grottp 3. The four sherds making up this category have compact, very dark cores which makes recognition of constituents in the
paste virtually impossible without retiring. Each is a small body
fragment, the exterior of which is completely covered by brushing.
The interiors are moderately well smoothed.

Combed
The exterior surfaces of two small sherds (Fig. 59, a, b ) are covered
with unusual textured decorations. One (Fig. 59, a) is a lower 15m
fragment found in Feature 7. It displays the short, vertically "combed"
incised lines described earlier. Indeed, were it not for its grog temper
this sherd could be assigned to the partially restored brushed-combed
vessel from the site (Fig. 58, a, b). The other sherd (Fig. 59, b), a
bone-tempered body fragment found in Feature 15, also has numerous
smal!, incised lines. These lines, however, are arranged into a honeycomb-like pattern. Both specimens have black cores and are basically
gTay-brown in surface coloration.

143

INDIAN AI~TIFA CTS

FIGURE 59. Combed, appliqu~d-punctated, appliqudd, and pinched pottery. a, b, combed sherds; c-e, appliqu4d-punctated sherds; f, appliqu4d
sherd; g, h, pinched vessel.

A pp liq udd-I ncised
An appliqu6d fillet decorated with deep diagonal notches or
punctations appears on the exterior surface of three shell-tempered

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

body sherds (Fig. 59, c-e). While little can be determined about
the vessel (or vessels) represented, it is quite possible that these
sherds are from a jar (or jars) similar to that found in one of the
burials at the Womack Site (Hm’ris et al., 1965: Fig. 4, E). This
particular Womaek Site vessel, identified as Ernory Punctated (ibid.),
has a notched fillet encircling the juncture of the body and rim, as
well as two opposing nodes just below the lip. The remainder of the
jar is undecorated.
AppliquSd
A tiny black body sherd (Fig. 59, f) with very fine sandy paste
has portions of two appliqu6d fillets. These fillets are spaced 0.7 cm.
apart and appear to have been parallel much like those found on
certain Case Appliqudd vessels (Suhm and Jelks, 1962, P1. 13, C-F).
This sherd, however, is too small to identify with an established
type.
Pinched

Among the small ceramic collection recovered from Feature 18
are four large sherds which have been glued together to form approximately half (the other half has been filled in) of a small bowl
(Fig. 59, g, h) with pinched decoration on the exterior surface.
Placed side-to-side, the pinched marks are alxanged into a pattern
consisting of two horizontal rows below the lip and eight more or
less equally spaced vertical rows. The vertically oriented pinching
extends from just below the second horizontal row of pinch marks to
the base. There is no well defined rim and the vessel wall tapers
gradually from the everted lip downward to the small, disk-shaped
base. The outside oral diameter is 15.5 cm. and the height a mere
5.6 cm. Wall thickness varies from 0.7 to 1.0 era., with the latter
measurement reflecting the thickness of the pinch marks. The rough
but compact paste is dark gray and heavily tempered with pulverized
bone. Both surfaces are fire mottled, ranging in color from reddish
buff to gray-buff.
UNDECORATED CEI~,AMICS

Most (1,487) of the Gilbert Site sherds, and probably many of
the vessels they represent, are undecorated. Compared with the decorated pottery from the site, these specimens display fewer variables
for technological and typological analysis or for easy recognition of

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

145

FIGu~ 60. Womac/e Plain. a, b, Vessel 1; c, Vessel 2; d-f, Vessel 3; g-j,
Vessel 4. Exterior to le]?t on profiles.

146

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

individual vessels. Thus, with the exception of Womack Plain and
Womack Ware- both proposed here as tentative new formal groups
-the plain pottery has not been formally typed. Rather, it has been
sorted into a number of broad categories based mainly upon variations in the paste. Other attributes, such as surface finish and vessel
form, have not been ignored but are of less importance in classifying
most of the plain pottery.
WO~ACK PLAIN (Figures 60 and 61, a-h)
Four partially restored vessels (Fig. 60) and 31 rim sherds (Fig.
6I, a-h) make up a distinctive ceramic group which is recognized
as a provisional new type, Womack Plain. The definition which follows is based solely upon the Gilbert Site material.
METHOD OF MANUFACTURE
Vessel walls were apparently built up by the coi! technique and
finished by scraping and smoothing.
PASTE
Temper: Fine, naturally-occurring(P) sand and slight to moderate
amounts of finely pulverized mussel shell.
Texture: Typically fine and compact with surfaces on occasion
being somewhat sandy.
Color: The core is generally a light gray contrasting with darker
gray, buffish, or even reddish surfaces. Fire clouds are common.
Surface finish: The exterior is usually well smoothed and in rare
eases may even be lightly burnished, while the interior is
eharaetelqstieally less well finished and more likely to bear
scraping and smoothing sears.
FORM
Wall thickness: 0.5 to 1.0 em. with individual vessels often showing considerable range.
Lip: One example (Fig. 60, a) is beveled inward; all others are
flat to slightly rounded and flush with the rim.
Base: The only restored base (Fig. 60, b) is small (about 4.0 em.
in diameter), disk shaped, and concave. At the juncture with
the body it is 0.6 cm. thick, but it thins out at the center to a
scant 0.3 em.
Vessel Shape and size: The only form now recognized is a smallto medium-sized modified earinated bowl with convex shoulders
and ineurved rim. Below the shoulder area the vessel wall

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

147

FIGURE 61.
Womac]¢ Plain and Womac]¢ Ware. a-b, Wo,mac]¢ Plain rim
sherds; i, Womac]¢ Ware.

tapers toward the base. The slight constriction about midway
between the base and the rim reported by Duffleld and Jelks
(1961: 36) for Womack Engraved has not been noted, although the fragmentary nature of the present samples does
not exclude the possibility that it might occur on Wornack
Plain vessels. The height of the four Gilbert bowls ranges
from 7.6 cm. to an estimated 12.0 era., the outside oral diameter from i2.0 to 29,.0 era.

148

TEXAS

AIRCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

DECORATION
None
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION
The presence of Womack Plain at Gilbert and its very obvious
kinship with Womack Engraved suggest that it should be
added to the inventory of Nortefio Focus traits. However, a
cursory examination of The University of Texas collections
from several other Nortefio components- Sanders, Pearson,
and Womack- failed to reveal additional examples of Wemack Plain. The significance of this seemingly limited distribution is not entirely clear, although it does hint at a narrow
temporal and/or spatial occurrence.
ESTIMATED AGE
The present sample evidently dates from about the middle of
the 18th century.
WO~XACK WAlaE (Figure 61, i)
The term Womack Ware is proposed as a broad grouping comprising two technologically similar ceramic types, Womack Engraved and
Womack Plain. It has as its most diagnostic character a modified
earinated bowl fon~n which features an ineurved rim, a rounded
shoulder, and a small, circular, concave base. Other attributes, including engraved decoration, surface finish, and tempering agent, are more
variable and serve primarily to differentiate the two constitutent types.
In addition to being an inclusive category which may well be the
principal resident Nortefio pottery, Womack Ware may be used
descriptively to indicate body and base sherds which could be from
either Womack Engraved or Womack Plain vessels. One hundred
sixty-five such specimens have been singled out of the undecorated
potsherds from Gilbert. How widely and accurately Womack Ware
sherds can be recognized in other collections will probably depend
upon the nature of the collection as well as the experience of the
classifier. At any rate, it appears to be a useful conceptual tool for
analyzing the Gilbei± potteiT, The Womack Ware sherds from the
site have been divided into six groups on the basis of variation in
paste.
Sherd Group 1 (Fig. 61, i). This group of sherds is distinguished
by the presence of finely pulverized shell temper, gray to grayish
black surfaces, a light gray core, generally wel! smoothed surfaces,
and a somewhat sandy paste. Included are 85 loose body sherds, and
47 body and base sherds (all from Feature 3) which have been joined
to form the lower portion of a Womack-shaped bowl (Fig. 61, i),

INDIAN

149

ARTIFACTS

possibly the lower pm’t of one of the Womack Engraved or Womack
Plain vessels mentioned earlier. The combination of att{ibutes observable in the Group 1 sherds suggests type Womack Plain; however,
there are enough overlaps with Womack Engraved to make positive
type identification impossible.
Sherd Group 2. Each of the 11 sherds making up this category is
grog tempered and gray-black to black in surface color. On the
whole they are better finished than most of the Group 1 sherds, with
both the exterior and interior being lightly polished. The paste is
compact, but rather rough, and light gray to black in color. While
it is impossible to type these sherds, their surface finish and grog
temper are more suggestive of Womack Engraved than Womack
Plain..
Sherd Group 3. Nine of the sherds believed to be from Womack
vessels are characterized by a somewhat sandy paste which is typically
light gray in color and which contains reddish particles (probably
ocher) as well as numerous dark areas. In some cases, the dark areas
appear to be particles (grog?), while in others they are more like
stains. Surface colors range from reddish buff to black. The exterior surfaces are all light to well polished and the interiors well
smoothed to lightly polished.
Sherd Group 4. The four sherds making up this group have a
sandy paste with very finely pulverized white particles, apparently
bone. Bone temper, however, is not common in the Womack pottery
at Gilbert (it is obvious and abundan(’ only in Womack Engraved
variant Vessel 2) so that the classification of these sherds as Womack
Ware is tenuous. It is based mainly on their buffish gray to gray
to gray-black coloration and well finished surfaces.
Sherd Group 5. Included in this group are nine tiny body sherds
with well smoothed to polished exteriors and poorly to well smoothed
interiors. No intentional tempering agent can be recognized, although the paste is somewhat sandy and contains unidentified dark
particles or areas. Surface hues range from gray-brown to black, core
colors from dark brownish gray to black.
Miscellaneous Plain
SHELL

TEMPERED

There are 494 undecorated, shell-tempered sherds from the site
which are not typed. Their poorly finished surfaces, moderately abundant and coarse shell temper, and probable vessel forms- largely,
if not entirely, small to medinm-sized jars- clearly exclude them
h’om Womack Ware. On the other hand, they do show similarities

150

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

151

with Nocona Plain, at least as that type is presently defined (Krieger,
1946: 109-111; Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 115). In terms of vessel shape,
surface finish, and even in the amount and chm’acter of the temper,
Nocona, however, includes quite a wide range of variation. That it
could be made into a more selMceable analytical tool by resta’icting
its definition is suggested by recent findings made by Dessamae
Lorrain at Henrietta Focus sites in Fish Creek Reservoir, Montague
County, Texas. Based upon her preliminalT analysis of the Fish Creek
material, Lorrain proposed (personal communication) that Nocona
Plain be limited to large jars with very abundant quantities of shell
temper. None of the undecorated shell-tempered sherds from Gilbert
fit this description.
Of these 494 specimens, 68 can be assigned to tba’ee vessels. The
remainder surely represent portions of many more vessels, but sorting them out has proved to be both a frustrating and fruitless task.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 62, i). Sixteen sherds from Feature 3 have been
joined to form approximately three fourths of this vessel, a small jar
with rounded body, constricted neck, and low, outflaring rim with
an everted, slightly rounded lip. The base is missing, but it was
probably slightly convex. The outside oral diameter is 8.6 cm., the
height is estimated at 10 cm., and the wall thickness varies between
0.5 and 1.0 cm.
Neither the exterior nor the interior surface is particularly well
finished and both are covered with broad, essentially horizontal
striations which were probably produced in an effort to polish the
vessel. The exterior surface is quite uneven, although shiny in spots,
while the interior is generally more regular but less polished. Surface
colors vary from reddish brown through shades of gray-brown and
black. On the whole, the interior tends more toward the darker hues
and is less fire mottled than the exterior. The core is uniformly darker
in coloration and forms a striking contrast with the particles of
crushed mussel shell used as temper. Limited amounts of fine sand
also occur in the compact but rather rough paste.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 62, a-h). Although 47 sherds found scattered over
three features (one in Feature 2, 45 in Feature 3, and one in Feature
6) seem to be from one vessel, vely little of the vessel could be
restored. It was evidently a fairly large, wide-mouthed jar with a low
(ca. 3.0 cm. high), perhaps slightly outflaring rim, rounded shoulders,
and a tapering body. The rounded lip is tapered and flush with the
FlCUR~ 62. Undecorated shell-tempered pottery, a-h, Vessel 2; i, Vessel 1;
j,/~, Vessel 3; 1, large body sherd; m-p, typical rim sherds. Exterior to left
on profiles.

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rim (Fig. 62, a). Only a tiny segment of the base (Fig. 62, f) was
recovered, but it is enough to indicate a circular, probably flat bottom which was heavily reinforced where it joined the body wall.
The paste of Vessel 9. is fairly smooth although it is not well
bonded. Rather sparse, coarse particles (as much as 0.5 cm. in maximum dimension) of mussel shell appear as the only intentionally
added aplastic. The core is orangeish toward the base, generally becoming darker, gray-buff to almost black, on the upper portion of
the vessel. Because of unevenness in firing, surface colors also exhibit a considerable range, from orange-buff to black. Much of the
interior surface is vel7 well smoothed, while the exterior is a bit
more uneven and covered with numerous horizontal to slightly diagonal striations. These striations occur in groups and could well be the
result of smoothing with the fingers. Wall thickness is 0.5 cm. just below the lip, 0.6 era. at the shoulders, and 1.4 era. at the juncture of
the body and the base.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 62, j-k). Five sherds from Feature 6 have been
joined to form a jar fragment which has been reworked into a ladle.
¯ This restored section, a rim-to-base piece representing approximately
one fourth of the original jar, either broke into a convenient cuplike shape or was so fashioned by intentional breakage. The surviving portion of the rim makes a ready handle, and a small, V-shaped
notch gouged into one edge from the interior surface forms the
pouring spout. One broken lateral edge (to the left in Fig. 69,, j) of
the rim seems to have been beveled and smoothed either intentionally or, perhaps less likely, from use. Thin, but quite distinct, dark
stains appear about the notch on both the interior and extel~or surfaces. These stains, along with surface discoloration produced by
exposure to fire, indicate that a small amount of some as yet unidentified substance was heated and then poured through the spout.
Enough remains of the original jar to indicate that it had been
a small vessel with a flat lip, a low (ca. 1.0 cm. high) outflaling rim,
a rounded body, and a convex bottom. Over-all height was 8.7 cm.,
the outside oral diameter between 6 and 7 cm. Wall thickness
ranges from 0.4 cm. at the lip to 1.0 em. at the shoulder. The fine,
compact paste is tempered with sparse amounts of pulverized mussel
shell. Both surfaces are poorly smoothed, the exterior one being
somewhat bumpy and the interior surface having numerous small
striations. These sears are most concentrated on the body and may
represent either deliberate roughening or efforts to scrape off some
of the dark substance adhering to the interior surface. Except where

153

INDIAN ABTIFACTS

darkened by exposure to heat, the surfaces are a light grayish buff.
The core is dark gray-black to black.
Sherds (Fig. 62, l-p). Included in this category are 32 rim fragments, 14 base pieees, and 80 body sherds. Although all are undecorated and shell tempered, they exhibit a fair amount of variation.
The shell in the paste ranges from fine and sparse to coarse and
moderately abundant, while the texture is from smooth and eompact
to rough and friable. Surface eolors are predominately shades of
gray, but buffish and reddish hues are also present. The eores are
consistently darker and are most often dark gray to black. Polished
surfaces are uncommon and most are either poorly smoothed or only
moderately well smoothed, with the inside tending to be less well
finished than the outside.
One large body sherd (actually three pieces glued together) stands
out beeause of the pronounced unevenness in wall thickness (Fig. 62,
e). On the exterior there are large and obvious depressions and on
the interior complementary raises. These irregularities, of eourse, suggest the paddle and anvil teehnique with the supporting tool, the
anvil, somewhat surprisingly having been held against the exterior.
Additional finishing by scraping and smoothing is indieated by fine,
horizontal striations, particularly evident on the interior.
While none of the rim sherds is very large (Fig. 62, m-p), most
appear to have come from jars with low, straight to gently outflaring
rims and flush lips, which are flat to slightly rounded. Two, however,
have everted and thinned lips and a third has a slightly thickened
lip. Each of the 14 recognizable base sherds is flat and disk shaped.
Their diameters are from a maximum of 9 cm. to an estimated minimum of 4.5 cm.
BONE TEMPEltED

(

Figure 63)

Of the 891 undecorated, untyped, bone-tempered sherds, 122 can
unhesitatingly be assigned to four vessels. These vessels and the 269
unassigned sherds are briefly described below.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 68, a). Ahnost completely restored, this vessel is
comprised of 57 sherds recovered from Feature 18. It is a large,
wide-mouthed jar with a high, markedly outflaring rim, constricted
neck, and gently rounded shoulder. Unlike most other jars from the
site, the body tapers to a small (4.6 em. in diameter) and slightly
concave, disk-shaped base. The rounded, markedly undulating lip is
flush with the rim. The orifice of the vessel is somewhat like a flattened
circle, with the oral diameter varying from 25.5 to 26.8 cm. Maximum

154

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE

63. Undecorated bone-tempered pottery, a, Vessel 1; b, Vessel 2;
c, Vessel 3; d, Vessel 4; e-g, typical rim sherds. Exterior to left on profiles.

diameter at the shoulder is approximately 24 em., and the total height
is 23.5 era.
Conspicuous particles of coarsely pulverized bone as much as 6

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

155

ram. across are fairly abundant in the paste. The grayish buff paste
is surprisingly firm, probably because of its slightly sandy nature.
Both surfaces are moderately well smoothed despite the frequent bits
of bone that protrude through them. The jar interior is predominately
gray-buff to black and the exterior is reddish buff to black. In both
cases the dark coloration is due mainly to organic stains. Portions of
the interior sm’face of the rim m’e particularly heavily coated with this
carbonaceous substance. Similar carbonaceous patches appear on the
exterior surface, positioned as they would be if some food stuff were
overheated and boiled over or the vessel were tipped and its contents
partially spilled.
Six biconically drilled crack-lacing holes are on the vessel rim. One
pair of opposing holes appears about 2.5 em. below the rim. The other
four are located on a nearly opposite side of the vessel where they
served to mend a more complex fracture. They are in two pairs, one
above the other, with the uppermost pair 9. cm. below the rim and
the bottommost 5 cm. below the rim. Each hole is approximately 0.5
era. in diameter.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 63, b). Twenty-seven sherds from Feature 3 and
one from Feature 5 have been joined to reconstruct about two thirds
of Vessel 2, a small, squat jar. An additional ten sherds, all h’om
Feature 3, are undoubtedly from the same jar but could not be
affixed. When complete, Vessel 9. stood 11.0 cm. high and had an
outside oral diameter of 11.4 cm. Its rim was low (1.7 era.), its
shoulder gently rounded, its body globular, and its base flat and disk
shaped. Thewalls reach a maximum thickness (0.8 cm.) at the
shoulder area and thin out toward the base and toward the rim (0.6
and 0.5 cm., respectively).
Finely crushed pieces of bone appear as an intentional additive to
the firm, somewhat sandy paste. Neither surface is well finished although the exterior is smoother than the interior. The inside is fairly
uniform medium grayish buff color, while the exterior ranges from
a darker gray-buff to black, the latter apparently the result of
cooking stains.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 63, c). Known from 17 sherds (16 of which have
been joined together) recovered from Feature 4, this roughly halfrestored vessel was a jar with a globular body and a low (3.0 cm.
high), outflaring rim. The base is flat and disk shaped, the shoulder
is rounded, but not prominent, and the lip is flat and flush with the
rim. Over-all height is 20.0 cm. and outside oral diameter is an estimated 19 cm. Maximum body diameter, at the shoulder, is approxi-

156

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

mately the same as the oral diameter. Wall thickness at the base is
1.0 em., at the shoulder 1.1 em., and at the lip 0.6 em.
Vessel 3 is very crudely made. The abundant, coarse particles of
crushed bone temper frequently protrude through the surface, the
finish is rough and malted by numerous tool marks, and the lip is
quite uneven. The paste is compact, gray-buff in color, and, in
addition to the many pieces of bone, contains an occasional hematite
fragment. Interior colors vary from buff to gray-buff, while the exterior
is predominately reddish buff. There is no staining to indicate use
as a cooking vessel.
Vessel 4 (Fig. 63, d). The only other partially restored, plain,
bone-tempered vessel is a small, ahnost miniature pot. It is known
from ten sherds, eight of which (six from Feature 3, two from Feature 4) have been glued together to form what appears to be the
lower two thirds of the vessel. Since no rim sherds are included, the
exact size and shape of Vessel 4 remains questionable. It is, however, clear that the body was globular (between 8.5 and 9.0 era. in
maximum diameter) and that the base was convex and not sharply
differentiated from the body wall. The most probable form is either
a cup-like bowl or a low, wide-mouthed jar which was no more than
i0 cm. high.
Numerous moderately fine particles of pulverized bone and an occasional hematite pellet appear in the compact, coarse, sandy paste.
Both surfaces are rough and ga’ainy despite the presence of a thin
veneer (intentional slip?) of fine clay. Core and surface colors are
a fairly uniform grayish black with some reddish tones. The vessel
wall is thickest at the base (1.0 era.) and thins out to 0.6 era. at the
upper portion of the body.
Sherds (Fig. 63, e-g). Among the 269 miscellaneous plain, bonetempered sherds are 31 rim pieces with lips intact, three basal fragments, and 235 body sherds. The bone temper in most cases is fairly
abundant and moderately coarse, while the paste is usually a bit
sandy.~ Surface colors are most often various shades of buff, reddish
~A petrographic analysis of a typical sherd was made by Drs. B. J. Scull and
Stanley B. McCaleb of the Sun Oil Laboratory in Richardson, Texas. They
found minerals in the paste to include, in decreasing abundance: montmorillinite, quartz, nmscovite, potash feldspar as orthoelase and mieroeline, hematite, magnetite (manganiferous hematite), elor-apatite or flour-apatite, diaspore, plagioelase. Some of the quartz, they noted, is coarsely rutilated and the
albite plagioclase has wide twin planes suggesting the Tishomingo-type granites
of the southern Afl?uckle Mountain series. The soft white inclusions are composed of about equal parts of clor-apatite (or flour-apatite) and diaspore, and
some have the outlines and fibrous structure of bone. As apatite and diaspore are
not commonly found in intimate association, the original material may have been

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

157

buff, and brown; blacks and grays do occur but are less common
than noted for the plain, shell-tempered sherds. Three body pieces
have traces of a thin, red wash, and two appear to be slipped. Surface
finish varies from poorly smoothed to lightly polished with the bonetempered sherds being, on the average, better finished than the undecorated shell-tempered ones. This may be, at least in part, a reflection
of finer paste, or it may be that a number of sherds fi’om undecorated
portions of bowls have been included. It is difficult to verify the latter
possibility as the only shapes definitely indicated are jars with slightly
to markedly outtumed rims (Fig. 63, e-g). In all eases the lip form
is simple: flush and rounded, sometimes slightly thinned. The three
small base fi’agments appear to be from two vessels. One sherd is
from a flat, disk-shaped base which was considerably thicker than
the body wall. The other ( actually two sherds which have been joined)
is also disk shaped, but it is slightly concave and not much thicker
than the body wall. Womack Ware is suggested by the latter base, but
it is not so identified because such a classification is too tenuous (for
example, Vessel 1 above also had a slightly concave base).
SHELL AND BONE TER’IPERED

The paste of five body sherds contains finely pulverized particles
of both bone and shell. In three the bone predominates, while in the
other two shell is more common. Whether or not the minor constituent is an intentional or accidental additive is not apparent. All
five sherds have grayish buff surfaces and darker, usually medium
gray, cores. Their surfaces are only moderately well smoothed. No
particulars can be determined concerning shape, although it is most
likely that all are from jars, with a minimum of three vessels being
represented. Wall thickness is 0.5 to 0.7 cm.

eBOC TE~PEBED (Figure 64)
One hundred forty-nine of the plain sherds are tempered with grog
(i.e., crushed particles of fired clay). Included are 115 loose sherds
which have been sorted into two groups, and two partially restored
vessels.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 64, a). This deep cylindrical vessel is represented by
22 sherds (18 of which have been joined) from Feature 1. As it presently stands, it is 13.6 era. high and about 17 era. in maximum diameter. This restored portion includes most of the bottom and perhaps
as much as two thirds of the body but none of the rim. Enough rebone and kaolinite, with the latter being altered to diaspore in the process of
vessel manufacture.

FIcue,E 64. Undecorated grog-tempered and grog- and shell-tempered pottery. a, grog-tempered, Vessel 1; b-e, grog-tempered, Vessel 2; f-h, typical
grog-tempered rim sherds; i, grog-tempered base sherd; j, It, grog-tempered
Sherd Group 2; l-r, grog- and shell-tempered Vessel 1. Exterior to left on
profiles.

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

159

mains to indicate that the body wall was convex and formed a sharp
angle at its juncture with the base. The base is flat, circular (7.3 era.
in diameter), and thicker than the body walls (1.6 era. versus 1.0 to
0.6 em. ).
Although only one is preserved, it is clear that there were two
appliqued strips on opposite sides of the upper body exterior. The
surviving strip is 4.5 era. long, 0.5 em. wide, and approximately 0.3
em. high. Both surfaces are grayish brown to black, moderately well
smoothed, and bear shallow indentations made by a finishing tool.
The core is quite dark, while the compact, slightly sandy paste contains numerous bits of grayish grog. Black stains and caked earbonaceous matter are present on portions of both surfaces, indicating use as a cooking vessel.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 64, b-e). Also found in Feature 1, this vessel, too,
may originally have been a deep cylindrical bowl or jar. It is, however, known only from twelve sherds, ten of which have been glued
together to form two larger sherds representing limited portions of
the base and lower body. Much uncertainty sun’ounds details of
shape, and all that can be said is that the body walls are outsloping
and rounded at their juncture with the flattened, slightly thickened
base. The upper edge of the highest projecting body sherd has been
smoothed, indicating that Vessel 9, had been broken and a new rim
formed by grinding. While the original height is impossible to reconstruct, the modified vessel stood about 9 era. high.
Both surfaces are well smoothed and much of the exterior is now
covered with black, sooty material. Less stained, the interior is predominately brownish gray. The darker core varies from black to dark
gray. Because of the numerous pieces of grog, the paste is coarse
and uneven.
Sherd Group I (Fig. 64, f-i). Most (107) of the undecorated sherds
making up this category are nondescript body fragments with
smoothed, but not polished, surfaces which are tan to gray-brown
in color. There are only two basal fragments and four rim sherds
with lips intact. The largest of the base sherds (Fig. 64, i) is a disk
about 6 cm. in diameter; the other is also disk shaped but is too
incomplete for measurement. Two of the rim fragments (Fig. 64, f,
g) appear to have come from simple vessels with essentially straight
walls. The third rim (Fig. 64, h) is scalloped and seems to be from
an undecorated red-slipped, carinated bowl. The fourth is from a low
(3.1 era. high), slightly outflaring jar rim.
Sherd Group 2 (Fig. 64, j-k). The two sherds included in this
group are separated from the above only because each shows signs

TEXAS

]60

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

of having been modified. One (Fig. 64, j) is a flat body or base sherd
which has portions of a bieonieally drilled hole. It was probably once
disk shaped, with approximately half of the specimen now missing.
None of the edges of the sherd is smoothed and it is possible that
they have been recently broken. The other worked sherd (Fig.
64, k), a rim piece, is a pie-shaped fragment of a disk which may
also have once been perforated. Portions of the lip have been left
intact to form an edge of the disk, while the remainder of the preserved disk edge was formed by grinding. The first sherd is 0.8 era.
thick, the second one 0.5 cm.
GROG AND SHELL TE~’IPEIKED

(Figure 64, l-r)

The paste of 17 sherds contains both grog and shell. While it is
conceivable that the shell is derived from crushed sherds, it occurs
in sufficient quantity to suggest that it, along with the grog, may
be an intentional additive. Among the 17 sherds are a partially restored vessel and three loose body sherds which perhaps represent
at least two more vessels.
Vessel I (Fig. 64, I-r). Thirteen sherds from Feature 6 and one
from Feature 3 appear to be from a small, crudely made jar which
had a low (approximately 2.4 cm. high), outturned rim, constricted neck, prominent shoulder, and globular body. No base or
lower body sherds seem to be included, but the over-all height
was probably less than 12 era. The poorly smoothed exterior bears
faint traces of a thin, bright red wash or slip, while the even less
well finished inside surface is quite irregular and bears striations left
by a finishing tool. Where not covered by the red wash, the exterior
is tan to gray-black. The interior is a uniform gray, and the tan to
gray core is only slightly darker than the surfaces. The walls are
thick (0.8 to 1.4 em. ) and the paste quite rough but surprisingly
compact.
Sherds. The only other grog- and shell-tempered specimens are
three small body sherds. Their well-smoothed surfaces vary in color
from gray-black to reddish tan. Two have smooth, compact pastes in
which shell is slightly more common than grog. The paste of the
third is much rougher and the particles of fired clay outnumber the
pulverized bits of shell. At least two, perhaps even three, vessels
are represented.
SANDY PASTE

(Figure

65)

The pastes of 123 ufldecorated potsherds from Gilbert contain very
fine to coarse sand gq-ains but no other recognizable aplastic. Since

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

161

FIGURE 65. Undecorated, sandy paste pottery, a-i, Vessel 1; j, It, Vessel 2;
l-t, Vessel 3; ~, Vessel 4; v-y, rim sherds. Exteriors to left on profiles.

various combinations, of sand and clay frequently occur in nature,
it is not at all certain how much, if any, of the sand is an intentional

162

TEXAS

AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

additive. To make clear this uncertainty, the term sandy paste is
utilized. Seventy-two of these sherds can be assigned to four vessels;
the remaining 51 are small and nondescript fragments impossible to
assign to individual vessels.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 65, a-i). Although this vessel is represented by 44
sherds (seven from Feature 1 and 37 from Feature 3) only limited
restoration could be accomplished. Moreover, the ~lpper edges of two
of the sherds (Fig. 65, a, b) have been ground flat forming a new lip
and quite possibly somewhat modifying the original form. It is probable that the modified form was a cylindrical bowl or jar with a
gently convex body wall and a flat circular base. While meaningful
vessel dimensions are impossible to reconstruct, the curvature of the
body sherds, the diameter of the base (6.9 era. ) and, to a lesser extent,
the wall thickness (0.6 to 1.0 cm.) suggest a vessel that originally
stood at least 13 em. high.
The paste of Vessel i is fine and sandy with bits of hematite and
dark, possibly carbonized, areas. As a result the core has a mottled
appearance with the reddish and black areas forming a marked
contrast with the predominately btfffish gray core. The surfaces are
black to brown black and poorly smoothed.
In terms of paste characteristics and surface coloration, this vessel
is strikingly similar to Womack Engraved Vessel 6 (Fig. 51, c-e),
which interestingly, and probably quite coincidentally, also has a new
lip formed by grinding. These likenesses, of course, suggest the possibility that some of the sherds from the two vessels may be incorrectly sorted. While this could be the case, it is quite clear nevertheless that two different vessels are represented, one decorated and one
plain.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 65, j-k). Vessel 9, is a small, partially restored cuplike bowl recovered from Feature 3. Its convex body wall merges with
a tapered, slightly rounded lip as well as with what appears to have
been a slightly thicker, convex base. When complete, this bowl stood
approximately 6.5 cm. high and had an outside oral diameter of about
8 cm. It is rather crudely made and may have been modeled directly
from a lump of clay rather than having been coiled. The exterior surface is smoothed but quite irregular because of the many groove-like
depressions left by a finishing tool. Although much of the interior
surface has flaked off, it appears to have been somewhat better
finished than the exterior. The soft, smooth paste contains fine, rounded
particles of sand and a fragment of what seems to be a charred twig.
The core is gray, turning yellowish toward the edges; the surfaces
are gray with faint tinges of yellow. Wall thickness varies from 0.4

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

163

cm. near the lip to 1.0 cm. at the juncture of the body and the base.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 65, l-t). Each of the 23 sherds assigned to this
vessel has a very coarse, sandy paste with numerous sand grains
protruding through the poorly smoothed interior and exterior surfaces. The eores and surfaces are so black and heavily stained with
a fugitive sooty substance that a elose analysis of the paste is impossible without retiring. Since so few of these sherds could be
joined, the exact size and shape of Vessel 3 are uncertain. It is,
however, probable that it was a small jar with an outflaring rim,
a globular body, and a convex base.
Vessel 4 (Fig. 65, u). This clearly lump-modeled miniature bowl
is known from a single sherd which, nonetheless, represents about
one third of the complete vessel. It has a tiny, somewhat outttaring
rim and a slight shoulder. The base is missing, but it appears to
have been thick and rounded. When complete, the bowl was probably
about 3.5 cm. high and had an oral diameter of between 4.0 and 4.5
cm. The paste is fine and sandy, the core black, the surfaces black to
grayish brown. Neither surface has been smoothed. A number of tiny
crescent-like sears-possibly produced by a fingernail-occur on
both surfaces.
Sherds (Fig. 65. v-y). The 51 undecorated, sandy paste sherds not
assignable to individual vessels are typically small and nondistinctive.
Included are seven rim pieces with lips intact, two base sections, and
42 body fragments. Simple direct rims with flush lips prevail; however,
one rim is low and markedly outflaring, while two are slightly outturned with thickened lips. The two base sherds are probably from the
flat, circular base of a single vessel. The only interesting body sherd
(Fig. 65, v) is one that has a small conical node which protrudes about
0.8 cm. above the exterior surface and is about 1.1 cm. in diameter at
the base. All of the sherds have a eompaet, sandy paste which varies
from fine to medium in grain size. No other partieles can be discerned
in the paste, although there are oecasional dark (carbonized?) areas.
Both surfaces are usually fairly well smoothed and range in color
from gray-black through brattish black to orange. The cores are consistently darker-most often either dark gray or black-than the surfaces.
TEMPER UNCERTAIN

A relatively small group of undecorated sherds cannot be assigned
to any of the above categories, although a few do have slightly sandy
pastes. Some, it must also be admitted, could be tempered with finely
pulverized grog which has blended imperceptibly with the paste,

164

TEXAS AItCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

while others could have contained very finely crushed shell which has
leached out. At any rate, the paste of all these sherds is smooth and
fine with no tempering agent being recognized. All of the sherds are
small, and they reveal no significant data concerning vessel form.
Included are three rim fragments, three basal pieces, and 22 body
fragments.
INTItASITE DISTRIBUTIONS

The intrasite distributions of the native-made vessels and fragments
are given in Tables 5-8. Table 5 presents the distributions in terms of
the minimal classificatory and recovery units, while Table 6 summarizes basic information obtained for individual vessels. Frequencies of
occurrence are emphasized in Tables 7 and 8, with the former being a
ranking of ceramic groups by feature and the latter a ranking of
features by ceramic group. In all four tables the frequency data are
expressed in terms of the smallest practical unit of observation, a
sherd. The principal advantage of making all counts in terms of sherds
is, quite obviously, that it makes all counts comparable. On the other
hand, vessels, not sherds, are the products of manufacture. Vessel
analysis, consequently, has a higher cultural yield and avoids some of
the sampling problems encountered in dealing with sherds (e.g., a
large pot is likely to break into more sherds than a small one, etc.).
Since the sherd sample from many of the features (Table 5) is relatively small and quite possibly subject to distortion, it is regrettable
that efforts to sort the entire sample into vessels were unsuccessful.
In spite of these limitations, the distributional data clearly reveal
that much the same ceramic complex was recovered from most parts
of the site. There are, however, some differences, the most apparent
of which is the presence of only grog-tempered pottery (59 undecorated sherds and two incised sherds) in Area B. Less striking are
differences within Area A: the near absence of Womack Plain in Feature 1; the absence of undecorated, bone-tempered pottery and Womack Plain in Feature 2; the high incidence of Wornack Plain but somewhat low incidence of undecorated, grog-tempered sherds in Feature
3; and the high frequency of undecorated, bone-tempered sherds in
Feature 18.
These distributional variations can, on theoretical grounds, be explained by one or more of the following hypotheses: (1) noncontemporaneous occupations are represented in various portions of the
site;,.(£) all parts of the site were occupied contemporaneously but by
diverse social groups, (3) all parts of the site were occupied concurrently and by the same social group but different activities were

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

165

carried out in different areas, and (4) no temporal or cultural differenees exist and the observed variations in occurrences are errors in
sampling. The best case for meaningful differences in the ceramics
can be made for Area B where the pottery is so much at variance with
a random pattern that it must surely represent a major temporal
and/or cultural variation. Fortunately, the absence of trade goods
from only this portion of the site provides a firm basis for placing the
Area B occupation (or occupations?) in prehistoric times. As for the
cultural affiliations and more exact age, the data are less conclusive.
The geographical location suggests Caddoan, a possibility which does
not conflict with the ceramic findings. However, in the absence of
diagnostic types no more percise alignment can be made.
The remainder of the differences in ceramic occurrences may well
be only vagaries in sampling. Certainly this seems to be the most
plausible explanation for Features 2 and 18, both of which yielded
only small samples of sherds. For Features i and 8, where the collections were larger, the distribution of Womack Plain tends to
complement that of Womack Engraved (see comments below), tlegardless, the most important conclusions to be reached are that all
the features (but not Area B) are essentially coeval and that each
feature reflects a similar activity-that is, the use of well defined trash
areas. Support for these conclusions is given by the basic homogeneity
of the ceramic distributions, the general agreement between the distributional expectations and the actual results (Tables 7 and 8), and
the finding of sherds from individual vessels in several different features (Table 6).

166

~XASARCHEOLOCICALSOCIETY

~D

iiiiiiili~iiii
i ! i i i i~ i i ! i i i~
!iiiiii~iiiiii
iiiiiii~iiiiii
iiiiiiiiiiiiii
>

o

>
O

iiii

,i,,

iiii

iii

iiiiiiiiiiiiii

iiii

iii

iiiiiiiili!iii

i!ii

ii

i i i i i i i~ i i i ! i

iiii
~
i

ii

i i i~ ! i i i i i i i i~

i~
.... ~ i~

i~
ii
O~

: i
i i i~~
%)
D

00000000~

167

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

,,,,,

iiiJiill

iJ

i i i i i i i i ~
i i i ] i i~ i ~
iiiiii~i
iiiiiiii
iiii~iii

i
i
i
i
i

v

~i~~

~

cqcq

.~

OO00

"~mmmmm

OO@

I~-~

0000==

~mm

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~.~ ~ ~ ~ ~

~

168

TEXAS

A!RCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

E~

I

~

I

I

I

I

I

I
I

I
I

~
~

I
I

I
I

:
I

I
I

i i i i i

iii
!iiiii!

i!~i

~ i ! i i

z

ii

ii~ii!i
i i i i

i

i

i

~ ! i

!

i

!

III~I

il~ll

o

I
I

~-~

I
I

i

I o,1
I

iiil~

~iii~

i i i i i

~ i i i

i

,~ ~ii~ ,’~i
i~~ i iii

0

,

~

~"

~

~~’~’~ N~ ~

~~

i

169

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

V-- oo V-- ~ oD.

~

¢~q cq ¢o. cq

lo

co
x~

cq

I~D

cq

~

c,]

F¸
t CQ
~D
oo,4
to

I

I

I

I

i

i!,-’~

!

E

i

i~

i~

ii!!ii~

!iiiii~

iiil

iiiili~
iiilto~
I

I

I

I

iill~

i~

,,,I

!~ii~~

~i~i
~o0

I

I

co.

,

ii~

I

~ ~-~ cq ’t"~

~’~.

c’.1

i~ io0~

i ID ,.-~

i O0 .¢0.

O0

i i ! ito’~

i i

!

ICq

tO

i

i

i

i

!

IIII~

i
~,1C-100

~’~ iI~’~

I

Ico

~D

o

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOC~TY

o

o~

o~
o~

’ >~,

~°

,

~o~ ~

~o

~

B~

,

~

~

¯

o’’~ ~0 o

.~

°~°

o o

~

°

,~
,

O,x~

~_~o

~

..~

~
~
0 ~0~

o o o

~,..~

o

,...~ ~.~

o ~

~ 0
0~--~

,x~ ~

~

,.~ .~

.~,~ ~

"~ ~
~ 0

~.~

~O

~

~.~

~

~~ ~~

-~~o~

o

v
Io

v

~q
¢0

>

>

>

>

oq
v
oq

171

INDIAN ABTIFACTS

¯

*o
=

O
o

’x~

xo

XO

L’D

IO

O
O

o

~,-~

~ .

,~

"’d
o
~-~
t.~

o
h0

h0

o

o

o ,.Q

0o

O

Cq

.£

o

0"0

o
0~ 0 0
.~
¢~ ,.,~ .~

.£

~0

~,o

O
>-,o
o

O
CO ,..-~

~q

CO~

,"-d

o

o
O

~

O,.~

o-~
o’3

~

~

o

v
03

A
CO
v

c,1
v

v

cq
v

cq

cO

o

>.

-’4
v

o’3

V--

o

~v
o,1
v

o

;>

>
o9

~>

-~

>.

>.

172

TEXAS

~

~ ~

~

~

o.o~

<

o,-.

~

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

~

~

<..~

o

o
k~

~

o

~
<
v

,.-Iv

v4

qv

v

~

v

v

e,1

;:>

173

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

¯

~
,...¢

0

o

o~

.~o~

~

s~

,~

0

0

0

0

0

O

~--~"~

~"

~

~ o

~.~
o

,~

<D

~

~

~.

oO
v
¢0

,..-i
~v

~v

c~

v

4~

o9
voO

~o

.-

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

O
"7"

o~
c.O

ZO

¢.D

¢J3

~0

¢.0

~0

r.~

O

,.o
O
~0

~o~
¯

~

0

t3Du~
0

-~ ~

.N o

.~ o

~ ~

.~

~

0,.~

F~
v

v

v

¢0

v

v¢,~

v

cO
v

v

175

INDIAN AI~T/LFACTS

o

¯n
~o

.~
o~

.~o~

r~

I

~
~

.~

_.~

v

v

-~
o~

o
~

.~

v

~o

v

v

v

v

v

co

~q

v

v

co

co

@
o,1

¢0

o

o

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 7

Sherd frequencies by site and feature.
Only features yielding at least 61 sherds are included.
Sherds
SITE AS A WHOLE
Undecorated, shell-tempered
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Womack Ware
Womack Engraved
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Undecorated, sandy paste
Womack Plain
Incised
Miscellaneous engraved
Brushed
Natchitoches Engraved variants
Womack Engraved variants
Simms Engraved
Brushed-combed
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Brushed-punctated
Punetated
Undecorated, grog- and shell-tempered
Emory Punctated
Natchitoches Engraved
Undecorated, shell- and bone-tempered
Pinched
Appliqu6d-incised
Combed
Appliqued
FEATURE 1
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Undecorated, shell-tempered
Womack Engraved
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Simms Engraved
Undecorated, sandy paste
Brushed-punctated
Miscellaneous engraved
Incised
Punctated
Brushed
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Womack Engraved variants
Natchitoches Engraved variants
Emory Punctated
Womack Plain
Appliqued
FEATURE 2
Simms Engraved
Womack Engraved variants
Undecorated, shell-tempered

2,221
494
391
165
158
149
123
115
98
91
85
69
60
59
46
28
19
18
17
12
9
5
4
3
2
1

Percent,
100.0
22.24
17.60
7.42
7.11
6.71
5.54
5.18
4.41
4.10
3.83
3.11
2.70
2.66
2.07
1.26
0.86
0.81
0.77
0.54
0.4I
0.22
0.18
0.13
0.09
0.05

376
97
83
46
42
29
27
13
9
9
5
4
4
2
2
2
1
1

100.0
25.8
22.1
12.2
11.2
7.7
7.2
3.4
2.4
2.4
1.3
1.1
1.1
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.3

89
28
24
11

100.0
31.5
27.0
12.4

177

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

TABLE 7 -- (Continued)
7
7
5
3
2
1
1

7.9
7.9
5.6
3.4
9,.3
I.I
i.i

FEATURE 3
Undecorated, shell-tempered
Womack Ware
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Womack Plain
Undecorated, sandy paste
Miscellaneous engraved
Brushed-combed
Brushed
Womack Engraved
Incised
Natchitoches Engraved
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Undecorated, grog- and shell-tempered
Womack Engraved variant
Natchitoches Engraved variant

751
148
120
108
91
48
40
37
32
25
20
9
6
6
1
23
37

I00.0
19.7
16.0
14.4
12.1
6.4
5.3
4.9
4.3
3.3
2.7
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.I
3.1
4.9

FEATURE 4
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Undecorated, shell-tempered
~gomack Engraved
Emory Punctated
Brushed
Undecorated, sandy paste
Brushed-punctated
Incised
Punctated
Miscellaneous engraved
Womack Ware
Natchitoches Engraved variants
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Appliqu6d-ineised
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Undecorated, grog- and shell-tempered
Undecorated, shell- and bone-tempered
Womack Engraved variant

178
56
46
22
9
9
7
6
5
3
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1

I00.0
31.5
25.8
12.3
5.0
5.0
3.9
3.4
2.8
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.1
1.1
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6

FEATURE 5
Undecorated, shell-tempered
Womack Ware
Incised
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Womack Engraved
Miscellaneous engraved
Punetated

224
77
37
27
24
17
9
7

100.0
34.4
16.5
12.0
10.7
7.6
4.0
3.1

Womack Engraved
Incised
Miscellaneous engraved
Undecorated, sand), paste
Brushed
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Undecorated, temper uncertain

178

TEXAS AHCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 7 - (Continued)
6
5
5
4
2
2
1
1

2.7
2.2
2.2
1.8
0.9
0.9
0.4
0.4

FEATURE 6
Undecorated, shell-tempered
Undecorated, sandy paste
Incised
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Natchitoches Engraved variants
Miscellaneous engraved
Brushed
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Undecorated, grog- and shell-tempered
Womack Engraved
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Womack Ware
Emory Punctated
Womack Plain

186
35
24
18
18
17

100.0
18.8
12.9
9.7
9.7
9.1
9.1
9.1
8.6
7.5
9..6
1.O
1.0
0.5
0.5

FEATURE 7
Undecorated, shell-tempered
Womack Plain
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Natchitoches Engraved variants
Womack Engraved variants
Brushed-combed
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Brushed
Punctated
Undecorated, shell- and bone-tempered
Womack Engraved
Simms Engraved
Miscellaneous engraved
Incised
Combed
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Undecorated, sandy paste

118

Undecorated, grog-tempered
Womack Plain
Undecorated, sandy paste
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Appliqu6d-incised
Womack Engraved variants
Simms Engraved
Brushed

17
17
16
14
4
2
2
1
1

9.
1
1
1
i
1
1
1

10O.O
37.3
13.5
11.9
8.5
6.8
6.8
3.4
2.5
1.7
1.7
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8

FEATURE 18
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Pinched
Womack Engraved
Incised
Brushed
Undecorated, shell-tempered

66
58
4
1
1
1
1

100.0
87.9
6.1
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5

AREA B
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Incised

61
59
9.

100.O
96.7
3.3

44
16
14
1O
8
8
4
3
9.

179

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

TABLE 8
Ceramic classification and frequency distributions.
ALL CLASSES
Feature 3
Feature 1
Feature 5
Feature 6
Feature 4
Feature 7
Feature 2
Feature 18
Area B
Feature 12
Uncertain provenience
Feature 15
Feature 16
Feature 10
Feature 11
Feature 13
Feature 17
Feature 8
Feature 19
Feature 20

751
376
224
186
178
118
89
66
61
35
35
31
20
14
13
7
7
4
3
3
Sherds

sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
Percent

Womack Engraved
Feature i
Feature 3
Feature 4
Feature 12
Feature 5
Feature 2
Feature 11
Feature 17
Feature 6
Uncertain
Feature 7
Feature 16
Feature 18
Feature 20
Feature 15
Natchitoches Engraved
Feature 3
Miscellaneous Engraved
Feature 3
Feature 6
Feature 1
Feature 5
Feature 2
Feature 10
Feature 12
Feature 4

158
46
25
22
18
17
7
6
6
4
2
1
1
1
1
1

100.0
29.1
15.8
13.9
11.4
10.8
4.4
3.8
3.8
2.5
1.3
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6

9
9

100.0
100.0

91
40
17
9
9
5
2
2
3

100.0
44.0
18.9
9.9
9.9
5.5
2.2
2.2
3.3

180

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

TABLE 8 -- (Continued)

Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature

7
11
15
16

I
i
i
i

i.i
i.I
i.I
i.i

Womack Engraved variants
Feature 2
Feature 3
Feature 7
Feature 1
Feature 5
Feature 4

60
24
23
8
2
2
1

10O.O
40.0
38.3
13.3
3.3
3.3
1.7

Simms Engraved
Feature 1
Feature 2
Feature 5
Feature 7

59
29
28
1
1

1O0.O
49.2
47.4
1.7
1.7

Natchitoches
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature

Engraved variants
3
6
7
4
1
1O

69
37
17
1O
2
2
1

10O.O
53.6
24.6
14.5
2.9
2.9
1.4

Punctated
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature

5
1
4
7
12

18
7
5
3
2
1

1O0.O
38.9
27.8
16.7
11.1
5.5

98
27
20
18
9
7
5
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1

100.0
27.6
20.4
18.4
9.2
7.1
5.1
3.1
2.0
2.0
L0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

46
37

10O.0
80.4

Incised
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Aa-ea B
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature

5
3
6
1
2
4
19
16
7
8
11
17
18

Brushed-Combed
Feature 3

181

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

TABLE 8 -- (Continued)
8
1

17.4
2.2

Combed
Feature 7
Feature 15

2
1
1

100.0
50.0
50.0

AppIiqudd
Feature 1

1
1

1O0.0
100.0

Appliqudd Incised
Feature 5
Feature 4

3
2
1

100.0
66.7
33.3

Emory Punctated
Feature 4
Feature 1
Feature 6

12
9
2
1

100.0
75.0
16.7
8.3

Brushed-Punctated
Feature 1
Feature 4

19
13
6

100.0
68.4
31.6

Brushed
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature

3
6
4
12
1
15
7
2
8
5
18
20

85
32
17
9
9
4
4
3
2
2
1
1
I

100.0
37.7
20.0
10.6
10.6
4.7
4.7
3.5
2.6
2.6
1.2
1.2
1.2

Womack Plain
Feature 3
Feature 7
Feature 5
Feature 1
Feature 6
Feature 15

115
91
16
5
1
1
1

100.0
79.1
13.9
4.3
0.9
0.9
0.9

Pinched
Feature 18

4

100.0

165
120
37
3

100.0
72.7
22.4
1.8

Feature 7
Feature 8

Womack Ware
Feature 3
Feature 5
Feature 4

182

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 8 - (Continued)

Feature 6
Feature 11
Uncertain

2
2
1

1.2
1.2
0.6

494
148
83
77
46
44
35
16
12
ii
4
3
2
1

100.0
30.0
16.8
15.6
9.3
8.9
7.1
3.2
2.4
2.4
2.2
.8
.6
.4
.2

5
2
2
i

100.0
40.0
40.0
20.0

Undecorated, Bone Tempered
Feature 3
Feature 1
Feature 18
Feature 4
Feature 5
Feature 6
Feature 7
Uncertain
Feature 15
Feature 10
Feature 13
Feature 11
Feature 12

391
108
97
58
56
24
16
14
6
5
3
2
1
1

lOO.O
27.6
24.8
14.8
14.3
6.1
4.1
3.6
1.5
1.3
.8
.5
.3
.3

Undecorated, Grog-Tempered
Area B
Feature 1
Feature 6
Uncertain
Feature 3
Feature 5
Feature 10
Feature 2
Feature 4
Feature 7
Feature 15

149
59
42
18
10
6
6
4
1
1
1
1

100.0
39.6
28.2
12.1
6.7
4.0
4.0
2.7
.6
.6
.6
.6

Undecorated, Shell-Tempered
Feature 3
Feature 1
Feature 5
Feature 4
Feature 7
Feature 6
Feature 16
Feature 15
Uncertain
Feature 2
Feature 12
Feature 13
Feature 10
Feature 18
Undecorated, Shell- and Bone-Tempered
Feature 7
Feature 15
Feature 4

12

183

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

TABLE 8 -- (Continued)

Undecorated, Grog- and Shell-Tempered
Feature 6
Feature 3
Feature 4
Uncertain
Undecorated, Sandy Paste
Feature 3
Feature 1
Feature 6
Feature 4
Feature 5
Feature 2
Feature 11
Feature 15
Uncertain
Feature 7
Feature 10
Feature 20
Undecorated, Temper Uncertain
Feature 3
Feature 1
Feature 5
Feature 7
Feature 4
Feature 6
Feature 13
Feature 2
Feature 10
Feature 15
Uneertain

17
14
i
1
1

100.0
82.3
5.9
5.9
5.9

123
48
27
24
7
5
3
2
2
2
1
1
1

100.0
39.0
22.g
20.0
5.7
4.1
2.4
1.6
1.6
1.6
.8
.8
.8

28
6
4
4
4
2
2
2
1
1
1
1

i00.0
21.4
14.3
14.3
14.3
7.1
7.1
7.1
3.6
3.6
3.6
3.6

INTERSITE DISTRIBUTION

The pottery from the features compares most favorably with ceramics recovered from components of the Nortefio Focus, an archeological complex that Dutqfleld and Jelks (1961: 69-75) have convincingly linked with 18th and 19th century southern Wichita-speaking
peoples, Taovayas, Tawakoni, Kichai, Yscani, Waco, and Wichita
proper. Indeed, the similarity is such that there can be no doubt that
the historic occupation at Gilbert is also a component of this focus.
Among the sites recognized as having Nortefio Focus occupations-Sanders and Womack in Lamar County, Spanish Fort and related sites
in Montague County and in nearby parts of Oklahoma, Stansbury in
Hill County, Stone in McLennan County, Vinson in Limestone

184

TEXAS

AIRCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

County, and Pearson and Gilbert in Rains County-the most frequently shared ceramic traits are types Womack Engraved and undecorated, shell-tempered pottery which is often (but not herein)
identified as Nocona Plain (Duf~eld and Jelks, 1961: 71-72). Other
ceramic comparisons are difficult as only the pottery from Pearson and
Womack have been described in any detail. Of these two sites, just
Womack has yielded a collection which is comparable in size to that
recovered from Gilbert. Pottery common to both includes, in addition
to the above, Emory Punctated, Simms Engraved, Natchitoches Engraved, untyped incised and punctated sherds, and plain grog- (or
"grit-") tempered pottery. Present at Gilbert but not recognized at
Womack are undecorated, bone-tempered pottery, Womack Plain,
and several plastic decorative techniques (combing, appliqu6ing,
brushing, and pinching). Conversely, at Womack but not at Gilbert
are types Hudso~z Engraved and Avery Engraved (both as trade
ware), as well as a high incidence of Womack Engraved Design B
(Design A was far and away the most common at Gilbert).
Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine (1965: 303) have already called
attention to the temporal and possible spatial significance of the design
variations found on Womack Engraved. Specifically, they note:
To judge from the writers’ collections, the same design (Design B ) is the
most common in the Nortefio Focus component at the Sanders Site. Significantly, Sanders and Womaek appear to he the earliest of the Nortefio sites
on Red River. While much less frequent, Design C seems to occur along
with Design A (sic*) at both of these sites. Design A, a very minor motif
at Womaek, becomes more important at Nortefio sites located on the Sabine,
Brazos, and upper Red Rivers, apparently at the cost of Designs B and C.
Design D, as far as is presently known, occurs only at the Gilbert and
Womaek sites where in both eases it is a very minor form (one and four
examples, respectively).

The other ceramic differences between the Gilbert and Womack Sites
may follow similar patterns. If so, a check would seem to be at hand
in the form of the Pearson Site pottery, as Pearson is near Gilbert but
possibly was occupied slightly later (Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 77-79).
However, in making a comparison with Pearson it must be emphasized
that this site yielded only 272 sherds. With this in mind, the two collections seem significantly similar. In addition to Womack Engraved
(design motifs not generally discernible), Pearson has undecorated
bone-tempered and shell-tempered, and sandy paste sherds in roughly
the same proportions as Gilbert. Also the same plastic decorative
techniques, exclusive of combing, are present. Absent at Pearson, but
known from Gilbert, are Womack Plain., Simms Engraved, and, less
* This should read Design B.

185

INDIAN ABTIFACTS

certainly, Natchitoches Engraved and Emory Punctated. In view of
the inequitable sample sizes, the possible absence of Natchitoches and
Emory at Pearson is probably not important. As for Simms, it almost
certainly represents trade with historic Caddoan peoples rather than
local Nortefio manufacture. Perhaps it was simply not traded for by
the historic occupants at Pearson, or, more likely, it was no longer
being made by Caddoan peoples at the time of the Nortefio stay at that
site. The apparent absence of Womack Plain is less easily disregarded,
unless it is a type unique to Gilbert. It has not been recognized in The
University of Texas collections from Sanders and Womack, a situation
which initially suggested the likelihood that it is a fairly late Nortefio
type. This does not seem to be borne out at Pearson, but perhaps the
sample is too small and fragmentary for recognition of Wornack Plain.
Cel~ainly, this and many other questions concerning the pottery can
only be answered when additional collections have been reported in
detail and particular attention has been given to specific and well defined attributes.
SUI~R,IAIRY

AND

CONCLUSIONS

The foregoing analysis of the 2,221 fragments of native-made vessels reveals that two cultural components, one prehistoric, the other
historic, are represented at the Gilbert Site. The earlier and less
intensive of the two, identified as Caddoan, was found to occupy only
Area B on the northern fringe of the site (Fig. 1). The small ceramic
collection made there consisted solely of grog-tempered sherds (59
plain and two incised), apparently from simple bowls and jars having
direct rims and fiat, circular bases. Precise cultural affiliations cannot
be assigned, although the probable vessel forms present, the seemingly high incidence of plain pottery and the temper agent used are
all suggestive of Gibson Aspect ceramics, particularly those of the
Sanders Focus.
The pottery from the remainder of the site-from 18 of the features
in Area A-is attributed to the second and later component, the
historic Nortefio Focus. It is markedly different from, and far more
diverse than, the pottery recovered from Area B. Included is a
striking variety of decorative techniques, vessel forms, and tempering materials. In spite of this diversity, few, if indeed any, significant
variations could be observed in the pottery collected from the various
features. While it is conceivable that this could be a result of inappropriate units of analysis (either the classificatory or the distributional ones, or both), it is believed that the present study has

186

TEXAS

AIRCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

resulted in an essentially valid picture of the history of the site and
the culture of its occupants. Among the inferences that can be drawn
from the ceramies found in Area A are:
1) The features represent discrete trash accumulations, a conelusion supported by the fragmentary condition of the pottery and
by the scattered distribution of many of the individual vessels.
The latter especially suggests that breakage occurred elsewhere,
presumably in a nearby dwelling area (or areas).
2) Most, if not all, of the features are generally eontemporaneous
and many were probably in use simultaneously. The eeramies from
the features are quite similar and the few differences which can be
observed are probably due mainly to errors in sampling.
3) Only in the sul~prisingly eoneentrated oeeurrenee of Womack
Plain may there be a meaningful variation in the interfeature distributions. It is possible, but not now demonstrable, that this refleets a slightly different age for Feature 3 and perhaps even for
Feature 7, where 91 per cent and 16 per eent, respectively, of the
sherds recovered were Womack Plain. Of course, it is also possible that Womack Plain was made by only one or a few persons
(presumably women) at Gilbert and, consequently, was not
characteristic of the community as a whole.
4) While the interfeature distributions overwhelmingly suggest that
a single, integrated socio-eultural group occupied the site during
historic times, the pottery seems too stylistically and technologically
diverse to represent only one locally-produced eeramie complex.
Some types, such as Simms Engraved and, less eertainly, Natchitoches Engraved (ineluding the somewhat aberrant examples found
at the site) were very probably obtained from historie Caddo Indians. How much of the remainder of the pottery represents introduced wares and how much represents locally manufactured
Nortefio wares is ve~3~ difficult to say. Ceramics common to the
late occupations at the Gilbert, Womack (Harris et al., 1965),
and Pearson (Duffield and Jelks, 196i) sites, the only eomponents
reported in stfftleient detail for consideration here, are principally
Womack Engraved, Emory Punctated (probably, but not eertainly,
present at Pearson), and an undeeorated shell-tempered ware which
is often identified as Nocona Plain. These are perhaps the major
types made by the Nortefios during the early and middle 18th
century. Other, apparently not so widespread ceramics-including
certain engraved types found at Womack (Hudson and Avery),

INDIAN AI~TIFA CTS

187

and the undecorated bone-tempered pottery and various textured
utility wares common to Gilbert and Pearson-may be the result
of exchange or dose social association (such as intermarriagecoupled with patriloeal residence pattern-with another group or
groups ).
5) Regardless of how much of the pottery was made locally, it is
unquestionable (as Duflleld and Jelks have already pointed out)
that the majority, and perhaps even all, of the decorated ceramics
are derived ultimately from the Caddoan, particularly Fulton Aspect, tradition. Many close parallels exist in the modes and styles
of decoration, paste characteristics, and vessel forms.
6) The derivation (or derivations) of the plain pottery is less
dear. Plain shell-tempered and bone-tempered jars are very common at Gilbert but are not characteristic of late Caddoan ceramics.
The shell-tempered jars could well be a reflection of Mississippian
influence, while the bone-tempered ones may be a more localized
development, one which certainly has prehistoric antecedents in the
general vicinity of the Gilbert Site.
7) Lastly, it can be noted that a striking number of the vessels
from Gilbert show signs of having been repaired or in some way
modified into serviceable containers after breakage had occurred.
This suggests that relatively few vessels were being made by the
oceupants; perhaps they were gradually being replaced by European-produeed containers.

188

FIcui~ 66.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Tobacco pipes, a-e, stone; f-j, ceramic.

189

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

TOBACCO PIPES
by 1~. K.

B. JELKS,
and LESTER

HARP,IS, EDWARD

CHARLES

NEMEC, BOBBY VANCE,

WILSON

There were 205 pipes and pipe fragments found at the Gilbert Site,
193 of them made of pottery and 19. carved of stone. All are native
made; no European ones were found. They vary considerably in size,
but their form is remarkably consistent (Fig. 66).
All the pipes, both ceramic and stone, are of the elbow variety.
They have flaring bowls, many with burned cake sti!l inside, and
stems that are usually shorter and of smaller diameter than the
bowls. A reed evidently was inserted into the stem section before the
pipe was smoked. The angle between bowl and stem is near 90 degrees in most eases but sometimes is slightly acute or obtuse. At the
opening of both the bowl and the stem there is usually a flat lip;
occasionally, however, a lip is rounded or even sharp, especially
on the bowls. The flat stem lips are generally wider than those of
the bowls. Most of the pipes have a small spur at the heel.
Seven small ceramic pipe fragments (Fig. 66, c-f) show portions
of designs that were engraved (5 examples) or incised (2 examples) on the exterior surface of the bowl, or perhaps of the
stem. The designs are made up of straight lines, the most common
elements being triangles, frequently filled with hachuring or crosshatching. Pipes with similar decorations have been reported from
the Pearson Site (Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 72-73) and from the
Womaek Site (Harris et al., 1965: 303; Fig. 6, F). The designs on
these pipes closely resembles those on certain Womack Engraved
pottery vessels. Furthermore, the paste of the ceramic pipes is the
same as that of Womack Engraved pottery.
The stone pipes are made of a soft, limey marl containing fossil
foraminifers. Kathleen Gilmore examined them and identified the marl
as of Cretaceous age, probably from the Eagle Ford Fo~Tnation
specifically. While of the same basic shape as the ceramic pipes,
they tend to have more slender proportions than the ceramic ones.
The stem of one stone pipe (Fig. 66, b) is completely covered with
an elaborate incised decoration reminiscent of the decorated ceramic
pipes. The design includes triangles, hachuring, and crosshatching.
Measurements were made of the relatively complete ceramic pipes.
The bowls are from 28 to 59 ram. high and from 24 to 47 ram. across
at the mouth (all outside measurements). The stems are 24 to 66 ram.
long (measured from the lip to the end of the spur at the heel)

190

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

and 17 to 44 mm. wide at the orifice. Flat bowl lips are 2 to 8 mm.
wide, flat stem lips 5 to 12 mm. wide.
The following measurements were obtained for the stone pipes:
bowl height, 40 and 60 mm. (2 specimens); bowl diameter at mouth,
33 mm. (1 specimen); stem length (measured from lip to end of spur
at heel), 37 and 49. mm. (2 specimens); stem diameter at orifice, 23
and 9.6 mm. (2 specimens); width of flat stem lips, 5 to 7 mm. (2
specimens). Only two stone pipes retain portions of the upper bowl,
and on both specimens the lip is rounded.

191

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

STONE TOOLS
by C. L.

ALLEN, JR., PAULINE ALLEN, JOE F. COCHRAN, LATHEL F.

DUFFIELD, t{.
1~.

E.

D. HELM, ISABELLE
E. PADGETr, and

FOBBESTER, JR., ELBERT

LOBDELL, DAVID LUBELL,

t~OY

~OBERT L. TAPSCOTr

In this section the stone artifacts other than guifltints and stone
pipes are described. They are separated into seven categories on
the basis of assumed function: projectile points, scrapers, knives,
celts, manos, hammerstones, and abrading stones. When appropriate,
each category is subdivided into smaller groups of similar specimens.
Arrow points and scrapers make up the bulk of the lithie assemblage.
Two major divisions of projectile points are recognized: dart points
and arrow points. Dart points are larger and heavier than arrow
points. Scrapers are divided into two principal groups: end scrapers
and side scrapers.
PROJECrlLE POINTS

Da,~ Points
Gary (Small Size)
No. of Specimens: 11
Provenience: Feature 1 (1), Feature 2 (1), Feature 3 (1), Feature
5 (2), Feature 16 (1), Area B (1), surface (4)
Illustrations: Figure 67, a-b
These points have small but well-defined shoulders, triangular
blades, and contracting stems with pointed or slightly rounded bases.
As a group they are smaller than the small Gary points from the
Pearson Site (Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 14-16, Fig. 3, a, b). All are
made of quartzite.
Measurements: length, 28 to 40 ram.; width, 14 to 21 mm.; stem
length, 10 to 15 ram.
Gary (Large Size)
No. of Specimens: 19
Provenience: Feature 3 (1), Feature 5 (2), Feature 7 (1), Feature
15 (1), Feature 16 (1), Feature 9.0 (1), Area B (2), surface (10)
Illustrations: Figure 67, c-d
This group of dart points varies rather widely in size and shape.
The only regular feature is a contracting stem which terminates
in a pointed or somewhat rounded base. All are made of quartzite.

192

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

Dart points, a-b, Gary (Small); c-d, Gary (Large)i e, Yarbrough; f, Pedernales; g, Pahnillas; h, slde-notched; i-j, rectangular stemmed.

FIGURE 67.

Measurements: length, 38 to 59 mm.; width, 22 to 45 mm.; stem
length, 13 to 22 mm.
Yarbrough
No. of Specimens: 3
Provenience: Feature 5 (1), Feature 7 (1), Feature 15 (1)
IUusCrations: Figure 67, e
The blade edges on these points are straight to weakly convex,
and the shoulders are unbathed. The stems are long and slightly
expanding with a straight base. The stem edges are straight to
mildly concave and are ground on two specimens. Two points are
made from chert; one is of quartzite.
Measurements: length, 45 mm.; width, 18 to 23 mm.; stem length,
12 to 16 ram.; stem width, 14 to 15 mm.

P edernales
No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Features 3 and 16
Illustrations: Figure 67, f

193

INDIAN AIITIFACTS

These specimens have triangular blades with straight edges, corner
notches, and prominent shoulders; the slightly expanding stems have
straight edges and concave bases. One is made of chert, the other
of quartzite.
Measurements: length, 43 mm.; width, 33 and 34 ram.; stem length,
li and 10 mm.; stem width, both 17 mm.
Palmillas
No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 3
Illus~rations: Figure 67, g
The blade of this point is broken but appears to have had straight
edges. The unbarbed shoulders are well defined. The concave edges
and markedly convex base of the stem give it a rounded or bulbous
appearance. It is made of chert.
Measurements: length, broken; width, 19 ram.; stem length, 10
mm.; stem width, 18 mm.
SIDE-NOTCHED

DAI/T

POINTS

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 3
Illustrations: Figure 67, h
Only the base and part of the unbarbed shoulder remain of this
broken point. The stem is short and expanding with rounded corners,
convex edges, and slightly concave base. The material is petrified

wood.
Measurements: length, broken; width, 22 mm.; stem length, 7 mm.;
stem width, 21 ram.
t/EG~rANGULAtl STEM

I

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Both from Feature 1
Ilhlstrations: Figure 67, i
These points have leaf-shaped blades with convex edges, weak,
rounded shoulders, parallel stem edges, and straight bases. Both are
made of chert.
Measurements of the more complete point: length, 52 ram.; width,
24 mm.; stem width, 18 mm,
ItECTANGULAlt STEM II

No. of Specimens: 3
Provenience: Feature 5 (1), Feature 17 (1), surface (1)
Illustrations: Figure 67, j
The blades of these dart points are triangular with straight to
slightly convex edges. The shoulders are prominent but unbarbed.

194

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

The stems have parallel edges and straight bases. All three points
are made of quartzite.
Measurements: length, 53 mm.; width, 21 to 27 mm.; stem length,
10 to 14 mm.; stem width, 11 to 14 mm.
DART POINT FRAGMENTS

No. of Specimens.: 19
Provenience: Feature 1 (2), Feature 4 (1), Feature 5 (2), Feature
6 (1), Feature 15 (1), Feature 16 (2), Feature 20 (3), Area B (2),
surface (5)
Arrow Points
FRESNO

No. of Specimens: 173
Provenience: Feature 1 (39), Feature 2 (9), Feature 3 (38), Feature 4 (15), Feature 5 (13), Feature 6 (20), Feature 7 (3), Feature
10 (4), Feature 12 (5), Feature 15 (1), Featnre 16 (1), Feature 18
(8), Feature 20 (2), surface (15)
Illustrations: Figure 68, a-g
These points are shaped like simple triangles. The lateral edges
are usually straight. They may be slightly convex but are never coneave. The bases are normally straight although a few specimens have
slightly to moderately eoneave bases. As a general rule these points
are thin and we!l made with over-all biracial flaking. Occasionally,
however, a thin, flat, conveniently shaped flake was merely retouched along the edges. All but two of the Fresno points are made
from chert or other fine eryptocrystalline quartz material. The two
exceptions are made from quartzite.
Measurements: length, range 15 to 39 mm., average 23.4 ram.;
width, range 9 to 21 mm., average 13.8 mm. These averages are
based on measurements of 131 complete points. The size distributions
are presented graphically in Figure 69.
I~IAUD

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 2
Illustrations: Figure 68, h
This slender, triangular point has straight lateral edges and a deep
V-shaped basal concavity. It is made of chert.
Measurements: length, 29 mm.; width, 13 mm.; depth of basal
concavity, 5 ram.
Maud is a common arrow type in the Texarkana and Belcher loci.
TURNEY

No. of Specimens:

i

INDIAN

195

AI~TIFACTS

FIGURE 68. Arrow points, a-g, Fresno; h, Maud; i, Talco; j-It, sidenotched; l, Catahoula; m, contracting stem.
Provenience: Feature 1
Illustrations: Figure 68, i
This is a triangular unnotched point with slightly convex, finely
serrated edges and a shallow V-shaped basal concavity. This specimen is made from chert.
Measurements: length, 22 ram.; width, 19. ram.; depth of basal
concavity, 2 ram.
The Turney type is found in Allen Focus sites.
SIDE-NOTCHED

ABt/OW

POINTS

No. of Specimens: 8
Provenience: Feature 1 (9.), Feature 3 ( 1 )
Illustrations: Figure 68, j-k
These small thin side-notched points fit no named type. One has
convex blade edges, shallow side notches near the base, rounded
shoulders, and a straight base. Another (Fig. 68, j) is a straightsided, straight-based triangular point of the Fresno type with a
pair of broad shallow side notches about halfway between the proximal and distal ends. The third specimen (Fig. 68, k) has convex,
strongly serrated blade edges, sharp, pronounced, unbarbed shoulders, side notches near the proximal end, a short stein wider than the

196

TEXAS AlqCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
20-

IO,
o~

2O
WIDTH

IN

25

MILLIMETERS

~15"
z

o

m
Ol0.

m
~E

15

FIGURE 69.

Size

20

25

30

35

4O

LENGTH ’N mLLIMETERS
distribution of Fresno arrow points.

blade, and a straight base with downward curving ears at each corner. One basal ear is broken. All three of these points are made of
chert.
Measurements: Specimen 1: length, 20 mm.; width, 12 mm.; basal
width, 13 mm.; basal height, 4 mm. Specimen 2: length, 9.3 mm.;
width, 10 mm.; basal width, 14 mm.; basal height, 9 mm. Specimen
3: length, 9.9 mm.; width, 11 mm.; basal width, 14 inm.; basal height,
8 mm.; length of basal ear, 3 mm.
CATAHOULA

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Feature 20 (1), surface (1)
IUustrations: Figure 68, 1
The most characteristic feature of these points is the long, wide,
flaring, squared-off barbs. Blade edges are concave and strongly

197

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

serrated. The expanding stem has a straight base. Both points are
made of quartzite. Only one of them is eomplete enough to measure.
Measurements: length, 23 ram.; width of blade above barbs, 11
mm.; width across barbs, 19 mm.; stem length, 4 ram.
CONTRACTING STE~N/I AIIIIOW POINTS

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Area B
Ilhtstrations: Figure 68, m
This point has a triangular, straight-edged blade, short pointed
barbs, corner notches, and a short wide stem with straight edges
which contract slightly toward the straight base. It is made of
quartzite.
Measurements: length, 28 mm.; width, 18 mm.; stem length, 5 mm.
AP,ROW

POINT FIIAGIV~ENTS

No. of Specimens: 28
Provenience: Feature 3 (9), Feature 4 (8), Feature 6 (9.), Feature
10 (1), Feature 18 (1), surfaee (7)
Remarks: It is worth noting that 83go of the 49. identifiable dart
points are made from a quartzite available in the immediate area of
the Gilbert Site. In sharp contrast to the dart points, only 2.8~o of the
181 arrow points were made of this loeal material. Three of the
arrow points made of loeally available material-the Catahoula and
eontraeting stem points-seem to belong to an older oeeupation than
the historic one. The use of finer imported material for the triangular
points of the historic occupation is probably one result of the
greater mobility of these people after they acquired horses.
SCRAPERS

End Scrapers
No. of Specimens: 418
Provenience: Feature 1 (66), Feature 9. (14), Feature 3 (157),
Feature 4 (45), Feature 5 (51), Feature 6 (51), Feature 7 (9.4), Feature 9 (3), Feature 10 (3), Feature 16 (1), Feature 20 (3)
Illustrations: Figures 70 and 71
Several different people worked on the scrapers, and-not too
surprisingly-the result was four different classifications of end scrapers. Descriptions of all four classifications follow.
In one study, the end scrapers were sorted into categories of the
"outline" classification used by Duttleld and Jelks (1961: 9.4-28) in
their report on the Pearson Site. Their categories are:
"Tapering Base Snub-nose Scrapers. This form is elongated, is

198

TEXAS AlqCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

widest at the bit end, and tapers from the bit end to a pointed base
¯ . . the working edge is straight to slightly convex.
"Rounded Base Snub-nose Scrapers. These differ from the above
group in that the bases are rounded and are of approximately the
same width, if not wider, than the working edge. Some, however, are
slightly narrower at the base than at the bit. The lateral edges do not
taper, but are approximately parallel.
"Subtriangular Snub-nose Scrapers. This form is basically triangular
in shape, with strongly convex edges. The lateral edges are slightly
longer th~in the working edge, and they taper down to a rounded,
or sometimes flattened, base.
"Straight Base Snub-nose Scrapers. The characteristic attribute of
this group is a straight base which may sometimes have resulted from
accidental breakage. The cutting edge is usually convex but may occasionally be straight. The lateral edges are approximately parallel,
although they occasionally taper slightly toward the base.
"Rectangular Snub-nose Scrapers . . . are rectangular in shape.
"Triangular End Scrapers or Gouges. These implements are characterized by their small size, triangular outline, and by a steeply beveled,
straight to slightly convex working edge. One face of these tools is
considerably flatter than the other."
When the Gilbert Site end scrapers were sorted into the above
groups, the following counts were obtained: tapering base, 170;
rounded base, 44; straight base, 146; rectangular base, 28; triangular
base, 30.
The same group of snub-nose scrapers was also classified using a
"method of manufacture" system similar to that used by Suhm (1962:
69) in her study of scrapers from the Footbridge Site at Canyon
Reservoir. She divided the scrapers into three groups: (1) initial
cortex flake scrapers, (2) cortex flake scrapers, and (3) secondalT
flake scrapers.
Initial cortex flake scrapers "are fashioned from the initial or outermost flakes detached from chert nodules . . . with the convex or
’outside’ surface retaining large portions of the cortex . . . most,
but not all, were struck from cores with prepared striking platforms."
Cortex flake scrapers "are derived from chert nodules after the
removal of the initial flake and, therefore, have a positive bulb of
percussion on one face and a negative bulb on the other. All, however, still retain portions of the cortex."
Secondary flake scrapers "are made from flakes which lack any
traces of cortex."
The counts using this system were: initia] cortex, 38; cortex, 136;

INDIAN

AI~TIFACTS

"199

secondary flakes, 216; total, 390. The 28 small snub-nose scrapers
were not included in these totals.
A third classification system was devised by one analyst. It is based
on the outline of the cross section just behind the scraping edge as
seen from a "nose-on" view. It is believed that such a cross-section
analysis would reflect whether the scraper was intended for heavy,
medium, or light duty scraping. It might also indicate whether the
scraper was halted to increase its efficiency.
The results using this system were: heavy dorsal rib, 69; medium
dorsal rib, 170; shallow arc, 69; flat dorsal plane, 110.
These classifications are all descriptive approaches to the problem
of end-scraper analysis and leave much to be desired as to functional
categories. End scrapers have been a matter of archeological record
over many areas and time periods although very few good descriptions
are found in the literature. It is our belief that a more refined methodof-manufacture system might offer some basic insight into the problem
if the following assumptions are valid.
This type of scraper is essentially a utility tool of everyday use,
probably a tool for working hides and leather. There are indications that some forms were hafted to increase the leverage and consequent utility or efficiency of the tool. Evidence of this is the
greater percentage of basal breakage on the scrapers with flat dorsal
faces.

Assmning these are normally utility tools, they would be made, as
needed, from the most convenient material at hand. They would be
prepared on the march, during the hunt, or in camp. For the same
reason, they would be discarded readily as seems indicated by their
wide distribution but relatively light concentration.
A technological or method-of-manufacture analysis of the Gilbert
end scrapers similar to the system used to describe Old World lithic
industries follows. Since many of the terms used by European typologists are unfamiliar to Americanists, they are defined in a glossary.
GLOSSARY

Flake The segment of rock broken off when a core is struck
properly.
Blade A flake which is at least twice as long as it is wide.
Core A piece of rock from whicb flakes are intentionally removed.
Strikin~ Platform The surface of a core which receives the blow
when a flake is struck off. Part of the striking platform usually remains on the proximal end of the flake as it breaks away.
Proximal End The end closest to a given point or to the user.
The bulb of percussion is at the proximal end of a flake.

9,00

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Distal End The end farthest from a given point or from the user.
The distal end of a flake is the one farthest from the bulb of percussion. The distal end of a projectile point is the tip of the blade.
Ventral Side (or Face) The surface of a flake which has the bulb
of percussion.
Dorsal Side (or Face) The "back" side on a flake; the side opposite the bulb of percussion.
Lateral Edge One of the two "side" edges of a flake or tool. An
edge between the proximal and distal ends which is formed by the
intersection of the dorsal and ventral sides.
Retouch Intentional alteration of a flake, usually by removal of
smaller flakes from the edges, to shape it into a to01.
Notch A concave scraper or spokeshave.
End Scrapers on Retouched Flakes
DISTAL

END

No. of Specimens: 113
Illustrations: Convex distal end (Fig. 70, a-b); concave distal end
(Fig. 70, c); oblique distal end (Fig. 70, d); straight distal end
(Fig. 70, e).
One or both lateral edges are blunted by retouch, but only the
distal end is steeply retouched to form a scraper edge. The proximal
end is never retouched except for occasional thinning of the bulb of
percussion.
Measurements: length, 23 to 80 ram. (74 pieces, or 657o, fall between 30 and 45 mm.); width, 20 to 50 mm. (87 pieces, or 777o,
fall between 24 and 34 mm.)
CIRCULAR

No. of Specimens: 14
Illustrations: Figure 70, f
The entire perimeter is retouched to produce a circular shape. Ordinarily the striking platform and bulb of percussion have been reduced or removed by retouch. In one instance a cortex surface has
been used for the striking platform.
Measurements: length, 31 to 50 ram. (5 specimens, or 367o, fall
between 38 and 40 ram.); width, 27 to 50 ram. (8 specimens, or 517O,
fall between 33 and 39 ram.)
OVOID

No. of Specimens: 28
Illustrations: Figure 70, g
The entire perimeter is retouched, but the striking platform and

INDIAN ABTIFACTS

201

FIGURE 70. End scrapers on retouched flakes, a-b, convex distal end; c,
concave distal end; d, oblique distal end; e, straight distal end; f, circular;
g, ovoid; h, end scraper on a notched flake; i, keeled end scraper; j, shouldered end scraper; k, double end scraper; l, combination end and side scraper.

bulb of percussion are frequently left intact to produce an ovoid shape
with a basal constriction.
Measurements: length, 29 to 62 mm. (20 pieces, or 71~, fall be-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

9,09,

tween 35 and 45 mm.); width, 21 to 43 mm. (23 pieces, or 82%, fall
between 26 and 37 ram.)
END SCRAPERS ON NOTCHED FLAKES

No. of Specimens: 15
Illustrations: Figure 70, h
The flake is notched on one of the lateral edges by retouch. The
distal end is retouched to foml a normal end scraper. All of
these specimens have a convex distal end.
Measurements: length, 30 to 55 ram. (9 pieces, or 60%, fall between 30 and 40 ram.); width, 21 to 38 ram. (9 pieces, or 60%, fall
between 2t and 30 mm.)
KEELED END

SCRAPERS

No. of Specimens: 9
Illustrations: Figure 70, i
This end scraper is on a thick flake with a keel-shaped profile. The
scraper edge is formed by laminate facets which may be wide and
short or long and narrow. This category of tools divides into two
discrete size groupings as indicated below.
Measurements: length, 31 to 67 mm. (1) 4 pieces, o1" 44~, fall
between 31 and 41 mm.; (2) 5 pieces, or 56%, fall between 51 and 67
mm. Width, 25 to 40 ram. (6 pieces, or 67%, fal! between 33 and 40
mm. )
SHOULDERED END SCRAPERS

No. of Specimens: 4
Illustrations: Figure 70, j
This end scraper is made on a thin flake. The scraper edge is formed
on a projection resulting from concave retouch on one or both sides
of the bit.
Measurements: length, 35 to 40 mm.; width, 24 to 38 ram.
DOUBLE END SCRAPERS

No. of Specimens: 3
Illustrations: Figure 70, k
Both the proximal and distal ends have been retouched to form
end scrapers.
Measurements: length, 36 to 56 mm.; width, 31 to 33 ram.
COMBINATION END AND SIDE SCRAPERS

No. of Specimens: ii
Ilhtstrations: Figure 70, 1
The flake used for these tools is usually larger and thicker than
the average for the Gilbert industry. One or both of the lateral
edges may be retouched steeply enough to be considered scraper

"203

INDIAN ABTIFACTS

edges. These tools are distinguished from either cfi’cular or ovoid
scrapers by their elongate and rectangular dimensions and by the
fact that die side scraper edges are not necessarily continuous with
the end scraper edges.
Measurements: length, 34 to 80 ram. (7 specimens, or 6470, falt
between 51 and 80 ram.); width, 23 to 54 mm. (9 specimens, or
8270, fall between 28 and 38 ram.)
ATYPICAL

END

SCRAPERS

No. of Specimens: 17
These are scrapers which cannot be assigned to one of the above
types or to new types because of vague morphology resulting from
poor technology, insufficient sample size, or heavy weathering which
has obscured the morphological and technological characteristics of
the piece. These are, however, clearly unbroken, finished tools that
belong in the end scraper category.
Measurements: length, 26 to 63 mm. (9 specimens, or 5370, fall
between 41 and 46 ram.); width, 17 to 47 ram. (13 pieces, or 76%,
fall between 27 and 38 ram.)
End Scrapers on Um’etouched Flakes
CONVEX

DISTAL

END

No. of Specimens: 117
Illustrations: Figure 71, a-b
This subtype represents the largest single categolT of scrapers in
this collection. The end scraper is formed by intentional retouch on
the distal end of the flake without any modification to the lateral
edges or the proximal end. The size range for these tools is small.
Examination of the flakes indicates a prepared-core technology. The
core was prepared to yield a flake within a predetermined and accepted size range which required no modifications to any surface
but the distal end.
Measurements: length, 24 to 67 ram. (65 pieces, or 56% fall between 30 and 39 ram.); width, 17 to 40 mm. (62 pieces, or 5370, fall
between 25 and 30 ram.)
OBLIQUE

DISTAL

END

No. of Specimens: 34
Illustrations: Figure 71, c-d
This scraper differs from the above scraper only in the oblique
orientation of the transverse angle of the distal end to the proximodistal axis.
Measurements: length, 25 to 58 ram. (28 pieces, or 8270, fall be-

204

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SO~ETY

FIcuR~ 71. End scrapers on unretouched flakes: a-b, convex distal end;
c-d, oblique distal end; e-f, straight distal end. End scrap2rs on blades: g-h,
convex distal end; i, oblique distal end. Thumbnail scrapers: j-n.

tween 30 and 42 mm.); width, 19 to 49 ram. (29, or 85g, fall between 20 and 30 ram.)

INDIAN

AIITIFACTS

905

STRAIGHT DISTAL END

No. of Specimens: 19
Illustrations: Figure 71, e-f
The distal end of this scraper is straight and frequently perpendicular to the proximo-distal axis.
Measurements: length, 23 to 54 ram. (9 pieces, or 47%, fall between 30 and 40 mm.); width, 17 to 38 mm. (8 pieces, or 49%, fall
between 9.0 and 30 mm.)
End Scrapers on Blades
CONVEX DISTAL END

No. of Specimens: 24
Illustrations: Figure 71, g-h
This end scraper is formed by steep retouch on the distal end of
a blade. The lateral edges are sometimes retouched as a blunting
device, but in no case is the retouch regular or steep enough to be
considered a scraping edge.
Measurements: length, 94 to 73 mm. (13 pieces, o1" 54%, fall between 39 and 47 ram.); width, 14 to 99 ram. (19 pieces, or 7970, fall
between 17 and 25 mm.)
OBLIQUE

DISTAL END

No. of Specimens: 1
Illustrations: Figure 71, i
The transverse angle of the distal end is oriented obliquely to the
proximo-distal axis.
Measurements: length, 24 to 73 ram.; width, 14 to 29 mm.
THUMBNAIL

SCRAPERS

No. of Specimens: 17
Illustrations: Figure 71, j-n
These are small, ]amellar retouched scrapers with an ovoid shape
reminiscent of the size and shape of a thumbnail.
Measurements: length, 11 pieces, or 64g, fall between 20 and
30 ram.; width, 14 pieces, or 82g, fall between 15 and 18 mm.
SInE SCRAPERS

No. of Specimens: 108
Provenience: Feature 1 (12), Feature 2 (5), Feature 3 (32), Feature 4 (7), Feature 5 (15), Feature 6 (24), Feature 7 (9), Feature
10 (3), Feature 16 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 79, a-e
The salient characteristic of these specimens is steep unifacial re-

206

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

touch of at least one lateral flake edge to form a tool suitable for use
as a scraper. Most of them are made on flakes but thirteen are on
blades.
The sizes and shapes of the flake scrapers are quite diverse. Most
have one retouched edge with no additional modification of the flake.
Eight, however, have two adjacent retouched edges (Fig. 72, b, d).
Most have straight or slightly convex bits but 18 are concave. These
latter are commonly called spokeshaves or notches.
The 13 side scrapers made on blades (Fig. 72, e, e) are long, thin
flakes that were struck from a core by direct or indirect percussion.
The backs of the blades usually have longitudinal ridges from removal of previous flakes in the same direction. In cross section the
blades are essentially piano-convex although they occasionally curve
slightly from end to end. The blades are modified by retoueh.
KNIVES

No. of Specimens: 27
Provenience: Feature 1 (3), Feature 3 (13), Feature 4 (5), Feature
5 (2), Feature 6 (3), Feature 7 (1)
Ilhlstrations: Figure 72, j-m
A knife may be described as an artifact with at least one bifacially
retouched edge suitable for cutting. There is no uniformity in size
or shape of the Gilbert Site knives. In general, the workmanship is
crude. One appears to be a medial portion of a Harahey or alternately beveled, diamond-shaped knife. Sixteen of these specimens
are made on blades.
There are fewer stone knives in the collection than might be expected probably due to the importance of metal trade knives in the
tool kit of the inhabitants.
GRAVERS

No: of Specimens: 16
Provenience: Feature 3 (14), Feature 4 (1), Feature 7 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 72, f-g
A graver is a small, thin flake with a short, sharp projection
which could be used to incise or groove material such as wood, bone,
soft stone, shell or pottery. The point or projection is usually well
worked although the rest of the item may show no pressure flaking
at all. Moderate to extensive wear may show on the point.
BOILERS Oil DRILLS
No. of Specimens: 10
Provenience: Feature 3 (6), Feature 5 (1), Feature 7 (1), Feature

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

FIGURE 72.
j-m, knives.

207

Chipped stone tools, a-e, side scrapers; f-g, gravers; h-i, borers;

13 (1), surface (1)
Illustrations: Figure 72, h-i
These are flakes with a natural subtriangular outline which are retouched along one relatively long corner to form a stout point. They
are not otherwise modified. Such tools would be suitable for drilling
or boring wood, bone, or soft stone.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SO~ETY

UTILIZED

FLAKES

No. of Specimens: 15
Provenience: Feature 3
These are flakes that show no intentional workmanship but do
show wear from use.
DEBITACE

No. of Specimens: 1,441
Provenience: Feature 1 (27), Feature 9. (14), Feature 3 (538), Feature 4 (204), Feature 5 (218), Feature 6 (9,27), Feature 7 (67), Feature 10 (9), Feature 11 (8), Feature 13 (2), Feature 15 (70), Feature 16 (39), surface (18)
Debitage is any waste material produced during the manufacture
of artifacts. This category includes core fragments, extremely small
flakes resulting from retouch and sharpening, and all unretouched
flakes.
The debitage was sorted according to the type of stone and tabulated. Identification of stone from non-local sources is assumed to be
evSdenee of trade.
Quartzite, sandstone, and petrified wood occur in the local vicinity and are combined in Table 9 under the heading Local Materials.
Types of stone of known origin are Kay County flint which comes
from quarries in north-central Oklahoma and is easily identifiable by
the inclnsions of small fossils, fusilinids; Central Texas flint occurs as
nodules or ledges in limestone outcrops throughout the Edwards
Plateau; Alibates flint, a silicified dolomite from the Texas Panhandle;
and novaculite which occurs in Arkansas.
CELTS

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Feature £ (1), Feature 6 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 73, d-e
The entire surface of these celts with the exception of the bit shows
evidence of the pecking and light grinding which was used to shape
the artifacts. The bits are ground smooth into sharp convex edges. The
cross sections are oval. The material is a dense, fine-grained, black,
igneous rock.
Measurements: Specimen l-length 84 mm., width, 45 mm.; Specimen 2-length 89 mm., width, 49 ram.
HA~vII~ERSTONES

No. of Specimens: 3
Provenience: Feature 6 (1), Area B (2)

209

INDIAN ABTIFACTS

co
v--

r-4

c.o

w~

cq

oo

~4

xo

c~

co

cq

¯~-

.~

~

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SO~ETY

These quartzite cobbles have battered edges. It is assumed they
were used as hammerstones in flint knapping.
MANOS

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 9.0
Ilhtstrations: Figure 73, f
This is a thick, well shaped, subround, quartzite mano with two
fiat grinding surfaces. Each grinding surface has small, shallow,
pecked depressions in the center.
Measurements: length, 96 ram.; width, 86 ram.; thickness, 59. ram.
SANDSTONE

ABRADERS

No. of Specimens: 46
Provenience: Feature 1 (13), Feature 3 (14), Feature 4 (8), Feature 5 (5), Feature 6 (4), Feature 7 (9.)
Illustrations: Figure 73, a-c
Twenty-one of these artifacts are loaf-shaped, rectangular pieces
the friable sandstone with a deep, longitudinal, U-shaped groove on
the flattest side. Eyewitness accounts by early explorers indicate
that this type of artifact was used to smooth an’ow shafts (La Flesche,
199.4: 113).
Eleven other specimens have one deep U-shaped shaft-smoothing
groove with additional smaller, shallower, V-shaped grooves on other
surfaces which could have been used to smooth and sharpen awls,
needles, or other narrow tools.
One very large block of sandstone has one large, smooth whetting
surface and two flat faces. Numerous randomly oriented cuts probably resulted from use as an anvil. The fact that this specimen was
found in the bottom of the pit in Feature 6 lends credence to the
theory that the pit was a storage pit.
Fourteen specimens are considered to be hones because they have
flat, smoothed surfaces suitable for sharpening relatively straight-edged
blades such as metal knives, hatchets, wedges, and stone celts.
PITTED STONES

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 3
This triangular piece of sandstone has a shallow pit in the center
of each face.

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

FIGURE 73.
mano.

211

Ground stone artifacts, a-c, sandstone abraders; d-e, celts; f,

Pieces of yellow and red ocher occurred throughout the site. There
were scratch marks on some pieces where the pigment had been
scraped off, evidently for use as paint.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

BONE AND SHELL ARTIFACTS
by DESSAMAE Lom~nv
BONE BEADS

No. of Specimens: 5
Provenience: Feature 1 (2), Feature 3 (2), Feature 10 (1)
IUustrations: Figure 74, a-b
These beads were made from bird limb bones by grooving and
snapping off sections and smoothing their ends. The beads have round
to oval cross sections, and their exterior surfaces are well polished.
Measurements: length, 9.8 to 48 ram.; exterior diameter, 7 to 9
mm.; interior diameter, 5 to 7 ram.
BONE

PENDANTS

No. of Specimens: 5
Provenience: Feature 1 (3), Feature 3 (2)
Illnstrations: Figtu’e 74, c-e
Two of these (Fig. 74, d-e) are flat pieces of bone with at least
two holes drilled at one end. The holes are biconical, having been
drilled from both sides. One pendant has fine vertical lines incised
on the face. Both specimens are quite fragmentary.
Measurements: thickness, 2 to 4 ram.; length and width of whole
pendants indeterminate.
One burned bone or antler pendant is circular in cross section.
It was the most carefully made of the bone artifacts but it is broken
on both ends and its original shape cannot be determined. The surface is smooth and highly polished. Three encircling grooves of even
width with almost vertical sides were cut near the top. The broken
top had a double collar with a hole of perfectly uniform diameter
through the junction between the collars and extending partially into
each of them. The hole is off-center.
Measurements: length, 32 mm.; diameter, 8 to 9 ram.
A bison incisor and a bear canine (Fig. 74, e) have holes drilled
through the root portion. Both show considerable use-polish. The
hole in the incisor is biconical. The hole in the bear canine is conical,
having been drilled from one side on!y.
ANTLER

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 1
Illustrations: Figure 75, a

HANDIJES

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

213

FIGURE 74. Bone and shell artifacts, a-b, bone beads; c, bear-tooth pendant; el-e, bone pendants; ) -h, shell disks; i, notched garfish scale; j, Olivashell pendant; k, conch-shell bead.
This segment of deer antler has a small hole hollowed out of the
larger end, evidently for the insertion of a stone or metal implement such as a knife or scraper. Oval in cross section, the segment
is i45 ram. long and has a maximum diameter of 28 ram. It was
removed from the antler by the groove-and-snap method, a process
which probably produced the transverse groove that lies athwart one
side of the handle 7 mm. from its larger end. The surface of the
antler is smooth and use-polished.

214

TEXAS

A1RCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 75. Bone artifacts, a, antler handle; b-e, awls; f-g, bird-bone
flageolets; b, bison-scapula hoe.
BONE AWLS

No. of Specimens: 6 whole, 15 fragmentary
Provenience: Feature 1 (9), Feature 3 (4), Feature 4 (2), Feature

215

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

5a (1), Feature 6 (1), Feature 7 (1), Feature 10 (1), Feature 18

(2)
Illustrations: Figure 75, b-e
Two of the awls are made of antler, the others of mammal long
bones. Because of extensive modifications including removal of articular surfaces, specific bone identification is impossible.
Segments of antler or bone wall were removed and rounded. The
proximal end has been rounded into a rough dome shape. The maximum diameter is at the proximal end which gradually tapers to a
point at the distal end. The cross section varies from triangular (18)
to oval (1) to round (9. antler awls). Patches of cancellous tissue can
be seen on one side of most of these artifacts.
Measurements: length, 65 to 142 ram.; maximum diameter at
proximal end, 7 to 10 mm.
Remarks: Three of the awls show the marks of a metal file. Although no files were found in the site, these awls indicate that the
Indians had access to such tools.
BIBD BONE FLAGEOLETS
No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Feature 6
Illustrations: Figure 75, f-g
These two objects are made from tibias of large birds, possibly
turkey. The articular ends have been removed by the groove-andsnap method. Unfortunately one end of each specimen is broken, so
that the original completed forms are unknown. One (Fig. 75, f) is
62 mm. long; the cut (unbroken) end has a maximum outside diameter
of 17 ram. and a maximum inside diameter of 12 ram. A rectangular
notch, 8 mm. wide, extends 10.5 ram. from the broken end down the
length of the bone. A band of crudely incised lines about 2.5 ram.
wide encircles the artifact about 9.2 ram. from the cut end.
The other flageolet (Fig. 75, g) is 168 ram. long; the cut (unbroken) end has a maxfinum outside diameter of 14.3 ram. and a
maximum inside diameter of 11.5 mm. There is no cut notch or opening in this specimen, but a number of crudely incised lines are cut
into one side starting at a point 45 mm. from the unbroken end and
extending to the broken end.
Remarks: These artifacts are probably flutes or flageolets with a
single stop hole near one end. Sfinilar artifacts were found with burials
at McGee Bend Reservoir (Jelks, 1965). The flageolets from McGee
Bend have oval stop holes rather than the square or rectangular one

216

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

on the shorter Gilbert specimen. Incised designs on the McGee Bend
flageolets are much better executed than those on the ones from
Gilbert.
BISON SCAPULA

HOES

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 4
IlInstrations: Figure 75, h
This artifact was made from the right scapula of a bison. The spine
was removed, and a rectangular halting notch was cut from the lateral
side, extending from the articular end down the blade of the hoe.
The original shape of the articular end cannot be determined because
a fresh diagonal cut removed most of the glenoid fossa. Originally
the hoe probably was much longer and wider but was reduced to its
present dimensions through wear.
Measurements: Notch-average width, 28 ram.; length, about 70
mm.; average depth, 10 mm. Hoe-length, 165 ram.; width at distal
end, 73.2 ram.
Bison scapula hoes are common on the Great Plains among historic
bison hunting groups and in prehistoric archeological sites. In Texas
they are found in many Henrietta Focus sites in the north-central
part of the state and less so in Wylie Focus sites slightly east of the
Henrietta Focus area. These loci represent people who apparently
combined agriculture with bison hunting-probably on a seasonal basis.
There were two methods of halting used for the scapula hoes. Either
a notch was cut out of the side, as was clone to the hoe described above,
or a hole was cut into the articular end without removing any bone
on either side of the scapula. The latter type appears to be earlier in
time, being succeeded by the notch-in-the-side type at very late prehistoric Henrietta Focus sites (R. K. Harris, personal communication).
DEER SKULL ARTrFACTS

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 4
Illustrations: Figure 76
This piece consists of parts of the frontal and parieta! bones of a
young deer with about 5 cm. of the left antler attached. The right
antler is broken just below the burr. The bones have been cut into a
crude triangular shape, and the antler has been sectioned lengthwise,
the back half being removed.
Measurements: length, 72.3 mm.; width, 84.0 ram.

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

FIGVRE 76.

217

Deer-skull artifact.

This artifact was probably part of a headdress. It is perhaps signifieant that this is the only object of a probable ceremonial nature
recovered at the Gilbert Site. It is assumed that the site represents a
historic village or eamp of one of the Wichita tribes, among whomaccording to Neweomb (1961: 173)-the deer dance was the most important eeremony. Kreiger (1946, P1. 23d, p. 327) illustrated a similar

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

artifact from the Sanders Site in Lamar County and mentioned (ibid.:
193) that four such cut skulls were found in the midden area. The
figure caption reads "Deer calvarium, inside view, showing trimmed
edge of brain case, and antler stubs. Probably fashioned to serve as
decoy or ceremonial object strapped to head." This artifact type is
also reported from the Texarkana Focus of the Fulton Aspect (Suhm,
Kreiger, & Jelks, 1954: 207-208).
MISCELLANEOUS BONE AIVI~nVACTS

No. of Specimens: 4
Provenience: Feature 1 (2), Feature 3 (1), Feature 11 (1)
One specimen is a broken rib of a smal! mammal which has been
smoothed and has a biconical hole drilled near the unbroken end.
This could have been a hair pin, a clothing ornament, or possibly a
needle.
Measurements: present length, 65 mm.; width, 5 ram.; thickness,
3 ram.
A cut piece of antler with a biconical hole has edges which were
cut and smoothed. The fiat, unnotched edge has striations left by a
metal file. The piece is broken.
Measurements: length (at present), 53.0 ram.; maximum width,
20.3 ram.
Another specimen is a cut section of the wall of a mammal long
bone. One edge is a gentle convex curve from end to end; the other
edge has two concavities with a conspicuous point between them.
One end is wider than the other. Any use for this artifact is not
immediately apparent.
Measurements: length, approximately 110 ram.; width at the narrow end, 17 to 18 mm.; width at the broad end, 29 ram.; width at the
point, 29 ram.
SHELL DISKS

No. of Specimens: 6
Provenience: Feature 1 (9,), Feature 2 (1), Feature 3 (2), Feature

5a (1)
Illustrations: Figure 74, f-h
These objects are small, thin, circular disks cut from mussel shells.
Two have a hole in the center; the other four are unperforated. Two
are too fragmentary to measure. The others have diameters of 9, 13,
14, and 18 mm.
It is possible that these disks and a small, thin, triangular piece cut

0,19

INDIAN AnTIFACTS

of shell from Feature 5 represent inlays similar to those found on
stone and wood artifacts from the Craig Mound at the Spiro Site in
Oklahoma.
SHELL PENDANTS

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Feature 1 (1), Feature 3 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 74, j
These are made from oliva shells with the apex ground off.
One specimen, nearly complete, is cone-shaped; the other was evidently of similar form although it is too fragqnentary to be certain.
Each of the pendants has a small hole drilled near the apical end,
and each is 32 mm. long.
SHELL BEADS

No. of Specimens: 1
Prooenience: Feature 2
Illustrations: Figure 74, k
This conch eolumella bead is cylindrical, 17 mm. long, 15 mm.
in diameter at the widest point, and has a longitudinal hole of
constant diameter. The surface is badly corroded except for one
small greenish spot which is probably due to copper salts which have
discolored and helped preserve the bead.

Provenience of the Artifacts
The respective authors examined separately the intra-site distribution of the different kinds of artifacts, sometimes in detail (for
example, in the ease of pottery vessels and glass beads), sometimes
cursorily. There has been no over-all analysis of artifact distribution
at the site.
While some authors noted minor variations in the occurrence of
certain kinds of artifacts from feature to feature, no general patterns suggesting significant temporal or cultural differences were
discerned. Still less did anyone observe any significant differences
in the artifact content of individual strata at the few stratified places
that were dug.
The material recovered from Area B (the point of high ground
extending northward from Area A, the main part of the site) consisted entirely of Indian artifacts which seem to be of prehistoric
origin, dating well before the 18th century. A few artifacts of late
19th- and 20th-century vintage, too, lay scattered about the site.
Otherwise the artifacts appear to be a relatively clean sample from a
single occupation dating from the period when the local Indians
were trading actively with Europeans. How long this occupation
lasted is uncertain.
If a more thorough distributional analysis of the entire artifact
collection were carried out, or if more features were excavated
extensively, perhaps important differences between features might
become apparent. But none have been observed as yet.
Table 10 lists the occurrence of al! the artifact categories by feature, except for glass bead types and pottery vessels which are
tabulated respectively in Tables 4 and 5. Giving more precise provenience data here would entail lengthy, complex tables of no apparent value. Precise information as to the origin of each specimen
is recorded in the artifact catalog, on file at the Texas Archeologieal
Ilesearch Laboratory, The University of Texas.

221

PROVENIENCE OF 27-IE AI~TIFACTS

I

,

llllllll~lllll

,q~t,,

i

!

i

i

i

!

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i~iiiiiiiii iii
i

i

i

i

i

i

iii

i

i

i

i

iiiiiiiiil i ili
iiiiiiiiiii iii

;~iiiiiii

6
0

i
r--,.i

b,.
¢.o

E

i

i

i~

i

i

i

i

i

i

!iiiiiiiiii

iiiiiiiiiii i!i
iiiiiiiiiii ii!

iiii!ii~iii
i~ i i i i i~ i i i

i i i i i i i i i ! i~ i~
iii!iiiii~ i i~i
i~ i~ i~ i i

.<

o’3

cq

~

i

i

i

i

E

i

ii~ii~i~

i

E

i

i~ iiiiijlii iii

ii

c~

o
o

~

.~

.~

o

.~
~

"~. ~ o,--~

.=
~ ~ ~ ~

..

’~
w,

~.~

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
t--

1511~Eil!~

~iiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
~mliiiiiiiiiiiiii!
~ i i i i i i i i i in i i i~ i
= iiin
=
~iiiiiiiiiiiiiill
=====
=
ii ii
~ = = = = +~ i i ! !n i i +

iiiiiiiiil
iiiiiiiiii
iiiiiiiJil
t

t

I

I

I

~

I

I

I

t

I

t

t

I

~

I

t

t

i

~iiiiiiiiiilniiii
~i!iiiiiiiiiiinii
~ i i i i i i~ i in i i i i~ i

iiiiiiiiin
i i i i i ! i i i~°
iiiiiiiiii

~ i i i i i i i~ i i~ i i i i i
~ i i i i i i i i i i i~n i i i
~iiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
In
~,,,,,+,
~iii!iiilnii~
iii
i~

I

t

I

I

~

I

tn

cO

iv i~ i~i~o

¢O
IO00

I

In

IO~

cq

PROVENIENCE OF THE ARTIFACTS

~2~

u

~iiiiii°1

.$~iiiii

iiiiiiiii

0’~

iiiiiiiii
!!iiiiill

iii!ii
°°ii!ii

,.--n

~

I

!

!

i

~iiiii
~ i i i i i~ ~ i i ~ ! i
iiiiiiiii
iiii ii
iiil ii
iiiiiiiii
ii
~ili
iiiiiiiii
iiii ii
iiiiiiiii
iiiiiiiii ~!ii i!
iiii ii
iiiiiiiii
ili! ii
ii!iii!il
i~ i i i i i i ~ i i i i i
!iiiiiil~ ~ii! ii

i

Icq
i

~

!

i

i

i

!

o~

i,

q

i

~

i

,

i

,

i

cq

.<
~1¢o

iiiiiii!~

~i!i ii

~ i

i i ! i i~ ~

~ ~ i i

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

IIIII~II

~ili ii iiiiiil

~i!!iiiiiiiii
~iiiiiiiiiiii
~!!iiiiiiiiii

iiiiiii!
ili~!i!i
iii!ilil

~giiiiiiiiiii

iiiiiiii
iiiiiiii
iiiiiili
!iiiiii~

IIIIIIII

~iiiiiiiiiiil

iiiiiiii
iii~iiii
r-q

i i i~ i~i

I

0

~D

~

I

~

~

~.~

~

~,~

1

1

0

0

1

~

1

1

0.~.~

1

1

°° ~.T,

Cq

:

~,..-~,...~,..zl

SOCIETY

Animal Remains
by DESSAX,IAE LOKRAn’~
The animal remains found at the Gilbert Site are tabulated by
feature in Table ll. Most common were white-tailed deer, box turtle,
and turkey in that order. Those three animals were undoubtedly
the primary protein source for the Indians living at the site.
The quantity and variety of turtle remains is unusually large
when compared to the fauna found at most areheological sites in
Texas. However, the Vinson" Site in Limestone County-another site
of the Nortefio Focus-also contained numerous turtle fragments.
This possibly could be a characteristic trait of Nortefio Focus sites.
The large size of the deer bones and the presence of puma, bear,
and probably bison, which are no longer present in the area, reflect
the impoverishment of the wild faun/ after White settlement in the
mid-nineteenth century.
Following is an analysis of the deer bones from Features 3, 4, 6,
and 7, the only features from which a significant amount of bone
material was collected. Of the total bones recovered, ahnost 90go were
the remains of white-tailed deer, Odocoileus virginianus. There were
at least 127 animals represented by 5,441 counted fragments. Deer
was obviously the major source of animal food for the people living
at the site.
This study was undertaken primarily in an attempt to determine
something of the hunting and butchering techniques and food preferences of these people. An attempt was also made to determine the
ages of the deer in order to discover the time of year they were
killed. It was thought that the ages of the animals would provide the
best clue to the time of the year that the site was occupied. The distribution of bone among the various middens was examined. It was
assumed that each midden represented the camping place of a specific
group of Indians. If this assumption is valid, any important difference
in distribution from midden to midden could have a cultural significance.
Half of the bones were washed at The University of Texas laboratolT; the other half were washed in Dallas by Mr. and Mrs. Jack
Bureh, Norma Hoffriehter, my husband Paul Lorrain, my three
children, and myself. After drying, a feature number was inked on

226

TEXAS

ARCI-IEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

each bone. As there was no significant stratification of the middens,
the exact position where a bone was found within the midden was
not recorded.
After numbering, the bones were sorted to isolate the deer remains.
The latter were in turn sorted according to bone: i.e., skull, femur,
tibia, etc. The rights and lefts were separated where applicable.
Because the long bones were almost always broken, they were recorded by proximal and distal ends. After counting and recording
each bone (Table 19.), an estimate of the minimum number of animals
represented by each was made (Table 13).
For the long bones, scapulae, pelves, astragali, calcanei, naviculocuboids, and mandibles, after determining how many rights and lefts
there were of each, the largest number was taken as the minimum
number of animals. The metacarpals and metatarsals were divided by
2. The phalanges were divided by 8. The atlases, axes, and first sacral
vertebrae were counted and the rest of the vertebrae were divided by
the number found in one animal. A record was kept of the number
of certain bones with loose, partially fused, or fully fused epiphyses
(Table 14). They were recorded as partially fused if, although the
epiphysis was attached, the line between epiphysis and shaft could
be seen clearly all around the bone.
The long bones, metapodials, atlases, axes, scapulae, and pelves
were examined to determine, if possible, where they had been broken
or cut by the Indians. The breaks were then examined and recorded
to determine any consistent patterns which would indicate the
butchering techniques used (Table 15).
The tooth development was examined to determine the age of the
deer. Table 16 lists the number of teeth cut, partially cut, or missing.
In addition it shows the height of the crown on the inside of the
second posterior cusp of the first and second adult molars.
The data thus recorded were plotted on several graphs to make
them easier to visualize. Table 13 shows the minimum number of individuals represented by each bone for each of the four features
and for the combined total of all four. Taking the largest number of
individuals in each ease as 100%, the percentages of this largest
number were caleulated for the others. For example, if the distal end
of the humerus was the most common bone and if it represented 50
animals, then bone representing 25 animals would total 50~o of the
maximum number. These percentages for the total of all four features
combined are plotted in Figure 77. The percentages for each feature
are plotted separately in Figure 78. A bar graph (Figure 79) shows
the incidence of pre-adult mandibles at various stages of develop-

227

ANIMAL REMAINS

ioo

\

90
80
70
60
50
&o
30

"\

i,J I

20

\

\

io
0
1 2 3 /+56 7 8 910
12
i~
=i~
fore-limb
~head~
spine

16
18
-i~

20
22
2&
26
28
.30
hind- llmb -----------~ toe --~

FIGURE 77. Percentage of minimum number of individual deer represented
by bones from different parts of the body. Data are for Features 3, 4, 6, and
7 combined.

ment. The variation in crown height of the first molar in mandibles
with adult dentition is shown graphically in Figure 80.
The bones were disarticulated with the exception of two vertebrae
and one ca!eaneum and astragalus. During excavation, several eases
were observed of an astragalus and caleaneum in articulation, but
these were accidentally separated during the washing process and
were not recorded. In addition, all but tbJee of the long bones were
broken, presumably for their marrow. Other bones were also cracked
and broken. The sku!l in particular was usually fragmented. With
the exception of these deliberate breaks, the bones were in excellent
condition and required no special handling.
The scarcest deer bones were caudal vertebrae and antlers. The
tails undoubtedly remained with the hide when the animal was
skinned, and most of them were subsequently removed from the site
when the skins were traded for guns, metal tools, glass beads, and
other items of European manufacture. Of the few pieces of antler, two
were fashioned into artifacts: one (Fig. 75, a) a handle for some type
of tool, the other (Fig. 76) a ceremonial headdress made of the antlers
and part of the skull. Neweomb (1961: 273) reports that the deer
dance was the most important Wichita ceremony. Perhaps most of

TEXAS

PER CF-NT

OF

GREATEST

AIRCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

NUMBER

Y
n

~
....... ~.~

~

...... : ~
.... ~:............

N
~

~
/J

=

/
r~

/

7,
i

---’------.--.-~.= ...........
..=.~ ~..........

...... :

~
D

~

,,,

~ ~-~

~

~ v~

~

/

<.
,,,
L~.

L.-.-.-......................
~--fil

0

o

_

g

g

~o

o

,,0

o

~0

o-.’r

o

¢0

o

o

--

o

.~

the antlers were made into artifacts that the Indians took with them
when they left, or perhaps deer were hunted in winter after the
antlers had been shed.
There was one direct indication of the method used to kill deer.
A stone arrow point was found imbedded in the centrum of one
thoracic vertebra. The arrow came from below and to the left of
the animal’s spine. A few bones showed small conical depressions
which might have been made by buckshot. The dents, measured with
a vernier caliper, ranged from three to five millimeters in diameter.
Whatever methods the Indians used in hunting were apparently
successful. The small percentage of other animals would indicate
that they were able to obtain an abundance of their favorite foodvenison.
There were enough representative bones from each area of the
body to indicate that at least half of the deer were brought to the
site complete. Figure 77 shows this diagrammatically. It also shows
that the vertebral column and feet including metapodials are present
for less than 505~ of the animals. Some animals were probably
butchered at the kill site and only the choice cuts brought to the
village. The choice parts are the limbs, excluding metapodials and
feet, and the head. The small percentage of skulls is attributed to
their badly fragmented condition. Only in Feature 7 were reasonably
complete skulls found, and even those were broken so that all bones
anterior to the frontals were missing. There was not a complete
maxilla anywhere on the site. As a result, calculating the number of
skulls was difficult and undoubtedly the number recorded is much
too low.
After examining the breaks, the following conclusions were reached
about the methods of disjointing a deer. Starting with the head and
working back, the skull was severed by a blow in the general area
of the occipital condyle. The condyle was usually broken; 5070 of the
atlases were broken and 697oo of the axes. It looks as if the Indian
simply took a swipe at the area and cut wherever he hit. The skull
was broken to extract the brains and probably the tongue. The one
fairly complete skull from Feature 7 had a large hole in the right
temporal area. The mandibles are usually broken behind the third
molar.
Most of the forelimbs were severed through or just below the head
of the humerus. The head was often so disfigured in the process as
to make identification impossible. The graph shows only 3470 for
the proximal end of the humerus. The distal end of the humerus is
the most frequent bone. Most of these are broken about two inches

230

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

from the olecranon fossa. The medial portion of the humeral shaft is
usually missing. It was apparently thoroughly shattered for extraction
of the marrow.
Most of the radii were broken about midway along the shaft, as
were the ulnas. The oleeranon of the ulna is also missing in the
majority of the bones. Figure 81 shows the probable direction of the
blows used in butchering the forelimb.
The scapulae most often were broken above the glenoid fossaquite far above as a rule-in an area where the scapulae are fragile
and could have broken accidentally.
The hind limbs were usually separated from the body by cutting
into the joint between the pelvis and the femur. There were three
distinet types of pelvic breakage observed, as shown in Figure 81.
The femora were broken badly at both ends. The number of proximal ends is 21~g below the number of pelves. The recognizable ones
are broken close to the head. There are even fewer remains of the
distal ends. Apparently the limb was disjointed by breaking through
the knee joint, thus disfiguring both the distal end of the femur and
the proximal end of the tibia. Although those two are among the last
epiphyses to fuse, the diaphyses alone are readily recognizable.
There are 34% more distal ends of tibiae than proximal ends. Most
of them include a considerable part of the shaft. The distal half of
the tibia shaft is very thick-walled and contains a negligible amount
of marrow.
The metacarpals and metatarsals are broken about midpoint of
the shaft. Most of the carpals and tarsals are complete as are the
phalanges. None seem to have been utilized in any way, and they
were probably just removed and discarded.
A few of the bones showed evidence of having been cut with
metal knives.
One of the questions asked about the Gilbert Site was whether
it was a permanent village or a seasonal hunting camp. The lack of
house remains and burials and the meager evidence of agriculture
suggested the latter. In an attempt to help settle this question, the
tooth development and the fusion of the epiphyses were exmnined
closely in an effort to learn the age of the animals. Studies of the
development of deer teeth with age have been made, but previous
studies on epiphyseal fusion in relation to deer age were not found.
Severinghaus and Cheatum (in Taylor, 1956, p. 91)
table for white-tailed deer:

give this

Age classes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Teeth palely or fully erupted
through gum
4 incisiform
4 incisiform, 2 premolars
4 incisiform, 3 premolars
4 incisiform, 3 premolars, 1 molar
4 incisiform, 3 premolars, 2, molars
4 incisiform, 3 premolars, 3 molars

Birth to 1 week
1-4 weeks
4-10 weeks
10 weeks-7 months
7-13 months
13 months and older

The premolars are the milk molars. Between 13 and 19 months
they are replaced by permanent premolars.
Harlow and De Foot (1962) give for the same age classes more
detailed information on how far the eruption of each molar has
progressed. In addition they give the premolar replacement sequence
and show the degree of wear of the permanent teeth for deer up
to 10~A years of age.
I pm
2 pm
3 pm

E~
0
0
E-~

3m
2 m
I m
3 am
2 dm

V//

I dm

v//

Jaw No.

I

1 3

Feature No.

7

6

FIGURE 79.

1

2

2

I

2 16 2 18

3

6

20 19

7 4 4

6

3

3

4

7

3

3 7

3

3

Tooth development of pre-adult deer mandibles.

The mandibles from Gilbert represent several stages of development which are shown in Figure 79. A full square on the graph
represents a tooth that is cut, and a half square represents a tooth
that is partially cut. Fifteen individuals do not have their full adnlt
dentition. In order to estimate the age of a deer at the time it was
killed, it is assumed that the fawns were dropped in May or June.
The youngest animal is represented by one tiny jaw with the milk
teeth barely showing. This was probably an unborn but ahnost
fully developed fawn. It would indicate a kill in the spring of the

239,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

12.0

ii.0 "---e
i0,0
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
~.0
3,0
2.0

0

h.

8

12

16

20

2/~.

28

32

36

TOOTH

/.~0

~

/=.8

52

56

60

6~

FIGURE 80. Lingual surface crown height, second posterior cusp of first
molar of deer mandibles.

year. There is a considerable lapse in time before the next stage.
This is a jaw with all three milk molars and one molar cut and the
second molar cutting. This indicates an animal killed during its first
winter. Next is a jaw with the second molar fully cut, which would
be an animal about a year old, killed in the spring. The next stage
is shown by six jaws which are cutting the third molar. These represent animals killed during the late summer or early autumn of their
second year. There is a jaw with the third premolar just starting
to cut which indicates a deer late in its second autumn. Lastly is the
jaw with the first premolar cutting. This is a deer in its second
winter. The other four immature jaws were broken in such a way
that the season could not be determined.
Most of the animals had full adult dentition. To get a rough idea
of the age range of these fully grown animals, the height of the
crown on the lingual surface of the second posterior cusp of the first
and second molars was measured. If the diets and rate of wear are
similar for deer in Florida and those from Gilbert, the majority of
the Gilbert deer were killed between 1,~’ and 3,~ years of age. Their
teeth were quite sharp and showed little wear. The Indians apparently preferred young but fully grown animals, as indeed would
we. There are a few jaws, however, which have teeth showing different amounts of wear including some worn down to the gum line.
There must have been animals ahnost 10 years old.

233

PELVIS
TYPE I

FmURE 81.

PELVIS
TYPE ~

PELVIS
TYPE~

X

Methods of butchering deer forelimb and pelvis.

One of the methods used to determine the age at death of human
skeletons is to examine the epiphyses to discover whieh have o1"
have not fused. The ages at whieh various human epiphyses become fused has been studied and reeorded. However, I was unable to find any similar studies on deer epiphyses. The Gilbel"c deer
bones from Features 3 and 7 were examined for fusion of the
epiphyses anyhow, and the data are presented in Table 14.
In order to discover if any significant variation existed in the distribution of bone among the four features studied, the pereentages
of bone in each feature were plotted in Figure 78. The agreement is
generally quite good and the differenees eould be due to accidents
of preservation or eolleetion with the exception of the low percentage
of hind limb bones from Feature 4. That feature also returned a
higher percentage of animals other than deer, espeeially bison or
cow. The people living there could have had enough of a taste for
bison to go some distanee to hunt them, or they may have had cattle.
At the time this site was oeeupied either animal was obtainable and
no distinguishing bones were reeovered. In any event they were a
bit more fastidious about their venison and used more of the forelimb
than the hindlimb. I have been told by deer hunters that the forelimb is "better eating." The rest of the site is homogeneous as far
as distribution of the deer bones is concerned.
The following eonelusions about the Gilbert Site are based on the
analysis of the bone scraps from Features 3, 4, 6, and 7. The emphasis

234

TEXAS

A1RCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY"

is on deer, but the fact that there was a small percentage of other
animals is taken into consideration.
1. The main source of animal protein for the people at the Gilbert
Site during the historic occupation was white-tailed deer.
2. The only weapon demonstrated by the study of the bone was
the bow and arrow. No lead balls or shot were found which would
indicate definitely the use of guns.
3. Approximately half of the deer were brought into camp whole;
the other half were butchered elsewhere and the choice cutsheads and limbs minus feet-were brought home.
4. The head was severed in the general area of the oecipital condyle,
atlas, and axis. The skull and mandibles were broken to remove the
brains and tongue. The forelimb was removed by cutting the head
of the humerus. It was further separated by cutting just above the
olecranon fossa of the humerus and midway along the shaft of the
radius. The hindlimb was removed by cutting the acetabulum of the
pelvis and the head of the femur. It was divided further by cutting
through the knee joint. The shafts of all the limb bones were broken
to extract the marrow. The shafts of the humerus and femur, which
would have the most marrow, were the most shattered.
5. The site was occupied all year. The teeth show two animals
killed in the spring, two in the winter, six in the late summer or
early autumn, and one in the late autumn. The small amount of
antler is attributed to its use for ornaments and tools rather than to
the antlers having been shed.
6. With respect to butchering data the site is culturally homogeneous, with the exception that Feature 4 had a lower percentage
of the hindlimbs of deer and more remains of other animals.

ANI~[AL REMAINS

235

.<
°~

h~

i~

i

i

i

i

!

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

~iiiii

b..
O1

~D
©

t~

~

i~

"~

i

i

i

i

i

i

!

i

i

i

i

i

236

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

,,,i
,,,J

X

X

x

xx~

i

ix

~i,!

iliii

iiii

iiili

,I,,

x

~xx]i

X

~XX~X

i~

i

i

ix

’’ii

~

i

k,

cD

v

.~~=~ ~

~ ~

~ ~

~. ~

~

TABLE 12
Count of deer bones from Features 3, 4, 6, and 7.
Feature
Skull, fragmentaW
Mandible, right
Mandible, left
Vertebra, atlas
Vertebra, axis
Vertebra, cervmal
Vertebra, thoracic
Vertebra, lumbar
Vertebra, sacral
Vertebra, caudal
Rib, fragments with head
Scapula, right
Scapula, left
Pelvis, right
Pelvis, left
Phalanx, first
Phalanx, second
Phalanx, third
Calcaneum, right
Calcaneum, left
Astragalus, right
Astragalus, left
Navieulo-cuboid, right
Naviculo-cuboid, left
Hmnerus, right whole
Humerus, right proximal end
Humerus, left proximal end
Humerus, right distal end
Humerus, left distal end
Radius, right whole
Radius, right proximal end
Radius, left proximal end
Radius, right distal end
Radius, left distal end
Ulna, right
Ulna, left
Femur, right proximal end
Femur, left proximal end
Fenmr, right distal end
Fenmr, left distal end
Tibia, right proximal end
Tibia, left proximal end
Tibia, right distal end
Tibia, left distal end
Metacarpal, whole
Metacarpal, proximal end
Metacarpal, distal end
Metatarsal, proximal end
Metatarsal, distal end
Antler, pieces
Sternum, pieces
Hyoid, pieces

7
4
6
3
7
10
6
22
17
23
47
13
16
20
51
17
12
12
7
38
10
9
10
35
27
38
24
116
38
50
30
169
50
59
37
179
5
5
10
22
4
............
74
90
63
272
19
15
13
61
19.
12
12
50
13
17
14
43
14
16
11
40
59
48
34
113
28
29
21
87
20
14
15
46
12
10
4
41
10
12
10
31
14
15
3
45
11
9
4
46
7
8
1
!5
7
7
2
19
1
............
9.
4
4
31
6
3
2
24
18
18
13
64
21
22
20
61
1
......
---....
13
14
9
61
18
17
12
48
12
9
4
43
14
!1
10
37
9
12
11
62
21
12
13
42
8
5
4
31
9
11
2
37
3
15
29.
4
8
6
3
29
11
1!
3
35
6
6
6
34
12
li
8
60
19
17
10
61
1
............
23
26
12
49
17
11
11
35
15
16
11
33
12
16
9
36
3
5
5
-6
2
4
14
7
8
5
20

9,38

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

~ ~ o ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ oo ~~

SOCIETY

o~co

o0cq

~5
~q
%. %.
©
,.C

co

co

~

¢o

©
,-4

<D

(D
,.O

b"

~,~ ~

~,~] ~,-~°° "~

°~" [° c’],-~
°~ ~D e~
c’I I~
,-~ "~
,-~ ,-~

CD

~~e~~

;> >.

>

~>

>-

>

~

m

239

ANIMAL BEMAINS

5",1

~

9’40

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

TABLE 14
Epiphyseal fusion of deer bones.
Number of animals with:
Name of bone

Epiphysis

Epiphysis per-

Epiphysis

loose

tially fused

fused

Feature 7
Femur, proximal end

2

2

2

Femur, distal end

6

4

4

Tibia, proximal end

1

0

9

Tibia, distal end

1

1

14

Humerus, proximal end

i

1

4

Humerus, distal end

1

0

22

Radius, proximal end

0

0

17

Radius, distal end

3

1

Ulna, proximal only

3

0

10
9.

Metacarpal, proximal end

0

0

14

Metacarpal, distal end

2

0

4

Metatarsal, proximal end

0

0

8

Metatarsal, distal end

3

0

5

Phalanx, first

0

1

6

Phalanx, second

1

0

5

Phalanx, third

0

0

3

Calcaneum

5

0

5

4
9.

10

Feature 3
Fenmr, proximal end

6

Femur, distal end

6

Tibia, proximal end

16

10

1

20

Tibia, distal end

4

2

56

Humerus, proximal end

7

2

11

Humerus, distal end

0

0

56

Radius, proximal end

0

0

61

Radius, distal end

7

4

30

Ulna, proxfinal only

10

0

10

Metacarpal, proximal end

0

0

25

Metacarpal, distal end

4

1

12

Metatarsal, proximal end

0

0

17

Metatarsal, distal end

6

0

12

Phalanx, first

1

1

13

Phalanx, second

1

1

11

Phalanx, third

0

0

6

Calcanemn

9

0

27

TABLE 15
Location of breaks and cuts on deer bones from Feature 3.
Name of bone
Femur, proximal

Broken just below end
38

Broken about midpoint
18 have less than 1/2
of shaft
4 midway

Femur, distal

21

Tibia, proximal

11

18
29 have 1/3 of shaft
8 midway

11

Tibia, distal

44 have 1/3 of shaft
42 midway
4 have over 1/2

Humerus, proximal

19

32

Humerus, distal

14 through end
34 near end

Radius, proximal

32

46 have about 1/2
19 have over 1/2
45 have 1/3 to 1/2 of
shaft
20 have 1/2 or more

17

Radius, distal

27 have 1/3 to 1/2
17 have 1/2 or more

Ulna, proximal
39 1 to 3 inches

(measured below

4 over 3 inches

eoranoid process )

27

Metacarpal, proximal

17

30

Metatarsal, proximal

10

20

Metapodial, distal

20

38

Scapula

28 are cut through or just above glenoid fossa.
65 are broken 2" or more from glenoid fossa.

Pelvis

42 have acetabulum cut and ilium and ischium

cut close to it.

19. have acetabulum whole; ilium and pubic symphysis cut.
13 have acetabulum whole; ilium and pubis cut close to it.
Atlas

12 complete
12 broken

Axis

9 complete
20 broken

242

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 16
Tooth development of deer mandibles. Inside crown heights of second
posterior cusps are given in millimeters for the first and second adult
molars. Each jaw represents one animal, din. = deciduous molar; pro.
= permanent premolar; m. = permanent molar; * = tooth present
in jaw; x = last tooth cut; ,~ = tooth partly cut.
Jaw# l dm.

2din. 3din.

i pm. 2pro.

3pro.

1 m.

2 m.

3 m.

?
?
*
*
?
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
?
?

?
*x12.2
’12.4
*x
*x12.6
"12.6
"11.2
"13.0
"11.3
"12.0
* 12.0
* 9.9
"11.7
* 8.2
* 8.5
* 8.5
* 6.9
’11.7
* 7.3
* 6.7

?

"10.4
* 8.9
?
"10.0
* 9.4
* 8.4
"10.0
* 7.8
* 7.9
* 9.4
* 6.6
* 8.9
* 6.4
* 4.7
* 6.5
* 5.5
* 8.4
* 5.4
* 5.5

?
*
*
*
*
*
*
?

"11.5
*11.0
"10.5
* 7.5
* 8.7
* 6.8
* 6.2
* 7.3
* 5.5
* 5.6

*
"13.0
*x12.0
* 9.6
’11.1
* 8.9
* 8.5
9

*x
?
*×
*x
?

* 7.0
* 6.5

*x
*x

*

*x10.3
* 9.8
* 8.4

1~2
*xll.9
"10.4

*x

Feature 7

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
!4
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

1!z

1/z

1!z

*
*

*
*

*
*
*

"~
*x
~
?
*
?
?
*
*
*
?
*
*
?
?
*
*
?
?

1/2
?
?
*
*
?
*
*
*
?
*
*
?
?
*
*
?
?

1/z
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x

Feature 4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

*
*

*
*
?
?
*
*
*
*
*
?

?
?
*
*
*
*
*
~

?
?
1/z

Feature 6
1
2
3

*
*
?

9

1~

243

ANIMAL REMAINS

TABLE 16 -- (Continued)
Jaw

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

# 1din.

2din. 3dm.

1 pm. 2 pm.
*
*
*
?
?
*
?
*
*
?
*

*
*
*
?
?
*
?
*
*
?
*
*

l m.

3pro.
*
*
*
?
*
*
*
*
*
?
*
*

*
*
*
?
*
*
*
*
*
?
*
*

8.6
8.6
7.0
9.5
6.4
6,8
5,4
5.0
4.7
3.8

2 m.
"11.6
"11.6
* 9.4
"10.3
"11.6
* 9.8
* 7,5
* 8,9
* 7.4
* 7.4
* 7,4
* 5.0

Feature 3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
3O
31
32
33

1/9

*X

?

?

.9

?

*

?

*

1/2

*

*

"10.3
* 9.4
* 8.2
* 9.5
* 8.6
* 8.7
out
"10.7
* 8.7
* 6.8
* 7.2
* 6.3
* 8.5
*11.0
* 8.3
"10.8
?
?
* 8.5
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

8.4
8.7
9.1
6.7
6.0
7.4

*
*
*
*
*
*

8,4
6,3
2.4
6.3
4.0
7.3

*X

*x13.2
"10.5
"11.3
*10,0
"10.4
* 6.2
"13,4
"10.8
* 9.0
* 9,5
* 8.7
"10,0
"13.5
* 9.0
*x14.3
*x

"11,5
*
"10.5
"10.9
"10.5
* 8.3
* 7.0
*11.0
* 9.3
"10.4
* 8.4
* 5,0
?
?
"10.7

3 rn,
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x
*x
?
*x
*x
*x
*x

Conclusions
These conclusions may be reached regarding the Gilbert Site:
1. It is a component of the Nortefio Focus and has augmented
knowledge of the focus appreciably.
9..

More specifically, it is probably a village site of the Tawakoni,

Kichai, or Yscani Indians.
3. Styles of certain artifacts indicate that the site was occupied
during the 18th century, principally during the third quarter of the
century.
4. Since the most active Indian traders in the area during the
18th century are known to have been French, much of the European
trade goods found at the site must have been obtained from French
traders operating out of Louisiana.
5. If conclusions 3 and 4 may be accepted, knowledge of 18thcentury French trade goods on the southern plains-guns, beads,
knives, and the like-is enlarged considerably by the findings at
Gilbert.

References Cited
Boudriot, J.
1963. Annes A Iveu Ivraneaises-Modeles Reglementaires. L. Petitot.
Bustanoby, J. H.
1947. Principles of Color and Mixing. McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Caldwell, Warren W.
1960.

Preliminary Notes on Ivragments of Firearms and Related Objects
from Fort Atkinson, 1820-1827. In Indian Trade Guns (compiled and
arranged by T. M. Hamilton). Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22, pp.
!92-200.

Castafieda, Carlos E.
1939. The Passing of the Missions 1762-1782. In Our Catholic Heritage
in Texas 1519-1936, Vol. 4. Von-Boeekmann-Jones Company.
Di Peso, Charles C.
1953. The Sobaipuri Indians of the Upper San Pedro River Valley, Southeastern Arizona. The Amerind Foundation, Inc., No. 6.
Duff]eld, Lathel 1v.
1961. The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains Count),, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Areheologieal Society, Vol. 30 (for 1959), pp.
51-116.
Du~eld, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961. The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir,
Rains County, Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropo!ogy, Arehaedogy Ser’es, No. 4.
George, J. N.
1947. English Guns and Rifles. The Stackpole Company.
Cooding, James S.
1960. A Preliminary Study of the Trade Guns Sold by file Hudson’s Bay
Company. Iu Indian Trade Guns (compiled and arranged by T. M.
Hamilton). Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22, pp. 81-95.
Hamilton, T. M.
1960a. The Determination of Date and Origin of Archaeological Gun Parts.
In Indian Trade Guns (compiled and arranged by T. M. Hamilton).
Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 9.2, pp. 5-15.
1960b. Additional Comments on Gunflints. Ibid., pp. 73-79.
1960c. Some Gun Parts from 18th Century Osage Sites. Ibld., pp. 120-149.
1960d. The Gunsmith’s Cache Discovered at Malta Bend, Missouri. Ibid.,
pp. 150-171.
1960e. Concluding Comments and Observations. Ibld., pp. 207-209.
1964.

Recent Developments in the Use of Gunflints for Dating and Identification. In Diving Into the Past (edited by June Drenning Holmquist and Ardis Hillman Wheeler), pp. 52-57. The Minnesota Historical Society and the Couneil of Underwater Archaeology.

TEXAS

246

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Hanson, Charles E., Jr.
1955. The Northwest Gun. Nebraska State Historical Society, Publications
in Anthropology No. 2.
Harlow, Richard, and Marlin DeFoor
1962. How to Age White-tailed Deer.

Florida

Wildlife,

December,

pp.

18-21.
Harris, R. K., and Inus Marie Harris
1962.

Another Marker on the Trail of the Nortefio: A Preliminary Report
on the Gilbert Site. The Record, Dallas Archeological Society, Vol.
17, No. 1.

Harris, R. K., Inus Marie Harris, Jay c. Blaine, and Jerrylee Blaine
1965. A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study of the Womack
Site, Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 36, pp. 287-363.
ms. The Spanish Fort Site in Texas and Oklahoma. Unpublished nmnuscript.
Harris, R. K., M. P. Miroir, J. L. McVay, and Jay C. Blaine
ms. Fort St. Louis de Kadohadacho. Unpublished manuscript.
Hayward, J. F.
1963.

The Art of the Gunmaker, Vol. II. St. Martins Press.

Held, Robert, and Nancy Jenkins
1957.

The Age of Firearms-A Pictorial History. Harper and Brothers.

Hodge, Frederick Webb
1912. Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin 30, Part 2.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962.

1965.

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill
County, Texas. The UniversitT of Texas, Department of Anthropology,
Archaeology Series, No. 5.
Archeology of McGee Bend Reservoir, Texas. Ph.D. Dissertation, The
University of Texas.

Krieger, Alex D.
1946.

Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas, with Extension of Puebloan Datings to the Mississippi Valley. The University
of Texas, Bulletin 4640.

La Flesche, Francis
1924.

Omaha Bow and Arrowmakers. Annaes
nacional de Americanistes, Vol. 1.
Manucy, Albert
1959.

do

XX

Congresso

Inter-

The Fort at Frederica. Publication of the National Park Service, The
U. S. Department of Interior.

Maxwell, Moreau S., and Lewis H. Binford
1961.

Excavations at Fort Michilimakinac. Publications
Michigan State University, Vol. 1, No. 1.

Nardini, Louis R.
1961. No Man’s Land. Pelican Publishing Company.
Neal, W. Keith
1955.

Spanish Guns and Pistols. C. Bell and Sons, Ltd.

of

the

Museum,

247

REFERENCES CITED

Neweomb, William W., Jr.
1955. An Historic Burial from Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 186-199.
1961. The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press.
Oetking, Philip F.
1959. Texas Geological Highway

Map.

Dallas

Geological Society, South-

ern Methodist University.
Olsen, Stanley J.
1963. Dating Early

Plain

Buttons

by

Their

Form.

American

Antiquity,

Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 551-554.
Peterson, Harold L.
1956. Arms and Armor in Colonial America. Branhall House.
Porter, James Warren
1964. Comment on Weaver’s "Technological Analysis of Lower Mississippi
Ceramic Materials." American Antiquity, Vol. 29, No. 4, pp. 59.0-521.
Bay, Cyrus N., and Edward B. Jelks
1964. The W. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Fisher County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35, pp. 127141.
Reinfeld, Fred
1955. Treasury of the World’s Coins. Dover Publications.
Russell, Carl P.
1957. Guns on the Early Frontiers. University of California Press.
Shepard, Anna O.
1957. Ceramics for the Archaeologist. Carnegie Institution of Washington,
Publication

609.

Shiner, Joel L.
ms. The Excavation of Fort Frederica. Unpublished manuscript.
Smith, Carlyle S.
1960. Two 18th Century Reports on the Manufacture of Gunflints in France.
In Indian Trade Guns (compiled and arranged by T. M. Hamilton).
Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22, pp. 81-95.
Smith, Ralph A.
1959. Account of the Journey of Benard de la Harpe: Discover), Made by
H/an of Several Nations Situated in the West. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly, Vol. LXII, No. 4.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1955. Excavation at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 7-54.
1962a. Footbridge: A Terrace Site. In Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir. The Texas Memorial Musemn Bulletin No. 5, pp. 49-76.
1962b. The White Site: An Historic Indian Burial in Yoakum County, ~Uexas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 3+2, pp. 85-119.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks (editors)
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Menmrial Mttseum
Bulletin No. 4.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Arcbeological Society+, Vol, 25.

~48

TEXAS

AIICHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Swanton, John B.
1911. Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adiacent Coast
of the Cull of Mexico. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin No. 43.
1942. Source Material on the HistmT and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 132.
Taylor, Walter P.
1956. The Deer of North America. Edited by Walter P. Taylor. The Wildlife
Management Institute. The Staekpole Company.
Thwaites, Reuben Gold
1959. The Jesuit Relations and Allied Docmnents, Vol. LXVI. Pageant Book
Co.
Webb, Clarence H.
1945. A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, Louisiana. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 16, pp.
52-83.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1959. An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 174.
Woolworth, Alan R., and W. Raymond Wood
1960. The Archeology of a Small Trading Post (Kipp’s Post, 32MNI) in the
Garrison Reservoir, North Dakota. River Basin Surveys Papers, No.
20. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 176, pp. 239-305.

