Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond,
Brazoria County, Texas
D. L. Hamilton
ABSTRACT
Archeological investigation of two Rangia shell midden sites at Shy Pond, a
smallbody of water on the Brazos deltaic plain on the northwest edge of the town
of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, was conducted in the summer of 1967
by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) of The University of
Texas at Austin. The data indicate that hunting and gathering groups occupied the
area from late summer to early fall. The sandy paste ceramic tradition and the
cultural manifestation are most strongly affiliated with the Galveston Bay area to
the east, but the artifacts have less typological variation than is found there. The
Brazos deltaic plain apparently was an isolated area between Galveston B ay to the
east and the Central Texas co ast to the west. The data from the sites provide insight
into cultural developments and adaptations to the varied coastal environments of
the Gulf Coast of Texas.

INTRODUCTION
In the summer of 1967, from July 17 through August 4, archeological
excavations were carried out at two sites on the northwest side of Shy Pond, a small
pond in an old meander belt of the Brazos River. Situated between the present
channel of the Brazos River to the west and Oyster Creek to the east, the pond is on
the northwest edge of the town of Lake Jackson, in Brazoria County, Texas. It is
on the Colorado/Brazos deltaic plain, and is about 20 km (12 miles) from the Gulf
Coast, in an area that varies in elevation from 4.5 to 6 meters (15 to 10 feet) above
mean sea level.
Until these investigations were made, no extensive controlled archeological
excavations had been carried out in the area. The Archeology Club of the
Brazosport Museum of Natural Science, under the direction of the late Raymond
Walley, of Lake Jackson, carried out limited excavations of some of the sites, but
most have not been investigated and none has been published. Since this report was
started, Aten (1971) has reported on the Dow-Cleaver site, 8.8 km (5.5 miles) south
of Shy Pond.
Due to the enthusiasm and concern shown by Mr. Walley, Dee Ann Story and
Thomas R. Hester, of TARL, visited Lake Jackson to examine several sites near Shy
Pond. They noticed manyRangia shell middens of various sizes on slightly elevated
elongated ridges around the pond, several of which looked promising. Since the
prehistory of this part of the Gulf Coast largely has been ignored to date and archeological excavations would provide significant data about local developments and
possible relationships with the central and southwestern Gulf Coast, one extensive
Rangia shell midden, site 41B O 13, later named the Copperhead site, was excavated.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

78 Texas Archeological Society
When rain interrupted work at the Copperhead site, time was spent testing the
Cleaver site (41BO 15), a smallRangia midden. The results of both excavations are
reported here.
Since both sites were excavated using English measurements, the excavation
measurements and site plans are in English units. However, metric equivalents are
given for most measurements.
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The ColoradoiBrazos deltaic plain is a late Quaternary feature associated with
the development of the Gulf Coast shoreline in the last 5,000 years (LeBlanc and

N

Gulf of Mexico

(after LeBlanc &

Hodgson 1959

208)

Figure 1. Map of parts of Brazoria and Matagorda counties, Texas, showing the alluvial
valleys and deltaic plains of the Colorado and Brazos rivers.

Hamilton -- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

79

left abandoned channels, meander belts, small lakes, and swamp areas. Shy Pond
is in a low-lying area next to a series of point bar ridges and swales in an Hodgson
1959:204). Upon this deltaic plain the Brazos River and other streams
old meander belt associated with the Oyster Creek Channel stage of the Brazos
River (Figare 2). The Brazos River diverged from the Oyster Creek Channel about
1,000 years ago (Bernard et al. 1970:8), but since the Shy Pond sites postdate this
divergence, the channel sequence of the Brazos River is not discussed here.
The sites around Slay Pond are on long, narrow point bar ridges slightly elevated
above the surrounding terrain (Figure 2).

41B015

41B013

Shy Pond

A

Archeological Sites

~Shy Pond
~ Swales filled during wet periods

o

400 feet

0

lOO meters

Figure2. Sketch planofShy Pondshowmg ~sociatedsites. Swales ~ebetween ~e
pomtb~s.

80

Texas Archeological Society

A point bar ridge is the principal depositional environment within a meander belt.
Point bars are parts of bar systems that are created when meanders cut rapidly into
eroding banks while arcuate systems of alternating low ridges and swales are
formed on the depositional banks (Bernard and LeBlanc 1965:171-172). They are
formed over varying lengths of time, depending on the volume of the water flow and
the rate at which the meanders travel, so point bar ridges--which are formed
sequentially--are separated from one another by a passage of time, and each ridge
in a meander belt represents a separate period in the depositional development of the
meander belt.
Local informants report that there is a sequence of at least five point bar ridges
along the northwest side of Shy Pond, and there are severalRangia middens on each
of these ridges (Figure 2). It has not been demonstrated archeologically, but it is
possible that the sites associated with each of the five or more point bar ridges of Shy
Pond represent chronological sequences of occupation in the area. However, all of
the sites investigated appear to postdate A.D. 1000.
The Shy Pond area of the Colorado/Brazos deltaic plain is in the coastal prairie
subdivision of the Texas Coastal Plain physiographic region, which is a nearly flat
strip of land 48 to 128 km (30 to 80 miles) wide, bordering the Texas Gulf Coast
(Moore 1970:127). The Shy Pond site is in a borderline area between the
Austroriparian and Texan biotic provinces (Dice 1943, Blair 1950). However, the
alluvial soils along the Brazos and other rivers support a floodplain cover of oaks,
blackberries, pecans, and other trees that provide environmental conditions more
favorable to the Austroriparian species (Blair 1943:97, 101).
According to Blair (1943:99) there are 47 species of mammals, 29 of snakes,
10 of lizards, two of land turtles, 17 of anurans, and 18 of urodeles in the
Austroriparian. In addition, alligators, various aquatic turtles, freshwater and
brackish water fish, various amphibians, and various freshwater and brackish water
mollusks such as Unio and Rangia live in the area. There are no species endemic
to the area.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Two late prehistoric artifact assemblages (loci) have been defined for the Gulf
Coast--one to the east and one to the west of the Brazos River. The Rockport focus
has been described in the Central Gulf Coast area from the Brazos River to Baffin
Bay, and the Galveston Bay focus has been described in the Galveston Bay area and
eastward to the Brazos River (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954:132, 133). Readers
are directed to Ambler (1967), Aten (1967,1971,1979), Campbell (1960:145-175),
Corbin (1974:29-54), Dering and Ayers (1977), Story (1968), Suhm, Krieger, and
Jelks (1954), and Wheat (1953) for more information on the prehistory of the Gulf
Coast of Texas.
The artifact assemblages of the Rockport and Galveston Bay foci are differentiated primarily on the basis of the associated pottery. The diagnostic ceramics of
the Rockport focus are the Rockport ware consisting of Rockport Plain, Rockport
Black-on-gray, and Rockport Incised. Rockport ware can be described generally
as having a fine-textured sandy paste (with or without white inclusions believed to

Hamilton -- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

81

be bone), smoothed surfaces, geometric incised designs on the rims, and, frequently,
asphaltum used for decoration or for mending cracks in vessel walls (Campbell
1962:331,332).
In the Galveston Bay focus, two pottery types--Goose Creek Plain and Goose
Creek Incised were identified (Suhm, Krieger, andJelks 1954:129). As originally
defined, the Goose Creek types had sandy paste that sometimes contained grog and,
rarely, pulverized bone, as additional temper, with a red wash applied to the exterior
surface in rare cases (Suhm and Jelks 1962:55-57). It soon became evident that the
Goose Creek types could be broken usefully into additional types that have definite
chronological and perhaps, regional, significance. Aten (1967), in the Jamison site
report, redefined Goose Creek Plain and Goose Creek Incised as having exclusively
sandy paste with no additional aplastics. Aten then established the Goose Creek Red
Filmed type for the red washed sandy paste pottery, the San Jacinto Plain and San
Jacinto Incised types for the sandy paste pottery with grog temper, and an unnamed
bone-tempered pottery type (Aten 1967:10-15). Aten found that Goose Creek
Plain and Goose Creek Red filmed were the earliest ceramics and that Goose Creek
incised, the grog-tempered San Jacinto types, and the bone-tempered pottery
appeared later, in that order.
Later work in the Galveston Bay area (Ambler 1967) has shown that the
Galveston Bay focus is too broad and, for that reason, invalid as defined. Similarly,
the Rockport focus is believed to be so broad that it oversimplifies the cultural
history of the area just as the Galveston Bay focus did (Story 1968:5, Corbin 1974).
It is clear that there were two ceramic traditions on the Texas Gulf Coast, but, on the
basis of present data, it appears that some Rockport ware has its origin in the sandy
paste pottery of Southeast Texas, since the sandy paste, the vessel forms, and the
incised decoration have earlier counterparts in the Galveston Bay area (Campbell
1962:335).
In the coastal area between Galveston and Matagorda bays there is an overlap
of Rockport ware and the Galveston Bay area types (Campbell 1962:335). It is in
this area that the least archeological investigation has been done. In order to answer
the many questions about the interrelationshps of the cenlxal part of the Texas Coast
and the Galveston Bay area, investigations must be made in the Colorado/13razos
deltaic plain, since that area is the center of the overlap of the two ceramic traditions.
ETHNOGRAPHIC BACKGROUND
From data presented by Newcomb (1961:59, 60), Campbell (1960:148, 149),
and Wheat (1953:16), it appears that in early historic times the Colorado~razos
deltaic plain was a transitional area between two major linguistic groups of the Gulf
Coast--the Karankawan speakers of the central part of the Coast who, at least in
part, are represented by both the Rockport and Galveston Bay loci (Corbin 1974)
and the Atakapan speakers of the Southwest Texas Gulf Coast, who must also be
represented in part by the Galveston Bay focus. The Karankawan speakers in the
Colorado/Brazos deltaic plain were the Capoques (Coco, Cocos, Coaque), who occupied the coastal area from Galveston Bay southwestward to the Brazos River, and
the Kohanis (Cujane), who occupied the area around the mouth of the Colorado

82

Texas Archeological Society

River (Newcomb 1961:315, Campbell 1960:148).
The Atakapan-speaking Akokisa (Arkokisa, Orcoquizac) are placed by
Newcomb (1961:315) in the area around the lower Trinity and San Jacinto rivers and
along the eastern shore of Galveston Bay. Wheat (1953:16), in addition, has the
Akokisa occupying the area north and northwest of Galveston Bay in the Addicks
Basin region. The Hans, who are believed to be linguistically Atakapan but
culturally similar to the Karankawas, shared the coastal area between Galveston
Bay and the Brazos River with the Karankawan Capoques (Newcomb 1961:59,
317).
In addition to these groups, some Lipan Apaches and Tonkawa were pushed to
the coast in the eighteenth century. The Mayeye band of the Tonkawa of Central
Texas moved to the coast in 1770 and, by 1779, the Mayeye had united with the
Capoque and ranged along the coast between the Colorado and Brazos rivers
(Wheat 1953:161). Despite our knowledge about the various groups that occupied
the Colorado~razos deltaic plain, few, if any, archeological sites can be identified
with a specific group. However, the archeological remains in the area usually are
attributed to the Karankawa.
Unfortunately, there is little ethnographic data on the subsistence patterns of
the coastal groups. The ethnographic information available indicates that the
coastal inhabitants followed a seasonal round regulated by availability of food,
climatic considerations, and the presence of other groups in the area. For example,
according to Newcomb (1961:66), the Capoque and the Hans of the coast camped
on the offshore islands, catching fish in cane weirs and eating the roots of an
unidentified underwater plant during the fall. By midwinter, the offshore islands
and bars were cold and wet, and the underwater plant roots were useless as food. The
bands were forced to move to the warmer mainland, where they subsisted on
shellfish until spring. In the spring they gathered blackberries, and apparently they
spent the summers on the lagoons and offshore islands and bars. This description
provides some insight into a seasonal round on the Gulf Coast, but it is important
to our understanding of the prehistory of the coast to determine what seasons were
spent in what regions or ecosystems (such as Shy Pond) of the coast. It should be
emphasized that sensitive and exacting archeological techniques must be used for
interpretation of seasonal occupation, and special emphasis must be given to
obtaining complete faunal samples. Only with data that are systematically obtained
from rigorously controlled excavations will it be possible to reconstruct seasonal
subsistence patterns.
THE COPPERHEAD SITE, 41BO13
Raymond Walley originally located the Copperhead site. A large pothole in the
center of the site revealed a concentrated Rangia shell midden and several sherds.
Other smaller potholes scattered through the midden revealed an extensive but thin
horizontal accumulation of shell.
The Copperhead site is aRangia shell midden 12.2 to 15.3 meters (40 to 50 feet)
wide that extends along a long, low ridge on the northwest side of Shy Pond. The
midden generally covers the higher central part of the ridge. Directly to the west,

Hamilton ~ ArcheoIogical Investigations at Shy Pond

83

on the same ridge, are two Rangia shell middens designated sites 41BOll and
41BO12. (Site designations at Shy Pond often are arbitrary, for site numbers have
been assigned to areas where shell midden lenses are exposed on the surface or in
excavations.) Sites 41BOll, 41BO12, and 41BO13 merge into one another,
forming an almost continuous shell midden for some 183 meters (200 yards).
The northwest shore of Shy Pond now comes to within 45 meters (150 feet) of
the Copperhead site, but, after a rain, the flat area between the ridge and the pond
fills to within 15 meters (50 feet) of the site. The ridge rises about.91 meters (3 feet)
above the level of Shy Pond.
Excavation Methods
Before excavation, after the heavy underbrush, shrubs, and vines had been
cleared, a horizontal datum point designated 00 (North 0, South 0) was established
and recorded on a wooden stake about 15.2 meters (60 feet) north of the Shy Pond
shoreline (Figure 3). A north-south base line was established, laid out through the
datum point, and excavation units were established on both sides. Because of
several large trees on the site, the excavation units varied in their dimensions (Table
1). The southeast comer stake was used to designate each unit. A large nail driven
into the base of a large oak tree near the N35/E10 coordinate served as a vertical
datum point, with the elevation arbitrarily designated 100 feet. The elevation of the
vertical datum point was used to determine the elevation in the excavation units and
in all of the site plans. A topographic map was made with the help of a telescopic
alidade. Because of the dense vegetation and lack of time, only the area adjacent
to the excavations was mapped.
In the first two 5-foot squares, it became apparent that the simple stratigraphy
and the shallow depth of the cultural deposits made digging by arbitrary elevation
levels unnecessary. The soil overlying the midden was essentially devoid of
cultural material; some was spot screened and some was removed and discarded
without screening. All of the matrix from the midden was screened through
quarter-inch wire mesh screen. All of the stone, sherds, clay lumps, bones, and
historic materials were collected.
The objectives of the excavation were to ( 1 ) expose an extensive horizontal area
of the midden, (2) sample the contents of the midden, (3) determine the extent of
the midden, and (4) investigate the intrasite variability. The materials found above,
on the surface of, and within the midden were cataloged separately. After the
surface had been carefully exposed and cleaned (Figure 3), elevations were taken,
and scale plans showing the extent of the shell in each unit were made. Adjacent
units were similarly excavated until a large area of the midden was exposed and
excavated. All of the shell matrix was screened, but time permitted excavation of
only about half of the exposed part of the midden.
Late in the excavation, in an attempt to determine the extent of the midden, 15
trenches, 30.48 cm (1 foot) wide and 1.5 to 5.49 meters (5 to 18 feet) long were dug.
Evidence from trenches failed to disclose the extent of the midden, but did show that
it was considerable (Figure 4), and shell scattered on the surface indicates that the
midden extends for about 183 meters (200 yards) along the ridge. The stratigraphy

84

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Dimensions of Excavation Units and I.~cations
of Trenches at the Copperhead Site (41BO15)

Unit 1

Dimensions

N50/00
N50~5
N50/E10
N45/00
N45/E5
N45/E10
N40/00
N40/E5
N40/E10
N25/W10
N25/W5
N25/W02
N20/W05
N15AV15
N15/Wl0

0.9xl.5 m (3x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
0.9xl.5 m (3x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
0.9xl.5 m (3x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
2.1xl.5 m (7x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
0.9xl.5 m (3x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
0.6xl.5 m (2x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)

Trench 1
Trench 2
Trench 3
Trench 4
Trench 5
Trench 6
Trench 7
Trench 8
Trench 9
Trench 10
Trench 11
Trench 12
Trench 13
Trench 14
Trench 15

Location

.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3xl.52 m (lx5 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x 1.52 m (lx5 ft.)
.3xl.52m (lx5 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x1.52 m (lx5 ft.)
.3xl.52 m (lx5 ft.)
.3x5.48 m (lx18 ft.)

Test Pit 1.9xl.52 m (3x5 ft.)
Test Pit 2.9x.9 m (3x3 ft.)

N of stake N30/W2
E of stake N55~10
N of stake N55/E10
N of stake N60/00
N of stake N55iE11
W of stake N30/W17
S of stake N30AV17
W of stake N20/W17
N of stake N30AV17
S of stake N20/W17
E of stake N55/E25
N of stake N00/00
E of stake N25/00
S of stake N54/E30
N of stake N30/W10

Not oriented with grid. Extends
northeast of N60/E22.
Not oriented with grid. Extends
southwest of N20/W23.

’ Unit designation is the coordinates at the southeast corner stake.

at the site is simple Figures 5, 6). Zone 1 (the uppermost zone) is a hard, compact
black sandy clay called gumbo, extending to as much as 39.6 cm (1.3 feet) below
the surface, averaging 30.48 cm (1 foot) in thickness. At the juncture of Zones 1 and
2 in some parts of the site the two zones are mixed.

Hamilton -- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

85

Figure 3. Photographs of the Copperhead site: Above, view of excavations, looking north;
Below, view of main excavation area with shell midden exposed.

86

Texas Archeological Society

N

[] SFtELL
[] POTHOLES
UNEXCAVATED

0

10 fee(

0

3 mete,rs

[] ~F,,o

Figure 4. Topographic map of the Copperhead site showing excavation grid, trenches, and
potholed areas.

Stratigraphy
The stratigraphy at the site is simple (Figures 5, 6). Zone 1 (the uppermost zone)
is a hard, compact black sandy clay called gumbo, extending to as much as 39.6 cm
(1.3 feet) below the surface, averaging 30.48 cm (1 foot) in thickness. At the
juncture of Zones 1 and 2 in some parts of the site the two zones are mixed.
Lying entirely within Zone 1 is the shell midden, which forms elongated lenses.
The depth at the top of the midden averages 18.2 cm (0.6 feet), but ranges between
9 and 21 cm (0.3 and 0.7 feet). Except for a few isolated contacts with the top of
Zone 2, the bottom of the shell midden is 6 to 18 cm (0.2 to 0.6 feet) above the top
of Zone 2. The thickness of the midden seldom exceeds 18 cm (0.6 feet). Most
artifacts came from the surface and interior of the midden. The upper half of Zone
1 is largely devoid of cultural material. In Zone 1, cultural material was found at

Hamilton-- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

87

A

N 45
E 10

I
30

2 }t

[] ZONE 1, GUMBO

6Ocm

[] ZONE 2, SAND

[
]SHELL
-"~’-N ~

MIDDEN

[] UNEXCAVATED

B
Figure 5. A, Photograph showing general view of excavations, looking northeast. The
stakes and string mark the line of profile. A burial is exposed in the foreground. B,
Profile along line El0 from N50 to N55.

88

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Photograph of the profile along line El0.

the same elevations inside and outside the midden. The presence of artifacts in the
upper part of Zone 1 is largely the result of disturbance. In the distribution tables
and in the remarks about provenience, Zone 1 is always the part of Zone 1 that
overlies the midden. Zone 2 is a stratum of sterile red sand underlying Zone 1 and,
where it is present, the midden. This stratum begins 27.4 to 39.6 cm (0.9 to 1.3 feet)
below the surface and extends to an unknown depth.
Basically at the Copperhead site there is a lower stratum of medium-to-fine red
sand that was apparently deposited during the formation of the point bar in the old
meander belt of the Oyster Creek Channel stage of the Brazos River. The black
sandy clay gumbo of Zone 1 was then deposited on the uneven eroded red sand
surface of Zone 2. In some areas the gumbo became mixed with the red sand,
producing a light red to greenish red matrix. Since the midden lies directly on the
red sand surface of Zone 2 in several places, its accumulation obviously began soon
after the start of the deposition of the Zone 1 gumbo. In most instances, however,
the midden is 6 to 9 cm (0.2 to 0.3 feet) above the top of Zone 2, surrounded
completely by the gumbo matrix of Zone 1. It is assumed that floods and overflow
periodically covered the point bar ridge, depositing the layer of black sandy clay
gumbo.
Burial
The poorly preserved burial of a juvenile was found in the northern half of Unit
N50/E 10 and the southern third of Unit N55/E10 (Figure 7). The outline of a burial
pit 82.2 cm (2.7 feet)east to west and 103.6 cm (3.4 feet) north to south could be
traced from the lower part of Zone 1 into the red sand of Zone 2 along the outside

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

89

Figure 7. Photograph of the burial exposed in the north end of unit NS0/E10, looking southeast. Trowel points to the north.

edge of the midden. The burial was semiflexed and on the right side, with the head
to the south and the face to the east Figure 7). The skull was at 40.84 cm (1.34 feet)
below the surface, well into the red sand of Zone 2. Four sherds, some Rangia
¯ valves, and a few fragments of animal bone were in the grave fill.
Since the burial was found at the close of the excavation, the skeleton was
exposed, photographed in situ, drawn to scale, and removed by the Brazosport
Museum under the direction of Raymond Walley, who found a small expanding
stem arrowpoint (Figure 14, B) about 6 cm (0.2 feet) from the base of, and at the
same elevation as, the spine. The tip of the point was oriented to the southwest, away
from the spine. There is no indication that it penetrated any bone, nor is there any
indication that it is a grave offering. All the artifacts could be accidental inclusions
from the midden debris. The skeletal remains have not been analyzed, and no other
features were recognized at the site.
Artifacts
Six hundred fifty-four artifacts were recovered from the Copperhead site
(Table 2). They were sorted into ceramic, stone, bone, and shell categories, which
were then broken down into more discrete groupings according to shared attributes.
Functional terms are used for some of the artifact categories, but they are merely
heuristic devices, and no specific functions are implied by their use. In most cases,
purely descriptive designations are used.
The materials recovered from the Copperhead site consist of ceramic, lithic,
bone, and some historic artifacts. Unutilized flakes have been treated as artifacts

90

Texas Archeological Society

O4

~

O4

tr~

I

~

o

O4

.r...4

Z

ll~ll

llO41~

O4

fill

Z
O4

°4

I

llO41

~O4O4

O4

t

<Rx

O4

O4

0
0.j

o
O4
~

O4
O4
O4
O4

.<

O4

0

l

O4

l

~

l

l

~

l

~

O4

o,.,~
O4

o
o

.~

.<
0

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

e,t
e4
t.N

o

eq
e,l

,-..-t

e.I

0

v"l

e.l

e.I
t",l

i

,.-=1

I
I

e,I

0
0

_<

°o.a

0

0

rj

~s

91

Texas Archeological Society

92

0

,,.-.t

o
v

I

I

E~

©

~-~

E~

I

I

I

I

t~

I

I

,.~

I

I

o’,

,-~

I
0
,-~

I

el

I
I

<

q,%

o

o

(N

o

I

I

I

I

,~

I

I

~

I

<’~

e.I

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

I

t

I

I

l’,-

I

I

v-,i

I

1

93

v-,.i

1

1

I

1
o

~

t

;>
III

I

I~~

III~Nt

I1111~t

IIit111

I

1

I

I

I

t~

0

~ m

o

~,~.~

.~

~~~

-~ ~~ ~ ~o~
o~

~-~
m

°
0

@

~s

94

Texas Archeological Society

because, as indicators of occupational intensity, they are considered as good as the
obvious artifacts such as sherds, utilized flakes, and fired clay lumps. The historic
objects--four metal cartridge casings and one potsherd--were recorded to give an
indication of the amount of mixing and disturbance that has taken place since the
aboriginal occupation, but they are not discussed.
Ceramics
Six hundred sixty-one sherds were recovered from the Copperhead site. One
rim sherd was decorated; the rest of the sherds were plain. For the analysis, a fresh
break on each sherd was inspected under a 10x binocular microscope in order to
identify the temper and grain size in the paste; the microscopic examination showed
that all had sandy paste. Twenty-two sherds had grog as an additional tempering
agent. Inclusions commonly found in the paste are organic materials such as
carbonized roots, small pieces of hematite, and scattered unidentified white particles that appear to be calcium carbonate. No significant variation or intrasite
distribution could be found in the size of the sand grains in the paste; on the
Wentworth scale they fell between the upper range of very fine (0.074 mm) and the
lower range of fine (0.49 mm). This grain size variation was found to be
characteristic of the basal red sand of Zone 2 below the occupational level. The
inclusions and the sand in the paste could result from the use of naturally occurring
sedimentary carbonaceous sandy clay for making the pottery.
As a group, the sherds can be characterized as poorly fired, with very fine to fine
sandy paste. All have soft paste and are very grainy and friable; none are harder than
2.5 on the Moh scale. The frequent breakage at poorly wedged coil junctures and
the high incidence of rectangular sherds indicate that the vessels were made by the
coiling technique. A study of sherds with breaks along the coils indicates that the
coils were commonly wedged together by pressing down on the inside and pulling
up on the outside.
In previous reports from Southeast Texas (Ambler 1967, Shafer 1968), sandy
paste plain ware has been separated into temper and grain size categories. Other
variations within temper and paste categories have been largely ignored or inadequately described. The regional variations in plain ware may have regional and
chronological significance and so may be important for comparison with adjacent
regions within a culture area. Unfortunately, these kinds of studies have not been
made. Different regions with single pottery traditions may have significant surface
treatment modes, so in the analysis the sandy paste plain ware was separated into
more discrete categories based on the treatment of the surfaces.
All surfaces were either (1) floated and/or lightly polished or (2) smoothed and/
or scraped. The exterior surfaces were generally buff to red; the interiors were buff
to red or gray to black or dark brown. For convenience, these colors are described
as oxidized (lighter colors--buff to red) or unoxidized (dark browns, gray to black).
Shepard (1956:103-106) states that the firing atmosphere cannot be determined accurately from the color of the pottery because the nature of the clay and impurities
in the clay also affect the color. However, the colors can be categorized as oxidized
or unoxidized.

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

95

The term floated refers to the process of lightly rubbing the surface of the
vessel, while the clay is still wet, with a film of water that floats the finer particles
of the clay in the paste to the surface and results in a thin, lustrous film on the surface
of the vessel, giving the appearance of a slip. After firing, the floated surface is
darker than the paste and is often crazed. The floated surface is not durable; it erodes
easily and deteriorates with wear. It is sometimes difficult to distinguish between
floated and lightly polished surfaces. However, most of the surfaces appear to have
been floated, so no distinction is made between them here.
The term polished generally refers to the process of rubbing the partially dried
surface of a vessel with a hard object such as a smooth rock in order to compress the
clay particles, thereby smoothing and polishing the surface.
The term smoothed refers to the process of wiping the surface with a pliant
material such as the hand or a piece of leather, which causes a plastic flow on the
surface of the clay that produces a smooth finish.
Scraping refers to rubbing the surface with a hard object such as a potsherd,
gourd, rock, or piece of wood. The surface is thinned and made smooth by scraping,
but small striations and grooves remain. A few sherds may have a combination of
smoothing and scraping, but most appear to have been smoothed, so all are called
smoothed here. The exterior surfaces of many sherds are greatly eroded, whereas
the interior surfaces are not eroded at all. Many of the sherds without eroded
surfaces have been smoothed. The floated surfaces usually are eroded more
severely than the smoothed surfaces.
According to Shepard (1956:216-220), smudging is the result of an extreme
reducing atmosphere that causes carbon to be deposited on the surface of the vessel,
producing a gray-to-black color. When the unoxidized color is not dense gray or
black, but is instead light gray, the term reduced is used instead of smudged; the
difference between the two is a matter of intensity. Most of the sherds from the
Copperhead site have blackened or gray interiors. It is not certain, but the blackened
interiors may not be accidental, since the denseness of the black on many of the
interior surfaces is greater than what would have resulted from a reduced atmosphere in direct firing. Nonetheless, it is not clear whether the smudging was an end
product of manufacture or a byproduct of a cultural activity. Smudged is used here
to describe sherds that are dark gray to dense black over their entire interior surfaces.
The smudging frequently extends over the lip and onto the external rim surface.
The interior smudging, the overlapping of the smudging onto the external rim
surface, the cores with reduced zones along the inner surface and an oxidized zone
in a double band effect along the outer surface suggest that the pots were fired mouth
down. Firing a vessel mouth down would concentrate the smoke in the inside,
smudging the interior surface. If organic matter is deliberately placed inside the
vessel, the smudging effect is maximized, because the smoke builds up and pours
out of the vessel and up the outside. The smoke smudges the lower part of the
outside, around the rim, but the flames of the fire oxidize the carbon in the smoke
before any can be deposited higher up on the vessel. This type of firing process may
explain the distribution of the smudging on the sherds; a smoking fire alone does not
explain it.

96

Texas Archeological Society

On the basis of the tempering agent and the treatment of the surfaces, the sherds
at the Copperhead site are divided into three categories, (1) sandy paste decorated,
(2) sandy paste plain, and (3) grog-tempered plain. The sandy paste plain sherds
are further divided into (a) sherds with both surfaces oxidized, as indicated by the
surface color, (b) sherds with the interior surface floated and smudged, and (c)
sherds with the interior surface smoothed and smudged. Typologically the pottery
fits the description of Goose Creek Incised, Goose Creek Plain, and San Jacinto
Plain as described by Aten (1967). Detailed descriptions of each are given to show
the variation within the types. These variations may have regional significance and
may be valid varieties of the established types.
It should be kept in mind that (1) the variations described may not have any
cultural reality or significance to the makers, and (2) the descriptive categories are
based on sherds rather than vessels or even partly reconstructed vessels. The
differences described in these categories could result from variations in firing,
functional intent, varying lengths of use in any one function, and, of course,
technological variations.
Munsell (1942) color examples are given in the descriptions of categories.
These colors are taken from one or more typical sherds that represent the range of
colors in the category.
Goose Creek Incised (Figure 8, A, A’)
No. of sherds: 1
Wall thickness: 4 mm
Surfaces: Both surfaces smoothed, but very grainy due to the sandy paste.
Color: Both surfaces and core are oxidized throughout to a very pale even
brown (10YR 7/3).
Rim: Slightly everted with interior thinning and rounded lip.
Decoration: Six horizontal incised lines 2 mm apart, parallel to the rim. Series
of incised diagonal lines from third line from the top, through the fourth line,
stopping at fifth line.
Comments: This is the only decorated sherd from the site.
Goose Creek Plain, Category 1 (Figure 8, B-F) Surfaces and cores are oxidized;
interior surfaces of a few sherds are dark, but do not merge with interior surfaces of
Categories 2 and 3, which are smudged.
No. of sherds: 98
Wall thickness: 4 to 7 mm, but most are 5 to 6 mm.
Exterior surface: Most outer surfaces apparently floated, resulting in a thin, fine
film that gives the effect of a polished or slipped surface. Floated film is easily
eroded. Outer surfaces of other sherds were smoothed, but not well smoothed, while
the clay was still wet. Smoothed surfaces less lustrous and much grainier than the
floated surfaces because the coarser sand grains are left on the surface. Smoothed
surfaces are much more durable and more resistant to erosion and use wear.
Interior surface: Almost all interior surfaces are smoothed, but a few may have
been floated.

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

97

z
¢

B
~

’i i,i,i ~

C

C~

E

!

E’

0

N

D

D

2

4

CM.

Figure 8. Body and rim sherds from the Copperhead site. The exteriors of rim profiles are
on the left; prime letters indicate interior surfaces. A, A’, Goose Creek Incised; B-F, Goose
Creek Plain, Category 1 sherds.

Color: Core colors are generally a reddish brown (5YR 6/8 or 7/8), yellowish red
(5YR 5/6), and very pale brown (10YR 7/3). Also present but not common are red
(2.5YR 5/8) and white (10YR 8/2). When the (primarily inner) surface is smoothed,
it tends to have the same color as the core; when the surface is floated, it takes on
a gray or light gray color (10YR 6/1 or 7/1) that is darker than the core.
Rim: The one rim sherd is direct, with a rounded lip.
Comments: Some sherds are very poorly fired. Sherds with both surfaces smoothed
are very grainy. A few sherds contain so much sand that they look like sandstone.
Very sandy sherds that have both surfaces smoothed are much darker than the rest
of the sherds in the category (Figure 8, E, E’).

98

Texas Archeological Society

Goose Creek Plain, Category 2 (Figures 9, 10) Sherds in this category have
smoother interior surfaces smudged a dense dark gray to black.
No. of sherds: 159
Wall thickness: Sherds cluster in two thickness groups, one of 80 sherds that are 5
to 8 mm thick, the other of 79 sherds that are 3 to 4 mm thick.
Exterior surface: Most exterior surfaces are floated, but a few may have been
smoothed. Floated surfaces often are crazed and heavily eroded.
Exterior color: Exterior colors generally are darker than those in Category 1, with
yellowish browns (10YR 4/3), brownish yellows (10YR 6/3 or 6/4), browns (10YR
5/2), and reddish yellows (7.5R 5/2) predominating. Floated surfaces are slightly
darker than smoothed surfaces, and cores are gray as in Category 1 and grayish
brown (10YR 5/2).
Interior surface: All inner surfaces are smoothed, with uneven surfaces, flowing
striations, and incomplete obliteration of the coils. Some interiors, especially of the
thinner group, are well smoothed and have a dense black, glossy, lustrous surface
finish. Many of the thicker group both feel and look very grainy. Smoothed surfaces
are durable, and, unlike many surfaces that are floated, none are eroded. Interior
surfaces are smudged; smudging permeates the core, producing a two-layered
effect with a dark reduced zone along the inner surface and an oxidized zone along
the outer surface. On several sherds the inner smudgingis only a filmlike layer that
does not penetrate into the core, resulting in a smudged film on an oxidized core with
the same color as the outer surface.
lnterior color: Smudged inner surfaces are dark gray (7.5YR 4/0) and very dark
gray (7.5R 3/0) to black (2.5Y 2/0). Core colors along the inside edge are generally
light grayish brown (2.5Y 6/2) and grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2). Color along the
outside edge of the core is generally the same as the outside surface.
Rims: Among the sherds 5 to 7 mm thick are five rim sherds; three are slightly
everted with interior thinning and rounded lips, and two are direct rims with flat lips.
Among the sherds 3 to 4 mm thick is one interior-thinned direct rim sherd that has
a sharp lip with a series of shallow nicks along the inside rim surface.
Comments: Sherds 3 to 4 mm thick generally are better made and fired, with
well-smoothed outer surfaces and well-smoothed, glossy, smudged inner surfaces.
The better quality of these sherds may be a result of their thinness, which promotes
better firing. The sherds of one vessel 5 to 7 mm thick are from a deep jar or bowl
(Figure 10). Also in this category are seven sherds perforated from the outside.
Goose Creek Plain, Category 3 (Figures 11, 12) The sherds in this category
have oxidized outer surfaces and floated and smudged inner surfaces. The inner
surface treatment cannot always be determined because the entire inner surfaces
of many of the sherds are heavily eroded, apparently as a result of thin-floated
surfaces.
No. of sherds: 271
Wall thickness: Sherds cluster in thickness ranges similar to those in Category 2.
In the 5-to-7-mm thickness range are 71 sherds; in the 3-to-4-mm thickness range
are 200.

Hamilton m Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

99

A
B

B

C

C

!

!

E

D

E’

0
L

i

2
4
~: _.l ....... J
CM

Figure 9. Body and rim sherds of Goose Creek Plain, Category 2, from the Copperhead
site. Prime letters indicate inner surfaces.

100

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

A

A

~

Figure 10. Goose Creek Plain, Category 2 body sherd from the Copperhead site: A, outer
surface; A’, inner surface.

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

101

Exterior surface: Same as Category 2, but, in addition, six sherds from one vessel
have floated exterior surfaces, and two of these have small patches of asphalt on the
exterior surfaces.
Rims: Seven different rim forms were represented in the total of 12 rim sherds. In
the 5-to-7-mm thickness group, the vessel with the asphalt on it had a direct rim
with a rounded lip. In the thinner 3-to4-mm thickness group were the following
rim forms:
Direct with rounded lip (1)
Direct with flat lip (2)
Direct with interior thinning (2)
Direct with exterior thinning (1)
Direct with flat lip slightly overlapping outside edge (1)
Slightly everted with interior thinning and rounded or pointed lip (1)
Slightly everted with rounded lip (3)
Comments: This category predominates by far at the site and has both the most rims
and the widest variety of rim forms of any category of Goose Creek Plain. Four of
the sherds are perforated from the outside, one basal sherd has a rounded base, and
one is the only example of asphalt decoration on a vessel.
San Jacinto Plain ~igure 13) Sherds in this category are plain and have a fine
sandy paste with crushed fragments of sandy paste sherds as additional tempering.
No. of sherds: 22
Wall thickness: 7 to 9 mm
Exterior surface: Outer surfaces are floated and are severely eroded, except for the
areas around the rims, which are smudged. The smudging apparently results from
an extension of the inner surface smudging out onto the outside of the vessel.
Exterior color: Floated surface is light gray (5Y 7/1) on a core of a lighter light gray
(5Y 7/2). Cores of a few sherds are reddish yellow (5 YR 7/6). Fragments of very
dark gray to black crushed sherds that range between 1 and 4 mm in diameter are
interspersed freely in the paste. These are seen clearly against the light gray paste
wherever the floated surface has been eroded.
Interior surface: Interior surfaces are smoothed, with shallow striations and
incomplete obliteration of the coil junctures. All interior surfaces have dense dark
gray to black smudging.
Interior color: Interior colors are very dark gray to black, as in Categories 2 and 3.
Rims: The four rim sherds are direct, with interior thinning and rounded lips.
Exterior color: Same as Category 2.
Interior surface: All interior surfaces are either floated or completely eroded,
probably indicating that they originally were floated. Sherds retaining interior
surface are smudged like those in Category 2. Layered reduced and oxidized zones
of the core are the same as in Category 2. Six sherds of one vessel with floated and
heavily eroded surfaces have small, random, isolated streaks and specks of asphalt
on the inner surfaces, but there is asphalt on the outer surfaces of only two of the six
sherds.
Interior color: Eroded surfaces and interior reduced core zones are light grayish

Texas Archeological Society

102

A

C

C

!

D

D

B

!

E

E
F
0
1

~

2
l
CM

4
t._.J

Figure 11. Sherds of Goose Creek Plain, Category 3 are from the Copperhead site:
Prime letters indicate inner surfaces.

Hamilton ~ ArcheoIogical Investigations at Shy Pond

A

A

B

B’

103

!

C

C’

~i¸¸~
i,

D’

E

Figure 12. Sherds (A, B, and D), and reconstruction (E), of Goose Creek Plain ware from
the Copperhead site.Prime letters indicate inner surfaces.

104

Texas Archeological Society

brown and grayish brown (2.5Y 6/2-5/2). A few sherds, as in Category 2, have only
thin, dark, black smudged filmlike layers on oxidized cores of reddish yellow (7.5R
6/8), light yellowish brown, very pale brown ( 10YR 7/3-7/4), pale brown, and a few
light grays (5Y 7/1). Floated smudged surfaces are dark gray to black as in Category 2.
Comments: This is the only category at the site with a limited intrasite distribution.
Except for one sherd from Unit N50/-00, all grog-tempered sherds came from the
south end of the site. This difference in horizontal distribution could represent a
time difference, the occupation of the site by a different group, trade, or just that
grog-tempered pottery was not commonly made at the site. In the next site to the
west, 41BO12, which is on the same ridge and merges with the Copperhead site,
were several grog-tempered sherds. At least two vessels are represented in this
category; one is a partially reconstructed deep cylindrical jar.
Summary of the Copperhead Site Ceramics
Most of the pottery at the Copperhead site falls into the Goose Creek type as
originally defined by Wheat (1953:184-189). According to Aten’s (1967:10-15)
definition, the decorated rim is Goose Creek Incised, Categories 1, 2, and 3 are
Goose Creek Plain, and the grog-tempered pottery is San Jacinto Plain. The
ceramic types and vessel forms are consistent with those found in the Galveston Bay
series to the east. All of the sherds whose forms can be determined are from
cylindrical jars or deep bowls. All appear to be cooking vessels, and none are special
function vessels. Taken as a group, the pottery of the Copperhead site is most like
the pottery described for the Addicks Basin, some 90 km (55 miles) to the north
(Wheat 1953:184-189). In both regions the prevalent surface treatment technique
is floating fine particles of the paste onto the surface to produce a smooth finish or
pseudoslip that is easily eroded and often is crazed or crackled. Also in both regions
are sherds with dense black interior surfaces. In the Cedar Bayou-Wallisville area,
Ambler (1970:4) describes plain pottery with darker surfaces---especially the inner
surfaces--and speculates that they may be a later variant of Wallisville Plain or an
early variant of Goose Creek Plain.
On the basis of the pottery from the Copperhead site and Addicks Basin, and
perhaps other regions, floated surfaces might be characteristic of Goose Creek ware
in specific regions. Where they may have limited distribution, they may be
characteristic of certain time periods, or they may even represent an early stage of
ceramic development after the floated surfaces came into the region from the
Southeast Texas coast. Smudged or blackened inner surfaces may have similar
significance. Only from additional work in the coastal area can this be determined,
but pottery with dark inner surfaces apparently is one variant or variety of the sandy
paste pottery tradition in some areas of the coast. The dates of this pottery, however,
may not be comparably early in all areas.
According to the ethnographic and archeological data, the Indians of the upper
Texas coast were seminomadic hunters and gatherers. But why is pottery relatively
abundant among these groups when, generally speaking, pottery is not abundant in
hunting and gathering groups? Among the possible explanations are

Hamilton -- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

105

B

A

!

Figure 13. San Jacinto Plain body and rim sherds with floated exteriors and smoothed,
smudged interiors, from the Copperhead site. Prime letters indicate inner sufaces. Note
smudging along outer surfaces of the rims.

106

Texas Archeological Society

1) The difficulties of transporting ceramics were offset by the development of a
food-processing technology.
2) Canoe travel made transporting these easily broken containers feasible.
3) Specific areas or sites were staging areas, or winter houses, where pottery was
cached, so it was not always necessary to carry it around.
Future research projects need to address this question and test the possible
answers.
Lithic Artifacts
Siliceous stone does not occur naturally in the Colorado/Brazos deltaic plain.
The small, irregularly shaped chert pebbles that were used at the Copperhead site
had to be obtained by trade or on trips inland. According to local informants, chert
pebbles occur at Damon Mound, 48 to 56 km (30 to 35 miles) north of the site, but
they may be too small to have been used. The nearest sources, other than Damon
Mound, for siliceous material are the gravel deposits in the alluvial valleys 136 to
145 km (85 to 90 miles) inland (Garner 1967).
Apparently because of the scarcity of siliceous material, lithic artifacts are not
abundant at sites in the region. Only two arrowpoints, one drill, three biface
fragments, 78 flakes, and one small core were found at the Copperhead site, making
a total of 85 lithic artifacts recovered. Because the siliceous pebbles they used were
so small, the flakes are naturally quite small; many fit Hester and Shafer’s (1975)
descriptions of small prismatic blades.
Bifacially Flaked Artifacts
Arrowpoints. Two arrowpoints were recovered. A Catahoula point (Figure 14, A)
recovered from the backdirt is well made, bifacially flaked, and has a lenticnlar
cross section. The material is fine-grained yellowish tan chert. It is 35 mm long
and as much as 6 mm wide. The expanding stem arrowpoint (Figures 14, B, B’),
found in the burial pit fill is bifacially flaked, but is crudely made, with an
asymmetrical lenticular cross section. The material is coarse, grainy, fossiliferous
chert. The crudeness of the workmanship may be due to the inferior material. This
point is 25.5 mm long, 14 mm wide, and 4.5 mm thick.
Drill. One well-made bifacially flaked expanding base drill (Figure 14, C, C’) was
recovered. The material is fine-grained tan chert. The bit is narrow, with an ovate
cross section, and expands abruptly to form the base. It is 15.5 mm long, tapers from
2 mm thick at the distal end, or bit, to 4 mm thick at the base, and ranges in width
between 3 mm at the distal tip and 13 mm at the base.
Fragments. Three bifacially flaked fragments were recovered in the excavations,
but they are too small to permit identification. The largest is a rather thick distal
blade fragment of reddish tan chert with a lenticular cross section (Figure 14, D,
D’). The maximum thickness is 5.5 mm, the length from the distal tip to the break
is 30 mm, and the width across the break is 17 mm. At the distal tip a flat section
of cortex 4-mm square forms a flat, blunt point. The flat cortex on the distal end
suggests either that it was not a projectile point or that it was broken before it was
completed.

Hamilton-- Archeologieal Investigations at Shy Pond

107

4

B

C

B’

C’

A

D

D’

F

F’

K

G

H"

H’

H

F"

K’

I

I’

L

K"

0

2
~, ,,I
CM

G

G’

I"

L’

{

L"

J

J’

M

M’

IlIf

J"

M"

4
I

Figure 14. Lithic artifacts from the Copperhead site. The scale to the right of A is for A only.
The bulb of percussion is down on all flakes. A, Catahoula point; B, expanding stem point;
C, expanding base drill; D, biface fragment, possibly dart point or knife; E, notched flake;
F-M, small steeply trimmed unifaces (F’-M’ show dorsal faces at a45° angle to show steep
retouch, F"-M" show bulbar faces, M is retouched on right lateral edge); G, flake scraper,
enlarged about 6X to show flake facets.

108

Texas Archeological Society

A very small bifacially chipped distal tip fragment of reddish chert has an ovate
cross section and may be the distal end of a drill bit, but, since the fragment is only
7.5 mm long, it is impossible to make a conclusive identification.
The third bifacially worked fragment of light tan chert is a small part of the
lateral edge of a thinned biface. The fragment is 7 x 4 mm, with a maximum
thickness of 3 mm.
Unifacial Artifacts
Flakes. Because of the dearth of lithics at the site, as much information as possible
was garnered from the flake sample. The flakes were sorted into four categories:
(1) cortex flakes, (2) secondary cortex flakes, (3) interior flakes, and (4)
nondescript flakes (Table 3). The first three categories were further divided
into subcategories based on natural and prepared striking platforms. Flakes in all
the categories were examined under a binocular microscope to determine whether
any flakes had been used or modified. The flakes were divided into these categories
in order to determine whether there had been apparent selection of specific flake
types for specific tools.
Both Epstein (1963) and Shafer (1969) have published descriptions of flakes
made of siliceous cobbles and pebbles. Similar terms are used, but there are
differences. However, when cobbles are used as the source for flakes, all of the
resulting flakes or pebbles, regardless of size, can be grouped into the same general
categories. The flint flake attributes and flake category definitions used here
generally follow Shafer (1969:3-5). A flake, in order to be placed in one of the
categories, must have the striking platform and the bulb of percussion; if they are
missing, the flake goes into the nondescript category. The following flake type
definitions are used.

Table

3.

Flake

Flake Type

Types

at

the

Copperhead

Utilized1

Cortex
Natural platform
Prepared platform
Secondary cortex
Natural platform
Prepared platform
Interior
Natural platform
Prepared platform
Nondescript
Minute flakes2
Cores with prepared platform
Total

Site

Unutilized

Total

1

2
6

3
6

2
18

2
7

4
25

7
14
1

1
3
14
22
1

8
17
15
22
1

43

1 Includes the small flake unifaces
2 Minute retouch flakes are not added into the total

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

109

1) Cortex flake. A cortex flake has the dorsal face covered with cortex. The
striking platform can be natural or prepared.
2) Secondary cortex flake. A secondary cortex flake is any flake that has cortex
on some part of, and at least one flake facet on, the dorsal face. The amount of cortex
on the dorsal face can be large or small. The striking platform can be natural or
prepared.
3) Interior flake. An interior flake has no cortex on the dorsal face; however,
it can have cortex on the striking platform, but only when the platform is natural.
4)Nondescriptflake. A nondescript flake has no readily identifiable attributes,
such as a striking platform or a bulb of percussion. This category also includes flake
fragments on which no attributes can be identified.
As a result of the small size of the siliceous pebbles used, the flakes are very
small (Table 4). Measurements taken on the 25 utilized flakes, the 18 small
unifacially trimmed flakes, and 18 of the unutilized flakes showed a mean length of
12.7 mm, a mean width of 13.1 mm, and a mean maximum thickness of 3.4 mm. The
maximum flake length is 34 mm, the maximum width is 22.5 mm, and the maximum
thickness is 6 mm.
Most of the flakes are very thin with small, elongated narrow striking platforms
and very diffused, indistinct bulbs of percussion. Most of the flakes are rectangular
with expanding lateral edges. Two lipped flakes are strongly arched (Epstein
1963:29, Shafer 1969:4). Of the 63 flakes from the site with striking platforms
intact, 48 are prepared and 15 are natural. The striking platforms of the remaining
15 flakes are not intact. The one core from the site has a prepared platform. Because
Table 4. Scattergram Showing Lengths and Widths of Utilized Flakes at the
Copperhead Site, 41BO13
40

30

-r-

20

I¯

Z
IJJ

¯ ,

¯°
=¯

¯

,.

10

.d

0

0

I

I

|

10

20

30

WIDTH

(mm)

N=41
Mean length=15.7 mm
Mean width=13.4 mm
Mean thickness=3.2 mm

110

Texas Archeological Society

of the small size of the chert pebbles used, it was thought that evidence might be
found for a bipolar flake manufacturing technique, since bipolar technique has been
found in the Caddo area to the north, where pebbles of similar size were used (Shafer
1970). No evidence of the bipolar technique is detectable in the flakes or the one
core, but in the analysis it was noted that the small flakes are very suggestive of small
blades. Subsequent studies by Hester and Shafer (1975) and Patterson (1975), who
worked with more data, describe a blade technology on the Texas Gulf Coast. The
material described by them is analogous to the lithic sample at Shy Pond, so Shy
Pond should be listed as a site that has a similar blade technology, but since the
material from the Coast is not available for reexamination, their terminology is not
used in these descriptions.
From the microscopic analysis of the flakes, it was determined that 43 of the
78 flakes recovered have evidence of use or modification. However, several of the
36 unutilized flakes are fragmentary, and some undoubtedly have been used. A significantly high proportion--55 percent of the flakes recovered--have evidence of
use.

In addition to the 78 flakes already discussed, 22 very small flakes, ranging
between 2 and 4 mm in both length and width, were recovered during the fine
screening of shell/matrix samples in the laboratory. They represent debris from the
manufacture of chipped tools and were recovered only from the units with shell
samples that were fine screened in the laboratory.
Utilized Flakes. The 25 utilized flakes (Figure 14, E; 15, A-I; Table 2, 3) like the
rest of the flakes, are very small. The largest flakes in the sample are in this category,
but the mean length is still only 16.9 mm, the mean width, only 13.5 mm, and the
mean thickness, only 3.7 mm. All of the utilized flakes are unifacially retouched on
one or more edges from use or perhaps intentionally. The retouch is not extensive
and usually is concentrated at curved junctures or toward the end of an edge. The
angle of the retouched edge is very acute, and, for this reason, they are separated
from the 18 flakes classified as small steeply trimmed unifaces, described below.
The utilized flakes are retouched on one lateral edge, on both lateral edges, or on the
distal end opposite the striking platform. Twelve flakes are unilaterally modified,
and six are bilaterally modified; on six flakes, the distal ends opposite the striking
platforms are modified, and one flake has a unifacially chipped notch on the distal
end opposite the striking platform (Figure 14, E).
The utilized flakes are sorted according to the type of flake from which they are
made (Table 3). Sixteen flakes are on secondary cortex flakes, 14 have prepared
platforms, and two have natural platforms. Seven utilized flakes are made from
interior flakes, three have prepared striking platforms, and four have natural
platforms. One utilized flake was made from a cortex flake with a natural platform,
and one utili~d flake is on a nondescript flake. From the flake types in the sample,
it is apparent that secondary cortex flakes are predominant. This predominance may
be a factor of the use of raw material that apparently produced secondary cortex
flakes most often. However, it is interesting to note that the smaller interior flakes
seem to have been selected for the small steeply trimmed unifaces.

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

111

Steeply Trimmed Unifaces. In the sample of 43 utilized and/or modified blades
from the site, 18 are classified as small, steeply trimmed unifaces. The functional
term scraper, often used for similar artifacts, is avoided here. These unifaces differ
from the utilized flakes in having a series of minute flakes removed from the edge
perpendicular to the long axis of the flake, producing a very steep, almost vertical,
working edge. The steepness of the retouch on the flakes is the basis for
differentiating them from the other utilized flakes with acute working edges. The
unifaces have expanding lateral edges and are piano/slightly convex or flat in cross
section, with very thin maximum thickness. Thickness, measured in the area of
maximum thickness on the flake, ranges between 1.1 and 4 mm, with a mean
thickness of 2.4 mm. The area of maximum thickness, however, is not a measurement of the modified working edge. The length of the scrapers ranges between 9
and 19.5 mm, with a mean length of 14.1 mm. The width ranges between 9 and 14.5
mm, with a mean width of 12.7 mm. The trimmed unifaces have had very small
pressure flakes removed from the ventral face to produce a very steep edge along
a straight line or a part of a straight line. The angle of retouch is about 55° to more
than 80°, forming an almost vertical working edge. In some cases, a snap, or hinge,
fracture has been retouched to produce the steep working edge. Under the binocular
microscope the ventral edge of the steep retouch characteristically has a crushed and
worn edge. No striations were seen on the working edges or on the ventral faces.
The working edges of the flake scrapers in this sample are always on a straight plane;
there are no steeply beveled ovate or circular forms. Several of the flakes have the
bulb of percussion on a thick noncutting part of the flake opposite the steeply
retouched edge, so the worked edges cannot be interpreted as backing opposite
cutting edges.
The straight working edges and the crushing along the steeply retouched
ventral edges suggest that these small unifaces could have functioned in shaping
thin bone, wood, or antler by shaving off fine slivers or by pulling or pushing the
ventral face of the flake against the object. One thinned pointed bone implement
fragment (Figure 14, E) has marks that apparently are the result of shaving and
shaping with a scraping tool. The small size of these tools and the other utilized
flakes suggests that they would have functioned more efficiently had they been
hafted in some manner or used in composite microblade tools. Fifteen of the
unifaces are steeply retouched on the distal end of the flake, perpendicular to the axis
of percussion. The remaining three are steeply retouched on a lateral edge at a right
angle to the axis of percussion, but, since the long axes of these three examples cross
at a right angle to the axis of percussion, they are wider than they are long, so, like
the other 15 examples, the working edges are perpendicular to the long axes of the
flakes. The three laterally retouched unifaces are so shaped that, because of the
thickness or shape of the flake, they are most easily held or hafted from a lateral
edge.
Ten of the 18 trimmed unifaces are retouched across most of the distal end,
perpendicular to the long axis of the flake, six are retouched on the left half of the
distal end, and two are retouched on the right half of the distal end. If the scraper
had been pushed along the ventral face of the working edge by a right-handed

112

A

D

G

Texas Archeological Society

D’

E

C!

C

a

B

A’

F

F

!

!

@

G!

H

0
j!

2

4

CM

Figure 15. Utilized flakes and core from the Copperhead site. The bulb of percussion is down
on all flakes. A-I, utilized flakes (prime letters show bulbar faces); C, Utilized thinning or
billet flake; J, small chert core.

person, the left half of the distal end would have been the area most extensively used
and most in need of being retouched. This might explain the placement of the steep
working edge, but, of course, this interpretation is highly hypothetical, for the
manner of using a tool is based on several motor habits and other factors.
Eleven of the 18 unifaces have steep retouching only on the distal ends of the
long axes of the flakes. The other seven are composite tools, for they have, in
addition, one or more acute edges with small, irregular, discontinuous marginal
flake scars on a lateral edge, probably the result of use as a cutting edge, as in the
case of the 25 utilized flakes.
Eleven of the 18 unifaces are on interior flakes with prepared platforms, three
are on interior flakes with natural platforms, and four are on secondary cortex flakes
with prepared platforms. The number of different flake types indicates that interior

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

! i~!~~:i;

113

,~

B

B’

A

D

C

F

C

D’

E

E’

~

F

I

G

Figure 16. Bone artifacts from the Copperhead site. A-D, modified deer ulnas; E, bone
artifact; F, bone fragment; G, H, alligator bone fragments; I, J, deer metapodials.

flakes may have been deliberately selected for the small unifaces. In contrast,
secondary cortex flakes are the most commonly utilized flakes.
Similar small trimmed unifaces, referred to as scrapers, have been reported
from the Laguna Madre sites (Campbell 1956:28, 29) and the Ingleside Cove site
(Story 1968:27, 28) in the Central Gulf Coast. The Copperhead unifaces are much
thinner than the ones reported from either of these sites. The thinnest uniface
reported from the Ingleside Cove site is 5 mm thick, which is thicker than the largest
uniface, in fact, thicker than all but five flakes from the Copperhead site. The
Copperhead site unifaces also differ in that they have exclusively straight, or nearly

114

Texas Archeological Society

ol

I

I

I

i

I ol

I

I

0

0

Z
0

cat..-

I

I

0
Z

I

I

I

I

I

Z
o10

Iea

I
I

.-C

I

Z

I

I

°.
ta

E
"E
<

.~

.

~r~O~

,~.~ ~ ~ ~ o ~.~’r~

~~ ~ ~,~ °c~’~,=o
~

so

0

~

¯ ~"c~

.~.~

Hamilton m Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

115

o~
[
I

i

I

[

cf

ko

I

,-4

I

t~
[

I

[

I

I

I

I

~D
~D

(.4
~D

I

I

[

I

I

I

E

I

I

I

[

aO~

7~~
0 0

I

~D

~0
0

~

o

c~

~.~

~

~o~.~.~ ~ ~~.~~o~o
0

o.

0
~

0

116

Texas Archeological Society

,~- /¢’1

¢q

¢q
¢q

¢-.I ¢ ~

I

I

I

1

I

I

I

¯--,

I

,,DOO

I

I

I

¢q

I

~5

t’-,I

1

¢q
¢d
dl
I.
¢d

I

1 % Iz’~
¢-t

I

I

o%

l

O

1

t"
°m

I

1

I

¢.1 lt’~

,2"

o

o~
N
O

.~

~
,A

.~

<

~’~-’~"~
o ~o-~~-~~.:..

;~

oo~
0

"~’~

o

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

117

v

l
ko

I

0

l

~.
t
c~

o"

l

o
t~
~0

l

I

I

I

I

I

o

.~
o

l

04

o

o~

0
t~

I
cq

l

i

cq

t’~0

t~3

"0

F~ ~.~

~So’~
~.~ ~

-

~o~o~o

118

Texas Archeological Society

straight, working edges. The scrapers from the Ingleside Cove site and the sites on
the small islands in the Laguna Madre are ovate or ovoid in form, with convex
working edges, and have thicker cross sections. It is possible that similar small flake
scrapers have not been reported elsewhere on the Gulf Coast because the flakes have
not been examined carefully, and they have been combined with the utilized flakes
with acute working edges. The absence of similar scrapers elsewhere on the coast
cannot be explained by the available raw materials, the technology, or different tool
function. The same raw materials are used elsewhere on the coast, and there is no
basis for assuming that a different technology or a different tool function was used
at the Copperhead site. The steeply trimmed unifaces, as well as the other utilized
flakes, have the characteristics of small blades as described by Hester and Shafer
(1975:175-185). From the data available at the time, they found that the blade
technology described in their paper was confined to the central and lower Texas
coast. However, the blades at the Copperhead site and subsequent work by Patterson
(1975) extend this technology into the upper Texas coast.
Bone Artifacts
Only five obvious bone artifacts were recovered--a thin, fiat, pointed bone
implement, two nearly complete deer ulna awls, and two distal tips of deer ulna awls.
Possible bone tools or residue from the manufacture of bone tools include a long,
slender fragment of alligator bone with a longitudinal groove incised in one surface
(Figure 16, G), a piece of alligator bone with a groove-and-snap break (Figure 16,
H, H’), a fragment of a long bone with a groove-and-snap break (Figure 16, F, F’),
and four split deer metapodials (Figure 16, I, J).
Pointed. This artifact fragment (Figure 16, E, E’) may be the distal end of a
projectile point, a compound fishhook, or an awl made from a piece of long bone
that has been ground and/or scraped very flat and thin. Under magnification, a series
of parallel striations can be seen along the lateral edges; they apparently are the
result of manufacturing and shaping with a scraping tool. No similar striations could
be seen on the flake surfaces, but this could be the result of differential preservation
of the bone. The artifact has a broken length of 25 mm and width, at the break, of
16 mm. The thickness at the distal point is 1 mm, at the break, 2.5 mm.
Ulna Awls. The four bone awls (Figure 16, A-D) are made from ulnae that have
the shaft and distal ends shaped. Two nearly complete awls are definitely made from
the ulna of the white-tailed deer, and the two distal ends also are probably
white-tailed deer. One nearly complete right ulna awl (Figure 16, B) has polish
along the edges and the distal end. Under the binocular microscope, striations
vertical to the long axis of the awl are easily detected. The proximal end of the ulna
awl is broken. Another nearly complete left deer ulna with the distal end broken
(Figure 16, A) has polish near the proximal end where it would have been held.
Distal fragments of two other ulna awls (Figure 16, C, D) are only slightly polished.

Shell Artifacts
No definite shell artifacts were recovered, but, since there was a dearth of lithic
tools, it is probable that unaltered and broken Rangia valves functioned as scraping

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

119

and cutting tools. From a site near the Copperhead site there are, in the Brazosport
Museum of Natural Science, five large flat oyster shells whose anterior edges are
ground to knifelike sharpness. Another ground oyster shell was found at the
Dow-Cleaver site (Aten 1971:44). These ground oyster shells apparently functioned as cutting tools. Arectangular fragment of aconch whorl shows no indication
of modification or use.
Faunal Analysis
Vertebrate bones and invertebrate shells were abundant at the site (Table 5).
All the vertebrate bones found on the quarter-inch screen were kept, regardless of
size or condition. In addition, extensive samples of Rangia cuneata shell were
taken. All the shell was collected from Unit Nt5iW10 and from the northwest
quadrant of Unit N45/E 10. Smaller shell samples were taken from N20/W5, N25/
W5, N40/E5, N40/E10, N50/E10, and Trench 6. No matrix samples, as such, were
taken, but the matrix that adhered to the Rangia samples was water-screened
through sixteenth-inch wire mesh. The faunal debris was sorted from the rest of the
debris with the aid of low magnification. Almost the total sample of small rodent
bones and teeth, snake vertebrae, frog bones, fish vertebrae, scales, spines, teeth,
and miscellaneous small bones was secured in this manner. Because the shell
samples taken varied in size, the adhering matrix was disproportionate, so comparisons cannot be made among the units. The microfaunai sample does not necessarily
indicate what would have been recovered had matrix samples been taken or had fine
screening been an integral part of the excavation procedure. The units from which
shell samples were taken, especially N15/W10 and N45/E10, are given emphasis
disproportionate to the other units because of the addition of the microfauna to the
totals.

Vertebrate Fauna
Except for the fish, the bones of white-tailed deer are by far the most numerous
of the vertebrates, indicating that deer were a major source of food. Deer are
represented by virtually all skeletal elements (Table 5), sugges~ng that the animals
were butchered at the site. The absence of any antler and any but juvenile and adult
deer may indicated that the site was occupied in the summer or that deer hunting took
place in the summer. The white-tailed deer is represented by 95 identified bones,
and, in all probability, a major portion of the 324 unidentified medium-sized
mammal bones are of white-tailed deer. At least four deer are represented in the 95
identified bones.
Fish and turtle bones are the most numerous vertebrate remains. The 564 fish
bones are a very small part of what must have been at the site, since most came from
the matrix adhering to the shell samples. The small size (0.2 to 0.4 mm diameter)
of many of the fish vertebrae suggests that nets or weirs were used. Ninety-three
turtle shell fragments were recovered, all from hard-shell turtles called sliders,
which are common in the area; some were from quite large turtles. Duck, frog,
salamander, snake, and two small alligator bones are also in the sample.
Terrestrial species in addition to deer include raccoon, squirrel, opossum,

120

Texas Archeological Society

rabbit, cotton rat, and at least two Canidae sp. All of these species are found on
wooded ridges and prairies around Shy Pond.
Very few whole bones of large mammals were recovered. Some of the bones
are burned, and some are broken, apparently for recovery of the marrow and the
manufacture ofbone tools. Most ofthebones, even quite small ones, arebroken into
very small angular pieces. All metapodial shafts are split; two metapodials have a
conical protrusion between the condyles that would result from driving an object
between the condyles to split the bone (Figure 16, I, J). One long bone fragment has
a small groove that was made in order to snap the bone, either to reach the marrow
or to obtain a bone fragment suitable for making a tool (Figure 16, F). The only
whole bones are those that contain no marrow (calcanea, phalanges, astraguli,
metatarsals, and caudal vertebrae) and are not suitable for the manufacture of tools.
The two alligator bones from the Copperhead site were modified, the larger by
a large groove-and-snap fracture and the smaller by a deep longitudinal groove
incised in one surface (Figure 16, G, H).
Molluskan Fauna
The brackish water clam Rangia cuneata is the only mollusk found at the site
in quantity. Commonly found along most of the Gulf Coast, Rangia is an estuarine
species that is found landward but overlapping the range of oysters. It is most
abundant in the heads of estuaries and tidal bayous where water has a salinity of as
much as 15 ppt (parts per thousand), and its range extends for several kilometers up
the mouths of permanent freshwater streams where, at times, the salinity may be less
than 0.3 ppt (Hopkins 1969, Hopkins and Andrews 1970). Because Rangia can
tolerate a wide range of salinity and their range overlaps the range of freshwater
mollusks and higher-salinity mollusks such as oysters, it has been suggested that
environmental conditions and changes as well as dietary information might be
inferred from study of the shell characteristics of Rangia shell and shifts in the
percentages of Unio, Rangia, and Crassostrea in individual or groups of shell
middens in a limited area (Mclntire 1958:47, Story 1968:62).
The shell midden sites around Shy Pond are composed almost entirely of
Rangia, which range in anterior-posterior length between 15 and 61 mm, but most
of which are less than 30 mm long. Extensive Rangia samples were taken from two
units in N15/W10 at the Copperhead site. In this unit, 67 percent (14.5 kg, or 32
lbs.) of the Rangia range in anterior-posterior length between 15 and 30 mm, and
5.4 percent (1.3 kg, or 3 lbs.) are more than 30 mm long. The density of the shell
and the size percentages differ significantly in the two units. The differing volumes
and densities of shell might represent different lengths or intensities of occupation,
or repeated occupations at one area or the other over a period of years. The
differences in the percentages might result from any one or all of the following
factors.
1) Significant chronological difference between the two areas of the site.
2) Rangia collected at different times of the year.
3) Exploitation of discrete monotonic populations.
In all probability the low salinity in the area of Shy Pond supports a nonbreeding

Hamilton ~ ArcheoIogical Investigations at Shy Pond

121

monotonic subpopulation consisting of classes of clams of limited size. New populations are introduced only when spawn are introduced in salt water that pushes into
the area from the Gulf, so the presence of monotonic populations would affect
numbers 1 and 2 in the list above.
It is apparent that noRangia measuring less than 15 mm were collected by the
inhabitants of Shy Pond. This may be because the smaller Rangia represent such
a small amount of food, or it could be a result of the shell-gathering technique.
Fairbanks, in his study (1963) of theRangia of Lake Pontchartrain, Louisiana
reported thatRangia between 14.25 and 23.75 mm were uncommon and were found
only during the summer months. Fairbanks postulates that Rangia spawrred in
March or April will reach 15 mm in length, depending on environmental conditions,
by the end of one year, and during the next six warm months of the growing season
(March-April through September-October), will increase from 15 to 24 mm in
length. Relatively few clams stay within the size range of 14.25 to 23.75 mm very
long, so this size range is common for only a short time in the spring and summer
months (Fairbanks 1963:20, 21). In support of Fairbanks, Wolfe and Petteway
1968:102) worked out a von Bertalanffy growth curve for Rangia that shows that
Rangia one year old would be expected to be 16 mm long, andRangia two years old,
28.3 mm long.
Most of the Rangia from the Copperhead site range between 15 and 30 mm,
with the greater number in the lower end of the range. If the von Bertalanffy growth
curve is applicable to the Shy Pond area, then the small size of the Rangia indicates
that the inhabitants of the Copperhead site were collecting them during the late
spring and summer months. Also in support of this conclusion, the Rangia at the
site apparently were collected daring their growing season.
During the growing season, Rangia steadily add to the edge of their shells,
forming a series of shell accretion bands, one for each growing season. Between the
accretion bands are small narrow lines, or grooves, which are growth interruption
lines that are formed by a halt in the shell accretion during the nongrowing season.
By inspecting the edges of severalRangia shells, it is possible to determine from the
growth accretion bands or growth interruption lines whether the Rangia were
collected during a growing season. Observations made on the Rangia at the
Copperhead site show that they were collected during the growing season. At Lake
Pontchartrain, the growing season covers the months from March through September (Fairbanks 1963:20, 21). These data show that the Rangia at that site were
collected during the spring to fall growth period. In addition, by comparing the
width of the growth accretion bands of past growth seasons, it is possible to
determine if the Rangia were collected early or late in the growing season. The
Rangia at the Copperhead site, for the most part, were collected in the latter part of
the growing season, or late summer to early fall. Rangia 40 to 60 mm long were
used for the inspection of the growth accretion bands and growth interruption lines,
because at this size they have a number of bands and lines that are more readily
apparent and so more suitable for analysis.
Although a late summer to early fall occupation is indicated for the Copperhead
site, the applicability of the von Bertalanffy growth curve and the Lake Pontchar-

122

Texas Archeological Society

tmJn data to the Rangia in the Shy Pond area may be debatable. It has been found
that the size and growth rate of a Rangia population is affected by both salinity and
bottom substrata. Rangia attain greater size in water of low salinity (Parker
1955:209) and in sand bottom sediments over clay silt sediments (Tenore, Horton,
and Duke 1968). Originally it was thought that the small size oftheRangia indicated
age classes because the Shy Pond area is a marginal environment that might inhibit
the growth of the Rangia. However, it is known that Rangia can thrive in water of
very low salinity for several months with no apparent detrimental effects on growth
(Hopkins and Andrews 1970:868). So a lower salinity for the Shy Pond area
apparently does not explain the small size of the Rangia population. At present,
there are no studies that indicate how differing marginal environments affect the
growth rates and size ranges of Rangia. Studies similar to the Lake Pontchartrain
study by Fairbanks (1963) are needed if the growth rates and seasonal age classes
for the Shy Pond and adjacent areas are to be determined more accurately.
The fact that Rangia more than 30 mm long are not as common as might be
expected may be an indication of monotonic populations or an indication that the
pond was being so thoroughly exploited each year that few of the Rangia were left
to grow beyond 30 mm. If this is the case, then the Rangia in the midden represent
the yearly harvest of the one- to two-year-old Rangia that have matured since the
last harvest. The larger specimens would represent the ones that had escaped
harvesting in past seasons. If this interpretation is true, the oldest areas of
occupation around the pond would have higher proportions of Rangia more than 30
mm long.
Rangia shells are the most apparent faunal remains at the Copperhead site and
are definitely the most important food mollusk. However, the importance ofRangia
to the diet of the aboriginal inhabitants can be easily overemphasized. From
measurements on Rangia from the lower Neches River, it was found that Rangia
with mean lengths of 45 mm and mean shell weights of 22.2 g have mean wet meat
weights of 4.6 g (Hopkins 1969, Hopkins and Andrews 1970:868). This is a ratio
of 0.2 g of wet meat per 1 g of shell weight (0.2 lbs. of wet meat per 1 lb. of shell
weight). However, the ratio of meat weight to shell weight is variable, since meat
quality changes with the season, spawning, and the local environment. For
example, Rangia in sand sediments have a significantly higher ratio of meat to shell
than those in clay silt sediments (Tenore, Horton, and Duke 1968:241). In all
probability, the ratio differs for Rangia from the Copperhead site. which have a
mean length of 20 to 30 mm, but there is no other published meat to shell ratio for
Rangia cuneata. The ratio of 0.2 g of wet meat per 1 g of shell weight probably is
a reasonable approximation from which to calculate the food weight represented by
the two large shell samples taken from the Copperhead site.
Using this ratio, the 21.7 kg (48 lbs.) of shell from the entire 5-foot square Unit
N15/W10 represent 4.34 kg (9.6 lbs.) of meat. The 24.9 kg (55 lbs.) from the
northwest fourth of the 5-foot square Unit N45iE10 represent about 5 kg (11 lbs.)
of meat, or about 20 kg (44 lbs.) for the entire unit. In addition to the Rangia, the
two units yielded bones from white-tailed deer and unidentified canines, rabbits,
squirrels, cotton rats, birds, turtles, various fish, salamanders, and alligators (Table

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

123

5). The Rangia from Unit N45~10 represent a significant percentage of utilized
food, but in no way do they constitute the greatest part, especially when the other
fauna represented at the site are taken into consideration. This contrasts with the
Trinity Bay area, where Dillehay (1975:11, 12) concludes that "the use of the
shellfish Rangia cuneata.., as a food source has not been overemphasized, for the
data show that it was the most important single food item in the diet of the prehistoric
inhabitants."
Except for Rangia, the only mollusks at the Copperhead site were five
fragments of oysters (Crassostrea sp.), one fragment of conch (Busycon sp.), one
fragment of a Dinocardium robustum, one fragment of a Mercenaria campechiensis, land snails (Mesodon romei, not collected), and a few freshwater mussels (Unio
sp.) that were so fragmentary that they could not be collected.
Summary
The four most important food sources at the Copperhead site were deer,Rangia,
fish, and turtles. Also represented in decreasing importance, as indicated by the
number of bones, are Canis sp., opossums, ducks, squirrels, raccoons, frogs,
alligators, salamanders, oysters, and freshwater mussels.
Again, it should be noted that the excavation techniques used at the site favored
the recovery of the bones of the larger vertebrates. The gumbo matrix around the
shell midden is difficult to dry-screen through quarter-inch mesh, and no water was
used. The lack of fine screening and the lack of adequate matrix samples result in
a disproportionate emphasis on the larger vertebrates, which presents an unbalanced
picture of the importance of the small fauna to the inhabitants. If a more
representative sample of the fauna at the site were available, it could be assumed that
a different picture would be presented here.
Except for the Rangia clams and the oysters, the fauna are what would be
expected in this riverine environment in the Austroriparian biotic province. The
Rangia and oysters are brackish water estuarine species. The Dinocardium is a
continental shelf species, and theMercenaria campechiensisis a tidal flat clam. The
Dinocardium and the Mercenaria campechiensis probably were beach--collected or
perhaps traded from the coast. The oysters from the site are small, smooth, rounded,
and white, characteristic of oysters from a marginal area of low salinity as is found
typically near the head of an estuary (Parker 1955:480). The oysters had to have
been brought to the S hy Pond area from somewhere nearer the coast. The freshwater
mussels indicated that freshwater mollusks were being exploited to a small extent.
Taken as a whole, the faunal assemblage at the Copperhead site indicates that a
variety of habitats such as the brackish- to freshwater ponds and tributaries, the
wooded levees and ridges, and the coastal prairies were being exploited. It should
be emphasized that canoe transportation, which, in all probability, was being used,
would put all of these environments within easy exploitation distance.
Summary of the Copperhead Site
The Copperhead site is a Late Prehistoric stageRangia shell midden that dates,
from geological evidence and the presence there of grog-tempered sherds, some-

124

Texas Archeological Society

time after A.D. 1000. The site is on a point bar ridge that parallels the northwest
shore of Shy Pond. The elongated accumulation of Rangia shell and midden debris
probably is the result of repeated seasonal occupations over a period of years by
smallgroups. The early historic accounts of the Capoques and the Hans indicate that
during the winter season they were on the mainland, where they subsisted on
shellfish. The faunal evidence indicates that the Copperhead site was occupied in
the late summer to early fall, with deer, Rangia, and fish the main food sources.
The faunal sample indicates that localized habitats were being exploited.
Bodies of brackish water to freshwater were being exploited for Rangia, ducks,
frogs, salamanders, alligators, snakes, turtles, gars, drums, and other fish. The
wooded ridges were being exploited for deer, opossums, raccoons, rabbits, and
squirrels. The absence of fauna from tidal flats and open bays indicates that none
of these habitats were close enough to be exploited to any extent, and the geological
history indicates that these habitats were no more available in the past than they are
now. The five oyster fragments, the one Dinocardium robustum fragment, the
conch whorl fragment, and the Mercenaria campechiensis clam were collected
elsewhere and brought to the site. Perhaps the coastal bay habitats were exploited
at another time of year, when the people were occupying areas closer to, or on, the
coast.
Sandy paste pottery was found throughout the excavations. With but two exceptions, all of the pottery is undecorated. The only decorated sherds were one
Goose Creek Incised rim with lines parallel to the lip and one plain rim sherd with
a nicked lip.
The Goose Creek Plain ware is grouped into three descriptive categories based
on the surface treatment and color. The inner surfaces have the most diversity; in
all three categories, most of the outer surfaces were floated with an oxidized buff
to red and brown. Most interior surfaces in Category 1 are smoothed, but a few are
floated. All of the Category 1 sherds have inner surfaces that are light red, yellow,
brown, and other similar oxidized colors. The interior surfaces of Category 2 sherds
are smoothed and smudged a dark dense gray or black. The interior surfaces of
Category 3 sherds are floated and have smudged or reduced dark gray or black
surfaces. The floated surfaces of Category 3 often are heavily eroded, apparently
because of their soft unstable surfaces.
In addition to the Goose Creek ware, 22 sandy paste San Jacinto Plain sherds
have grog as an additional tempering agent. All but one of the grog-tempered sherds
came from the southwestern part of the excavated area. This intrasite distribution
may represent a later occupation, for it is known from the Galveston Bay area that
grog-tempered wares are stratigraphically later than the sandy paste ware (Aten
1970).
Within all the pottery categories are a variety of similar rim forms. The most
common forms are straight and slightly everted, with interior thinning and rounded
or flat lips. From the rim and body sherds it is apparent that the predominant vessel
forms were deep bowls and jars.
Lithics are scarce, but a large percentage of the flakes are utilized. The most
common stone artifacts were rather distinctive small thumbnail-sized flake uni-

Hamilton-- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

125

A

B

Figure 17. Cleaver site: A, view, looking north; B, main past of excavation with shell
midden exposed, looking south. Trench 1 in foreground; Trenches 2 and 4 to the right;
Trench 3 in background; Trench 5, with shell removed, to left.

126

Texas Archeological Society

N
D
D
0

0

DENSE SHELL
SCATTERED SHELL
SAND

3 feet

I meter

Figure 18. Cleaver site (41BO15): plan of excavation showing extent of midden in Trenches
1-5.

faces that provide some insight into how lithic resources were used in the Shy Pond
area. The only typed stone artifact recovered is a Catahoula point, but a bifacially
flaked expanding base drill, a small expanding stem point, and three biface
fragments also were found.

Hamilton m Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

127

THE CLEAVER SITE, 41BO15
For a day and a half, while the Copperhead site was drying out following a rain,
the Cleaver site was briefly investigated (Figure 17). The site is about 229 m (250
yards) north of the Copperhead site on a long sandy ridge that appears to be another
point bar ridge parallel to the northwest side of Shy Pond. According to local
informants, the site is on the second ridge from the northwest side of the pond. (The
Copperhead site is on the first ridge.) This second ridge is covered with dense brush
and a thick stand of trees. Unlike the Copperhead site, theRangia shell midden at
the Cleaver site is overlain by a layer of brown sand instead of black gumbo, but it
is not known whether other sites on this ridge also are overlain by sand.
The Cleaver site is a small Rangia shell midden, perhaps as few as 6.1 m (20
feet) long and about 4.6 m (15 feet) wide. In the center of the midden, C. L. Cleaver,
for whom the site is named, excavated a 5 x 5-foot unit called Trench 5 herein
(Figure 18). He donated his notes, artifacts, and faunal material from the unit to the
Brazosport Museum of Natural Science in Lake Jackson, Texas.
Excavation Methods
The objective of the excavation was to expose a large horizontal area of the
midden. To accomplish this, four 3 x 5-foot trenches (Trenches 1 to 4) were
extended from Cleaver’s unit, Trench 5. Trenches 1 to 4 were excavated down to
the top of the midden. Since the overlying sand is virtually sterile, it was not
screened. Arbitrary controls were not deemed necessary for the excavation, so the
surface of the midden was exposed and cleaned, and its limits as seen in the trenches
were plotted (Figure 18). The elevation of the midden was calculated from the
northwest stake, and photographs were taken of the excavation trenches. Time did
not permit excavation of the midden in Trench 5, so small pits were dug at the
periphery of the excavations; they failed to reveal additional shell accumulations.
The limited time available, combined with the very dense brush, prevented the crew
from making a contour map of the site.
Stratigraphy
S tratigraphically, the Cleaver site comprises two zones. Zone I is a grown sand
layer that extends from the surface to 36.5 cm (1.2 feet). The top 15 cm of Zone 1
is virtually sterile. Within Zone 1, about 15 cm below the surface and above the top
of Zone 2, are scattered thin clumps of Rangia cuneata that range in thickness
between 3 and 15 cm (0.5 and 1 foot). The shell concentrations are at varying
elevations; there is no single horizontal shell midden extending over the site. Zone
2 is a basal stratum of sterile reddish sand that extends from about 36 cm (1.2 feet)
below the surface to an unknown depth.
The stratigraphy is similar to that at the Copperhead site, except for the brown
sand that overlies the midden instead of the black sandy clay gumbo. At both sites,
Zone 2 evidently represents the sand deposited during the formation of the point bar
ridges. The brown sand of Zone 1 at the Cleaver site is the result of fluvial action
following the deposition of the basal red sand of Zone 2. As at the Copperhead site,
the shell midden of the Cleaver site lies entirely within Zone 1. The scattered thin

128

Texas Archeological Society
Table 6. Distribution of Ceramics at the

Ceramic
Category
Sandy Paste
Category 1
Category 2
Category 4
Category 5

Cut

Trench: 1

2

3

4

5

Zone1:1

1

1

2

1-2

1
7
-

3
19
-

-

6
11
2

8
33
8

-

3

1

-

-

-

4

8

25

1

19

49

5

107

1-2

Total

Plain

Bone-tempered

TOTALSHERDS

Cleaver Site

Plain

9
2
3

9
18
72
13

1 Zone 1, surface to top of shell midden
Zone 1-2, surface through shell midden

clumps of shell at varying elevations and the small size of the site is what would be
expected in the initial building process of a shell midden. The site apparently
represents a brief occupation, or a series of brief occupations, over a short period of
time, possibly by a single family group.
No definite features were found at the site, but there was a small, shallow
depression at the juncture of the southeast comer of Trench 2 and the northwest
comer of Trench 4. Several sherds were lying in the bottom and around the edge
of the depression, but no conclusive determinations were made concerning its
function.
Artifacts
The only recognizable artifacts recovered from the excavation at the Cleaver
site were 107 sherds, all plain, with sandy paste. No lithic material or artifacts of
bone or shell were recovered.
Ceramic Artifacts
The potsherds of the Cleaver site were analyzed and sorted, as far as possible,
in the same manner as the sherds from the Copperhead site. The 107 sherds were
sorted into five categories, only two of which are found at the Copperhead site
(Table 6).
The Cleaver and Copperhead sites share the Goose Creek Plain ware categories
1 and 2. Category 3, the largest category of sherds at the Copperhead site, and
grog-tempered sherds are not found at the Cleaver site, nor are the Goose Creek
Plain ware categories 4 and 5 or the bone-tempered sandy paste ware found at the
Cleaver site.
Goose Creek Plain, Category 1 (Figure 19, A-E). The same as Category 1 of
the Copperhead site, but this is a smaller and more uniform sample.
No. of Sherds: 9

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

129

B

A

g

A’

C

C°

E

D

E’

!

D’

F

F’

0

2

4

ClvL

G

G’

Figure 19. Body sherds from the Cleaver site. Prime letters indicate inner surfaces. A-E,
Goose Creek Plain, Category 1; F, G, Sandy paste Category 2 sherds.

Wall thickness: 7 mm
Exterior surface: Floated
Interior surface: Smoothed, with uneven wavy surfaces.
Color: Both surfaces and the core are oxidized a yellowish red.

130

Texas Archeological Society

A’

A

B

B

!

C

0
t

2
1
CM.

1

4
1

Figure 20. Goose Creek Plain Category 4 sherds from the Cleaver site. Rim profiles have
exteriors to the left. Prime letters indicate interior surfaces.

Hamilton-- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

131

A

B

B

D

C

D’

C’
0
k

2

4

’- _I

CM,

E

E’

F

F!

Figure 21. Body and rim sherds from the Cleaver site. Rim profiles have exteriors to the left.
A’-F’ are interior surfaces. A-B, Goose Creek Plain, Category 4; C-E, Goose Creek Plain,
Category 5; F is a sandy paste bone tempered sherd.

132

Texas Archeological Society

Goose Creek Plain, Category 2 (Figure 19, F, G). identical to Category 2 of the
Copperhead site, but all sherds have wall thicknesses of 5 to 7 mm,
No. of sherds: 9
Goose Creek Plain, Category 4 (Figure 20; 21, A, B). These sherds could fit into
Category 2 of the Copperhead site, but there are minor differences in color and the
interior surface. Only the thicker sherd group is found.
Wall thickness: 5 to 7 mm.
Exterior surface: Floated.
Exterior color: Same as Category 2 of the Copperhead site.
Interior surface: Smoothed.
Interior color: Gray (5Y 5/1).
Rims: The smudged or reduced gray of the interior spreads on to the exterior surface
of the rim. Among the rims are one direct with a rounded lip, two direct with fiat
lips, and two direct with interior thinning. It is sometimes difficult to determine
whether lips are fiat or rounded; perhaps these rims should be considered slight
variations that might occur on a single vessel. Some of the rounded lips could be
eroded fiat lips.
Comments: The interior surfaces may be smudged, but the light gray color and thick
core zone of the same color along the interior surface suggests that instead of being
smudged (as in Category 2) the interior surfaces have been reduced, but not to the
degree that could be called smudging. Firing the vessel with the mouth down could
result in such variations. Except for the fact that it does not have a dense dark gray
to black interior, this category is the same as Category 2 at the Copperhead site. Two
perforated sherds and one basal sherd from a round-based vessel are in this group.
Goose Creek Plain, Category 5 (Figure 21, C-E). Thin, dark sherds, most of which
probably are from one vessel.
No. ofsherds: 13
Wall thickness: 4 to 5 mm.
Surfaces: Both surfaces are smoothed. Color is dark, but surfaces are not smudged.
Color: Surfaces and core are dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2).
Rims: The two rim sherds are slightly everted, with interior thinning and pointed
lips.
Bone-Tempered Plain Ware (Figure 21, F, F’). Sherds have a very fine sandy
paste with many fragments of crushed bone as additional tempering agent.
No. ofsherds: 4
Wall thickness: 4 to 6.5 mm.
Surfaces: Both surfaces are well smoothed.
Color: Both surfaces and the core are very pale yellow (10YR 7/4).
Comments: These four sherds represent, at the most, two vessels. The incised
lip is the only example of decoration at the Cleaver site.

HamiItonm Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

133

Summary of Ceramics from the Cleaver Site
The Goose Creek Plain ware pottery of the Cleaver site differs from the pottery
of the Copperhead site in several respects. Category 4, the predominant category
of the Cleaver site, is similar to Category 2, the second largest category of the
Copperhead site. There are relatively few Category 2 sherds with dense black, often
glossy, well-smoothed interior surfaces at the Cleaver site. The Category 3 sherds,
with very dark gray to black floated interior surfaces are the largest category at the
Copperhead site, but are not found at the Cleaver site.
The bone tempering suggests that the Cleaver site may date later than the Copperhead site. In the Galveston Bay area, bone tempering appears stratigraphically
later than sandy paste ware and grog-tempering (Aten 1970). If the Copperhead site
is indeed earlier than the Cleaver site, the vessels represented by the Category 3
sherds with surfaces that were popular early in the Shy Pond area, probably were
later completely replaced in favor of the more durable and functional smoothed
vessels. From a functional point of view, the floated surfaces, especially floated
interior surfaces, may not have been less useful as cooking vessels because these
unstable surfaces are easily eroded and worn. This difference in popularily between
floated and smoothed interior surfaces may be chronological or it may merely
represent the different techniques of individuals or groups. This problem needs to
be investigated at other sites in the area.
The Cleaver site also differs in the absence of the thin (3 to 4 mm thick) sherds
that are typical of Categories 2 and 3 at the Copperhead site. The thin sherds in
Category 5 at the Cleaver site do not correspond to any of the categories at the
Copperhead site. The only example of decoration at the Cleaver site is the
bone-tempered rim sherd that has diagonal lines incised across the flat lip. No
grog-tempered sherds were found at the site.
As suggested earlier, the differences between the pottery of the Cleaver and
Copperhead sites may be an indication that there were different groups with
different finishing and firing techniques. The differences also may have chronological or functional significance, but we do not know enough of the prehistory of
the area to determine which interpretation is correct. More sites in the area need
investigation, and radiocarbon dates are needed to establish the sequence of changes
in the ceramic tradition and to plot the distribution of specific ceramic traits or
techniques.

Faunal Analysis
No part of the midden was excavated in Trenches I to 4; no fine screening was
done in these trenches, and no matrix samples were taken. For these reasons the
faunal remains recovered cannot be considered a good representation of the fauna
at the site. In addition, the methods of excavation were not favorable for the
collection of the microfauna at the site. However, the fauna collected by Mr.
Cleaver from the midden in Trench 5 contribute significantly to the faunal sample
from the site.
The vertebrate fauna of the Cleaver site follow essentially the same pattern as
the fauna at the Copperhead site, but at the Cleaver site there are some probable

134

Texas ArcheologieaI Society
Table

7.

Animal
MAMMALS
Bison
Bison bison
White-tailed deer
Odocoileus virginianus
Medium-sized mammal
fragments
Rabbit
Sylvilagus sp.
Cottontail
Sylvilagus floridanus
Jackrabbit
Lepus californicus
Raccoon
Procyon lotor
Opossum
Didelphis marsupial
Small-sized mammal
fragments
BIRDS
Duck
Anas sp.
Unidentified fragments
REPTILES
Alligator
Alligator
mtsstsstpptensts
Hard shell turtle
Pseudemys sp.
AMPHIBIANS
Frog
Rana sp.
FISH
Gar
Lepisosteus sp.
Unidentified fish spine
MOLLUSKS
Oyster
Crassostrea virginica
Freshwater mussel
Unio sp.
Land snail
Mesodon romeri
Clam
Rangia cuneata
TOTAL

Faunal

Remains

of the

Cleaver Site

Trench: 1

2

3

4

5

Cut

Zone1:1

1

1

1

1-2

1-2

-

-

31

1

2

34

-

-

-

2

10

12

1

2

7

-

16

26

-

-

3

-

-

3

-

-

l

-

-

1

....

1

1

....

1

1
m

-

-

4

1

Total

1
7

1

2
3

_

....

15

1

16

-

2

m

1
1

1

1

-

1

-

1

-

-

-

1

-

7

--

--

1

w

6
not collected
not collected
1

1 Zone !, surface to top of shell midden
Zone 2, surface through shell midden

3

62

3

55

126

Hamilton-- ArcheologicaI Investigations at Shy Pond

135

bison ribs and more alligator bones (Table 7). However, the 34 bison rib fragments
found at the Cleaver site represent, at the most, only a few ribs. The Cleaver site also
differs in having only a few turtle carapace fragments. There are very few data on
the microfauna, so comparisons of microfauna from the Cleaver site with the limited
microfauna sample from the Copperhead site cannot be made. As at the Copperhead
site, very few whole bones were recovered; the bones are broken into small angular
fragments, probably in order to obtain the marrow.
Because of the small sample and the excavation methods, all that can be said
of the fauna is that bones of white-tailed deer, bison, rabbit, raccoon, opossum,
duck, alligator, turtle, frog, and fish were found. The only invertebrate remains were
six fragments of freshwater mussels, one oyster shell fragment, and several
Mesodon romeri land snails. NoRangia samples were taken, however, Robert Cole,
of Lake Jackson, collected a small sample of Rangia from Trenches 2 and 4 for
analysis and radiocarbon dating.
The Rangia in the sample, as suggested by the width of the growth bands,
apparently were collected near the end of a growing season, suggesting, as at the
Copperhead site, a late summer to early fall occupation. Because there were so few
specimens in the sample and the collecting was so selective, size ranges were not
determined.
The faunal sample from the site is only partially representative of what could
be expected from the exploitation of the area. The deer, rabbits, opossums, and
raccoons came from the wooded ridges around the pond; theRangia, turtles, frogs,
alligators, and fish came from the brackish water to freshwater ecosystems of the
area. The presence of bison and jackrabbits indicates that there was some
exploitation of the coastal prairies.
Summary of the Cleaver Site
The Cleaver site is a small Late Prehistoric stage Rangia shell midden. The
compacmess of the site, together with the thin shell lenses, indicates a rather brief
occupation by a small family group or other social unit. Theshell lenses may bethe
remains of house floors. The fact that no artifacts except sherds were found
indicates a brief or a specialized occupation, and the homogeniety of most of the
sherds indicates that most were made by a similar process, possibly by one person
or by a few related individuals. The four bone-tempered sherds indicate that the site
may date somewhat later than the Copperhead site.
Comparison of the distribution of pottery with the distribution of faunal
remains brings to light some interesting details. In Trench 5, where the extent of the
shell midden was unknown because the shell had been removed when it was
excavated by Mr. Cleaver, there was an even proportion of ceramic (49) to faunal
(55) remains. Trench 1, with a limited distribution of shell midden, has few sherds
(9) and few faunal remains (1), except forRangia. Trenches 2 and 4, with the most
extensive amounts of shell, have a greater proportion of sherds (44) to faunal
remains (6). The most striking anomaly is in Trench 3, where half the trench was
covered with shell, and the most bones (62), but only one sherd, were found. The
reason for this distribution is not known, but it could be postulated that food debris

136

Texas Archeological Society

was tossed clear of the living floor. If the presence of pottery is an indication of a
living area, Trenches 2, 4, and 5 represent a living area, whereas Trench 3 and part
of Trench 5 are the areas where food debris was thrown. This interpretation is highly
speculative, but it would explain the intrasite distribution of the sherds and
vertebrate food debris. However, this uneven distribution does show that animal
and cultural remains are not distributed evenly across the site, and this fact has
implications for the reliability of determinations of prehistoric diets and subsistence
patterns made from small test excavations, a concern that has been expressed by
Dering and Ayers (1977:7). In order to eliminate similar problems in the future, all
research on coastal subsistence should take into consideration the sampling biases
built into the sites.
The limited faunal sample from the site, as at the Copperhead site, indicates that
several specific habitats were being exploited. The brackish water to freshwater
ponds and distributades were sources forRangia, mussels, alligators, fish, ducks,
and frogs, and the wooded ridges were exploited for deer, rabbits, opossums, and
other small mammals. In addition to the fauna found at the Copperhead site, several
probable bison rib fragments were found at the Cleaver site, suggesting that bison
from the coastal prairies were hunted and butchered elsewhere or that there was
contact with groups that hunted bison. Some bison bones have been noted in
collections from various Shy Pond sites in the Brazosport Museum, and local
informants state that bison bones occasionally are found in the area.
DATING
The absence of diagnostic artifacts makes the task of dating these two sites
difficult, but there are several possibilities. Grog temper appeared in the area by
A.D. 1000 and bone temper, by A.D. 1400 in the Galveston Bay area (Aten 1970),
and, according to Dillehay (1974), bison appearedby A.D. 1300. It should be noted,
however, that the ceramics of the Shy Pond area do not necessarily align perfectly
with other sequences and that a time lag is to be expected between areas. Radiocarbon dates are needed from sites in the area to assess the development of the ceramic
tradition in the Shy Pond area and the diffusion of ceramic traits from the Galveston
Bay area. It is assumed that the first ceramics and subsequent ceramic traits spread
by diffusion from the Galveston Bay area, since pottery appeared there earlier (by
A.D. 400) than in the areas of the coast to the west (Aten 1971).
Paired charcoal and Rangia samples from the Cleaver site were submitted for
dating to the Radiocarbon Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin. The
shell samples were collected by Robert Cole from the surface of the shell midden
in Trenches 2 and 4, several months after the excavation was concluded. The
charcoal sample (Tx-1116B) yielded a date of 180-Z-_60 B.P. (A.D. 1770-L-_60), and
the Rangia sample (Tx-lll6A) yielded a date of 860L-_50 B.P. (A.D. 1090-L-_50)
(Valastro, Davis, and Varela 1975:81). No correction for dates on Rangia shell in
this area has been worked out (shells should give anomalously early dates due to
carbonates in estuarine water here) and the shell date Tx-1116A cannot be used. A
date on charcoal, however, should not be affected by environmental factors, and the
Tx-lll6B figure of A.D. 1770+_-60, giving a 67 percent chance that the true

Hamilton--Archeological lnvestigations at Shy Pond

137

radiocarbon age is between A.D. 1710 and 1830, can be used as a valid piece of
chronological evidence, even though a single radiocarbon date such as this can be
taken only as a preliminary approximation.
Other evidence suggests a time earlier than A.D. 1700. Presidio San Agustin
de Ahumada and Mission Nuestra Sefiora de la Luz were established in A.D. 1756
(Tunnell and Ambler 1967:12), and trade materials must have been available
during the eighteenth century from these and other sources such as shipwrecks. If
the Cleaver site had been occupied after A.D. 1700 one could reasonably expect it
to contain historic materials. Since there are no such materials, the site is most
probably earlier than A.D. 1700.
It is also probably later than A.D. 1400. There are bison remains in the site,
and we know from the work of Dillehay (1974) that bison were not present on the
coastalprairie until after A.D. 1300. In addition, if thebone tempering in thepottery
at the Cleaver site is, as we believe, a trait diffused from the Galveston Bay area,
then the site should be later than A.D. 1400.
The radiocarbon date does not contradict this evidence, since (1) it is a single
date, so must be taken only as a suggestion, and (2) if the two-sigma error is taken
(a sound statistical practice in radiocarbon dating), the chances are 95 percent that
the radiocarbon age is between A.D. 1650 and 1890.
On the basis of current evidence, then, a range of A.D. 1400 to 1700 is a
reasonable estimate for the time of the Cleaver site.
Among excavated sites, the Cleaver and Copperhead sites correlate most
closely in time and artifact assemblages with Zones 2 and 2A at the Dow-Cleaver
site (41BO35) south of Shy Pond (Aten 1971). The Dow-Cleaver site is the only
other excavated site in this area of the coast with radiocarbon dates. Aten believes
that theRangia radiocarbon samples had been affected by recent chemical contamination and, by some statistical juggling, arrived at a date of A.D. 1320£_80, which
falls within his expected calendar span of A.D. 1300 to 1600. This is believed to
be a realistic date range, but some reliable radiocarbon dates from this area are
desperately needed.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The prehistory of the Gulf Coast area between Galveston and Corpus Christi
bays is largely unknown. In an attempt to remedy this situation, excavations were
carried out in the summer of 1967 at the Copperhead and Cleaver sites, two Rangia
sites on Shy Pond. The sites are on two ridges that, because of their modest
elevation above the surrounding terrain and the protection they provided from high
water, were sought out for habitation.
The two excavated sites and the other sites visited in the area are thin
accumulations of Rangia shell and midden debris, rarely more than 30 cm thick.
A great many small shell midden accumulations in the area, such as the Cleaver site,
apparently are the result of repeated occupations over a period of time. Neither of
the excavated sites has clearly stratified shell zones or massive shell accumulations
that might indicate a long time span or a long, continuous occupation.
The artifact yield from the sites is meager; at the Cleaver site, only sherds were

138

Texas Archeological Society

found. At the Copperhead site, in addition to sherds, there are small utilized flakes,
small steeply beveled flake scrapers, three biface fragments, one Catahoula arrowpoint, one untyped expanding stem arrowpoint, one bifacially chipped expanding
base drill, four bone awls, and a fragment ofapossible bone point, awl, or compound
fishhook.
Not surprisingly, the cultural components represented by the two sites do not
fit nearly any of the Late Prehistoric stage foci or phases so far defined for the Texas
Gulf Coast (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954:123-133). However, the sandy paste
ware of the sites is most closely related to the sandy paste ware of the Galveston Bay
area. Attributes held by the Copperhead and Cleaver wares in common with the
Galveston Bay area ware are the cylindrical jar and deep bowl vessel forms, rim
profiles, lip nicking, incised decorations, conchoidal or rounded bases, grog temper,
and bone temper. On the basis of the sherd attributes, it is most feasible to credit the
origin of the pottery tradition and technology to the Galveston Bay area. The six
sherds with traces of asphalt are not considered necessarily representative of
Rockport focus influence from the central Gulf Coast, since, as suggested by Shafer
(1966:30), the application of asphalt to pottery seems to be rather widespread on the
Gulf Coast.
Despite the similarity of the Shy Pond pottery to the pottery of the Galveston
Bay area, there appear to be some differences in the popularity/occurrence of
decorated pottery. At the Copperhead site, 22 grog-tempered San Jacinto Plain
sherds were found in addition to the sandy paste sherds, but the only obvious
examples of decoration were one incised rim sherd and one interior nicked lip. At
the Cleaver site, aside from the plain sandy paste sherds, were four bone-tempered
sherds, one of which is a rim with diagonal lip notching.
In the Galveston Bay area, incised decoration steadily increased in popularity
after it was introduced around A.D. 400, and was common by the time grog-and-bone
temper appeared in the Galveston Bay area at about A.D. 1100 and A.D. 1400. But
why is there almost no decorated pottery in the Brazos delta area? During this time
period, incised decorated pottery is common in the Matagorda and Corpus Christi
Bay areas, and it is obvious that the incised decorated ceramics spread from the
Galveston Bay area. There is some question about the applicability of the pottery
sequence in the Galveston Bay area to the Colorado/Brazos deltaic plain, but sandy
paste pottery and both grog-tempered and bone-tempered pottery certainly were
not any earlier, and probably were later, in the Colorado~razos deltaic plain than
in the Galveston Bay area. Using the Galveston Bay sequence, the grog tempering
at the Copperhead site suggests an occupation sometime after A.D. 1000, and the
bone tempering at the Cleaver site suggests an occupation sometime after A.D. 1400
(Aten 1970). However, it is possible, but not probable, that bone tempering spread
from the central coast or from Central Texas at an earlier date, since both the
Rockport ware of the central coast and the Leon Plain of Central Texas have bone
tempering (Suhm and Jelks 1962).
At the Copperhead site, sandy paste cooking ware with floated interior surfaces
predominated; at the Cleaver site the interior surfaces are only smoothed and/or
scraped. The grog tempering at the Copperhead site and bone tempering at the

Hamilton-- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

139

Cleaver site support the possibility that floated interior surfaces are earlier and were
later replaced by the more durable smoothed and/or scraped surfaces. Also common
to both of these excavated sites and noted in collections from other sites in the area,
is the high incidence of lace holes used for repairing cracks. The holes apparently
were part of deliberate attempts to make vessels last as long as possible. The other
most obvious ceramic trait at the Copperhead site is the prevalence of the dense dark
gray to black interior surfaces that apparently were the result of smudging. This trait
is not prevalent at the Cleaver or Dow-Cleaver sites.
In the Colorado/Brazos deltaic plain, the Copperhead and Cleaver sites
correlate most closely in time and artifact assemblages with Zones 2A and 2B at the
Dow-Cleaver site, 8 km (5 miles) south of Shy Pond. The two zones, which date
to about A.D. 1300 to 1600, have plain sandy paste, bone-tempered, and
grog-tempered ceramics, but no decorated wares (Aten 1971:52). Additional
comparisons of the Shy Pond sites with the Dow-Cleaver site were made by Aten
(1971).
Lithic artifacts are scarce, probably because of the scarcity of siliceous material
in the area. The flakes that are found are characteristically very small and bladelike,
and a large percentage are utilized. The small, steeply retouched unifaces from the
Copperhead site are distinctive, but their significance and distribution on the Gulf
Coast is not known, since no similar unifaces have been reported elsewhere on the
coast. Small scrapers that differ in many respects from the Copperhead examples
are reported from the island sites in the Laguna Madre that belong to the Rockport
focus (Campbell 1956:28-29). The Catahoula arrowpoint and the small expanding
base, bifacially flaked drill, together with the pottery, suggest stronger affiliations
with the Galveston Bay area than with the central Gulf Coast.
The archeological record of the Shy Pond area indicates that there was no
significant change in the technology or subsistence pattem during the occupation of
the area. The artifact sample available for study from the two excavated sites and
other sites in the area comprises a narrow typological range. The scarcity of
decorated pottery may be shown by future work to be a significant characteristic of
the sandy paste pottery found to the west of the Galveston Bay area. The scarcity
of traits held in common by the Shy Pond and adjacent areas indicates that Shy Pond
may have been isolated from outside influences or that innovations were not
generally accepted. The lack of typological variations may be best interpreted as
representing a very short time period; cultural stability and/or cultural stagnation are
other possible explanations. The basic similarity of the Shy Pond sites to one
another makes it possible to consider them part of a single cultural late prehistoric
’hunting-and-gathering pattern. The archeological evidence in Newcomb (1961)
and data from Service (1962) indicate that the simplest form of social structure
above the family--the band (probably patrilocal)---was characteristic of the coastal
Indians of Texas. At the band level of sociocultural integration,
altofthe functions of the culture are organized, practiced, or partaken of by no more
than a few associated bands made up of related nuclear families. The economy...is
organized by and takes place entirely within these units; there are no special

economic groups of specialized productive units....no specialized occupation

140

Texas Areheological Society

group, no economical institutions....no special consuming group or classes. The
economy...remains merely an aspect of kinship organization. The widest level of
integration achieved was that established through affmal ties with other bands
[Service 1962:108].
At a given time of each year the band occupied a certain locality within a territory
or area to exploit a primary food resource. Some sort of seasonal round was made
through the rest of the territory during the remainder of the year. Favorable
campsites were revisited year after year, resulting in the accumulation of large shell
middens in the areas where mollusks were being gathered. Many of the smaller
middens represent the time needed to exploit the mollusks, plant resources, or game
in the area during one season, part of one season, or on a short visit.
The apparent absence of deer antler and bones of very young deer, the size
ranges of the Rangia being collected, and the width of the Rangia growth rings
indicate a late summer to early fall occupation of the Shy Pond area. Since the
groups are assumed to have been migratory, houses probably were very simple; the
small circular shell middens commonly found in the area probably are the remains
of living and/or house floors. Since the food resources being exploited probably
were not stored, the absence of storage facilities is to be expected. Generally,
features other than burials, hearths, pits, and shell house floors are seldom found in
these sites.
In the archeological record of this part of the Texas Gulf Coast there is little
evidence to indicate any major change in the technology of the subsistence pattern.
This stability can be attributed in part to the environmental potential of the coast,
where there were few alternatives to exploitation of the estuarine and littoral
environments for mollusks, fish, plants, and game. If the environmental potential
of the area was sufficiently great to support large groups living year-round in
sedentary villages, the aboriginal inhabitants do not seem to have taken advantage
of it. Evidently the quantity and distribution of food resources forced the inhabitants
to break for most of the year into small bands or individual family units that could
seasonally exploit the environment to their advantage. Only in favorable areas and/
or in certain seasons of the year could entire bands or multibands get together. Some
groups in the Southeast Texas Gulf Coast area may have had garden plots
(Newcomb 1961:323), but in the Shy Pond area, probably no forms of agriculture
were practiced.
It is reasonable to expect the Shy Pond and adjacent areas to have similar
cultural stages, social structures, and settlement and subsistence patterns. It is also
reasonable to expect that some traits appear at Shy Pond later than in the adjacent
areas. Similar artifacts, potter,/types, and sequential developments that correlate
with adjacent areas are to be expected. But although correlations are to be expected,
local variations and developments that represent the individuality and integrity of
the cultures in their adaptation to the particular environment of the Shy Pond area
must be sought and investigated. This was attempted in the analysis of the material
from the Copperhead and Cleaver sites, but in general, any individual or local
adaptations that may have occurred have been masked by cultural similarities with
the Galveston Bay area.

Hamilton-- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

141

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The excavation of the Copperhead and Cleaver sites was made possible by the
work, interest, and cooperation of many individuals. The project was financed in
1967 under a contract with the Texas State Building Commission and then State
Archeologist Curtis Tunnell. The late Raymond Walley, who was active in the
archeology of Brazoria County, brought the Shy Pond sites to the attention of archeologists at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory of The University of
Texas at Austin and provided valuable assistance during the excavation of the sites.
Lloyd Morrison, president of the Texas Better Homes Building Corporation in Lake
Jackson, granted permission for the excavations to be carried out on the property.
Thomas R. Hester conducted the excavations under the general direction of
Dee Ann Story, then Director of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
Larry Thompson and James McMichael, both of Lake Jackson, and Daniel Fox, of
San Antonio, served as crew members. Robert Cole provided a sketch of the Shy
Pond area that was the basis for Figure 2 and a sample of Rangia shell for
radiocarbon dating. C.L. Cleaver, for whom the Cleaver site is named, excavated
the first 5 x 5-foot unit at that site and made available the material he excavated from
the site for analysis. The Brazosport Museum of Natural Science in Lake Jackson
made their facilities available, thereby enabling the crew to work in the evenings
while the excavations were in progress. Appreciation is extended also to all of the
individuals in Lake Jackson and members of the Brazosport Museum who volunteered their time.
During the writing of this report, Lawrence Aten, then of the Texas Archeological Survey, made a trip to the area and provided valuable information concerning
the geomorphology, provided additional data on the prehistory of the Galveston Bay
area, and made pertinent comments about the Shy Pond sites and this report. Billy
Davidson helped in identifying the vertebrate fauna, but the responsibility for the
accuracy of the faunal identifications and any interpretations expressed herein rests
with the author.
REFERENCES CITED
Ambler, J. Richard
1967 Three prehistoric sites near Cedar Bayou, Galveston Bay area. State Building
Commission Archeological Program Reports, 8. Austin.
1970

Additional archeological survey of the Wallisville Reservoir area, Southeast
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Reports 6. The University
of Texas at Austin.

Aten, Lawrence E.
1967 Excavations at the Jamison site (41LB2), Liberty County, Texas.
Archeological Society Reports, 1. Houston.
1971

Houston

Archeological excavations at the Dow-Cleaver site, Brazoria County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Technical Bulletin 1. The University of
Texas at Austin.

142

Texas Archeological Society

1979

Indians of the upper Texas coast: ethnohistoric and archeological framework.
Ph.D. Dissertation, Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Bernard, Hugh A., and Rufus J. Lebranc
1965 Resum~ of the Quaternary geology of the northwestern Gulf of Mexico. In:
Quaternary of the United States, edited by H. E. Wright, Jr. and David Frey, pp.
137-185.

Bernard, H.A., C. F. Majors, Jr., B. S. Parrot, and R. J. LeBlanc, Sr.
1970 Recent sediments of Southeast Texas. A field guide to the Brazos alluvial and
deltaic plains and the Galveston barrier island complex. Bureau of Economic
Geology Field Book No. 11. The University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The biotic provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117. Texas
Academy of Science. San Marcos.
Butler, Phillip A.
1954 SummaryofourknowledgeoftbeoystersintheGulfofMexico. In: TheGulfof
Mexico, Its origin, waters, and marine life. Fishery Bulletin of the Fish and
Wildlife Service 55:479-489. U.S. Government Printing Office.
Campbell, T. N.
1956 Archeological materials from five islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 27:7--46.
1960

Archeology of the central and southern sections of the Texas coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 29:145-175.

1962

Origins of pottery types from the Coastal Bend region of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 32:331-336.

Corbin, J. E.
1974 A model for cultural succession for the CoastalBend area of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 45:29-54.
Dering, Phil, and David Ayers
1972 Archeological investigations in the village of Oyster Creek, Brazoria County,
Texas. Anthropology Laboratory Report 42, Texas A&M University.
Dice, Lee R.
1943 The biotic provinces of North America. Ann Arbor.
Dillehay, T. D.
1974 Late Quaternary bison population changes on the Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19(65)180-196.
1975

Prehistoric subsistence exploitation in the lower Trinity River delta, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 51. The University of Texas at Austin.

Hamilton--Archeological lnvestigations at Shy Pond

143

Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1963 Centipede and Damp caves: excavations in Val Verde County, Texas, 1958.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 33:1-129.
Fairbanks, Laurence D.
1963 Biodemographic studies of the clam Rangia cuneata Gray. Tulane Studies in
Zoology 10(1):3-47. Tulane University.
Garner, L. E.
1967 Sand resources of the Texas Gulf Coast. Bureau of Economic Geology Report of
Investigation 60. The University of Texas at Austin.
Gooch, Donald M.
1969 StudiesonbrackishwaterclamsofthegenusRangiainLouisiana. Paperpresented
at the annual meeting of the National Shellfisheries Association in New Orleans,
July 1969.
Hester, Thomas R., and Harry J. Shafer
1975 AninitialstudyofbladetechnologyonthecentralandsouthemTexascoast. Plains
Anthropologist 20(69): 175-185.
Hopkins, Sewell H.
1969 Studies on brackish water clams of the genus Rangia in Texas. Paper presented at
the annual meeting of the National Shellfisheries Association in New Orleans,
July 1969.
Hopkins, Sewell H., and Jay D. Andrews
1970 Rangia cuneata on the East Coast; thousand mile range extension or resurgence?
Science 161:5919.
LeBlanc, Rufus J., and W. D. Hodgson
1959 Origin and development of the Texas shoreline. Transactions of the Gulf Coast
Association of Geological Societies IX: 197-220.
McIntire, William G.
1958 Prehistoric Indian settlements of the changing Mississippi River Delta. Louisiana
State University Studies, Coastal Sdudies Series 1. University Press, Baton
Rouge.
Moore, Walter B., Editor
1970 Texas Almanac 1970-1971. H.A. Bello Corp., Dallas.
Munsell, A. H.
1942 Munsell book of color. Pocket ed., 2 vols. Baltimore.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas from prehistoric to modem times. The University of Texas
Press, Austin.

144

Texas Archeological Society

Parker, Robert H.
1955 Changes in the invertebrate fauna, apparently attributable to salinity changes in the
bays of Central Texas. Journal of Paleontology 19(2): 193-211.
Patterson, Leland W.
1975 Some Texas blade technology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
44:89-111.
Service, Elman R.
1962 Primitive social organization, an evolutionary perspective. Random House, New
York.
Sharer, Harry J.
1966 An archeological survey of Wallisville Reservoir, Chambers County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Reports 2. The University of Texas
at Austin.
1968

Archeological investigations in the S an Jacinto River basin, Montgomery County,
Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 13. The Univestiy of
Texas at Austin.

1969

Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir basin, west central
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Papers 17. The University of Texas
at Austin.

1973

Lithic technology at the George C. Davissite: apreliminaryreport. Ph.D. Dissertation, Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Shepard, Anna O.
1956 Ceramics for the archaeologist. Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publication
609.
Story, Dee Ann
1968 Archeologicalinvestigations at two CentralTexas GulfCoastsites. State Building
Commission Archeological Program Report 13. Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 AnintroductoryhandbookofTexasarcheology. BulletinoftheTexasArcheologicat Society.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas archeology: type descriptions. Texas Archeological Society
Special Publication I and Texas Memorial~ Museum Bulletin 4.
Tenore, Kenneth R., Donald B. Horton, and Thomas W. Duke
1968 Effects of a bottom substrate on the bracksih water bivalve Rangia cuneata.
Chesapeaks Science 9:238-248.

Hamilton m Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

145

Turmell, Curtis D., and J. Rickard Ambler
1967 Archeological excavations at Presidio San Agustin de Ahumada. State Building
Commission Archeological Program Report 6. Austin.
Valastro, S., Jr., E. Mott Davis, and Alejandra G. Varela
1975 University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates X. Radiocarbon 17:52-98.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953

An archeological survey of the Addicks Dam basin, Southeast Texas. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin 154:143-252.

Wolfe, Douglas A., and Ernest N. Petteway
1968 Growth of Rangia cuneata Gray. Chesapeake Science 9(2):99-102.

