301

Getting to the Point: Some Comments on Cox and
Smith’s Perdiz Point Damage Analysis
John E. Dockall, William A. Dickens, and Harry J. Shafer

ABSTRACT
A recent study by Cox and Smith (1991) used unprovenienced Perdiz
arrowpoints in an experimental study of breakage patterns. The use of prehistoric
points in this study is ethically wrong and detracts greatly from the intrinsic value
of their study. The experimental frameworkof the study was inadequate to provide
support for the problems presented and didnot address other areas of breakage such
as manufacture and taphonomic processes. An experimental program involving
the replication and use of Perdiz points would have avoided the use of prehistoric
specimens and would have provided crucial data regarding breakage patterns
resulting from both manufacture and use. A functional analysis of stone tools must
incorporate data from manufacture, use, retouch, discard, and natural processes in
order to eliminate potential sources of bias from the study.

Cox and Smith (1991) most recently provided us with an initially interesting
article on the possible behavioral significance of fracture patterns of Perdiz points
from 41 SP135, the McGloin House site. The aim of the article is admirable in some
respects, and their emphasis on the importance of fracture patterns in assessing lithic
assemblage variability is well taken.
We, as archeologists and lithic technologists, are very disappointed in the
article, since it represents the unethical usage of archeological material in destructive experiments. Obviously, some archeological material must be used in some
destructive processes, such as for dating and trace element analysis for raw material
sourcing, but in each of these uses the return in information is sufficient to justify
the loss, and in these cases information on context and provenience of the destroyed
pieces is recorded. Even though the artifacts used in Cox and Smith’s experiments
were unprovenienced, they did have some potential research value and should not
have been destroyed. The kinds of information that can be collected from such
artifacts, for instance those in private collections, are
1. Technological information regarding production methods.
2. Raw material variation within types.
3. Geographic variation within formal types.
Schiffer (1987:117-118) indicates that private collections are an important
archeological research tool. These collections can provide insights into the occupational history of little-known regions and can indicate areas for further research. The
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 61 (1990)

302

Texas Archeological Society

effects of collections on the archeology of a region also can be observed. Legitimate
study of these collections will also allow archeologists to begin to reassess
generalizations about collecting and pothunting processes and their effects on the
archeological record.
With some minor effort or forethought on their part, Cox and Smith could
have avoided the use of unprovenienced specimens. First, Perdiz points (both
bifacial and unifacial varieties) can be relatively easily replicated by anyone with
a knowledge of flintknapping. Second, if the authors lack the ability to knap
flint, they could have contacted any of a fair number of practicing flintknappers
in the state. Texas is fortunate to have this resource, and more attention should
be given to the contributions that practicing flintknappers have made to archeology and experimental archeology as a whole in Texas (consider the efforts of
J. B Sollberger). Several flintknappers in Texas would enjoy an opportunity to
participate in avocational and professional research projects; their knowledge
and experience are excellent resources that have been neglected. Third, the application of an experimental program that involved the manufacture of Perdiz
arrowpoints would have yielded significant behavioral data regarding breakage
in addition to that associated with use as projectiles or cutting tools.
Aside from the ethical considerations, Cox and Smith (1991) failed to provide satisfactory answers to major questions they attempted to address, and they
did not fully explore their alternate hypotheses before they reached their conclusions. We will refute their article, point by point.
First, there are problems with their experimental program. Statements made by
Cox and Smith (1991) regarding behavioral inferences based upon their experiments were extremely biased and misguided by the fact that use wear already
present on many of the Perdiz points they used was not accounted for prior to the
experiments. The fast experiment involved the use ofa45-1b compound bow to fire
18 arrows into arecently killed white-tailed deer carcass (Cox and Smith 1991:287).
A white-tailed deer was chosen because of its abundance at the archeological sites
with which the experimental data were compared. Cox and Smith apparently
operated under an unstated assumption that all arrowpoints (whole and fragmentary) found at the archeological sites in question were used for hunting deer, and that
the hunters never missed. Archeological interpretation cannot occur within the
framework of a "Pompeii Premise," where the archeological record is assumed to
represent an unbiased record of the pasL They have not considered other possible
reasons for fracture damage at these sites, such as trampling, geomorphic processes,
manufacturing failures, misses that were shot into the soil or against other hard
objects (rocks or trees), or thermal fracture. Many experimental programs have been
conducted that could have served as models for this experiment (e.g. Flenniken and
Raymond 1986; Odell 1977).
The second experiment involved the butchery and skinning of a white-tailed
deer (presumably the same one used in the first experiment) with five hafted Perdiz
points (Cox and Smith 1991:287). Presumably, this experiment was designed to
examine the possibility that some Perdiz points could have been used as hafted

Dockall, Dickens, and Shafer m Geeing to the Point

303

cutting and butchering implements, and the authors entertain the notion from their
wear analysesthat some projectile points were in fact tools and not projectiles. Cox
and Smith provide no discussion of their use-wear analytical methodology, nor do
they describe patterns of edge-wear that are interpreted as evidence of butchering
and skinning. There is neither discussion nor data concerning other activities that
may have led to the development of the wear patterns observed. Edge-wear was
automatically assumed to be from the use of arrowpoints as tools rather than as
projectiles, and an array of other potential sources of wear such as firing into the
ground (misses), quiver wear, haft wear, and impact wear were not considered in the
experimental design. Quiver wear would affect the lateral edges of the barbs, where
most of the wear was observed, and would even cause some damage leading to
broken barbs, tips, and stems. Arrowpoint stems and points with broken tips were
found together with complete points bunched together as if they had been in quivers
at the George C. Davis site (Shafer 1973:206). Haft wear could cause edge and
surface smoothing along the stem and upper part of the blade. Attrition caused by
impact misses that did not break the point would appear as lateral edge wear.
Manufacturing techniques such as platform or edge preparation during pressure
flaking could also cause lateral edge wear. Cox and Smith naively inferred that
lateral edge wear was equivalent in all respects to wear associated with cutting. This
may have been true for some of the points, but the inferences would have been
stronger had alternative explanations been discounted. Again, a well-developed
experimental program could have addressed most (if not all) of these factors.
During the third experiment (Cox and Smith 1991:287), three Perdiz points
were repeatedly fired from a 15-1b compound bow into a stack of ten deer hides
affixed to a plywood backing. The light bow was used to prevent the point from
penetrating all ten hides and striking the plywood backing. This experiment was
supposedly designed to test both accrual of wear and type of wear on points
from their use as hafted projectiles.
This experiment is flawed in several aspects. First, the experiment is biased
by the measures taken to insure that points did not break prematurely in the wood
or stacked hides. Second, the repeated firing of only three points brings into
question the statistical validity of statements based on breakage and wear patterns observed on these specimens. Third, the purpose of stacking deer hides
and affixing them to a plywood backing is unclear. In essence, the experiment
apparently was designed to simulate the developmental stages of wear and attrition of Perdiz points used in hunting. Little useful information can be gleaned
from the discussion of the results of this effort (which are limited to a mere short
paragraph in the report). Aspects of developmental wear and attrition would have
been better addressed in the first experiment.
Cox and Smith (1991:294) make a blanket statement that all of the dull,
broad artifacts that morphologically resemble Perdiz points could not possibly
be Perdiz points. This statement was based on their test firing of various Perdiz
points into a deer carcass. They essentially conclude that a short stubby point
would not have been effective in hunting. The point they refer to (Cox and Smith

304

Texas Archeological Society

1991:288, Figure 2e) looks like a point that has been extensively resharpened,
but their claim that this point could not have been used to hunt is unfounded,
due to a lack of sufficient experimental data.
Cox and Smith (1991:293) stated that "snaps are not caused by impact," citing
Ahler and McMillan (1976:167). But since this statement is much too simplistic,
and many other factors are involved, it appears that they may have misinterpreted
Ahler and McMillan’s work. The fact is that Ahler and McMillan stated that
projectile points at Rodgers Shelter exhibited a "relatively high frequency of
impact-fractured and complete specimens and relatively few specimens with
transverse blade fractures" (Ahler and McMillan 1976:167). Specimens with snap
or bending fractures at Rodgers Shelter were interpreted within a more sophisticated
analytical framework than the one used by Cox and Smith. Breakage at Rodgers
Shelter was conclusively shown to be associated with observed wear patterns, and
dart points were the focus of analysis at Rodgers Shelter whereas Perdiz arrowpoints
were examined by Cox and Smith. Large hafted bifaces are more amenable than
smaller arrowpoints to a wide range of functional variability.
Experimental data contradict the statements of Cox and Smith (1991:293)
regarding the origin of snap fractures on projectile points. Cox and Smith indicate that the damage that accrued to their Perdiz point assemblage was in the
form of impact fractures restricted to the distal region. Flenniken (1985:270)
conducted experiments on live goats with dart points, and found that several of
the points had snap fractures as a result of movement of the animal. Flenniken
(1985:270) was careful to note that breakage was not due to missed throws and
that movement of the animal during the killing process transferred several fragments to places far from the point of entry. Such movement would produce
bending forces transverse to the blade, stem, and barbs that Cox and Smith (1991)
could have interpreted as breakage from use as a tool. Flenniken (1985:273) noted
that 72.7 percent of the fracture damage on experimental points (that had been
manufactured for the experiment) were of the bending variety and occurred near
the haft area.
Cox and Smith (1991:297) also noted that some Perdiz points with minor
impact damage had been later reused as cutting tools. The citation of Ahler and
McMiUan (1976) is again felt to be out of place here because their work dealt
with larger dart points and hafted bifaces, which, due to their larger size, have
a greater potential for a more diverse functional role.
As a result of their use of Perdiz points in butchering and skinning experiments, Cox and Smith (1991:295) stated that what were formerly believed to be
Perdiz points from 41SP135 were merely hafted cutting tools that had been
discarded. We ask why individuals would manufacture small hafted bifaces
exclusively for butchery when available flakes might be more handy. The longitudinal wear noted on the Perdiz points at 41SP135 and other sites by Cox and
Smith may actually have originated from the many reasons already mentioned.
Another reason for wear along the edges of these points could be grinding of the
edges during manufacture. This grinding would have been done to prepare the

Dockall, Dickens, and Sharer ~ Getting to the Point

305

edge for pressure flaking. It could just as easily be from another step in the
manufacturing process that Cox and Smith did not control for. These same
arguments were echoed by Sheets (1973) and Keeley (1974) in response to the
claims by Nance (1971) that "Stockton" points exhibited longitudinal striations
indicative of use for purposes other than as projectile points.
The lesson to remember is that although Perdiz points may indeed have been
used on occasion for cutting, most were probably used as projectile points, and
analysis should attempt to address these possibilities. Development of experimental programs that are designed to yield data to be used in cultural/behavioral
reconstructions should be exhaustive. The formation processes that can influence the archeological record, both natural and cultural, should be considered
an integral part of the experimental framework, and use-wear studies should also
be accompanied by concurrent experimental manufacture studies, for manufacture experiments can be very useful when fracture pattern studies are included.
¯ Finally, no archeological material should be destroyed in experimental programs
such as these when there are other more useful alternatives.
REFERENCES CITED
Abler, S. A., and R. B. McMillan
1976
Material Culture at Rodgers Shelter: A Reflection of Past Human Activities. In:
Prehistoric Man and His Environments: A Case Study in the Ozark, edited by
W. R. Wood and R. B. McMillan, pp. 183-199 Academic Press,
Cox, K. A., and H. Smith
1991
Perdiz Point Damage Analysis. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
60(for 1989):283-301.
Flenniken, J. J.
1985
Stone Tool Reduction Techniques as Cultural Markers. In: Stone ToolAnalysis:
Essays in Honor ofDon E. Crabtree, edited by M. G. Plew, J. C. Woods, and M.
G. Pavesic, pp. 265-276 University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Flenniken, L J., and A. W. Raymond
1986
Morphological Projectile Point Typology: Replication Experimentation, and
Technological Analysis. American Antiquity 51 (3):603-614.
Keeley, L. H.
1971
Functional Interpretations from Microscopic Analysis. American Antiquity
36:361-366.
1974

The Methodology of Microwear Analysis. American Antiquity 39: !26-128.

Odell, G. H.
The Application of Micro-wear Analysis to the Lithic Component of an Entire
1977
Prehistoric Settlement: Methods, Problems, and Functional Reconstructions.
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Harvard University, Cambridge. University Microfilms, Ann Arbor.

306

Texas Archeological Society

Schiffer, M. B.
FormationProcessesoftheArchaeologicalRecord.UniversityofNewMexico
1987
Press, Albuquerque.
Shafer, H. L
Lithic Technology at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
1973
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Austin
Sheets, P.
1973

Edge Abrasion During Biface Manufacture. American Antiquity 38:215-218.

