The Lott Site (41GR56): A Late Prehistoric
Site in Garza County, Texas
Frank A. Runkles and E. D. Dorchester

ABSTRACT
A prehistoric site in southern Garza County, Texas has yielded several
specimens of a distinct, previously undescribed arrowpoint type that is named
here the Lott point. Because of the large number of distinctive pottery sherds,
this site is also important in providing a link in the transfer of traits among the
cultures of the southern Plains and the Caddoan culture ofnortheasternTexas,
southeastern Oklahoma, and southwestern Arkansas.

INTRODUCTION

The Lott site (41GR56), about 3 km (2 miles) east of the Llano Estacado in
Garza County (Figure 1), was discovered in 1961 by Emmett Shedd and Frank
Runkles, who were surveying an area about 26 km (16 miles) south of Post for
prehistoric sites that had not been recorded. As Shedd walked from the streambed
of Sand Creek, he came upon a gently sloping, relatively flat area between two
ravines (Figure 2), on which lay a great profusion of chips, hearths, potsherds, and
other artifacts where the thin covering of soil had weathered away. This was after
the severe drought of the 1950s, when little or no vegetation was left on much of
the land, and the few remaining cattle had pulverized the soil. Then, as the rains
came, the loosened soil was gradually eroded away where there was no vegetation
to hold it. This gentle sheet erosion left cultural material exposed essentially as it
would have been had controlled excavation exposed it. Shedd realized that this was
a site of major importance, so he, Runkles, and members of the South Plains Archeological Society staked it out in 10-foot squares so records could be kept of the
locations of features and artifacts. This report is based on a surface collection rather
than one resulting from controlled excavation. A review of the literature (Varner
1968 and others) indicates that the locations of surface materials can be useful
evidence if the materials were exposed in such a way that they are not badly
displaced laterally or vertically. The investigators of this site believe there was little
or no lateral displacement of artifacts, in fact many were still partially covered and
were definitely in situ. The limited excavations described later have verified that
the cultural m aterial had only a thin covering of the sort that would leave the artifacls
exposed in situ when it was gently eroded away.
This site is unique in several ways. For many years arrowpoints of a previously
unknown form had been found by collectors in very small numbers around Post. On
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57 (1986)

84

Texas Archeological Society

EDD

Figure 1. Map of Texas showing Oarza County and the Lott site. Drawn by E. D. Dorchester.

this site, however, this type was found in considerable numbers in a relatively small
area. The site was on the property of John Lott, of Lubbock, so in proposing a new
point type we are calling it the Lott Point.
The other unique feature of the site was the large number of sherds of well-made
and distinctive pottery. Except for three sherds, all of the pottery appears to have
been made or manufactured at or near this site. Although some sites in the High
Plains have large numbers of potsherds, a large percentage of the sherds are from
vessels imported from the Rio Grande drainage area of New Mexico. Pottery was
made on the Texas High Plains, but it is generally thick, coarse, and not plentiful
except in the upper Panhandle where Borger Cordmarked is common. The pottery
from the Lott site is made from Triassic clays found in the area and is tempered with
burned or calcined bone.
More than 750 sherds were found at the Lott site, and a great number of them
show traits of Caddoan pottery from East Texas. In fact many of the sherds could

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

85

@

0

0

[--,

%

o

L~
t~

©
o
p.,

&d
e,i ,-o

%

e,.0

86

Texas Archeological Society

,&

0

0

0

©

Runkles and Dorchester w The Lott Site

87

be easily identified as Caddoan except for the fact that they are made from the
Triassic clays that are exposed below the Caprock.
The site is unusual in another way. Three types of arrowpoints were found:
Lott, Garza, and Perdiz, each in sufficient numbers to indicate that the people using
them occupied the site several times. With few exceptions each of the three types,
to the best of the writers’ knowledge, was found in a separate part of the site (Figure
3). Lott points were found in areas designated A and F, Garza points in areas C and
D, and Perdiz points in areas B and E. Very few Harrell points were found on the
site, and triangular preforms were found in Lott- and Garza-point areas. Perdiz
points are relatively scarce on the Texas High Plains, and they are not found in large
numbers on any site.
Some limited excavation was done about 3-6 meters (10-20 feet) east of the east
edge of area A to verify that the exposed cultural material probably had been covered
by only a thin layer and that its surface occurrence represented a true distribution
of the artifacts (Figure 4). In this limited area, a triangular preform, three Lott points,

Figure 4. Photograph showing Frank Runkles working at the excavation to test still-buried
parts of the site.

and two drills were recovered from the top 8 cm (3 inches). Below this level there
was no evidence of cultural material. This excavation seems to verify that there was
a thin cultural layer and that Lott points were concentrated in area A. Additional
excavation should be carried out to define better the occupation areas on which the
different point types were found.

88

Texas Archeological Society
GEOGRAPHY

AND

ENVIRONMENT

The Lott site is about 3 km (2 miles) east of the eastern edge of the Llano
Estacado, or Staked Plains. The Llano Estacado is a vast, fiat, largely treeless
grassland that is the southern extension of the Great Plains, which extend through
the central United States. This fiat plain terminates along its eastern edge in an
escarpment (the Caprock), marking an abrupt drop from 15 to more than 60 meters
(50-200 feet). Below the Caprock are canyons, hills, creeks, washes, and gently
sloping terraces that were formed as the Caprock eroded (Figure 1).
The Plains were an ideal habitat for large mammals such as bison and pronghorns, and there were large populations of rabbits, badgers, skunks, coyotes,
wolves, bobcats, deer, prairie chickens, quail, and others. On the Plains are many
playa lakes that were originally small depressions that filled with water during
spring thunderstorms, killing the vegetation. As the water receded, bison or antelope pulverized the bare dirt as they went out to the water, and when the lakes dried
up, winds carried away the loose soil, making the depressions larger and deeper.
Some of these depressions, popularly known in West Texas as buffalo wallows,
reached several acres in size. This area, with its vast grassland and playa lakes, could
support large numbers of animals when there was sufficient moisture, but changing
climatic conditions on the Plains resulted in mass migrations of the bison herds. In
his detailed study of many sites on the Plains, Dillehay has determined that there
were periods when bison were absent from the Texas plains and other periods when
the large bison herds returned (Dillehay 1974:181). Since bison are short-grass
animals, they were not found on the Southern Plains for several hundred years
before A.D. 1200 when moisture levels were high and the tall grass varieties predominated. During the next 250 years, as the shorter varieties of grass predominated, the bison population literally exploded, and when this happened, more prehistoric people migrated into the area and moved with the game. Campsites were
occupied for only short periods of time, or seasonally, as these people followed the
herds, but they came back to good sites again and again for many years. The Lott
site shows evidence of occupation by several groups; people making Lott, Garza,
and Perdiz points apparently occupied different parts of the site, leading the writers
to believe that these groups occupied the site over and over, but not at the same time.
Most of the High Plains is underlain by the Ogallala aquifer, a vast fresh-water
reservoir. Above the Caprock in prehistoric times, the distance to the water table
was only 9-15 meters (30-50 feet), and below the caprock the water table was
exposed in many places, resulting in springs and seeps that provided water to ideal
campsites for the roving groups of hunting and gathering people. The escarpment
also provided some shelter from winter winds and, at some times of the year, the
springs and water seeps provided the only water available in this part of Texas.
THE SITE
The Lott site is on the higher of two terraces on the west bank of Sand Creek,
a tributary of the South Fork of the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River
(Figure 1). The occupation area is about 45 meters (150 feet) from north to south

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

89

and about 100 meters (350 feet) from east to west. The area is generally flat with
a few north-to-south-trending washes; it slopes gently southward toward the creek
with a drop of about 3.5 meters in 100 meters (10 feet in 350 feet). The site is
bounded on the west by a ravine with a sharply defined bank that has a drop of about
1.5 meters (5 feet) (Figure 5). It is likely, from the appearance of this ravine, that

Figure 5. Photograph showing the Lott site (outlined by dashed white line) from anearby hill.

there was a spring in the area. A circular ravine with a 1-meter (4-foot) cut extends
into the site about 45 meters (150 feet) to the east. Sand Creek is about 100 meters
(110 yards) south and 150 meters (165 yards) east of the site (Figure 2). About 140
meters (150 yards) to the north are small rises, about 3 -4.5 meters (10-15 feet) above
the terrace.
FEATURES
The features in this site consist of 10 hearths (Figure 6), a young, nearly complete bison skeleton, and two separate chipping stations with concentrations of chips
and flakes (Figure 3). Features 1-10 are hearths consisting of flat limestone rocks
that have been arranged to contain the fire; in many, bits of charcoal have been
exposed by erosion. Three of these (features 1,4, and 6) were the source of charcoal
samples from which radiocarbon dates were obtained (Figure 20). Hearth feature
10 was uncovered during test excavations in square 60N/30E. Feature 11, the site
of workshop debris consisting of about 750 chips and flakes, was exposed by
erosion; limited excavation in the area exposed many more flakes. A 10-foot square
whose southwest comer was 70N/20 E was excavated; artifacts were found in the

90

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Photograph of a typical hearth at the Lott site.

northeast quarter in the upper 8 cm (3 inches), and below this was sterile soil.
Feature 12, the site of another concentration of workshop debris, consisting of about
375 flakes and chips, was excavated during work in square 70N/20E. The debris
from both features indicates a complete range of flaking operations: cortex removed
by percussion from nodules, thinning flakes removed by percussion, and trimming
flakes removed by direct pressure. Since tools were manufactured at these two
workshops, the site apparently was occupied for extended periods of time. Undoubtedly other chipping or work stations will be revealed by further excavation, for the nearby creek and hills provide a ready source of lithic material. The
absence of larger cores from which material has been removed could indicate that
most of the tools made here were made from small nodules.
A nearly complete young bison skeleton (feature 13) had been partially eroded
out when the site was discovered. No photographs were taken, and the bones, which
were in extremely poor condition, have since weathered away.
ARTIFACTS
The artifacts from the Lott site include flaked arrowpoints, knives, scrapers,
drills, gravers, a few bone tools, shell beads, arrow-shaft abraders, many hammerstones and choppers, and a great many potsherds. As workers picked up the exposed

Runkles and Dorchester -- The Lott Site

91

artifacts on the surface, reasonably good records were kept of the numbers, types,
and locations of most of the artifacts, but many of them were kept by those who
worked on the site, and the writers have been able to examine and photograph only
a small percentage of them. However, the artifact descriptions and photographs are
of a completely representative assemblage retained by the senior author, which
included almost all of the potsherds.
Most of the artifacts apparently were made from local materials. Thesiteis near
outcrops of the Dockum Group (Triassic) (Holliday and Welt,.,, 1981:205, 207),
which contains coarse- to medium-grained, light colored quartzite, red jasper, flint,
and light, glossy, fine-grained, tan and light to medium gray cherts that are suitable
for the manufacture of tools. The only nonlocal material found was a very small
amount of obsidian.
Two obsidian Garza points were recovered, together with an unknown number
of obsidian flakes. The Garza points and three flakes were submitted to the
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory at the University of California for x-ray fluorescence analysis, which determined that two of the Lott specimens came from the
Valles Caldera area of northem New Mexico (Table 1); the source of the three
Table 1.

Neutron Activation Analysis of Trace Elements
in Obsidian from the Lott Site (41GR56)
Ba

Ce

Nb

Zr

Sr/Zr

Rb/Zr

8137-E
Lott-1 15±5
-F
-2 16±4
-G
-3 13±4
Average
15
RMSD
±2
Artifacts assigned provenience
of a Valles Caldera source

93_+9
96±8
90±7

52
47
46

211
206
187

.059±.017
.048±.012
.027±.013

.869£-_.040
.871±.034
.850±.034

93
+__3

48

201

.045
±.016

.863
±.012

-H

Lott-4

-I
Average
RMSD

-5

81+7
81+_8
81

85

219
221

<.037
<.027

1.138±.038
1.117+.043

85

220

<.032

Artifacts from Texas Panhandle,
unknown provenience

<8
<8
<8

1.078
±.056

Ref. group
Valles Caldera Source
<4 78+1
(Valles Caldera Composition Group)

85

192

<.026

1.07±.05

SOURCE: Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of California
NOTE: The ratios are precise, but the absolute values of Nb and Zr will not be accurate
because of uncertainties inherent in our nondestructive analyses due to the varying shapes and
sizes of the samples. These errors would tend to make the Zr and Nb values larger than the
reference Valles Caldera source.

92

Texas Archeological Society

other Lott samples is unknown, but they came from the same source as an obsidian
biface from Blackwater Draw Locality No. 1 that was submitted for sourcing by
Texas Tech University (Table 2) (Johnson: 1984).
Table 2. Neutron Activation Analysis of Trace Elements in
Obsidian From Lubbock Lake and Blackwater Draw
Ba

Ce

Nb Zr

Sr/Zr

83+7
81+6

91
79

225
200

<.023 1.013+.014
<.017 1.044_+.013

<4 77.7_+.9

85

192

<.026

1.07_+.05

Artifacts assigned to Valles Caldera
8138-ELUBK-1TTU-A39314 FAS-17<8
8138-C BLWD-2937--862 Bed C
<6

Rb/Zr

Ref. group
Valles Caldera Source
Unassigned Source
8138-F BLWD-1 937-33 Bed A
Texas Panhandle Artifacts
Lott Specimens 1, 2, 3

13_+3

107_+7

45

192 .018_+.006

.865_+.012

15+_2

93_+3

48

201 .045_+.016

.863_+.012

SOURCE: Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of California
NOTE: The ratios are precise, but the absolute values of Nb and Zr will not be accurate
because of uncertainties inherent in our nondestructive analyses due to the varying shapes and
sizes of the samples. These errors would tend to make the Zr and Nb values larger than the
reference Valles Caldera source.

Lithic Artifacts

Loft Points (N=56)
The Lott point (Figure 7) is named for John Lott, owner of the ranch in Garza
County on which the site is located1. It is basically triangular; most have indented
bases and all have central basal notches. The sides are trimmed parallel to the edges
from the base about a third of the way to the tip to form shoulders (Figure 7, C-F),
most of which are slight and nearly perpendicular to the edges; a few specimens have
small barbs (Figure 7, A, B). The sides are straight or slightly convex, and some
specimens are slightly serrated. Most of the points from this site are thin and finely
made fromlocal cherts and flints. Many are widest at the shoulders, but in the typical
or classic Lott point ~igure 7, C) the "ears" flare at the base, making them wider
there. The "ears" formed by the basal notches vary from pointed (Figure 7, C, D)
to square (Figure 7, E).
On the basis of about 75 specimens, the length ranges between 18.8 and 45 mm,
with an average of 27 mm. Width at the shoulders varies from 7.4 to 20 mm, with
1 A preliminary description of the type has been published by Turner and Hester (1985:182).
A more complete description is given here.

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

A

B

93

D

0
L

2
¯ CB

I

G

H

Figure 7. Lott points from the Lott site. A-E came from the surface of the site; F-H came from
the test excavation at 70N/20E.

an average of 12.37 mm. The width at the base varies from 9.1 to 19.4 mm,
averaging 12.44 mm.
The Lott points at this site cover the range of Lott varieties (Figure 7).
Specimen A has a deeply indented base with a very slight U-shaped notch at the
bottom and side trimming deep enough to form barbs. Specimen B has a deeper U
notch in the base and only very slight barbs. Specimen C is a typical Lott point; its
slightly concave base has a very distinct U notch and the sides are trimmed to form
square shoulders. Specimen D has a slightly concave base with a much wider U
notch and slight shoulders. Specimen E has a straight base with a wide, deep U notch
and typical shoulders. About 82 percent of the points are like specimens B, C, D,
and E; only 18 percent have barbs like specimen A. One Lott base (Figure 7, I-I) and
a complete Lott point (Figure 7, F) were recovered from the top 8 cm (3 inches) of
the test excavation in the northeast quarter of square 70N/20E about 6 meters (20
feet) east and 20-25 meters (70-80 feet) north of the reference datum point (Figure
3). Another Lott base (Figure 7, G) came from the southeast comer of the same test
square. All of the Lott points came from areas A and F.

94

Texas Archeological Society

Garza Points

~=49; Figure 8)

Specimens A-E are typical of the Garza points as defined by Turner and Hester
(1985:176) found at the Lott site as well as at other sites in the area. The G arza points
were found in areas C and D (Figure 3). Specimen D is made from obsidian.
Specimen C is of special interest: the sides are straight from the base for about a
third of the way to the tip, where there is the hint of a shoulder. It is possible that
this is a Lott Point in a not-quite-finished stage of manufacture, or perhaps the maker
had started to trim these edges to make the Lott shoulders but did not finish the work.
On the other hand, since the Lott point appears from existing data to be the older of
these two, specimen C may be a transition point between the Lott and Garza points,
when the makers were beginning to leave the side trimming off to form shoulders.

2cm

A

B

C

Figure 8. Garza points found at the Lott site.

Triangular Preforms (N=52; Figure 9)
The triangular points recovered at the site are preforms for manufacturing both
Lott and Garza types. Most of the triangular points examined have defects, are
broken in two, or are apparently unfinished. Both pieces of many broken points
were found, which indicates that the makers broke the points before completing
either Lott or Garza points. The triangular preforms were found only in areas A, C,
D, and F, which are the areas containing the Lott and Garza specimens. One (Figure
9, F) was recovered from the test excavation at 70N/20E.
Perdiz Points (N=58; Figure 10)
Perdiz points (Turner and Hester 1985:187) are not common on the Llano
Estacado or on the sites along the Caprock. The 58 specimens found at the Lott site
put it among the most prolific Perdiz sites in the area. The Perdiz points were in
the relatively small areas B and E on the northern edge of the site. No hearths have
been found in areas B and E, so no radiocarbon dating has been possible.

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

95

D

0
I

i

2
Icm

Figure 9. Triangular prefom]s found at the Lott site. Point F was recovered during the
excavation of square 70N/20E.

o

I

2 cm

};

A

B

C

D

E

F

Figure 10. Perdiz points from the Lott site. Specimen F has been sharpened so much that very
little is left of the blade.

96

Texas Archeological Society

Harrell Points (N=6)
Only six Harrell type points (Turner and Hester 1985:178) were found; none
were available for photographing. Harrell points are common on the High Plains
and were found at the Garza site as well as at many other sites.
Drills (N=35; Figure 11)
Most of the drills or awls from the site have slender shafts and are made on
flakes. They are well made, but none have bifacially worked bases. About half of
the artifacts originally classified as drills consist of the shafts only; reexamination
indicated that these are probably Perdiz stems that were removed from arrow shafts
and discarded after the points were broken.

A

o
I

,

2
I cm

Figure 11. Drills from the Lott site. A-D were surface finds; E was recovered from the
southeast comer of the test excavation 70N/20E.

Gravers (N-12; Figure 12, A-C)
All of the gravers were manufactured from flakes that had one or more points
worked onto them. The graver points are well worked and steeply chipped on both
sides of the points, but they are generally unworked on the undersides; resulting in
points that are sharp and hooklike in appearance. They would have been ideal for
cutting shell, bone, or wood, or for incising pottery.

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

97

Serrated Flakes (N=2; Figure 12, D)
Two heavily serrated flakes were found.

J

0
I

2
Icrn

E

i

A
C
B
Figure 12. Gravers, A-C, and a serrated flake, D, from the Lott site.

Knives (N=34; Figure 13)
A total of 34 exceptionally well worked bifacial alternately beveled knives
(Figure 13, C-F) made from high quality materials were recovered. These
alternately beveled knives were created by resharpening knives that were otiginally
long and leaf shaped, generally with rounded ends. Resharpening of both sides
beveled the edges on opposite sides along about two-thirds of the length. Specimen
F (Figure 13) is a knife that has been sharpened several times; it would eventually
have become sharp pointed and shorter if sharpening had continued.
Another variety of knife (Figure 13, A, B, and G) is relatively small, round or
oblong, and bifacially worked. The knives in this category show no signs of
sharpening. What cutting chore these knives were used for is not apparent; they
would have been less effective for butchering and meat cutting than the larger,
beveled knives (Figure 13, C-F). In any event the larger, beveled knives seemed to
be preferred at this site. Knives were found only in Areas A, B, and D (Figure 3).

G
Figure 13. Two kinds of knives found at the Lott site: alternately beveled, C-F, and small
round bifacially worked, A, B, and G.

98

Texas Archeological Society

Scrapers (N=81; Figure 14)
The most prevalent scraper was the snub-nosed end scraper (Figure 14, B, E)
represented by 41 specimens. These scrapers were generally made from thick flakes

5

Figure 14. Scrapers from the Lott site.

that were worked and shaped on one face so one end was steeply beveled. The
resulting tool was very effective for scraping meat or fat from hides or bones. The
junior author has experimented with scraping hides with both snub-nosed scrapers
and scrapers with thin edges; the steeply beveled edge is more effective. Three of
the scrapers were round, with longer steeply beveled scraping edges. A third form
(Figure 14, D), represented by 26 specimens, many with some of the cortex, came
from flakes that were worked on only one edge. The scraping edges have been
steeply beveled, but they are not as well made as the totally worked tools. Another
form represented by 11 specimens, has one worked concave edge (Figure 14, A).
These scrapers could have been used as spokeshaves to shape arrow shafts or bows,
or to remove fat and tissue from bones or from hides that were laid across logs.
Modified Flakes
An examination of the workshop debris from features 11 and 12 revealed
several flakes measuring about 1.5 by 2 cm, with exceedingly fine chipping along
one edge. This chipping is fairly steep, and the flaked edges are less than 1 mm wide.
If these flakes originally had sharp edges and were used for scraping, this fine
chipping could be the result of wear from dragging, but if the edges were flaked
intentionally, the flakes were used as tiny knife blades.
Choppers and Hammerstones (Figure 15, A, B)
Several stream-bed cobbles have been used as hammerstones (Figure 15, B),
and several have b~en modified on one edge for use as choppers (Figure 15, A). The
hammerstone could have been used to break bison or other mammal bones for
marrow or to prepare local chert for flaking.

Runkles and Dorchester -- The Lott Site

99

Arrowshaft Smoother (Figure 15, C)
Two tools, one of sandstone and the other of black lava rock (Figure 15, C),
were recovered at the Lott site that are believed to be arrowshaft smoothers. Both
tools have grooves that are approximately 11-12 mm wide, 4 mm deep, extend
across the tool, and are very smooth, apparently from use.

A

B

C
0

L

,

,

,

,

5

Icm

Figure 15. Chopper, A, and hammerstone, B, made by modifying river cobbles. Arrowshaft
smoother, C, is made of black volcanic rock.

Shell Artifacts
About 13 shell beads and part of a shell pendant were recovered in area D
(Figure 16). The beads are about 5 to 6 mm long and 9 mm in diameter. The walls,
which are between 1 and 2 mm thick, have rings similar to tree rings. The beads are
thought to have been made from a Pacific coast marine shell, Dentalium semipolitum, since similar beads positively identified as being made from this shell were
found at Casas Grandes. The Casas Grande area became a commercial manufacturing and trade center for shell beads (DiPeso et al. 1974). One of the apparent trade
routes was to the Jemez Mountains in New Mexico, in the same general area
determined to be the source of some of the Lott site obsidian samples.

100

Texas Archeological Society

0
I

2
Icrn

Figure 16. Shell artifacts from the Lott site. Beads and--top row center--part of a pendant,
about a millimeter thick, made probably from a local mussel shell.

Bone Artifacts
Two nearly identical bone beads were found, but only one was available for
examination (Figure 17, A). This bead, 25 mm long and 9 mm in diameter, was
made by scribing a ring around the bone and snapping it off. The other end has

o
I

~

2
I cm

Figure 17. Bone artifacts from the Lott site. A bead, A, is made from a foot bone of a coyote
or wolf; an awl, B, is made from an unidentified bone.

indications of the ringing procedure, but the bone evidently broke before it was
finished. Specialists at the bone analysis laboratory at North Texas State University,
who examined the bead, believe it could be a coyote or wolf foot bone (Yates 1985).
These two bone beads are almost identical to four bone beads that were found at the
Garza site (41GA40).
A finely made and highly polished bone splinter awl, broken on the end, is
6.3 cm long and 2 mm thick (Figure 17, B), but the bone has not been identified.

Runkles and Dorchester u The Lott Site

101

Pottery
Four kinds of pottery were found at the Lott site. In Figure 18, Group I is represented by specimen A, Group II by specimen B, Group III by specimens C and D,
and Group IV by specimens E-I. Specimen J (Figure 18) is one of several pieces of
fired clay that were found near two hearths. Color codes in the descriptions that
follow are from the Munsell Color Charts (Munsell 1975).

C

A

~ii!~ i ~ i¸ i~i

G

2
Icm

Figure 18. Pottery from the Lott site. Specimen A illustrates Group I; B illustrates Group
II; C and D illustrate Group ]lI; E-I illustrate Group IV. Specimen J is a fragment of fired
clay.

Group 1
Group I is represented by only one sherd (Figure 18, A), which differs from all
other sherds at the site.

102

Texas Areheological Society

Method ofManufacture: Breaks along welds indicate that coiling was the form
of construction. The exterior is fairly well smoothed; the interior is well finished.
Paste: Compact and even paste, with crushed clay particles and occasional
particles of quartz sand. The exterior is gray (5Y5/1), shading into light gray (5Y7/
1); the interior is very dark gray (10YR3/1), shading into light gray (5Y7/1); the
cores are black (10YR2/1).
Form: Since this sherd has no apparent curvature, the vessel shape cannot be
determined.
Decoration: The exterior has light diagonal brushing by corn cob or other
means. Over the brushing are incised rectangles at a slight diagonal to the coil welds
and slanted opposite to the angle of the brushing (Figure 18, A).
Dimensions: Maximum thickness, 7.5 mm.
Comments: Sherds of this type are commonly associated with sites affiliated
with the Edwards complex in southwestern Oklahoma (Swenson 1985); this
specimen probably represents a trade vessel fxom one of these sites.
Group H
Group II (Figure 18, B) is represented by at least 75 sherds. Fourteen sherds
(9 body sherds and 5 rim sherds), representing at least five vessels, have been
studied in detail.

Method of Manufacture: Coiling is indicated by several breaks along welds.
Both interiors and exteriors are well smoothed.
Paste: A finely crushed bone temper is visible throughout the fabric of these
sherds together with small pieces of chert, gypsum, igneous quartz, and small
pebbles typical of weathered sedimentary materials in the Triassic clays. Most of
the tempering materials measure less than 1 mm. Mica is visible; a natural inclusion
in the clay. Exterior colors are brown (10YR5/3), pale brown (10YR6/3), very pale
brown (10YR7/3), light brown (7.5YR6/4), reddish yellow (5YR6/6 and 5YR7/6),
light reddish brown (5YR6/4), yellowish red (5YR5/6), and pink (7.5YR8/4). One
specimen has a very dark gray (7YR3/0) firing cloud. Interiors are light yellowish
brown (10YR6/4), pale brown (10YR6/3), very pale brown (10YR7/3 and 10YR7/
4), light brown (7.5YR6/4), pink (7.5YR7/4), and reddish yellow (7.5YR7/6).
Cores are dark gray (10YR4/1), very dark gray (10YR3/1), gray (10YR5/1 and
10YR6/1), light brownish gray (10YR6/2), light yellowish brown (10YRr/4), and
dark gray (7.5YR4/0).
Form: Three rim sherds have simple direct lips (Figure 19, A-C), one has a
simple flattened lip, and one has a simple rolled lip (Figure 19, D). Four have flaring

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

103

walls and one has relatively straight walls; these are probably jar rims. One body
sherd suggests a carinated bowl. The other sherds are too small to provide any
information about vessel shape.
Decoration: All of the Group II sherds are fingernail punctated. On only the
two largest can the overall pattern--parallel rows of chevrons--be seen.
Dimensions: The mean maximum thickness of the rim sherds is 6.52 mm, with
a standard deviation of .94 and a range of 5.5 to 7.9 mm. The mean maximum
thickness of the body sherds is 7.14 mm, with a standard deviation of .52 mm and
a range of 6.6 to 8.1 mm.
Comments: Group 11 and III sherds are the ones that first got the attention of
the writers. The decorations are similar or even identical to Caddoan pottery from
East Texas, Arkansas, and Louisiana. The pottery is also similar to Caddoan pottery
in method of manufacture, color, and in its bone tempering. The writers have not
seen similar pottery sherds from this area of West Texas. Reid Ferring has prepared
thin sections of sherds from Groups II, III, and IV, and has done a petrographic
analysis. It is his opinion that the pottery could not have been made from East Texas
materials. He further states that the materials are consistant with those found in the
Triassic clay beds exposed along the Caprock, and there is no evidence that would
preclude the pottery’s manufacture in West Texas (Ferring 1986).

Group III
Group III (Figure 18, C, D) is represented by at least 60 sherds. Eight body
sherds were studied in detail.
Method ofmanufacture: Several of the sherds have visible coil welds. Interior
surfaces are well smoothed to burnished; exteriors are smoothed.
Paste: Group III sherds have compact, even paste with fine bone temper
(generally less then 1 mm in size) that can be seen on the exterior surfaces, and with
very small pebbles, feldspar, gypsum, and other weathered sedimentary materials.
Exterior colors range between pale brown (10YR6/3) and light brown (7.5YR6/4).
Interiors very from pale brown (10YR6/30) and light yellowish brown (10YR6/4)
and between very pale brown (10YR7/3 and 90YR7/4) and light yellowish brown
(10YR6/4) to very pale brown (10YR7/3 and 10YR7/4). Most cores are gray
(10YR5/1 and 5YR5/1), yellowish brown (10YR5/4), pale brown (10YR6/3), and
dark gray (10YR4/1).
Form: One body sherd may be a bowl fragment. The others are too small to
afford any inferences concerning vessel shape.

Decoration: All of the Group III sherds have parallel incised lines. Six have
either vertical or slightly diagonal incised lines originating at the coil welds.

104

Texas Archeologieal Society

Dimensions: The mean maximum thickness of Group III sherds is 6.57 mm,
with a standard deviation of .74 mm and a range of 5.8 to 7.8 mm
Comments: See Group II comments.
Group IV
Group IV (Figure 18, E-J) is represented by at least 500 sherds. Twenty-seven
sherds from at least six vessels were studied in detail.
Method ofmam~acture: Coiling is indicated by breaks along welds. Exteriors
are well smoothed to burnished; interiors are well finished.
Paste: Compact and even, with fine bone temper measuring less than I mm in
addition to very small pebbles, feldspar, gypsum, and other weathered sedimentary
materials. Exterior colors are light red (2.5YR6/8), yellowish red (5YR5/6 and
5YR5/8), reddish yellow (5YR6/6, 5YR6/8, and 5YR7/6), pinkish gray (5YR6/2),
dark gray (10YR4/1), dark grayish brown (10YR4/2), brown (10YR5/3), light
yellowish brown (10YR6/4), light gray (10YR7/2), very pale brown (10YR7/4),
light brown (7.5YR6/4), and brown (7.5YR5/2). Interiors vary in color from gray
(5YR6/1), pinkish gray (5YR7/2), pink (5YR7/4), and reddish yellow (5YR7/6)
through light brown (7.5YR6/4) and reddish yellow (7.5YR6/6 and 7.5YR6/8) to
very pale brown (10YR7/4), light yellowish brown (10YR6/4), dark gray (10YR4/
1), and dark brown (10YR4/4). Cores are very pale brown (10YR7/3 and 10YR7/
4), reddish yellow (7.5YR6/6), dark gray (10YR4/1 and 7.5YR4/0), very dark gray
(10YR3/1 and 5YR3/1), pinkish gray (7.5YR6/2), brown (7.5YR5/2), gray
(10YR5/1 and 5 YR5/1), light yellowish brown (10YR6/4), and black (7.5¥R2/0).
Form: Threerimsherds (Figure 19, A-C) have simple direct lips. Seven (Figure
19, G-M) are direct rounded, one (Figure 19, L) with an overlap of clay on its exterior
surface, and one (Figure 19, M) probably from a miniature bowl. Three rimsherds
(Figure 19, D-F) are simple rolled. Three bowls and one jar are apparently
represented by these rims.
Decoration: None.
Dimensions: The mean maximum thickness of the rim sherds is 6.42 mm, with
a standard deviation of 1.82 mm and a range of 4.7 to 9.9mm. The mean maximum
thickness of the body sherds is 6.8 mm, with a standard deviation of 1.12 mm and
a range from 5.4 to 9.9 mm.
Comments: Group IV sherds are all from plainware vessels. These vessels are
well made, hard and smooth, and are similar in appearance to Caddoan plainware.
They do not resemble other locally made plainware sherds from the southern High
Plains examined by the writers.

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

105

Rim Sherds (Figure 19)

D

B

A
Simple

Simple

Direct

G

I

K

H

Direct

Rolled

M

Rounded

Figure 19. Rim outlines: A-C, simple direct; D-F, simple rolled; G-M, direct rounded.

Sixteen of the rim sherds recovered were sufficiently large that vessel shapes
and diameters of the openings could be determined from them (Table 3).Additional
rim sherds were found at the site, none large enough for inferring size or shape, but
representing at least 16 to 18 vessels, including at least one carinated bowl. A high
percentage of the sherds are of a ware of extremely high quality; most are hard and
smooth, and many are highly burnished. The paste is, without exception, fine and
compact.
Rio Grande Area Sherds
Three of the sherds from the Lott site have been identified by Helene Warren,
of Albuquerque (Warren 1984), as Agua Fria or Glaze 1 from the Rio Grande
drainage area. They came from one vessel, but its size and shape could not be
determined.

106

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3.

Vessel Shapes and Orifice Diameters Inferred From
Rim Sherds at the Lott Site

Sherd No.

PT-1
PT-2
PT-3
PT-4
PT-5
PT-6
PT-7
PT-8
PT-9
PT-10
PT-11
PT-12
PT-13
PT-14
PT-15
PT-16

Sherd, from
Figure 19
A
B
D
G
H
E
C
I
F
J
K
L
M

Oriface Diameter
inches
cm
15.24

7.62
12.70
10.16
10.16
7.62
10.16
7.62

6
4
7
3
5
4
4
3
4
3

10.16
15.24

4
6

10.16
17.78

Shape

Jar
Bowl
Jar
Jar
Bowl
Jar
Jar
Jar
Jar
Jar
Jar
Jar
Jar
Bowl
Bowl

DATING
The Lott site is believed to have been occupied periodically by people who
made and used Lott points, from the middle 1300s of the Christian Era into the early
1400s. That the site was not occupied continuously during this time is evidenced
by the very thin cultural layer, the small number of hearths, and the apparent lack
of permanent living structures. However, a considerable number of fire-hardened
clay lumps that have impressions of grass and sticks and finger prints were found
in and near two hearths. The lumps could have come from wattle-and-daub structures that caught fire, but there has been no excavation where the clay lumps were
found that might have yielded evidence of post holes or other structural features.
The number of arrowpoint preforms, arrowpoints, other tools, bison bones, and
chipping stations indicates that the site was probably a base camp for hunting
expeditions, where tools were made and limited butchering and meat drying was
done. The number of potsherds, representing at least 16 to 18 vessels, further
supports this base-camp theory. The Lott site was probably used intermittently and
seasonally, but only in the years when there were concentrations of bison or other
game in the area.
Only the part of the site where Lott points were concentrated has been dated by
the radiocarbon method. Most of the features, including most of the hearths where
charcoal samples could be found, were in this part of the site. The parts of the site
where Garza and Perdiz points have been found will be investigated further in an
attempt to establish reliable dates.

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

107

The time from A.D. 1350 to1400 is suggested for the Lott site by several lines
of evidence. Three radiocarbon dates, listed below, were obtained on charcoal samples from three different hearths in the area of the site on which Lott points were
found almost exclusively. One of the hearths, Feature 4, from which radiocarbon
sample Tx-4600 was obtained, was excavated by entering from the side rather than
from the top in order to obtain a suitable amount of wood charcoal with a minimum
of disturbance to the hearth. During this excavating a Lott point was found in situ
(Figure 20), further indicating that the hearth was in use during the Lott period of
occupation.

Figure 20. Photograph of Feature 4, from which a charcoal sample was taken for radiocarbon
dating. The arrow points to the base of a Lott point found during the excavation for the
charcoal sample.

The radiocarbon dates of the three samples, which were run at the Radiocarbon
Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin (Valastro n.d.), with their
dendrochronological corrections according to the calibration table of Klein, Lerman, Damon, and Ralph (1982), are as follows:
Sample NQ,
Tx-4442
Tx-4600
Tx-4788

Radiocarbon Ag~
450-2_70 B.P.
510!-_60 B.P.
540-2_50 B.P.

Corrected Date
A.D.1390-1505
A.D.1335-1435
A.D.1325-1435

108

Texas Archeological Society

This dating is further supported by the quantity of bison bones at the site. One
virtually intact skeleton was found, and all of the hearths examined contained
burned and fragmented bison bones. Bison bone and tooth fragments are scattered
over the entire site. There were almost no bison in this area before A.D. 1200;
however, they became much more plentiful on the Llano Estacado beginning about
A.D. 1200 (Dillehay 1974:181). In addition, three sherds of Agua Fria or Rio
Grande Glaze 1 pottery were found on the site. This pottery, which originated in the
Albuquerque area, was widely traded during the 1300s, the peak trade period being
A.D. 1315-1400 (Warren 1970:6). These dates indicate that the Lott point was in
use as much as 50 years earlier than the Garza point. The suggested date for occupation of the Garza site, which is only about 3 km (2 miles) from the Lott site, is
before A.D. 1500 (Runkles 1964:123). Excavations at the Lubbock Lake site
revealed Garza occupation zones that were dated by two radiocarbon samples, one
of which came from the hearth in which a Garza point was found in situ. The dates
were A.D. 1635 and 1665, but these dates may be 50 years too young (Johnson et
al. 1977:105). However, most of the few Lott points found at other locations in the
Garza County area have been found on Garza types of sites. So there probably was
a transition from the Lott point to the Garza point. The writers believe that Lott and
Garza points represent not two different cultures, but rather a change in the making
of the arrowpoint over a period of time. Such a transition fits in with the general
trend of simplification of artifact manufacture that, in this case, amounted to simply discontinuing trimming the lateral edges of the points. In many areas through
which there was a diffusion of Plains traits and traits from the East, the simple triangular point became predominant in later periods.
DISCUSSION

The Lott site differs from other prehistoric sites on the southern High Plains in
ways that make it an important link in the study and interpretation of the archeology
of the southern High Plains.
The writers are not aware of any other site in the southern High Plains with such
a concentration of arrowpoints. The site has yielded more than 60 Lott points, more
than 50 Garza points, more than 60 Perdiz points, and more than 60 triangular
preforms. The count of Perdiz points is probably falsely low because, as noted
above, about half of the artifacts originally classified as broken drills are believed
to be Perdiz stems that were removed from arrow shafts after the points were broken
off. In addition, 50 to 75 other points were broken so badly that type could not be
determined. The site is small, covering only about a halfa hectare (1.25 acres), the
zones from which artifacts were recovered covering less than a fifth of a hectare
(less than half an acre). The number of Perdiz points is especially noteworthy, since
they are scarce in this part of Texas. On sites at the edges of the Llano Estacado there
are rarely more than 3 or 4 Perdiz points.
In addition to the large number of arrowpoints, this site has produced more than
750 sherds of a distinctive pottery representing at least 16 to 18 vessels. The sherds
were found in areas A, C, D, and F, as shown on Figure 3. No sherds were found

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

109

in areas B and E. Only three of the sherds are from the Rio Grande drainage area
of New Mexico; all the rest appear to have been made locally. Most of the sherds
resemble Caddoan pottery and are tempered with burned or calcined bone, which
is found in 20 to 30 percent of Caddoan sites (Davis 1961:6). Bone tempering is
found in other pottery as far west as west-central Texas (Suhm and Jelks 1962:95),
but only rarely on the Llano Estacado. The writers have examined sherds from at
least 90 sites in West Texas and found none that resemble the most common group
of the Lott site sherds. Our observation is that the typical pottery from Llano Estacado sites is thick, coarse, tempered with grit or sand, and not well finished. Apache
pottery on these sites is coarse and usually black, with mica inclusions. In addition,
pottery from the Rio Grande drainage is common on West Texas sites. On most sites
there is a mixture of pottery, with a high percentage from the Rio Grande drainage
together with locally made vessels.
By contrast, the Lott site had only three Rio Grande sherds, and the locally made
Lott pottery is extremely well made. It has a fine paste, is highly smoothed and hard,
and some is burnished. The intentional temper is not sand or clay, but burned bone.
There are some inclusions of small weathered rocks, gravel, and minerals that, as
we have found, occur typically in the Triassic clays of the area. The decoration on
three varieties closely resembles the decoration on some Caddoan vessels.
Ceramics have long been used by archeologists to help establish dates, cultural
associations, diffusion of cultural traits, and social changes. Ceramics are especially useful for these purposes because temper, firing techniques, finish, and
decoration can be used to support some assumptions. Pottery of a distinctive type
manufactured in a known area is often found in another locale. The assumption is
then often made that the pottery was brought by the makers or traded to the other
place. But assumptions based on pottery for establishing cultural backgrounds
cannot be made blindly without in-depth investigation. For example, some of the
sherds found at Edwards complex sites in southwestern Oklahoma have long been
thought to have been traded from Caddoan areas in East Texas. Recent thin-section
and petrographic analyses, however, have indicated that this pottery was made at the
Edwards complex sites (Ferring 1986). People in different areas and of different
cultures used their own techniques in making ceramics, and when they moved, their
techniques usually went with them, so their techniques could be easily recognized
in their new locations. Researchers must make sufficient tests and investigations to
determine if the pottery was traded into the area, if its presence represents a movement of people, or if it represents diffusion of traits or techniques. Since thepottery
found at the Lott site appears from our examination to be made from local materials
and yet has Caddoan decorative elements, its presence there is clearly an important
manifestation of the movement of traits from the Caddoan area to the Plains.
The large quantities of arrowpoints, chipping debris, and pottery strongly
suggest that this site is more than a temporary or short-term campsite. Rather it is
most likely a base camp for hunting expeditions in the area, used seasonally for
making and repairing hunting equipment. Further investigation should be made of
the pieces of fired-clay with imprints of grass and sticks, described earlier, to try to
determine if they came from wattle-and-daub shelters.The writers believe there is

110

Texas Archeological Society

a definite relationship between Caddoan and Plains cultures and that the Lott site is
an important link in this relationship. In the rest of this discussion we will consider
many of the factors beating on related changes in Caddoan and Plains prehistory.
In the last 10 years, a great deal of work has been done that is beginning to
provide explanations for the conditions and factors that brought about changes in
the southern Plains and Caddoan cultures. Much archeological information has
been obtained from research in Central Texas, East Texas, and Oklahoma,dealing
with population declines or increases, population shifts, and changes in culture.
Several researchers are beginning to discem patterns of climate and weather
changes that parallel changes in archeological patterns; these parallels may lead to
the most logical solutions to many archeological puzzles.
In the eastern half of Texas the density of archeological sites suggests that for
1600 years, from 1000 B.C to A.D. 500, there was an increase in population, after
which the population remained about static. In Central Texas an apparent decline
in population began in the late Prehistoric period, or about A.D. 500 (Skinner
1981:114). Then, after A.D. 1200, the population in north-central and East Texas
apparently began to decline (Peters 1986). The decline in prehistoric populations
seems to have begun in Central Texas around A.D. 500 and to have moved after that
to the north and east.
Bruseth has made extensive studies as part of the Richland Creek Archeological Project (RCAP)(Bruseth et al. 1986), dealing with the paleoecological conditions for the late Holocene period. A variety of disciplines were exploited, the principle ones being pollen analysis, radiocarbon dating, and studies of alluvial stratigraphy. When these studies are combined with archeological data, a clear picture
of cause and effect emerges. From archeological data and study of utilization of
bison and other mammals through faunal analysis, it is possible to trace fluctuations
in prehistoric populations and, especially, movements of people and cultures.
The Richland Creek Project has been ideally suited to make these studies of
climatic change. Its geographic setting is along the Prairie Margin, a major ecotone
separating the eastem Deciduous Forest Biome from the Grassland Biome in Texas
and Oklahoma (Shelford 1963), where the forests of eastern Texas and Oklahoma
give way to the Great Plains, sharply and distinctly in some parts of the zone, and
through a complex mixture of forest, prairie, and savannah in other parts. The zone
has not been static during the Holocene but has advanced and retreated as temperature and moisture conditions have changed (Borchert 1953). These changes
have had a major impact on the adaptations of prehistoric peoples because grasslands and forests have markedly different subsistence potentials. The overall
change that occurs during drought conditions is a retreat and replacement of forests
by tall grasses. The existing tall grasses are in turn replaced by medium grasses and
by short grasses, which are very tolerant of drought conditions.
The studies by Bruseth have established some patterns of climatic changes.
Although each site is different, his studies of pollen remains and fluvial or floodplain deposition at many sites indicate a wet period from 1000 B.C. to about A.D.
800 (Bruseth 1986). From A.D. 800 to 1170 the climate began a drying trend, and
from A.D. 1170 to the present the climate in the study area has been dry. Studies

Runkles and Dorchester w The Lott Site

111

by Hail in eastern, central, and southwestem Oklahoma have indicated a similar
pattern (Hail 1982:391). In southwesten Oklahoma, 650 B.C. to A.D. 950 was a
moist period; A.D. 950 to 1290 began a dryer period; and A.D. 1290 to the present
was a dry period. Studies by Ferring in Delaware Canyon in southwestern Oklahoma also indicate that A.D. 1 to 1000 was moist. Other research (Hall 1982) suggests that the area has been dry from A.D. 1000 to the present.
These better-defined climatic changes relate exceptionally well to changes
noted among the southern Plains cultures and the Caddoans of eastern Oklahoma
and Texas. Wyckoff has made extensive studies of the Caddoan cultures in the
Arkansas River basin C/gyckoff 1980:514), dividing the sequence into four periods.
We are interested in his Period III (A.D. 1200-1400) and Period IV (1400-1550).
The changes noted during these periods are definitely related to events on the
southern High Plains. The Caddoans were farmers, who supplemented their diet
with hunting and gathering. They lived in scattered villages and houses on the rich
soil of stream and river terraces. Their pottery, arrowpoints, houses, mounds, and
religious items resembled the Mississippian cultures to the east. Around A.D. 1200,
a decrease in the number of houses demonstrates that the villages began to disperse
to other areas. At about the same time, Plains traits began to appear in Caddoan sites,
and by A.D. 1400 Caddoan villagers were using southern Plains flints, turquoise,
and tool types, and the farmers were using bison scapulas for digging tools.
All of these changes coincide with the drying trend that began in A.D. 1200 and
has continued to the present. This drying trend adversely affected farming activities; the short-grass prairies moved to the east where bison herds became much
more plentiful. In fact, the ratio of deer to bison usage changed from 10.6:1 (A.D.
950-1200) to 1.04:1 (A.D. 1400-1550). These ratios are based on bone counts in
dated sites (Wyckoff 1980:500). The Plains people apparently were moving into
eastern areas following and hunting bison, and the Caddoan farmers began to move
westward onto the plains on hunting expeditions. These events could explain the
mixing of Plains and Caddoan traits seen at the Lott site and other sites from northcentral Texas to western Oklahoma. It is possible that groups of Caddoan hunters
actually reached the Llano Estacado by traveling up the Brazos River basin from
known Caddoan sites such as Stansbury and Chupek in the Waco area. It is also possible that groups traveled up the Red River and then southward down the east edge
of the Llano Estacado along the Caprock, where water and campsites were readily available. The radiocarbon dates from the Lott site fit very well into the time
frame proposed here for the movement and intermixing of the Plains and Caddoan
people.
CONCLUSIONS
The writers believe the Lott site is a distinct manifestation of the movement of
Caddoan traits to the southern High Plains and that the people used the site
seasonally as a base camp for hunting, manufacturing stone tools, and perhaps for
making pottery. The site was used for 50 to 100 years beginning in the mid A.D.
1300s and continuing into the early 1400s. During this time their arrowpoint

112

Texas Archeological Society

making went through a transition, and with elimination of the side trimming, the
Lott points became Garza points. Sherds of one Rio Grande glaze vessel and two
obsidian Garza points, obsidian flakes, and shell beads made from Pacific Ocean
shells found at the site indicate that in the late 1300s some limited trade with areas
to the west took place.
Since the tools and arrowpoints, generally thought to have been made by the
men, are Plains varieties, we believe they were from Plains rather than Caddoan
groups. On the other hand, ceramics are generally thought to have been made by
women, so it is possible that men in Plains hunting parties that encountered Caddoan
groups to the east may have married Caddoan women who went with them to the
plains. This could account for the Caddoan-style pottery that was made on or in the
vicinity of the Lott site. However, we cannot see any way to test or validate this
explanation, although it has plausibility on its side.
We are unable to explain the large number of Perdiz points on this site. They
are common in many parts of Texas, including parts of the Caddo area, in very late
prehistoric times. Their distribution on this site does not correspond to the
distribution of Caddoan-style pottery. This problem will be investigated further and
we hope to deal with it in a later report.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors express a great deal of appreciation to several people who have
contributed their time, talent, and ideas to this report. Mary Dorchester, wife of the
junior author, deserves many thanks for the hours of typing, retyping, and changing
that are always necessary in a report of this kind. We especially single out and thank
the many professional archeologists who have been helpful and cooperative and
have gone out of their way to share their expertise and to assist in many ways. This
kind of cooperation does a great deal to encourage amateurs not only to do thorough
research, recording, and reporting of prehistoric sites, but also to seek the help of
professionals. We thank Don Wyckoff, Timothy Baugh, and Fern Swenson, all of
the Oklahoma Archeological Survey. Don Wyckoff very kindly supplied information of importance to this report from his unpublished dissertation, and personal
conversations with him were especially helpful. Baugh examined Lott site pottery
and shared his knowledge of the Edwards complex cultures in southwestern
Oklahoma, and special thanks are due Fern Swenson for her technical description
of the pottery. Thomas R. Hester, of The University of Texas at San Antonio,
submitted five Lott site obsidian samples to the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory,
University of California, for x-ray fluorescence examination for sourcing the
samples. We especially appreciate the support of this sourcing project by the Center
for Archaeological Research at The University of Texas at San Antonio. Reid
Ferring, of North Texas State University, prepared thin sections of Lott site
potsherds and prepared a petrographic analysis. Bonnie Yates, also of North Texas
State University, examined bone artifacts and specimens. Dee Ann Story, of the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin,
provided encouragement, advice, her expertise on Caddoan cultures, and identifi-

Runkles and Dorchester -- The Lott Site

113

cations of the shells from which beads at the Lott site were made. Thomas N.
Campbell, of The University of Texas at Austin, offered advice on radiocarbon
dating. Alan Skinner arranged for radiocarbon funding from the Texas Archeological Research Foundation. Elton Prewitt, of Prewitt and Associates, was especially
helpful when we visited with him on numerous occasions for practical counseling
and advice. Helene Warren examined the Lott site pottery and assured us that none
of it originated in the Rio Grande drainage. We appreciate the permission given by
Eileen Johnson, of Texas Tech University, to use the x-ray fluorescence data on
specimens from the Lubbock Lake and Blackwater Draw sites.
Finally, it is not possible to thank properly Michael B. Collins, who offered
much guidance, especially editorial comments and organizational suggestions.
John Lott, owner of the ranch on which the Lott site is located, is to be especially
thanked for allowing the writers and others to work at the site. Lott has supported
the project in other ways, and this support is especially appreciated, for it allowed
us to obtain some data that otherwise would have been difficult to get. The report
has been improved by all of these people. The junior author was able to write the
paper only because of the help of very detailed notes, representative artifacts, and
the senior author’s long-term knowledge of this site.
REFERENCES

CITED

Baugh, Timothy G., and Swenson, Fern E.
1985 Personal communication.
Borchert, J. R.
1953 The Climate of the central North American grassland. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 40(1):1-39.
Bruseth, James E., Raab, Mark, and Mcgregor, Daniel E.
1986 Richland Creek Technical Series, Chapter 5, Volume 1. Archeological Research
Program. Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Davis, E. Mott
1961 The Caddoan area: an introduction to the symposium. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 31:3-10.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974 Late Quaternary bison population changes on the Southern Plains. Plains Anthro pologist 19-65:180-196.
DiPeso, Charles C., Rinaldo, John B., and Fenner, Gloria J.
1974 Casas Grandes--a fallen trading center of the Gran Chichimeca. The Amerind
Foundation/Dragoon, Vol. 6, Chapter 7. Northland Press, Flagstaff.
Ferring, Reid
1986 Personal communication.

114

Texas Archeological Society

Hall, S. A.
1982 Late Holocenepaleoecology of the Southern Plains. Quaternary Research 17:391407.
HoUiday, Vance T., and Welty, Curtis M.
1981 Lithic tool resources of the eastern Llano Estacado. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:201-214.
Johnson, Eileen
1984 Personal communication.
Johnson, Eileen, Holliday, Vance T.; Kaczor, Michael J.; and Stuckertrath, Robert
1977 The Garza occupation at the Lubbock Lake site. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 48:83-109.
Klein, Jeffrey, Lerman, J. C., Damon, P. E., and Ralph, E. K.
1982 Calibration of radiocarbon dates. Radiocarbon 21(2):103-150.
Munsell, A. H.
1975 Munsell soil color charts. Macbeth Division of Koll Morgen, Baltimore
Peters, Duane
1986 Report on the Joe Pool Lake archeological investigations. Unpublished draft.
Runkles, Frank A.
1964 The Garza site: a Neo-American campsite near Post, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 35:101-125.
Shelford, V. E.
1963 The ecology of North America. University of Illinois Press, Urbanna.
Skinner, S. Alan
1981 Aboriginal democraphic changes in Central Texas. Plains And~ropologist
26-92:111-118.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Jelks, Edward B.
1962 Handbook of Texas archeology: type descriptions. Texas Archeological Society Special Publication 1 and The Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4, Austin.
Swenson, Fem
1985 Personal communication, March.
Tumer, Ellen Sue, and Hester, Thomas R.
1985 A field guide to stone artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Field Guide
Series, Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Valastro, S., Jr.
n.d. Written communication.

Runkles and Dorchester n The Lott Site

115

Vamer, Dudley M.
1968 The nature of non-buried archeological data: problems in northeastem Mexico.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 38:51-65.
Warren, A. H.
1970 Centers of manufacture and trade of Rio Grande glazes. Apreliminaryreport from
the Laboratory of Anthropoloty, Museum of New Mexico, Santa Fe.
Warren, Helene
1984 Personal communication, March.
Wyckoff, Don G.
1980 Caddoan adaptive strategies in the Arkansas Basin, eastern Oklahoma. Unpublished dissertation, Washington State University, University Microfilms, Ann
Arbor.
Yates, Bonnie
1985 Personal communication.

