A REPORT ON WILLIAMSON COUNTY
MOUND MATERIAL*
By

MARDITH K. SCHUETZ

In 1937 and 1938 Mr. Erich Pohl excavated several mounds
in Williamson County, beginning his work on the Cedar Park
Mound after the field party from the University of Texas had
finished work on the site. Cedar Park Mound is located on the
north side of South Brushy Creek, 400 yards south of Cedar
Park. According to records kept at the University of Texas,
the mound originally covered more than an acre and was seven
feet high in the center.
Work was next done at San Gabriel Mound three miles
Northwest of Leander on the South Fork of the San Gabriel
River where the stream flows under the railroad.
Mr. Pohl then proceeded to the Hughes Mound located between Leander and Georgetown on the Hughes Ranch on the
South Branch of the San Gabriel River and a quarter-mile
distant from the site of the "Webster Massacre." Correspondence to the Witte Museum at the time reports that the mound
was topped by three feet of gravel washed in over the original
mound making excavation slow and "non-productive."
The Lake Locke Mound near Jarrell was worked next and it
was reported that in five days time more artifacts had been
found than two months’ excavation had produced at Hughes
Mound.
Mr. Pohl finished his work in Williamson County at the
Cobb’s Spring Mound located eight or nine miles from the turneff to Florence north of Georgetown.
Mr. Pohl was looking for only perfect and unusual artifacts
since his interest was commercial. When the Witte Museum
learned of Mr. Pohl’s activities at Cedar Park Mound, arrangements were made to salvage the broken material that was to
*The writer wishes
artifacts.

to

thank

Gibbs

Milliken

for

photographing

the

136

Texas Archeological Society

be discarded. Mr. Pohl reports that he employed a three foot
grid system on the Cedar Park Mound, but kept notes only on
the positions in which unusual specimens were found (Private
conversation, July, 1957). Mr. Pohl also states that the perfect
material recovered from these mounds is still in his possession.
The author has not had the privilege of seeing this material
since it is in storage.
Since none of the material is identified except by mound
origin we can treat it only as we would surface material. A
statistical comparison does bring to light interesting variations among the mounds and future controlled excavation in
the county should clarify the data presented here.
One point of confusion needs to be brought out before proceeding. Boxes from Cedar Park, San Gabriel, and Hughes
Mounds were labeled as such. Other boxes were improperly
labeled "Koch Mound," a site which does not exist. From an
examination of the correspondence between Mr. Pohl and the
Witte Museum and the similarity between the names Koch
and Locke, it is probably safe to assume that these labels refer to Lake Locke material. The last two boxes of material
examined were labeled "the broken crate, Williamson Co." This
material, herein referred to as "unidentified mound" is probably
from Cobb’s Spring although the evidence is not sufficient to
refer to it by the site name.
PROJECTILE POINTS
The following table shows the count of points in terms of
by Suhm,

established projectile point types as described
Krieger, and Jelks (T. A. S. Bull., Vol. 25, 1954).
Cedar
Park
Pedernales ..........
Castroville ..........
Montell .............
Travis .............
Ensor ..............
Edgewood ..........
Abasolo ............

418
306
88
100
100
50
80

San
Gabriel
298
270
147
124
117
92
89

Hughes
715
516
124
63
28
52

Lake
Locke

Unknown

517
456
229
19
70
40
173

51
34
16
8
1
21

A Report on Willia~son Coz,nty Mound Material

Cedar"
Pa.rk
Marcos .............
78
Darl ...............
91
Marshall ...........
65
Lang’e .............. I01
Bulverde ........... 126
Fairland ...........
63
Frio ...............
60
Nolan .............. 110
Williams ...........
35
Pandora ............
33
Refugio ............
35
Kinney .............
23
Martindale .........
15
Uvalde .............
64
Catan ..............
33
Tortugas ...........
36
Scallorn ? ...........
6
Gary ...............
9
Palmillas ...........
Lerma .............
Shumla ............
2
Fresno .............
29
Wells ..............
Matamoros .........
11
Young .............
Perdiz .............
Cliffton ? ...........
Desmuke ...........
1
Almagre ............
2
Ellis? ..............
Alba ? ..............
1
Hayes ? .............
2
Pogo ? ..............
Plainview ..........
12
Meserve ............
5
Angostura ..........
9
Scottsbluff ..........
!

San
Gabriel
71
70
68
63
65
60
44
41
44
35
28
25
24
24
23
12
II
9
9
7
5
5
4
4
3
3
1
2
2
1

2

Hughes
43
14
195
26
38
45
19
3
15
11
5
19
4
8
8
21
4
I0
1
2
2
5

137

Lake
Locke

Unknown

73
58
168
63
46
24
33
16
20
36
19
22
9
15
26
33
1
II
2
3
2
I0
3
4

4
1
5
2
2
5
1
4
4
8
6
2
3

1

4
4
1
1
1

I0
2
2
4

2
1
2

138

Texas Archeological Society

With such a large sampling of the Pedernales type it seemed
feasible to examine the series in detail, since this type exhibits
such a wide range of variation.
Cedar
Park
Indented base .....
Concave base .....
Contracting stem
.
Expanding stem ....
Parallel stem ........
Squared shoulders
Barbed shoulders
Concave blade ......
Convex blade ......
Straight blade .......
Recurved blade ......

326
100
126
83
218
178
201
8
128
160

San
Gabriel
244
56
35
70
193
143
146
23
112
131

Hughes
561
154
108
124
483
216
452
29
352
256
23

Lake
Locke

Unknown

401
116
51
108
358
314
178
29
309
118
11

40
11
12
11
28
17
33
1
23
22

On occasion a Pedernales point exhibits a beveled blade.
Of the series from San Gabriel Mound four points which have
concave blades also exhibit beveling, two on the right sides of
both faces and two on the left. They are not sufficiently slimmed
to have been reworked into awls. The unidentified mound produced a similar point with concave blade and slight beveling
on the left sides of both faces. In addition, one straight blade is
beveled on the left sides of both faces. One concave-bladed
point from Cedar park Mound is beveled on the right sides of
both faces. Points listed as having "barbed shoulders" are
those whose shoulders are oriented towards the base although
varying from small in proportion to massive. Conversely,
"squared shoulders" are sometimes massive, but without the
downward projection, or are so slight as to be almost nonexistent.
Points listed as Abasolo are thus identified in the broadest
possible sense. All fall within the size range of the Abasolo,
but all are unbeveled. These might just as readily be called
convex-based knives as are their larger counterparts.
A similar discrepancy is encountered with the Tortugas
category. They, too, for the most part, are unbeveled. Among

A Repo~’t on Williamson Co~nty Mound Material

139

the 36 from Cedar Park Mound five are beveled on the right
sides of both faces. One is beveled (more a case of steep chipping than true beveling) on the left sides of both faces. Two
points display steep chipping along the right side of one face;
one point displays steep chipping along the left side of one
face; one point displays steep chipping along both the right
and left sides of one face. From Hughes Mound three points
have suggested bevels and four have the appearance of having
been reworked. The edges are rechipped into concave blades and
beveled. Only five of the 29 Tortugas points from Lake Locke
are beveled: four on the right edges of both faces and one on
the left. One has the addition of a small basal notch near the
corner. The single Tortugas from the unidentified mound is
beveled.
The Darl points from Williamson County indicate what
might be a regional variation of the type, lacking the typical
beveled blade and being somewhat wider than the described
type. Of those found in Cedar Park only two points have
beveled blades although some exhibit slightly steeper chipping
suggesting a bevel. Four blades are twisted like Pandale points.
Four blades are serrated. Thirty-eight points are between 1.6
and 1.7 cm. wide; twenty-four are from 1.8 to 2.1 cm. wide.
The series of 70 points from San Gabriel Mound produced no
beveled blades although 11 are twisted by steep chipping from
the center to the blade edge on opposite sides of the blade.
Twelve blades have finely serrated edges. Thirty-two are from
1.6 to 1.7 cm. in width; 26 are from 1.8 to 2.1 cm. in width. The
13 Darl points h’om Hughes Mound show three with slight
beveling on the right sides of both faces. Eight have serrated
blades. Only two points fall within the 1.5 cm. width of the
described type. Five points are 1.6 to 1.7 cm. wide; three are
between 1.8 and 2.1 cm. wide. Two have broken blades and
cannot be measured for width. Fifty-eight Darl points came
from the Lake Locke site. One point has a beveled blade on
both faces along the right sides. Another has suggested beveling along the right side of one face. Four specimens have
twisted blades. One other specimen has a stem beveled on the
right sides. Ten blades have serrated edges. Four points are
within the described widths for the type. Twenty-three of the

140

Texas Archeological Society

points have a width of 1.7 cm. Eighteen measure 1.8 to 2.1 cm.
The single Darl point from the unidentified mound is unbeveled but has a ground stem.
A few other variations of Edwards Plateau types should be
mentioned. Eleven Edgewood points from the Hughes Mound
are exceptionally large, ranging from 5.5 cm. to almost 7 cm.
for one specimen. Two Fairland points from the same site appear to have been about 8 cm. long. These outsized points would
seem to be an idiosyncrasy of the Hughes site. A Castroville
point, also from Hughes Mound, is made of a bright orange
flint, obviously intrusive, though the origin of such flint is unknown to the writer. A possible Desmuke point is 5.8 cm. long
and quite thick, measuring 1.3 cm. A Kinney point from the
same site has a deeply recurred base that could have doubled
as a spokeshave.
A Wells point from San Gabriel Mound measures 9 cm. in
length with a shoulder width of 2.7 cm. and a stem length of
3 cm.
A Kinney point from Cedar Park has serrated blade edges.
Eight Lange points from the same location fall under the minimum length of 5 cm., varying from 4 cm. to 4.5 cm. One Martindale point measures approximately 9 cm., the missing distal
end making a positive measurement impossible. Like those
from Hughes Mound, three Edgewood points are over the 5 cm.
maximum length, varying from 5 to 5.5 cm. The blade of one
is serrated. One Almagre point from the same locale measures
only 4.3 cm. The stem may be broken, but crudeness and outline suggest the type.
One possible Travis point from Lake Locke has a stem
beveled on the right side of each face and a blade beveled on
the left side of one face but only at the tip on the opposite side.
Another Travis point is made of inferior chert and is probably
intrusive. A questionable Refugio point from Lake Locke is
11.2 cm. long and 3.5 cm. wide.
Of the Matamoros points from the Williamson County
mounds, only two from Cedar Park are beveled and only one

A Report on Willia~nson Co~nty Mo~nd Material

141

from Lake Locke has any evidence of beveling. Another from
Lake Locke has a beveled base.
Arrow points from all the mounds would seem to have been
exceedingly scarce, judging from the table. Such was not the
case, however, for a letter from Mr. Pohl written at the time
of his excavation of Cedar Park Mound states, "we are finding
an exceptionally great number of bird points." We can only
conclude that most of the material representing the Central
Texas Aspect, assigned to the Neo-American Stage, was in perfect condition. A few arrow points are too fragmentary for
identification. Three points from Cedar Park are unidentified.
Two points from Hughes Mound are like miniature Shumla and
Lang points.
Fig. 31 shows the "Early Man" points from Cedar Park
Mound. Angostura-like points are on the top row (A-G). Plainview points are represented from H through R. Examples 0
and P are characterized by fine diagonal chipping. S through
W are Meserve points, S and T representing reworked Plainview points without beveled blades, U through W have beveled
blades and the blades of V and W are fm’ther modified by serration. Lines indicate the extent of stem grinding. Example
H lacks smoothing. Of much more interest than the Plainview,
Angostura, and Meserve types, which frequently appear with
Archaic material in the Edwards Plateau Aspect, is the Scottsbluff point numbered X which appears but rarely in such association (the author is grateful to E. Mort Davis of the University of Texas for identification of the Scottsbluff point). It
is a flat, finely worked point of grey flint exhibiting matched
flake scars meeting in a central ridge. Blade and stem edges are
finely retouched. There is no stem smoothing. Not shown is the
mid-section of a Plainview point and the mid-sections of what
appear to be beveled Angostura blades.
On Fig. 32 are "Early Man" points from San Gabriel Mound.
Angostura-like points are lettered A through F. B is a reworked point. E has the appearance of having been reworked
as an awl. Not shown are five questionable Angosturas. Plainview points are from G to S and a few of these specimens display beautiful workmanship. H is made fyom a very thin flake

J

vJ

b,

Fig. 31.

"Early Man"

points,

Cedar

Park

Mound.

A-G,

Angostura.

H-R, Plainview. S-W, Meserve. X, Scottsbluff.
NOTE: For dimensions of specimens in Figs. 31o through 41, see text.

i

¯

Fig. 32.

"Early Man" points,

G-S, Plainview. T, Meserve.

San

Gabriel

Mound.

A-F, Angostura.

J

Fig. 33. A-C, Angostura, Lake Locke. D, unidentified, Lake Locke. E,
Meserve, Lake Locke. F, G, Plainview, Lake Locke. H, I, Angostura, Unidentified Mound. J, Plainview, Unidentified Mound. K, slate pendant, San
Gabriel. L, rim of soapstone bowl, San Gabriel. M, atlatl weight (?), Lake
Locke. N, quartzite sinker, Lake Locke.

A Repor~ o~ T~VilIiamson County Mound Material

145

of brown flint and is made like the Scottsbluff point described
above that is, with matched flake scars running from a central ridge to the blade edges. The blade edges are further refined by the finest possible chipping. Examples M and P are
characterized by fine diagonal ripple flaking. Both specimens
are quite thin. An additional Plainview point is not shown as
it is badly damaged by fire and weathering. T is the only entire
Meserve found and has a beveled blade. The distal ends of
what were probably Meserve points also came from this mound.
In addition to beveling, two of the blades are serrated.
Fig. 34, M is a unique point from San Gabriel Mound which
has all the appearance and "feel" of an "Early Man" point.
It bears a very close resemblance to the Scottsbluff type, is of
a heavily patinated flint and is quite worn. The technique of
manufacture is similar to Scottsbluff and the stem edges and
base are slightly smoothed by grinding. The coupling of an
expanded stem with a slightly concave base and slightly barbed
shoulders do not allow for a Scottsbluff identification at this
time, but this might eventually prove to be a variant of the
type. The point measures approximately 10 cm. in length, 2.7
cm. in width at the base, and approximately 3 cm. in width at
the shoulders.
"Early Man" points from Lake Locke are seen in Fig. 33,
A-G. A, B, and C are Angostura-like points. D is difficult to
identify. It may be either an Angostura with a beveled blade
or a 1Keserve with a narrower stem than usual. Workmanship
of the base is closer akin to the former type. The blade edges
are also serrated. E is a Meserve with beveled blade. F and G
are Plainview points.
The unidentified mound produced the three points on the bottom row of Fig. 33. H and I are Angostura. J is a Plainview
point.
The "Early Man" points from Hughes Mound are not shown.
The Meserve point has a beveled blade. One Plainview point
must have measured 10 cm. in length and another has longitudinal flaking at the base much like a Clovis point.

146

Texas Archeological Society

Unidentified Projectile Points
Unidentified points from the Lake Locke site are shown on
Fig. 34. A is made of a brown flint and measures approximately 5.5 cm. in length and 2 cm. at the shoulders. The point
is crudely worked and it is difficult to determine whether the
stem has been broken. The point could be a Palmillas.
B appears to be made of an intrusive flint whose origin may
be North Central or East Texas. The flint is a speckled, light
brownish-grey color. The point is similar to a Lange but lacks
the heavy shoulders of the type. It measures 4.5 cm. in length
and 1.6 cm. in shoulder width.
Example C, like A, might be a Palmillas, the stem being
rounded. The flint is a light brownish-grey. The point measures
approximately 5.3 cm. in length and 3 cm. in breadth at the
shoulders.
Judging from the red clay stain, D is an intrusive point from
East Texas. The blade is slightly convex and well barbed. It is
parallel stemmed and measures 5 cm. in length and about 2.5
cm. in breadth at the shoulders.
E is characterized by fairly deep side notches resulting in a
flaring stem with a slightly concave base. The blade is too broken
to tell much about it. The flint is a light buff color. The point
measures about 5 or 5.1 cm. in length and about 2.2 cm. in
shoulder width.
Specimen H is an intrusive point of rose quartzite. Workmanship is crude. The point has weak shoulders, an expanding
stem, and a crudely rounded base. Length is about 3.7 cm.
Width at the shoulders is about 1.8 cm.
I is a fairly fine point of buff colored flint measuring 4.1 cm.
in length and 2 cm. in shoulder width. The blade is triangular.
The stem expands and has a slightly convex base.
J is an unusual point of the same buff flint. The blade is unusually broad, being 2.4 cm. wide at the shoulders compared to
3.5 cm. in length. Wide corner notches result in a Langetype stem-shoulder form. The base is slightly convex.

\

Fig. 34.

Untyped points. A-E, H-K, Lake Locke. F, M-P, R-T,

Gabriel. G, L, Q, Cedar Park.

San

Fig. 35.

Untyped points. A-C, San Gabriel. D, Lake Locke. E, knife~

Lake Locke. F, knife, San Gabriel. G, I-I, Cedar Park. I-L, San Gabriel.

A Report on Williamson County Mo~nd Material

149

Example K is probably another intrusive point, resembling
the crudely worked chert from East Texas. The blade was probably recurved originally with small barbs. The stem expands
slightly and the base is slightly convex. The point originally
measured about 3.8 cm. in length and 2.1 cm. in shoulder width.
A unique point from the San Gabriel mound is example F on
Fig. 34. It is similar to example I but is not as fine a point. It is
of grey flint and measures 4.7 cm. in length and 2.5 cm. in
breadth at the shoulders.
G is a unique point from Cedar Park Mound and is similar
in appearance to B pictured directly above it. G, however, is
made of indigenous flint, light grey in color. Like B it has weak
shoulders, an expanding stem, and convex base. It is about 4.9
cm. long and 2.1 cm. wide.
Another unique point from Cedar Park Mound is Fig. 34, L.
It is made of a brown flint with a sharply contracting stem and
a straight base. It must have measured around 9.5 cm. in length
and is 3 cm. wide at the shoulders. Stem length is 2.4 cm.
The bottom row (N-T) of Fig. 34 shows a group of closely
related points from San Gabriel and Cedar Park Mounds. (N-P,
R-T, San Gabriel; Q, Cedar Park.) The points are similar to
the Pandale type in having twisted blades. But, unlike the Pandale type, the stems are not beveled and the blades are not
obviously twisted--that is, only when the stem is held between
the fingers is it noticeable that the blade lies in a plane diagonal
to the stem. Lengths vary from 5.8 cm. to about 6.7 cm. and
shoulder widths from 2.5 cm. to 3.8 cm. Two additional points
from Cedar Park fit this description.
Fig. 35 shows a group of large points from the Williamson
County Mounds. A, from San Gabriel Mound, is of a light grey
flint. It must have been about 8 cm. in length and may be a
large Bulverde. One side of the stem is almost flat so that it
does have a wedge-shaped cross-section.
B, also from San Gabriel, is made of brown flint. It is a nondescript point with convex blade, a stem which contracts on

150

Texas A~’cheological Society

one side and expands on the other, and a straight base. It is
7 cm. long and 2.9 cm. wide.
C, from San Gabriel Mound, is pretty well described by example A above, and although cruder in workmanship than most
Bulverde points, may be a variant of the type. It measures
about 7 cm. in length and 3.5 cm. in width.
D comes from the Lake Locke site and is similar to a Lange
but for the long stem and shoulder width. The point was probably about 8.5 cm. long and is 4.3 cm. wide at the shoulders.
The stem is proportionately narrow with a width of only 1.5
cm. The stem is 2 cm. long and ends in a slightly convex base.
G is a crudely worked point from Cedar Park. It is made of
striped buff flint. The stem is parallel edged and the base appears to have been straight. Length is 9.3 cm. and width is
3.3 cm.
H is made of light grey flint and comes from Cedar Park. The
blade is barbed and recurved, the stem slightly bowed, and
the base slightly concave. It is about 7.9 cm. long and 3.3 cm.
wide at the shoulders.
San Gabriel Mound produced the next two points, I and J,
both of which are similar to G described above. Again, the
blades are recurved and the blade of J is serrated. The stem of
I expands slightly; that of J appears to have been parallel
edged. Bases of both appear to have been straight. I is 9.7 cm.
long and 4 cm. wide at the shoulders. J is 7.3 cm. long and 2.8
cm. wide at the shoulders. I is made of buff flint, J of brown
flint.
K and L are related points from San Gabriel. Both are fairly
flat and made of light grey and buff flint, respectively. They
are characterized by short contracting stems, flat bases, and
slightly convex blades. They resemble example L of Fig. 34, but
L has a much longer stem and is a thicker point. K and L may
be knife blades. K measures approximately 11 cm. in length and
L approximately 10 era. K is 3.4 cm. wide at the shoulders; L
is 3 cm. wide at the shoulders.
Some of the larger, heavier points on Fig. 35 are probably

Fig. 36. East Texas int~sive specimens, Hughes Mound. A, J-N, unidentified artifacts. B, C, I, unidentified points. D, gouge. E-H, Gary points.

%

Fig. 37.

San Gabriel Points, San Gabriel Mound.

Texas Archeolegical Soole%~
Southern Methodist Universi~
Box 165
Dallas~ 9exas 75££Z
A Report on Williamson County Mound Material

153

spear points, particularly D through J, and may be Pogo points,
a type which allows for a great deal of variation. (Note in the
above table other points tentatively assigned to the Pogo point

type.)
The Hughes Mound produced an appreciable amount of intrusive material. Fig. 36 shows this material. B is a small, thin
point of buff colored flint with a trace of red clay stain. The
flake is unworked on one side except for retouching on the
blade edge. The stem appears to have been parallel edged with
a straight base. The point is 3.7 cm. in length and 2.1 cm. in
shoulder width.
C is made of white flint, little worked on one side with but
crude shaping on the other. The outline is the same as B described above. It is 3.4 cm. long and 2 cm. wide at the shoulders.
E through H are extremely crude Gary points made of chert.
E is made from mottled rose and green-grey chert, F from red
chert, G from a lead colored chert, and H from an orange-buff
chert.
I probably represents the same "type" as B and C, being the
chert-made counterpart. This piece of chert is banded: black
bands alternating with white and speckled brown bands. Length
measures 4.9 cm., width 2.4 cm.
On Fig. 37 are a group of points from San Gabriel Mound
which seem to represent a type, as there were 46 of them from
Cedar Park Mound, 83 from San Gabriel, 10 from Hughes, 21
from Lake Locke, and one from the unidentified mound site,
making a total of 160 points. The points bear resemblances to
several different Central Texas types, but in spite of such
gradient resemblances they display a consistent grouping of
their own which seems to warrant description as a type. Blades
are triangular with edges usually straight to slightly convex
although sometimes slightly recurved (U). Shoulders are
slight (H) to prominent (Q). Stems are genarally parallel
edged but may expand or contract slightly. Bases are generally
straight but may be slightly concave (G, H, I) or convex (A,
O, P, T, U). Length varies from 3.9 cm. (0) to about 8 cm.
(U), with most falling between 5 and 6.5 cm. Shoulder width

154

Texas Archeological Society

varies from 2 to 3.5 cm., most falling between 1.5 and 3 cm.
Those points having a contracting stem (G, N, Q, W) resemble
Bulverde points, but lack the thinning of the stem. Those with
expanding stems (A, C, D) resemble Lange points, but do not
have the heavy shoulders and the usually short stem of that
type. Those with weak shoulders (H, V) resemble Travis
points, but are not as crude as Travis and the shoulders are
better defined. All of these have a strong resemblance to the
Yarbrough type of East Texas, but are cruder points and never
have the beveled blade or ground stem edges often seen on the
Yarbrough. I propose the name of San Gabriel points for this
type since the mound of that name, so far as is known, seems
to have been the center of the type.
Another sizeable group of points turned up which may
eventually prove to be another type, although there is as yet
insufficient evidence to name it. Fig. 38 shows this group of 18
points. The group is recognizable by its long blade and stem
and absence of well-defined shoulders. The blade is usually
parallel edged for much of its length, or may be convex giving
it more of a leaf shape (L, O, P, Q). Any indication of shoulders
is ordinarily lacking, but they may be slightly defined (K, P).
Bases are usually straight but may be slightly concave (F, N, R)
or convex (0). Some of the points exhibit the symmetry of
"Early Man" points (particularly P), but none exhibit the
fine flaking technique or smoothing indicative of a respectable
age.
One last group of untyped points remains to be described.
Fig. 39 shows a group of single-notched points. C and D are
basally notched points measuring respectively about 3.7 cm. in
length and 2.3 cm. in width, and 4.1 cm. in length and 1.9 cm. in
width. E, F, G, and J have their single notches removed at
the sides. E is 5.9 cm. long and 2.8 cm. wide. F must have been
about 8 cm. long and is 3.7 cm. wide. G is about 5.5 cm. long
and is 2.7 cm. wide. J is about 7 cm. long and is 3.3 cm. wide.
K has its single notch removed at the corner. It was approximately 7 cm. long and is 3.2 cm. wide. H and I have single
notches removed from the center of the base. H originally
measured about 7 cm. and is 3.1 cm. wide. I measures 5.5 cm.

vJ

Fig. 38.

Untyped group. A-F, I-L, San Gabriel. G, Unidentified Mound.

H, Lake Locke. M-R, Cedar Park.

ii

s"

!

I
|

!
I

Fig. 39. A, B, beveled knives, Lake Locke. C-G, single-notched points,
Cedar Park. H, J, K, single-notched points, Lake Locke. I, single-notched
point, San Gabriel. L, knife blade, Cedar Park.

157

A Report on WiUiamson County Mound Material

long and 4.2 cm. wide. Both of these single-notched variations,
those with single notches removed from the corner area and
those with single notches removed from the center of the base,
should probably be set up as described types. Both variations
are known to the author as occurring from Val Verde County
in the Trans-Pecos area down the Rio Grande through the
Southwest area of Texas where they seem to be found with
greater frequency Collections throughout the state need to be
searched to establish the distribution and frequency of these
points.
OTHER LITHIC MATERIAL
The following table provides the count of lithic specimens
other than dart points.
Cedar
San
Park Gabriel
Heavy Blades ....... 160
Choppers ...........
1
3
Hatchets, hand axes ..
Hammerstones-milling stones .....
48
Convex-based knives . 129
Straight-based knives. 101
13
Concave-based knives.
Flake knives ........
Specialized knives ...
4
Side scrapers .......
15
End scrapers ........
12
Turtleback scrapers ~
7
Flake scrapers ......
8
Gouges .............
12
23
Drills ..............
Drills reworked
from points ......
16
Drills reworked
from knives .......
2
2
Gravers ............
Spokeshaves ........

Hughes

108
10

203
19

23
20

382
147
15

Lake
Locke

U~know~

477
55

65
13

5
1
13
4
1
12
1
12

2
42
46
5
28
10
20

4
812
251
23
28
5
70
55
8
59
12
21

38

29

12

2

1
1
4

85
53
1
1
10
5
3
2
1
3

158

Texas Archeological Society

Knives
Some of the knife blades listed by base shape in the table
above should perhaps be called adze blades. It had been the
writer’s intention to suggest a dividing line between the two
classifications: the point at which a blade became too large
and unwieldy to be used efficiently as a knife. The task proved
impossible due to the great percentage of broken specimens.
These large blades, however, are well-thinned and chipped, unlike the crude "heavy blade," and include the blades which have
often been called "ceremonial blades" in Texas. Some of the
knife blades in this collection must have measured up to 15
cm. in length and some, because of their greater" thickness and
weight, suggest a function other than cutting. Since the function of an adze was suggested for the "ceremonial blades" at
the 1956 meeting of the Texas Archeologica! Society in Waco,
the term is used in this paragraph.
Two convex-based knives from Lake Locke are made of
chalcedony.
As indicated in the table, several specialized knives were
found. Cedar Park produced example L of Fig. 39. This stemmed
knife measures 13.4 cm. in length and 6.3 cm. in breadth across
the middle of the blade. It is of buff-colored flint with a convex blade, short, slightly expanding stem and convex base.
B on Fig. 40 is another knife from Cedar Park which must
have been about 15.5 cm. in length. It is made of grey flint with
heavy barbs which probably extended to the base line.
From Cedar Park came a broken corner-tang knife and the
crescent-shaped knife seen in Fig. 41, A. It is worked on both
sides from the edges to a central ridge. It is made of light
grey flint. An additional set of six artifacts could be called
knives or scrapers. Some of them are seen in Fig. 41, B-D. B
and D are piano-convex but, like the others, have fine pressure
retouching on both sides. Another series of six piano-convex
artifacts questionable as to function came from the Lake Locke
site. These specimens range in length from 2.7 cm. to 8.2 cm.
All exhibit a crescent or semicircular shape and the largest two
are also rather thick, measuring 1.5 cm.

I
I

Fig. 40. A, hammerstone-milling stone, Cedar Park. B, knife, Cedar
Park. C, hatchet, Hughes Mound. D-F, heavy tools, Cedar Park.

Fig. 41. A-E, knives, Cedar Park. F, side scraper, Hughes Mound. G,
turtleback scraper, Cedar Park. H, side scraper, Lake Locke. I, J, gouges,
Cedar Park.

A Repo~’t on Williamson County Mound Mateo’ial

161

Two corner-tang knives are E and F of Fig. 35, the former
from Lake Locke, the latter from San Gabriel. E is made of
grey flint and measures 6.3 cm. F is made of brown flint and
measures 6 cm. Another corner-tang knife came from Hughes
Mound, but was cruder in workmanship.
Two beveled knives from Lake Locke are seen in A and B
of Fig. 39. A has only the stem beveled on the right sides of
both faces. It originally measured about 11.3 cm. in length.
B is more typical of the double pointed knife with alternate
beveling of the four sides. It was about 9.3 cm. long. The blade
of another beveled knife came from the unidentified mound.
A straight based knife with a single basal notch in the middle came from Lake Locke. It measures 8.5 cm. in length.
Heavy Tools
Heavy tools are classified by the shape and/or degree of
crudeness. A "heavy blade" is seen in Fig. 40, E. These tools
range from a length of 5.2 cm. to something over 13 cm. on one
specimen with a missing distal end. Width ranges from about
3 cm. to 7.5 cm. All are crude, characterized by only primary
percussion chipping.
Choppers are crude, little modified core tools, mostly circular
in shape.
Hatchets and hand axes are separated from the "heavy
blade" classification because they are better made. Two hatchets
are seen on Fig. 40, D and F, both from Cedar Park. F has
some evidence of halting with chipped areas at the sides. Example C on Fig. 40 shows another blade from Hughes Mound
with evidence of halting. Several other blades from the mounds
were similarly treated, making the possibility of accidental
chipping somewhat remote. Only one hand-axe with the nodule
encrustation left at the top for grasping was found in the
museum material, that one being from Cedar Park.
The quartzite stones from Cedar’ Park are listed as both milling stones and hammerstones as they appear to have functioned
as both. Of the 48 stones from that mound, 21 had been utilized

162

Texas A~’cheological Society

for milling on one face. Twenty-seven stones had been utilized for
milling on two faces. Twenty-four of the number had battered
edges, apparently having been used as percussion tools. Six stones
had been used only for hammering. Five sandstones had possibly been used as hammerstones as well. Four streamworn
pebbles were unmodified by use. The "grinding faces" are convex, suggesting that a rocking motion was employed. Al! are
one-handed implements. An example with cross-section is seen
on Fig. 40, A.
Gouges
Of the 12 gouges from Cedar Park Mound, four are pianoconvex. The others are bifacially worked. Three gouges have
slightly convex bit ends. Four have slightly concave bit ends,
and four have straight bit ends. The twelfth has the bit end
missing. Six of these have convex bits; five have concave bits.
One specimen differs from the others in that the underside is
worked flat rather than having been flattened by a single blow.
The variation occurs in the bit end where it is beveled on the
underside. One other gouge exhibits the reverse bit (Fig. 36, D).
It is from Hughes Mound and is described below. The crosssection should clarify this description. Fig. 41, I and J are two
Cedar Park gouges.
The gouge listed from San Gabriel is only tentatively identifled, so will not be described.
Ten gouges came from the Hughes Mound. The first is made
of East Texas flint, bifacially worked with a convex bit end
and a concave bit. Of those made from indigenous flint, two
are piano-convex with convex bit ends and convex bits. Three
others are bifiacially worked with convex bit ends, two with
convex bits, the other with a concave bit. Another is a planoconvex artifact and appears to be the middle part of a gouge.
The edges are convex. The bit end is missing. The eighth gouge
has a slightly concave bit end, the bit itself being convex. The
ninth gouge shown in Fig. 36, D is a tiny piano-convex specimen 4.1 cm. in length utilizing a fractured plane of the flint
as the bit. This is the specimen with the "reverse bit" mentioned
above. A similar specimen has a slightly convex bit end--convex on top and concave underneath.

A Report on Williamson County Mound Material

163

There are twelve gouges from Lake Locke of which six are
piano-convex and triangular in shape. They range in length
from 6.3 cm. to 11.5 cm. and in width from 4 cm. to 6 cm. Of
these there are three piano-convex gouges with straight bit
ends, two with concave bits and one with a convex bit. One
gouge has both a concave bit end and a concave bit. Two gouges
have convex bit ends and convex bits. Bifacially worked specimens show three with convex bit ends and convex bits and
three with convex bit ends and concave bits.
Drills and Gravers
Drills which were not reworked from points had varied
handles: rectangular, T-shaped, triangular, and semi-circular.
Many drills are stemmed, having been reworked from dart
points. Cedar Park produced two drills which had been reworked from knives or heavy blades and San Gabriel produced
two reworked from knives. Drill shafts are not counted in the
table. One double dril! came from Hughes Mound. It was reworked from a Castroville point with the distal end thinned to
a drill in the usual manner and one shoulder also converted to
a drill.
Nothing unusual was noted about the gravers, except that
one from Lake Locke is on a Fresno point.
Scrapers
Three of the 15 side scrapers from Cedar Park Mound are
unmodified split stones. Three of the seven turtleback scrapers
are of the long, piano-convex variety common to South Central Texas with thick ridges up to 3 cm. in thickness. These are
commonly called "buffalo scrapers." One is shown in Fig. 41, G.
Five of the 12 end scrapers are refined by pressure retouching,
resulting in convex bits.
Hughes produced 25 flake scrapers only six of which are
modified by retouching. Three of the turtleback scrapers from
Hughes are piano-convex. Twenty-two of the side scrapers are
biracial, characterized by crude primary chipping only. Twelve
others are modified by pressure retouching’. One scraper could

164

Texas Archeological Society

have employed four sides, being lozenge-shaped. Another utilized a large piano-convex spall with a naturally concave curve.
In addition to the concave side, two others have been thinned
down by rough chipping to make scraping edges. This scraper
is pictured in Fig. 41, F. End scrapers show 15 which are
crude, showing only primary chipping. Thirteen others have
been retouched by pressure flaking. Two are remade from large
blades and six are unmodified split stones.
Lake Locke produced a series of 32 flake scrapers and/or
knives. Ten appear shaped more for use as knives showing retouching by fine pressure flaking. Eight of these are planoconvex and unmodified on the flat sides. One has what may be
an attempt at a corner tang. Of the 22 others, only four have
what appears to be intentional modification by pressure flaking.
Most of these are piano-convex flakes. Seven are quite angular
in cross-section, having been shaped by the extraction of long
flakes running the length of the implements, thus having three
or four planes on the convex surfaces. Lengths of the series
vary from 2.7 cm. to 6.5 cm. Thirteen of the end scrapers are
also refined by retouching. All have convex bits. Twenty-four
of the side scrapers are piano-convex. One is pictured in Fig.
41, H. Thirteen are double-edged. Nine have definitely retouched edges, the others being modified probably through
use. Seventeen are made from large spalls, smooth on one side
and modified on the other. One concave scraper is a crescentshaped, unmodified spall. One of the two piano-convex turtleback scrapers is of the lineal "buffalo scraper" type described
above. The other six turtleback scrapers are bifacially worked.
MISCELLANEOUS
Several interesting items of miscellaneous material are found
in this collection. The first is the middle section of a slate
pendant from San Gabriel Mound (Fig. 33, K). It is made of
dark brown slate and the edges of both sides are thinned in
attempted bevels. The hole has been drilled from both sides.
The length is 5.2 cm. Width at the base is 5.9 cm.
Example L of Fig. 33 is a sherd from a soapstone bowl, also
from San Gabriel Mound. The rim is rounded and striation

A Report on WiUiamson County Mound Material

165

marks appear on both the outside and the inside, the latter
perhaps only from use as they are not as deep. The sherd is
.6 cm. thick.
Fig. 33, M is a loaf-shaped piece of petrified wood, well polished on the two cut sides and the ends. It is 3.4 cm. long, 1.5 cm.
wide, and 1 cm. thick. Judging from the shape, it may have
served as an atlatl weight. It is from Lake Locke.
A quartzite net sinker (Fig. 33, N) also came from Lake
Locke Mound. It is identical to those prevalent around Waco
in McLennan County. It is oval in cross-section with notches
ground out at either end. It measures 4 cm. in length, 2.8 cm.
in width, and 2 cm. in thickness.
Hughes Mound produced three sherds of Leon Plain pottery.
These represent the only evidence of pottery in the museum
collection and the small count in only one mound is an intriguing mystery, to be solved, it is hoped, through future excavation.
Other Miscellaneous items are as follows:
Cedar Park Mound: fossil Cretaceous Brachiopod and Ammonite; a walnut; and bone, probably bison.
San Gabriel Mound: seven pieces of petrified wood; two
pieces of quartz; one sandstone abrader; one smoothstone; one
piece of charred bone.
Hughes Mound: fossil Cretaceous Gastropods, Pelecypods,
Echinoderms; two Cretaceous rocks with holes drilled by water
action; two pieces of cave material--one a piece of calcite and
one a piece o£ rock showing compressed and folded strata and
modified by underground water action; petrified wood; quartz;
bone material representing deer, bison, and bird; red ochre;
piece of lime-encrusted flint with incising; three rubbing stones;
piece of pure lead 2.5 cm. long, folded over to form a cylinder
and crimped together with pliers.
Lake Locke Mound: two steel washers, one apparently damaged by a fired bullet; piece of heavily patinated amber glass;
six smoothing stones; a metamorphic split stone that is plano-

166

Texas A~’cheological Society

convex and celt-shaped with a small flat surface worn on the
end as though it had been used as a pestle; red ochre; hematite
ball; bone and antler material representing bison, deer, and
carnivore; Cretaceous fossil Ammonite, Pelecypod; snail shells;
stream-worn pebbles; petrified wood; quartz; shell scraper
made from fresh water musse!.
Unidentified Mound: quartz; smooth red granite pebble probably used as a rubbing stone.
OTHER MATERIAL
A last group of artifacts remains to be described. Hughes
and Lake Locke Mounds produced large amounts of crudely
worked materia!. Most of the material is intrusive : metamorphic
material whose origin must necessarily be from the ArbuckleWichita outcroppings to the west and cherts whose provenience
could be North Central or East Texas. Other materials used are
quartzites which are found throughout the Edwards Plateau
area. Six-hundred ninety-one pieces of this material were found
in the Hughes Mound and 70 pieces in the Lake Locke site.
Some of the Gary and unidentified points made of this material
from Hughes have been described above. Sixty-four other pieces
are shaped with some semblance of a stem for halting and are
probably Gary points though three bear more resemblance to
Lange or Bulverde points. One drill, one side scraper, and one
gouge or end scraper can be identified. A T-shaped broken piece
may also have been a drill. Seventy-one artifacts are thinned at
the rounded basal ends. However, the majority of these crudely
made artifacts defy identification as to function. Fig. 36 shows
the variety of shapes and sizes. A is a triangular piece of chert
measuring 3.8 cm. in length and 3 cm. in base width. J is one
of the few larger pieces. It is a pinkish-grey granite measuring
6 cm. in length, 4.3 cm. in width, and 2.5 cm. in thickness. K is
a larger chert version of A being 5.6 cm. long and 4 cm. wide.
L might be described as a crude Abasolo point made of chert.
It is 5.8 cm. long, 3 cm. wide, and 1.1 cm. thick. Most of the
intrusive artifacts are like M: small, circular, and made of
chert. M. measures 3.6 cm. along its longest axis and 2.8 cm.
along its shortest. N is more oval in shape measuring 4.5 cm.

A Report on Williamson County Mo~nd Material

167

in length and 2.4 cm. in width. It is also a thicker specimen
than M. Five-hundred five specimens fall within this described
range of artifacts.
The crude material from Lake Locke can be broken down
into: 20 Gary points (four additional ones the size of Almagre
points); four points with crude attempts at stems not of the
Gary type; one point which resembles a Travis point; eight unbeveled Cat6n-Abasolo type implements; twelve chert counterparts of "heavy blades"; two pieces thinned down to convex
based "knives"; 25 implements shaped like the unidentified
artifacts described from the Hughes site; and a unique point
with slightly concave blade edges beveled on the right side of
one face and with a serrated blade on the other, and a slightly
contracting stem. The base of this point is broken. Its origina!
length was about 4 cm.
Limitations of the rock used readily explains the crudeness
of all this material, but the question remains whether the
rock was brought in and the implements made in Williamson
County or whether they were brought into the area already
manufactured. Further, why would these have been used in an
area rich in fine flint which is easily worked and makes a far
superior tool? Overall crudeness of the material caused the
author to lump all this material together, but it must be kept
in mind that the rocks and minerals used come from different areas: west, north and/or east, and possibly south.
SUMMARY
One must understand that the artifact count given in this
paper cannot present an accurate picture since only the imperfect and broken material is accounted for. Records from
the University of Texas, Witte Museum correspondence, and
conversation with Mr. Pohl contribute additional information.
According to the University of Texas files, Pearce’s excavation
at Cedar Park Mound disclosed burials in the center of the
mound. Mr. Pohl states that the skeletal material he found
was given to the University of Texas. He also reports that he
gave some metates from the site to the University (private
conversation, July, 1957).

168

Texas Archeological Society

Notes on the Hughes Mound in the Witte Museum disclose
that "besides the usual run of implements such as arrows
[points?], spears, drills, knives, scrapers, etc. several rare corner tang artifacts, slate ceremonials [pendants?l, two effigy
arrows[?], and bone awls have been found up to date." The
report further states that ash pits containing an abundance of
split bones had been uncovered; that no burials were encountered at the mound; that a 3" bead of conch shell had been excavated along with shells from the coast; and that animal bones
had been tentatively identified as buffalo, deer, javelina, fox,
coon, squirrel, and wild turkey. Two levels of culture were recognized in Hughes Mound. We can obtain an idea of the
mound’s size from the information that at the time the report
was written the "ditch" was 100 feet wide and had progressed
to the 90 foot mark. Depth varied from 24 to 42 inches.
Correspondence also tells us that a "big pot" was dug out of
Cobb’s Spring Mound. As far as the author can determine, this
was the only piece of pottery found other than the three sherds
from Hughes Mound.
Another unique find was a "solid copper hammer" from "one
of the mounds close to Leander." Whether this site is represented at all in the Museum collection cannot be said.
The presence of the steel washers and the lead piece can
most logically be explained as originating in Mr. Pohl’s camp.
The heavily patinated amber glass was probably scooped up
from the surface with the discarded broken artifacts. In the
absence of artifacts of European manufacture representing
an historic zone of occupation this would seem to be the best
explanation possible under the circumstances.
Witte Memorial Museum
San Antonio, Texas

