75

Burial to Bronze: Excavation, Analysis,
and Facial Reconstruction of a Burial
From the Wilson-Leonard Site, Texas

Elisa Phelps, Joan Few, Betty Pat. Gatliff
D. Gentry Steele, and Frank A. Weir

ABSTRACT
In 1983, the skeleton of a female human was found beneath Late Prehistoric,
Archaic, and Late Paleoindian cultural components during excavation at the
Wilson-Leonard Site (41WM235) on Brushy Creek north of Austin, Texas.
One of the six most complete Paleoindian skeletons recovered in North
America, the analysis revealed information about the biological nature and
health of this early North American inhabitant. The skull was complete but
crushed. Skull measurements and casts of skull fragments were used to rebuild
the skull to a form as anatomically correct as possible for this individual. The
rebuilt skull was used to sculpt the face in clay using tissue depths of bony
landmarks. The end product, a collaboration between an anthropologist and a
sculptor, is not an imaginative artistic work but reflects some of the individual
anatomical features of this particular skull based on the underlying cranial
architecture. The process of facial reconstruction was viewed by the public as
part of a Houston Museum of Natural Science educational program on the
biological evidence of the first Americans. A bronze was cast from the clay
sculpture and is on display at the Houston Museum of Natural Science.

INTRODUCTION
Our interest in the human remains from the Wilson-Leonard site
(41WM235) can be directly traced to an interest in the origins of our species,
Homo sapiens, and its dispersal throughout the world. Current knowledge suggests that modern humans arose sometime between 500,000 and 200,000 years
ago. We are uncertain whether our species first appeared in a specific locality
(some say Africa, some say the Middle East) and recolonized the Old world, thus
displacing the older species Homo erectus, or whether our species gradually
arose from Homo erectus throughout Africa and Eurasia.
However we began, the last contingents to be colonized by humans were
Australia and the Americas. Since these continents have been the most recently
colonized, we are hoping our understanding of these peoples and their migraBulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 62 (1994for 1991)

76

Texas Archeological Society

tion events will help us to understand better the earlier processes which led to
the establishment of modern humankind and our dispersal throughout the world.
The Wilson-Leonard site is particularly important in our quest for an understanding of the origins of the first Americans and the origins of all humankind because of the site’s antiquity and the antiquity and completeness of the burial
remains.

THE WILSON-LEONARD SITE
In 1983, the Texas State Department of Highways was excavating the
Wilson-Leonard Site on Brushy Creek, approximately 30 km north of Austin,
Texas, when the skeleton of a human female was found three m below the
present ground surface and beneath excellent Late Prehistoric, Archaic, and Late
Paleoindian cultural components; these cultural time periods span the last 12,000
years (Weir 1985). The burial pit was apparent in plan and section and the original depth of the grave was approximately 30 cm. Interred with her was a fossil
shark’s tooth found at the proximal end of the left humerus, a granitic sandstone chopper with pigment stains, and an angular fossiliferous limestone cobble
under which were found several particles of charcoal. This charcoal was submitted to the University of Arizona for dating through their tandem accelerator.
Reduced to only one mg of fine charcoal, a date (AA-171) of 13,000 + 3,000
years before present (B.P.) was produced. Two other assays using standard radiocarbon dating methods and yielding smaller deviations were derived from
the soil humates within the burial pit and are probably more accurate dates for
the burial. These are 9,470 + 170 (Tx-4787) and 9,650 + 120 (Tx-4793) years
B.P. Soil humate dates can be equal to, but are generally younger than, the actual time of deposition. The human bone was dated by the AMS technique, and
yielded radiocarbon ages of between 1270 to 6700 B.P. (Stafford et al. 1987).
These determinations can be accepted as minimum estimates only (Collins et
al. 1993).
In 1992-1993, excavations at the Wilson-Leonard site were conducted by
the staff of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin. The purpose was to obtain geological, radiocarbon, stable isotope, archeomagnetic, phytolith, diatom, and organic residue samples. These
new samples are undergoing analysis (Collins et al. 1993).
The stratigraphy at the site clearly documents the provenance and antiquity of the interment pit. The two soil zones immediately above the burial strata
contained traditional Paleoindian dart point forms including Midland, Plainview,
Scottsbluff, and Angostura. Seven specimens of a thick and notched dart point
form ("Wilson" points), and three lanceolate type specimens were found in the
soil strata associated with the burial. Below the burial the oldest and most discrete evidence of human occupation of the site was found. This assemblage
contained one very thin lanceolate projectile point associated with at least one

Phelps et al. ~ Burial to Bronze

77

butchered bison. At the time of interment the individual was placed in the burial
pit on her right side in a semiflexed position facing west.

LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF THE BURIAL
With an estimated time of death approximately 9,500 years ago, the WilsonLeonard burial represents one of the four oldest individuals recovered in Texas,
and one of no more than 25 individuals of comparable age recovered in North
America. When one considers the completeness of the remains, the WilsonLeonard specimen represents one of the six most complete Paleoindian skeletons
recovered from North America. It is on the basis of these few remains that we
evaluate the biological nature and health of the first human populations to
colonize the New World. Consequently, each of these individuals is of extreme
importance to our understanding of the peoples of the Americas.
While the study of the biological remains of these Paleoindians has just
begun, there are a few evaluations which can be made at this time. The adult
female from the Wilson-Leonard site is represented by the major portion of the
skeleton. She was in her mid-20s to mid-30s at the time of death, and there is no
evidence for the cause of death. She was of modest height by today’s standards
with an estimated stature of 157.0 + 6.0 cm (62 + 2.5 inches), but her stature falls
near the female mean for Archaic and Late Prehistoric hunters and gatherers
from Central Texas. Her teeth were in remarkably good condition at the time of
death, exhibiting very slight wear on the molars and moderate wear on the
incisors. A much greater degree of wear is typically seen on burials of hunters
and gatherers of the Archaic and Late Prehistoric cultural periods within the
same geographic region. No cavities were apparent in the teeth, and only slight
calculus was present.
It would be particularly satisfying to have a clear perspective of this
individual’s biological affinities, but rarely can one individual reflect the nature
of the populations to which she or he belongs. The presence of shovel-shaped
lateral upper incisors is certainly indicative of this individual’s affinities with
Mongoloid populations of northern Asia and later North American Indian populations. The central upper incisors, on the other hand, are not as markedly
shoveled as is typical of most individuals in more recent northern Asian and
North American Indian populations. Similarly, the slight prognathism of her
upper palate is not the norm of later hunter and gatherer populations within the
region. Since both of these latter characteristics occur in more recent populations, but in a minority of individuals, we are left with an unanswered question.
Is the Wilson-Leonard individual representative of the norm of an earlier population which differs slightly from more recent hunters and gatherers, or does she
represent an individual reflecting the normal range of variation which we see in
more recent populations? In other words, were the first Americans a part of the
same human population as later North American Indians, or did these earlier

78

Texas Archeological Society

populations out of northern Asia represent a different population and a different
migration event? Only with careful comparative analyses of rare finds like the
Wilson-Leonard female will we ever be able to resolve these issues.

CASTING AND REBUILDING THE SKULL
The cranium of the Wilson-Leonard individual was crushed and fragile,
inhibiting handling and analysis (Figure 1). An acrylic medium was used to make
a cast of the skull which exactly reproduced the original shape as well as
reflected the damage to each side of the skull and the distortion and displacement
of the left side facial bones (Figure 2).
The original cast was preserved as a reference and a second cast was used
to rebuild the skull to reflect as close as possible the correct anatomical shape
of this particular individual. The second cast was altered by cutting it apart with
a dental burr, so that the pieces could be reassembled in their correct positions.
Working from the original cast, D. Gentry Steele estimated skull dimensions in
millimeters: Maximum cranial width, 125 mm; Maximum cranial length, 175
mm; Bizygomatic arch, 122 ram; Palate width, 56-60 mm; Nasion-gnathion, 115
mm; Gonion-gonion, 94-95 mm; and Nasospinale-gnathion, 66 mm.
Much of the cranium was sculpted in clay to these overall dimensions.
Casts of the temporal bones (including the external auditory meatus and mastoid process) were cut from the second cast and pressed into the clay cranium.
The casts of the grontal bone, right orbit, right zygomatic arch, and entire maxilla had little distortion and were readily positioned into the clay. The left side
of the facial bones was sculpted entirely of clay, using the opposite configuration and dimensions. The skull, rebuilt in clay incorporating the cast bone fragments and the rebuilt mandible, was ready for facial reconstruction (Figure 3).

FACIAL RECONSTRUCTION BACKGROUND
The facial reconstruction of the oldest known female American Indian from
Texas was sculpted by Betty Pat. Gatliff in January, 1990, at the Houston
Museum of Natural Science. The week-long process was viewed by the public as
part of an educational program on Texas prehistory that included the importance
of studying human biological remains.
The reliability of the facial reconstruction procedures developed and used
by Ms. Gatliff has been tested in modern forensic cases (Gatliff 1984; Gatliff
and Snow 1979). Unidentified remains, when facially reconstructed, have been
identified by families and friends who were able to produce photographs of the
deceased. Comparing clay reconstructions to photographs has supported the
ability of the techniques used to accurately reconstruct individual facial features.
Ms. Gatliff has sculpted 140 facial reconstructions on unidentified forensic

Phelps et al. ~ Burial to Bronze

79

~5
C~3

oj

©

~o

80

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Acrylic casting of cranium of skull from the Wilson-Leonard Site. 90-145-BPG
identifies this skull by year, number, and sculptor, Betty Pat. Gatliff.

Figure 3. Skull reconstruction in clay using portions of the acrylic casting. Skull
measurements by Dr. D. Gentry Steele.

cases, resulting in 105 identifications. Identification in forensic cases is difficult because unidentified mortalities are frequently criminal victims, runaways,
and transients.
Skin depth measurements from 28 individuals were first used in facial
reconstruction by W. His (1895). In 1898, J. Kollman and W. Buchly added
additional measurements from 53 individuals. Skin depth measurements and
comparative studies by Krogman (1962), Rhine and Campbell (1980), and Rhine
and Moore (1982) have resulted in data useful on current forensic cases,

Phelps et al. ~ Burial to Bronze

81

particularly in America. It is helpful to have the tables divided by emaciated,
normal, and obese, as well as by sex and race.
Each individual skull dictates the location, size, and/or form of all of the
features: mouth, eyes, nose, and ears. The shape of the face is based on tissue
thickness. A physical anthropologist examines the skull to determine the
individual’s sex, race, and age. Depths of the soft tissues of the face are different in males and females of the three major racial groups. The individual’s age
at death, as well as individual anatomical peculiarities, diseases, and injuries,
influence the facial features of the person during life and must be considered
during reconstruction. For example, tissue depth and muscle tone change over
time, and to correctly reflect the individual must influence the reconstruction
processes.

FACIAL RECONSTRUCTION: PROCESS
The process of facial reconstruction follows a set pattern of procedures with
the individual skull measurements and determined tissue depths directing the
sculpting process. To begin the process, the rebuilt clay and cast skull was
mounted on a stand maintaining the Frankfort horizontal plane. Rubber cylinders were cut according to the appropriate tissue thickness for each of the 18
facial landmarks. Since there are no data for tissue thickness for prehistoric
populations, for this reconstruction, Gatliff used the tissue thickness charts compiled by Kollmann and Buchly (1898) because the diet and physical lifeways of
prehistoric Indians is closer to nineteenth century Europeans than to late twentieth century Americans (Figure 4). Tissue thickness includes in one measurement the size of the muscle, fatty tissue, and the skin thickness. The cut rubber
cylinder markers were glued directly onto the rebuilt skull (Figure 5). The markers were connected using modeling clay, sometimes called plasteline. The open
spaces were then filled in to form the shape of the face.
The mouth was formed by the shape of the front teeth. Three dimensions
were used in this process: (1) the depth, tissue marker #7 (see Figure 4), of the
upper lip margin; (2) the vertical thickness of the lips measured gumline to
gumline on the teeth; and (3) the width of the mouth, which is approximately
the distance between two lines radiating out from the junction of the canine and
first premolar on each side. Basically, the lips cover the front six teeth.
The mouth barrel was bent around the teeth, and the parting line of the lips
was creased horizontally along the halfway line and to each edge, to mark the
width (or corners) of the mouth. Chin and cheek areas were connected to the
mouth barrel. Lips were spread, rounded, and striated to give a life-like appearance and texture.
In facial reconstructions, the eye is a clay ball centered within the bony
orbit. The iris and pupil are carved out to give the eye expression. It is important
to construct the eyes to be anatomically correct, and thus the shaping of the eye

82

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Average tissue thickness (adapted from Kollman and Buchly [ 1898]).

follows certain anatomical guidelines: (1) the apex of the cornea is approximately
tangent to a centrally located line drawn from the superior and inferior margins
of the orbit; (2) eyelids bend around the eyeballs, which give them the proper
three-dimensional quality; (3) the lower lid comes up to the bottom of the iris;
and (4) the pupil seems to hang from the upper lid.
There appears to be no relationship between the shape of the orbit and the
shape of an individual’s eyelids. A pleasant appearance can be given by closing
the lids just slightly and forming a little puff under the eye, just as a person
appears when starting to smile.
The human nose is based on two simple measurements: the width and the
projection. The width is computed by measuring the bony nasal aperture at its
widest points and increasing the dimension by 10 mm. The projection from subnasale to pro-nasale is three times the length of the nasal spine, which establishes
the tip of the nose. The tip of the nose can then be connected with the bridge

Phelps et al. ~ Burial to Bronze

83

Figure 5. Tissue thickness markers glued on bony landmarks of the Wilson-Leonard
skull.

and built out to the width measurement. To complete the process of forming the
nose, the wings were rounded and the nares carved out to complete the nostrils.
The skull gives the location of the ear but no clues about their exact shape.
A rule of thumb is that the ear and nose are approximately the same length. Ears
are constructed in five steps:

84

Texas Archeological Society

1.

A "C" shaped bit of clay is formed to be the concha, and spreads at the top
for the antihelix.

2.

The helix is a long thin worm-like strip, rolled and pointed at one end.
Starting with the pointed end, it is curved around and fastened to the antihelix
and around the concha.

3.

The lobule is flattened and added to the lower portion of the ear, under the
concha.

4.

The ear is attached and the clay is smoothed into the side of the head. (To
position the ear, the external auditory meatus should be at the top of the
tragus. The ear is tipped back at about 15 degrees.)

5.

The tragus is constructed and attached, and then smoothed into the cheek to
complete the ear.

With the attachment of the ears, the facial sculpture was complete, as far
as using all of the information that the skull revealed (Figure 6). Hair style is
very difficult in prehistoric cases. It was decided for the Wilson-Leonard specimen to make the hair medium length, to fall below the earlobes on the sides.
The Wilson-Leonard clay sculpture was cast in bronze. It is on display at
the Houston Museum of Natural Science, a respectful alternative to the display
of human remains. From burial to bronze, this unnamed individual has had a
singular effect on the public. Museum visitors are amazed to find that the Wilson-Leonard female looks much like them. This visual connection to the past
humanizes our ancient ancestors and facilitates our understanding of the first
Americans.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Houston Museum of Natural Science hosted and sponsored the facial
reconstruction of the burial from the Wilson-Leonard Site as part of a museum
program, "The First Americans: The Biological Evidence." Grants from the
Texas Committee for the Humanities, a state program of the National Endowment for the Humanities, and the Anchorage Foundation made this project possible. Dr. Frank A. Weir and the Archaeological Studies, State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation in Austin, loaned the cast of the WilsonLeonard skull. Lewis Sadler, University of Texas Health Sciences Center in
Dallas, provided the second acrylic casting and photographs of the original skull.

Phelps et al. -- Burial to Bronze

85

o

©

©

,,6

86

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Collins, M. B., C. B. Bousman, P. Goldberg, P. R. Takac, J. C. Guy, J. L. Lanata, T. W.
Stafford, and V. T. Holliday
The Paleoindian Sequence at the Wilson-Leonard Site, Texas. Current Re1993
search in the Pleistocene 10:10-13.
Gatliff, B. P.
Facial sculpture on the skull for identification. The American Journal of
1984
Forensic Medicine and Pathology 5(4):327-332.
Gatliff, B. P. and C. Snow
1979
From skull to visage. The Journal of Biocommunications 6(2):27-30.
Gerasimov, M. M.
1971
The Face Finder. Lippincott, Philadelphia.
His, W.
1895

Anatomische Forschungen tiber Johann Sebastian Bach Gebeine und Antilitz
nebst Bermerkungen tiber Dessen Bilder. Abhandlungen der MathematischPhysikalischen Klasse der Konigl. Sachsischen Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften 22:379-420.

Kollman, J. and W. Buchly
Der Persistenz der Rassen und die Reconstruction der Physiognomie
1898
prahistorishcher Schadel. Archives fur Anthropogie 25:329-359.
Krogman, W. M.
The Human Skeleton in Forensic Medicine. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield,
1962
Illinois.

Rhine, J. S. and H. R. Campbell
1980
Thickness of facial tissue in American blacks. Journal of Forensic Sciences
25(4):847-858.
Rhine, J. S. and C. E. Moore
1982
Facial tissue thicknesses of American caucasoids (in ram). Laboratories of
Physical Anthropology, Maxwell Museum of Anthropology, The University
of New Mexico, Albuquerque.
Stafford, T. W., Jr., A. J. T. Jull, K. Brendel, R. C. Duhamel, and D. J. Donahue
Study of Bone Radiocarbon Dating Accuracy at the University of Arizona
1987
NSF Accelerator Facility for Radio Isotope Analysis. Radiocarbon 29:44.
Weir, F. A.
An Early Holocene Burial at the Wilson-Leonard site in Central Texas.
1985
Mammoth Trumpet 2( 1): 1-3.

