Rock Art at Monk’s Cave (41RK84)
Rusk County, Texas
Henry F. Ball

ABSTRACT
Until Monk’s Cave was reported in 1980, there had been only one Texas
rock-art site reported east of the Brazos River--that one in Henderson
County--and no rock-art sites had been reported in deep East Texas, Louisiana, or Mississippi. A small rock-shelter in Rusk County, Texas, near the
Louisiana border, has on one wall incised figures that are of unknown origin
and age. They include elements similar to ones found elsewhere in rock art
of Indian origin. There is evidence of use of the shelter by Caddos for temporary or permanent habitation, and its orientation suggests that it may have
served a ceremonial function as well.

INTRODUCTION
Monk’s Cave, or Indian Cave, as the rock-shelter is called by many of the
local inhabitants, came to the writer’s attention in the spring of 1980, when W. E.
Langford, an architect living in Henderson, Texas, described it to him. Langford
believed the little cave was of some archeological significance; the only previously reported site in Texas east of the Brazos River is in Henderson County
(Jackson 1938:460), and to the writer’s knowledge none have been reported in
deep East Texas, Louisiana, or Mississippi (Grant 1967: 17).
Langford had been shown the shelter first when he was a boy, in about 1935,
after a friend had failed to locate a larger cave reported to have two rooms, with
lots of Indian artifacts in the back room. Langford was taken to the small cave so
he wouldn’t be disappointed, and thereafter, he and a friend visited it often when
hunting in the area. The shelter is in a rather remote location and remains essentially as it was remembered, by an acquaintance of Langford’s, from his youth in
the 1890s. A large beech tree on which were carved Civil War period dates grew
on top of the shelter, but it is gone.
Upon our arrival at the site, we found that the shelter had been visited
shortly before by pothunters. A hole had been dug on the south side of the entry,
the incised figures had been traced with aluminum paint (with some embellishment), and efforts had been made, with some success, to pry off sections of the
sandstone slab on which the figures were incised (Figure 1). A small pocketscreen and a trenching tool had been left behind.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986 for 1984)

154

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Photograph of Monk’s Cave showing petroglyphs on the north wall.

The site, which is beside an old logging road, was thought to be on the prop-.
erty of the Southern Pine Lumber Co., but was found to be owned by Morgan
Strong, of Tyler, Texas. Strong had plans to clear the property for a tree farm,
but kindly agreed to permit investigation of the shelter pending that work. He
also agreed to preserve the site if it was archeologically important, and we assured him that it was.
INVESTIGATION

Monk’s Cave is located southwest of Mount Enterprise, in Rusk County,
Texas, on a fast-flowing branch in an area of heavily wooded, rolling terrain with
deep, sandy topsoil. Drainage is generally westward to the Angelina River,
thence via the Neches River to the Gulf of Mexico. Where it has not been logged
or farmed, the land is timbered with pine, beech, water oak, post oak, and sweet
gum trees. Chinkapin, hickory, pecan, and black walnut trees can also be found,
together with wild plum, muscadine, persimmon, and mayhaw.
The principle determination to be made about the shelter was, of course, the
authenticity of the inscriptions. All of the local inhabitants with whom the cave
was discussed simply took it for granted that the petroglyphs were of Indian origin. Artifacts were found near the surface at the entrance to the cave, and we
were shown a celt and half a celt, apparently of quartzite, and a cast-iron Confederate grave-marker that were found near the site.

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

155

Figure 2. Topographic map and cross section of Monk’s Cave.

The site has apparently aggraded over the years; local inhabitants who can
remember standing erect in the shelter can no longer do so. Since the water in the
branch is gritty, and the shelter is at a point where steep confining creek banks
give way to a relatively wide flood plain with a meandering channel, accretion of
soil could have occurred at Monk’s Cave as the products of cycles of erosion and
flooding accumulated.
The site was mapped (Figure 2), and photographs were taken of the petroglyphs, the shelter, and its environs. In the hope of demonstrating that the site

156

Texas Archeological Society

had indeed been used by Indians, a 1 x 2-meter test pit was put down just outside
the entrance. This location was chosen on the premise that hearths might be located there, since the shelter is too small to be comfortable with a fire inside.
The premise appeared to be confirmed when artifacts were uncovered at
quite shallow depths; one of the first was a Perdiz point. All excavation was by
trowel. Time limitations permitted excavation of only two levels of 10 cm each.
Primary screening was through quarter-inch hardware cloth, and about six random samples were fine-screened through window screening for trade beads, but
none were found.
Historic and prehistoric artifacts were intermingled to a depth of 15 cm, but
little was recovered in the last 5 cm. The intermingling and perhaps the shallow
depth of artifacts can be explained by the churning that is commonly found in
flood plains. (The light soils frequently found in such places become unstable
when the stream rises in flood stage, moving and shifting artifacts that are
in them.) There was nothing to map in the walls of the test pit except for some
charcoal--probably displacediand little to gain from flotation analysis of the
churned matrix.
Excavation records were kept, and progress photographs were taken. These
records, together with the artifacts and uncontaminated charcoal samples, were
kept for possible future detailed study and analysis that time and resources of this
investigation did not permit. Positive association of the occupants of the shelter
with the petroglyphs on the wall could not be established. The rock art could be
much older than the artifacts, and comprehensive investigation of the site would
be justified, since this is apparently a very old occupation site.
The objective of this investigation was attained with the evidence of Indian
occupation. The artifacts discovered in the test pit are evidence that the rock
art is of Indian origin. A list with brief descriptions of the artifacts documents
this claim.

ARTIFACTS
Lithic
Points
A Perdiz point (A.D. 1000-1500), made from petrified wood, was recovered from Level 1, and a Yarbrough point, apparently reworked (500 B.C.A.D. 1000), made from jasper, was found in Level 2 (Figure 3, C, D) (Bell
1960:78, 98).
Tools
A quartzite knife was recovered from level 1 and a petrified wood scraper
from Level 2 (Figure 3, A, B).

Stones
Rather large stones, apparently quartzite, were found in Level 2 at 10 to
15 cm, as much as 10 to 15 cm in major dimension, and associated with some of
the larger potsherds. The stones were not fire stained.

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

157

ARTI FACTS

0y
C

13

D

LITHICS

G

H

M

L

POTTERY
0

5cm

Figure 3. Drawings of diagnostic artifacts from Monk’s Cave.

158

Texas Archeological Society

o
0

d

~

o

=

o

0o
0

0

0

tth

0

eo
o~
~

t-q

o

0

.0
0
0

©

o
~0

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

~=~o
:::3

0D

<

o

159

160

Texas Archeological Society

Debitage
Two interior flint flakes, one gray and one buff, were found in Level 1, and
three pieces of petrified wood about 2 x 4 cm. Many small pieces of quartzite,
possibly country rock, were found in Level 2.

Pottery
Bullard Brushed (A.D. 1200--1500)
About i5 sherds were found in each level that were diagnostic bone and
sand tempered ware typical of Caddo utility ware (Figure 3, E, F, G, H, J)
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954: 252).

Polished Ware
Pieces of finer, polished ware were also found at both levels (Figure 3, L). A
rim sherd from Level 1 was engraved with a V pattern (Figure 3, K) and one from
Level 2 was incised (and brushed ?) diagonally (Figure 3, M). All appear to be
typical of Caddo eating or storage ware (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954:252).

Bone
Level I
Deer. One vertebra, two knuckle bones, 11 leg bone fragments.
Bird. One wing bone and one talon.
Unknown. Twelve pieces less than 1 cm long.

Level 2
Deer. One vertebra, 13 pieces leg bone, larger than in Level 1, as long as 4 cm.
Turtle. Carapace 1.5 x 3 cm.
Unknown. Eleven pieces
Historic
Nails
Two rusted, wire nails, one 6d and one 12d, were found in Level 1.

Glass
Level 1. Two pieces of milk glass, nine of bottle glass (one brown), seven of
window glass, one of crockery, and a piece of an ornamental ceramic base.
Level 2. Two pieces of milk glass, nine of bottle glass (two brown), one window
glass, and one piece of crockery.

Ammunition Cases
Five .22 caliber shell cases marked U on the bases came from both levels.

Projectiles
Two flattened lead balls, apparently .30 caliber ball-and-cap ammunition,
were found, one in each level.

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

161

Other
Charcoal
Both levels contained several concentrations of charcoal, indicating hearth
areas. However, as noted above, cobbles found were not fire stained or associated
with the charcoal.

Red Ocher
Several pieces of red ocherous sandstone, soft and readily abraded, were
found in both levels.
PETROGLYPH ANALYSIS
The pertroglyphs are on the north wall of the rock-shelter, and there appear
to be some 34 figures remaining (Figure 4). A slab of sandstone on which, according to a local resident, was "the best picture of a deer" has been pried off at
the upper left corner (facing the wall), and another smaller slab (Figure 5) apparently has sloughed off. The petroglyphs consist of primitive stick figures and
other shapes, with little obvious meaning in most cases. A few do appear to be
representational.
Indian rock art in the form of petroglypl-rs"and pictographs has been viewed
by different observers as having served various purposes for its creators. Some
consider it to be a primitive form of writing (Gelb 1963 : 24). Others consider it
to consist of doodles, fetishes, or personal signatures (Colton 1946: 1-18). It
probably serves all of these purposes and more, considering the diversity and
wide distribution of the figures found. There does appear to be general agreement also that although similar figures occur in the thousands of sites in this
country and around the world, common meanings cannot be assigned to them.
Any universality that exists must be attributed to the limited possibilities available to their creators for figure formation (Renaud 1935:5-8).
This limited commonality of meaning makes classification, identification,
and interpretation of rock art difficult. Jackson made a survey of Texas rock art
and established two major classifications: (1) realistic figures and (2) conventional figures. The word conventional was used to identify primitive or stylized
figures. These major classifications were subdivided into many more categories,
grouped under common headings (i.e. weapons, ladders, rakes, Spanish mission
and other European influences, animals, and others). Identification of the individual elements was based on resemblance to known objects, geometric shape,
and ethnic identification (i.e. tepees, zigzags, headdresses).
Jackson identified two sources of information available to aid in interpreting
the elements: (1) ethinic sources and (2) the accumulated knowledge of primitive
psychology and the early ways of man in general (Jackson 1938:357). However,
he provides few insights into the meanings of the figures, concentrating instead
on their identification and distribution.
Jackson also proposed a broad chronology to be applied to rock art in Texas.
It consists of three categories: (1) entirely prehistoric, (2) prehistoric and his-

162

Texas Archeological Society

t

I

1

~5"i

’’-’~

¯

I

1..~’~.\\ 1

#

o

~

"-I ~

I

"

1
/! \-\t

rm

,-.M
©

t~

/

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

163

Figure 5. Photograph of Monk’s Cave showing illumination by the sun at 5:00 p.m. The
apparently scaled-off central part of the back wall can be seen.

toric, and (3) historic (Jackson 1938 : 5). He found 70 percent of the work to be
prehistoric; 20 percent prehistoric and historic; and 10 percent entirely historic.
His chronology is based on the presence or absence of historic elements (i.e. men
on horseback and depictions of mission buildings) among the figures. This procedure has obvious limitations: it does not account for subsequent additions to earlier figures or the creation of purely magic or hunting fetishes in historic time.
Examination of the elements in Monk’s Cave in accordance with Jackson’s
findings yields the fol!owing information:
1. The elements are conventional, identified as
a. Deer (Figure 6, nos. 4, 16, 27, 31 32)
b. Wind (Figure 6, no. 17)
c. Bird (Figure 6, no. 7), possibly realistic
d. Rain (Figure 6, no. 19)
e. Y-shape (Figure 6, no. 26)
2. The elements are entirely prehistoric.
More success has been achieved by others in establishing a rational classification system derived from analysis of Great Basin style petroglyphs. They have
been divided into four categories: 1) naturalistic, 2) stylized, 3) abstract curvilinear, and 4) abstract rectilinear (Grant 1967 : 25-27). In California the elements

Texas Archeological Society

164

have been further separated into five styles, according to location: 1) human,
2) animal, 3) circle and dot, 4) angular, 5) curvilinear (Clewlow 1978:619).
These rationalizations are the result of the study of thousands of elements that
apparently were formed primarily by pecking (Great Basin style). The further
stylistic subdivisions appear to be valid only for the sites from which they were
derived in California.
A chronology has also been devised for the California pecked figures, spanning the period between 1000 B.C. and A.D. 1500, with some subdivisions for
the various styles (Heizer and Baumhoff 1962: 226-233). The elements analyzed to establish the time frame were: 1) lichen growth, 2) associated cultural
phenomena such as the change from the atlatl to the bow and arrow, 3) patination, 4) erosion, 5) stylistic and technological analysis, 6) superposition, 7) archeological correlation, and 8) ethnographic identification (Heizer and Baumhoff 1962:226-233). The pecked elements lend themselves to the use of such
techniques more readily than do incised or gouged elements. It is not clear
whether chronology developed from the analysis of pecked petroglyphs can be
applied to gouged or incised petroglyphs without substantiating evidence.
Many sites have various combinations of the elements of classification, and
this is the basis on which the California sites are futher subdivided (Clewlow
1978:619). Others include all of the elements; Monk’s Cave appears to fall into
this category.
Heizer and Clewlow (1973) identify five sources of information for use in
identification and interpretation of rock art. They are
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Statistical analysis (Von Werlhof)
Ecological analysis (Heizer and Baumhoff)
Ethnological analysis
Direct observation
Eclectic analysis (all or part of above)

All of the various methods have been used at different times and places with
varying degrees of success. Interpretations have been established for the following commonly used symbols:
1. Clan symbols, marking boundaries (Grant 1967:28ff.)
2. Ceremonial symbols: weather modification, fertility, puberty (Clewlow
1978; Sutherland 1976: 97 ft.; Williamson 1984: 77 ft.)
3. Mnemomic memory aids (Grant 1967:28 ft.)
4. Records of important events (Miller 1955:6 ft.)
5. Doodling, copying ancient designs (Grant 1967 : 28 ft.)
6. Hunting magic (Clewlow 1978:621)
The symbols for weather modification and prayers for assistance in hunting
are especially widespread (Ctewlow 1978). In California the Great Basin style
petroglyphs are almost always associated with game trails, winter grazing areas,

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

165

and favored hunting and ambush areas; they are clearly linked with hunting and
hunting magic (Clewlow 1978:621). Ceremonial symbols have been identified in
Texas (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967 : 218; Grieder 1982: 22 ft.), as have records
of important events (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967: 328; Jackson 1938 : 349).
The petroglyphs in Monk’s Cave can be examined against this background.
A classification system that groups the petroglyphs into five categories will be
used in an attempt to be more definitive.
The elements in Monk’s Cave (Figure 6) are classified and interpreted as follows. Numbers refer to those in the sketch of the petroglyphs (Figure 6):
A. Naturalistic
1. Bird (priesthood symbol): 7
2. Setting sun (religious fetish): 18
3. Star (religious fetish): 19
4. Female genitalia (fertility symbol): 28
B. Stylized
1. Deer (hunting fetish): 4, 16
2. Unfinished deer (hunting fetish): 27, 31, 32
C. Symbolic
1. Clan, boundary markers: 1, 22
2. Wind, rain (weather fetish): 17, 19, 24
3. Fertility symbols: 5, 9, 13, 20, 28
D. Abstract
1. Curvilinear: 12, 15, 26, 30, 33
2. Rectilinear: 6, 25, 27
E. Tool sharpening and unknown: 2, 3, 8, 10, 11, 14 21, 23, 29, 33, 34
These classifications and interpretations are necessarily largely subjective,
but the interpretations are believed to be consistent with those made by other investigators cited herein. Perhaps the ultimate test of an interpretation is whether
it makes sense, provides information, or tells a story. Applying this test to the
petroglyphs at hand, we find that the elements, as classified and interpreted, do
appear to make sense and tell stories. We find that the figures to which meaning
has been ascribed can be grouped as follows. Numbers refer to those in the
sketch of the petroglyphs (Figure 6).
A. Prayers for good hunting: 4, 16, 27, 31-32
B. Prayers for good weather: 17, 19, 24
C. Prayers for fertility, good harvests: 5, 9, 13, 20, 28
D. Religious symbols: 7, 18, 19
These interpretations strongly imply a religious usage for the shelter. Since
religion appears to have been a common inspiration for rock art, this is not surprising. For example, rock art is rare in areas of Caddo occupation, so what does
exist is likely to have special, possibly religious, significance; and we are told

166

Texas Archeological Society

that the lives of the Caddo were ruled by their priests (DuPratz 1758). We find too
that the father (sun) and the child (evening star) are strong religious symbols of
the western Indians (Williamson 1984), who appear to have based their calendar
on the sun. Their priests established sun-watching stations marked with rock art
(Williamson 1984) which permitted them to identify the solstices, the equinoxes, and other important celestial occurrences.
There is also some basis for establishing a more definite time frame than
Jackson’s inclusive prehistoric dating. Only one of the elements suggested by
Heizer and Baumhoff (1962) as useful for establishing time frames--archeological correlation--is present in Monk’s Cave. The test excavation uncovered
artifacts identified with the Caddo Indians, most recently probably of the Frankston or Allen focus, who once occupied that area, as well as a possible Archaic
dart point. Potsherds from the area have been dated between A.D. 1200 and
1700, dates that correspond well with the time span (A.D. 1000-1500 estimated
for the California petroglyphs. This comparison is significant primarily because
the elements identified by Heizer and Baumhoff were present in California, permitting a more accurate estimate of time than is commonly possible elsewhere.
Obviously, the link between artifacts and cave art is tenuous at best, and any
link between Texas rock art and that of California is even more so. Although rock
art was being created as early as 1500 B.C. by the Olmecs in Mexico (Smith
1968:37) and by the Indians in Texas well into historic time (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967:207), it is believed that the correlation between the Texas and
California dates lends some credence to the archeological linkage.
One final item of interest was the orientation and configuration of the shelter. The discovery of the sun dagger at Chaco Canyon (Williamson 1984:103)
spawned a spate of activity in archeoastronomy. One result is the documentation
that attests to the knowledge and use of celestial bodies and their cycles by the
Indians. Spiral elements appear to have been widely used as calendrical devices
(Williamson 1984:103; Sherrod 1984:119), and although there is no spiral element in Monk’s Cave, the major axis of the cave is oriented N60°E, magnetic
(Figure 2). The magnetic declination is now 8°E of N, making the true azimuth
of the major axis of the cave 248°. The shelter is at 31°52’N, and the azimuth of
the sunset on the horizon at the winter solstice is 242° at this latitude, a difference of 6°. However, the sun’s rays do not penetrate the trees across the branch
when it is on the horizon; the last uninterrupted rays of the sun come from above
the trees at about the same azimuth as that of the major axis of the rock-shelter.
Monk’s Cave has a somewhat peculiar configuration (Figure 2), for it comes
to a point at the back wall. This means that the only time that that point will be
illuminated by sunlight may be at sunset during the winter solstice period. So the
configuration of the shelter might have permitted it to serve the same purpose for
its users that the spiral elements served for the desert tribes of New Mexico and
Arizona and the tribes along the Arkansas River (Sherrod 1984:119).
The agricultural economy of the Caddos required that they have some
means of marking seasonal changes so they could know the proper time for planting their crops. Among ancient peoples the world over this time has been marked
from the summer and winter solstices, the equinoxes, and the positions of the

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

167

planets. From these observations they could measure the passage of time (perhaps in moons--lunar months) required until the best planting time for their
crops came around. Further investigation appeared to be called for in order to see
if Monk’s Cave could have been used in such observations.
On January 4, 1983 a visit was made to the shelter to see if it was in fact
oriented with relation to the solstices. At the previous visit the shelter had not
been visible from the approach route because of its orientation and the dense
vegetation in the creek bottom, but now winter had stripped the leaves, and from
across the creek the first view of the shelter was startling: a bright shaft of sunlight illuminated the petroglyphs on the north wall, while the south wall and rear
of the shelter were in shadow. As the sun continued to sink in the west, the illumination crept to the back of the shelter, and, as the sun disappeared at 5:30 p.m.,
the south wall remained in shadow while the north wall and the narrow back of
the shelter were fully illuminated (Figure 5).
The shelter was inspected closely for evidence that it might have been made
by man, but although the texture, grain, and composition of the rock and bedding
of the rock differ from one part of the shelter to the other, no evidence was found
to indicate that Monk’s Cave was not a natural shelter.
But it is possible that man may have improved on a natural rock formation.
The roof has horizontal fissures that provide purchase for prying loose slabs of
rock. Vertical fissures made it possible for vandals to pry off a section of the
petroglyphs and for other larger spalls to fall or be pried off the north wall, and a
flat shelf had been formed on the south wall by removing some of the overlying
rock. Finally, the rock that forms the shelter is unique in its composition and
fractured state. The other rock in the area is a uniform, very dense, ferruginous
sandstone approaching quartzite in hardness.

CONCLUSIONS
Monk’s Cave could have been used to determine the occurrence of the winter
solstice. It would have required only a mark on the back wall to indicate the
northernmost point reached by the shadow. Whether it was so used is, of course,
a matter of conjecture, for no signs of such markings have been found.
A survey of mound-builder sites (Rolingson and Sherrod 1984) it has been
found that such orientations existed at most of the sites. Notable exceptions are
the George C. Davis site (Caddo Mounds State Historic Site) near Alto, Texas,
and apparently the Washington Square prehistoric site in Nacogdoches. It may be
significant that Monk’s Cave, which does have celestial orientation, is only about
32 km (20 miles) from either of these two sites.

REFERENCES CITED
Bell, Robert E.
1960
Guide to the identification of certain American Indian projectile points. Special
Bulletin 2, Oklahoma Anthropological Society.

168

Texas Archeological Society

Clewlow, C. W., Jr.
1978
Prehistoric rock art. Ballena, Ramona, California.
Colton, H. S.
1946
Fools names like fools faces. Plateau, 19. Museum of Northern Arizona,
Flagstaff.
Du Pratz, Le Page
1758

L’histoire Louisianne. Paris.

Gelb, J. J.
1963
A study of writing. University of Chicago Press.
Grant, Campbell
1967

Rock art of the American Indians. Promontory, New York.

Grieder, Terence
1982
Origins of Pre-Columbian art. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Heizer, R. F., and Robert F. Baumhoff
1962

Prehistoric rock art of Nevada and eastern California. University of California
Press, Berkeley.

Heizer, R. F., and C. W. Clewlow, Jr.
1973
Prehistoric art in California, vols. 1, 2. Ballena, Ramona, California.
Jackson, A. T.
1938

Picture writing of Texas Indians. Anthropological Papers 2, The University of
Texas, Austin.

Kirkland, Forrest, and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967
The rock art of Texas Indians. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Miller, W. C.
1955

Two pictographs from northern Arizona, super nova, July 4, 1054 A.D., birth
of the Crab Nebula.

Renaud, E. B.
Petroglyphs of north central New Mexico. University of Denver Archeological
t938
Survey, 1 l~h Report. Denver.
Rolingson, Martha A., and R Clay Sherrod
Celestial alignments of mounds at Caddoan and Lower Mississippi Valley sites.
1984
Paper presented at the 26’h Annual Caddo Conference, Nacogdoches, Texas.
Sherrod, R Clay
1984
Motifs of ancient man. University of Arkansas Press, Little Rock.

Ball--Rock Art at Monk’s Cave

169

Smith, Bradley
1968
A history in art. Editoria Cultural Y Educativa, S.A. de C. V., M~xico, D.F.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954

An introductory handbook of Texas archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society vol. 25.

Sutherland, Kay (editor)
1976
American Indian rock art. El Paso Archaeological Society.
Williamson, Ray
1984
Living the sky. Houghton-Mifflin, Boston.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Henry F. Ball was born in Yoakum, Texas, and grew up in Victoria. In World War II
he saw active duty in the Army Field Artillery, with combat in the Pacific Theater and
occupation duty in Japan.
Upon his return from service, he took his degree in Civil Engineering at Texas A&M
University. A registered civil engineer, his professional life has encompassed most phases
of the profession in local, state, and federal governments, and he has authored several
technical articles. Since he retired from the federal service in 1979 he has operated a consulting business in Euless, Texas.
Ball’s active participation in archeology began with his retirement. He is a member of
the Texas Archeological Society and has attended several field schools. He is also a member, and has served twice as president, of the Tarrant County Archeological Society.

