Archeological Investigations at the Little Campus
Restoration Project, Austin, Texas
Jack M. Jackson

ABSTRACT
The oldest building of the former Texas State Asylum for the Blind in
Austin, built in 1858 and 1859, was investigated archeologically in 1982.
The building was briefly home and headquarters to General George Armstrong Custer, who in 1865 was commander of federal occupation troops in
Texas.
Mrs. Custer’s written account of her life in Austin is examined together
with other nineteenth century documentation of the site.
Artifacts deposited from t859 to 1872 in a kitchen area are described
and offered for comparison with artifacts from other Civil War and Reconstruction sites of this type.
The photographic mapping of the original (1859) kitchen floor, the
sampling by excavation of a large nineteenth century cistern, and other aspects of the investigation are described.

INTRODUCTION
This paper presents results of an archeological investigation at the Little
Campus, 41TV611, part of The University of Texas at Austin. The investigation
was unusual because the excavation took place inside a well-dated standing historic structure that was at the time undergoing restoration.
The Little Campus, a collection of buildings that were the original home of
the Texas State Asylum for the Blind, has been part of the main campus of The
University of Texas at Austin since the 1920s. The complex was placed on the
National Register of Historic Places in August 1974 and was designated a State
Archeological Landmark in May 1981. The oldest building in the complex has
often been referred to as the Custer House. This two-story limestone masonry
structure with brick trim was erected in 1858 and t859 (Tillotson 1977:18) by
Abner Cook, the master builder who built the Governor’s Mansion, the John Hancock house, and the Neill-Cochran house, all National Register properties in
Austin. Built to house the Texas State Asylum for the Blind, it did so for 60
years. Although it was only briefly, during the winter of 1865, home and headquarters to General George Armstrong Custer, commander of the federal occupation troops in Austin, this is the era that has surrounded the building with
popular lore.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986for 1984)

2

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Figure 1. Photograph taken in 1865 showing General Armstrong Custer with members of
his staff and family gathered on the front porch of his quarters (now the Arno Nowotny
Building of The University of Texas) at the Texas State Asylum for the Blind. Seated at
left side of door frame is Custer’s father; seated at right side of door is Custer with left
hand at chin; in front of Custer on the steps is Mrs. Elizabeth Custer. Photograph from the
Barker Texas History Center, University of Texas at Austin.

Construction of the Custer House was begun in the spring or early summer
of 1858 and completed in March 1859 (Trustees Report, 1860, quoted in Tillotson 1977:18). The Board of Trustees closed the school in the summer of 1862
because of the distressed financial condition of the Confederate States, but was
overruled by Governor Lubbock, who ordered it reopened. At this time (during

Jackson--Little Campus

3

the Civil War) there were ten students. In March 1864 the trustees "directed that
tallow, wicking and moulds should be purchased so that candles could be made at
the institution, for none could be purchased in the Confederate States." Exigencies of the war finally closed the school on January 7, 1865, when the Board
declared that "owing to the worthlessness of Treasury warrants the wants of the
pupils can not be supplied" (Tillotson 1977:18).
The building remained vacant until November 4, 1865, when General
Custer arrived in Austin. He brought not only 4000 federal troops, but also his
father, brother Tom, and wife Elizabeth Bacon Custer (Figure 1), who has left us
an account of their arrival.
Before we reached Austin, several citizens sent out invitations for us to come to their
houses; but I knew the General would not accept, and, cold as the nights were, I felt
unwilling to lose a day of camp life. We pitched our tents on rolling ground in the
vicinity of Austin, where we overlooked a pretty town of stuccoed houses that appeared summery in the midst of live-oak’s perennial green. The State House, Land
Office, and Governor’s Mansion looked regal to us, so long bivouacking in the forest
and on uncultivated prairies. The Governor offered for our headquarters the Blind
Asylum, which had been closed during the war. This possessed one advantage that
we were glad to improve; there was room enough for all the staff, and a long saloon
parlor and dining-room for our hops during the winter.
There were three windows in our room, which we opened at night; but, notwithstanding the air that circulated, the feeling, after having been so long out of
doors, was suffocating. The ceiling seemed descending to smother us. There was
one joy: reveille could ring out on the dawning day, and there was no longer imperative necessity to spring from a warm bed and make ablutions in ice-water. There
is a good deal of that sort of mental snapping of the fingers on the part of campaigners when they are again stationary, and need not prepare for a march. Civilization
and a looking-glass must now be assumed, as it would no longer do to rough it and
ignore appearances, after we had moved into a house, and were to live like "folks."
Besides, we soon began to be invited by the townspeople to visit them [Custer
1971 : 216-217].
Custer lived in the building for only a brief time; he left Austin on February
4, 1866, barely three months after he arrived. The letters and later writings of
Elizabeth Custer left a lively record of their stay.
After the war, efforts to reopen the Blind Asylum were initiated by Governor J. W. Throckmorton, who appointed a new board in August 1866. The new
Board, "finding the Legislature disinclined to do anything for the institution, resolved to resign" (Trustees Report 1869, quoted by Tillotson 1977:29). The institution was reopened during the winter of 1866 and had 15 students by the following spring. The succession of boards and staffs dismissed and appointed
during the Reconstruction years are detailed by Tillotson (1977:31-35). During
these turbulent years the building remained largely as it was before the war, and
although some frame buildings were added to those already on the grounds, no
significant remodeling of the main building occurred until 1872.

4

Texas Archeological Society

New wing
erected 1872
outbuildings

111111
to kitchen
floor & kitchen fireplaces

Original 1858-59
building

east wing excavation
shown in figure 7

0

i

20

i

I

40

i

80

i

feet

Figure 2. Plan of the building at the Texas State Asylum for the Blind as of 1872. There
were more frame buildings to the west of this building. The area that is shaded but not
crosshatched is the part of the building that has been restored and now known as the Arno
Nowotny Building. See Figure 3. After Tillotson (1977, plate 30).

In the summer of 1872 the first of many modifications to Abner Cook’s
original building was undertaken, at least partially under his direction (Cook was
then a member of the Board of Trustees). Two wings, each 24 by 60 feet and two
stories high, were planned, but construction was delayed until the arrival of the
railroad in Austin, which was expected to lower significantly the cost of lumber
and other materials. When the expansion was undertaken, a large, two-story
wing was added to the north side (Figure 2); classrooms on the first floor and
five girls’ dormitory rooms on the second all opened onto a west-facing gallery
(Trustees’ Report, 1872).

Jackson--Little Campus

0

40

80

|

I
FEET

i

5

Figure 3. Plan of the building at the Texas State Asylum for the Blind as of 1881. From
Tillotson (1977).

The site plan (Figure 2) shows that the new north wing covered most of the
areaway that let light into the kitchen area and probably blocked the flue that
served the kitchen fireplace on the north wall and the first-floor fireplace just
above it. We cannot be certain that the addition of this wing rendered the kitchen
obsolete, but it certainly made it a dark and airless place after 1872. Archeological
data on this addition were destroyed when the wing was demolished in the 1880s
to make way for more elaborate improvements.
The 1880 project, completed in October 1881 (Tillotson 1977:53), affected
the entire main building and greatly changed its exterior appearance. The origi-

6

Texas Archeological Society

Jackson--Little Campus

7

nal roof and cupola were removed, and a brick third floor was added. The east
and west wings were extended (Figures 3 and 4) and given second floors; the
north wing was razed and replaced with a larger structure.
Building continued at the site to provide for an ever-expanding student body.
Whole complexes of classrooms, dormitories, and other facilities were built, and
by the early part of the twentieth century the site had become a warren of courtyards, hallways, and connected buildings. Although they now appear to be a
single structure, three of the high Victorian brick buildings that have been preserved and restored on the site--known for many years as Building H, now
the Employment Center of the University of Texas--were built in 1888, 1891,
and 1900.
When World War I began, the institution, which had been renamed in 1905
the Blind Institute and in 1915 the Blind School, had begun to move its operation
from this site to its present location, a new and larger campus on 45th Street. The
move was hastened when the original buildings of the Blind School were given to
the newly founded School of Military Aviation (SMA) at The University of Texas
in July 1917. Wholesale remodeling was undertaken to adapt the buildings to
wartime military usage. The Trustees of the School complained that the orderly
move to their new campus was hampered by the SMA’s "tearing the buildings
apart" (Tillotson 1977: 171). During this era alphabetical designations were
given to the buildings: the old main building became Building C, and the combination of three Victorian buildings became Building H. These designations
persisted until the University Board of Regents in 1982 renamed Building C the
Arno Nowotny Building.
After World War I, the buildings remained officially under control of the
University, although their use between February 1919 and October 1922 is unclear
(Tillotson 1977: 189). In 1922 the legislature transferred the buildings to the
State Lunatic Asylum as an annex called the Institution for the Senile for housing
senile persons who had become wards of the State. This usage was almost as
short lived as was the use of the site by the Central Texas State Fair, held there
in 1922.
Several legal actions concerning the buildings were brought against the
State Board of Control, and on July 1, 1925 the Institution for the Senile was
finally closed, and all patients were transferred to the State Hospital in Wichita
Falls. In anticipation of this move, the legislature in March 1925 had transferred
all the buildings to The University of Texas, where they became known as the
Little Campus. After some renovation, the Little Campus became a men’s dormitory. Occupancy of the buildings has changed several times since 1925, but
ownership has remained with the University.
Since restoration was completed, the Arno Nowotny Building (Building C)
(Figure 5) has housed the University Visitors’ Center, and Building H, the University admissions and employment offices. The exteriors of both buildings have
been restored as nearly as possible to their original (1888-1900) appearance
(Figure 6). The interiors have been modified to accommodate modern heating

8

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Plan of the main building at the Texas Asylum for the Blind with the
Arno Nowotny Building, which is all that remains today, superimposed.

and cooling equipment as well as safety and fire-protection features not required
when the buildings were erected. The interior of the Arno Nowotny Building has
been restored to conform to the historic period compatible with its exterior
design.

RESEARCH DESIGN
One of the conditions of the Antiquities Permit for restoration of the Nowotny Building virtually dictated the role of the archeologist in the project, requiring that "demolition should be monitored by the architect and a qualified
historic archeologist. If historic fabric is uncovered then appropriate steps should
be taken to investigate, incorporate, record, or protect as required."
Tillotson’s (1977) excellent history of the site, the architect’s plans, and the
files of the Texas Antiquities Committee were studied to identify problems and
areas of good archeological potential. Three questions were posed to be answered by excavation: (1) what was the size of the original east and west wings of
the Nowotny Building, (2) could intact nineteenth-century cisterns be found, and

Jackson--Little Campus

9

10

Texas Archeological Society

(3) what could be discovered about a basement kitchen that had been located
under the north side of the main block of the Nowotny Building (Figures 2, 3C).

PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS
Excavation began at the Nowotny Building during the University’s 1982
Christmas break, to avoid interference with the restoration work. The first project
was to uncover whatever remnants could be found of the foundations for the east
wing of the building, in order to determine its original (1859) size, for the original wings has been extensively expanded and remodeled in 1880 (Figure 5). The
renovation architect’s estimates of the size of the original wings were derived entirely from drawings and photographs.
East Wing
It took, almost a week to clear and map the foundations, which were fortunately found intact. First, we explored with a steel-rod probe to find the outline
of the foundation, in order to determine what areas should be cleared of soil and
building debris. Then we removed the hard-packed clay from the remains of the
walls with picks, shovels, and trowels. No power equipment was used. Once
cleared, the courses of masonry that were uncovered were swept clean to facilitate accurate mapping and photographing (Figure 7). Much to the relief of all
concerned, the foundations we uncovered proved the architect’s estimates to
be correct.

Cistern
Our second objective was to sample the contents of a large cistern that had
been fortuitously uncovered when its concrete cover was dislodged during the
clearing of demolition debris. The cistern was 17 feet deep and 10 feet in diameter, with a capacity of about 11])g cubic feet when filled to the 14-foot level.
Location of the cistern 20 feet north of the original west wing of the building
suggests that it was part of the original site rather than a later addition.
We sampled the contents of the cistern by quartering the deposit as if it were
a pie and excavating the southwest quadrant, waterscreening the soil through
quarter-inch mesh. Though we hoped for a significant artifact deposit, the result
was disappointing. The complete inventory of artifacts from the cistern follows:
1
1
1
23
1
1

iron sash pulley
two-piece sash pulley cover
fragment of ornamental iron
clear glass window sherds
brown/amber bottle sherd
1978-D U.S. copper penny

5
1
1
10
1

badly rusted nails
rodent skull
black-on-gray historic ceramic sherd
white ironstone ceramic sherds
fragment of white plastic

The plastic and the 1978 penny immediately destroyed our hope for an undisturbed nineteenth century deposit. After consultation with members of the

Jackson--Little Campus

11

~ FEET
Figure 7. Plan of the excavation of the foundations of the former east wing of what is now
the Nowotny Building, December 1982. Drawing by David G. Robinson.

Texas Antiquities Committee staff, further investigation of the cistern deposit
was abandoned. The cover was replaced, and the cistern is preserved intact beneath the landscaped grounds.

THE KITCHEN
Testing
When the kitchen wall at the west end of the central part of the Nowotny
Building was opened during demolition of the old added-on west wing (Figure
2), we gained access to the presumed basement kitchen and found the space partially filled with dirt and cultural debris.
A 1-by- 1-meter test pit was dug in the northwest corner of the area to determine the depth and nature of the cultural fill. That and other test pits showed that
the upper part of this fill contained caliche and ash, mixed throughout with mainly
post-1920 building debris: fi’agments of electrical wire, discarded plumbing
scraps and fixtures, nails, etc., but a sherd of a stoneware wine bottle led us to believe that at least the lower part of the fill had been in place since the late nineteenth century. At a depth of 7 feet 8 inches below the joists supporting the first
floor we encountered what appeared to be an intact flagstone floor.

12

Texas Archeological Society

Preparation for Digging
Several delays prevented an early start on excavating the kitchen: the forest
of piping and wiring had to be removed, but the structural engineer did not wish
the fill removed until certain deteriorated sections of the below-grade stone foundation wall had been repaired. It was also desirable that we wait until the building
contractor had excavated the areaway on the north side of the kitchen so we could
open the original windows into the kitchen to allow both daylight to work by and
access for our equipment.
The kitchen was 12 feet wide and slightly more than 44 feet long, and the fill
varied in depth from 2 to 3 feet. Therefore, since the upper part of the fill contained mainly post-1920 building debris, we chose, with the concurrence of the
Antiquities Committee staff, to remove the overburden with a small front-end
loader. Only the final 6 inches of the fill covering the flagstone floor would be
excavated by hand.
Surface Collecting
Some artifacts had been noted on the surface in a low crawl space that bordered the kitchen on the south. Two original access vents, each about 25 inches
square, led from the kitchen into this area. Because of plans for duct work and
other utilities, this space was to be excavated by the building contractor to a
depth of 4 feet below the supporting timbers.
Before the construction workers started excavating this area, we collected
all of the cultural material that lay on the surface. This crawl space evidently had
been a favored place for disposal of broken dishes, bottles, and glassware.
Sherds of white ironstone serving pieces had been thrown into the area from the
kitchen, and a quantity of bones suggested that pets had been fed kitchen scraps
and leftover meat here.
Excavation
Once the construction workers started to dig, they were asked to save all
artifacts for the archeologists. Daily monitoring visits were made, and an archeologist screened every tenth wheelbarrow load of soil removed from the space.
The fairly low rate of recovery from these sample loads suggested that the construction workers were indeed spotting most of the material and saving it for us.
We began the hand excavation of the final 6 inches of fill from the kitchen
area along the west wall and worked toward the east. We did not use grid units
because the artifacts could be plotted exactly from their locations relative to the
walls. After the floor was exposed, a grid system of 2-foot intervals was laid out
for use in photographic recording.
As we began uncovering the flagstone floor, the material turning up on our
screen suggested that the room had not been a kitchen when the first layer of fill
was deposited on the flagstones. Bits of anthracite coal, cinders, and badly rusted
pipes and fittings of the type once used in steam heating systems began to appear.
Most of these lay on or in a i-inch layer of white caliche that covered the flagstones;
the fill above the caliche was darker soil containing more debris and some ash.

Jackson--Little Campus

13

Figure 8. Photograph showing the east half of the kitchen during the final stages of excavation; a, upper limit of the overburden; b-b’, top of the standing balk of fill left at the east end
of Feature 1; c, the sealing layer of clean white caliche; d-d’, the brick and coal-slag debris
of the boilerhole fill.

Twelve feet from the west end of the kitchen we encountered a break in the
flagstone pavement and a distinct line of brick masonry, which we designated
Feature 1 (Figure 8). Investigation of his feature revealed the foundation of a
large, about 8-by-10-foot coal-fired boiler. Feature 1 was about 1 foot below the
level of the flagstone floor, and the sides had been lined with brick. A section of
the flagstone floor about 12 feet square had been removed to permit the installation of the boiler in this centrally located pit dug into the undisturbed caliche
beneath the site. The fill of Feature ! was rich in coal, slag, lumps of cinders, and
fire-blackened bricks. Here too we encountered many iron pipe fittings.
Oddly, the plaster on the walls below the fill line was quite well preserved,
but no plaster remained on the exposed walls; even the limestone blocks were
badly eroded by spalling above the upper surface of the fill.

Stratigraphy
The dark soil of the rather uniform overburden in the kitchen gave way to
the distinct layer of white caliche that lay on the flagstones (Figure 8). Below the
flagstone floor was the dark fill with burned brick of Feature 1, which was excavated into bedrock caliche.

14

Texas Archeological Socie&

Chronological Interpretation
We know from Mrs. Custer’s account (1971:230) that the kitchen was functioning as such in 1865 and that the building was still heated by wood-burning
fireplaces at that time (1971:238-239). We also know that after the centra!
boiler plant for the Asylum was completed in 1888, the separate furnace (Feature
1) would have been unnecessary. So the room ceased to be used as a kitchen at
some time during the 23 years between 1865 and 1888, when the separate furnace was installed.
Because we found anthracite coal in Feature 1, we can infer that the furnace
was designed to use this fuel and that it was installed after 1872 when the railroad
came to Austin. (Hauling hard coal by ox wagon would not have been economic.)
The records show that a planned expansion of the building was delayed for two
years in anticipation of a fal! in lumber prices expected when the railroad arrived
(Tillotson 1977:35). This expansion, which was the two-story stone wing built
in 1872 onto the north side of the central part of the building (Figure 2), blocked
the areaway that let light and air into the kitchen.
It seems apparent from these facts that the kitchen was not used as such after
the summer of 1872, and that the flagstone floor was pierced at about that time
for installation of the furnace. It should be noted that subsequent construction
projects further damaged the floor, but when it was fully exposed, more than 50
percent was intact.
A Preservation Problem
Although a substantial part of the original kitchen floor was intact, plans for
the restoration called for a concrete floor with drains and supports for heavy air
conditioning equipment at a level 6 inches below the flagstone floor. The cost and
delay of redesigning these installations would be prohibitive, but we were contractually obligated to preserve aJlJaistoric fabric.
In May 1983, University of Texas officials met with the staff of the Texas
Antiquities Committee to decide the disposition of the flagstone floor. They
decided:
I. That in-place preservation of the floor over concrete and under airconditioning equipment was not justified in a room to which the public
would not have access.
2. That the flagstones should be salvaged and reused, with appropriate
interpretive markers, in a patio outside the building.
3. That a systematic photographic record should be made of the floor
as it was found and before the flagstones were removed.

Photographic Techniques
Because the joists supporting the first floor were only 7 feet 8 inches from
the floor, that was our maximum camera distance. At this distance a 120-ramformat reflex camera framed an area about 36 by 40 inches in sharp focus. We
therefore set up a series of tracks at 2-foot intervals down the length of the room.

Jackson--Little Campus

15

Each track was simply two wires that were sufficiently far apart that they supported the body of the camera but allowed the lens to protrude down between
them. By exposing a frame every 3 feet along these tracks, we were able to construct a complete photomosaic of the floor surface.
We directed a hand-held floodlight at a low angle to create sharp shadows
between the individual stones and to augment the sometimes weak natural light
in the kitchen. A light-meter reading was taken before every fifth exposure, and
shutter speeds were adjusted accordingly. This photomapping operation consumed the efforts of three persons for most of a day, but was quite successful.
Although some of the film was not ideally exposed, the images obtained were of
sufficiently good quality that we were able to record the exact position of every
stone in the floor.
A string grid laid out at 2-foot intervals--each intersection was labeled with a
small tag--was the primary ground reference for the photomosaic. One of the
lessons we learned while cataloging the photographs was that larger tags with
numbers perhaps an inch high or larger would have been better than our discreet
little tags with numbers so small that on contact prints they could hardly be read
even with a microscope.

THE ARTIFACTS
The most interesting finds made by the construction workers were a reasonably well preserved fragment of a man’s pleated-front shirt that was completely
buried in the loose, dry soil, and an effigy tobacco pipe (Figure 17, a).
Since the provenience of some of the artifacts from the site is rather vague,
we will discuss in detail only the contents of the kitchen and the crawl space that
bordered it on the south, where the excavation was carefully controlled. This artifact assemblage does not so much lend further proof to the dates of the use
of the kitchen as it provides, from a limited context, a series of chronological
markers that can be used in dating other Reconstruction-era sites in Texas. The
true value of Custer’s kitchen lies in the fact that it was used so briefly; the space
served as a kitchen from 1859 to 1872, a total of only 13 years of the Civil War
and Reconstruction period. Some of the domestic artifacts from this kitchen that
are described here may become additions to the list of diagnostic artifacts for
this period.
Stoneware
Several sherds of a stoneware wine bottle (Figure 9) with part of the seal of
the Duchy of Nassau, which ceased to exist as a political entity in 1871, were
found in the lower part of the kitchen fill.
White lronside China
Several patterns and makers were represented in the assemblage of white
ironstone dinnerware fragments. A passage from Elizabeth Custer’s writing helps
to explain the surprising variety of patterns.

16

Texas Archeological Society

0

0
r

2 inches
i

1
m

b
I
,;
1

J
2

2
I
3

3 inches
,,I
CM

Figure 9. Photograph of sherds from stoneware wine bottle, a; drawing of impressed seal
from shoulder of bottle, b.

Occasionally we attempted a dinner, and, as we wanted to invite our own ladies
as well as some from the regular regiments, the table was a subject of study; for
when twenty came the dishes gave out. The staff dined early so we could have theirs,
and the southern woman who occupied two rooms in the building lent everything she
had [Custer 1971:230] .... and that on that table were the united contents of all our
mess chests, and there were not [more] saucers or dessert plates nearer than town.
We were aware that our stay in the south was limited, and made no effort to keep
enough crockery for dinners of twenty [Custer 1971 : 232].

A large baker or serving dish (Figure 10) was made by T&R Boote Co., of
Burslem, Staffordshire, England. The registry mark indicates that the pattern
(octagon shape) was registered for a three-year period beginning September 10,
1851 (Wetherbee 1980: 27, 49).
A 10-inch dinner plate (Figure 11) was made by Livesley and Powell & Co.,
of Hanley, Staffordshire, England. The shape was registered in 1855. The company was in business from 1851 to 1866 (Wetherbee 1980: 28).
Another 10-inch dinner plate (Figure 12) was made by T. J. and J. Mayer,
of Longport, Staffordshire, England. This firm operated from 1855 to 1858
(Wetherbee 1980: 29). The shape seems to be a variant of the Memnon pattern
registered by John Meir and Co. in 1857 (Wetherbee 1980:65).
A plain-bordered white ironstone 10-inch dinner plate (Figure 13) was made

Jackson--Little Campus

17

10 Cm

o
I
|

I

5 inches

)
C

0
I

i
I

I
t

2 inches

I

i

2 Cm

Figure 10. Large reconstructed baker or serving dish made by T&R Boote Co., of
Burslem, Staffordshire, England; a, photograph; b, enlargement of part of border design;
c, drawing of impressed registry mark.

by James Edwards, of Burslem, Staffordshire, England about 1850. The firm
went by this name from 1841 to 1851 and used a registry mark like the one on
this plate (Figure 13, c) on some later pieces (Wetherbee 1980:28, 40). The term
felspar opaque china, rather than ironstone, is used on this mark.

18

Texas Archeological Society

lO
_

5

inches 0

cm

0

c

0

|

!,

I
in

2

1

Figure I I. Ten-inch dinner plate made by Livesley and Powell & Co., of Hanley,
Staffordshire, England; a, photograph; b, enlargement of part of border design; c, drawing
of impressed registry mark.

Potter’s marks (Figure 14, a, b) show that a 10-inch dinner plate of unidentified pattern was made by John Maddock, of Burslem, Staffordshire, England,
who operated from 1842 to 1855 (Wetherbee 1980:28). The potter’s mark (Figure 14, c) from a nearly complete plain white ironstone 5.5-inch saucer shows
that it was made by James Edwards, the same potter who made the plainbordered dinner plate noted above (Figure !3). The marks differ, but the two
pieces appear to be from the same set, made between 1842 and 1851.
The printed maker’s mark (Figure 15) on a large sherd from a 10-inch dinner
plate has the same variant of the Memnon shape (as an edge design) as the plate

Jackson--Little Campus

0

I

19

2IN.
I

Figure 12. Fragment of a 10-inch dinner plate made by T. J. and J. Mayer, of Longport,
Staffordshire, England; a, photograph; b, drawing of part of the printed registry mark; c,
enlargement of part of the border design.

shown in Figure 12, but although this piece is apparently of U.S. origin, the other
is from Staffordshire. The style of the edge decoration is 1850s.
A heavy white ironstone dinner plate (Figure 16) bears the mark of the Prospect Hill Pottery Works, of Trenton, New Jersey, which, according to some au-

20

Texas Archeological Society

a

5CM

o
1,,
0

;IN.

C
0
I,

I
!

2IN
!

Figure 13. Part of a plain-bordered white ironstone 10-inch dinner plate made by James
Edwards, of Burslem, Staffordshire, England about 1850; a, photograph; b, enlargement
of border; c, drawing of registry mark, which is impressed under the glaze.

thorities, was founded in 1880 (Kovel and Kovel 1953:34, 154, 156,241; Barber
1976: 305). However, Lehner (1980: 1224) mentions that Dale and Davis, the
partnership that first operated the Prospect Hill Pottery, exhibited products in
Philadelphia in 1876. Because of the distinctly 1850-1860 style of the edge
decoration (Figure 16, c), itappears that they may have been in business earlier.
If that is not true, the piece is intrusive.

Jackson--Little Campus

21

b

Figure 14. Drawings of potters’ marks: a and b, from a 10-inch dinner plate of unidentified pattern; c, drawing of trademark from a nearly complete plain white ironstone 5.5inch saucer.

o
I

1
I
inch

Figure 15. Drawing of fragment of printed maker’s mark on a large sherd from a 10-inch
dinner plate. The mark probably read St. Louis, Missouri.

The variety of patterns and marks suggests that some of the assemblage
came from mess chests of the Custer party. The decorations typical of Britishmade white ironstone during the 1860s and 1870s were generally elaborate, with
ears of corn, sheaves of wheat, and vine leaves arranged in symmetrical decorative profusion. But the plainer, more formal designs were characteristic of the
white earthenware production of the Staffordshire potteries in the late 1840s and
the 1850s. The one piece of pottery that may have been made at the Prospect Hill
Pottery works (Figure 16) was perhaps intrusive in the fill, but its heavy symmetrical edge patterns were already 20 years out of fashion in 1880. It seems more
likely that the Prospect Hill Pottery was in operation as early as the mid-1860s
and that this particular item made its way south, possibly in a Union officer’s
mess chest.

22

Texas Archeologica! Society

u:

5

,mi

5-

E
U

G

I0

(
¢

|
I
Inches

2
,I

Figure !6. Part of a heavy white ironstone 10-inch dinner plate (three large sherds); a,
photograph; b, drawing of maker’s mark; c, enlargement of edge decoration.

Ceramic Tobacco Pipes
Three ceramic tobacco pipes were recovered. One is a slightly damaged
effigy (Figure 17, a) of President Franklin Pierce, who served from 1853 to 1857,
and because the title President appears on the molded label, the pipe probably
was made after 1853. This pipe, which was found in the crawl space adjacent to
the kitchen, was glazed with a glossy red-orange (terra cotta) slip that has been
noted on other effigy pipes (Pfeiffer 1981).
Another complete pipe (Figure !7, b) and a stem fragment (Figure 17, c) are
unglazed yellowish bisque-fired. Both were found in the caliche fill on the

Jackson--Little Campus

23

a

0
I

1
1

inches

C

2
]
I

I

3
I I
2

4
I

5
[,I Cm
3

Figure 17. Photographs of three clay tobacco pipes. Effigy pipe, a: complete pipe, b; stem
fragment, c.

kitchen floor, but the stem fragment was found during screening and came from
the far east end of the kitchen.
These pipes may be evidence of a problem that plagued the administration
of the Blind School. The trustees’ report for 1874 noted that "addiction to tobacco" was a problem among the boys and that "this habit, so injurious to all
who have not attained maturity, is especially pernicious, and unclean in the case
of the blind.., no evil habit is... more difficult to reform or eradicate .... "
(quoted by Tillotson 1977:36). We might speculate that the boiler room was a
favorite haunt of those who wished to practice the evil habit.
Glass Bottles
Certain diagnostic features of the glass bottles may be useful for dating
other Civil War and Reconstruction-era sites in Texas. A pontil scar is a circular
glass ring on the base of a hand-blown bottle. After a bottle is blown, it is
gripped with a pincers or pliers while being cut at the neck to separate it from the
blowpipe. The blowpipe, with the tubular remnant of neck glass still adhering to
its tip, then is stuck against the bottle’s base, and the blowpipe is held while the
neck is finished. Rather than using the blowpipe with the remnant tubular piece
of glass, a simple iron rod (pontil), with a glob of hot glass on its tip, can be
pushed against the bottle base until it adheres, and the pontil supports the bottle
while it is being finished. After the finish (i.e., the mouth) is applied, the bottle is
gripped with the pincers while the piece of glass between the blowpipe (or pontil)

24

Texas Archeological Society

0

5

CM

I,

3

IN

Figure 18. Photographs of bases of several bottles recovered from the crawl space, showing
rough pontil scars. All of these bottles have a faint aquamarine tint.

and the bottle base is severed (Blake and Colne 1880:358-359,384). The resultant scar, a raised circle of tubular glass (or a simple spot, from the glob on the
pontil’s tip) is the pontil scar characteristic of hand-made mouth-blown bottles
such as made in the United States before 1857.
An iron rod pontil can be pushed against the bottle base until it adheres temporarily. After the bottle finish is applied, the rod is detached by a sharp blow on
the pontil rod. The resultant circular indention, called a bare-iron pontil scar
(Baugher-Perlin 1982), is seen on some bottles found at Texas sites of the Civil
War era (see Figure 18).
The snap case was being used in the United States by about 1857 (Encyclopaedia Britannica 1959). By 1878 its use had nearly supplanted the method-described above--that produced pontil scars (Blake and Colne 1880: 358-359).
The snap-case is a pliers with curved jaws that grips the bottle when the blowpipe
is detached and then holds the bottle as its finish is applied.
The exteriors of bottles blown into iron molds that are too hot sometimes
appear as if they have been whittle marked or rough hammered. The use of whole

Jackson--Little Campus

25

(1

d

3
2

-3

1_-2 CM
!
0
Figure 19. Photographs of applied bottle necks from the crawl space behind the kitchen.
All but b have the rough-textured surface, and all but d have faint aquamarine tint. The
applied lip on specimen a was put on with a lipping tool and may be from a free-blown
bottle. Specimens c and d apparently have hand-finished lips.
iron molds was common in United States glass manufacturing by 1878; wooden
molds (water-soaked to prevent burning) were still preferred by many European
manufacturers because a smoother exterior finish could be obtained (Blake and
Colne 1880: 358-359, 366). The use of iron molds allows the imprinting of a
variety of symbols on the sides and bases of bottles.
Minerals or elements, including manganese, have been used since ancient
times to make new glass appear clear or to tint the glass certain colors (Brill
1963). By the 1870s it was common knowledge among glass manufacturers that
glass containing manganese turned purple with exposure to sunlight (Blake and
Colne 1880: 317), but the use of manganese to make clear glass persisted until
World War I, when German-controlled manganese supplies were not readily
available to United States manufacturers.
It can be assumed that bottles of standardized shapes and neck finishes and
with mold seams and/or symbols on the bases are post-Civil War and usually of
United States manufacture. Bottles with pontil scars, whittle marks, uneven side
seams, varying thickness, irregular (hand-finished) mouths, and without subtle
horizontal striations below the necks (often a sign that they were spun in the iron
molds in order to obliterate the side seams) may be of pre-Civil War manufac-

26

Texas Archeological Society

ture. Applied necks (Figure 19) made without benefit of lipping tools are seen on
most bottles made before about 1870.
Other Artifacts
The complete inventory of recovered artifacts is not given here because it
would not be of general interest. Most are in the permanent collection of the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin and are available for examination. Some specimens, such as plumbing fittings and pieces of pipe, have been
sketched, inventoried, and discarded. Badly rusted nails were counted and discarded, as were sherds of window glass, fragments of furnace slag, and lumps
of coal.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The investigations at the Arno Nowotny Building (41TV611) were of the
type that actively support and aid restoration projects. Our aims were not to illuminate the lifeways of nineteenth-century military men or blind children, but to
establish a few facts about a specific building. We were able to determine that the
architect’s estimates from photographs of the original sizes of the east and west
wings were accurate, we found the flagstone floor of the original kitchen and
recorded it before it was removed and before the flagstones began their new life
as a patio, and we evaluated the deposit at the bottom of the cistern.
The artifact assemblage was from the former cellar kitchen--which, according to documentary evidence, was used between 1859 and 1872--and from
the directly adjacent crawl spac~.~White ironstone sherds like the ones found here are common at many Texas
sites of the last half of the nineteenth century, but these specimens are especially
well dated archeologically because of the unusually discrete temporal context. In
addition, research into the makers’ marks and patterns of edge decoration has
shown them to be consistent with that context. So this artifact sample is presented not as support for dating the deposits excavated from the crawl space and
kitchen, but as a catalog of diagnostic types that may be useful for future reference. For this reason, several artifacts that are interesting, but of types not commonly encountered (such as the fragment of a man’s pleated-front shirt--noted
earlier--and a collection of pre-Braille raised letters), have not been discussed
or illustrated.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The restoration of the Little Campus was authorized under a permit issued by the
Texas Antiquities Committee to The University of Texas at Austin.
The writer thanks all the people who participated in the excavations at Little Campus. These include field workers Kevin Jolly, Don Lloyd, David Robinson, Leland
Bement, Bruce Nightengale, and Deborah Smith. I also extend my appreciation to Harry
S.’ Hansson, the University’s on-site construction inspector, for his cooperation throughout
the project.

Jackson--Little Campus

27

REFERENCES CITED
Barber, Edwin Atlee
1976 The pottery and porcelain of the United States and marks of American potters.
(Single-volume reprint of two-volume set published 1893 and 1904.) J. & J.
Publishing, New York.
Blake, William P., and Charles Coln6
1880
Glass and glass ware; classification and properties of glass. Reports to the
United States Commissioners to the Paris Universal Exposition, 1878. Government Printing Office, Washington.
Brill, Robert H.
1963

Ancient Glass. Scientific American 209(5): 120-130.

Custer, Elizabeth Bacon
1971
Tenting on the plains, or General Custer in Kansas and Texas. (Original edition
1877, C.L. Webster & Co., New York.) University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.
Encyclopaedia Britannica
1959
Glass. Volume 10. William Benton, Chicago.
Kovel, Ralph M., and Terry H. Kovel
1953
Dictionary of marks; pottery and porcelain. Crown, New York.
Lehner, Lois
Complete book of American kitchen and dinner wares. Wallace-Homestead
1980
Book Co., Des Moines.
Pfeiffer, Michael A.
Notes on unusual clay tobacco pipes found in Seattle. Historical Archaeology
1981
15(1) : 109-112.
Tillotson, Steven Land
Remnant of an era: the history of the Little Campus site (1859-1977). M.A.
1977
thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
Wetherbee, Jean
1980

A look at white ironstone. Wallace-Homestead Book Co., Des Moines.

Trustees’ Report
1872
Trustees’ Report. Texas State Asylum for the Blind, Austin.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Jack M. Jackson received his M.A. in anthropology from The University of Texas at
Austin in 1982. He is a historical archeologist, formerly on the staff of the Texas Archeological Survey, now on the staff of Prewitt and Associates in Austin.

