A PAINTED PEBBLE FROM A SITE ON THE
NUECES RIVER, SOUTHERN TEXAS
THOMAS R.

HESTER

ABSTRACT
A painted pebble from an archeological site on the Nueces River,
Zavala County, Texas, is documented. It represents the only known
occurrence of this artifact form in southern Texas. Comparative studies
indicate considerable similarity with the painted pebbles of the lower
Pecos region.

As a part of the 1975 Field Course in Archeology of The
University of Texas at San Antonio, an archeological reconnaissance was conducted on the Mangum Ranch (owned by Belton K.
Johnson) near La Pryor in Zavala County (Fig. 1). The eastern edge
of the ranch lies along the Nueces River; on a series of eroded
terraces west of the present river channel, a number of prehistoric
archeological sites were recorded.
At one site, M-2 (41 ZV 183), the author discovered a painted
pebble recently exposed by gullying action that had cut through
buried deposits. In addition to the painted pebble, a limited surface
collection at this large terrace occupation site produced a series of
Archaic period chipped stone artifacts, including dart points
(Marshal1, "Early Corner Notched," Matamoros), a Clear Fork tool,
preforms, cores, flakes and flake-blades, and a hammerstone made
on a cobble very similar to the painted example reported here.

FIGURE 1. Location of Zavala County, Southern Texas. The location
of the county is shown as a darkened rectangle.

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The painted pebble is illustrated in Fig. 2. It is made on an oval,
biconvex pebble of cherty limestone, gray-white in color. The
designs are in red and are painted (or at least survive) on one face.
Length of the specimen is 78 cm, maximum width is 59.5 cm,
maximum thickness is 22 cm, and it weighs 149.4 g.
The motifs, as shown in Figs. 2 and 3, consist of bilaterally
symmetrical pairs of curved and intertwined lines (the lines
average 2 mm in width). Linear and oval appendages are found on
the right side, and may have been present on the left, but that area
is badly eroded. There also appear to have been lines running up
the center of the pebble between, or perhaps connecting, the pair
of curved double lines. Again erosion has removed all but minor
traces of these lines. An artist’s rendering of the motifs (Fig. 3)
clearly depicts a tri-lobed motif in the lower left portion of the
pebble; if a similar motif was present on the opposite side, it has
been eroded away.
Specimens of this kind have not previously been reported from
southern Texas sites. Typically, southern Texas prehistoric sites
have not yielded any perishable cultural materials (other than
faunal debris and occasional artifacts of bone). The nearest
reported specimen comes from Kincaid Rockshelter, near Sabinal in
Uvalde County. T. N. Campbell (personal communication, February
1977) describes the specimen as being larger than the artifact from
41 ZV 183, with the painting barely visible. Campbell also notes
that the Kincaid specimen has closely parallel, partly overlapping
lines at one end "and looks a bit like certain specimens said to
have come from the lowest levels of Fate Bell and Eagle Cave."
In the lower Pecos region of southwest Texas, numerous painted
pebbles have been found in Archaic contexts in dry rockshelter
deposits (cf. Davenport and Chelf 1941; Parsons 1965a, b; Collins
1969).* The most comprehensive study is that of Davenport and
Chelf. They note (p. 3) that the dominant paint used on lower Pecos
specimens is black, with red the second most common color. They
describe most of the red paints as "ferrous pigments," derived
from ochre or hematite. While the residue on the painted pebble
from 41 ZV 183 has not been analyzed, I would guess that it has an
ochre base. Although the designs on the Zavala County specimen
are rather faint, comparison shows them to be somewhat similar,
though by no means identical, to those found on several lower

*Occasional painted pebbles are also found in central and west central Texas (cf.
Field 1956: Jelks 1962; Shafer 1971).

PAINTED PEBBLE FROM NUECES RIVER

crn

FIGURE 2. Painted Pebble from 41 ZV 183.

141

142

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Pecos painted pebbles (cf. Davenport and Chelf 1941: Pls. VIII, 1;
XlII, 3).
While it is beyond the scope of this brief note to explore the
meaning or interpretation of painted pebbles it has been suggested
that they represent anthropomorphic figures, probably females (cf.
Davenport and Chelf 1941: 5-6; Parsons 1965a: 154; Parsons ms.:
39). A thorough review of this interpretation, and other theories, is
found in Shafer (1975: 11-13).

FIGURE 3. Artist’s Sketch of Painted Pebble from 41 ZV 183.

PAINTED PEBBLE FROM NUECES RIVER

143

The significant aspect of the painted pebble from 41 ZV 183 is
not its mere occurrence. Rather, it sheds new light on the material
culture of the prehistoric populations of the southern Texas coastal
plain. Most often, archeologists working in this area have to deal
solely with chipped and ground stone tools which have survived the
ravages of time. Yet we know from ethnohistoric accounts (cf.
Ruecking 1955) that the native populations had an extensive
cultural inventory consisting of artifacts fashioned of wood, plant
fibers, and other perishables. Ornaments made of shell have been
briefly reported from some sites (cf. Hester 1971), but other forms
of "art" have not been documented until this
point out in closing that a pictograph site was
1974 UTSA Field Course in Archaeology along
Webb County (author’s notes, on file at the
Archaeological Research). It is hoped that this
be published in the near future.

time. I should also
documented by the
the Rio Grande in
UTSA Center for
important site can

REFERENCES CITED

Collins, M. B.
1969 Test Excavations at Amistad International Reservoir, Fall, 1967.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 16.
Davenport, I. W. and C. Chelf
1941 Painted Pebbles of the Lower Pecos and Big Bend Regions of
Texas. Witte Memorial Museum, Bulletin No. 5.
Field, A.
1956 Archeological Investigations in Lampasas, Burnet, Llano and San
Saba Counties, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 27, pp. 161-184.
Hester, T. R.
1971 Marine Shells from Archeological Sites in Southwestern Texas.
Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 87-88.
Jelks, E. B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill
County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 5, Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin.
Parsons, M. L.
1965a Painted and Engraved Pebbles. In: The Archeology of Eagle Cave
(R. E. Ross). Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No.
7.
1965b 1963 Test Excavations at Fate Bell Shelter, Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Miscellaneous Papers, Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, No. 4.
ms. Painted Pebbles:
A
Stylistic and Chronological
Analysis.
Unpublished manuscript.

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Ruecking, F., Jr.
1955 The Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. Unpublished MA thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Shafer, H. J.
1971 Investigations into South Plains Prehistory, West Central Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 20.
1975 Functional Interpretations of the Lower Pecos Archaic Art. Paper
presented at the conference "Prehistory of Northeast Mexico and
Texas," Monterrey, N. L., Mexico.

