136

Texas Archeological Society

Raymond Wo Neck

INTRODUCTION
The excavation lots examined totaled 2,451 land snail shells representing
14 species (Table 1). In addition, three aquatic snail shells representing an
additional two species were found. All of the macrosnails found living at this
site today are represented in this sample. These species are to be expected
in a riparian woodland bordered by grassland in the ecotonal area of central
Texas where the Blackland-Grand Prairies meet the Texas Hill Country.
The scarcity of freshwater gastropods (three specimens all in the lower terrace) indicates that these did not result primarily from flood debris but are
samples of natural assemblages.

SPECIES COMMENTS
All species are native except Rumina decollata, a native of the Mediterranean areas of northern Africa and southern Europe. This species is extremely common in Central Texas today. This species was recorded from Travis
County by Strecker (1935). Specimens of R. decollata obtained "from the
campus of the University of Texas" were utilized in the fall of 1923 for experimental purposes by Garth and Mitchell (1926).
The time of initial introduction into Travis County is unknown, but it is
probably no earlier than the late 1880’s. Singley (1893) did not record this
species from the state. Introduction probably came later as Pilsbry (1905)
reviewed the world range of this snail but did not list any collections from
Texas. The first Texas report was by Camp (Ferriss, 1914) from
Brownsville; other Texas localities were not mentioned although Ferriss
(1914) compared the specimens to those from Louisiana and South
Carolina. The scarceness of R. decollata in the house area samples (0.4%)
in comparison to the mill site (4.5%) indicates that this snail entered the area
via downstream transport and was not introduced inadvertently by actions
of the McKinney family.
Archeological investigations such as this are potentially important sources
to pinpoint when R. decollata became established in various areas.

Neck -- Gastropods of McKinney Homestead

137

Table 1

Gastropods from 41TV289
Species
Helicindiae
Helicina orbiculata (Say)
Succineidae
Succinea luteola Gould
Catinella vermeta (Say)
Zonitidae
Glyphyalinia paucilirata (Morelet)
Mesomphix friabilis (Binney)
Zonitoides arboreus (Say)
Spiraxidae
Euglandina singleyana (Binney)
Achatinidae
Rumina decollata (L.)
Bulimulidae
Rabdotus dealbatus dealbatus (Say)
Rabdotus mooreanus (Pfeiffer)
Polygyridae
Polygyra mooreana (Binney)
Polygyra texasiana texasiana (Moricand)
Practicolella berlandieriana berlandieriana (Moricand)
Mesodon roemeri (Pfeiffer)
Planorbidae (aquatic)
"Helisoma trivolvis (Say)
Biomphalaria obstructa (Morelet)

However, there is an inherent problem. Even if the layer from which the
deepest shells are found could be dated accurately, the burrowing habit of
this snail would complicate the situation. In Travis County, this species has
been found in several archeological excavations of pre-European sites.
These include the Smith Rockshelter, (Suhm, 1957), just across Onion
Creek from the McKinney house, and the Barton Spring site (Reddell,
1965). Estimates of time of arrival of this snail would most likely be on the
early side. Arrival in Travis County would most likely be after 1915 and no
later than 1923.
Two Rabdotus species are present in these samples: Ft. dealbatus Say and
mooreanus Pfeiffer. The former is characteristic of riparian woodlands while
the latter occurs most commonly in prairies. These species occur together in
many areas and hybridize. Both species and hybrids are present in the sample examined.
Aged shells are difficult to determine to species because of staining and an
apparent fading of markings. Experiments were conducted in an attempt to
make the markings more distinct. Although some snails could not be determined, most could be assigned to one or the other taxon. The figures indicate that dealbatus is more common on the lower terrace while
mooreanus is more common on the upper terrace. The same relationship
exists today. Detailed examination of Ftabdotus from archeological sites

138

Texas Archeological Society

should provide essential information on the history of hybridization of these
two species.
The McKinney House apparently allowed an expansion of the area colonized by Mesodon roemeri. This species is well represented in the mill
(lower terrace) area but is less common in the house (upper terrace) area.
All snails found in the upper terrace are from very near the surface; in the
lower terrace, this species is found at least down to the third layer. The
McKinney House and associated materials (boards, stone, etc.) provided
retreats which protected the snail from dessication by solar radiation. The
same phenomenon can be observed today in Austin.
Several remarks need to be made concerning standard methods of obtaining molluscan samples. Samples in this study were sifted through I/4 in
mesh screen. Thus, all minute snails are lost. Many of these, particularly
various species of Gastrocopta (Pupillidae), could give important clues to
paleoenvironmental conditions. These data are not as essential at this site as
in older pre-European sites. In prehistoric sites, such specimens would be
essential for paleoenvironmental reconstruction.
Utilization of a smaller screen size also would retain fragments of larger
shells. Collections from deeper levels tended to contain only Rabdotus spp.
The shells of other medium sized species, e.g. Polygyra texasiana, apparently fragment at some point in time and depth. Helicina orbiculata composed about 30% of the total sample but few were found in deeper levels.
There is no reason not to expect these species in such assemblages.
SUMMARY
All snails to be expected in a riparian woodland bordered by grassland in
central Travis County are represented in the excavated samples.
Assemblages are the same as present. Effects of the McKinney family’s activities on the snail fauna appear to be minimal with the exception of one
species which was able to expand somewhat and utilize cover in the house
area. The appearance of the single non-native species was probably not
associated with the activities of the McKinney family. Utilizing a smaller
screen size would improve the sampling technique.

REFERENCES CITED
Ferris, James H.
1914
Rumina decollata in Texas. Nautilus, 28:11.
Garth, T.R. and M.P. Mitchell
The Learning Curve of a Land Snail. Journal of Comparative
1926
Psychology, 6:103-113.
Pilsbry, Henry A.
1905
Rumina decollata L. Manual of Conchology, 17:212.
Reddell, James R.
1965
A Checklist of the Cave Fauna of Texas. I. The Invertebrata (exclusive
of Insecta). Texas Journal of Science, 17:143-187.

Singley, J.A.
Texas Mollusca. Annual Report of the Geological Survey of Texas,
1893
4:299-343.

Neck -- Gastropods of McKinney Homestead

139

Strecker, John K.
1935
Land and Freshwater Snails of Texas. Transactions of the Texas
Academy of Science, 17:4-44.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1957
Excavations of the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas
Journal of Science, 9:26-58.

