TWO EARLY HISTORIC SITES ON THE
SOUTHERN PLAINS
CHARLIE R. STEEN

This is an appraisal of two large, early historic sites on
the southern plains: the Deer Creek site in Kay County,
Oklahoma; and the Spanish Fort site in Montague County,
Texas, and Jefferson County, Oklahoma.

Other sites, sim-

ilar in aspect, and probably contemporaneous, have been
recorded but not enough is yet known of them to warrant
comparison with the two described here.

At each of these

sites there has been found a large quantity of early 18thcentury material of French origin, but of the several sites
only Spanish Fort is mentioned in known accounts of
French or Spanish travelers and explorers. Spanish Fort
figured, as the principal Taovayas village, in both French
and Spanish accounts of the Red River country throughout
the 18th century and it persisted as a settlement into the
19th century (Krieger, 1946, p. 161 et seq.). For Deer Creek
there is no positive identification by Europeans but the
Indians at that site were probably Wichita proper.
The Deer Creek Site
The Deer Creek site lies in an excellent position at the
confluence of the creek of that name with the Arkansas
River, northeast of Newkirk, Oklahoma (Plate 16, A). Approximately two miles north is a smaller contemporaneous
site and there are rumors of at least one other similar site
in the vicinity. In order to distinguish between the two
known sites I shall refer to the smaller site, north of Deer
Creek, as the Bryson site; it was partially excavated in 1926,
by the late Joseph Thoburn of the Oklahoma Historical
Society.
The principal site, at Deer Creek, covers an area of perhaps two hundred acres of high ground which is well above
the flood plain of the river. At the present time most of
the site is under cultivation but a portion of the vi!lage
area lies under sod which has never been plowed.

178

Texas Archeological Society

Apparently about the middle of the 19th century finds of
European relics at Deer Creek gave rise to a belief that a
Spanish fort had once existed there and the name Ferdinandino, or Fernandino, appeared on several maps to indicate such a post. Just how this name originated cannot now
be determined.
In 1925 Joseph Thoburn obtained excavation funds for
work at Deer Creek and, during parts of that summer and
of the summer of 1926, dug a portion of the Bryson site. No
report of the work was ever published, and the material
recovered lies unstudied at the Museum of the Oklahoma
Historical Society in Oklahoma City. A few newspaper accounts, dictated by Thoburn during the work, gave little
archeological information; two of these accounts were republished in an obituary for Thoburn (Wright, 1947). The
only item of any importance which appeared in the newspaper articles was that definite evidences of a stockade were
found. In none of the stories is there any account of artifacts, house types, or any other features which would help us
place the site with a cultural group.
The best collection of Deer Creek material available for
study is in the private collection of Mr. Burt Moore, of
Winfield, Kansas. Mr. Moore has collected from the surface
of the site for many years.
At the Deer Creek site no evidence of a stockade can be
detected On the ground, nor, for that matter, is there a trace
of any other structure. The only surface features of the site
are half a dozen large middens, apparently composed entirely of bison bones among which hundreds of large scrapers
areto be found. Most of the middens are well plowed down
but still stand a foot or more above the surrounding ground
and are thirty feet or more in diameter (Plate 16, A).
The Spanish Fort Site
Archeological accounts of Spanish Fort have been published by Krieger (1946) who discussed the site at some
length, especially its relationship to the Henrietta Focus,
and Witte (1938) who gave a brief account of the site. In

B
4¸¸

C
PLATE 16
A, Air view of Deer Creek Site, Oklahoma, looking west across Arkansas River with
Deer Creek entering it from the right.
In the plowed field in center, one large bisonbone midden shows as a white scar, and other middens, closer to the river, as dark
spots.
B, Parts of mechanisms of flint-lock muskets from Spanish Fort Site on Red
River, Joe Benton Collection, Nocona, Texas (about 1/3 actual size).
C, Indian-made
gun flints and steel projectile point, from Deer Creek Site (about actual size).

Two EarZy Historic Sites

181

addition, Mr. Joe Benton, of Nocona, Texas, has collected
artifacts from Spanish Fort for years and has gathered a
large collection of Indian and European artifacts from the
vicinity.
Two locations, and an unknown number of sites, make
any analysis of Spanish Fort material exceptionally difficult. Fluted points have been found here; and other
point types from the Spanish Fort vicinity which are much
older than the historic period are the Gary and Martindale
types described by Bell and Hall (1953). The Spanish Fort
bend of Red River was apparently a favored homesite for
primitive man for many centuries and an intensive survey
of this stretch of the river would undoubtedly locate a number of sites with a considerable time span. The historic
material is concentrated in two comparatively small areas.
One of these lies in the triangle of land between Red River
and Farmers Creek, on the Texas side of the river; and directly east, on the Oklahoma side, there is a site fully as
large, on higher ground.
No controlled excavations have been made at either of
the historic Spanish Fort sites, and we have no evidence of
the Taovayas Indian culture other than artifacts recovered
from the surface of the sites. There is indirect evidence that
the village on the Texas side, at least, was surrounded by a
stockade, for Parrilla reported that during his attack on the
site in 1759 the Indians fought from behind such defense
works. The only visible features of the villages are large
middens of bison bones, identical with those at the Deer
Creek site, and from which many scraping tools have been
recovered.
French Goods at the Sites
The similarity of metal goods found at the two sites is
astonishing, as is the quantity in which the items have been
found. It is easy to understand how tales of trading posts
located at these sites could get started, for a large amount
of material has been recovered from each location.

The

collections of European materials from each site are so

182

Texas :ArcheologiCaI Society

similar that, except for the possibilit~ that some perishable
goods such as blankets formed part of the trading stock, it
would appear that we have a rather complete list of trade
items of the time. These are:
1. Flint lock muskets--numerous parts of many muskets
have been found at each of the sites (Plates 16, B; 17) ; butt
plates, trigger guards, hammers, frizzles, and short lengths
of barrels which have been altered to serve as tools. Some
European gun-flints are found at Deer Creek but they are
fewer in number than Indian-made flints (Plates 16, C; 17) ;
at Spanish Fort the proportion of European to native-made
flints seems greater.
2. Lead Bullets (Plate 17).
3. Cutting tools--Knives (probably "sheath" knives), scissors, pole axes, and cleaver-like chopping knives.
4. Cooking pots--of iron and copper.
5. Ornaments--Glass beads of several types, rolled "tinklers" of thin metal sheets, brass buttons and hat ornaments.
6. Projectile points--of iron and copper (Plate 16, C).
Mr. Burt Moore sent a representative collection of this
material to Mr. Arthur Woodward, then of the Los Angeles
County Museum, for identification. Mr. Woodward wrote
to Mr. Moore that all of the material was of French origin,
that it could be dated as of the first half of the 18th century,
and that he would place the time 1725-1750 as the most likely
period in which the items were traded to the Indians.
Now we have, at two widely separated sites, European
materials of the type which can safely be termed "trade
goods", materials which have been dated as of the second
quarter of the 18th century. The question remains as to
what sort of trading establishments were maintained at
these villages, A definite clue can be found in a letter
written in 1727 by Father du Poisson, a Jesuit stationed
for a short time at the Arkansas Post, Du Poisson wrote a
rather lengthy letter to a fellow priest in France in which
he described Louisiana and its inhabitants. It reads, in part:

Two Early Historic Sites

183

"Besides these grantees and planters, there are also in this
country, people who have no other business than that of
vagabondizing. 1st, Women and girls taken from the hospitals of Paris, from Salpetriere, or other places of equally
good reputation, who find the laws of marriage too strict,
and the care of a single household too troublesome. Voyages
of four hundred leagues present nothing to terrify these
heroines; I have met with two of them, whose adventures
would furnish material for a romance. 2d, The voyagers;
these are for the most part young people sent for some
reason to Mississippi by their parents or by justice, and who
finding it too low to dig the earth, prefer engaging themselves as rowers, and wandering about from one shore to
the other. 3d, The hunters; these at the end of the summer
ascend the Mississippi to the distance of two or three hundred leagues to the buffalo country; they dry in the sun
the flesh on the ribs of the buffaloes, salt the rest, and also
make bear’s oil. Toward spring they descend, and thus furnish provisions to the Colony. The country which extends
from New Orleans even to this place [Arkansas Post], renders this business necessary, because it is not sufficiently
inhabited, or enough cleared to raise cattle there. At the
distance of only thirty leagues from here they begin to find
the buffaloes, and they are in herds on the prairies or by
the rivers. During the past year a Canadian came down to
New Orleans with four hundred and eighty tongues of buffaloes he had killed during the winter campaign with only
one associate." (Kip, 1846).
One has a great desire to deviate from the announced
subject of this paper and speculate on the lives and adventures of the women and girls who roved the Mississippi
valley because they could not be bothered by the cares of a
single household, but with only that single tantalizing statement du Poisson dropped the subject of women and went
on to more prosaic matters. It is with the hunters, the
third group listed by du Poisson, that we are here concerned. The description given of these men, and their activities, furnishes the clue to the sort of establishments
maintained by the French at the Indian villages on the

184

Texas ArcheoIogicaI Society

southern plains.

It is doubtful that we can ever be certain

that Deer Creek, Spanish Fort, and other similar sites were
winter headquarters for French hunters.
If we assume however that such hunters returned to a
certain village, or village group, year after year and paid
for carcasses, or for help in the hunt, with trade items, it
would easily explain the large amount of trade goods to be
found at sites at which there is no record of a permanent
trading post or factory. Such activities are also in keeping
with the general nature of the vanguard of Frenchmen on
the American frontier.
Summary
At present there are many more questions to ask than
statements to make concerning the material culture of the
Indian population of the villages under discussion. On the
map which accompanies his article on the archeology of the
Central Great Plains, Wedel (1940, p. 293) indicates a site
on the Arkansas River (at the approximate location of Deer
Creek) with the symbol for the Paint Creek manifestation
of Plains culture. I believe that if his viewpoint had been
from the Southern plains that he would with just as much
certainty, have stamped the site with a Henrietta Focus
label. In a subsequent paper I hope to show that, based on
artifacts alone, there is remarkably little change in material
culture between districts in the central and southern plains
in late prehistoric and early historic times. The differences
which do exist seem based partly on materials available to
the different groups, partly on regional proximity to other
cultural areas, but mostly differences are apparent merely
because we lack the information which intensive excavations would give us concerning the economy of the plains
Indians.
With the evidence available at present it appears that the
great middens of bison bones are products of the decades
after 1700. This probably indicates a change in the hunting
methods of the Plains Indians which followed the introduction into Plains economy of the horse, which Haines (1938)

PLATE 17
Artifacts from the Deer Creek Site.

Flint lock mechanisms, Indian-made gun flints,

and lead balls in the Butt Moore Collection, Winfield, Kansas.

187

Two Early Historic Sites

places on the central Arkansas River by 1719.

It may not

be stretching a point to say that, with the coincident use of
the horse for hunting, and for carrying or dragging carcasses, and with the arrival of professional hunters from the
Louisiana colonies, hunting habits did change.

The neces-

sity to produce meat far in excess of the needs of the village,
with a sudden ability to transport major portions of bison
carcass, could well mean that much of the meat cutting and
skin dressing, which formerly seems to have taken place at
the site of the hunt, was transferred to the village.
In general, early 18th-century villages of the Wichita, and
their affiliates, appear frequently to have been located on
major streams at, or near, the mouth of a small stream which
probably furnished the water supply. The villages often
appeared in clusters; this may have been dictated by the
location and distribution of arable land. Some evidence
exists that a stockade was a common feature of the village,
but practically nothing else is known of the village structure. It is also probable that these villages served as winter
quarters for small bands of professional hunters whose business it was to supply the Louisiana colony with meat. Since
there are no surface indications of permanent structures for
trading posts it seems likely that, with the evidence now
available, the hunters were responsible for all of the trade
material found at the sites. Excavation at these sites probably would furnish data on the acculturation process which
was then (1700-1750) beginning to change the lives of the
Plains Indians.
Bibliography
Bell, Robert E. and Baerreis, David A.
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
22: 7-100.
Bell, Robert E. and Hall, Roland Scott
1953. Selected Projectile Point Types of the United

188

Texas Archeo!ogical Society

States, Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, ,1:1-16 ......
Hainesi Francis
1938. The Northward Spread of Horses Among the
Plains Indians. American Anthropologist, 40:429-437.
Kip, Revi William Ingraham (Translator and Editor)
1846. The Early Jesuit Missions in North America.
Wiley and Putnam, New York, 2 Vols. See: Letter
VIII, from Father du Poisson, Missionary to the Akensas, to Father * * * (Vol. 2: 231-263).
Krieger, Alex D,
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas. University of Texas Publication 4640. Austin.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1940. Culture Sequence in the Central Great Plains.
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, 100: 291-352.
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C.
Witte, Adolph Henry
1938. Spanish Fort, An Historic Wichita Site. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 10:
234-244.
Wright, Muriel H.
1947. Pioneer Historian and Archeologist of the State
of Oklahoma. Chronicals of Oklahoma, 24: 396-413.
National Park Service
Region Three
Santa Fe, New Mexico

