187

Faunas from House 5
at the Vinson Site
Bonnie C. Yates

ABSTRACT
The assemblage of animal remains from just one of the abandoned house
features at the Vinson Site (41LT1) reveals the exploitation strategy of the
occupants of this late eighteenth century Contact Period site in Central Texas. The
natural habits and habitats of the identified faunas in House 5 help to complete the
picture of an environment in which Native Americans could garner sustenance
from a bounty of animal life in nearby streams, woodlands, and prairies. From
butchering patterns, it is evident that the large game was plentiful so that minimal
processing was required of each carcass. Diversity in large and small game is a
hallmark of a healthy environment, and therefore, it can be deduced that these
people made efficient use of the local catchment area--at least for a short time.

INTRODUCTION: THE BONE SAMPLE

Faunal remains from House 5 at the Vinson site (41LT1) were analyzed to
obtain an adequate and representative sample of late eighteenth century Wichita
subsistence activities. The House 5 sample was excavated as one contiguous
assemblage, and unlike previous excavations at the site, the matrix was processed through window screen (see Smith, this volume). Window screening
enables recovery of microfaunas that otherwise would be lost and artificially
underrepresented when processed through larger-grid screens, mad, thus, a more
comprehensive view of faunal exploitation is obtainable (Shaffer 1992). The
animal bones from Vinson were washed prior to submittal to the Zooarchaeology
Lab at the Institute of Applied Sciences (University of North Texas) where the
bones are presently curated. Permanent curation will be at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) where osteological material from the 1964
Texas Archeological Society Field School is housed. Bones from the Field
School excavations were also cursorily examined for the presence of additional
species and to verify observed butchering and species selection patterns represented in the assemblage from House 5.
Bone preservation is excellent in all samples from the Vinson Site. This
results from a number of factors: first, food debris was periodically deposited in
abandoned house floor depressions. The periodicity is in turn a function of
housecleaning and butchering episodes where a large quantity of food debris
may have been dumped at one time, ensuring a protective effect for all but the
last fragments. These were on top of the heap and directly exposed to weathering
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64 (1993)

188

Texas Archeological Society

elements. Furthermore, if any shelter remained from the previously occupied
structure, then these surface-exposed bones would also benefit from some protection until the shelter was destroyed or ruined. Secondly, it is probable that
extra dirt was applied over the mass of rotting debris to alleviate its stench and
reduce chances of camp harassment by hungry scavengers. Additionally, minimal breakage during processing, a near-neutral soil pH, and the relatively short
duration of burial, all favor preservation and enhance identif’mbility and minimum number estimates. A neutral soil pH inhibits the solubility of calcium
phosphate in bone and may preserve bone almost indefinitely (Beik 1973).
The taphonomy of the bone bed, therefore, reflects the behavior of the
human occupants (i.e., periodic dumping of refuse, stench control, and minimal
processing), as well as non-human processes. Non-human processes also include
the actions of tree roots and rodents, for example, that are responsible for mixing
the midden and confounding certain inferences. For example, excavations revealed many rodent burrows throughout the deposit and a mixing of artifacts
from the known, non-Indian, nineteenth century component. Furthermore, bones
of European-introduced animals such as pig and cat found deep in the midden
illustrate the effects of this bioturbation.
BIOGEOGRAPHY AND ECOLOGY
To reconstruct the ecological setting of the Vinson Site, it is important to
know what kinds of vegetation and animals would be expected given the biotic
characteristics of the region. Because only about 200 years have passed since the
Indian occupation, the overall setting resembles present day conditions
(Stephenson 1970). Wood’s (1976) commentary on the colder, moister conditions of the mid-continental Neo-Boral or "Little Ice Age" period (ca. A.D. 15501850) probably caused only minor and imperceptible changes in the distribution
of vertebrate faunas at the latitude of Limestone County, Texas.
Blair (1950) places Limestone County within the Texan Province ~igure
1). This biotic province is characterized as a mesic ecotone where the
interdigitation of woodlands and prairies permits some species in the eastern
Austroriparian Province to reach their western limits, and a few species from the
western Balconian and Kansan provinces to reach their eastern limits. The site is
located in the Blackland Prairie vegetation area, sandwiched between the Eastern
Cross Timbers and the Post Oak Belt. Located in the northeastern corner of
Limestone County, the site lies at the western edge of the Trinity River Basin
near the source of Tehuacana Creek.
Originally the Blackland Prairie consisted of tall grasses, including many
species enjoyed by bison: Western wheat grass (Agropyron smithii), Silvery
beardgrass (Andropogon saccharoides), Little bluestem (A. scoparius), Texas
needlegrass (Stipa leucotricha), and Hairy triodea (Triodia pilosa) (Blair 1950;
Gould 1975). The Vinson Site has an elevation of 600 feet above mean sea level
in an ecotonal setting, with nearby upland prairies and dense bottomland woods

]rates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

189

o

i
0

p
o
9

I
i

"~

KANSAN

0
o

~

o

’,,

BALCONIAN

n

%6

GHIHUAHUAN

#

0

~ T~MAULIPAN
O

Z

<

X

"

0
0
0
Figure 1. Biotic Provinces of Texas (from Blair 1950).
along the creeks feeding the Trinity River. Around the margins of the prairie, oak
savanna dominates the landscape, and other nutritious mast-producing trees such
as black walnuts (Juglans nigra) and pecans (Carya illinoensis) grow in the
bottomlands.
The climate now is probably much the same as in the late eighteenth
century: spring and fall are moist, summer is hot and humid, and winter is
variable with infrequent severity. Rainfall averages 30-45 inches yearly; average
maximum low temperature is between 8 and 20° F, and the average maximum
high is between 103 and 105° F. The last frost for Limestone County occurs
around March 27, and the first frost may appear in mid-November. In this
setting, then, the Wichita hunters and farmers that occupied the Vinson Site
exploited the w~lands and grasslands of a temperate climate with moderate
rainfall and tolerable seasons.
ANIMAL LIFE AND THEIR HABITATS
There are no endemic vertebrates in the Texan Province, but a wide variety
of animal life spills over into this province from east and west to create a rich
ecotonal setting. Table 1 provides a list of mammals known to inhabit the area, as

190

Texas Archeological Society

well as a list of mammalian species identified from the House 5 sample. Table 2
presents the non-mammalian taxa identified in this sample from the Vinson Site.
From these lists, it is apparent that the early occupants of this site enjoyed the
bounty of three biomes--grassland prairies, oak-hickory woodlands, and stream
or riverine habitats.
The grasslands provided the majority of animal protein available and utilized by the site occupants. Bison, pronghorn, and jackrabbit are prairie mammals that are represented in the sample. Bison, by virtue of its abundant meat
yield (160 kilograms of e~ble meat according to White [1953]), was the most
economically important source of meat and other raw materials such as hides,
sinews, bones, and horns for clothing, tools, and trade. Evidence of this importance will be discussed below in a comparison with the use of white-tailed deer.
Pronghorn is identified by only three elements from House 5. In the early
and middle nineteenth century, sightings of small herds of antelope are recorded
for McLennan, Falls, and Robertson counties bordering Limestone County on
the west and southwest (Schmidly 1983). Pronghorn is reported from six archeological sites in the Central Brazos River Valley (Lynott 1977), ranging in age
from the Archaic period at the Baylor Site to Protohistoric remains from the
Hopewell School Site, but no pronghorn is reported from five later sites listed by
Lynott from the Trinity River Valley. Pronghorn remains are also reported from
Pictograph Shelter in the Whitney Reservoir by Stephenson (1970) and from the
Boggy Creek Site in Washington County, about 100 miles south of the study area
(Hasskarl 1961).
Non-mammalian remains of grassland animals in the sample include prairie chicken, western coachwhip snake, and plains leopard frog. These snake and
frog remains may not represent food items; they are not burned and show no
butchering marks. However, because they were recovered as infrequent isolated
elements instead of complete carcasses, their use as food cannot be ruled out in
favor of natural intrusion, which tends to leave articulated skeletons (Shotwell
1955; Thomas 1971). In the case of House 5, disarticulation may be a result of
bioturbation.
Three small burrowing mammals found in this sample are possible, but
unlikely, food sources. Although rodent remains (hairs and caudal vertebrae) have
been found in human coprolite samples from dry caves in South Texas (WilliamsDean 1978) and northern Mexico (Heizer and Napton 1969), other explanations
may account for their presence in House 5. Most likely, cottonrat, pocket gopher,
and mole remains from House 5 represent denizens of the midden and surrounding
landscape rather than human meal debris. What they do reveal is their predilection
for, and therefore the proximity of, sandy or sandy loam soils in the study area,
particularly in the case of moles and pocket gophers. Cottonrats are particularly
common in tall-grass prairies where bluestem, cordgrass, or sedges provide food
and cover (Davis 1978). These small mammals and the non-mammals mentioned
above could certainly provide modest food value, but the energy exchange involved is unwarranted given the presence of large game in the House 5 sample.

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

191

Table 1
List of Mammals Expected to Range in
the Texan Province and those Identified
from the Vinson Site, House 51

Opossum
Mole
Fox Squirrel
Pocket Gopher
Ground Squirrel
Harvest Mouse
Pocket Mouse
White-Footed Mouse
Deer Mouse
Cottonrat
Woodrat
Beaver
Cottontail Rabbit
Swamp Rabbit
Jackrabbit
River Otter
Badger
Racoon
Ringtai!
Long-Tail Weasel
Mink
Spotted Skunk
Striped Skunk
Red Fox
Gray Fox
*2

Coyote
Red Wolf
*2

Bobcat
,2

White-Tailed Deer
*2

Domestics

Expected

Identified

Habitat

Didelphis virginiana
Scalopus aquaticus
Sciuru.~ niger
Geomys cf. breviceps
Citellus tridecemlineatus
Reithrodontomys sp.
Perognathus hispidus
Peromyscus leucopus
P eromyscus maniculatus
Sigmodon hispidus
Neotoma floridana
Castor canadensis
Sylvilagus floridanus
Sylvilagus aquaticus
Lepus californicus
Lutra canade,~is
Taxidea taxus
Procyon lotor
Bassariscus
Mustela frenata
Mustela vison
SpiIogale putorius
Mephitis mephitis

Opossum
Mole

Various
Various

Woedland
Pocket Gopher

Cottonrat

Cottontail
Jackrabbit

Raccoon

Riparian
Skunk

Vulpes fulva
Urocyon cinereoargenteus
Ursus americanus
Black Bear
Canis latrans
Canis rufus
Felis concolor
Felis rufus
Antilocapra americana
Odocoileus virginianus
Bison bison
Felis caius
Sus scrofa
Equus caballus

Grassland
Grassland
Grassy Edges
Various
Woodland
Grassland
Grassy Edges
Woodland
Aquatic
Various
Riparian
Grassland
Aquatic
Grassland
Riparian
Woodland
Woody Edges
Various
Woody Edges
Introduced
Various
Woodland

Various
Riparian
Cougar
Bottomlands
McLennan Co.
Woodland
Pronghorn
Grassland
White-tailed Deer Woody Edges
Bison
Grassland
House Cat
Cosmopolitan
Pig
Cosmopolitan
Horse
Cosmopolitan

1Excludes bats and some rodents.
2Species now extirpated from province.
Sources: Blair (1950); Davis (1978); and Schmidly (1983).

192

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2
Non-Mammals Represented in Faunal
Remains from House 5

Birds

White-fronted goose
Turkey vulture
Red-shouldered hawk
Wild turkey
Prairie chicken
Green heron
Sandpiper
Ivory-billed woodpecker (?)
Cardinal
song birds

Anser albifrons
Cathartes aura
Buteo lineatus
Meleagris gaUopavo
Tympanuchus sp.
Butorides virescens
Scolopacidae
cf. Campephilus principalis
Richmondena cardinalis
Passeriformes

Alligator snapping turtle
Florida box turtle
Pond slider
Western coachwhip
Bullsnake

Macroclemys temmincki
Terrapene carolina
Trachemys scripta
Masticophis flagellum
Pituophis melanoleucus

Reptiles

Amphibians
Woodhouse’s toad
Leopard frog

Bufo woodhousei
Rana cf. utricularia

Fishes
Gar
Bass/sunfish

Lepisosteus cf. osseus
Centrarchidae

The woodland-prairie ecotone may have been more frequently and
dependably exploited by the Vinson inhabitants. White-tailed deer and cottontail
rabbit are the major ecotonal mammals found in the sample. From raw element
counts, deer bones outnumber all other taxa represented. Although deer may be
found today in the Blackland Prairie, they are known to thrive on the acorns of
the oaks and fruits of yaupon, beautyberry, and hawthorn found in the mixed
woodlands of the Cross Timbers (Schmidly 1983).
Cottontail rabbit remains, like those of jackrabbit, are not numerous in the
assemblage, but their presence may indicate that more passive collecting techniques such as snaring were used. The presence of cottontail is another good
indicator of ecotonal exploitation and illustrates that the site occupants took

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

193

advantage of the abundance of game provided by the ecotones, not relying solely
on one or two large meat-yielding species.
Non-mammalian woodland/prairie ecotonal faunas from Vinson consist of
bullsnake, songbirds, and box turtles. Again the remains of snakes and birds may
have been introduced by raptors into the midden. Box turtle is probably a food
item, however, and many fragments are burned; at least eight individuals are
indicated. These adaptable turtles may be found in open woodlands, wooded
edges, fields, stream banks, and moist areas. They eat nearly anything, including
carrion (Collins 1981), an item that may have drawn them into the site and
midden areas only to be caught and used for food and their shells used as vessels.
Other ecotonal forms indicate exploitation of the wooded streambanks. The
riparian faunas identified in the sample include opossum, raccoon, wading birds,
and leopard frog. From the paucity of their remains, none of these animals
provided substantial food resources. Nevertheless, their inclusion attests to the
varied diet available to site occupants and helps reconstruct the catchment area
~igure 2).
The woodlands and their clearings hosted a variety of animals whose bones
are also recorded from House 5. These forest faunas include mammals such as
black bear, cougar, and skunk, as well as two bird species: pileated or ivorybilled woodpecker and wild turkey.
Although bones from the two dangerous carnivores (black bear and cougar)
are not abundant, their presence offers insight into the prowess of the hunters’
skills, and to some extent, into the iconography of the group occupying this site
(see bone artifact discussion below). In this part of North America, bears merely
nap during winter, not truly hibernating, and are particularly attracted to carrion
(Caras 1967). Bear and "panther" hunting constituted great sport for white
settlers in the early 1800s, and sightings persisted in this area into the twentieth
century, although sightings were rare by 1905 (Schmidly 1983). Panthers were
common in the Brazos River bottoms of McLennan County in the mid-1800s, but
bears disappeared from western East Texas around 1850. Skunk bones are common in faunal inventories from aboriginal Texas sites, being ubiquitous creatures
then as now, and obviously not shunned by these hunters.
Of the woodland bird life, the wild turkey holds a preeminent position as an
important food source. According to Schorger (1966:54): "No section of the
country contained such multitudes’ of turkeys as the Oklahoma-Texas area." His
estimate for pre-Columbian turkey populations in Texas is 10 turkeys per square
mile, with almost 20 percent of the entire United States flock located within the
state (namely, two million birds). Schorger’s accounts of nineteenth century
sightings and turkey hunts mention hundreds and sometimes thousands of them
blackening the trees in which they roost. Despite this recorded abundance, there
are only two individual turkeys (15 elements) recognized in the House 5 material.
The other large woodland bird represented in the assemblage is possibly an
ivory-billed woodpecker. This beautiful bird is now considered virtually extinct,
but at one time it occupied all of eastern Texas, including the study area (Jaques

194

Texas Archeological Society

Z
" .4
/4
I

4\

P

©

©

8o

C

°

-j

©

~4

©
<2

8

0

T>

8
<
~J

0

<3

e4

<>

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

195

1947). Oberholser (1974) states that these birds inhabit mature virgin forests and
notes that Native Americans especially valued them for their spectacular ivory
beaks. The closely related, but slightly smaller, pileated woodpecker (Dryocopus
pileatus) still ranges throughout the woodlands of East Texas; it may be this
equally conspicuous, crow-sized, black and red crested bird that is represented
by a fragmentary carpometacarpus from House 5.
The last habitat to be represented in the sample is the aquatic environment.
Proximity to water is axiomatic to hunter/gatherers and agriculturalists. Near the
Vinson Site were reliable spring waters. Small creeks exist there today rather
than actual riverine habitats.
Remains of two fish species, two aquatic turtle species, and bullfrog, along
with the above-mentioned streambank faunas, constitute the riparian community
available for resource procurement. Elements from a small species of gar and a
centrarchid (bass family) were part of the House 5 material; however, no other
fish remains were recorded, suggesting that fishing was not an important subsistence activity. These two fish bones indicate that small sluggish creeks existed
near the site rather than fast-flowing rivers. Pond sliders, like the red-eared turtle,
prefer any quiet water with soft muddy substrate; similarly, snapping turtles are
found in many aquatic situations, preferring those with mud and abundant vegetation (Ernst and Barbour 1972; Collins 1981).
Turning from water to sky, three bird species identified in the faunal assemblage deserve mention here. Red-shouldered hawks hunt small mammals, reptiles, and amphibians in wooded or open areas, usually in moist terrain (Collins
1981); they migrate through Central Texas in early spring and late fall (Robbins
et al. 1966). Turkey vultures are regionally pandemic and a common feature to
Texas skies as they scan open-wooded or hilly ground for carrion. Although
famous as soaring, scavenging, smelly birds, they are accessible targets when
feeding or nesting as they do on the ground surface (Collins 1981). Furthermore,
vultures would be attracted to nesting near, and feeding in, middens containing
deer and bison bones as well as other food refuse.
Evidence of eagle (bald or golden) use exists as a flute made from an ulna
(described below). This use of this bird’s bones imparts an importance beyond
that of a prey species. According to Oberholser (1974), bald eagles prefer nesting
and hunting near clear water or swamps and had a breeding record in adjacent
McLennan County in 1900; he also noted that they scavenge for food in winter.
Although not a scavenger, the golden eagle hunts rodents in the hills, grasslands,
and deserts ~obbins et al. 1966) and is known from specimens also collected in
McLennan County (Oberholser 1974).
That water animals and large birds are found in an aboriginal refuse pile is
not particularly unusual in the region (e.g., Raab 1982); nevertheless, these
faunas from Vinson indicate a local environment dominated by lush bottomland
at the edge of a mature oak woodland, probably fed by a mineral spring, and
nearby upland prairies consisting of sandy and loamy soils with tall and mixed
grasses. Here, the everyday chores and activities of life centered around food

196

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

gathering, with some part of the workday dealing with animal food processing or
animal materials reduction and use. To Binford’s (1981) sequence of carcass
processing (i.e., skinning, dismemberment, filleting or consumption, marrow
extraction, and disposal) then can be added cooking, meat-strip drying, hide
preparation, sewing, and tool-making. This general description of the identified
taxa from Vinson, and the environmental reconstruction of the catchment area,
paints a broad picture of these peoples’ lifestyle. The bones from House 5
indicate that they concentrated their hunting subsistence activities on bison and
deer; i.e., those animals that supplied them with the most meat.
BISON AND DEER REMAINS
Two large ungulates dominate the faunal sample from House 5. These
remains were identified using bison skeletons obtained from the Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge in Oklahoma and a selection of deer skeletons ranging
from large individuals from northern latitudes to smaller deer from South Texas
counties. Each deer and bison element was closely compared to those of skelemily similar pronghorn and domestic cow, respectively, to ensure the correct
assignment to the proper taxa. Although pronghorn is represented by a few
elements, deer bone predominates in the assemblage, and no domestic bovine
was identified.
Archeological specimens were sorted by element, side (left or fight), and
end (proximal or distal). Relative age was determined by degree of epiphyseal
fusion; sex of bison was determined using Speth’s (1983) measurements for
fragmentary adult long bones; and condition was noted for state of preservation,
incidence and location of cut marks, burning, and other modification.
Although they belong to the same taxonomic order (Artiodactyla), bison
and deer are ecologically quite different. Bison have fairly stable populations,
long life span, low productivity in relation to standing crop, and are slow to
disperse into new habitats (see Shay 1978). By comparison, deer populations
experience greater fluctuations and individuals do not live as long. They also
have higher production rates while adapting quicker to new habitats. Furthermore, bison and deer habitats overlap at the praifie-forest ecotone, thus providing
a consistent source of abundant animal protein to any hunting group situated in
this kind of setting.
A minimum of nine adult bison is represented in House 5 material by 134
identifiable elements and approximately 300 fib and miscellaneous fragments.
The body parts of bison recovered from this single midden classically indicate
the "Schlepp effect" (Daly 1969): the tendency to leave the larger, less choice
portions of a carcass at the kill site, returning to camp with the meatier and more
easily transported pieces. In the House 5 sample, primarily meaty elements
(limbs and fibs) are present. The hunters either chose not to haul back the huge
skulls, mandibles, pelves, and backbones, or they chose to deposit these in
another trash pile. The former notion is more likely, suggesting some distance

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

197

existed between the Vinson Site and the kill site of these animals. Another
possibility exists: all of the bisons were killed at once, necessitating some selectivity in what to glean from the carcasses by virtue of an abundant kill.
Bison carcasses, therefore, were preliminarily butchered at the kill site; this
determination is based on the virtual absence of lower leg bones, vertebrae,
skulls, and mandibles in this particular midden (Figure 3). In most cases, the
lower leg was removed at the joint between the distal tibia or radiocubitus and
the corresponding tarsals or carpals. Only eight elements (seven tarsals and one
phalanx) from below this juncture are recorded in the House 5 sample; these
elements probably adhered to at least four butchering units returned to the site
based on the presence of two right astragali, two right naviculocuboid tarsals,
and two left maUeoli. All but two of these bones exhibit numerous cut marks.
Deer, by contrast, were brought to the camp unbutchered. All body parts are
represented in this sample of over 900 elements, with only carpals, tarsals, and
ulnae underrepresented. Minimum number of individuals (MNI) estimates on a
per-element basis range from a low of four deer (based on four right second and
third fused tarsals) to a higher minimum of 20 deer (based on 20 lower right third
molars); most of the elements, however, yield MNI estimates between 12 and 17.
The paucity of carpals and tarsals (excluding astragali and calcanea) is
puzzling in light of the abundance of cannon bones (metapodials) and toe bones
(phalanges). If the deer were skinned at the kill site and there was a corresponding lack of metapodials and phalanges, one could postulate that initial dismemberment occurred simultaneously with skinning activities and that the lower leg
bones had been retained with the skin and deposited elsewhere. This does not
seem to be the case, however, given the large numbers of astragali and calcanea
(see Figure 3). Possibly the small but compact carpals and tarsals were lost or
battered beyond recognition during final dismemberment of the lower legs from
the rest of the body. The lack of additional ulnae may represent the salvage and
curation of these elements for tools.
Butchering patterns are quite clear in the bison and deer samples from
House 5 and can be grouped into three processing activities. These different
butchering activities result in distinctive cut marks on bone. Skinning the carcass
results in minor bone cutting because the only bone surfaces likely to be cut are
in those areas of the body covered by thin tissue: lower legs and skull. Dismemberment cut marks occur during disarticulation of manageable meat units and
usually appear between bones on articulating surfaces. Filleting activities free the
meat from the bone as a secondary butchering procedure. In the case of the
Vinson material, primary butchering (skinning and initial dismemberment) of
bison occurred at the kill site, and further dismemberment and filleting probably
occurred at the site itself. Deer and smaller game, on the other hand, were
processed entirely on site.
Cut marks on the bison and deer appear to have been made with both stone
and metal tools. Stone tool marks are generally short, parallel series of cuts with
an open (or U-shape) cross section (Binford 1981:t05). Some of the marks on

198

Texas Archeological Society
~pT,b

prod

80

dRadA
dRad~

70

prod
,ApMC
pMT

6O

d Fern

5O
pUi~
40

o<

A Deer

30

@ B,son

20
I0

50
MGUI

60

70

80

90

I O0

Figure 3. Frequency of Bison and Deer Elements from House 5 at Vinson. Key: MNI=Minimum
Number of Individuals; MGUI=Modified General Utility Index (Binford); Fragmentary
Elements: d=distal; p=proximal; Ast=Astragalus; Calc=Calcaneum; Fem=Femur;
H=Humerus; MD=Mandible; MC=Metacarpal; MT=Metatarsal; Pat=Patella; Phx=Phalanx;
Ply=Pelvis; Rad=Radius; Sc=Scapula; Sk=Skull; Tib=Tibia; Ul=Ulna.

these specimens also resemble the distinctive hairline oblique cuts made by
metal tools, and several femoral, tibial, and vertebral fragments appear to have
been "sliced" from the whole bone with such smoothness that metal must be
considered the cutting agent. These specimens exhibit more or less flat planes of
cancellous tissue, some of which indicate that the slicing motion halted abruptly
inside the cancellous mass. The edge of some of these fragments are straight and
meet at right or obtuse angles. Many are sliced from two sides leaving a rectangular fragment roughly 2.5 cm across. Although carnivore gnawing has probably
obscured this pattern, the repetitive nature and frequency of the pattern recorded
on at least 30 bone fragments represent a type of processing activity indicative of
metal tool use not reported in the literature dealing with Historic aboriginal
butchering techniques. This activity must occur late in the processing procedure,

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

199

and may be ancillary to bone grease manufacturing where long bone shafts and
cancellous elements are smashed, or cleaved, then boiled to render the fat.
While it is asserted that metal implements were employed in latter stages of
processing game, there is inconclusive evidence to support the use of metal
knives in initial butchering activities. Many cut marks appear macroscopically to
be similar to those on bones from prehistoric sites that were made with stone
knives. Whereas, other marks on the House 5 specimens are quite fine and strike
the bone at a 45 degree angle, leaving a deep V-shape cut with one ann of the
profile longer than the other. Replicative experiments by Walker and Long
(1977) cite this general profile as resulting from a steel knife; however, they also
caution associating cut marks with a specific implement because of the variable
results produced in their experiments with tools used at different pressures.
Nevertheless, the artifact assemblage from House 5 indeed contains metal cutting
tools (see Smith, this volume), any of which might have been used during the
various stages of carcass processing.
The site occupants butchered the carcasses of bison and deer in basically the
same way, first removing the limbs from the axial skeleton at the easiest junctures and the skull at the neck. Closer examination found subtle differences in
placement of cut marks on individual elements of deer and bison. For example,
cuts on the dorsal border of the olecranon process of the ulna and corresponding
cuts on the epicondyles (.posterior ridges) of the distal humerus are produced
when separating the upper and lower front limb. Bison remains have both sets of
marks, but deer ulna are not cut in the same way.
Binford (1981:126) notes that this particular combination of marks represents flexed joint cutting; that is, after the animal is stiff and/or frozen: "Stiffness
may be related to the dismemberment being part of secondary butchering activities, or to scheduling problems at mass kills." Likewise, separation of the distal
femur and proximal tibia generally occurs during secondary butchering; these
deer and bison elements from House 5 show characteristic circular cuts around
the intercondylar tubercles of the proximal tibia and cuts on the condyles of the
distal femur, although bison distal femurs are less frequently scarred than deer.
Also, similar dismemberment patterns are noted from cut marks on the femur
heads of both species, for separation of the hind quarters and the axial skeleton,
and again the placement of the cuts vary between species. Additionally, the
acetabuli of deer pelvis fragments exhibit corresponding marks of this dismemberment technique, which entails insertion of a knife into the socket to cut the
ligaments. This technique differs from that described by White (1953) where the
neck of the femur head is cut to remove the hindquarter.
Differences in processing these two game species may be more the results
of the Schlepp effect (i.e., the aforementioned absence of certain bison elements)
and the disparity in size and handling of the carcasses. For example, it is not
possible to compare the processing of pelves because bison pelves are virtually
absent from the assemblage as they were left at the kill site. But differences
between represented skeletal elements reveal variations in butchering techniques

200

Texas Archeological Society

that may be useful to subsequent studies in identifying and comparing ho~,
related cultures processed large game animals.
To summarize the butchering process undergone by either species, the
following description compares the processing evidence collectively for major
individual body sections. Binford’s (1981) distinctions between dismemberment
and filleting cuts constitute the model used, but other descriptions of aboriginal
butchering patterns are also cited. Cut marks are visually represented in Figure 4
for deer and bison.
Skull and Mandibles

Bison heads are represented by very few elements: an unmarked hyoid bone
was recovered that most probably adhered to the tongue upon removal. The
immature appearance of an incisor socket fragment with a longitudinal scratch
below the mental foramen denotes mandible processing (tongue removal) of a
juvenile bison.
Deer heads were processed by smashing the skulls at the crown and then
pulling away the bassiocciput. Some cuts are noted across the occipital condyle
of one specimen and on one of the basilar portions; these cuts probably occurred
upon dismemberment of the skull at the neck. Maxillae are very fragmentary and
consist of not much more than the tooth row itself. A few of these have fine
longitudinal cuts above the second and third molars that may occur when removing the mandibles; the latter are mostly uncut but broken at the corresponding
position of the ascending ramus where it rests against the maxilla. Several
mandibles are basaUy broken, exposing the medullary cavity below the teeth
roots as a result of marrow extraction. Two hyoid fragments exhibit cuts resulting from removal of the tongue.
Ribs and Vertebrae

All three recovered thoracic vertebrae of bison have multiple transverse cuts
on the upper flanks of the neural spine and just below the rib heads. Binford
(1981) attributes these types of cuts to filleting the tenderloin.
These cuts do not appear on thoracic vertebrae of deer where the neural
spines of several specimens have deep jagged cuts or are broken at the bases;
deer ribs, however, exhibit fine short cut marks farther down on the curvature of
the rib. The cervical vertebrae of deer took the brunt of dismembering the skull
from the neck: some atlases have cut marks on the cranial facets (both dorsal and
ventral aspects) and several lower cervicals are cut through the centra, exhibiting
the grease-processing "sliced" appearance discussed previously.
Pelvis and Sacrum

The entire bison assemblage contains only one pelvis fragment (left ilium)
and one sacrum fragment, and both show cut marks. The ilium is from a calf and
is broken midway just below the sacral scar (auricular surface) with three

Yates-- Vinson Site Faunas

201

II

0

0

0

0

v

E

202

Texas Archeological Society

transverse cuts along the lateral border. The ventral surface of the sacrum has a
partial encircling cut just behind the initial centrum. Both sets of marks probably
resulted from dismemberment activities. Their presence in the midden suggests
that they were returned to the site with meat attached.
Contrasting again with bison, deer sacrae show no marksat all. Although
pelvis fragments are quite rare in the bison collection, they rank highest in
element frequency for the deer assemblage (see Figure 3); about 33 percent of
them exhibit dismemberment cut marks primarily around the acetabulum or light
filleting marks running lengthwise over these elements’ extremities. Several of
the hairline marks show characteristics of metal implements.
Hindlimbs

The major trochanter of all but one bison femur has been broken off,
probably as a result of battering and leverage applied backwards against the
innominate during dismemberment of the hind leg. Other dismemberment cuts
exist around the ball of the femur head and distally across the back of the
condyles. Filleting marks occur as fine transverse scratches below the lesser
condyle. Bison tibiae exhibit the fine encircling cuts around the intercondylar
tubercles that articulate with the femur. Binford (1981:116) notes that this dismemberment action occurs when a metal or stone knife is "inserted from the rear
of the tibial-femoral joint and rotated around the intercondylar tubercles." Filleting marks on bison tibiae are found as short oblique cuts across the tibial crest;
small cuts along the margins of the proximal epiphyses of some specimens
probably also resulted from filleting. Cut marks occur on each of the seven bison
tarsals recovered and all of these resulted from detaching the hind limb from the
foot during primary (kill site) butchering activities. The retained tarsals were
returned to the site with the meaty hind limb.
Damage to the greater trochanter of the deer femurs exists on half of the
proximal specimens and appears to result from carnivore gnawing instead of
butchering. Cut marks on the ball of the femur head are similar to those found on
bison bones except they are less frequent on the ball than just beneath it; both
kinds of marks were made during dismemberment. Transverse marks across the
posterior surface of the distal condyles also conform to those found on bison
remains and indicate use of the same method of disarticulating the lower leg at
the knee when preparing the meat for distribution or consumption. Corresponding
marks are also found on the proximal tibia of deer, again similar to bison,
although dismembering marks on the distal tibia of deer are not duplicated on
bison. Filleting marks also differ, with deer having short parallel cuts at the
points of muscle insertion on the distal tibia. Deer metatarsals have few marks on
the proximal ends, the tarsals (especially the calcaneus and astragalus) being the
location of disarticulation and cutting marks; distal condyles exhibit skinning
and filleting marks. Five deer calcanea have marks across the body of the
element that conform to Binford’s (1981) description of filleting and/or

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

203

suspension of the carcass for processing; however, most of these elements are
badly gnawed, thus obscuring the nature of other marks.
Forelimbs
Bison scapulae are rare (four specimens); the two more complete specimens
have dismemberment marks around the neck of the scapula. This type of cut may
be made at the kill site when the objective of primary butchering is to lessen the
weight of the carcass unit to be returned to the village. Alternatively, in at least
four instances from the House 5 midden, complete scapulae or portions were
retained with the foreleg unit prior to their final dismemberment. Three of these
exhibit long filleting cuts on the blade, and the fourth fragment has unusually
deep cuts extending into the inner bone wall from its broken edge, suggesting the
use of a chopping tool (cf., Gilbert 1969). The most complete scapula has deep
cuts and jagged breaks around a rectangular hole formed through the center of
the blade; this piece may have been removed as the preform of a scapula hoe,
although no hoes were recovered from Vinson (cf. Bell et al. 1967:Figure 61c).
The distal ends of bison and deer humeri have similar dismemberment cut
marks except bison humeri also have cuts on the medial face of the condyle; this
latter cut facilitates disarticulation of this joint after rigor mortus has set in and is
associated with secondary butchering and marrow procurement activities (Binford
1981:126). Corresponding cuts on the olecranon of the ulna occur only on bison,
while cut marks from this technique on the anterior face of the proximal radius
occur only on deer ulnae. The difference is most likely one of timing, in that the
freshly killed deer carcass disarticulates easily with cuts to the flexible joint from
the back of the distal humerus and from the front along the face of the radius.
Conversely, the bison carcass would be stiff or frozen after transport and locked
at the joint, requiring cuts along the dorsal crest of the ulna while simultaneously
cutting the posterior face of the distal humerus. Filleting marks on the upper front
limb are generally the same for both species, occurring along the medial crest of
the humeral shaft and on the anterior neck areas of the distal end, as well as
below the medial tuberosities of the proximal radius and along the posterior ridge
of the ulna.
The lower foreleg (metacarpals, carpals, and phalanges) is not represented
in the bison elements, indicating the removal of bison feet at the distal radius.
Bison radii are represented by 11 specimens, and eight show evidence of cutting
(knife) and/or chopping (stone or metal axe) on the distal end. Sixty-five percent
of the minimum number of deer were represented by metacarpals, but very few
carpals were recovered. Like the hindlimb, skinning and dismembering marks
occur across the metacarpal condyles, and short filleting marks appear across the
ridges of the anterior face.
Besides cut marks, other indications of processing, such as burning and
breakage, are informative about certain behavioral activities of the site occupants.
For example, 33 percent of the bison elements from Vinson and 10 percent of the

204

Texas Archeological Society

deer elements have lightly charred spots at or near their mid-shaft breaks. This is
evidence of marrow extraction activities. After f’dleting, the bone shaft is held
over a fire to bum away the tough periosteal sheath covering the surface of the
bone; this charring away of the sheath causes the shaft to break cleanly, without
shattering and contaminating the marrow with bone splinters (cf. Gilbert 1973).
No faunal reports reviewed by this author have commented on this kind of
faunal processing, although many faunal assemblages from Central Texas studied by the author have this characteristic; some examples include bones from the
Franty Watson Site (X41PPll6) (Yates 1979a), Aquilla (X41HI171) (Yates
1979b), and the Late Archaic and Neo-American sites in the San Gabriel Reservoir areas of Williamson County (Yates 1982a, 1982b), as well as those currently
under study from Rowe Valley (41WM437).
Two further comments are warranted regarding this type of processing at
Vinson. First, the bones were only minimally rendered further for bone grease;
unlike in Gilbert’s (1973) description, no attempt was made to smash the bones
of bison or deer as preparation for boiling out the "butter" (see Leechman 1951;
Vehik 1977). Secondly, then, it is possible to infer that the site occupants either
had no knowledge of bone grease rendering (this is doubtful), or they had little
need for it. The latter notion seems more reasonable given the abundant biomass available and procured by the Vinson occupants; the more destitute the
hunter, the more effort will be expended on satisfying basic nutritional needs.
Therefore, the late eighteenth century occupants of the Vinson Site may be said
to have been well fed.
Hunting selectivity is prompted by two factors: (1) degree of human nutritional need, and (2) the quality of the game’s nutritional state. Even though the
Vinson Site occupants did not process their game as thoroughly as possible, the
evidence discussed below suggests that they deliberately chose those elements
high in nutritious marrow, fat, and meat from animals in the best condition at the
time of the hunt.
Selectivity based on age is demonstrated at Vinson by the choice of older
deer. Based on 29 mandibles that could be aged, 66 percent are from deer over
four years of age at death (Table 3). Younger specimens may be absent as a result
of destruction by carnivores, however.
Sex and Seasonality

Sex in deer was not assessed owing to the fragmented condition of pelves,
although at least three males are represented by two left pedicles and a spike fine
in a sample of 24 antler fragments. Speth’s (1983) measuring criteria for sexing
fragmentary adult bison limb elements was used because of the excellent
preservation of bison long bones. Measurements revealed that over 95 percent of
the elements from House 5 are securely within the range of modern bison cows.
This overwhelming selection of cows may reveal the season of procurement
according to Speth’s (1983) data on seasonal changes and differences in marrow

Yates m Vinson Site Faunas

205

Table 3
Age Classes of Deer Mandibles from Midden Area
of House 5, the Vinson Site
Age Classes*
Age Not Assessed
<2 years
2 - 3.5
4 - 5.5
6-7.5

Right
1
4
1
7

18 (+2 left)

Left

1
3 (2 MNI)
3
4
11
20 Minimum

Total
1
5
4
10
9
29
Maximum

*Sevefinghaus 1949
quality between the sexes in bison. Furthermore, Speth (1983:163) finds that the
aboriginal hunter may have been attuned "to the anatomical and physiological
’facts’ of bison."
These "facts," coming to light from modern range management studies,
show that seasonal changes in protein values of important forage plants affect the
physiological maintenance levels of grazers. Figure 5 illustrates the relative
condition of male and female bison throughout an average rainfall year. As Speth
(1983:163) notes, "the changes in the two sexes differ to some extent in degree,
and they are also slightly out of phase. Both sexes are in poorest shape in the
spring, but males reach their lowest point earlier than females and are improving
at the time when females reach their lowest point."
Applying these principals to the Vinson material, a site exhibiting predominantly female bison remains, one can postulate a fall/winter occupation or at least
a fall/winter hunting of bison. This is because at that time of year, males are weak
from rutting behavior and females have stored up reserves for gestation. Therefore, selection for greater fat, prime hides, and better condition is suggested as a
hunting strategy.
Other cool-month evidence in the Vinson fauna is the abundance of fetal
and neonatal bison and deer remains, the presence of migratory fowl, and ethnographic accounts of the kinds of animals hunted in winter by Plains peoples. The
following discussion concerns the first piece of evidence: an abundance of
juvenile material from Vinson. "Juvenile" is def’med as those elements having
unfused diaphyses that are smaller than sub-adult elements and have surficial
qualities indicative of incomplete ossification.
There are at least four juveniles in the post-cranial deer remains. Several
elements appear to belong to a single fawn no older than three weeks at death. A

206

Texas Archeological Society

a
r-

0

o

0
z 12.-o
_J

"o
laJ

o

0
¢)
0

0
u~

LL

~0-

uo!J,!puo9 aA!,~O I a~l

Yates m Vinson Site Faunas

207

left radius and a left humerus are from an older fawn, and another, more
developed humerus is from a fawn from an age category around four months old
at death. Lastly, two fragments of a left femur from a fawn approximately six
months old completes the identifiable juvenile deer sample.
With the exception of the three-week old fawn, the young deer remains
agree with a fall/winter occupation interpretation. This single three-week old
fawn could have been an out-of-season birth or remains from a singular hunting
foray in the late spring.
Young bison are represented by an minimum of six individuals ranging in
age from fetal to six months old at death 0~igure 6). Fetal bison are identified by
two unmatched humeri, an ulna fragment, cannon bone fragments, a proximal
rib facet, and a mandibular condyle. A femur, scapula, and two humeri from
calves estimated at death to be near-term exhibit butchering cuts. A femur and
metatarsal represent a slightly older bison, and it is undetermined whether the
elements came from a single individual; cut marks and charring are evident on
the femur.
The next oldest calf remains include a humerus, proximal femur, and proximal tibia, all from the right side. They also exhibit cut marks (on the humerus)
and charred and exfoliated spiral breaks. The age at death of this individual is
between four and six months. Again these elements may belong to different
calves of similar age, but because they are different body parts, they must be
recorded as one individual. In comparison to a minimum of eight female bison,
there is a minimum of six calves recorded. Although Frison (1974) notes that
female bison may have out-of-season calves, the high correlation between the
number of female bison and unborn or newborn bison is strong evidence for
kills occurring midway or late into the normal gestation cycle of the Southern
Plains herd (see Hornaday 1887; McHugh 1972).
Five juvenile elements are tentatively identified as young pig. This is to be
expected given the presence of adult pig in the later nineteenth century occupation (see Smith, this volume). No juvenile pronghorn elements were identified.
BONE TOOLS FROM THE VINSON SITE
The quest for the identity of site occupants is based in large measure upon
the types of artifacts left behind at the site. Artifacts of bone may not be as useful
for this pursuit as are projectile point types or ceramic styles because the morphological variation in bone tools is dictated in large measure by the intrinsic
design of the vertebrate body. For example, a deer ulna with but a few grinding
strokes is made a generic awl; there is little variation in ulna tool styles. Aboriginal tools of bone rarely provide temporal indicators based on shape alone.
Preferences for a particular tool may, however, represent a cultural selection that
could be revealed by comparing frequencies of specific bone tool types from
different but contemporaneous sites.

208

Texas Archeological Society

Summer

Spr~ng

B
BB
B
B

DB

Fall

W~nter

B

Age at Death, Btson

D

Age at Death, Deer

Figure 6. Age Estimation of Bison (B) and Deer (D) from House 5.

In the artifact descriptions that follow, measurements and morphology are
complemented by comments regarding similar bone tools from roughly contemporaneous or otherwise related assemblages. Descriptions and illustrations of
bone artifacts from the following site reports (among others) were examined for
comparison with the Vinson Site materials:
Wichita Pilot Study (Bell et al. 1967)
Gilbert Site (Lorrain 1967c)
Roseborough Lake (Gilmore 1986)
Toyah component of the Kyle Site (Jelks 1962)
Toyah components from the San Gabriel Project sites (Yates 1982b)

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

209

Whitney Reservoir sites (Stephenson 1970)
Sites in Central Brazos and Trinity River Valleys (Lynott 1977)
Late Prehistoric sites in Kansas (Wedel 1959)
This list is by no means exhaustive, but it does represent a sampling of sites
occupied by hunting/farming aboriginal groups from ca. A.D. 1300 to ca. A.D.
1800 in North Central Texas. Emphasis is given to sites that are within or border
the ecotonal Texan biotic zone (Blair 1950) where the Vinson Site is located. In
addition to bone tools from House 5, other bone and shell artifacts from previous
excavations at Vinson are described herein.
Bone Artifacts of Native Manufacture
Bison Metatarsal Fleshers
Three left bison metatarsals were recovered from the Vinson Site (Figure
7a-c). All three have proximal ends of the element as unmodified bases. Transverse whittling cuts are apparent approximately midway down the shaft on two
specimens as manufacturing marks applied against the anterior face toward the
distal end; the condyles are removed from all three specimens. The two fleshers
that exhibit manufacturing marks do not appear to have been used extensively:
one (Figure 7a) was broken in use not long after its manufacture as indicated by
the light sheen and wear on the whittling marks and the posterior break of the
working tip. The flesher illustrated in Figure 7c broke before use and appears to
have been made too thin distally to take stress from finishing work. The third
flesher (Figure 7b) was extensively used and is split longitudinally from weathering; manufacture marks have been worn away by constant rubbing and the
broken edges of the walls are smooth and rounded. This working tip has a hint of
a toothed edge and is beveled to about a 45° angle; in all other respects it is of
similar manufacture to the other fleshers.
Used to remove fat and flesh from animal hides, fleshers are reported as a
Plains Indian feature in Dismal River Aspect sites (ca. A.D. 1700) in Scott
County, Kansas (Wedel 1959). Likewise, toothed fleshers were recovered from
the Glass Site and the Longest Site (among others) on the Red River in Oklahoma (Lorrain 1967a, 1967b; Bastian 1967). The presence of a series of jagged
chisel marks angled into the shaft (distally) of these specimens match the manufacturing characteristics of the Vinson tools. Similar toothed fleshers have been
found at the Floydada Country Club Site in the Texas Panhandle (Jim Word,
1984 personal communication), again demonstrating the Plains influence.
Burnisher

This highly polished object is 10.6 cm long with a gently rounded base on a
slightly curved subtriangular shaft tapering to a conical tip (broken away after
recovery). Smoothed-over cancellous tissue is visible at the round end of the
burnisher (Figure 8b).

210

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 7. Bison Metapodial Tools from House 5.

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

211

212

Texas Archeological Society

Wedel (1959:Plates 32, 70, 83) does not see these bone implements as
piercing tools but rather as rubbing tools; it is not clear, however, what was
rubbed. He (1959:311) describes the specimens from Kansas as subtriangular
"with slightly flattened, faceted, or transversely striated points.., unlike the
symmetrical polished awl tips." Some of the ones reported by Wedel are fashioned from ribs or neural spines, and considering the curvature and hint of
cancellous tissue apparent on the Vinson specimen, it also may have been made
from a rib or neural spine fragment. Similar tools are described and illustrated by
Lorrain (1967c:Figure 75) from the Gilbert Site.
Flat-tipped A wl/Hairpin/Bodkin
Two highly polished conical fragments resemble a blunt-pointed "needle"
described by Stephenson (1970:83) from Lake Whitney. The complete specimen
from the Stansbury Site has a slanted perforation at one end that enters the top
and exits through the wall (Stephenson 1970:Plate 4f); the opposite end is blunt.
The Vinson specimens exhibit characteristics of both ends of the Stansbury
example. The first has a flat-tipped working end on a conical bone tool fragment
6.7 cm in length (Figure 8d). The other specimen is almost a duplicate of the one
from Stansbury, in that it has a slanted perforation and a blunt (broken?) tip that
is 5.4 cm in length.
According to replicative studies by Richtsmeier (1980), a perforation where
the exterior circumference is greater than its interior can be made with either
stone or metal implements. The difference is detected macroscopically by the
scoring on the interior walls of the different holes. The metal blade creates coneshaped holes (as in the Vinson specimen); a stone tool produces irregular ridges
inside the perforation, appearing "stepped," reflecting the working edges of the
stone tool.
Both specimens from Vinson are polished to a high sheen and exhibit fine
longitudinal striations along their conical surfaces. Being flat-tipped, their function as awls is doubtful; an ornamental function is more likely. They do not,
however, fit the description of hairpins described by Olsen (1979:365) as being
"extremely large, highly polished staffs, with flat broad tips." Olsen (1979:357)
calls a selection of blunt-tipped awls from Grasshopper Ruin "problematical
because they bridge the gap.., between delicate sewing awls and ornamental
hairpins." If indeed the one broken specimen from Vinson that is perforated is
the same type as the other broken specimen that is flat-tipped, then perhaps both
could be called bodkins, or clothing fasteners. Lorrain (1968) describes a flat
polished awl with a rounded end from Crockett County, Texas, that may have
been used similarly to these from Vinson.
Grinding Tool
A left bison tibia fragment from House 5 shows evidence of burning and
grinding of the distal surface. The protuberances forming the sagittal plane are

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

213

completely ground down to the level of the lateral facets; the medial malleolus is
likewise ground to this level. These abraded areas are also slightly charred as if
used to grind something hot. A similar specimen is reported from Awatovi
(Olsen and Wheeler 1978:60). In Texas, similar bone tool specimens have been
reported from sites in the Ray Roberts and Lewisville Lake areas of North
Central Texas (Yates and Ferring 1992) and from Early Caddoan components
(41DT6 and 41DT16) at Cooper Lake in Northeast Texas (Yates 1992).
Another specimen with evidence of grinding is a horn core from a pronghorn. It has been cut from the skull at the base, and then ground flat. The core
tissue is beveled around the base, and there is a small polished area in the beveled
tissue. Also, the anterior edge of the horn core, naturally blade-like, appears to
have some wear, and a slight sheen is evident. Lorrain (1967b) describes an
abraded antler from the Glass Site on the Red River that may have served a
similar function. However, the specific function of this element is unknown.
Chopping Tool

The broken diaphyses (shafts) of two right proximal bison femurs have
charred breaks and small singular areas of polish. When the shafts of long bones
are broken for marrow extraction, the resulting halves and splinters often have
jagged edges. The articular ends can then serve as handles for these dagger-like
objects. Many examples can be found in the North American literature (e.g.,
Frison 1974; Johnson 1976); however, Lyman’s (1984) caution regarding expediency tools is well founded. Nevertheless, the Vinson specimens have wear and
polish confined to a working edge that clearly indicates applied directional force
(see Halstead and Middleton 1972).
Gaming Pieces
Fifteen deer toes (phalanx I) have no proximal ends. Of these, only one
appears to have been ground and beveled, conforming to the shape of perforated
phalangeal cones used in cup-and-pin gaming devices (Figure 8e). None of the
phalanges from Vinson have perforated distal condyles, although five toe bones
do have damaged or degraded and weakened spots between the condyles. Guilday
(1963) illustrates some examples in which the proximal end is only roughly
trimmed (similar to the Vinson specimens), but all are perforated in the distal
ends. If modified at all, those found in the debris of House 5 might have been
discarded preforms or unfinished items.
Pendants
A beautifully-preserved, drilled bear canine (left maxillary) was recovered
from House 5 (Figure 8c). It is 7.44 cm long and 2.2 cm at its widest. Approximately 1.6 cm from the end of the root is an oblong to round perforation
measuring at most 6 mm (outer diameter) and tapering to an inner diameter of 2
mm. The hole was drilled from both sides; the hole is wider and deeper on the

214

Texas Archeological Society

buccal side and slants inward toward the root end. This side was probably drilled
first given that the lingual side of the tooth body is flatter and provides greater
stability. Faint longitudinal striae appear near the hole on both sides. Although
slightly root-etched, the ornament is well-polished over the entire specimen, with
the greatest amount of polish above the perforation. According to Wedel
(1959:208), drilled-bear teeth such as these are reminiscent of those found on
Hopewellian sites, but Lorrain (1967b:36) points out that this ornament type was
probably borrowed by the Wichita from the Caddo. Examples have been recovered from the Longest Site (Lorrain 1967a) on the Red River in Oklahoma and
from the Gilbert Site (Lorrain 1967c) in Rains County, Texas.
Two drilled bison incisors were also recovered from Vinson, although their
exact provenience is unknown. Both were referred to in site excavation notes as
drilled human teeth, but the morphology, slant of attrition, and enamel ridges
compare well with worn bovine incisors, probably bison. Drilled incisors and
canine from deer, coyote, raccoon, and puma have been found in Native American sites; drilled bison teeth are thus not surprising. The Vinson specimens were
perforated from both sides near the root tip. It is unknown if they were recovered
in close proximity to each other as possible remains of a necklace.
Beads

Two bone beads are included in the House 5 materials ~igure 8g, h). One is
2.53 cm in length with an inner diameter of 3.7 mm. It is subtriangular in crosssection with a bone wall thickness of approximately 1.4 mm. Species identification is undetermined. The other bone bead is an unusual specimen made from the
sternebrae of an unidentified mammal. It is small, 9 mm in length, and with a
total diameter of 3.3 mm. It may have been somewhat longer since one end has a
jagged fresh break; the opposite end is smooth and ground flat, showing the canal
structural of the sternebrae. Like the pendants, these beads probably served as
adornment. Similar ornaments are recorded from numerous aboriginal sites,
including Wichita sites along the Red River (Bell et al. 1967), the Gilbert Site
(Lorrain 1967c), from Kansas (Wedel 1959), and from prehistoric sites in the
Whitney Reservoir (Stephenson 1970).
Flute
An intact bone flute is made from the right ulna of an eagle. It is 14.2 cm
long, slightly curved as befits the element, and retains just enough of its diagnostic articulations at its distal end to identify it as an eagle, although exact species
determination is not possible. The Vinson specimen has six finger holes, averaging 3 mm in outer diameter and one mm inner diameter. The blowhole is
triangular, and located near the proximal end of the element with the apex of the
triangle pointed distally. Scoring scratches are visible on the flanks of the long
sides, and there is a distance of 3 cm between the apex of the blowhole and the
first finger hole. The flute is finished to a light polish, and the quill knobs of the

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

215

ulna have been completely ground smooth. The finger holes are located approximately where the quill knobs had been. There are no other marks of decoration
on the object (Figure 9).
A flute from the Longest Site is the geographically and morphologically
closest comparative specimen. It is broken and has no finger holes, but its
blowhole is exactly the same as the Vinson flute (5 x 8 mm in size and with an
isosceles triangle shape). Other examples from the literature either have no
blowhole (cf. the Gilbert Site [Lorrain 1967c:Figure 75g]), or they have rectangular holes (Wedel 1959:Figure 70a), or they have oval holes (Jelks 1965).
Wedel (1959:597) recounts the presence of bone "flageolets" as a "Southwestern
feature" in some of the Dismal River sites in the Central Plains. Two examples
from Southwestern sites can be found in Awatovi (Olsen and Wheeler 1978) and
Grasshopper Pueblo (Olsen 1979).

Scored Rib
A 6 cm length of deer rib bears six parallel transverse cuts at one end. The
intervals between scorings vary between 1 and 2 mm over a length of approximately 1 cm. The scorings were made with a metal blade as indicated by the
hairline cuts with a retained lip of bone. The cuts are located on the inferior
(concave) surface of the midsection of the rib and were made either incidentally
during secondary butchering activities (i.e., filleting) or deliberately as part of
implement manufacture. What kind of implement these scored ribs represent is
not apparent. Wedel (1959) identifies such scored implements either as musical
rasps or as pottery stamping devices. Unlike deeply notched or grooved fragments found at other Texas sites (e.g., the Arnold Site at Cooper Lake [Doehner
and Larson 1978] and the Glass Site [Lorrain 1967b]), the Vinson specimen is
not scored deeply and would not make much sound nor would it leave deep
marks on pottery.
Modified Epiphysis

A proximal bison humerus had a large hole in the medial side of the head of
the humerus. The 6 mm diameter hole is ringed with small battered or pecked
areas. There are deep longitudinal grooves apparent inside the hole in the cancellous tissue. Remarkably, there is a description in the Wichita Pilot Study of a
"worked bison humerus head" from the Glass Site (Lorrain 1967b), and Lorrain
describes similar chopping marks on the outside of the cavity and removal of a
considerable amount of cancellous tissue. This modification may be due to the
removal of this nutritious tissue during food processing activities.
Curated Object (?)
A mineralized fragment of a fish dentition was submitted for analysis with
the bone tools. It is approximately 2.5 x 2 cm in size and bears the remains of
tooth sockets that compare well with those of modern sargo or sheepshead

216

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 9. Eagle Ulna Flute from the Vlnson Site, House 5.

(Archosargus probatocephalus). The exposed sockets are roughly triangular in
shape to accommodate the incisor-like forward teeth of this Gulf fish. It is so
thoroughly mineralized that its presence in the site is best explained as a curated
fossil.
Bone Artifacts of European Manufacture
Double-toothed Comb
This delicate specimen has lost many teeth, and its full length is indeterminable due to breakage (see Figure 8f). Nevertheless, its presence at Vinson is
considered to be additional evidence of the importance of European trade goods
at the site. The comb adequately fits Nrel Hume’s (1970) description of common

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

217

seventeenth and eighteenth century lice combs. Wray (1963) calls these combs
"cootie" combs and describes them as having one row of teeth "usually fine
while the second row was usually coarser." Both rows of teeth on the Vinson
specimen are equally fine, there being less than a millimeter space between teeth
measured at the base. The execution of manufacture is very refined judging by
the regular spacing and linearity of the teeth. The distance between the rows (i.e.,
the body width) is 1.6 cm, maintaining an equal distance from completed end to
broken end, about 3.9 cm. The longest intact tooth measures 0.6 cm, excluding
the terminal teeth which measure four cm from tip to tip (greatest width) and are
each 4 mm wide at the base. The bone itself is probably a split mammal rib,
suggested by a slight curve in the length of the comb and traces of smoothed
cancellous tissue on the body. A lice comb from a nineteenth century historic site
(41DN157) in the Ray Roberts area is another comparable specimens from a site
in Texas (Yates and Ferring 1992).
Knife Handles

Five iron-pegged knife handles further evidence the use of European tools
at Vinson. The flat inner sides reveal manufacturing marks indicating use of
metal hand saws. These fragments still retain the iron pegs, and the remaining
two have indentations where the pegs had been. Each specimen is half of a pair
used to sandwich a knife shank secured by the iron pegs or rivets.
Riveted bone handles came into use in the early eighteenth century (N0el
Hume 1970). The Vinson bone handles were either trade items or possibly belonged to the later Anglo-American nineteenth century occupation, although all
metal utensils were more common in this later period except for ornamental
pieces. None of these specimens are decorated. In fact, one is rather crudely
made, still showing traces of the cancellous tissue on its underside, although
evidence of saw marks and iron rust are clearly visible at one end; its opposite
or outer side is scratched and scored, but the piece is too small to discern a pattern
of any kind. These handles may have been part of folding clasp knives. Clasp
knives usually have two rivets at each end, while the most complete specimen
from Vinson (length 8.6 cm) has three pegs and tapers from butt to shank insertion more like a table knife. A clasp knife, however, was found at the contemporaneous Longest Site with traces of bone adhering to the rust. Harris and Harris
(1967) comment that the handle from the Longest Site was "probably of English manufacture" not fitting the typical French trade knife pattern.
INVERTEBRATE MATERIAL

Approximately 50 items of invertebrate material were submitted for analysis. Remains of landsnails are noted, but were not examined for species identification. The analyzed materia! is exclusively bivalve or clam shell.
Seven of the specimens are complete enough to identify as Lampsilis
anodontoides (N=5) and Uniomerus tetralasmus (N=2). With few exceptions the

218

Texas Archeological Society

preservation of shell is fair to poor, many specimens being quite friable and
powdery. Both species are found in Texas where Lampsilis occupies a wide
variety of habitats including sand, gravel, or muddy bottoms in swift or slow
currents, and at variable depths; Uniomerus prefers muddy bottoms in shallow
waters (Parmalee 1967). Several unidentified specimens, on the other hand,
appear quite strong and fresh, retaining relatively sharp broken (or cut) edges.
SHELL ARTIFACTS
Button
A two-hole button measuring 2.4 cm in diameter was recovered from the
Vinson Site. The button may be of European manufacture, but it is quite rough
and rather crudely made. That is, the holes are of different sizes, there is no
finish to the artifact, and traces of the natural ribbing are visible on the shell’s
exterior.
According to Parmalee (1967:65), Lampsilis was "perhaps the most valued
shell used in the pearl button industry" because of its uniform thickness and
lustrous nacre. Although mussel shell buttons became a great industry late in
the nineteenth century (and this button then associated with the later AngloAmerican occupation at Vinson), its manufacture suggests attempts by the aboriginal inhabitants to mimic buttons possibly displayed by the European traders.
A two-hole shell button was recovered from a Protohistoric period Wheeler
Complex site in Oklahoma (Bell and Bastian 1967).
Pendant Blanks
That the aboriginal occupants at Vinson engaged in a shell industry is
evidenced by many fragments of cut shell from the assemblage. Whereas most of
the suspected preforms or blanks for pendants lack suspension holes, several
have the remains of drilled holes and are cut with notches that could have
retained a cord for suspension.
The criteria used to sort these modified shell fragments are the notches and/
or the partial suspension holes, as well as their shape and angularity. The latter
criterion is admittedly nebulous, but there is a distinct repetition of squares,
rectangles, and triangles with sharp angles and edges, suggesting deliberate
shaping and execution during manufacture. One Uniomerus valve had an excised
triangular blank. Similar triangular mussel shell pendants were found at the
Longest Site (Lorrain 1967a).
It is interesting to note that Noil Vinson has an object in his Vinson Site
collection that resembles these shell pieces although it is made of metal: the piece
is flat and triangular in shape and perforated with small, thin metal rings in the
hole. Another example of triangular pieces of flat metal used by a contemporary
group is found in a burial from the Longest Site (Bell et al. 1967:Fig. 40); a small
flat silver triangle was photographed in situ on the brow of Burial 5. Perhaps the

Yates m Vinson Site Faunas

219

introduced metal replaced shell in the progression of adornment manufacture for
these people.
Shell Spoons
At least one of the more complete Lampsilis valves exhibits a smooth
beveled exterior edge that resembles shell artifacts generally referred to as spoons
or scoops. It is one of the rather powdery specimens, and therefore its identification as such is tentative. Nevertheless, shell disks and shell spoons are reported
from the Glass and Coyote sites in the Wichita Pilot Study (Lorrain 1967a).
Possible Curated Object
A valve from a fossilized Rangia sp. was also submitted along with the
bone and shell artifacts. Unless the site has suitable outcrops for this kind of
fossil, it is suggested that, like the Archosargus dentary fragment, this ecofact
was introduced into the site and possibly curated by the inhabitants, either modem
or aboriginal.
SUMMARY

The animal remains from the late eighteenth century Vinson Site provide
information on the ecology of the site, as well as the subsistence habits and other
behavior patterns of the people that lived there. They hunted many different
animals for meat, hides, utensils, ornaments, and entertainment as revealed by
the bones left in the middens. They may have opportunistically exploited their
own refuse dumps by killing the scavengers that were drawn to the site by the
butchering debris. The ecotonal situation of the site supplied a variety of animals
for hunting, trapping, and fishing. Bison and deer provided the majority of meat,
although smaller game was also procured. The people probably had sufficient
nutrition from this diet as indicated by a pattern of minimal bone processing, an
abundance of animal resources with high species diversity, and the sheer bulk of
the midden contents. The cultural identity of the aboriginal occupants at Vinson
is probably Tawakoni, and not surprisingly, affinities exist among the modified
bones with those from eighteenth century Wichita sites of the Red River Valley
of Texas and Oklahoma.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded by the TAS Donor’s Fund, and it is with sincere
appreciation to C.K. Chandler, the Committee, and the Society for their support.
Some of the materials were identified with the aid of specimens kindly loaned by
Dr. Elizabeth Pillaert, Zoological Museum, University of Wisconsin. I would
also thank Dr. C. Reid Ferring for his endless encouragement of my research
endeavors and for use of the zooarcheological collections at the University of

220

Texas Archeological Society

North Texas. I am eternally grateful to Gerald Blow for the graphics and advice
on all things stylish. Gratitude is expressed to Dr. Timothy K. Perttula and Brian
Shaffer for commenting on the draft of this report, and to Nancy G. Reese and
Sam Melant for its preparation.
REFERENCES CITED
B astian, T.
1967

Beik, L.
1973

Native-made Artifacts from Historic Sites. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian
Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 184-196. National Science Foundation, Grant GS-964, Washington, D. C.

Archeology and the Microscope. Fred A. Praeger, New York.

Bell, R. E. and T. Bastian
1967
Survey of Potential Wichita Archeological Remains in Oklahoma. In: A Pilot
Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E.
Bell, E. B. Jelks and W. W. Newcomb, pp. 119-127. National Science Foundation, Grant GS-964, Washington, D. C.
Bell, R. E., E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb (assemblers)
A Pilot Study of Wichita lndian Archeology and Ethnohistory. National Science
1967
Foundation, Grant GS-964, Washington, D. C.
Binford, L. R.
1981
Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myths. Academic Press, New York.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.
Caras, R. A.
1967
North American Mammals. Meredith Press, New York.
Collins, H. H., Jr.
Complete Field Guide to North American Wildlife. Harper & Row, Publishers,
1981
New York.
Daly, P.
1969

Approaches to Faunal Analysis in Archaeology.AmericanAntiquity 34(2):146153.

Davis, W. B.
1978
The Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Bulletin 41, Austin, Texas.

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

221

Doehner, K. and R. E. Larson
1978
Archaeological Research at the Proposed Cooper Lake, Northeast Texas,
1974-1975. Research Report 108. Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
Ernst, C. H. and R. W. Barbour
1972
Turtles of the United States. University of Kentucky Press, Lexington.
Prison, G.
1974

The Casper Site: A Hell Gap Bison Kill on the High Plains. Academic Press,
New York.

Gilbert, M. E.
1969
Some Aspects of Diet and Butchering Techniques Among Prehistoric Indians
in South Dakota. Plains Anthropologist 14(46):277-294.
1973

Mammalian Osteo-Archaeology: North America. Missouri Archaeolog&al
Society Special Publications, Columbia.

1980

Mammalian Osteology. Published by the author, Laramie, Wyoming.

Gilmore, K. K.
1986
French-lndian Interaction at an 18th Century Frontier Post: The Roseborough
Lake Site, Bowie County, Texas. Contributions in Archaeology No. 3. Institute
of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton, Texas.
Gould, F. W.
1975
The Grasses of Texas. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Guilday, J.
1963
The Cup-and-Pin game. Pennsylvania Archaeologist 33(4):159-163.
Halstead, B. and J. Middleton
1972

Bare Bones: An Exploration in Art and Science. University of Toronto Press,
Toronto.

Harris, R. K. and I. M. Harris
1967
Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. In: A Pilot Study of W&hita Indian
Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 129-162. National Science Foundation, Grant GS-964, Washington, D. C.
Hasskarl, R. A.
1961
The Boggy Creek Site of Washington County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 30:287-300.
Heizer, R. F. and L. K. Napton
1969
Biological and Cultural Evidence from Prehistoric Human Coprolites. Science
165:563-568.

222

Texas Archeological Society

Homaday, W. T.
1887
The Extermination of the American Bison. United States National Museum,
Annual Report.
Jaques, H. E.
1947
How to Know the Land Birds. William C. Brown Co., Dubuque.
Jelks, E. B.
1962
The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County, Texas.
Archaeology Series No. 5. University of Texas, Department of Anthropology,
Austin.
1965

Archeology of McGee Bend Reservoir, Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, Department
of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.

Johnson, E.
1976
Investigations into the Zooarchaeology of the Lubbock Lake Site. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Leechman, D.
1951
Bone Grease. American Antiquity 16(1):355-356.
Lorrain, D.
1967a Artifacts from Prehistoric Sites. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 197-203. National Science Foundation, Grant GS-964, Washington, D. C.
1967b

The Glass Site. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks and W. W. Newcomb, pp.
24-44. National Science Foundation, Grant GS-964, Washington, D. C.

1967c

Bone and Shell Artifacts. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Aspect Site in
Northeastern Texas, edited by E.B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 37:212-219.

1968

Archeological Excavations in Northwestern Crockett County, Texas, 19661967. State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report No. 12,
Austin.

Lyman, R. L.
1984
Broken Bones, Bone Expediency Tools, and Bone Pseudotools: Lessons from
the Blast Zone around Mount St. Helens, Washington. American Antiquity
49(2):315-333.
Lynott, M. J.
1977
A Regional Model for Archaeological Research in Northcentral Texas. Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

223

McHugh, T.
1972
The Time of the Buffalo. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
Nrel Hume, I.
1970
A Guide ofArtifacts of ColonialAmerica. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
Oberholser, n,c.
The Bird Life of Texas. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
1974
Olsen, S. J. and R. P. Wheeler
1978
Bones from Awatovi. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and
Ethnology 70(2):35-74. Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Olsen, S. L.
1979
A Study of Bone Artifacts from Grasshopper Pueblo, Arizona. The Kiva
44(4):341-373.
Parmalee, P. W.
1967
The Fresh-water Mussels of Illinois. Illinois State Museum Popular Science
Series, Vol. VIII, Springfield, Illinois.
Raab, L. M. (editor)
1982

Settlement of the Prairie Margin: Archaeology of the Richland Creek Reservoir, Navarro and Freestone Counties, Texas. Southern Methodist University,
Archaeology Research Program, Monographs, No. 1. Dallas.

Richtsmeier, J. T.
1980
Modified Bone Replication Experiment. Paper presented at the 38th Plains
Conference, November 5-8, Iowa City, Iowa.
Robbins, C. S., B. Bruun and H. S. Zim
1966
Birds of North America. Western Publishing Co., Inc., Racine, Wisconsin.
Schmidly, D. J.
1983
Texas Mammals East of the Balcones Fault Zone. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.
Schorger, A. W.
1966
The Wild Turkey, its History and Domestication. Oklahoma State University
Press, Stillwater.
Severinghaus, C. W.
1949
Tooth Development and Wear as Criteria of Age in White-tailed Deer. Journal
of Wildlife Management 13 (2): 195 -216.
Shaffer, B. S.
1992
Quarter-Inch Screening: Understanding Biases in Recovery of Vertebrate
Faunal Remains. American Antiquity 57" 129-137.

224

Texas Archeological Society

Shay, C. T.
Later Prehistoric Bison and Deer Use in the Eastern Prairie Forest Border. In:
1978
Bison Procurement and Utilization: A Symposium, edited by L. B. Davis and M.
Wilson. Plains Anthropologist Memoir 14" 194-212.
Shotwell, J. A.
1955
An Approach to the Paleoecology of Mammals. Ecology 36(2):327-337.
Speth, J. S.
1983

Bison Kills and Bone Counts. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Stephenson, R. L.
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-277.
Thomas, D. H.
On Distinguishing Natural from Cultural Bone in Archaeological Sites. Ameri1971
can Antiquity 36(3):366-371.
Vehik, S.
1977

Bone Fragments and Bone Grease Manufacturing: A Review of Their Archaeological Use and Potential. Plains Anthropologist 22:169-182.

Walker, P. L. and J. C. Long
An Experimental Study of the Morphological Characteristics of Tool Marks.
1977
American Antiquity 42:605 -616.
Wedel, W. R.
An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bulletin No. 174. Smithsonian Institu1959
tion, Bureau of Ethnology, Washington, D. C.
White, T. E.
Observations on the Butchering Technique of Some Aboriginal Peoples, No. 2.
1953
American Antiquity 19(2):160-164.
Williams-Dean, G.
1978
Ethnobotany and Cultural Ecology of Prehistoric Man in Southwest Texas.
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Botany, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Wood, W. R.
Vegetational Reconstruction and Climatic Episodes. American Antiquity
1976
41(2):206-207.
Wray, C. F.
Ornamental Hair Combs of the Seneca Iroquois. Pennsylvania Archaeologist
1963
33:35-50.

Yates m Vinson Site Faunas

225

Yates, B. C.
1979a Observations on the Faunal Remains Recovered from the Franty Watson Site,
X41PP116. In: The Framy Watson Site and Palo Pinto County Archaeology,
edited by S. A. Skinner and T. Turner. Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
1979b

Observations on the Faunal Remains Recovered from Aquilla Lake Site,
X41HI171. In: Prehistoric Seulements at Aquilla Lake, Texas, edited by S. A.
Skinner. Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

1982a

Vertebrate Faunal Remains. In: Archaeological Investigations at the San
GabrielReservoir, Central Texas, edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 14/33-53. Institute
of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University. Final report to U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, Contract DACW63-78-C-0012.

1982b

Bone Artifacts. In: Archaeological Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir,
Central Texas, edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 15/57-227. Institute of Applied
Sciences, North Texas State University. Final report to U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Contract DACW63-78-C-0012.

1992

Zooarcheology of Four Woodland/Caddoan Sites at Cooper Lake. In: Excavations at the Tick, Spike, Johns Creek, and Peerless Bottoms Sites, Cooper Lake
Project, Delta andHopkins Counties, Texas, by R.C. Fields, E.F. Gadus, L. W.
Klement, C.B. Bousman, and J. B. McLerran, pp. 457-489. Review Draft.
Reports of Investigations No. 91, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Yates, B. C. and C. Reid Ferring (editors)
1992
Holocene Archeology and Geoarcheology at Ray Roberts Lake, Northeentral
Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton.
Submitted to U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Ft. Worth District, Contract No.
DACW63-C-0098.

