217

Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial
John Redding and Wayne Parker
ABSTRACT
A single slab-lined Archaic burial in southern Crosby County, Texas was
excavated in April of 1986 by South Plains Archeological Society members
Wayne Parker, of Crosby County, and John Redding, of Floyd County. Due to the
extreme fragmentation and absence of some skeletal parts, it was impossible to
determine the exact position of the body at interment. The burial was of an adult,
probably male, who most likely lived sometime between 2000 B.C. and A.D. 1000
Artifacts recovered in direct association with the burial are one Ensor dart point,
three Olivella shell beads, and one polished quarter-moon shaped stone with 24
notches cut into the convex edge. This artifact is called a lunate stone throughout
this report.

SETTING
Crosby County covers the southeast edge of the Llano Estacado and the
adjacent rolling plains. Atop the Llano is the geographical region called the Texas
High Plains. Although appearing to be a flat plain, it in fact slopes gradually to the
southeast at an average of 2.44 meters (8 feet) per 1.5 km (J. Hughes,, this volume).
Many playa lakes on the plains vary in size from several to several hundred
hectares. Occasional gullies meander southeastward to the escarpment of the Llano
and eventually to the Brazos River. Near the escarpment, constant erosion has
created deep, narrow canyons in these drainages. The largest canyon in Crosby
County originates in Floyd County to the north and cuts several miles into the Llano
Estacado.
Below the escarpment lies the region known as the Rolling Plains (J. Hughes,
this volume) made up of low hills, many gullies, and occasional springs. A few flattopped mesas, scattered along and usually near the escarpment, vary in size from
mere flat-topped peaks to mesas a few hundred meters long.
The elevation of Crosby County ranges between 975 meters (3200 feet) atop
the Llano in the north and 640 meters (2100 feet) below the escarpment in the south
(Koos et al. 1966). Average temperatures range between 21.8°C (53.8°F) to -6.7°C (25.3°F) in January and 62.1°C (94.1°F) to 34.3°C (66.3°F) in July. The
annual rainfall averages 54 cm (21.42 inches), with a 206-day growing season.
Plant life consists of many grasses; buffalo and mesquite are the most common.
Yucca, cactus, shin-oak, broomweed, wild sunflower, and mesquite are common.
Below the escarpment, along the many drainages, cottonwood, hackberry, wild
plum, cedar, and sagebrush flourish. Animal life consists of mouse, rat, rabbit,
prairie dog, raccoon, porcupine, skunk, opossum, badger, bobcat, coyote, deer, and

Bulletin of the Texas ArcheoIogical Society 60 (1989)

218

Texas Archeological Society

antelope. Native birds are quail, turkey, sparrow, mockingbird, bluejay, blackbird,
field lark, and cardinal; the many migratory birds include duck, goose, dove, crow,
hawk, buzzard, and an occasional eagle. Reptiles include homed toad and several
other kinds of lizards, tortoise, snapping turtle, and snakes in abundance,---most
commonly rattlesnake, bullsnake, and prairie racer. Amphibians include many
species of frog and toad. catfish, perch, minnows, and fiver clams are found in the
few water holes along the drainages below the escarpment.
Archaic sites are plentiful along the escarpment, both near the upper rim and
along the waterways below. Unfortunately, very few have been studied and
documented, for most archeological attention in the region has been centered
around the Paleoindian and Neoindian periods; most evidence of the Archaic is
in surface-collected artifacts.
Within a few kilometers of the burial are many sites that have yielded an
abundance of surface-collected Archaic material. The most prominent sites are in
southern and southwestern Crosby County in the sandhills atop the Llano. Archaic
artifacts can also be found around nearly all of the larger playa lakes of this region.
As the drainages of the High Plains approach the escarpment, they form deep,
narrow canyons that create peninsulalike ridges of varying width and length.
Several of these points, though only a few hundred yards wide, extend for more than
a kilometer between the canyons. To geologists and to ordinary lovers of nature,
the view from one of these points is, to say the least, spectacular as the eye scans
the narrow gorges on each side and drifts southeastward across the Rolling Plains
below to the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River some 80 km (50 miles)
away. Undoubtedly this magnificent panorama must have played at least some part
in the decision of Archaic people of the region to use these projections as places
of interment. This lunate stone burial was on such a projection in south-central
Crosby County (Figure 1).
DESCRIPTION OF SITE

The burial site was near the center of the projection and about 140 meters (150
yards) back from its point, atop a small knoll some 9 to 12 meters (30 to 40 feet)
in diameter. Burned rock is scattered along the top of the escarpment, and an
occasional hearth has been exposed by erosion. A few flint flakes and quartzite
hammerstone fragments have been found nearby.
Below the escarpment along the banks of the many drainages there is limited
evidence of prehistoric man; a few hearths are exposed: flint flakes of Edwards
chert, Tecovas jasper, and Alibates dolomite have been found, but no major
campsite has been discovered.
Many fragments of quartzite hammerstones and sandstone grinding tools have
been found, but the only known artifact collected from the area directly surrounding
the burial site is a sandstone mano about 18 cm (7 inches) in diameter, discovered
near a dry stream bed below the escarpment.

Redding and Parker E Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

219

CROSBY COUNTY
ON

RALLS
US 62/82

CROI

O4

E
HIGH PLAINS

Crosby County
Lunate Stone Burial

_~

Cap Rock

I"

0

ROLLING

2-

PLAINS

5 MILES

0
i

I

5 KILOMETERS

CAPROCK ESCARPMENT
)

Figure 1. Map of part of Crosby County showing the location of the lunate stone burial.

EXCAVATION

Before excavation was begun, magnetic north was established, photographs
were taken, and it was decided to make scale drawings and field notes as well as
photographs at different levels during the excavation (Figure 2). Smaller loose
surface cobbles and fill were removed by trowel and brush in order to pinpoint the
exact location of the burial crypt, which was encountered at about 15 cm (6 inches).
At this level larger slablike stones of the local escarpment rock the only rock type
used in the burial--were exposed (Figure 3). These slabs were from 28 to 48 cm
(11 to 19 inches) long, 15 to 35 cm (6 to 14 inches) wide, and 5 to 13 cm (2 to 5
inches) thick.
At this depth most of the stones were laid horizontally, but five were vertical
to near vertical. The five vertical slabs---only two of which were partly exposed
at the surface---made a circular pattern with a diameter of about 120 cm (4 feet).
Only small parts of two of these stones were exposed at the surface. These stones
and fill were removed, and the excavation continued to a depth of about 35 cm (14
inches), where, near the center of the crypt, two large, fiat, horizontal slabs were
uncovered (Figure 4). These stones were about 61 cm (2 feet) long, 23 to 30 cm
(9 to 12 inches) wide, and 5 to 8 cm (2 to 3 inches) thick.
After the two slabs were removed and troweling continued for about 3 cm (one
inch) to a depth of 46 cm (18 inches), the first bones, identified as the femurs, tibias,

220

Texas Archeological Society

\

0

0

0

0
!

1 CENTIMETER

\
Figure 2. Map showing the surface of the site before excavation.

and fibulas, were exposed Figure 5). The two femurs, about 47 cm (18 1/2 inches)
long, above and nearly parallel to the lower leg bones, were lying in a northeastsouthwest position with the pelvic area to the southwest. These bones were
extensively fractured, and much of the pelvic region was absent, making precise
measurements impossible; no foot bones were recovered. Directly north of the
pelvic area were fragments of three vertebrae, and near the northern part of the
burial pit were one humerus, ulna, radius, and parts of three ribs. The arm bones

Redding atul Parker ~ Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

Part of rock exposed

~i~

at surface

D

Rocks placed vertically
around burial

0
I
0

1
i
,
1 CENTIMETER

Figure 3. Plan showing placement of vertical rocks around the burial. 3.5x4.5

o

1 INCH
w

0

J

l CENTIMETER

Figure 4. Drawing of the horizontal slab rocks covering the burial.

221

222

Texas Archeological Society

were folded, with the wrists to the west. North of the leg bones, near the edge of
the burial pit, were two Olivella shell beads, and another was found north of the
leg bones near the pelvic region (Figure 5). Two small fragments of the skull were
excavated just northwest of and below the pelvic region at a depth of 61 cm (24
inches); one fragment included part of the left eye guard, with the exterior of the
skull facing the bottom of the pit (Figure 5). No more skeletal remains were
recovered from the burial.
An unusual artifact was discovered in the southwest sector of the pit about 7.5
cm (3 inches) from the pelvic region at 51 cm (20 inches). This artifact was a

t
I

N

Burial pit
about 1 meter (3 ’)

Animal burrow
at 56 cm (22 "),
about 18 cm (7") diameter

/

diameter

"
,

/

Arm bones
,

at 46 cm (18")

t¢I

Vertebra
fragments
at 51 cm(20")
Two
I

Ollvella
shell bead
at 51 cm (20’)

I

t

ollvella
shell
beads
i at 48 cm (19")

t

I

!
t

I

\

Lunate ~’~
stone
at 51 cm (20")

Leg bones
at 46 cm (18")

Two skull
fragments
at 61 cm (24")

Ensor point
at 56 om (22")
(below all leg bones)

Figure 5. Drawing of the burial showing locations of skeletal remains and artifacts.

Redding and Parker m Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

223

quarter-moon-shaped, highly polished stone of greyish green material that measured 16.5 by 5 by 1.5 cm (6 ½ by 17A by 9/16 inches). The convex side had been
ground to a nearly sharp edge, with 24 notches cut or ground into it from both sides,
giving the convex side of the artifact a saw-toothed appearance. The artifact was
oriented nearly north-south, with the flat side up and the notched convex side down.
For a more thorough description of this stone, see the "artifacts" section.
At this point in the excavation, all bones were removed from the pit in order
to trowel the remaining f’dl. Directly below and near the center of the leg bones at
about 56cm (22 inches) was anEnsor dart point of Edwards chert lying horizontally
and pointing to the southwest (Figure 5). Final troweling yielded no more artifacts.
There are at least two possible explanations for the unnatural arrangement and
absence of some skeletal parts. Death may have occurred at another location, and
the body may have been abandoned for some reason. In this event, surely
scavengers (birds and animals) would have devoured or carried away part of the
remains. At a later date the balance of the remains might have been gathered for
interment. Such bundle burials have been reported previously. Grant Hall (1981),
in his extensive work at Aliens Creek, excavated and described two bundle burials.
Two other individuals, distinguished by virtue of the energy expended
in preparing them for interment, were group 2 burials 65 and 93, representing
about 1.4 percent of the known group 2 population. Both bundle burials,
the flesh of these individuals was apparently removed and the bones
disarticulated prior to interment. Several artifacts were placed amidst the
bones of burial 93; one tubular shell bead was possibly associated with
burial 65. It is interesting to note, that, unlike the four cremations, there
were grave goods associated with the bundle burials. Whether defleshing
of the bodies took place at the site of interment or at some other locality
could not be determined from available evidence.
Another possible explanation is that an animal whose 18 cm (7 inch) burrow
was discovered entering the northern part of the burial pit at about 56 cm (22
inches), could account for the disarray and absence of some skeletal parts.
ARTIFACTS
Olivella Shell Beads

Three small Olivella shell beads were recovered from the burial, each 1.5 cm
(½ inch) long and .75 cm (¼ inch) in diameter. Under magnification, all of the beads
show some erosion due to decay, and each has the apex and canal opening abraded
off, but no other abrasion or engraving is evident (Figure 6)
Marine shells were obtained either by trade with inhabitants of the Gulf of
Mexico, the Gulf of California, or the Pacific Coast, or by excursions to those areas.
That such trade was extensive is evidenced by the number of shell artifacts

224

Texas Archeological Society

0

I ~NO

0

1 CENTIMETER

Figure 6. Artifacts from the Crosby County burial. A, Ensor dart point; B, C, D, Olivella
shell beads; E, side view of lunate stone; F, bottom view of lunate stone; G, top view of
lunate stone.

recovered from sites in the Southwest. Charles Amsden (1949), in his survey of the
basketmaker period of the Southwest (A.D. 11 to 600), made the following
reference to marine shell ornaments:
If the basketmakers dressed sparingly, they adorned themselves with
a great variety of simple jewels and trinkets. Beads are abundant in
basketmaker caves. There are beads of stone in varying colors, carefully
ground, polished, and perforated for stringing; beads of Olivella and
abalone shell from the Pacific prove a widespread commerce in luxuries
among people whose necessaries must often have been but slenderly
provided.

Redding and Parker m Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

225

Marine shell is also found in abundance at sites in East Texas. In his study of
the Aliens Creek sites, Hall (1981) concluded that

marine shell omaments in Archaic context are distributed across the
eastern half of Texas in much the same way as are boatstones. The major
exceptions are the shell artifacts found at sites around the three bays along
the south central Texas coast. Because most of these shell artifacts are
utilitarian rather than ornamental objects, it has been concluded that the
Texas coast was probably not the origin of the shell ornaments found in
Late Archaic components at Aliens Creek and elsewhere in the state.
Other than the Texas Coast, the next most likely source of the shell would
be the Gulf Coast of Florida. The evidence now available suggests that
the Florida Coast was indeed the source of shell artifacts circulating
through the import-export system, both during Late Archaic and Late
Prehistoric (Caddoan) times.
All shells had to be worked before they could be worn as ornaments or used
as charms. Univalve shells were worked in several ways. The most common was
abrading the apex of the Olivella spire to make a hole for stringing. Some Olivella
shells were also abraded at the opening of the canal, producing cylindrical beads.
Ensor Point
One Ensor dart point was excavated from the burial. It is 4 cm (1% inches) long,
1.5 cm (11A6 inches) wide, and .5 cm (¾6 inches) thick and was made from greytan Edwards Plateau chert (Figure 6). Under magnification, the point shows
evidence of abrasion, possibly from boring, and the edges show evidence of
resharpening. These two characteristics suggest that it might have been hafted and
used as a small knife.
Suhm and Jelks (1962) describe the Ensor point as follows:
Blade triangular and varying considerably in length and width; edges
are often quite straight, otherwise slightly convex, occasionally finely
serrated. Shoulders vary from slight to pronounced; barbs, if present, are
short. S tems are very broad across neck, due to notches being shallow, and
bases are commonly wider than shoulders so that basal comers are in line
with blade edges. Occasionally the base is less wide than the shoulders but
shallow notches and broad stem neck suggest Ensor type. Bases are most
commonly straight but may be concave or convex.
Distribution: Occurs most frequently in Central Texas and the Lower
Pecos River area, decreasing southward toward the lower Guadalupe
River and eastward to the upper Sabine River. Estimated Age: Possibly
1000 or 2000 B.C. to 500 to 1000 A.D.

226

Texas Archeological Society

Of the several distinct Archaic complexes that have been studied and documented
in Texas, the one nearest to Crosby County is the Edwards Plateau (Central Texas
Archaic). The authors believe that its northern extent should be extended to include
the southern High Plains of Texas because of the large number of chipped stone
artifacts that are common to this area and to the Edwards Plateau, especially in the
late terminal period.
Prewitt, in his summary of this aspect (1974), divided the Archaic into four
periods spanning 5900 years (Table 1). He dates the Ensor point to the end of the
Archaic period.

Table I. Prewitt’s Division of the Archaic with their
Corresponding Projectile Points

Period

Dates

4650 B.C. to 2050 B.C.
Early Archaic
2050 B.C. to 450 B.C.
Middle Archaic
450 B.C. to A.D. 25
Late Archaic
Terminal Archaic A.D. 250 to A.D. 750

Projectile Points
Bell, Travis, Nolan, Bulverde
Pedemales
CastroviUe, Marcos, Montell
Darl, Fairland, Ensor

A significant number of the many Archaic sites in and around Crosby County
have yielded Ensor points. The authors know of one site---about 16 km (10 miles)
south of the burial site in extreme southern Crosby County--in which Ensor points
predominate.
Lunate Stone

Due to the rarity of these artifacts, little is known of their origin, distribution,
or purpose. One lunate stone measuring 16.5 by 5 by 1.5 cm (6 ½ by 1 7~ by 9A6
inches) was found among the burial artifacts (Figure 6); its workmanship is nothing
short of artistic. The base of the stone has been ground nearly perfectly flat, giving
the basal edges a sharp feel. The sides have been ground evenly toward the top and
ends of the convex part of the artifact to a nearly sharp edge. The entire surface of
the stone has been finely polished. Twenty-four distinct and precise notches have
been made in the narrow convex edge, apparently cut into the stone---rather than
ground by some abrasive material---probably with upward motion from each side
rather than straight down from the convex edge. One notch near the center appears

Redding and Parker m Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

227

to be wider and deeper than the others, and close examination proves that there is
higher polish through this notch, down the adjacent sides, and across the base,
indicating friction wear (Figure 6). There is no evidence of wear polish in any of
the other 23 notches or on any other part of the artifact. This indicates that the stone
may have been bound to some other object, or may have been bound for suspension.
The lunate stone was examined by Vestal Yeats, retired Professor of
Geosciences, of Lubbock. He identified the stone, concurring with the identification
made by Jack T. Hughes, as igneous metamorphic rock, nearly slate, possibly
greenstone. The nearest westward source for such rock is the Davis Mountains
region; the most likely eastern source would be Arkansas, or possibly Alabama or
Georgia.
OTHER LUNATE STONES

Descriptions and Comparisons
Only limited information is available about lunate stones. Chipped stone
artifacts of similar outlines are known in the Great Basin, where they are called
crescents, but these lunate stones are considered to be related more to projectile
points than to ground stone objects (Mitchell, Rosa, Castagnetto, and Hester 1977).
Speculation varies among archeologists as to the purpose of these artifacts; some
of the most popular suggestions are atlatl weights (Parker 1981; Parker and Parsons
1979), bannerstones (Mitchell, Hester, and Parker 1980), pendants, and ceremonial
axes. The authors will compare all of the information available about these stones
from publications and from personal contacts in the hope that they can shed some
light on, or at least inspire further study of these unique stones.
Mitchell County Site

In 1935, Cyrus N. Ray, while examining a series of mortar holes, discovered
and excavated a burial near Colorado City in Mitchell County. Among the burial
artifacts were two lunate stones. Some quotations from his account of this excavation, which was titled "Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found Near Colorado,
Texas," (Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Vol. 8,
September 1936), follow.
When we examined the top of the mountain a rock structure of
circular form, consisting of large stones set into the earth closely, was
found. This rock structure was 14 feet in diameter and consisted of one
layer of stones. Below the stones was 11/2 feet of hard, dry earth filled with
small stones. Much to our disappointment after the hard labor of clearing
the stones and earth away under a temperature of above 100 degrees we
came to hard, flat bed rock, and apparently projecting out of the center of

228

Texas Archeological Society

this were some large rough stones which we supposed were part of the
same ledge.
Reluctantly we came to the conclusion that we had wasted our efforts
on a gas blowout or some other natural formation. However, the writer had
always wondered about this site, after later digging up some long headed
burials in stone lined graves which were buried 4 and 5 feet deep. In 1932
the writer dug up a similar structure situated about about 30 miles north
of this site, and found a flexed long headed skeleton, buried below the
earth and stone covering in a pit cut into the solid rock beneath it.
However, nothing was done about it until the summer of 1935, when
the writer returned to the site with James G. Morrow, and we again dug
out the refilled earth down to the projecting stones, and then found that
we were able to pry them loose in the center.
There were six large stones wedged in tightly, and when these were
removed, more black earth was found beneath them. The space the
occupied was a round hole three feet across, which had been cut down into
the solid bed rock for about a foot in depth. We found this filled earth to
be full of small burned bone and shell fragments and soon the writer
unearthed the largest stone pendant that he ever saw, an oval gray stone
pendant, with an hour glass shaped hole at one end. It was nicely
proportioned but was a rather large ornament for the small child that wore
it. The fragments of bones were quite small and fire-blackened, and the
finding of two very small milk teeth showed that the cremation was that
of a very young child. This child must have been that of an important chief
when one considers the number of artifacts of unusual nature found with
the cremation. In addition to the large pendant there were four other oval
stone pendants; one was 3 inches long and7/16 inches wide, rounded at the
top and pointed at the bottom; one was 2 1/2 inches long and 14/16 inches
wide; one was 21/4 by n/16 inches; one was 2 inches by 1 inch. In addition,
a smaller pendant of shell 1 14/16 inches long and a shell bead 7/16 inches
across were found. A curved stone object, 2 2/16 inches long on the inside
of the curve, was found. A hole was drilled in each end and a groove
connects the two end holes on the inside of the curve; the object is lfl inch
wide. The use probably was as a bandeau ornament, probably worn on the
forehead to hold back bobbed hair. Its curve would be about fight to fit
the head of a small child. A large stone ring 115/16 inches in diameter was
found. Two peculiar polished gray-green stones of the shape of about a
third of a circle, or of about the shape of the visible part of the sun when
a little more than a third has risen, were found. The rounded portions of
both are notched or serrated. One is 57/16 inches long, and 23/16 inches wide
in the middle and it has 18 serrations. The other one is 5 1°/16 inches long
and 1 x5/~6 inches wide in the center, and it has 19 serrations, but there is
a small piece of the edge missing at one end where two more serrations
probably were. There were a great number of small polished fire blackened

Redding and Parker ~ Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

229

quartz pebbles scattered all through the cremated materials; these varied
from a third to a half inch in diameter, and probably were used inside dry
land terrapin shells as rattles. Portions of broken polished bone tubes were
found, and much burnt shell which was too fragmentary for one to
determine from what it came. Three thick, roughly made, stemmed and
shouldered, flint projectile points, probably spear of atlatl points, were
found with the burial.
Reconstructing the scene the best we can, we visualize the death of
a small child of some important chieftain. The selection of a site on the
point of a mountain overlooking all the wide valley below. The removal
of the earth covering the bed rock and then the laborious cutting with flint
tools of a hole in the hard rock three feet in diameter and a foot deep. Then
filling this hole with fuel, laying the body thereon with all its toys, rattles,
beads, and most valuable ornaments and then setting fire to the pyre, to
the end that this fire, sacred agency of their sun god, would consume the
remains, and the burial fixtures, and carry their spirits to their home in the
sun. When the fire had cooled then six large stones were wedged tightly
into the opening, earth heaped above, and then a wide circular pavement
of stones set on top Ray, 1936].
The Cyrus Ray artifacts are now in the Texas Tech University Museum, where,
with the cooperation of the staff, the authors examined and photographed those that
were associated with this burial (Figure 7). Of particular interest for this report are
the Shumla, Marcos, and Fairland dart points and the two lunate stones.
Sh umla Dart Points. Distribution is centered about the area of the PecosRio Grande confluence, becoming less frequent down the Rio Grande
and Nueces rivers in southwestern Texas; may also extend into the
Big Bend and Northern Coahuila, Mexico west of the mouth of the
Pecos; estimated age is from an unknown time before Christ to A.D.
700 or 800 [Suhm, Kreiger, and Jelks 1954; Suhm and Jelks 1962].
Marcos Dart Point. Distribution is from the lower Pecos River Valley
across Central Texas to the middle Brazos River and from the Possum
Kingdom Reservoir area on the Upper Brazos southward to the
central part of the Texas coast; estimated age is from 2000 B.C. to
A.D. 100, or most of that time span [Suhm, Kreiger, and Jelks 1954;
Suhm and Jelks 1962].
Fairland Dart Point. Distribution includes the entire Central Texas Region; probably not as long-lived as the more common types associated with the Edwards Plateau aspect; estimated age from 1000 B.C.
to A.D. 500 or part of that time span
[Suhm, Kreiger, and Jelks 1954; Suhm and Jelks 1962].
The two lunate stones had suffered extensive damage during cremation of the
burial, but the authors believe that both were made of greenstone. Friction wear is
evident in the main center notches of both artifacts. This wear polish is visible down

230

Texas Archeological Society

one side of Lunate A. Although no wear can be seen down the sides of the center
notch of Lunate B, wear is quite evident across the base in line with this notch.
There is no indication of friction polish in any other notches of either lunate, but
an interesting feature of both is the absence of notches near the ends of the artifacts.
Either the makers decreased the size and depth of the serrations toward the ends
of the stones or, possibly, the size and depth were decreased by abrasion. The five
stone pendants were made from materials that are common in the region of the
burial.
Garza County Site (41GA60)

In 1960, Dan Cockrum and John Bullard discovered four burials (site no.
41GA60) 24 km (15 miles) northeast of Post on a sandy ridge above McDonald
Creek in Garza County (Cockrum 1963); the Garza Chapter of the South Plains
Archeological Society helped excavate the burials. A keel-shaped polished stone

A
1 ~CH

0

I

,

0

1 CENTIMETER

J

B
0

1 t,~--’H
1

0

1 CENTIMETER

Figure 7. Lunate stones A and B from Mitchell County, Texas (Courtesy of Texas Tech
University Museum).

Redding and Parker ~ Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

231

artifact nearly 18 cm (7 inches) long, 5 cm (2 inches) wide, and 1.27 cm (half an
inch) thick in cross section on the straight edge was discovered between the knees
and against the rib cage of skeleton no. 3. The gray-green stone was polished on
all surfaces (Figure 8). Earl Green, of Texas Tech University, identified the stone
as a diorite material whose nearest source is New Mexico. No other artifacts were
found in direct association with the burial.

0

1 INCH

I
0

~
1 CENTIMETER

Figure 8. Lunate stone from site 41GA60, Crosby County, Texas.

Old Tom Burial

Ronnie Hill and Mike Martin, of Spur, Texas, excavated a lunate stone from
a slab-lined burial near Mud Creek in Dickens County. The burial site, 41DK16,
is on the high point of a hill on the McGinty Ranch (Parsons, Hill, and Parker 1979).
Also excavated from the burial were three conch shell pendants (Figure 9). The
pendants and lunate stone were laid on edge in the burial pit in the four directions
around the skeletal remains; the lunate stone was at the south. Only partial skeletal
remains were found in the slab-lined burial, which was similar to the Crosby
County lunate stone burial. The dark green lunate, made from greenstone, measures
about 19 by 5 by 1 cm (7A6 by 1 15A6 by 7A6 inches). The highly polished artifact has
26 notches cut into the convex edge; one notch near the center is larger than the
others. Upon close examination, the authors found that the lunate has wear polish
through this larger notch, down the sides, and across the base. No other notches
have this kind of wear. This artifact and the one from Crosby County lunate stone
burial are so similar in size, workmanship, and material that they could have been
made by the same person.
The shell pendants associated with this burial are remarkably similar to the
Form 7 pendants excavated by Grant Hall at Aliens Creek (Figure 10; see Hall
1981:203 Figure 47). One pendant from the Old Tom Burial and one from Aliens
Creek are especially similar in that both have parallel rows of small conical

232

Texas Archeological Society

depressions drilled into the surface of the shell. These depressions form an inverted
T when the shell is viewed with the apex up. This description by Grant Hall could
apply to either pendant.
The T is composed of four sets of dotted lines, two sets running across the
posterior edge (bottom) of the pendant and the other two sets perpendicular to the first and following the long axis up the center, roughly half the
length of the shell [Hall 1981].

At Aliens Creek the shell pendants were associated with Ensor points in Late
Archaic burials.
Other Sites

Fairy McWiUiams, of Silverton, Texas found a lunate stone on the surface of
a site near Silverton in Briscoe County. It measures about 11 by 1 cm (4 3A6 by
7A6 inches). It is made from a fine-grained siltstone composed of minute particles
of quartz cemented by a quartz solution. The reddish brown artifact has 19 notches
cut into the convex edge; the center notch is deepest and largest.
On close examination wear polish was noted in this center notch. Although it
was not visible on one side of this artifact, the wear polish was very obvious down
the other side and across the base. Both ends of the stone are damaged, as if it had
been used for striking other objects (Figure 11); no wear is evident in any other of
the other serrations.
Rick Waiters, a member of the Southern Plains Archeological Society,
formerly of Lubbock, found a small fragment of a lunate stone made of greenstone
on the surface of a site in Lubbock County.
Another lunate stone, obtained from a collector in Gaines County (Figure 12),
measures about 9.5 by 3 by 1 cm (3 ¾ by 1 1A by ~ inches). It was a surface find
at a sandhill site about 8 km (5 miles) southeast of Seminole, Texas. The artifact
is made from a grey igneous material speckled with black. There are seven evenly
spaced grooves across the convex edge of the artifact. This particular lunate stone
differs from all the others in that the convex edge is wide and flat rather than sharp.
The seven serrations appear to have been abraded rather than cut into the artifact,
probably because this stone is so much harder. The hardness of the stone may be
the reason why there is no visible indication of strapping wear through the center
groove, down either side, or across the base.
Jim Hogue, also a member of the Southern Plains Archeological Society,
found about two-thirds of a lunate stone at a sandhill site in Hockley County (Figure
13) near Sundown, Texas. If the main notch was near the center, the artifact was
about 11.5 cm (4 ½ inches) long, 4.5 cm (1 ¾ inches) wide, and 1.5 cm (~ inches)
thick.
There are 8 notches between the large notch and the end, indicating that the
artifact probably had a total of 17. This lunate is heavily weathered, but the material

Redding and Parker m Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

0

1~

o

1 CENTIMETER

233

J

Figure 9. Lunate stone (A) and shell pendants ~, C, D) from the Old Tom burial, site
41DK16, Dickens County, Texas.

234

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 10. Shell Pendants from the Allens Creek site (From Hall 1981:203, Figure 47).

Figure 11. Siltstone lunate from Briscoe County, Texas.

is apparently greenstone. The only visible indication of strapping wear is through
the center notch, which is worn deeper than the others into the convex edge.
Other lunate stones have been brought to the attention of the authors, but little
information is available about them; one is from Mitchell County, one is from
Hemphill County, and an undetermined number are from Dickens and Crosby
counties. The one from Hemphill County is unique in that there are no serrations
along the convex edge (possibly unfinished). Those from Dickens and Crosby
counties were excavated from burials by a state game warden several years ago with
no documentation. The origin of the Mitchell County artifact is unknown.

Redding and Parker ~ Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

o

235

1NCH

o

I

f

0

1 CENTIMETER

Figure 12. Lunate stone from the Sandhill site in Gaines County.

0

1NCH

I

,

0

1 CENTIMETER

J

Figure 13. Fragment of a greenstone lunate from Hockley County.

SUMMARY

From the evidence obtained from the Crosby County burial and similar burials
in this region, the following conclus’ons have been reached.
°

2.

Based on the length and size of the femurs and the thickness of the skull
fragments, the burial was of an adult male.
The estimated age of the burial is between 650 B.C. and A.D. 450, based
on the following:
A) The Ensor point recovered from the Crosby County burial and the
Fairland point from the Mitchell County burial; both are common
to the late-terminal Archaic of the Edwards Plateau aspect (Central
Texas Archaic).

236

Texas Archeological Society
B) There are similarities between the shell pendants from the Dickens
County lunate stone burial (Old Tom) and those from excavations
at Aliens Creek, which Grant Hall has dated to the late-terminal
Archaic.
C) The absence of most of the smaller skeletal parts is an indication that
the burial was in all probability a bundle burial.

These unusual artifacts apparently have been found along and near the
escarpment of the Llano Estacado of the northwestern part of Texas (Figure 14).
Perhaps with more time and research, the area of their distribution will increase.
There appears to be no evidence of these stones before the Late Archaic.
Also important is consideration of the materials from which these stones were
made, for none of the lunates described in this report are of local material. This,
together with the fact that polished stone is not common in the region, suggests that
the lunates have ceremonial significance.
Grant Hall (1981) suggested an extensive import-export network to the east
from Texas during the Late Archaic, but there is little evidence of trade to the west
during this period. This suggests that the materials for the lunate stones were either
traded in from or obtained by eastward excursions; Arkansas is the nearest eastern
source. Patterson, in his report on boatstones in 1937, concluded that boatstones
were manufactured in southwestern Arkansas and were found in northern Louisiana,
southeastern Oklahoma, and Central Texas, with their numbers decreasing with the
distance from southwestern Arkansas. At this time, however, there is no direct
evidence suggesting that lunate stones were made at some other location and traded
into northwestern Texas.
For the present, the purpose served by these artifacts must be left to speculation. Many polished stone artifacts, especially throughout the eastern states, have
been called atlatl weights. Patterson, in his study of boatstones in 1937, concluded
that all boatsones are atlafl weights. Many tests have been conducted using atlatls
with and without weights, with the conclusions being variously: increased effectiveness, decreased effectiveness, and no effect at all. That stone weights were
sometimes used on atlatls is known because some atlatls have been recovered with
small stones attached to them (Hester 1974).
The evidence set forth here does not seem to support the use of lunate stones
as atlad weights. Although it has been speculated that these artifacts were strapped
to the bases of aflatls through the notches on their convex edges, the only evidence
of strapping of these stones is through the main center notch, which would not
create a very secure bond between the weight and the atlatl, and the wear polish
on these artifacts itself indicates a looseness of strapping. The fact that this wear
polish continues from the main notch down both sides and across the base seems
to indicate that it was not strapped to another object unless perhaps it was strapped
to that object along the flat base, as an axe or a bannerstone would be.
But there is another possible explanation of the wear pattern on these artifacts.
The main notch of the Crosby County lunate stone is a little off center, and the wear
polish down the sides from this "center" notch is not exactly perpendicular to the

Redding and Parker-- Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

237

I

i
1
t
.t
A

Lunate Stone

¯rcn~ Caprock Escarpment
"--" County Boundary
m~ State Boundary

0
t"

~
0

MI
’ ~
KM

50

50

Figure 14. Map showing the distribution of lunate stones on and near the Caprock
Escarpment in the Texas Panhandle (Map drawn by Sandy Hannum; courtesy of J. Peter
Thurmond).

238

Texas Archeological Society

flat base but, in fact, angles slightly toward the end nearest the main notch. Perhaps
this wear pattern came about from suspension of the artifact from the flat base, for
in this case the longer end, being heavier, would hang down slightly causing the
strapping to ride upward on the basal edge of the artifact, so it is possible that these
artifacts may have been worn suspended around the neck. The lunate stone of the
McDonald Creek burial was found between the flexed knees and the rib cage, where
it would be if it had been suspended around the neck of the individual.
Bruce Dickson (1985) considered it highly unlikely that most polished stone
artifacts were used as atlatl weights, especially the large, heavier ones. The authors
must agree with this conclusion and suggest that most of these stones should remain
in the category of problematical polished stone artifacts, pending further research.
REFERENCES
Amsden, C. A.
Prehistoric Southwesterners from Basketmaker to Pueblo. Los Angeles
1949
Southwest Museum.
Cockrum, Dan
A Multiple Burial from the Caprock Area. Bulletin of the South Plains
1963
Archeological Society 1:26-31.
Dickson, Bruce
1985
The Atlatl Assessed. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56:1-38.
Hall, G. D.
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River
1981
Valley, Texas, Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 61, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hester, T. R.
1974
Archaeological Materials from Site NV-WA-197, Western Nevada: Atlatl and
Animal Skin Pouches. Contributions of the University of California Archaeological Research Facility 21:1--43.
Hughes, J. T.
1991
Prehistoric Cultural Developments of the Texas High Plains. Bulletin of the
TexasArcheological Society 60 (for 1989); this volume.
Koos, W. N., L. A. Putnam, and W. D. Mitchell
1966
Soil Survey of Crosby County, Texas. U.S. Soil Conservation Service. Series
1961, No. 36. Washington, D.C.
Mitchell, J. L., T. R. Hester, and Wayne Parker
1980
A Bannerstone from Padre Island on the Texas Coast. La Tierra 7:23-25.
Mitchell, J. L., Paula Rosa, Stanly Castagnetto, and T. R. Hester
1977
A Preliminary Statistical Analysis of Chipped Crescents from the Great Basin.
Archeological Research Facility Un&ersity of California 35:23--48.

Redding and Parker ~ Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

239

Parker, Wayne
1981
A Keel Grooved Atlatl Weight from Arkansas. Crosby County Historical
Commission. Artifacts Society 11:6.
Parker, Wayne, and M. L. Parsons
1979
Camiform Atlatl Weights from Westem Texas. Artifacts 9(2).
Parker, Wayne and John Redding
1985
An Archaic Bundle Burial from Crosby County, Texas (Unpublished
Manuscript).
Parsons, M, L., Ronnie Hill, and Wayne Parker
1979
The Old Tom Burial. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 50:69-87.
Patterson, J. T.
1937
Boat-Shaped Artifacts of the Gulf Southwest. The University of Texas Bulletin
3732.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974
Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 49.
Ray, C. N.
1936
Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found Near Colorado, Texas. Bulletin ofthe
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Soc&ty 8.
Suhm, D. A., Alex Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society Vol. 25.
Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology; Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication I and Texas Memorial Museum Special Publication
4.

