SOIL CHARACTERISTICS OF
AN ARCHEOLOGICAL DEPOSIT:
RANDALL COUNTY, TEXAS
EMERSON L. PEARSON

ABSTRACT
In presenting soil information on an archeological deposit in Palo Duro
Canyon, Texas, regional environmental data of a general nature are necessarily outlined to place mechanical and chemical values of that site in
proper perspective. Toward that end, physiography, topography, climate,
and vegetation are specifically addressed as they relate to the state park,
particular site, and soil under consideration. Those broader parameters
are followed by a discussion and initial interpretation of discrete cultural
and natural levels encountered during survey and their possible relationship to the entire site. A final statement briefly pursues the utility of soil
analysis during survey, a need for presenting several interrelated variables when considering any single aspect of site environment, and information more pertinent to continuing study of the cultural components
encountered.

INTRODUCTION
In the course of an initial survey mechanical and chemical analyses
of a prehistoric cultural deposit were performed on an archeological
site in Palo Duro State Park, Randall County, Texas in the winter of
1971-72 (Fig. i). The reason for that type of sampling and subsequent
testing addressed further quantification of occupational versus
nonoccupational zones in sites of a given culture within a specific
environmental setting. The following paragraphs discuss that site
(TsA:2.3.0.1.) and various aspects of the natural region that had an
influence on pedogenesis, preservation of cultural remains, and the
original inhabitants.
The site is located approximately 13.5 linear miles S 84° E of
Canyon, Texas at 34°57’19.0" N lat. and 101040’33.5" W long. (Fig. 2).
It is thus situated on a remnant second terrace above the Prairie Dog
Town Fork of the Red River. Existing deep in canyon country of the
Texas Panhandle has placed this deposit in the following environmental circumstances.

Physiography
Roughly 200 million years ago all of the Texas Panhandle was
covered by a shallow sea (Sellards 1932:185-186; Frye and Leonard
1957a:2). The highly oxidized ferric deposits left behind by that
marine transgression formed what is today referred to as Permian

152

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

RANDALL COUNTY

N

PALO DURO STATE PARK
Randall Couny, Texas
t

TEXAS PANHANDLE

FIGURE 1

S OIL CHARACTERISTICS

15 3

redbeds. It is this rock-stratigraphic unit that was later reworked and
presently forms most of the main channel terraces within Palo Duro
Canyon -- including the abovementioned second terrace.
At the onset of the Mesozoic Era streams moving in a general
eastward direction eroded earlier sediments and redeposited them as
fine-textured, water sorted alluvium in outwash and flood plains
(Baker 1915:14; Lee 1918:10; Adkins 1932:244-245). Those superimposing Triassic sediments were responsible for what is now seen as
many differentially eroded mesas, buttes, and questas in’the canyon.
Talus debris from a butte of that configuration overrode an exposed
portion of Permian terrace and consequently formed the original
living floor of TsA:2.3.0.1.
The Mesozoic Era came to a close with the advent of the Laramide
orogeny. During that period of mountain uplift water in the form of
stream run-off moved from the Rocky Mountains, down-slope across
an eastern peneplain of little-resistant detrital sediments toward the
coast (Barton 1930; Plummer 1932:526-529). Those downward cutting channels in the face of tectonic uplift generated such dendritic
drainage systems as the Arkansas, Cimarron, Canadian, Pecos, and
Red Rivers. Materials lost through that fluvial erosion were transported toward the Gulf of Mexico. Then, near the apex of mountain
building, massive erosion and accompanying high stream load redeposited silts, sands, and gravels eastward across much of the high
plains (Plummer 1932:769-771; Frye and Leonard 1957b:13). Those
water-born deposits form the present day late Pliocene Ogallala formation; a rock-stratigraphic unit containing today’s aquafer and supporting subsequent eolian deposits. This latter Cenozoic material
comprises much contemporary channel fill well up and in the main
and tributary channels to the Prairie Dog Town Fork of the Red River.
It is this same reworked sandy loam which has been wind deflated out
of dry stream beds and flood plains that is responsible for a good
portion of the present topsoil on the site under consideration (Fig. 3).
Parenthetically, the geomorphology of Palo Duro Canyon -- and
specifically that portion of the state park presently under study -includes highly weathered, weakly consolidated, fine Permian sandstone which has been unconformably overlain by nonmarine Dockum
Group sediments of the Triassic Period. Lithologically, the lower
Dockum contains poorly metamorphosed Tecovas shales and plaky
clay, while its upper section is primarily massive micaceous Trujillo
sandstone. Finally, the Tertiary and Quaternary Periods are represented by late Pliocene sands and gravels that have been "capped
off" with Pleistocene to Holocene caliche and eolian sand.

154

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

%

TOPOGRAPHIC SETTING

of

DURO
STATE

SAMPLING UNIVERSE and TYPE SECTION

PARK

1 mile
?~.~.~.~.~

diminished flora] cover

_____

road

¯

sol! type section

m

Ts A: 2. 3. 0, I.

FIGURE 2

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

155

v

v

~?ssoHl

5D
Z

o
E

Z
Z
d
c6

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Each of the aforementioned depositional units, when considered in
topographic and temporal perspective, are constituent elements of
the parent material forming today’s soil. Though parent material is
believed to be a greater central factor in local and regional
pedogenesis (Lotspeich and Coover 1962:7-10), climate and vegetation are also important agents in soil formation and shall be briefly
considered here for the additional parts they have played in soil
chemistry, internal site stratigraphy, and the preservation of cultural
materials.
Climate
In that a true paleosol (Ruhe 1965:755) is not immediately involved
with the archeological focus of this paper, and because TsA:2.3.0.1.
was not occupied much before 2000 B.P. (a typological assessment
based on large, corner-notched projectile points but no ceramics) it
will not be necessary to discuss climatic and biotic factors prior to the
beginning of Neoglacial time. From that period [(8,000 but }5,000
B.P. (Denton and Porter 1970:102)] down to the Christian era paleoenvironmental evidence suggests first a low level in available moisture
and maximum warming near the end of the Hypsithermal; then a
general tendency toward wetter (Maulde 1964:127; Mehringer
1967:99; Haynes 1968:608-610, 612) and fluctuating albeit cooler
conditions than the present (Denton and Porter 1970) down to ca.
2000 B.P. Since the time of Christ available moisture in the greater
southwest was probably on an erratic but overall decline (Maulde
1964:127-128; Haynes 1968:610,612; Schoenwetter and Dittert 1968;
Irwin-Williams and Haynes 1970:68-70), with global air temperatures
possibly even more episodic (Bryson 1970) but continuing to deterriorate from the previous climatic optimum until the mid- to late
A.D.1800s (Richmond 1960:1371; Maulde 1964:128; Denton and Porter, 1970). After a brief return to more moist and cooler times overall
environmental conditions have been waning and are today likely
quite similar to events of the period of site occupation (Hafsten
1961:79, 91).
Following the Ko’ppen system of climate classification (Koppen
and Geiger, 1930-39) Randall and immediately surrounding counties
are currently positioned between a low latitude steppe climate (BSh)
to the south and southeast and a middle latitude steppe climate (BSk)
to the north. In other words, the locality in question currently exhibits
a Bwk regime of relative inequality. Working with temperature and
precipitation values computed in accordance with monthly and
yearly means (Table 1) it is readily noticeable that the uppermost
portion of Palo Duro Canyon comes under the influence of both

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

157

continental-tropicai (cTs) air masses typical of latitudes 15°-- 35°N,
and the seasonally alternating continental tropical (cT) and continental polar (cP) air masses more common of latitudes 35° -- 50°N. This
has resulted in a rather dry climate (B) where evaporation usually
exceeds precipitation [a feature central to calcimorphic soils (calcic
pedocals)]. It is also largely responsible for most rain occurring as
convectional thunderstorms during May, June, July and August
(w=dry winter season), and an average yearly temperature of 58.69°F
(k= dry-cold; mean annual temperature < 64.4°F)- as well as marked
diurnal changes. Obviously, such a restricted yet intense precipitation pattern has played an important part in local depositional/erosional history. Further, air temperature has affected soil temperature
and therefore soil mechanics and chemistry. Consequently, climatic
effects on parent material over a substantial period of time -- when
coupled with factors of local topography -- have had a marked influence on vegetation as well as pedogenesis.
Vegetation
Considering only the land biocycle of the canyon, plant life at the
biochore level has been classified as a northern temperate grassland
biome (Shelford 1963:328-329). That macroenvironment (Coe and
Flannery 1964:650; Pearson 1968:25-26, 35) is regionally represented
as a short grass prairie formation [Shelford’s Mixed-Grass Grassland
Region (1963:329, 334-344)]. This latter classification has been
further restricted and is locally referred to as the Kansan Biotic Provence (Blair 1950: 109-112), which includes all of the Texas Panhandle and extends as far south as the northern escarpment of the Edwards Plateau. Within that formation Blair and Hubbell (1938),
largely for edaphic reasons, have further delineated three biotic
communities -- the presently more germane of which is the Mesquite
Plains district, i.e., primarily an open mesquite savanna that covers
most of the rolling Permian redbeds. The Mesquite Plains district
supports what Blair (1954:238-240) later referred to as four major
"associations". Those "associations", or more properly plant communities in a formal systematic sense, are the Mesquite -- Grama
(dominating the second terrace under consideration) and Rock Bluff
(a saxicolous development present on talus at the south end of the
site) associations, the Mesquite -- Buffalo-Grass association (also
identifiable in the immediate vicinity of TsA:2.3.0.1.), and arenicolous associations found on localized accumulations of deep sand. An
additional "minor association" also present is cottonwood. This latter
community, while not occurring on the site proper, can be found as an
interdigitating ecotone intrusive along the flood plain and some first

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

158

IX

Z~

0

o

~.~

~8~

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

159

terraces straddling this portion of the Red River (Table 2). While it and
other deciduous communities such as hackberry and chinaberry are
more common to eastern biotic communities and provences (e.g.,
Austroriparian), their leaves and fruit do make up a portion of the
organic matter found in the present topsoil of the site.
From this initial survey picture emerges an ecotone situation of
largely xerophytic, mesothermal vegetation reflecting both climatic
and edaphic factors of site locality. In turn, the floral cover has
certainly had an effect on the mechanical and chemical characteristics of the soil. Though rather drought resistant, none of the plant life
on the site proper can be considered phreatophytic. As a result, major
subsurface root disturbance of a magnitude to drastically obscure or
even alter natural or cultural stratigraphy should not be expected. On
the other hand, the moderately luxuriant surface growth when combined with seasonal shed of surrounding deciduous plants would
undoubtedly influence at least chemical values in upper reaches of
the soil profile. The following section discusses some of these interrelationships and their effects on the cultural deposit.

TABLE 2

Biotic Community Dominants Affecting
Soil Characteristics of TsA:2.3.0.1.
MESQUITE PLAINS DISTRICT
Mesquite---Grama Community
Dominants:
mesquite (Prosopis juliflora )
grama grass (Bouteloua sp.)
three-awn (Aristida )
broomweed (Gutierrezia )
bluestem (Andropogon sp.)
dropseed (Sporobolus cI~yptandrus)
Mesquite--Buffalo-Grass Community
Dominants:
buffa!o grass (Buchloe" dactyloides)
Rock Bluffs Community
Dominants:
cedar (Juniperus sp.)
hackberry (Celtis reticulata )
chinaberry (Melia azedarach )
yucca (Yucca glauca )
scattered cactii

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PEDOLOGY AND ARCHEOLOGY
Soil Classification
Taking into consideration regional and local parent material, the
surrounding topographic setting, interrelationships of climate and
vegetation, and length of time for pedogenesis the soil in the immediate vicinity of TsA:2.3.0.1. can be classified in the following
manner.
TABLE 3

Soil Systematics*
(CLASS-~ Pedocal; REGIME-~ Calcification)
ORDER: Inceptisols (Zonal)
SUBORDER: Ochrepts (Dark-colored soils of semi-arid, subhumid, and humid
grasslands)
GREAT GROUP: Ustochrepts (Brunizem)
SUBGROUP: Typic Ustochrepts
FAMILY: Loamy, mixed, thermic, shallow
ASSOCIATION: Rough Broken Land-Potter-Quinlan-Woodward
COMPLEX: Quinlan-Woodward
SERIES: Quinlan
TYPE: Very fine, sandy loam
PHASE: 5% to 30% slope (lower range)
*7th Approximation (1960); terms in parentheses are units of older and possibly more
familiar taxonomic systems.

As may be surmised from temperature and precipitation data presented earlier the general class of soil present throughout most of west
Texas is a pedocal. This is a situation where evaporation usually
exceeds precipitation as a monthly and yearly mean; a phenomenon
common to areas of the western United States where yearly rainfall is
seldom greater than 25 inches. Such a paucity of available moisture
more often sets up a soil-forming process termed calcification. In BSh
to BSk climates with high total evapotranspiration rates there is very
little downward leaching of reasonably soluble bases. As a result, (1)
ions such as calcium and magnesium are not moved out of the zone of
eluviation, but remain to be used by grasses which return them to the
A horizon, and (2) calcium carbonate will move upward into the B
horizon (or form a discrete Cca) to be precipitated out as an illuvial
concentrate. This characteristic must be born in mind when considering several of the absolute values presented below in chemical
analysis.
Ordinal placement of local soils as Inceptisols has stemmed from
most all localities in this region being well-drained -- save playa

SOIL CHARACTE~STICS

161

basins which are Intrazonal. When climatic information is coupled
with an understanding of regional geomorphology and pedogenic
processes, many soils of the rolling Permian plains fall into the reddish prairie class of Ustochrepts -- especially south of the Canadian
River. While such Prairie Soils are well-suited for farming -- namely
corn in high grass plains to the north -- as one moves south into areas
of less effective moisture cattle raising and cotton become the more
feasable products. Within this Great Group is a specific Quinlan
Series. The Quinlan is a Palo Duro Canyon manifestation of the Typic
Ustochrepts Subgroup occurring within the Quinlan-Woodward
Complex of the Rough Broken Land-Potter-Quinlan-Woodward Association (Jacquot et.al. 1970:24-25). Following the 1970 soil survey
of Randall County (Jacquot et.al., Ibid.): "Typical profile of a Quinlan
soil that has a very fine sandy loam surface layer [in the Palo Duro
State Park, about 200 feet northeast of Sad Monkey Tourist Railroad
Depot, on east side of Park Road 5 (type section ca. 1.2 miles due north
of and on same terrace as TsA:2.3.0.1.)]:
A1--0 to 6 inches, reddish-brown (5YR 514) very fine sandy loam, dark
reddish brown (5YR 3/4) when moist; weak, fine, subangular
blocky and granular structure; slightly hard when dry, very friable
when moist; worm casts common; most roots occur in this layer;
fine flecks of shale throughout; calcareous; clear boundary.
B&R--6 to 12 inches, reddish-brown (2.5YR 4/4) very fine sandy loam,
dark reddish brown (2.5YR 314) when moist; weak granular structure; very friable when moist; few roots and worm casts; weathered
flakes of shale common; gypsiferous; calcareous; clear boundary.
R--12 to 18 inches +, reddish-brown (2.5YR 5/4), medium, platy, weakly
cemented sandstone, dark reddish brown (2.5YR 314) when moist;
prominent, round, gray splotches throughout; a few roots between
weathered plates in upper 4 to 6 inches; surfaces of plates gypsiferous; calcareous; interiors of plates are noncalcareous; mildly alkaline.
The A horizon ranges from 6 to 8 inches in thickness. When this horizon
is dry, color ranges from light reddish brown or reddish brown to yellowish red in hue of 5YR or 2.5YR, value of 5, chroma of 4 to 6. In a few
places texture ranges to fine sandy laom.
The B and R horizon ranges from reddish-brown (2.5YR 4/4) very fine
sandy loam in the upper part to red (2.5YR 4/6) very fine sandy loam in the
lower part.
The R horizon is weakly consolidated Permian sandstone that has red to
dark-red lenses of gypsum and pockets of packed sand.
Quinlan soils have about the same depth as Potter soils but are sandier.
Quinlan soils have a thinner solum than the Woodward soils."

As is the case with many standard U.S.D.A. county soil studies, the
Randall County report by the Soil Conservation Service is unfortu-

162

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

nately lacking in reports of chemical analyses. Indeed, not much
beyond gross mechanical tests are ever accomplished in such surveys
(L. C. Geiger, personal communication). For at least this reason suggestions pertaining to sample procurement out of the archeological
deposit to establish a normal range of values for relative comparison
are certainly wise (Cornwall 1958:116; Cook and Heizer 1965:11). In
this study that practice was followed vertically but not horizontally.
Given a bit more in-field time to establish an identical Series of the
same Type and Phase (Table 3), albeit no intervening cultural
component(s), off-site sampling should always be performed- at
least in this area of Texas. Nevertheless, earlier quoted mechanical
data are relevant to considerations concerning the prehistorically
altered mechanics of the soil discussed below.
Archeology
The site was originally reported in April 1969 by Bill R. Harrison of
the Panhandle-Plains Museum in Canyon. He formally visited the site
again in June of that year. A surface collection and initial field observations were made with each visit. Those notes and material are
presently on file with that institution and have received a West Texas
State University site designation number of A704. That museum’s
artifact inventory by gross category is briefly listed in Table 4.
With Mr. Harrison’s initial observations, and tentative knowledge
of material culture from the museum surface inventory, this investigator visited the site in early January, 1972 (Fig. 4). A study of
present vegetation on the site systematically placed this second terrace in the earlier mentioned Mesquite--Grama--Buffalo-Grass
Community of the Mesquite Plains District. A subsequent surface
distributional study of artifacts as correlated with an extant soil profile in the western erosional face of the terrace suggested:
1. the site occupies all of the remnant second terrace, and therefore
2. it is not of original dimensions;
3. maximum horizontal extension is approximately 300 feet north/south,
thus
4. it does not extend onto the talus slope (which doesn’t exclude the
possibility of a portion of the southern sector having been overridden
by the same in recent times);
5. soil color is relatively dark and debitage concentration heavier in the
southwestern corner, which may indicate
6. a remaining portion of the site might still contain a special function
area;
7. the depth of cultural deposit and volume of tertiary flakes and spalls
exceeds the normal expected range for small camp sites in the canyon
floor, so

SOIL CHARACTER!STICS

163

8. habitation may have been more than occasional; and finally
9. general museum data are representative of tool types and raw materials
of manufacture as exhibited on the surface -- but in no way a measure
of (a) current horizontal and vertical site dimensions, (b) the number of
possible components, or (c) intensity of occupation.

The terrace was next sectioned off in fourths and hydrogen-ion
values were determined along the site’s midline in each of the four
sampling units. The sampling was done 0.1 feet below the present
ground surface and tests were accomplished with a Truog Soil Reaction (pH) kit. This tool is reagent correct to the nearest 0.5 interval;
thus a rough alkalinity estimation found the northern half of the site to
be about 8.0, while the southern portion averaged around 8.5. These
gross parameters were later corroborated by laboratory ascertained
pH values.
TABLE 4

Panhandle-Plains Museum Surface Inventory.
[Site: A704; (TsA:2.3.0.1.)]
Bifaces
Unifaces
Scrapers
Projectile points and fragments
Utilized flakes
Unutilized lithic
TOTAL LITHIC

7
4
4
3
6
167
191

Bone (badly fragmented)
Tooth enamel
TOTAL OSTEOLOGY

6
1

Ceramics
Shell
Manos and fragments
Metates and fragments
Choppers
Fossilized corporlite
TOTAL MUSEUM INVENTORY

1
2
4
2
6
1

7

214

Three areas for test pits (T.P./1.-3.) were then laid out on what
visually appeared to be the more stable surfaces in an eroding terrace
(Fig.4). Those excavation units were 3 feet by 3 feet and received
examination for possible cultural and natural stratigraphy, discrete
soil characteristics, and cultural content. Individual strata were defined on the basis of soil color, texture, and mechanical inclusives.

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

That process was aided by each proposed stratum being tested in a
field-moist condition for hue, value, and chroma (Munsell Soil Color
Charts), approximate particle size (7X Peak achromat #7 reticled
comparator), and hydrogen-ion level (pH kit). Approximately 500 g.
of soil was collected from each unequivocal level for later laboratory
analysis. And finally, all pits were excavated by a natural level
method, with each distinct zone being separately screened for artifact
content. Information produced from those three squares is presented
and discussed in the following paragraphs.
Test Pit]l. (Fig. 5; Fig. 6)
The first square was excavated to a maximum depth of 2.33 feet and
found to contain three discrete levels with well-defined interfaces.
Level A averaged 1.2 feet thick, and was considered a generalized
occupational zone that extended from the present ground surface
down to a sharp change in color, texture, and content of cultural
inclusives that marked the beginning of Level B.
Mechanical analysis of the first zone indicated it was a moderately
weathered, dusky red silt loam containing rather well-weathered
calcite geodes and rotten sandstone. Those mechanical inclusives
were of general Triassic age and had been secondarily deposited as
talus debris from several yards upslope to the south.
From a chemical point of view, laboratory determined hydrogenion values were not surprising in light of either an initial in-field
estimation (pH 8.0) or more general regional reports (Jacquot et.al.,
1965; 1970). In light of pH the sodium level (170 ppm) was correspondingly quite in line. More noteworthy here was first the relative
acidity of Level A when compared to lower strata (pH 9.1; 8.8), and
second phosphate (P205) and organic carbon values. The hydrogenion ratio for the first zone, when compared to the mean pH for nonoccupational zones (~=8.9; s=0.122), was noticeably less alkalinemore especially when contrasted with that of Level B. There was also
a corresponding drop in phosphates (42.5 ppm to 11.0 ppm) and
organic carbon (from an average of 0.952% to 0.193%) from what is
here considered an occupational zone to the subsoil. It should be
noted that organic carbon content of the first level was relatively high
when compared to occupational zones in T.P./2. and T.P./3. This
phenomenon was probably more a reflection of the occupational zone
being exposed at the present ground surface and consequently supporting contemporary vegetation, than it was differential intensity of
habitation within the site. In sum, the northern half of the site has a
truncated profile in the sense that a culturally sterile topsoil is lacking.

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

165

Potassium (K20) is usually a good indicator of wood-ash along with
sodium (Na) in drier environments (Cornwall 1958:67). However, it
did not prove of much utility in these tests. Its sensitivity seems to
have been greatly diminished by the elevation and leveling out of
absolute values. Much of the eolian and some water deposited sediments on the second terrace are derived from Permian and Triassic
(Tecovas formation) parent material rather high in illite clay (Adkins
1932:252-253) -- an aluminum silicate quite rich in potassium
(Buckman and Brady 1960:25). In addition, soils of the Quinlan series
are fairly rich in muscovite mica (Green, 1972); a nonferromagnesian,
potassic silicate [K2A12Si6.AhO20(OH)4] whose composition is 11.8%
K20 (Jackson 1964:82). The primary source of such mica is massive
upper Dockum sandstone (Trujillo formation) -- a stratigraphic unit
completely ringing the upper portion of Palo Duro Canyon immediately below basal Ogallala gravels (Adkins, ibid.).
Total artifact inventory of Level A was 33 items which included:
cores--l, projectile points and fragments--2, unutilized lithics--29,
bone--l, in addition to minimal amounts of fleck charcoal present
throughout the level.
Level B averaged 0.5 feet thick, and was a culturally sterile zone that
extended rather uniformly from a sharp upper contact with Level A
down to an equally marked break in color and texture at the boundary
of Level C. Soil texture fell largely within the particle size range of
sand and presented a red color under field-moist conditions. That
matrix was moderately weathered and contained geode and sandstone inclusives of like derivation and age to Level A, albeit in much
more dense concentration. Chemically, the highly calcareous nature
of this strata in conjunction with the obvious lack of organic material
was well reflected in both sodium and pH levels. While potassium
seems to again be of limited archeological utility, the reduction of
phosphate values from 42.5 ppm to 11.0 ppm adds support to the
notion gained from physical inspection and the above chemistry that
Level B represents a period of nonoccupation. There were no artifacts
found in this depositional unit and the slight increase in nitrogen
probably reflects little more than downward mobility of nitrates.
Level C averaged 0.45 feet in exposure and extended from a sharp,
convex interface at the lower boundary of Level B downward into and
formed the test pit floor. From a mechanical point of view that unit
was a dark red, plaky clay whose texture fell in the inferred particle
size range of (0.002 ram. That well-weathered, undisturbed matrix
contained alternating lenticular facies of tightly interbedded, reduced white, plaky clay. Geomorphologically, those banded sediments unquestionably represent the upper aspect of the second ter-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

166

TsA: 2.3,0.1.-- T. R/1.
Scale:

1ft.

~

(no distortion)

True Horizon ....... i-*

Level

A-----

©

O

O

O

0

Level B

Level C

Pit Floe

NOT EXCAVATED

_~_J

VIEW:
pH units
Looking S.W.

10075 FS

0.002

Occupation Zone:

To
TOR 3/4

0.05

20252FS

0.05

Lithics, bone and fleck charcoal.

Culturally Sterile:

6.

8.0

5.

8.0

4.

8.0

3.

8.0

2.

8.0

dusky red silt with rotten

sandstone and calcite geode talus inclusives.

light red sand containing

dense concentration of rotten sandstone and
10R

5/6

0.~

¯ ) "-’,-.

calcite geode talus material

Culturally Sterile:

20109FS
<0.002

hibiting

1OR 3/6

dark red plaky clay ex-

alternating,

thin,

reduced

white

"episodal" bands. Undisturbed.

NOTE:

Profile truncated because of localized absence
of "true" top soil.

FIGURE 5

8.0

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

167

©

,/

I

¢4
el

u

:i

%

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

race found elsewhere in the site locality. As such, they are of general
Permian age and constitute a reasonable permeability basement for
meteoric water (e.g., note the dramatic increase in soluble salts).
Initial Interpretation: The soil texture and colors of Level C suggest its
having been water deposited in a series of lacustrine/bog or marsh
environments of presently unknown duration; the red representing
the former, the white the latter. For lack of a better term some of the
white, laterally intrusive facies are here referred to as episodes -- as
they seem to reflect but brief intervals of an oxyg en-poor environment
in a larger oxidizing picture. Others were nothing more than lenticular deposits of gypsum analogous to Jacquot’s earlier quoted R horizon.
The mineral composition and random distribution of mechanical
inclusives in Level B implicate the higher Trujillo formation as well
as the Tecovas formation as parent material; that is to say upper
Dockum derived micaceous sandstone and calcareous conglomerate
material was blended with finer lower Dockum sediments in a portion
of the second terrace as talus debris. Overall particle size and luster
analysis of individual grains composing the soil matrix within which
pebble-size debris occurs indicates wind deposition exceeded water
in volume of total soil deposited. In sum, the surface of the northern
half of the terrace at the time of initial occupation was a slightly
gravelly sand lacking a true A horizon, and thus probably supported
very little vegetation.
From a stratigraphic standpoint it was readily noticeable Level A,
clearly an occupational zone, exhibited no superimposed topsoil.
However, soil profiles in test pits 2 and 3 did produce a culturally
sterile top stratum that differed markedly in texture and mechanical
inclusives from a like depth in T.P./1.A. Such observations could have
a good deal of utility if formal excavation with tight artifact proveniencing is later planned. Daily reports on soil temperature from the
U.S.D.A. Southwestern Research Center at Bushland, Texas indicate
soils with native grass cover in this region "tend to freeze four to five
inches deep during average years". This would create a frost-heave
situation from the present ground surface down to that approximate
depth with at least two possible ramifications. Physical movement
would tend to obscure stratigraphic markers in upper reaches of the
profile; it is this investigator’s experience that such would also alter
original artifact provenience more than would be expected in uncultivated areas. In another respect the majority of primary and secondary root activity within the surrounding biotic community is largely
limited to the upper half foot or so of the weathering profile. As a
result, one might expect less reliability from artifact triangulation on

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

169

the northern portion of TsA:2.3.0.1. than might be gained in areas
represented by test pits 2 and 3. In general, the absence of a protective
topsoil in T.P./1. makes less trustworthy visual and mechanical inspection of upper portions of the profile. Were this reporter to encounter a similar test situation in the future he would certainly procure soil samples by the arbitrary level method within such a natural
unit. The procedure followed on this site was to select "averaging
samples" from the approximate middle of each visually defined depositional level. It is here suggested future arbitrary sampling units be
no larger than the observed or expected thinnest strata found elsewhere on the site.
Chemically, the organic carbon and phosphate values of Level A,
when coupled with sodium and hydrogen-ion values, correspond
nicely with what should be relatively expected for a surface exposed
occupational zone.
A reasonable inference at this point is a combination of sheet wash
from more steep grades immediately to the south, in conjunction with
wind deflation acting on those reworked sediments, gradually truncated the soil profile on the northern half of the site. Consequently,
vegetation and weathering directly affected the occupational zone
which elevated organic carbon values and lowered the pH ratio
beyond those expected in either the topsoil or habitation levels of the
other test pits.
Test Pit/2. (Fig. 7; Fig. 8)
The second square was placed 110 feet $7° W of T.P./1. and excavated to a maximum depth of 2.30 feet. Stratigraphically, the pit
exhibited four gross levels, but only tWo of the three resultant interfaces were immediately obvious. While the contact between general
levels A and B, and B and C were visually quite distinct, the interface
between B1 and B2 was "much less obvious upon initial exposure and
cleaning. It was not until the finished profile had stood overnight that
two separate units within the larger Level B became apparent. This
distinction was first made on the weight of soil color and texture, and
later supported by chemical analysis.
Level A averaged 0.4 feet thick, and was found to be a culturally
sterile zone that extended from the present ground surface down to a
sharp change in color, texture and the beginning of cultural inclusives that marked the start of Level B.
The soil was a dark red, silty sand that presented itself as a swirled
mixture of reddish brown loam and medium tan sand -- all of which
supported a fair amount of primary and secondary root activity from
grass.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

170

TsA: 2. 3. 0. 1, -- T.P./2
Ift.

Scale: i

i (no distortion)

True Horizon

Level A --

Level B1

Level B2

Level C --

::;~<,;. : o\+ ;ooo = o~.o+:o., o .

Pit FIOo~

NOT EXCAVATED

I ....

VIEW:
pH units

Looking S.W.

10091FS
2+5YR 3/6

20109F5
1OR 3/6

301o9
1OR 4/6

0.05
TO
0.1

iiiii!i

0~02
0.05

Top Soil: dark red silty sand resulting from
a down-slope random blending of chocolate
brown loam and medium tan sand.

4.

8.0

Occupation

3.

8.0

2.

8.0

1.

8.0

Zone:

dark

red

coarse

silt.

Lithics, bone, teeth, and fleck charcoal.

~
0.05

Occupation Zone:

red flnesilt. Lithics, bone,.

teeth, and fleck charcoal

20252 F S
1OR 5/6

0.002
~o
0.05

oo°~Oo
’,o

,

Culturally

Sterile:

light

red

silt

loam

including fairly dense concentration of rotten
sandstone and calcite geode talus.

Profile Pins, at 0.5 ft. interval.

FIGURE 7

171

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

68

o~

E
o

r,

!o2

~O

o

o

z z

E

T

o o

g

.<
o o

o

172

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

When considering relative chemical values it must be remembered
that, while this southern portion of the site exhibited more dense
floral cover than the deflated area to the north, root activity in the
northern half of the site was immediately involved with an occupational zone. For this reason the pH value is not quite as depressed in
either the first or second stratum of T.P./2. in comparison to T.P./1. On
the other hand, the marked nonphreatophytic nature of vegetation on
the site may largely -- if not wholely -- account for what initially
appears anomolous in the phosphate profile of the second test pit.
Initial inspection of these values could give a reversal impression
moving from Level A to Level B, -- if phosphates are indeed to reflect
human activity. However, more careful consideration of the distribution of exchangeable bases during plant growth suggests not a depression in the phosphorus content of B,, but an elevation within the
topsoil. The active absorption of phosphates and other plant nutrients, and their subsequent accumulation in the surface horizon
(Barshad 1964:48) has had at least two effects. First, it has increased
the phosphate level from 42.5 ppm in the sparcely covered area of
T.P./1. to 47.0 ppm in the more luxuriant region of T.P./2. Second,
through upward mobility during the winter dry season it has slightly
robbed and exceeded the P205 content of B1. This floral cause is
supported both by the content of organic carbon in each Level A, and
by a comparable ppm value of P2Oa in Level A of the third test pit. At
this point it should also be noted that the increase in phosphates from
B 1 to B 2 is proportionally quite in line with that from B 1 to B a in T.P./3.
-- especially if a bone bed is taken into account with the latter.
What sensitivity potassium may have as an effective indicator of
occupation may be seen in the second square if viewed in relation to
soluble salts. Together their increase in the larger B horizon could
reflect the effect of animal soft tissue on that depositional unit.
The total artifact inventory of combined Levels B1 and B2 was 38
items which included: projectile point fragments--I, unutilized
lithics--28, shell (Succinea sp.)--3, dental enamel--6, in addition to
minimal amounts of fleck charcoal throughout both strata.
Initial Interpretation: Though somewhat finer texture, the soil color
and talus inclusives in Level C along with its stratigraphic placement
suggest it to be a portion of the same depositional unit witnessed as
Level B in T.P./1. The same can be said on stratigraphic, soil texture,
and artifact yield bases for Levels B~ and B2 in T.P./2. and Level A in
T.P./1. -- soil color in the latter being altered because of additional
organic material and extraedaphic phenomena discussed earlier.
The increase in levels of soluble salts and sodium moving downward probably indicates leaching of more mobile elements, rather

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

173

than increased living activity at greater depths. But the low pH,
increased potassium value, and percentage peaking of organic carbon
in Level B, is indicative of a period of greater occupational intensity
than the earlier B2 stratum. The quite high phosphate value in B2 may
therefore reflect not much beyond a heavier distribution of bone, or
possibly lateral movement of phosphorus within the same stratigraphic unit from an area of greater concentration no more than 37
feet upslope.
The anomolous nature of the nitrogen curve has not yet been satisfactorily determined. However, it may be no more complex than
assimilatory nitrate reduction (one of two classes of denitrification)but probably not nitrate respiration (Stevenson 1964:270-271).
The reason for T.P./2 and/3, not having exposed the Permian redbed
is reflected in an upslope direction to the south of superimposing
sediments and is schematically represented in figure 3.

Test Pit/3. (Fig. 9; Fig. 10)
The third square was to originally be placed about 75 feet upslope
from T.P./2. in a S 51°E direction. But results of the surface distributional study of artifacts pointed out a heavy concentration of small
retouch flakes and spalls on the southwesternmost terrace extension
(Figs. 3 and 4). This debitage, in conjunction with dark carbonaceous
earth and the presence of bone and dental enamel in the immediately
surrounding erosional profile, strongly argued for pit placement approximately 37 feet S 42° W of T.P./2.
The last testing unit was excavated to a maximum depth of 2.05 feet
and produced six distinct levels with well-defined interfaces.
Level A averaged 0.6 feet thick and extended from the present
ground surface down to a sharp change in soil color, texture, and the
advent of cultural material that marked the upper surface of Level B,.
With the exception of surface deposited artifacts resulting from erosion in the immediate vicinity this unit was culturally sterile.
Rather similar to Level A in T.P./2., the soil was a light red, silty
sand that seems to have resulted from a down-slope random blending
of reddish brown loam and medium tan sand. The texture was not at
all atypical of that found in the topsoil of T.P./2., and it as well
supported a fair amount of primary and s econdary grass root activity.
With the exception of sodium and the soluble salts, Level A was
also chemically comparable to the topsoil in T.P./2. Concerning those
bases, an initial inspection might warrant an interpretation that the
undisturbed product was one of salinization, i.e., an intrazonal
halomorphic situation. This can and does occur in regions of limited
rainfall such as localities of Randall County that are poorly drained. In

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

174

TsA:2.3.0.1. -- T.P./3
1 ft.

Scale:

, (no distortion)

True Horizon
Level A

Level Bi
Level B2

Level B3
........ J

Level B4

Level C

--

Pit Floor

NOT

EXCAVATED

VIEW:
Looking South

o
Top Soil:

pH units

light red silty sand resulting from

a down-slope random blending of chocolate

10.30252FS
0.856/6
0.1’°

iiiiiii

30.TFS 0~5
5YR 4/3
30108FS
2,5YR 3/2

Occupation Zone:

8.0

reddish brown to organic

black fine silty sand. Lithics, bone, and chunk

0.1
0~o002
0.05

6.

brown loam and medlum tan sand.

L_J

carbon.
Occupation Zone:

8.0

dusky red to heavy organic

black fine silty sand. Artifacts >BI.
20117FS
5YR 4/4

~02
0.05

20117FS

0.002

5YR4/4

0.005

20252FS
108 5/6

0. C02
TO
0.05

Occupation

L_J
~

~

’

Zone

(?):

reddish brown silt.

Minimal, random chunk carbon; some bone.
Occupation

Zone

(?):

reddish brown silt.

8 .o+

8.0+

Artifacts about = to 82.

Culturally Sterile:

light red loam containing

dense concentration of rotten sandstone and
~ ~ ¯ ¯
o-,.

i

calcareous talus material.

Minimal,

chunk carbon.

Profile Pins, at 0.5 ft. interval.

FIGURE 9

intrusive

1.

8,0

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

175

O

©

d
e4

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

those situations water that is available does not experience much
downward percolation. Instead, it is primarily lost through evaporation and transpiration; consequently salt concentration is increased
(Seatz and Peterson 1964:308-310). However, there are two falacies in
this assessment. First, the soil has been altered as a result of cultural
activity, i.e., a typical Quinlan solum is not present. And second, this
human intervention has not reduced the permeability rate of the
typical Quinlan series [0.8-2.5 inches per hour (Jacquot et.al. 1970:49,
Table 3)] -- in fact in-field calculations suggest a slight increase in
this rate. For this reason increased salinity of the topsoil is here
believed to reflect an area on the site having contained a disproportionate volume of animal flesh at lower levels. Some support for this
position can be gained by consulting sodium and soluble salt values
from underlying deposits.
Aside from thickness (ca.0.15 feet), the most noticeable features of
Level B, are the marked increase in phosphates and a corresponding
reduction in percentage of organic carbon. This is accompanied by a
change in soil texture and drastic color change from brownish beige to
brown-black. Concerning carbon, an interesting lesson relevant to
visual assessment is to be learned. In-field generalizations about
content of carbon based on blackness of color and presence of charcoal may not always be warranted -- especially if the inference involves organic carbon. While a dark staining may reflect the presence
of inert charcoal, it may not reflect to the slightest degree the presence
or absence of organic matter such as decomposed plant and animal
remains. In this vein, though color does deepen in B1, the percentage
of organic carbon is significantly less than that of Level B1 in T.P./2. (a
salient feature discussed below). On the other hand, the phosphate
value is much higher in the second stratum. This is here taken to
represent a fairly dense deposit of bone; a point supported by minimal
amounts of preserved bone fragments.
Level B2 averaged 0.2 feet thick and was essentially void of artifacts,
save some minor intrusions through both upper and lower interfaces.
Soil texture indicated a bit finer depositional unit than immediately
above, and a change in color to brownish beige further aided in
visually distinguishing this separate stratum.
Chemically, the potassium curve is slightly depressed, the phosphate value is noticeably reduced, percentage of organic carbon is
further lowered, and pH reaches its highest value in the tested portion
of the site. From an archeological position this level clearly represents
a reversal from that either above or below it.
Level B3 averaged 0.18 feet thick and produced an even more
dramatic change within the stratigraphic sequence than B,. While

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

177

particle size was not markedly altered, soil color was a heavy organic
black and exhibited a typical "greasy feeling" to the touch. Though a
fractional test for total carbon was not performed on any of these
samples (which would indicate amount of charcoal), Level B3 is
believed to have contained more chunk and fleck charcoal than the
above Level B1. It should be noted, however, that the content of
organic matter is quite high in both a relative and absolute sense. This
is accompanied by the highest phosphorus content obtained anywhere on the site, a peaking of nitrates, an increase in soluble salts,
and a sudden drop in the hydrogen-ion value. However, concerning
the elevated nitrate value to 11.0 ppm in this stratum, it is here felt that
is not a marked enough increase to suggest either a buried A horizon
or more than usual concentration of excreta (uric acid or fecal material). Instead, it is more probably related to an increase in organic
matter in this depositional unit (Jackson 1964:133), or reflects the
tremendous volume of intrusive protein through the process of nitrogen mineralization (Stevenson 1964:265-268) -- or both.
That this was an occupational zone hardly needs mention -- especially in light of tangeable osteological evidence. The stratum produced a partially disarticulated portion of the thorax of Bison bison,
one moderately worn antler flesher, and the right distal epiphyseal
head of a B. bison humerus which exhibited utilization along the
fractured epiphysis-diaphysis plane. The lithic assemblage from this
level was distinctly higher than that for Level B1.
Level B4 was surprisingly similar in thickness to B2 above (ca.0.2
feet) and extended from an undulating interface at the bottom of B3
down to a sharp contact with Level C. The soil was a brownish beige
silt, and a bit finer texture than that of B2. This matrix contained some
chunk carbon, and a moderate amount of calcareous and sandstone
pebbles -- not at all atypical in derivation to like material found in
other levels.
This zone represents a quick return to more alkaline conditions, an
obvious drop in phosphorus value, a reduction in the amount of
soluble salts, and a lower percentage of organic carbon. These chemical returns are supplemented by an almost complete lack of artifacts.
Some bone did occur in the level but, as was the case with unit B2, the
test pit profile suggested intrusion -- in this instance coming in from
B3.

Level C averaged 0.75 feet in exposure and extended from a sharp,
undulating interface at the bottom of B4 downward into and formed
the test pit floor.
The soil was about the same color as Level B in T.P./1. and Level C in
T.P./2., and had a particle size range of 0.002 mm. to 0.05 mm. That

178

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

matrix contained a fairly dense concentration of rotten sandstone and
calcite geode talus debris. Generally, the level was quite dry (even
though a moisture line was noted at a depth of 1.9 feet in T.P./2.) and
very calcareous. The combination of those three features (viz., rock
inclusives, matrix composition, and dryness) necessitated maddock
excavation.
It is within this level that phosphates return to regional values
expected in fields under normal cultivation (J. L. Green, personal
communication). As mentioned earlier, potassium remains at an understandably high level, and soluble salts appear to be accumulating
in this "hard pan". No cultural material was encountered in this
depositional unit.
The total artifact inventory of combined levels B, and B3 was:
projectile point fragments--2, scrapers--2, utilized lithics--2, unutilized lithics--91, obsidian--2, total osteology--216; or a total artifact inventory of 315 items.
Initial Interpretation: As was the case in T.P./2., this excavation unit
did not terminate with Permian sediments. Instead, Level C represents the same depositional unit as that called Level C in T.P./2. and
Level B in T.P./1., viz., Triassic talus material. In this third excavation
unit the soil matrix was somewhat more consolidated. This was a
consequence of carbonate cementation -- which probably resulted
from ground water run-off toward the slumping western erosional
face (Fig. 3). This lower area near the toe of the present talus cone
seems to have been a recipient of eolian deposited silty loam which
comprises the culturally sterile Level B4. The upper surface of that
latter stratum unquestionably formed the uppermost surface of the
terrace in the southwestern extension of the site at the time of initial
occupation.
Level B3 represents a period of time of initial site occupation and
may therefore be termed a portion of the first cultural component.
Projected internal site stratigraphy suggests this unit to be the same as
T.P./2.B2. In that there was no indication of intrusion or stratigraphic
disturbance (mixing or reversal) the site could not have been occupied prior to the advent of B. bison.
More than gross thickness, soil chemistry-- particularly phosphate
and organic carbon values -- strongly suggests this earlier level was
more heavily utilized than Level B1. In that the phosphate content is
directly reflecting a bone bed, it should not be used as an indicator of
more intense occupation. However, organic carbon values are not
known to function in anywhere near a 1:1 relationship (direct or
inverse) with phosphorus. For this reason the high percent of organic
carbon present in B3 may more safely indicate more intense occupa-

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

179

tion than occurred in B, -- either by a greater number of people, or
over a longer period of time, or both. Added support for this argument
could be gained from pH (8.3) and soluble salts (3120 ppm) given, of
course, bison and other faunal remains more often find their way to a
garbage dump lacking most of their eatable protein.
Level B2 suggests a period of nonuse for that portion of the site. A
time during which the earlier occupational zone was covered over by
wind deposited sediments. This should not be taken to mean a period
of nonactivity for the entire site in the sense of a complete cultural
hiatus.
The period of occupation represented by Level B, was possibly one
of lighter reliance on that segment of the site; it clearly was the last
period of purposeful prehistoric habitation, and is stratigraphically
analogous to T.P./2.BI. It is this zone and its stratigraphic counterpart,
as separated from those below, that qualify the site as multicomponent; this is said regardless of any similarities or differences that may
be later witnessed in the material culture through formal excavation.
The topsoil is a largely wind deposited silty sand that has and is
experiencing differential erosion and deposition through sheet wash
and wind. Rapid removal by water is more probably occurring during
periods of convectional thunderstorm activity. Deposition, though
undoubtedly some from upslope, is primarily a result of windborn
sediments. A combination of the two, the former gradually "outstripping" the latter, has resulted in a highly mobile topsoil over most of
the site. As a result, the tightly quantifying utility of a distributional
study concerning artifacts on or within the topsoil should be weighed
carefully.
DISCUSSION
Supplementary to the more obvious points presented earlier, at
least three additional issues warrant comment: the utility of increased
quantification at a survey level of investigation, the necessity of
presenting a larger environmental picture to sufficiently understand
any single feature of that mosaic, and an overriding archeological
value of data presented in this report.
Though Redman’s (1973:64, Fig. 1) reiteration concerning an "organizational framework for a regional multistage field research design" is rather biased toward problem oriented surveys, fieldwork
prior to systematic excavation should be at least cognitively separated
into different-- albeit interrelated -- operational phases. While these
phases, e.g., literature search, reconnaisance and general ecological
study, site and specific environmental context survey, may be looked

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

upon as successive stages or levels of data retrieval, none is ideally
more or less sophisticated than the next. Indeed, while each may be
oriented toward a single methodological approach, all employ discrete techniques of execution. Hopefully, involvement at each level
will produce ultimate data retrieval for that step in terms of the
specific project and in the face of temporal expediency. Achievement
of such a balance is not always easy and techniques that lend themselves to greater quantification at a minimal cost of time and money
are surely worth consideration for the greater amount of information
they may generate. Mechanical and chemical analysis of soils has
long been recognized as such a tool, and it is this investigator’s
position that soil sampling can be of high survey utility if problems
posed involve pedologicat dynamics. The question remains, "At what
level of survey can this technique of information acquisition be expediently employed?"
Archeological survey at the reconnaissance level seldom entails
much beyond a statement of subareal or regional potential. This can
often be achieved by flying over, driving across, or walking through
the universe in question; the end product rarely requires an exacting
site inventory. Sample procurement at this stage of analysis is usually
limited to culturally and environmentally representative photography. At a second stage of investigation site survey may involve a
detailed list of components or localities encountered, their approximate horizontal size, and the collection of artifactual and nonartifactual surface samples. Tools needed during this phase can include
techniques of photography, controlled surface collection, probing,
and possibly rapid planimetric mapping. Such is the case for many
non-problem oriented, "salvage" surveys. Data retrieval at a more
intensive third level of survey is largely guided by problem oriented
research designs; though it frequently occurs that researchers either
bypass the earlier second phase or begin at this investigative level
from extant work when a final report requires statements significantly
beyond the descriptive [exceptions to this course of action can be
found with some research among participants in programs such as the
Southwestern Anthropoligical Research Group (Gumerman 1971), or
entire institutions such as the Museum of Northern Arizona where the
philosophy concerning archeological clearance for industrial projects has taken on "non-salvage" dimensions (A. J. Lindsay, personal
communication)]. Results of this latter stage are most recently tailored
along lines of environmental impact statements, or more commonly
have formed highly quantifying guidelines for formal excavation
selection. It is at this operational level that selective subsurface site
testing is sometimes added to augment information gained from ear-

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

181

lier mentioned techniques, e.g., vertical site dimentions, establishing
locality potential for cultural and/or natural stratification, and consequently a greater or lesser probability for single v.s. multiple components, etc. In the absence of an erosional face or other natural events
providing a convenient site profile, archaeologists will employ a
variety of coreing devices or a series of small escavation units
(trenches or test pits). If questions are being asked that require these
procedures, and if field time and money have been allotted for attempting answers to those questions, then surely time and funds are
such as to permit implementation of expedient yet high return tools
like soil sampling and analysis. In the instance of TsA:2.3.0.1. thirteen stratified samples of 500 g. each were prepared, provenienced,
collected from bottom to top, and filed for later analysis in approximately twenty minutes. The average laboratory cost per 250 g. samples was $2.08 (one half of each sample was retained for mechanical
analysis, rechecking, and obvious safety factors). In the end, little
time and money have been invested in a type of quantification that
better elucidates excavation potential in terms of a given problem
orientation, and aids in selection of a specific technical approach
should further exploration be desired.
The geographic location of TsA:2.3.0.1. in canyon country of
northwest Texas has placed that site and its contents in an ecologically transitional setting (Table 5). For that reason, along with the
intimate and subtle interplay between physiography, topography,
climate, vegetation, and soils, it is more necessary to consider a larger
environmental picture when assessing and reporting upon any discrete feature of the total collage. In the first instance, soil parent
material is not a primary product of local Permian bedrock -- any
more than it is wholely of Triassic origin. In fact, each is stratigraphically represented in the profile, and both have been overriden by
windborn Recent deposits of nonindigenous origin. Together they
represent a matrix of pedogenic inputs not always common to
localities or regions of more central or homogeneous placement
within a single physiographic provence. This must be well understood in order to better comprehend mechanical and chemical results
of soil analyses. It was, for example, within this parameter that potassium values were interpreted as less sensitive -- and not because the
entire profile was loaded with wood-ash. In the second instance,
attempts to understand one environmental factor without notice to
several others may lead to total befuddlement or again -- and yet
worse-- misinterpretation. In this vein, during comparison of topsoil
and occupation levels between test pits 1 and 2 a consideration of
density and type of floral cover aided explication of differential

182

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

hydrogen-ion values as well as a seeming reversal in the phosphate
profile. The former does not necessarily indicate more intense occupation of the northern half of the site by less alkalinity; and the latter
does not suggest stratigraphic mixing or an additional component
through elevation in phosphate content. In addition, understanding
climatic influences on particular soil types can certainly aid in prediction of the presence or absence of more perishable remains. In the
case of TsA:2.3.0.1. levels of temperature and precipitation working
on local soils over a reasonable length of time have been primarily
responsible for creating a calcimorphic soil. With the Quinlan series
this has resulted in little downward leaching of soluble bases and a
high probability that many ions remain in place -- indeed; any such
vertical movement at a reasonable depth may be expected to be in an
upward rather than downward direction. Surely this has been a central factor to excellent preservation of bison bone, and may further
remove ambiguities surrounding supposed zones of greater or lesser
occupational intensity.
TABLE 5
Transitional Physical Setting of TsA:2.3.0.1.

Setting

PHYSIOGRAPHY

Between Osage Plains section of
Central Lowland Provence and
High Plains Provence

TOPOGRAPHY

Talus slope

CLIMATE

Bwk

VEGETATION

Biotic ecotone

SOILS

Rough Broken Land

Description

Permian sediments overlain by
nonmarine Triassic rubble and
capped off with redeposited
Pliocene to Pleistocene eolian
sands.
3%-7% grade of Dockum detritus
overriding second terrace above
floodplain.
regime of inequality between air
masses to west & north (cT, cP),
and south & east (cTs).
western margin of Mesquite
Plains District (edaphic distinction) near Short-Grass Plains
{Kansan Biotic Provence}.
immature weathering profile of
talus rubble between stratified
floodplain alluvium [Broken Alluvial Land (Br)] and wind deposited loams of Potter-Mobeetie
(Pe) and Pullman (Pm-Pu) Associations.

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

183

On the other hand, knowledge of existing soil types and factors of
influence must be treated with guarded caution. One should not make
one-to-one assumptions from a known soil type at its type section to
soil involved with an archeological site. Not only must confidence
decrease with distance from the type or control section, human intervention certainly has a hand to play in changing chemical and
mechanical characteristics enough in degree that the kind or type of
soil being sampled is something other than the naturally maturing
ideal. Just as soil scientists should be careful not to establish a
pedological type section on an archaeological site, given enough time
the archaeologist should develop his own controls just off-- but quite
near -- the cultural component; these samples may then be accompanied by an inventory from all levels within the site (Cornwall
1958:116; Cook and Heizer 1965:16; van der Merwe and Stein
1972:245ff.). Regrettably, this sampling neglect is a shortcoming of an
otherwise excellent study performed by Eddy and Dregne (1964:8-9);
as samples appear to have been taken only from disturbed levels, the
final report lacks necessary horizontal and vertical controls against
which to compare culturally altered soil. In sum, type section information and close proximity control samples -- though very necessary
to understanding localized phenomena -- should be used only to
erect parameters within which the products of analysis may be expected to fall, and by no measure absolute dicta.
In survey perspective, mechanica! and chemical analysis of soil at
one archeological locality in Palo Duro Canyon has produced some
quantitative and repeatable information most beneficial to general
site assessment and future excavation. In addition to adding vertically
stratified artifactual and nonartifactual samples to an extant museum
surface inventory, establishing some technical approach guidelines
for more intensive exploration, and affording quantitative data on a
specific type and phase variation within the Quinlan series (Appendix and Table 3), the three test pits discussed herein present the
beginning of a strong argument for intrasite functional differentiation. Insofar as visually identifiable soil stratigraphy is reflecting
more a cultural reality within periods of natural deposition than
wholely physical events attributable to such phenomena as a mature
weathering profile or depositional/erosional history, it is here felt
TsA:2.3.0.1. was occupied at more than one discrete period of time
and probably by more than a single group of people. The projected
stratigraphic correlations between levels B1 and Ba in T.P./3. and BI
and B2 in T.P./2. certainly mitigate in this direction. In this light, ithas
been suggested the north half of the site may present a picture of
stratigraphic mixing, and thus produce less reliable cultural sequencing from tight artifact proveniencing.

184

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

;~

oa

ID

4d~dd44ddd44d ~
"Ct~

I:10 ""

ddddddddddddd

Z

~

~ggg~g~ggggg[

~ ~’~

~.~

ddddddd4d444a ~
ila

Ca

¢,~

¢ 30,1eO’vl~eO’cl4~o"ar~
O~a

v,.,l¢’Ox--~
O’a e’.l eO

ff.~

©

Ill
A A A A A A A A A A A AA

q

0

"~

o ~

Z

~~ 4dM4ddd

~0~0~00~00~
-~,~

~
~

a:

.~ >,<
~.~0

~No

Ca

=uSmu<~umugu
5
Z

.g
,-1

0
Z

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

185

It is further believed multiple occupations may have been of a
permanent enough nature for inhabitants to designate certain portions of the original terrace for specific functions -- at least at the
midden level. While the horizontal extent of midden debris could not
be determined by a single 3 feet by 3 feet test pit, T.P./3. does argue for
trash accumulation -- and comparison of data from that square to
information from the other excavation units suggest localized midden
deposits at each proposed occupation level (rather surprising in light
of local notions concerning "Archaic patterns").
Understandably, the equally synthetic query concerning occupation intensity has generated more questions than materiality. Within
T.P./2. the relatively low hydrogen-ion level (8.4), increased potassium value (222 ppm), and peaking of organic carbon (0.8983%) offers
a beginning suggestion that Level B, experienced a greater intensity
of occupation than the lower B2. On the other hand, the low pH (8.3),
level of organic carbon (0.7076%), and increased soluble salt value
(3120 ppm) exhibited by T.P./3.Ba points to more intense activity in
that district of the site at an earlier point in time. Barring stratigraphic
inversion or mixing, and bearing in mind the remnant nature of this
particular terrace -- as well as the very incomplete nature of survey
data -- one might be suspicious of such cultural patterns as shifting
centers of activity through the time represented by human habitation.
Were this the situation, it is possible T.P.i3. was located nearer the
center of the earlier midden than the later -- in which case a substantial portion of the latter deposit may have been lost to the combined
action of "pot hunters" and natural erosion; each form of site alteration has been quite common within the state park. Conversely, T.P.i2.
may not have found the center of either component and so not reflect
artifactual, stratigraphic, or pedological circumstances typical of sectors of highest use.
Certainly not all site surveys require or even allow for subsurface
testing. But it is the position taken in this report that greater quantification is sorely needed in all phases of preexcavation investigation.
And when means of pedological explication can place the archeologist in a better site evaluating position at so minimal a cost of
time and money, it is surely a tool worthy of consideration for any
person in a testing position, with a problem in mind, and more
intensive exploration ahead. It has undoubtedly shed most helpful
light on this investigator’s original problem of defining and describing occupational versus nonoccupational zones in the floor of Palo
Duro Canyon.

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author is indebted to Mr. Curtis Tunnell and the Texas State Historical Survey
Committee for substantial project funding of which this report is a part. Equal appreciation is expressed toward the State Antiquities Committee and Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department for a permit to investigate state property, as well as continuing help and
encouragement. Gratitude is personally extended to Drs. J. T. Hughes and J. L. Green of
West Texas State University and B. R. Harrison, Curator of Anthropology, PanhandlePlains Museum in Canyon for individual time, advice and facilities. Ms. Nova Young of
the Museum of Northern Arizona, Flagstaff delightfully served as graphic illustrator.

REFERENCES CITED

Adkins, W. S.
1932 The Mesozoic Systems in Texas. In: The Geology of Texas (Vol. I). (E.
H. Sellards, W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer, eds.), pp. 239-517.
Bureau of Economic Geology, Bulletin 3232, University of Texas,
Austin.
Baker, C. L.
1915 Geology and Underground Waters of the Northern Llano Estacado.
University of Texas, Bulletin 57.
Barshad, I.
1964 Chemistry of Soil Development. In: Chemistry of the Soil. (F. E. Bear,
ed.), pp. 1-70. Reinhold Publishing Corporation, New York.
Barton, D. C.
1930 Deltaic Coastal Plain of Southeastern Texas. Geological Society of
America, Bulletin 41, pp. 359-382.
Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provences of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1,
pp. 93-117.
1954 Mammals of the Mesquite Plains Biotic District in Texas and Oklahoma, and Speculations in the Central Grasslands. Texas Journal of
Science, Vol. 6, pp. 235-264.
Blair, W. F. and T. H. Hubbell
1938 The Biotic Districts of Oklahoma. American Midland Naturalist, Vol.
20, pp. 425-454.
Bryson, R. A.
1970 The Character of Climatic Change, and the End of the Pleistocene.
Paper presented at first meeting, American Quaternary Association.
Montana State University, Bozeman.
Buckman, H. O., and N. C. Brady
1960 The Nature and Properties of Soils. MacMillan, New York.
Coe, M. D., and K. V. Flannery
1964 Microenvironments and Mesoamerican Prehistory. Science, Vol. 143,
pp. 650-654.
Cook, S. F., and R. P. Heizer
1965 Studies on the Chemical Analysis of Archaeological Sites. University
of California Press, Los Angeles.
Cornwall, I. W.
1958 Soils for the Archaeologist. Phoenix House, London.

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

187

Denton, G. H., and S. C. Porter
1970 Neoglaciation. Scientific American, Vol. 222, No. 6, pp. 100-110.
Eddy, F. W., and H. E. Dregne
1964 Soil Tests on Alluvial and Archaeological Deposits, Navajo Reservoir
District. E1 Palacio, Vol. 71, No. 4, pp. 5-21.
Federal Standard Colors
1968 Federal Standard No. 595a, (Vol. I). Washington, D.C.
Frye, J. C., and A. B. Leonard
1957a Ecological Interpretations ofPliocene and Pleistocene Stratigraphy in
the Great Plains Region. American Journal of Science, Vol. 255, pp.
1-11.
1957b Studies of Cenozoic Geology along Eastern Margin of Texas High
Plains, Armstrong to Howard Counties. Bureau of Economic Geology,
Report of Investigations, No. 32, University of Texas, Austin.
Geiger, L. C.
1972 Oral communication. U.S.D.A., Soil Conservation Service, Amarillo.
Green, J. L.
1972 Oral communication. Plant Science Department, School of
Agriculture, West Texas State University, Canyon.
Gumerman, G. J. (ed.)
1971 The Distribution of Prehistoric Population Aggregates. Southwestern
Anthropological Research Group, Proceedings No. 1. Prescott College
Press, Prescott.
Hafsten, U.
1961 Pleistocene Development of Vegetation and Climate in the Southern
High Plains as Evidenced by Pollen Analysis. In: Paleoecology of the
Llano Estacado. (F. Wendorf, ed.), pp. 59-91. Museum of New Mexico
Press, Santa Fe.
Haynes, C. V., Jr.
1968 Geochronology of Late-Quaternary Alluvium. In: Means of Correlation of Quaternary Succession. (R. B. Morrison and H. E. Wright, Jr.,
eds.), pp. 591-631. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Irwin-Williams, C., and C. V. Haynes, Jr.
1970 Climatic Change and Early Population Dynamics in the Southwestern
United States. Quaternary Research, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 59-71.
Jackson, M. L.
1964 Chemical Composition of Soils. In: Chemistry of the Soil. (F. E. Bear,
ed.), pp. 71-141. Reinhold Publishing Corporation, New York.
Jacquot, L. L., L. C. Geiger, B. R. Chance, V. D. Woods, D. A. Leath, and L. C.
Imke
1965 Soil Survey of Armstrong County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Jacquot, L. L., L. C. Geiger, B. R. Chance, and W. Tripp
1970 Soil Survey of Randall County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Koppen, W., and R. Geiger (eds.)
19301939 Handbuch der Klimatologie. 4 Vols. Berlin.
Lee, W. T.
1918 Early Mesozoic Physiography of the Southern Rocky Mountains.
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collection, Vol. 69, No. 4.

188

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Lindsay, A. J., Jr.
1972 Oral communication. Research Center, Department of Anthropology,
Museum of Northern Arizona, Flagstaff.
Lotspeich, F. B., and J. R. Coover
1962 Soil Forming Factors on the Llano Estacado: Parent Material, Time,
and Topography. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 14, pp. 7-17.
Maulde, H. E.
1964 Environment and Man in Arid America. Science, Vol. 145, pp.
123-129.
Mehringer, P. J., Jr.
1967 Pollen Analysis and the Alluvial Chronology. The Kiva, Vol. 32, pp.
96-101.
Munsell Color Company, Inc.
1971 Munsell Soil Color Charts. Baltimore.
Pearson, E. L.
1968 Geocultural Survey of the West Mexican Marismas Nacionales. State
University of New York, Buffalo.
Plummer, F. B.
1932 Cenozoic Systems in Texas. In: The Geology of Texas (Vol. I). (E. H.
Sellards, W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer, eds.), pp. 519-818. Bureau
of Economic Geology, Bulletin 3232, University of Texas, Austin.
Redman, C. L.
1973 Multistage Fieldwork and Analytical Techniques. American
Antiquity, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 61-79.
Richmond, G. M.
1960 Glaciation of the East Slope of Rocky Mountain National Park, Colorado. Geological Society of America, Bulletin 71, pp. 1371-1382.
Ruhe, R. V.
1965 Quaternary Paleopedology. In: The Quaternary of the United States.
(H. E. Wright, Jr., and D. G. Frey, eds.), pp. 755-764. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Sellards, E. H.
1932 The Pre-Paleozoic and Paleozoic Systems in Texas. In: The Geology of
Texas (Vol. I). (E. H. Sellards, W. S. Adkins, F. B. Plummer, eds.), pp.
15-238. Bureau of Economic Geology, Bulletin 3232, University of
Texas, Austin.
Schoenwetter, J., and A. E. Dittert, Jr.
1968 An Ecological Interpretation of Anasazi Settlement Patterns. In:
Anthropological Archaeology in the Americas. (B. J. Meggers, ed.),
pp. 41-66. Anthropological Society of Washington, Washington, D.C.
Seatz, L. F., and H. B. Peterson
1964 Acid, Alkaline, Saline, and Sodic Soils. In: Chemistry of the Soil. (F. E.
Bear, ed.), pp. 292-319. Reinhold Publishing Corporation, New York.
Shelford, V. E.
1963 The Ecology of North America. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Soil Survey Staff
1960 Soil Classification, a Comprehensive System, 7th Approximation.
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Washington, D.C.

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

189

Stevenson, I. L.
1964 Biochemistry of Soil. In: Chemistry of the Soil. (F. E. Bear, ed.), pp.
242-291. Reinhold Publishing Corporation, New York.
Van der Merwe, N. J., and P. H. Stein
1972 Soil Chemistry of Postmolds and Rodent Burrows: Identification
without Excavation. American Antiquity, Vol. 37, No. 2, pp. 245-254.
University of Colorado, Boulder

