Utilization of Marine Mollusks by Inhabitants
of the Texas Coast

D. Gentry Steele

ABSTRACT
Along the Texas Coast, marine mollusks were used by the aboriginal
populations both as a significant food resource and as a source of raw material
for the manufacture of tools and ornaments. The utilization of this resource
v aries along the co ast, and this variation is correlated with differences in marine
habitats and the availability of lithic resources. Along the upper Texas coast the
common rangia and the eastern oyster were the major mollusks used as food;
along the central and southern coast a greater variety of marine species were
utilized. More tools and ornaments were manufactured from mollusks along
the central and southern parts of the coast.
INTRODUCTION

Many Texas coastal archeological sites can be recognized by the shell refuse
littering the area, yet the aboriginal use of these marine resources was one of the last
questions seriously examined by archeologists working in the state. The early
period of archeological research concentrated on finding evidence of prehistoric
occupation, establishing the cultural sequences, tracing historic groups back through
time, and understanding Texas’s role in the origin of Mesoamerican cultures and
their diffusion into the Mississippi Valley. This phase of archeological research has
been well reviewed by Aten (1979, 1983), Campbell (1960), Dillehay (1975),
Hester(1980a), and Patterson (1979a, 1979b).
This early research did not focus on analyses of subsistence patterns, such as
utilization of marine resources, but it did establish the importance of marine
resources to dwellers of the Texas coast. The concentration of shell midden sites
along the upper Texas coast was first documented by Sayles (1935), whereas the
significance of the marine resources to peoples of the central and southern coast of
Texas was first documented by Martin (1929, 1930) and Sayles (1935). In a more
systematic fashion, Campbell’s research on the central coast of Texas emphasized
the importance of shell as a resource for production of tools (1947,1952,1956,
1958a, and 1958b), whereas MacNeish’s work emphasized the shell industry of the
south (1947).
Only in the last two decades have archeologists systematically pursued
questions concerning the use of marine resources by Indians of the Texas coast. For
the upper Texas coast, Ambler’s excavations in the Trinity River delta (1973) and
Dillehay’s report (1975) on prehistoric patterns of subsistence in the lower Trinity
Bay area are landmark research efforts. For the central coast of Texas the work of
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

216

Texas Archeological Society

Story (1968) in the Corpus Christi Bay area is especially noteworthy for its
ecological orientation. Her work was followed shortly by research conducted by
Hester (1969a, 1971b) and Fritz (1975). In these studies, the first serious consideration of the faunal remains and human subsistence patterns was presented, as well
as traditional research on the artifacts made of bone and shell. Since these studies
appeared, Aten (1979,1983), Carlson, Steele, and Bruno (1982), Day, Laurens-Day,
and Prewitt (1981),Smith (1983a, 1983b), and Steele and Mokry (1985) have
continued to pursue environmentally oriented questions. Janota’s study of the shell
ornaments of the central and upper Texas coast (1980) and Mokry’s examination of
whelk shell adze technology (1980) are two studies that specifically examine one
aspect of aboriginal use of marine resources
What is lacking for the Texas coast is a review of the aboriginal use of marine
resources for the entire region focused on recognition of regional patterns and
explaining the reasons for these patterns. This paper is an initial review that
concentrates on aboriginal use of mollusks as food and for the production of tools
and ornaments. It is restricted to the mollusks because insufficient data is available
to warrant inclusion of other marine resources such as salt and fish. The emphasis
is on analysis of geographic variation in the use of species, since data are too limited
to support analysis of temporal and seasonal use of mollusks. However, the
literature on these topics will be discussed where it is pertinent.

SITES AND MATERIALS
This review of aboriginal use of marine mollusks is based on material recovered
from 111 sites and the Anderson Collection, the most extensive collection of
mollusks recovered from archeological sites in the Rio Grande delta region, made
by A. E. Anderson during the first half of the century. After Anderson’s death, the
collection was lent to The University of Texas at Austin (Prewitt 1974a). Tabulation
of the mollusks in the Anderson Collection is based on a brief paper of Anderson’s
(1932) and on the author’s examination of material from that collection that is
housed in the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.
To facilitate regional comparisons, materials from the sites have been clustered
into 15 separate localities along the coast (Figure 1, Table 1).
Identifications made by the original analysts generally have been accepted, but
species identifications of shells originally identified as oyster or whelk are tentative.
Since all sites were not sampled originally in the same fashion, precautions
should be taken in evaluating the data (Table 2). No distinction is made on Table
1 between one or a thousand specimens since frequencies are not available for the
various species at all sites. Certain taxa, such as Rangia, Crassostrea, or Busycon,
are quite frequent, but species such as Diodra cayenensis or Cerithideapliculosa are
never very frequent. In these cases, subjective evaluations of species frequency are
presented, but in cases where specimens of species appear in apparent equal
frequency, no frequency comparisons are made. Too, absence of a species from a
locality may be significant, as is the absence of Rangia cuneata from southern
coastal sites, but the absence from a locality of species that show up only rarely in

Steele m Utilization of Marine Mollusks

re. 6 ~ a

217

_A

~

T

X

Bay
Y
sland

.Lavaca Bay
Matagorda Bay
’San Antonio Bay
-Aransas Bay
ous Christi Bay
"Nueces Bay

Gulf of Mexico
County Key

-Baffin Bay

A-Zavala
B- Dimmit
C - McMullen
D- Live Oak
E- Kleberg
F- Goliad
G - Victoria
H- Williamson
I - Matagorda

Island
una Madre

0
O

lOO mile
1oo kilometers

J - Brazoria
K - Harris
L - Galveston

Figure 1. Map of the Coastal Bend of Texas showing the 15 localities from which sites were
sampled.

all sites may simply be a result of sampling error.
Variation in mollusk use through time, and seasonal variation in the use of
mollusks are discussed only briefly because little data are available on them. One
exception concerns seasonal utilization of rangia, which is discussed by Carlson
(1988).
FACTORS AFFECTING DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF MOLLUSKS
Three major factors that affect the distribution of mollusks along the Texas
coast are (1) the structure of the coastline itself, (2) the amount of rainfall in the
region and the amount of runoff into the bays, and (3) the scarcity of lithic materials
along the Gulf Coast.
The most distinctive features of the Texas coastline are the many embayments
that flood the m outh s of the rivers, and the peninsulas and barrier islands that parallel

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

218
Table

1.

Sites from 15 Localities Along the Gulf Coast
Containing Material Examined or Cited

Map
No.

County

Coastal Area

1

Chambers

Trinity
Bay

2

Harris

3

Galveston

Galveston
Bay
Galveston
Bay and
Gulf of

Brazoria
4

Brazoria

Mexico
Gulf of
Mexico

5
6
7

Wharton
Matagorda
Jackson

Matagorda Bay
Matagorda Bay
Lavaca Bay

8
9

Victoria
Calhoun

Lavaca Bay
Lavaca Bay

10

Aransas

Aransas Bay

11

San Patricio

12

Nueces

Corpus
Christi Bay
Nueces Bay

13

Kleberg

Laguna
Madre
Baffin Bay

14

Cameron

Laguna
Madre and
Gulf of
Mexico

Hidalgo
Willacy
15

Cameron

Laguna
Madre and
Gulf of
Mexico

Sites

41CH1, 16, 20,
24, 31-33, 36, 40,
46, 47, 52, 80,
88, 98, 106, 110,
137, 169, 172
41HR50, 56, 61,
80, 81, 85
41GV1, 5,
41BO2

41BO4, 11-13,
35, 41, 50, 126

41WH8
41MG8-25, 29
41JK7, 41, 47,
91, 110-120,
122, 124-130,
132-142, 144,
41VT!
41CL8, 9, 2132, 35, 41, 42,
44
41AS1, 3
41SP43
41NUll, 35,
65, 101, 102104, 169, 184,
185, 221

41KL13, 71
41CF2, 18
19, 97-102

41HG89
41WY48, 51,
60, 74
Anderson
Collection

of Texas

Source

Ambler 1973,
Aten 1983,
Dillehay 1975,
Gilmore 1974,
Shafer 1966
Aten et al. 1976,
Aten 1983
Aten 1965,
Campbell 1957
Hole and
Wilkinson 1973
Aten 1971, 1983,
Dering & Ayers
1977, Hamilton
1988, Hollingsworth
1981, This study
Hudgins 1984
Fritz 1975
Fritz 1975,
McGuff 1978,
Story 1968
This study
Fritz 1975

Campbell 1947,
1952
Story 1968,
This study
Carlson et al.
1982, Steele &
Mokry 1985,
Riklis & Gunter
1986, Ricklis
1986, This study
Campbell 1956
Hester 1969a, 1971,
Smith 1983b
Collins et al. 1969,
Hall & Grombacher
1974, Prewitt,
1974a, This study
Day et al. 1981
Day et al. 1981
Anderson 1932,
This study

Steele ~ Utilization of Marine Mollusks

219

the coastline, protecting these bays (Figure 1). In the northeast comer of the state,
Galveston Bay and Trinity bays are almost completely separated from the Gulf of
Mexico by Bolivar Peninsula and Galveston Island (Figure 1, localities 1 to 3).
These bays, because of their isolation, together with high annual rainfall and
resultant discharge into them, are brackish water bays that support few mollusk
species. South of Galveston Bay (near locality 4, Figure 1), a short stretch of the
Texas coast directly fronts the Gulf; like the seaward rim of Galveston Island and
Bolivar Peninsula, it provided hunters and gatherers access to a marine environment
and to fauna more reminiscent of the southern bays than of the adjacent brackish
water bays.
The next embayment is Matagorda Bay, with the smaller arms Lavaca Bay,
Carancahua Bay, and Tres Palacios Bay flooding the lower reaches of the streams
that bear the same names (near localities 6 and 7, Figure 1). Matagorda Bay, like
Galveston Bay, is bounded seaward by barrier islands and peninsulas, but less
freshwater enters the bay, so Matagorda Bay’s mollusk fauna is more reminiscent
of the Gulf of Mexico than of Galveston Bay.
Directly south of Matagorda Bay are the narrow San Antonio Bay, the larger
sprawling Aransas Bay with smaller embayments Copano and St. Charles bays
(near locality 10), and Corpus Christi Bay with smaller Nueces Bay and Cayo del
Oso (near localities 11 and 12, Figure 1). All three of these bays, like Matagorda
Bay, are sufficiently saline to support a highly varied marine fauna reminiscent of
the Gulf of Mexico.
South of Corpus Christi Bay stretches Laguna Madre (localities 14 and 15,
Figure 1), separating the mainland from Padre Island, which opens to the Gulf only
at its southern and northern tips and has little freshwater entering from the mainland.
Consequently, of all Texas bays, the saline Laguna Madre supports a marine fauna
most like that of the Gulf of Mexico. Baffin Bay (locality 13) with its sister bays
Cayo del Grullo and Alazan Bay, is the only embayment that breaks the main
coastline fronting Laguna Madre, flooding one of the most arid stretches of the
Texas coast. It is one of the most saline bays along the Gulf, and it appears, in fact,
that this bay complex has grown more saline during the period of human occupation
(Hester 1971a, 1980a, Smith 1983a, 1983b).
The second factor affecting mollusk distributions and their value to aboriginal
populations is the amount of rainfall along the coast, together with the amount of
water entering the bays from the rivers. Today, a marked precipitation gradient
characterizes the Texas coast. The current annual precipitation means range
between 112 cm (44 inches) along the upper coast and 71 cm (28 inches) at the
mouth of the Rio Grande (Figure 2).
The upper Texas coast receives the major part of both precipitation and runoff
for the state. The Colorado, Brazos, Trinity, Neches, and Sabine Rivers, which enter
the upper half of the Texas coast, drain well over half of the entire landmass of
Texas. On the other hand, the Lavaca, Guadalupe, San Antonio, Aransas, and
Nueces Rivers, short rivers draining only the base of the Edwards Plateau and the
south Texas plains, cross the central part of the coast, with discharges far less than
those of the rivers of the upper Texas coast. Between the Nueces and the Rio Grande

220
Table

Texas Archeological Society
2.

Species of Marine Mollusks Recovered
Along the Gulf Coast of Texas1

Species
(Common name in parentheses)
Aequipecten irradians
amplicostatus (Atlantic
bay scallop)
Anadara sp. indet.
(Ark)
Anadara transversa
(Transverse ark)
Atrina serrata
(Saw-tooth pen shell)
Brachiodontes sp. indet.
(Scorched mussel)
Busycon sp. indet. (Whelk)
Callista nimbosa
(Sunray venus)
Cerithida pIicuIosa
(Plicate horn shell)
Chione cancellata
(Cross-barred venus)
Crossostrea virginica
(Eastern oyster)
Crepidula fornicata
(Common Atlantic slipper)
Cyrtopleura costata
(Angel wing)
Diodora cayenensis
(Keyhole limpet)
Dosinia discus (Disk dosinia)
Fisciolaria lilium
(Banded tulip)"
Geukensia demissa
(Ribbed mussel)
Ischadium recurvum
(Hooked mussel)
Laevicardium robustum
(Giant Atlantic cockle)
Littorina irrorata
(Marsh periwinkle)
Lucinia floridana
(Florida lucina)
Mercenaria campechiensis
(Southern quahog)
Murex pomum (Apple murex)
Noetia ponderosa
(Ponderous ark)
OIiva savana (Lettered olive)
OIivella dealbata
(Whitened dwarf olive)
Ostrea equestris

in

15

Localities

Locality
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

11 12 13 14 15

S-SB-- S S SS

S

S

S

SS-S
ABBBSSBABB

S

B

A A A

AAASB

-

B

B

S

A

S

S

S

.... SS

A A
A

S

S
SS

S

-

S

S-SS-ABASB

S

S

S

S

-

S-

S

S

S

S

A

S

s
--AS
S

S

S

S

S

-

S-SSS
S

S
S

S
S

S

-

S
A-A-A--A-S

S
S

A A A
S A A

S-SSB
S

SS
S

--ASSSB-SS

S

SS

S

--S

S

S
S

A

continued

Steele m Utilization of Marine Mollusks

221

Table 2, continued

(Horse oyster)
Phalium granulatum

(Scotch bonnet)"
Pleurophloca gigantea
(Florida horse conch)
Polinices duplicatus
(Shark’s eye)
Prunum apicina
(Common Atlantic
marginella)
Rangia cuneata
(Common rangia)
Rangia flexuosa
(Brown rangia)
Thais haemastoma floridana
(Florida rock shell)
Trachycardium sp. indet.
(Cockle)

-B

S

S

A-A

-

A

S-SSS

-

S

---A---A
B-SS SSBS S--S

S
S

A A
-

S
S

S

SS-S

t Based on the taxonomic list of Andrews, 1971
S (Shell) unmodified specimens
A (Artifact) modified specimen
B (Both) both unmodified and modified specimens

lies a fourth of the entire Texas coastline, but it is drained by no constantly flowing
river.
These conditions were probably less harsh in the past, but the precipitation
gradient apparently has existed at least since Cabeza de Vaca’s time. Krieger
(1956), in his review of the food habits of aboriginals along the Texas coast based
on the journals of Cabeza de Vaca, describes three regions: one near Galveston Bay,
one inland from Lavaca B ay, and the expanse between the Nueces River and the Rio
Grande. Although the relative amounts of rainfall are not given for these regions
by Cabeza de Vaca, his descriptions closely fit the conditions for the regions as they
are now.
We do not know how far into antiquity these conditions persisted. Hester
(1980b) and Smith (1983b) have reviewed changing salinity in Baffin Bay. Based
primarily upon the work of Behrens (1963, 1971, and 1972), they report that until
4,000 years ago Baffin Bay supported a varied marine fauna similar to what is found
in Aransas and Corpus Christi bays today. Then, with the development of the barrier
islands around 5,000 years ago and the gradual reduction in the amount of fresh
water discharging into the bay, the bay became too saline to support the varied
mollusk fauna.
Ricklis and Gunter (1986) reported recovering only brown rangia in Late
Archaic deposits at 41NU 184 and 41NU221, but by Late Prehistoric times, both the
brown and the common rangia were being harvested at 41NU221. They inferred that
this reflected increasingly brackish water conditions in the area of the site as the
developing barrier islands slowed the dispersion of the fresh water emptying into

222

Texas Archeological Society

2O

32

14

2G
2(
0

2OO

Miles

2O

Figure 2. Map of Texas showing the precipitation gradient along the coast. Numbers give
the mean annual precipitation recorded in inches along the representative lines.
Corpus Christi Bay from the Nueces River. This is the reverse of the trend
postulated for Baffin Bay, where the developing barrier islands, water evaporation,
and the lack of a constant fresh water discharge resulted in increasing rather than
decreasing salinities.
Aten, Chandler, Wesolowskyl and Malina (1976) reported sequential changes
in mollusk fauna recovered at the Harris County Boys’ School site similar to those
seen in Nueces Bay. Here the changes indicated a shift from an early brackish water
fauna dominated by common rangia to a more saline fauna with increasing numbers
of oysters, then a final return in the most recent times to a brackish fauna, again
dominated by the common rangia. Aten (1983) suggested that these changes
reflected the development of the Galveston Bay estuary.
From these three examples it is apparent that conditions along the coastline
have changed during the period of human occupation. The creation of the barrier
islands was a major change that could have affected conditions in all of the estuarine

Steele ~ Utilization of Marine Mollusks

223

bays, limiting the exchange of bay waters and those of the open Gulf. This would
have resulted in the gradual establishment of either brackish water estuaries such as
the upper reaches of Galveston and Nueces bays, or hypersaline estuaries such as
Baffin Bay, depending upon the degree of freshwater discharge into the bays.
Availability of marine fauna along the Texas coast could have been affected
not only by the establishment of the barrier island system, but also by the changing
environmental conditions during the late Quaternary. Aten, in summarizing the
climatological data available for the upper Texas coast (1983), points out that with
the last recession of the glaciers there was a gradual submergence of the Texas
coastline. Between 10,030 and 8490 B.P. river flow was reduced to about what it
is today, cloud cover dissipated, and seasonal temperatures became increasingly
divergent. Between 8490 and 5060 B.P. the area became markedly more arid and
warmer, conditions that supported the formation of caliche deposits; during this
period river discharge may have dropped. S ince 5060 B.P. there has been a gradual
change to present conditions. These broad changes were taking place along the
upper Texas coast together with analogous changes along the southern part of the
coast, but the exact nature of the changes and their effects upon the mollusk fauna
are unknown.
In summary, the Texas coastline today is a complex series of bays nestled
behind a protective screen of barrier islands and peninsulas. From the upper Texas
coast southward these bays form a graded series of saline environments from the
brackish Trinity and Galveston bays to the highly saline Baffin Bay complex.
Various aboriginal populations living along the Texas coast then, would not have
harvested from a homogeneous marine environment, but rather from a variety of
environmental zones with specific foraging opportunities and limitations that
probably required adaptation to changes through time.
The third factor to be considered when examining mollusk utilization is the
scarcity of locally available lithic material for tools and ornaments. The land
bordering the coast is a broad, gently rising plain of late Pleistocene sands and
aeolian deposits resting on Holocene clays. These deposits, which extended as far
as 145 km (90 miles) inland, are virtually barren of rock or gravel of suitable size
for the production of artifacts (Aten 1979,Hester 1980a), except for the upper Texas
coast where (Aten 1983) has postulated that gastroliths from crocodilians were
locally available lithic raw material (Figure 3). Except for this rather unusual
source, aborigines had to look inland for lithic materials.
The nearest chert- and silicified wood-bearing deposits are along a belt about
95 to 145 km (60 to 90 miles) inland that broadly parallels the coastline. Here,
silicified wood fragments and stream-worked chert pebbles and cobbles are found
on the surface of locally exposed Pliocene and early Pleistocene deposits. Further
inland, late Pleistocene stream gravels are exposed along stream beds and abandoned terraces. These gravels, washed down during the last phases of the Pleistocene, contain some large cobbles and appear to have been a useful source for chert.
In the eastern part of the state the Manning Formation (Brown 1976) is a more
localized source for fused glass, and one of the major sources for chert and
precipitated flint is the limestone exposures of the Edwards Plateau. In this region,

224

Texas Archeological Society

TEXAS

\
Sntclfled Woods
~, Manning Fused Glass
Uvalda Gravels
Plateau Charts

~eA Alligator Gastrolltha
Alibatas Flint

Big Band Cherts
o
MilII

Figure 3. Map of Texas showing sources of lithic raw material that were available to coastal
populations. Numbered localities are specific sources. Prepared in consultation with Harry
J. Shafer and with information from Aten (1983), Brown (1976), and Hester (1980a).
large chert nodules can be found eroding from some of the limestones; the region
undoubtedly was one of the ultimate sources for chert in stream gravels. In the Big
Bend region of West Texas are some other important sources for chert, and some
of this material has been found downstream along the Rio Grande. One of the most
widely recognized sources of lithic raw material, the Alibates Quarry, is in the
Panhandle region of Texas, but little or no Alibates flint has been recovered along
the coast.
Several authors, including Aten (1971, 1983) and Hester (1980a), have noted
these extensive inland lithic sources and the lack of lithic resources along the Texas
coast. They have pointed out that there must have been trading relations with inland
groups for acquisition of the raw materials needed for lithic tools. Cabeza de Vaca
referred to these trading relations when he noted his value to the Indians as a trader
carrying conchs and other things inland (Newcomb 1961:70). As a result of the
scarcity of lithic deposits along the Texas coast, mollusk shells were widely use(]
as raw material for the manufacture of tools and ornaments.
MOLLUSKS AS A SUBSISTENCE RESOURCE

Food for the hunters and gatherers who lived along the Texas coast may not
have been abundant throughout the year. Anyone who has read Cabeza de Vaca’s
experiences among the aborigines from 1528 to 1536 comes away with a strong

Steele u Utilization of Marine Mollusks

225

feeling that hunger was a common condition to contend with, and that little that lived
and could be collected was not eaten. Based primarily on Cabeza de Vaca,
Newcomb (1961:39) stated that the Coahuiltecans living in the central and south
coastal regions of Texas had available the fewest usable resources of any Texas
Indian group. For the coastally locatedKarankawa Indians Newcomb (1961:66-67)
stated that
it is difficult, in fact, not to think of Karankawas as harvesting a little here, then hastening
to another spot to reap another minuscule harvest, and on to a third place, and so on
continuously, seldom starving but never having a truly bountiful or fully dependable
subsistence either. They were no more able to overlook a potential food source than
were the Coahuiltecans.
Krieger’s summary of the food habits of Texas coastal Indians, gleaned from
his translation of the journals of Cabeza de Vaca (1956), also presents a grim picture
of the subsistence base for hunters and gatherers along the coast. For the central part
of the coast Krieger (1956:52) stated that there apparently were only two seasons
of comparative plenty, one in the fall when the pecans were ripe and available in the
river bottoms and one in the summer when the Indians journeyed inland to harvest
the fruit of the prickly-pears. For the southern part of the Texas coast starvation was
the year-round rule except for the season when the tunas and young stems
ripened(Krieger 1956:55).
Whether this rather harsh outlook for subsistence reflected conditions present
only for a short period of the sixteenth century or only the biased view of Cabeza
de Vaca, food hardly could have gone unclaimed and uneaten, and any mollusks,
either alive or with hermit crabs in the abandoned shells, found in sites could have
served as food. Therefore, most of the 34 species of mollusks recovered from the
15 locations probably served as food. Beyond this broad level of generalization are
some patterns of utilization.
Of the 34 species recovered and identified, 22 were recovered in more than one
locality and 13 were found in five or more localities. Comparison of the number
of species found in each locality indicates that fewer species were utilized along the
upper Texas coast, whereas a more varied mollusk fauna was utilized as food along
the central and southern parts of the coast ~igure 4). This variation from locality
to locality may be a result of sampling error rather than a reflection of reality, but
other lines of evidence suggest that fewer species were important in the subsistence
pattern of Indians of the upper Texas coast. Virtually all researchers working in this
area have found that most shell middens were composed predominantly of rangia,
with fewer middens composed predominantly of eastern oyster (Ambler 1973, Aten
1965, 1971, 1979, 1983, Campbell 1957, Dering and Ayers 1977, Dillehay 1975,
Gilmore 1974, Hole and Wilkinson 1973, Hollingsworth 1981, and Shafer 1966).
Ambler (1973) in particular has discussed how the rangia populations, because of
their abundance in the slow-moving brackish waters, could be easily harvested to
serve as a staple resource during most of the year. On the other hand, mollusk
samples recovered from sites along the central part of the coastline are far more
varied in species, and usually several species such as eastern oyster, southern
quahog, and specimens of the whelk are equally common. Exceptions to this
generalization on the upper coast of Texas may be sites with ready access to the Gulf

226

Texas Archeological Society

of Mexico’ s more varied mollusk fauna (Localities 3 and 4). Aten ( 1983), in listing
eight species of marine mollusks recovered from 41BO4 (Locality 4), noted the
large number of species recovered at this site compared to other upper Texas coast
sites he had sampled. He also noted that the site was within 5.5 km of the Gulf of
Mexico.
There may be regional differences in the numbers of species harvested, but five
species appear to have been utilized consistently along the entire coastline: the
Atlantic bay scallop, the whelk, the eastern oyster, the giant Atlantic cockle, and the
lettered olive. Of these, the scallop, whelk, and oyster are found frequently enough
in one or more sites to indicate that they were indeed eaten consistently and were
harvested frequently enough to be of significant value. The giant Atlantic cockle
and the lettered olive, on the other hand, may have been of more value as tools or
ornaments than as food. Neither of these species occurs with high enough frequency
in any sample examined by the author to suggest that they could have been a major
mollusk food resource. The fact that shells found in sites are usually modified casts
further suspicion of use of the lettered olive as food.
The value of the giant Atlantic cockle as a substantial food resource is even
more questionable. According to Andrews (1971), this species is found at the

PRECIPITATION
44"

20

32N

:15

tL
o
rr
W
X
Z

:10

I,

5

I
I
I

I
I
I
0

~

I

I

:t

2

3

4

5

~

~

I

I

6

7

8

9

I

I

I

I

I

I

:10 :1::1 :12 :13 :14 :15

LOCALITIES
Figure 4. Graph showing the number of species of mollusks reported at the 15 localities on
Figure 1.

Steele -- Utilization of Marine Mollusks

227

mouths of the bays,and offshore from the barrier islands, so it is probable that this
species was harvested at ocean front sites not yet discovered, or that the occasional
shells found in the sites were acquired through trade.
It is possible to document not only differences in the numbers of species
harvested from locality to locality, but also the relative importance of specific
species in different localities. One of the most dramatic regional variations is found
in the distribution and relative importance of the two species ofrangia. The common
rangia dominates the shell middens in Trinity and Galveston bays. Here, many of
the middens are composed almost exclusively of this species, and they are so
abundant and so large that they have been used as a shell resource for present day
construction proposes (Ambler 1973; Shafer 1966). In the central coastal bays of
Matagorda, San Antonio, and Aransas, the common rangia occurs much less
frequently, and in Corpus Christi Bay is found only at sites along the upper reaches
of Oso Creek and the lower reaches of the Nueces River. South of Corpus Christi
Bay the common rangia has not been documented. The brown rangia, on the other
hand, is recovered most frequently in the Corpus Christi Bay area, particularly in
Archaic horizons. These distributional differences for the rangia species reflect the
presence of more brackish bays suitable for the common rangia to the north along
the upper Texas coast and saline bays suitable for the brown rangia to the south
One note of interest concerning the possible method ofprocessing ofrangia can
also be made. At site 41BO35, Hollingsworth (1981) reported dwelling platforms
composed of uniformly small specimens of the common rangia, and Hollingsworth
and Polan (personal communication 1983) stated that many were still articulated,
unbroken, and unburned. He tentatively interpreted this as evidence that the Indians
were boiling the rangia before eating them, rather than shucking them alive and
using the shells as flooring.
The common rangia and the ubiquitous eastern oyster were the apparent main
mollusk fare along the upper Texas coast, but a different group of mollusks seems
to have been a more significant food resource along the central and southern parts
of the coast. From Matagorda Bay southward, the eastern oyster, Atlantic bay
scallop, southern quahog, sunray venus, and whelks dominate the shell middens. Of
these, the eastern oyster, Atlantic bay scallop, and southern quahog can be found in
the bays today, and they can be harvested by techniques similar to those used for the
common rangia. Of these three, the eastern oyster seems to be the most frequent in
these bays.
Evaluating the sunray venus as a food resource is more difficult. Today,
although this species is virtually absent from the bays (Andrews 1971; personal
experience), fossil specimens eroded out of submerged muds wash up frequently
along the bayshores. In some sites around Aransas and Corpus Christi bays, shell
fragments of the sunray venus have been recovered, so the bays may have supported
live colonies of this species in the recent past that may have been harvested for their
food value. However, shells of this species were commonly modified and used for
a variety of tools, so it is possible that only the shells of this species were collected.
It is the author’s opinion, however, that shells and fragments of shells in sites along
Oso Creek occur at sufficiently high frequencies to suggest that live colonies may

228

Texas Archeological Society

have been harvested (Steele and Mokry 1985). Hester (1971a) also reported the
sunray venus as one of the most abundant mollusks at sites around Baffin Bay,
further suggesting the possible use of the species as a food resource, but Smith
(1983b) proposed that only fossil shells were harvested around Baffin Bay.
The whelk also is a difficult species to evaluate. For the purposes of this paper,
all species of Busycon are lumped into the single taxonomic category since, in many
sites, the only parts of the shell found are modified fragments of the body whorl or
columella, and these cannot always be identified to species. But not all whelk shells
recovered from central and southern coastal sites have been modified into artifacts,
so they probably served as food as well (Steele and Mokry 1985). Additionally, at
sites along Oso Creek near Corpus Christi Bay, whelk shells of a wide variety of
sizes were recovered, indicating that the aborigines were not selecting specific sizes
for manufacturing material. Some shells have a hole punched through the body
whorl opposite the aperture, a common method used today to remove the body of
the gastropod. The whelk’s lower frequencies in sites along the upper Texas coast
suggests that it was either less important as a food resource there, or that the shells
were collected and utilized for artifact production only, serving little value as a food
resource. Hollingsworth and Polan (personal communication, 1983) reported only
five or six whelks from site 41BO35 in Brazoria County (Locality 2), two of these
had segments cut from the body whorl.
All species probably were harvested when possible for food; Busycon perversum is the species most commonly recovered in the shallow flats of the bays, and
it is this species that is most commonly recovered from the sites near Oso Bay
(Steele and Mokry 1985). Unlike the bivalves described above, whelks are carnivores that forage over the flats where they can be caught on bait (Andrews 1971).
Also, abandoned shells of whelks are taken over by hermit crabs, which can in turn
be harvested for food. So whelks and hermit crabs are scattered more sporadically
over the bays, and, although baited traps could have been used, they would have
required wider foraging by the aborigines.
The last species to be considered separately as a food resource is the horse
oyster, noted only for Baffin Bay, where it has proven to be of dietary significance.
However, this species has provided the only substantial data for a temporal change
in the use of mollusks along the Texas coast. Smith (1983a, 1983b) points out that
the horse oyster is most frequent in the late prehistoric sites along Baffin Bay, and
suggests that this frequency was the inadvertent result of the increasing salinity of
Baffin Bay. The increasing salinity of the bay destroyed the bay as a habitat for most
species, except for the horse oyster, which prefers these saline conditions. So the
change in the frequency of this species in archeological sites probably reflects a
change in availability of species, rather than a change in dietary preferences. Hester
(1980b) also has addressed the problem of changing salinity in Baffin Bay,
suggesting that as the bay became hypersaline, the aborigines ate fewer mollusks.
Although commonly harvested species appeared to have been consistently significant food resources, some species may have been collected opportunistically,
brought to the site unintentionally, or may have entered by other means. Species of
the genus Crepidula, for instance, could have been brought to the site attached to

Steele -- Utilization of Marine Mollusks

229

oysters, shark’s eyes, whelks, or other intentionally harvested mollusks, but
however acquired, they may have been eaten. Two other species, the marsh
periwinkle (Litorina irrorata) and plicate horn shell (Cerithidea pliculosa) feed
over the mud flats of the bays during low tide and could have been harvested
unintentionally with marsh grasses. They could have been brought to sites also by
birds, but their small size and low frequency in sites clearly indicate that they were
of only minor importance.
In summary, the Atlantic bay scallop and the eastern oyster undoubtedly were
used along the entire coastline. The whelks, the giant Atlantic cockle, and the
lettered olive also are found in sites along the entire coastline, but their value as food
is less well documented. It is also possible to see regional variations in the number
of species harvested; more species were harvested in the southern bays and fewer
species in the northern bays, and some species were of only regional subsistence
value. The common rangia proved to be of great significance along the upper Texas
coast and of less and less value southward. On the other hand, the southern quahog
and sunray venus proved to be of greater regional significance in the central and
southern parts of the coast. The whelk was shown to be eaten along the central and
southern coast, and possibly along the upper coast as well, and finally, the horse
oyster was documented as of local significance only in Baffin Bay.
Some questions about seasonal and temporal variations in harvest time cannot
be answered in a simple presence-or-absence distribution chart. Among the Texas
coastal species, only the common rangia has been the subject of seasonality studies.
By determining that shell growth is correlated with seasons, and thereby determining what growth phase the shellfish was in at death, Aten (1981,1983) has estimated
that the common rangia was harvested mainly in the early summer along the upper
Texas coast; common rangia recovered from sites along Corpus Christi Bay
apparently were harvested earlier, from late April to late May (Carlson 1988,Ricklis
1986).
One reason why there is so little data on temporal variation of subsistence
patterns is that the Texas coastline has undergone gradual flooding since the end of
the Pleistocene, which has inundated earlier shorelines and sites. As a result, most
sites that are known represent only Middle and Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric
times; no Paleo-Indian shell midden sites have been documented along the Texas
coast. This problem of identifying earlier coastal sites and analyzing temporal
variation in coastal adaptations is not unique to Texas. All reviewers of North
American coastal archeology have noted the flooding of the coastline, but they do
not agree on the effects this has had on adaptations of populations to coastal
environments (Clark and Workman 1983, DePratter 1983, Gagliano 1983, Sanger
1983, Stewart and Custer 1983). Stewart and Custer (1983) believe the flooding of
the coastline has resulted in increasing use of marine resources by coastal populations, whereas DePratter (1983) believes there has been little increase during the last
4,500 years in the utilization of marine resources along the southeastern Atlantic
coast. For theGulfCoast, Gagliano(1983) documentedtheuseofcoastalresources
back through the Late Archaic, but did not specifically address the issue of whether
increasing use of resources could be documented.

230

Texas Archeological Society

In addition to the flooding of the coastal margin, archeologists along the Texas
coast must also deal with the problem of the relatively slow rate of soil deposition,
particularly in the central and southern parts of the coast, which has resulted in
mixing of the faunal debris in what multicomponent sites there are. Both Corbin’s
(1974,1976) reviews of the Texas Archaic and cultural sequence of the central coast
and Patterson’s reviews of the upper Texas coast (1979a and 1979b, 1985) have
summarized the literature pertaining to cultural sequence, but neither found
evidence documenting changing subsistence patterns through time.
As already mentioned, exceptions to the lack of evidence for temporal variation
are found in the adaptation to shifting resources in Baffin Bay (Smith 1983a, 1983),
Nueces Bay ~icklis and Gunter 1986), and Galveston Bay (Aten et al. 1976). In
Baffin Bay the shift was to increased reliance on the horse oyster; in Nueces Bay the
shift was from brown rangia to a combination of brown and common rangia; in
Galveston Bay the shift was from the common rangia to the eastern oyster, followed
by a return to greater use of common rangia.
MOLLUSKS AS RAW MATERIAL FOR TOOLS AND ORNAMENTS

In addition to serving as food, mollusks, through their shells, served also as raw
material for the manufacture of artifacts. In discussing shell artifacts the topics
considered are (1) the species used and the types of artifacts produced, (2) methods
of preparing artifacts, (3) regional variations in the manufacture and use of shell
artifacts, and (4) evidence of the trade of these shells and artifacts inland. ReSearchers particularly interested in these topics should consult Anderson (1932), Campbell
(1947, 1952, 1956, 1958a and 1958b), Hall (1981), Hester (1969a, 1969b, 1971a,
1971b, 1980a), Janota (1980), Mokry (1980), Steele and Mokry (1985), and Story
(1968).
Both utilitarian and ornamental artifacts were made by Texas coastal Indians.
S hells used for tools and other utilitarian needs are the whelks, sunray venus, eastern
oyster, banded tulip, horse conch, and common rangia. Discarded shells have been
reported in house platforms; Aten (1971) and Hollingsworth (1981) reported
platforms composed of the common rangia at 41BO35 in the upper Texas coastal
area. There, many of the platforms appeared to be composed of uniformly small
shells of the common rangia, suggesting that small shells were the preferred
platform material (Hollingsworth 1981). To the south, along the coast, Campbell
(1947) has reported circular shell areas at the Archaic site 41AS1 that may have
served as floors of temporary shelters, but here the circular areas were composed of
a variety of shells. Common rangia shells that show signs of having been heated and
possibly were being used in cooking have also been reported by Gilmore (1974).
Shells such as the giant Atlantic cockle also can be used as containers with little
or no modification. This cockle is one of the largest bivalves found along the Texas
coast; other shells and objects have been found stored in valves of this species at
burial sites around Corpus Christi B ay (Hester and Corbin 1975). McGuff (1978:219)
reported one giant Atlantic cockle valve with red pigment on the interior recovered
from a site north of Lavacabay. In addition, broken but otherwise unmodified valves
of this species have been recovered from virtually every location along the coast,

Steele ~ Utilization of Marine Mollusks

231

but they never occur there in sufficient numbers to suggest that aborigines used this
species extensively as food, indicating that the valves were used as vessels or for
other purposes.
In the instances just described, the shells were used without modification, as
building material, convenient material for cooking, or as vessels. In most other
instances the shells were consciously modified. Whelk shells with the body whorl
removed have been recovered from the Corpus Christi Bay area; the shells are
battered, suggesting use as billets or hammers (Steele and Mokry 1985) (Figure 5,
A). Similar whelk shell hammers have been reported from sites along Aransas Bay
(Campbell 1947, 1952).
Other functional tools made from whelk shells are adzes (Figure 6, E) made
from prepared sections of the body whorl recovered from many sites along Aransas
Bay, Corpus Christi Bay, and Laguna Madre (e.g. Campbell 1947, 1952, 1956,
Hester 1969a, Steele and Mokry 1985, Story 1968). There are some specimens in
the Anderson collection, and one specimen has been recovered more than 100 km
inland at 41LK67 (Brown et al. 1982). The finding of whelk shell columellae with
the whorls removed at central Texas sites indicates that they were being made
locally, and Mokry (1980) has described probable techniques of manufacture of
adzes from the shells. It is worth noting that Eaton (1974) reported techniques for
making similar adzes from Strombus shells from sites along the Yucatan coast,
indicating that the techniques for manufacturing tools and ornaments from body
whorls of large marine gastropods were well known along the entire coastline of the
Gulf of Mexico
Hollingsworth and Polan (personal communication 1983) also reported recover/ of two whelk shells with sections of the body whorls cut away from site 41BO35
(Locality 2) on the upper Texas coast. The removed material could have been used
for tools such as the adzes described above or for ornaments; however, Hollingsworth
and Polan believe the segments were being used in the manufacture of ornaments.
No body whorl adzes were recovered at 41BO35.
Small ovoid shell discs made from body whorls of shells have also been
reported by Campbell (1956), Corbin (1963), and Story (1968) from the central
Texas coast. Story (1968) has also reported a similar shaped ceramic sherd from the
Ingleside Cove site. These discs are only about 1.5 cm in diameter, smoothed along
the margins, and unperforated. Their function has yet to be determined.
Awls made from the columella of the whelk are found frequently in sites along
the central and southern parts of the coast; they have been reported from the
Matagorda Bay area (Fritz 1975; this paper), Aransas Bay (Campbell 1947, 1952),
and Corpus Christi Bay (Steeleand Mokry 1985, Story 1968). All of these awls have
a ground point at the siphonal end of the columella; the spiral part of the shell may
or may not have been removed (Figure 5, A-E). Some of the smaller whelk
columella awls also may have been made from banded tulip shells. It should be kept
in mind, however, that beach-rolled fragments of columellae and the columellae
left after body whorls have been removed can resemble manufactured and used
columella awls, making it difficult to determine which, if any, of the columellae
were specifically prepared for this purpose and which are tools that had no

232

Texas Archeological Society

o

B Cm

B

A

\

G

\

H

Figure 5. Drawings of tools made from the columellae of whelks and conchs recovered from
sites near Cayo del Oso, off Corpus Christi Bay. A, a whelk used as a billet or hammer; B-E,
awls made from columellae of whelks; F-H, gouges made from columellae of the Florida
horse conch. From Steele and Mokry 1985.

Steele -- Utilization of Marine Mollusks

233

intentional modification.
Another gougelike tool made from the columella of the Florida horse conch has
been reported from Aransas and Corpus Christi bays (Campbell 1947, 1952, Corbin
1963, Steele and Mokry 1985) and the Anderson Collection (personal observation).
They differ from the columella awls made from the whelk in that the columella are
much stouter, and the siphonal ends are ground obliquely, rather than to a point
(Figure 5, F-H). No horse conch shells have been recovered from sites examined
by the author, but there is one of unknown provenance in the Anderson Collection.
James E. Corbin (personal communication), however, has seen horse conch shells
in site refuse along Ingleside Cove. This miniscule amount of material, added to the
fact that this species is more an inhabitant of the Gulf than of bays, may indicate that
the adzes were made only occasionally or were not made at the bay sites commonly
sampled.
Shells were also used as net weights. Campbell (1958b), basing his idea upon
a Florida analogy, suggested that perforated shells from sites along Aransas Bay
were net weights. Since publication of Campbell’s paper, perforated oyster shells
have been reported at sites along Trinity Bay (Aten 1979), along Matagorda Bay
(Fritz 1975), at Corpus Christi (Story 1968), and in the Anderson Collection.
Rangia shells punched from the inside outward seem to have been put to similar use,
and have been reported by Ambler (1973), Aten (1983), and Shafer (1966).
Shells from three species commonly have been used as raw material for making
cutting instruments. Aten (1979, 1983) reported cutting implements made from
valves of the eastern oyster recovered from Brazoria County (Locality 4) that
usually were made from the upper valve and were worn or battered along the
margins. The rough exterior of the shell was also commonly smoothed. McGuff
(1978) reported these tools farther south along the Lavaca River (Locality 7). Aten
(1983) noted this limited distribution of shell knives from Matagorda Bay to the
western margin of Galveston Bay and indicated that it may or may not reflect
prehistoric territorial boundaries.
Although rangia shells are common in middens on the upper Texas coast and
in some sites on the central Texas coast, their shaping into cutting tools is rarely
reported. Hamilton (1988) suggested that broken rangia shells at41BO13 may have
been used as cutting implements, and McGuff (1978) reported rangia shells with
ground and chipped margins from 41JK91.
The eastern oyster and possibly the rangia apparently were the preferred
material for the production of shell cutting implements along part of the central and
upper Texas coast, but aborigines from most of the central and southern parts of the
coast used sunray venus and disk Dosinia valves. The sunray venus has the
smoothest shell with the finest microstructure of the larger bivalves along the Texas
coast, making it possible to use the chipping and pressure flaking techniques used
for flint tools to produce chipped shell tools from the sunray venus shells (Figure
6, A-D). Tools of chipped shell also have been reported by McGuff (1978) from
the Lavaca Bay area, by Campbell (1952) from the Aransas Bay area, and by Hester
(1971a, 1971b,1980a) and Smith (1983b) from the Baffin Bay area, and there are
some in the Anderson Collection. Chipped shell arrowpoints have been reported

234

Texas Archeological Society

0

1

2

0

5

fn

Cra

C
A

[3

E

Figure 6. Drawings of tools made from sunray venus shells (A-D) and the body whorl of the
whelk (E) from sites near Corpus Christi Bay. A and B, valves with the unbo and unmodified hinge area attached (possibly to make the tool more comfortable to hold) and part of the
ventral edge of the shell intentionally flaked to pro-duce a cutting or scraping edge; C and D,
flakes from the valves of the sunray venus with more than one edge finely flaked; E, adze with
a ground bit made from the body whorl of a whelk. From Steele and Mokry 1985.

Steele -- Utilization of Marine Mollusks

235

from theRio Grande delta area (Anderson 1932), Baffin Bay (Highly 1980), and the
Corpus Christi Bay area (Steele and Mokry 1985). A disk Dosinia has been found
in the Rio Grande delta area with a chipped ventral margin (Anderson Collection,
Hester 1980a).
Cylindrical projectile points made from the columella of large gastropods,
probably whelks, have been reported by MacNeish (1947) from the Rio Grande
delta area, and are represented in the Anderson Collection (Hester 1980a), but the
type has not been reported elsewhere along the coast. The points are made from
short sections of columella that are rounded into a smooth cylindrical shape and
ground at one end to a rounded point.
The use of mollusk shells along the Texas coast as ornaments, worn on the body
or otherwise associated with burials has been documented in a series of burials
reported from the Rio Grande area (Collins 1969, Hester and Rogers 1971, Hester
and Ruecking 1969, Hudgeons and Hester 1977), from the Corpus Christi Bay area
(Hester and Corbin 1975), and the Galveston Bay area (Aten et al. 1976, Campbell
1957, Hall 1981, Hole and Wilkinson 1973). Similar ornaments also have been
found associated with archeological sites along the entire coastline.
The most commonly recovered ornaments are made from whole or slightly
modified plicate horn shells, lettered olive, whitened dwarf olive, and common
Atlantic marginella (Figure 7, A-D). These apparently were strung through the
aperture, with a second opening made through the body whorl (plicate horn shell and
common Atlantic marginella) or by removing the spire (lettered olive and whitened
dwarf olive).
Of these ornaments, the most commonly recovered are beads made from the
lettered olive, which are reported from the Galveston Bay area (Ambler 1973,
Campbell 1957, Hudgins 1984), the Aransas Bay area (Johnson 1979), and the Rio
Grande delta area (the Anderson Collection, Collins et al. 1969, Hester and Rogers
1971, Hester and Ruecking 1969). Olive shell tinklers have been made by
suspending a mammalian canine tooth inside the shell (Hester 1980a). Beads made
from the common Atlantic marginella have been reported from Galveston Bay and
the surrounding area (Hall 1981), and the Rio Grande Delta area (Anderson
Collection; Collins, Hester, and Weir 1969). Beads made from the whitened dwarf
olive have been reported from Galveston Bay and the surrounding area (Hall 1981)
and there are beads from the plicate horn shell in the Anderson Collection.
Only one bivalve shell is thought to be used as a bead--the ponderous ark found
in central and southern coast sites (Collins et al. 1969, Hester 1969b). The bead was
apparently strung through a hole in the umbo of the valve (the hole could have been
drilled by a predatory gastropod before the valve was collected); its identification
as a shell bead was based on its presence in a burial with other shell beads.
Disc-shaped beads also have been made from small parts of shells, round in
shape with holes drilled through the centers, they have been reported from the Rio
Grande area (Collins et al. 1969, Hester and Ruecking 1969), the Baffin Bay area
(Hester 1969a), the Aransas Bay area (Campbell 1952), and the Galveston Bay area
(Ambler 1973, Aten et al. 1976, Campbell 1957). These beads reportedly are made
from whelk shells, but they are usually modified to such an extent that positive

236

Texas Archeological Society

<

A

C

/

D

Figure 7. Drawings of shell ornaments from the Texas coast. A, marginella bead with a hole
ground tt~rough the body whorl (after Hall 1981); B, olivella bead with spire removed (after
Hall 1981); C, olive tinkler made by removing the entire spire, incising the margin, and
drilling a hole in the body whorl (after Janota 1980); D, olive bead with the apex of the spire
removed (after Janota 1980); E, perforated whelk columella (after Hudgeons and Hester
1977); F, whelk body whorl pendant with edges and surfaces ground and smoothed and two
perforations in the body (drawn from a slide of a pendant from 41VT1). Not drawn to scale.

Steele ~ Utilization of Marine Mollusks

237

identification of the original shell cannot be made.
Ornaments also have been made from the columellae of whelks by one of two
techniques. One technique, requiring less modification of the columella, involved
smoothing and grinding the piece, blunting the tips and perforating one or both ends
to allow for stringing (Hudgeons and Hester 1977) (Figure 7, E). The other more
involved technique required cutting or grinding the columella into short sections,
smoothing the exterior surfaces more completely, and drilling a hole longitudinally
through the center of the bead (Aten et al. 1976, Hall 1981, Janota 1980). These
beads are most commonly reported from the Galveston Bay area (Campbell 1957,
Hall 1981, Hole and Wilkinson 1973).
Another ornament often recovered in burial contexts is the whelk body whorl
pendant (Figure 7, F) reported by Ambler (1973), Aten et al. (1976), Hall (1981),
and Hole and Wilkinson (1973) from burials on the upper Texas coast. The author
has seen similar pendants from 41VT1 along the middle Texas coast in Victoria
County near Lavaca Bay, and they have been reported from burial sites in the Rio
Grande delta area (Hester and Rogers 1977, Hester and Ruecking 1969).
The most complete description of these ornaments has been provided by Hall
(1981), who recognized 12 different forms made from the body whorl of the whelk.
All forms share some features; they are made from the body whorl of the shell, they
have shaped and ground edges, and they have one or two perforations that have been
ground from both sides. They vary in size, however, from large subtriangular slabs
consisting of a large part of a body whorl to much smaller rectangular or round
pendants that may or may not be incised.
There is good evidence for regional variation in the extent to which mollusks
were used as raw material for tools along the Texas coast. In his report of
excavations of shell middens near Trinity Bay, Ambler (1973:102-103)noted the
surprisingly few kinds of shell tools and ornaments. He noted a relatively large
number of shells with large perforations in the middle of the shell, presumably used
as net weights. Except for these, he noted only two whelk columella beads, a whelk
body whorl pendant, and a bead made from an olive shell. This meager list of shell
artifacts from the upper Texas coast can be expanded to include occasional cutting
tools made from the eastern oyster (Aten 1983, McGuff 1978) and habitation
platforms consisting of beds of the common rangia (Hollingsworth 1981).
The limited number of utilitarian shell artifacts from the upper Texas coast is
in marked contrast to what is seen along the central and southern parts of the coast.
No tools made from columellae of gastropods or whelk hammers or chipped shell
artifacts been reported, which leaves the impression that these tools were not
considered necessary on the upper Texas coast, or equivalent tools were made from
stone or wood. It is interesting to note that whereas stone is generally scarce along
the Texas coast, the one local source for gastroliths (Aten 1983) is in the area where
the fewest shell artifacts are found. It is also of note that wood resources are more
extensive along the upper Texas coast. Another factor that may have limited the use
of shells for tools along the upper Texas coast was the possible lack of easy access
to the wide variety of shell types available farther south.
The highest concentration of shell ornaments was found inland along the upper

238

Texas Archeological Society

Texas coast among the material associated with burials at the Harris County Boys’
School cemetery (Aten et al. 1976) and the Aliens Creek site (Hall 1981). From
these sites were recovered a shell columella atlatl weight (Aliens Creek), numerous
whelk body whorl pendants, olive shell beads (Aliens Creek), marginella shell
beads (Aliens Creek), two styles of columella beads, disc-shaped shell beads, and
a modified bonnet shell (Harris County Boys’ School). Hall (1981:214-222) noted
little evidence of shell debitage from sites in the area and proposed that these shell
artifacts could have reached the upper Texas coast from the southeast Gulf Coast by
established trade networks.
Ample evidence for such trade networks was established with the finding of
boatstone and gorget material that originated in Arkansas. The author’s examination of nonutilitarian material from the Texas coast lends support to Hall’s
hypothesis for the origins of at least the pendant material and probably all the
material. The pendants found at Aliens Creek and the Harris County Boys School,
although made from body whorl of whelks as are pendants of the Rio Grande delta
area, seem to be distinct from southern material in workmanship, common shapes,
and placement of perforations.
The evidence for the origin of the other shell ornaments from Aliens Creek is
slightly more equivocal. With the exception of the columella beads drilled through
the center, all of these other shell ornaments have been recovered from elsewhere
along the coast. This raises the possibility that at least some of the material could
have reached the upper Texas coast through trade networks with peoples from the
southern part of the coast. The overall evidence, however, does support the view that
the nonutilitarian material, like that found at Allen’s Creek, did enter the upper
Texas coast through trade networks with the east.
For the central part of the coast, a variety of researchers (Campbell 1947, 1952,
1956, 1958a, 1960, Corbin 1963, Hester 1969a, 1971a,1980a, Martin 1930, Steele
and Mokry 1985, Story 1968) have provided ample evidence of the use and
manufacture of utilitarian tools from shell by the aborigines. The commonly
reported tools are hammers, shell net weights, cutting implements, columella awls,
columella gouges and whelk body whorl adzes, and Campbell (1947) reported
possible habitation platforms composed of shell at the Archaic Aransas site. Mokry
(1980) described the process used locally for manufacturing the whelk body whorl
adzes, and Steele and Mokry (1985) reported the high number of broken whelk
shells found at sites near Corpus Christi Bay. Steele and Mokry (1985) also reported
the high number of sunray venus shells with chipped ventral margins and shells
represented by chipped fragments alone. This evidence demonstrates that most of
the utilitarian artifacts were being made locally.
The one utilitarian tool for which minimal evidence of local manufacture has
been demonstrated is the Florida horse conch columella gouge. With the exception
of Corbin’s sighting of horse conch shells eroding from sites along Corpus Christi
Bay (personal communication), no shells or shell fragments from this species other
than the gouge itself have been reported in sites from the central coast. The only
shell specimen associated with archeological material seen by the author is a shell
in the Anderson Collection; this shell artifact could be of local manufacture, but it

Steele w Utilization of Marine Mollusks

239

has yet to be clearly documented.
Limited reports of nonutilitarian artifacts document the presence of olive shell
beads (Johnson 1979), shell disc beads (Campbell 1952, Hester 1969a), and
ponderous ark shell beads (Hester 1969b). In addition, Hester and Corbin (1975)
reported on a juvenile burial fortuitously recovered near Aransas Bay that had a
cluster of small white shells, possibly marginella beads, around the neck; similar
beads have been found along Baffin Bay (Hester 1969a).
The central coastal material, then, is characterized by a much larger inventory
of locally made utilitarian tools that are made from a wider variety of species of
mollusks, than is seen in upper Texas coastal sites. The ornaments recovered also
differ from those in the upper Texas coast inventory. For instance, ponderous ark
shell beads are seen centrally and in the south, and no whelk pendants have been
reported. This extensive use of shells for the manufacture of tools and ornaments
has been noted as characteristic of the central Texas coast, beginning with Martin
during the 1930s and continuing through Campbell’s research initiated in 1947 to
the work of other current researchers.
Although less research has been conducted along the Texas coast south of
Baffin Bay, this area is in many respects the most intriguing, particularly in the
extensive use of shell for tools and ornaments. MacNeish (1947), reporting on the
sites of the Rio Grande delta region, which he characterized as the Late Prehistoric
Brownsville complex, identified projectile points made from columellae of gastropods, chipped shell discs, whelk body whorl pendants, olive shell beads, and shell
fishhooks. In the Anderson Collection the author has seen utilitarian tools such as
eastern oyster shells with large perforations, whelk body whorl adzes and Florida
horse conch gouges similar similar to ones from the central coast, marginella beads,
columella tube beads, and beads made from the lettered olive shell.
For this southern part of the coast, researchers beginning with Anderson (1932)
have noted that shell tools and ornaments characterized archeological assemblages
from the region. Sayles (1935) first defined a Brownsville phase characteristic of
sites south of Baffin Bay on the basis of the shell industry; MacNeish (1947)
expanded Sayles’s concept, defining it as the Brownsville complex of the Late
Prehistoric period. More recent researchers such as Collins, Hester, and Weir
(1969), Hester and Ruecking (1969), Hester (1969b), and Prewitt (1974a) have
provided further evidence of the extensive use of shell for tools and ornaments by
aborigines in this region.
The most distinctive features separating the shell industry from that found in
the central part of the coast seems to be the columella arrowpoints, fishhooks, and
the far more extensive selection of shell ornaments. MacNeish (1947) believed that
the aborigines of the Rio Grande delta region were participating during the Late
Prehistoric in a large trade network that extended from the Huasteca to the south to
Texas groups inland, but did not extend to coastal groups beyond the Baffin Bay
region. Hester (1980a:122), more recently discussing the trade networks of the
peoples of the Rio Grande region, reconfirmed their ties with the Huasteca along the
Gulf of Mexico to the south. He also suggested that their trade network may have
included desert groups of northeastern Mexico.

240

Texas Archeological Society

In contrast to MacNeish, the author also suggests that the trade network of the
Rio Grande peoples extended up the Texas coastline at least as far as Matagorda
Bay. The utilitarian tool industries of the Brownsville, Aransas, and Rockport
complexes are remarkably similar since all of them include whelk body whorl adzes,
columella awls, and Florida horse conch gouges. Trade with the complex to the
south is also suggested by the presence of typical Brownsville complex lithics at
sites in Kleberg County (Highley 1980) and on north Padre Island (Gunter 1985).
Probably one of the most intriguing questions about aboriginal use of mollusks
along the Texas coast is the extent to which the locally made shell ornaments or
locally acquired shells were traded inland. Cabeza de Vaca reportedly traded shells
inland (Newcomb 1961:70), and Krieger (1956:52) believes that coastal groups
ranged as far as 145 to 190 km (90 to 120 miles) inland. But not all shells found in
archeological sites in Texas came from the Texas coast. Hall’s (1981) discussion
of the shell ornaments reaching the upper Texas coast from the southeastern Gulf
Coast has been discussed already, and there is evidence of shell artifacts from the
Jornada area in West Texas, whose origins were ultimately the West Coast
(Woolridge 1979). Because of this problem, the surest way to examine the question
is to consider only those shells and shell artifacts that can be assigned definitely to
the Texas coast.
From the southern part of Texas, Hester (197 lb) reported fragments of the giant
Atlantic cockle found at 41DM30 in Dimmit County and a sunray venus shell with
a chipped ventral margin recovered from 41ZV 14 in Zavala County. Both of these
sites were reported by Hester to be 250 to 320 km (160 to 200 miles) from the coast.
In the central part of the coast a giant Atlantic cockle was found at 41GD4, in Goliad
County (Hester and Parker 1970), a sunray venus shell was reported at 41GD30, in
Goliad County, about 80 km (50 miles) inland from the coast (Fox et al. 1979), and
a whelk columella awl similar to ones found along the central coast 96 km (60 miles)
south was recovered at 41LK67, in Live Oak County (Brown et al. 1982, Hall et al.
1982). Also recovered from Live Oak and McMullen counties were a battered
columella fragment from a Florida horse conch (41LK75), marginella beads
(41KL31/32, 41LK87, 41MC55), and a body whorl fragment from a whelk
(41 MC55) (Hall et al. 1982). Along the upper Texas coast, the historic site reported
by Hudgins (1984) and listed in this report as Locality 3, clearly contains material
¯ from the Texas coast, 80 km (50 miles) away. Further inland, in Central Texas,
Prewitt (1974b) records a conch pendant from the Loeve-Fox site in Williamson
County. Although other shell artifacts have been reported from inland sites, it is
difficult to identify them as coming from the Texas coast, especially in the case of
Caddoan sites, since the Caddos had well-established trade networks with populations of the Mississippi valley.
These sites, then, do document trade by coastal inhabitants with some inland
groups and the possible extension of this trade network as far as 250 to 320 km (160
to 200 miles) inland in the southern coastal region.

Steele ~ Utilization of Marine Mollusks

241

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In summation, a series of patterns in the use of mollusks by Texas coastal
inhabitants can be recognized. Although there was extensive reliance on mollusks
for subsistence along the upper Texas coast, the emphasis was on harvesting the
common rangia and tile eastern oyster, primarily in the early summer. Along the
upper Texas coast, few utilitarian shell artifacts are recovered; those reported are
shell net weights and cutting implements made from eastern oyster shells. Shell
ornaments of some variety are reported from the upper Texas coast, but the evidence
strongly indicates that at least during the Archaic these ornaments reached the area
from the east. This pattern of use was the result of a series of factors. The great
amount of water reaching the upper Texas coast created an excellent and extensive
habitat for the common rangia, but it limited the availability in the inland bays of
the more saline-adapted marine mollusks. A possible factor contributing to the
minimal use of mollusks for utilitarian tools was the local availability of stone.
Along the central and southern parts of the coast, reliance on a greater variety
of mollusks for subsistence is evident. Here, the bays are more saline and support
the varied marine mollusks of the Gull On the other hand, the habitat for the
common rangia is limited to a narrow band of brackish water near the mouths of the
rivers that enter the bays. A far more varied shell industry is also typical of the
central and southern parts of the coast. From Matagorda Bay southward, utilitarian
tools of great variety are found in the sites, including whelk body whorl adzes, whelk
columella adzes and gouges, Florida horse conch adzes, sunray venus and disc
dosinia shell cutting implements, and oyster net weights. Columella arrowpoints
are limited to the south. From Baffin Bay southward an extensive shell ornamental
industry is found, and around the Rio Grande delta region there is strong evidence
that the Late Prehistoric Brownsville complex produced large amounts of shell
ornaments and tools for trade to the south, north, and possibly northward along the
coast. This greater shell industry was possible because of a rich and varied mollusk
fauna available in the shallow saline bays and possibly was necessitated by the fact
that the nearest lithic resources were 145 km (90 miles) inland.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author thanks Harry J. Sharer for generous help with reviewing lithic
resources and collaboration on the development of Figure 3, Ed Mokry for the
cooperative research conducted with him in the Corpus Christi Bay area, Ted
Hollingsworth and Johnney Polan for unpublished information on 41BO35, Roger
Coleman for providing the excellent maps and other illustrations, and Harry Sharer,
Thomas Hester, Ed Mokry, Raymond Neck, and anonymous reviewers for critiques
of the manuscript.

242

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Ambler, J. Richard
1973 Excavation in the Trinity River delta." The lost River phase. Texas Archeological
Survey, Austin
Anderson, A.E.
1932 Artifacts of the Rio Grande delta region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society. 4:29-31.
Andrews, Jean
1971 Shells and shoars of Texas. Dill Russell Spencer Foundation Series 5. University
of Texas Press, Austin.

Aten, Lawrence E.
1965 Five crania from the Jamaica Beach site (41GV5), Galveston County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:153-62.
1971

Archeological Excavations at the Dow-Cteaver site, Brazoria County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Technical Bulletin 1

1979

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast: ethnohistoric and archeological frameworks.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin

1981

Determining seasonality of Rangia cuneata from Gulf Coast shell middens.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:179-200

1983

Indians of the upper Texas coast. Academic Press, New York.

Aten, Lawrence E., Charles K. Chandler, A1 B. Wesolowsky, and Robert M. Malina
1976 Excavations at the Harris County Boys’ School cemetery: Analysis of Galveston
Bay area mortuary practices. The Texas Archeological Society Special Publication 3.
Behrens, E. W.
1963 Buried Pleistoceneriver valleys in Aransas and Baff’mbays, Texas. Publication of
the Institute of Marine Science, The University of Texas 9:7-17.
1971

The development of hypersalinity in Baffin Bay, Texas (abstract). The Texas
Journal of Science 22(2-3):279.

1972

Baffin Bay marl and shell samples, Texas. In S. Valastro, Jr., E. Mott Davis, and
Alejandra G. Varela, University of Texas at Austin Radiocar bon Dates IX.
Radiocarbon 14(2):466-468.

Brown, Kenneth M
1976 Fused volcanic glass from the Manning Formation. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 47:189-207.

Steele m Utilization of Marine Mollusks

243

Brown, Kenneth M., D. R. Potter, G. D. Hal!, and S. L. Black
1982 Excavations at 41LK67, a prehistoric site in the Choke Canyon Reservoir, South
Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Choke Canyon Series, 7.
Campbell, T. N.
1947 The Johnson site: TypesiteoftheAransasfocusoftheTexascoast.Bulletinofthe
Texas Archeological Society 18:40-75.
1952

The Kent-Crane site: A shell midden on the Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 23:39-77.

1956

Archeological materials from five islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 27:7-46.

1957

Archeological investigations at the Caplen site, Galveston County, Texas. Texas
Journal of Science 10:423-442.

1958a Archeological remains from the Live Oak Point site, Aransas County,
Texas Journal of Science 10(4):423-442.

Texas.

1958b Probable function of perforated oyster shells found in Aransas focus sites. Texas
Archeology 2(2):7.
1960

Archeology of the centxal and southern sections of the Texas coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 29:145-19.

Carlson, David L.
1988 Rangia cuneata as a seasonal indicator for coastal archaeological sites in Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58.
Carlson, D. L., D. G. Steele, and H. L. Bruno
1982 Archeological investigations at the Allison site (41NU185). Archeological Research Laboratory Reports of Investigations 1, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Clark, Donald W., and William B. Workman
1983 Maritime adaptations of northwestern North America. Presentation at the 48th
Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, Pittsburgh.
Collins, Michael B., Thomas R. Hester, and Frank Weir
1969 Two prehistoric cemetery sites in the lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas. Part 1:
The Floyd Morris site (41CF2) A prehistoric cemetery site in Cameron County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:119-146.
Corbin, James E.
1963 Archeotogical materials from the northern shore of Corpus Christi Bay, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34:5-30.

244

Texas Archeological Society

1974

A model for cultural succession for the CoastalBend area of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 45:29-54.

1976

The Archaic of the Texas coast. In: The Texas Archaic, a Symposium, edited by
Thomas R. Hester. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio, Special Report 2:91-97.

Day, D. W., J. Laurens-Day, and E. R. Prewitt
1981 Cultural resources surveys and assessments in portions of Hidalgo and Willacy
counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports of Investigations 15 ,
Austin, Texas.
DePratter, Chester B.
1983 Primary swamp stomping or marsh/lagoon Efficiency on the southeastern U.S.
coast. Presentation at the 48th Annual Meeting of the Society for American
Archaeology, Pittsburgh.
Dering, Phil, and David Ayers
1977 Archeological investigations in the village of Oyster Creek, Brazoria County,
Texas. Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Report 42.
Dillehay, Tom D
1975 Prehistoric subsistence exploitation in the lower Trinity River delta, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 51, Austin.
Eaton, Jack D
1974 Shell celts from coastal Yucatan, Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 45:199-208.
Fox, Anne A., S. L. Black, and S. R. James
1979 Intensive survey and testing of archaeological sites on Coleto Creek, Victoria and
Goliad counties, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 67.
Fritz, Gayle
1975 Matagorda Bay area, Texas: a survey of the archeological resources and historic
resources. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 45, Austin.
Gagliano, Sherwood M
1983 Prehistoric maritime adaptations, northern Gulf of Mexico. Presentation at the
48th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, Pittsburgh.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1974 Cultural variation on the Texas coast: Analysis of an aboriginal shell midden,
Wallis Reservoir, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 44,
Austin.
Gunter, Rita R.
1985 The Ben Bickham Collection from north Padre Island, Texas. La Tierra 12:6-17.

Steele -- Utilization of Marine Mollusks

245

Hall, Grant D.
1981 Allens Creek: a study in the cultural prehistory of the lower Brazos River valley,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 61, Austin.
Hall, Grant D., Stephen L. Black, and Carol Graves
1982 Archaeological investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: the Phase
I findings. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Choke Canyon Series: 5.
Hall, Grant D., and K. A. Grombacher
1974 An assessment of the archeological and historical resources to be affected by the
Brazos Island Harbor Waterway Project, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report 61, Austin.
Hamilton, D. L.
1988 Archeological investigations at Shy Pond, Brazoria County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 58.
Hester, Thomas R.
1969a Archeological investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy counties, Texas in August
1967. Texas State Building Commission, Archeological Program, Report 15.
1969b Two prehistoric sites inthelower Rio Grande ValleyofTexas. Partm: TheFloyd
Morris and Ayala sites: a discussion of burial practices in the Rio Grande Valley
and the lower Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:157166
1971a Loyola Beach: an example of aboriginal adaptation to the maritime environment
of the lower Texas coast. Florida Anthropologist 24(3):91-106.
1971b Marine shells from archeological sites in southwestern Texas. Texas Journal of
Science 22:87-88.
1980a Digging into South Texas prehistory. Corona, San Antonio.
1980b Changing salinity in Baffm Bay, Texas, and its possible effects on prehistoric
occupation. In: Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by Lynn
Highley and Thomas Hester, pp. 105-108. The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Special Report 11.
Hester, Thomas R., and J. E. Corbin
1975 Two burial sites on the central Texas coast. Texas Journal of Science
26:519-528.
Hester, Thomas R., and R. C. Parker
1970 The B erclair site: A Late Prehistoric component in Goliad County, southern Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:1-23.

246

Texas Archeological Society

Hester, Thomas R., and R. W. Rodgers
1971 Additional data on the burial practices of the Brownsville complex, southern
Texas. Texas Journal of Science 22(4):367-371.
Hester, Thomas R., and R. Ruecking, Jr.
1969 Two prehistoric cemetery sites in the lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas.Part II:
Additional materials from the Ayala site, a prehistoric cemetery site in Hidalgo
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:147-157.
Highley, Lyrm
1980 Archaeological materials from the Alazan Bay area, Kleberg County, Texas. In
Papers on the archeology of the Texas coast, edited by Lynn Highly and Thomas
Hester, pp. 51-60. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio, Special Report 11.
Hole, Frank, and Richard G. Wilkinson
1973 Shell Point: a coastal camp and burial site in Brazoria County. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 44:5-30.
Hollingsworth, Ted D.
1981 Investigations at 41BO35, the Dow-Cleaver site, Brazoria County, Texas. Houston Archeological S ociety Newsletter 71:5-10.
Hudgeons, Mark D., and T. R. Hester
1977 An aboriginal burial at the Dunn site, De Witt County, southern Texas. La Tierra
4(3): 10-14.
Hudgins, Joe D.
1984 A Historic site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-52.
Janota, Beverly
1980 A preliminary study of the shell ornaments of the Texas coast between Galveston
B ay and the Nueces River. In Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas coast, edited
by Lynn Highley and Thomas Hester, 29-50. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 11.
Johnson, Malcom L.
1979 Oliva shell beads or dangles, San Patricio County, Texas. La Tierra 6(3):22-24.
Krieger, Alex D.
1956 Food habits of the Texas coastal Indians in the early sixteenth century. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 27:47-58.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1947 A preliminary report on coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico.
13(1):1-15.

American Antiquity

Steele ~ Utilization of Marine Mollusks

247

Martin, George C.
1929 Notes on some Texas coast campsites and other remains. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 1:50-57.
1930

Two sites on the Callo de10so, Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:7-17.

McGuff, Paul R.
1978 Prehistoric archeological investigations at Palmetto Bend Reservoir: phase 1.
Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 58, Austin.
Mokry, E. R., Jr.
1980 Notes on conch shell adze technology, Texas coast. In Papers on the archeology
of the Texas coast, edited by Lynn Highley and Thomas Hester, pp. 51-60. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special
Report 11.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Patterson, L. W.
1979a Archeological summary of the upper Texas coast. La Tierra 6(4):30-35.
1979b A review of the prehistory of the upper Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 50:103-124.
1985

Prehistoric settlement and technological patterns in southeast Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 54:253-270.

Prewitt, Elton
1974a Preliminary archeologicalinvestigations in the Rio Grande delta of Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 45:55-66.
1974b Archeological investigations at the Loeve-Fox site, Williamson County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 49, Austin.
Ricklis, Robert A.
1986 Archaeological investigations at the McKinzie site (41NU221): description and
contextual interpretations. Unpublished M.A. thesis, Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Ricklis, Robert A., and Rita R. Gunter
1986 Archaeological investigations at the Means site (41NU184), Nueces County,
Texas. La Tierra 13:15-31.
Sanger, David
1983 Recent research on maritime adaptations in northeastern North America. Presentation at the 48th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology,
Pittsburgh.

248

Texas Archeological Society

Sayles, E. B.
1935 An archeo!ogical survey of Texas. Medallion Papers 17.
Shafer, Harry J.
1966 An archeological survey of Wallisville Reservoir, Chambers County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Report 2. Austin.
Smith, Herman A.
1983a An archeological assessment of the Baffin Bay area of the lower Texas Coast.
Paper presented at the 48th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology.
1983b Prehistoric settlement and subsistence patterns of the B affin B ay area of the lower
Texas coast. Ph.D. dissertation, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Steele, D. Gentry, and E. R. Mokry
1985 Archeological investigations of seven prehistoric sites along Oso Creek, Nueces
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:287-308.
Stewart, R. Michael, and Jay F. Custer
1983 Maritime adaptations in the Middle Atlantic America. Presentation at the 48th
Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, Pittsburgh.
Story, Dee Ann
1968 ArcheologicalinvestigationsattwoCentralTexasGulfCoastsites. StateBuilding
Commission Archeological Program Report 13.
Woolridge, Harold G.
1979 The Bald Eagle Cache: Implications of an early exchange system in the Jornada
region of south-central New Mexico. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The
University of Texas.

