THE SUGAR INDUSTRY AT MISSION SAN JOSI~ Y
SAN MIGUEL DE AGUAYO
JOHN W. CLARK, JR.

ABSTRACT
Archeological and historical investigations connected with archeological
testing of foundations at Mission San Jos6 conducted in December of 1974
revealed details of the first sugar refinery in the bounds of the State of
Texas. As early as 1755 San Jos6 had a sugar mill and cane fields. By 1794
the mill was associated with a water powered grist mill.

INTRODUCTION
The Mission San Jos6 y San Miguel de Aguayo was established on
the left bank of the San Antonio River by Fr. Antonio Margil in 1720.
By 1740 it had been moved to the right bank and moved again to its
final location before 1755. During much of its history the mission
served as the administrative center of the Texas missions. It was
widely recognized as an efficient and aesthetically pleasing mission.
The mission had several significant aspects to its function. Of
course, the best known and most publicized function was the
christianizing of the Indians. Other functions included the inculcation
of Spanish social values and customs, teaching the Indians useful
industrial arts so that they could become independent members of a
hispanized community and to provide a hispanized community to
enhance Spanish claims to the frontier.
To facilitate these activities or functions the missionaries
developed a major architectural and industrial complex. The complex
naturally included a church and sacristy with a convent for the
resident priests and for the offices connected with the administration
of the Texas missions. Additionally there was a wall for defense from
raiding "wild" or noncongregated Indians with a "Pueblo" or Indian
quarters built on the interior perimeter of the compound wall. Within
the compound were the granary and a number of shops associated
with the varied industrial activities of the mission Indians. The
interior of the compound was divided into eight plazas surrounded by
structures. In addition to the structures within the compound were a
small number of structures on the outside of the compound and the
mission ranch located several miles from the mission. The mission
farm was located near the mission, irrigated by an acequia deriving
its water from the dammed San Antonio River. Drinking water for the
mission was provided in wells excavated within the compound.
Morfi (1935: 97) provides a list of the crops which included maize,
beans, lentils, cotton, watermelons, other kinds of melons, sweet

246

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

potatoes, peaches, and sugar cane. Cattle, sheep and goats were
raised on the ranch, a few being kept at a corral at the mission for
weekly butchering.
There were several shops both within and without the compound.
They included a carpentry shop (Marmolejo 1755, Salas 1785 and
Mu_~oz 1794), a textile shop (Marmolejo 1755, Salas 1785, and Mugoz
1794), a masonry shop (Marmolejo 1755), a tailor’s shop (Solis 1931:
20), and an armory (Morfi 1935). Outside the compound were the
blacksmith shop, corral, sugar mill and by 1794, the grist mill.
The location of the blacksmith shop is provided by Salas (1785) as
on the opposite side of the granary from the carpentry shop. The
foundations of the carpentry shop were partially exposed by
restoration architect Harvey P. Smith, Sr., in 1933 on the interior of
the compound adjacent to the granary. Thus the blacksmith shop is
outside the compound on the west wall adjacent to the granary.
Likewise, the location of the grist mill is known. It was located in
1934 when the reservoir inlet was encountered during the cleaning of
the acequia for the restoration project. The structure was then
excavated and restored.
Also when cleaning the area around the mill, another feature was
encountered. This feature consists of a bottomless stone box. This
will be discussed in connection with the sugar processing at the site.

18TH CENTURY SUGAR PROCESSING
Little information is available on the technology of the sugar
industry of New Spain especially on the frontier. One of the best
descriptions is one found in the Archivo General de la Nation in
Mexico City quoted by Sandoval (1951: 158) describing the sugar

refinery at Cocoyotla, Veracruz:
"... se compon{a de anden, casa de calderas, trapiche con paredes de cal
y canto y techo de tejamanil,un trapiche en corriente y armado de cuatro
castillos, dos capirotes, teleras, banco, cuatro calderas, tres moledoras de
teguague, canales para el caldo con mds tres moledores chicos en bruto. Y
en dicha casa de calderas sentadas y puestas cuatro calderas de cobre
fundidas casi nuevas. Un tanque para recibir el caldo, un cazo que sirve de
resfriadero, otro mediano para paradera, cuatro espumaderas, una bomba
de cobre, dos remillones de lo mismo, dos espgtulas de fierro 2’
"... It is composed of a loading dock, a house of cauldrons, sugar refinery
with walls of masonry and a shingle roof, a water powered sugar mill
having four towers, two hoods, cutters, bench, four cauldrons three
teaguague [stone] grinders, channels for the syrup and three additional
small, rough grinders. And in the said house of cauldrons are placed and
set four nearly new copper cauldrons. There is a vat to receive the syrup,
a pan which serves as a cooler and another medium size one serving as a

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

247

reservoir, four skimmers, a copper pump, two syrup extractors for it and
two iron spatulas."

From this description it is clear that there are several steps
involved in the processing of the sugar. First the cane was cut and fed
into the mill to crush the cane and extract the juice. The juice was
collected and cooked in a vat (Fig. 13) or large flat cauldron to near a
carmelized state then cooled and poured into molds to make
piloncillo.
P

SUGAR PROCESSING AT SAN JOSE
The question arises as to the comparability of the San Jos6 sugar
ingenio or sugar refining complex.
Marmolejo (1755) described the ingenio at the mission as being 15
varas long, 61/2 varas wide roofed with tule or native cane. It had
wooden moledoras for crushing the cane, three cauldrons for boiling
the syrup and a trough for conducting the syrup from the mill to the
vats. Additional information was provided by Mu~oz (1794). The
items associated with the sugar industry listed in his inventory
(slightly out of original sequence) include the following:
"Un dicho [molino] en corriente para moler ca~a.
Un fondo de metal con peso de trese arrobas nueve libras con payla de cal
y canto para cocer el caldo de la carla de castilla para hacer piloncillo.
Un perol grande de cobre para lo mismo con peso de sets arrobas.
Quinientas y cinquenta y quatro formas para pilocillos.
Se les entregaron y recibieron dos cientos siete rail ciento ochenta y sets
cafias de castilla en ciento ochenta y sets surcos que ocupan quatro
tablas."
"One of the said [mill] powered by water to grind cane.
A vat of masonry with a metal basal grate weighing 338.9 pounds for the
cooking of sugar cane syrup to make sugar cones.
A large copper vat for the same [the masonry vat) weighing 159 pounds.
Five hundred and fifty four molds for sugar cones.
They were given and they received 207,186 sugar canes in 186 rows
occupying 4 fields."

248

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

These descriptions point out striking similarities with the ingenio at
Cocoyotla and provide a detailed description of the equipment used.
LOCATION OF THE SAN JOSE INGENIO
The physical location of the sugar refining complex has remained
in question until recently. It has been thought by some that the ingenio
was on the interior of the compound. The earliest suggestion is a
report by governor Jacinto Barrios y Ifiuregui (1758) which states:
"Y hay otras quatro plazas que formalos quarteles, carpinterfa, troje y
obraje sin otras oficinas como el yngenio donde se haze el piloncillo y la
miel..."
"And there are four other plazas formed by quarters, the carpentry shop,
granary and workshop except others such as the sugar refinery where
they make piloncillo and syrup."

This would suggest that the sugar mill was not associated with the
eight plazas composing the compound. This is enhanced by the
inventory of governor MulSoz in 1794. In his document he discusses all
of the shops and items associated with the interior of the compound
then discusses the blacksmith shop, the grist mill and the sugar mill.
The smithy and grist mill are known to have been on the outside of the
compound. The grist mill, "Un molino para moler trigo en corriente
con la falta de una cortina" (a water powered mill for the grinding of
wheat, lacking one wall), was built adjacent to the acequia to make
maximum use of the available water to drive the mill. In the next
sentence (Mufioz 1794) the sugar mill was described.
There are two points to be noted here:
I. Both mills are described as "en corriente," that is, powered by a
current of water, and
2. The mill lacked a wall. The excavation in 1934 of the mill revealed the
reservoir, three walls, a vaulted turbine chamber and the millrace. The
missing wall apparently was the same missing wall described by
Mufioz.

Thus, there are two documents suggesting that the sugar mill was
outside the compound, the Barrios y Jguregui report and the Mufioz
inventory. Furthermore, if Mufioz was proceeding clockwise around
the compound as he appears to have been doing, then the sugar mill
was east of the grist mill.
ARCHEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE OF AN INGENIO AT SAN JOSt~
During the 1934 excavation of the acequia and mill complex Harvey
P. Smith, Sr., encountered the remains of a stone box (Fig. 2). He

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

249

identified this structure as a leather tanning vat. It did not have,
however, a sealed masonry base. On the north wall of the structure
he found an opening into a small cylindrical chamber oriented
vertically. The south wall of the structure was found to be somewhat
broken down.
The major portion of the structure (Fig. 1) measures 2.23 meters by
1.49 meters by 0.95 meters deep (interior measurements). It consists
of walls approximately 18 cm thick. The cylindrical chamber is 0.99 m
in diameter, 69 cm deep and set away from the main rectangular
structure 23 cm. The walls are constructed of "cal y canto" or
limestone and lime mortar. The walls are laid up with irregularly
shaped limestone cobbles with much mortar on the exterior sides of
the walls. The interiors are smooth plaster. The bases of the walls are
fiat and level.

/
/
11
II

II

FIGURE 1. Plan of the Ingenio de Azucar (payla de cal y canto).

250

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Archeological excavations in December, 1974 were conducted at
the mission, and one 1 x 2 meter pit was excavated adjacent to the
east wall of the structure. The fill adjacent to the wall consists of
horizontal zones of calcium carbonate (caliche) suggesting that the
structure was constructed in a pit using the walls of the pit as a form.
This appears to be true at least for the east wall. There appears to
have been no attempt at coursing the stones. The wall and mortar fill
masks the exterior face of the wall.
Much of the fill above the structure had been removed in the 1934
excavations leaving the structure in an internally drained pit so that
a drain had to be placed in the structure to reduce water
concentrations. Even so, water levels are generally high in this area
and shade provided by the many trees in the area reduces the
evaporation rate. This has resulted in the weakening of the structure
and the possible obliteration of evidence of firing in the structure.
COMPARISONS WITH 19TH AND 20TH CENTURY INGENIOS
An effort was made to locate small scale sugar operations of the
19th and 20th centuries as a point of reference for the archeological
remains at San Jos~. It was quickly found that sugar and sorghum
presses and refineries were not especially uncommon. Five selected
examples will be discussed, one in Hays County near Buda, one in
Kendall County near Sisterdale, one in Jasper County near Kirbyville,
one near Rabun Gap, Georgia, and one at Bustamante, Nuevo Leon,
Mexico. All four are very similar in construction and their internal
relationships.
The ingenio near Buda (Fig. 3) consists of a cast iron "trapiche"
sitting on a wooden platform operated by an arm moved by a horse or
other draft animal and a syrup cooker (payla) consisting of a
rectangular stone and lime mortar (cal y canto) and brick and lime
structure. The rear half of the structure, including the rectangular
chimney is made of stone and the front made of brick. The top is open
and the base is the unmodified ground surface. The front (brick) half
has an iron grate ffondo de metal). In addition there is a metal door
built into the front of the payla (Fig. 4) with the following inscription in
raised letters:

D. M. COOK
PAT JUNE 22 ’58
DEC 20 ’59.
The total length of the payla structure including the chimney is 3.85
meters with the chimney being .77 cm wide. The structure is 1.21 m

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

2 51

FIGURE 2. View of the payla de cal y canto at San Jos6 looking
northwest. The photo shows the original structure, the test pit and the
chimney structure.

FIGURE 3. General view of the sugar refinery (ingenio) near Buda,
Texas, consisting of a metal mill (trapiche) and syrup cooker (payla de
cal y canto).

252

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

wide and 67-70 cm high. On the structure is a vat or cauldron {perol)
made of wood and galvanized sheet metal. This perol is 2.9 m long,
and 1.11 meters wide.

FIGURE 4. A detail of the Buda refinery showing the iron grate, cast
iron door and cooking vat on the top of the payla de ca1 y canto.
Constructed over the payla is an open walled pitched galvanized
iron roof 3.1 m wide and 3.5 meters long. The chimney of the payla
projects beyond the rear of the roof.
The ingenio near Sisterdale (Fig. 5) is evinced by a simisubterranean payla made of stone and mortar lined on the interior
with brick. It is similar to the Buda ingenio but does not retain theperol or the metal door at the front. Also unlike the Buda example, the

FIGURE 5. A general view of the semi-subterranean payla de ca1 y
canto at Badenthal near Sisterdale having a round pipe chimney.

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

253

chimney appears to have been round rather than square. The
chimney had apparently collapsed and was replaced by a sheet metal
tube. Like the Buda example it is protected by a galvanized pitched
roof.
The ingenio near Kirbyville is similar to that at Buda and the one
near Sisterdale. It had an iron trapiche with two vertical cylindrical
grinders (moledoras). The payla consists of an above ground
rectangular brick structure with a chimney made from round metal
culvert pipe. It has a removable rectangular metal perol and a shelter
having a galvanized pitched roof.
Additional information on the structure was provided by Elton R.
Prewitt of the Texas Archeological Survey who has seen this ingenio
in operation. The trapiche was operated by a mule. Canes were fed
into the trapiche and the juice of the crushed canes ran from the
grinders (moledores) to a metal trough (canales para el caldo) and
then to a wooden trough or vat (tanque para recibir el caldo). It was
then transferred to the cooking vat (perol). In the payla pine wood
was used for fuel. A skimmer (espumadores) was used to remove the
froth and foreign material in the syrup (caldo).
The most complete information available on current use of an
ingenio is provided by Wiggington (1975: 424-436) in discussing the
process of making sorghum syrup. In this process the cane is fed into
the fill and the juice filtered through coarse cloth into a barrel (Fig.
6). When a sufficient quantity of juice is collected it is again filtered

FIGURE 6. The mill near Rabun Gap, Georgia grinding cane. Courtesy,
Foxfire Fund, Inc.

254

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and then placed in a vat over a boiler or firebox. There it is thickened
and foam is removed by skimmers (Fig. 7). It is then collected in
buckets and jars for storage. This operation is virtually identical to
the sugar making. The principal difference is that the sugar cane
syrup would be placed in molds to crystalize.
The fifth mill examined is located at Bustamante, N.L., M~xico
north of Monterrey. The complex consists of a large rectangular
firebox with a substantial chimney and having a large rectangular
vat for preliminary cooking of the syrup (Fig. 10). An adjacent smaller
firebox (below ground level) with a circular vat for final cooking of
the syrup, a shed roof over both structures and a mill powered by a
mule. The smaller firebox appears to be virtually identical to the
feature at San Josd (Figs. 9, 11), having a rectangular box connected
to a circular (Fig. 12) chimney-like feature for the final cooking of the
syrup. It has a subterranean vent similar to the vent hole shown of the
drawings of Harvey P. Smith, Sr. Virtually the entire structure is
subterranean, like the feature at San Jos~, except the upper portion of
the support for the cooking vat.

FIGI~E 7. Cooking the juice of the cane and skimming off the foam in a
payla de cal y canto near Rabun Gap, Georgia. Courtesy, Foxfire
Fund, Inc.

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

255

RECONSTRUCTION OF THE SAN JOSt~ INGENIO
Archeological excavations, historical documentation and
comparison with other ingenios allow a tentative reconstruction of
the sugar industry at San Jos6 (Fig. 8). Documentary sources suggest
that the trapiche was outside the main compound possibly east of the
grist mill. Archeological investigations have revealed the location of
the grist mill and a payla de cal y canto or masonry and mortar vat.
Since both the grist mill and the sugar mill were water powered it
stands to reason that both would use the same power source, namely
the acequia north of the compound wall.
An interesting facet of the 1794 description of the grist mill is that it
lacked one wall. Also, interestingly, the Harvey P. Smith, Sr.,
excavation did not find evidence for an east wall (as indicated in his
architectural drawings). This may suggest that the trapiche was
driven from belts using the same shaft and turbine as the grist mill.
Thus the trapiche would necessarily be near the grist mill. There is
certainly historical precedent for the use of water-power to runtrapiches. By the middle 16th century a water-powered mill was built
at Yaguate in Espafiola, West Indies by technicians from the Canary
Islands (Sauer 1966: 210}.

FIGURE 8. Hypothetical reconstruction of the ingenio de azucar at San
los6 Mission as it might have appeared in 1794. Drawing by Jim Bonar.

256

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The trapiche at San Jos6 consisted "... of three, sometimes [possibly] only of two, vertical cylinders which may be smoothed tree
trunks, the cane being crushed as it passed between the
cylinders..." (Sauer 1966: 210). It probably was mounted on thick
posts sunk fairly deeply in the ground.
Leading from the trapiche at a shallow angle there would have
been a trough to conduct the juice from the trapiche to the metal tank
(tanque) where the juice (caldo) was collected. The tank was
probably located adjacent to the payla so that by removing a plug
would allow the juice to flow into the pan or perol grande de cobre by
gravity. Therethe caldo would be cooked into thick syrup.
The payla was protected by a pitched roof open walled structure
(Marmolejo 1755) 15 varas (12.54 meters) by 6½ varas (5.43 meters
using the Castilian vara of 0.835905 meters/Haggard 1941: 851) with
roof thatched with tule or native cane. Associated with the sugar
production were 554 pi!onci!lo molds {formas) (Fig. 14). These molds
were almost certainly conical and had a bunghold in the base to drain
off the molasses from the crystallized sugar (Diderot 1559: Plate 39
and 41).

CONCLUSIONS
Archeological, documentary and comparative investigation of the
"leather tanning vat" feature at San los6 Mission suggests that the
feature is the payla de cal y canto described in the San Josd
documents associated with a sugar refining complex. This complex
included a mill run by water power as of 1794, an open walled
structure roofed with native cane and a number of pieces of
equipment particular to the sugar industry.
An intriguing aspect of the situation is that the sugar industry in
the West Indies as developed in the early 16th century was
introduced by Canary Islanders (Sauer 1966: 210). In the San Antonio
area Canary Islanders formed the core of the secular community
beginning in 1731. Thus Canary Islanders, islefios, were available as
consultants for several civil engineering projects such as the acequia
systems and the sugar industry at San Jos6.

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

o

257

258

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

MISSION SAN JOSE Y SAN MIGUEL SUGAR INDUSTRY

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This paper could not have been written without the aid of my field
assistant on the 1974 test excavations at San Jos~, James E. Ivey. David
McDonald, a translator working at the Old Spanish Missions Historical
Research Library at San Jos6 provided help in finding the Barrios y
J~uregui report. Father Benedict Leutenegger provided access to records
in the library and always proved to be a valuable source of information.
Elton R. Prewitt of the Texas Archeological Survey provided information
on his father’s sugar processing in Jasper County. Dan Scurlock of the
Texas Historical Commission accompanied me on a trip to examine the
ingenio near Buda and provided valuable data and sources.

259

260

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED

Barrios y Jfiuregui, Jacinto
1758 Informe del governador sobre la mision de San Jos6. Archivo de San
Francisco el Grande, Biblioteca Nacional de Mexico. Photostat on file
at the University of Texas at Austin, Vol. 12, pp. 59-61, Barker Texas
History Center Archives.
Diderot, Denis
1959 A Diderot Pictorial Encyclopedia of Trades and Industry. Edited by
Charles C. Gillispie. Dover Publications Inc., New York.
Haggard, J. Villasana and Malcolm D. McLean.
1941 Handbook for Translators of Spanish Historical Documents. Semco
Color Press, Oklahoma City.
Marmolejo, Yldephonso
1755 Inventory of the mission and the increase gained in the year and ten
months which elapsed before I took charge. Translated by Fr.
Benedict Leutenegger. Old Spanish Missions Historical Research
Library, San Antonio.
Morfi, Fr. Juan Agustfn de
1935 History of Texas, 1763-1779. Part 1. Translated by Carlos Eduardo
Castafieda. Quivira Society Publications, Vol. 6. New York.
Mufioz, Manuel
1794 Inventory of the material goods of the Mission San Jos6. Typescript
from the Archivo de Govierno, Legajo 7, Expediente 448, Saltillo,
Coahuila.
Salas, Josef Maria
1785 Inventory which I, Fr. Josef Agustin Falc6n Mariano received in this
mission of Sehor San Josef of the province of Texas from Fr. Josef
Maria Salas. Translated by Ft. Benedict Leutenegger. Old Spanish
Missions Historical Research Library, San Antonio.
Sandoval, Fernando B.
1951 La industria del Azficar en Nueva Espafia. Universidad Nacional
Aut6noma de Mexico, Instituto de Historia, Mexico.
Sauer, Carl Ortwin
1966 The Early Spanish Main. University of California Press, Berkeley and
Los Angeles.
Solis, Jos~ de
1931 The Solis Diary of 1767. Translated by Peter P. Forrestal. Preliminary
Studies of the Texas Catholic Historical Society, Vol. 1, No. 6.

