THE ROLE OF COPROLITE
ANALYSIS IN ARCHEOLOGY
VAUGHN M. BRYANT, JR.

ABSTRACT
This article discusses the applications of human coprolite data in archeological research. It points out methods used for recognizing prehistoric coprolite specimens and then explains effective procedures for their
analysis. Under ideal circumstances human coprolites can yield data
pertinent to the understanding of seasonality, paleoenvironmental conditions, food preparation techniques, actual diet preferences and the general health of the individual. This can be achieved through the identification and analysis of coprolite contents which are often composed of fossil
pollen, seeds and other plant remains, phytoliths, feathers, bones, hair,
shell, insect chitin, parasites and non-organic compounds such as sand
and dirt.

INTRODUCTION
New demands are being placed upon the archeologist of today. In
the past it might have been sufficient for an archeologist to excavate a
site and later report his finds solely in terms of the ceramic, lithic and
fiberous artifacts. Those types of reports rarely, if ever, dealt with
some of the more important questions concerning man’s antiquity
and culture. Only occasionally did someone try to speculate upon
aspects such as animal butchering techniques, seasonal usage of a
site, subsistence patterns, paleoenvironmental conditions, or
methods of artifact manufacture. Part of the reason for the omission of
these kinds of data analyses resulted from a lack of suitable material
preserved for recovery during archeological excavations. However, in
other cases great quantities of potentially valuable artifacts were
inadvertently destroyed or discarded through a lack of understanding
of their usefulness in the interpretation of archeological data. One
such item, which has only recently been saved with any degree of
regularity during the excavation of archeological sites, is human
coprolites (preserved feces).
The remainder of this report is an attempt to acquaint the archeologist with the types of potentially important data which can be
recovered from the analysis of human coprolites.

HISTORY OF COPROLITE ANALYSIS
IN AMERICAN ARCHEOLOGY
Harshberger (1896) may have been the first to realize the potential

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
value of human coprolite analysis since he suggested that undigested
seeds and bones found in the feces of prehistoric man might offer a
clue to the types of foods eaten. Later, Young (1910) examined human
coprolites from Salts and Mammoth caves in Kentucky and found that
they contained sunflower seeds and hickory nut shells. From this he
concluded that these items may have been important diet components. Loud and Harrington (1929) were the next to report on the
analysis of human coprolites. From their study of fecal remains found
in Lovelock Cave, Nevada they suggested that man’s earlier diet
patterns included a variety of wild seed types and various plant fibers.
For the nex{ 30 years (1930-1960) there were only a few additional
attempts to examine human coprolite remains recovered from archeological sites. Volney Jones (1936) looked at coprolite material
from the Newt Kash Hollow Shelter in Kentucky and found that they
reflected a human diet consisting of ground seeds from canary grass,
pigweed and sunflower as well as acorns and hickory nuts. In the
same year Wakefield and Dellinger (1936) examined dried fecal remains found in a mummy recovered from a shelter site in Arkansas
and found they contained sumac seeds and acorns. During the 1940s
there were no new attempts to analyze human coprolite remains but
by the late 1950s there was a renewed interest in that type of research.
Sperry and Fonner found mesquite and burro weed seeds, antelope
hair and bird feathers in prehistoric human coprolites from Danger
Cave (Jennings, 1957). Webb and Baby (1957) looked at some human
coprolites recovered from caves in eastern Kentucky and found that
the fecal remains contained evidence to suggest that those early cave
inhabitants had eaten a diet of sunflower and goosefoot seeds as well
as several kinds of insects. MacNeish (1958) noted that human coprolites recovered from sites in Tamaulipas, Mexico, contained maguey
fibers, squash seeds, insect fragments and pieces of snail shells.
During the 1960s there were a number of new studies conducted of
human fecal materials. Callen and Cameron (1960) reported their
analysis of human coprolites recovered from Huaca Prieta Cave in
Peru. Three years later Callen (1963) published the account of his
analysis of human coprolites from the Ocampo Caves of Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Later, he (Callen 1965) reported on the completed analysis of
additional human fecal materials recovered from several Peruvian
archeological sites. Callen completed three additional studies and
had begun a fourth study before his death in 1970. The analysis of over
100 human coprolites from Tehuacan, Mexico (Callen 1967a) was of
critical importance to archeology because it dealt with diet changes
before, during, and after the period of early plant domestication in
Mesoamerica. Callen (1969) also became the first person to examine

COPROLITE ANALYSIS
the contents of human feces from Middle Paleolithic (ca. 75,000 B.P.)
age deposits. In the last report published before his death (Callen and
Martin 1969) Callen reported on the contents and probably diet patterns of the prehistoric peoples who lived in the Glen Canyon region
of Utah. In 1970 Callen began the analysis of human feces recovered
from rock-shelter and cave deposits near Ayacucho, Peru. However,
he died in Peru before that study could be completed.
Following the examples and new analytical techniques perfected
by Callen, others also began to recognize the importance of human
coprolite analysis. A series of reports resulted from the analysis of vast
quantities of human feces found at Lovelock Cave, Nevada including
reports by Heizer (1960, 1967); Napton and Brunetti (1969); Ambro
(1967); Cowan (1967); Tubbs and Berger (1967); Roust (1967); Heizer
and Napton (1969); Heizer (1969). Other human coprolite studies
conducted during the ! 960s include Bryant (1969), who reported on
the analysis of 43 human coprolites recovered from southwest Texas;
Fry (1969), who published his analysis of human feces recovered from
Danger Cave, Utah; and the Watson and Yarnell (1966) Salts Cave
report.
In the mid 1960s Martin and Sharrock (1964) introduced a new idea
to the study of human feces --pollen analysis. In their initial study of
54 human coprolites from the Glen Canyon area they found that the
pollen contents of coprolites could provide information relative to the
understanding of prehistoric diet, seasonal camp site occupation and
insights into the cultural usage of specific plants (such as juniper)
which are not otherwise represented in coprolite samples. Soon other
pollen analyses of human coprolites fo!lowed. These included the
studies by Bryant and Larson (1968) and Bryant (1969, 1974a) of
coprolites from southwest Texas; Napton and Kelso (1969) of human
feces from Lovelock Cave; Riskind (1970) of human coprolites from
Parida Cave, Texas; and finally those of Bryant (1974b) and Schoenwetter (1974) of human feces recovered from Mammoth and Salts
caves in Kentucky.
Even though this brief review of previous coprolitic research may
seem to include a large number of analyses it represents only a
fraction of the work that should have been done. There were undoubtedly many other archeological sites excavated during the last eight
decades which also contained human coprolites, yet those samples
were either lost, discarded or never recorded.

PRESERVATION AND RECOGNITION
OF HUMAN COPROLITES
In certain areas of the New World dry conditions prevail and result

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in the archeological recovery of perishable wood and fiber artifacts as
well as botanical and fecal specimens. When present, fecal remains
may or may not be easy to identify as being of human origin. This
problem is clearly evidenced by the large number of misidentified
samples received by coprolite analysis laboratories. Past examples, to
name a few, include samples of rodent, rabbit, horse and owl dung all
of which were labeled "human feces" when they arrived for analysis
at the Texas A&M University Anthropology Laboratory. Other misidentified samples have included root fragments, quids, dirt clods
and even pi6ces of rock.
Coprolite analysts also find that fecal material is often difficult to
identify with assurance and identification sometimes can only be
determined after completion of a chemical test. In general, coprolite
identification must take place on three distinct levels: 1) during the
initial examination prior to chemical reconstitution, 2) during the
chemical reconstitution, and 3) during the analysis of coprolite contents.
Prior to chemical reconstitution certain major determinations as to
human versus non-human coprolites can be made. Fecal pellets from
certain types of rodents such as mice, packrats, gophers and moles are
easily recognized by their small size and shape. The feces of many
herbivores such as llama, deer, antelope, sheep, rabbit and horse can
be recognized easily by their shape, size and predominantly grass and
plant fiber contents. Many coprolites from large carnivores can be
identified by their hard outer coating of dried intestinal lubricant
secreted as protection against intestinal wall perforation by ingested
fragments of sharp bone. In other cases it becomes more difficult to
distinguish human from non-human coprolites, especially when the
samples have been crushed or fragmented. Another factor that makes
human feces identification difficult is the great variety of shapes and
sizes found represented by human coprolite specimens. Depending
upon the diet and the interval between bowel movements human
feces can appear as large segmented pellets, cylindrical masses or as
amorphous masses resembling the dung of certain large herbivores
such as cow and bison.
At the second level additional separations can be made between
human and non-human coprolites. When coprolites are placed in a
reconstitution solution such as trisodium phosphate the liquid generally becomes tinted within 72 hours. The resulting color of the fluid
and the degree of translucency are fairly reliable indicators of coprolite origin. Coprolites from carnivores usually turn the trisodium
phosphate solution white, pale brown, or yellow brown in color and
do not interfere with its translucency. Herbivores’ coprolites will turn

COPROLITE ANALYSIS
the reconstitution solution pale yellow to light brown in color and do
not change the fluid’s translucency. Human coprotites, on the other
hand, will always turn the trisodium phosphate solution dark brown
or black in color and make it opaque. So far as is known, there is only
one non-human type of coprolite that will produce a chemical reaction similar to that of a human coprolite. Fry (1970:19) reported that
the coprolites of the coati (Nasua nasua) will turn a trisodium phosphate solution black and make it opaque. There is one other additional clue that one could use at this second level of identification -odor. From experience it is known that non-human coprolites (even
those of the coati) generally emit a musty odor during the reconstitution process. Human coprolites, however, reproduce the original intense odor when reconstituted.
At the final level, during the actual analysis of the coprolite contents, one can often separate human coprolites from non-human coprolites. Man tends to favor an omnivorous diet and often eats prepared
foods. As such, human coprolites tend to include a wide range of
diverse components such as charcoal, cracked and ground seeds,
snail and clam shell fragments, bird egg shell and feathers, insect
chitin, bone fragments, mammal hair and plant fibers. Sometimes a
few of these items could be expected to appear in non-human coprolites, yet very rarely will such a variety be found in any single nonhuman coprotite.
An apparent exception to the foregoing must be noted for coprolites
from hominids of great antiquity such as those fromHomo africanus,
Homo erectus and Homo sapiens neanderthalensis. Although very
rare, coprolites of such ages have been recovered and analyzed from
the Olduvai Gorge, Terra Amata, and Lazaret archeological sites.
Coprolites of suspected hominid origin recovered from occupational levels associated with Homo africanus at Olduvai Gorge (dated
as older than 1 million B.C.) were sent to Lewis K. Napton for analysis.
His study showed that those prehistoric coprolites did not react to the
chemical reconstitution process in the usual manner. When placed in
a solution of trisodium phosphate the specimens did not emit a fecal
odor and did not discolor the solution; yet based upon the coprolite
contents, Napton (Leakey 1971) stated that they could reflect a possible hominid origin.
Callen (1969) examined four suspected human coprolites of great
antiquity recovered from archeological deposits associated with the
cultural remains of Homo sapiens neanderthalensis at the Lazaret site
in France. During his analysis Callen encountered many of the same
types of problems that Napton found during his study of the Olduvai
Gorge specimens. The coprolites did not darken the reconstitution

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B

D
FIGURE 1. Scanning electron photomicrographs. (A.) Zea mays (corn)
pollen grain (1,500 x). (B.) Sorghum halepc, nse (Johnson grass) pollen
grain (2,400 x). Note the fine reticulate pattern of the surface ornamentation. (C.) Zea ma)’s (corn) pollen grain (6,000 x). Note the
absence of the surface reticulate pattern. (D.) Curcurbita sp. (gourd)
pollen grain (1,000 x).

COPROLITE ANALYSIS
solution nor did they produce the usual fecal odor. On the other hand,
based upon their contents of charcoal, bone fragments, hair and other
debris Callen suggested that at least two of them were of probable
human origin.
More recently, the Texas A&M Anthropology Laboratory has begun
a preliminary examination of the contents of fecal samples 400,000
years old found in association withHomo erectus remains at the Terra
Amata site in France. The early analysis of those coprolites reveal the
presence of small fragments of marine shells, sand grains, flecks of
charcoal, and a few animal hairs (Fig. 3,D). As yet no seeds, bones,
fibers or other organic residues have been found. Like the earlier
studies of other very ancient coprolites these specimens did not react
to chemical analysis in the usual manner. When placed in a trisodium
phosphate solution the samples produced a weak fecal-like smell and
only a few specimens turned the solution even a faint brown color.
In all three of the studies where coprolites of Early Man have been
examined the resulting analysis has raised a number of important
questions. For example: 1) what should any human coprolite still
contain after many thousands of years of weathering; 2) how does
time alter the color and odor-forming substances of human coprolites;
or 3) do these apparent differences reflect different digestive patterns
found in other species and subspecies of man?

LABORATORY PROCEDURES
The most valuable data come from the total analysis of any given
coprolite sample and the first essential step towards such an analysis
is the laboratory extraction process. During the early history of coprolite analysis there was no known effective method whereby a coprolite specimen could be carefully opened and examined without causing damage to certain delicate plant and animal tissues.
Harshberger {1896) and Young (1910) reported that they broke open
dried coprolites and examined what was inside whereas Jones (1936)
crushed dried human coprolites with a mortar and pestle and then
examined the crushed remains. Each of these basic methods worked
with some degree of efficiency, yet it was not until Callen and Cameron (1960) introduced the chemical reconstitution process that a
suitable laboratory procedure became available for coprolite analysis.
Their method, which is herein described, is presently the most widely
used and accepted method of coprolite analysis.
Some coprolite analysts seek only the pollen data while others seek
only the macrofossil data. Ideally, however, the identical samples
should be used for both types of analysis. In this way each type of data

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

will complement the other and thus give the analyst two vital sets of
important information from which to derive his interpretive information.
At the Texas A&M University Anthropology Laboratory coprolite
samples are initially measured, weighed, photographed and their
general appearance described before any laboratory process is begun.
Next the samples which appear to be of possible human origin are
carefully and thoroughly cleaned on the surface in order to remove
any pollen contamination which may have been deposited on the
coprolite after it was excreted. This is often a difficult task yet is an
essential step towards gaining an accurate analysis. Once cleaned, the
coprolite samples are placed in airtight containers. Here they are
subdivided for analysis. The amount of each coprolite specimen that
is used for analysis will vary with the individual sample. In some
cases, where large sized coprolites are available, a sizeable portion
can be used for the analysis. In other cases where only a very small
fragment is available the entire sample may have to be used. Once the
material for the analysis is selected each specimen is placed in the
airtight container and a sufficient amount of 0.5% trisodium phosphate solution is added to cover the sample. The strength of the
trisodium phosphate solution must be carefully regulated since experiments (Callen 1967a) have shown that strengths greater than 0.5%
will destroy the middle lamella of plant cells and cause the destruction of delicate plant tissues, limiting macrofossil identification. The
samples are then sealed and allowed to soak for a period ranging from
a minimum of 72 hours to several weeks. The exact length of time
needed for each sample to soak is dependent upon a number of factors
such as actual diet component, age of specimen, degree of preservation and completeness of dessication. There does not seem to be a
point beyond which a sample will begin to deteriorate if left to soak
too long in the trisodium phosphate solution. Experiments conducted
by this writer have shown that there is no degree of sample deterioration or destruction to delicate plant tissues even in coprolite specimens allowed to soak for periods of up to three years. Rarely, however,
is a sample ready for further processing in less than 72 hours after it is
placed in the trisodium phosphate solution.
The trisodium phosphate solution acts as a reconstituting agent and
once this is completed the next phase of the extraction process can
begin. Since the original incomplete breakdown of protein components in the coprolite samples often results in the liberation of an
intense odor it is suggested that the remainder of the process be
conducted under a vented fumehood. This is especially true of the
unstable amino acid tryptophan which is a common component of

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

B

D
FIGURE 2. Scanning electron photomicrographs. (21.) Homo sapiens
sapiens hair (1,000 x). Note the fine scales on the hair surface and the
wavy pattern.they form across the main body of the hair. (B.) Apodemus
sp. (field mouse) body hair (1,000 x). Note the coarse scale pattern on
the outer surface. (C:) Prosopis glandulosa (Mesquite) pollen grain
(3,000 x). (D.) Chenopodium sp. (Goosefoot) pollen grain (3,500 x).

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

most animal proteins. During its breakdown to 3-methyl indole, and
then to indole, it produces an intense offensive odor as a byproduct of
the reaction (Callen 1967a). Other compounds such as methyl mercaptan and hydrogen sulfide result from the bacterial putrefaction
process and may also add to the disagreeable odor {Oser 1965:530).
Each sealed jar containing a sample should be opened carefully and
a notation made of its color, smell, and whether or not a thin scum
appears on the surface. According to Callen {1967a) the presence of a
thin surface scum is an additional indication that meat was a diet
component. Once these data are recorded then each sample should be
carefully screened first through a clean 20-mesh brass screen and then
through a clean 100-mesh brass screen. During this process the larger
pieces of debris that appear on each screen should be gently agitated
and broken down to liberate any possible trapped pollen grains. Each
screen, with its contents, should then be gently washed with a jet of
distilled water so that all pollen grains will pass freely through both
screens into the beaker below. Once this step has been completed the
trapped solid residues on both screens should be dried and stored in
sealed containers for later analysis. The liquid fraction recovered
beneath the screens should be centrifuged and saved for pollen
analysis studies. For details of this process see Bryant and Holz
{1968).

ANALYSIS
One of the most frequently asked questions concerning coprolite
data is, "What kinds of information can human coprolites give us?"
The answer to this question is entirely dependent upon the specific
human coprolite sample and the procedures of analysis followed by
the analyst. It can range from a very limited amount of information in
some samples to extensive amounts of data in others. For example,
under ideal circumstances any specific human coprolite could contain pertinent information concerning seasonality, paleoenvironmental conditions, food preparation techniques, actual diet preferences
and the general health of an individual. Some of these data must come
from the presence of one specific component such as the occurrence
of parasite cysts which could be used to speculate on the general
health of the individual. In other cases, such as diet reconstruction,
more than one component must be relied upon to provide the pertinent data.

11

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

A

B

D
FIGURE 3. Scanning electron photomicrographs. (A.) Opu~tia sp.
(pricklypear cactus) pollen grain (1,300 x). (B.) rl)’pt~a lati/~)lia (cattail)
pollen grain (4,700 x). (C.) D<’rma<w~tor sp. (tick) head (180 x). (D.) Hair
of unknown mammal recovered from a 400,000 year old coprolite of
Homo cr<,rtu,s.

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

POLLEN COMPONENT

Pollen data recovered from human coprolites can often be very
informative since under ideal circumstances they can yield information as to: 1) diet, 2) types of economic, versus background, pollen, 3)
seasonality of site occupation, and 4) paleoenvironmental conditions.
Prehistoric man had to depend upon the available natural resources
for his food supply. Some of these food sources such as bark, tubers
and leaves do not contain pollen. Others, such as flowers and certain
types of seeds do contain pollen or have pollen accidently adhering to
their outer surfaces. When these ingested pollens are later voided
along with other materials as feces, they then can be identified (Fig.
1-5) and used to infer certain probable dietary patterns. In southwest
Texas, for example, pollen analyses of human coprolites reveal that
the prehistoric peoples living in that region between 800 B.C. - A.D.
500 ate a diet that contained a considerable proportion of flowers
and/or flower buds from plants such as yucca, sotol, agave, cactus and
mesquite (Bryant 1974a). This type of diet information was not otherwise known and would not have become apparent without the pollen
analysis of their fecal remains.
Not all of the pollen found in human coprolites are a direct indication of diet. Within each human coprolite there are two distinct
groups of pollen, economic pollen and background pollen. Economic
pollen, as a specific category, is recognized by the palynologist to
include those pollen types which have been ingested as part of the
diet during the eating of flowers and/or certain types of seeds. These
pollen types are easily identified because they come from plant
species whose pollen rarely, if ever, become part of the normal atmospheric pollen rain. Pollen types such as those from yucca, cactus,
agave, sotol and mesquite are transported from flower to flower solely
by insects which come to feed on the associated flower nectar or come
to collect the pollen. As such, these pollen grain types are only rarely
cast adrift into the atmosphere like the pollen grains of ragweed, pine
or oak. Therefore, when economic pollen types are present in human
coprolite specimens it reflects the direct eating of flowers rather than
accidental ingesting from other sources.
Background pollen, on the other hand, is in most cases incidental to
the understanding of diet practices since it reflects atmospheric pollen which is part of the normal pollen rain that constantly settles to
the ground and could be accidently ingested by man. Any, or all, of
the background pollen types (such as grass, pine, oak, hackberry,
ragweed, juniper and pecan) found in any specific human coprolite
could have become trapped in available drinking water sources, been

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

13

accidently inhaled, or could have settled out on prepared foods that
were later eaten by man.
Preserved pollen in human coprolites can often reveal clues as to
probable seasonality of site occupation. There are several ways in
which these data can be determined. If a coprolite contains high
percentages of economic pollen from one or more plants which bloom
during the spring and/or summer (such as yucca, agave, cactus, sotol
or mesquite), that season can be inferred as being the time of year that
that coprolite was voided. This information can then be used to offer
tentative evidence as to the seasonal usage of certain archeological
sites provided that man ate the flowers soon after they were picked
and did not store and eat them later in the year. Ethnobotanical reports
of many subsistence level protohistoric cultures have noted that in
most instances flowers were eaten fresh and were not stored for later
use (Palmer 1878; Newberry 1887; Barrows 1900; Castetter and Bell
1942; Curtin 1949).
In some cases pollen found in human coprolites can be used to
make limited generalizations concerning the local paleoenvironment. Often the local vegetation compositions will change when, and
if, the climate changes. Certain plant species would be sensitive
enough to reflect this change. If the pollen from those indicator types
were present in the coprolites from one specific time period but not
the coprolites from a later or earlier time period then these data could
be used to infer certain environmental changes. However, a great deal
of caution must be taken not to "over-interpret" dramatic climatic
changes based solely upon the pollen spectra in human coprolites.
One must always remember that man is a highly mobile and selective
animal; thus the coprolites represent the ingestion of food and water
that may, or may not, reflect only the actual pollen types in the
immediate area of his campsites.
SEEDS, LEAVES AND OTHER PLANT REMAINS
Hunters and gatherers as well as agriculturalists rely heavily upon
seeds of various types to supplement their dietary needs. Seeds are
especially useful because they are rich in carbohydrates and have
important caloric value. In addition to these assets many types of
seeds can also be stored for later use.
When eaten, seeds are useful indicators of actual diet and can
sometimes be used to provide insights into food preparation techniques. Seeds have a hard outer coat called the testa which is generally resistant to most human digestive processes and this is excreted
almost unchanged in feces. The shape and surface morphology of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

14

A

B

FIGURE 4. Scanning electron photomicrographs. (A.) Taxaxacum sp.
(dandylion) pollen grain (3,000 x). (B.) Gossypium barbadense (cotton)
fiber (1,000 x). (C.) Agave lecheguilla (lecheguilla) phytolith (2,000 x).
(D.) Opuntia lindheimeri (pricklypear cactus) phytolith (200 x).

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

15

most seed testae are quite diagnostic (Fig. 5,B) and can be used to
provide an accurate identification as to the plant family, genus and/or
species represented. In many cases even when the seed testa has been
broken or ground during food preparation or masticated during eating it can still be identified by its fragmented parts.
Seeds are sometimes the item that is sought as the food source such
as maize, wheat, barley, rye and sunflower seeds. In other cases seeds
are accidently swallowed during the eating of the pericarp (fruit
wall). When eating squash, tomatoes, grapes, cactus fruits, guavas,
blackberries and chili peppers most of the seeds are swallowed along
with the edible pericarp. Regardless of why seeds are eaten, their
presence in human coprolites is a valuable source of data useful for
the reconstruction of diet patterns.
When fruits such as apples, peaches, plums and pears are eaten the
seeds are not usually ingested along with the fruit pericarp. In such
instances coprolite identification of the fruit must rest upon the correct identity of the hard outer pericarp wall. This outer fruit skin is
more difficult to identify than is the testa yet accurate recognitions
can be made by using the shape, frequency and arrangements of the
surface stomatal openings as morphological clues.
Food preparation techniques can sometimes be inferred from seed
remains present in human coprolites. Callen (1967b) found that some
of the millet seeds in prehistoric human feces from Mexico had been
prepared by pounding, while others had been split open by rolling
them back and forth on a grinding stone prior to being eaten. In
prehistoric coprolites from southwest Texas, Bryant (1969) noted that
some of the cactus seeds had been broken open either by pounding or
grinding before being eaten by prehistoric man. Some of the broken
cactus seeds in those coprolites were also charred which suggested
that they may have been roasted prior to being eaten. Baegert (1952)
has reported similar practices as noted in the ethnographic reports of
the Indians of southern California.
Plant leaves are not a frequent component in most human coprolites
yet when present they generally appear as chewed and broken fragments. Ethnographic reports suggest that leaves were either chewed
alone or were mixed with other foods and then eaten. This has been
noted by Brown (1868) for parsnips (Heracleum lanatum), by Blankinship (1905) for western dock (Rumex occidentalis), by Palmer
(1878) for saltbush (Atriplex powellii), and by Castetter (1935), for
goldenrod (Solidago missouriensis.) When present in human feces
leaves are usually very difficult to identify accurately. Small leaf
fragments that have been well chewed are generally so altered in
shape and form that there remains little to use as a diagnostic identifi-

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cation feature. In some cases the only statement that can be made
concerning such leaves is that they were from either the monocot or
dicot group of plants. This level of identification does have limited
value and can be determined by the venation pattern even in badly
crushed or chewed plant leaves.
Roots, tubers and bark are not common in human coprolites yet do
occur in some samples. In southwest Texas, Bryant (1974a) noted that
out of a total of 43 Late Archaic Period human coprolites, four contained fragments of chewed bark and, in one specimen, the major diet
item had been the bark. Regardless of how often roots and bark occur
in human coprolites they still remain a difficult plant substance to
identify accurately. Experience has shown that the mere identification of these two plant substances is not usually a great problem, yet
beyond that level there are few morphological features which can be
used for a more nearly precise identification. The problem of specific
identification becomes even more complicated when the bark or root
fragments were pounded or chewed before being swallowed.
PHYTOLITHS
Phytoliths (plant crystals) (Fig. 4,C,D) occur in many kinds of plants
and are especially frequent in regions where available water sources
are rich in dissolved silicates and calcium. Plants, unlike animals,
have no method of excreting inorganic materials and therefore must
deposit these substances internally. These inorganic deposits in
plants consist primarily of calcium salts and anhydrides of silica in
crystalline form. When deposited they occur in four basic crystalline
shapes (druses, raphides, rhombohedrals and prismatics) and are
concentrated throughout the plant tissues mainly in specialized
idioblast cells. When these crystal-containing plant tissues are eaten
by man most of the phytoliths are liberated during chewing and pass
through the digestive system unchanged to become part of the fecal
remains. Later, during the analysis of human coprolites the phytoliths
can be isolated and described.
One of the major problems with trying to use phytoliths is that it is
nearly impossible to assign a specific type to a specific plant taxa
since most crystal types are not diagnostic of any one plant species. In
the analysis of plant crystals present in certain species of plants from
southwest Texas this writer found that four species of cacti (Opuntia
lindheimeri, O. phaeacantha, O. leptocaulis and Echinocactus
texensis) contained similar calcium oxylate plant crystals of the druse
shape. Furthermore, phytoliths were present in great numbers and
varieties in the leaves of three species of yucca (Yucca torreyi, Y.

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

17

thompsoniana, Y. constricta), two species of sotol (Dasylirion
texanum, D. leiophyllum), one species of sacahuiste (Nolina texana)
and in two species of agave (Agave americana, A. lecheguilla). Of all
the different crystal types found, only one type was unique and
diagnostic of a single specific plant species. Lechuguilla leaves contained one type or raphide crystal (Fig. 4,C) that was not found in the
leaves of any other plant taxa examined. Based solely upon the occurrence of large numbers of certain types of phytoliths Bryant (1969)
was able to suggest that certain prehistoric human coprolite samples
from southwest Texas contained evidence of a cactus and/or
lechuguilla diet even though no leaf fragments or fibers were present
in the feces. It was his conclusion that in certain instances phytoliths
can be used effectively as an aid to diet reconstruction; in most cases,
however, phytoliths present too many problems in terms of accurate
identification to be of diagnostic interpretative value.
FEATHERS
Down feathers and other types of feather fragments sometimes
appear in the coprolitic remains left by prehistoric man. These small
feathers often appear to be unidentifiable yet microscopic examination can often lead to a more nearly precise finalysis. Along the edges
of most feathers barbs are small processes called barbules. These
barbules (Fig. 5,C,D) are quite diagnostic for Certain bird groups and
can be used as morphological keys for the accurate recognition of the
birds they represent. Based upon these types of analyses Napton and
Brunetti (1969) were able to identify feather fragments in Lovelock
Cave human coprolites as belonging to several species of waterfowl
including the grebe, heron, goose and mudhen. The bones of these
same species of waterfowl were found in the archeological deposits of
Lovelock Cave (Napton 1969) yet the presence of their feathers in
human feces gives added strength to the assumption that these waterfowl species were actually part of prehistoric man’s diet in that region
of Utah. Other analysts noting the occurrence of feathers in prehistoric human coprolites include Callen (1967a), Fry (1969), Callen and
Martin (1969), and Yarnell (1969).

BONES, HAIR, SHELL AND SCALES
Prehistoric and protohistoric man tended to include meat as an
integral part of his diet much as man does today. The percentage of
meat versus plant foods in his diet was dependent upon a number of
variables, yet few, if any, groups subsisted solely upon a diet of plant

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

18

A

B

FIGURE 5. Scanning electron photomicrographs. (A.) Gclllus g’allus
(chicken) egg-shell surface (1,000 x). (B.) Chenopodium (goosefoot)
seed showing the fine reticulate surface pattern (60 x). (C.) Spizell~ sp.
(sparrow) feather (200 x). (D.) Gcdl’~,s g’allu,s (chicken) feather (500 x).
Note the tiny barbules along the edges of each barb.

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

19

foods. To the analyst looking at the coprolite remains of ancient man it
would be of great benefit to know what percentage of any given diet
was composed of meat. Unfortunately, to date this type of quantification has proven impossible to achieve based upon coprolite remains.
There are, however, a number of clues which can be used to suggest
the ingestion of certain kinds of meat.
Often when small animals such as snakes, lizards, rodents, birds
and small fish are eaten by man many of the bones are chewed and
swallowed along with the meat. These bones are generally small
enough so that they do not puncture or otherwise injure the digestive
tract and are later expelled as part of the feces. When present in
human coprolites animal bones can be segregated into general
categories such as fish, reptiles and mammals based upon general
morphologic features. If certain diagnostic bone fragments are present, more precise identifications as to actual species are also possible.
Even though bones present in human coprolitss are useful clues as to
man’s diet preferences they can not tell the analyst precisely what
percentage of that diet is represented by meat.
Bryant’s (1969) study of prehistoric human coprolites from southwest Texas demonstrates that the early inhabitants of that region ate a
variety of small animals as seen by the number of bone fragments in
their feces. In 21 of the total 43 human coprolites analyzed in that
study the bones of small reptiles, birds, mammals and fish were
encountered. Similar studies by Callen (1967a), Douglas (1969), Yarnell [1969), Fry (1970) and Trevor-Deutsch (n.d.) have also noted the
presence of animal bones in prehistoric human coprolites.
When man eats larger animals such as rabbits, deer, bison, antelope
and elk bones are not ingested since they are large and can be removed
easily during butchering or later while eating. Since meat protein is
rapidly broken down by the human digestive system little evidence of
its presence is ever found. However, in many cases during the butchering of large animals a few animal hairs will adhere to the meat and
can be accidentally and unknowingly eaten with the meat. Unlike
meat, hairs are very resistant to the human digestion process and
remain unaltered when excreted as part of the feces. These hairs (Fig.
2,A,B), like the bones of smaller animals, are often quite diagnostic
and can be used as a key to the identification of the species of animal
they represent. In the analysis of human coprolites from Tehuacan,
Mexico, Callen {1967a) was able to identify a number of large animal
genera that were eaten based soley upon direct morphological comparisons between the hairs found in human feces with hair reference
samples of known origin. Today, more refined techniques are available through the use of the scanning electron microscope.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Small shell fragments are sometimes found in human coprolites.
During the opening of clams, oysters, or snails small chips are often
broken off and can be inadvertently eaten along with the meat. Such
small pieces of shell are not significantly altered by man’s digestive
system and are thus incorporated into the fecal remains. When
analyzed during coprolitic research these shell fragments can be
identified and sometimes assigned to specific categories or even to a
generic type. As in other instances, the preciseness of the level of
identification depends upon the amount of shell present and available diagnostic features.
Like snail, clam and oyster shells, egg shell fragments (Fig. 5,A) are
also found in human coprolite specimens. Egg shell fragments can be
segregated from other types of shell, yet a more precise identification
is often difficult. Current research using the techniques of scanning
electron microscopy are being applied to this identification problem
and soon may produce a solution.
Animal scales fall into two broad groups -- those from fish and
those from reptiles. Fish scales are generally rounded and have patterns of small concentric growth rings whereas reptile scales are more
often pointed at one end and lack the annual growth rings. As evidenced by previous analyses of prehistoric human coprolites (Bryant
1969; Yarnell 1969) both types of scales pass freely through the
human digestive system and can sometimes be an abundant component of a coprolite specimen. Species identification of scales can be
accomplished under ideal circumstances with an adequate comparative reference collection. In the study of prehistoric human coprolites
from Lovelock Cave in Nevada, Helzer and Napton (1969) were able to
identify three species of fish eaten by man based upon the identification of scales preserved in the feca! remains.
INSECTS
Among many modern cultures the eating of insects is considered
distasteful and is not a common practice. Ethnographic records, on
the other hand, reveal that many past cultures often ate insects and in
fact considered certain insect types to be a delicacy. Additional evidei~ce from the analysis of prehistoric human coprolites demonstrates
that the practice of insect eating is not strictly a recent innovation.
Remains of various insect types have been reported in prehistoric
human coprolites from Mexico (Callen 1967a), Utah (Fry 1970; Hall
1972), Texas (Bryant 1969), Kentucky (Yarnell 1969), Nevada (Heizer
and Napton 1969) and Peru (Bryant n.d.).
Many insects have a hard outer chitinous surface which forms a

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

21

durable exoskeleton that protects the insect’s internal organs. When
these types of insects are eaten by man their exoskeletons are not
dissolved by the digestive system and are expelled as part of the feces.
Some exoskeletons, such as those of grasshoppers and beetles are easy
to recognize while other types of insect chitin fragments are more
difficult to identify. Recovery of these components from prehistoric
human coprolites can be accomplished in several ways. Callen
(1967a) suggests mixing benzene with a trisodium phosphate solution containing the reconstituted feces specimen and then shaking
the mixture vigorously. This process will separate the insect chitin
and cause it to float at the interface between the benzene and
trisodium phosphate solution. Callen’s procedure is an effective
method to remove insect chitin yet it can not be used when pollen
analysis of the same samples are desired. During the benzene process
some, but not all, of the pollen present in the sample will adhere to the
benzene and float at the interface where it could be inadvertently
removed along with the floating insect material. The result would be
the selective removal of certain pollen types which would lead to an
incorrect analysis of the coprolitic pollen contents. When pollen
studies aredesired, insect chitin must be removed during the screening process rather than through the use of the benzene process.
There are two main categories of insects found during the analysis
of human feces: 1) insects eaten as part of the diet and 2) coprophagous insects. Insect types eaten as part of man’s diet will vary depending upon local availability and the personal preferences of certain
ethnic groups. The other category includes species of insects which
use excreted human feces as a place to nest and lay their eggs. Some of
these insects and/or their empty egg and pupa sacks often become
incorporated as part of the coprolite specimen and are recovered
during later coprolitic analysis. Once the analyst identifies these
coprophagous insect types then they can be disregarded as being
incidental to the understanding of prehistoric man’s actual diet practices.
ENDOPARASITES AND ECTOPARASITES

Human coprolites can sometimes contain the.remains of endoparasites such as the actual parasites, parasite eggs and/or protozoan cysts
which can provide certain clues as to the overall health of the individual who excreted the feces. Callen and Cameron (1960) found
tapeworm eggs in human feces, 3,000-5,000 years old from Huaca
Prieta Cave in Peru; Samuels (1965) found pinworm eggs in 1,000 year
old human coprolites recovered from sites at Mesa Verde, Colorado;

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and Moore, Fry and Englert (1969) found the eggs of the thornyheaded worm in 10,000 year old prehistoric hum’an feces from Danger
Cave, Utah. Not only can these endoparasites help us to measure the
hygienic habits and overall health of ancient man but they also provide clues as to the antiquity and geographical distribution of specific
organisms that infect man.
The ectoparasites that infect man such as ticks, mites, lice and fleas
can sometimes appear in human feces. These organisms tend to concentrate mainly in man’s hair and during grooming it would not have
been uncommon for prehistoric man to catch and eat one or more of
these ectoparasites. Callen (1967a) found several ticks (Fig. 3,c) in
6,000 year old coprolites from Mexico and Samuels (1965) found
mites in prehistoric human coprolites from Mesa Verde, Colorado. In
other studies Yarnell (1969) found mites in human coprolites from
Salts Cave, Kentucky while Fry (1969) found the remains of lice and
lice eggs in 3,000 year old human feces from Danger Cave, Utah. The
remains of ectoparasites, like those of the endoparasites, help to
identify the types of parasites that infected prehistoric man, how far
back in time they were associated with man and the geographical
range of these parasites.
NON-ORGANIC COMPONENTS

Coprolites often contain a number of non-organic items such as dirt,
rocks, sand and chemical residues. Like the organic components,
these items have great interpretative value.
Sand, dirt and grit found in human coprolites could come from
several sources. Some of the dirt and grit could have become attached
to the outside of the feces at the time it was excreted. Other grit in feces
could result from the eating of dirt or from the eating of foods containing grit. Callen (1969) has noted that some of the prehistoric human
coprolites he examined contained considerable amounts of dirt. Callen and Cameron (1960) had suggested earlier that this may have
resulted from the eating of dirt as seasoning, or the medicinal eating of
dirt for its suspected curative powers. Smaller amounts of dirt and grit
could become ingested inadvertently along with the eating of stoneground seeds, meat or plant foods roasted on hot coals and in the
drinking of silt-laden water.
Occasionally, small chips of stone occur in prehistoric human
coprolites. At first these were not regarded as important yet recent
ethnographic studies among the Australian aborigines (Gould 1968)
and among certain American Indian groups (Hester 1973) suggest that
such chips may result from the practice of using one’s teeth to retouch

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

23

the cutting edges of stone tools. In several prehistoric human coprolites from Hogup Cave, Utah, Fry (1969) found tiny chips of obsidian
and chalcedony. A similar occurrence of sma!l obsidian chips was
found by Nissen (1973) in a prehistoric human coprolite from Bamert
Cave, California. These small chips are not the kind of item one might
expect to find in a human coprolite unless it could be explained as the
byproduct of stone tool retouching using one’s teeth.
Human feces also contain certain inorganic substances that are
secreted into the intestinal tract and become incorporated into the
feces. These substances include phosphates, calcium, potassium,
sodium, iron and other trace elements. Chemical tests of prehistoric
human feces will reveal the percentages of these substances found in
the specimen yet these data are limited in value since they are dependent upon a number of variables. To use this type of chemical information one must be able to accurately reconstruct precisely what
foods were eaten and in what proportions; the pH (degree of acidity or
alkalinity) of the local water sources and the amount of water ingested; and the amount and frequency of urine and perspiration
excreted.
Occasionally one will find human coprolites that contain masses of
charcot-leyden crystals. These small inorganic crystals often form in
the intestinal tract as a result of severe diarrhea or dysentery and when
found in human feces can be used to infer this type of condition.
Heizer and Napton (1969) noted that in one of the Lovelock Cave
human coprolites these types of crystals were present. This led them
to suggest that perhaps some of those early inhabitants might have
suffered from intestinal amebiasis resulting from infection by the
endoparasite Entamoeba histolytica.

SUMMARY
The wealth of information that can be recovered from the analysis of
human coprolites can assist the archeologist in many ways. Fossil
pollen trapped in coprolites can offer clues as to certain diet preferences, possible seasonality of site occupancy, and inferences as to the
paleoenvironmental conditions. What types of foods were eaten by
prehistoric man and in some cases how he prepared them would be
especially evident by the presence of seeds that had been pounded,
ground and/or roasted. Other items often found in human coprolites
include pieces of feathers, hair, shell fragments and insect chitin.
These result from the eating of meat and can be used to identify the
actual meat sources and suggest the importance of meat as a dietary
item. Parasites in prehistoric human coprolites indicate the probable

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

health of the individual. Occurrence of pinworms, tapeworms and
thorny-headed worms in ancient human feces show that in some areas
of the world these parasites long have been associated with man. And
finally, the non-organic portion of human coprolites (such as sand,
small rocks, stone chips and dirt) can be used to infer practices such as
dirt eating and using one’s teeth to retouch the cutting edges of certain
stone tools.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to thank Harry J. Shafer and Glenna Williams-Dean for their helpful suggestions in the preparation of this manuscript.

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

25

REFERENCES CITED

Ambro, Richard D.
1967 Dietary-Technological-Ecological Aspects of Lovelock Cave Coprolites. University of California Archeological Survey Reports, No. 70,
pp. 37-48.
Baegert, J. J.
1952 Observations on Lower California: Notes and Translations by M.
Brandenburg and C. Baumann. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Barrows, D. P.
1900 The Ethnobotany of the Cahuilla Indians of Southern California. Ph.D.
dissertation on file at the University of Chicago Library.
Blankinship, J. W.
1905 Native Economic Plants of Montana. Montana Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin No. 56.
Brown, R.
1868 On the Vegetable Products used by the Northwest American Indians,
as Food and Medicine, in the Arts, and in Superstitious Rites.
Botanical Society of Edinburgh Transactions (1866-1868) Vol. 9, pp.
378-396.
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr.
1969 Late Fullglacial and Postglacial Pollen Analysis of Texas Sediments.
Ph.D. dissertation on file at the University of Texas at Austin Library.
1974a Prehistoric Diet in Southwest Texas: The Coprolite Evidence.
American Antiquity, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 407-420.
1974b Pollen Analysis of Prehistoric Human Feces from Mammoth Cave,
Kentucky. Archeology of the Mammoth Cave Area, pp. 203-209.
Academic Press, New York.
n.d. Analysis of Human Coprolites from Ayacucho, Peru. (unpublished
manuscript).
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr. and R. K. Holz
1968 The Role of Pollen in the Reconstruction of Past Environments.
Pennsylvania Geographer, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 11-19.
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr. and Donald A. Larson
1968 Pollen Analysis of the Devil’s Mouth Site, Val Verde County, Texas.
In: The Devil’s Mouth Site, The Third Season, 1967 by William M.
Sorrow. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 14,
pp. 57-7O.
Callen, Eric O.
1963 Diet as Revealed by Coprolites. Science and Archeology, pp. 186-194.
London.
1965 Food Habits of some pre-Columbian Indians. Economic Botany, Vol.
19, No. 4, pp. 335-343.
1967a Analysis of the Tehuacan Coprolites. The Prehistory of the Tehuacan
Valley: Vol. I. Environment and Subsistence, pp. 261-289. University
of Texas Press, Austin.
1967b The First New World Cereal. American Antiquity, Vol. 32, No. 4, pp.
535-538.
1969 Les Coprolithes de la cabane acheuleenne du Lazaret: Analyse et
Diagnostic. Memoires de la Societe Prehistorique Francaise. Vol. 7,
pp. 123-124.

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Callen, Eric O. and T. W. M. Cameron
1960 A Prehistoric Diet Revealed in Coprolites. The New Scientist, Vol. 8,
No. 190, pp. 35-40.
Callen, Eric O. and P. S. Martin
1969 Plant Remains in Some Coprolites from Utah. American Antiquity,
Vol. 34, No. 3, pp. 329-331.
Castetter, E. F.
1935 Uncultivated Native Plants used as Sources of Food. New Mexico
University Bulletin, No. 266.
Castetter, E. F. and W. H. Bell
1942 Pima and Papago Indian Agriculture. University of New Mexico
Press, Albuquerque.
Cowan, Richard A.
1967 Lake-Margin Ecological Exploitation in the Great Basin as Demonstrated by an Analysis of Coprolites from Lovelock Cave, Nevada.
University of California Archeological Survey Reports, No. 70, pp.
21-36.
Curtin, L. S. M.
1949 By the Prophet of the Earth. San Vicente Foundation, Santa Fe.
Douglas, Charles L.
1969 Analysis of Hairs in Lovelock Cave Coprolites. Archeological and
Paleobotanical Investigations in Lovelock Cave, Nevada. KroeberAnthropological Society Papers, Special Publication No. 2, pp. 1-8.
Fry, Gary F.
1969 Prehistoric Diet at Danger Cave, Utah as Determined by the Analysis of
Coprolites. MA thesis on file at the University of Utah Library.
1970 Prehistoric Human Ecology in Utah based on the Analysis of Coprolites. Ph.D. dissertation on file at the University of Utah Library.
Gould, R. A.
1968 Chipping Stones in the Outback. Natural History, Vol. 77, No. 2, pp.
42-49.
Hall, Henry J.
1972 Diet and Disease at Clyde’s Cavern, Utah: As Revealed by Paleoscatology. MA thesis on file at the University of Utah Library.
Harshberger, J. W.
1896 The Purpose of Ethnobotany. American Antiquarian, Vol. 17, No. 2,
pp. 73-81.
Heizer, Robert F.
1960 Physical Analysis of Habitation Residues. Viking Fund Publication in
Anthropology No. 28, pp. 93-157.
1967 Analysis of Human Coprolites from a Dry Nevada Cave. University of
California Archeological Survey Reports, No. 70, pp. 1-20.
1969 The Anthropology of Prehistoric Great Basin Human Coprolites.
Science and Archeology (2nd ed.), pp. 244-250. London.
Heizer, Robert F. and L. K. Napton
1969 Biological and Cultural Evidence from Prehistoric Human Coprolites.
Science, Vol. 165, No. 3893, pp. 563-568.
Hester, Thomas R.
1973 A Supplementary Note on Flint-Chipping with the Teeth. Newsletter
of Lithic Technology, Vol. 2, No. 1-2, p. 23.

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

27

Jennings, Jesse D.
1957 Danger Cave. University of Utah Anthropological Papers, No. 27.
Jones, Volney H.
1936 The Vegetal Remains of Newt Kash Hollow Shelter. University of
Kentucky Reports in Archeology and Anthropology, Vol. 3, No. 4, pp.
147-165.
Leakey, Mary D.
1971 Excavations in Beds I and II, 1960-1963. Cambridge University Press.
Loud, L. L. and M. R. Harrington
1929 Lovelock Cave. University of California Publications in American
Archeology and Ethnology, Vol. 25, No. 1.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1958 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico.American Philosophical Society Transactions Vol. 44, No. 5.
Martin, Paul S. and F. W. Sharrock
1964 Pollen Analysis of Prehistoric Human Feces: A New Approach to
Ethnobotany. American Antiquity, Vol. 30, No. 2, pp. 168-180.
Moore, John G., Gary F. Fry and E. Englert
1969 Thorny-Headed Worm Infection in North American Prehistoric Man.
Science, Voh 163, pp. 1324-1325.
Napton, Lewis K.
1969 The Lacustrine Subsistence Pattern in the Desert West. Archeological
and Paleobiological Imrestigations in Lovelock Cave, Nevada. Kroeber
Anthropological Society Papers, Special Publication No. 2, pp. 1-98.
Napton, Lewis K. and O. A. Brunetti
1969 Paleoornithology of Love!ock Cave Coprolites. Archeological and
Paleobiological Investigations in Lovelock Cave, Nevada. KroeberAnthropological Society Papers, Special Publications No. 2, pp. 9-18.
Napton, Lewis K. and Gerald Kelso
1969 Preliminary Palynological Analysis of Lovelock Cave Coprolites. Archeological and Paleobiological Investigations in Lovelock Cave,
Nevada. Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers, Special Publications No. 2, pp. 19-27.
Newberry, J. S.
1887 Food and Fiber Plants of the North American Indians.Popular Science
Monthly, Vol. 32, pp. 31-46.
Nissen, Karen
1973 Analysis of Human Coprolites from Bamert Cave, Amador County,
California. The Archeology of Bamert Cave, Area dor County, California (R. F. Heizer and T. R. Hester)., pp. 65-71. University of California
Archaeological Research Facility, Berkeley.
Oser, B. L.
1965 Hawk’s Physiological Chemistry. Fourteenth edition. New York.
Palmer, E.
1878 Plants Used by the Indians of the United States. American Naturalist,
Voh 12, pp. 593-606.
Riskind, David H.
1970 Pollen Analysis of Human’Coprolites from Parida Cave. Archeological
Investigations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Papers of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 19, pp. 89-101.

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Roust, Norman L.
1967 Preliminary Examination of Prehistoric Human Coprolites from Four
Western Nevada Caves. University of California Archeological Survey
Report, No. 70, pp. 49-88.
Samuels, R.
1965 Parasitological Study of Long-Dried Fecal Samples. Society for
American Archeology Memoirs, No. 19, pp. 175-179.
Schoenwetter, James
1974 Pollen Analysis of Prehistoric Human Feces from Salts Cave Kentucky. The Archeology of the Mammoth Cave Area. Academic Press
(in press).
Trevor-Deutsch, Burleigh
n.d. L’Etude des Coprolites. Methods en Prehistoire (H. de Lumley, editor).
Marseille (in press).
Tubbs, D. Y. and R. Berger
1967 The Viability of Pathogens in Ancient Human Coprolites. University
of California Archeological Survey Reports, No. 70, pp. 89-92.
Wakefield, E. F. and S. C. Dellinger
1936 Diet of the Bluff Dwellers of the Ozark Mountains and its Skeletal
Effects. Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 9, pp. 1412-1418.
Watson, Patty Jo and Richard A. Yarnell
1966 Archeological and Paleoethnobotanical Investigations in Salts Cave,
Mammoth Cave National Park, Kentucky. American Antiquity, Vol.
31, No. 6, pp. 842-849.
Webb, W. S. and R. S. Baby
1957 The Adena People, No. 2. Ohio State University Press. Columbus.
Yarnell, Richard A.
1969 Contents of Human Paleofeces. The Prehistory of Salts Cave, Kentucky. Reports of Investigations, No. 16, pp. 41-56. Illinois State
Museum.
Young, B. H.
1910 The Prehistoric Men of Kentucky. Filson Club Publication, No. 25.
Louisville.
Texas A&M University

