201

Fran Jaecques Albrecht

ABSTRACT
The skeletons of at least 12 individuals were excavated from the Dillard Site
(41CO174), a Plains Village site in North Central Texas. Seven individuals
were found in single interments, and five individuals were tbund in one mass
grave. Osteological analysis of these skeletons was undertaken to obtain demographic, bone, and dental pathology information for inclusion in a larger
data base being compiled by Dr. Douglas W. Owsley of the Smithsonian
Institution that encompasses the entire Great Plains area. A second objective
was to examine the osteological evidence for cause of death, with emphasis on
the mass burial of five individuals. The initial archeological assessment that
the mass burial represented a funerary rite of mutiliation and decapitation of
four Of the five people buried in the mass grave could not be confirmed by this
analysis.

INTRODUCTION

The Dillard Site (41 CO 174) is a Late Prehistoric Plains Village occupation
discovered, surveyed, and partially excavated by Dr. Ernest R. Martin in the mid1980s (see Martin, this volume, for a description of the site excavations, burial
context, and associated artifacts). Seven skeletons were found in individual
graves at the site. These included five children and two adult males. Of the seven,
five individuals were buried in partially or fully flexed positions. One was
extended, and one was fragmentary and scattered such that the origina! burial
position could not be determined.
Some of the interments had been disturbed before the present excavation.
Martin (this volume) attributed the displacement of some of the bones of Burial 2
to the later excavation of the pit for Burial 1. Likewise, the badly disturbed Burial
7A seems to have been encountered prehistorically during the digging of a later
grave (Burial 7B).
Five individuals were interred in a common grave. Two dissociated skulls,
from Burials 8 and 9, were initially found, along with some arm bones, seemingly separate from other skeletal material. Soon three more skulls were found in
rapid succession. These, too, gave the impression of isolation from postcrania.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 62 (1994for 1991)

202

Texas Archeological Society
Five relatively intact skeletons were found below the five skulls. The

apparent separation of the skulls from postcranial skeletons, the presence of
avulsed teeth and facial fractures that were perceived to be perimortem (at the
time of death), and the shifting of bony elements(including missing cervical
vertebra), as well as the multiple interment, suggested a catastrophic event that
involved death and mutilation (decapitation) (Martin 1994). Four of the skeletons were fully extended and one, the deepest, was tightly flexed. The bones
were found within a 15-17.5 cm thick layer. This dense commingling and
shifting of skeletal material over the past 600-800 hundred years made the
excavation complex and difficult. Martin (1994) reported only one skull, Burial
10, to be in normal anatomical relationship to the cervical spine.

OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY
Other Late Prehistoric village sites along the Red River contemporaneous with this site are known to have produced mixed sex burials of decapitated skulls. Some of these have been interpreted as ritual burials of trophy
skulls taken in warfare (Powell 1977), or as evidence of domestic funerary
rites. The principal objectives of the osteological analysis of Dillard site skeletons were to determine age and sex, to inventory bones and teeth present (and
missing), and to identify, document, and record dental and bone pathology for
inclusion in the Great Plains data base (see Owsley and Jantz 1989, 1994).
Additionally, an effort was made to identify cuts on bones (particularly on
cervical vertebrae and the base of the skull), to identify evidence of blunt force
perimortem trauma, and to identify dental and bony pathological conditions.
Determination of when and why teeth were lost was important to confirm or
deny the possibility of perimortem loss due to trauma. The presence of cuts,
perimortem trauma, or other signs of mutilation would be strong positive
evidence supporting the hypothesis of ritual, violent death for four of the five
individuals found in the mass burial. Absence of this evidence leaves the cause
of the death and reason for mass burial of these individuals open to further
speculation.

METHODS AND MATERIALS
Criteria used for sex determination of the skeletons included skull, mandible and pelvic morphology, and long bone size and robustness. In general,
male skulls possess larger, more rugged mastoid processes, supra-orbital ridges,
and muscular attachment sites such as the nuchal notch on the occipital bone.
Male mandibles are larger and heavier, they have square chins, and the gonial
angle is typically obtuse. Females have sharper supra-orbital margins; their

Albrecht ~ Dillard Site Osteological Analysis

203

vaults are smaller, and more gracile than those of the male. The chin tends to
be more rounded with a point at the midline (Bass 1987).
The female pelvis is wider and more shallow than the male. The female
innominate has a wide, shallow sciatic notch, a long pubic bone, a ventral arc
on the pubic bone, a wide subpubic angle and concavity, a preauricular sulcus,
and an elevated auricular surface. The male sciatic notch is deep and narrow, as
is the pelvis as a whole. It is heavier and larger than the female pelvis. The pelvis
is the most reliable indicator of sex (Bass 1987; Ubelaker 1978).
Long bones are not as reliable as sex indicators but still contribute to the
confirmation of an opinion. Male bones tend to be larger and more robust than
female bones. Maximum diameters of the head of the femur and the humerus
are larger in the male.
Dental development and eruption were the criteria used to make age determinations of the children when possible. Radiographs of the maxilla and
mandible allowed accurate assessment of the stages of root development. The
dental development stages for four of the five children in the sample are given
in Table 1.
Long bone length and cranial vault suture closure were used when the
dentition was not recovered. Closure and obliteration of long bone epiphyses,
long bone length, dental attrition, cranial suture closure, palatal suture obliteration, spinal osteophytosis, other degenerative disease processes, and pubic symphysis and the sacroiliac auricular surface changes were used as criteria for aging
adult skeletons (Bass 1987; Mann et al. 1987; Moorrees et al. 1963a, 1963b;
McKern and Stewart 1957; Stewart 1979; Suchey et al. 1986).
Scoring of dental pathology included evaluation of the eruption status of
teeth, the existence of enamel defects and hypoplasia, tooth loss and alveolar
resorption, alveolar bone trauma (fracture), dental attrition (wear), pulp exposures, the existence and extent of caries, abscesses, and antemortem tooth loss.
Bone pathology scoring included bone response to infections, wear, trauma, and
nutritional distress such as ectocranial porosity, periostitis, cribra orbitalia,
osteoarthritis, eburnations (polishing of bone due to wear against bone), remodeling, and healing of antemortem fractures.
Radiographs of the left femur and tibia were taken if possible; the right
was substituted when the left was unavailable or unsuitable. Skull, maxilla, and
mandible radiographs were taken as well. Trauma and pathology were documented radiographically and photographically.

OSTEOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF BURIALS
Table 2 summarizes the results of the osteological analysis. A detailed
discussion of each burial follows, beginning with the single burials (see Martin
1994 for additional details).

204

Texas Archeological Society
t.

t~

r.~cr

o’13

o

o

o

z

o_
m

~

=’8
o
m

--!

~

+

<°<°~<°~-~

~a
~

,Q

0

¢)

ol

o

E=

,.4

%2

N~
IQ
A

o

J~
m

~a

¢)

~~
^

,q.
r.

r)~-’d

©

,q.
¢q

~<°~ ~ ~ u ~ ~ J~-d°

c~

~’~

s~
~

A~

~

V~

g

&
"6

&

<

¯~

<

Albrecht -- Dillard Site Osteological Analysis

205

i

°

o

©

o

©

o
o

o

0
.

8

o

o

r.~

~9

%
o
09

0
~0

<

e~

~
09

o

~

o

09

09

0,3

o

206

Texas Archeological Society

~
O8

~

o~

o

o

o

u~

o

u

o
o

o

o

©
o
n~

£

©

o

o

C~

~D
"0

o
"0

o
n~

u~

u~

u~

o
u~

o
II

II

u~

0

o%

A

u%

t"-I

tl
00

O~

0

z

Albrecht ~ Dillard Site Osteological Analysis

207

SINGLE BURIALS
Burial 1 - Unit A
This is the skeleton of a 2.5-3.5 year old. Missing were the hyoid, sternum,
left scapula, left clavicle, right innominate, sacrum, coccyx, both patellae, tali
and calcanei, 10 left ribs and seven right ribs. Extrasutural bones were noted in
the lambdoidal suture.
The deciduous dentition was present and mostly complete with only the
maxillary central incisors having been lost postmortem. Both the maxilla and
the mandible were present, and dental radiographs allowed comfortable assessment of the age of this child.
No sex determination could be made because of the child’s young age.
Slight cribra orbitalia, ectocranial porosis, and enamel hypoplasia of the left
mandibular canine indicate some nutritional deficiency. No antemortem or
perimortem trauma was evident.
Burial 2 - Unit A
This skeleton of a 4.5-5.5 year old was mostly complete. The right palatine,
hyoid, sternum, coccyx, both patellae, right fibula, 1 lth and 12th right ribs,
and third, fourth, and fifth lumbar vertebrae were missing.
Enough deciduous dentition was present to allow for age estimation, even
though there was some postmortem tooth loss. All four permanent first molars
were partially erupted, but none of the second molars had begun eruption.
Interproximal root caries was noted on five deciduous teeth. The deciduous teeth showed fairly heavy attrition. No trauma or pathology other than the
dental caries was present.
No estimate of sex was attempted due to the skeleton’s age.
Burial 3 - Unit A
This well-preserved male skeleton was judged to be 55-59 years of age
at death. Most bones were present, and only the hyoid, manubrium, coccyx,
both patellae, and first cervical vertebra were missing.
Age was determined by visual examination of the pelvis, long bones, and
skull. The cranial vault sutures were partially obliterated. Dental attrition was
severe and extensive. All epiphyses were closed. The ribs showed significant
sternal end cupping, macroporosity was evident in the auricular area of the
ilium, and thinning of the iliac was also noted. The condition of the pubic
symphysis would suggest a younger age, but the overall condition of the
skeleton is clearly that of an older individual (Suchey et al. 1986).
The skull was rugged, with clearly defined supraorbital ridges and muscle
marking. Bone size and ruggedness, pelvis, skull, and mandibular morphology
were all consistent with that of an older adult male.

208

Texas Archeological Society

Most permanent teeth were present. The maxillary third molar was lost
antemortem and showed alveolar bone resorption. The maxillary left lateral
incisor and right mandibular central incisor were lost postmortem. The remaining
teeth were worn; five were without enamel. Three teeth showed carious lesions
with more than one half of the crown surface destroyed. Nine teeth had alveolar
abscesses, eight with pulp chamber exposure due to attrition. The left maxillary
third molar had an enamel pearl.
The temporomandibular joints had been affected by osteophytes, porosity,
and erosion. The vertebral column and right acetabulum, left scapula, left and
fight humeri, left radius, left ulna, left femur, left and fight tibiae, and both
calcanei displayed mild osteophytic pathology with some joint surface porosity.
The right scapula, right clavicle, and four fibs showed evidence of old
healed fractures. The scapula and three ribs developed pseudoarthroses (healing
without union), and the remaining fib healed normally. The nasal bone and left
maxilla also displayed healed fractures. Rodent gnawing was seen on the fight
humerus and ulna. No evidence of perimortem trauma was found.

Burial 4 - Unit A
This skeleton is that of a child estimated to be between 1.5 and 2.5 years
old. The presence of the complete skull and mandible facilitated aging by allowing examination of tooth calcification and eruption. The hyoid, sternum, both
scapulae, both innominates, the sacrum, coccyx, both patellae, and calcanei are
missing, as well as one right fib, the seventh, 1 lth, and 12th cervical vertebrae.
The right and left maxillary deciduous central and lateral incisors had been
lost after death. All four deciduous second molars were unerupted as were the
permanent first molars.
No sex determination was possible on this young child. No evidence of
pathology or trauma was evident.

Burial 5 - Unit A
This is the virtually complete skeleton of a male estimated to be over 60
years of age. Only the hyoid and coccyx bones are missing.
This male’s age was determined by visual examination of the skull, long
bones, vertebra, and pelvis. All epiphyses are closed and obliterated. The
ectocranial and endocranial vault sutures are closed with only traces of the
coronal and sagittal sutures in evidence. The basilar synchondrosis is closed.
There is thinning of the right parietal bone, which affirms an age estimate of over
60 years (Kerley 1970). Marginal lipping, macroporosity, and increased irregularity of the auricular area of the ilium are also seen.
The large, heavy skull has a well developed nuchal crest, heavy large
mastoid processes, pronounced supraorbital ridges, and blunt supraorbital

Albrecht ~ Dillard Site Osteological Analysis

209

margins. The mandible has a squared symphysis and wide ascending rami. These
features are all consistent with male morphology. The pelvis shows classic male
features. It is large, narrow, and deep, and has a very narrow sciatic notch. The
pubic bones did not survive, but other morphology is convincingly male.
Both parietals, the frontal, and the occipital bones are affected with
ectocranial porosis. Vertebral lipping (osteophytes) is widespread, with the greatest involvement of the lower cervical vertebra (C4-C7) and lower thoracic (T9)
inferiorly through the lumbars and the sacrum. There is periostitis on the visceral
side of one left rib. The weight of the femur is very light, suggesting this
individual suffered from osteoporosis.
Advanced dental attrition is evident with the crowns markedly worn. The
maxilla is missing the right canine, which was lost postmortem. Both right and
left second and third molar sockets show bone resorption, which indicates
antemortem tooth loss. Both mandibular central incisors, the left first and second
premolars, and the first permanent molar, were lost antemortem. The right lateral
incisor, and the right and left canines, were lost postmortem. All other teeth were
present in their sockets. Extensive caries affected three teeth, causing pulp
exposure in two of them. Pulp exposure in three other teeth occurred because of
marked attrition. All the maxillary molars had abscesses. They were probably
responsible for the loss of all but the first molar. Mandibular abscesses were seen
in both central incisors, the left second incisor, the left canine, the left second
premolar, and the left first and second molars. Four of these teeth were missing
because of the abscesses. No evidence of perimortem trauma was seen.

Burial 6
This skeleton was identified by Martin (1994) in the field, but it was not
excavated.

Burial 7A - Unit B
This is the incomplete skeleton of a child estimated to be between 6.5 and
7.5 years old. No sex determination was attempted because of the young age of
the child.
Missing elements of the skull include the left zygoma, left maxilla, left and
right palatine, and the hyoid. Missing postcranial elements include the sternum,
both scapulae, both clavicles, both patellae, the coccyx, left humerus, both radii,
both ulnae, the right femur, 10 fight and left fibs, first and seventh cervical
vertebrae, the entire thoracic spine, and the third lumbar vertebra.
A separate bag of maxillary teeth found packed with the skeleton was
determined to belong with Burial 7A, and they provided additional data with
which to determine age. The deciduous central and lateral incisors of both the
maxilla and mandible were exfoliated while the child was living. The maxillary

210

Texas Archeological Society

deciduous left canine may also have been lost in this manner. The mandibular
deciduous right canine and permanent central incisor were lost postmortem. The
maxillary permanent central and lateral incisors had erupted, but all other maxillary permanent teeth were unerupted. The mandible retained the deciduous left
canine, and both deciduous first and second molars. The permanent central and
lateral incisors had erupted but the left central was lost postmortem.
Caries was found interproximally (between the teeth) and on the root of the
deciduous fight and left first molars. One occlusal pit caries was found on the
mandibular permanent fight first molar.
Very slight ectocranial porosis was found on the occipital bone, but was so
insignificant that it was not coded for this study. No other pathology or trauma
was detected for Burial 7A.

Burial 7B - Unit B

This is the skeleton of a child estimated to be between 3.5 and 4.5 years of
age at death. It was found with burial 7A after the excavation of the mass burial
of individuals 8-12 was completed. Since it was a single interment, it is included
here (It is referred to as Burial 13 by Martin [1994]).
Postcrania present included the body of the sternum, part of the left scapula,
parts of both radii, an ulnar fragment, a fragmentary right femur and an almost
complete left femur, right and left tibiae, and the left fibula. No fibs, vertebrae, or
sacrum were included.
Due to the fragmentary condition of this skeleton and absence of any facial
material, the estimated age was based on estimated femur length (Ubelaker
1978). No estimation of sex was attempted. There was rodent gnawing on the left
femur diaphysis. No other pathology or trauma was detected.

MASS BURIAL
Burial 8 - Unit B
The skull of this 16-20 year old female was the first encountered during the
excavation of the mass burial. It was not found in anatomical position with the
postcrania. The arms were positioned between this skull and that of Burial 9 and
were among the first bones found. Packed with the carpals of this skeleton were
also found the hand bones of at least two other individuals. These were those of
an older male and of a younger child. A 6 to 10 year old sternal body and first
metatarsal were also found commingled with this skeleton. A right mandibular
second premolar was found as well, but it could not be positively identified as
belonging to this individual. The mandible, hyoid, sternum, coccyx, and the first,
second, and third cervical vertebrae for Burial 8 were not recovered.

Albrecht -- Dillard Site Osteological Analysis

211

Aging of this skeleton was determined both by dentition and epiphyseat
state. The maxillary third molars were root complete, although not erupted. The
proximal humeral head and ulnar epiphyses were in the terminal stages of
closure, as was the iliac crest. Ischial epiphyses were nearly complete, except the
anterior portion.
The determination of sex of Burial 8 was based mainly on the morphology
of the pelvis and skull. The cranial vault was smooth, gracile, and consistent with
that of a female. The pelvis was wide, shallow and possessed a wide sciatic
notch.
There was Slight, localized ectocranial porosis noted on the occipital bone,
the parietals, and the frontal bone. No other pathology or trauma was evidenced,
and no cuts were found on the crania or postcrania.
Anterior teeth were missing due to postmortem loss, not trauma. The right
mandibular second premolar found with this skeleton had been gnawed on by
rodents.

Burial 9 - Unit B

This is a male skeleton estimated to be 30-34 years of age at death. The
skull was the second uncovered during the excavation and was the highest within
the grave. The skeleton was, however, one of the last two exhumed because it
was below Burials 8, 10, and 11. The hyoid, coccyx, three right and three left
ribs, and the first cervical vertebra are missing for this individual.
Age estimation was based on the condition of epiphyseal closure and the
pelvic bones. The sacrum is fused and there is no buildup in the postauricular
area of the pelvis. The pubic symphysis suggests an age of 30 to 34 years.
Sex determination was based on skull and pelvic morphology. The skull
displays prominent supraorbital ridges, nuchal notch and mastoids, and the mandible is large and heavy. The pelvis is typically male: large with a narrow sciatic
notch and no buildup of the post-auricular area.
The maxillary central incisors, the mandibular central and lateral incisors,
left canine, and left second premolar were lost postmortem. All other teeth are
present and in good condition with the exception of a large carious lesion in the
impacted mandibular left third molar. None of the teeth are abscessed, and
enamel wear is not excessive for this group.
Slight osteoarthritis lipping is noted on both calcanei and tali, but otherwise
no evidence is apparent that this individual had arthritis. A remnant of the
metopic suture is present on the anterior and inferior aspect of the frontal bone.
There is a small circular (8 x 9 mm) healed depression fracture in the middle
of the left parietal. No other trauma is seen, and with the exception of slight
arthritis seen on the heel and ankle bones, no pathologies were noted. The
acquisition of the V-shaped cleft in the left clavicle was determined not to be
perimortem but rather postmortem in nature.

212

Texas Archeological Society

No cuts were found on this skeleton. Rodent gnawing was observed on the
distal linea aspera of the right femur.

Burial 10 - Unit B
This skeleton of a 27 to 34 year old male was nearly complete. It was
missing only the coccyx, one rib from each side, one thoracic vertebra, and the
first and second cervical vertebrae. There were 14 thoracic vertebrae packed with
this skeleton, two of which could not be articulated. Although the ribs were
badly fragmented, the possibility of a 13th rib could not be ruled out. An extra
right clavicle found packed with Burial 8 was determined to belong to this skeleton.
Burial 10’s age was determined by recent epiphyseal fusing of the medial
clavicle and iliac crest; the sacrum is also fused. The development of the symphysis pubis supports an estimate of 27-34 years of age.
Sex determination was based on skull and pelvic morphology and long bone
size and ruggedness. The supraorbital ridges, mastoids, mandibular size and
shape, and the nuchal notch, all confirm maleness. The pelvis had the classic
male shape with a narrow sciatic notch.
Burial 10 retained all its permanent teeth. Caries were seen on the left
maxillary third molar and both mandibular third molars. The lateral maxillary
incisors were peg shaped (barrel). The third molars showed little attrition; no
abscessing was seen.
There is no arthritis of the spine and the sacroiliac joint is smooth. Widespread active ectocranial porosis was seen on the frontal bone, both parietals, and
the occiput. Osteochondritis dissecans (localized necrosis, followed by degenerative changes in the articular cartilage) was found on the medial condyle of the left
distal femur (Loveland et al. 1984).
No cuts, no evidence of trauma, and no other pathology were seen on this
skeleton.

Burial 11 - Unit B
This is a female skeleton judged to be 17-21 years of age at death. The
hyoid, right scapula, coccyx, both patellae, left humerus, two left ribs and one
right rib, and the second through sixth cervical vertebrae, were missing.
The age estimation was based on the development and condition of the teeth
and the progression of epiphyseal closure. The third molars were root complete
and the crowns show wear. The palatine incisive foramen is gone, the ilium is
fusing, and the proximal femur is fused. The clavicular epiphysis is not fused and
the proximal humerus has not reached final closure stage.
Sex determination was based on the small, gracile, smooth skull. The
mastoids were small and delicate and there was no significant nuchal notch. The

Albrecht -- DiUard Site Osteological Analysis

213

frontal bone had no supraorbital ridges. The pelvis did have a very deep narrow
sciatic notch, but other postcrania were consistent with the female designation.
There was postmortem tooth loss of the maxillary right central and lateral
incisors, right first and second premolars, the left canine, and both premolars.
The symphyseal portion of the mandible was missing, but only the right central
incisor, the left central and lateral incisors, the canine, and the first premolar
were lost. Caries was present in the maxillary third molar, the mandibular right
first molar, and all three left molars; no abscesses were found.
There is a slight localized ectocranial porosis on the occipital bone. Both
tibiae show moderate but well-healed periostitis. X-rays demonstrated increased
cortical thickness in these bones. The distal right humerus has a billowy, very
slightly swollen quality that seems atypical. The atlas (first cervical vertebra)
was discovered in the laboratory while cleaning the muddy clay of the burial pit
from the skull. It was displaced forward of the foramen magnum. No cuts or
evidence of trauma were found.

Burial 12 - Unit B

This skeleton of a 35 to 44 year old female was found in a flexed, prone
position under the other four individuals in this grave (the others were all
extended). The hyoid, coccyx, left clavicle, left innominate, left femur, the first,
1 lth and 12th ribs bilaterally, and the first through fifth cervical vertebrae, were
all missing.
The age estimate was based on visual examination of the skeleton. All
epiphyses were closed and obliterated. Dental attrition due to abrasion was
significant. The symphysis pubis suggests an middle aged to older female.
Sex was determined by visual examination of the skull, pelvis, and long
bones. The skull had no supraorbital ridges, small mastoids, sharp supraorbital
margins, no nuchal notch, and the gonial angle of the mandible was pulled
inwardly. This female had probably had children since there was a large
preauricular sulcus on the pelvis and parturition pits on the dorsal surface of the
pubis (Suchey et al. 1979). There was a ventral arc on the pubic bone, a wide
shallow sciatic notch, and an elevated sacro-iliac articulation. The humeri had
septal apertures which tend support to the determination of female gender
(Trotter 1934).
With the exception of a congenitally missing right third molar, all
mandibular teeth were present. Both maxillary central incisors were lost
postmortem as was the right maxillary canine. Caries were evident on both
maxillary first molars and the right second molar. On the mandible, only the right
second molar was carious. The left maxillary first molar also suffered pulp
exposure and alveolar abscess. The incisors were shovel shaped.
Porosity is seen on both temporal mandibular joint surfaces, and
ectocranially on the parietals and occiput. Osteophytes and porosity are found on

214

Texas Archeological Society

cervical, thoracic, and lumbar vertebra. One lumbar vertebra was found to be
eburnated on an articular facet. Several of the vertebra had Schmorl’s depressions.
Distal femoral cortical excavation (Mann and Murphy 1990) is seen on the
medial side of the posterior surface of the right femur.
No evidence of perimortem trauma was seen.
Included with the skeletons were bones that could not be assigned to any of
the twelve analyzed individuals. Since space considerations prohibited laying out
all the burials at once, it is conceivable that some matches exist that were not
recognized. Some, however, are clearly not of the age groups represented in this
sample from the Dillard site and some are duplicates of bones already inventoried. The extraneous bones are likely from disturbances of other interments in the
cemetery at the site.

DISCUSSION
The seven single burials included two old adult males and five children. The
two old males, Burials 3 and 5, suffered extensive dental disease and
osteoarthritis. There is no evidence of perimortem trauma that would suggest a
violent cause of death. More likely, they grew old, and died of natural causes.
Neither did the five children show signs of trauma that would suggest violent death. Rather, slight ectocranial porosis, cribra orbitalis, heavy dental attrition, caries, and enamel hypoplasia are seen, suggesting stress and possible
nutritional deficiencies. It is likely that these children succumbed to childhood
diseases.
In the mass burial, two men in their 30s, two very young women in their late
teens or early 20s, and an older woman in her 40s were found together. Although
the older woman had significant dental attrition, she had kept her teeth and had
only one abscess. She had some arthritis, but it was not extensive or severe. A
cortical excavation on her distal right femur was seen at a muscle insertion site.
The older of the young women had evidence of healed periostitis. One of the men
had a small healed depressed skull fracture. Osteochondritis dissecans was seen
on the distal left femur of the younger male. This is often seen clinically, but
rarely reported in bioarcheological literature (Loveland et al. 1984).
Six of the 12 skeletons showed mild ectocranial porosis. Eight of the 12
were found to have caries. Only one adult had none, and one individual (Burial
7B) had no dentition to examine. The old men had extremely worn, carious,
abscessed teeth. This pattern reflects the diet of these people, and suggests a high
carbohydrate intake as well as food processing techniques that introduced considerable grit into the diet.
Although the state of preservation of the bones was remarkable, an unexplainable loss of skeletal elements was common. This loss was seen in both the
individual interments and in the group grave.

Albrecht ~ Dillard Site Osteological Analysis

215

CONCLUSION
When decapitations and mutilations occur there usually is good osteological
evidence of its occurrence. Cuts are found on the ascending ramus of the mandible, around the foramen magnum, and on the cervical vertebra, usually the first
and second (Willey 1991). Dismemberment of the arms would be expected to
leave some trace of the act on either the humeral head, around or in the glenoid
cavity, and/or on the acromion or coracoid processes of the scapula. Turner
(1983) believes that perimortem breakage, cutmarks, and burning are fundamental properties of bone altered by human intent. None of these properties were
found in this sample from the Dillard site.
The fact that some skulls and arms were displaced so far from their normal
anatomical position is not easy to explain. Perhaps the cause of the displacements
and disturbances can be explained by natural postmortem taphonomic processes.
Rodent gnawing was detected on four bones from three burials, and on one tooth
from a different burial. Two of these burials were within the mass grave. This
evidence that there was rodent activity within the mass grave, and with some of
the individual graves, suggests animal transportation of the bones. Field tests
have shown that buried bones do migrate underground when disturbances as
slight as treading occur on the surface (Bielenstein 1990). Other taphonomic
processes include: settling of the backfill of the burials as soft tissue decay
progresses, migration of the bones due to surface disturbance, or differential
bone attrition within the graves possibly due to variations in microclimate.
Of the 12 recognized burials, only three had complete cervical spines when
examined. Of those three, only one was an adult, and all of them were interred
in single burials. Not one individual in the mass burial had a complete cervical
spine. Even Burial 10, ostensibly the unmutilated important person (Martin
1994), whose head was thought to have been articulated with his cervical spine,
was missing both the first and second cervical vertebrae. The mandible from
Burial 8 was never located. A portion of the mandible from Burial 7 was "found
beneath the skull; the remaining two-thirds was missing" (Martin 1994:136).
Not surprisingly, no cocci were found in any of the graves and only one
horn of one hyoid was found. Examples of other missing bones include 61
ribs (not counting the fragmentary child in Burial 7B), 10 patellae, and four
clavicles. Evidence such as this could also suggest continuing disturbances of
old graves as new burial pits were dug. The bones left over came from somewhere else within the cemetery. There was no evidence of any graves immediately above the mass grave. Burials 7A and 7B were close on one side and
Burial 2 was close on the other, but the leftover bones could not be matched
to any of these graves.
The age distribution of the skeletons in the graves excavated so far at the
Dillard Site is skewed. The young and the old are represented in single grave
burials. Those in the middle age range are found in the mass burial. That
something catastrophic happened at the Dillard site long ago is possible. The

216

Texas Archeological Society

circumstances that would cause a middle-aged woman, two very young women,
and two men in the prime of their lives to die together and be buried together is
open for further speculation. However, there is no osteological evidence that
confirms either sacrifice, mutilation, or dismemberment.

REFERENCES CITED
Bass, W. M.
1987

Human Osteology: A Laboratory and Field Manual. Third Edition. Missouri
Archaeological Society, Columbia.

Bielenstein, D. E. M.
1990
Forensic Taphonomy: Definitions and Applications to Forensic Anthropology and Paleoanthropology. Master’s thesis, The George Washington University, Washington, D.C.
Kerley, E. R.
1970
Estimation of Skeletal Age: After About Age 30. In: Personal Identification
in Mass Disasters, edited by T. D. Stewart. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.
Loveland, C. J., J. B. Gregg, and W. M. Bass
1984
Osteochrondritis Dissecans from the Great Plains of North America. Plains
Anthropologist 29( 105):239-246.
Mann, R. W. and S. P. Murphy
1990

Regional Atlas of Bone Disease: A Guide to Pathologic and Normal Variation in the Human Skeleton. Charles C. Thomas, Inc., Springfield, Illinois.

Mann, R. W., S. A. Symes, and W. M. Bass
1987
Maxillary suture obliteration: Aging the human skeleton based on intact or
fragmentary maxilla. Journal of Forensic Sciences 32:148-157.
Martin, E. R.
1994
The Dillard Site: A Late Prehistoric Plains Village Site in Cooke County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 62:105-200.
McKern, T. and T. D. Stewart
Skeletal Age Changes in Young American Males. Technical Report EP-45,
1957
Headquarters Quartermaster Research and Development Command, Natick,
Massachusetts.

Moorrees, C. F. A., E. A. Fanning, and E. I. Hunt
1963a Age Variation of Formation Changes of Ten Permanent Teeth. Journal of
Dental Research 42:1490-1502.

Albrecht -- Dillard Site Osteological Analysis
1963b

217

Formation and Resorption of Three Deciduous Teeth in Children. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 21:205-213.

Owsley, D. W. and R. L. Jantz
1989
A Systematic Approach to the Skeletal Biology of the Southern Plains. In:
From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great
Plains, by J. L. Hofman, R. L. Brooks, J. S. Hays, D. W. Owsley, R. L. Jantz,
M. K. Marks, and M. H. Manhein, pp. 137-156. Research Series No. 35.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Owsley, D. W. and R. L. Jantz (editors)
1994

Skeletal Biology in the Great Plains: Migration, Warfare, Health, and Subsistence. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Powell, M. L.
1977

Prehistoric Ritual Skull Burials at the Crenshaw Site (3MI6), Southwest
Arkansas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 48:111 - 1 l 8.

Stewart, T. D.
Essentials’ of Forensic Anthropology, Especially as Developed in the United
1979
States. Charles C. Thomas, Inc., Springfield, Illinois.

Suchey, J. M., D. V. Wisely, R. F. Green, and T. T. Noguchi
Analysis of Dorsal Pitting in the Os Pubis in an Extensive Sample of Modern
1979
American Females. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 51:517-540.
Suchey, J. M., D. V. Wisely, and D. Katz
1986

Evaluation of the Todd and McKern-Stewart Methods for Aging the Male Os
Pubis. In: Forensic Osteology, edited by K. J. Reichs. Charles C. Thomas,
Inc., Springfield, Illinois.

Trotter, M.
1934

Septal Apertures in the Humerus of American Whites and Negroes. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 19:2 l 3-227.

Turner, C. G.
1983
Taphonomic Reconstructions of Human Violence and Cannibalism Based on
Mass Burials in the American Southwest. In: Carnivores, Human Scavengers
and Predators: A Question of Bone Technology, edited by G. M. LeMoine
and A. S. MacEachern. Proceedings of the !5th Annual Conference
(Chacmool) of the Archaeological Association, University of Calgary.
Ubelaker, D. H.
1978
Human Skeletal Remains. Taraxacum, Washington, D.C.
Willey, P.
1991

Prehistoric Warfare on the Great Plains. Garland Publishing, Inc., New York
and London.

