65

The Live Oak Hole Complex: Plains Indian Art and
Occupation in the Lower Pecos River Region
Solveig A. Turpin and Leland C. Bement

ABSTRACT
A search for historic Indian occupation sites in the Lower Pecos River
Region, centered on demonstrably postcontact pictographs, resulted in the recording of several circular stone features near Live Oak Hole, where a rock art
panel was painted between A.D. 1700 and 1775. Site 41VV828 was surveyed,
surface collected, and mapped with computer-aided photographics. One intact
feature, a possible Plains Indian stone ring, was excavated. Two artifacts of
equivalent age, a Guerrero arrowpoint and a ceramic fragment, were exposed
on the surface of the site and cannot be related to any of the stone features or the
pictograph panel. The sparsity of artifactual material may be attributable to the
mobility of the horse nomads of this era and to severe erosion of the shallow
site deposits.
INTRODUCTION

Most of archeological research in the Lower Pecos River Region has concentrated on Archaic-age material culture preserved in dry rock shelter deposits
and in the spectacular pictographic sequence. The total evidence for historic
Indian occupation of this region consists of one rockshelter reported by Kirkland
(1942), scattered metal arrowpoints (Parsons 1962; files of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory), scanty ethnohistoric references (Griffen 1969,
Daniel 1955), and 15 rock art panels (Turpin 1989) (Figure 1). The need for
more detailed studies of the protohistoric and historic periods became apparent
during a recent synthesis of the historic pictographs (Turpin 1989). On the
premise that the best place to search for camp sites of this age was in the vicinity
of the postcontact pictographs, in 1986 the area surrounding several known
historic panels was surveyed. At Live Oak Hole, 41VV169, a series of sites
consisting of stone circles--features usually identified as tipi rings on the
Great Plains--was recorded.
In addition to the well-known pictograph (Jackson 1938, Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967, Grieder 1966), Graham and Davis (1958) had recorded one
burned rock midden, 41VV170, slightly upstream from the pictograph site.
Newly recorded were 41 VV827, comprising two stone circles and a burned rock
midden above the pictograph; 41VV828, comprising four stone circles, a cairn,
and extensive burned rock middens across the creek; and 41VV844, disturbed
stone features and a dense lithic scatter above 41VV170, upstream and across a
small tributary from the pictograph (Figure 2). The recovery of one small

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (1988)

66

Texas Archeological Society

) Pandale

Comstock
Canyon Park

Del Rio

0

5

I0

20

miles

Figure 1. Map of the Lower Pecos River Region of Texas.

fragment of plain brown pottery from one stone circle at 41VV828 confirmed
the late date of at least one component at that site. Another stone circle at this
site was substantially intact and retained sediments sufficient to have buried
artifactual material within and adjacent to the ring. This feature seemed to hold
potential for the recovery of more evidence of a historic period occupation and
was selected for excavation.

Turpin and Bement-- Live Oak Hole Complex

67

1

E

E
"

u~

n

0
0

o

"N
o

E
o
o
o

©
o
o~

,..1
o

o

e4

\
\

68

Texas Archeological Society
THE LIVE OAK HOLE SITE COMPLEX

Live Oak Hole is a permanent tinaja on a long, meandering tributary of the
Rio Grande east of the mouth of the Pecos River. The tinaja abuts the limestone
bluff on the outside of a horseshoe bend in the creek. Three entrenched tributaries (L1, L2, and L3) cut through the bluff on the left bank (Figure 2). A smaller
water hole is contained within the uppermost (L1) tributary. The right bank
stairsteps down from a rounded hilltop, creating level benches above the stream.
The surrounding countryside is rolling hills cut by relatively gentle drainageways that eventually entrench nearer the Rio Grande.
Soils in this area are stony residual sediments, deflated and eroded to
bedrock on the level benches. The creek bottom is mobile gravel, washed and
scoured by recurrent discharge. The slopes are rocky scree gravels. The vegetation is typical desert scrub, its growth intensified by abnormally abundant recent
rainfall.
41VV169, Live Oak Hole
A shallow overhang, protected by roof fall across the front, lies under the
left bank at a corner formed by the confluence of the L1 tributary and the creek
(Figure 2). The cultural deposits in the shelter are eroded and vandalized.
Bedrock mortars, burned rock, flint flakes, mussel shell, a large metate, and,
above all, the pictographs testify to former occupation of the shelter.
The Pictograph at Live Oak Hole
The pictograph at Live Oak Hole, 41VV169, has been known to students of
Lower Pecos rock art for 50 years (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:Plate 52,
Jackson 1938:Site 195, Figure 195; Graham and Davis 1958, Grieder 1966:34),
but its historic importance has been overlooked. All previous descriptions remark about the length of the serpentine line that traverses the shelter wall
~igure 3); more than 13 meters (44 feet) long, this undulating red streamer
originates in three concentric circles and ends in a trident. Above and below are
monochromatic deer and geometric designs, and next to the concentric circles
stands a small, frontally posed stick figure. All of these designs are roughly of
the same soft red hue and are probably contemporaneous. Superimposed on the
small stick figure is a larger, darker red rectangular-bodied male figure with
pronounced genitals and half-painted face. The frontal half of a horned animal-bison or cow faces the larger man. Central in the shelter, above the undulating
line, is a triangular-bodied bison with horns, beard, and hooks for hooves
painted in the same dark red. Below, on the downstream corner of the shelter
wall, are two bright red miniature figures. One stands facing the viewer; the
other, in profile astride a horse, carries a lance that is longer than his steed.
The serpentine line, deer, and smaller stick human are not easily dated, but
they would not be out of place in an Archaic context. The small, square geometric design could belong to the Bold Line Geometric style, estimated to be of Late

Turpin ~ Live Oak Hole Complex

69

>

O

~

°~

70

Texas Archeological Society

Prehistoric age (Turpin 1986). The small horse and rider are undoubtedly historic; their companion figure is probably of the same age. The triangular bison
and the largest human figure are stylistically akin to iconography characteristic
of the Northern Plains between A.D.1700 and 1775 (Keyser 1987). Static, rectangular bodied figures are attributed to the late prehistoric Ceremonial style,
dated from A.D. 1000 to 1700, and the protohistoric transition to the Early
Biographic style between A.D. 1625 and 1775 (Keyser 1987). The rectangular
male and triangular bison of Live Oak Hole bear a strong resemblance to figures
at North Cave Hills in South Dakota (Keyser 1987:Figure 3f).
The advent of the Plains Indians in the Lower Pecos Region presumably
transpired after the Great Pueblo revolt of 1680. By 1729, Berroter~in, who was
leading a punitive and exploratory mission to the Lower Pecos Region, commented that the area was under the domination of Apache, Jumanos, and Pelones, all fierce and hostile tribes (Weddle 1968:200). The ethnohistory and the
stylistic similarities, therefore, place the pictograph at Live Oak Hole within the
eighteenth century, probably before 1775. Although the Apache were in control
of the area at this time, neither the pictograph panel nor any of the surrounding
sites can be attributed firmly to any specific ethnic group. The recognition of the
historic age of these human and animal figures at Live Oak Hole, however, led
to our intensive survey of the surrounding area under the assumption that the
best place to start searching for historic period camps was in the vicinity of their
pictograph sites.
41VV170, Live Oak Midden
Graham and Davis (1958) recorded one burned rock midden in the floor of
the canyon above the mouth of the L1 tributary that marks the upper end of
41VV169, the pictograph shelter. The plotting of the site location in the TARL
files was corrected, but little could be added to their description. The midden is
scoured by each discharge down the creek and is scattered into the creek bed, so
it no longer has any distinctive morphology. This burned rock accumulation lies
slightly upstream and below 41VV844 (Figure 2).
41VV844, Robertson Camp
On the flat rim of the L1 tributary, above the smaller tinaja and 41VV170
and across from the pictograph shelter, a large site composed of several highly
disturbed rock features overlooks the creek from the left bank (Figure 2). A
rough ranch road, leading to a hunting blind, ends on the site. The placement of
the blind, which, incidentally, is anchored by large blocks borrowed from the
features, testifies to the broad view of the surrounding countryside commanded
by the site. A dense lithic scatter, exposed on the barren limestone, included
burned rock, flakes, biface fragments, and several projectile points. Langtry,
Shumla, Ensor, Frio, and Figueroa dart points and four arrowpoints of differing
morphology reflect occupation from Middle Archaic to Late Prehistoric or
historic times, with the more recent types predominating.

Turpin m Live Oak Hole Complex

71

41VV827, Live Oak Camp
On the bluff, between the L1 and L2 tributaries and above the pictograph
shelter, are two highly disturbed stone rings, a small burned rock scatter, and
moderately dense lithic debris, mostly near the burned rock scatter. At present,
the rock features are two abutting circular piles of angular blocks, with a larger
pile paralleling the rim of the canyon. The dispersed midden is some 10 meters
northwest of the stone features. Two Ensor points were found during the survey
on the western periphery of the rings, midway between them and the midden,
and one Montell point was recorded on the slope near the burned rock scatter.
41VV828, The Tonto Site

The Tonto site, 41VV828, lies on the right creek bank, opposite the water
hole and pictograph. On initial survey, four relatively intact stone rings, a cairn,
and dense lithic debris on the second bench above the creek met expectations for
the layout of a historic aboriginal campsite. Temporal diagnostics recorded
during the survey included Uvalde and Late Archaic dart points, three arrowpoint fragments, and one small fragment of plain brown pottery associated with
one of the rings.
Site Features
Five stone features, a historic debris area, and a series of burned rock
middens were mapped at 41VV828 (Figure 2). A long, linear concentration of
burned rock, fire-darkened soil, and flint debris parallels the creek at the base of
the slope opposite the permanent water hole in the canyon bottom. This lowlying, densely occupied area has been frequently subjected to high water flooding and erosion. The rich soil and high moisture content have promoted the
growth of dense, thorny brush, so a veritable scrub thicket extends some 80
meters along this inside meander of the creek. A second burned rock concentration lies on the second bench above the creek at the west end of the site.
Projectile point styles probably related to the midden areas include Uvalde,
Langtry, Shumla, Marshall, and Ensor, covering the entire span of the Archaic
Period.
A cluster of historic trash--glass, ceramics, and metal scraps--lies opposite
the water hole on the first bench above the creek bed. Nothing of singular merit
or great antiquity was noted. Such debris concentrations are common in these
settings, since they were favored camping locations for shepherds, hunters, and
ranch workers.
The five aboriginal features of possible Late Prehistoric to Historic age are
four complete or partial rings of stone and one rectangular cairn. All lie on the
second bench above the creek on deflated and eroded surfaces.

72

Texas Archeological Society

Feature E
Feature E--the cairn--consists of 17 large and about a dozen smaller rocks
in a pile 60 cm tall, 1.3 meters on the north-south axis, and 1 meter on the eastwest axis. The longer dimension can be attributed to collapse of a once-taller
pile. The function of this cairn is problematical, but its antiquity is apparent in
the dense lichen growth and discoloration of the exposed surfaces.
FeatureD
Two contiguous rock ovals lie side by side on the west end of the second
bench above the creek. One has eroded to bedrock; the other is filled with
sediments that support thorny scrub. The original configuration of the structures
is not easily discerned, but this is the area of densest lithic debitage, perhaps
because of its proximity to a burned rock midden. A few burned rocks are
trapped against the west edge of the feature.
Feature C
Two parallel lines of rock are aligned roughly north and south. C-east is a
pile, consisting of 22 rocks, 3.2 meters long and 1.5 meters wide. C-west,
separated from C-east by a gap 1.3 meters wide, is 1.9 meters long and 1.3
meters wide. Scattered blocks on the south end suggest that this feature was
originally an oval ring. The one fragment of plain brownware found during site
recording was next to a block in C-west.
Feature B

A semicircle of approximately 55 contiguous rocks from 2 to 5 blocks thick
lies on exposed bedrock 50 meters east of Feature C. The largest component
block measures 35 by 30 by 14 cm. The interior diameter of this crescentic
feature is 2.6 meters; the exterior 3.8 meters. The horseshoe opens 50 degrees
west of north. Minimal sediment is entrapped within the rock pile. Dense lichen
growth and in situ cracking of blocks testify to considerable antiquity for this
feature.
Feature A
The most intact ring, Feature A, is on the eastern edge of the upper site area,
50 meters east of Feature B (Figure 2). A double ring of 71 large blocks forms a
circle 2.5 meters in diameter (Figure 4). The component blocks are massive, the
largest measuring 94 cm along its longest dimension. A few blocks have been
displaced into the interior of the ring. An opening, 50 cm wide, faces south. The
apparent integrity of the stone structure and the sediments trapped within suggested that excavation might confirm the estimated historic age of this feature.
Between February 12 and 14, Michael W. Davis, David G. Robinson and Jeff
Turpin joined Bement and Turpin to excavate the interior of Feature A.

Turpin ~ Live Oak Hole Complex

73

A

B
Figure 4. Plan (A) and photograph (B) of stone ring, Feature A, at the Tonto site
(41VV828).

74

Texas Archeological Society
Methods

The site was first mapped with transit and stadia rod to establish the
locations of all features and the site’s relationship to adjacent sites 41VV169,
41VV170, 41VV827, and 41VV844 (Figure 2). Surficial artifacts and features
were flagged and plotted; the formal artifacts were later collected. Center and
end points were established in and around Feature A as controls for vertical
photographs taken from a bipod built by E. Mott Davis, of The University of
Texas, Department of Anthropology. A series of black-and-white photographs
was taken with a 35 mm Nikkormat FTN camera elevated 3 meters above the
stone circle (Figure 5). The grid, stadia rod, and folding ruler served as scales.
Four overlapping photographs covered the entire feature. Series of photographs
were taken before, during, and after excavation.

Figure 5. Vertical photography in action. The bipod in use at the Tonto site (41VV828),
Feature A.

The feature was then gridded into 50-cm squares, and the matrix was
removed with trowels and water-screened through window screen at the tinaja in
the canyon bottom. The excavation continued until the sloping bedrock floor
was exposed between 5 and 20 cm below the surface. At the upper (north) end
bedrock was encountered just beneath the vegetation mat of moss and small
grasses; at the lower (south) end as much as 20 cm of sediment was trapped
within the feature. No cultural strata were apparent; only the root mat at the

Turpin ~ Live Oak Hole Complex

75

surface, and the increase in clay content with depth differentiated the interior
matrix from the surrounding soil.
The area surrounding the ring was barren bedrock, so no test pits could be
dug to compare exterior and interior artifact densities. As is so often the case on
these exposed surfaces, most of the surficial artifacts have been moved from
their original contexts and are lying trapped in pockets in the limestone or along
the edges of the vegetation that fringes the benches.
Analysis of the recovered materials was carried out at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), The University of Texas at Austin, where
all site information is curated. Site and feature maps Were computer-generated
from the transit data and vertical photographs using IBM-ATs equipped with
digitizing table and AUTOCAD software, a system assembled and refined at
TARL by H.H. Eling, Jr.
Results of Excavation

The artifactual recovery from within the feature was minimal. The one
possible interior feature, a cluster of burned rocks, extended under the eastern
peripheral blocks, indicating that the hearth predated construction of the ring.
The upper bench surrounding the rings is largely exposed bedrock, and it can be
assumed that much of the cultural material originally exposed on the surface all
over the site area had been displaced by sheetwash and deflation.
Artifacts

A total of 27 lithic items was recovered during the excavation and screening
of the ring deposits, including 15 pieces of burned chert, 3 secondary flakes, 4
tertiary flakes, and 5 chips. All materials could be attributed to ground clutter,
and none had ties to the structure or its inhabitants.
In addition to the items recovered during the excavation, 14 temporally
diagnostic artifacts were recovered during intensive surface survey (Figure 6).
The part of the site area around the rock alignments and the uppermost burned
rock midden was the focus of this search. Each diagnostic artifact was flagged,
plotted on the site map, and collected for inclusion in the analysis of site
materials. The 14 specimens collected represent 8,000 years of prehistoric use of
this campsite. Projectile points, from oldest to most recent, are Uvalde, Langtry,
Shumla, Marshall, Marcos, and Ensor types (Figure 6, f-k). Minimally Late
Prehistoric (post-A.D. 600) times are indicated by the stemmed arrowpoints,
including one with broad barbs similar to those of the Sabinal type (Figure 6, d)
(Turner and Hester 1985:188). The most recent projectile point is an unstemmed
triangular form (Figure 6, b) assigned to the Guerrero type (Turner and Hester
1985:177).
In addition to projectile points, an end scraper (Figure 6, e) morphologically
consistent with the Dorso type (Bement and Turpin 1987) was collected. Use
wear along its distal edge includes the rounding, striated pattern attributed to
hide preparation (Hayden 1979:25, Bement and Turpin 1987:194). Also a single

76

Texas Archeological Society

d

e

h

,.......... ~
J

=, ~’i~!!~¸¸¸¸ ¯
i

Scale

0

5

I0

I centimeters
Figure 6. Artifacts from the Tonto site (41VV828): a) fragment of plain brownware
pottery, b) Guerrero arrowpoint, c) stemmed arrowpoint, d) Sabinal arrowpoint, e) Dorso
end scraper, f-g) Ensor dart points, h) Marcos-like dart point, i) Shumla dart point, j)
Langtry-like dart point, k) Uvalde dart point.

Turpin m Live Oak Hole Complex

77

fragment of bone-tempered brownware pottery was collected adjacent to Feature C-west (Figure 6, a).
The stemmed arrowpoints, Dorso end scraper, and ceramic sherd are components of an assemblage consistently associated with circular rock alignments
in the Lower Pecos Region (Turpin 1982:109). They are defining characteristics
of the Infierno phase (Dibble 1978), now estimated to be Late Prehistoric or
protohistoric in age, ranging from A.D. 1400 to 1600 in this region. No absolute
dates have been obtained for Infierno phase sites. The Guerrero arrowpoint is
common on mission-era sites, dated to about A.D. 1700 (Turner and Hester
1985). Unfortunately, at 41VV828, none of the artifacts could be securely tied to
any feature, with the possible exception of the one sherd found directly adjacent
to Feature C-west.
DISCUSSION
Stone circle sites, especially those considered to be tipi rings, are a common
phenomenon throughout the Plains, where they have aroused archeological
interest for decades (Davis 1983). In Texas, Mallouf (1985, personal communication) has investigated several ring sites in the Big Bend, where they are a
major component of the Cielo complex, dated from A.D. 1200 to 1750. Young
(1985) excavated several wickiup rings at the Squawteat Peak site in Pecos
County. Similar sites were first recognized in the Lower Pecos River Region on
the margins of the Southern Plains at Infierno Camp, the type site of the Infierno
phase, in the 1970s (Dibble 1978).
Subsequent survey in the heart of the Lower Pecos River Region has increased the inventory of stone circle sites, leading to more precise definition of
their salient characteristics and permitting an assessment of the variability at
different sites. With the notable exception of Infierno Camp, which has more
than 100 stone rings (Dibble 1978), most of the sites have from one to four such
features. Characteristically, stone circles are found on high promontories, canyon rims, or level limestone benches above permanent water holes. Due to
massive erosion in these exposed locations, the building surfaces usually are
barren limestone, with pockets of sediment trapped behind rock outcrops or in
shallow depressions in the bedrock. Vegetation is sparse, restricted to desert
shrubs such as ocotillo and prickly pear and low grasses.
The typical Infierno ring is a circle of paired stones, presumably used as
pole supports for brush- or hide-covered huts. Morphological variations at other
sites include subrectangular, semicircular, or straight lines of piled rock, rarely
more than one course high. The Lower Pecos rings are usually only about 3
meters in diameter, much smaller than the classic late tipi rings of the Plains
(Davis 1983). The superstructure probably resembled the more casual domed
huts often seen in early historic photographs (Figure 7). The stone ring excavated at 41VV828, the Tonto site, is unusual in that it is a continuous circle,
broken only by a possible doorway on the south side. The configuration of this
ring could have resulted from rocks piled around a hide superstructure to help it

78

Texas Archeological Society

withstand high winds. A few examples of this contiguous placement of blocks
were identified at Infierno Camp (see Patterson 1987: Figure 38).
The orientation of the two intact features, A and B, permits some estimation
of the seasonality of occupation. The semicircular course of rock (B), arcs into
the southeast wind; the opening faces 50° west of north. During the excavation
of Feature A in mid-February, the wind was blowing strongly from the southeast
directly toward the buffer formed by this arc. Feature B would have served
admirably as a windblock on this winter day. The opening, or doorway, of
Feature A faces south; the densest grouping of rock clusters is on the north end
(Figure 4). The opening is also slightly upslope, suggesting that runoff from the
hill was not a serious consideration. The double arrangement of stones implies
that considerable weight had to be applied along the base to enable the structure
to withstand the wind. The ring is the best construction for warding off the
effects of cold, windy, dry weather that, in this region, usually comes as blue
northers--icy blasts of Arctic air blown down from the Plains between December and March. The different orientations of Features A and B suggest that they
were not contemporaneous.
The small number of artifacts found within the stone circle supports the
implication that Feature A at 41VV828 was used only for shelter, possibly as
sleeping quarters for two or three individuals. Cooking and other day-to-day
activities would have been conducted outside the hut, and the residue from those
activities would have blended with the long-term habitation debris at the site.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The mapping and excavation of 41VV828 provided no conclusive evidence
that the stone features are directly related to the historic pictograph or the
historic period. The surface artifact assemblage yielded two temporal diagnostics of protohistoric or historic age--a Guerrero arrowpoint assigned to the
mission era in Texas and northern Mexico, about. A.D. 1700 (Turner and Hester
1985) and a minute sherd of plain brownware (Figure 6, a, b). Similar ceramics
were recovered from Infierno Camp, usually considered protohistoric in age
(Dibble 1978), and at San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz, the Lipan Apache mission
established in 1762 on the headwaters of the Nueces River and abandoned in
1771 (Tunnell and Newcomb 1969).
The entire span from Early Archaic through Late Prehistoric is evidenced in
the lithic assemblage at the site. Predictably, population concentrated around
permanent water sources such as Live Oak Hole throughout prehistory. The
distribution of sites and features at Live Oak Hole illustrates in microcosm the
larger settlement pattern in the Lower Pecos, with the burned rock middens on
the floodplain and lowest slopes and the stone circles on the high, flat limestone
benches above. The burned rock middens fringing the creek are probably Archaic as are the older pictographs. The stone features and later pictographs are
much more characteristic of the late Late Prehistoric and early Historic periods.
In their setting, the three adjacent stone ring sites typify these sites throughout

Turpin m Live Oak Hole Complex

79

the region, situated as they are on promontories with views up and down the
water course. The location of the pictograph, under a shallow overhang facing a
broad, fiat, grassy expanse, is typical of the historic art in this region (Turpin
1989).
These few stone features, arranged in clusters, that comprise the sites
described here, possibly reflect the size and composition of the groups who built
them. The dearth of occupational debris associated with the features and the
distance between rings give the impression of small groups camping independently around the water hole. Some of the rings may have been contemporaneously occupied, but the orientation of the more intact features suggests that they
were constructed to meet differing weather conditions.
The difficulty in detecting historic (and prehistoric) campsites is best explained by referring to a photograph of a historic Indian campsite (Figure 7). To
change their camp, this family had to move only one basket, one water jar, two
kettles, a couple of cans, and the hut coverings. All that would remain would be
the dirt embankment surrounding their hut, soon to be leveled by erosion, and
the hearth. The limited artifactual material attributable to the historic period at
41VV828 is consistent with the mobile lifeways of the intrusive Plains Indians.
During one episode, they lingered long enough to paint the pictograph in Live
Oak Hole, but, otherwise, their tenure is marked only by one tiny fragment of a
protohistoric or historic ceramic vessel and one complete arrowpoint of the
mission era. Therefore, although there can be no doubt that people camped at
Live Oak Hole during the historic period, the threads of evidence can not tie the
artifacts to the stone circles or the circles to the pictograph. The excavation of
Feature A at 41VV828 proved useful in identifying construction techniques and
site layout, estimating the season of occupation, and emphasizing the fragility of

Figure 7. Photograph of a historic Indian camp in New Mexico. (Photo from the National
Archives, iii-sc-85775.)

80

Texas Archeological Society

the archeological record in a region best known for the preservation of deposits
in dry rock shelters. The value of the bipod and the computer-generated mapping
of the site and its features was demonstrated, but the presence of the Plains
Indians in the Lower Pecos remains best documented in the ethnographic and
pictographic record while the search for occupational sites continues.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Our deepest appreciation goes to Mrs. R. C. (Johnnie) Robertson, who gave
us permission to carry out archeological studies on her property. David G.
Robinson, Michael W. Davis, and Jeff Turpin donated their time to complete the
excavation of Feature A, 41VV828. Deirdre Rushing and Nan Olson, of Bastrop, helped map the site. E. Mott Davis lent his bipod and gave lessons in its
use. Herbert H. Eling, Jr. introduced the use of Autocad for archeological
mapping to TARL and helped in the preparation of the site and feature map. He
also provided the Nikkormat camera used in the field and prepared the photographs. The computers used in this experiment were obtained through a research
grant from Project Quest, a cooperative program of IBM and The University of
Texas at Austin. Funding for the field research was provided by the Joseph H.
Thompson Fund of Cleveland, Ohio.
REFERENCES CITED
Bement, L. C., and S A. Turpin
1987
Technological Continuity and Functional Change: The Case of the Dorso
End Scraper. Plains Anthropologist 32(116): 191-196.
Daniel, J. M.
The Advance of the Spanish Frontier and the Despoblado. Masters thesis,
1955
The University of Texas at Austin.
Davis, L. B.
1983
From Microcosm to Macrocosm: Advances in Tipi Ring Investigation and
Intepretation. Plains Anthropologist Memoir 19, Vol. 28(102).
Dibble, D. S.
1978
The Infierno Phase: Evidence for a Late Occupation in the Lower Pecos
River Region, Texas. Paper presented to the 43rd Annual Meeting, Society
for American Archeology, Tucson, Arizona.
Graham, J. A., and W. B. Davis
1958
Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Diablo Reservoir, Val Verde
County, Texas. Report to the National Park Service by the Inter-Agency
Archeological Salvage Program, Field Office, Austin, Texas.

Turpin ~ Live Oak Hole Complex

81

Grieder, Terence
1966
Speculations on Some Pictograph Sites in the Region of Amistad Reservoir.
Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Griffen, W. B.
1969
Culture Change and Shifting Populations in Central Northern Mexico. Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona 13, Tucson.
Hayden, Brian
Snap, Shatter and Superfracture: Use-Wear of Stone Skin Scrapers. In Lithic
1979
Use-Wear Analysis, edited by B. Hayden. Academic Press, New York.
Jackson, A. T.
1938

Picture-Writing of Texas Indians. Anthropological Papers, Vol. II and Bureau of Research in the Social Sciences Study No. 27, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Keyser, James
1987
A Lexicon for Historic Plains Indian Art: Increasing Interpretive Potenial.
Plains Anthropologist 32(115):43-72.
Kirkland, Forrest
1938
A Description of Texas Pictographs. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological
and Paleontological Society 1:11-40.
1942

Historic Material from Fielder Canyon Cave. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society 14:9-25.

Kirkland, Forrest, and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967
The Picture Writing of Texas Indians. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Mallouf, R. J.
1985
A Synthesis of Eastern Trans-Pecos Prehistory. Masters thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Parsons, Mark
1962
Testing and Reconnaissance in Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde County,
Texas. A report to the National Park Service on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Patterson, P. E.
1987
Archaeological Excavations at 41LL78, The Slab Site, Llano County, Texas.
Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division, Publications in Archaeology Report No. 34, Austin.
Tunnell, C. D., and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
A Lipan Apache Mission, San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz 1762-1771. Texas
1969
Memorial Museum Bulletin 14, The University of Texas at Austin.

82

Texas Archeological Society

Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts in Texas. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
¯ Turpin, S. A.
Seminole Canyon: The Art and the Archeology. Texas ArcheologicalSurvey
1982
Research Report 83, The University of Texas at Austin.
1985

Toward the Definition of a Pictograph Style: The Lower Pecos Bold Line
Geometrics. Plains Anthropologist 31(112): 153-161.

1989

The Iconography of Contact: Spanish Influences on the Rock Art of the
Middle Rio Grande. IN: Columbian Consequences, Vol. I: Archaeological
and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West. Smithsonian
Institution Press.

Weddle, R. S.
1968
San Juan Bautista, Gateway to Spanish Texas. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Young, W. C.
1981
Investigations at the Squawteat Peak Site, Pecos County, Texas. State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division
Publications in Archaeology Report No. 20, Austin.

