The Re-examination of Pedro De Castaneda’s
Bone Bed by Geological Investigations
EDWIN L. KISER
ABSTRACT
This paper describes the bone bed mentioned by Pedro de
Castaneda in 1541 and compares it to the Silver Lake Bison Site in
Hockley County, Texas.
The Silver Lake site is described in some detail. Concluding the
paper is a brief examination of different historians’ proposed routes
which Coronado’s army traveled on their return from Quivira.

The journey of the Coronado expedition across the American
Southwest has always been an intriguing study for the student of
American history or anthropology. Scholars have toiled many years trying
to define precise routes which the Conquistadors traveled to and from
Quivira. Regardless of historians’ quibbling, Coronado and his army were
the first to record descriptions of the Llano Estacado, or Staked Plains.
Among their descriptions was the first palaeontological site report,
and perhaps also first anthropological site report recorded in the
American Southwest. This description was given by Pedro de Castaneda in
1541 after the Army had split from Coronado on their return trip from
Quivira. Castaneda’s description follows:
Another thing was a heap of cowbones, a crossbow shot long, or a very
little less, almost twice a man’s height in places, and some 18 feet or
more wide, which was found on the edge of a salt lake in the southern
part, and this in a region where there are no people who could have
made it. The only explanation of this which could be suggested was that
the waves which the north winds must make in the lake had piled up the
bones of the cattle which had died in the lake, when the old and weak
ones, who went into the water were unable to get out. The noticeable

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

332

thing is the number of cattle that would be necessary to make such a
pile of bones (Winship 1896: 140).
Castaneda definitely described the southern plains area in this
exerpt, and specifically mentioned an area in which salt lakes are present.
Castaneda also mentioned in his narrative that they traveled by way of
both salt and fresh water lakes. This area visited by Castaneda appears to
fit the description of lakes within the Portales valley drainage system
(Holden 1944: 14).
The Portales valley drainage system extends from near Portales, New
Mexico, to west of Lubbock, Texas. Drainage is from the northwest dipping towards the southeast. Salt lakes are found extending from northern
Bailey and Lamb Counties to the southern edge of the Llano Estacado.
Castaneda’s bone bed should be within the northern area of the salt
lakes as stated. Thorough geological investigations by Evans and Meade
(1945) indicated vertebrate palaeontological localities within this northern
salt lake area; however, only one was described as a bison bone bed
situated along the southern edge of a salt lake.
This particular vertebrate palaeontological locality described by
Evans and Meade is Locality Number 10. It is a bison bone bed 55 yards
southeast of Silver Lake. Silver Lake is in the extreme northwestern
corner of Hockley County, Texas and extends into adjacent Cochran
County (Fig. 1).

BAILEY

LAMB

...
I

MODERN LOCATION
"~

....

COCHRAN

FIGURE 1.

HOCKLEY

Modern Location of Silver Lake.

OF SILVER LAKE

RE-EXAMINATION OF BONE BED

333

Locality Number 10 has been assigned the name the "Silver Lake
Bison Site." Several anthropological sites are located nearby and a
Spanish sword with inscriptions dating 1724 has been found east of the
lake (Demel 1976). Silver Lake was also used as a natural landmark by
Mexican guides for the U. S. military during the 1874-1875 Red River War.
As indicated, the lake area has an intriguing, complex story of historical
significance.
The Silver Lakes Bison Site was originally recorded on November 8,
1954, by Jack T. Hughes of West Texas State University. Hughes and Glen
Evans examined several fossil sites in the area. The November field notes
were used as a guide for a February 22, 1976, re-examination of the site.
Arrangements were made prior to the February field trip for
permission to investigate the site located on the McCutchin Ranch. The
February observations indicated Silver Lake was .7 mile in length by 1/~
to 1/a mile in width, or north-south direction. Diameter of the lake had
previously been reported as .7 mile (Reeves 1966: 282). The lake’s
measurements have varied which is to be expected of playa lakes.
Silver Lake is fed by underground springs from both the east and
west side (Hogue 1976). A high content of salt in the lake deprives the
lakeshore of much vegetation; however, a few cacti and yucca are
present in the sandy soil surrounding the lake.
Silver Lake (Fig. 2) was formed out of a series of lakes which were
filled during the Late Wisconsin glaciation. Presently minor land
modifications are taking place in the form of wind action that results in
the formation of sand dunes.
Soil deposits are of two distinguishable types: the Tahoka Clay, and
recent dune sand. The Tahoka Clay is bluish gray in color and is the
oldest deposit definitely recognized in Silver Lake (Frye and Leonard
1957: 8). Extinct vertebrate animal faunas are associated within some
of the Tahoka Clay deposits. These fossils are representatives of the
Late Pleistocene. Unconformably overlying the Tahoka Clay is the recent
sand material. Prevailing southwest and winter north winds present a
major erosional problem at the site. The result is a mixture of the
bluish-gray clay with reddish brown sand.
The Silver Lake Bison Site (Fig. 3) is situated in the Tahoka Clay at
a depth of 6 to 8 inches (Bass and Kiser 1976: 5). Bison bone also rests
on top of the Tahoka Clay intermixed with caliche, and recent dune soil.
The bison site underlies 6 to 8 feet of overburden and covers an
area of 35 yards east-west by 32 yards north-south. The bison bone is
piled, giving the appearance and mixture of a bone bed. The number of
individual bison present is estimated at two dozen. The bone is in good
shape and is mineralized. A few samples of the bone were taken to
Killgore Research Center in Canyon, Texas, for comparative studies.
The Silver Lake Bison Bone samples proved to be much larger in

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

334

~

Z

RE-EXAMINATION OF BONE BED

335

SILVER LAKE BISON SITE
Top View

~r~rr

15

0
1

J
yards

fff~

Q

lake

edge

over

burden

exposed

bone

partially
exposed

bone

Cross Section
A

B

15
.f

x

represents

exposed

bone

yards

FIGURE 3.

Plan and Cross Section Views of the Silver Lake Bison Site,

336

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

comparison to bison from known Archaic bison sites of the Texas
Panhandle. After comparative studies and identification were made the
Silver Lake samples were placed in the Panhandle-Plains Historical
Museum and assigned the site number of P-61.
Some of the bison gives the appearance of being broken prior to
deposition {Wendorf and Hester 1975: 32). Located near the bison bone
is evidence of burned caliche, previously reported by Wendorf and
Hester (1975). Artifacts had previously been found by Adolph A. Witte
near the bison site and Folsom points have been found along the lake’s
eastern dune ridge (Demel 1976}. These findings enhance the probability
of an Early Man site at Silver Lake.
The Silver Lake Bison Site, previously discussed, and Castaneda’s
bone bed in all reality may be the same site. The Silver Lake Bison Site
was the only bone bed described by Evans and Meade located on the
south side of a salt lake. The assumption of the Silver Lake Bison Site
being Castaneda’s cannot be made on these comparisons alone. Other
comparisons can be made as follows: Castaneda described his bone bed
as being a crossbow shot long, or a very little less (Winship 1896: 140).
James Hansen, former Director of the Panhandle-Plains Historical
Museum, described the length of a crossbow shot as being about 200
yards (Hansen 1976). Bison bones were found on the February field trip
eroding out of the terrace edge 180 yards west of the main bison bone
concentration. These samples were also mineralized and of the same
comparable size as those at the main site concentration. Palaeontological testing indicated that the majority of the bones had already
eroded (Wendorf and Hester 1975: 32); Castaneda described his bone
bed as being almost twice a man’s height in places and some 18 feet or
more wide (Winship 1896: 140). Height of the Silver Lake Bison Site was
recorded as being over 8 feet, and the site extends north of the terrace
edge 15 yards; Castaneda remarked on the number of cattle that would
be necessary to make such a pile of bones (Winship 1896: 140).
These comparisons are all intriguing, but the most interesting still
remains that Evans and Meade only found one bone bed on the south
side of a salt lake. Several historians have considered the Silver Lake as
one of the possibilities as being within the return route of Coronado’s
army (Fig. 4). Four historians have properly placed their routes within
the salt lake area; however, Holden and Donoghue’s routes are along
the extreme northern area of the salt lakes in northern Bailey and
Lamb Counties. Winship and Wedel placed their proposed routes
further south, nearer Silver Lake, and away from the very marginal
salt, fresh water area.
Definite proof of the Silver Lake Bison Site being Castaneda’s bone
bed does not exist, nor will it ever be definitely proven. But as indicated
in this paper, the Silver Lake Bison Site is the most likely candidate for

RE-EXAMINATION OF BONE BED

337

being the first palaeontological and archaeological site to be recorded in
the American Southwest.

PROPOSED RETURN ROUTES
OF CORONADO’S ARNY
N

@
0

4

o

®o

AO

~.,. o
¯ : ,-.-..

;i

®

?

00

0

o

0
o
o
o

0

:

%/

~:i,
0.~.

.0 A

":

O,

~’,

e

e

~!::
;?
:

:Q
.:

e tit
<’.:"

Margin of the
Staked Plains

""F’_ "L ;.:£

~r

A

~:

Proposed routes:

:"
.(

c <"

f:
..:: ¯ -.:!.

Donoghue

A

1 -’

0
@

Wedel

0

Holden
£)

Winship
50

100

I

f

miles

0
o

0

Simpson

FIGURE 4. Proposed Routes of Coronado’s Army Return from Quivira in
Relation to Silver Lake.

338

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wishes to thank: Polyanna, David, and Jack Hughes
for their family effort, guidance and strong interest in the Silver Lake
Project; Dr. James A. Hansen and Dr. Frederick Rathjen for
assistance concerning the Coronado Expedition; residents of Pep,
Texas, for being very gracious to two strangers; the Jack McCutchins
of Levelland, Texas, for permission to re-examine the bison site; Dr.
Robert Sawvell for the cartographic work; and Janice Bass for field
and laboratory assistance.

REFERENCES CITED

Bass, Janice and Edwin Kiser
1976
Silver Lake Field Notes, February 22, Pep, Texas. On file,
Killgore Research Center, West Texas State University
Campus.
Bolton, Herbert E.
Coronado: Knight of Pueblos and Plains. University of New
1949
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Day, A. Grove
1940
Coronado’s Quest. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review 17: 4771.
Demel, N. C.
1976
Interview with author, February 22, Pep, Texas.
Donoghue, David
1929
The Route of the Coronado Expedition in Texas, Southwestern
Historical Quarterly 32(3): 181-192.
Evans, Glen and Grayson E. Meade
Quaternary of the Texas High Plains. The University of Texas
1945
Bureau of Economic Geology 4401. Austin.
Frye, John C. and Byron Leonard
1957
Studies of Cenozoic Geology Along Eastern Margin of Texas
High Plains, Armstrong to Howard Counties. The University of
Texas Bureau of Economic Geology, Report of Investigations 32.
Austin.
Hansen, James A.
1976
Interview with author, February, Canyon, Texas.
Hague, L. V.
1976
Interview with author, February 22, Pep, Texas.
Holden, W. C.
Coronado’s Route Across the Staked Plains. West Texas
1944
Historical Association Year Book 20: 3-20.
Hughes, Jack T.
1954
Silver Lake Field Notes, November 8, Pep, Texas. On file,

RE-EXAMINATION OF BONE BED

Killgore Research Center,
Campus.

339

West Texas

State

University

Kiser, Edwin L.
1976
The History of Silver Lake, Hockley and Cochran Counties,
Texas. On file, Killgore Research Center, West Texas State
University Campus.
Pearce, William
1936
A Survey of the Sand-Hill Camp Sites of Lamb and Bailey
Counties. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 8: 184-186.
Reeves, Corwin C.
1966
Pluvial Lake Basins of West Texas. The Journal of Geology, 74.
Wedel, Waldo R.
Coronado’s Route to Quivira
1970
15(49): 161-168.

1541. Plains Anthropologist

Wendorf, Fred and James Hester
1975
Late Pleistocene Environments of the Southern High Plains.
Fort Burgwin Research Center, Taos, New Mexico.
Winship, George Parker
1896
The Coronado Expedition, 1540-1542. Fourteenth Annual
Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 1892-1893.
Washington.
Witte, Adolph H.
1947
Certain Archaeological Notes on the High Plains of Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
18: 76-82.

