NOTES ON SOME ARCHEOLOGICAL MATERIALS
FROM THE PALO DURO CREEK AREA
OF HANSFORD COUNTY, TEXAS
JIMMY L. MITCHELL

ABSTRACT
This paper reports on a private collection of artifacts from Hansford
County, Texas, an area which is almost unknown in the Texas archeological literature. Even though this collection is small and was not obtained under controlled conditions, it nonetheless represents a useful index
of the cultural materials found in this remote area of the state.

BACKGROUND
Relatively little archeological material has been reported from the
upper tier of counties of the Texas Panhandle. This region is not included in the Jelks, Davis, and Sturgis (1960) review of the archeology
of the state, nor in Kelley’s (1964) subsequent report on the Llano
Estacado. Kelley (1964: 1) limited her study to the Llano Estacado
proper which she defined as being bounded on the north by the
Canadian River. Collins (1971) recently reviewed the archeology of
the area but similarly restricted his study to the Llano Estacado,
focusing primarily on the southern edge of the area.
Known archeological sites in the northeastern Texas Panhandle include a "Panhandle Pueblo" site at the Handley Ranch on Wolf Creek
in Ochiltree County, and the Lipscomb Bison Quarry site in Lipscomb
County (see Figure 1). Wormington (1957) locates the Lipscomb site
eleven miles southwest of the town of Lipscomb, Texas. Wedel (1961)
reports that eighteen Folsom projectile points were recovered at this
site in association with a mass of fossil bison bone. Almost’all of the 21
articles listed by. Campbell (1960) forLipscomb County deal with this
one site.
The Handley Ranch village site in Ochiltree County is the major site
which has been reported for the area in the literature (Holden 1929:
Moorehead 1931, 1933; Ellzey 1966) and is generally now considered
to be a Panhandle Aspect site (Baerreis and Bryson 1966; Collins
1971; Bousman n.d.). It has recently been the subject of a verbal
report by Rolla Shaller (1973) who summarized prior~s~Ludies. This site
and the Lipscomb Bison Quarry site are the only archeological sites
which are fairly well reported in the three county area, although
other sites are known to local collectors,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

218

OKLAHOMA

HANS FOR O

/

/
OPERRYTON
OGH

I

LTREE

.~#.

"i ,i~~.,’ i~’~ ° o M B
--0

~
?MAN
g?

.;

I

..~r ///
./

i /
(

.!

J

:

¯

©

I00°

FIGURE I. Archeological sites in the northeastern Texas Panhandle:
1, area on Palo Duro Creek; 2, Panhandle Aspect village on the
Handley Ranch; 3, Lipscomb Bison Quarry site.

This paper will deal with a collection of artifacts found in Hansford
County, along Palo Duro Creek (see Figure 1). Studer’s field map of
the Panhandle shows no sites in the county (1931: 142). Campbell’s
bibliography of Texas archeology (1960: 186) notes only two articles
with any reference to Hansford County and these deal with rock art
graver
g
e.

HANSFORD COUNTY ARTIFACTS

219

These articles are dated 1940 and 1942; apparently no work has been
done in the county since that time.
The Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin has no
record of any site for Hansford County (Dorris L. Olds, personal communication 1972). This lack of published material or even site reports
from Hansford County represents a serious gap in the archeological
record of the Panhandle.
The specific area of concern for this report lies north of the town of
Spearman, Texas. This is a very rugged area where the Palo Durc
Creek has cut a substantial canyon. The creek lies at about 2850 feet
where the top of the canyon rim is from 3000 to 3050 feet above sea
level. The main creek bed is joined by a number of side streams and
washes, so that it is very difficult country to survey. The creek bed
varies from a very sandy soil to gravel and rock, and its appearance
changes considerably after the occasional major thunderstorms.
Since so little is reported of this county in the archeological
literature, it appeared to be a good area for surveying amateur collections in order to define the archeological problems of the area and
assess the need for future research. As Heizer (1974)has noted, archeological resources are finite and professional and serious
amateur archeologists will be increasingly dependent on such collections for data in the future. The initial step in documentation of collections is, of course, to locate and secure the cooperation of local
collectors.
Mr. Robert Cochran is a local Hansford County collector. In
August, 1969, we visited this area of Palo Duro Creek, and recovered
two of the specimens discussed later in this report (Figures 2,c and
4,c). The remainder of the artifacts reported here were collected by
Mr. Cochran and his son over a period of several years.

THE ARTIFACTS
The sample reported here is quite small and yet, since they are the
only artifacts reported from Hansford County, they provide information on the local prehistoric cultures which has not previously
been available. The specimens are shown in Figures 2 through 4.
Metric measurements are given in Table 1. The metric data is a very
abbreviated version of the standard data elements developed by Binford (1963) as adapted by Luchterhand (1970). The specimens reported here are neither complete enough nor numerous enough to
warrant inclusion of all the data recommended by Luchterhand.

Large Projectile Points -- Figure 2 illustrates the larger points from
this collection. These specimens are significantly greater in mean

220

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

length, width and weight than are the small projectile points
shown in Figure 3. {Means tested with 5 values of 3.957, 5.566, and
4.555; all significant at p < .01). As can be seen in Table 1, the
thickness of projectile point specimens ranged from .2 cm to .5 cm;
mean thickness for the large points was .4166 cm and for the small
points was .3269 cm, but this difference is not significant at the
p < .01 level, largely due to the variability of the smaller points
which themselves range from .2 to .5 cm. The significant differences
in length, width and weight suggest that their grouping into the two
categories of large and small points is valid. These groupings
correspond to the popularly named classes of dart points and arrow
points (Suhm and ]elks 1962).
Figure 2. a and b -- These specimens are fairly large, expanding base
dart points which are made of Alibates dolomite. Similarly shaped prolectile points have been reported from Archaic Bison Kill sites in Hall and
Donley Counties (Tunnell and Hughes 1955: Collins 1968a); [rom late
Woodland sites in Hutchinson and Potter Counties {Hughes 1962: Green
1967}; and from the Roy-Smith site. a Panhandle Aspect locality in the nearby Oklahoma Panhandle (Schneider 1969}. Thus. these expanding base
dart points are somewhat typical of finds in the Texas and Oklahoma
Panhandle areas bui they are apparently not diagnostic of any single
period since they are reported from Archaic. Woodland and Panhandle
Aspect sites.
Figure 2. c -- This specimen is also an expanding stem projectile point
but is unusual enough to deserve separate comment. It is also made of
Alibates material and feels smoothed on the base. This mav be due to
natural causes since it was found in the stream bed in tumbled gravel. Instead of straight-in notching, as on the other expanding stem points, the
notches on tlus specimen are a combination ot angles which suggests that
more than one step was involved in preparing the notches. This unusual
type of notching has not been reported on any other Panhandle specimen.
Figure 2. d
One shoulder of this point is rounded and the other, which
is broken appears to have been barbed. It is also made of Alibates
material but is primarily a light gray in color with faint maroon and tan
streaks.
Figure 2, e and f -- These two specimens are smaller than the other dart
points and have bulb-shaped bases. The barbs and general shape of these
points are similar to the attributes of one variety Of the Williams point type.
Bell (1960: 96) illustrates such bulbar bases for some Williams points and
notes that the type occurs in eastern Oklahoma. He also reports that the
type shares some characteristics with the Castroville. Palmillas and Marcos point types.

Small Projectile Points -- Figure 3 illustrates a series of small expanding stem projectile points, which show considerable variability
in size and shape.

HANSFORD COUNTY ARTIFACTS

221

b
d7

C

d
2
I

I
CM

FIGURE 2, Large projectile points: a-c, expanding stem points; d,
rounded stem point; e-f, bulbar base points.

222

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Figure 3, a and b -- These are very small corner-notched points. They
are very similar to specimens recovered at CR-1 (A175) in Moore County,
Texas (Glasseock and Glasscock 1955: Plate 17. t and n). Glasscock and
Glasscock report eight such points including one made of obsidian, and observe that this point type is "rare" in the Texas Panhandle although they
are said to occur frequently in the sand bql section of West Texas and in
the headwaters area of the Red River.
Figure 3. c through e -- These small projectile points appear to be
similar to the Scallorn point type (Suhm and Jelks 1962). Scallorn points
have been recovered at late Woodland sites in the Texas Panhandle
(Hughes 1962; Harrison and Griffin 1975) but are not reported from later
complexes [Duffield 1964: Keller 1975) of the area. Thus. such points would
appear to be diagnostic of the Woodland period for this area of the state.
The specimen illustrated as Figure 3. e is exceptionally small for a Scallorn
point: its metric measurements are less than those given as the normal
range for Scallorn points by Bell (1960: 84) and Suhm and Jelks (1962: 285).
Figure 3. f and g -- Triangular points without notching are most frequently said to be Fresno points. Moorehead (1931: Figure 41) illustrated
similar points from the Handley Ranch. Duffield [1964) reports them from
the Panhandle Aspect sites in Hutchinson County, and Lintz [1972) has
recently reported similar points from the McGrath site near Guymon in
the Panhandle of Oklahoma. Such points are also reported from late Woodland sites [Hughes 1962) and from site components which are later than
the Panhandle Aspect at the Black Dog Village site [Keller 1975).
Figure 3. h -- This crude specimen resembles a Toyah point (Suhm and
Jelks 1962). It is quite distinct from the other points in both material and
workmanship. Toyah points are not usually reported from the vicinity of
the Texas Panhandle but have recently been reported in Lamb County,
Texas (Randall 1970) and at the Adobe Mound site (41AD3) in Andrews
County, along with Fresno. stemmed and side-notched points (Collins
1968b).
Figure 3 i and j -- These two points appear te be Washita points (Bell
1958), a type which occurs widely in the Panhandle-Plains area. Washita
points are frequently found in the Panhandle Aspect (Duffield 1964) as well
as in the Custer Focus [Lintz 1974) and the Washita River Focus (Bell 1973)
in adjacent areas of western Oklahoma. Duffield (1964) has pointed out
that their relative frequency decreases in later sites where the proportion
of Fresno-like points increases.
Figure 3. k
This thick, rough projectile point somewhat resembles the
Young type (Suhm and Ielks 1962). Suhm and Jelks estimate that the Young
type has the same cultural affiliation as the Scallorn type but Duffield
(1964) reports Young points associated with Fresno and Washita-like sidenotched points at the Medford Ranch site and the Spring Canyon site in
Hutchinson County, where no Scallorn points were recovered.
Figure 3. 1 and m -- These specimens are too fragmentary for
classification bul they are both made of materials probably not native to
the Panhandle-Plains area. The point illustrated as Figure 3, 1 has some
resemblance to the Trinity point type: it is made of a tan colored chert and
has a high glossy sheen which suggests that it may have been heat treated.
The specimen shown as Figure 3. m is made of an orange-tan flint which is
unusual for this area.

HANSFORD COUNTY ARTIFACTS

223

G

d

g

h

k

/

/
0
t

rn

2
J

/

1

4
I__l

CM

FIGURE 3. Small projectile points: a, b, corner notched points; c-e,
expanding stem points; f, g, triangular points; h-j, notched triangular
points; k-m, unclassified points.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

224

Bifaces and Miscellaneous Pieces -- The artifacts shown in Figure 4
represent the remainder of this collection.
Figure 4, a through c

i

These fragments of bifaces are interesting in

terms of material and workmanship. The specimen illustrated as Figure 4.
a is made of a dark brown flint has a fairly thick cross section (.8 cm) and
has fine reworking along its edge. Figure 4, b shows a biface made of
Alibates material which is very thin (.4 cm} and also has excellent workmanship. The fragment illustrated as Figure 4. c is larger, thicker (.8 cm),
and much cruder but is also made of Alibates dolomite.
Figure 4, d
This complete biface is of a mottled grey color but there is
a small amount of dark maroon speckle at one end which suggests that it is
probably Alibates material. Duffield (1964) reports similar specimens as
ovate knives at two of the three Panhandle Aspect sites at the Sanford
Reservoir. Sollberger (1971} suggests that such oval knives are
unretouched forms which become alternately beveled knives, a form
frequently recovered from Panhandle Aspect sites, through resharpening
of its edges.
Figure 4, e -- The piece is an excellent example of an end scraper. The
reverse face of this specimen is a single plane with the bulb of force very
evident at the smaller end. The leading edge is finely worked and is
somewhat dulled. Duffield reports similar scrapers from Hutchinson County (1964: Figure 16. D-F), but this type of scraper is widespread in the
Plains area and is reported as far away as the middle Missouri area of
North Dakota (Lehmer 1971}.

DISCUSSION
The study of this small collection demonstrates that there are a
variety of archeological materials in Hansford County which can and
should be analyzed. This becomes a critical issue since a dam is
planned for this area of Palo Duro Creek and yet no sites are on record, nor are there any reports in the literature to alert state agencies of the need for a comprehensive archeological investigation.
Even with the limited amount of material reported here, there are
several serious questions which can be raised about our present understanding of the prehistory of the upper Panhandle region. One
such question emerging from an examination of published reports
concerns the diagnostic value of large expanding base dart points
which previously had been thought to be horizon markers within the
Archaic period (Tunnell and Hughes 1955) based on stratigraphic
work in other areas of the state or general type descriptions. Work in
the Texas Panhandle and in western Oklahoma in recent years indicates thai such forms are found at sites assumed to be Archaic
(Twilla Finch, Sitter Ranch, etc.), in Woodland sites (Lake Creek,
41MO5, 41PT29), at Custer Focus sites, and in Panhandle Aspect sites
,these large ex-

HANSFORD COUNTY ARTIFACTS

225

b

G

C

o
I

1

2
;

I

4
I

CM

d

FIGURE 4. Miscellaneous pieces: a-c, bifaces; d, plains knife; e,
scraper.

226

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

panding base dart points are increasingly associated with plain, sidenotched, and basal notched triangular arrow points. At the Roy-Smith
site in Oklahoma, where there was a multiroom stone structure, the
arrow point types predominate and the dart points are rare
(Schneider 1969). In later Panhandle Aspect sites and post-Panhandle
Aspect components, these large expanding base projectile points appear to be absent (Keller 1975). Thus, this size and style of projectile
point can no longer be considered as temporally diagnostic of the Archaic stage. Presently, some of the sites thought to be Archaic in this
area are so designated primarily on the basis of these kinds of points;
such sites may need to be re-evaluated.
A second issue is the potential for the Scallorn point type to be
diagnostic in the Texas Panhandle of a Woodland horizon which is
earlier than the Panhandle Aspect (Hughes 1962; Harrison and Griffin 1975). Moorehead (1931) noted the possibility of such an earlier
horizon on the basis of ash lenses underneath the walls of the massive
stone structures at the Handley Ranch site. Such an earlier occupation strengthens Hughes’ hypothesis of an in situ development for
the Panhandle Aspect (Hughes 1968). Lintz (1974) and Bell (1973)
have presented convincing cases for similar in situ developments in
western Oklahoma, the Custer Focus (A. D. 800-1100) and the subsequent Washita River Focus (A. D. 1100-1400). Their re.cent works
synthesizing information of these two Plains Village developments
represent substantial contributions to the archeology of the Southern
Plains. Unfortunately no comparable analysis of the Panhandle
Aspect has yet been published, though such a synthesis is sorely
needed (Keller 1975).
The presence of Scallorn, Toyah and small corner notched arrow
points also raises the possibilty of some type of relationship between
the Panhandle and those parts of Central and West Texas where such
forms are common. Dibble and Lorrain (1968) postulated such a
relationship on an Archaic time level between the Bonfire Shelter and
the Twilla site of the lower Panhandle based on the presence of large
expanding base dart points and fossil bison bone in both locations.
Dillehay (1974] has recently restated this hypothesis, attributing it to
Hughes and Dibble, and studied the presence of bison in both areas as
a possible causal factor. Certainly this hypothesis deserves further
study since it implies another possible source of influence in the
presently unclear developmental sequence of Texas Panhandle archeological complexes.
The artifacts reported here do establish thai the Woodland and
Panhandle Aspect horizons, which have been demonstrated in other
parts of,the Texas and Oklahoma Panh~dles,, are, a!s~,present in the

HANSFORD COUNTY ARTIFACTS

227

Palo Duro Creek area of Hansford County, an area previously
unreported in the archeological literature. Archaic occupation may
be indicated but cannot be demonstrated conclusively since the large
dart points are also found in Woodland and Panhandle Aspect
horizons.
In this northernmost tier of Texas counties, a great deal of work is
yet to be done, even in the basic documentation of sites. Hopefully,
such work will be done in this area of Palo Duro Creek before it is
inundated by the lake presently planned for the area.
While archeological work in this remote area of the northeastern
Texas Panhandle is not as glamorous or as immediately rewarding as
in some other parts of the state, this brief report has demonstrated
that there are archeological materials and problems in this area
which need study. Very little has been published about this specific
area in the past 30 years and it is possibly one of the least known
areas of the state. At this stage when so little professional work has
been done in this region, the examination of amateur collections is a
particularly fruitful method of research.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
My thanks to Mr. Robert Cochran and his son for permitting me to study
their collection; to the late Sam Handley for a personal tour of his sites: to
lim Barlow of Lackland Air Force Base for assistance with the
illustrations; and to Dr. Dave Dibble for lending references and being concerned with my bibliography. Special thanks to Dr. Thomas R. Hester for
locating Moorehead’s book and for having the patience to critique a number of drafts of this paper over the last three years.

228

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Baerreis, David A. and Reid A. Bryson
1966 Dating the Panhandle Aspect Cultures. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 14, pp. 105-116.
Bell, Robert E.
1958 Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile
Points. Special Bulletin No. 1, Oklahoma Anthropological Society.
1960 Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile
Points. Special Bulletin No. 2, Oklahoma Anthropological Society.
1973 The Washita River Focus of the Southern Plains. In: Variation in Anthropology. (Lathrap and Douglas ed.), Illinois Archaeological Survey.
Binford, Lewis R.
1963 A Proposed Attribute List for the Description and-Classification of
Projectile Points. Miscellaneous Studies in Typology and
Classification. Anthropological Papers, Museum of Anthropology,
University of Michigan, No. 19, pp. 193-221.
Bousman. C. Britt
n.d. Archeological Assessment of Alibates National Monument. Archeological Research Program, Southern Methodist University.
Campbell. T. N.
1960 Texas Archeology: A Guide to the Literature. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 177-254.
Collins, Michael B.
1968a A Note on Broad Corne~-Notched Projectile Points Used in Bison Hunting in Western Texas. J~he Bull-Roarer, Vol. 3 (2), pp. 13-14.
1968b The Andrews Lake Ldcality: New Archeological Data From the
Southern Llano Estacado, Texas. Unpublished M. A. Thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
1971 A Review of Llano Estacado Archaeology and Ethnohistory. Plains
Anthropologist, Vol. 16 (52}, pp. 85-104.
Dibble, David S. and Dessamae Lorrain
1966 Bonfire Shelter, A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val Verde County, Texas.
Miscellaneous Papers No. 1, Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains.
Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 19 (65), pp. 180-196.
Duffield. Lathel F.
1964 Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir, Hutchinson
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35,
pp. 19-82.
Ellzey, Tom S.
1966 A Panhandle Aspect Site (Preliminary Report). Midland Archeological Society Special Bulletin No. 1, pp. 59-65
Glasscock, Keith, and Alma Glasscock
1955 A Preliminary Report on CR-1. an Indian Campsite in Moore County,
Texas. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 96-105.
Green, F. E.
1967 ~rcheological Salvage in the Sanford Reservoir ,Area~,, ManuscripLon

HANSFORD COUNTY ARTIFACTS

229

file at the Southwestern Regional Center, National Park Service, Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Harrison, Billy R. and Bob T. Griffin
1975 An Infant Burial in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeelogical Society, VoI. 44 [for 1973), pp, 61-68.
Heizer. Robert F.
1974 Some Thoughts on Hoaxes and Fakes. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 45, pp. 191-196.
Holden, W. E.
1929 Some Recent Explorations and Excavations in Northwest Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol.
1, pp. 23-25.
Hughes, Jack T.
1962 Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32, pp. 65-84.
1968 Prehistory of the Caddoan-Speaking Tribes. Ph.D. Dissertation.
Columbia University. University Microfilms, Ann Arbor.
Jelks, E. B., E. Mott Davis, and H. F. Sturgis (ads.)
1960 A Review of Texas Archeology, Part One. Bulletin of the Texas Archological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 1-176.
Keller, John E.
1975 The Black Dog Village Site. Texas Highway Department Publications
in Archaeology, Highway Design Division, Report No. 5.
Kelley, Jane H.
1964 Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacado. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35, pp. 1-18.
Lehmer, Donald J.
1971 Introduction to Middle Missouri Archeology. Anthropological Papers
No. 1. U. S. Department of Interior, National Park Service.
Lintz, Christopher
1972 The 1972 O.U. Field School. Oklahoma Anthropological Society
Newsletter, No. 20 (6), pp. 8-9.
1974 An Analysis of the Custer Focus and Its Relationship to the Plains
Village Horizon in Oklahoma. Papers in Anthropology, Vol. 15 (2),
Department of Anthropology, University of Oklahoma.
Luchterhand, Kubet
1970 Early Archaic Projectile Points and Hunting Patterns in the Lower
Illinois Valley. Illinois Archaeological Survey, Monograph No. 2.
Moorehead, Warren K.
1931 Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley. Phillips Academy; Andover.
1933 The Importance of Texas as an Archeological Field. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 5, pp. 9-13.
Randall, Mark E.
1970 The Archaeology of the Lamb County, Texas Area. Lower Plains Archeo!ogical Society Bulletin Number 1, pp. 43-53.
Schneider, Frederick
1969 The Roy-Smith Site (By-14} Beaver County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 18, pp. 119-179.
Shaller, Rolla
1973 The Wolf Creek Expedition, A Review. Paper presented at the 1973

230

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Texas Archeological Society Annual Meeting, Lubbock, October 30,
1973.
Sollberger, J. B.
1971 A Technological Study of Beveled Knives. Plains Anthropologist, Vol.
16 (53), pp. 209-218.
Studer, F. V.
1931 Some Field Notes and Observations Concerning Texas Panhandle
Ruins. In: Moorehead, Archae!ogy of the Arkansas River Valley, pp.
131.143.
Suhm, D. A., and E. B. Jelks.
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. The Texas Archaeological Society Special Publication No. 1 and the Texas
Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 4.
Tunnell, C. D. and J. T. Hughes
1955 An Archaic Bison Kill in the Texas Panhandle. Panhandle-Plains
Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 63-70.
Wedel, W. R.
1961 Prehistoric Man on the Great Plains. University of Oklahoma Press.
Wormington, H. M.
1957 Ancient Man in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History.
Popular Series No. 4 [4th Edition).

Lafayette, Indiana

