249

Experiments in Pictograph Replication
Emery C. Lehnert

ABSTRACT
Several informal experiments were conducted to replicate endangered or
v andalized prehistoric pictographs in the Lower Pecos Region. Various animal fats
and plant oils seem to work well as emulsion binders to facilitate painting on porous
limestone, and some paints also seem to harden the limestone, and thus may have
served to help preserve the pictographs. More research is needed to improve our
understanding of the prehistoric painting process and to learn more about how
these unique pictographs can be properly preserved and replicated.

INTRODUCTION
When the Amistad Dam Project was begun in Val Verde County, Texas, on
the International border between the United States and Mexico, new interest was
sparked in the extensive Indian wall paintings, ranging from Paleoindian to Late
Prehistoric age, in shallow shelters in cliffs and canyons that would be inundated by the lake. Similar sites were also known in the canyons of the Lower
Pecos and Devils rivers and the Rio Grande just above the maximum lake level.
Turpin (1991) has suggested a Middle Archaic age for the Pecos River Art Style,
and believed it flourished in the San Felipe period, between 3000 and 4000 years
ago; she has also demonstrated recently that the Lower Pecos Region extends
further southward into northern Coahuila, Mexico (Figure 1) than had been
previously realized.
The dry climate of this semiarid desert country has been responsible for the
preservation of these enigmatic paintings, even though many of them are on the
walls of open rock shelters. Some of the sites are now lost under the waters of Lake
Amistad, and many others are readily available to boaters, so vandalism has become
quite a problem (Labadie 1989). The natural exfoliation of the shelter walls appears
to have been accelerated by the moisture from the lake; lake water evaporates into
the air and condenses in the many cracks in the limestone walls and ceilings,
detaching small flakes.
REPLICATION EXPERIMENTS
In an effort to preserve a record of these interesting paintings and in order to
learn more about how and with what substances they were painted, I have been
painting miniatures of various prehistoric wall paintings on small limestone slabs
obtained from the strata in which the rock shelters are located. I use pigments dug
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 61 (1990)

250

Texas Archeological Society

Modern City

o

Archeotogical Site

,&

TEXAS

Previous boundary
of Lower Pecos
Cultural Area

0

;O

50 km
MEXICO

"-~

1

f

COAHUILA

~oNueva

Rosita

Sabinas

Figure 1. Map of the Lower Pecos Region of Texas and Mexico showing sites in the northern
part of Coahuila ~urpin 1991:Figure 1; map reproduced by courtesy of S. A. Turpin and the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory).

from the same or similar sources as those used by the Indians, and have experimen ted
with a variety of substances as emulsion binders.
Emulsion Binders
Among the various substances that were available to these prehistoric people
for the manufacture of paint were: water, oily animal and bird fats, oils obtained

Lehnert m Experiments in Pictograph Replication

251

from seeds, fish, or reptiles; eggs from wild birds in season, and juices from
plants such as prickly pear (Opuntia var.) or leather stem (Jatropha dioica). There
is sound archeological evidence that these early Indians ate deer, antelope, buffalo, raccoon, beaver, muskrat, goose and ducks (Dibble 1967), and they may
have used the fat from these animals and birds in emulsion binders for their paint
(David S. Dibble, 1983 personal communication).
Beaver (Castor canadensis), a very good source of easily obtainable oily
fat, were abundant (and are still present) along the Rio Grande and the Pecos
and Devils rivers. They were utilized to a great extent by the early Indians, as
is evidenced by the quantity of both beaver, muskrat (Ondatra gibethicus), and
other mammal bones found in the occupation debris in caves such as Arenosa
Shelter (Dibble, 1967 and 1985 personal communication).
The fat of the beaver forms a coat or layer 2 or more inches thick under its
skin, and it is also abundant in the body cavity. Beaver fat, which is very greasy
and oily, is so easily rendered that it is possible to squeeze out large quantities
of oily Liquid from a handful of fat. The fat of the raccoon (Proycon lotor) and
of the muskrat (Ondatra zibethicus) is like beaver fat but is not found in such
great quantities. In order to render the most oily fat from the beaver and similar
animals the Indians might have hung the parts of the animal to be rendered in
skin bags on wooden frames or put them in a tightly woven basket in a hole in
the mud along a stream or river. They would have covered the animal parts with
water and cooked them, causing the fats and oils to liquefy and float to the top,
where they would have skimmed them off (Black Hawk, Kooshariam Paiute,
1966 personal communication).
It would have been possible for these people to grind sunflower seeds and
other seeds high in oil content in stone mortars, then to separate out the oil by
heating them in containers such as mussel shells on the coals of a fire.
Fish also contain a fairly high proportion of oil, primarily in their heads and
eggs. The Indians could have gotten quantities of small fish by using wild gourd
vines and green gourds (Cucurbitafoetidissima) in season, or lechuguilla (Agave
lechuguilla), or black walnut hulls (Juglans nigra) as piscicides (there is some
ethnographic evidence of fish poisoning by the Tarahumara Indians of western
Chihuahua, Mexico). The toxic properties of these plants would have killed the
fish so they could be dipped up and cooked whole in the same way beaver fat
was cooked. The boiling process would release the fats in the fish and they would
be skimmed from the surface.
Other sources of emulsion binders could have been fat from turtles and the
intestinal tracts of snakes, both rendered in the same way as the fish; bird eggs
also could have been used in season.
The juices in the leaves of certain plants such as the leaves of the Spanish
dagger (Yucca torreyi) could also have been utilized. Juice is obtained from the
yucca leaves by heating them in hot coals till they soften, then wringing them
out as you would a dishrag. This juice is a clear, rather viscous liquid that takes
colored pigments readily. The leather stem (Jatropha dioica), also known in

252

Texas Archeological Society

Mexico as Sangre de Dragdn, which means blood of the dragon, has sap in its
roots that, although it is clear at first, gradually turns blood red on exposure to
air and sunlight.
However, Indians of that time probably were as much opportunists as we are
today and would have used the easiest obtainable substances, which would have
been the oily fat renderings of the beaver, raccoon, or muskrat.
Tests and Observations
The shelters containing many of the Archaic Indian camp sites in the
Amistad Lake area are in the thick-bedded, quite permeable Cretaceous limestone known as the Buda Formation. Water passes through the limestone quite
easily, and seeps and springs in the caves carry other minerals that coat and stain
the nearby cave ~walls.
While utilizing various paint emulsion binders, it was observed that the
lighter oil- and grease-based paints appear to be carried into the pores of the
rock surface more easily than are egg, plant juice, or heavy "suet" type paints.
The capillary spaces and pores in the rock surface serve as the route for entry
until the pigment fills the pores completely.
Red hematite is abundant in the Lake Amistad area; when ground to a powder and mixed with boiling hot rendered deer suet this mixture, in its liquid form,
makes a good paint.
Vegetable fiber brushes were made from Narrow Leaf Yucca (Yucca
thompsoniana) and Sotol leaves (Dasylirion leiophyllum). Archeological evidence of the use of Sotol leaf brushes has been reported from the Shumla Caves
(Martin 1933). Brushes were made by chewing the ends of the leaves and scraping the soft tissues off of the fibers. It is very necessary to use these types of
brushes with the hot animal fats since these plant fibers are stiffer and do not
shrivel up from contact with the boiling hot fat as animal hair brushes do.
These early people had no ceramics, so they would have had to put the
suetlike mixture in shells of fresh water mussels on coals in the fire, or melt it
by boiling so the color could be mixed into it. When the suet is in its hot melted
state, it takes the pigment well and makes good paint; however, it cools quickly.
Melted deer suet, after being mixed with colored pigments, cooled, and hardened, makes a very serviceable crayon. The Indians could have rolled the cooling suet into a ball or made a lump of it as a type of crayon. The use of black
manganese ore in a similar fashion at the Shumla Caves was also reported by
Martin (1933).
Sunflower seed oil, the next substance tested, carded the pigment well and
produced the kind of edge feathering so evident in many of the pictographs where
the color along the edge of the painted line fades into the rock rather than remaining sharp.
An interesting effect is that this paint also hardens the surface directly underneath it. The oil base evidently carries the pigment into the rock pores until

Lehnert ~ Experiments in Pictograph Replication

253

the pores are full, apparently making the area beneath the paint more dense than
the unpainted surface. For example, the unpainted limestone is very soft and
was easily scraped with a steel putty knife, but it took a tremendous amount of
pressure to scrape the surface color off the painted sections. When the surface
color had been removed, a "ghost" image remained in the stone, and the area
beneath the ghost was so hard that a steel scraper would not remove it all, and
the slab had to be split again to get down to a greaseless surface. In some prehistoric sites, such ghost images are found on the canyon walls. Possibly they
have resulted from natural weathering, during which windblown dust and sand
removed the colored pigments and left the ghost behind.
The absorption of the oil or grease carrying the pigment into the pores of
the limestone may have helped preserve the pictographs on these cave walls,
especially the ones that are covered with soot, charcoal, or spray paint. Ron W.
Ralph and Kay Sutherland (1973) have outlined the steps taken with commercial cleansers to remove the spray paint, charcoal, and soot, without apparent
harm to the pictographs. However, the hard rock at the Hueco Tanks differs
greatly from the soft limestone of the Lower Pecos area.
Further work should be done here, following Ralph’s and Sutherland’s procedures, to see if the same results can be obtained on pictographs on the Lower
Pecos limestone, but great care should be taken lest the chemicals in the cleaning agents remove the color from the rock pores or damage the pores of the rock
surface. Some work was done along these lines by Silver in 1985 at Panther
Cave, but more should be attempted (Silver 1985).
The ground or near-surface temperatures in the canyons during the summer
are often above 110° F. Such heat, over a period of time, will warm both the
walls inside the rock shelters and those of the cliff outside.
In an attempt to see if this heating contributed to the durability of the pictographs, the slabs of limestone with the paintings on them were placed in a
standard electric oven set at 100°F for 10 to 15 minutes. The heating apparently
sets the paint into the rock, so heating does have some bearing on the durability
of the painted surface. This may explain why colors in pictographs that seem to
be of the same type and age, range from dim to bright. It could be that all other
conditions--weathering, emulsion binders, and abrasion by the elements--were
equal, but that the dim pictographs were painted in the winter when the rock
was cool, so the paint did not soak in so readily as i( did when the rocks were
warnl.

,

Red ocher is the most abundant pigment found in this area; yellow ocher
can be found in some places in thin layers between the thicker layers of limestone, and black manganese ore can be found in the upper Cretaceous gravels
around Shumla Bend on the Pecos River. These are the three colors most used
by the prehistoric people in painting the pictographs.
Michael Zolensky (1982) ran some tests on the pigments taken from pictograph paint in the Seminole Canyon State Park and found that many chemical
elements were common to all of the paint samples tested.

254

Texas Archeological Society

Since the black pigment was found only in certain small areas, I decided to
seek another source for the black color. Charcoal, the most easily obtained black
substance, when mixed with animal fat or egg white, did not produce a lasting
black paint; powdered charcoal tends to clump and does not mix evenly throughout the medium.
CONCLUSION
It is hoped that the information obtained in these informal experiments will
be of use in further understanding prehistoric painting techniques and that some
of the methods and materials used here may be of value in replicating pictographs for museum exhibits. Further experiments to test methods of cleaning,
preserving, and stabilizing replicated rock art panels are needed before any work
is done on the vandalized originals.
REFERENCES CITED
Dibble, D. S.
1967
Excavations at Arenosa Shelter; 1965-66. The University of Texas at Austin,
Texas Archeological Survey Project.
Labadie, J. H.
1989
TheParidaCaveConservationProject1987.BulletinoftheTexasArcheological
Society 59(for 1988):83-109.
Martin, G. C.
1933
Archeological Explorations of the Shumla Caves. Witte Museum Bulletin 3.
Witte Memorial Museum, San Antonio.
Ralph, R. W., and K. Sutherland
1973
Pictograph Conservation at Hueco Tanks State Historical Park. Presentation at
Hueco Tanks State Historical Park, April 22, 1973.
Silver, C.
1985

Turpin, S.
1991

The Rock Art of Seminole Canyon State Historical Park: Deterioration and
Prospects for Conservation. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Contract
Report, Contract 340-299, Austin.

Sin Nombre and E1 Fortfn: Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (for 1989):267-281.

Zolensky, M.
1982
Analysis of Pigments from Prehistoric Pictographs, Seminole Canyon State
Historical Park. In: Seminole Canyon, The Art and The Archeology, edited by
S. Turpin. The University of Texas at Austin, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory Report 83.

