New Perspectives for Physical Anthropology
and Archaeology
Sr-mImY Hu~PmmYs
ABSTRACT
Physical anthropology and archaeology have diverged in their aims from
a common base in anthropology. Today, these two sub-fields must come
closer together in their investigation of man as a biological being and as a
cultural being.

It is the purpose of this paper to present a new approach to the
relationship of physical anthropology and archaeology. The basis of
the approach centers about the idea that man is first a biological
being, and only second is he a creature with culture. The concept is
clearer if we look at the evolution of man. Most people will agree
that there is a physical basis, a biological capacity, for culture which
must have evolved prior to the evolution of culture. This relationship
of biology and culture is present, however, and the import of the
relationship has been hotly debated.
Granting the evolution of a biological capacity for culture, it is
nmch easier to proceed to the second premise, that of biology as a
cultural limitation. As biological beings, no matter how complex our
culture may be, there are certain limits placed on this culture by the
mere fact that we are, after all, human. We still suffer from diseases,
we must still eat, our nutrition must be adequate, and so on.
Within tfiis £ramework, the physical anthropologist may take skeletal remains and cultural materials and add another dfinension to the
framework. Historically, this dimension has been lacking. Physical
anthropologists were struggling with a plethora of metrical data,
and the first article of faith for physical anthropology was the acceptance of anthropometry as the basis of its science.
At present, a new trend has been taking root. Meaningless measurements are being either re-evaluated or cast aside for better techniques
(Brothwell, 1968). Genetics, with its dynamic implications, is becoming the most useful tool with which to approach the analysis of our
data, including that of skeletal remains. It emphasizes the analysis
of populations and the changes of populations through time.
Much useful information has come from the application of a genetic
framework to our skeletal populations. The use of epigenetic traits,
those traits which are closely related to direct genetic content, has
opened a new basis for analysis (Anderson, 1963, 1968a; Berry and
Berry, 1967; Berry, 1968). For example, often cranii have accessory
bones in the sutures. These accessory, or Wormian, bones may be

9,60

TEXAS ABCttEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

closely linked to the genetic content. Thus, two populations with high
incidences of the accessory bones may be related. However, this data
is not meaningful by the consideration of one trait alone. Usually many
of these traits are used to compare two populations on the basis of a
profile of these traits. If the profiles are very similar, then the two
populations are said to be genetically similar populations. It is not
safe to say that the two populations may be related on the basis of
one trait, since, for example, brown hair has a high incidence in many
and often unrelated populations.
A more complete listing of epigenetic traits is given in Berry and
Berry (1967), and Anderson (1963).
Ideally, an anttn’opologist may trace a population through time as
Anderson did at the Serpent Mound site. He compared the Mound
and the Pit populations on the basis of 30 anomalies, which he called
true hereditary traits. By use of statistical techniques he was able to
show how the two populations differed from each other and how these
populations changed through time (Anderson, 1968a). This may show
the archaeologist the degree of intermarriage between the two groups
or the isolation of the groups, at least in mating patterns, from other
groups.
Another way to show degree of relationship is to examine diseases
which are hereditary. Brothwell cites a situation in which five females
of one period were found to have a congenitally abnormal femur head.
This hip anomaly suggests genetic relationship, and further evidence
suggests that this is certainly probable. All of these skeletons were in
the same district, and three were in the same cemetery. Two of the
latter occupied adjacent graves (Brothwell, 1965).
Numerous other diseases are hereditary; lists of these may be found
in Dobzhansky ( 1969,, pp. 107-111).
Other diseases, not necessarily hereditary, show the effects of occupation on the skeleton. For instance, a degeneration of the elbow
joint, called atlatl-elbow, or javelin thrower’s elbow, often occurs.
This degeneration is caused by the peeuliar movement aceompanying
a thrust of the object to be hurled. Cultural and skeletal evidence
should both support this diagnosis (Miller, 1960).
Other skeletal adaptations are manifested elsewhere. The Balearie
Islanders used slingshots and the result of this action pulled the
deltoid muscle on the arm so that the bone was roughened in a
distinctive manner at the attachment of this muscle (Wells, 1964:134).
Not only does the examination of disease and skeletal adaptation
tell us something about culture, but equally importantly, it helps
describe the physical world on which the culture rests (Armelagos,

PHYSICAL

ANTI-II~OPOLOGY

261

1969). An analysis of artifacts does not tell us the degree of human
suffering experienced by a people, and neither does a skeletal analysis
tell us how people coped with their physical milieu in terms of their
culture. Archaeology and physical anthropology in combination can
tell us a great deal more about a culture and a people than we can
simply discover relying on one to the exclusion of the other. This is
the new approach which nmst be taken, and must include ethnology
and linguistics, or else our data will become so fragmented as to
become meaningless. Artifacts do not exist without the biological
organisms, i.e., humans, who manufacture them.
Skeptics may well eite past performances on the part of the physical
anthropologists. While volumes of data were produced, they may say
no meaning has emerged from this data in terms of the study of
anthropology. Some physical anthropologists and others are, however, orienting themselves in this new direction. There are articles on
the effect of inadequate nutrition in infaney on mental ability (Eichenwald and Fry, 1969). Armelagos (1969) and Roney (1966) discuss
paleoepidemiology, the study of disease in ancient populations. Bone
cells are being studied to discover disorders of metabolism, infectious
diseases, developmental diseases, and so on (Frost, 1966).
New methods of skeletal analysis are presently available, through
the use of which physical anthropologists could expand their contributions. These include X-ray diffraction, neutron activation analysis,
laminography, fluorescent antibody techniques, and light microscopy.
New knowledge is available in serology, genetics, chemistry, and
physics.
For example, since many of the Southwest Indians kept turkeys,
Sahnonella, a bacteria which may cause an intestinal infection, could
have been transferred from the turkeys and might be present in
nmmmified remains. By new techniques, it is now possible to discover the presence of the infection (Jarcho, 1966).
Although this paper is mainly limited to a discussion of genetics,
diseases, and sl~eletal adaptations, other areas of investigation yield
much necessary information about human biology and culture. Some
of these areas include the study of dentition, demography, skeletal deformations induced by cultural practices, non-hereditary diseases,
biochemistry, K-ray studies, and so on. The use of genetics, diseases,
and adaptation illustrate the central theme of this paper.
Physical anthropologists are presented a challenge to master and
use these new techniques.
With data from all subfields in anthropology, not just archaeology
and physical anthropology, the archaeologist may arrive at an inter-

262

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

disciplinary approach to his data. In essence, the net result of this
interdisciplinary effort will be a unified approaeh to the study of
anthropology. Some intradiseiplinary effort already has been recognized as important with regard to zoologists, geologists, palynologists,
and others.
Although this approach should be beneficial to the anthropologists,
it makes greater demands on both the archaeologist and the physical
anthropologist. It calls for more rigid controls in the excavation of
human skeletal remains, and the dose co-operation of the archaeologist and the physical anthropologist who will correlate their data.
No physical anthropologist should pretend to be an archaeologist, but
both should realize that anthropology is an endeavor to study all
aspects of naan.
REFERENCES CITED
Armelagos, Ceorge J.
1969 Disease in Ancient Nubia. Science, 163: 255-259.
Anderson, J. E.
1963 The People of Fairty. Canada Dept. of Northern Affairs and National
Resources. Paper #2. Ottowa.
1968a The Serpent Mound Site: Physical Anthropology. Royal Ontario Museum,
Toronto. Occasional Paper #11, Art and Archaeology, Toronto.
1968b Skeletal Anomalies as Genetic Indicators. In: Brothwell (ed.), Skeletal
Biology of Earlier Human Populations, Pergamon Press: 135-148.
Berry, R: J.
1968 The Biology of Non-metrical Variation in Mice and Men. In: Brothwell,
(ed.), The Skeletal Biology of Earlier Human Populations, Pergamon
Press: i03-133.
Berry, A. C. and R. J. Berry
1967 Epigenetie Variation in The Human Cranium. Journal of Anatomy,
101: 361-379.
Brothwell, D. R.
1965 Digging up Bones. British Museum of Natural History, London.
1968 Introducing the Field. In: Brothwell, (ed.) The Skeletal Biology of
Earlier Human Populations. Pergamon Press: 1-18.
Dobzhansky, Theodosius
1962 Mankind Evolving. New Haven. Yale University Press.
Eichenwald, Heinz F. and Peggy C. Fry
1969 Nutrition and Learning. Science, 163: 644-648.
Frost, H. M.
1966 Morphometry of Bone in Paleopathology. In: S. Jareho, (ed.), Human
Paleopathology. Yale University Press, New Haven: 131-174.
Miller, J. E.
1960 Javelin Thrower’s Elbow. Journa! Bone and Joint Surgery, 42-B:
788-792.
Roney, J. G.
1966 Paleoepidemiology: An Example from California. In: Jarcho, (ed.),
Human Paleopathology. Yale University Press, New Haven: 99-120.
Wells, Calvin
1964 Bones, Bodies, and Disease. F. A. Praeger, New York.
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, Texas

