177

Exploring The Possibilities of Acorn Utilization
in the Burned Rock Middens of Texas
Ellen Sue Turner
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the possibility of a correlation between acorn processing and some types of burned rock middens in Texas, using known interrelationships between North American aboriginal culture and the technology of
acorn gathering and utilization. The acorn industry, as reported in ethnographic
records and reconstructed through archeological excavations, is reviewed, and
the processing of acorns in the Texas environment is considered.

INTRODUCTION
Many burned rock midden sites of varying forms or types are found in
Central Texas along the east edge of the Edwards Plateau (Hester 1980:63). In
addition to an abundance of fire-cracked rocks, some middens typically yield
large amounts of sandstone, chert, ash, and baked clay, indicating that prehistoric
people camped on and around them. Other types of burned rock middens comprise little else but burned rock and some ashy soil. There is much controversy
over the nature and function of the different kinds of burned rock middens, but
some may have been specialized food-cooking or plant-processing areas (Hester
1980:63).
ETHNOGRAPHIC RECORDS OF ACORN UTILIZATION
Some of the highest population densities for North American Indians were
among the acorn-gathering groups of California and the sedentary Pueblo farmers of the Southwest. The native culture of central California followed a hunting-and-gathering-based subsistence pattern in an unusually rich environment.
In most cases, the basic staple was acorns, which were consumed annually in
vast quantities, indicating their high food value in that culture. The hunting-andgathering culture of central California reached ecological stability around 2000
B.C.; later changes were primarily in artifact styles (Sanders and Price 1968:85-

86).
Sweet acorns were eaten by the Omahas and the Delawares of the midwestern prairies (Hecklewelder 1882), and by the Tonkawas, Coahuiltecans, and
Karankawas of Texas (Newcomb 1973:139). In the Southeast, the Choctaw of
Louisiana also ate acorns (Merriam 1918). In the Northeast, the Algonquins,
Iroquois, Hurons, and other tribes stretching from Canada to the Gulf of Mexico
included acorns in their diets (Merriam 1918).
There are some 60 species of oaks in North America (genus Quercus), and
Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society 59 (for 1988)

178

Texas Archeological Society

acorns of 27 species are known to have been eaten by the Indians. At least half of
the Indian tribes in the United States ate acorns, but they were a staple food only
in California, where they were eaten in greater quantity than any other foodanimal or vegetable (Driver 1975:91).
In California, wherever tan oak acorns (Quercus densiflora) were obtainable, they and Quercus kelloggii were most preferred overall. Quercus kelloggii
was preferred by the Southern Maidu or Nisenan, Miwok, Shasta, and Luiseno,
Quercus dumosa by the Cahuilla, Quercus gambeli by the Southern Maidu,
Quercus kelloggii, Quercus chrysolepis, and Quercus wislizenii by the Northern
Maidu, and Quercus agrifolia by the Pomo (Gifford 1936:240).
The nuts of the bur oak, Quercus macrocarpa, which grows in moist forests
along streams in East and Central Texas, eastward to the Atlantic Ocean, and
northward to New Brunswick and Saskatchewan (Correll and Johnston 1970:472),
were gathered in late autumn by the Ojibwa and buried for winter or spring use
(Densmore 1928:320). The red oak, Quercus rubra, was used by the Ojibwa and
the Iroquois. The Potawatomi used all kinds of acorns (Smith 1932:369, 1933:100,
Waugh 1916:123). The white oak, Quercus alba, grows in moist forests in the
timber region of East Texas, eastward to the Atlantic Ocean, and northward to
Canada (Correll and Johnston 1970:473). The Ojibwa depended on the nuts for
soup stock. The tree is common in lower Michigan and was also used by the
Menomini, the Sauk-Fox, and the Iroquois (Smith 1923:66, 1932:401, Waugh
1916:123).
Acorn Gathering and First Fruit Rites
Collecting acorns was a simple annual event in almost all California native
groups, initiated with a First Acorn Ceremony in the fall. The community was
organized for the collection and distribution of acorns by the shaman, moiety
chief, or secret society headman (Swezey 1975:14), and harvesting or eating of
acorns before the rite was a strict ritual prohibition (Voegelin 1942:175). There
were many varieties of regulatory rites, all emphasizing the central position of
ritual specialists in the direction of the work of the fall harvest (Swezey 1975:15).
Acorns matured and were gathered in the late autumn and early winter.
Rapid and efficient gathering simultaneously with the onset of the mature crop
was essential; natural competition from birds, mammals, and insects was an
ever-present factor that threatened to reduce the harvest (Wolf 1945:19). In
times of shortage, the trees in which the California woodpecker had drilled holes
and stored acorns were examined, and the fresh acorns were pried out with a
pointed instrument (welup) of deer antler (Barrett and Gifford 1933:143). Both
men and women engaged in acorn-gathering; the men climbed the trees to shake
the nuts down, and the women retrieved the falling and already fallen acorns.
The men and boys shook down or dislodged the nuts with long poles (Spencer,
Jennings, et al. 1968:243). "The acorn harvest lasted many days, perhaps as long
as a month" (Gayton 1948:178), "until enough nuts had been picked up to last
over the winter when food was scarce" (Baumhoff 1963).

Turner m Acorn Utilization

179

Acorn Processing
The acorns were gathered in large conical burden baskets, each large enough
to hold a bushel or two (Spencer, Jennings, et al. 1968:233). Two methods of
removing the hulls have been reported; the first engaged all the family--men,
women, and children--who removed the hulls with their teeth, but the more
common method was to crush the acorns with a hand-held stone and a rock
platform. Sometimes unworked flat stones were used as anvils, but frequently
special stones with several small pecked cuppings were used.
After hulling, the plump meats were placed on a bedrock mortar and ground
into meal. The bedrock mortars were merely fiat outcroppings of the bedrock of
the region. Development of the basket- or hopper-mortar was particularly important. It was a special stone mortar, provided with a conical basket hopper
stuck to the rim with asphalt for use in the processing (Snow 1976:162). If the
acorns were too oily, Spanish clover was pounded with them to absorb some of
the oil, and roots of pond lilies, or sometimes rattails, were mixed with the meal
that was intended for bread (Barrett and Gifford 1933:144-145).
Many procedures were involved in the preparation of acorns for consumption. The striking thing about the California Indians was their almost universal
knowledge of leaching (Barrett and Gifford 1963:250). Boiling was practiced in
the eastern Woodlands, but no other areas are known to have developed the
acorn industry (except for sweet acorns) to the magnitude reached by the
California Indians.
Various methods were used to leach the tannin from the acorns. In one
method, a shallow basin about a meter in diameter was scooped out in the sand.
The ground meal was placed in the basin and water was poured over it. "As the
water soaked through the fine meal, it dissolved out the acid and leached it down
through the porous sand" (Barrett and Gifford 1933:145). In other methods,
leaves were put in the bottom of a hole, and bark was put on the sides and over
the top. Green acorns were pounded and leached in the same way as dried acorns
or, in some cases, were simply boiled whole and eaten. Green (undried) acorns
were sometimes placed in long cylindrical openwork baskets that were laid
across the flow of a stream until the shells cracked open. Often acorns were
buried for at least a year (Kroeber et al. 1937:382); caches of acorns that have
lain in cold boggy places for more than 30 years have been turned up by farmers’
plows. The acorns were black, but still good (Merriam 1918). The Yurok
considered the quantity of acorns they had buried in the mud a partial measure of
a family’s wealth and prestige; a good family had at least a year’s supply. One
informant told that his buried acorns were not ripe after three years in the ground
because he had forgotten to bite a rotten branch, which was part of the burial
ritual (Kroeber et al. 1937:381). When smaller amounts of meal were to be
processed, the meal was placed in a sifting basket, which was lined with a layer
of leaves to keep the ground meal from leaking out. The meal was then leached
as in the leaching pit (Barrett and Gifford 1933:146).
The Algonquins, Iroquois, and Hurons used all available species of acorns

180

Texas Archeologieal Society

and removed the tannin by soaking or boiling them in hot wood ash lye water
(Smith 1932:402). The Omaha boiled the acorns until the water was almost
gone, then added fresh water and ashes. They boiled the nuts again until they
turned black, threw out the water and ashes, and added more fresh water until
they were clean; then they cooked them until they were soft. The Delaware
Indians prepared the Q. stellata (post oak) acorns in a similar way, then mixed
them with hominy (Heckewelder 1882). In the Southeast, acorns were boiled
whole, and the valuable oil was skimmed off the top of the hot liquizl (Merriam
1918).
The acorns were either dried before processing or processed green. The
hulled green acorns were put into "large, flattish, circular receptacles of basket
work which were placed on top of a high frame over the fire in the house so that
the heat in rising dried them" (Merriam 1918). They were also spread out in the
sun to dry.
Cooking and Preparation
One common method of preparation of acorn meal was by stone-boiling in
baskets. To prevent the basket from burning, the meal was stirred with a wooden
paddle or a looped stick with string binding. The meal became a thin gruel soup,
or, if the consistency was thicker, it was mush--a thick, glutenous porridge
(Barret and Gifford 1933:141). Acorn bread was made by dipping out the hot
mush ~to a special basket and turning it out into a cold running stream where
the cold water caused the loaves to contract and harden. They were then placed
on racks to dry, and, when hardened, they could be carried for weeks. The
naturalist John Muir often carried the dry acorn bread of the Indians on his field
trips into the California mountains and claimed that this slightly sour-tasting
bread was the most compact and strength-giving food he had ever used (Merriam 1918). Another way to make bread was to mix the meal with red clay, one
part clay to twenty parts meal, then to wrap it in leaves to bake overnight on hot
stones either in the ground or covered with earth and hot stones.
When removed the next morning, the bread previously mixed
with clay is as black as jet, and while still fresh has the
consistency of rather soft cheese. In the course of a few days it
becomes hard.., the sweet taste is very evident [Merriam
1918].
Algonquin tribes of the northeast used acorns for bread and for oil, and
mixed the boiled acorns with their fish and meat. The Iroquois pounded the nuts
and boiled them slowly in water. Then they skimmed off the oil and seasoned it
with salt to be used with potatoes, squash, pumpkins, and other foods. They
mixed the nut meats with mashed potatoes or added them to hominy and corn
soup to enrich them (Merriam 1918).
In the New World and the Old World, the use of acorns as food for men and
beasts dates back to prehistoric times. In England, France, and Italy, boiled

Turner ~ Acorn Utilization

181

acorns were used for bread in times of scarcity, and in most Mediterranean
countries the sweet fruit of Quercus esculenta was prized. In Algeria and
Morocco, the large acorns of an evergreen oak were eaten both raw and roasted;
in Spain those of the Gramont oak were considered superior to chestnuts. In
Spain and Italy in the early part of this century, as much as 20 percent of the total
food of the poor consisted of sweet acorns (Merriam 1918).
ARCHEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE

From the beginning of the Archaic, nuts and acorns have been an important
food resource in the diet of North American Indians (Yarnell 1970). Oak trees
grow throughout the continent, and acorns have been found in archeological
sites from Canada to Mexico.
Two charred acorn fragments were found at the Holdsworth III site in the
Tortugas Creek drainage east of Crystal City, Texas (Hester and Hill 1975:160),
and acorn fragments were also found at the Davis site in Cherokee County,
Texas (Yarnell 1970). Acorn hulls decompose, and when they are burned they
make a hot and lasting fire. Evidence of their use will be difficult to find in the
typical open sites of Central Texas, but not all of the shells would have been
completely burned; charcoal remains of such acorn shells might be found by
flotation of soil samples in these areas.
Ethnohistorical sources indicate that although acorns were used extensively
by Woodland groups, they were more often regarded as an emergency food to be
used in the event that more usual and desirable food sources failed. They
probably were gathered by groups to supplement the more reliable and staple
foods and to add variety to the diet, but they probably were not regarded as a
major resource (Betteral and Smith 1973:129).
Sites where acorns have been documented archeologically are the Koster
site in Illinois (Asch, Ford, and Asch 1972) (the report on which is one of the
best studies showing evidence of acorn use) the Fisher site in northeastern
Illinois (University of Michigan Museum of Anthropology, Ethnobotanical, and
Archeological Records, Report 75, as cited in Yarnell 1970), the McGraw
Hopewell site in Ohio and Moccasin Bluff (Yarnell 1970:70), the Franks, Feurt,
and Ash sites in Ohio, Richmond Mills (Parker 1918:29), Westfield (Guthe
¯ 1958:39), Silverwheels (Parker 1910:P1.31), and the Iroquolan sites--the Bates
and Castle Creek Owasco sites, Vine Valley site ~itchie 1959:11, 1944:64,
187), the Frontenac Island Archaic site (Ritchie 1945:8), the Lawson site in New
York (Wintemberg 1939:6), the Alway site (Jury 1937:2), the Sidney-Mackay
site (Wintemberg 1946:55), and a site in Ontario near Aylmer (University of
Michigan Museum of Anthropology, Ethnobotanical and Archeological Records, Report 176, as cited in Yarnell 1970).
Acorns also have been identified in five localities at the Feeheley site, the
Stroebel site, the Verchave II site (20MB181), three localities at the Juntunen
site and the Hopewell site in Michigan (Yarnell 1970:70). Montet-White
(1968:19) reported that the most abundant plant foods of the Middle Woodland

182

Texas Archeological Society

cultures of the Illinois Valley were acorns and nuts. They were found at the
Stillwell, Snyder, and Apple Creek sites (Streuver 1962). "Between 7840 and
6910 B.C. (as estimated on the basis of radiocarbon determinations) the Indians
who camped seasonally in Guila Naquitz Cave in Mexico collected acorns,
pinyon nuts, mesquite beans ... all of which were preserved within the cave by
desiccation" (Flannery et al. 1970).
Quercus L. Oak In Texas
The Edwards Plateau, 59 million ha (24 million acres) that comprise the Hill
County in west-central Texas, is predominantly rangeland, with usually shallow
soils underlain on the Plateau proper by limestone or caliche and in the central
basin by granite or gneiss (Correll and Johnston 1970:9). On the east and south,
the plateau ends at the Balcones Escarpment, but on the north and west it
extends into and interfringes with other regions (Correll and Johnston 1970:9).
The rough rocky areas of the plateau typically support a tree cover primarily of
live oak, Texas oak, shinnery oak, junipers, and mesquite (Correll and Johnston
1970:9). Some species of oak whose acorns conceivably could have been used
by the Texas Indians in the Edwards Plateau area are described briefly below.
Quercus Drummondii (Post Oak) Small or moderate-sized trees found in
the deep sand belts of Central Texas eastward; bears acorns annually (Correll
and Johnston 1970:477).
Quercus glaucoides Varies from shrubs to moderate-sized trees, on limestone surface and in canyons of the Edwards Plateau in Central Texas; also in
northeastern Mexico; small acorns produced annually (Correll and Johnston
1970:474).
Quercus Havardii (Shin Oak or Shinnery Oak) Very low shrubs spreading
by rhizomes, or small trees. Found in deep sand across the southern Panhandle
Plains; fruit annual, very polymorphic and very variable in size (Correll and
Johnston 1970;477-478).
Quercus macrocarpa (Bur Oak) Large trees with coarse twigs found in
moist forests along streams in East and Central Texas; fruit annually (Correll
and Johnston 1970:472).
Quercus Margaretta (Sand Post Oak, Runner Oak) Low or moderate-sized
shrubs branched from the base; found in deep sandy soil in low woodlands of
Central and East Texas; fruit annually (Correll and Johnston 1970:477).
Quercus marilandica (Blackjack Oak) Small trees as much as 10 meters
tall, with short trunks and very roughly furrowed hard black bark; abundant on
sand or on clay and gravel hills in Central Texas; fruit biennially (Correll and
Johnston 1970:490-491).
Quercus Mohriana (Scrub Oak) Shrubs or small trees that grow on limestone hills and mountains at low elevations in West and west-Central Texas,
northward into the Plains and also southward into Coahuila, Mexico. Fruit
annually (Correll and Johnston 1970:479).
Quercus Muehlenbergil (Chinkapin Oak) Moderate-sized or large trees

Turner ~ Acorn Utilization

183

found in calcareous upland forests of northeastern, Central, and West Texas;
small fruit produced annually (Correll and Johnston 1970:473-474).
Quercus Shumardii (Shumard Red Oak, Southern Red Oak) Large trees as
much as 18 meters tall with straight trunks and hard, furrowed black or platedgray bark; found in moist forests in the timber region of East Texas and
westward along waterways to the escarpment of the Edwards Plateau; fruit
biennially (Correll and Johnston 1970:488-489).
Quercus sinuata (Bastard Oak) Large trees as much as 20 meters or more
high, found in moist forests in the timber region of East Texas and westward
along the river courses to the escarpment of the Edwards Plateau; fruit annually
(Correll and Johnston 1970:481).
Quercus stellata (Post Oak) Moderate-sized trees, found in dry upland
woods, frequently on sandy soil in Central Texas (one of the dominant species of
the Cross Timbers region) and the timber region of East Texas; fruit annually. Q.
stellata x Q. sinuata var. breviloba is found with both parents on mixed gravel
and limestone banks (Correll and Johnston 1970:475-476).
Quercus texana (Texas Red Oak, Spanish Oak) Moderate or small trees as
much as 10 meters tall, with hard rough furrowed black or smooth gray bark;
peculiar to rocky limestone slopes of the Central Texas uplands; fruit biennially
(Correll and Johnston 1970:489).
Quercus virginiana (Live Oak) Small or very large spreading trees; several
natural hybrids occur sporadically in Texas; usually found in sandy loan but also
may occur in heavy clay; fruit annually (Correll and Johnston 1970:482).
Productivity in the various species of oaks is determined by many factors
and varies greatly in each region. Some oaks require two to three years to mature
whereas others (such as the white oak) mature in a year but have heavy yields
only every three years, with light crops intervening. The acorns of the Emory
oak ripen from June to September; those of the post oak mature from September
to November. White-tailed deer, squirrels, wild turkeys, prairie chickens, and
peccaries eat the acorns and would have competed with the Indians for the
harvest. Weir (1976:125) states that "nut collection and deer hunting go hand
and hand.., great quantities of the functionally specific artifact--the projectile
point--are found within the first type of midden" (middens with sufficient
occupational debris to indicate that prehistoric peoples camped on or around
them). The wide diversity and range of Texas oaks would have been an abundant
food source for the prehistoric hunters and gatherers.
BURNED ROCK MIDDENS OF CENTRAL TEXAS
Climatic conditions today approximate those of about 5,000 years ago,
when there was an apparent expansion in population together with a greater
density of oak and the development of the diagnostic burned rock midden (Weir
1976:125). There is no ethnographic record of an acorn industry in Texas, but in
comparing processing procedures in other parts of the country, significant similarities suggest a possible correlation of acorn processing with some types of
burned rock middens.

184

Texas Archeological Society

Burned rock middens are the most characteristic Archaic sites in Central
Texas. One type is a low mound of cracked and burned limestone rocks varying
in depth from a few centimeters to as much as 2.14 meters (7 feet). This type
ranges in size between 4.5 meters (15 feet) and as much as "an acre [0.40 hal in
diameter" (Schuetz 1971:131). Along the Balcones Escarpment these middens
are on bedrock or on residual soil near streams and springs and are also found on
alluvial terraces of spring valleys. The assemblages found in these middens
reflect hunting economies, sometimes with projectile points, bone, shell, and
faunal remains (Weir 1976:39).
Another type of burned rock midden, which dates from the late Archaic
(Weir 1976:39), has a central pit extending to bedrock; (sometimes bedrock
slabs have been removed from the center of the pit for greater depth [Jarvis and
Crawford 1974]). The middens are surrounded by massive concentrations of
burned rock fragments; they contain few or no diagnostic artifacts, but charred
remains of plant foods are often found in them (Weir 1976:39).
Burned rock middens of still another variety, found on the western periphery of Central Texas, were described by Wilson (1930) as circular piles or
mounds of burned rocks that are smaller than a doubled fist. The mounds vary in
circumference from 4.88 to 15.24 meters (16 to 50 feet), and they are from a few
centimeters to as much as 0.91 meters (3 feet) deep in the center; the base of the
mound proper always extends into the ground. All of the rocks in the mounds
show the effect of thorough, but not excessive, burning. They contain ashes and
dirt and, as a rule, are some distance from the campsites. Thousands of these
mounds are scattered over west-central Texas in Menard, Edwards, and Kimble
counties and westward from there toward the Pecos River, always near a wetweather water hole, stream, or lake. The streams of this area are bordered with
pecan trees, and the tops of the hills are covered with live oaks (Wilson 1930).
Wilson (1930:62) believes the mounds were hearth ovens for baking sotol
roots. F. W. Buckelew, who was captured by the Indians in 1886, related the
following eyewitness account to Wilson.
A large circular hole was then dug three or four feet deep and
several feet in diameter. In this hole they would place a large
pile of wood and rock in such a way that the rocks would
become thoroughly heated by the time the wood was consumed. The rocks were then replaced in such a way that the
sotol could be placed on and around them. When this was
completed, brush and leaves were placed next to the sotol and
the entire heap covered over with dirt so as to make it airtight.
This was allowed to remain several days during which time
the heat from the rocks would penetrate the sotol and thoroughly cook it... The bulbs were then spread out in the sun
where they could dry [Wilson 1930:62, 63].

Turner m Acorn Utilization

185

Hearths similar to those described by Buckelew often are associated with
burned rock middens, most commonly with those on open terrace sites. These
basin-shaped pits are no more than 30.48 cm (1 foot) deep and are filled with
limestone cobbles or ashy soil and contain little or no burned rock. Kelley and
Campbell (1942) believe that burned rock mounds came about as a byproduct, or
dump area, from the use and reuse of favored areas for the building of stonelined hearths. In addition to the stone-lined hearths, another variety was made by
scooping out a small cavity in the silt and sand and surrounding it with large
stones to hold the fire. In some instances stones were put into the fire, suggesting
that they might have been used for stone boiling.
W. Max Witkind conducted "An Experiment in Stone Boiling" (Gunn and
Mahula 1977:205) using dolomite stream cobbles and pieces of tabular limestone fired on a campfire of oak wood. Prefiring and postf’~ng weights were
measured, and they were boiled in a 15-quart plastic dishpan. Changes in color
were obvious (Gunn and Mahula 1977:207). Fracture lines and a proclivity to
fragment after several heatings suggest that there must have been only limited
reuse of both boiling- and cooking-pit stones and that each stone could be used
only several times before it was discarded on a nearby midden. Stones discarded
by people who visited the same location repeatedly for extended periods of time
could could have made the many and sometimes massive burned rock middens.
Courtenay J. Jones performed "A Further Experiment in Stone Boiling: A
Calcining Process for Acorns" (Jones 1980), in which he also determined the
prefiring and postfiring weights and colors of the cobbles used. In a mesquite
wood fire, Jones first rotated the limestone cobbles between a fire and a cooking
vessel; later, he rotated the cobbles between the fire and a vessel containing
water until they fractured. He then put ground acorn meal and water into the
cooking vessel and added the fractured cobbles to the thin gruellike mixture one
at a time until the mixture boiled. He took colorpHast readings, and the neutralization of the increased acidity (caused by the addition of the acorns, which
increased the acidity one hundredfold) suggested to Jones that
knowledge of the benefits of using limestone rocks in acorn
processing (eliminating the need for a leaching process to
remove the acid prior to cooking) could easily have been
gained by aboriginal peoples without requiring an understanding of the mechanics of calcination [Jones 1980:35].
Jones also noted a sizable amount of fatty, oily substance on the surface of
the water after boiling the acorn meal. Since the matrix in some middens is
greasy, this observation may be of some significance.
The possibility that the Indians used heated limestone cobbles to boil or
steam acorns or other plant foods could also account for the relative absence in
South Texas of acorn-leaching pits like those that are described above for the
acorn-gathering peoples of California.

186

Texas Archeological Society

LIMESTONE

Figure 1. Pictorial (top) and diagrammatic (bottom) representations of the chemical
interactions in acorn-processing. On the introduction of fire and water, limestone (CaCO3)
decomposes into its components CAO and CO2 to produce a base (CaO2H2), which
neutralizes and leaches the tannic acid from the acorns.
DISCUSSION

Many hypotheses have been proposed to solve the burned rock midden
mystery of Central Texas. Exploration of areas surrounding the burned limestone rock accumulations (Hester 1971, Suhm et al. 1954) indicate that the
burned rock middens are functionally specific intrasite features (Hester 1973).
Hester further states that it "may be no coincidence that some of the major sites
are located among, or in the immediate vicinity of, large groves of oaks." Weir
(1976) suggests that the middens may have come about as a result of specialized
nut processing, including the leaching and cooking of acorn bread.
Limestone is composed of the mineral calcite (CaCO3), which has been
deposited by either inorganic or organic processes. The rocks are soft, and
moistening them with dilute acid produces vigorous effervescence caused by the
liberation of copious amounts of carbon dioxide gas. When heated in a hearth pit
with burned wood, limestone breaks down into calcium oxide (CaO) and carbon
dioxide (CO2), and the addition of water makes calcium hydroxide (CaO2I-I2) or

Turner ~ Acorn Utilization

187

Ca(OH)2, a base that would neutralize and serve as an excellent leaching agent
for the bitter tannic acid (C14H1003) in the acorns (Figure 1).
There are 75 carbon atoms in the complex molecular structure of tannic acid
(C14H~003). It is a sacroid glucosinate whose ingredients include phenolics,
which give it its acidity. The ability of tanninates to extract water and combine
with the base Ca(OH)2 is low, but the wood burned to heat the limestone rocks in
the pit would have produced sodium ash, which is even more effective as a
leaching agent. When galls (made by wasps) are burned with the branches they
are attached to, the sodium ash leaches out their tanninates and leaves the galls
palatable.
Heating the limestone rocks or using them as boiling stones with water for
processing acorns and other plant foods would have left the limestone fragments
chemically altered, so reuse of the stones as either boiling stones or cooking-pit
stones would have been limited. Therefore, the burned rock middens that are so
common in Central Texas might be explained, in accordance with the Aboriginal Dump Theory of Hester (1971) and Sorrow (1969), as accumulations of
discarded altered stones.
REFERENCES CITED
Asch, N.B., R.I. Ford, and D.L. Asch
1972
Paleo Ethnobotany of the Koster Site. Illinois State Museum Reports of
Investigation 24.
Barrett, S. A., and E. W. Gifford
1933
Miwok Material Culture. Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City of
Milwaukee 2:117-376.
Baumhoff, M. A.
1963
Ecological Determinants of Aboriginal California Populations. University
of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 49:155236.
Betteral, R. L., and H. G. Smith
1973
The Moccasin Bluff Site and the Woodland Cultures of Southwestern
Michigan. Anthropology Papers of the Museum of Anthropology.23. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Correll, D. S., and M. C. Johnston
1970
Manual of the Vascular Plants of Texas. Texas Research Foundation, Renner, Texas.
Densmore, Francis
1928
Uses of Plants by the Chippewa Indians. Bureau of American Ethnology
Annual Report.44:275-397.

Texas Archeological Society

188

Driver, H. E.
1975
Indians of North America (fifth ed.). University Chicago Press, Chicago.
Flaamery, K. V., Anne Kirkley, Michael Kirktey, and A. W. Williams
1970
Farming Systems and Political Growth in Ancient Oaxaca. Plant identification by C. Earl Smith, U. S. Department of Agriculture.
Gayton, A. H.
1948
Yokuts and Western Mono Ethnography II: Northern Foothill Yokuts and
Western Mono. University of California Anthropology Records 10(2): 143302.
Gifford, E. W.
1936
California Balanophagy. In : Essays in Anthropology Presented to A. L.
Kroeber. University of California Press. pp. 87-98.
Gunn, Joel, and Royce Mahula
An Experiment in Stone Boiling by W. Max Witkind. In: Hop Hill: Culture
1977
and Climatic Change in Central Texas. The Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Guthe, A. K.
The Late Prehistoric Occupation in Southwestern New York: An Interpre1958
tive Analysis. New York State Archaeological Association, Research and
Transactions 141.
Hecklewelder, John
1882
History, Manners and Customs of the Indian Nations Who Once Inhabited
Pennsylvania and the Neighboring States. New and revised edition, Members Historical Society 12, Pennsylvania.
Hester, T. R.
Archaeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Texas.
!971
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42, Dallas.
1973

The Formation of a ’Burned Rock Midden’: A California Example. The
Record (Dallas Archaeological Society) 29(3).

1980

Digging Into South Texas Prehistory. Corona Publishing Co., S an Antonio,
Texas.

Hester, T. R. and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1975
Some Aspects of Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric Archaeology in Southem Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio. Special Report No. 1.
R. W., and D. D. Crawford
Archaeological Excavations on Interstate Highway 10, Sutton County, Texas.
1974
Texas Highway Department Publications in Archaeology 4, Austin.

Jarvis,

Turner ~ Acorn Utilization

189

Jones, C. J.
1980
A Further Experiment in Stone Boiling: A Calcining Process for Acorns. La
Tierra 8(2):31-38.
Jury, Wilfred
1941
The Clearville Prehistoric Village Site in Oxford Township, Kent County.
Bulletin of the Museum, University of Western Ontario 2. London, Ontario,
Canada.
Kelley, J. C., and T. N. Campbell
1942
What are the Burned Rock Mounds of Texas? American Antiquity 7(3):319322.
Kroeber, A. L., R. L. Olson, R. H. Lowie, and E. W. Gifford
1937-1939
Culture Element Distribution. University of California Publ&ations
in Anthropological Records 1. University of California Press, Berkley.
Merriam, C. H.
The Acorn, A Possibly Neglected Source of Food. National Geographic
1918
Magazine, 34:129-137. Washington, D. C.
Montet-White, Anta
1968
The Lithic Industries of the Illinois Valley in the Early and Middle Woodland Period. Anthropology Papers of the Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan 35.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1973
The Indians of Texas. The University of Texas Press. Austin.
Parker, A. C.
1910
Iroquois Uses of Maize and Other Food Plants. New York State Museum
Bulletin 144.
1918

A Prehistoric Iroquoian Site on the Reed Farm, Richmond Mills, Ontario
County, New York. Research Transactions of the New York State Archaeological Association 1:1-41.

Ritchie, W. A.
1945
An Early Site in Cayuga County, New York: Type Component of the
Frontenac Focus Archaic Pattern. Rochester Museum of Arts and Sciences
Research Records 7.
1959

Excavation of an Owasco Village Site in New York: Report on 1958
Settlement Pattern Studies in the Northeast. Eastern States Archaeological
Federation 18:11-12.

Sanders, W. T., and B. J. Price
1968
Mesoamerica: The Evolution of a Civilization. Random House, Inc.
Scheutz, M. K.
1957
A Report on Williamson County Mound Material. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 28:135-168.

190

Texas Archeological Society

Smith, H. H.
Ethnobotany of the Menomini Indians. Bulletin of the Museum of the City of
1923
Milwaukee 4(1):1-174.
1928

Ethnobotany of the Meskwaki Indians. Bulletin of the Museum of the City of
Milwaukee 4(2):175-326.

1932

Ethnobotany of the Ojibwa Indians. Bulletin of the Museum of the City of
Milwaukee 4(3):327-525.

1933

Ethnobotany of the Forest Potawatomi Indians. Bulletin of the Museum of
the City of Milwaukee 7(1 ):1-230.

Snow, Dean
The Archaeology of North America. Viking Press, New York.
1976
Sorrow, W.

1969

n.

Archaeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site: A Burned Rock Midden in Williamson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project
Paper 18.

Spencer, R. F., J. D. Jermings, C. E. Dibble, Elden Johnson, A. R. King, Theodore Stem,
K. M. Stewart, O. C. Stewart, and W. J. Wallace.
1965
The Native Americans. Harper and Row, New York.
Struever, Stuart
1962
Implications of Vegetal Remains From an Illinois Hopewell Site. American
Antiquity 27(4):584-587.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Kreiger, and E. B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
1954
Archeological Society 25.
Swezey, Sean
1975
The Energetics of Subsistence-Assurance Ritual in Native California. Contribution.s of the University of California Archaeological Research Facility.
University of California, Berkley.
Voeglin, E. W.
Culture Element Distribution: XX, Northeastern California. University of
1942
California Anthropology Records 7(2):47-251.
Waugh, F. W.
1916
Iroquois Foods and Food Preparation. Canada Department of Mines, Geological Survey, Anthropology Series, No. 12.
Weir, F. A.
1976
The Central Texas Archaic. Doctoral Dissertation. Department of Anthropology, Washington State University.
Wilson, E. W.
1930
Burned Rock Mounds of Southwest Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society 2.

Turner ~ Acorn Utilization

191

Wintemberg, W. J.
1939
Lawson Prehistoric Village Site, Middlesex County, Ontario. National
Museum of Canada Bulletin 94:1-104.
1946

The Sidney-Mackay Village Site. American Antiquity 11(3):154-182.

Wolf, C. B.
1945
California Wild Tree Crops. Rancho Santa Aria Botanical Gardens.
Yarnell, R. A.
1970
Aboriginal Relationships Between Culture and Plant Life in the Upper
Great Lakes Region (reprint of 1964 ed.). Museum ofAnthropology, University of Michigan 23.

