WATER SEPARATION PROCEDURES AT THE 1076
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY FIELD
SCHOOL: AN APPRAISAL OF RESULTS
JOHN

E.

KELLER AND BRUCE B. FULLEM

ABSTRACT
An apparatus for flotation separation used at the Texas Archeological
Society Musk Hog Canyon field school is described. The methods used in
processing the matrix samples from archeological contexts and the
results of the experiment are presented.

INTRODUCTION
During the 1976 Texas Archeological Society field school at
Musk Hog Canyon, the authors carried out water separation
experiments with some of the excavated samples. Our investigations were oriented toward several related, but nevertheless
separate, goals: the collection of a floral sample and an evaluation
of the methods by which this can be accomplished. In addition, we
wished to evaluate the feasibility of conducting an extensive
flotation operation for the archeological work to be conducted
along the right-of-way of IH 10 in western Crockett County.
The basic principle behind the water separation technique, that
lighter-than-water materials such as plant remains can be
separated by floating from soil and other heavier-than-water site
constituents, is well understood. In fact, descriptions of the
techniques and equipment are abundant in recent archeological
literature (Jarman et al. 1972; Struever 1968; Davis and
Wesolowsky 1976; Limp 1974; Watson 1976).

APPARATUS
The ultimate design of our equipment had more to do with
available materials and resultant construction requirements than
with any preconceived plan. The basic component of our apparatus
(Figure 1) is an open fiberglass tank measuring approximately 60
inches (152.5 centimeters)by 21 inches (53.5 centimeters). A
central baffle of fiberglass and plywood (metal or plastic would be

equally effective) serves to separate this tank into two approximately equal chambers. The first of these, the "riot chamber" (A) is
connected to the water supply by means of an external garden hose
fitting (B) and a controllable gate valve (C). The interior of the

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

chamber contains an appropriate amount of pipe and an upward
directed showerhead (D} through which the chamber is filled and
the water agitated. A removable wooden stand (E) which serves to
support a fine mesh screen "riot box" (F) completes the first
chamber arrangements. The "riot chamber" is connected with the
second or collection chamber (H} by means of a fiberglass covered
spillway {G), which allows for removal of the floating or light
fraction by moving water. The spillway is directed into a smallmesh, #20, gramametric screen (I), which collects the sample and
allows for water run off. Drainage from the collection chamber is
provided by a number of strategically placed holes (J).
During the course of our experimentation, we noted that the
amount of agitation seemed rather important in sample collection.
This was in substantial agreement with the literature on the
subject and as a result, we added a further variation to the
apparatus. Since agitation can be accomplished by forced air and
water, we decided that a second hose with a controllable nozzle
might provide sufficient water movement. Accordingly, a second
hose was connected to the water source and this was used to inject
a forceful jet of air and water into the "riot chamber". This
injection resulted in a marked increase in agitation and the
associated frothing producing an observable increase in the size of
the sample collected.
An ample supply of water is obviously necessary for the proper
operation of the device. Our water source was the Pecos River
from which water was taken by means of a three-horsepower
centrifugal pump with a fine mesh gauze covered intake. This
arrangement supplied ample quantities of filtered water at
sufficient pressure to allow operation of the showerhead and
agitation nozzle simultaneously.
Flotation samples were removed during the course of the
excavation by means of trowel and placed directly into cloth sacks.
Each sample contained approximately 12 quarts and was brought
to the flotation tank for processing within 24 hours.

METHODS
Our first goal in using the flotation device was to evaluate its
performance and to determine what alterations were needed.
The flotation procedure was varied to accommodate the various
field objectives (ex. whether or not carbon samples were to be
taken). In all, six variations were tried using various combinations
of air, water, and kerosene.

WATER SEPARATION AT 1976 T.A.S. FIELD SCHOOL

FLOTATION

147

TANK

TOP
O

!! !!~
TO PUMP

O

OUTLET

iiill
I

I

SIDE

TO PUMP

-xd-*

A

"Flat"

B

Hose

Fitting

C

Gate

Valve

D

Showerheod

E

Removeoble

F

"Fiat"

FIGURE

~

Fitting

Stand

Box

Spillway

H
I
d

~

Collection

Chamber

Gromametric

Drainage

.... "~’ Water

matrix.

Chamber

G

20

OUTLET

Screen

I~

Stand

Holes

Path

1. Apparatus for flotation separation for archeological

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1) WATER
2) WATER & AIR
3) WATER & KEROSENE
4) WATER, KEROSENE & AIR
5) WATER & SOAK KEROSENE
6) WATER, SOAK KEROSENE & AIR
In cases where carbon 14 material is to be retrieved, the process is
restricted to water only with two possible alternatives.
In west Texas during the summer, there is no reason to attempt
drying of the soil anymore than it is naturally. This being the case,
it was decided to handle the soil as little as possible and therefore,
it was not dry screened. This did not seem to cause any difficulty
in processing the samples. It should be added that our samples
were kept to a six quart size. This was accomplished by dividing
the original samples and running them twice, so an evaluation
could be made of the various methods. With the use of water only,
a sample was poured in slowly while the operator stirred the soil
and water. This in connection with the below-surface shower head
produced considerable agitation and the flow of water and dirt
allowed sufficient overflow to carry all floating or nearly floating
material down the spillway.
The second alternative also used no chemical additives thus
allowing C’4 samples to be taken. Attempting to duplicate the effect
described by Jarman at el. (1972), the second hose with the
agitation nozzle was used. By injecting a jet stream of water into
the tank with the end of the hose several inches above the surface,
a tremendous amount of air is added as well. This produces not
only a greater in and out flow of water, but a vigorous bubbling
action accompanied by a froth. The occurrence of a froth without
chemical additives is particularly useful when C" samples are
desired.
When C" samples are not to be recovered, the use of a collector
has been recommended (Jarman et el. 1972). Two methods of
application were utilized and both were tried with and without the
air and froth action. This provided four additional variations to
evaluate. First, the collector (kerosene) was added in the amount of
less than one-half cup and then the soil was added as before. This
is considerably more kerosene than Jarman et ol. (ibid.) used, but
our machine has a constant flow of water which carries off much
of the kerosene. The second technique was to presoak the sample
in herosene for five minutes while still in the sack, thus allowing a
much greater time for the collector to work. Both of these

WATER SEPARATION AT 1976 T.A.S. FIELD SCHOOL

!49

techniques are potentially harmful to the environment and
adequate kerosene disposal methods should be employed.
All of these methods worked quickly, but the bubbling action was
the fastest and seemed most efficient. A sample could be run and
the tank purged to avoid contamination in ten minutes. If samples
were from the same feature and purging was not necessary,
samples could be run in less than two minutes.

RESULTS
It is not possible to assume equal light fraction contents for all
samples. Therefore, comparisons between samples are not valid.
However, the samples were divided in half, permitting two methods
on each sample and by this means, comparisons can be made
between two parts of the same sample.
Without the forced air, the light fraction from the water-only
method out-weighed the kerosene methods in 75 percent of the
cases. When forced air was used, the water and kerosene method
proved to be most effective. In comparing samples run with and
without the forced air, it was found that the air increased the
weight of the light fraction.
After our return to Austin, we ran two more samples to check
the results with a different water source. The density of water
from the Pecos River [perhaps due to salinity) (Lange and Carty
1975) is significantly greater than water from less arid regions and
this could change the effectiveness of the collector. These check
samples were divided into thirds and each of the three methods
with air were employed. The results are given in ratio form -water: soak kerosene: kerosene - 1:1.25; 1.50 and 1:1.29: 1.29.
The results indicate that the largest returns are given when
forced air and a small amount of kerosene are used. If C’4 samples
are to be taken, then the use of forced air and water is
recommended. It is also possible and practical to process a large
number of samples with a realistic hope of gaining useful
information. While no quantitative statements can be made about
the types of material recovered, as this was not the purpose of this
experiment, there were botanical remains identified and they
include seeds of luglans, Celtis, Quercus, cactus and Acacia.

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED

Davis, E. Mott and W. B. Wesolowsky
1976 The Izam: A Simple Water Separation Device. Journal of Field
Archaeology, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 271-273.
Jarman, H. N., A. J. Legge and J. A. Charles
1972 Retrieval of Plant Remains from Archaeological Sites by Froth
Flotation. In Papers in Economic Prehistory (edited by E. S. Legge),
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, pp. 39-48.
Lange, F. W. and F. M. Carry
1975 Salt Water Application of the Flotation Technique. Journal of Field
Archaeology, Vol. 2, No. 1 & 2, pp. 119-123.
Limp, F. W.
1974Water Separation and Flotation Processes. Journal of Field
Archaeology, Vol. 1, pp. 337-342.
Munson, P. J., P. W. Parmalee and R. A. Yarnell
1971 Subsistence Ecology of Scovell, a Terminal Middle Woodland
Village. American Anthropologist, Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 410-431.
Struever, Stuart
1968 Flotation Techniques
for
the Recovery of Small-Scale
Archaeological Remains. American Anthropologist, Vol. 33, No. 3,
pp. 353-362.
Watson, Patty Jo
1976 In Pursuit of Prehistoric Subsistence: A comparative account of
some contemporary flotation techniques. Mid-Continental Journal of
Archaeology, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 77-100.

