281

A Flexed Burial From Llano County, Texas

Leland C. Bement

ABSTRACT
A semiflexed burial was salvaged from a roadcut at site 41LL356 near Sandy
Creek in Llano County, Texas, during the spring of 1987. Two superimposed
hearths lay above the burial. A dart point associated with the skeleton places it in
the Late Archaic period, but a radiocarbon date (1200-260 BP ) from charcoal in a
hearth directly above the burial indicates the Late Prehistoric period. There is a
stratigraphically consistent relationship between the burial, which contains an
Ensor dart point of the Twin Sisters phase (1750-1400 years BP) and the lower
hearth dated to the Austin Phase (1250-650 BP). The second hearth, 60 cm above
the dated feature, probably belongs to a later Austin Phase occupation tentatively
dated to about 770 BP based on the deposition rate of0.18 cm per year calculated
from the radiocarbon-dated hearth..

SITE SETTING
Site 41LL356 is a terrace site along the right (south) bank of Sandy Creek
in Llano County, Texas (Figure 1). No cultural materials are exposed on the
terrace surface to indicate the presence of the site, but a road cut into the terrace
at a ford of the creek exposed the deeply buried cultural remains, consisting of
rock concentrations and a single burial.
The burial was discovered by an avocational archeologist who noticed the
top of a skull eroding from the roadcut. Upon notification of the find, the landowner became concerned that the skeleton might be vandalized and requested
that professional archeologists remove the burial. The site was subsequently
designated 41LL356 by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL)
of The University of Texas at Austin.
SALVAGE RECOVERY AND RESULTS
Excavations were performed by Dr. Solveig A. Turpin and Leland C. Bement,
of TARL, and Mark Denton, of the Texas Antiquities Committee on April 16,1987.
The salvage recovery of this burial revealed hearth construction and burial practices
attributable to Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric inhabitants along Sandy Creek.
Methods and Techniques
Excavation began with the placement ofa 1.5x 1.5-meter shovel-dug unit over
the exposed cranial vault. Every eighth shovel load was screened through quarter-

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 61 (1990)

282

Texas Archeological Society

Llano County

Figure 1. Map showing location of Llano County.

inch hardware cloth, except in levels where cultural materials and features were
uncovered. In these levels all shovel loads were screened.
Cultural Stratigraphy
Initial recovery of materials intrusive to the fine grained, sandy silt alluvial
deposits was at a depth of 1.1 meters below the surface, where fist-sized cobbles of
gneiss were uncovered (Figure 2). A light scatter of chert flakes was uncovered from
1.2 to 1.4 meters below the surface. Also at 1.4 meters was Hearth 1, consisting of
three burned cobbles and charcoal-mixed sand that defined a circular pit 50 cm in
diameter and 10 cm deep (Figure 2). There was insufficient charcoal for a
radiocarbon date.
At 1.8 meters below surface, the tops of large rocks were hit, and subsequent
cleaning exposed Hearth 2, an arc of stones that bisected the excavation unit into east
and west halves. Forty large stones (the largest 25 cm x 30 cm x 15 cm) were stacked
two high and three wide. Charcoal lumps and fire-hardened clay defined a 15 cm
deep pit on the west side of the stone alignment. Burned and unburned chert flakes
were common both in and out of the feature. Charcoal sufficient for five radiocarbon
dates was collected; however, only one sample was run, rendering an uncorrected
age of 1200-L-_60 years BP (Tx-5756) (S. Valastro, personal communication). This
date, when calibrated using the Stuiver and Reimer (1986) calibration, provides a
one standard deviation (sigma) range from 1256 to 1013 years BP, assigning this
occupation to the Neo-Archaic Austin phase as defined by Prewitt (1981:75) in
Central Texas. The arc of stones comprising this feature continues into both north

Bement ~ Flexed Burialfrom Llano County

Years
B.P.

o-

283

41L L356

Depth
cm

o

50-

500-100-

Heart h 1

Hearth 2

1000--

Tx 5756
1200+-60

Fle=ed Burial

250-

1500--

300

[]Lithic Level

~Rock

[~x Charcoal

Figure 2. Profile drawing of the excavation at 41LL356.

and south walls of the unit and reemerges in the cut bank, giving the feature a
diameter of more than 2 meters. The exact configuration could not be determined
due to the damage to the hearth caused by road construction.
The burial lay at 2.2 meters below the surface (Figure 2), and the skeleton was
totally exposed (Figure 3).
Based on the known depth of Hearth 2 and the radiocarbon age, a rate of
deposition for this terrace was calculated. Using the calibrated radiocarbon date

284

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Photograph of the burial in situ, site 41LL356, Llano County, Texas.

mean of 1134 BP and a depth below the surface of 2.0 meters, the rate of deposition
is 0.18 meters per year. This rate of terrace deposition provides a means of
estimating the age of the other cultural levels. When this calculation is applied to the
Hearth 1 level, an estimated age of 780 years is obtained. Such age estimates are only
tentative, since not only does each flood deposit a different amount of alluvium, but
also the individual flood episodes could notbe differentiated in the fine grained silts
of this terrace.
Skeletal Data
The burial is that of a 35-45-year-old male, 168 cm (5 feet 6 inches) tall.
The skeleton was semiflexed, lying on the right side. The skull faced south,
although the long axis of the burial is more SE to NW. The left arm lay across
the side with the hand on the abdomen; the right arm parallelled the torso, and
the hand curled along the thigh. Most of the bones were highly fractured, and
only the skull, which rested on a gneiss slab, and the right humerus could be
removed intact. This was accomplished by applying spray foam, which hardened to form a supportive case around the bones (Figure 4) (Bement 1985:371).
Noted pathological conditions include two pea-sized depressions in the left
parietal and occipital area of the skull, probably the result of infectious lesions. The
teeth of this individual are evenly worn, except for the first maxillary molar on each
side ~igure 4). Here, wear has reduced the occlusal surface to the roots, splitting

Bement ~ Flexed Burialfrom Llano County

285

Figure 4. Closeup photograph of the skull jacketed in foam for protection.

each molar into two separate but apparently viable toothlets. The incidence of caries
is low, and no teeth have been lost.
Ensor Dart Point
An Ensor dart point was uncovered along the dorsal side of the spine opposite
the lower thoracic vertebrae (Figure 3). This dart point was made from a large flake
of tan chert, the ventral surface of which is apparent on one face. The blade of the
point has been reworked, giving it an asymmetrical outline (Figure 5). Sharpening
of the tip has drawn the edge toward one surface and has enhanced the curve of the

286

Texas Archeological Society

entire specimen. Shoulders are square to sloping, the stem is formed by broad sidenotches, and the base is extremely thinned. This specimen is aligned with the Ensor
type because of the broad side-notching. The point is 5.3 cm long, 2.6 cm wide, and
0.7 cm thick.

\
Ventral

Dorsal

Dorzai

Ventral

J

Figure 5. Ensor dart point recovered with burial from 41LL356, Llano County, Texas.

DISCUSSION

The skeletal material was in a state of poor preservation, since all but the
small, compact bones of the hands and feet were fractured in situ. Postburial
deformity is amply demonstrated in the skull/where vertical pressures compressed the facial region through fracturing and slippage of the eye orbits, bridge
of the nose, and maxilla midline.
In addition to disturbances related to overburden pressures, the left rib cage
and humerus were dislodged--the humerus was totally removed, either by rodent action or as a consequence of the construction of Hearth 2. Although the
burned soil and charcoal lens in Hearth 2 mark the floor of the pit above the
skeletal material, it is likely that during initial scooping in construction of the
pit, the rib cage was disturbed without being recognized as part of a human
skeleton. Thus, the hearth was constructed and fired.
This burial is significant because it adds to the sparse data we have on Late
Archaic mortuary practices in the Llano County area. No exploratory tests were
performed to determine if the site contains other graves. This burial follows the
general trend in Central Texas during the Late Archaic period of isolated flexed
interments (Prewitt 1981:81). The cause of death of this individual could not be
determined, but it is possible that the dart point was embedded in the body at
the time of death and came to rest where it was unearthed as a result of later
disturbance from construction of the Late Prehistoric hearth.

Bement ~ Flexed Burial from Llano County

287

All skeletal materials have been donated to the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The Univerity of Texas at Austin, to be preserved for detailed study
together with other burials from the Central Texas Region.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Special recognition is extended to Mr. and Mrs. Ted Franklin and family and
Mr. and Mrs. Frank Poplin for their concern and interest in preserving the prehistoric
heritage of Llano County. Gratitude is also expressed to MD Enterprises of Austin,
Texas, for contributing the money for the radiocarbon assay. Field supplies and
laboratory space were provided by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
REFERENCES
Bement, L. C.
1985
SprayFoam:ANewBoneEncasementTechnique.JournalofFieldArcheology
12(3):371-372.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 52:65-89.
Stuiver, M., and P. J. Reimer
1986
Computer Program for Radiocarbon Age Calibration. Radiocarbon 28:10221030.

