THREE ARCHAIC SITES IN EAST TEXAS
By E. W. HAYNER
Like Walter W. Taylor, who gave us a good article on a
cave in Coahuila (Taylor, 1956), I am not looking for old age
in the sites and artifacts which I find, nor am I looking for
an argument about their age. Yet, when we deal with the
Archaic Aspect, the question of age comes up at once. Therefore we must deal with the problem of age by using all methods
available.
In East Texas there are several factors which tend to confuse the person who makes an investigation of the Archaic
Aspect. First, we do not have any completed publications to use
as references. Second, we have to deal with the Pleistocene
Epoch and the Recent deposits. Third, a real problem, we have
materials from most of the loci of the Gibson and Fulton Aspects piled on top of most of the Archaic sites.
During the time period of the Archaic Aspect, all of East
Texas was occupied. We find remnants of Archaic components
in every part of the area, and it is a fact that nearly every good
campsite location in the area will show some evidence of the
Archaic occupation. As the Neo-American people moved into the
area, or as the Archaic people developed into the Neo-American
the same camp sites were used by the Neo-American people as
had been used by the Archaic people.
Sam Houston made the statement that when he crossed this
country and rode at night, he was never out of sight of a Caddo
campfire. This being the case, Archaic sites which are pure are
rare, and when we find a component within the Archaic which
we can type as a distinct focus, then we have a prize indeed.
This article is not an attempt to deal with the East Texas
Archaic Aspect; but since I have been fortunate enough to find
several pure components within the Aspect, I shall present such
facts as are at hand.
Caddo Lake, with its sandbars, islands, and surrounding
shore line, is a distinct archeological area. At no other place in

Texas A~’cheological Society

170

Texas or the Southwest will be found such a merging of aspects
and loci.
When we deal with the Archaic Aspect here, we must also
deal with the age of Caddo Lake and the Pleistocene Epoch. The
lake itself shows three very distinct stages of water level. One
is the present-day stage, which is held almost constant by the
dam below Mooringsport, Louisiana. Then there was a low water
stage of which we have evidence in the form of many oak snags
and stumps, better known as "buckhorns," which are to be
seen wherever the lake is shallow enough to see bottom. There
is also an old high water stage. Along the south shore from
Bird Island to Buzzard Bay there is an old shore line about
12 feet above the present water level, revealed as a ledge along
the sides and brows of the post oak ridges which abut on the
lake along this shore. At the base of this ledge is a shore line
which yields wave-washed gravel and sand. The post oak ridges
themselves are formed by an outcropping of the Rockdale formation, which is a member of the Wilcox group. The west end of
this Rockdale outcrop can be seen at old Port Caddo Landing
on Cypress Bayou and it can be followed from that point down
the bayou and along the south side of the lake.
i.

THE PIPELINE SITE

About one mile west of the Texas-Louisiana state line, which
crosses the lake, is an oil pipeline running straight across the
lake. At the point on the south side where the pipeline comes
ashore and climbs the post oak ridge, there is an Archaic campsite, which I call the Pipeline Site. It sits on the top of a post
oak ridge which lies parallel to the lake and is about 200 yards
from the lake shore. Just a short distance from the site is the
beginning of the old Pleistocene shore line.
The site is crossed by the pipeline and a road, and there are
also two wash-outs where the soil is eroded down to the Rockdale formation, which is a red silty clay with some small concretions. The top-soil of the ridge is clearly of the Recent Epoch,
and is of organic nature, which means that it was formed where
it is located.

Tl~ree Archaic Sites in East Texas

171

The size of the area covered by the site is not known. The
materials recovered have come from an area about 125 feet in
diameter. There are some remains of burned rock, a few small
pieces of petrified wood, and some evidence of charcoal.
The first artifact to be found at this site, in 1954, was a rubbing stone or mano (Fig. 42, A). During the three years since
then, five points (Fig. 42, B-F) have been recovered. Two of
these points are made from a brown novaculite, one from a
dark brown flint, one from a tan flint banded with red, and one
from a tan flint. All of these points have a contracting stem
which is rounded on the end. They could be typed as Gary; but
as of now, and unti! more ~esearch is done on them and on the
site, I feel it best not to place them in any certain type.
This is a very difficult site to work. When the weather is dry,
the soil is hard and will not pulverize or go through a screen.
When the soil is wet, it is sticky and can be neither dug nor
screened. As this site is so hard to work, I let the rains do the
excavating for me. After every rain I go over the site, and have
done so many dozens of times.
About 400 yards down the lake from this site is the Jones
No. 1 site (Hayner, 1957, pp. 6-7), which sits on the presentday shore line, with the ridge and ancient shore line behind it.
Jones No. 1 has produced.Archaic, Gibson Aspect, and Titus
Focus artifacts. In the Archaic horizon of this site, spear-sized
points of the Gary type have been found, as well as specimens
of other Archaic types and one Angostura Point.
I am not in a position to build a strong case for the antiquity
of the Pipeline Site, but will present the facts. We have here
two sites--Pipeline and Jones No. 1--both Archaic, yet completely different both in type of location and in type of points
produced. In the Pipeline site we have only small points which
some people would type as Gary, whereas in the Jones No. 1
Archaic zone are Gary and other Archaic types.
It can be stated categorically that all the specimens from
the Pipeline site, shown in Fig. 42, A-F, came from within the
top, or from on the top, of the red silty clay, the Rockdale formation. Two of these points (Fig. 42, B, E) were found in the

172

Texas Archeological Society

roadway, one in the center of the road, one in the outside edge
of a rut. They were very definitely in the red formation and had
to be cut out. The other three points (Fig. 42, C, D, F) were
found in the wash-outs, in place in their original beds, not
dislodged and moved by rain.
In the site area and on the upper side of one of the washouts
is a large area of the organic topsoil, washed clean. In this clean
area there is no evidence of occupation. At no place in the road
or pipeline is there any occupation evidence except in or on
the red Rockdale.
At the beginning of this paper, I stated that when we deal
with the East Texas Archaic, we have to deal with the Pleistocene Epoch. Here in the Pipeline site we have such a case. The
organic topsoil is clearly of the Recent Epoch, and the underlying Rockdale is clearly older. Although not a geologist, I am
acquainted with Texas geology, and I have described the circumstances of the Pipeline site to a qualified oilfield geologist.
It would not be fair to quote him directly here, since he has
not examined the site himself; but on the basis of my description he suggested a date of about 6000 B.C. for the site.
This gives us about an 8000 year age for these early Archaic
points. Of course, this date may seem too early for some people
to accept; but it is not out of line when we take into account all
the factors that bear on the site. Let us briefly review some of
them. Caddo Lake is a Pleistocene lake. In this lake are two
kinds of deposits. One is Pleistocene, manifested as several
islands composed of an intermix of red and blue buckshot clay.
The other is a Recent deposit which is composed of sandbars.
The lake has a Pleistocene shore line, above which is the Pipeline site. The close of the Pleistocene Epoch was about 10,000
years ago. Eight thousand years ago there would surely not have
been much, if any, soil on this site, since in 1957 only from three
to four inches of soil was found in any of the three pits dug.
The preceding material by no means represents a complete
analysis of the Pipeline site, but it will give the reader some
idea of the problems to be encountered when an attempt is
made to deal with the Archaic Aspect in East Texas.

Three Archaic Sites in East Texas

2.

173

THE GREY AND HICKEY SITE

In this site I have been fortunate enough to find a component
of a pure type or focus within the Archaic Aspect. The Grey
and Hickey site is located on a post oak ridge which lies parallel
to Caddo Lake on the south side, about three-quarters of a mile
eastward down the lake from the Pipeline site. The site is partly
on the lot which is at present the location of my camp on the
lake. The artifacts are found where a deeply eroded road forks,
with one fork going into my camp and the other into an adjoining camp.
At this site we have the Rockdale as a base, but above it is
a Recent deposit which is different from that at the Pipeline
site. A test pit was dug here on July 2, 1957. The Recent deposit is 17 inches in depth and is of two parts, the top seven
inches being a gray topsoil and the lower 10 inches a yellow
intermix between the gray topsoil and the red Rockdale. However, the yellow deposit is of organic origin and not Pleistoeerie.
This site has been under almost daily observation for three
years and has produced a considerable group of artifacts (Fig.
42, G-M). The recovery area for the artifacts is less than 100
feet in diameter. Two points and one gouge were found within
a two-foot area. All of the artifacts have been exposed by rain
action, and all have been removed from their original bed by
myself. Also, all of the artifacts have been exposed in the washouts in the camp roads.
The first artifact found at this site was a mano or rubbing
stone (Fig. 42, G). This stone is not a true mano; it appears
to be stream formed and later used by man until it acquired a
high degree of polish.
In addition, the site has produced many flint chips or microflakes, some burned rock, some chips of petrified wood, some
charcoal, a few bits of hematite, two gouges, and four points.
In the points (Fig. 42, H-K) I have the material by means of
which I can type the site. These points appear to be of the
Palmillas type but I will not definitely type them as such at the
present time. They are all of the same material, a tan colored

bl

~

X

m

Tl~ree Archaic Sites in East Texas

175

chert. Points of this same material occur in abundance in the
collection of Mr. J. F. Lentz, from the Lentz site, the Lickskillet Farm in Harrison County (Hayner, 1955, p. 242). In
the Lentz collection we have no way of knowing from what
aspect the points were derived, but here in the Grey and
Hickey site we have proof of where the points of this type
originated--in the Archaic Aspect. This is also a good example
of what can be accomplished with years of investigation.
The distinctive feature of the gouges (Fig. 42, L, M) is the
materia! from which they are made. Both appear to be of
chalcedony. Fig. 42, L, is from a flake knocked from the outside
of a cobble, and M is from a dark semi-transparent material
which has some type of fossil as an inclusion.
The location of the Grey and Hickey site is very similar to
that of the Pipeline site. It sits on a ridge above the shelf of the
ancient shore line of the lake, which indicates an occupation
at a time when the lake stood at a much higher stage than it
does today. Also the horizon of recovery of the artifacts is very
distinctive. Every artifact recovered has come out of the yellow
soil, and some of them from well within the yellow. There is no
evidence of occupation in the gray topsoil.
I have discussed the circumstances of the Grey and Hickey
site with the geologist mentioned earlier, and on the basis of
this conversation I estimate that the Palmillas-like points from
this site, coming from the yellow soil on top of the Rockdale,
could have an age of 5000 years or perhaps more.
This site is well suited to controlled excavation, as the soil
both works and screens well. There is also a good possibility that
the site would yield material for a Carbon-14 date.
At Grey and Hickey I am fortunate in having a site which,
through comparisons, gives me much information in regard to
other sites in the area. For one thing, this is a pure Archaic
site which can be used as a check against local pottery-bearing
sites, some of which contain Archaic types of specimens. Two

Fig. 42.

A-F, Pipeline Site. G-M, Grey and Hickey Site.

176

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

sites in the area are worth mentioning here, the Akin No. 1
Archaic site and the Jones No. 2 site, to show, by comparison,
the significance of the Grey and Hickey site.
About one mile south of the Grey and Hickey site and directly away from the lake, is another site of exactly the same complex or focus. This site, which I call the Akin No. I Archaic
site, occupies the same soil horizon as the Grey and Hickey site.
Here we also have the Rockdale formation at a depth of about
18 inches. Above that is a yellow soil about 10 inches thick, and
at the top a gray topsoil about eight inches thick. A ~’oad goes
over the brow of the ridge on which the site is located, and there
is also a cut bank on this ridge, caused by erosion resulting from
cultivation. I have recovered two points, one mano of petrified
wood, some flint chips, and some burned rock at this site.
Two facts at this Akin site are very striking. First, the points
are of the same type and the same material as those from the
Grey and Hickey site. Second, all artifacts here come from the
yellow soil, which is completely below the plow zone.
The Grey and Hickey site, as has been stated, sits on the eastern brow of a ridge which lies parallel with the lake. The ridge
has a western brow where a spring-fed branch cuts through oll
its way to the lake. On this western brow and at a distance of
about 250 yards from the Grey and Hickey site is a pottery site,
the Jones No. 2 site (Hayner, 1957, p. 6). This site has produced both Gibson and Fulton Aspect pottery. Six test pits have
been dug at Jones No. 2, several of them down to the red Rockdale. All artifacts are found in the gray topsoil, and there is no
evidence of occupation in the yellow soil or on the red base. The
interesting feature here is that the soil formations are exactly
the same at ~ones No. 2 as at Grey and Hickey, yet there is a
marked difference in the stratigraphic positions of the occupation zones.
Here, then, within a distance of one mile, are three different
types of occupation in terms of both artifacts and time. The
soil formations are very nearly the same, yet the occupation
zones are different. First, at the Pipeline site we have a type
of point similar to the Gary, which lies directly upon, and

Three Archaic Sites in East Texas

177

perhaps within, the top of the Rockdale formation, possibly
8000 years old. Second, at Grey and Hickey and Akin No. 1
Archaic, we have a type of point similar to Palmillas, which
is well within the yellow intermix above the Rock’dale. This type
of point may be about 5000 years old, perhaps older. Third, at
Jones No. 2 we have a Neo-American site which occupies only
the gray topsoil, and is probably from 500 to 900 years old.
Yes, in East Texas Indian archeology is very interesting.
3.

THE RUDD SITE

Now to deal with the last site in this series. The Rudd site is a
real puzzle. I have tried to get help from a number of archeologists in dealing with this site, but without much success. The site
is located near Latex on the Louisiana-Texas state line, about five
miles south of Caddo Lake. It sits on top of a wide flat-topped
ridge, which has a spring branch flowing on each side of it. The
site is composed of 21 mounds and covers an area that is triangular in shape, about 50 yards wide at one end, 200 yards at the
other, and 300 yards in length. The majority of the mounds are
in the smal! end of the triangle. The mounds are small, from
six to 20 ft. in diameter and from a few inches to about two
feet high. The largest in diameter are not the greatest in height.
The first mound which I excavated in this group was about
six feet in diameter by two feet in height. It produced some
charcoal, bits of burned wood, and one small object which I felt
sure was crude pottery. This object was sent to Dr. James Griffin of the University of Michigan, and he stated that it was a
sand concretion. I am not yet entirely satisfied about the hature of this object.
The second mound to be tested produced a pit stone (Fig. 43,
A). Another pit stone (Fig. 43, B) was found at the base of
the mound. This mound was one of a pair that were joined together. Each of these mounds is about 12 feet in diameter
and 18 inches high.
Mound No. 3 was small, about eight feet in diameter and 20
inches high. When a pit was dug into this mound it produced
only chips and flakes of petrified wood. The artifact shown in

i

Fig. 43.

Specimens from the Rudd Site.

Three Archaic Sites in East Texas

179

Fig. 43, C, was recovered from this mound. It seems to be an
arrow-shaft sizer. Another specimen very similar to this one
was also found.
Mound No. 4 is one of the largest in the group, about 20 feet
in diameter and about 20 inches in height. At a depth of about
eight inches was found the artifact shown in Fig. 43, D. As can
be seen, this is a large pit-type grinder. It has a large pit in
each side and each pit extends over the edge of the stone, with
the pits being opposite each other. Fig. 43, E, was found on
¯ the surface of the soil about 30 feet from the base of this mound.
It could be the mano which was used with the grinder. Stones
of this kind do not occur on the surface in East Texas. Both of
these stones are of a gray granite and appear glacier-formed.
One other mound was tested. It produced some charcoal and
a few bits of burned wood.
About 18 months ago I conducted a group of Boy Scouts from
Shreveport, Louisiana, on an expedition to these mounds. We
were accompanied by Robert Fulton and J. Ashley Sibley, Jr.
We covered the whole of the mound area and found only a few
flint chips, along with the blade part of a spear point.
All of this mound area has at one time been in cultivation.
Some of the mounds have been plowed down and some have
been plowed over. The site is noted for its paucity of artifacts,
but it did yield points when it was in cultivation. The man who
first showed me the site is a good friend of mine who had the
place under lease as a pasture. He stated that a farm hand on
the place had found and sold to a man in Dallas nearly a gallon
syrup bucket full of large spear~ points from this site. Some
day I shall find this collection of points or others from this site.
Today, only one place in the area produces chips and points,
where a small ravine is being eroded down the east slope of the
ridge. A’ll of the chips recovered here are of either a white chalcedony or a white quartzite, except for one very large flake
of jasper. In East Texas we have five types of points that are
made mostly of a white material, usually a chert, a chalcedony,
or a quartzite. The point types are Ellis, Edgewood, Wells,

180

Texas Archeological Society

Bulverde, and Lange. Possibly these are the point types which
will eventually be found at the Rudd site.
The Rudd site as described here is another component within
the Archaic Aspect. The large grinder does suggest the use
of corn as a food, but without the proven use of the bow and
arrow or of pottery, this site is still in the Archaic Aspect.
Yet it could border on the Neo-American and as such it could
be of major importance.
These three sites have been treated briefly, as was the stated
intention in the beginning. The Archaic Aspect in East Texas
is certainly a challenge, and more information on the subject
is a must. Some work is being done, but very little is being recorded. Let us hope for a clear treatment of the East Texas
Archaic in the near future.
REFERENCES CITED
Hayner, E. W.
1955. Research in East Texas projectile points. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 235-243.
1957. Some pottery bearing camp-sites in and around
Caddo Lake. Newsletter, Oklahoma Anthropological Society,
Vot. 5, No. 8, pp. 4-8.
Taylor, Walter W.
1956. Some implications of the Carbon-14 dates from a
cave in Coahuila, Mexico. Bulletin, Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 27, pp. 215-234.
Box 152
Karnack, Texas

