Proceedings of the
Fourth Conference on Caddoan Archeology
Edited by E. Mott Davis

Contents
"

INTRODUCTION

¯

2

....

History of the Caddoan Conference

2

Accomplishments of the Fourth Conference

3

Nature of these Proceedings

4

PARTICIPANTS

.

.....

..........

NOTE ON SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS

.....

8

Gibson Aspect
Pre-Gibson

.

6
6

INTRODUCTORY DISCUSSION: TAXONOMIC FRAMEWORK
Fulton Aspect

5

.............
¯
.
¯
.......
~

CERAMIC TYPOLOGY

.........

,

12
13
15

.........

15

Vessel shape ..............

17

Decoration and surface treatment

18

Temper

........
..........

18

List of categories of surface treatment
......
.
.
.
"
.
.......
Plain

2t

Incised.

.............

21

Brushed

.........

21

Punch-&-drag

.........

22:

eneral discussion

.............

22

................

22

.............

23

Trailed
Appliqu6
Punctated
MARGINAL CULTURES

..... ¯

McGee Bend Reservoir, East Texas
Wylie Focus

Oklahoma Quartzite Industry

......

.....

......

23
26
27
28
28

......

GENERAL DISCUSSION

23
25

.....

.....

Peripheral materials in Arkansas

HISTORIC SITES

....

.....

Central Texas Caddoan material

Sanson site

21

....

30’
31

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Introduction
A CONFEREN CE of Caddoan archaeologists took place at the Louisiana
State Exhibit Museum in Shreveport on Saturday and Sunday, April
13 and 14, 1957. The conference was initiated by Edward B. Jelks,
who made the preliminary arrangements and drew up a tentative
agenda. C. H. Webb took care of local arrangements, and H. Brainerd
Wright of the Museum, our host, kindly provided space in the room
where the Poverty Point diorama is being constructed. Webb acted
as Moderator for the sessions~ and E. Mott Davis was elected Secretary. The Conference took the form of an informal roundtable discussion, with specimens and reference volumes ready at hand.

HISTORY OF THE CADDOAN CONFERENCE

Systematic archaeology in the Caddoan area is relatively recent,
most of it having been carried on within the last twenty-five years2 A
number of conferences of Caddoan archaeologists have taken place in
the latter part of this period, but until the meeting reported here. nothing approaching a formal institution was set up. Although the specific
titles of these conferences varied, they shall be referred to here as the
Conferences on Caddoan Archaeology, or Caddoan Conferences for
short.
The First Conference on Caddoan Archaeology grew out of informal discussions during the 1940’s at the home of Clarence H. Webb
in Shreveport, Louisiana. This first formal meeting was "The First
Symposium on the Caddoan Archaeological Area," held at the University of Oklahoma in Norman in September, 1946. At this three-day
meeting the several archaeological complexes in the area were described by those most familiar with them, and their relationships with
-one another and with materials in neighboring areas were discussed.2
The Second Caddoan Conference was held at Dr. Webb’s home in
1 Krieger gives a brief summary of the systematization of Caddoan archaeology
in Suhmo Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 151-1’61).
"-’ Published r6sum6s of the first three Caddoan Conferences have appeared as
follows:
First Conference: Alex D, Krieger, "The First Symposium on .the Caddoan Archaeological Area," American Antiquity, Vol. 12, No. 2 (January, 1947), pp. 198-207,
Second Conference: A brief note by Krieger appears in Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks,
J954, p. 160.
Third Conference: Robert E. Bell, "Caddoan Area," American Antiquity, Voh
J8, No. 1 (July, 1952), pp. 95-96.

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

Shreveport in August, 1950. This conference concentrated on problems of pottery typology.
The Third Caddoan Conference was a "Caddoan Area Workshop
Session" held at the University of Oklahoma in Apri!, 1952. It was
devoted to reports on current work in the area and to discussion of
pottery types.
The Fourth Conference on Caddoan Archaeology, held in Shreveport in 1957, is the one reported on the following pages. Intensive
field work in the Caddoan area, in connection with the building of
federal dams and reservoirs which necessitated archaeological salvage
work, brought about the need for an assessment of the current status
of the archaeology of the area. Edward B. Jelks, seeing this need in
the course of analysis of his materials from excavations at the McGee
Bend Reservoir, initiated the conference and suggested that it be made
a regular affair. Accordingly, at the Fourth Conference a Secretary
was elected who had the responsibility for initiating the next meeting.
It is anticipated that Caddoan Conferences will be held with some
regularity in the future, in order to keep abreast of the research that
is continuing ill the area.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THE FOURTH CONFERENCE

The Fourth Caddoan Conference was in many respects a soundingout opportunity, a chance to find out what was going on in the minds
of others in the field. There was a gap of six years between the Third
and Fourth Conferences, so that in a sense the Fourth Conference was
preliminary--a fact signalized by the lack of significant disagreement
in the course of the meeting, an extraordinary circumstance in a
scholarly discussion. It is anticipated that future Caddoan Conferences,
although as congenial as this one, will not be as peaceful. Certainly
one of the accomplishments of this Conference was that most of the
participants left with the intention of coming to the next meeting
armed with organized material to present towards the working out of
special problems which had come to the fore during this meeting.
More specifically, there were matters which can be spoken of as concrete contributions of this Conference. One of these was the emergence of a consensus that the taxonomic units now utilized in Caddoan archaeology are far from being neat classificatory compartments.
Many of the foci grade into one another, and even the two Caddoan
aspects, the Gibson Aspect and the Fulton Aspect, are not as clearly
demarked from each other as might appear from a brief perusal of

4

TEX~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

-the literature. However, there was no suggestion at the Conference
that the existing taxonomic framework be discarded or even appreciably modified at this stage of studies, Whatever alterations will eventually be made in this framework must await more data than are
now at hand.
The second concrete accomplishment is implicit in the agenda: there
was a detailed review of the significance of pottery attributes in problems of classification-and chronology in the Caddoan area. It is strik~ng (to the editor at least) that in the course of this review the question, "What do we mean by ’type’?" never became important even
though it was in the background of much of the discussion. It is a
-tribute to the skill of Dr. Webb as Moderator that matters were kept
on factual grounds and were not allowed to bog down, at this relatively
preliminary stage of current Caddoan discussions, in theoretical arguments concerning basic classificatory concepts arguments impossible
to bolster with data, since the data were not brought for the occasion.
For some of the participants those relatively new to Caddoan
work--the Conference provided an introduction to the complexes included under the rubric "Caddoan." The people from Louisiana State
University, for instance, had an opportunity to see the differences and
similarities between their Mississippi .Valley material and that in the
Caddoan area~ and to get an impression of the relationships and re,semblances within the latter area which give it ~some distinctiveness.
In general, this conference provided an opportunity to bring data
together, look them over, and find where the main problems lie. Subsequent conferences will in all likelihood be devoted to more specific
problems.
NATURE OF T~-IESE PROCEEDINGS

The proceedings as recorded here are based on notes taken during
the sessions. The record is incomplete, as the Secretary does not take
shorthand and was himself occasionally embroiled in the discussion.
To insure clarity, the original notes had to be entirely rewritten in
¯effect, translated into readable English and a few changes had to be
made in the order of certain remarks. As a result, the statements attributed to specific persons are not to be taken as quotations, but as
paraphrases.
The second step in the preparation of the proceedings was to send
the record to all participants, who revised and amended the record of
their remarks according to their own notes and memories. A few of the
¯nore formal statements in the proceedings, for example those by

FOURTH CADDOAN

CONFERENCE

Gregory and by Webb on the Sanson Site, have been completely rewritten--or, in some cases, added to insure the completeness and usefulness of the record. In such cases an asterisk has been placed after
the participant’s name at the beginning of the revised sta~tement.
The third step, following this working-over by participants, was to
send the record thus revised to a number of archaeologists concerned
with the Caddoan area who were not present at the conference, so
that they might add comments. Their remarks are included in smaller
type.
It has not been possible to undertake a logical fourth step, that of a
final rewriting of the whole proceedings to achieve smoothness and
consistency of style. The text, as it stands, is stylistically rough and
erratic, and apologies are made for this state of affairs. The editor has
had to limit his efforts to the achievement of clarity.
The editor is grateful to the participants and the later contributors
for their co-operation, and trusts that they will find their helpfulness
rewarded by the usefulness of these proceedings.
PARTICIPA~TS
Those participating in the Conference were:
Michael Beckman, Shreveport, Louisiana
Robert E. Bell, University of Oklahoma
E. Mott Davis, University of Texas
W. A. Davis, Jasper, Texas
Robert L. Fulton, Shreveport, Louisiana
Pete Gregory, Louisiana State University
William G. Haag, Louisiana State University
Edward B. Jelks, National Park Service
LeRoy Johnson, Jr., National Park Service
Robert S. Neitzel, Marksville State Park, Louisiana
James B. Shaeffer, University of Oklahoma
C. H. Webb, Shreveport, Louisiana
Fred Hadleigh West, Louisiana State University
Those contributing later comments to these proceedings:
David A. Baerreis, University of Wisconsin
W. W. Crook, Jr., Dallas, Texas
R. King Harris, Dallas, Texas
Alex D. Krieger, Riverside Municipal Museum, Riverside, California
Philip Phillips, Harvard University
Robert L. Stephenson, Smithsonian Institution

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

NOTE

ON SYMBOLS

AND ABBREVIATIONS

The heading "Dis:" signifies discussion and general comment not
attributable to any one participant.
An asterisk after the name of a participant signifies that the passage which follows has been added or significantly revised, by the
participant, since the conference took place.
A paragraph without a heading is referable to the heading of the
preceding paragraph.
Statements in smaller type are later comments made by persons not
present at the conference.
Included are maps of the Caddoan area showing foci of the Gibson
Aspect and other early foci (Fig. 1), foci of the Fulton Aspect and
other late foci (Fig. 2), and location of sites mentioned in these Proceedings (Fig. 3).

Introductory Discussion: Taxonomic Framework
Webb: How adequate is our general Caddoan area taxonomic framework. the foundations of which were laid down by Krieger?
Dis: This is firmly enough imbedded so that we need to use it and
to work within its framework.
"Aspect" as used in the Caddoan area is a formal, strictly McKern
concept.
Baerreis: I have personally tended to use Krieger’s approach to the concept of Aspects as an illustration of the manner in which the McKern or
Midwestern Taxonomic classification is modified in use, rather than as a
strict use of the method. The aspects would appear to be in essence a regional period classification. Krieger himself uses the term "horizon"
alternatively with "aspect" (Krieger, 1946: 267).
Stephenson: I think the Caddoan taxonomic framework is one of the
soundest we have for any area in the country. Krieger did an excellent
job in devising this basic framework. "Aspect," as used in the Caddoan
area, is not a strictly McKern concept. It goes beyond the McKern concept
by adding a time dimension. Of course, this is what McKern envisioned
when he devised his taxonomic system That is, he presumed that people
would take the taxonomic units as they would develop in the McKern
system and then put a time perspective on them. This is what Krieger did
in the Caddoan framework

[Webb, at the blackboard, listed foci. He tried to list them chronologically, but this brought up problems which led to much of the %llowing discussion. First the Gibson Aspect foci were listed and dis-

FOURTH CADDOAI~T COI~TFERENCI~

OUAC

.NATCHEZ

LAKE
CHARLES

IALVESTON

o~

FOCI

OF

THE

ASPEGT
CHRISTi
FOCUS

NAMES

ARE

EARLY

OTHER

AND

UNDERLINED

0
I

,
scole

Fig. 1

50
!

,

in

Miles

I00
3

FOCl

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cussed: then those of the’Fulton Aspect, which is later than Gibson
Aspect, were taken up.]

GIBSON

ASPECT

Gibson Aspect loci:
Alto
Spiro
Gahagan
Haley
Sanders

Dis: The Alto, Spiro, and Gahagan foal are earlier; the Haley and
Sanders foci are, general.]y speaking, later.
Krieger: It would be better to say that the Alto, Spiro, and Gahagan
loci are approximately contemporaneous and that ~the Haley and Sanders
loci are somewhat later, but overlap the first three.

Dis: What do we mean by "Spiro"? For this discussion it means,
from Krieger, Middle Spiro, i.e., the middle component of the Spiro
site--the Craig Component.
Bell:* "Spiro" materials are being found all through the Gibson
Aspect, causing taxonomic difficulties because of our lack of data concerning the Spiro Mound, the Spiro site, and the Spiro Focus. The
total number and variety of artifacts from the Spiro Mound (Craig
Mound) must represent a reasonably long time period. Until we can
break this down into smaller time units containing diagnostic traits,
comparisons of Gibson sites with "Spiro" will remain difficult.
Krieger: If, as Bell says, Spiro materials are being found all through the
Gibson Aspect, then these are aspect traits, not specifically Spiro Focus
traits.
Bell: The McCurtain Focus is mainly in the Fulton Aspect, but
Baerreis thinks it goes back into Gibson Aspect times. We have no
final reports upon any McCurtain component at present, so I am not
prepared to present the evidence. I suspect, however, that the focus is
based upon such things as temple mounds, four-post rectangular
houses, large burial pits, shell gorgets, ear spools, and so forth, such as
are represented at the Clement site.
Harris: The McCurtain Focus or something very close to it seems to last
just to the beginning of historic contact times at the Kaufman site on Red
]liver in Red River County, Texas. I say this because of the small number

FOURTH CADDOAI~ CONFERENCE

of trade beads and cones made from sheet copper found around the house
sites at Kaufman. Also Burial 9 at this site contained vessels which can
be traced to McCurtain and proto-historic times intead 6~ historic times.
White contact is much heavier at the Womack or Garretts Bluff site in
Lamar County, Texas. However, the Womack site has some sherds from
McCurtain Focus. I will say that if the McCurtain Focus started in Gibson
Aspect times and lasted to historic times, it had a fairly long time span.
Krieger: Why might not the McCurtain Focus represent a survival,
rather than going back into the Gibson Aspect?
Dis: The Haley Focus shows a definite transition from Gibson Aspect to Fulton Aspect. The Sanders Focus is latest.
Jelks:* There is some information suggesting that the Sanders Focus
might be the earliest Gibson Aspect focus rather than the latest. The
evidence is as follows. There are several ceramic traits whose earliest
appearance in the Southeast seems to have been in the Gibson Aspect
of the Caddoan area. These include carinated bowl forms, bottles, and
engraving. These traits all occur at the large ceremonial centers such
as the Davis, Sand’ers, Spiro, and Gahagan sites, but at all those sites
they are only part of very well developed, elaborate ceramic arts.
Over a sizeable area of northeast Texas are a number of smaller sites
(such as the Yarbrough site), generally identified with Sanders
Focus, where engraving, carinated bowls, and bottles occur, but without the elaborations found in the large .ceremonial centers. Pottery is
simple--a~d is often quite scarce--at these sites, anti some of them
seem to be essentially Archaic components, with’the addition of small
quantities of a pottery which migt~t; be thought of as representing a
basic Caddoan ceramic tradition. One reasonab}e hypothesis that can
be advanced in interpreting this set of circumstances is that’a, relatively early--and simple ceramic tradition (exemplified by t!~e Yar~
brough site and others) existed in northeast Texas, .out of which the
elaborate developments found,at the large ceremon~al~sites evolved.
If so, the sites where the hypothetica} early Caddoan ceramics occur,
and which are now cl’assified as Sanders Focus sites, could well represent a developmental phase of Gibson Aspect and may be earlier
than the Alto, Spiro, and Gahagan foci--=and also probably earlier than
the Sanders site itself.

.

.

Krieger: This is a good idea; and I wouldadd that there is:an amazing
resemblance between Canton Incised of Sanders Focus and the incisedpunctated utility pottery of Fourche Maline, which Jelks"ideas would fit
(as an hypothesis). It should be added that the Southern Cult at the Sanders site would then be a simple, developmental expression rather than a

1o

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

decadence of the Spiro expression of the Southern Cult. The Evans Component at Spiro (after Orr) should have been discussed here in relation to
"Early Spiro" and Sanders.

Crook and Harris: We think Ed Jelks has a point. From the study of
materials from several sites in Kaufman, Henderson, Wood, and other
counties in northeast Texas in the last few years, we have sites which
seem to be built largely on an Archaic base. These sites have very little
decorated pottery; a large number of sherds from each site are plain
about 90% plain and about 10% decorated. In decoration and color this
pottery falls into the Gibson Aspect. The arrowpoints are few compared
with dart points--about 18% arrowpoints and 82% dart points. Alba and
Bonham-Perdiz points predominale among the arrowpoints, and Gary
points make up about 99% of the dart points. Copena points or knives are
present in very small numbers in some sites (e.g., Trinidad). We think the
utility pottery of Sanders Focus should have more study. If this is done,
our knowledge of the Gibson Aspect would probably increase.

]elks: The Alto, Spiro, and Gahagan loci form a group with many
similarities. Sanders Focus stands somewhat apart. We need to give
attention to these greater or lesser similarities between loci.
Bell: Aren’t these greater or lesser similarities merely a matter of
time span within the Gibson Aspect? ]elks: Yes, but also a matter of
geography. What do you do with the sites that don’t really fit any one
focus? For instance, house floors at the Battle Mound had good associations of both Texarkana and Belcher Focus types, which demonstrates
the existence of a complex that is neither Texarkana nor Belcher but
which shares traits of both loci in roughly equal proportions. Webb:
We have pottery types, such as Hodges Engraved, Sinner Linear Punctated, and Pease Brushed-Incised, which we previously thought to be
pure Fulton Aspect types, but which we now know to go back into the
Gibson Aspect in the Haley Focus. ]elks: The main point is that the
foci are not distinct entities exhibiting similar types and traits from
site to site. There is actually considerable variation from one site to
another, and therefore a focus must not be defined as a tight cluster
of traits, but rather should be allowed a great deal of flexibility.
Stephenson: I most certainly agree with this in all respects. W’e must
sooner or later admit that no culture unit, however small, is either
static in time or identical with any other culture unit. On the component
level every single culture is unique; no other is exactly like it. We must
devise our clusters of traits in each component, focus, and aspect in such
a way as to reflect the internal temporal change that must necessarily
have gone on in that unit, and at the same time reflect the external

11

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

OKLAHOMA

!

\
~’NATCHEZ

CHARLES

GALVESTON

FOGI

OF

FULTON

THE
ASPECT
FOCI

AND
GL,- GLENDORA FOCUS
COMPONENTS

FOCUS NAMES ARE
UNDERLINED

0

Fig. 2

I00

50
scale in

miles

12

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

impact of acculturation upon it. The "tight cluster of little traits" concept
of focus is false and misleading.

Webb: There are more common traits running through Gibson Aspect than there are running through Fulton Aspect. For instance,
tapering spouts on bottles, long-stemmed pipes, Hickory and Crockett
pottery types, Alba projectile points, copper plating, pulley-shaped
stone ear spools, knives with recurved edges (Copena?), Catahoula
Sandstone hones, large mound sites, multiple pit burials, profuse
burial offerings, effigy pipes.
Dis: Earliest Caddoan (i.e., early Gibson Aspect) traits all over the
Caddoan area are: Crockett, Pennington, Hickory, and Holly pottery
types; tapering spouts on bottles; Alba points; delicate long-stemmed
pipes; no brushed pottery; no carved shell. Bell: The Harlan site in
Oklahoma has many of these traits, but with some differences. The
Gibson Aspect is the only aspect in Oklahoma where there is ceremonial destruction of vessels.
FULTON ASPECT

Fulton Aspect loci:
Prehistoric loci:
Titus (Texas)
Frankston (Texas)
Texarkana (Texas, Arkansas)
McCurtain (Oklahoma. Texas)
Fort Coffee (Oklahoma)
Turkey Bluff (0klahoma)
Mid-Ouachita (Arkansas)
Bossier (Louisiana, Arkansas)
Belcher (Louisiana, Arkansas)
Wylie (Texas)--possibly not Fulton Aspect
Historic loci:
Allen (Texas)
Glendora (Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas)
Dis: The Glendora Focus seems a bit broad. About the only trait
common to all Glendora sites is contact material; otherwise there is a
great deal of variation.
Krieger: Yes, the Glendora Focus seems a bit broad, but contact material is not found in all of the sites, however close to the historic horizon
they may be; and shell-tempered Natchitoches Engraved is a better diag-

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

13

nostic trait. I agree that this "focus" needs better definition and that there
may be more than one focus involved.
West: Where do you find Catlinite artifacts in the Caddoan area?
Dis: There are no definite cases in the Caddoan area, though there are
some specimens of fine-grained red sandstone.
Dis: Are there any bison bones in the Caddoan area? They are
absent in all Gibson Aspect foci except Sanders Focus, and are found
in Wylie, Turkey Bluff, and Fort Coffee foci. Haag: There were bison
all over the East in historic times, but no bison bones have been found
in a prehistoric archaeological site.

PRE-GIBsON

Bell: "Archaic" is not all Archaic. There is a "pre-Gibson," for instance the upper Fourche Maline. We are eventually going to need a
separate term.
Jelks: The Snipe site (41-20D4-3) in the Texarkana Reservoir, is
another possible example of "pre-Gibson." And still another example
of material not covered by present classification, and seemingly preGibson, is material from McGee Bend in East Texas [discussed below,
p. 23]. It is neither Fulton nor Gibson, but has traits suggestive of
Adena-Hopewell, including a copper reel-shaped ornament and several
copper bracelets.
Webb and Fulton:* Bellevue, in northern Louisiana, is also an example of "pre-Gibson." Bellevue mounds are situated on hilltops, representing a Pleistocene terrace, overlooking small valleys with streams.
Burials are unusual, three types having been found so far: (1) primary, semi-flexed; (2) secondary, the bones having been scraped or
else gnawed by animals, and later re-articulated for secondary burial;
(3) cremations. Pottery is 99% plain, poor in quality, usually tempered with crushed sherds. There is some bone tempering. One burnished Marksville rim sherd and one Churupa Punctated sherd have
been found. Points are all dart points averaging about 4 cm. long,
chiefly Gary and Ellis types, with two San Patrice specimens. In one
cremation that is probably (but not yet certainly) of this same complex, numerous stone beads and 3 copper beads were found, 40 to 50
beads in all.
Stephenson: Why not formulate a new aspect for this post-Archaic, preGibson material?

TEXA~ ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

OKLAHOMA

@
CORSIC~NA

\

"NATCHEZ

, LAKE

GOLIA

MAP OF
IN

SITES

THE

THE

MENTIONED

PROCEEDINGS

CADDOAN

ARCHEOLOGICAL
AND

AREA

VICINITY
IOO

SCALE IN MILES

Fig. 3

FOURTH CADDOAI~ COI’qFEREI~qCE

15

Ceramic Typology
TEMPER AS A TYPOLOGICAL DETERMII’CAI’CT
Webb: How much emphasis are we to give to certain attributes?
Shell temper, for instance. In northeast Texas it is historic and protohistoric (Allen Focus). It is late in Louisiana, earlier in Oklahoma
and North Texas (Nocona-Woodward).
Krieger: One should also add McCurtain Focus, in mentioning shell
temper. McCurtain components occur in the adioining corners of Oklahoma, Texas, and Arkansas; and shell temper is common in all or most of
these components.
Bell: Shell is not useful as a determinant in Oklahoma. Webb: This
is true also in Louisiana; you can’t use it for Krieger’s distinction between Hodges Engraved and Natchitoches Engraved. ]elks: In the
Fulton Aspect, it would be unusual to find a type which occurs with
one tempering agent exclusively, even in one site.
Krieger: It may be true that shell temper is not a useful determinant in
Oklahoma, as Bell says, but I don’t agree with Webb that you can’t use it
to distinguish between Hodges and Natchitoches Engraved. :[elks’ statement is true enough as far as it goes for general purposes; but in the case
of Hodges versus Natchitoches Engraved, the Handbook [Suhm et al.~
1954] had to settle on some specific difference; and in this case we had to
decide on a trait that would distinguish the two types. I still say that, no
matter how much alike the vessels and decorations may be, Hodges Engraved (almost wholly in Arkansas) has no shell temper, whereas Natchitoches Engraved (in Texas and Louisiana) does have this temper. In other
words, while agreeing that shell temper is not suitable for distinguishing
types in most cases, in this case shell temper was seen to be significant for
distinguishing two types that are otherwise very similar.
Dis: But in any case shell is relatively late in the Caddoan area. In
Central Louisiana, shell doesn’t appear until nearly historic times.
It is a little earlier, but still rare, in the Belcher Focus (at the Belcher
site, shell tempering is absent in pre-mound Haley pottery, present in
2% to 5% amounts in subsequent Bossier and Belcher), and at the
Sanson site; Woodward Plain in Oklahoma (same as Nocona Plain in
North Texas) is earlier; and at the Norman site in Oklahoma, shell
tempering is found in a Gibson Aspect, Spiro-like component.
Krieger: Woodward Plain is similar to Nocona Plain, rather than being
the "same as Nocona Plain" as stated parenthetically above.

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

KEY TO FIG. 3
Numerical
1 Norman
2--Harlan
3--Horton
4 Splro
5--Greer
6--Douglas
7 Old River Landing
8--Spanish Fort
9 Hogge Bridge
10 Stansbm7
] 1--Chupek
12--Sanders
13 Womack (Garretts Bluff)
14 Kaufman
15 Yarbrough
16 Hunt
t 7--Clement
18 Snipe
19--Battle
20 Haley
21 Belcher
22 Bellevue
23--Smithpor t Landing
24---Gahagan
25--Los Adais
26---Jonas Short
27 Walter Bell
28--Print Bell
29--Sanson
30 Bayou Goula

Alphabetical
Battle--19
Bayou Goula--30
Belcher--gl
Bellevue--2g
Chupek--11
Clement--17
Douglas--6
3ahagan--24
Greer 5
Haley--20
Harlan--2
Hogge Bridge--9
Horton--3
Hunt--16
Jonas Short--26
Kaufman--14,
Los Adais--25
Norman--1
Old River Landing--7
Print Belt 28
Sanders--12
Sanson--29
Smithport Landing--23
Snipa--18
Spanish Fort--8
Splro--4
Stansbury--10
~vValtar Bell--27
Womack--13
Yarbrough--I 5

The question of shell temper in a component of the Spiro Focus (or any
focus of the Gibson Aspect) needs to be thoroughly investigated from the
point of view of intrusion. At the Spiro site, for example, considering the
nature of the field notes, it is an open question whether vessels in a grave
in the Spiro Mound really belonged to the Spiro Focus or were intruded
in the mound by a later people. As to the Norman site I cannot say, but ff
shell-tempered pottery were actually a part of any focus of the Gibson
Aspect, I would like to see some exact field notes to prove it.
Dis: It looks as if shell tempering moved into the Caddoan area from
the north. There is no shell temper in Coles Creek, but it is present in
Plaquemine. In Bossier Focus, which covers a long time, shell temper
seems late, and is absent from most sites.
Baerreis: Small quantities of shell temper are present in sherds of Middle

FOURTH CADDOAIW CONFERENCE

17

Woodland type in Delaware County, northeastern Oklahoma. This could
well be a local innovation and one possible source for its early appearance
in the Caddoan area.

Dis: Bone temper seems to occur mainly in Texas and Oklahoma.
It is very common in East Texas, in both the Gibson and Fulton
aspects. Webb: Bone temper is early in northwest Louisiana, in the
pre-Gibson Bellevue Focus; it continues in Bossier and Belcher potteries. Haag: There is no bone temper east of the Mississippi. Dis: Bone
temper is found westward into the Central Texas Aspect in Leon Plain
pottery. (No one here can recall it for the Lower Mississippi, or in the
Southwest.) Except for Leon Plain, bone tempering seems strictly
Caddoan,
Krieger: Bone temper is not exclusively Caddoan. It occurs in several
types of pottery in the southern Plains, as, for example, those described
by Schmitt and others in Central Oklahoma, and the type Borger Cordmarked in the Texas and Oklahoma Panhandles.

.[elks: Sand is sometimes added, in small amounts, especially in
harder pots. It is used either in addition to clay temper or without
evident temper. Is it intentional? Dis: There are excellent kaolin
deposits in the Caddoan area, where the finest wares occur. Inferior
clays may have considerable sand, but in other instances sand seemed
to be added intentionally.
Dis: In the Caddoan area, there is little, if any, crushed stone
temper. Temper is dominantly clay. And temper is not a determinant
of type.
VESSEL SHAPE

Webb: Do we have consistencies in vessel shapes by type, or are
there all sorts of shapes in each type, if you type by decoration?
]elks: Yes, there are consistencies within limits. For instance, there
are no square bottoms in Belcher Engraved; square bottoms are a
Gibson Aspect, not a Fulton Aspect, trait (except at Sanson, which is
a marginal site). Webb: The later you get, the more variation in shape
there is in terms of decoration type. Shape is not a determinant, but it
is better than temper. You don’t throw a vessel out of a type because
it is the "wrong shape"; many of them are. The primary typological
determinant, then, is decoration and surface treatment.
West.. Are there any stirrup-spouts in the Caddoan area? Dis: Yes,
some in Mid-Ouachita Focus, but these specimens, or the stirrupspout trait, appear to be due to trade. This is a Middle Mississippi trait.

18

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

DECORATION AND SURFACE TREATMENT

General Discussion.
Dis: What about paste color as a trait in differentiating types?
Titus Focus pottery tends to be lighter and more reddish than the
dark-chocolate, black or brown on Red River and the Ouachita. Some
of the Titus Focus types of Krieger are almost the same as some of the
Texarkana and Belcher types, but the lines are heavier and the color
is different. Burnished black pots evidently were carefully made and
the firing was controlled. In this case, color is important because of the
firing technique.
Applied color and slips are not consistent within any one type.
Rubbed-in color occurs only in engraving (with the rare exception of
a few vessels of East Incised), and hence is more limited. Red film in
the Gibson Aspect is limited to Sanders and Haley foci.
Is the distinction between "incised" and "trailed" clear? Consensus:
yes, it seems to be.
There is no cord-marking in the Gibson or Fulton Aspects. except
at the Sanson site, which is peripheral and would fit with Troyville
and Coles Creek. Absence of cord-marking is a negative Caddoan trait.
(The decorative technique on Sinner Linear Punctated pottery looks
like an imitation of cord-marking.)
Is it all right to use hyphenated names for types? For instance,
Pennington Punctated-Incised, Pease Brushed-Incised. What should
the policy be? (No decision.)
Stephenson: I for one do not like the long hyphenated names. They
serve very little useful purpose and hinder concise writing. Type names
should be as brief as possible in order to be most usable.
Krie#er: Hyphenated type-names seem iustified in some cases, as when
a Pennington design is done entirely in incised lines, seemingly as a
simple substitute for combinations of lines and punctates; or when Pease
vessels have either incised or brushed lines, or lines which cannot easily
be determined as incised (cut with a single sharp implement) or brushed
(cut with a few stiff grasses or the frayed end of a stick, etc.). The alternative would be to set up separate "types" which probably had no
meaning to the people who made the pots.

Webb: Curvilinear incising and trailing (parallel line. scrolls,
spirals, volutes) seems most common along the Ouachita and west as
far as the Red. Is it found farther west? Dis: It is found sometimes in
Titus Focus, and sometimes in Oklahoma, mostly in the Fulton Aspect. This trait seems to center on the Ouachita, but is also found

FOURTH CADDOA!N~ CONFERENCE

29

around Natchez, and extending into the Mississippi Valley (Leland
Incised).
Phillips: But don’t forget that it goes back at least to Yokena, which has
some very fine meander patterns (but not spirals as far as I know), and
this continues on into French Fork Incised. Leland, Fatherland, and
Natchez appear to be the end products.
Bell: Williams Plain sometimes has incisions on the rim. Should
you have two type names, Plain and Incised? Dis: The occurrence of
a few incised lines on otherwise plain vessels would not necessitate
two separate types. (Not 100% agreement on this. Discussion of this
and related problems. The implications of same and different names,
e.g. Dunkin, Manchac). Should there be type names and variant
names? Jelks is in favor of lumping. Webb points out inclusiveness of
Pease Brushed-Incised.
Phillips: I think there should be type names and variant names. Wheat,
Gifford, and Wasley are shortly coming out with a proposa! for the classification of Southwestern ceramics that may be the answer to our problem.
[see Wheat et al., 1958; Phillips, 19581.
Stephenson: Names for variants serve no purpose until they have broad
cultural significance, and as soon as they have broad significance they become type names. I think we should lump all of these things as much as
we can. There is certainly nothing wrong with minor amounts of decoration in a plain pottery type if this fact is clearly stated in the definition
of the type.

Webb: You often get one decoration around the rim and a distinct
one on the body; for instance, in the Titus and Mid-Ouachita loci
there are bowls with engraved rim and a different decoration (one
of several techniques) on the body. (Dis: This is found in the Glendora
and Texarkana foci too.) Which is to be considered most important,
the rim decoration or the body decoration? In the past we [Webb and
colleagues] have generally assumed rim decoration as the determinant. Earlier, for instance in the Haley Focus, there is none of the
body decoration on these bowls.
Krieger: Alto Focus should also be mentioned, since there you often
find rim and body with decoration done in different techniques. Rim
decoration has usually been chosen as "more important" in Caddoan
ceramics because rim sherds tell more about vessel shape and size, and
rim decorations are more variable than body decorations.

Bell: How much of this pottery is made purely as burial ware, and

2O

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

how much is utility ware? And why do you have concentrations of
points in only one area of a site? Webb: Do you find arrow points in
burials, or both arrow and dart points? Dis: Webb finds only small
points with burials. Bell likewise, in Oklahoma. But dart points are
found in these sites. Shaefer:* Both dart and arrow points are found
with burials in the Horton site, near Vian, eastern Oklahoma. The
dart points are late, or a small variety of Gary point. Dis: Red River
sites, on the floodplain, have only small points. Upland and terrace
sites have large points in addition. It looks as if typology of small
points may eventually turn out to be more helpful than has been
thought in the past. There certainly is an element of selection in
burial materials. But even then, you find some of the fancy material
in the middens. There does not seem to be any special burial ware,
with the possible exceptions of Cowhide Stamped, and head effigies
(in Arkansas only). It is rather a matter of selectivity; you get the
good material in the burials, along with some everyday specimens.
Shaeffer:* In Oklahoma. decorated pottery is confined pretty much to
burials, and plain ware to house areas. Perhaps this is an area differentiation, in Oklahoma within the Caddoan area.
Haag: How about having the next conference work out geographic
distributions of certain pottery types? For instance, pottery motifs-the scroll, ticking, hatching, and the like. We could use dittoed maps
of the area in plotting distributions. This might focus the matters we
have been discussing.
Gregory: What significance is there to the distribution of large
notched points? You find a few in the valleys, more on the hills.

Webb: How do you distinguish between dart points of Archaic and
post-Archaic sites? Dis: In the Lower Mississippi area, the same types
of dart points occur in both Archaic and later complexes, and this is
also largely true in the Caddoan area. And certainly you can’t distinguish between Archaic and post-Archaic sites on the basis of
presence or absence of dart points. W. A. Davis: The problem of
distinguishing Archaic from non-Archaic sites is worth taking up as a
special subj ect at a later Conference.
Dis: Gary points are of all sorts, and will probably be subdivided
chronologically. Bell: Gary points seem to get smaller, lighter, and
with bigger shoulders, as time goes on; this is a hunch. Dis: This
hunch seems to be borne out in the Poverty Point report (Ford and
Webb, 1956, p. 54, Fig. 18). Some Gary points are quite small.

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

21

Stephenson: This hunch is absolutely true from Texas to the Atlantic.
It’s no hunch at all. It’s a fact.

Dis: Discussion of the atlatl versus the bow, and of "atlatl weights."
Perhaps the atlatl survived in the Fulton Aspect as a specialized
implement, for example, for use in fishing.
Categories of Surface Treatment
Plain
Incised
Brushed
Punch-&-Drag
Trailed
Appliqu6
Punctated
Engraved
Ridged
Pinched (separate technique? Probably should be so considered)
Stamped
Combed
Krieger: Under "Pfinctated" you need two treatments: stick punctates
and fingernail punctates. These are clearly used in different ways and are
different on certain types of pottery. In the Lower Mississippi Valley you
also have linear punctates made with serrated shells or something similar
(this is also found in the Midwest), but this probably doesn’t concern
Caddoan ceramics. As to whether "pinched" is a separate technique, I
should say yes.
PLAIN (As a vessel, not just a sherd, character). Dis: Is there
more plain ware in the Gibson Aspect than in the Fulton Aspect?
Fulton vessels are likely to have more of the surface decorated. There
are plain vessels in all shapes and in all periods.
INCISED. This technique is found throughout the Caddoan sequence.
BRUSHED. Dis: Is there any brushed pottery in the Gibson Aspect?
]elks: At the Davis site, some "fine incising" might be brushing.
Webb: Haley Complicated Incised, in Haley Focus, is often seemingly
brushed. Perhaps brushing started here. Dis: The Bossier Focus has
brushed pottery. In Central Louisiana, the earliest brushing is in
Plaquemine. (Except that Tchefuncte has Chinchuba Brushed, a very
localized type. This, like a lot of Tchefuncte traits, died out, leaving

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

no evident descendants. There is similar material in early Southeastern pottery, e.g. at Stallings Island.)
Krieger: Brushing Js present in Haley Focus, on the Pease Brushed-Incised and Haley Complicated Incised types at least. On Pease it may occur
alone or with incising; and on Haley Complicated Incised it may occur
in some of the circles and odd areas, along with incising and appliqu&
Brushing, red film, applique, handles, lugs, and effigies a!l appear to enter
the scene with Haley Focus and then become common in various Fulton
Aspect loci.
Phillips: In Mississippi (Yazoo Basin) our type Salomon Brushed is at
least as early as Coles Creek. It is not always distinguishable from incision, however. Caddoan brushing could have come from this.

PUNCH-&-DRAG. Dis: This is a special incised-and-punctate technique. You find it in Tchefuncte (Orleans Incised), but not used in
the same way as on Caddoan vessels. In Caddoan pottery it is mainly
used in lines dividing fields. It is a minor technique, in other words,
serving the same function as appliqu~ or punctate lines.
A special treatment to be considered is the making of small depressed triangles (not excised) at the end of incised or engraved lines.
Did this trait come into the Caddoan area with French Fork Incised?
(Ford’s idea.) Haag: It could have spread in the other direction.
TRAILED. Dis: This trait is late in northwest Louisiana. in the
Belcher and Glendora Foci. It appears at the same time as do groups of
curvilinear lines. It occurs in Military Road Incised. Cowhide
Stamped, Keno Trailed. In these types it is often used to outline zones,
as in Marksville; but it is not so used in Texas except in the Titus
Focus and a little in the Texarkana Focus. It is found in Tchefuncte
pottery.
What is the difference between Foster Trailed-Incised and Keno
Trailed? On sherds you often can’t tell. The shapes are different, and
so is the frequency of certain design elements.
APPLIQUIk. Dis: As far as the Caddoan area is concerned, this
treatment appears earliest in the Haley Focus (Pease BrushedIncised and Haley Complicated Incised) and Sanders Focus (Maxey
Noded Redware). It is absent in Alto Focus. It is found throughout the
Fulton Aspect. In Fort Coffee Focus it is not common, but it is common in McCurtain Focus. As for nodes, they are found at the Haley
Site, in the Haley Focus component at the Belcher Site, and in the
Sanders Focus (Maxey Noded). Nodes are common to the east. in St.

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

23

Francis. Appliqu~ seems oil first glance to come from the Mississippi
Valley, but the earliest appliqu~ there is Fortune Noded, which is
fairly late. Appliqu~ is popular at Cahokia and northward to VVisconsin, but it seems to be late everywhere. Perhaps this trait spread
from the Sanders and Haley Foci. But, Oil the other hand, the ialey
Focus has Mississippian trade material in it, for instance shell tempered trade vessels, so appliqu~ in Haley Focus may not be earlier
than in the Mississippiall material. Thus we don’t know where
appliqu~ might be earliest.
PUNCTATED. Dis: This trait is found everywhere. But what about
profuse fingernail body punctate, e.g., Wilkinson Punctated? This
tends to be early, fading out at about [he time brushing comes in. It is
verT frequent from Alto Focus into Bossier Focus and drops out in the
Belcher and Glendora foci. The situation is the same in Oklahoma.
In Central Louisiana it is late (Parkin) but this seems to be different
from Wilkinson Punctated.
Phillips: But there are earlier types in the Lower Mississippi Valley
showing the same technique, e.g. Evansville Punctated.
Dis: Is fingernail punctate earlier elsewhere than in the Mississippi
Valley? It is found in Tchefuncte and also at Stallings Island in
Georgia. This, however, is random punctate. In East Texas, fingernail punctate is usually thought of as Alto Focus.
Krieger: Fingernail punctate may usually be thought of as Alto Focus
in East Texas, but it does continue into the Frankston and Titus foci in
quantity, and in the Allen and Texarkana foci somewhat. When one collects a large number of sherds from a site in the central part of East Texas,
it is often possible to guess the affiliations as Alto Focus if there is a lot
of fingernail punctating (and pinching), but no brushing, on body sherds
of utility jars; and conversely one may suspect Frankston, Alien, or Titus
foci if the reverse is true: lots of brushed jar sherds but comparatively
little fingernail punctating or pinching. In testing scores of sherd collections, this distinction proved to be a rather good and constant clue to
the focus. Then, one would naturally look for the proper associated types
of engraved ware, and so on.

Marginal Cultures
MCGEE BEND PtESERVOIR,

LowErt ANGELINA RIVER, EAST TEXAS

7elks: All the sites excavated at McGee Bend last Fall [1966] have,
among other things, some very sandy pottery, undecorated, with

TEXANS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

simple vessel shapes. This is supposedly close to the western edge of
its distribution. Goose Creek sites have this sandy material, but it is
often decorated. The Jonas Short Mound, at McGee Bend, had it.
One rocker-stamped sherd, Marksville or Troyville, was associated
with it at the Print Bell site at McGee Bend.
Haag: You don’t get this in southwestern Louisiana, and work has
been done there, by McIntyre. On the east side of the lower Sabine
you get only Tchefuncte and Marksville sites. Farther east you do get
sandy ware, Alexander-like, in Tchefuncte sites.
]elks: At the Walter Bell site at McGee Bend, we have also a
punctated-incised ware, similar to Pennington but rather poor. Haag:
This is found all across southern Louisiana, and it all resembles
Pennington or Rhinehardt. In the same area there is also a "cheesy
French Fork Incised" and also an incised "messy Dunkin" or "messy
Manchac." Webb: This material is probably later than both Pennington and Rhinehardt. The vessel shapes are different and the treatment
of decoration idea and paste is different. Dis: This material should
have a separate name in order to distinguish it from Pennington and
Rhinehardt. ]elks: What about "Angelina Incised"? Dis: It includes
both incised alone and punctated-incised. It derives from PenningtonDunkin (in Texas) or Rhinehardt-Manchac (in Louisiana). In this
case one name should be valid, even though elsewhere two names are
used depending on whether or not punctates are used. ]elks: In addition to the differences in decoration, the Angelina vessel shapes are
wrong for Pennington. At the Walter Bell site (at McGee Bend)
we do have good Pennington--in addition to this poorer material-but it grades off into the poor material. We have Dunkin too; it is
found east into DeSoto Parish, Louisiana, for instance at Smithport
Landing. Webb: There should be Alba points with this. ]elks: There
are some Alba points, but mostly the points are Perdiz. We have free
punctates too. Webb: This is Wilkinson Punctated. ]elks: Also we
have sloppy ridged pottery--it is really incised (Webb: Karnack Incised); these vessels are in burials, with Perdiz points. Possibly it
means that there were two occupations at Walter Bell.
Webb: At Smithport Landing you find things like this, and they
appear to be due either to two occupations or to a general development
toward Bossier Focus. Stephenson’s material from his 1948 reconnaissance at McGee Bend was, according to Krieger, Alto III and "Shelby
Focus"--later re-named Bossier. To me this appears to be an AltoBossier development.

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

25

Stephenson: For most of the sites producing enough material to tell in
my reconnaissance of the McGee Bend area, I believe this statement is
quite true.
]elks: In East :Texas, Perdiz points arb Supposed to represent the
Frankston Focus. At Walter Bell there are not only Perdiz, but
Bassett points, vvh~ich are similar to Perdiz. g/ebb & Gregory: At the
Sanson site you get both Perdiz and Bassett points. The difference
between Perdiz and Bassett points is in whether the stem goes below
the barbs or not; if it does, you call it Perdiz.
WYLIE FOCUS

]elks: Along with Fort Coffee and Turkey Bluff, the Wylie Focus
is a sort of buffer between the Caddo area and the Plains. It has both
Caddoan pottery and Plains material. The type site is Hogge Bridge.
There is some Sanders and some Frankston pottery. The points are
of the types Alba, Bonham, Perdiz, Fresno, Cliffton, and Plains triangular (Harrell). Wylie Focus sites are small. Hogge Bridge seems
to represent a brief occupation and the associations seem good. In the
middle of each site is a saucer-shaped depression about 100 ft. in
diameter. Nocona Plain, a shell-tempered pottery type, is found here
and farther west. There are eight or ten Wylie Focus sites in a localized area in the Trinity drainage. Wylie Focus also has bone work:
bison scapula hoes, fish hooks, bone pins. There is also charred corn.
Webb: The Bonham points in Wylie Focus are very much. like
Alba points; is Bonham really a separate type? ]elks: Some Bonham
points are more like Perdiz points.
Webb: It looks as if Wylie Focus covered a long time.
]elks: It seems closely related to the Henrietta Focus; Krieger
originally included in the Henrietta Focus several Dallas County sites
which later became incorporated in the Wylie Focus by Stephenson.
We don’t know whether the Caddoan pottery is trade ware or not.
The Henrietta Focus has a stronger Plains flavor and doesn’t have the
basins. There are probably more Wylie Focus sites than those which
have been recorded--non-pit sites, for instance. The burials usually
don’t have offerings, and are tightly flexed--a Plains, rather than
Caddoan, trait.
Bell: Wylie Focus is very odd; it is reminiscent of Fourche Maline.
Krieger: I do not feel that the Wylie and Fourche Maline loci are much
alike, either in ceramic or non-ceramic traits.

~6

TEXA£ ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Baerreis: ]elks speaks of the Wylie Focus as "a sort of buffer between
the Caddoan area and the Plains." This has an implication in terms of
historic events that may not be quite adequate. For at least the northern
margin of the Caddoan area the Fulton Aspect would appear to represent
a shrinkage in the geographic scope of the late Caddoan cultures. The
shrinkage may in part be due to a somewhat earlier departure of Caddoanspeaking peoples from the area~Wichita, Pawnee, and Arikara, for example-and with their departure and residence in the Plains the opportunity for culture contact with linguistic relatives would be enhanced. If
a "buffer" implies, as my dictionary states, "anything serving to deaden
a shock or bear the brunt of a collision," I would argue rather for a peaceful Contact situation allowing for a free interchange of traits.
Stephenson: To me, the Wylie Focus is simply a marginal group of Fulton Aspect people who, due partly to geographic location, absorbed a
number of Plains (or Henrietta Focus) traits. I fail to see the relationship
between Wylie Focus and Fourche Maline, but then perhaps I am not
adequately acquainted with Fourche Maline. The Wylie Focus appears to
me to have had its beginning early in Fulton Aspect times, if not perhaps
overlapping the last dying gasps of the Gibson Aspect, and certainly continuing on long into Fulton times. I am sure there must be more sites of
the Wylie Focus than we have recorded, particularly--as ]elks points
out--sites without pits.
Crook and Harris: We have thought of the Wylie Focus as follows: the
first occupation was Archaic for a long period of time, then contact was
made with pottery cultures of Gibson or pre-Gibson Aspect and continued
through a part of the Fulton Aspect. The Henrietta Focus also exerted
some influence on Wylie Focus. The Wylie Focus people may have also
made a small amount of pottery.
CENTttAL TEXAS CADDOAN MATEI~IAL

]elks* [Elaborated later on the basis of comments by Krieger]:
There is a band of material between the Brazos and Trinity rivers,
between the latitudes of Waco and Austin. A few sites have sherds of
Alto Focus types, Alba arrowpoints, and Copena points or knives.
Other sites have numerous Frankston Focus sherds and associated
artifacts; and still others have sherds more closely resembling
Sanders Focus types than any others. Krieger calls the Chupek site
near Waco, where Frank H. Watt has made extensive collections,
primarily an Alto Focus component, but there are sherds and other
artifacts of the Frankston Focus there too, as well as sherds resembling Sanders Focus types. The Alto Focus pottery types at

FOURTH CADDOAiN CONFERENCE

27

Chupek include Weches, Dunkin, Pennington, Crockett, Holly, and
Hickory. There is another component near Bryan with several of the
key Alto Focus pottery types, Alba points, and Copena knives, but no
admixtures of other Caddoan foci. West of the Brazos, you find fewer
dart-point types of the Alto Focus (Wells, Morrill), Copena knives,
and Alto Focus sherds, and these disappear as you go west in Central
Texas. Presumably, all Alto Focus pottery found west of the Brazos
(and possibly the typical dart points and Copena knives as well) was
carried there by traders or visitors. On the other hand, Frankston
Focus pottery is fairly common in Central Texas and extends much
farther west than any Alto Focus traits.

OKLAHOMA

QUARTZITE INDUSTRY

(Bell and Shaeffer showed specimens from an Oklahoma quartzite
industry. This material does not seem related to Caddoan material but
was introduced for general appraisal.)
Schaeffer:* FOr some time quartzite chips, cores, and tools from
sites principally in central Oklahoma have been brought in, mainly
by Dr. Sherman Lawton. Bell has examined several of these sites and
has found Plainview points. The sites are characteristically located
away from present water sources or on high ground above them and,
in southwest Oklahoma and the Panhandle, on the shores of now dry
lakes. The collections contain many chips and large fragments but,
except for knives and a few point fragments, no bifacially chipped
artifacts. The remainder of the tool types are pebbles which are percussion-chipped on one face only. These consist of choppers, highbacked planes or pebble scrapers, a form which might possibly be a
prototype of the Clear Fork Gouge, hammerstones, and possibly a few
grinding stones. A recognizable point which was found is a typical
Plainview form 2.5 cm. wide, and a small 5 cm. quartzite projectile
point with a single prominent shoulder is reminiscent of the Sandia
point form. The present distribution suggests a western connection
but it may be that future surveys will fill the gap to the south so that
it can be more directly connected with Archaic material in north
central Texas.
]elks: These specimens can be duplicated (except that the material
of which they are made is different) in the Edwards Plateau Aspect
of Central Texas; but the Edwards Plateau sites which contain specimens like these are quarry sites, and the specimens are thought to be
rejects. Shae~er: If these are rejects, where are the tools? In Central

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Oklahoma, they are unique. They seem to occur mainly along the
Canadian, but this distribution may simply reflect where the work has
gone on. The investigation is really just beginning. ]elks: Perhaps this
is a flint industry which has moved into a non-flint area. 8haefJer:
Typologically and in selection of stone, these specimens hint at a developmental sequence. To me, the main resemblance is to Cochise.

PERIPHERAL MATERIALS IN ARKANSAS

Dis: Were there Caddoan settlements along the lower Arkansas
River? The Douglas, Greer, and Old River Landing sites between
Little Rock and Arkansas Post--are these Caddoan sites with some
Mississippian and Quapaw, or are they, as Griffin suggests, Quapaw
with Caddo influence? They have vessels with banded punctates (formerly called Menard Punctate Banded; now called Owens Punctated).
These sites have painted vessels and the teapot shape, plus Caddoan
material. [Looking at C. B. Moore illustrations.] They are all quite
late. This seems to be a Caddoan-Mississippian contact area. The Greer
site in particular is surely mainly Caddoan. It is late, with shell temper; late Foster Trailed-Incised pots, and painted pottery, among other
things:
Stephenson: Robert Greengo made a survey for the River Basin Surveys
in the Spring of 1957 at the Dardanelles Reservoir area about midway between Fort Smith and Little Rock, Arkansas. Here he found a number of
sites that provide sherds and proiectile points of perfectly good Caddoan
types running through all time periods. Particularly numerous were
projectile points that seemed to relate the sites to the Archaic period in
the Caddoan area. This, of course, is an extremely fringe area relative to
the Caddoan area, and the materials Greengo got were only surface collections; consequently, there isn’t much that can be said about them at
this time. I am sure that with some testing and excavation in these sites
before the dam is built, we will have something of major significance
from the area.

SANSON SITE

Gregory:* The Sanson site is located on the south end of Catahoula
Lake in Rapides Parish, Louisiana. The site runs along a broad sandy
ridge and covers a small island. It consists of two dome-shaped mounds,
one truncated pyramidal mound and vast midden accumulations.
There might possibly have been a plaza associated.
One of the dome-shaped mounds was a burial mound that was ex-

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

29

cavated during the 1930’s by the Sanson brothers for the collections
of Mr. Edward F. Neild and Mr. and Mrs. U. B. Evans. These individuals supervised the work at the site and Mr. Emerick Sanson was
put in charge of the field crew. They used a standard grid system and
four lateral trenches by which the whole mound was moved.
The mound contained numerous burials, a great many of which
had been reached by the plow line. Therefore a lot of the material at
the site was scattered by the plow prior to the excavation. There were
three cremations in the very center of the mound and these were accompanied by an offering of three groups of five pots, all of which
were ceremonially "killed" either by perforation (before or after
firing) or by smashing. There was also a placement of two pipes at
the cremation. Scattered through the fill (there was no stratification
visible) were numerous other burials accompanied by all types of
offerings ranging from arrow points to vessels. A good number of the
vessels were ceremonially "killed." The burial forms ranged from
disarticulated to extended forms.
The pottery types included a number of "typical" Plaquemine
Period types, plus a good number of Caddoan types such as Maddox
Engraved and Pease Brushed-Incised. The projectile point types included a number that were definitely Caddoan in origin, such as
Perdiz, Bassett, Steiner, and Hayes; plus some types that are found
with material in the Lower Mississippi tlegion such as "Fir Tree," a
form which might be compared to Scallorn in Texas. A number of
large notched points including San Patrice and Ensor, have been collected from the surface of the site, and since many of these are worn
and broken, they might indicate an Archaic site in the area.
Webb:* Surface collections along the beach at Sanson indicate to
me a fairly long occupation, with stone work which appears Archaic
(probably late), sherds of Marksville, Coles Creek, Plaquemine, and
Caddoan pottery types. None of this is surprising, since the site has
a favorable location fronting on the lake, generally above high water
and with good soil available. Gregory is hesitant about concluding
that there was an Archaic occupation, because of some geological
implications--not too certain--and the frequent occurrence elsewhere
of Archaic projectile point types extending into the pottery-making
horizons. Our surface collection in the summer of 1957 [after the Conference], however, included crude pointed or "pick-like" tools, one
graver, and numerous large and small flake "scrapers," in addition to

TEX~LS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a variety of proiectile types, all in one day’s search. To me this seems
to be too much for a simple "carry-over" of Archaic traits.
The maior and apparently final occupation was the mound-building
period, which is a mixture of Plaquemine and Caddoan traits. Gregory
and Ford think it is primarily Caddoan with some Plaquemine: I think
it is primarily Plaquemine with some Caddoan; the truth probably is
about 50-50. Each of us inclines as he does because the total assemblage is considerably different from either Caddoan or Plaquemine. as
the case may be.
In summary I would say that the Sanson site represents occupation
from late Archaic through Marksville-Troyville and Coles Creek to a
final, and apparently major, occupation by a mound-building people
whose culture represents an admixture or amalgamation of Fulton
Aspect Caddoan and Plaquemine traits. The strength of influence
from either direction and the presence of pottery decoration which is
similar to, but not identical with. that found in the Caddoan or Plaquemine areas makes it unlikely that trade obj ects could account for the
situation. Moreover, the presence of some traits which are different
from either Caddo or Plaquemine elsewhere will probably set Sanson
apart as a distinctive culture. In relation to the Caddoan area. Sanson
could be considered as a fringe culture which has Caddoan affinities.

General Discussion
Discussion of trade and its importance, particularly in relation to
Poverty Point and Hopewell. Might organized traders from Mexico
have come into the Southeast? This idea is being worked on by Dr.
William Sanders of the University of Mississippi, in a project for
Louisiana State University.
Haag-Webb controversy on where the Poverty Point people got the
idea of building those earth structures. This is no matter of incidental
stimulus diffusion, says Haag; this reflects closer contact. It is not the
same as Mexico-Southeast relationships. And how does one explain
the microflints in Poverty Point?
Discussion of burial types. [Transcription incomplete.] In Oklahoma, all types of burials run all the way through the sequence. In
general, in the Caddo area, cremations are exceedingly rare. and seem
to be early. Nearly all Fulton burials are simple extended primary
burials. The trait of large deep pits with multiple burials and large
offerings is uniquely Caddoan in the Southeast (it also occurs in Hopewell).

FOURTH CADDOAIN

CONFERENCE

31

Historic Sites
(Topic taken up at the request of West)
West: Where are there sites with contact material? What are the
late pottery types like Fatherland Incised? Webb: Natchitoches Engraved and Keno Trailed, especially when they are shell tempered.
Neitzel: It is surprising how few European trade goods are to be
found in localities where the French are known to have been for a
number of years. As a related problem, we tried finding material in
known spots on Civil War battlefields, using mine detectors, and often
found very little. White-Indian trade may have emphasized perishables.
West: Is there much contact material in the mission sites around
Nacogdoches? ]elks: None of these sites has been excavated. One finds
beads on the surface. Small beads "seed beads" are most common.
West: You don’t find those in Louisiana. Dis: If you sieve the dirt, you
will find them. Webb: Around Natchitoches, most beads are ~" long.
Dis: These are Venetian glass and porcelain. There are no trade sites
in northwest Louisiana; only at Natchitoches. The Hunt and Clement
sites in East Texas are historic, as in Womack (Garretts Bluff). ]elks:
Spanish Fort, on both sides of the Red River in Texas and Oklahoma,
is a major historic site; this is a Taovayas site (Wichita Confederacy).
Another is Stansbury, on the Brazos River above Waco, probably
Tawakoni (Wichita Confederacy).
Dis: Extended discussion, at prompting of West, of information on
different sorts of trade goods: beads, various kinds of china and earthenware Majolica, feather-edge, Willow ware, etc.; stone ware; glass,
green glass. The best things to look for in the Caddoan area that will
indicate a historic date are glass beads, metal knives, iron bracelets,
and gun fragments. Very little chinaware on any site. Porcelain dolls
may be expected. [Note differences with West’s comments below,
which were added later. Ed.]
West:* Following are impressions of what are presently taken to be
contact sites in northwestern, central and southeastern Louisiana:
No excavation has been attempted and, indeed, in most cases indications are that the bulk of the material is on the surface and in the
root zone. Thus the establishment of definite association, and hence
contemporaneity, of the Indian and European materials is difficult.
Seemingly the only possible approach is to determine first that one is
dealing with unequivocally late Indian pottery types such as Fatherland Incised. Secondly, it must be possible to state with some certainty

32

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

that the White materials are of the same general time period. The latter of these two problems is more difficult.
My observations of sites of this kind have led to the conclusion that
looking for trade goods as such, and using them as the prime determinant of the contact site, can lead to serious errors. Far and away the
most common item of White manufacture consists of china sherds.
Probably second most common are Churchwarden pipestems. Less
numerous are musket balls. Green bottle glass is fairly common. One
finds, after a while, that he develops a "feel" for the European material. Some "feels" old and some not so old. I have not yet had an opportunity to check and verify this sensation, so it may develop that I
"feel" upside-down: what is early may "feel" late, and vice versa. In
other words, this is a raw field impression.
Having determined rough coevality in a surface sample of late Indian pottery and early White material cannot, of itself, prove the site
to be an historic contact one. It does, however, render this supposition
highly likely and may in many cases constitute the best hypothesis.
If the sites from which this discussion is drawn are indeed of the
contact period, then there is in this area an apparent anomaly: standard trade items such as glass beads are virtually absent. Instead. European china and glass are found. This is in marked contrast to contact
sites elsewhere in the country. Perhaps a partial explanation is that
very little of the early exploration here was overland. Another possible pertinent factor may have been the very early and widespread
missionizing among the Indians which most often entailed the actual
resid ence in the village of a priest.
Actually, the paucity of such materials at other sites in other areas
may be more apparent than real. Such things as china, being slightly
suspect as being non-contemporaneous, may have been overlooked in
favor of the more obvious trade goods.
I have observed one type of china. Featheredge, in contact situations
in such widely separated localities as Louisiana, North Carolina. and
North and South Dakota. Unfortunately, Featheredge has such a long
period of apparently great popularity (ca. 1750-1850) that it is of
little utility as a time-marker. In fact, there have been exceedingly
few contact sites that have not yielded at least one sherd of this ware.
For the most part, identification of European ceramics must be
done by an expert in such matters. There are few of these willing to
undertake such a tedious task gratis, and all of them are generally

FOURTH CADDOAN COI~I~]gR]~NCE

33

swamped with requests for identification, so that the problem of identification is a difficult one.
Quimby’s Bayou Goula site yielded abundant china and glass. I
have done some testing at Los Adais, the site of the Spanish mission
and presidio among the Adai. Expectably, china and glass are also of
frequent occurrence here. A comparison of these materials from Bayou
Goula and Los Adais, both of which are dated, may yield a basis for
more certain identification of European wares found elsewhere in the
region. In fact, it was with this plan in mind that I tested at Los Adais.
None of this material has, as yet, been analyzed, so the success of this
scheme is still unknown.
It is impossible to draw any firm conclusions from incomplete work.
However, it does seem conceivable that a re-examination of other
contact sites may be in order. Perhaps the apparent situation here in
regard to surface indications may not be quite so local in character as
it now appears.

Re]erences Cited
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point, a Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 46, Part 1.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
Texas Publications, No. 4640.
Phillips, Philip
1958. Application of the Wheat-Gifford-Wasley Taxonomy to Eastern Ceramics.
American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 117-125.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas:
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Wheat, Joe Ben, James C. Gifford, and William L. Wasley
1958. Ceramic Variety, Type Cluster, and Ceramic System in Southwestern
Pottery Analysis. American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 1, pp. 34~47.

The University
Austin, Texas

of Texas

