Relationships Between the Caddoan and
Central Louisiana Culture Sequences1
CLARENCE H. WEBB

The major expressions of the central Louisiana culture sequence-Tchefuncte, Marksville, Troyville, Coles Creek, Plaquemine, Natchez
--lie generally south and east of the Caddoan area. Caddoan sites are
recognized down the Red River to central Louisiana; central Louisiana
occupations are found in northern Louisiana and into Arkansas, examples being the Kirkham site (Lemley and Dickinson, 1939) on
Little Missouri River, the Fredericks site (Ford, 1951 ) in Natchitoches
Parish, Lo~isiana, and the Crenshaw site (Lemley, 1936; Dickinson,
1936) in Miller County, Arkansas. The last two sites are in the Red
River valley.
Trade sherds and vessels have been found in both areas. From the
Gibson Aspect Davis site in eastern Texas (Newell and Krieger, 1949)
Krieger has identified sherds as Marksville Stamped, Marksville Incised, and Chevalier Stamped. Orr (1946, 1952) mentions Coles Creek
types at the Spiro Craig Mound site, arbitrarily equating these with
Spiro 1, but provenience and relationships with Caddoan materials at
this site have not been made available. Harrington (1920: P1. LXVIII,
B) illustrated a French Fork Incised vessel from the Washington site
(Haley Focus) and a cup (ibid.: Fig. 19) with Marksville Incised
decoration from Cedar Glades. From Sycamore Landing on the Ouachita River, Moore (1909: Figs. 104-118) illustrated stone pipes very
similar to Plaquemine pipes from Selsertown (near Natchez, Mississippi), also a vessel of type L’Eau Noire Incised (engraved in this
instance), along with Caddoan pipes and vessels. In the late period,
vessels of Fatherland Incised were shown by Moore (1909) from Keno
1 This paper was presented at a symposium entitled "Relationships between the
Caddoan Area and Neighboring Areas," which was a part of the program of the
23rd Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, held at the University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma, May 1-3, 1958. On the program this paper
was entitled "Relationships between the Caddoan Area and Louisiana."

12

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and Glendora. Similar Natchezan vessels have been found with late
Caddoan wares at Camden on the Ouachita and at the Battle Mound
site on Red River (these were observed in the collections and from the
excavations of Frank Soday and M. P. Miroir respectively).
Conversely, Caddoan sherds have been found at a number of central
Louisiana sites. From the secondary mantle and surface wash of the
Crooks Mound, a Marksville site in La Salle Parish, Ford and Willey
(1940) have illustrated sherds now identifiable as Caddoan types
Belcher Ridged, Sinner Linear Punctuated, and Maddox Engraved
(Bossier Focus types), as well as Wilkinson Punctated and Harrison
Bayou Incised (Alto and Bossier Focus types). With these Caddoan
sherds were Plaquemine types Sanson Incised, Chevalier Stamped,
Anna Interior Engraved, sherds then called Catahoula Incised but now
assignable to Manchac Incised, and Plaquemine Brushed. Anna Interior Engraved occurs in Natchez in addition to Plaquemine, and
Chevalier Stamped begins in Troyville and extends through Coles
Creek into Plaquemine. The authors lumped all of these Caddoan,
Plaquemine, Coles Creek, and Natchez sherds as a late re-occupation,
discounting their appearance in the secondary mantle as a technical
field error, and stated that
after a period of desertion the structures were once more utilized by
Indians, apparently some time very close to 1700 A.D. This latter occupation seems to have been a brief one, and is indicated by potsherds of late
Caddoan, Natchez, and Tunican types mixed in the wash soil on the slopes
of Mound A.

A priori conclusions of this type, understandable in !940, are no
longer tenable. Two other statements from this report are significant.
(1) The authors stated that, with the error of identification of wash
material corrected, the fill of the secondary mantle ceased to show "appreciable" amounts of the late types. (2) They were at a loss to explain the presence of Sanson Incised and Catahoula Incised sherds in
pre-mound and burial platform levels, and again suggested that field
errors could be responsible. A few sherds of these types in Marksville
deposits should not be too surprising, particularly as a development
from Chinchuba Brushed and diagonal incising in Tchefuncte. I
found sherds of Harrison Bayou Incised, Coles Creek Incised, Manchac
Incised, and one sherd of Plaquemine Brushed in the deeper levels of
the Wiley Mound at Larto Lake, where the dominant sherd types were
Marksville and Troyville Stamped, Marksville Incised, and Churupa
Punctated.

GADDOAr,I AREA AI~qD CENTRAL LOUISIANA

13

From the Greenhouse site in central Louisiana Ford (i 951 ) reported
trade sherds that were identified by Krieger as Caddoan, including
Crockett Curvilinear Incised, probable Pennington Punctated-lncised,
and Holly Fine Engraved from Alto Focus ceramics, as well as possible
Haley and Texarkana Focus types. Furthermore, Hardy Incised, Wilkinson Punctated, and Harrison Bayou Incised (included in the type
Beldeau Incised, although punctations within the diamonds formed by
cross incising were lacking) are types present in Caddoan pottery of

the Alto and Bossier loci as well as in the central Louisiana ceramics.
The analyses show that these Caddoan sherds and shared types came
from Greenhouse levels assigned to both Troyville and Coles Creek
periods.
On the Plaquemine level, the Medora site (Quimby, i951) included
Hardy Incised and Harrison Bayou Incised as major Plaquemine
types. We have noted that these are also present in the Alto and Bossier foci (Hardy Incised is included by Krieger in type Kiam Incised).
Manchac Incised~ Plaguemine Brushed, Dupree Incised, and Lulu
Linear Punctated are indistinguishable, in my experience, from corresponding types in the Bossier Focus of northern Louisiana. The Bayou
Goula site (Quimby~ 1957) had these same types, as well as Rhinehardt Punctated, which is shared by Bossier Focus and has similarities
to Pennington type of Alto Focus. Therefore seven of the 16 Plaquemine decorated pottery types are generally indistinguishable from
Bossier Focus Caddoan types. Some of these have earlier beginnings in
Coles Greek and Alto in the two areas. One should note that these are
utility wares, tending to be much longer lived than ceremonial or
burial wares.
The Gordon site reported by Cotter (1952), origina!ly the type site
for Coles Creek, reveals Caddoan sherds in the state of Mississippi.
This site goes through the transition from Coles Greek to Plaquemine,
with the Coles Creek early enough to have Marksville and Troyville
Starnped~ Yokena Incised, and Mulberry Creek Cordmarked sherds,
and the Plaquemine lasting long enough to include a few Natchezan
criteria. Hardy Incised was the dominant type and Coles Creek Incised, Manchac Incised, and Rhinehardt Punctated were secondary
types in the early levels, with progressive replacement of Hardy Incised by Plaquemine Brushed in the later periods. Maddo_z" Incised
(Engraved), which reached this area from the Bossier Focus, was well
represented at all levels. Crockett Curvilinear Incised sherds and carl
hated bowl shapes were other Caddoan pottery features. Harrison
Bayou Incised type was present~ and unidentified sherds had engrav-

1+

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ing with spurs or triangles, suggestive of Haley Engraved. Circular
houses in the early period were succeeded by rectangular structures,
and the analogy to Davis (Alto Focus) houses was suggested by the
author. Rectangular structures with post holes in trenches, interrupted
at the corners, are very similar to the Haley Focus pre-mound structure at the Belcher Mound site (Webb, 1959). Projectile points included several Archaic types, the "fir-tree" variety of Alba or Scallorn, one Alba type (called Hayes), and the "fish-tail" or "sword-fish"
type found regularly at Plaquemine sites in Louisiana. "Fish-tail"
proiectile points in one of the Gahagan burial pits are more understandable when we note that they were found in the pre-mound Coles
Creek level at the Gordon site.
Cotter (1952) links the Gordon, Medora, Davis, and Greenhouse
sites as manifesting the primary features of Temple Mound I. He suggests that the progression from Troyville to Plaquemine appears to be
of no long duration, with Coles Creek pottery types common to both,
and that the interposition of Coles Creek as a cultural period is unnecessary. He thinks that the Gordon site provides the needed transition between Temple Mound I and Temple Mound II; at the culmination of Temple Mound II Plaquemine gave way to characteristic
Natchezan. He suggests a similar transition in the Gibson Aspect at
Alto, progressing from lingering Marksville and Copena traces toward
true Temple Mound characteristics.
At the historic level Quimby (1942), in his summary of the Natchezan culture, illustrates from Angola the types Wilkinson Incised,
which is a shell-tempered curvilinear incised Glendora Focus type,
and Hodges Engraved, a clay-tempered Belcher and Glendora Caddoan

type.
It may seem surprising that, despite these and many other evidences
of trade and contact between Caddoan and central Louisiana cultures,
there is serious disagreement concerning relationships and chronology.
Ford (1951) and Sears (1958) have compressed the entire Caddoan
sequence into the Plaquemine-Natchez time span, without elimination or compression of the Troyville or Coles Creek periods such as
Cotter suggests. Krieger (Newell and Krieger, 1949) finds convincing
reasons to equate Gibson Aspect inception with Marksville, and is supported by maize typology at the Davis site and C-14 datings. Since the
Plaquemine beginning date is estimated at i.D. 1300 to 1500 by Quireby (1957) and the Marksville-Troyville C-14 datings cluster around
A.D. 500 to 800, the variance of opinion is of serious proportions.
Time does not permit discussion of the many factors which remove

CADDOAN AREA AND CENTRAL LOUISIANA

15

these differences of opinion from the area of intransigence or the maintenance of preconceived ideas. As examples of these factors, one could
cite the conceptual differences expressed by Cotter and Quimby concerning the Plaquemine period, the sweeping movements of ceramic
traits recounted by Ford, differences in typing methods in the two
areas, the long life span of certain pottery and other artifact types, and
spatial as contrasted with temporal variations in ceramic techniques.
I have attempted to clarify Caddoan-central Louisiana interchanges
by a study of surface sherd collections and ten site excavations in the
chief contact zone across northern Louisiana. Our surface collections
include over a hundred sites, but I have particularly studied the 20
larger collections, each of which yields between 100 and 1200 decorated sherds.
The Tchefuncte culture has not been found in northern Louisiana
or the entire Caddoan area. It can be eliminated from direct comparison, but one notes that the linear punctated Tchefuncte type Lake
Borgne Incised looks like a good ancestor for the Bossier Focus type
Sinner Linear Punctated. Our recent finding of Sinner Linear Punctated vessels with Haley and Alto Focus types in Mineral Springs
Mound burials, and the presence of linear punctated sherds at the
Troyville, Crooks, and Wiley sites narrows the gap between these
types.
On the Marksville level, the Fredericks site in Natchitoches Parish
has been termed Marksville or Troyville by Ford (1951). Our sherd
collection includes zoned dentate and rocker stamping which may be
interpreted as both Marksville and Troyville Stamped, as well as
Marksville Incised, Churupa Punctated, Mulberry Creek Cordrnarked,
Mazique and Chase Incised, and plain with notched rims. No Caddoan sherds have been found on this site. Other sites in northwestern
Louisiana on this time level are included in the Bellevue Focus, of
which four mound sites have been excavated. Significant traits are
flexed burials, cremation, primary platforms in small conical mounds,
late Archaic lithic artifacts, and small beads of stone and rolled copper. The preponderantly plain pottery is clay-, sherd-, or bone-tempered. The few decorated sherds are unidentified incised, plain sherds
with transverse or oblique lip incisions, Marksville Stamped, and Churupa Punctated. The Bellevue sites belong to a single culture period,
no Caddoan or Coles Creek pottery types or small projectile points
having been found.
All other pottery-yielding sites in northwestern Louisiana, from
which we have collections, have Caddoan sherds, mainly of Bossier

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Focus types (Webb, 1948). Tabulation of some 35 pottery types from
the 20 sites (five mound and 15 village sites), and grouping the sites
in accordance with the combined frequencies of six major Bossier
pottery types which would not be confused with Coles Creek or Alto
types~iaddox Engraved, Belcher Ridged, Sinner Linear Punctated,
Pease Brushed-Incised, Bossier Brushed, and Karnack Brushed-shows three distinct groupings:
(1) Group 1, comprising two mound and six village sites, shows the
combined Bossier types to total 12.4 to 27.6% of the decorated sherds.
Alto Focus wares, judged by the distinctive types Holly and Hickory
Engraved, Weches, Crockett, Pennington, and Davis, are well represented, with combined frequencies of 6.7 to 14% from six sites, 1.6%
at one, and 26% at another. Only a few distinctive Haley Focus sherds
are found.
Six of these eight sites have distinctive Coles Creek sherds, judged
by the types French Fork Incised, Chase Incised, Chevalier Stamped,
Beldeau Incised, and Coles Creek Incised (with subjacent triangles or
incisions along a flat lip), in combined frequencies of 2 to 8% of dec-orated sherds from four sites, less than 1% in the other two. Moreover,
two of these sites have one to two sherds of Churupa Punctated or
Maziquo~ Incised, and one site lacking Cole Creek sherds has three
sherds of Marksville or Troyville Stamped.
(2) Group 2, represented by one mound and six village sites, had 39
to 59% of the decorated sherds represented in the combined Bossier
Focus types. One would assume that these well-developed Bossier sites
are later than Group 1, and this is borne out by the fact that the listed
Alto types total less than 1 ~o from five of the seven sites. One site
has 4% Alto, chiefly Davis Incised. It also (the only instance in Group
2) has Coles Creek sherds, totaling 4% among the listed types, and
one sherd of Marksville Stamped. A second site of Group 2, lacking
Coles Creek types, has three sherds (out of 1948) of Marksville
Stamped. These Group 2 sites have Plaquemine types like Evangeline
Interior Incised and Dupree Incised, whereas Evangeline was lacking
and Dupree rare in Group 1. The broad line incising of Sanson Incised
increases in frequency to as high as 5 % in two of the Group 2 sites.
Sherds with curvilinear incising of grouped lines increase in frequency
to 1 to 4%, compared to less than 1% in all but one site of Group 1.
(3) Group 3 consists of three mound and two village sites in which
the stated Bossier types increase to 70-79% of decorated sherds. Four
of these five sites have no Coles Creek, Marksville, or Troyville types;

CADDOAI~ AREA AND CENTRAL LOUISIANA

17

two of these four have no Alto or Haley, the other two having i % or
less. The fifth site has three sherds of Crockett Curvilinear, one each
of Coles Creek Incised and TroyvilIe Stamped. Dupree and curvilinear
incising continue, there is a considerable increase in brushing, red
filming increases, occasional sherds of shell-tempered or porous light
wares occur, as well as Belcher Engraved and Cowhide Stamped types.
These facts indicate that Group 3 is approaching Belcher Focus times.
The rarity of shell tempering shows that none of the 20 sites are
late Caddoan. From the 20 sites more than 12,000 sherds were examined. Only 55 sherds from six sites are shell tempered, and 42 of
these are from a recognized Glendora Focus component at Smithport
Landing. This leaves 13 shell-tempered sherds among the 11,000
(0.1%) from the other 19 sites. All Group 1 sites except Smithport and
four of the Group 2 sites are totally lacking in shell temper. By comparison, shell tempering totals 3% in Belcher Focus levels at the Belcher site and 50% or more in Glendora Focus sites at Natchitoches and
near Shreveport.
I omitted from the distinctive Bossier, Alto, and Coles Creek sherd
tabulations the types Hardy, Harrison Bayou, Dunkin and Manchac
Incised, Wilkinson and Rinehardt Punctated, because I have found
it impossible to allocate these utility types specifically to Coles Creek,
Plaquemine, Alto, or Bossier ceramics--they generally occur in all.
Hardy Incised shows levels of 14 to 30% in Group 1, dropping to
levels below 10% in Group 2 and below 5 % in Group 3, except in two
sites of Group 2, one of which maintains 4% Coles Creek Incised.
Sherds of Dunkin and Manchac Incised types are generally not separable; they diminish markedly in Group 3. Wilkinson Punctated is
at levels from 5 to 15 % in Group 1, decreasing in most of Group 2 and
Group 3, but is still present from all but one Group 3 site. Sherds of
Rhinehardt Punctated, random punctated, Pennington Punctated Incised and Dupree Incised are often difficult to separate, except when
Pennington appears on the typical bowl form in those Group 1 sites
where Alto is well represented. Punctations were made with pointed,
rounded, fiat-tipped, and circular tools; crescentic, comma-shaped, rectangular, circular, triangular, and nail punctations occur, free or in
zones, alternating with incised areas or plain areas. All punctations
are more frequent in Group 1, progressively declining thereafter;
triangular punctations and typical Pennington are infrequent or absent from Group 2 and Group 3 sites. Although zoned punctations
continue, punctations in single rows between horizontal lines are found
only where Coles Creek and Alto types are present.

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In summary, these site studies give evidence that Bossier Focus
ceramics developed in northern Louisiana out of Coles Greek and Alto;
there was close parallelism between the appearance of Coles Greek
and Alto ceramic types in this area in Group 1 sites and their progressive diminution and disappearance in Groups 2 and 3 as Bossier
Focus developed fully. Contemporaneity of Plaquemine and Bossier is
indicated by trade sherds and shared types in Group 2 sites. These
studies and other evidences indicate that Bossier Focus lasted for a
rather long time, was manifested from the Ouachita River in the
Camden area completely across northwestern Louisiana to dip into
eastern Texas, and was at least partially contemporaneous with Haley
Focus, judging by the shared types Maddox Engraved, Sinner Linear
Punctated, and Pease Brushed-Incised (which we found with Haley
ceramics in Mineral Springs Mound burials, Howard County, Arkansas). The intrusion of Belcher Focus down the Red River into northern
Louisiana probably occurred at or near the end of Bossier times.
Excavations at the Mounds Plantation in Caddo Parish, Louisiana,
give an opportunity to check the contemporaneity of Coles Creek and
Alto, which is indicated above in the surface collections. The Sanson
site on Catahoula Lake offers a similar check on Plaquemine and Bossier. At the Mounds Plantation, a large temple-mound-with-plaza site,
a refuse deposit exposed along the sides of a drained borrow pit, therefore presumably pre-mound, yielded over 400 sherds, 33% of which
are bone tempered, all others clay tempered. Many of the bone-tempered sherds are from large, thick-walled plain vessels; 14 sherds are
black polished plain. Decorated types include Coles Creek Incised, triangular punctated, Hardy Incised, Davis Incised, black polished engraved of uncertain type, Wilkinson Punctated, and Sanson Incised.
During 1957 Mound B at this site was trenched by a friend who allowed me to study the sherds removed by approximately one-foot
levels. From the pre-mound level there are Hardy, Coles Creek, and
Davis Incised (one bone tempered), thin burnished, and thick plain
sherds. The mound fill to the six-foot level contained the same types,
as well as Pennington and Hickory. Davis Incised is particularly frequent, as it is in all collections from this site, totaling 22% of the
decorated wares. An occupation level at six feet above the base yielded
many sherds of Holly Engraved, also Hickory, Davis, Crockett, Wilkinson, Hardy, Chase, and Coles Creek Incised (including subjacent
triangles, triangles between incised lines, rim thickening, and lip incising). At the eight-foot level there were Hardy, Davis, Hickory,
Pennington, and Wilkinson types, and these continued to the surface.

GADDOAN AREA AND GENTBAL LOUISIANA

19

From the surface and mound wash, these same Alto and Coles Creek
types were found, also Harrison Bayou~ Beldeau~ and triangular, circular, and crescentic punctated sherds. An intrusive burial into the
mound had Maddox Engraved and Belcher Ridged pottery, presumably
a later Bossier burial.
The Sanson site on Catahoula Lake, central Louisiana, has evidence along the beach of occupation from Archaic through Plaquemine times. Excavation of a mound by a local resident during the early
1930’s produced many whole vessels and sherds, the vessels associated
with evidences of cremation, along with stone beads, polished stone
artifacts, stone and pottery pipes, and a cache of small projectile points
with pointed stems similar to Bassett and Perdiz types of the Fulton
period. Pottery sherds included Coles Greek~ Plaquemine, and Bossier
types, also Cowhide Stamped sherds which could pertain to Belcher
or Bossier wares. Whole vessels are assignable to Plaquemine and Bossier types, including a number of the type Maddox Engraved (one
incised). The trait of "killing" the vessel was present, some in the
process of manufacture, others by punching a hole in the base after
firing. This site offers convincing evidence of contemporaneity of
Plaquemine and Fulton periods.
A word should be added about the "Pre-Caddoan" burials at the
Crenshaw site, with vessels identified by Ford (1951) as Coles Creek
Plain, Coles Creek Incised, Greenhouse Incised, French Fork Incised,
and Rhinehardt Punctated. Ford (1951) and Dickinson (1936) both
mentioned differences in vessel shape, paste characteristics, and surface
finish from Coles Greek vessels of central Louisiana. Ford attributed
this to temporal lateness in the Coles Greek period, but I submit that
these are characteristics seen often in Gibson Aspect Caddoan ceramics,
especially the insertion of pigment into the decoration lines and red
filming over the entire surface (traits never found in central Louisiana Coles Greek). Other Gibson characteristics of these burials are
the orderly placement of many extended burials in large pits, flooring
of the burial pits with multicolored sands, generous burial offerings,
caches of small projectile points (of a type similar to Hayes), longstemmed pipes, and turtle carapace rattles. This adds up to modified
Coles Greek pottery in typical Gibson Aspect burials, evidence which
is more suggestive of contemporaneity than of Coles Greek antecedence.
In conclusion, I would agree with Cotter’s thesis of close parallelism
between central Louisiana and Caddoan cultural development after
Marksville times~ except that I would prefer elimination of the Troy-

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ville concept, which we cannot identify in the Caddoan area, whereas
we can readily identify Marksville, Coles Creek, Plaquemine, and
Natchez ceramics. The same sweeping changes are seen at the end of
Marksville times in both areas--temple mounds, plaza arrangement,
large circular houses shifting to squared, introduction of small arrow
projectile points, scroll motifs, polished vessel surfaces, and many
others, also closely paralleled by early Mississippian developments.
With clarification of the terminal Marksville-Troyville-Coles Creek
confusion, one should be quite comfortable in equating Coles Creek
with Gibson Aspect Caddoan; Plaquemine with Bossier, Belcher or
other protohistoric Fulton Aspect Caddoan; Natchez with Glendora
Focus contact period Caddoan. This is true whether one judges by general cultural context, by closely related or shared traits, or by actual
trade items.
Addendum. Since completion of this paper, a report has been received from the Humble Oil and Refining Company Research Laboratory, Houston, Texas, of two radiocarbon assays from the Belcher
Mound site, Caddo Parish, Louisiana, which bear on this discussion.
(1) Run No. 320, charcoal from charred timber, House 4, pre-mound
level beneath Mound B, on a Haley-Alto Gibson Aspect level, yielded
a date of 1100 -- 100 years before the present. (2) Run No. 322, charcoal from charred timber, House 7, Primary Mound A, on a Belcher
Focus, Fulton Aspect level, yielded a date of 200 -+- 100 years before
the present. If these dates hold up, this gives a time span of 900 years
or more at this site, with Bossier Focus occupation intervening between
the dated levels, and places the Gibson occupation at a time shortly
after most Marksville-Troyville C- 14 dates.

ReJerences Cited
Cotter, John L.
1952.

The Gordon Site in Southern Mississippi. American Antiquity, Vol. 18,

No. 2, pp. 110-126.
Dickinson, S. D.
1936.

Ceramic Relationships of the Pre-Caddoan Pottery from the Crenshaw Site.
Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 8,

pp. 56-69.
Ford, James A.
1951.

Greenhouse:

A Troyville-Coles Creek Period Site in Avoyelles Parish.

Louisiana. Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural
History, Vol. 44, Part 1.
Ford, James A., and Gordon R. Willey
1940.

Crooks Site, A Marksville Period Burial Mound in La Salle Parish, Louisiana. Louisiana Geological Survey, Anthropological Studies, No. 3.

CADDOAN AREA AIXID CENTRAL LOUISIANA

21

Harrington, M. R.
1920. Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas. Indian Notes and Monographs, No. 10.
Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation.
Lemley, Harry J.
1936. Discoveries Indicating a Pre-Caddo Culture on Red River in Arkansas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 8,
pp. 25-55.
Lemley, Harry J., and S. D. Dickinson
1939. Evidences of the Marksville and Coles Creek Complexes at the Kirkham
Place, Clark County, Arkansas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 1i, pp. 139-189.
Moore, Clarence B.
1909. Antiquities of the Ouachita Valley. Journal of the Academy of Natural
Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. 14, pp. 1-170.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949.

The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.

Orr, Kenneth G.
1946. The Archeological Situation at Spiro, Oklahoma: A Preliminary Report.
American Antiquity, Vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 228-256.
1952. Survey of Caddoan Archeology. In: James B. Griffin (editor), Archeology
of Eastern United States, pp. 0_.39-255. University of Chicago Press.
Chicago.
Quimby, George I., Jr.
1942. The Natchezan Culture Type. American Antiquity, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp.
255-275.
1951. The Medora Site, West Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana. Field Museum of
Natural History, Anthropological Series, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 8i-135.
1957.

The Bayou Goula Site, Iberville Parish, Louisiana. Fieldiana: Anthropology, Vol. 47, No. 2, pp. 91-170.

Sears, William H.
1958. Burial Mounds on the Gulf Coastal Plain. American Antiquity, Vol. 23.
No. 3, pp. 274~-283.
V~rebb, Clarence H.
1948. Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier Focus. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19, pp. 100-147.
1959.

The Belcher Mound, A Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 16.
1560 Line Avenue
Shreveport, Louisiana

Discussion
By Alex D. Krieger
Webb has analyzed the relationships between the Caddoan cultural
block and the lower Mississippi Valley with great skill and insight.
His general correlation of Gibson Aspect with Coles Creek, and Fulton
Aspect with Plaquemine, plus the importance of Bossier Focus and

