Prehistoric Population Dynamics
of Southeastern Texas
L. W. Patterson

ABSTRACT
A study is presented on development of tentative models of
population dynamics for prehistoric periods o f southeastern Texas.
The inland and coastal margin areas of this region, which appear to
have significant differences in population dynamics, are considered separately.

INTRODUCTION

Demography is of general interest in the study of prehistoric lifeways and
cultural change, but population studies are often limited by problems in obtaining
and interpreting data from archeological sites. There now appear to be enough data
available to begin development of models for prehistoric population dynamics in
southeastern Texas, especially for the later postceramic periods.
The only demographic model published for this region is one proposed by Aten
(1983:Figure 17.1), which covers mainly postceramic and historic Indian time
periods for the upper Texas coastal margin. This article considers prehistoric
population dynamics of both the coastal margin and inland parts of the Coastal Plain
of southeastern Texas (Figure 1); there appear to be significant demographic differences between the two.
STUDY PROBLEMS
Several factors that make demographic studies for prehistoric periods difficult
are listed below.
1. The limitations of radiocarbon dating diminish its value for determining the
populations of areas for short time periods.
2. Most cause-effect studies are of limited value because they do not have
usable data. For example, there are problems in relating cultural dynamics to
climatic changes (Butzer 1983:301).
3. Sampling patterns can cause problems, especially if there are intraregional
differences in population densities.
4. The time ranges established for many artifact types that are commonly used
as time indicators for archeological sites are not sufficiently accurate for demographic use.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57 (1986)

118

Texas Archeological Society

5. The kind of data needed for dating sites are available for only a limited
number of sites.
6. Chronological data from one region may be of limited value for dating an
adjacent region because of interregional differences in chronologies for specific
artifact types.
7. The data base for early preceramic periods is generally limited.
8. Possible differences in interpretation of identical data can make conclusions
meaningless. For example, was a large site occupied by a large group for a long
period or by small groups for several short periods.

I. Grimes
2. Walker
3. San Jacinto
4. Polk
5. Tyler

KEY TO COUNTIES
6. Jasper
I I. Montgomery
7. Newton
12. Liberty
8. Washington
13. Hardin
g. Austin
14. Orange
I O. Wailer
15. Fort Bend

16. Harris
17. Chambers
18. Jefferson
I g. Brazoria
20. Galveston

Figure 1. Map of the eastern part of the Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas, showing the coastal
margin and inland areas.

Patterson ~ Prehistoric Population Dynamics

119

SOUTHEASTERN TEXAS
Data published by Patterson (1979:Tables 1,2) on recorded prehistoric sites of
various time periods for a 20-county area in southeastern Texas can be used for
developing tentative models of population dynamics in this region. At this stage of
study, available data are useful for judging population changes, but not for
establishing absolute population densities. The time period for occupation for a
large number of sites in this region is unknown (Patterson 1979:Table 1). For this
study, the following time periods have been used:
Late Prehistoric, 900 years, from A.D. 600 to 1500
Early Ceramic, 500 years, from A.D. 100 to 600
Middle/Late Archaic, 3100 years, from 3000 B.C. to A.D. 100.
The time ranges shown above are the same ones used previously in a discussion
(Patterson 1985:Table 1) of southeastern Texas prehistoric settlement patterns. The
Paleoindian and Early Archaic periods have not been used because the data base for
those periods is insufficient. The term Early Ceramic period (Story 1981:145) is
used here rather than the term Woodland (Patterson 1979:108).
Population density factors (PF) for each prehistoric time period are calculated
here by taking the number of sites in a region for the time period in question (Table
1) and dividing this by the number of years in the time
Table 1.
Time Period

Summary of Population Factors
Inland
No. of Sites

PF

232
214
104

25.8
42.8
3.4

Late Prehistoric
Early Ceramic
Middle!Late Archaic

Coastal Margin
No. of Sites PF
74
27
8

8.2
5.4
0.3

PF: Population Factor
SOURCE: Patterson 1979
period. The result is here termed the Population Factor (PF). For the convenience
of dealing with large numbers, all results have been multiplied by 100. This is
essentially the same method used by Prewitt (1983:216) to examine population
densities for various time periods in Central Texas. Population Factors have been
calculated here separately for inland sites and coastal margin shell middens (Table
1; Figure 2). The curve for the coastal margin shows population increasing from
the Archaic through the Late Prehistoric periods. This is in agreement with Aten’s
population model for this area (1983:Figure 17.1). In comparison, it can be seen
(Figure 2) that for the inland area there is a population peak in the Early Ceramic
period and a population decline in the Late Prehistoric.
The population decline in the Late Prehistoric for the inland area of southeastem Texas may be underestimated here. It has been noted (Patterson 1976) that

Texas Archeological Society

120

5O

A

i/
Y
._.___ _____--,------O’

4~

3O0O

L~)O0

1000

BC

AD

I000

CO00

Figure 2. Graph showing population density estimates for the inland and coastal margin
areas.

Indians on the inland part of the Coastal Plain of southeastern Texas may have been
more mobile in the Late Prehistoric, using smaller sites perhaps for shorter periods.
A given number of mobile people would occupy more sites in a time period than
would the same number of sedentary people.
DISCUSSION
This study establishes for the inland part of the Coastal Plain of southeastern
Texas during the Early Ceramic period a population density peak that is similar to
the peak shown by Prewitt (1983:Figure 6) for Central Texas during roughly the
same period. Still unexplained is why a population decline occurred in the Late
Prehistoric after continuous population increases in all preceding prehistoric time
periods. Some common reasons for population decreases are climatic change,
disease, and warfare, but this question remains a subject for future research in
Central and southeastern Texas. As noted by Story (1981:144), reasons for
population change can be difficult to determine.
In contrast to the inland Coastal Plain, th e population density of the upper Texas
coastal margin seems to have continued to increase from the Late Archaic through
the Late Prehistoric, as shown by both this study and Aten’s (1983:Figure 17.1)
model. Apparently the marine food resources of the coastal margin could be
exploited more intensely, supporting a larger population. There are several indications too that the Indians of the coastal margin continued to follow a sedentary lifeway while Indians of the adjacent inland areas were becoming more mobile
(Patterson 1983:260) in the Late Prehistoric. Large amounts of pottery are generally

Patterson ~ Prehistoric Population Dynamics

121

found at coastal margin shell middens during the Early Ceramic and Late Prehistoric
periods, one indication of a fairly sedentary lifeway. Inland sites, however, do not
have large amounts of pottery in the Early Ceramic period and have even less in the
Late Prehistoric.
Artifact assemblages at inland sites in postceramic periods differ significantly
from artifact assemblages at coastal margin sites in southeastern Texas, indicating
not only differences in lifeways, but also suggesting relatively little communication
between the two areas. For example, inland sites usually have large lithic assemblages and coastal margin sites have small lithic assemblages. Too, incised pottery
comprises a small percentage of the ceramics at inland sites but is common at coastal
margin sites. It is concluded that potentialpopulation shifts from inland to the coastal margin did not contribute much to population increases on the coasta! margin.
SUMMARY

This study has provided two patterns of population dynamics for southeastern
Texas. In the inland area there seem to have been continuing population increases
from the Archaic through the Early Ceramic periods, followed by a leveling off, or
more likely a decline, in population density in the Late Prehistoric. In contrast, on
the coastal margin, population density seems to increase from the Late Archaic continuously through the Late Prehistoric. These conclusions are, of course, subject to
change as more data become available. More research is needed to determine why
population changes have occurred and to refine the data on the magnitude of
population changes.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1983 Indians of upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
Butzer, K. W.
1982 Archaeology as human ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Patterson, L. W.
1976 Technological changes in Harris County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 47:171-188.
1979 A review of the prehistory of the upper Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 50:103-123.
1983 Prehistoric settlement and technological patterns in Southeast Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeologica! Society 54:253-269.
Prewitt, E. R.
1983 From Circleville to Toyah: comments on Central Texas chronology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.
Story, D. A.
1981 An overview of the archeology of East Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26:139-156.

