LA VENTA: A CRADLE OF MESOAMERICAN
CIVILIZATION*
ROBERT F. HEIZER
ABSTRACT
The site of La Venta, on the Gulf coast of Mexico, has yielded a wealth of
information on the Olmec, the earliest known manifestation of high culture
in Mesoamerica. The paper traces the history of archeological research at
this important site. Past and present interpretations of the site’s age,
function, and significance are reviewed.

Before Hernando Cortfs and his handful of fighting men equipped
with horses, guns and steel swords conquered the Aztec nation in
1519, there had developed, and then disappeared, a number of
civilizations in the culture sphere which anthropologists call
Mesoamerica. By the word "civilization" I am referring to a
qualitative level of cultural development which is difficult to define
strictly, but in general terms can be applied to societies with large
populations with a highly developed division of labor, a stratified or
hierarchial social structure with ranking ranging from low to high,
with some broad governmental apparatus, cities or large urban
communities, an organized religion, monumental architecture,
technically good sculpture or some other form of fine art, an economic
base resting on agriculture, a calendar, mathematics, and some kind
of writing. Not every one of these features must be present for a
culture to be classed as civilized, but most of them should occur.
There is no disagreement that the Maya of two thousand years ago,
the people who built the city of Teotihuacan in the valley of Mexico in
the first centuries of the Christian era, the Toltecs whose capital lay
at Tula, not far distant from Mexico City, and the Aztecs whose state
Cort6s destroyed were bearers of civilization. Where and when this
continuum of civilizations of Mesoalnerica began we cannot be
certain, but as of this moment, it appears to have generated among an
older people to whom the name Olmec has been given. By that I mean
to say that the search by archeologists for the earliest manifestation
of high culture in Mesoalnerica can take us back no further in time
than the great sites of the Ornecs which were founded on the Gulf

*Annual lecture given on October 30 to the Texas Archeological Society in San
Antonio.
EDITOR’S NOTE: The first scientific report of the major 1955 excavations at La Venta
was published by Professor Heizer in Vol. 28 (1957) of the Bulletin.

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Coast in the first few centuries before the beginning of the first
millennium B.C.--around 1100 or 1200 B.C.--some 3000 years ago.
Agriculture began around 5000 B.C. in Mesoamerica, and as the
plants were improved and increasing dependence was placed on
crops for basic subsistence, the populations practicing farming also
grew. Settled village life, trade, aesthetic expression in pottery and
stone sculpture develop as integral elements of the gathering
elaboration or enrichment of life. At some point in time, as all the
essential ingredients for what seems to be a kind of quantum jump are
assembled, there occurs a cultural revolution, presumably a peaceful
one, from which a new kind of society arises. An analogy would be an
explosive chemical reaction which is effected by adding a bit of this
compound and a little of that one until suddenly everything comes
together with a loud bang. It is supposed that the elements of the
civilizational explosion in Mesoamerica were developing over time
until they reached the proper mixture of population numbers, assured
food supply, level of social and political organization, technological
know-how, and many other features, and that about 3000 years ago in
the lowland area of the Gulf of Mexico the break-through occurred.
The Olmec culture is known to us from the substantial excavation
of two major sites: La Venta and San Lorenzo in southern Veracruz
and northern Tabasco, and two other equally large but less well
studied sites named Tres Zapotes and Laguna de los Cerros. Until 50
years ago this was a little known part of Mexico. There was no
industry, populations were not large, there were few roads, and as a
result scarcely nothing was known of the archeology there. In 1925
Oliver La Farge and Frans Blom made a trip through this country, and
hearing of sculptures on an island of dry ground rising above the
swampy lowland along the Tonala River, went there and were shown
a number of unusual stone carvings. Their visit to La Venta island
was brief and their study was necessarily superficial. The
monuments they saw they thought looked vaguely Mayan in type,
though later work showed this to be wrong. Not until 1939 was the site
next visited, this time by Matthew W. Stifling, now recently
deceased, who saw not only the sculptures earlier viewed by Blom
and La Farge, but found many others.* He recognized these as quite
different in style than anything known from the Maya area, but
resembling a limited number of others from the same general Gulf

*Stirling’s work in 1939 was the first of a long series of research expeditions financed
by the National Geographic Society to investigate the Olmec culture. Drucker and I were
supported by the NGS in 1955, and on several subsequent occasions up to 1969.

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

3

lowland region. Here apparently was a different kind of culture, at
least as expressed in its art style, which was highly developed and
quite distinctive. Stirling thought, quite naturally, that the sculptured
art belonged to the Classic period which ran from the second or third
century A.D. to about A.D. 1000. In 1940 and 1942 some stratigraphic
excavations were carried out in the mounds at the La Venta site, and
various carved jade objects and pottery were recovered. All of this
was attributed to the Classic period. This was understandable
because these were the first collections of small Olmec material, and
there was little to compare them with. In the meanwhile Mexican
archeologists such as Miguel Covarrubias were saying that the
recently discovered Olmec materials from La Venta did not belong in
the Classic period, but rather in the Preclassic, but North American
archeologists gave this opinion little credence. The stage of cultural
development as expressed in the stone sculpture and the large size of
the site seemed to best correlate with the imposing Maya ruins and
sculptures in Guatemala and Yucatan as well as with the largest of
the Mesoamerican sites, Teotihuacan. In 1955 Philip Drucker and I
carried out a five months excavation at the La Venta site and found a
number of new sculptures, a literal treasure of jade objects, and
worked out the complicated stratigraphy from which we concluded
that the site had originally been laid out, and a patterned series of
earth mounds built, which were then enlarged on three occasions,
apparently at more or less regular intervals. We could not even guess
whether the interval between the rebuildings was to be measured in
decades or centuries. Among other things we did was to make careful
collections of wood charcoal from layers of earth fill assignable to the
first, second, third, or fourth building period, and in 1957 these were
dated by the radiocarbon method at the University of Michigan. Much
to our surprise, and even to the disbelief of a number of our American
colleagues, but not to our Mexican colleagues such as Covarrubias,
the radiocarbon dates told us that the site had been first built about
800 B.C. The site was 1000 years older than nearly everyone had
assumed it was. La Venta was a Preclassic site, as Covarrubias had
long maintained, and not a Classic period site as most people,
ourselves included, had wrongly assumed. At La Venta, it seems, we
had excavated a very large site with big mounds and monumental
sculpture which appeared to be of Classic type, but which
chronologically fell comfortably in the preceding period of the
Preclassic where sites of this size and degree of development were,
by definition, not supposed to exist.
The La Venta site is nearly a mile long, oriented north and south,
and about a third of a mile wide. In this rectangle are a large number

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of earth mounds, an earth pyramid which dominates the scene
measuring 420 feet in diameter and rising 110 feet into the air and
with a cubic mass of about 4 million cubic feet. That mound of clay
impressed us as having represented a great deal of human labor to
carry and pile up the earth, but in 1968 we were really surprised to
learn that a large rectangular fiat-topped elevation (now known as
the Stifling Acropolis) lying southeast of the pyramid which we
assumed was a natural hillock which had been levelled off was
entirely man-made and contains about 17 million cubic feet of earth.
These immense shaped piles of clay--one can scarcely dignify them
as architecture--clearly point to an enormous expenditure of human
labor to procure and pile up. Over a hundred stone sculptures, of
which dozens weigh over ten tons and a few approach 50 tons in
weight also imply a sizeable labor force to move them--all the more
so when it is known that the source of the stone lies some 80 miles
away on the southern slope of the Tuxtla Mountains (Velson and
Clark 1975). It is obvious that a lot of people did a lot of work at the La
Venta site, and that this work was not directly connected with maize
farming or the daily living routine. If there had been a large urban
population at La Venta, you might suppose that there was some form
of public levy on the labor of the inhabitants to do so many days of
work per week, or month, or year. But, since the small island of La
Venta which has a surface area of only two square miles and which
will support not more than 150 persons by the tropical slash-and-burn
farming system, shows no evidence of having held a large population,
we must conclude that the site was an isolated center whose support
came from people living some distance away (Heizer 1960; Drucker
and Heizer 1960; Drucker 1961). That the La Venta site was a
ceremonial or religious center and not a city is made certain by the
way it is laid out, the nature of the mounds, the abundance of
precisely and ritually placed buried offerings of jade objects of great
value, the positioned stone sculptures, and the persons portrayed on
those stone monuments. La Venta, in short, was a religious capital of
the people we call the Olmecs. The elaborately costumed persons
shown on the monuments can be taken either as priests or secular
rulers, but more probably religious heads not only by reason of their
elaborate costumes, but also because these monuments dominate the
site. We can see in these sculptures, if we assume them to be
portraits, the very persons who were the chief officers of the religious
precinct. Perhaps also similarly important persons are represented in
the colossal stone heads that occur at La Venta and other Olmec sites
in Veracruz and Tabasco. In short, if the site itself was built to serve
for ritual activities, the immense labor required for mound

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

FIGURE 1. Reconstructed Low Relief Scene on Stela 3, La Venta Site.

FIGURE 2. Low Relief Sculpture on Stela 2, La Venta Site.

5

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

construction and moving the great stones from the Tuxtla Mountains
to embellish the site must have been done at the order of the people in
charge of the site--that is, the priests. So from all this comes the
clear suggestion that the La Venta priesthood was vested with great
power and authority over a large general population whose time and
energy it could call on when desired. The picture we get of La Venta
society is that of a theocracy or rule by the priesthood (of. Heizer
1961). The site, we think, was the nerve center of a society whose
main efforts were directed toward the maintenance and benefits of a
religious cult--in other words, the capital of a theocratic society,
analogous to western Europe in the time before the Reformation when
the popes ruled both politically and religiously from the Vatican.

FIGURE 3. Colossal Head No. 1, La Venta Site. 2.41 m. high; weight 24
tons.

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

7

We know nothing certain about the origin of the Olmec culture
itself, but we are in possession of some facts which allow us to
speculate about this. I have devised a theory of how Olmec
civilization came into being. I do not know whether that theory is
correct, and I know of no way to prove it. And I know of no hard
evidence which makes my theory invalid. Yet, it may be incorrect.
When one formulates a theory of this sort he is rather like the judge
who said that while he was often wrong he was seldom in doubt.
There were people in the Olmec area before the great religious
centers such as San Lorenzo and La Venta were founded. In these
earlier archeological deposits we see Preclassic farmers living out
their lives without any religious architecture or stone monuments.
Whoever the mound-building, jade-carving and stone sculpturing
people were who conceived of and built such centers as La Venta or
San Lorenzo, it appears that they must have moved to these spots
from some other locality. The most likely source area may be the
Tuxtla Mountains which lie about 80 miles to the west, where stone is
abundant, and the volcanic soils are very favorable to maize
agriculture. The main purpose of the La Venta site and its activities I
think, without going into the details of the proposition, was to carry
out ritual activities directed toward agricultural fertility. We may
suppose that in the Middle Preclassic period, between 1500 and 1000
B.C., the village farmers, perhaps those living in the Tuxtla
Mountains, got talked into supporting an emerging religious elite, a
body of people who were calendrical and weather experts, and who
promised, in return for labor and goods, to exercise control of the
weather through intercession with the deities of the sky and earth,
and to guide the farmers in the yearly round of activities connected
with farming--to tell them when to clear the forest for new fields,
when to burn the dry slash at the very end of the dry season, when to
plant the new fields just before the onset of the rainy season, and
when to harvest the crops. Any miscalculation of these necessary
elements of the agricultural cycle in this area, even today, may mean
that the farmer will not succeed in growing an adequate crop. If the
farmer is over-anxious and fires the dry field cuttings too soon he
does not get a good clean burn, and in the interval before the rains
start weeds and suckers from the field cleared from the forest may
sprout so rapidly that the crop yield will be reduced. Planting too
early can be a costly error since the seed may be eaten by insects,
and planting too late after the rains have begun may discourage
germination of the seed. The uncertainties of producing a crop large
enough to feed your family are many, and it seems possible that an
informed group of people who had studied the weather and knew how

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

to correlate seasonal changes with an exact calendar might offer to
the farmers a most attractive bargain of crop management in return
for their support in building the sacred center where the necessary
rituals could be carried out. Both parties got something out of such a
social contract--the farmers were spared the uncertainties of
producing the crop which was necessary for their survival, and the
priesthood got their temple center and a pretty good living on the side.
Once this contract was entered into between the religious elite and
peasant farmers, larger and larger mounds and ceremonial precincts
could be made, and if the system really worked the corps of
specialists at the sacred centers could be expanded to include stone
sculptors, engineers and architects to lay out new plans and
supervise the considerable work of bringing the multi-ton stones to
the centers to be carved. All of this formative process which I am
suggesting did take place may have occurred
Mountains. Then perhaps around 1200 or ii00 B.C.
some major event, perhaps a devastating volcanic
Tuxtla Mountains--a volcanic cataclysm such as we

in the Tuxtla
there occurred
eruption in the
know happened

in 1793 in the Tuxtlas (Mozino 1913) when the earth shook, the San
Martfn volcano spewed out lava, and great clouds of hot cinders and
ash were ejected so that the whole area was buried under many feet
of cinders. All of the fields were buried, roofs were crushed by the
ash, and some parts of the zone became no longer liveable. If one of
these events had occurred not long before I000 B.C., the population
may have had to clear out in order to survive, and it may be that the
population, already operating under a theocratic system, moved out
into the coastal plain and established a new series of settlement
zones, each with its ceremonial center or capital which was in time
equipped with mounds, temples, sculptures of colossal heads, and the
like. It is almost certain that the unusual form of the La Venta
pyramid can be traced back to a prototype which exists in the Tuxtla
Mountains, but more about this later.
In any case, whether or not you subscribe to the hypothesis of how
the Olmec theocracy was born, where it spent its infancy, and how it
happened to be transferred to the major sites of Tres Zapotes, Laguna
de los Cerros, San Lorenzo and La Venta, at least we know these
several major sites were established at about the same time and that
they were all participating in the same distinctive style of sculptured
art. After about 500 years the whole operation came to an end at
these great sites--they were abandoned and never again used for the
same purposes. Why the system failed we do not know--it is one of
those genuine mysteries of archeology which archeologists cannot
yet, and perhaps never can, answer. Possibly the lowland zone was

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

9

invaded by another people who killed off the priesthood and thus
deprived the large mass of simple farmers of leadership and
direction. Perhaps there happened a series of bad weather years with
too short or too long dry seasons, or unseasonably early rains, or
plagues of pests which attacked the crops, and since these events
could not be controlled or anticipated, the reputation of the
priesthood declined to the point where they no longer commanded the
support of the larger population for whom they worked in return for
other services. Natural disasters, in brief, may have been the cause
of disrupting what I earlier called the social contract between the
priests and the farmers.
Why the Olmec culture developed its distinctive art style; why the
rituals which we can get hints of in the great pits with their stone
offerings at the La Venta site took the form they did; what was the
inspiration for the distinctive art style which we label Olmec, and a
half-hundred other questions that can be asked, are ones for which
we have no answers. Olmec culture in its material expression of
architecture, art and ritual, and in its more dimly perceived
sociological aspects, is one which seems not to have been copied from,
modelled after, or adapted from some other and earlier known
culture; rather it is one which is rich in originality and inventiveness.
What may be the explanation of Olmec culture in its developed form
as seen at La Venta is as the climax of an essentially self-contained
experiment in cultural creativity, one led by a newly organized
religious elite which was endowed with great energy and innovative
genius. Perhaps that dynastic group died out after five or six
centuries and their successors were unable to maintain the formula
which had for so long worked effectively. Or, perhaps the
persuasions of political power and its application were so great that
the temptations of the excessive use of that power came to be seen as
a misuse of authority. Something very like that happened in the
United States in the last few years with Watergate. But whatever the
course of events was, and the reasons for these, the scene of
creativity shifted away from the Gulf Coast Olmec area to other
regions, and to other people, in Mesoamerica. But at this moment the
complex continuum of Mesoamerican civilization, shifting from time
to time with geography and the human bearers, seems to first come
into sharp focus in the lowland Gulf region of southeastern Mexico
around or just before 1000 B.C.
In 1959 we published our full report on the 1955 excavations and in
1963, with funds provided by the National Science Foundation, made
a 30-minute movie from live footage and still pictures of the
excavation and interpretation of the La Venta site. We now know that

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

some of what we said in 1959 and put on film in 1963 is wrong because
we have learned more. Here is some of the newer information.
The radiocarbon dates we secured in 1957 from the University of
Michigan showed that the site was established about 800 B.C. and
abandoned about 400 B.C. {Drucker, Heizer and Squier 1957). In 1964
William R. Coe and R. Stuckenrath of the University of Pennsylvania
who were then engaged in the excavation of the lowland Maya site of
Tikal in the Peten District of Guatemala read the report which
Drucker and I had published in 1959 on our 1955 excavation of La
Venta. When I say that Coe and Stuckenrath read our report, I mean
they really read it, and after doing so sat do,ore and wrote a 44 page
review (Coe and Stuckenrath 1964} in which they stated that our work
was not only badly done as far as excavation went, but also that we
were guilty of misinterpreting a lot of evidence, and furthermore our
radiocarbon dates were not to be trusted. In 1967, stimulated in part
by Coe and Stuckenrath’s challenge of our abilities as stratigraphers
and of the radiocarbon datings we had secured ten years earlier, we
made a short return trip to La Venta, hired a few of our old crew who
were able to locate, dug some new trenches to expose the
construction layers, got arrested and put for a few hours in the worst
jail I was ever in, and made new collections of wood charcoal from
the deposits we could identify as having been laid down in building
phases 1, 2, 3, and 4 (Heizer, Drucker and Graham 1968). In the
meanwhile we learned that the Michigan laboratory had not used up
all the charcoal we collected in 1955 and which it had dated in 1957,
and we were able to secure the remainder of this original material
from Professor lames B. Griffin. The UCLA radiocarbon laboratory in
1967 provided us with several dozen radiocarbon dates which were
much more accurately dated than it was possible to do in 1957 as a
result of more precise instrumentation. It turned out that while the
Michigan dates were accurate enough in terms of the limitations of
the radiocarbon dating method in 1957, much more precise or
accurate dates could be secured ten years later. By the usual
methods of interpreting what such dates mean, we concluded in 1967
that La Venta was established about 1000 B.C., perhaps as early as
1100 B.C. and abandoned about 600 B.C. (Berger, Graham and Heizer
1967}. Those two hundred years of extra age do not mean very much
as such, and in speaking of that I am reminded of what Agatha
Christie, the wife of Max Mallowan, the Near Eastern archeologist
said. She said, "It is wonderful to be married to an archeologist--the
older it is the more interested he becomes."
The extra 2 centuries of La Venta’s age seem to make the Olmec
cultural florescence on the Gulf Coast even more removed in time

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

11

(:33

03
(D

b.0

,..o

.,--4
v~Jm-v~m
<1

-4,.<I

6zg-M

<I

~3
z~e~a

ha
Ik

r..r3

~D

r.D

0~SS’{/70 3"d
X7~V3

]]AI.L~/I~}30:I

3A[±Xt~EIO.~

31V7

37001~

3AI&VB~O.~

X’lh]’~3

4’--’
O

[""

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

from that of the Maya further south, and they also indicate that San
Lorenzo and La Venta were both occupied at the same time, thus
allowing the correction in 1967 of a view which was then gaining
currency that San Lorenzo had been built and abandoned before La
Venta and that many of the La Venta sculptures had been moved
there from San Lorenzo.
A second correction I have already briefly mentioned. That is the
form of the big earth mound which is referred to as the La Venta
pyramid. In 1955 we did not clear the heavy jungle growth from this
man-made mountain because we had no intention to try to excavate it
since it would have strained our funds and manpower to have done
so. Our surveyor was busy recording the excavations, and when he
found time to make the map of the site as a whole it proved to be a
difficult job because of the heavy tree growth over the entire area. He
did correctly determine the position of the base of the pyramid, and
when he drew its form he assumed, along with us, that it had a
rectangular base plan and four fiat sloping sides rising to the
truncated top--the form that any proper Mesoamerican pyramid
could be assumed to have. But in making that apparently simple
assumption we could not have been more in error. In 1967 when
Drucker and I spent two weeks excavating for additional charcoal,
we noted that most of the large trees covering the pyramid had been
cut off, and while casually looking at it one day while walking past we
saw a sizeable depression or valley on the north slope running from

FIGURE 5. The La Venta Pyramid as Imagined to be in 1955.

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

13

the top to the base. Drucker’s first answer to my question about what
that meant was to say that it must have been where some treasure
hunter had gouged into the side of the hill, but he did agree with my
observation that it was a mighty big and long trench that someone had
dug into the slope, and even if they had, where was the dirt pile, of
which there was no sign, which must have resulted? Something was
apparently going on with that pyramid which we had not noticed 12
years earlier, so we went over to look at it more carefully. Then we
saw to our surprise that not only were the sides of the pyramid not
flat at all, but were distinctly convex or outward curving, and also
that the slopes of the mound consisted of an alternating series of ten
long valleys with ten ridges separating one from the other. In short,
and quite by accident, we discovered that the La Venta pyramid was
a round cone, and that its sides were fluted like a cupcake mold. No

FIGURE 6. The La Venta "Pyramid" Photographed from the Air in
1968.

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

pyramid like it was known from any part of Mexico, or anywhere else,
for that matter. Dr. Ignacio Bernal of the Institute of Anthropology
and History in Mexico still refers to this anomalous structure as the
"monster" which Drucker and I brought to light. There were several
things about our surprising discovery of the form of the pyramid. One
was its uniqueness which may be connected with the fact that it is the
oldest pyramid (if that term can be correctly used) known from Mesoamerica. Second, Drucker and I were very pleased to have been able
to correct our own error.
In 1968 we returned to La Venta once more (Heizer, Graham and
Napton 1968), got arrested again, cut off all the growth on the
pyramid, made a contour map, borrowed a helicopter from Petrdleos
Mexicanos, and photographed the pyramid from the air.
Diagrammatically the pyramid looks like this. In 1969 a magnetometer survey was made of La Venta pyramid with interesting results
(Morrison, Clewlow and Heizer 1970). One, probably two, sizeable
stone constructions exist within the pyramid near its peak. These
have not been excavated. While the pyramid itself has not been
removed, the site area is now covered by the town of 5000 people who
work in the major oilfield of La Venta which has over i00 producing
wells.
On the point of the local civil officials being somewhat less than
cooperative, one might even say they acted downright unfriendly. In
1968 the local mayor took one look at our official permit to excavate
and declared that all of the signatures on it were false. The Minister
of Education of the Republic of Mexico and President Hitch of the
University of California were not there, unfortunately, in our hour of
need, to swear that their signatures were genuine, and so the mayor
had us dead to rights. He ordered us not to dig. We obeyed for a while
but finally decided to take the plunge. That was an error--our error.
He showed up with a bunch of deputies, each armed with a .45
automatic, and announced he was confiscating all the sculptures,
some 20 in all, we had dug up. I said that we had an agreement with
the Mexican federal government to turn over everything we found to
the museum in Villahermosa and that if he seized them we would need
a list signed by him. So he said, "Not only am I taking these, and not
signing anything, but what is more, you are going to haul them to the
jail in your truck." So I said we would not do that, but he was so
persuasive that in the end we, of course, bowed to his wishes. Now,
eight years later, it sounds amusing, but at the moment it seemed like
a Mexican version of "Gunsmoke"--with real guns.
I have already suggested that the Tuxtla Mountains may have been
the earlier homeland of the Olmec populations who seem to make

!

....................................................

15

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

FIGURE 7. Helicopter of Petroleos Mexicanos in 1968 at La Venta.
Left to right: John A. Graham, Patrick S. Hallinan, helicopter pilot, R.
F. Heizer.

,

I
FIGURE 8. Schematic plan of the La Venta pyramid abstracted from
the contour map made in 1968 by Lewis K. Napton and his aides. V
stands for valley; R for ridge. Compare with photograph in Fig. 6.

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SAy OF CAMPECHE

J
<~3 Modern se]llement
Over 600 ft. elevation

50kin

The Olrnec

N

Region

(After Berne]

1969 : 16

FIGURE 9. Southern Veracruz Gulf Coast Showing the Tuxtla
Mountains Area and the Four Major Olmec Sites. The relatively
regular geographical distance of each site encourages the hypothesis
that these are district "capitols" or administrative-religious centers
of a single society. The Tuxtlas have not been "apportioned" because
we know so little of Olmec occupation of this highland zone.
their presence known at the same time out on the Gulf coast plain in
such sites as Tres Zapotes, Laguna de los Cerros, San Lorenzo and La
Venta. Perhaps these were district capitals, each distant about 50
miles from its neighbor, founded by a population forced out of the
Tuxtla Mountains by some event such as a major volcanic eruption
with a heavy fall of ash. Each of these four sites is somewhat different
from the others, but there are also some features of similarity. Unique
to the La Venta site, so far as we know, is the great conical pyramid
with its ridged and valleyed exterior. What could be the model for
such a structure? The answer is that a very good model is the cinder
cones which are abundantly present in the Tuxtla Mountains, and
which not only exhibit the same kind of erosional channels and ridges,
but also the precise slope angle which we see on the La Venta
pyramid (Mayer Per6z Rul 1962}. The model, therefore, may have
been a natural cinder cone somewhere in the Tuxtla Mountains
which was of ritual significance to the people who founded La Venta,
and when they established this retreat they laid out the series of
mounds on the plan of the ritual center which they had lately
abandoned, and, lacking their sacred mountain, they built an
imitation one of earth and clay. It is a pretty theory which fits some of

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

17

FIGURE 10. Cinder Cone near Lake Catemaco in the Tuxtla
Mountains. Compare erosional valleys and angle of slope with the La
Venta pyramid shown in Fig. 6.

the things we know, but it is the purest speculation. But like Mark
Twain, who said, "I do not vouch for the truth of that statement; I
merely believe it," I like my theory of why La Venta appears where
and when it did. The alignment of the centerline of the La Venta site
has recently been investigated by Hatch (1971) who has provided
powerful arguments in support of her conclusion that the La Venta
Olmecs were expert astronomers who used the La Venta pyramid as
an observation platform or observatory and as a means of gaining
sufficient height above the tropical forest to see the true horizon to
the north on the water of the Gulf of Mexico. Some of the decorative
designs or symbols which occur in Olmec art at La Venta and
elsewhere, she interprets as glyphs or signs which symbolized certain
aspects of ritual, heavenly bodies, and the like, and which in a special
sense can be considered a kind of writing. There are no actual
hieroglyphic texts from La Venta in the form of a consecutive series of
these symbolic designs which form a record of some celestial
occurrences. In a sense these could be called texts--even
hieroglyphic texts--but they are a long way from constituting the
complex texts which appear about seven centuries later on Maya
monuments.

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The oldest known lowland Maya hieroglyphic date is on Stela 29
from Tikal. It is equivalent to A.D. 292. Other early stelae, though
engraved in something other than pure Maya form are Stela 2 from
Chiapa de Corso and Stela C from Tres Zapotes which bear the
equivalent of B.C. dates. Another early Maya text is the Leyden Plate,
a green jade piece engraved with Maya hieroglyphs and dating from
about A.D. 320. There are somewhat similar Olmec engraved axes
(Hatch 1971), presumably of earlier date, and they may represent the
oldest known Mesoamerican evidence of the beginning of writing.
So, while we now know a good deal about the Olmecs there remains
a good deal we do not know, and much which we can probably never
hope to learn or recover about these people who, some 3000 years
ago, suddenly appear into view with a knowledge of how to keep track
of time by studying the heavens, who were perhaps making fumbling
attempts at writing, whose society was divided into an upper class of
priests and rulers, or perhaps priest-kings, whose religion was surely
a complex one and probably concentrated on insuring agricultural
fertility, and whose jade carving and monumental stone sculpture
was technically and aesthetically equal to anything produced in
Mesoamerica in the centuries and millennia following the Olmec
disappearance.
In October, 1492, when Columbus discovered the New World, the
inevitable day when Old and New World civilization would come into
contact did occur. And when Cortds in Mexico, imbued with the less
refined aspects of medieval chivalry and equipped with steelarmored horsemen and guns which gave his fighting men an
overwhelming advantage, brought down the Aztec state, not only
were a lot of cultured Native Americans killed off, but there also
came to a sudden end the greatest American achievement of all times,
namely the invention and development of true civilization, an
achievement which in the end came to naught because it was
overwhelmed and destroyed by the bearers of a superior technology
in the form of better military tactics, better transport in the form of
the horse, and better offensive and defensive weapons in the form of
steel armor, steel swords, and guns. In earlier times similar
disappearances or cultural extinctions on a smaller scale must have
occurred, as we know by the examples of the once-vigorous Olmecs of
the Mexican Gulf lowland who suffered a decline about 600 B.C., or
the Maya of Guatemala and Yucatan whose Classic Period heyday
had passed by A.D. 1000, but whatever the cause or causes of the
passing of these people from the scene, their decline or even
disappearance did not affect the general continuation of the Native
American style of civilization since no single society anciently

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

19

became, as did that of the Spaniards in the sixteenth century, so
overwhelmingly effective as a destructive force. To what heights
Native American civilization might have developed we can never
know because this process was suddenly truncated with the Spanish
conquest. It is only through archeology that culture historians in the
form of archeologists can hope to learn how, and where, and when,
the civilizational level of New World culture emerged, and that is the
principal reason, in my opinion, why there is something important in
the study of the site of La Venta.
Neither the La Venta nor San Lorenzo sites are the probable spots
where Olmec civilization first came into focus. The Tuxtla Mountains
strike me as a good place to look for the birthplace of this society, but
thus far we know of no pre-La Venta, pre-San Lorenzo sites there.
Perhaps if these exist they are hidden under a mantle of volcanic ash
which has been laid down in the last 3000years.
Meggers (1975) has recently proposed that the Shang culture of
China may have, after being carried in some fashion across the
Pacific, sparked the origin of Olmec culture. The Phoenecians have
also been proposed as the stimulators of this early and unusual
Mesoamerican culture. So there is no lack of parental candidates
from other continents. It is much more probable, I think, that Olmec is
merely an early, perhaps the earliest, Mesoamerican high culture. It
is conceivable that the little-explored south coast of Guatemala may
have been the Olmec nursery. Some Olmec sculpture occurs there,
not the least interesting of these pieces being a remarkable low-relief
sculpture shown here (Fig. 11) and which comes from the Pacific

FIGURE 11. Olmec Style Low Relief Sculpture from the South (Pacific)
Coast of Guatemala. Diameter, 81 cm. Photograph courtesy of E. M.
Shook.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

coast zone. Either some Tabascan Olmec sculptor got a long way from
home or there were things going on in that area some 400 kilometers
(240 miles) to the southeast of La Venta that we do not yet know
about.* So, we have to admit that we do not really know where the
Olmecs appear first. It is possible that some clue as to origins lies in
the stone drains which occur both at the La Venta site (Fig. 12) and
the San Lorenzo site.
I do not know whether we can shape our future from the lessons of
the past. Probably not, because there are certain forces built into any
system which tend to inhibit deviation, even though these seem to take
a counter-productive direction. In this country we are preparing to
celebrate the bicentennial of American independence. We are still
strong, but also in a state of disarray. There was Watergate, and
more recently two attempts to take the life of still another President.
And there was Vietnam--a war we clearly lost and at great cost in
treasure and human life. Three thousand years ago the Olmec at La
Venta may have celebrated their centennial, or their bicentennial
founding. And they were to last for about 400 more years before they
disappeared from view. One wonders whether the United States will
be a recognizable entity four centuries from now. I hope it will, but
since I am not a fortune-teller, I do not even have an opinion on this.
So, while I know nothing about how to predict the future, I have spent
a lot of time studying the past. And I think there are some lessons to
be learned here. Perhaps it would be important to us today if we could
learn how Maya society operated, and how it managed to keep going
for eight centuries; or how the Olmec civilization succeeded for four
to six centuries; or how the Teotihuacanos of the Valley of Mexico
managed to keep it together for seven or eight centuries. Those are
respectably long cultural lifetimes, it seems to me, and it would be
comforting to be able to make an informed guess that the USA was
still going to be around and in reasonably good shape in, say four or
five centuries from now. Is it possible that we might learn something
of the art of national survival by studying these defunct
Mesoamerican civilizations? I think it is probable that when the
Europeans came to the New World and destroyed some twenty million
people with disease and guns that they may have, however

*Since writing this the author and John Graham have conducted preliminary
excavations in the site of Abaj Takalik, Depto. Retalhuleu, on the south (Pacific) coast of
Guatemala. There we have at least six pure Olmec sculptures and a large number of
proto-Classic or Early Classic Maya stelae and altars, some of which are older than any
other Maya sculptures with hieroglyphic dates. Abaj Takalik is the only site known to
date where a substantial corpus of Olmec and Maya sculpture occur together.

LA VENTA: MESOAMERICAN CIVILIZATION

21

FIGURE 12. Trough-shaped Stone Block Drain Discovered in 1968 in
the Stifling Acropolis at the La Venta Site.
unwittingly, erased some very important persons who knew a lot
about how to keep cultures going for an extended period of time. In
the end (and I remind you that I am no soothsayer) the New World
that Columbus discovered may have really been the Old World.
If we do not yet know the answers to such questions as where, and
in what manner Olmec culture began we will keep looking for the
evidence of that spot and the process. In the meanwhile we devise
theories which are based on facts at present known. Such theories
are always short-lived because new facts invalidate them, either
wholly or in part. That is how we learn. Mark Twain understood that,
and he summed it all up when he wrote: "There is something
fascinating about science. One gets such wholesale returns of
conjecture out of such a trifling investment of fact."

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Berger, R., J. A. Graham and R. F. Heizer
1967 A Reconsideration of the Age of the La Venta Site. Contributions of
the University of California Archeological Research Facility, No. 3:
pp. 1-24.
Coe, W. R. and R. Stuckenrath
1964 A Review of La Venta, Tabasco, and its Relevance to the Olmec
Problem. Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers, No. 31: pp. 1-44.
Drucker, P.
1961 The La Venta Support Area. Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers,
No. 25: pp. 59-72.
Drucker, P. and R. F. Heizer
1960 A Study of the Milpa System of La Venta Island and Its Archeological
Implications. Southwestern Iournal of Anthropology, Vol. 16: 36-45.
Drucker, P., R. F. Heizer and R. Squier
1957 Radiocarbon Dates from La Venta, Tabasco. Science, Vol. 126: pp. 7273.
Hatch, M. P.
1971 An Hypothesis on Olmec Astronomy, with Special Reference to the La
Venta Site. Contributions of the University of California Archeological
Research Facility, No. 13: pp. 1-64.
Heizer, R. F.
1961 Inferences on the Native Olmec Society Based Upon Data from the La
Venta Site. Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers, No. 25: 43-57.
1960 Agriculture and the Theocratic State in Lowland Southeastern
Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. 26: pp. 215-222.
Heizer, R. F., P. Drucker and J. A. Graham
1968 Investigations at La Venta, 1967. Contributions of the University of
California Archeological Research Facility, No. 5: pp. 1-34.
Heizer, R. F., J. A. Graham and L. Napton
1968 The 1968 Investigations at La Venta. Contributions of the University
of California Archeological Research Facility, No. 5: pp. 125-154.
Mayer Perez Rul, F.
1962 Estudio Vulcanol~gico de la Regi6n de los Tuxtlas, Ver. Facultad de
Ingineria, U.N.A.M., Mexico.
Meggers, B. J.
1975 The Transpacific Origin of Mesoamerican Civilization: a Preliminary
Review of the Evidence and Its Theoretical Implications. American
Anthropologist, Vol. 77: pp. 1-27.
Morrison, F., C. W. Clewlow and R. Heizer
1970 Magnetometer Survey of the La Venta Pyramid, 1969. Contributions
of the University of California Archaeological Research Facility, No.
8: pp. 1-20.
Mozino Suarez de Figueroa, J. M.
1913 Noticias de Nutka, diccionario de la lingua de los Nutkeses, y
descripcign del volc~n de Tuxtla. Sociedad M6xicana de Geograffa y
Estadistica, Mexico.

LA VENTA: MESO AMERICAN CIVILIZATION

23

Velson, J. S. and T. C. Clark
1975 Transport of Stone Monuments to the La Venta and San Lorenzo
sites. Contributions of the University of Ca!ifornia Archaeological
Research Facility, No. 24: pp. 1-39.

