THE CAHINNIO-CADDO: A CONTACT
UNIT IN THE EASTERN MARGIN
OF THE "CADDO AREA"
By MRS. T. L. HODGES
Caddo archeology is now defined. Caddo identity is today
justified by certain homogeneous traits exhibited by the artifacts of the aboriginal residents in the great area which combines eastern Texas, northern Louisiana, southern Arkansas,
and southeastern Oklahoma. This "Caddo Area" comprises
the southern branch of the linguistically related Caddoan tribes.
Within the mid-Ouachita River basin of Arkansas and Louisiana, far in the northeastern corner of this region, lies the
area of the Mid-Ouachita Focus, the archeological unit apparently identified with the historic Cahinnio tribe. The Cahinnio
were affiliates of the Caddo Confederacy and were encountered
in this territory in 1687 by the survivors of the last ill-fated
LaSalle expedition.
Besides having traits identifying them as Caddoan, the Cahinnio are distinguished by known localized characteristics.
Their Watermelon Island seed jar, a resident ceramic type,
finds no counterpart in other Caddo units. The loop-ended conical clay pipe associated with Cahinnio pottery seems localized. The use of native novaculite (quarried near Hot Springs,
Arkansas, in the Ouachita Mountains) in arrowpoint manufacture originates in this outlying, marginal province of the
Caddoans. These characteristic developments help distinguish
the Cahinnio artifacts from the general mass of Caddo material and help define the traits of the Mid-Ouachita Focus. However, the Mid-Ouachita specimens manifest also a blending of
borrowed trait elements, a condition which might logica!ly be
anticipated in peoples of a contact state.
Just before 1700 the Cahinnio were adjacent to, and in contact with, a number of different peoples and cultures. Their
eastern neighbors were peoples of the late Mississippi Valley
culture. To the south were the cultures of the Lower Mississippi.

The Cahinnio-Caddo

191

The Ozark Mountain aborigines bordered them on the north,
and to the southwest were the the other units of the Caddo
Confederacy. Along the general "Caddo Area" border to the
south and west were lands of the Plains Indians, the Pueblos,
and the Mexican aborigines.
There are a number of traits which identify the Cahinnio as
Caddoan :
1. The major ceramic trait is the use of engraved decoration,
often filled in with ~ed ochre, on drab brown to drab black highly polished pottery.
2. Agricultural, hunting, and gathering implements are present.
3. Burials are extended, single, with many grave furnishings, and are commonly located in flat interment grounds.
4. There are many sites, usually located in the vicinity of a
large mound.
5. The houses are of split-cane and thatch construction, and
are round in the late historic period.
6. The primary Caddoan linguistic alignment and the "empire" building tendency are two additional traits provided by
ethnohistoric sources.
Although Caddo affiliates, the Cahinnio are reported to have
spoken a "different" language. In fact, they manifested many
unique features resulting in part from their strategic position
which undoubtedly helped p~omote interchange of cultural trait
elements on two borders and the distant periphery of the Caddo
Confederacy. The most striking of these distinguishing Cahinnio-Caddo features is the superior beauty and workmanship of
their ceramic wares. Certain resident types have been declared
as ranking alongside the best ceramic products. An outstanding attribute also, is the great quantity of pottery, all originally
utilitarian, found in the Mid-Ouachita burials. As pointed out
above, the Central American technique of rubbing red ochre
into delicately engraved decorations is here widespread. The
bottle form is very numerous. Tripod bottles are not uncommOil.

192

Texas Archeological Society

The many zoomorphic forms in Cahinnio pottery suggest a
remote resemblance to Central American pottery elements. The
Cahinnio effigies include the human head (Fig. 46, C) and the
unique full-body effigy seed jar (Fig. 46, A). All are simplified
in representation and hint of an attenuation of cult symbols.
Both the tripod bottle (Fig. 46, D) and zoomorphic forms are
found also in the adjacent contemporaneous Mississippi culture pottery, but there the effigies are often eccentrically ornate and occur in relatively greater preponderance. Also the
respective decorative treatments and pottery quality are entirely different. The frog of the Mississippi clay vessels is
non-existent in the Cahinnio complex and is supplanted by the
turtle. Mid-Ouachita ceramic components include three-sided
and rarely two-sided boat effigies and stirrup bottles. Cahinnio
animal forms include the hard- and soft-shelled turtle, the
bear, beaver, fish, deer, quail, duck, and turkey (Fig. 46, E).
This common animal-effigy element, developed in the traditional
styles (but not necessarily techniques) of adjacent peoples, may
reflect a slow diffusion, originating either in the distant Mexico-"Caddo Area" periphery to the southwest or directly from
the coeval Middle Mississippi cultures to the east.
A contemporaneity of the Cahinno and late Mississippi cultures is suggested by intrusive specimens exhibiting a curious

Fig. 46. Certain Caddo pottery of the Mid-Ouachita Focus. A, effigy
seed jar. B, polychrome bottle; in front, loop pipe. C, Hodges Engraved
head effigy bottle. D, Blakely Engraved tripod bottle. E, turkey effigy
bowl. F, Keno Trailed bottle with interlocking four-unit curvilinear design
suggestive of a swastika. (Dr. and Mrs. Thomas L. Hodges Collection,
Bismarck, Arkansas.)

The Cahinnio-Caddo

193

mixture of established culture techniques and styles. One such
relic is a variant of a polychrome (painted) bottle (Fig. 46, B)
found in a Cahinnio grave. On this specimen the red bands
of the concentric circle motif are outlined by trailed lines, resulting in a variation of polychrome ware probably produced
by Caddo workmanship. Another such bottle was reported by
Moore from the Foster Place on Red River in Lafayette County, Arkansas. Still another notable example is an exquisitely
engraved "head-pot" made in the typical black, highly polished
Caddoan pottery (Fig. 46, C). While the decoration style is
distinctly that of Hodges Engraved, a Caddo type, the form
and symbols of this rare head effigy vessel resemble the specialized type uniquely localized at Pecan Point, Arkansas, a
Middle Mississippi site. Again an alien indoctrination certainly
influenced this indigenous artist-potter. Still another, a unique
seed jar (Fig. 46, A), features a seated human in Caddo drab
black artistry combined with the Buddha-like face-and-arm
design of the Middle Mississippi human effigy decoration element. Clarence Moore found a similar Caddo vessel in a grave
from a Middle Mississippi pattern site near the Menard Mounds
on the lower Arkansas River.
Further evidence for contemporary Middle Mississippi and
Cahinnio-Caddo contacts may be summarized:
1. Novaculite arrowpoints of mid-Ouachita origin were found
near LaGrue Bayou in the Arkansas Post vicinity.
2. Pottery of the Menard site, on the lower Arkansas River
manifests trait elements of the mid-Ouachita complex and some
Glendora Focus pottery.
3. Joutel’s party of LaSalle survivors in 1687 first encountered the calumet ceremony at a village of Cahinnio but had
not observed the ceremony among Texas Caddo. However, on
the lower Arkansas, the Quapaw tribe knew the ceremony. The
Cahinnio archeological material contains many pipes of clay.
4. Joutel records trade relations of the Cahinnio with the
Quapaw, the Tunica, and the Red River Caddo. The Cahinnio
carried Tunica salt cakes for trade with the Quapaw. Aboriginal salt-making artifacts, such as large, thick, flat, heavily shell-

194

Texas Archeological Society

tempered salt pans of pottery, occur in the Mid-Ouachita Focus
near the regional salt springs and salt "licks."
5. Joutel further tells of Cahinnio trade affiliations with
the Red River Kadohadacho. He says that they exchanged bows
and arrows for Osage orange (bois d’arc) bow wood, and also
traded bows and arrows with the Quapaw. Large arrowpoint
workshop sites exist on the Ouachita River both at Friendship and near Hot Springs, Arkansas. Also novaculite quarries
or "workings" are located in the Ouachita Mountains around
Hot Springs, Arkansas. Most of the regional arrowpoints are
of novaculite. This region also abounds in salt "licks" and has
salt springs.
Another interesting exchange of trait elements between the
Cahinnio and their historic neighbors or affiliates is suggested
in the seeming simplification of the trailed or red-filled engraved
swastika motif into an interlocking four-unit curvilinear representation in deep trailed lines, on the Keno Trailed type of
Cahinnio bottles (Fig. 46, F). The swastika motif is a decoration element prevalent in Louisiana and Arkansas components
of the Glendora Focus, a historic Caddoan archeological unit to
the southwest of the Cahinnio area. However, the apparently
related Cahinnio simplification occurs abundantly in many midOuachita sites and is a resident ceramic type of the MidOuachita Focus. This situation suggests possible acculturation
within the Caddo nation.
Contemporaneous remotely peripherial influences, besides the
Central American relationship, presumably left little impression on the well established Cahinnio-Caddo. Few Puebloans,
after the revolt of 1680, reached the western confines of the
"Caddo Area." Corn had been introduced into the mid-Ouachita
country probably from Mexico via the Gilmore Corridor, and
not by the southwestern Pueblos. The shallow excavated milling stones and manos suggest the southwestern technique of
maize cracking, but in the main the Cahinnio used the Caddoan
hoe-mortar-pestle system in their corn economy. To date there
are insufficient data on Caddo milling stones, but Mid-Ouachita
flat fieldstone metates and stone pestles attest to the pounding
type of milling.

The Cahinnio-Caddo

195

Concerning Central American relationships: specialists in
Mexican archeology have been amazed at resemblances between Mexican aboriginal artifacts and the Cahinnio complex
and associated specimens. They have noted especially examples
of black, shiny pottery; also the motifs on vases with outflaring edge. The loop-pipe (Fig. 46, B, in front of bottle) looks
familiar to Mexicanists. So do cross-hatched triangle engravings below bowl rims, common also to the Texarkana Focus. The
tripod Blakely Engraved bottles (Fig. 46, D) are astonishingly
like forms occurring in red pottery in Mexico. There are also
non-ceramic features of pre-Fulton Aspect Caddo foci (not
otherwise mentioned in this paper) which are held in common
with Mexico. These features include quartz crystals in burials,
mass burials, and galena in middens.
Significant is the finding of two three-legged basalt metates
of Mexican origin, in the Cahinnio area. They were dug out of
Ouachita River bank sites independently in Garland and Hot
Spring Counties, Arkansas. The finds were isolated ones and associated artifacts were overlooked. For the present, these Mexican metates remain mute evidences of brief Mexican contact of
unknown dating.
The Cahinnio of the mid-Ouachita basin were obviously subjected to many external stimuli from peoples both adjacent and
remote. They were the proto-historic bearers of Caddo traits
modified both by intricate pre-Caddo heritage and by contemporaneous influences. They hold a uniquely important "melting
pot" status in the "Caddo Area." Their artifacts bear out the
dynamics of a developing contact or borderline people. We hope
future research may clarify borderline impacts from all directions-warlike or peaceful--upon the Cahinnio, the people of
the Mid-Ouachita Focus of the Fulton Aspect of the Caddo
Horizon.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American State Papers, Indian Affairs, Vol. I.
DuPratz, M. LePage
1763. The History of Louisiana. 2 vols., translated from
the French. London.

196

Texas A~’cheological Society

Du Solier, Wilfrido, Alex D. Krieger, and James B. Griffin
1947. The archeological zone of Buena Vista, Huaxcama,
San Luis Potosi, Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. 13,
No. 1, pp. 15-32.
Glover, Wm. B.
1935. A history of the Caddo Indians. Louisiana Historical
Quarterly, Vol. 18, pp. 872-946.
Harrington, M. R.
1920. Certain Caddo sites in Arkansas. Indian Notes and
Monographs, Misc. Series No. 10.
Hodge, F. W., ed.
1907, 1910. Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico. Bur. Amer. Ethnot., Bull. 30, pts. 1 and 2.
Hodges, Dr. T. L. and Mrs. T. L. Hodges
1945. Suggestions for identification of certain Mid-Ouachita Pottery as Cahinnio Caddo. Bulletin, Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 15, pp. 98-116.
Jones, Volney H.
1949. Maize from the Davis Site: Its nature and interpretation. In Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 241-249.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas. Publications, The University of Texas, No. 4640.
1948. Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor" in culture
contacts between Middle America and the Eastern United
States. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 19, pp. 155-178.
Margry, Pierre
1875-1886. D~couvertes et ~stablissements des Francais
dans l’oueste et dans le sud de l’Am~rique Septentrionale
(1614-1754). Tomes 3 and 5. Paris.
Moore, Clarence B.
1908. Certain mounds of Arkansas and Mississippi. Philadelphia.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Memoirs, Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.

The Cahinnio-Caddo

197

Orr, Kenneth G.
1946. The archaeological situation at Spiro, Oklahoma;
a preliminary report. American Antiquity, Vol. 11, No. 4,
pp. 228-256.
Phillips, Philip
1940. The Menard Site of the Lower Arkansas. Special report to the National Park Service on behalf of the Central
Mississippi Valley Archeological Survey.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An introductory handbook of Texas archeology. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vot. 25.
Swanton, John R.
1942. Source material on the history and ethnology of the
Caddo Indians. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bull. 132.
Troike, Rudolph C.
1955. Anthropological theory and Plains archeology. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 113-143.
Webb, Clarence H.
1940. House types among the Caddo Indians. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 12,
pp. 49-75.
OTHER SOURCES
Drs. Pedro Armillas and Alex D. Krieger, on visit to the Dr.
T. L. Hodges Collection, 1946.
Drs. Wilfrido Du Solier, Pedro Armillas, and Eduardo Noguera, discussion at First Caddo Symposium, Norman, Oklahoma, 1946.
Collections :
Lt. Col. Hal Conner, Hot Springs, Arkansas.
Dr. and Mrs. T. L. Hodges, Bismarck, Arkansas.
Proctor Collection, Museum of Henderson State Teachers
College, Arkadelphia, Arkansas.
Bismarck, Arkansas

