The Devils Mouth Site: A River Terrace
Midden, Diablo Reservoir, Texas1
LEROY JOHNSON~ JR.

Introduction
THE DEVILS MOUTH SITE (University of Texas Site No. 41VV188) is
located in southern Val Verde County, Texas, approximately 12 air
miles northwest of the city of De1 Rio. The site is composed of numerous lenses of occupational debris within a relatively high terrace
which overlooks the disemboguement of the Devils River, being situated directly to the northwest of the point where the Devils empties
into the sluggish Rio Grande (Fig. 1). The Devils Mouth Site is one
of several which have been excavated in the Diablo Reservoir area by
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project of The University of Texas,
a participant in the Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program.
During the winter months of 1958, Messrs. John A. Graham and
W. A. Davis (1958: 8, 37) of the Austin office of the U.S. National
Park Service found and recorded the Devils Mouth Site while making
a boat reconnaissance of a portion of the Rio Grande in connection
with their survey of the reservoir. Their report gives the fo!lowing
description of the site:
"The Rio Grande terrace in this area achieves a considerable length
and breadth and reaches a depth of some 20 feet. Midden material is
scattered over the surface of the terrace across an area of three to four
acres. In the eroded face of the terrace a number of small lenses composed of fire-cracked stone and other detritus were observed. The large
extent of this site, its considerable depth, and the excellent prospect
of clear-cut stratification promise great archeological potential. Its
1 The archeological investigation of the Devils Mouth site was carried out by the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project as a cooperative project of the National Park
Service and The University of Texas. The following report was prepared in partial
fulfillment of the terms of Contract No. 14-10-333-528 between The University of
Texas and the National Park Service.

254

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

location near the deepest part of the proposed Diablo Reservoir strongly
calls for intensive excavation prior to inundation" (Graham and
Davis, 1958: 37).
As a result of this strong recommendation, a small field party was
sent out by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project to investigate
the site more thoroughly and to carry out preliminary excavations
and stratigraphic tests. The field party, under the leadership of Mr.
Lathel F. Duffield, was composed of Messrs. Richard E. Ross, LeRoy
Johnson, Jr., Carlos Sotomayor, and Alberto Trevifio. The results of
the work at the site, carried on from December 3 to December 12,
1959, are presented in this paper.
The writer wishes to express his sincere thanks to Mr. Federico
Figueroa of Del Rio, on whose ranch the site is located, for permission to dig on his land and for the wholehearted assistance and aid
which he gave the field crew during their stay in the area.
Thanks are also due Mr. Edward B. Jelks, executive-director of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, and Dr. J. F. Epstein of the
Department of Anthropology of The University of Texas--both of
whom have extensive knowledge of the archeology of western Texas-for the aid which they freely gave the writer in interpreting the data
from this site.

Environment
Diablo Reservoir lies within the northeastern fringe area of the
Chihuahuan biotic province, which extends from southern New Mexico and western Texas southward into Chihuahua, Coahuila, and
parts of Nuevo Ledn, San Luis Potosl, and Zacatecas (Dice, 1943).
This province is an arid desert land with many plains, hills, and a
few mountains.
In their description of the immediate vicinity of the reservoir,
Graham and Davis (1958: 3-4) give the following account:
"Topographically, the Diablo Reservoir area is a semi-arid hilly
region of 900 to 1,500 feet elevation, dissected by numerous steepwalled canyons, including the gorges of the Pecos, Devils River, and
the Rio Grande. Cretaceous limestone of the Comanche Series forms
the country rock and is responsible for the rugged, sharply eroded
terrain. Thin limestone-derived soils are found on the uplands while
alluvial soils occur along the Rio Grande and to a much lesser extent
along the Pecos and the Devils.
"Except along the three rivers--the Devils, the Pecos, and the Rio

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

25~

Fig. 1. View of Devils Mouth site looking southeast from cliff above site. Terrace (site)
in foreground; Devils River, left background; Rio Grande, right background.

Grande--water is extremely scarce throughout the region. Virtually
all the tributary canyons are dry and carry water only during periods
of rain.
"... The climate of the Diablo area is semi-arid. Based on a 47
year record at the nearest weather station, Del Rio, the average rainfall is 15.58 inches. Temperature varies from an average of 60° F. in_
January to 85° F. in July. The maximum recorded is 110° F. and the
minimum 11° F. The wind speed averages 10.7 miles per hour.
"... Common fauna include peccary, deer, coyote, iackrabbit,
beaver, rock squirrel, raccoon, skunk, fox, and ring-tail. The gray
wolf, the mountain lion or panther, and the black bear were formerly
numerous but are rarely seen now. Reptiles are represented by various lizards and snakes, with the poisonous diamond-back and rock
rattlers being notable examples of the class. Centipedes, millipedes,
scorpions, and a variety of spiders are the typical myriapods and

256

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

arachnids. Vultures, ravens, sparrows, wrens, turkeys, ducks, doves,
and quail are the most common birds."
The vegetation of the area for the most part consists of thorny
shrubs and cacti, although a few trees grow along the rare permanent
streams. Ocotillo (Fouquieria splendens) is found on the rocky slopes,
as wel! as Agave lechuguilla, particularly on limestone soils in the
northern part of the reservoir (see Fig. 1 ). Since the reservoir lies on
the fringe of the Chihuahuan biotic province, many plants from adjacent regions to the north and east occur there too, and the total number of plants is larger than it would be for a locality deep within the
limits of one province or another. Of these, Fouquieria splendens, the
desert members of the Liliaceae, Compositae, and several of the grasses
are relatively abundant around the mouth of the Devils River.

Description oi the Site
The terrace in which the midden deposits occur rests against the
south slope of a high limestone cliff which rises some 150 ft. above the
present level of the Rio Grande and Devils River at their conflux (Figs.
1 and 2). The slopes of the cliff are rough, but not at all difficult to
scale as are the sheer canyon walls of the Rio Grande farther upstream~
there the river is much more entrenched and the channel narrower
and considerably deeper. The surface of the terrace, now approximately 50 ft. above the water level, is comparatively flat and is covered
by a rather lush assemblage of low bushes and grasses which seem
to have checked the erosion which would otherwise result from rainfall. The edges of the terrace, however, show evidence of severe cutting by the rivers during periods of inundation. At the present time
both the Rio Grande and the Devils are quite shallow, and at several
points near the site one can wade across either without particular
difficulty.
The terrace extends, on an average, about 150 ft. southward from
the cliff face toward the Rio Grande, although at one point it attains
a width of some 200 ft. Cultural detritus was observed on the surface
of the terrace for a distance of approximately 1000 feet along the Rio
Grande, although the excavations were confined to the extreme eastern part of the site. The faces of the terrace tend to be perpendicular
near the top, which fact facilitated the observation and recording of
-the natural zones occurring therein. East of the terrace, just above the
level of the water, is a long, fiat exposure of bedrock limestone with
several deep, oval mortars worn into the rock (Fig. 2).

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

DEVILS

RIVER

PRESENT FLOODPLAIN

/
!
/

RIO GRANDE

[

DEC 1959

Fi9.

2.

Sketch map of Devils Moufh site.

On the surface of the terrace mesquite is quite common, and several
species of grass grow abundantly. Contrariwise, Acacia seems to replace mesquite almost entirely on the rocky cliffs above the site, and the
grass is not nearly so profuse. Also, presumably because of the rich
soil, the plants growing on the terrace surface attain a higher and
fuller growth than those on the nearby hills.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Unfortunately, the Pleistocene and Recent terraces of the Rio
Grande have not undergone correlative studies in the area of the Devils
Mouth Site, and no statements can be made at this time concerning
their geologic affinities. Future work in the area should have as a goal
correlation with terrace sequences of other regions--for instance, with
those of the Big Bend area. Such studies, however, were outside the
scope of work of our field party.
Work Done at the Site
To begin with, a rather hasty sketch map of the site was prepared
by plotting in the edge of the terrace, using a transit and an alidade,
and by correlation with U. S. Geological Survey topographic sheets.
A future field party should construct a complete, detailed contour
map of the site and surrounding terrain.
In order to facilitate recording procedures, an orange-colored metal
stake was driven horizontally into the rock face of the cliff adjacent
to the terrace, was designated "primary datum," and was assigned
an arbitrary elevation of 100 ft. (Fig. 2). All measurements at the
site, both vertical and horizontal, were calculated in relation to this
point. Next, two lines of metal stakes were laid out across the site,
one going from north to south, the other from east to west. The former
was given the designation "W500," the latter, "N500."
It was then decided to clean the exposed face of the terrace at several
points in order to record the gross natural stratigraphy of the site.
Three profiles were taken: No. 1, approximately 60 ft. away from the
rock cliff and facing towards Devils River; No. 2, about 90 ft. from
the cliff and likewise facing Devils River; and No. 3, which was 170
ft. out from the cliff and facing the confluence of the two rivers. After
the profiles had been cleaned, a series of occupation zones, extending
from the top to the bottom of the terrace and separated by apparently
sterile strata, was clearly discernible.
Next, three test pits were sunk into the terrace surface in the hope
of acquiring artifacts which might reveal cultural stratigraphy. Each
pit consisted of two contiguous 5-ft. squares; each square was given
the north-south designation of the stake in its southeast corner. Although digging was done by half-foot, artificial levels, care was taken
to record natural stratigraphy in the excavating process as well.
Test Excavation No. 1, consisting of 5-ft. squares N480-W350 and
N480-W355, was opened just inside the terrace edge at the point
where Profile 2 had been recorded, and the stratigraphy encountered

i ...........

DEVILS R’IOUT]~I SITE

259

therein was for all practical purposes identical to that of the profile.
A maximum depth of 6.5 ft. was reached.
Test 2, which included squares N390-W390 and N390-W395, was
put down near Profile 3 in the area where the upper midden deposits
seemed to be thickest. This excavation attained a depth of Z ft. and
yielded more artifacts than either of the other two tests.
Test 3 was placed far back from the terrace edge, and it reached a
depth of 3.5 ft. This third test embraced 5-ft. squares N495-W495 and
N490-W495.
All of the soil removed from the three pits was passed through hardware cloth having a ¼-inch mesh, and all bone fragments, shells,
spalls of chert, etc., were placed in paper bags labeled with appropriate depth and square designations, and were taken back to the laboratory for s’tudy and description.
In order to determine the desirability of having a palynological
study done at the site at some later date, three soil samples were collected from Test 1 and sealed in glass tubes. Also, soil samples were
collected for all the strata represented in Profile 3 for purposes of
lithological and other analyses. Unfortunately, because of time limitations, these particular studies have not yet been completed.

Internal Structure of the Site
The natural zoning of the site was determined from the three profiles cleaned along the terrace face and from the three test excavations. Because of their greater depth, the profiles proved most useful
in providing an overall picture of the bedding and zoning. A general,
but tentative, correlation has been made between these profiles and is
presented graphically in Fig. 3. Because the deeply buried beds at
the bottom of the columns could not be studied and defined as thoroughly as those occurring higher up, the designation of the strata
could not proceed from bottom to top, as is customary in describing
geologic columns, but rather it was necessary to progress from the surface downward. This seems to be the most practical procedure, since
future work may reveal as yet unrecognized zones at the base of the
sequence. The designations for these new zones can be easily added in
their proper sequence to the end of the series presented here (see Fig.
3).
Zone .4, the surface zone, consists of humus-stained, brown, unconsolidated sand and a small amount of occupational debris; it ranges from
0.4 to 1.5 ft. in thickness.

TEXA,S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

~

"burnt

rock

r

C ~block
burnt sand
rock

WHITE

SAND

COARSE TAN
SAND

Q
Q

76’

O’

Fig.

3.

I’

2’
iI

Natural stra?igraphy of Devils Mouth site.

DEVILS

MOUTH

SITE

Zone B, a relatively thin zone of somewhat clayey, whitish-brown sand,
is sterile of artifacts; this bed ranges from 0.2 to 0.5 ft. in thickness.
Zone C is a thick occupation deposit of tan-colored sand containing a
large amount of burnt rock and midden material; though more or less
consistent in Profiles 1 and 2, where it ranges from 1.3 to 1.5 ft. in
thickness, Zone C divides into five distinct lenses in Profile 3, attaining there a thickness of 4.3 ft. These lenses are labeled Zones C1
through C5 in sequence from top to bottom.
Zone C1 consists of dark black midden soil with a large amount of
burnt limestone fragments of small size.
Zone C2 is a lens of dark brownish-black, sandy soil with abundant
charcoal flecks.
Zone C3 is a relatively thick layer of dark-brown sand and burnt rock.
Zone C4 contains a tan, sandy soil with charcoal flecks.
Zone C5 is a layer of burnt rock and charcoal flecks. All of these subdivisions of Zone C show evidence of heavy occupation, and from
them came a maiority of the artifacts from Test 2.
Zone D, ranging from 0.2 to 0.9 ft. in thickness, is a bed of compact
clayey sand of a whitish-brown color very similar in texture and
composition to Zone B. It likewise seems to be sterile of artifacts and
cultural debris.
Zone E is an occupation zone of dark brown sand and abundant burnt
rocks, ranging in thickness from 0.7 to 2.8 ft.
Zone F is a thick layer of light tan sand with a small amount of burnt
rock. This bed ranges from 1.] to 2.1 ft. in thickness.
Zone G is composed of apparently sterile, whitish, clayey sand similar
to that of Zone B and D except that G seems to have more clay present. It ranges from 0.1 to 0.9, ft. in thickness.
Zone H, a thick layer of light tan, compact sand, contains very little
in the way of occupational materials. It ranges from 2.2 to 3.3 ft. in
thickness. In Profile 2, Zone H is cut by a thin lens of whitish clayey
sand, which, however, could be detected neither in Profile i nor in
Profile 3. For that reason it has not been assigned a letter designation.
Zone I consists of sterile, white sand; this zone did not appear at all
in profile 1, and only very faintly in Profile 2. It ranges in thickness
from 0.1 to 0.3 ft. Below it, but only in Profile 3, is found a thin~
local lens of dark gray sand with charcgal particles.
Zone 7is a layer of brownish-white sand which evidences some light
occupation. This zone is quite thin in Profile 3, but is well represented
in both 1 and 2. It ranges in thickness from 0.4 to 2.0 ft. Below this
zone, in Profile 3, occur two local, thin lenses of reddish sand with
abundant charcoal flecks.

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Zone K, consisting of a grayish-white sand showing some occupation
debris, is well represented in al! three profiles, ranging from 0.6 to
2.8 ft. in thickness.
Zone L, a stratum of light tan sand, contains a few fire-cracked stones.
Although the indications are few, it seems that this layer constitutes
the deepest occupation zone which can be seen in the terrace faces. The
thickness of Zone L ranges from 0.5 to 0.8 ft.
Zone M is a very thin zone of white clayey sand, lacking any indication
of occupation. It ranges in thickness from 0.1 to 0.3 ft. Just below
Zone M the recording of Profile 2 was terminated.
Zone N, in Profile 1, follows Zone M, and consists of light tan sand 1.5
ft. thick, which is seemingly sterile.
Zone 0 is a thin bed of white, clayey, sterile sand 0.2 ft. thick which
was observed only in Profile !.
Zone P is a relatively thick deposit of hard, compact, tan sterile sand
appearing in Profile 1. The recording of Profile 1 was terminated at
a distance of 15 ft. below the surface of the terrace, the base of Zone
P not being reached.

In Profile 3 the N--O--P sequence could not be recognized. Bather,
Zone M, the layer of sterile clay and sand, is there underlain by a
group of il!-defined zones of light tan and buff-colored sand, 5.4 ft.
thick, which seems to extend downward to the low exposure of bedrock 23 ft. below the top of the terrace. These beds are represented,
collectively, by the letter Q in Fig. 3. Because of the sharp inclination
of the terrace faces near the bottom, the profile cuts had to be offset
several times in the direction of the rivers as work progressed downward, in order to avoid moving a tremendous quantity of soil. Consequently the lower portions of the profiles were not cut in vertical
planes, a factor that may have some bearing on the diNculty of correlating the lower zones in Profiles 1 and 2.
In general, the picture we have gained of the natural stratigraphy
from these three profiles is the following. Several (at least eight)
superimposed natural geologic zones are present which show signs of
human occupation, separated, for the most part, by apparently sterile
zones of sand and clayey sand evidently deposited on the site in times
of inundation. These sterile zones served, it seems, to seal off from
each other the several different occupational beds, thereby making the
possibility of acquiring clear-cut cultural stratigraphy ’excellent. Unfortunately our field crew could only test the upper few strata, and it
remains for a future expedition, with ample time and funds, to
excavate a complete column of the 30 ft. of sediments present in the
terrace.

-o63

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

Occupational Features
Only one occupation feature was found at the site: the partial outline of a large pit (Fig. 4) discovered in the eroded face of the terrace
only a few feet from the spot where Profile 2 was recorded. The surviving portion of the pit measured approximately 3.5 ft. in diameter
and 2.5 ft. in depth, and contained dark black soil in which were
many small fire-cracked limestone rocks. Unfortunately the major
part of the pit’s fill had been eroded away, and though the soil was
passed through screens, no artifacts were recovered.
It seems that the original surface from which the pit was dug is the
line dividing Zone E from Zone F. Much of the soil in Zone E, Profile
2, is like that found in the pit.
The use to which the pit could have been put remains a problem.
The soil immediately under it shows no signs of alteration due to
heating.

Description o] the ArtiJacts
Considering the amount of soil moved in the three test excavations
(850 cubic ft.), a relatively small number of artifacts, 1 i3, was recovered. These include dart points, arrowheads, scrapers, knives, potsherds, and other miscellaneous artifacts. In spite of the somewhat
disappointing returns, some interesting evidence on cultural stratigraphy was acquired from these implements (see section entitled
"Provenience of the Artifacts").
TECHNIQUES

oF FLINTKNAPPING

Before beginning the description of the lithic artifacts, it seems
appropriate to present a short discussion of the knapping techniques
involved in their manufacture. Dr. J. F. Epstein (1960) has prepared
a comprehensive analysis of the lithic technology of nearby Centipede
(VV191) and Damp rockshehers (VV189)including precise classification of the different kinds of flakes, cores, etc., which are distinguishable from each other by their diverse methods of manufacture.
Dr. Epstein kindly let me read his manuscript report of excavations
at Centipede and Damp shelters, and has permitted me to borrow
from his classification of knapping techniques.
Several classes of chipped artifacts were made from cores: choppers,
perhaps a few of the knives, and rarely a scraper. The rest of the
artifacts were made from flakes, the classification of which, following
somewhat the terminology developed by Epstein, is given below.

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

264

o

o~

-i

~5
WO

N

z

o2

a

I--

E.

b~

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

(1) Initial cortez flakes--the first flakes knocked from a rounded chert
nodule, resulting in a piano-convex shape for the flakes, with the
convex surface retaining the patina (or cortex) of the nodule.
(2) Cortex flakes--large flakes knocked from the nodule after the removal
of initial flakes but without the advantage of any prepared striking
platform. The exterior surface of the nodule, the cortex, still shows
clearly on one or more edges of these flakes; hence their name.
(3) Flakes struck from a core having a prepared platform--long, narrow
flakes that exhibit a positive bulb of percussion and a flattened area
above the bulb representing a small part of the original platform;
they occur very rarely at the Devils Mouth Site.
(4) Billet flakes--wide, thin flakes, somewhat longer than most pressure
[lakes, exhibiting a small positive bulb of percussion as evidence of
conchoidal fracture. They have a rather small flat area above the bulb,
or frequently lack this flattened area altogether. Laboratory experiment has shown that these flakes can best be produced using a bone
or antler billet, although hammerstones sometimes produce the same
kind of [lakes.
A technique used frequently for retouching artifacts is the pressure
method of removing very small flakes, often employed inthe making
of dart points and arrow points. Most pressure flakes, unfortunately,
are too small to be caught by the ¼-inch mesh screens used in excavation, but use of the pressure technique is evident on several of the
artifacts themselves, particularly the dart and arrow points.

DART POINT TYPES

In all, 40 identifiable dart points and dart point fragments were
recovered. Many of these fit existing type categories fairly well, while
others show only general resemblances to recognized types. For those
points of recognized types, the current taxonomic names will be employed. Groups of points, however, which do not conform to established
taxonomic designations will be considered as provisional types and will
be assigned letters of the alphabet for identification purposes. Although
an extensive analysis was not made, it seems that locally acquired
gray cherts were used almost exclusively in the manufacture of the
dart points.
Montell (Fig. 5: e, f, g)
No. of specimens: 12
Overall proportions: large and relatively broad
Blade:
shape--triangular to leaf-shaped with considerable variation

266

TEX~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 5. Artifacts from Devils Mouth site. a-b, cortex flake scrapers; c, prepared platform
scraper; d, burin; e-g, Montell dart points; h-i, Abasolo dart points; j, Shumla dart point
fragment; k, Pedernales dart point.

267

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

edges--generally straight, sometimes markedly convex
shoulders--pronounced; extremely well developed barbs on all
but 4 specimens
Stem: one-fifth to one-fourth the length of the entire point
shape-slightly expanded and bifurcate
edges--straight but diverging toward the base
base--divided by a deep V-shaped notch; the base of each half of
the stem is fiat to slightly convex
Length: range, 40 to 70 ram.; average, 55 mm.
Width across the shoulders: range, 27 to 42 mm.; average, 35 ram.
Thickness: range, 4 to 7 ram.; average, 5 ram.
Workmanship: These large points are very thin in cross section, and
were made by the removal of thin, wide flakes from the surface.
According to Dr. J. F. Epstein (personal communication), these
Montell points could well have been thinned by the billet technique.
Remarks: Although considerable variation is present in the sample
of Montell points from the Devils Mouth Site, the range 0f variation
exhibited falls within the definition of the type given bySuhm et al.
(1954: 452, Plate 105). Because of the limited sample at hand, no
varieties can be set up at the present time.
Abasolo (Fig. 5: h, i)
No. of specimens: 2
Overall proportions: medium-sized; triangular-shaped
Blade:
shape--roughly triangular
edges--straight to slightly convex; left edge of both faces markedly
beveled
Stem: none
Base: slightly convex
Length: first specimen, 45 mm.; second specimen, 51 mm.
Width at base: first specimen, 28 ram.; second specimen, 21 mm.
Thickness: first specimen, 8 mm.; second specimen, 8 mm.
Workmanship: These points are thicker in cross section than the
Montell points and do not seem to exhibit the billet flaking of the
latter type. On the contrary, narrow and deep flakes were removed
from the surface of the points, perhaps by percussion with a
hammerstone.
tlemarks: These points fit the definition for the Abasolo type as defined
by Suhm et al. (1954: 400, Plate 79).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Shumla (Fig. 5: j)
No. of specimens: 1 fragment lacking the distal part and one shoulder
General proportions: undeterminable
Blade:
shape--undeterminable
edges--undeterminable
shoulders--pronounced with long barbs reaching to the base of the
stem
Stem:
shape--subtriangular
edges--very slightly convex
base--slightly rounded
Length: undeterminable
Width: undeterminable
Thickness: 5 mm.
Workmanship: The billet technique of removing long, wide flakes is
not evidenced. Rather, the flake scars are deep and narrow.
Remarks: Although the point identified here is fragmentary, the stem
and barb are peculiar to the Shumla type (Suhm el al, 1954: 480,
Plate 119).
Pedernales (Fig. 5: k)
No. of specimens: 1 (lacking tip of the blade)
Overall proportions: long and narrow
Blade:
shape--triangular
edges--straight
shoulders--slight, lacking barbs
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire point
shape--straight and bifurcate
edges--straight
base--divided by a deep V-notch; the base of each half of the stem
is pointed
Length: 65 mm. (estimated)
Width across shoulders: 26 mm.
Thickness: 6 mm.
Workmanship: Relatively wide, thin flakes, possibly representing the
billet technique, were removed from the surface; little secondary
flaking is evidenced.
Remarks: This point conforms to the definition of the type given by
Suhm et al. (1954: 468, Plates 113, 114, 115).

DEVILS MOUTH

SITE

Frio (Fig. 6: a)
No. of specimens: 1
Overall proportions: short and broad
Blade: (fragmentary, lacking the tip)
shape--triangular
edges--straight
shoulders--prominent but without barbs
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire point
shape--sharply expanding and bifurcate
edges--concave
base--concave and recurved
Length: 37 ram. (estimated)
Width across the shoulders: 24 ram.
Width across the base: 23 ram.
Thickness: 6 ram.
Workmanship: some secondary pressure flaking; no evidence of billet
flaking
Remarks: This point resembles closely several examples of the Frio
type defined by Suhm et al. (1954: 428; Plate 93, S, V, and Y), but
also shows resemblance in stem outline to the Martindale type
(ibid.: 446, Plate 102).
Langtry (Fig. 6: b)
The basal and medial portion of a Langtry point could be identified.
This fragment shows the weak shoulders, contracting stem and flattish base so characteristic of that type.
PROVISIONAL DART POINT TYPES

Provisional Type A (Fig. 6: c, d)
No. of specimens: 3 (fragmentary; tips lacking)
Overall proportions: medium-sized, somewhat narrow
Blade:
shape--triangular or laurel leaf-shaped
edges--straight to slightly convex
shoulders--well developed, with moderately long barbs on 2 specimens
Stem: one-fifth to one-fourth the length of the entire point
shape--expanding slightly toward the base
edges--straight to very slightly concave
base--slightly concave

Fig. 6. Artifacts from Devils Mouth site. a, Frio dart point; b, Langtry dart point fragment; c-d, Provisional Type A dart points; e-f, Provisional Type B dart points; g-h, Variety
C1

dart points (Provisional Type C); i-j, Variety C2

dart points (Provisional Type C); k,

Variety C3 dart point (Provisional Type C); I-m, Provisional Type D dart points; n, Perdiz
arrow point; o, arrow point; p, Toyah arrow point; q-s, potsherds.

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

Length: 60 ram. (estimated average)
Width across shoulders: first specimen, 35 ram.; second specimen,
35 ram.; third specimen, 33 ram.
Thickness: first specimen, 7 ram.; second specimen, 5 ram.; third
specimen, 5 ram.
Workmanship: All three examples are thin and show the removal of
large, wide flakes as well as some amount of secondary flaking.
l~emarks: These points belong to the tradition of stemmed points
represented by the Marshall and Lange types. The points of Type
A, however, fall within the extreme limits of both those types as
defined by Suhm et al. (1954: 436,444), but fit the norm for neither.
Their stems are too wide for Marshall, yet do not expand enough for
the Lange category.

Provisional Type B (Fig. 6: e, f)
No. of specimens: 2
Overall proportions: long and narrow
Blade:
shape--somewhat lanceolate
edges--slightly convex
shoulders--fairly well developed, but without barbs
Stem: about one-third the length of the entire point
shape--very slightly expanding
edges--concave; beveled on one face only
base--slightly rounded
Length: first specimen, 60 ram.; second specimen, 50 ram.
Width across the shoulders; first specimen, 29 ram.; second specimen,
26 ram.
Thickness: first specimen, 6 ram.; second specimen, 7 ram.
Workmanship: These examples exhibit short, deep flake scars and
very little secondary flaking. Evidence is lacking for billet flaking.
Remarks: These two points are very much like the Nolan type in
general outline and in stem shape. However, both specimens have
stems with the edges beveled only on one face, while true Nolan
points usually have stems beveled on both edges but on opposite
faces. These points can, perhaps, be considered as variants of the
Nolan type.
Provisional Type C
Type C is made up of 10 rather small dart points with expanding
stems and short blades. They will here be broken down, for descriptive

272

TEX2~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

purposes, into three varieties. These points may form part of a large
group of small stemmed dart points (including Darl and Fairland
types) that seem to be relatively late in the Archaic Stage over much
of Texas.
Variety C1 (Fig. 6: g, h)
No. of specimens: 4
Overall proportions: small and relatively wide
Blade:
shape--triangular
edges--straight
shoulders--weak, without barbs
Stem: about one-third the length of the entire point
shape--expanding and short
edges--concave
base--concave
Length: range, 30 to 40 ram.; average, 36 ram.
Width across the shoulders: range, 17 to 22 ram.; average, 19 ram.
Thickness: range, 4 to 7 ram.; average, 6 ram.
Workmanship: These points are proportionately thicker in cross section than the Montell points and show shorter and deeper flake scars.
The workmanship gives the impression of being quite poor.
I~emarks: Variety CI is distinguished here from the other varieties
of C by its concave base. C2 has a markedly convex base, while the
base of C3 is flattened. All three, however, are small, have expanding stems, and seem to be closely related to each other. The shoulders
of C1 are less strongly developed than those of C2, however, with the
latter variety exhibiting small barbs. CI is quite similar to the
Uvalde point (Suhm et al., !954: 486) and to the Martindale (ibid.:
446) and Dad points (ibid.: 414). It seems probable that all represent a common stemming tradition.

Variety C2 (Fig. 6: i, j)
No. of specimens: 3
Overall proportions: small and broad
Blade:
shape--triangular to subtriangular
edges--straight or slightly convex
shoulders--well developed with short barbs
Stem: approximately one-fourth the length of the entire point
shape--short and expanding

Dt~VILS MOUTH SITE

073

edges--concave
base--convex
Length: first specimen, 32 ram.; second specimen, 55 ram. (estimated) ; third specimen, 40 ram.
Width across the shoulders: first specimen, 17 ram.; second specimen,
21 ram.; third specimen, 17 ram.
Thickness: first specimen, 6 ram.; second specimen, 5 ram.; third
specimen, 5 ram.
Workmanship: The flake scars are short and deep, with little secondary
flaking.
Remarks: This variety is distinguished from the other varieties of
Type C by its convex base and short barbs.
Variety C3 (Fig. 6: k)
No. of specimens: 3
Overall proportions: small and thick
Blade:
shape--subtriangular
edges--slightly convex
shoulders--slight, without barbs
Stem: one-fourth to one-third the length of the entire point
shape--sharply expanding
edges--concave
base--straight
Length: first specimen, 22 mm., second specimen, 37 mm.; third
specimen, 40 ram.
Width across the shoulders: first specimen, 16 ram.; second specimen,
17 ram.; third specimen, 18 ram.
Thickness: first specimen, 4 ram.; second specimen, 5 ram.; third
specimen, 5 ram.
Workmanship: The flake scars are short and rather deep, and the
points exhibit little secondary flaking. These were not made by the
billet technique.
Bemarks: Variety C3 is distinguished from CI and C2 by its straight
base. Also, this variety shows some resemblance to the Ensor dart
point type, but is somewhat under the size range for Ensor (Suhm
et al., 1954: 422, Plate 90).
Provisional Typed (Fig. 6: 1, m)
No. of specimens: 3
Overall proportions: large and long

TEXi%S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Blade:
shape--sharply expanding
edges--concave
base--concave to almost straight
Length: first specimen, 50 ram. (estimated); second specimen, 50
ram.; third specimen, 53 ram.
Width across shoulders: first specimen, 21 ram.; second specimen,
21 ram.; third specimen, 22 ram.
Thickness: first specimen, 8 ram.; second specimen, 6 ram.; third
specimen, 9 ram.
Workmanship: Chipping was done by the removal of short, deep
flakes, presumably by percussion.
tlemarks: Type D is quite close to the Ensor type described by Suhm
et al. (1954: 422, Plate 90). However, the present points have
wider side notches and a more concave base than points illustrated
by Suhm et al.
MISCELLANEOUS DART POINTS

Among the points which could not be typologically identified or
described are one large, leaf-shaped point with very shallow side
notches, and three basal fragments of medium-sized, expanding stem
dart points. These latter points are too fragmentary to allow for a fuller
description.
ARROW POINTS

Only one intact arrow point and two arrow point fragments were
found at the Devils Mouth Site. The first (Fig. 6: n) is a small, thin
point whose dimensions are 32 mm. (length) by 21 ram. (width) by
3 mm. (thickness). It is of the Perdlz type (Suhm et al., 1954: 504),
having a long, contracting stem and relatively long barbs.
One of the fragmentary points (Fig 6: p) belonging to the Toyah
type (Suhm et al., 1954: 508), has a triangular outline, and side and
base notches. The other fragment (Fig. 6: o) is an extremely narrow
specimen with small contracting stem and barbs. It resembles, in a
very general way, the Perdiz arrow point, but is much narrower and
proportionately longer, having an estimated length of 35 ram. and a
width of only 11 mm. All three points were made by pressure flaking.
BUlllN

Dr. J. F. Epstein (1960), in his excavation of the nearby Centipede
tlockshelter, found an abundance of burins throughout the whole

275

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

sequence of artifacts from that site. Only one artifact (Fig. 5: d) from
the Devils Mouth Site, however, fits the burin category. This is an
apparently reworked knife or blade from which two long flakes were
struck to produce a burin cutting bit. The bit has an angle of approximately 70 degrees. This implement is 61 ram. long, 30 ram. wide, and
5 ram. thick (for provenience see Table 1).

FIST AXES

Two small fist axes (Fig. 7: a, b) were recovered from the site, one
70 ram. in length, the other 88 ram. Each has a well worked, pointed
distal end, while the other extremity is relatively broad and thick;
these are the definitive characteristics of fist axes. Both faces have
been worked, presumably by percussion flaking, and the edges of the
larger specimen show some signs of secondary pressure flaking as well.
Much of the cortex of the original core can be seen on the basal part
of the larger specimen.

CHOPPER

One large implement (Fig. 7: d) is a slightly reworked flint core,
having been flaked by percussion on one edge and adjacent parts of
both faces into a chopper. The maximum diameter of this artifact is
93 ram. Choppers, in contrast to the pointed fist axes, have wide cutting
edges which may be straight or somewhat convex.

KNIVES

A group of 17 fragmentary bifacial tools are here classified as
knives. They can be divided into two groups: knives of a general
rounded or oval outline. (3 specimens), and those which seem to have
been originally leaf-shaped (14 specimens, Fig. 7: c), having more or
less pointed ends. There is a considerable size range in both groups
with specimens varying from 50 to 80 ram. in length. The workmanship is generally quite crude, and it appears that all the work was
done by the percussion technique. As far as can be determined, al!
specimens were manufactured from large, irregular flakes and not
from cores. Two specimens stand out from the others because of their
thinness, and because their edges show some evidence of secondary
pressure flaking. None shows evidence of the billet manufacturing
technique.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Fig. 7. Artifacts from Devils Mouth site. a-b, fist axes; c, knife fragment; d, chopper;
~e, initial cortex scraper; f, mano; g, pitted mano.

277

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

SCRAPERS

All artifacts that have a cutting edge or edges worked from only
one face of the piece, leaving a flat opposing face, have been included
within the scraper category. These, in turn, are grouped in three divisions, following in part the terminological designations used for material from the Centipede and Damp rockshelters by Dr. J. F. Epstein
(1960). These are (1) initial cortex flake scrapers, (2) cortex flake
scrapers, and (3) scrapers made from flakes that were removed from
cores with prepared striking platforms. Unfortunately the descriptive
terminology long in use in central Texas and other areas--of which
such terms as "end-scraper," "side-scraper," etc., are a part--could
not be conveniently employed in describing the scrapers from the
Devils Mouth Site. The explanation for this seems to be a difference
in techniques of lithic manufacture between this and other areas. The
scrapers of the Diablo Reservoir region for the most part are much
cruder than those of central Texas and their irregular shape has not
lent itself to existing classificatory terms. For this reason the system
proposed by Epstein has been used here. His descriptive system is based
more on techniques of manufacture than on the shape of the end
product.
Initial Cortex Flake Scrapers (Fig. 7: e). Eleven very crude scrapers
were made from the initial or outside flakes struck from large nodules
or cobbles (see section entitled "Techniques of Flint Knapping." These
flakes are generally piano-convex, the convex side representing the
original surface of the chert nodule. A small amount of percussion
flaking was usually done on the cortex face, but there is rarely any
evidence of secondary pressure flaking. These crude scrapers contrast
sharply in quality of workmanship with the well made piano-convex
scrapers of the central Texas and Abilene regions. Most of the examples show very little in the way of effective cutting or scraping edges,
some being worked only on one small part of the edge, while others
exhibit irregular percussion flaking around the whole circumference
of the artifact. A considerable variation occurs in size, the maximum
diameters running from 59 to 74 ram.
Cortex Flake Scrapers (Fig 5: a, b). Sixteen cortex flake scrapers
were recovered. These scrapers are made of large, irregularly worked
flakes which were struck from medium-sized nodules after removal
of the initial flakes. In all instances some part of the cortex of the
nodule was left intact, hence the name "cortex flake scraper" (Epstein,

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

1960). Evidence of a small amount of percussion flaking is found along
the edges of many specimens, but only on a limited section of the edge.
The average diameter of these artifacts is 55 mm.
Prepared Platform Scrapers (Fig. 5: c). Five rather crude and
irregular scrapers were made from flakes struck from the prepared
striking platforms of large chert cores. A large bulb of percussion and
a small remnant of the striking platform can be seen on all the specimens. The general outline of these scrapers is quite irregular, but the
"sharpening," done by percussion, is found generally on the end opposite the bulb of percussion. In all instances retouching is foufi’d only on
one face. The average diameter of these scrapers is 55 mm.
Miscellaneous Scrapers. Aside from the aforementioned scrapers,
three others were found which did not fit any of the above categories.
The first of these is long, approximately rectangular, and was made
from a flake struck from the fiat, unworked surface of a nodule. This
artifact has a square bit at the end opposite the striking platform and
perhaps was used as an adz or gouge. The other two scrapers are very
similar in outline to the leaf-shaped knives discussed earlier, differing
only in that one face is flat and unworked.
GROUND STONE ARTIFACTS

Eleven manos--hand stones used for grinding purposes--were found
at the site. Of these, four are very flat, showing smoothed areas resulting from use on both faces. Two (Fig. 7: g) have small, pecked areas
on their surfaces and resemble strongly the so-called "nut stones" or
"pitted stones" of eastern Texas (Jelks and Tunnell, 1959: 50; Suhm et
al., 1954: 207). Another hand stone (Fig. 7: f) has only one grinding
surface; the back is sharply humped and ridge-shaped. Aside from these
complete manos, six fragments of manos were found; unfortunately it
is not possible to be certain of the original shapes. On three specimens
one broken edge has been sharpened by percussion flaking, and it seems
probable that they were reused as choppers.
MISCELLANEOUS STONE MATERIAL

Nineteen small, elongate river pebbles occurred at the site, similar
in form to the painted pebbles characteristically found in the dry caves
of western Texas. The specimens from the Devils Mouth Site may
originally have had paintings on their surfaces which weathered away
as a result of the exposed nature of the site. Several fragments of ochre
(limonite and hematite) were also recovered from the excavations.

279

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

UNALTERED

FLAKES

Unworked flakes of the four major forms (i.e., initial flakes, cortex
flakes, prepared platform flakes, and billet flakes) were found in practically all the excavation levels. Because many of the flakes recovered
were broken and of a minute size, the writer could not make accurate
statistical counts of the flakes for the various stratigraphic levels.
From a cursory examination, however, it seems that both cortex and
billet flakes are very common in all the levels excavated, while the
prepared platform flakes are rare. Initial flakes are also common, but
most of them have been worked and utilized as scrapers.
POTTERY

Three small potsherds (Fig. 6: q, r, s) were recovered from the
upper levels of Test 2. Their surfaces are smooth, but not polished,
and of a tan or cream color. The hardness of the surface is between
2.5 and 3 on Moh’s scale. The paste is of the same color as the exterior,
and is porous and soft. Abundant bone fragments, clay hlmps or
ground potsherds, and a small amount of sand constitute the tempering
materials. Two of the sherds measured 7 ram. in thickness, the other
8 ram.

These sherds are similar, except for their lighter color, to sherds of
type Leon Plain found at the Oblate Site in central Texas (G. D.
Tunnell, personal communication). The affiliations of the sherds from
the Devils Mouth Site as well as the type Leon Plain from central
Texas seem to lie with the Caddoan ceramic tradition of the southeastern United States, as evidenced by the paste, tempering agents, and
softness of the surfaces.

Provenience oi the Artifacts
Even though the number of artifacts recovered from the three test
excavations is relatively small, there are some rather interesting differences in the vertical distribution of the types represented. Because
of the small size of the sample these stratigraphic data are not statistically conclusive, yet they clearly point out several possibilities which
future work at the site should be able to verify or reject.
The artifacts and their distribution will be presented here by areas:
Tests 2, 1, and 3 respectively.
Test 2 (see Table 1) provided by far the largest sample of artifacts
and the greatest amount of distributional information. In all, 67 arti-

280

TEX~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCI~ETY

TABLE I
Provenience of Artifacts
Test 2

o

~
0

~

0

%

0

~

%

1
..
2
1
..
1
1
..........................
..............
1
1
1
..
1
1
1
..
..
2
..
1
................
1
..
1
..........
1
....
1
1
..
2
2
....
..................
I
1
..
1
1
1
1
..
1
1
........
2
1
..
1
1
4
1
3
........
2
..
1
2
2
5
2
......
3
4,
..
....
1
............
1

0.0-0.5
0.5-1.0
1.0-1.5
1,5-2.0
2.0-2.5
2.5-3.0
3.0-3.5
3,5-4,0
4,0-4,5
4.5-5.0
5.0-5.5
5.5-6.0
6,0-6,5
6.5-7.0

facts were recovered from this pit. The excavations at Test 2, reaching
a depth of 7 ft. below the surface, were limited to Zones A through C as
defined from the three profiles of the terrace face (Fig. 3). Although
this test pit was put down only a short distance from the edge of the
terrace near Profile 3, the zoning encountered correlated only
roughly with that of Profile 3. It could be determined, however, that
the strata of the pit corresponded to Zones A through C, although the
constituent beds and lenses were not comparable to the five divisions
of Zone C which appeared in Profile 3.
With regard to the provenience of the artifacts from Test 2, there
were some interesting differences in the occurrence of several dart
point types, the arrow points, and the potsherds. The main utilitarian
artifacts, however, showed no important change in styles from the
bottom to the top of the column, indicating a certain degree of cultural
uniformity for the whole period of occupation evidenced by Test 2. On
the basis of the differences in the distribution of artifacts mentioned

DEVILS 5’IOUTIK SITE

281

above, two tentative periods are hypothecated for the site on the basis
of Test 2 (Table 1 ) :
Periorl I, representing the artifacts found from depth 4.5 ft. to 7 ft. below
the surface, is characterized by the Montell dart point type (11 specimens), and Provisional Type A dart points (2 specimens). One Shumla
point was found in the lowest excavation level. The only burin recovered
was associated with artifacts of this period.
Perio~,t lI, represented by the artifacts found from the surface to a depth
of 4 ft., is characterized by Provisional Type C dart points (7 specimens), three arrowheads (Perdiz, Toyah, and an unclassifiable, fragmentary specimen), and the three potsherds. Also occuring in Period II
are one dart point of Provisional Type D and one At)asolo point.
The half-foot excavation level 4.0-4.5 ft. falls between the two
periods, and seems to represent a mixture of them. In it were found
one Montell point, one point of Provisional Type C, and one Frio
point.
Running through the whole stratigraphic column, but somewhat
more frequent in the lower zones, are bifacial knives, initial flake
scrapers, prepared platform scrapers, and cortex scrapers.
Viewing this tentative periodification of the site in toto, then, it
seems that we have a more or less consistent culture pattern represented from the lowest stratum to the highest, characterized by the
knives, sundry scrapers, and manos. In Period I the Montell dart point
seems to have been the dominant type, while in Period II it was apparently replaced by Provisional Type C, and arrow points and pottery
were added to the general culture. Based on our knowledge of culture
history from other areas, it would seem possible that the arrow points
and pottery were intrusive into Period II, and do in themselves represent a latter occupation of the site by people of the Neo-American
Stage. Data to substantiate this assumption, however, are not present,
and these artifacts can not be factored out of Period II without further
evidence.
We do not have to assume that the site was necessarily occupied
continuously, even at the time during which Zone C was being built
up, a period of time which seems to have been relatively free from
flooding. Rather it is quite possible that the site was used only intermittently by bands of roving food-gatherers and hunters, possessing
similar, but not identical artifact assemblages. This is one possible
way to account for the difference in the distribution of the various dart
point types and to account for the presence of the potsherds in Period
II.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Unfortunately very few artifacts were recovered from Tests 1 and
3 and their provenience is not presented in the tables.
In Test 1, which extended from Zone A through Zone E, were found
4 bifacial knives, 2 cortex flake scrapers, 6 initial cortex flake scrapers,
2 Provisional Type C dart points, one Langtry point, and 8 mano
fragments. Except for two initial cortex flake scrapers from Zone E, all
the artifacts came from Zone C, but the column can not be broken into
two periods, as at Test 2. The two C dart points and the one example
of Provisional Type D might suggest affinity with Period II.
In Test 3, only 6 artifacts were recovered: 2 knife fragments, 1
prepared platform scraper, 1 Provisional Type D dart point, 1 Abasolo
dart points, and 1 mano. Test 3 included Zones A through C.
On the surface of and along the base of the terrace were found one
Pedernales point, one Provisional Type A and two Provisional Type
B dart points as well as sundry scrapers, manos, and other miscellaneous artifacts.

Faunal Remains
In the course of excavation, a few animal bones and bone fragments,
a few mussel shells, and a large quantity of snail shells were recovered.
These were kindly identified by Mr. Holmes A. Semken of the Vertebrate Paleontology Laboratory of The University of Texas, and their
generic names are presented below. Unfortunately, identification
could not be made on the specific level because of the fragmentary
nature of the remains.
Two genera of snails were recognized, Bulimulus spp. and Polygyra
sp., the former occurring in all levels of the three test excavations,
while the latter was much less common, occurring primarily in the
upper levels of Test 1. Small mussel shell fragments (Unio sp.) were
also found in quantity throughout the site, but were not nearly so
common as Bulimulus.
The few bone fragments represent two genera of hares (Lepus and
Sylvilagus), two genera of rats (Neotorna and Sigrnadon), and deer
(Odocoileus). Several bones of snakes and fish were recovered as
well. Most of the bone material came from Test 2, the excavation made
in the rich midden area, although a few bones were found in Tests
1 and 3. Distribution studies by depth revealed no important differences in the relative percentages of the various genera except for
Polygyra, which was more common in the upper levels of Test 1.
The large number of snails may suggest that these small animals

283

DEVILS 5IOUTH SITE

were gathered and used for food. Such was certainly the case in many
of the sites of the Edwards Plateau Aspect of central Texas. It may be
assumed that the various animals represented were also used for food,
although the rat bones may possibly represent debris from burrows.

Cultural Affiliations
The assemblage of artifacts from Period I at the Devils Mouth Site
consists of manos, crude knives and scrapers, fist axes and dart points.
Later, in Period II (as defined in Test 2) arrow points and pottery
appear and the dart point forms are different from those in Period I;
but there seems to be a continuity of knife and scraper forms throughout the whole period of time represented in Test 2.
We have a picture, then, of a hunting-gathering people (or peoples)
who probably utilized the animal and plant foods of their environment quite efficiently. That they were hunters is attested by the presence of deer, small mammal, and rodent bones, and that they were
food-gatherers can be inferred from the manos, bedrock mortars, and
abundant snail and mussel shell. Fishing seems also to have been
practiced.
Projectile points have been used throughout North America as "index fossils," or as keys to cultural classification, and it is to these artifacts that we must turn to make some inferences regarding possible
affiliation of the Devils Mouth materials with defined archeological
culture units. The projectile points of Period I (Test 2) are of the
Archaic Stage, specifically the Edwards Plateau Aspect of central
Texas, a division of the Balcones Phase as defined by J. Charles Kelley
(1947, 1959). Kelley earlier (1947: 124-125) divided the Edwards
Plateau Aspect into three loci--Round Rock, Uvalde, and Clear Fork
--defined primarily on the basis of dart point types.
Period I at the Devils Mouth Site shows strong affinity with the
Uvalde Focus, which is characterized by dart point types Montell,
Frio, Smithwick Small Stem (Kelley, 1947: 124). Montell is the most
common dart point type from the lower levels of Test 2. According to
Kelley (1959: 282), the Uvalde Focus is relatively late in the Archaic
Stage of central Texas and correlates on a time level with the Chisos
Focus of the Big Bend area. Since the validity of the Uvalde Focus as
a culture unit has not as yet been demonstrated in print, it can only
be suggested here that Period I relates to it.
There are two possible ways to interpret the material represented
by Period II: (1) two distinct occupations, one by late Archaic and

TEXAS AltCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the other by Neo-American peoples, are present but stratigraphically
inseparable, or (2) Period II belongs exclusively to a Neo-American
Stage culture that used Provisional Type C dart points as well as
arrow points and pottery. The Perdiz type arrow point (of which one
specimen was found in the Period II level) is common both in central
and western Texas; the Toyah type arrow point occurs in many NeoAmerican sites of Trans-Pecos Texas.
The materials represented by Periods I and II from the Devils
Mouth Site contrast somewhat with the nearby Pecos River Focus sites
of Diablo Reservoir, primarily in the relative percentages of dart point
types. Only one each of dart point types Shumla and Langtry, characteristic of the Pecos River Focus, were found at the Devils Mouth Site.
The Shumla point occurred in the deepest part of Test 2, below the
Montell points, while the Langtry point came from Test 1.

Conclusions
The following conclusions have been reached regarding the Devils
Mouth site:
1. At least 8 occupational zones, separated by sterile alluvial beds, have
been identified in the terrace.
2. Excavation of the uppermost of these zones (A through C) yielded an
assemblage of artifacts divisible into two tentative culture periods.
3. Period I, characterized by a high frequency of Montell points, shows
strong

affiliation with the

Uvalde

Focus

of the

Edwards

Plateau

Aspect.
4. Period II, characterized by Provisional Type C dart points, and including arrow points and pottery, may represent (]) a late or transitional Archaic occupation within intrusive pottery and arrow points;
(2) occupation by Neo-American peoples that used dart points, arrow
points, and pottery; or (3) intermittent occupations by both Archaic
and Neo-American cultures.
5. The affinity of the excavated portion of the site is with central Texas
more so than with western Texas, especially in Period I.

In view of the clear-cut stratigraphy in the terrace, it is strongly
recommended that more extensive work be done at the site. The possibility of obtaining good cultural stratigraphy appears excellent since
many more occupation zones occur below the ones analyzed in this
report.
The presence of a Shumla type dart point near the bottom of Test 2
suggests that the deeper occupational levels, not excavated in 1959,

DEVILS h~OUTH SITE

285

may well contain remains of the Pecos River Focus. Consequently,
further work at the Devils Mouth Site might well provide significant
data on chronological and other relationships between the Uvalde and
Pecos River foci. Such data would be of considerable importance in
reconstructing the prehistory of the Devils River area.

Reierences Cited
Dice, Lee R.
1943.

The Biotic Provinces of North America. Ann Arbor.

Epstein, J. F.
1960.

Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1958. Manuscript.

Graham, John A., and William A. Davis
1958.

Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Diablo Reservoir, Val Verde
County, Texas. Unpublished report by the Austin Office of the U. S. National Park Service, River Basin Surveys Program, on file at the Regional
Office of the National Park Service, Santa Fe, New Mexico, and at the
Department of Anthropology of The University of Texas, Austin, Texas.

Jelks, Edward B., and Curtis D. Tunnell
1959.

The Harroun Site; A Fulton Aspect Component of the Caddoan Area,
Upshur County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 2, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.

Kelley, J. Charles
1947.

The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and
Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 18, pp. 115-128.

1959.

The Desert Cultures and the Balcones Phase: Archaic Manifestations in
the Southwest and Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 3, pp. 276£88.

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954.

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.

The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

