201

Prehistoric Subsistence Strategies
in Northeastern Central Texas
David O. Brown
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the hypothesized paleoenvironment of the Aquilla
Lake area at the margin of the Cross Timbers and Blackland Prairie biotic
regions in northeastern Central Texas. Quantitative approximations are offered
for both the faunal and floral resources of the area during the prehistoric period.
Prehistoric resource procurement is discussed in light of faunal data excavated
from the McDonald site at Aquilla Lake. The data are then utilized to offer
suggestions concerning possible adaptive strategies in the northeastern Central
Texas area. Prehistoric subsistence and the exploitation of various food resources along the northeastern edge of the Central Texas culture area are
discussed. At the core of the discussion is a model proposed by Skinner, Shaw,
Huckaby, and Bartsch for the Aquilla Lake area in Hill County. The plant
resources of the Aquilla Lake area are discussed, and some preliminary figures
are presented. The previously developed quantitative model of faunal exploitation is tested against actual excavation data from the McDonald site at Aquilla
Lake. The revised model is examined in the context of proposed adaptive
strategies for the northeastern Central Texas area.
INTRODUCTION
Aquilla Lake is a reservoir project of the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers in
central Hill County about 16 km (10 miles) west of Lake Whitney (Figure 1).
Geologically, the area is underlain by sandstone as well as shales and clays of
Cretaceous age. The western part of the lake area, along Aquilla Creek, is
underlain by sands of the Woodbine Formation and forms the west boundary of
the eastern Cross Timbers vegetation zone. The eastern arm of the lake, which
follows Hackberry Creek, cuts into Eagle Ford clays and shales that underlie the
Blackland Prairie.
The region has been the scene of much archeological activity, most notably
that associated with Lake Whitney (Jelks 1962, Stephenson 1970, Lynott 1978).
have been undertaken in Aquilla Lake by both Southern

Archeological projects

Methodist University (SMU) (Lynott and Peter 1977, Skinner and Henderson
1972, Skinner et al. 1978, 1979) and the Texas Archeological Survey (Watson
1982, Brown 1987a). Surveys of the lake area recorded more than a hundred
prehistoric archeological sites ranging in age from Late Paleo-Indian to Late
Prehistoric.
As with many archeological projects in Central Texas, lithic artifacts comprise most of the materials recovered from the Aquilla Lake. Analysis of the
stylistic and functional variability of lithic materials provides an essential base
for the

understanding of prehistoric lifeways, but there are noticeable limitations
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (for 1988)

Texas Archeological Society

202

\
Hillsboro

?
[]
Peoria

Creek

N

Brazil Site

McDonald Site
Lake
Jilla Lake Dam
cobb

o~

0

Aquilla

6

1
"[

2 miles
2 kilometers

Figure 1. Map of the Aquilla Lake area, Northeastern Central Texas.

in attempting to extrapolate from lithic material culture to other cultural subsystems. One area in which these limitations leave unfortunately large lacunae is
the interpretation of the exploitation by the prehistoric group of the biotic
resources of their environment. Although it is possible to make limited ecological inferences from tool forms (e.g., hunting activities based on the presence of
projectile points), for the most part such interpretations cannot substitute for the
actual faunal or floral remains that make up the primary data.

Brown -- Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

203

One approach to the study of utilization of environmental resources that is
not necessarily limited by the fortuitous preservation of faunal or floral materials is catchment analysis. This technique, originally devised by Higgs, VitaFinzi, Harris, and Fagg (1967) for Paleolithic sites in Epirus, Greece, and later
expanded upon by Vita-Finzi and Higgs (1970) in a study of Upper Paleolithic
and Neolithic sites in Palestine, involves determination of the resources available within a stated distance from a site. Site catchment analysis has been widely
used in many parts of the world in the study of both hunter-gatherers and village
agriculturalists (Davidson 1976, Findlow and Erickson 1980, Flannery 1976,
Peebles 1978, Webley 1972, Zarky 1976, Zvelebil 1983). Roper (1979) and
Dennell (1980) have discussed some of the better applications of catchment
analysis as well as some of the limitations of the technique.
In the report on the 1976 testing at Aquilla Lake (Skinner et al. 1978), SMU
conducted preliminary catchment analysis of the area. This analysis, centered on
the Brazil site (41HI76), described the faunal and floral resource potential for
the Cross Timbers and Blackland Prairie biotic zones. A detailed list was
compiled of potentially exploited faunal and floral species, and some quantitative approaches were suggested for the derivation of yield values. Faunal resource potential was explored in greater detail, taking into account animal
population densities, maximum harvest rates, kilograms of usable meat, and
calories per individual. This potential was compared with the estimated caloric
requirements necessary for the survival of human groups of various sizes.
The complexities of catchment analysis are beyond the scope of this paper,
but a brief discussion of some of the more troublesome problems is in order. One
of the major difficulties in any such analysis is the identification and characterization of aboriginal resource zones. The identification of microareal resources
zones is all but impossible, and even the use of generalized resource zones can
be problematical in areas where agriculture and grazing have radically altered
the landscape. At Aquilla Lake, where the major biotic zones are controlled by
readily identifiable geologic features (sandstones versus shales and clays), this
problem is somewhat alleviated. There are still many questions, however, about
the character of the aboriginal vegetation of the two major biotic zones and
about the nature and extent of a possible ecotonal region between the two.
Other major problems include the choice of a catchment area of appropriate
size. Following Lee’s (1968) observation of foraging distances among the !Kung
Bushmen, 10 km (6 miles)--the figure used by the analysts at SMU--has
become common. However, the use of a single value without question brings on
difficulties. In addition to the problems with distance, there remains the critical
problem of aboriginal selection of resources. No known group exploits the full
potential of its environment, and many groups exploit resources such as roots
and insects, which are rarely quantified in modern environmental studies.
Due to the lack of preservation at the Brazil site and at many such sites in
the area, the question of which resources were used cannot be answered completely, but, fortunately, a faunal collection is available from the McDonald site
(41HI105). Although the resources in the McDonald site might differ somewhat

204

Texas Archeological Society

from those at the Brazil site, the 10-km catchment rings for both are nearly
identical. There are slightly more Blackland Prairie and slightly less Cross
Timbers in the McDonald site 10-km catchment ring than in the Brazil site
catchment ring, but the differences are certainly within the margin for error for
estimating aboriginal resource zones from modem topographic maps. For this
reason, the figures derived from the 1978 catchment analysis will be used here
as a first approximation.
FLORAL RESOURCES
Modeling the Aquilla Lake Paleoenvironment
The catchment analysis developed at Southern Methodist Univesity describes in some detail the floral resources that were available to the aboriginal
populations, but stops short of providing quantitative estimates.
In this analysis, Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978:150-151)
divide the Blackland Prairie into three zones. The principal climax dominant of
their upland zone is little bluestem grass (Schizachyrium scoparium), with
subdominants including Indian grass (Sorghastrum nutans), big bluestem (Andropogon gerardii), Texas wintergrass (Stipa leucotricha), and dropseed
(Sporobolus sp). Areas along drainages are divided into a drier grassy lowland
zone with big bluestem grass as the dominant and Indian grass and switchgrass
(Panicum virgatum) as subdominants. The wetter bottomland zone includes an
overstory of red ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica), cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia),
and hackberry (Celtis sp.), with an understory of weedy vines such as grapes
(Vitis sp.), poison ivy (Toxicodenron radicans), and greenbriar (Smilax bonanox) and frutescents such as rough-leaf dogwood (Cornus drummondii), downy
and green haws (Crataegus mollis and C. viridis), big-tree and hog plums
(Prunus mexicana and P. rivularis), Eve’s necklace (Sophora affinis), black haw
(Viburnum rufidulum), and coralberry (Symphoricarpos orbiculatus). Occasional
overstory species include red oak (Quercus shumardii), pecan (Carya illinoiensis),
post oak (Quercus stellata), red mulberry (Morus rubra), and live oak (Quercus
virginiana).
Although there is not complete agreement regarding the original vegetation
of the Cross Timbers region, it seems likely that various species of oak wood
were more important in the upland areas of the Cross Timbers than in the
Blackland Prairie. Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978) apparently
favor an upland savannah with stands of post oak and blackjack oak (Quercus
marilandica), with some white oak (Quercus sp.), red oak, and black hickory
(Carya texana). The understory, in addition to greenbriar, probably consisted
primarily of little bluestem, big bluestem, Indian grass, tall dropseed (Sporobolus asper), sideoats grama (Bouteloua curtipendula), and hairy grama (B. hirsuta).
They also suggest that the Cross Timbers bottomland was very much like the
Blackland Prairie bottomland.
As Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978) point out, grasses were the
predominant vegetation over much of the upland area of the Aquilla Lake

Brown m Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

205

region. Some of the Quaternary terrace surfaces and some of the bottomland
areas may have been predominantly grassy. They also suggest that the small size
of the seeds of these grasses would not have made them very desirable as
aboriginal food resources. In any case, many grass species are widely spread
throughout the are in several biotic zones or subzones. Ubiquitous in the lake
area are little and big bluestem grasses, which account for as much as 70 percent
of the cover in some areas (Skinner et al. 1978). Except for Texas wintergrass,
which produces seed in the spring, all of the grasses produce seed in the
(generally late) summer and in the fall Figure 2).
JAN 1

FEB

I MAR [ APRIL I MAY ~ JUNE I JULy I AUG I SEPT I

OCT t

NOV t DEC

[’,’,: Chinquapin oak";’;’;

ed muibe’r#";:l
I Fo~.grape,t
UBIQUITOUS BOTTOMLAND SPECIES l’"" Mustang grape

[ #~ack ha~Vo~.n

i: areen ha~horn,"t

I.,,,.,., Cor~! 9e~7 ,,,,.,,.,~
[,I,1<,’:,I,1,!. Soapberry .i,.,i,:<,i,1, .1
JAN I

FEB

I MAR 1 APRILI MAY ~ JUNE I JULy 1 AUG I SEPTI

CROSS TIMBERS BOTTOMS

OCT t

NOV l DEC

~-~.Post. o~k ~1
~,.~!v.o.o~k.J

JAN I

FEB

I MAR I APRIL[ MAY ~ JUNE I JULy I AUG 1 SEPTI

CROSS TIMBERS UPLANDS

OCT 1

NOV t DEC

I~. Blackjack oak

Figure 2. Chart showing seasonality of grass seeding in the Cross Timbers and Blackland
Prairie of Texas. Adapted from Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978:Table 14).

206

Texas Archeologicat Society

Aboriginal vegetal resources would have been found in the bottomland
areas as well as in stands of oaks in the upland areas of the Cross Timbers. In the
chart showing the seasonality of the major nongrass vegetal species (Figure 3), it
should be noted that there are no major species listed for the Blackland Prairie
uplands, which are thought to be almost exclusively grasslands. This figure
shows the productivity of the bottomlands of both biotic zones and their similarity; the Cross Timbers biotic zone differs from the Blackland Prairie only in the
addition of various oak species. The greatest potential resource production
period for both areas is fall, although both bottomland zones have secondary
fruiting seasons in the spring and available plant foods in summer, as well.
Limited largely to oak, the upland Cross Timbers is a major food resource
production area probably used almost exclusively during the fall.

JAN I FEB 1 MAR IAPRILI MAY

FEB

DEC

[:i:i:i:i’;:.’,:; Little Bluestem ::-:;:;:;:-:;~,;~.,:]

UB aU TOUS
JAN I

i JUNEI JULyI AUG 1 SEPTI OCT I NOV I

9 u,estem .::’":’N

I MAR I APRIL I MAY i JUNE I JULy’ 1 AUG I SEPT I

OCT I

NOV 1 DEC

! ’d an’glras’sl
;ROSS TIMBERS UPLANDS[~,X~%%,’~,\\"~IS,ide~Oa!s~ g~r~a}n’a" ,~\\\\\\"x~

JAN 1

FEB I MAR t APRILI MAY i JUNE I JULy’ I AUG I SEPT1

OCT t

NOV I DEC

Indian grass
BLACKLAND PRAIRIE UPLANDS
[

JAN I

FEB

{

I Prairie droplseed

Needle grass

I MAR t APRILI MAY i JUNE I JULy I AUG I SEPTI

OCT 1

NOV I DEC

Figure 3. Chart showing plant seasonality in the Cross Timbers and Blackland Prairie of
Texas. Adapted from Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978:Table 14).

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

207

The list of edible plants (Table 1) by no means exhausts the edible plants
available, many of which have been documented as used by historic Indian
groups and by early settlers. Nonetheless, the lack of both preserved botanical
remains and detailed ethnohistoric and ethnographic information from the area
hinders further investigation.
Elaboration of the Paleoenvironmental Model
The original SMU catchment model attempted quantification of the available faunal resources of the Aquilla Lake area, but no such model was created
for the floral resources of the area. Any attempt to recreate the paleoflora of a
disturbed ecosystem such as that in the study area is obviously fraught with
difficulties, but quantitative estimates of the modern vegetal communities were
unavailable for the area at the time of the original model (Skinner et al. 1978:152),
so the task was almost impossible. A more recent study by Texas A&M University (Slack and Marcy 1983), which provides valuable data on the density of
modern floral resources in the Aquilla Lake area, has been used here to estimate
the amounts of available floral resources.
Areal figures used for this reanalysis are ones provided by Southern Methodist University for the 20-km-diameter catchment circle around the Brazil site,
which was considered by them to be an example of a Late Archaic base camp
(Skinner et al. 1978:150). These figures include 15,450 ha of upland and 390 ha
of bottomland in the Blackland Prairie, 13,560 ha of upland and 1,640 ha of
bottomland in the Cross Timbers biotic province, and 360 ha of remnant terraces
that do not fall into either biotic zone. Although the potential food value of
grasses to the aboriginal inhabitants might have been great, the following estimates are confined primarily to hardwood nuts and fruits, which are thought to
have contributed a significant portion of the vegetal resources in the Aquilla
Lake area. The differential preservation of floral remains introduces considerable bias into quantitative analyses, but hardwood nuts are the primary vegetal
remains at many East Texas Caddo sites (Keller 1974:!42; Jackson 1981;
Perttula and Bruseth 1983:18-19).
For this study, only two major biomes are considered in estimating resource
potential. These are the riparian forests lining the creeks and major lateral
tributaries of both biotic zones and the oak savannah of the Cross Timbers
uplands. The bottomland area of both the Blackland Prairie and Cross Timbers is
assumed to be part grassland and part riparian forest. Although the percentages
of forest would have fluctuated through time, with perhaps much greater areas of
grassland occurring during both very wet and very dry climates, a figure of 50
percent riparian forest is assumed here for bottomland areas. In not precisely
comparable figures, the Slack and Marcy (1983) study recorded 278 ha of
riparian forest in the 4,133-ha project study area, which corresponds closely to
the actual lake area; this yields 6.7 percent riparian forest. In their broad study
area of 17,465 ha, which coi-responds more closely to the range of habitats found
in the catchment circle, only 394 ha of riparian forest was recorded, yielding 2.3

Texas Archeological Society

208

g

~=.-~o~
~

0

~

0

o

0

t~
o~

.-Z
.<
o~
~J

r~
0

oo
-o

o

~.~

~

;~.0

0~’~

~ ~ ~ ~:~.i
¯ ~’~
~
-~"~~.~.~:~
~"
~
~’~ ~.~ ~0"~ ~ ~’~ ~.
~ ~ ~-~’~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~.

¯~

~ ~

~

~.0 ~<~ ~.~

~ [b~ ~ ~,~.~

¯

0

~

_

o

~ 8~’~

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

209

percent riparian forest. Adding to this figure the 149 ha of developed riparian
land yields an overall figure of 3.1 percent potential riparian forest, which is
almost identical to the 3.2 percent figure from an estimation of 50 percent of the
catchment area bottomland as forested.
Reconstructing the vegetation of the upland Cross Timbers area is more
difficult. Slack and Marcy describe 1,029 ha (24.9 percent of the smaller study
area) as forest during the original 1979 survey (by the 1982 vegetation survey).
Additional forested acreage had been cleared, so the later figures are not used
here. This 1,029-ha figure includes some parkland and savannah, however, only
644 ha (15.6 percent) are described as woodland forest.
Despite recent lossses to cropland, the invasion of brushy species following
historic grazing and agriculture and the inlyoduction of modern fire control
measures may have contributed to increased woodland area in the Cross Timbers. An examination of Slack and Marcy’s less disturbed primary habitat
types---cedar elm woodland, oak woodland, pecan woodland, mesquite/cedar
elm parkland, mesquite woodland, mesquite savannah, and riparian woodland--shows that only one----oak woodland--approximates the original habitat. For the
sake of simplicity, the oak woodland habitat has been chosen to represent the
original forest, estimated as comprising only 10 percent of the total upland Cross
Timbers area. Admittedly, this figure may a gross underestimation of the extent
of the upland forest during moist climatic periods, but it provides a starting point
for further analysis. The remaining 90 percent of the upland and terrace areas is
assumed to be grasslands and is not considered further here.
Production figures used here (Tables 2, 3) are, with some adjustments,
extrapolated into the Aquilla Lake area from those reported by Keller (1974) for
similar species in East Texas. The climate at Aquilla Lake is drier than in East
Texas, so these figures may overestimate the available resources, but the overestimation of resources should be offset by the underestimation of upland forest.
Keller (1974:146-147) gives the average annual weight and the caloric value per
pound of fruit produced annually by many common species (Tables 2, 3).
The total estimated production from these two areas is 10,909,800,000
kilocalories, which is enormously greater than the 137,051,207 kilocalories
estimated for animal resource potential for the catchment area. However, the
bulk of the vegetal production is acorn production from the Cross Timbers
upland area, where the estimated percentage of forested area was set quite low.
The implications of this figure will be discussed in the concluding section of
this paper.
FAUNAL RESOURCES
The Paleoenvironmental Model
Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978) have discussed the Aquilla
Lake fauna in some detail, estimating animal population densities, potential
harvest rates, meat yields, and caloric values for several important game species.

210

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2.

Species
OVERSTORY
Quercus macrocarpa
(Bur oak)
Carya illinoiensis
(pecan)
Morus rubra
(Red mulberry)
Celtis laevigata
(Texas sugarberry)
Gleditsia triacanthos
(Honey locust)
Crataegus spathulata
(Pasture haw)
TOTAL

Productivity of Bottomland Forest
Annual
Kcal/b
Yield (Kg)
Kg

Total
Kcal

Density
(N/Ha)

Total
Treesa

4.5

4568

4.54

13.1

13297

22.68

22.4

22736

2.72

661

40.9x106

11.6

11774

2.72

441

14.1x106

7.4

7511

4.54

772

26.3x106

4.5

4568

2.49

551

6.3x106
1318.3x106

70.7

71761

9.07

2789

907.7X106

10.6

10759

2.72

661

9.7x106

196.4

199346

2.72

441

119.6x106

35.3

35830

4.54

772

61.5x106

50.7

51461

2.49

551

35.3x106
1133.8x106

3726

77.2x106

3825 1153.5x106

UNDERSTORYc
Carya texana
(Black hickory))
Morus rubra
(Red mulberry)
Celtis laevigata
(Texas sugarberry)
Gleditsia triacanthos
(Honey locust)
Crataegus spathulata
(Pasture haw)
TOTAL

BOTFOMLAND PRODUCTION

2452.1x106

a Kilocalories
b Based on half of the estimated bottomland, or 1015 ha.
c Understory kilocalorie figures halved to account for smaller yields and
immature trees.

These species include deer, racoon, opossum, turkey, cottontail, fox squirrel,
and blacktailed jackrabbit. Several other potential animal food resources are
listed, but no yield calculations are offered for individual species. The minor

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas
Table 3.

Species
OVERSTORY
Quercus stellata
(Post oak)
UNDERSTORYc
Quercus stellata
(Post oak)
Quercus marilandica
(Blackjack oak)
Crataegus spathulata
(Pasture haw)
TOTAL

211

Productivity of Cross Timbers Forest
Density
(N/Ha)

Total
Treesa

Annual Kcalb/Kg
Yield (Kg)

Total
Kilocal0ries

607.2

823363

1.68

3726

5148.8x106

593.4

804650

1.68

3726

2518.4x106

86 7

117565

3.45

3726

755.0x106

38.2

51799

2.49

551

35,3x106
3308.9X106

CROSS TIMBERS PRODUCTION

8457.7x106

aBased on 10% of upland Cross Timbers area or 1356 hectares.
bKilocalories
CUnderstory kilocalorie figures halved to account for smaller yields and immature
trees.
game resources consist of gray fox, coyote, bobcat, weasel, mink, striped skunk,
shrew, swamp rabbit, pocket mouse, gray squirrel, ground squirrel, muskrat,
gopher, rat, vole, woodchuck, otter, frog, toad, salamander, lizard, box turtle,
snakes, waterfowl, other birds, fish, and shellfish. Nutria, a historically introduced species (Burt and Grossenheider 1964:210), is incorrectly listed. Together, these minor species are estimated to comprise about one-fourth of the
total meat calories consumed by the aboriginal populace.
Deer are a major source of animal protein as projected for the aboriginal
population, providing almost 90 percent of meat consumed by weight (Table 4).
Since there are no data on the prehistoric capacity of the Cross Timbers and
Blackland Prairie to support deer, and the prehistoric population has become all
but extinct, these figures for deer, which are extrapolated from the ecologically
quite different Edwards Plateau area, may be too high. On the other hand, it is
probably realistic to expect deer to form the greatest single component of the
faunal assemblage.
After deer, whose available meat weight per individual is more than ten
times that of any other animal on the list, the fox squirrel, with the smallest
available meat weight, is listed as providing the greatest caloric addition to the
diet. Racoon and opossum each provide more than half of the caloric total of the
fox squirrel, while both lagomorph species each provide only about half of this
total. Wild turkey, with a meat weight equal to or larger than any of the smaller
mammals, provides only a minor fraction of the total calories. The minor species

212

Texas Archeological Society

Table 4.

Estimated Meat Yields and Caloric Values, Southern
Methodist University Catchment Model
Meat
Yield (Kg)

Species

Kcal/
Kg

Total
Kcala

Protein/
Kg

Total
Protein

PRIMARY RESOURCES

White-tailed deer
Raccoon
Opossum
Turkey

71,974
986
927
156

1,260

90,687,240

2,800

2,760,240

2,800
2,180

2,585,600
340,080

Cottontail

1,080

1,350

1,458,000

Fox squirrel
Black-tailed
jackrabbit
TOTAL

4,029

1,000

4,029,000

878

1350

1,185,3013
103,046,020

210

15,114,540

201
210

31,356
226,800

SECONDARY RESOURCES

Pocket mouse

Vole

Snake
Box turtle
Muskrat
Rat
Salamander
Frog

Swamp rabbit
Striped skunk
Gopher
Lizard

Bobcat
Shellfish
Waterfowl
Shrew
Weasel
Gray fox
TOTAL
GRAND TOTAL

Toad
Otter
Woodchuck
Fish
Birds
Ground squirrel
Mink
Coyote
34,005,187
137,051,207

a Kilocalories

listed in the paragraph above are not individually quantified by SMU but are
estimated to provide collectively an additional 34,005,187 kilocalories, or onethird of the 103,046,020 kilocalories estimated for the major game species.
Dividing 34,005,187 by the 28 potential minor game resources (excluding
nutria) yields 1,214,471 kilocalories per resource; each minor game resource
provided a contribution to the faunal diet equal to that of the jackrabbit. Of
course, all of these minor species were not likely to have been exploited with
equal diligence, and many animals not included on the list may have comprised
a significant minor portion of the diet. Fish and shellfish, for example, may have
played an important dietary role at some riverine sites.

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

213

The construction of a model describing the food resources potentially exploited by the aboriginal inhabitants in the Aquilla Lake area could be approached from the point of view of the biotic potential of the study area, as
Smith (1975) has done for Late Prehistoric populations in the upper part of the
Lower Mississippi Valley, or from the point of view of human subsistence
requirements, as done by Reidhead (1979) for Late Woodland populations in
Illinois. Although the parameters of a subsistence model, considering the current
knowledge of human nutritional needs, are much more likely to be recovered
than prehistoric faunal densities are, the complexities of such a model might
outweigh its utility. As Jochim (1983) has pointed out with respect to Reidhead’s
study, the actual data show a stronger correlation with biomass estimates than
with the Reidhead model.
SMU’s biotic potential model (Skinner et al. 1979) is similar in many
respects to Smith’s (1975), substituting locally available animal population
figures. Unfortunately, the study suffers from the lack of figures for the Cross
Timbers and Blackland Prairie biotic zones. Even if such figures were available,
the extent of historic land modification in these areas would make them
automatically suspect when extrapolated backwards to the prehistoric condition.
The difficulties in accurate paleofauna reconstruction render any model
questionable.
But even without such data, the SMU model can serve as a first approximation of the aboriginal resource exploitation of the area, i.e, a hypothesis to be
tested by the data.
McDonald Site Fauna: Quantifying the Paleoenvironmental Model
The McDonald site is a deeply buried prehistoric occupation site on the
floodplain adjacent to the modem channel of Hackberry Creek ~igure 1).
Cultural remains recovered from the site range between the Middle Archaic and
the Late Prehistoric periods. Most occupational debris accumulated during the
Late Prehistoric period and, in addition to lithics and ceramics collected from
the site, an excellent sample of faunal remains was recovered. The site is divided
into two areas by a gully that apparently follows an old creek channel. Area A is
closest to the modern channel, and Area B is across the paleochannel to the east.
Both areas have extensive and possibly contemporaneous deposits of Late
Prehistoric occupational debris. Cultural strata sloping toward the creek, observed in a backhoe trench cut laterally into the creek bank, indicate that the
modem channel was active at least during the Late Prehistoric occupation; i.e,
during the occupation the site was on the river bank and probably was surrounded by riparian forest. The riparian woodland--possibly a virgin stand-that surrounded the site at the time of excavation in 1982, had a remarkable
diversity of species, and was relatively clear of undergrowth. Although no
stumps were evident, it is possible that some hardwoods were logged out of the
bottoms during the nineteenth or early twentieth century.
A few hundred meters to the east of the site, an oak forest covers the valley

214

Texas Archeological Society

slopes and the deeply incised drainages that cut back into them. Because of the
unsuitability of these slopes for agriculture, it is unlikely that this area has been
cleared in the past. Between the riparian woodland and the oak forest is a strip of
grassland that extends to the creek south of the site. Much or all of this grassland
may be land that was cleared for agriculture, but, if partly natural (i.e., if it is part
of SMU’s grassy lowland zone described above), it would have been part of a
relatively large edge forest that would have made the area attractive to deer and
other species that exploit diverse resources.
Above the oak-lined hillsides are rolling hills that are now almost completely cleared and cultivated. Although patches of the hillside forest would
have extended over the top and spilled out onto the rolling hills, as they do now,
these fields are at the west edge of the Blackland Prairie, which begins only
about half a kilometer east of the site. (For a more detailed discussion of the
environment, see the site descriptions in Peter, Brown and Jackson (1987) and
Brown, Watson, Peter, and Rawn-Schatzinger (1987)).
The Brazil site, a few kilometers west of the McDonald site (Figure 1), also
represents occupation over a long period of time, with artifacts ranging between
the Early Archaic and the Late Prehistoric periods. The environmental setting of
the Brazil site is similar in many respects to that of the McDonald site. Situated
on a low alluvial terrace, it abuts the modem floodplain of Aquilla Creek, but it
is some distance from the modem channel; an apparent filled channel, which
marks the east edge of the site, may have been the course of the creek at the time
of occupation. The Brazil site is somewhat closer to upland slope and upland
forested areas than the McDonald site, but, because the slope and forest follow a
narrow projecting finger ridge, the Brazil site is nevertheless much farther from
the main upland landform. Although oak forest still grows on the projecting
upland remnant, only a very thin strip of riparian woodland remains along the
edge of the stream in this area.
A major distinction between the two sites is that the Brazil site is near the
east edge of the Cross Timbers, whereas the McDonald site is at the extreme
west edge of the Blackland Prairie. The immediate environments of both are,
however, similarly riparian. The major differences between the two are the
closeness of the Brazil site to oak forest, which it abuts and actually extends on
to, and the possible distance of the Brazil site from major upland prairie areas.
Faunal materials (Table 5) were collected during the three seasons of
excavation at the McDonald site (see Brown et al. 1987). All of the material described here was recovered from quarter-inch-mesh screen, so the smaller species are underrepresented. Dry screening was carried out at the first two seasons
of excavation; water screening was used during the third season, a change that
may have affected the sample recovery.
The faunal data are grouped by broad cultural strata. The shallower excavations in Area A included some Late Archaic material, but, because of the
difficulty in matching stratigraphy between widely separated test excavations,
the small sample of Late Archaic materials cannot be separated out. It is estimated that the total faunal sample from Area A probably includes less than 10

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

215

percent Late Archaic material. In Area B, the divisions between the cultural
strata were more easily identified, but, since the diagnostic markers were limited
in number, the divisions may not always have been equally precise. The larger
amounts of material in the upper strata of Area A primarily reflect larger
excavation unit sizes, but there was also some decrease in the quality of bone
preservation with depth.
Faunal figures (Table 5) are for number of identified specimens (NISP)
rather than for minimum numbers of individuals (MNI). MNI figures are generally preferable, since they make it possible to calculate meat yield per individual
animal more accurately, but such calculations present several problems. Binford
(1978) has criticized the standard calculation of meat yield from MNI based on
differential utilization of animal parts. Yates (1982) has pointed out the difficulties in calculating MNI from small samples where many species are represented
by only one or two bones. Additionally, the McDonald site faunal analysis was
conducted by two different analysts over three seasons of investigation. A
combination of the MNI figures, based on different elements for each season,
has been attempted in the Aquilla Lake excavation report (Brown et al. 1987)
but these are probably underestimates of the actual figures. Even while recognizing the potential for errors that can result from the comparison of SMU’s
kilocalorie figures with NISP faunal material figures, an approximation still can
be generated. In such a comparison, differential recovery becomes important.
White-tailed Deer (Odocoileus virginianus)
As predicted by the SMU catchment analysis model, the white-tailed deer is
apparently the most commonly exploited faunal resource at the McDonald site.
Based solely on the frequency of bones identified to the the species level alone,
white-tailed deer comprise 10.4 percent of the McDonald site faunal remains.
The intentional fragmentation of deer bone for marrow complicates the interpretation of this percentage, since many bones probably attributable to this species
have been fragmented beyond identification. In fact, all of the bone fragments
identified simply as large mammal remains probably represent large artiodactyls
other than bison (which is included in the extra large mammal category or in the
bison category, based on bone wall thickness). In the Aquilla Lake area, such
artiodactyls are limited to white-tailed deer and pronghorn (Antilocapra americana). Pronghorn remains have been identified from the McDonald site and
from other Central Texas sites, but the density of this grassland-loving species
was apparently low in aboriginal Central Texas, and they may represent only a
tiny fraction of the total large mammal remains. The modern distribution of
pronghorns is restricted to the western half of Texas from the panhandle to the
lower Rio Grande area (Davis 1974:248). On the other hand, pronghorn remains
are difficult to identify without relatively complete articular surfaces on bone
elements, so some misidentification of material is possible. A third possibility is
the occurrence of an occasional mule deer (Odocoileus hemionis), but the usual
range of this species is much farther to the west and it is not expected in the

2,16

Texas Archeological Society

,~’<l c

=
o

<

.

~

~c
2
o

~

Brown -- Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

oO

6
oo

00o0

000~

o

~O0000000000~

0

oo

,-~ %0

0000 0

un

O00000000000~

N
~ o o [’- o

d~

000000~00000~

ddddddddddddo od
m

dddd d

~
t~

d
0000000000000

(-,1 ~

d~
t’N 0

<

=

M

<

o

0

217

218

Texas Archeological Society

~O~~O00C

~dd~d~dc

~- oO.i
el

el
o
el

~q~qq%qq~c

~.

.ol ~

~.

ol

iz

<

o

kO

,,q

oI

0£.

m
el

OI

"~-

el
t-’,q
el

ol

~0~0~0~0 el

OI

4d4dd~dddd

,-4

ol

00

m

el

el

el

~:~

m

t¢3
~ ~ ~0~ 0 ~ ~ ~

t’~

~

<

~- ~,~ ~ ¯
~a

ge
g
>=,g>

Brown m Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

219

Aquilla Lake fauna. At present, their range is restricted to the Trans-Pecos area
and parts of the High Plains (Davis 1974:254).
A total of 71.1 percent of all the identifiable faunal remains from the
McDonald site is attributed to large mammals. If these are assumed to be whitetailed deer, the total percentage of deer remains would be 81.5, a figure even
greater than the 66.2 percent meat yield predicted by SMU. Comparing such
figures is, of course, unrealistic. Bone for bone, white-tailed deer yield a much
larger quantity of meat, on the order of ten times as much as other commonly
exploited small mammals (Skinner et al. 1978) Contrasted with this is the
extreme fragmentation of deer bone at the McDonald site, suggesting that
marrow extraction was an important activity. The true percentage of exploitation
may be somewhat closer to a figure suggested by a comparison of the MNI
figures for all species.
Whatever the method of accounting, it is clear that white-tailed deer was the
single most important faunal resource at the McDonald site, both in terms of
individuals and caloric yield, a not uncommon finding in Texas prehistoric sites.
At Bear Creek shelter on nearby Lake Whitney (Murry 1978), white-tailed deer
comprise the single most numerous identified species throughout most of the
cultural strata, ranging between a low of 1.4 percent in the Middle Archaic
levels and 6.9 percent in the Austin phase materials. Deer are underrepresented
in the Late Archaic (where specimens ofSigmodon hispidus are more numerous)
and particularly in the Middle Archaic (where at least 10 species are more
numerous), but the addition of fragmentary material identified only as large
artiodactyls increases these totals dramatically. Combined deer and large artiodactyl percentages (which presumably do not include bison, generally rare at
the site) range between a low of 13.1 percent for the Middle Archaic and a high
of 37.3 percent for the Austin phase. It is not clear whether the low frequencies
of deer in Late and Middle Archaic levels are a function of the low sample size
in these two strata or actually represent lower utilization during these periods.
White-tailed deer are also the most numerous single identified species
throughout the various strata at the Kyle site (Lundelius 1962). Other Lake
Whitney sites show similar figures (Stephenson 1970). Farther to the south,
white-tailed deer are the most numerous species represented at both the Baylor
and Britton sites at Lake Waco, although the total sample is relatively small in
both cases (Story and Shafer 1965). The pronghorn is also represented by a few
bones at both the Baylor and Britton sites and at the Kyle site.
For sites with a sample size of more than 100 bones at the North Fork and
Granger reservoirs on the San Gabriel River (Yates 1982), white-tailed deer
ranged from a low of 4 percent in the Clear Fork horizon at 41WM73 up to 46
percent in the San Marcos component at 41WM124. White-tailed deer are the
most numerous single species present at nine of the 15 sites with larger
sample sizes.
The importance of white-tailed deer at the McDonald site cannot be overstated. As noted above, deer comprised both the greatest number of individuals
captured and the probable largest animal caloric addition to the diet. However it

220

Texas Archeological Society

is indeed possible that animal resources that are not represented by large numbers of bones were exploited at the site. Such unrecorded contributions could
have come from the use of dried meats or from butchering larger animals where
they were killed, with only the meat being brought to camp. Although almost
any animal might have been butchered away from the camp, the most important
single resource, in addition to deer, that presents a transportation problem is
bison. Bison bones are present in small quantity at the McDonald site, but, for a
number of reasons, bison are thought to have made only a minimal contribution
to the overall subsistence at the site.
Although it is not possible to quantify readily the actual caloric intake from
deer meat, the 66.2 percent figure estimated by SMU may be nearly correct. This
brings up two important points. One, the prehistoric population at the McDonald
site, and perhaps throughout the Aquilla Lake area, appears to have been highly
dependent upon deer as a food source. Too, an aboriginal population of any size
might well have placed some stress upon the reproductive potential of the deer
population, an important point because, although the enormous reproductive
potential of deer populations is well known (see Smith 1975:24-26 and McCullough 1979:44-46), deer populations tend to be controlled, by exogenous factors,
primarily available subsistence base and predators. Fluctuating deer populations, caused either by excess predation from increased human population density or reduced subsistence resources from drought or extreme cold, may have,
in turn, placed some stress upon the aboriginal population.
The dangers of specialization in a single resource are clear, particularly if
that resource has any hint of instability. The percentage of deer in the diet
suggests such extreme specialization, but it must be remembered that only the
caloric intake from animals is considered here, since no botanical information
has been preserved that might give an indication of the contribution made by
plant foods to the diet. In fact, many ethnographically documented groups find a
significant portion of their subsistence in plant foods.
Turtles
Since it is almost impossible to calculate accurately the number of individuals represented from a sample of turtle carapace and plastron fragments, it is
difficult to estimate the proportion of the McDonald site inhabitants’ diet that
was made up of turtle meat. The issue is further complicated by the fact that
turtle shell has a unique structure and may deteriorate somewhat differently
from other bone. Nonetheless, it is clear that turtles, not considered a major food
source in the SMU catchment analysis, were an important source of food
throughout most of the occupation of the McDonald site.
The figures of 4.6 percent for pond sliders and 13.7 percent for all turtles are
of little value except perhaps for comparison to percentages of turtle shell flagments from other sites. The 2,799 shell fragments from the McDonald site could
represent as few as 20 or 25 individuals or perhaps many more. Estimating meat

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

221

yield is also difficult when the age, size, and species of most of the specimens is
not known (most of the shell fragments could not be identified as to species).
Seven turtle species have been identified in the McDonald site fauna,
including include two species of the genus Chrysemys---Chrysemys scripta, the
pond slider, and C. concinna, the cooter--which comprise the largest portion of
the sample. Shell fragments from Terrapene ornata, the western box turtle, are a
little more than a fifth as numerous as the Chrysemys specimens. Three species,
Chelydra serpentina (snapping turtle), Trionyx cf. spiniferous (spiny softshell
turtle), and Graptemys sp., (map turtle), are represented by only a few
specimens each.
At Bear Creek shelter (Murry 1978), turtles are also an important resource,
ranging between 9.9 percent in the Middle Archaic zone and 28.0 percent in the
Austin phase stratum. T. spiniferous comprises nearly all of the identified
sample (Murry 1978:56). At the nearby Kyle shelter (Lundelius 1962), turtles,
listed as softshell and miscellaneous, comprised only a small portion of the total
sample.
Turtle shell is found throughout most of the units at the Baylor site in
McClennan County, comprising nearly 30 percent of the identified bone elements (Story and Shafer 1965:132-133). It is somewhat less common at the
nearby Britton site, where it comprises less than 10 percent of the elements
identified. Only one individual genus was identified, Trionyx sp., from a single
element in each of the two sites.
Still further to the south in the North Fork and Granger reservoirs, turtle
elements ranged between barely half a percent of the total in the Late Prehistoric
cultural strata at 41WM230 and more than 20 percent at the Clear Fork component at 41WM56 and the mixed Clear Fork and Round Rock component in Area
B of 41WM73. The pond slider appears to be the most frequently exploited
species by a slight margin, but softshell (Trionyx sp.), yellow mud (Kinosternon
flavescens), and other kinosterninae (musk and mud turtles) are strongly represented among water turtles, and box turtles (Terrapene ornata) are also quite
common.
The recovery of various turtle elements from a riverine site that has also
yielded fish and pelycypod remains is not surprising. However, land turtles were
also used, and, after the pond slider, the box turtle is the most common identified
genus. Various species of turtles are found in all cultural levels at the site, but
they are generally most common in the Late Prehistoric levels, where they
account for nearly a third of all elements recorded (31.0 percent in levels 8-13).
They are also most common in the Late Prehistoric levels at Bear Creek shelter
(Murry 1978), but this trend does not extend to the Late Prehistoric sites in the
North Fork and Granger Lake areas (Yates 1982).
Little has been written about the aboriginal exploitation of freshwater turtles,
but Smith (1975:10-14,100-102) specifically lists snapping turtles (Chelydrinae) as a secondary food resource of the Middle Mississippi groups, ranking

222

Texas Archeological Society

ninth overall in total projected meat yield at the sites in his study.
speculates that

He

it is entirely possible, of course, that snapping turtles, and other species of
aquatic turtles, were never deliberately hunted, but rather were collected along
with fish during the continual summer harvest from ever-diminishing shallow
backwater lake areas [Smith 1975:102].

Such a possibility seems remote at many Central Texas sites where turtle
carapace fragments greatly outnumber fish bones and scales, but this difference
may be a function of the poor preservation of fish bone and the relatively
excellent preservation of carapace and plastron. In any case, turtles may never
have been actively hunted, but only gathered when observed basking on shoals
or foraging on banks.
Ubelaker and Hall (1972:248-249) report eleven different species of turtles
in the modem Aquilla Lake project area, but Slack and Marcy (1983) were able
to document only five species in their more recent study. The aboriginal remains
include at least six species (note: Chrysemys includes two species, scripta, the
pond slider, and concinna, the river cooter, both of which were recorded in the
sample but were combined in Table 5). The aboriginal specimens represent all of
the groups that have been reported in the area, except for the family Kinosternidae and one genus in the family Emydidae, suggesting that the aboriginal
population was not highly selective in its choices.
Small Mammals
No other single resource approaches deer or turtle in the total number of
elements identified in the sample, with the exception of shellfish, which, though
numerous, may not have been as important as small mammals to the McDonald
site diet. Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsch (1978), in their catchment
analysis of the Aquilla Lake area, projected five small mammals--racoon,
opossum, cottontail, fox squirrel, and blacktailed jackrabbit--as significant
secondary resources (after white-tailed deer) for the aboriginal population. In
their projections, the greatest total caloric contribution was made by the fox
squirrel; racoon and then opossum, both with fewer individuals captured but
greater body weights, each contributed a little less than three-fourths of the
squirrel total. Next in order of importance were the cottontail, which contributed
less than a third of the squirrel total, and the blacktailed jackrabbit, which
contributed slightly more than a fourth of the squirrel total.
All of the projected species are found at the McDonald site, though clearly
none of them contribute the estimated amounts. Bones of the cottontail, Sylvilagus
sp., the most numerous, are more than twice as common as the other four
purportedly major small mammals combined. The ratio of identified deer bone
to cottontail bone is about 37:1. Based on the meat yield estimates of 45 kg (100
pounds) for deer and 79 kg (1.75 pounds) for rabbit, the meat yield ratio is
2,100:1. This calculation assumes, albeit somewhat tenuously, that the number

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

223

of individuals consumed is directly proportional to the number of identifiable
bone elements at the site. Although there are certain problems with this assumption, notably potentially different preservation and differential breakage for
marrow consumption (i.e., the larger deer bones probably would have been
broken more frequently for marrow), the ratio is still vastly greater than the 67:1
ratio predicted by the SMU catchment model. This suggests that rabbit and the
other small mammals were less heavily exploited than was predicted. Using the
same calculating procedure, a total deer-to-small-mammal meat yield ratio (using weight estimates from Skinner et al. 1978) at the McDonald site is 1,072:1,
which compares quite unfavorably to the meat yield ratio of 9:1 predicted from
the SMU model.
Except for rodents, which form a comparatively small portion of the
McDonald site fauna, some of which may be recent, only two other small mammals are recorded--beaver and wolf (as well as other unidentified canid remains). At the McDonald site a wolf, found in the upper levels of Area A, is a
nearly complete skeleton and apparently postdates the aboriginal occupation at
the site. The other canid remains, all from Area B, are probably from at least
three individuals and may be dog or coyote. Beaver is represented by eight
elements, including several teeth and a mandible fragment, from both areas at
the site.
Small mammals are a somewhat more prominent part of the faunal assemblage at the nearby Bear Creek shelter at Lake Whitney (Lynott 1978). Cottontail is by far the most common, with an elemental ratio of identified deer bone to
rabbit bone of less than 3:1. Using the SMU meat weight figures, this would
yield a meat weight ratio of 458:1, showing a much greater proportion of rabbit
than at the McDonald site. The range of small mammals represented at the Bear
Creek shelter site is about the same as at the McDonald site, without any
specimens of opossum, but with skunk (Mephitis mephitis) and bobcat (Lynx
rufus) represented by a few elements each.
At the North Fork and Granger Lake areas, cottontail percentages (in sites
with larger samples) are from less than 1 percent to nearly 15 percent of all
bones, with the lowest percentages apparently occurring in Late Archaic (Twin
Sisters phase) and Late Prehistoric sites (Yates 1982). Blacktailed jackrabbit is
the second most important small mammal in most of the larger sites, with beaver
a distant third. Fox squirrels are found at many sites in very low percentages,
and opossum and racoon are found sporadically in variable percentages. Badger
(Taxidea taxa), not noted in any of the Hill County sites (except for a few
elements recorded at the Kyle site (Lundelius 1962)), is found in several North
Fork and Granger sites.
Although the five small mammals predicted to be secondary food resources
after deer in the Aquilla Lake aboriginal diet are present in the faunal remains
from the McDonald site, it is clear that they do not comprise the proportion
anticipated in the catchment analysis. How much of this reduced proportion is
due to differential preservation or treatment of the bone and how much is due to

224

Texas Archeological Society

actual underutilization of these resources is uncertain, but it is suggested that the
figures represent an overall emphasis of larger mammals, particularly deer.
Despite its small size, the cottontail appears to be the most important small
mammal, both numerically and in total meat yield, at the McDonald site, just as
in many other Central Texas sites. Fox squirrel, predicted to be the second
greatest contributor to the animal portion of the diet, is barely present, as are the
other larger members of this group (racoon and opossum, and the other leporid,
theblacktailed jackrabbit). The samples of each of these other small mammals
are so small that it is difficult to determine whether any one made a larger
contribution than the others. It is interesting to note that all of the projected
secondar¢ small mammals besides cottontails were recovered from Late Prehistoric parts of the site. Although it is tempting to suggest a dependence on a wider
variety of resources during the Late Prehistoric, the large Late Prehistoric
sample and the low overall sample size suggest that such differences might well
be attributed to sampling methods.
The reason for the predominance of the cottontail in this sample may lie in
their overall density or in the relative ease with which rabbits can be caught. Fox
squirrels, since they are arboreal and perhaps slightly more difficult to snare,
and provide only a small meat yield, might be expected to be exploited only
minimally. Racoon and opossum, although larger than the rabbit and providing
more meat, are nocturnal animals and may occur at lower density levels than the
rabbit. Further, although the Hill County area appears to be within the range of
the blacktailed jackrabbit (Hulbert 1984), the cottontail is much more common.

Mussels
Shellfish are clearly one of the most important supplementary resources at
the McDonald site, possibly far surpassing the minor role assigned to them in the
SMU catchment analysis model (Brown et al. 1987, Neck 1987). Although the
evidence is difficult to assess, mussel might well be the most important dietary
element after white-tailed deer at the site (Table 6).
A calculation of the approximate meat weight (using approximations from
Brown 1987b:Table 39.3) of the minimum number of individuals from identified specimens (about half of the total sample) at the site gives a total meat
weight of 27.5 kg, equal to the weight of about 22 cottontails or more than half a
single deer. Mussels, however, have only slightly more than half the calories and
protein per gram that deer or rabbit meat have, so the numbers must be adjusted
accordingly to account for the nutritional properties of mussel.
Obviously, like other secondary resources at the site, mussels are only a
fraction of the white-tailed deer totals. They do, however, compare quite favorably with other minor resources at the site, such as rabbit and turtle. Although
turtle cannot be quantified accurately, the comparison between mussel and
rabbit suggests that mussel may have been a more important contributor to the
diet, since the total MNI for rabbits (although not formally calculated) probably
lies at about 10 individuals. If the unsampled mussel is estimated and the caloric

Brown m Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas
o.

~~~0~~

o
o

,.S

0~~~~

o~

~D

~O~O000000~C

o.

~

¢q

m

~D

,q.

~dd~dddd4ddC

oo
¢xl

0

[...,

Z

¯= _~
0

00
L,%

,d
~0~0~0~00~
.......°0...,

¢q

~o~z~~oo-

o

¯~

~

s~ ~-~u ~ ~-~

"~ ~ e~a~

o

225

226

Texas Archeological Society

calculations are made, it would leave the mussel at just under twice the caloric
potential of the 10 rabbits. Preservation factors must be taken into account,
however, as well as the differences in methods of counting minimum number of
individuals. With the small sample size, it is difficult to evaluate accurately the
dietary contribution of any one species, but, at the McDonald site,.mussel may
equal the contribution of all small mammals, in bulk weight if not in caloric
importance.
It is not easy to compare molluscan fauna between sites because of widely
differing collection techniques. At the McKenzie site, the other major mussel
consumption site at Aquilla Lake, the order of prominence of the species collected is nearly identical to that at the McDonald site. At both sites, Amblema
plicata is the most important species, with Lampsilis hydiana the most important
secondary species. Quadrula apiculata comprises a substantial percentage of
the assemblage from both sites; L. teres makes up a large portion of the McDonald
site pelycypod fauna. At Bear Creek shelter (Lynott 1978:71), A. plicata is a
relatively minor species, falling fourth after Obovaria olivaria, Cyrtonaias
tampicoensis, and Potamilus purpuratus. O. olivaria was not recorded from the
Aquilla Lake sites (nor, as Lynott [1978:72] notes, had it been previously
recorded anywhere in Texas), and the latter two were very minor components.
Both L. hydiana and L. teres are only minor species at Bear Creek shelter. The
similarity among the Aquilla Creek mussel assemblages and the differences
between these and the Bear Creek shelter faunas probably parallels the differences that different flow regimes and different sedimentary contexts produce in
the indigenous assemblages that existed between these two streams
Bison (Bison bison)
The contribution of bison to the diet of the inhabitants of the McDonald site
is not entirely clear. Numerically, skeletal elements of bison comprise the
second largest identified mammal species at the site, accounting for almost three
times the cottontail total Since a full-grown bison may yield as many as 500
times as much meat as a rabbit; (see Roe 1970:57-61 for bison size ranges), the
potential contribution of bison at the site is significant.
Despite the enormous potential significance of bison as a food resource, its
overall contribution to the inhabitants of the McDonald site may have been
negligible through time. In the first place, bison has a restricted distribution at
the site, generally occurring only in the uppermost (Late Prehistoric) cultural
levels. No bison bone was recovered below level 8 in Area B or below the top
cultural level in Area A (Table 5). Secondly, perhaps only two individuals are
represented by the large number of bones---one in Area A and one in Area B.
The specimen in Area B, a juvenile only tentatively identified as a bison, was
found stratigraphically above the Late Prehistoric cultural layers in a stratum
that yielded a few other bones and very few tiny flakes. Cut marks on the
specimen suggest that it was butchered, but the absence of tools or significant
quantities of debitage in the layer with the bones suggests that the bones

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

227

represent a single individual that was killed and butchered on the spot after the
last major campsite occupation in Area B. Finally, because of its size, bison is
identifiable (in prehistoric contexts) from only small fragments of bone, thus
skewing upward its potential contribution.
Other Faunal Resources
One other animal, the turkey (Meleagris galopavo), was listed separately by
SMU in its secondary faunal resources from the Aquilla Lake area (Skinner et al.
1978); 29 other species or animal groups are included in the additional potential
game resources category. Of these other species, turtles and shellfish have been
described above as important secondary resources, and beaver has been included
with the small mammal group. Many of the remaining additional potential game
resources are absent, or they are found in such small numbers that they would
have been of questionable value as food resources.
In addition to turtles and shellfish, fish were probably of some importance
at the site, adding to the inhabitants’ full exploitation of the available resources
of the site’s riverine setting. However, fish remains are not found in great
quantity, and it is not clear whether this is due to only minimal use of fish, the
poor preservation of fish bones, or perhaps a special method of disposal. The
most common single item is gar scales (Lepisosteus sp.), which survive well and
are found in some quantity in Area A and throughout the Late Prehistoric levels
in Area B (Table 5). However, the total number of scales found is small, much
less than the total on a single fish. Bones from the bass family (Centrarchidae)
and catfish (Ictalurus sp.) were also identified No fish remains were recovered
from the Archaic levels at the site.
In the faunal sample from the site are several different species of birds, not
all of which may have been consumed by the inhabitants. Turkey bones are the
most common, primarily from Area A, but five other species are present as well.
Crow (Corvus brachyus) was represented by three bones in Area A. The remaining specimens, all represented by single elements, include an unidentified duck
or teal (Anas sp.), a hawk (Buteo sp.), a member of the finch or sparrow family
(Fringillidae), and a bobwhite quail (Colinus virginianus). The hawk bone is the
only identified bird bone from the Archaic levels at the site.
Rodents are fairly common at the site, but much less common than at Bear
Creek shelter on Lake Whitney (Lynott 1978). Beaver, which may have contributed a small amount to the subsistence of the site’s inhabitants, has been
mentioned above. Most of the remaining rodents are smaller, and, although their
bones outnumber those of many other species, it is not at all clear that they
contributed much, if anything, to the diet at the site. Some of the rodent bones
appear to be more recent; some individuals may have died in burrows after the
occupation of the site. Only a few, if any, of the bones can be convincingly noted
as burned or broken by human agency.
The relatively small size of the faunal sample from the site and the predominance of deer make any comparative study of these minor food resources

228

Texas Archeological Society

statistically meaningless. Many of the species included here, the bones of some
of which were burned or spirally fractured, were obviously utilized by the
inhabitants, but some of the species may have been incidental to the site. In a
study of the burned and spirally fractured bones from the 1980 excavation
season at the McDonald site, in addition to many specimens from turtle, deer,
and various other mammals, only one blackened turkey bone, and slightly
charred single specimens from an indeterminate fish and a crotalid snake were
found (Brown et al. 1987). In contrast, more than 6 percent of all identifiable
deer bones were burned (and a much greater percentage of indeterminate large
mammal bone fragments). With the exception of a single turkey bone, spiral or
green bone fractures occurred only on mammal bones.
Interpretations
As noted above, white-tailed deer remains comprise the largest sample from
the site. Adding to their number the indeterminate large mammal remains,
which, as previously noted, should consist primarily of white-tailed deer, yields
a proportion that is close to the SMU estimate of deer as providing about twothirds of the available animal calories. This comes as no surprise, since deer,
which are large and not difficult to catch, are certainly an attractive resource.
Deer are the predominant species in almost all faunal samples from Central or
East Texas sites. Their bones are found in the largest numbers at both open sites
and rockshelters along the Balcones Escarpment, as seen at the North Fork and
Granger Lake areas and at Lake Whitney, further to the north. They are also the
most important faunal resource by meat yield at many East Texas sites such as
the George C. Davis site (41CE19) in Cherokee County (Keller 1974:158) and
the Tadlock site (x41WD39) on Lake Fork Creek in Wood County (Perttula and
Bruseth 1983).
For these reasons, the high percentage of deer has very little significance for
specialized adaptations at the site, since most sites (except for short-term special
activity sites such as the McKenzie site at Aquilla Lake reported by Brown
1987b) will have such assemblages. On the other hand, the high percentage of
deer suggests a clear, but not exclusive, dependence on this resource.
Some attempts to model prehistoric resource utilization in other parts of the
country have indicated that deer might not be the primary resource (at least not
throughout the entire year) in a least-cost-resource-procurement solution.
Reidhead (1980) predicted that deer would rank fourth in Late Woodland animal
utilization at the Leonard Haag site in Illinois, with fish, mussel, and turtle
ranking higher in a four seasonal aggregate model. However, examination of
faunal remains from the sites showed that deer ranked first, with fish, mussel,
and turtle falling way behind, ranked tenth, eleventh and ninth respectively.
In attempting to explain the differences between the model and the actual
recovered animal remains, Reidhead notes that mussels and turtles were included in the model because they are rich sources of calcium. If the calcium
needs of the population were satisfied in some other way, for instance, from the

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

229

calcium-rich water in the limestone bedrock area, then mussels and turtles
would drop out of the optimal solution altogether, moving the hypothetical
ranking of deer second only to fish. Jochim (1983), however, argues that the
nutritional model offered by Reidhead is needlessly complex and that a simple
model based on animal size and abundance more closely approximates the
actual ranking found at the site.
The SMU catchment analysis is essentially a size-abundance model like the
one Jochim feels might be more suited to the Leonard Haag data than to
Reidhead’s model, which uses not only size and abundance but nutritional data
and a measure of procurement costs as well. Yet the lack of fit for the SMU
model, except for deer and, perhaps, cottontail, is striking. Two factors may
account for this lack of fit. One, incorrect data on species abundance for the
Aquilla Lake area may have altered the model. Two, other factors such as
nonfood resource values, nutritional deficiencies, unusually high procurement
costs, and socio-cultural factors such as prestige and taboos may alter the
equation. In fact, all of these factors are possible contributors to the inaccuracies
in the solution.
In the first place, although there is little hard data, the exclusion of turtles
and mussels from the primary resources may be a mistake based on underestimation of abundance. Unfortunately, no quantitative data are available for the
occurrence of either resource in the Aquilla Lake or southern Cross Timbers
area. Both reproduce themselves rather slowly, however, and, in view of the
relatively small area of aquatic habitat in the catchment area, it is unlikely that
they would rival the cottontail in total annual harvestable yield. On the other
hand, they may be numerically more important than many of the other small
mammals or bird species.
The lack of adequate quantification makes further speculation difficult, but
one point is important. It was noted above that a possible reason for the apparent
underrepresentation of the fox squirrel in faunal collections is the presumed high
procurement cost relative to the size of meat yield. Procurement costs may be a
factor in the exploitation of turtles and mussel. Mussels, whose search-time
costs vary with the level of knowledge of the area and the preferred habitat
types, have essentially no pursuit costs and may require only minimal preparation. Turtles, which can be caught easily as they bask in the sun, are perhaps
easier to cook than many small mammals.
It could, of course, be speculated, as maintained by Reidhead, that turtles
and mussels were important to the aboriginal Aquilla Lake population for their
calcium content. The absence of extensive limestone deposits in the Aquilla
Lake area might have made the acquisition of calcium a resource procurement
behavior selected for through time. If aquatic resources were important as
providers of calcium, it might also indicate that the local groups did not spend
much time in the west along the limestone bluffs and calcium-rich waters of the
Brazos River.
As predicted by the SMU catchment analysis model, data from the McDonald
site indicate that deer were a primary food resource. This was the case at the

230

Texas Archeological Society

Leonard Haag site (Reidhead 1980), the Tadlock site (Perttula and Bruseth
1983), and in the two faunal exploitation models that served as primary inspirations for the SMU model--the Middle Mississippi study of Smith (1975) and the
Davis site Caddo study of Keller (1974). At the McDonald site, however, deer
appear to make an even more important contribution to the animal diet than
predicted by the model. The underrepresentation of lesser-ranked species in the
diet may be an indication that there was no stress on the total resources of the
area, so that only the most highly prized resources needed be taken. Such a
condition could come about if plant foods contributed heavily to the diet and
meat was only a supplement, perhaps as important to prestige as to nutrition.
The other major possible causal factor might be a human population density well
below the predicted carrying capacity.
It would be no surprise to find that plant foods did not contribute greatly to
the Aquilla Lake diet, nor would it be surprising to find that the population was
maintained well below the theoretical carrying capacity. Such conditions are not
unknown in ethnographically documented hunter and gatherer populations.
However, it would be difficult, if not impossible, to evaluate these possibilities
in the light of the available data. Even data from pollen or plant macrofossils
would not provide estimates of the true dietary mix. Although unlikely, it is
possible that the dietary mix could be detected from coprolites that might be
recovered from cave sites in the region, since some remarkably preserved
coprolites were recovered from the Kyle site at Lake Whitney (Jelks 1962)
RETHINKING THE MODEL
Aquilla Lake Subsistence Economy
Even without evidence for the actual diet of the aboriginal inhabitants of
Aquilla Lake, it is reasonable to speculate on the overall exploitation of resources in the study area. Two important conclusions are clear. First, whitetailed deer, almost to the exclusion of all other species, were a source of animal
protein. If the number of bones can be taken as an indication, then as much as 90
percent of all faunal kilocalories were provided by deer. In fact, the 90 percent
figure may be an underestimation of the importance of deer. Second, the enormous
amount of plant food resources that were available provided a relatively stable,
if somewhat cyclic, diet with a potential caloric yield as much as a hundred
times greater than the yield from faunal resources in the Aquilla Lake area.
The emphasis on deer among faunal resources may be an indication, as
noted above, of the absence of resource scarcity in the local population and the
concentration on the primary resource. It should be remembered, however, that
the extreme emphasis on deer at the McDonald site is not necessarily the rule at
other Central Texas sites. Deer are frequently the single most important species,
but they are not always as dominant as they are at the McDonald site, and the
data from a single campsite at Aquilla Lake are not an adequate basis for making
an unqualified extrapolation to the rest of Aquilla Lake or to the central Brazos
region.

Brown m Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

231

The estimated amount of available floral resources at Aquilla Lake totals
10,909,800,000 kilocalories, in contrast to the 137,051,207 kilocalories projected by SMU for the faunal resources. Obviously, such a figure would provide
food for a relatively large population, but several adjustments must be made.
First, the apparent importance of deer is corrected for, and the importance of
animals such as fox squirrels, not clearly represented in the faunal remains, is
heavily modified or they are dropped from the original SMU model. The modified estimates for deer, mollusca, turtle, rabbit, other small mammals, and other
resources (including fish, birds, and, at times, bison) total less than the SMU
total (Table 7). This is intended to reflect the complete dominance of deer and
the apparent absence of stresses that might have forced partial dependence on
lesser resources. It might also have been useful to drop the total figure for deer
exploitation in order to reflect further the absence of resource stress, but such a
reduction could be little more than arbitrary. Therefore, as a comparative baseline
to the SMU study, the deer exploitation figure has remained unchanged.
If the total estimated food resources available to the aboriginal inhabitants
of Aquilla Lake were used, the faunal total from Table 7 would be less than 1
percent of the total subsistence, well below the 20 percent minimum found in
nearly all ethnographic sources (Lee 1968:42). It is therefore reasonable to
suggest that the Aquilla Lake peoples, like many ethnographically documented
groups, were probably somewhat selective in their use of plant resources, harvesting far less than the maximum available. Lee (1968:33) also points out that
after the harvest of tens of thousands of pounds of mongongo nuts, the primary
Bushman subsistence item, thousands more rot on the ground each year.
Obviously, all of the available plant foods cannot be harvested for one
reason or another. Animal competition is a major factor; birds, arboreal mammals, and small ground-dwelling animals consume a portion, and the major
Table 7.

Modified Estimates of Faunal Resource Yields

Animal
White-tailed deer
Turtle
Mollusca
Cottontail
Other small mammalsd
Other resourcese
TOTAL

SMUa Estimate (Kcalb)
90,687,240
e
e
1,458,000
10,560,700
34.345.267
137,051,207

New Estimate (Kcal)
90,687,240
729,000
729,000
364,500
182,250
2.308.010
95,000,000

aSouthern Methodist University.
bKilocalories
cOdginally included in the Other Resources total.
dIncludes racoon, opossum, fox squirrel, and blact-tailed jackrabbit.
encludes additional resources listed in Skinner, Shaw, Huckaby, and Bartsh
(1978) in addition to turkey. See Table 4.

232

Texas Archeological Society

competitor for the resources, particularly for hardwood nuts, may be the principal faunal resource, the white-tailed deer. In addition, some fruits or nuts never
ripen properly or rot on the trees, and finally, perfect harvest scheduling is
probably impossible, particularly for some fruits that may mature and rot quickly
if the trees are not visited at precisely the right time.
In his study of the ecology of the Caddo, Keller (1974:144) accepts a figure
of 30 percent for all such losses, but this figure may be too low for the
maintenance of an animal population and to account for potential losses as well.
Keller himself lists a potential 34 percent in losses from arboreal mammals and
defective nuts alone. A figure of 50 percent is used here to account for the total
of such losses, leaving the resources of the 10-km-radius area at 5,454,900,000
kilocalories.
In order to calculate the extent of utilization possible for this resource
potential, a few diets can be hypothesized with meat percentages within typical
ranges for hunter-gatherers. Lee (1968:43) notes that, except in the highest
latitudes, hunted foods generally constitute from 20 to 45 percent of the diet. If
the percentage of meat at Aquilla Lake were near the minimum, at 20 percent,
then only 380 million calories of plant foods would be consumed in the remaining 80 percent, or only about 7 percent of the adjusted total of available floral
resources. With meat consumption at 35 percent, a figure Lee cites as the
apparent median (the Bushman meat intake is 37 percent), about 176.4 million
calories of plant food would supplement the diet, and, for a maximum meat
consumption figure of 50 percent, only 95 million calories of plant food would
be consumed.
If it were assumed that gatherers foraged over smaller areas than hunters,
foraging areas could be calculated for each of these percentages. If the 20
percent of meat in the diet were recovered from the entire 10-km catchment area,
the plant food foragers would have to cover an area with a radius of only about
2.6 km in order to gather the estimated 380 million kilocalories available after a
50 percent reduction from losses. Correspondingly, at the 35 percent level,
foragers would need a plant food catchment area with a radius of only 1.8 km,
and, at the 50 percent level, an area with a radius of only 1.3 km.
Another approach to the use of these potential yield figures is to calculate
various potential population sizes. The following calculations use a rounded
figure of 2000 calories per day per person, essentially the same as that computed
for the Aquilla Lake population (Skinner et al. 1978) and those found by Lee
(1968) for the Bushman population. Using the 50 percent plant food figure and
the full animal resource figure, a total of 5,549.9 million calories, supports 7,602
persons, an obviously high figure for a prehistoric hunter-gatherer population.
Another approach is to use Zubrow’s (1971:132) 5 percent human resource
exploitation figure as Keller (1974:156) did in the Caddo region. Five percent of
the total available resources (eliminating the 50 percent plant food reduction in
this case, since it is redundant) of 11,059.8 million calories would support a
population of 758 persons, a much more reasonable figure. Yet another ap-

Brown -- Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

233

proach is to use the 35 percent meat utilization figure calculated above; the
271.4 million calories available would support 372 people in the area.
None of the figures can be verified, but some population density parameters
can be calculated. For 758 persons, the population density would be .024
persons per ha (2.41 persons per km2), and, for a population of 372 persons, the
density would be .012 persons per ha (1.18 persons per km2) .
To put it differently, a band of 25 persons in the Aquilla Lake catchment
area with an annual requirement of 18.25 million calories, would be utilizing the
area only to less than two-tenths of 1 percent efficiency, an extremely low
figure. Operating at a 5 percent efficiency ratio, the same band would need to
exploit a territory of only 10.4 km2, an area with a radius of only 1.8 km.
With a subsistence territory of this size, the establishment of permanent
settlements might be expected. The archeological evidence does not clearly
support any trend toward a sedentary lifeway. Rather, figures such as these
suggest either a gross overestimation of the available resources or populations
that may have existed well below the carrying capacity of the land. Some
overestimation of resources is probable. The amount of forested area in the
Cross Timbers biotic zone is hardly clear, and the estimation of the original
resource potential using the modern oak forest, with its generally small post oak
specimens, may be a serious error. Modern yield figures may also be highly
inaccurate. Nonetheless, it seems that there is at least some evidence to suggest
that the Aquilla Lake and, perhaps, the central Brazos populations also may have
functioned at well below the carrying capacity of the land. More precise quantification might be helpful in ascertaining the degree to which such underutilization of the resources occurred, but appropriate figures for the reconstruction of
the paleofauna and paleoflora never may be available.
Broader Adaptive Strategies
Considering the model developed above, what is the evidence for particular
adaptive strategies in the Aquilla Lake area? Was there a specialized adaptation
localized along the Aquilla Creek drainage? Or was there a broader, less specialized adaptation throughout the central Brazos or even all of northern Central
Texas? Or, if such adaptations cannot be clearly isolated, what are some of the
environmental parameters that might have defined such an adaptation.
Shafer and Bryant (1976) have proposed two adaptive strategies for the
North Fork and Granger reservoirs on the San Gabriel River in Williamson
County. Wllliamson County and the San Gabriel River are many miles to the
south, but they share with Aquilla Lake and Hill County the role of transitional
area between the Edwards Plateau and the Blackland Prairie. In other words,
both archeological project areas are on the extreme eastern edge of the Central
Texas culture area.
The first of these adaptive strategies is termed the Prairie Centered Adaptation. This model proposes an adaptation centered upon the gallery forests along
the major streams of the Blackland Prairie in which prehistoric groups ranged

234

Texas Archeological Society

east and west to exploit the resources of the Post Oak Savannah and the Edwards
Plateau. Moore, Shafer, and Weed (1978:72-77) point out that the model implies
that none of these zones could support populations throughout the annual subsistence cycle, but Peter and Hays (1982:19-5) suggest that this assumption may
not be valid and that the resources of the prairie alone could have supported a
group throughout the year.
The second model, considered the least likely of the two alternatives (Moore,
Shafer, and Weed 1978:75), is termed the Prairie Ecotone Adaptation. In this
model, the Blackland Prairie is seen as the boundary or ecotone between adaptations centered in the Edwards Plateau and the Post Oak Savannah. Although
they find some evidence for contact with culture areas to the south and east on
the East Texas Coastal Plain (as indicated by the presence of coastal shells and
sandy paste ceramics after 1750 B.P.), Peter and Hays (1982:19-8) suggest that
what little is known about specific Post Oak Savannah adaptations (e.g., Mallouf
1979) does not strongly support this model.
The different nature of the biotic zones of the Aquilla Lake area precludes
the exact correspondence of Aquilla Lake to these models, they can be translated
into parallel forms that may serve to explain locally successful adaptations. S uch
a translation generates two basic forms: (1) an adaptation centered on the Cross
Timbers region, dividing resource procurement time between the bottomland
hardwood forests and the upland oak savannah areas, and (2) adaptations to the
east and west that jointly exploit the resources of the Cross Timbers area. This
latter model implies that the resources of the Cross Timbers region might
become a zone of contention between groups, as those of the Blackland Prairie
would in the Granger region (Peter and Hays 1982:19-4). There is no clear
evidence for such contention, and there is little to suggest that the available
resources of the Cross Timbers region would have been worth fighting over.
Although Lynott’s (1977) characterization of the Blackland Prairie uplands
as a "sea of inedible grasses" may be an overstatement, it does seem quite
unlikely that the resources of the prairie uplands were sufficient by themselves
to support a prehistoric group of any size throughout its annual cycle. A group
determined to remain in the prairie ecozone would have had to have been
"tethered" to one of the larger floodplain-riparian forests that cross the prairie.
Streams of sufficient size to maintain even small groups are widely spread to the
east of the Aquilla Lake area, and, although the Blackland Prairie area adjacent
to Aquilla Lake may be somewhat wider than that found in the Granger Lake
area, it seems less likely that a true Prairie-Centered Adaptation would be a
successful alternative in the Aquilla region.
On the other hand, a localized adaptation between the Edwards Plateau and
the Post Oak Savannah may well have centered upon the Cross Timbers and the
southward-flowing Aquilla Creek with its substantial gallery forest and floodplain.
Aside from the presence of the Cross Timbers biotic zone (which also runs
north-south), one of the major differences between the Granger-North Fork area
and the Aquilla Lake area is the east to southeasterly flow of the major streams
in the Granger-North Fork area and the southward flow in the Aquilla Lake area.

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

235

Therefore the model replacing the Prairie-Centered Adaptation in the Aquilla
Lake area is one centered on the Cross Timbers and Aquilla Creek. There are
two possible versions of this adaptive model. In the first, the adaptation is
centered on Aquilla Creek, ranging westward to the Brazos River and eastward
through the Blackland Prairie to the Post Oak Savannah region. This model,
adapted to a basically east-west seasonal subsistence territory, is termed the
Stream Centered Model. A second model is proposed that ranges the length of
Aquilla Creek, foraging in the immediately adjacent upland areas but only rarely
venturing to the Brazos or very far east into the Blackland Prairie area. This
model is tentatively termed the Stream-Oriented Model.
.It is possible to envision a Prairie Ecotone Adaptation occurring within the
Aquilla Lake region. Certainly, if the prairie were not the center of a particular
adaptation, it would hardly have been left unexploited. The model defined above
as Stream Centered is in reality a version of this ecotonal model. Another
possibility considered here is the Cross Timbers and Aquilla Creek as a cultural
ecotone between prehistoric groups adapted to the Brazos River on the west and
to either the Blackland Prairie or Post Oak Savannah on the east. As already
mentioned, a specific Blackland Prairie adaptation seems unlikely except along
major east-west prairie tributaries such as Richland-Chambers Creek to the
northeast of the project area. Additionally, it is not altogether clear whether the
resources would have been sufficiently different or plentiful to draw groups
from the Post Oak Savannah across the Blackland Prairie.
A similar argument could be made for the Brazos River adapted groups.
There is little if any evidence that any single resource was plentiful enough or
scheduled differently enough in the Cross Timbers area or the Aquilla Creek
drainage to be attractive to people who lived in a zone of plentiful resources.
Skinner and Henderson (1972) had originally proposed that the prehistoric
inhabitants of Aquilla Lake were based along the Brazos River and foraged
seasonally into the Aquilla drainage area. However, upon examination of the
data regarding base camps versus seasonal foraging stations, Lynott and Peter
(1977) suggested that the converse could be possible, since the largest sites
along Aquilla and Hackberry creeks were larger than the sites nearer the Brazos.
In any case, the argument for a localized Aquilla Creek or Cross Timbers
adaptation has been opened.
It has been determined above that the resources available in the Aquilla
Lake catchment area could support a fairly large population, with estimates
ranging between 372 and 7,602 persons. The estimated resource potential of the
Cross Timbers, which includes 1,640 ha. of bottomland, is 10,438.7 million
kilocalories; the resource potential of the Blackland Prairie zone, tallied exclusively from bottomland riparian forest, is estimated at only 471.1 million kilocalories. The differences in productivity are immediately obvious; the 15,200 ha
of Cross Timbers land in the Aquilla Lake catchment area have an average
production potential of .69 kilocalories per ha, whereas the 15,840 ha of Blackland Prairie are projected to yield only .03 kilocalories per ha. So the ratio of
Cross Timbers to Blackland Prairie production is 23:1, making it clear that the
Blackland Prairie is less attractive in terms of resource potential.

236

Texas Archeological Society

Another way of looking at the differences above is to examine them in terms
of the adaptation models. The Aquilla Lake catchment area, with a total area of
314.16 kmz, produces 10,909.8 million kilocalories annually. An equivalent area
contained totally within the Cross Timbers biotic province would produce about
twice that, or 21,576.5 million kilocalories. A corresponding area of Blackland
Prairie would produce only 933.1 million kilocalories. Obviously, the survival
of a population in the pure Blackland Prairie would require a larger subsistence
range, i.e., to support a population equal to carrying capacity in the Aquilla Lake
catchment area would require in the Blackland Prairie an area 23 times greater,
or 7,225.68 km2, a catchment circle with a radius of 48.0 km. However, this
calculation is somewhat misleading, for whereas the Cross Timbers resources
are spread across the landscape, the Blackland Prairie resources are confined
primarily to riparian forests along stream drainages. To equal the Aquilla Lake
catchment area’s potential annual resources, some 974.1 km of stream drainage
would be needed. This strongly suggests that a true Prairie-Centered Adaptation,
relying totally on riparian resources within the prairie zone, is not possible in the
Aquilla-Central Brazos area, but the data analyzed have yet to provide a clear
choice between the two versions of the model that center on the Aquilla Creek
drainage.
Considering the apparent surplus available in the Cross Timbers area, the
potential differential may be of less importance than is apparent. It seems
unlikely that the population of the Aquilla Lake catchment area ever exceeded a
thousand, much less seven thousand, at any one time. Even the lower estimate of
372 persons given above may be high for a permanent population confined to
this area. It is possible that the area may have been inhabited at well below its
carrying capacity by only a few small bands. Further quantitative analysis of
food remains from sites in the area will be necessary to reduce the speculative
nature of the population estimates given here.
The adaptive models discussed here, however valid they may be, are primarily static models. Peter and Hays (1982), in their discussion of the adaptations through time in the North Fork and Granger Lake areas, suggest that it is
unrealistic to expect a single model to remain valid throughout the entire prehistoric period, for with at least minor climatic changes throughout the prehistoric
period, some changes should be expected. There is at least some evidence in the
Aquilla Lake area for shifting spheres of cultural influence through time (Brown
1987c), for the most part apparently indicating very early and very late participation in the broad cultural traditions of Central and East Texas, with some
degree of independence throughout the Middle and during parts of the Late
Archaic. It may well be that home ranges of prehistoric groups narrowed considerably during these latter periods. Although no major adaptive changes are
documented during the prehistoric period of Central Texas, such range shifts
may indicate subtle changes in adaptive strategies.
It is all but impossible for archeologists to track the remains of single bands.
As Weissner (1983) has pointed out, study of material culture alone may not be

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

237

sufficient to provide distinctions among separate bands. Only broader adaptations can be distinguished to any degree, but even these may provide clues to the
maximum limits of band territories within regions.
Gunn and Prewitt (n.d.), in their broad ecotone model, have discussed the
possible changing patterns of Central Texas cultures This model views the
Central Texas culture area as having a changing environment that tends to
promote alterations to adaptive strategies, and it views the broad ecotone of
Central Texas as a climatically unstable area that, unlike the narrow ecotone that
promotes the development of complex cultures, tends to inhibit long-term cultural development.
Gunn and Prewitt’s model is tied to both the Primary Forest Efficiency
model of Caldwell (1958) and the Focal-Diffuse adaptive model of Cleland
(1976), as well as to the model of tethered nomadism proposed by Taylor
(1964). They propose a series of maximum ranges for each of the phases of
Prewitt’s (1981) cultural chronology of Central Texas and the correlation between each of these and interpreted climatic changes is examined.
Gunn and Prewitt (n.d.) describe the climate of the Late Prehistoric as
primarily cool and dry, with a warm, moist spike during the late Austin phase.
The estimated mean northern hemisphere temperatures during the mid-Toyah
phase are at their coolest since the Pleistocene. Ranges during the Late Prehistoric are at their maximum to the north, east, and south. The early Late Archaic
(San Marcos and early Uvalde) is warm and moist, with a cool, dry interval
peaking at the beginning of the Twin Sisters phase and becoming hot and dry
during the Driftwood phase. Cultural ranges of the Late Archaic phases are
average during the middle phases and constricted during the Driftwood and San
Marcos phases. The Middle Archaic begins with a cool, dry interval that peaks
in the late Clear Fork; a major hot and dry interval peaks at the transitional
between the Marshall Ford and Round Rock phases. Ranges of the later phases
are moderate, but the early Clear Fork phase is constricted. Climates during the
Early Archaic vary from warm and moist to hot and dry, with the warmest
average temperature of the entire Archaic period falling at the beginning of the
Jarrell phase. Another warm peak, at the end of a long late Pleistocene warming
trend, occurs at the beginning of the Circleville phase. Ranges are narrowly
constricted during the later part of the Early Archaic, but the Circleville phase
range expands to nearly the extreme width of the Late Prehistoric.
These Central Texas ranges can be examined from the perspective of the
presence of Central Texas materials in the Aquilla Lake area. Gunn and Prewitt’s
(n.d.:Figure 9) summary of the ranges of Central Texas groups during the
Archaic and post-Archaic suggests the following predictions. The Central Texas
phases least likely to be heavily represented in the Aquilla area are, in the
approximate order of distance, Oakalla, Jarrell, San Marcos, Driftwood, and
Clear Fork. After the Late Prehistoric phases and the San Geronimo and Circleville phases, those predicted as most likely to be represented are Round Rock,
Marshall Ford, and Uvalde.

238

Texas Archeological Society

Examination of the sample of projectile points from the Aquilla Lake area
(see Brown 1987c for discussion) shows that there is no evidence of the diagnostic artifacts of the OakaUa or Clear Fork phases and only minimal evidence of
any from the San Marcos phase. Projectile points linked to the Driftwood and
Jarrell phases are present, though not in great numbers. Round Rock and Marshall
Ford and, to a lesser degree, Uvalde phase projectile points apparently are more
prominent in the Aquilla Lake area, but the overall numbers are still small. The
presence of Central Texas projectile points from both the early part of the Early
Archaic (San Geronimo and Circleville) and the Late Prehistoric (both Austin
and Toyah phases) is well documented in and around the project area (Brown
1987c).
The projectile point sample seems to indicate that, except for the Late
Prehistoric, extension of Central Texas cultures into the Aquilla Lake area was
at its maximum during hot and dry intervals such as the Early Archaic and midMiddle Archaic. The smallest amount of northward extension from Central
Texas came during both warm-moist and cool-dry intervals, so it is possible that
the resources of the Cross Timbers may have drawn groups from other areas in
hot, dry times when, away from the major drainages, much of Central Texas
may have consisted of relatively unproductive grasslands.
It is easy to envision different adaptive strategies, strongly linked to varying
population densities and resource depletion pressures, emerging during different
climates. During cool or moist periods, population densities may have been
lowered, resulting in less pressure on the resources from marginal groups. A true
Cross Timbers-Centered Adaptation may have arisen during these periods. It
may have been during the cool, dry interval of the mid-Late Archaic that the apparently locally centered Godley projectile points and the people who used them
first appeared. During warmer and drier periods, adaptations may have ranged
farther along the peripheral drainages of the Blackland Prairie, not only to
maximize the exploitation of resources in hard times, but to increase spacing
between band territory centers in the face of increased population density. The
resources of the uplands of the Cross Timbers would be shared, but from home
range territories that extended out across the prairie.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper includes revised parts of Chapters 43 and 48 of the report of
excavations during the 1978-1982 seasons at Aquilla Lake (Brown 1987a),
written while the author was field director and project archeologist there; thanks
are due to Robert Burton and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for permission
to publish them. During the original preparation of those chapters, the author
received much needed editorial help from Solveig Turpin, Abby Treece, and
Deborah Smith, of the Texas Archeological Survey at the University of Texas at
Austin, and Dee Ann Story and several unidentified reviewers made many
helpful comments on the final draft. Alicia Nelson helped type parts of the
manuscript and provided some necessary encouragement during the final
preparation.

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

239

REFERENCES CITED
Binford, L. R.
1978
Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology. Academic Press, New York.
Brown, D. O. (editor)
1987a
Archeology at Aquilla Lake: 1978-1982 Investigations. Texas Archeological Survey. The University of Texas at Austin. Research Report 81.
Brown, D. O.
1987b
The McKenzie Site - 41HI115. In: Archeology at Aquilla Lake: 1978-1982
Investigations, Volume II, edited by David O. Brown. Texas Archeological
Survey. The University of Texas at Austin. Research Report 81.
1987c

Aquilla Lake: A Culture History Perspective. In: Archeology at Aquilla
Lake: 1978-1982 Investigations, edited by David O. Brown. TexasArcheological Survey. The University of Texas at Austin. Research Report 81.

Brown, D. O., R. P. Watson, D. E. Peter, and V. Rawn-Schatzinger
1987
The McDonald Site - 41HI105. In: Archeology at Aquilla Lake: 1978-1982
Investigations, Volume H, edited by David O. Brown. Texas Archeological
Survey. The University of Texas at Austin. Research Report 81.
Burt, W. H., and R. P. Grossenheider
1964
A Field Guide to the Mammals. Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston.
Caldwell, J. R.
1958
Trend and Tradition in the Prehistory of the Eastern United States. American Anthropological Association Memoir 88.
Cleland, C. E.
1976
The Focal-Diffuse Model: An Evolutionary Perspective on the Prehistoric
Cultural Adaptations of the Eastern United States. Mid-Contintent Journal
of Archaeology 1(1):59-76.
Davidson, I.
Les Mallaetes and Mondfiver: The Economy of a Human Group in Prehis1976
toric Spain. In: Problems in Economic and SocialArchaeology, edited by G.
de G. Sieveking, I. H. Longworth and K. E. Wilson, pp. 483-499. Westview
Press, Boulder, Colorado.
Davis, W. B.
1974
The Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Bulletin 41. Austin.
Den.nell, Robin
1980
The Use, Abuse and Potential of Site Catchment Analysis. In: Catchment
Analysis: Essays on Prehistoric Resource Space, edited by Frank J. Findlow
and Jonathon E. Ericson, pp. 1-20. Anthropology UCLA. 10(1-2). Department of Anthropology, University of California, Los Angeles.

240

Texas Archeological Society

Findlow, F. J., and J. E. Ericson.
1980
Catchment Analysis: Essays on Prehistoric Resource Space. Anthropology
UCLA. 10(1-2). Department of Anthropology, University of California, Los
Angeles.
Flannery, K. V.
Empirical Determination of Site Catchments in Oaxaca and Tehuacan. In:
1976
The Early Mesoamerican Village, edited by K. V. Flannery, pp. 91-95.
Academic Press, New York.
Flook, J. M.
Aqui!la Lake Botanical Survey. In: The Natural and Cultural Environmental
1972
Resources of the Aquilla Creek Watershed, Hill County, Texas. S. Alan
Skinner, compiler. Southern Methodist University. Archaeo!ogy Research
Program Research Report 17.
Gunn, J., and E. R. Prewitt
n.d.
Theory of Culture Change on Broad Ecotones. Unpublished MS.
Higgs, E. S., C. Vita-Finzi, D. R. Harris, and A. E. Fagg
The Climate, Environment, and Industries of Stone Age Greece: Part III.
1967
Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 33:1-29.
Hulbert, R. C., Jr.
1984
Latest Pleistocene and Holocene Leporid Fauna from Texas: Their Composition, Distribution and Climatic Implication. The Southwestern Naturalist
29(2):197-210.
Jackson, J. M.
1981
Floral and Faunal Remains. In Archeological Investigations at the George
C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas: Summers of 1979 and 1980. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory. The University of Texas at Austin.
Occasional Papers 1.
Jelks, E. B.
The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill Count,,,, Texas.
1962
The University of Texas at Austin. Department ofAnthropology. Archeology
Series 5.
Jochim, M.A.
1983
Optimal Models in Context. In: Archaeological Hammers and Theories,
edited by J. A. Moore and A. S. Keene, pp. 157-172. Academic Press, New
York.
Keller, J. E.
The Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches Region of Eastern
1974
Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Anthropology Department, University of Texas at Austin.

Brown ~ Subsistence Strategies, Northeastern Central Texas

241

What Hunters Do for a Living, or, How to Make Out on Scarce Resources.
In: Man the Hunter, edited by R. B. Lee and I. DeVore, pp. 30-48. Aldine,
Chicago.
1979

The !Kung San. Cambridge University Press, London.

Lundelius, E.L., Jr.
1962
Nonhuman Skeletal Material from the Kyle Site. Appendix to The Kyle
Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County, Texas. by E. B.
Jelks. The University of Texas at Austin. Department of Anthropology.
Archeology Series 5.
Lynott, M. J.
1977
A Regional Model for Archaeological Research in North Central Texas.
Unpublished PhD. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University. Dallas.
1978

An Archaeological Assessment of the Bear Creek Shelter, Lake Whitney,
Texas. Southern Methodist University Research Report 115. Dallas.

Lynott, M. J., and D. E. Peter
1977
1975 Archaeological Investigations at Aquilla Lake, Texas. Southern Methodist University. Archaeology Research Program. Research Report 100.
Dallas.
McCormick, O. F., III
1973
The Archaeological Resources in the Lake Monticello Area of Tiros County,
Texas. Southern Methodist University. Contributions in Anthropology 8.
Dallas.
McCullough, D. R.
1979
The George Reserve Deer tlerd._ University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Mallouf, M. G.
1979
Archeological Investigations at Lake Limestone. Texas Archeological Survey. The University of Texas at Austin. Research Report 71.
Moore, G. L., H. J. Shafer, and C. S. Weed
1978
Archeological Surveys of Granger and North Fork Reservoirs. Volume 1,
The Granger Report. Texas A &M University. Anthropology Research Laboratory Report 38a. College Station.
Murry, P. A.
1978
Vertebrate Faunal Remains. An Archaeological Assessment of the Bear
Creek Shelter, Lake Whitney, Texas. Southern Methodist University, Research Report 115. Dallas.
Neck, Raymond
1987
Analysis of 1982 Molluscan Fauna. In: Archeology at Aquilla Lake: 19781982 Investigations, Volume III, edited by David O. Brown. Texas Archeological Survey. The University of Texas at A ustin. Research Report 81.

242

Texas Archeological Society

Peebles, C. S.
1978
Determinants of Settlement Size and Location in the Moundville Phase. In:
Mississippian Settlement Patterns, edited by Bruce D. Smith, pp. 369-416.
Academic Press, New York.
Perttula, T. K., and J. E. Bruseth
1983
Early Caddoan Subsistence Strategies, Sabine River Basin, East Texas.
Plains Anthropologist. 28(99):9-19.
Peter, D. E., D. O. Brown, and J. M. Jackson
1987
The Brazil Site - 41HI75. In: Archeology at Aquilla Lake: 1978-1982
Investigations, Volume II, edited by David O. Brown. Texas Archeological
Survey. The University of Texas at Austb~. Research Report 81.
Peter, D. E., and S. Hays
1982
Models of Prehistoric Adaptation in the San Gabriel River Valley. In:
Archeological Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central
Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences. North Texas State University. Denton.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Centra! Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 56:65-89.
Reidhead, V. A.
1979
Linear Progranuning Models in Archaeology. Annual Review ofAnthropology 8:543-578.
1980

Roe, F. G.
1970

The Economics of Subsistence Change: a Test of the Optimization Model.
In: Modeling Change in Prehistoric Economies, edited by T. K. Earle and
A. L. Christenson, pp. 141-186. Academic Press, New York.

The North American Buffalo: A Critical Study of the Species. University of
Toronto Press, Toronto.

Roper, D. C.
1979
The method and theory of site catchment analysis: a review. In Advances in
Archaeological Method and Theory. Volume 2, edited by Michael B. Schiffer. Academic Press, New York.
Shafer, H. J,. and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
1976
A Prelminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources in the North Fork and
Granger Reservoir, Williamson County, Texas. A Supplemental Report to
An Archaeological Survey of Granger and North Fork Reservoir, Preliminary Report. Texas A&M University. Anthropology Research Laboratory.
College Station.
Skinner, S. A. (editor)
1972
The Natural and Cultural Environmental Resources of the Aquilla Creek
Watershed, Hill County, Texas. Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program, Research Report 17.

243
Skinner, S. A., and M. L. Henderson
1972
Archaeological Resources of the Aquilla Watershed. In: The Natural and
Cultural Environmental Resources of the Aquilla Creek Watershed, Hill
County, Texas, edited by S. Alan Skinner. Southern Methodist University.
Archaeology Research Program. Research Report 17.
Skinner, S. A., C. Shaw, K. Huckabay, and M. L. Bartsch.
1978
An Evaluation of Archaeological Resources at Aquilla Lake. Southern
Methodist University. Archaeology Research Program. Research Report.
Dallas.
Skinner, S. A., T. S. Turner, D. E. McGregor, and J. H. Richards.
Prehistoric Settlement at Aquilla Lake, Texas. Unpublished MS. Southern
1979
Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program.
Slack, R. D., and L. E. Marcy
Pre-Impoundment Environmental Study of Aquilla Lake. U.S. Army Corps
1983
of Engineers. Supplement to Design Memorandum 9. Fort Worth.
Smith, B. D.
1975
Middle Mississippi Exploitation of Animal Populations. University of Michigan, Museum of Anthropology, Anthropological Papers 57. Ann Arbor.
Stephenson, R. L.
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir area, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:32-257.
Story, D. A., and H. J. Shafer
1965
1964 Excavations at Waco Reservoir, McLennan County, Texas: The Baylor and Britton Sites. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University
of Texas at Austin, Miscellaneous Papers 6.
Taylor, W. W.
1964
Tethered Nomadism and Water Territoriality: an Hypothesis. In: Actas y
Memorias del XXV Congreso lnternacional de Americanistas 1962, pp.
197-203.
Ubelaker, J. E., and N. M. Hall
Zoological Resources of the Aquilla Lake Watershed. In: The Natural and
1972
Cultural Environmental Resources of the Aquilla Creek Watershed, Hill
County, Texas, edited by S. Alan Skinner. Southern Methodist University,
Archaeology Research Program, Research Report 17.
Vita-Finzi, C., and E. S. Higgs
Prehistoric Economy in the Mount Carmel area of Palestine: Site Catchment
1970
Analysis. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 36: !-37.
Watson, R. P.
1982
The Archeology of Aquilla Creek Reservoir: Implications for a Regional
Research Design from the Central Brazos River Basin, Texas. Unpublished
PhD. Dissertation, Anthropology Department, The University of Texas at
Austin.

244

Texas Archeological Society

Webley, D.
Soils and Site Location in Prehistoric Palestine. In: Papers in Economic
1972
Prehistory, edited by E. S. Higgs, pp.169-180. Cambridge University Press,
London.
Weissner, Polly
Style and Social Information in Kalahari San Projectile Points. American
1983
Antiquity 48(2):253-276.
Winkler, B. A.
1982
Wild Plant Foods of the Desert Gatherers of West Texas, New Mexico and
Northern Mexico: Some Nutritional Values. Unpublished M.A. Thesis,
Anthropology Department, The University of Texas at Austin.
Yates, B.
1982

Zarky, A.
1976

Vertebrate Faunal Remains. In: Archeological Investigations at the San
Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Institute of Applied Sciences,
North Texas State University, Denton.

Statistical Analysis of Catchments at Ocos, Guatemala. In: The Early
Mesoamerican Village, edited by K.V. Flarmery, pp. 117-128. Academic
Press, New York.

Zubrow, E. B.
1971
Carrying Capacity and Dynamic Equilibrium in the Prehistoric Southwest.
American Antiquity 36:127-138.
Zvelebil, Marek
1983
Site Catchment Analysis and Hunter-Gatherer Resource Use. In: Ecological
Models in Economic Prehistory, edited by Gordon Bronitsky, pp. 73-114.
Arizona State University, Anthropological Research Papers No. 29.

