ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES
FROM A CROCKETT COUNTY SHELTER:
A TEST FOR SEASONALITY
J. PHIL DERINC AND HARRY J. SHAFER

ABSTRACT
Four matrix samples collected from a thin fiber lens in Gobbler Shelter,
Crockett

County,

Texas

are

analyzed

in

an

attempt

to

determine

seasonality. Analyses of the artifacts, plant and animal remains are also
reported. Problems of plant identification are discussed and preliminary
techniques

for

identification

of

the

plant

materials

are

described.

Insufficient knowledge of plant flowering behavior and prehistoric plant
distribution prevented the determination of seasonality. A more inclusive
approach which involves placing the seasonality question in its proper
ecological context is suggested.

INTRODUCTION
"No material relicit of a former population can be discarded as
irrelevant" (Heizer and Cook 1956:230).
Archeologists have found the analysis of plant remains to be
indispensible to the reconstruction of prehistoric subsistence
patterns. Although many reports emphasizing analysis of plant
remains have been printed recently, archeologists have overlooked
one of their best data sources, southwest Texas. In this paper we
report the analysis of well preserved plant material from a small, dry
rockshelter in Crockett County, Texas. The data were used in an
attempt to determine which season or seasonsI the site was utilized by
prehistoric hunter-gatherer groups.
Literally hundreds of small rockshelter sites occur in the limestone
canyons of west central, southwest, and west Texas. Many of these
shelter

sites

once

contained

dessicated plant

remains

left

by

aboriginal inhabitants. The cultural deposits in an ,alarming number
(perhaps most) of these rockshelter sites have been destroyed by relic
hunters for the sake of a few chipped stone artifacts. In other
instances, amateur archeologists have attempted to obtain controlled
samples of artifacts from these sites. However, by discarding the
dried plant materials they overlooked perhaps the largest potential
source of information about the lifeways of the prehistoric
inhabitants.

’For the purposes of this paper, "season" is used in the chronological sense to denote
one of the four astronomical periods of the year: spring, summer, autumn, and winter.

210

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

For the most part, the amateur archeologists cannot be faulted for
this inappropriate sampling technique, for they were using precisely the same methods of collecting employed by professional
archeologists. At the time of this writing, partial excavations at II
rockshelter sites have been reported from Crockett County (Lorrain
1968; Riggs 1968a, 1968b, 1969, 1974; Word 1971). Several of these
shelters contained dried plant remains but the materials were neither
systematically collected nor analyzed.
OBJECTIVES
Many hunter-gatherer groups follow a seasonal migratory path in
search of food (Lee and Devore 1968: 12). Since the prehistoric
populations who inhabited the Live Oak Creek area were hunters and
gatherers and since the dry deposit at Gobbler Shelter was 10 cm. or
less in thickness, the analysis of the botanical materials in the fiber
lens could yield data on seasonality. We felt that there was a good
chance the shelter was visited intermittently by late prehistoric
groups during one or more seasons of the year. A demonstration of
seasonality could be used to advance hypotheses regarding the
subsistence settlement models of Late Archaic populations in the
area.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE
Gobbler Shelter is a westward-facing rockshelter located on a
small tributary canyon of Live Oak Creek in Crockett County, Texas
(Fig. 1, A,B). The rockshelter is about 23 meters wide, 7 to 9 meters
deep, and 2 to 3 meters high at the drip line. The site was recorded in
1974 by Texas Highway Department archeologists during the course
of their work along the proposed right-of-way of Interstate 10.
Prehistoric cultural activity was evident from the outside by a thin
burned rock talus on the slope in front of the shelter and remnants of
soot deposits on the ceiling. A badly disturbed dark gray ashy deposit
was evident under the overhang near the drip line; dessicated plant
remains could be seen in the edges of several potholes in the central
portion and near the southern end. Much of the floor at the back of
the shelter was exposed limestone bedrock. It is estimated that
approximately 70% of the aboriginal deposit was destroyed by
artifact collectors.
The fill exposed in the walls of several shallow potholes revealed a
stratified deposit averaging 20 to 25 cm. thick. The upper portion of
the deposit consisted of 4 to 6 cm. of compacted sheep dung overlying
a thin layer of white limestone dust weathered from the shelter wall.

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

211

A

FIGURE 1. Views of Gobbler Shelter. A, View of shelter setting, Gobbler Shelter (41 CX 117) located on the right; site 41 CX 113 to the left.
B, View of Gobbler Shelter (41 CX 117).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

212

This layer of dust measured about 6 cm. thick. Beneath the dust was a
thin fiber lens resting directly on bedrock. The fiber lens varied in
thickness but averaged about 10 cm.
In January, 1975, members of the Highway Department’s archeological staff returned to the shelter for the purpose of obtaining small matrix samples from the fiber lens exposed in the
pothole walls. These samples were sent to the Texas A&M University
Anthropology Laboratory for analysis.
This study reports the contents of four of these samples together
with a small collection of artifacts obtained from the surface of the
shelter.

ARTIFACTS
The small sample of artifacts collected from the surface and
pothole backdirt during the two trips to the site is described below.
Cordage (6 specimens; Fig. 2, D-F)
There are 5 examples of 2-ply, Z-twist yarn in the sample. The diameter
of the smallest is I mm., while the largest twist measures 4 mm. The fibers

B

0

cnl

2

C
FIGURE 2. Perishable artifacts. A, pointed stick; B, C, knotted fiber;
D-F, cordage.

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT
of three examples are from unidentified plants. One specimen of cordage is
a 4-ply yarn with S-twist fibers twisted into a 2-ply Z-twist which was then
S-twisted into a 4-ply yarn. Two specimens (one shown in Fig. 2, F) are of
combined plant fibers and hair. Identification of the hair was made by
Glendon H. Weir {ms.) on the basis of structural data using the Scanning
Electron Microscope. He compared the archeological specimens with fur
samples in the mammalian reference collection in the Wildlife and
Fisheries Department at Texas A&M University. Weir’s findings indicate
that the hair is jackrabbit (Lepas californicas}.

Knotted Fibers (5 specimens; Fig. 2, B, C)
Four of these are square knots and one is an unidentified fragment.
Three are tentatively identified as Yucca sp. on the basis of the cell morphology in traces of the epidermis (see methods section for description of
this technique). Two of these knots are on the same fiber strip (Fig. 2, C).
The fourth square knot is made with Agave lecheguilla; here again, the
identification was made on the basis of epidermal cell shape. The fifth and
fragmentary specimen is unidentified.

Modified stick (1 specimen; Fig. 2, A)
This artifact is 12.3 cm. long and 5 mm. in diameter at the maximum. The
entire surface of the stick has been presumably scraped with a sharp
edged stone tool, and one end is tapered to a point. The point appears to
have been fire-hardened and is polished from use. Traces of polish extend
up the stick approximately 2 mm. from the tip. The opposite end exhibits a
series of hack or cut marks, the largest of which appears to have severed
the stick from a larger piece. Owing to the polished tip, it is doubtful that
this stick functioned as a foreshaft as one might suspect from a cursory
glance. The polished tip suggests that it may have served as a wooden awl.

Lithic Artifacts
Several stone artifacts were recovered from the disturbed fill in the
front portion of the shelter. This sample includes unmodified flakes, an
unretouched chert nodule or core, a chert core-hammerstone, modified
chert flakes, and a mano fragment,
Two of these flakes were removed during the course of retouching a
biface. Three were removed from cores by hard-hammer percussion
during early stages of core reduction.
One specimen (Fig. 3, C) is a flake fragment which is unifacially
retouched along one edge. Traces of charred organic material adhere to
one end. Another specimen (Fig. 3, A) is a burned fragment of a unifacially
retouched tool. The flake’s ventral surface exhibits a high gloss resulting
from extensive use along and near the retouched edge. This gloss plus the
unifaeial retouch indicates that this specimen was used as a knife. The
angle of the modified edge is 48 degrees.

213

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

214

Utilized Flake (1 specimen; Fig. 3, B)
A hard-hammer flake exhibits bifacial edge nicking around much of the
lateral margins; traces of edge polish can also be detected in two areas.
The edge angles are sharp, measuring 40 degrees or less.
Hammerstone (1 specimen; Fig. 3, F)
A fragment of a chert nodule has been battered along a thick portion of
the edge. The battering is not extensive.
Core Fragment (1 specimen)
This item is a tabular chert nodule 71 cm. long and 37 cm. wide that
exhibits two flake facets. It has not been altered otherwise.
Mano Fragment (1 specimen; Fig. 3, G)
This specimen is of coarse-grained quartzite, a material which is clearly
foreign to this predominantly limestone region. The mano was biracial and
extensively used. There does not appear to be any clear evidence of use
subsequent to its breakage. Therefore, it was likely broken at the site.
Traces of unidentified organic material adhere to the pits in both faces.

A

C

D

E

F

G
0

cm

3

FIGURE 3. Lithic artifacts. A-C, retouched flakes; D, E, unmodified
flakes; F, hammerstone; G, mano fragment.

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

215

Comments on the Artifacts
This small artifact sample is not considered sufficient to be representative of those activities at the site that are manifested in material
remains. The sample is, however, indicative of the diversity of
activities carried out here, such as those involving manufacture and
use of chipped stone tools, use of ground stone tools, use of various
artifacts requiring the manufacture and/or use of cordage, knotted
fibers, perhaps weaving, certainly food preparation, and cooking.
Taken together, the range of functions at the site strongly suggests
that Gobbler Shelter served as a camp site.
This sample is also lacking temporally-diagnostic specimens.
However, based on findings from other small rockshelter sites in
Crockett County (Lorrain 1968; Word 1971}, we expect that the
deposits date some time after 500 B.C., either during the Late Archaic
or post-Archaic periods.

PLANT ANALYSIS
A. Methods
Each of the four Gobbler Shelter matrix samples filled a 20-pound
paper bag about two-thirds full. The samples were sifted through a
window (1/16-inch) screen to remove the cave dust. The material
which i3assed through the screen was examined for very small seeds
and then discarded. The rest was hand sorted, identified and
separately packed for storage.
Because of the small sample size, the seeds were simply counted.
Measurement of bulk volume is a more satisfactory indication of
relative abundance. The vegetative remains of sotol, lechuguilla, and
yucca were weighed. Plant remains were identified using seed
identification manuals, illustrated floras, and available reference
collections.
In dry areas of southwest Texas fibrous remains of lechuguilla,
sotol, and/or yucca often comprise the bulk of the dry midden
contents. Sandals, matting, baskets, and cordage which were made of
the leaves and fiber of these plants have often been recovered.
Charred and/or chewed leaf parts (quids) are often an abundant
midden component. In separating these three genera archeologists
have tried to rely on differences in external appearance. However,
this method has nod been adequate since the altered condition of
most plant remains obscures the more obvious morphological
characteristics. Recent investigations into the prehistoric subsistence
patterns in the lower Pecos River area (Alexander 1970; Moore 1975;
Shafer 1975) have created a need for a convenient and more nearly

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

accurate means of identifying these genera in all stages of
processing, including the final product, whether it is a quid or a
basket.
The problems of accurate identification of these fibrous remains
can be illustrated by reviewing previous reports from the lower Pecos
area. Irving (1966: 61-88) reported fibrous plant remains from six
shelters in the Amistad district. He found that lechuguilla was the
dominant economic plant, yet sotol was not mentioned. This is
contradictory since at Fate Bell Shelter, one of the sites Irving
studied, two sotol cooking pits with fragments of sotol had been
reported earlier by Pearce and Jackson (1933: 16-17). At Baker Cave
in Val Verde County, Word and Douglas (1970: 12-13) reported that
quids were present but made no attempt at identification. Remains of
lechuguilla were the most abundant midden component in Parida
Cave (Alexander 1970: 63) and Conejo Shelter (Alexander 1974: 220),
both in Val Verde County.
In Crockett and Pecos Counties, upstream from the Val Verde
County sites virtually no macrofossil analyses have been made.
Holden (1941: 33) found many quids in McKenzie’ Cave in Pecos
County that he said were "perhaps sotol." Near Iraan in Crockett
County, Lorrain (1968: 43) reported only a few knotted sotol leaves
and several cut lechuguilla leaves from Meadows Shelter H and she
found no perishables at the Sotol Site. At Red Mill Shelter, Word
(1971: 306) identified cut leaves of sotol, sacahuisti (Nolina texana)
and lechuguilla. He found two types of quids which he speculated
were of sotol and lechuguilla (Word 1971: 307).
None of these reports substantiate their plant determinations by
detailing identification methods. Anyone trying to synthesize
prehistoric subsistence patterns in the lower Pecos River area is
faced with a mixture of conflicting data.
Recognizing the need for dependable means of identifying sotol,
yucca, and lechuguilla, we began testing different analytical
techniques. Of the methods attempted, the one involving the
comparison of the cuticular features of the three genera has proved
the most promising. Thin pieces of the leaf’s epidermis are placed on
a clean glass slide with a drop of clearing solution over which is
placed a cover slip. Microscopic identification is made by comparison
to known reference specimens. Photographs taken by Glenna
Williams-Dean of a lechuguilla quid epidermis and lechuguilla, sotol
and yucca reference leaf cuticle are shown in Figures 4 and 5.
This technique is preliminary, but refinement and expansion of the
process could insure quick and dependable identification of even
highly modified plant remains. We believe this technique will be

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

217

A

FIGURE 4. A, photograph of the epidermal cells of sotol (Dasylirion
texanum); B, epidermal cells of lechuguilla (Agave lecheguilla).

A

B

FIGURE 5. A, photograph of the epidermal cells of Yucca (Yucca sp.);
B, epidermal cell of cut leaf base from Gobbler Shelter identified as
Agave lecheguilla (compare with Fig. 4, B).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

218

especially helpful in determining the specific plants used in
manufacturing material culture elements, and have already
demonstrated its potential in artifact analysis by identifying the
genera of the split and knotted leaves from Gobbler Shelter.
B. Results
The results of the quantitative analysis of macrofossils from
Gobbler Shelter are listed in Tables I through 4. The sample size was
TABLE 1. CONTENTS IN MATRIX SAMPLE #1

Scientific Name

Common Name

Number or Amount

Leaves:
Quercus virginiano

Virginia Live Oak

35 leaves

Quercus pungens

Vasey Shin Oak

29 leaves

Janiperus sp.

Jmfiper, Cedar

24 leaf fragments

Seeds, Bulbs:
13 seeds

Prosopis sp.

Mesquite

luniperus sp.

Juniper, Cedar

102 seeds

Opuntiu sp.

Prickly Pear

205 seeds

Allium drummondii

Onion

13 bulb fragments

Quercus pungens

Vasey Shin Oak

11 acorn fragments

Jaglans microcarpa

Walnut

3 infloresence stalks,
numerous seeds

Setaria lutescens
Diospyros texana

4 fragments

Texas Persimmon

1 seed

Other Plant Remains:
Dasylirion texanum

Sotol leaf & caudex
fragments

Agave lecheguilla

Lechugnilla leaf & caudex
fragments

Yucca sp.

Yucca leaf & caudex
fragments

191.9 grams
32 grams
5 culms

Gramineae
Faunal Remains:

27.8 grams

Nunlber

fish vertebrae

8

scales

3

gill covers

1

small bone fragments

3

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

219

small and indicates the contents of only a fraction of the Gobbler
Shelter midden. Leaf and caudex fragments of Yucca (Yucca sp.),
lechuguilla (Agave lechegui!!a), and sotol (Dasylirion texanum),
constituted the largest portion of preserved botanical material. Fruits
of mesquite (Prosopis sp.), juniper (]uniperus sp.), prickly pear
(Opuntia sp.), oak (Quercus pungens), walnut (luglans microcarpa),
and persimmon. (Diospyros texana), indicated that other plant
resources were exploited when ripe.

TABLE 2. CONTENTS IN MATRIX SAMPLE #2
Scientific Name

Common Name

Number or Amount

L eave s:
Quercus virginiana

Virginia Live Oak

Quercus pangens

Vasey Shin Oak

Diospyros texana

Texas Persimmon

11 leaves
5 leaves
35 leaves

Seeds, Bulbs:
A!Hum drummondii

Onion

Opuntia sp.

Prickly Pear

52 seeds

/aniperus sp.

Juniper, Cedar

85 seeds

Prosopis sp.

Mesquite

25 seeds

Quercas sp.

Oak

8 acorn fragments

luglans microcarpa

Walnut

5 walnut fragments

Diospyros texana

Texas Persimmon

i seed

Gramineae

probably three unknown
species

4 bulb fragments

Other Plant Remains:
Dasylirion texanum

Sotol leaf & caudex
fragments

Opuntia joint fragments

Prickly Pear pads

Agave lecheguilla

Lechuguflla leaf & caudex
fragments

charcoal
Faunal Remains:

(including

3.5 grams

58 grams
10 grams

Number

beetle

1

rabbit bone

1

charred bones

2

5 quids)

wt. 155 grams

total

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

220

The remains of plant and animal resources are listed in Table 5. No
attempt will be made to explore all of the uses of the plant and animal
parts identified in the matrix samples. The samples were collected
mainly to seek an answer to the problem of seasonality and not to
provide a definitive statement concerning the much more encompassing problem of plant use. However, using information
derived from this study we can tentatively list those plants which we
feel served as food and material for manufacturing products.
Coprolite analyses from other locations in the lower Pecos River
area have provided a substantial list of plant foods actually
consumed by peoples of the Lower Pecos Archaic (Riskind 1970;
TABLE 3. CONTENTS IN MATRIX SAMPLE #3
Scientific Name

Common Name

Number or Amount

Leaves:
Quercus virginiana

Virginia Live Oak

Quercus pungens

Vasey Shin Oak

3 leaves

Juniperus sp.

Juniper, Cedar

Fouquieria splendens

Ocotillo

Diospyros texana

Texas Persimmon

53 leaves

Prosopis sp.

Mesquite

21 seeds

Quercus sp.

Oak

/urdperus sp.

Juniper

85 seeds

Allium drummondii

Onion

58 bulb fragments

Diospyros texana

Texas Persimmon

Opuntia sp.

Prickly Pear

37 seeds

Dasylirion texanum

Sotol leaf & caudex
fragments

54 grams

Agave lecheguilla

Lechuguilla leaf & caudex
fragments

58 grams

Yucca sp.

Yucca leaf & caudex
fragments

17 grams

Opuntia sp,

Prickly Pear pads

7 leaves
20 leaf fragments
7 leaves

Seeds:

6 acorn fragments

1 seed

Other Plant Remains:

Unidentified Quids

4.4 grams
48 grams

Unidentified fiber mass
(Lechuguilla, Sotol, or Yucca)
Charcoal

23 grams
7.8 grams

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

221

Bryant 1974). This information, combined with ethnographic data on
historic Indian adaptations in the American Southwest (Sharer, et al
1975) serves as the basic reference in our interpretations of the uses
for some plants. The economic uses of other plants or plant parts not
used for food are more certain since they occurred in the artifactual
remains at the site.

TABLE 4. CONTENTS IN MATRIX SAMPLE #4

Scientific Name

Common Name

Number or Amount

Quercus virginiana

Virginia Live Oak

19 leaves

Quercus pungens

Vasey Shin Oak

41 leaves

luniperus sp.

Juniper

86 leaf fragments

Diospyros texuna

Texas Persimmon

94 leaves

Leaves:

Berberis trifoliolata

i leaf

Seeds, Bulbs:
Prosopis sp.

Mesquite

11 seeds

luniperus sp.

Juniper

37 seeds
33 seeds

Opuntia sp.

Prickly Pear

Allium drummondii

Onion

Celtis sp.

Hackberry

I seed

Diospyros texana

Texas Persimmon

1 seed, 1 calyx

Juglans microcarpa

Walnut

7 fragments

Quercus sp.

Oak

4 acorn fragments,
2 acorns

Sophora segundiflora

Mountain Laurel

i seed, i pod fragment

4 bulb fragments
2 bulbs

Other Plant Remains:
Dasylirion texanum

Sotol leaf & caudex
fragments

90 grams

Agave lecheguilla

Lechugnilla leaf & caudex
fragments

65 grams

Yucca sp.

Yucca leaf & caudex
fragments

22 grams

Agave lecheguilla

Lechuguflla quids (5)

14 grams

Dasylirion texanum

Sotol quids (3)

12 grams

Unidentified Quids

(21)

73 grams

Opuntia sp.

Prickly Pear pad
fragments (13)

38 grams

222

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The listing in Table 5 is representative only of the matrix samples
themselves and not necessarily the shelter as a whole. A more
comprehensive and informative listing of economic plants and
animals will be possible only after the completion of additional
sampling of the shelter. Nevertheless, the contents of the samples
may be viewed as random selections and therefore give some
indication of the range of plants and animals exploited by the
aboriginal populations who frequented Gobbler Shelter.
C. Discussion
The prehistoric hunter-gatherers of the lower Pecos River area
utilized plants extensively in their diet and in their subsistence
technology. As emphasized earlier, dry conditions in many of the
area’s rockshelters have saved otherwise perishable plant remains in
midden deposits for thousands of years. While analysis of the
perishable artifacts has contributed much to the understanding of
these aboriginal populations, the bulk of the dry shelter middens is
composed of plant refuse, the by-product of implement making and
food preparation.
Although plant macrofossils comprise the bulk of deposits in many
of the lower Pecos area rockshelters, few people have systematically
collected and examined them. There are only four reports which
seriously treat plant remains from the lower Pecos River area (Irving
1966; Alexander 1970, 1974; Shafer, et al 1975). All of these papers
dealt with plant macrofossils found in caves downstream from
Crockett County, in or near the Amistad Lake district. The earliest
paper was a partially quantified checklist of plant parts recovered
from six rockshelters in the Amistad district (Irving 1966:89). Irving’s
(1966:89) only significant remark about his data was that plant usage
differed among the six sites. Shafer, et al (1975) reported ten of the
most abundant plant species recovered from 41 W 456.
Interpretation of data was confined to cautious speculation about the
utility of these plants. Both of the studies by Irving and Shafer, et al,
were preliminary reports.
Alexander’s observations on vegetal remains from Parida Cave
(41 VV 187) constituted the first significant interpretation of plant
macrofossils from the lower Pecos area. He reported that vegetal
parts of lechuguilla, sotol, and prickly pear occurred in "overwhelming proportions" which "Occupied important positions in the
prehistoric diet" (Alexander 1970: 61). This component of the vegetal
refuse was probably available on a year-round basis, raising the possibiility of long-term shelter occupation. Therefore Parida Cave may
have been retained as a campsite, or permanent base, from which
long range foraging was conducted (ibid: 63).

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

223

o

o

°
~

o

~

0

"E

U
m

~

o
o

o
o

cO

;>

-o= ~

--

"=

9,.,=--.

,-a

-

CO

c~

0

~’:~

~°~

___

~°~ ~
.~0 0

0

o ~ =

0
0

C~ 0 "-

.. ~

,~

0 ~.~
M (D .~
~
~ ~

-~

.~
o

’_

~.~~

<

.~ ~ ~

0

~o~

224

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The first quantitative analysis of plant macrofossil remains from
this area was reported four years later (Alexander 1974). The plant
material came from Conejo Shelter, located two miles north of the
confluence of the Rio Crande and the Pecos River. Alexander used
macrofossil data to test a hypothesis explaining prehistoric cultural
stability in the lower Pecos area. Because the environment changed
very little over a period of about 4,000 years, he believed that the
people had a chance to adapt very efficiently and maintain this
cultural pattern for a long time. We shall focus on his treatment of
seasonality for the purposes of this paper.
Using seasonal flowering and fruit ripening data from Vines’ (1960)
book on woody vegetation in the American Southwest, Alexander
determined the time of year when the fruits of nine economic
plants would ripen. He placed them in chronological order of the
seasons hoping to find evidence of a similar order in the midden
deposits of Conejo Shelter. Instead, he found that most of the plants
occurred in varying abundance throughout the midden (Alexander
1974: 197-198). As a result of this broad distribution within the
midden, Alexander’s conclusions from Conejo Shelter differ from
those in his Parida Cave report. Instead of stressing the possibility of
year-round shelter occupation, he (1974: 198) states:
It appears from this [data distribution] that lenses represent the residues
from long seasonal occupations which lasted perhaps from early summer
through late fall...

Alexander’s evidence could lead to this conclusion. However, there
are many variables which complicate the determination of seasonality from plant macrofossil data.
It is indisputable that many plant resources are available on a
short term basis during the year. Seeds and fruits can be excellent
examples. If prehistoric peoples in the lower Pecos area made
seasonal rounds, they probably left remains of the plants which were
available at the time of the year they visited Gobbler Shelter. We
were tempted to use these plants as an indication of what season of
the year shelters were occupied. Unfortunately we have found that
these indicator plant parts are not always available in southwest
Texas during the same season of every year. In Table 6 we have
demonstrated this problem by comparing Alexander’s source of
seasonality (Vines 1960) to the flowering and fruiting observations
which we made in the summer of 1975. This illustrates the fact that
flowering of many plants in the lower Pecos is not directly governed
by the "seasons," but by factors such as photoperiodism, tern-

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

225

perature, and soil moisture. True, seasons generally exhibit certain levels of light, temperature, and moisture. However, abundant rainfall can result in a double flowering/fruiting of some
plant species as we noted during the wet summer of 1975. We realize
that any area in the world is subject to this variation. But in
southwest Texas rainfall is so erratic and plant response to moisture
is so pronounced that archeologists seeking clues to seasonality
should not overlook these factors.
The problem is easily illustrated by applying our reasoning to the
Gobbler Shelter data. As shown in Tables 1 through 4, we recovered
seeds, fruits, or flower parts representing nine plant genera.
One must remember that these plant remains were available to
human populations because the plants had produced fruits in
response to local environmental conditions.
The left column in Table 6 shows when the plants might normally
flower. However, if the winter is mild and rainfall is heavy, flowering
can occur much earlier and extend late into the fall. In fact, any
combination of rain or drought and warm or cold could produce
flowering or fruiting which is idiosyncratic to a given year or series of
years. In the case of Gobbler Shelter, we have evidence of occupation
from late summer to early fall only if we follow Vines’ (1960) schedule
of flowering. If we compare our data to the observations made in a
wet year (See Table 6, right column) occupation is shifted to earlier in
the summer and extends later into the winter. Moreover, one cannot
TABLE 6. POSSIBLE SEASONAL OCCURRENCES OF GOBBLER SHELTER FLOWERING

Plants

Vines 1960
Months of Flowering

Prosopis sp.

August-September

Opuntia sp.

June-September

Celtis sp.

September-October

Quercus pungens

September-November

Juglaus
microcarpa

September-November

Fruits in July and August,
second flowering in August

Diospyros texana

August-February

Fruits in July, fruit
ripening in late August

Observations of 1975
Fruits in July, same trees still
flowering

Fruits in July

still

226

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

exclude the possibility that the shelter was occupied in the winter
because an absence of most plant fruits would be a normal winter
occurrence. To say that Gobbler Shelter was unoccupied in the
winter because of an absence of seasonal indicators would involve
the use of negative evidence.
An oversimplified approach has kept us from detecting seasonal
occupations at Gobbler Shelter. We lack the information needed to
place the problem of seasonality in its proper context. Environmental
factors which encourage flowering of each plant species in southwest
Texas are not well known. Neither are we certain of the prehistoric
distribution of these plants. Six years ago Alexander {1970: 61} emphasized that post-contact changes have occurred in the vegetation of
the area. More accurate knowledge of plant distribution in relation to
microenvironments will enhance the accuracy of our statements
about plant behavior and prehistoric human procurement patterns.
The establishment of an ecological Context in southwest Texas for
the study of prehistoric human behavior is currently underway at
Texas A&M University. The project has two immediate goals: (1} to
reconstruct vegetation changes which have occurred in southwest
Texas since initial European settlement and [2) to determine the
feasibility of selecting certain seasonal indicator plants based on a
thorough understanding of their flowering behavior. When we know
what makes these plants flower and approximately where they were
flowering, our stories of prehistoric lifeways in southwest Texas will
become both more informative and more accurate.

CONCLUDING STATEMENT
The results of the analysis of four matrix samples from a small
rockshelter containing dessicated plant remains are neither
representative nor conclusive with regards to what can be learned
from such studies. We do feel, however, that these results indicate
the potential of such data sources as plant macrofossils.
The major objective of the study was to determine which season or
seasons of the year the shelter had been utilized. To this end, all
plant, animal, and lithic materials were sorted and a quantitative
list of all components was compiled. During the analysis new plant
identification techniques were explored. Refinements of the method
will be reported later. Thirteen genera of plants commonly listed as
lower Pecos food sources were identified. This represents the largest compilation of potentially economic plants reported from
archeological sites in Crockett County. Nine genera of plants were
listed as potential seasonal indicators. Wood, fiber, and cordage

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

227

artifacts made from at least four different plant sources and one
animal source were also recovered.
However, in attempting to determine seasonality the question of
plant behavior and unpredictable weather conditions complicated the
issue. Reliable data on seasonal flowering of plants in the lower Pecos
are not available. Field observations by the authors have shown that
erratic rainfall can cause very early or very late flowering by plants
in semi-arid regions such as the lower Pecos. Because of this highly
variable behavior, the assumption that plants flower on a seasonal
basis has proved misleading. We conclude that a determination of
seasonal occupation at Gobbler Shelter is premature, given the
available information. This by no means nullifies the value of plant
macrofossil data in interpreting prehistoric subsistence patterns. The
problem is merely expanded to include a detailed consideration of
both plant and human behavior.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank several individuals for their
contributions to this study. Gary L. Moore, Glen Goode and Frank A. Weir
of the Texas Department of Highways and Transportation directed the
authors to Gobbler Shelter and provided the matrix samples for study. The
photographs used in Figure 1 were also made available by Frank Weir.
Glerma Williams-Dean worked with the senior author on developing
methods of identifying leaf fragments of yucca, lechuguilla and sotol.
Glendon H, Weir provided the identification for the animal and plant fibers
in cordage specimens. Williams-Dean, Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr., Gary L.
Moore and B. I. Strode critically reviewed earlier drafts of this paper.
However, we assume sole responsibility for any error of fact or
interpretation.

228

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Alexander, Robert K.
1970 Archeological Excavations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeologieal Salvage Project, No. 19.
1974 The Archaeology of Conejo Shelter: A Study of Stability at an Archaic
Rockshelter Site in Southwestern Texas. Ph.D. Dissertation, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Bryant, Vaughn M.
1974Prehistoric Diet in Southwest Texas: The Coprolite Evidence.
American Antiquity, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 407-420.
Campbell, T. N.
1958 Origins of the Mescal Bean Cult. American Anthropologist, Vol. 60:
pp. 156-160.
Heizer, Robert and Sherburne Cook
1956 Some Aspects of the Quantitative Approach in Archaeology.
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 12, pp. 229-248.
Holden, W. C.
1941 McKenzie Cave and Adjacent Sites in Pecos County. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 13, pp. 46-57.
Irving, Robert S.
1966 A Preliminary Analysis of Plant Remains from Six Amistad Reservoir
Sites. In: Dee Ann Story and Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr: (assemblers), A
Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the Amistad Area. Report of
Research, National Science Foundation, GS-667, Austin.
Lee, Richard B. and Irven DeVore
1968 Man the Hunter. Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.
Lorrain, Dessamae
1968 Archeological Excavations in Northwestern Crockett County, Texas,
1966-1967. State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report
No. 12.
Moore, Gary L.
1975 Scheduled Hunting and Gathering in the Trans-Pecos. Paper
presented at the Symposium "Prehistoric Adaptations in the
Chihuahuan Desert." Annual meeting of the Society for American
Archaeology, Dallas.
Pearce, J. E. and A. T. Jackson.
1933 A Prehistoric Rockshelter in Val Verde County, Texas. University of
Texas Publication No. 3327, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No. 3.
Riggs, Aaron D.
1968a A Crockett County Shelter (41 CX 10). Transactions of the Third
Regional Archaeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico
and Western Texas, South Plains Archaeological Society, pp: 41-50.
1968b A Preliminary Report on a Crockett County, Texas Shelter: 41 CX 12.
Transactions of the Fourth Regional Archaeologica! Symposium for
Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, Iraan Archaeological
Society, pp. 2-18.
1969 Rattlesnake Shelter: 41 CX 29. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological
Society, Vol. 40, pp. 107-117.
1974Nan’s Shelter: 41 CX 109. Transactions of the Ninth Regional
Archaeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and
Western Texas, Midland Archaeological Society: pp. 25-38.

ANALYSIS OF MATRIX SAMPLES FROM CROCKETT

229

Riskind, David H.
1970 Pollen Analysis of Human Coprolites from Parida Cave. Papers of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 19, pp. 89-101.
Shafer, Harry J.
1975 Art and Territoriality in the Lower Pecos Archaic. Paper presented
at the Symposium "Prehistoric Adaptations in the Chihuahuan
Desert." Annual meeting of the Society for American Archaeology,
Dallas.
Shafer, Harry I., Phil Dering, Glerma Williams-Dean and Vaughn M. Bryant,
Jr.
1975 A Preliminary Report of Hinds Cave, Val Verde County, Texas.
Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Report No. 8.
Vines, Robert A.
1960 Trees, Shrubs and Woody Vines of the Southwest. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Weir, Glendon H.
ms. Mammalian Hair from Gobbler Shelter, Crockett County, Texas.
Manuscript on file at the Texas A&M Anthropology Laboratory,
College Station.
Word, James H.
1971 The Dunlap Complex in Western Central Crockett County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42, pp. 271-318.
Word, James H. and Charles L. Douglas
1970 Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas
Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 16.

