NOTES
A POLYCHROME VESSEL FROM GOLIAD COUNTY,
SOUTHERN TEXAS
ANNE A. FOX

AND W. S. FITZPATRICK

ABSTRACT
A polychrome, bone tempered vessel embellished with a trailed and
punctated motif is described. The vessel bears characteristics of both
Goliad and Rockport wares and the implications of these mixed
attributes as to the origin of the potter are discussed.

In 1974 W.S. Fitzpatrick of Corpus Christi, Texas, sent a
collection of ceramic sherds to Dr. Thomas R. Hester of The
University of Texas at San Antonio for analysis. The sherds had
been found some years previously on the south bank of the San
Antonio River two or three miles upstream from Mission Rosario.
Since the decoration on the vessel represented by the sherds
appears to be unlike that reported from other sites in the area, the
vessel will be documented fully here for the information of others
who are interested in ceramics from south Texas aboriginal and
mission sites.
DESCRIPTION
The collection consists of 64 sherds from a single vessel (see Fig.

1). No information is available on whether there was other
artifactual material present on the site. It has been possible to
restore enough of the vessel to reconstruct the original shape and
to estimate its dimensions (Fig. 2). The following data have been

obtained from examination of the sherds:
Shape: small, wide-mouthed jar with globular body and rounded
bottom
Method of manufacture: coiled construction
Approximate height: 19 cm
Diameter at rim: 14.5 cm.
Maximum diameter of body: 16 cm
Wall thickness: neck, 4 cm; base, 5 to 6 cm
Rim: flat, with closely spaced notches, giving a serrated appearance
(Fig. 1)
Paste texture: very fine, 1/8 to 1/16 mm
Temper: tiny flecks of white and gray bone
Finish: exterior, smoothed with fine, vertical striations on neck;
interior, crudely smoothed with overlapping coils visible on neck,
numerous fingernail impressions lumpy areas, and random striations.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

134

0

5

I

I

cm

d

C
o
I

!

!

cm

I

I

5

3

f

2
:,:,,I
cm

FIGURE 1. Sherds of Vessel from Goliad County. a, portion of neck
showing incised decoration and notched rim; b, body sherd with
asphaltum on exterior; c, basal sherd with incised lines; d,
enlargement of incised decoration (approximately 4 times actual
size). Note varying scales.

POLYCHROME VESSEL FROM GOLIAD COUNTY

135

~ max. 4 cm

red painted lines

II

?

max. 6 cm

1

136

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Color: exterior, reddish-brown (5YR 6/4) to pinkish-gray (5YR 6/2)
with dark gray fire clouds on body and base; interior, uniformly reddishbrown; core of most sherds is dark to light gray.
Surface treatment: double incised vertical lines containing punctations
from rim to near base, barely visible red lines parallel to incised lines,
traces of asphaltum in no particular pattern, probably accidental or the
result of crack mending (Fig. 1,b).

DISCUSSION
In general, this vessel fits the description by Mounger (1959: 164165) for the bone tempered Goliad wares, in all details except
decoration. Its shape, size and proportions are similar to those of
vessels she describes from Mission Espiritu Santo seven miles
downstream from the site where the vessel was found (ibid.: 166).
However, the surface treatment appears to be unique. Campbell
(1962: 334) in his summary of Mounger’s type descriptions,
indicates that Goliad Red-on-buff often bears broad, vertical,
widely spaced lines in a dull red paint. The red lines barely visible
on the vessel in question are neither broad nor widely spaced. The
incised decoration, apparently made while the clay was still quite
wet, was accomplished by alternately pulling and jabbing a stick or
reed 1.5 mm in diameter along the surface of the vessel, probably
from the rim down the neck and onto the body. Also present are
short pairs of similar lines on the body of the vessel (Fig. 1). There
is not enough of the vessel present to determine the pattern, but
the design appears to repeat three or four times around the vessel.
This type of trailed and punctated design has not been reported
previously on any type of Texas ware. However, Gilmore illustrates
sherds of Goliad Black-on-buff with a single line of punctations
extending downward from the rim from Mission Rosario (1975:117
and Fig. 35, E and G), and Campbell (1962: 332) indicates that
punctations are occasionally found on Rockport Black-on-gray
vessels.
The rim treatment in this case is unusual, not in form but in the
execution of the notching. A tradition of rim notching is well known
on Rockport wares (Suhm and Jelks 1962: 135, 136L), but the
notches on this vessel are much closer together than any the senior
author has seen.
It appears that we have in this one small jar an unusual blending
of Goliad and Rockport traditions. Since there exists no information
about other materials from the site, we can only speculate on the
possible origins of vessel and potter. There are indications in the
collections of sherds from the Goliad missions that Goliad ware was

POLYCHROME VESSEL FROM GOLIAD COUNTY

137

occasionally decorated in a manner reminiscent of Rockport Blackon-gray (Campbell 1962: 334). It appears that in the case of the
Fitzpatrick vessel, the vertical lines of punctations and rim
notching may have been inspired by similar, though not identical,
designs the potter may have known from his or her own
experience, or observed on Rockport wares brought into the
missions. The workmanship of the vessel, the thin walls and fine
textured paste, are suggestive more of Rockport wares than of the
thicker walls and coarser paste of Goliad wares, implying perhaps
a neophyte coastal potter working with local clays but in his own
tradition.
The location of the site on which the sherds was found is near
the trail from Mission Rosario to its ranch upstream (Forrestal
1931: 17). Goliad ware sherds have been found on a number of
other sites in Goliad and Karnes Counties. The Scarborough Site
(Calhoun 1966} contained two restorable jars of Goliad Plain
accompanied by chert tools in a campsite about 20 miles east of
Mission Rosario on a tributary of the San Antonio River. Another
site containing sherds of Goliad Plain plus typical Mexican made
ware used in the missions, was located approximately the same
distance upstream on the west bank of the San Antonio River
(ibid.). Undoubtedly many more such temporary campsites exist
along streams in southern Texas, where mission Indians stopped in
their travels between missions and on visits to other aboriginal
groups in the area.
In conclusion it was suggested that this small, well-made and
carefully decorated jar was made by an Indian in one of the Goliad
missions who had either been taught in or exposed to the coastal
pottery traditions (a phenomenon which probably also occurred in
the Goliad County area in late prehistoric times; cf. Hester and
Parker 1970: 21). It was probably accidentally broken during a trip
up the San Antonio River, perhaps to the Rosario ranch or to the
ranches or missions near San Antonio.

REFERENCES CITED

Calhoun, C. A.
1966 A Small Campsite near Kenedy, Texas. Newsletter of the Houston
Archeo!ogical Society, No. 18.
Campbell, T. N.
1962 Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32.

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Forrestal, Rev. P. P., translator
1931 The Solis Diary of 1767. Preliminary Studies of the Texas Catholic
Historical Society, Vol. 1, No. 6.
Hester, T. R. and R. C. Parker
1970 The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in Goliad County,
Southern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
40, pp. 1-24.

