The Caddoan Area: An Introduction to

the Symposium
E. MOTT DAVIS

The Symposium
This paper and those which follow are based on presentations made
at a symposium on "Relationships Between the Caddoan Area and
Neighboring Areas" at the 23rd annual meeting of the Society for
American Archaeology at the University of Oklahoma on May 2,
1958. Robert E. Bell, Chairman of the Program Committee for that
meeting, suggested a session on Caddoan archeology in which the
papers would not be so specialized as to be incomprehensible to the
listeners, almost all of whom would not be specialists in Caddoan
archeology. The symposium was therefore set up with two factors
in mind: the relative ignorance of the audience, and the specialized
interests of the speakers. The general topic of "relationships with
neighboring areas" was chosen because it provided an opportunity to
present not only something about Caddoan archeology, but also about
its place in the culture history of the continent--a subject of interest
to all Americanists, whether Caddoan specialists or not. In addition,
the program was set up to include discussions for each paper, since
this practice, especially when disagreements are voiced, makes technical subjects stimulating for specialists and non-specialists alike. For
this reason also, the discussants were enjoined not simply to echo the
opinions of the main speaker. In addition, the symposium was begun
with a brief presentation of the current state of knowledge of Caddoan
archeology, in order to provide a frame of reference for those unacquainted with the area.
It is acknowledged with regret that one set of relationships, perhaps
the most fascinating of all, is not touched on here: the relationships
between the Caddoan area and Mexico. This is a subject which, to be
treated other than superficially, would alone require an entire symposium, or even several symposia.

4

TEXAS AIlCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Since the symposium took place, in 1958, the authors of the papers
and the discussants have had the opportunity to revise their oral presentations as they have seen fit. In a few cases the papers appear here
essentially as they were given at the symposium; those by Bell, Webb,
and Ielks are in this category. The rest of the papers have undergone
revision; some more, some less. The task of marshalling the written
papers has been carried out by T. N. Campbell, the editor of this
bulletin.
It should also be noted that the Fifth Conference on Caddoan
Archeology was held at the University of Oklahoma just before the
meeting of which this symposium was a part, and some of the matters
treated formally in the symposium had already been discussed informally, and at length, in the Conference. The Proceedings of the
Conference are published in this bulletin, following the present group
of symposium papers. There is .some duplication, but not a great deal.
The combination of symposium and conference provides a good view
of the present status of Caddoan archeology.

The Caddoan Area
Geographical Limits. The area in which Caddoan sites are important
is made up of the adjoining parts of the states of Oklahoma, Arkansas,
Louisiana, and Texas. The northern boundary is the Arkansas River,
with its immediate tributaries, and the eastern boundary is the
Ouachita and its immediate tributaries. On the south, the edge of the
area is about one hundred miles inland from the Gulf of Mexico, and
on the west the border can be drawn at the western edge of the "piney
woods" in Texas--roughly, the Trinity-Brazos divide--and northward
to the vicinity of Tulsa, Oklahoma. Some Caddoan components are
found outside these bounds, but in general they define what we usually
think of as "The Caddoan Area." It is a wooded, well-watered area
without significant natural barriers to movement, and well suited to
native agriculture. Archeologically it is part of the Southeastern area
of North America.
Archeological Characteristics. Caddoan sites are village sites, ceremonial centers with mounds, and burial grounds containing graves
with quantities of distinctive, well-made pottery of a wide variety of
types. On the pottery, which is not painted, engraving and excising o[
polished ware, often with paint rubbed into the engraved lines, is a
favorite form of decoration; and bottles and carinated bowls are (along
with jars) popular vessel forms. The interlocking scroll is a frequent
design motif. The usual tempering material is clay, but twenty to

CADDOAN AREA

I

I
I
!

!

I
I
I

EL DORADO

\\

NATCHEZ

\
\

o
SAN ANTONIO

CADDOAN AREA
50

0
SCALE

Fig. 1. The Caddoan Area.

IN MILES

100

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

thirty per cent of vessels are tempered with crushed bone--a trait
which sets Caddoan ceramics off from most others. No shell tempering
occurs until relatively late times in most of the Caddoan area. Pottery
pipe forms are distinctive. One very distinctive trait is a particular
house type in which the archeologist finds a large post mold underneath the central fireplace, signifying the use of a central post as a
temporary scaffold in the building of the structure.
Subdivisions: Aspects and Foci. Archeological nomenclature in the
Caddoan area follows the Midwestern Taxonomic System. The components fal! into two groups: Gibson Aspect or early Caddoan, and
Fulton Aspect or late Caddoan. Transitional sites are known, but most
components are clearly in one aspect or the other. Within the two
aspects a number of foal have been distinguished. They are listed here
alphabetically.
Gibson Aspect Foci
Alto (Texas)
Haley (Arkansas, Louisiana,
Texas)
Gahagan (Louisiana)
Sanders (Texas, Oklahoma)
Spiro (Oklahoma)

Fulton Aspect Foci
Prehistoric loci:
Belcher (Louisiana, Arkansas)
Bossier (Louisiana, Arkansas,
Texas)
Fort Coffee (Oklahoma)
Frankston (Texas)
McCurtain (Oklahoma, Texas)
Mid-Ouachita (Arkansas)
Texarkana (Texas, Arkansas)
Titus (Texas)
Turkey Bluff (Oklahoma)
Wylie (Texas--a western focus
which may not be Caddoan)
Historic foal:
Allen (Texas)
Glendora (Texas, Louisiana,
Arkansas)

CADDOAN AREA

The components of the Fulton Aspect which contain European trade
material--those in the Alien and Glendora loci and others--are currently being re-examined with an eye to reclassification. This part of
the list will very likely soon be changed.
Gibson Aspect sites include ceremonial centers with platform
mounds containing large deep burial pits with multiple burials and
rich cult offerings, including (in some sites) Southern Cult materials.
Characteristic ceramic traits are very fine-line engraving, bottles with
long tapering spouts, and pipes with very long slender stems and
small bowls.
In the later Fulton Aspect, the whole impression is that of a less
sophisticated culture, except in a restricted area along the bend of the
Red River in southwestern Arkansas, where a number of Gibson
Aspect ceremonial traits survive. In general, Fulton Aspect mound
building is restricted to relatively small mounds and to mantles on
Gibson Aspect mounds. By historic times, mound building is no longer
practiced. Typical Fulton Aspect sites are extensive cemeteries of single
interments with a great deal of pottery, but usually no Southern Cult
objects. Characteristic ceramic traits are red slipped ware, brushed
utility pottery, relatively coarse engraved lines, wide-mouth vessels
with high flaring rims, spurred-line scrolls, the interlocking scroll
motif repeated four times around the vessel, cross-hatched engraving
as a background motif, and conical-bowl pipes.
Some Fulton Aspect sites contain European trade material, as already mentioned, and some of these historic remains have been identified with specific Caddo tribes of the 17th and 18th centuries, such as
Kadohadacho, Cahinnio, Hasinai, and Natchitoches.
Concentration on Ceremonial Sites. The fact that nothing has been
said about village sites, in this description of the two aspects, reflects
the fact that most archeological work in the Caddoan area has been
directed at mounds and cemeteries. Little information is available on
subsistence patterns, settlement patterns, or others of the everyday,
basic facets of Caddoan culture history. The fact that Caddoan culture
is synonymous with horticultural village life in this area is about all
we can say. The reasons for such phenomena as the appearance of
Caddoan traits in the area, certain shifts in the geographical range
of Caddoan materials with time, and the change from the Gibson
Aspect to the Fulton Aspect, are almost entirely unknown. Systematic
studies of prehistoric Caddoan socioeconomic patterns can rightfully
be said to be in their infancy.

TEXAS AttCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Chronology. Concerning the matter of chronology in the Caddoan
area, there are important disagreements. Naturally the European
trade material, which first appears sometime between A.D. 1600 and
1750, provides an anchor at the near end of the sequence. In the prehistoric complexes the chronological evidence takes the form of stratigraphic relationships at a relatively few sites, strong cross-ties and
sequential ties in artifact types, a few radiocarbon dates, and correlations with the relatively well-established central Louisiana sequence
of Marksville-Troyville-Coles Creek-Plaquemine. It is in the critical
matter of the correlations with central Louisiana and the rest of the
Mississippi Valley that the disagreements occur. In simplified terms
there are two schools of thought on this matter:
(1) The first school is made up in the main of persons who have
done their work in the Caddoan area; the name of Alex D. Krieger is
most commonly associated with this viewpoint. According to this point
of view, the whole Caddoan archeological sequence covers a thousand
years or more, beginning around A.D. 700, or perhaps as early as A.D.
400 or 300. The Gibson Aspect is seen as beginning at about the same
time as, or earlier than, the Coles Creek period in the lower Mississippi
Valley.
(2) The second school of thought is made up mostly of persons who
have done their work in the Mississippi Valley, and is frequently
identified with the name of James A. Ford. In this view, the whole
Caddoan sequence is relatively brief, covering perhaps four centuries.
It begins around A.D. 1200 or 1300, at the end of the Coles Creek period
in the lower Mississippi Valley.
Both points of view have good evidence in their favor, as certain of
the papers which follow will make clear. The problem is important~
since it has a bearing on Caddoan origins. The cult material, platform
mounds, and many other items, which are commonly classed as
"Mississippian" and are found in early Caddoan sites as well as
farther east, derive their ultimate inspiration from Mesoamerica. If
Caddoan beginnings go back to A.D. 400, as adherents of the "Krieger"
school think possible, then the Caddoan area could have been the first
to have these Mesoamerican traits, which could have spread thence
eastward to the Mississippi Valley. By the "Ford" chronology, on the
other hand, the Caddoan area would necessarily have been the recip-lent of these traits from the Mississippi Valley cultures, rather than
having donated them to the latter.
Archaic Antecedents. A further aspect of the question of Caddoan

CADDOAN AREA

origins lies in the problem of the relationship of early Caddoan cultures to the Archaic cultures which preceded them in the same area.
Little is known on this subject, because until very recently our knowledge of the Archaic cultures was based almost entirely on studies of
surface collections (a major exception has been Baerreis’ work in
northeastern Oklahoma). However, despite the rudimentary state o[
knowledge, some relevant facts are known. Much of the Archaic stone
inventory continues with little alteration into the early Caddoan complexes, so that the impression of continuity from Archaic to Caddoan
is as strong as that of change. From this circumstance it might be
assumed that the appearance of Caddoan traits in the area was due
more to cultural diffusion than to population movement. Unfortunately
there have been few skeletal studies in the area, so that the question of
population changes remains to be answered’.
There are a number of complexes in the area which are postArchaic in the sense that they include pottery, but are pre-Caddoan
because they lack the distinctive Gaddoan style. The Bellevue Focus
in northwestern Louisiana and the upper Fourche Maline Focus of
eastern Oklahoma are examples of these ’°pre-Caddoan" ceramic complexes. In some degree these cultures appear to represent a transition
from the Archaic to the fully developed Caddoan cultures, but in
general their role in the development of the latter is not yet clear.
Tazonomic Position in Southeastern Archeology. For the sake of
formal taxonomists, it may be said that the Gibson Aspect and the
Fulton Aspect together make up a unit that, in the strict application
of the Midwestern Taxonomic System, would be called the Caddoan
Phase of the Mississippian Pattern. However, "Caddoan Phase" is not
a term currently in use; mainly because the term "phase" is in widespread use in American archeology in another sense--synonymously
with the Midwestern term "focus"--but also because the concept of
"phase" as employed in the Midwestern Taxonomic System has been
difficult to apply meaningfully in many areas, including this one.
It should further be pointed out that classifying "Gaddoan" as a
segment of something more general called "Mississippian," while a
convenient pedagogical device and not without some meaning in terms
of culture history, leaves much to be explained. "Gaddoan" applies to
the archeological evidences in a particular area, reflecting a particular
segment of culture history. "Mississippian" is a much more generalized concept, signifying certain resemblances, and hence relationships,
among most of the late prehistoric cultures of the Southeast. When an

10

TEXAS AIICIIEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

archeological complex is identified as Mississippian, it naturally remains to be determined how, when, and why it came to have the particular Mississippian characteristics. This is a job which has not yet
been accomplished for the Caddoan complexes. The chronological controversy already discussed points up some of the difficulties involved,
and the contributions to the symposium by Drs. Webb and Griffin and
their discussants elaborate the problem in some detail. Therefore,
when we classify "Caddoan" as part of "Mississippian," this categorization should be taken to signify only that Caddoan materials are primarily related to certain other complexes in the Southeast. The nature
of the relationship, in terms of historical events, is not yet fully understood.
Caddoan Archeology and Caddoan Linguistics. Finally, it should be
noted that the term "Caddoan" is used by both archeologists and linguists, but it has distinct meanings in the two fields. In both cases, it is
true, the term refers to phenomena related to the historic Caddo people.
Archeologically, however, the term applies to the cultures directly
ancestral to the Caddo, whereas linguistically it refers to a far-flung
group of related languages, one of which is that spoken by the Caddo.
The linguistic term is also often applied ethnologically to the historic
tribes who spoke Caddoan languages: not only the Caddo themselves
(who are thought to occupy the original homeland of the whole
group), but also the "Plains Caddoans"--the Wichita, Pawnee, and
Arikara, peoples of the Great Plains whose prehistoric ancestors in
that region did not share in the Caddoan archeological tradition we
have been discussing here. "Caddoan archeology" will doubtless eventually be tied in with the distinct prehistoric remains of the "Plains
Caddoans"; the paper by Dr. Bell in this symposium bears on this
matter. At present, however, the relationship of the Caddo proper to
the Wichita, Pawnee, Arikara, while well demonstrated linguistically,
has not been traced archeologically. "Caddoan archeology," then, applies to the study of the prehistory of only one member of the Caddoan
linguistic group, the Caddo proper.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

