140

Texas Archeological Society

INTRODUCTION
Archeological excavations were undertaken in McKinney Falls State Park
at the Horse Trainer’s Cabin (41TV307) between July 22 and July 26,
1974. This structure is believed to represent the living quarters of John Van
Hagan, Thomas McKinney’s horse trainer, during all or some portion of the
period 1851 (or 1852) to 1872.
An investigation of the standing structure to recover easily disturbed data
was necessary because of possible site disturbance during park development
and due to the proximity to proposed camping and picnicking areas. A crew
of six from the Historic Sites Branch of the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department carried out limited archeological excavations assisted by several local
volunteers. Information on the cabin’s structural remains and a representative sample of artifa~ts~ primarily representing the uses of the building during the early 1900’s, were recovered.

METHODOLOGY
Initial inspection of the site indicated that park development activities then
in progress had already disturbed much of the area immediately adjacent to
the structure. However, the structure was still fairly undisturbed except for
minimal use by construction workers as a lunch area.
The roof had previously fallen into the structure interior and most of the
peripheral walls were collapsed; only the north wall of the building was fairly
intact. The remains of the roof were removed by hand and accumulated
mulch fill cleaned out. Brush and other debris were removed from around
the exterior of the structure.
Cleaning revealed several wooden floor sleepers running north/south
and spaced about 3 ft apart. The sleepers were used as natural north/south
grid lines for dividing the room into units for excavation, each unit being approximately 3 ft sq (Fig. 1). Selected units along the walls were excavated
either partially or completely. Units also were excavated outside the two entrances in the hopes of revealing possible porches or door steps. Other units
to the south and north of the structure were excavated to check for rock
walls such as the one abutting the southwest corner. Two crossing trenches

Black -- Horse Trainer’s Cabin

\

Fig. I Plan of foundation showing excavation units.

141

142

Texas Archeologica! Society

were excavated outside the south wall to test a scattered rock mass thought
to be the remains of a fallen chimney or a possible second room.
Fill was passed through I/4 in screen and collections were bagged by unit
and returned to the Parks and Wildlife Department Archeology Lab for
cleaning and cataloging. Relative elevations were calculated on the basis of
an arbitrary elevation of 100 feet established on the surface of a nearby
manhole cover.

STRUCTURAL REMAINS
The cabin’s exterior dimensions were approximately 28 ft 10 in by 16 ft 9
in. The two foot thick walls were built of rough shaped limestone blocks
forming separate interior/exterior faces and laid with a mud mortar. Occasional tie stones spanning the width of the wall hold the two faces together.
The interior cavity of the wall contained rubble fill set in a mud mortar.
Some lime/sand mortar pointing is still visible on the interior of the north
wall and traces of a scoring line can be seen in the surfaces of the mortar
joints.
The only known early photograph of the cabin is one taken in 1942 by
Reynolds Lowry (Fig. 2). This photograph shows the cabin gabled at both
the north and south ends with a shingled roof later covered over by corrugated metal roofing. The cedar shingled roof was constructed of cut
wooden beams using cut (square) nails in the construction. The later metal
roofing was attached with wire nails.
Windows and doors details are almost unknown as artifacts from these
features were not recognized. Figure 2 shows that the east door was constructed of vertical boards and probably hinged on the right hand or north
side with large strap hinges. The single window in the photograph is covered
by a piece of corrugated metal; details are not visible.
The archeological remains of the cabin revealed little data. Two doorways
of different widths are present in both the east and west walls. Traces of
three window openings are found in the same walls: one to the south of the
door in the west wall; and two, one to either side of but at different distances
from the door, in the east wall. The window to the south of the east door
was filled with stone and concrete sometime before 1943.
A single fireplace of unknown dimensions is located in the center of the
south wall. Little remains except the opening of the fireplace and a portion
of the east coving interior face. The fireplace extruded or extended outside
the structure from the exterior of the wall an undetermined distance. The indicated fireplace (Fig. 1) is therefore mainly hypothetical, based on a common plan of extruded fireplaces.
The flooring was modern I x 6 to I x 8 in tongue and groove pine boards
attached to 2 x 10 in sleeper joists with wire nails. The sleepers were approximately 3 ft apart and rested on a prepared surface. The original floor was an
uneven packed earth floor at approximately the same level (or slightly lower
through compacting) as the first coarse of the stone wall. Before the wooden
flooring was laid, a tan to orange sand was used in the lower spots to provide a level surface for laying the sleepers. Artifacts indicate that this could
have occurred at almost any time in the late 19th or early 20th centuries.
The hearth of the fireplace was then raised to the level of the flooring by

Black - Horse Trainer’s Cabin

143

Fig. 2 Photograph of Cabin, looking west (courtesy of Texas Memorial Museum, The
University of Texas at Austin).

building it up with flat laid stone. A rough chronology of building events is
given in Table 1.
STONE FENCES
Although McKinney’s estate was large, only a portion within a large bend
in Onion Creek was rock fenced and used for specific types of pasture
(perhaps to keep mares and foals separated from the herd). These rock
fences were built of dry laid, tabular limestone slabs, starting with a double
wide course of larger slabs about 2 ft wide at the base. Successive courses
used smaller slabs as the fence narrowed to a truncated pyramid. Some
rough field stone occasionally was used in the upper courses. Most of the
stone fences have fallen and little remains except for long mounds of rocky
rubble. One section of fence near the middle of the park is still standing to
the original height of about 5 ft.
A rectangular corral measuring about 80 ft by 260 ft is near the center of
the rock fence which forms the south boundary of the state park. The site is
overgrown heavily with trees and thick under brush. Exact dimensions could
not be taken due to the deteriorated condition of the fence and poor visibility. A low, double wide, single course of dry laid limestone blocks abuts the
south side of the southwest corner of the cabin This one course of stone is
the only fence remains near the cabin.
ARTIFACTS
Artifacts reflecting the original occupation of the cabin were not found
within the structure. Several cast .36 caliber lead balls found along the interior of the east wall may relate to the early occupation although their uncorroded condition would indicate otherwise. One pink spongeware sherd

144

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1
Chronology of Building Events

Events
1850/1870--Original construction of limestock rock and mud mortar structure with shingle
roof.
1900/1920--Three events (non-sequential): shingle roof covered with corrugated iron
sheeting; repointing and replastering; fireplaces and chimney fell (or dismantedl)
and opening rebuilt with stone.
Post 1920-- Structure used for hay storage at least into the 1940’s.
Post 1950-- Collapse of roof and general disintegration of walls.

may date to the early occupation, but it was found a short distance west of
the structure.
The identifiable artifacts, primarily bottles and glass sherds, date to the
late 19th and early 20th centuries. The Mcleans Volcanic Oil Liniment bottle
(Fig. 3a) has a manufacturer’s mark used by the Illinois Glass Co. between
1916 and 1929 (Toulouse, 1971:264). The manufacturing technique of the
Harter’s Soothing Drops bottle (Fig. 3b) and dating on the product, indicate
a date range from the 1870’s to mid-1910’s (Devner, 1968:42).
A number of agriculturally related artifacts such as baling wire fragments
reflect the building’s use as a storage shed or barn at a later date.

SUMMARY
Based on scanty historical data and limited artifactual material, two occupational periods are indicated. The first is the presumed occupancy by
Thomas McKinney’s horse trainer, John Van Hagan, between 1852 and
1872, as reported by Reynolds Lowry. The second occupation was in the
late 1880’s, lasting, possibly intermittently, into the 1910’s. Afterward, the
structure was used as an agricultural or ranching support facility.
The house originally had a dirt floor or a wooden floor which was later
removed. The second floor was modern tongue and groove boards supported by joists. The collapsed roof has rafters with shingles (cedar) and
(later) sheet iron. Square 4d nails were used in the roofing; round wire nails
in the second floor.
The first building stage was of stone mortared with local sandy sediment.
The original walls were later flush pointed or plastered with a lime/sand
mortar; scoring gave it the appearance of squared courses. Evidence of
plastering was not found on the exterior of the house. The original height
from the (dirt?) floor to the underside of the ceiling joists was about 7 ft 7 in;
the later height from plank floor to ceiling was about 6 ft 10 in. Evidence of
outbuildings was not noted.

REFERENCES CITED
Devner, Kay
1968
Patent Medicine Picture. Tombstone Epitaph, Tombstone, Arizona.
Toulouse, Julian H.
1971
Bottle Makers and Their Marks. Thomas Nelson, New York.

Black -- Horse Trainer’s Cabin

0
i

145

1cm

a

o

lcm

b

Fig. 3 Bottles from the Cabin: a) McLeans Volcanic Oil Liniment bottle; b) Harter’s
Soothing Drops bottle.

