283

Perdiz Point Damage Analysis
Elm A. Cox and Herman A. Smith
ABSTRACT
Experimental damage of Perdiz points resulted in two major types of
breakage patterns--snaps and impact fractures. Analysis of wear and breakage
patterns on Perdiz points from several archeological sites in South Texas revealed
that some points were probably being salvaged for use as hafted cutting tools.
Whole points were discarded after use as cutting tools, probably due to edge
dulling. Evidence of variations in breakage patterns among sites and the possible
implications of the patterns of variation are discussed.

INTRODUCTION
Recently, the Coastal Bend Archeological Society conducted an archeological
investigation of the McGloin House site (41SP135) in western S an Patricio County,
Texas, along the lower Nueces River (Figure 1). It is a multicomponent site with at
least three Late Prehistoric components, characterized by Perdiz arrowpoints. Only
one other arrowpoint type is represented in the assemblage; a Starr point was
recovered from the upper component (Table 1).
The three levels have been radiocarbon dated at 210 BP-L-_ 100 (TX5394), 340
BP-L-_70 (TX5395), and 540 BP-L-_60 (TX5393), which equate to uncorrected A.D.
dates of 1740, 1610, and 1410. Since their standard deviations do not overlap, these
dates suggest three discrete components, apparently confirming the stratigraphic
evidence of three distinct layers of occupational debris.
All three components are characterized primarily by Perdiz arrowpoints, which
are found in the Rockport complex (Campbell 1960) along the central and lower
Gulf Coast of Texas (Suhm, Kreiger, and Jelks 1954; Story 1968; Smith 1984a).
Since there are no significant differences in the other artifacts in the three levels,
41SP135 seems to be a site that was repeatedly occupied by the same cultural group
(or at least groups sharing a common material culture) at three different times in
slightly more than 300 years.
The sample of more than 100 Perdiz projectile points is large enough for valid
statistical analysis, so this site provides us with an exceptional opportunity to assess
possible variability in Perdiz arrowpoints over an extended time period. The Perdiz
specimens were classified according to manufacturing technique (bifacial versus
unifacial) and degree of completeness (Table 1). More than 75 percent of the Perdiz
specimens for all three components are predominantly unifacial, and this is
consistent across levels (mean =78.66, range +2.66). The percentage of resharpened specimens is small and inconsistent. The proportion of whole specimens,
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

284

Texas Archeological SocieU
Table 1. Arrowpoints from 41SP135 by Level
Variable/Level or Component
Upper
(1740AD)

Middle
(1610AD)

Lower
(1410AD)

Number of Arrowpoints
32
56
17
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
9
4
0
0
0
Attributes of Perdiz Points
81%
Unifacial
79 %
76%
19%
24%
21%
Bifacial
47%
Essentially whole
18%
30%
Resharpened
2%
19%
12%
3.20mm
2.64mm
Average Length
3.13mm
(23)
(28)
(based on n = )
(8)
Condition of Perdiz Points (Percent of total sample)
Tip damage
28
29
38
Base damage
19
53
30
Condition of Damaged Perdiz (Percent of broken points)
Tip damage
54
53
36
44
Base damage
64
35
Perdiz
Expanding Stem
Fresno
Starr
Tip fragments
Base fragments

however, varies dramatically in the three components, and the trend appears to be
a systematic reduction of complete Perdiz points across time (47 percent complete
in the lower level to only 18 percent complete in the upper level). This intriguing
result deserves further analysis.
Of particular interest is the amount and type of damage such arrowpoints
evidence. Since the number of points in each level varies markedly, comparisons
can be made most realistically by calculating the percentage of the total number in
each level by category or condition (Table 1). Note that the proportion of Perdiz
points with damage to the tip remains constant across levels. Damage to bases,
however, systematically and substantially increases across time, whether expressed
as a percentage of all specimens or as a percentage of just the broken points.
This variability in wear and breakage patterns of Perdiz points across time
implies some change in their use during this timespan. Further analysis and perhaps
some experimental verification are needed, but before this analysis was done it was
necessary to determine whether this variability was a general trend at other sites in
the region, or was unique to 41SP135. To this end, the same kinds of data from
comparably dated Perdiz components at other sites in the region were examined.

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

285

Three Rivers

J

!.°
Figure 1. Map of the Central Coastal Bend area showing sites discussed.

Only a few such sites have been documented; the three sites with sufficient data for
comparison are the Rockport complex site 41KL13 (Smith 1984b) and two inland
sites 41LK201 (Highley 1986) and 41JW8 (Black 1986), which are relatively
close to 41SP135 (Figure 1, Table 2).
The dates of these components generally parallel the three levels at 41SP135,
but, of course, they are not exact matches. The other sites are dated in various ways;
the date for 41KL 13 is a guess based on the presence of historic artifacts at the site,
and dates from the other two sites are averages of the published radiocarbon dates
(corrected). Since the objective here is to compare contemporaneous components,
these three sites are excellent choices for comparison and analysis.
None of the comparison sites is as much a pure Perdiz site as 41SP135 appears
to be. At 41SP135, more than 99 percent of the arrowpoints identified are Perdiz,
at 41KL13 only 59 percent are Perdiz; at 41LK201, 91 percent are Perdiz; and at

286

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Comparison of Arrowpoints from Sites 41KL13,
41KL201, and 41JW8
Variable/Level or Component
41KL13
(AD1750)*

41LK201
(AD1530)*

41JW8
(AD1370)*

Number of Arrowpoints
Perdiz
Expanding Stem
Fresno
Starr
Tip fragments
Base fragments

61
2
22
19
15
5

43
4
0
0
2
0

111
6
0
4
22
18

Attributes of Perdiz Points
Unifacial
Biracial
Essentially whole
Resharpened
Average Length
(based on n = )
Tip damage
Base damage
Tip damage
Base damage

36%
54%
70%
64%
46%
30%
34%
58%
43%
10%
5%
16%
2.46mm
3.07mm
2.49mm
(45)
(27)
(37)
Condition of Perdiz Points (% of total sample)
45
35
39
36
9
18
Condition of Damaged Perdiz (% of broken points)
69
31

83
22

68
55

*For dating information, see Smith (1984b), Highley (1986), and Black (1986).
41JW8, 92 percent are Perdiz, so, in this respect, 41SP135 is more similar to
41LK201 and 41JW8 than it is to 41KL13.
There are also differences among the comparison sites in the proportions of
unifacial and biracial Perdiz arrowpoints. At 41JW8, 64 percent of the Perdiz are
bifacially worked; at 41KL13, there are almost equal percentages of bifacial and
unifacial points. Only at 41LK201 is the percentage (70 percent) roughly comparable to 41SP135.
As at 41SP135, the percentage of resharpened points at 41LK201 is relatively
small, and there appears to be no trend across time. Neither does the pattern of
decreasing percentages of whole points at 41SP135 hold for the other three sites.
There also appears to be no general trend in average length, and only at 41LK201
is the average length of points comparable to the average length at 41SP135.
At 41SP135 there is a trend of increasing percentages of Perdiz points with
basal damage across later time periods, but this trend also is not confh’med at the

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

287

other Perdiz sites. Rather, the data are very mixed or, in some cases, seem to support
op~site trends. Since there is no confirming evidenceofthe trends seen at 41SP135
in these other comparably dated Perdiz sites, another hypothesis must be sought to
explain the damage to Perdiz arrowpoints at the McGloin House site.
EXPERIMENTS
If the damage to the Perdiz points is not a general cultural phenomenon, it may
be the result of some other changing factor, such as the use made of these artifacts
at different times and at different sites, as suggested by Ahler (1971), Ahler and
McMillan (1976), and Roper (1979). To evaluate this possibility, a series of
experiments were conducted, using Perdiz arrowpoints in a variety of ways and then
assessing the physical evidence of wear and damage.
The design of the first experiment was patterned after Flenniken and Raymond
(1986). Arrows were modeled on historical descriptions of Karankawa arrows
(Kilman 1959; Kuykendal11903; Gatschet 1891); they hadreed shafts and foreshafts
and were tipped with unprovenienced Perdiz points acquired from local collectors.
Due to the abundance of white-tailed deer remains at all four of the sites studied,
and the association of Perdiz points with those remains (Smith and Cox 1987;
Highley 1986; Black 1986; Smith 1984b), a recently killed white-tailed deer carcass
was the target. A 45 lb compound bow was then used to shoot 18 arrows into the deer
carcass from a distance of three meters.
Of the 18 arrowpoints that struck the deer, all or parts of 17 were recovered
(Figure 2). Four suffered very minor damage, and among the others were at least six
distal breaks, four proximal breaks, and nine barb breaks. The greatest damage was
sustained by arrowpoints shot into shoulders; those shot into the neck and ribs
suffered less damage.
In the second experiment, five foreshafted Perdiz arrowpoints were used to skin
and butcher white-tailed deer. Wear was examined at intervals of continued use.
In the third experiment, three Perdiz arrowpoints affixed to modem wooden
arrow shafts were repeatedly shot into a series of 10 white-tailed deer hides mounted
on a plywood backing. A 15 lb compound bow was used in this experiment to
prevent the arrow’s penetrating all 10 hides and destroying the points. Use wear was
ascertained and documented after each shot.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Construction of Arrows
In the first experiment, arrow shafts were made, according to aboriginal
standards, of native reed (cane) and were fitted with reed foreshafts (Figure 3). A
notched wooden peg was inserted in one end of the main shaft and a stone-tipped
foreshaft in the other. All connections between the shafts and foreshafts were
tapered and bound. As results were noted, some modifications were made; in the last

288

Texas Archeological Society

P

I

e

h

g

o

d

c

b

q
4 CENT IMET ERS

I

Figure 2. Perdiz arrowpoints from the first experiment showing damage from use.

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

289

eight foreshafts, the connection between the point and the foreshaft was also bound,
an improvement that prevented splintering of the foreshafts.
A wide variety of shafts, foreshafts, and points were tried out, and minor
improvements were made in efficiency during the experiment. It was discovered
that small foreshafts penetrate much easier than larger ones, but they are unable to
withstand as much battering. The ideal design was a relatively large arrow shaft
(approximately 1.2 cm in diameter) with a long, slender foreshaft (.5 to .7 cm in
diameter) narrowing to the stone point; the best results were achieved with this
design. A single, unforeshafted reed arrow shaft ranging between .6 and .8 cm in
diameter penetrated well at first, but disintegrated completely in the process.
The greatest advantage of the foreshafted reed arrow is the ease with which
another foreshaft can be attached, making it possible for the hunters to carry only
a few arrow shafts together with any number of foreshafts. The only problem with
this design was some wedging of the foreshaft into the main shaft on impact. This
became less of a problem when the foreshafts were butted to the last joint in the reed
(cane) main shaft so the joints absorbed the recoil.
The strength of the main shaft was never a problem. Even when the arrows
missed the target, sudden and violent impact left the main shafts relatively
unscathed.
Halting

The main advantage of the contracting-stem Perdiz arrowpoint is that it can be
socketed in a reed or cane foreshaft with relative ease, and whole points can be
interchanged for broken ones in a matter of seconds. In the first experiment, four
Perdiz points were socketed, without the use of an adhesive substance, without any
loss of effectiveness. It is quite probable, however, considering the multitude of
sources for adhesive substances available to aboriginal hunters, that some sort of
adhesive was used. Several of the Perdiz points recovered at 41SP120 and 41AS3
had traces of asphalt on the stems.
Snaps Versus Impact Fractures
In the analysis of point damage from the four sites studied, two distinct types
of breakage---transverse and irregular--were initially noted. Breakage patterns
were similar to those described by Abler and McMillan (1976) and Roper (1979).
Transverse breaks are referred to as snaps, and most others, including Roper’s
angular, oblique, and crenated breaks, for reasons to be discussed later, are assigned
to the generic category, impact fractures (Abler and McMillan 1976).
Most snaos are caused by tensile forces perpendicular to the longitudinal axis
of the point. In the assemblages examined, there were two principal locations of
snaps--on the distal part of the stems and on the upper half of the body of the
projectile points (Figure 4). Snaps almost always leave a sharp disjuncture on one
side and either slight crushing or a minor hinge disjuncture on the opposite side.
Breaks almost invariably are transverse, running perpendicular to the longitudinal

290

Texas Archeological Society

Y
¢3

O
3

0
3
"ID

taa

i"

0

0

C~
N

G)
r~

6

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

291

Figure 4. Drawings of Perdiz points showing snaps. (Points are three times actual size.)

axis of the point (although in recent excavations at 41AS3, the only broken Perdiz
arrowpoint has a sharply oblique snap showing damage as a result of torque rather
than perpendicular tensile force).
Impact fractures, on the other hand, usually evidence a high degree of crushing
and irregular breaking on both lateral edges of the disjuncture (Figure 5). Also,
impact will sometimes result in cone fracturing on the surface of the disjuncture.

292

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Drawings of Perdiz points showing impact damage. (Points are three times
actual size.)

It is nevertheless quite often difficult to distinguish basal snaps from basal
impact fractures. Snaps and impact fractures on the body of the point are much
easier to distinguish since body impact fractures are almost always obvious. Impact
breaks are the result of parallel force vectors to the longitudinal axis of the points.

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

293

Such breaks often end in a type of feather termination (Crabtree 1972:64) and less
frequently in hinge or step termination (Ahler 1979). Facial and, usually, bilateral
asymmetry are characteristic of body impact fractures and cannot be duplicated by
pressure from use as a tool.
Both types of breaks are quite prevalent on specimens from all four sites. One
of the purposes of our experimental studies was to see if arrowpoints create both
snaps and impact fractures upon penetration, as implied by Roper (1979) and
Brown, Potter, Hall, and Black (1982). They do not; in fact, our results were the
opposite of those suggested. All eleven proximal and distal breaks created in the first
experiment and three of the distal breaks in the third experiment were obvious
impact fractures. Snaps are not caused by impact. Ahler and McMillan indicate the
same findings for dart points, saying "moderate to large size and transverse blade
fractures are direct indicators of points that were used for purposes other than as tips
for projectiles" (1976:167).
This finding is interesting, but the practical application is not readily apparent-there are other easy explanations for snaps on projectile points. The significance, however, does not lie with the presence of the snaps, but rather with the
presence of the impact fractures. All projectile point types must evidence impact
fractures.
This idea gives rise to a method of analysis for reexamining what are being
identified as projectile point types. For instance, since the inception of modem
projectile point typology, archeologists have called the small, thin, triangular,
bifacial stone artifacts found almost all over Texas, Fresno arrowpoints (eg. Turner
and Hester 1985; S uhm and Jelks 1962). They are found in Late Prehistoric sites and
in surface collections from the Coastal region (Hudgins 1984; Steele and Mokry
1983; Corbin 1974), including site 41KL 13 (Smith 1984b). Ignoring the fact that an
inordinate percentage of these Fresno points from the South Texas coast are whole,
the important issue is that all of the breaks in the more-than-200 specimens
examined are snaps; there are no impact fractures.
On the other hand, a very high percentage of impact fractures are noted among
the similarly hafted Starr arrowpoint, often found in association with Fresno points
in South Texas (Smith 1984b). When considered in the overall context of arrowpoint damage analysis, this evidence certainly suggests that the so-called Fresno
arrowpoints of the Texas coastal zone were probably never intended or used as tips
for arrows.
Typology
The dramatic disparity in results achieved in the impact experiment led to the
inescapable choice of the ideal stone point--it was long and thin and sharp. Shot
from a 45-1b bow at a distance of 3 meters, a wide blunt point (Figure 2, e) bounced
off a deer, whereas a thin sharp point (Figure 2, f) passed through neck vertebrae
virtually undamaged.
Modem bow hunters prefer the razor-sharp, thin steel arrowheads that can now
be purchased in many sporting goods stores. Their advantage, of course, is in their

294

Texas Archeological Society

killing ability--the arrow does its damage by causing hemorrhaging and the farther
it goes into the deer, the better the results. Most bow hunters are finicky about their
arrowheads, for if they are dulled by carelessness or use, they lose their maximum
penetrating power, and although they still look sharp to the uninitiated, such points
are not favored by experienced bow hunters. To those whose freedom from hunger
depended on their arrow’s killing ability, this fact could not be ignored. It is simply
not possible that all of the many broad, dull artifacts with the configuration of Perdiz
arrowpoints are, in fact, projectile points.
Projectile Points Versus Tools
For many years, people have noted a disturbingly high ratio of whole projectile
points to broken ones. L. W. Patterson (1980), for instance, comments that in
excavations of Archaic sites, there is about one whole dart point found for every two
and a half broken ones.
In the first experiment, only one entire point was lost; presumably it is still in
the deer. It is assumed that even this point could have been recovered. Had the
authors been Late Prehistoric hunters, modern archeologists would have found parts
of nine projectiles, none of which would be reusable. Had a hundred projectiles been
fired into the animal, there still would be no whole or reusable points to be found;
they would have been salvaged.
This underscores an intriguing fact about virtually all Late Prehistoric sites-there is a preplexingly large number of whole and apparently reusable points found.
At 41SP135, for instance, there were 35 essentially whole points found out of a total
of 105 Perdiz specimens.
Two possibilities present themselves for the prevalence of these whole and
reusable points they were intentionally discarded or they were lost. Neither of
these possibilities is appealing; it is highly unlikely that, through carelessness, they
lost or failed to retrieve whole points in such high percentages and so universally,
particularly in a region where good lithic resources are scarce. On the other hand,
religious taboos and poison immediately come to mind as possible reasons for
intentionally discarding points, but neither shows up in the historical record.
But what if what we are calling projectile points are not really points? Would
their use as other tools affect the Late Prehistoric hunter’s inclination to discard
them?
Ahler and McMillan (1976), in their analysis of the Rodgers Shelter artifacts,
identified what they believed were foreshafted projectile points that were also used
as hafted cutting tools. In addition, they identified a previously described point type,
which they believed served strictly as a halted cutting tool and not as a projectile
point. This latter group showed greater wear, a much lower percentage of impact
fractures, and a much higher percentage of transverse breaks. Wear analysis
demonstrated that the hafted cutting tools were used for slicing, cleaving, sawing,
and scraping, among other things.
Edge wear on the points from the four Perdiz sites studied was microscopically
indistinguishable from wear created by skinning andbutchering,but was inconsistent

Cox and SmithmPerdiz Point Damage

295

with use as scraping tools. In all other respects, however, wear analysis was
consistent with Ahler and McMillan’s findings. Several observations are of note.
First, of the 124 essentially whole points from the four sites, all but three tiny
points from 41JW8, when viewed microscopically, showed wear resulting from
longitudinal cutting. In addition, the whole points tended to show heavier wear, and
more points actually showed wear than either the ones with snaps or the ones with
impact fractures.
Second, points bearing major impact fractures from 41SP135, 41KL13, and
41LK201 showed little wear, and most showed virtually no wear at all. The minor
wear that was present could easily be attributed to impact and penetration. Some
points with minor distal impact fractures had apparently been used as tools
subsequent to their use as projectiles, which caused longitudinal wear patterns on
the fresh edges created by impact. At 41SP135, several points with minor distal
impact fractures also had proximal snaps.
Third, virtually all of the points with snaps showed some degree of longitudinal
wear. In the skinning and butchering experiment, the points with flared barbs were
not useful for skinning (which is easier done by hand) but were very useful for
cutting meat from bones. For this task, the barbs were used most heavily. It is
interesting that many points, whole and with snaps, evidence heavy wear, principally on their barbs.
Apparently, some foreshafted Perdiz arrowpoints were multipurpose tools
which were used for butchering, among other purposes. As anyone who has
processed a deer knows, a knife dulls rapidly and, once dulled, makes the job much
more difficult. At 41SP135, what were initially believed to be Perdiz arrowpoints
probably were, in fact, simply hafted cutting tools that had been discarded by their
users.

Whole Points and Broken Points

Three other facts are relevant to an understanding of the relation of whole to
broken points. First, as previously mentioned, the points with major impact
fractures from 41SP135 showed either no wear or very small amounts of wear.
When considered vis-a-vis the wear patterns on whole points, this fact would
indicate that there was a propensity against reusing points with even moderate wear
patterns. If they had been reused as projectile points, they would have shown up in
the group with major impact fractures. On its face, this is reasonable, because
nobody would deliberately use a dull point when a sharp one was available.
However, in some instances, there is no way to tell by sight or feel that the points
have been used--a fact which raises the interesting prospect that a Perdiz point,
once used, was never reused as a projectile point.
Second, in the first experiment, barb damage was caused to a surprising number
of points. On closer evaluation of all four collections, many of the points that were
labelled as essentially whole (Tables 1 and 2) did in fact suffer very minor barb
damage. This raises the possibility that essentially whole points were being

296

Texas Archeological Society

salvaged at the kill sites to be used later as knives. The barb damage could not be
replicated by using the points as butchering tools, but all the other purposes for
which these tools may have been used are not known.
Third, points tend to be shorter in areas like 41JW8 and 41KL13, where flint
is not naturally available (Highly 1986; Smith 1984b), and there are moreresh_arpened
points from these sites (Table 2). Apparently, points were being resharpened when
it was absolutely necessary, but not as a preferred strategy. Considering the savings
in time and effort, the fact that the aboriginal hunters preferred not to salvage broken
points raises questions about the structural integrity of used points.
Impact Damage on Repeated Use
In the third experiment, three Perdiz points without wear were shot repeatedly
through a stack of deer hides. Performance decreased noticeably upon continued use
due to dulling, and all points eventually suffered structural failure. No point
survived more than four shots, and damage generally occurred to the tips. Each shot
produced additional wear, and once tip damage became noticeable, the projectile
point decreased markedly in performance. It appears that even minimal repeated
impact adversely affects the structural integrity of a point, resulting in its ultimate
structural failure.
A Final Analysis

The experiments were undertaken with the primary purpose of explaining the
statistical variations in breakage patterns among the four sites studied, but to that
end they were not wholly successful. However, several comments can be made
about the Perdiz point collections from these and neighboring sites.
First, the lack of basal parts from three of the four sites is significant (Table 1,
Table 2). Large numbers of basal breaks were found at all three sites, but the broken
parts were not found. The presence of basal parts at the fourth site,41JW8, suggests
reloading (fitting a new arrowpoint on the arrow shaft), but why are the results from
this site different from those at the other three sites?
The answer may lie in the hafting technique. Basal parts attached to foreshafts
were probably discarded on the run, whereas basal parts attached to unforeshafted
wooden arrows had to be taken to a spot where arrows were meticulously reworked.
So at least some of the hunters at 41JW8, where cane was perhaps not readily
available, may have used wooden arrow shafts (perhaps cane was not readily
available) whereas those at 41LK201,41KL 13, and 41SP 135 used cane foreshafts.
This suggestion is further strengthened by the high percentage of basal impact
fractures at 41JW8 and the low percentages of basal breaks--most of which are
snaps--at the other sites. When a point is hafted to wood, the stem absorbs the shock
of impact, but when it is hafted to cane socketing, the body of the point absorbs the
shock.
At 41NU54, a recently excavated site, Perdiz points that were found in
association with historic artifacts had a high percentage of impact fractures. Of the

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

297

16 Perdiz arrowpoints recovered from this site, one is unfinished, two are whole
except for slight barb and tip damage, and all the rest have impact fractures; there
are none with snaps. According to historical accounts, at least some local Indian
groups, such as the Lipan Apache, used wooden arrow shafts (Banta 1977).
A Perdiz arrowpoint attached to a short cane foreshaft makes a much more
impractical hafted cutting tool than a Perdiz arrowpoint attached to a wooden shaft.
This fact could account for the lack of Perdiz points with snaps at41NU54, but, more
importantly, it underscores the fact that cultural differences probably influence
breakage patterns. In addition, the collection from 41NU54 suggests that Perdiz
arrowpoints do not suffer snap damage after impact to the extent previously
believed (cf. Brown, Potter, Hall, and Black 1982:42-43).
Third, no valid statistical analysis of projectile points can be made without first
eliminating stone artifacts that were never intended to be used as projectiles. Stone
artifacts that were apparently used as Perdiz arrowpoints are usually long and thin-ranging from 2.5 to as much as 5 times in length (not counting the stem) to width
half way up the point, though this does not hold true for the smaller points.
Fourth, the length of whole points may or may not be significant. As would be
expected, the farther away from flint resources one goes, the shorter the points
become due to conservation of material. It is also quite possible that size of
projectile points is affected by targets. Most points from 41SP135 found in
association with bison were more than 3 cm long. Corresponding information from
41JW8 and 41LK201 is not available.
Fifth, a caveat about basal snaps. The Corpus Christi Museum has an undocumented collection of mostly Starr and Perdiz arrowpoints, believed to be from Sarita
in northern Kenedy County. Eighteen of the 23 Perdiz points have basal snaps--in
the same place at the top of the stem--as their only damage.
If the people who used Start points were taking Perdiz points and snapping the
bases from them to facilitate hafting in a fashion that resembles the stemless Starr
point, this would be another explanation for basal snaps that, in South Texas at least,
would have to be taken into consideration.
CONCLUSIONS

Although there are many variables, wear and damage analysis contributes
significant information to an archeological investigation and site analysis:
1. There are many reasons for projectile points appearing in the archeological
record (see Roper 1979), but the four Perdiz point sites studied reveal only four
reasons for their appearance at those sites:
a. Points with major impact damage were not salvaged and were, as no
longer viable, either discarded or simply not retrieved.
b. Some arrowpoints with minor impact damage appear to have been
salvaged to be used later as cutting tools. Most of these exhibit minor distal,
proximal, and barb impact damage but subsequent use has caused wear on the edges
created by earlier impact fractures. In this regard, points with distal impact fractures

298

Texas Archeological Society

may have proximal snaps. These were discarded principally due to breakage or
dulling, but perhaps also due to the unreliability of points that have suffered the
stresses of impact.
c. Some points with major snaps show heavy wear and some do not,
depending upon at what stage of use they broke. They were discarded as no longer
viable.
d. Most whole points and many of those with only minor snaps revealed
at least moderate wear and were discarded probably due to dulling.
2. The study of varying percentages of types of breaks and location of breaks
between types has tremendous potential as an analytic tool and warrants further
research. All four Perdiz point sites studied evidenced multifunctional uses of points
for both killing and longitudinal cutting. However, at 41SP135, the lower zone
contained a high percentage of essentially whole points (Table 1).
Faunal analysis at this site showed a schlepp effect (Perkins and Daly 1968)
in that lower leg bones and mandibles were very much in evidence, but other bones
were totally absent or present in insignificant numbers (Smith and Cox 1987). It is
believed that this accounts for a rarity of impact damaged points from that level,
since they were lost in other parts of the carcasses which were not brought to camp.
Conversely, in the upper levels at 41SP135, bison were being butchered at
the location (Smith and Cox 1987). Most impact-damaged points from these levels
are probably the results of shooting bison, which may also account for the statistical
differences between these points and those from the other sites. Ideas of this kind
can be very useful in site analysis, but their true tests await further excavations.
3. Finally, there is a strong possibility that certain cultural groups produced
their own damage patterns. An understanding of these patterns not only will reveal
cultural affiliations, but also will help to identify distinctive traits within cultures.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Sheila Kersey and Don Kindler for their help in preparing this paper,
and special thanks to all our friends in the Coastal Bend Archeological Society, who
put in long hours in the hot sun at the McGloin House site (41SP135). Without the
tremendous assistance of dozens of overworked and underpaid volunteers, this
report would not have been possible.

REFERENCES CITED
Ahler, S.A.
1971

Projectile Point Form and Function at Rodgers Shelter, Missouri. Missouri
Archeological Society, Research Series No. 8.

Cox and SmithmPerdiz Point Damage
1979

299

Functional Analysis of Nonobsidian Chipped Stone Artifacts: Terms, Variables,
and Quantification. In: Lithic Use-Wear Analysis, edited by B. Hayden, pp.
301-328. Academic Press, New York.

Abler, S. A., and R. B. McMiUan
1976

Material Culture at Rodgers Shelter: A Reflection of Past Human Activities. In:
Prehistoric Man and His Environment: A Case Study in the Ozark Highland,
edited by W. R. Wood and R. B. McMillan, pp. 163-199. Academic Press, New
York.

Banta, S. E.
1977

Buckelew, the Indian Capt&e, as Related by Himself. Garland, New York.

Black, S. L.
1986

The Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa Site, 41JW8: A Toyah Horizon Campsite
in Southern Texas. The University ofTexas at San Antonio, Centerfor Archaeological Research, Special Report No. 18.

Brown, K. M., D. R. Potter, G. D. Hall, and S. L. Black
1982

Excavations at 41LK67. A Prehistoric Site in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
SouthTexas. The University ofTex~s at San Antonio, Centerfor Archaeolog&al
Research, Choke Canyon Series 7.

Campbell, T N.
1960

Corbin, J..

1974

Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Lower Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 29:145-175.
E.
A Model for Cultural Succession for the Coastal Bend Area of Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 45:29-54.

Crabtree, D. E.
1972

An Introduction to Flintworking. OccasionaIPapers ofthe Idaho State University Museum, Number 23.

Flenniken, J. J., and A. W. Raymond
1986

Morphological Projectile Point Typology: Replication Experimentation and
Technological Analysis. American Antiquity 51" 603-614.

Gatschet, A. S.
1981

TheKarankawalndians’Arche°l°gicalandEthn°l°gicalPapers°fthePeab°dy
Museum 1(2).

300

Texas Archeological Society

Highley, C. L.
1986

Archeological Investigations at 41LK201, Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern
Texas. The University of Texas at San Antonio, Center for Archaeological
Research, Choke Canyon Series 11.

Hudgins, J. D.
1986

A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 55 (for 1984):29-51.

Kilman, E.
1959

Cannibal Coast. The Naylor Co., San Antonio.

Kuykendall, J. H.
1903

Reminiscences of Early Texas. Quarterly of the Texas Historical Association
6:236-253.

Patterson, L. W.
1980

The Significance of Dart Point Stem Breakage. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 51:309-316.

Perkins, D., and P. Daly
1968

A Hunter’s Village in Neolithic Turkey. Scientific American 219(5):96-109.

Roper, D. C.
1979

Breakage Patterns of Central Illinois Woodland Projectile Points. Plains
Anthropologist 24-84 (Part 1):113-121.

Smith, H, A.
1984a

Origins and Spatial/femporal Distribution of the Rockport Archeological
Complex, Central and Lower Texas Coast. MidcontinentalJournal ofArcheology 9(1):27--42.

1984b

Prehistoric Settlement and Subsistence Patterns of the Baffin Bay Area of the
Lower Texas Coast. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Smith, H. A., and K. A. Cox
1987

The McGloin House Site: A Rockport Complex Campsite in San Patricio
County, Texas. Manuscript on file, Corpus Christi, Texas.

Steele, D. G., and E. R. Mokry, Jr.
1983

Archeological Investigations of Seven Prehistoric Sites Along Oso Creek,
Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (for
1982): 287-308.

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

301

Story, D. A.
1968

Archeological Investigation at Two Central Texas Gulf Coast Sites. State
Building Commission, Archeological Program Report No. 13.

Suhm, E. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks.
1954

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.

Suhm, E. A., and E. B. Jelks.
1962

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas MemoriaI Museum Bulletin No. 4,
Austin.

Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1985

A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press,
Austin.

