On Replicating Fluted Projectile Points
J. B. Sollberger

ABSTRACT
This paper is an invitation to others in experimental archeology to publish
explicit details and data on the subject of how and why fluted points were
made. The author believes that fluting methods evolved over time from simple
to complex as Paleo-Indians filled a need for longer and longer flute scar
channels. It is demonstrated that lever-controlled pressure replicates the complex, evolved form of Folsom fluting with precision and efficiency. Advocates
of punch percussion fluting should support their beliefs on how full-length
flutes were made with specific comparative data and examples of high-quality
replications (i.e.; put up or shut up).
INTRODUCTION

For the new world, Crabtree (cf., 1966, 1968) set the American archeological community on fire by demonstrating outstanding ability to replicate stone
age tools, projectile points, and blades. He described a lithic tool kit, flaking
methods, and techniques. These and other contributions made Crabtree the
father of modern lithic technological studies, and deservedly so. His disciples
now number in the thousands; one can now even obtain college credit by
attending a flintknapping course. But such courses are, by their very nature,
elementary. One graduates with neither great skill nor any profound insights in
lithic analysis. Such skills are developed only later, after long and diligent
experience in actual flintknapping.
For accurate replication of a prehistoric artifact, much more than a basic
shape is required. Errett Callahan reported that his first several hundred attempts
to replicate eastern Clovis points were actually not "replications because they
were too thick (1979:170)." In his early work, Crabtree (1966) maintained that
he could replicate Folsom by two different methods of fluting; however, one has
simply to check his published data to find that only one of his points is thin
enough to qualify as an average Folsom. Average thickness of Folsom points is
between 3.7 and 3.8 mm (Sollberger 1985); this implies that 50 percent of the
total documented Folsoms are thinner than that standard.
Folsom Flute Scar Length
In the early (pre-Crabtree) days, the Folsom type was characterized as
having two flutes that snap-terminate at about two-thirds of the point’s length (I
have been asked many times how one makes the flutes snap off at that percise
length). All older point-type books illustrate and describe a single blunt-pointed
form, widest above mid-length, as the typical Folsom point.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (1988)

2

Texas Archeological Society

This stereotype ignored the fact that many Folsoms are widest across the
basal corners (Suhm et al. 1954:Plate 92 and others). But, by precedent, the first
to publish often sets an unalterable consensus. It is difficult subsequently to
modify such stereotyping.
However, Crabtree (1966) later described the Lindenmeier Folsom as having both flutes intersect the distal end (the tip), thus forming a knife-sharp point
or penetrator. Today, much of the archeological community believes that Folsom
man always intended full length fluting. Judge, for example, believes that
Folsom preforms were snapped off at the end of the shortest flute scar and then
completed (Judge 1977). Such action would certainly require a thick distal end,
and the shaping retouch would leave obvious scars within the channel faces.
In contrast, Wilmsen and Roberts (1978) provide a photograph of acuteangled distal ends of finished points that were broken off (in use?) above the
fluted part. Therefore, I feel justified in asking, how long are flute scars supposed to be? To answer this we must first determine the purposes fluting served.
Why Flute?
The discovery of the association of fluted points with Ice Age animals at
Folsom, New Mexico, was denied before eventually being accepted. The channel scars from fluting were first called grooves; it was widely supposed that
these were "blood grooves" that were ground out to enhance bleeding to make
the animal die more quickly. No one seemed to realize that to function as a
"blood groove" the grooves must necessarily be in the spear shaft itself, external
to the binding, and not on the stone point. Analysis of the mechanics of this
weapons system made this obvious. By accurately replicating the artifacts and
using them experimentally, we can begin to understand their very functional
design characteristics.
After some years of replicating fluted points, I have come to believe that
fluting was done for one major reason: fluting reduces the diameter of the spear
shaft needed at the opening of the mounting slot for point attachment. This
extends the amount of cutting edge that slices into the animal, widening the
entry wound, before the full thickness of the spear shaft is encountered, increasing the depth that can be penetrated with a hand-thrust spear. On the supersized,
thick-hided megafauna, repeated deep penetrations were very necessary in order
to kill the animal. Men have limited strength, and their tools are designed to help
overcome their limitations.
Fluting technology did not develop overnight. It takes a long time to learn
the properties of the materials being used and develop the techniques for proper
control of the patterns of flaking. We would expect such technology to improve
over time, as long as the need for such technology remained.
Fluting Versus Basal Thinning
When archeologists discuss point technology, a common question is, "is it
fluted or is it basal thinning?" I don’t think we have a published rule, so I will
provide one.

Sollberger ~ Fluted Projectile Points

3

When basal flaking thins the proximal end longer than the
length of the hafting notch (typically with one or two, or, rarely,
with three or more flakes), the point is fluted. When the hafting slot
is longer than the basal thinning flake or flakes, the point is not
fluted.
Pre-Folsom Fluting
We do not know how long it took the Clovis people to recognize a need for
fluting and to learn how to make a flutable biface..
Could it be that as Paleo-Indians’ technology progressed, they improved
their methods eventually to obtain full length fluting? The channel scars on
Clovis points--at least those on a majority of them--range between little longer
than basal pressure-thinning flakes and half the length of the points. The evidence from mammoth-kill sites west of the Mississippi River tends to support
this generalization.
East of the Mississippi, however, there are more varieties of Clovis and
Clovis-like points. Eastern points with full-length flutes are not uncommon (but
note that no Folsoms have been found in the eastern states).
Some authors have proposed that Clovis fluting originated in the East but I
do not believe there is sufficient dating or other evidence to support the theory
that fluting is earliest east of the Mississippi. However, fluting in the East
probably persisted to a later date and became more diverse in the East. The
shorter flutes of the western United States are probably the earlier technology.
Bonnichsen and others illustrate and describe a Moosehorn Clovis variety
from Maine (Bonnichsen et al. 1983:36-48). The lengths of their specimens
range between 75 and 136 mm (their Table 1), and their illustrations clearly
suggest that full-length fluting was intentional.
Storck (1984:6, Figure 2) describes and illustrates a Parkhill Clovis complex in Ontario that produced Barnes type Clovis points; flute scars measuring
as much as 85 mm long are reported. Cambron and Hulse (1964) describe the
Cumberland Clovis points of the eastern United States as about three inches
long, many of them fluted right to their tips.
In the light of such evidence, my judgement on eastern Fluting (the Cumberland, Moosehorn, and eastern Clovis varieties) is that full-length flutes were
highly desired and are the most well developed form. These point types are,
therefore, probably more recent than western Clovis fluting by at least a few
hundred years. They could have been produced only after technological advances that made full-length fluting consistently achievable.
The technological advantage of full-length fluting is simply this: fluting
right to the tip thins the projectile tip to a razorlike edge. Such tip-thinning
reduces the resistance to entry by reducing the bifacial friction encountered
while cutting the slot of entry wide enough for the attached spearshaft to enter.
This results in greater hunting efficiency and, therefore, is a constructive adaptive change.

4

Texas Archeological Society
Paleo-Indian Versus Archaic and Late Prehistoric Technology

At the end of the ice age, as the large, slow megafauna gave way to smaller,
quicker game animals, fluted lanceolate points evolved first into points with
stem constrictions, then shouldered points, then quite wide corner-notched and
basal-notched projectile points. These were probably adaptive changes, not just
stylistic ones. Megafauna such as mastodons required more than six inches of
penetration to reach vital organs; they were hunted less and less as their numbers
diminished until they became extinct. Smaller game such as deer and antelope
move too fast for repeated thrusting. The two-man thrust spear gave way to the
atlatl and thrown darts. Darts lengthened the hit range but, being longer, had to
be of lighter weight. Hunters learned to get penetration to vital organ depth by
cutting a wider slot at the point of entry. The wider wound, that is, the wider
slot-cut at entry, opened easily for the shaft entry following.
A simple analogy would be to take a steel needle and a thick hide or canvas.
Push the needle through half or more of its thickness, then try to pull it through
from the other side. The friction of the round, tight hole makes it very difficult to
pull the needle through. Now, take a sharp edge and cut a slot at the point of
entry; the needle goes through with very little force, since the slot lets it almost
fall through. Such a slot, cut by a wide-shouldered or corner-notched Archaic
projectile point hitting with some force, allows deep penetration of the projectile
point and its attached foreshaft, resulting in more efficient hunting of fastmoving wild game.
Eventually, the bow and arrow came along as another major technological
innovation. The high-velocity arrow, with its flatter trajectory, is much more
accurate than a thrown spear, and, with higher velocity and smaller shafts,
hunters could get substantial penetration. Again, the weight of the point was
substantially reduced in a tradeoff for greater hunting efficiency; a hunter could
carry many more arrows than he could the heavier atlatl darts with their foreand mainshafts. He could shoot from ambush before the game or enemy saw him.
PRESSURE VERSUS PERCUSSION FLUTING

The challenge for modern flintknappers to replicate examples of aboriginal
fluted points has motivated a great deal of experimentation and generated a great
deal of literature. Efforts have been centered on finding the method by which
aboriginals fluted their points. Many of the published reports claim success, but
illustrate only mediocre results. Most agree that some form of percussion is
required for true replication. The words true replication have become a subterfuge to forestall constructive criticism.
The process of replication has two inherent, inseparable parts:
1. The tools and manufacturing processes should be like those of the
aboriginals.
2. The product must equal in every respect the quality of the original.
Part 1 has been adhered to by hardly anyone working in the field of lithic
technology, so part 2 is all that is left. The proof of a pudding is in the eating, so,

Sollberger m Fluted Projectile Points

5

if part 2 is obviously a failure, the replicated tool should be rejected, and there is
no need to invoke part one.
In lieu of the more popular percussion fluting, I have used fork-and-lever
pressure fluting since about 1966. Every reaction I have had from professional
and avocational archeologists (other than Bruce Bradley and Errett Callahan)
has been, "I prefer percussion" or "Indians would not have used such a device."
Many percussion fluting advocates have chipped flint as long as I have.
Where are their Folsom, Cumberland, and Barnes Clovis points of acceptable
thinness and length, with each flute extending right to or nearly to the tip? The
longitudinal section between the channel scars at the very tip should be straight,
thin, and centered. The thinness of the tip proves that overshot or end-snipping
corrections were not needed to complete the point. The better examples of
Cumberland, Folsom, and some specialized Clovis have converging channel
scars (Crabtree 1966). With pressure fluting, I have made dozens of all these
types, in all of which the channel scars do converge exactly as Crabtree suggests.
Why is pressure fluting held in disdain? It is generally accepted by most
lithic technologists that in the beginning there was only percussion flaking. Flint
is a tough stone, and most strong men can consistently produce only flakes of
less than 2.5 cm by pressure flaking. The first people to publish work on lithic
technology shared this belief; they are cited and quoted, so a general consensus
has been created that, unfortunately, is treated as proof.
One of several possible examples is the work of H. Holmes Ellis (1965),
who attempted experimental lever flaking and came to the conclusion that "this
procedure is unsuitable and awkward to use (Ellis 1965:22)." In a later section
"Lever and Fulcrum," Ellis finds that the method "has many limitations" and
"only small flakes can be removed (Ellis 1965:39-41)." I find, however, that
Ellis is wrong on lever flaking and misleading on other techniques (such as those
illustrated in his figures V, VI, XI, XII, XVIII, and XX). No knapper can trap the
dorsal face of his flakes against a solid stone anvil and be successful.
There is a moral to the Ellis work and similar reports. It is, don’t necessarily
believe what you read or hear. Believe what you can see and do for yourself. Do
not join the concensus blindly; open your eyes and demand proof.
In the 1960s, I devised the fork-and-lever flaking method for bifacing and
fluting (Sollberger 1978). The late Joel Shiner observed my work and remarked
that "your use of the copper lever invalidates your work," so I then switched to
antler levers and found not only that my fluted points were acceptably thin (by
aboriginal standards) but also that my success-failure ratio was greatly improved
(Sollberger 1985). This outcome was the opposite of what Shiner predicted.
It can be neither proven nor disproven that lever fluting was used in the past.
The unwavering support of a consensus that lacks good empirical evidence is,
however, simply insisting that subjective voting can produce correct results.
We modems are surely at least equal to people of 10,000 years ago in
cognitive abilities and flintknapping skills. It follows then that the quality of our
replications should be equal to or exceed the quality of their best work. Judging

6

Texas Archeological Society

from most efforts, however, I can find only poor and mediocre replications when
the force to obtain long flutes was compression fluting by a punch.
However, by using lever pressure fluting I can match some of the better
works of Paleo-Indian era flintknappers (Figure 1). Flute flakes in excess of
130mm long and 9.0 mm wide offer no problem to pressure fluting when a lever
is employed to control the flaking.

Figure 1. Three pressure flutes from the author’s replications; long, wide, full preformlength channel flakes. The wide one is 114.55 mm long. Note that the long flutes always
detach in three or more pieces.

Sollberger ~ Fluted Projectile Points

7

Length Versus Thickness
Experimental archeologists searching for replicative methods and techniques often claim (or imply) success while ignoring comparative data (i.e.,
aboriginal points) on thickness and length. For an example, see Boldurian,
Fitzgibbons, and Shelly (1985:293-303 their Tables 1 and 2). To consider that
their one finished point (their Figure 5) replicates a freshly completed Folsomman projectile product requires a great stretch of the imagination. The Boldurian
report wrongly stresses the inherent ineptness of clamp-and-lever pressure fluting. Their Table 1 provides a mean length of 55.5 mm, maximum thickness of
11.0 mm, and weight of 18.9 g, giving a length-to-thickness ratio of 5.045.
For comparison, I recently weighed the first five points from a tray of my
clamp-held, lever-fluted replications to find that the five totaled no more than
19.0 g, and averaged about 3.8 g. The ten flute scars at mid-length averaged
13.57 mm wide. Each of the ten flutes terminated at the tip. The average
maximum width was 20.35 mm, mean length was 45.32 mm, and average
maximum thickness was 3.0 mm, giving a length-to-thickness ratio of 15.10:6.
The Folsom length-to-thickness ratio for aboriginal specimens is about 11.29:1
(Sollberger 1985:47), demonstrating that, at this time, pressure fluting appears
to be producing results closer than percussion to the attributes of aboriginal
specimens.
Sharp, Centered Distal End Tips
The full-length fluting of eastern Paleo-Indian projectile types (such as
Cumberland), suggests a highly developed fluting technology. In fact, such fulllength fluting may be by itself a sufficient indicator of more recent dates for
such specimens (radiocarbon dating may not be needed, except as an independent
verification of this hypothesis). It is my view that such point types have been
produced only since the advent of technological developments that included
vertical preform clamping with lever-assisted pressure flaking (on this point, see
E. L. Davis [1978] on the evolution of fluting at China Lake, California).
A basic intuitive understanding of fracture mechanics (which we today
know as Hooks Law) is all that is required. With that, any competent knapper
can produce both flutes with constant, even thinning, without outrepasse, to a
sharp, centered, distal end tip. Heat treatment is not required (Figure 2).
The maximum thickness of any projectile point is the width of the slot it will
pass through. For percussion fluting advocates, if a point will not drop through a
4.0 mm slot, the replication does not qualify as a Folsom.
Clovis points of the northeastern United States and Ontario, Canada have
deeply concave basal configurations compared to the shallow-base western
Clovis (Figure 3). The very short distal end flake scars outside the channel faces
show that the fluting made these ends very thin. None of the preform faces were
chipped to have strong flute-guiding ridges.

8

Texas Archeological Society

Obverse

Reverse
Figure 2, Obverse (above) and reverse (below) photographs of replicated Cumberland
Clovis points, on which the flutes on both sides intersect the light grinding to the sharpedged distal ends of the preforms. All of these specimens were made by lever pressure
fluting. The longest one is 97 nml long, the widest, 24.0 mm wide, and the maximum
thickness is 5.9 ram. The third from the left is 87 nun long, 25.7 mm wide, and has a
maximum thickness of 5.0 mm.

Sollberger ~ Fluted Projectile Points

Obverse

9

Reverse

Figure 3. Photographs of replicated Clovis points showing the difference between eastern
Clovis (deep basal concavity at left in each photograph) and western Clovis (shallow
basal concavity, at right in each photograph). The western style illustrated the shortening
of basal comers in setting up the second fluting platform.

Well-developed guiding ridges, as are found on Eden points, are not safe to
use except for long, narrow points, such as Cumberland. Note that on the longer
point (Figure 3, reverse face, left edge), the preform volume is abruptly increased at a snapped-off bifacing flake. This suggests that the small volume
increase added sufficient resistence to the leading edge of compression to slow it
down while the then-freed length of fracture was still being opened to widen the
flute flake crack above. The widening of the crack formed a secondary compression (Sollberger 1986:101-105) within the flute flake at and along the fracture
front. The combined load of the flaking tool and secondary compression required that a new and deeper tension formation direction (to support further
fracture propagation) must come from the flute flake side of the fracture front.
The result was certainly the undulation trough you see extending across the
channe! flake scar. The depth of that trough was limited by the fact that when the
compression front passed through the volume increase noted (the snap-break) it
accelerated, in that the volume reduction concomitantly speeded up the closely
following fracture front, which was as the trough deepened. Had the volume
beyond not reduced, an outrepasse (or reverse hinge fracture) would have
divided the preform into two pieces. The shallow and deep basal concavities
(Figure 3) will be discussed later.

10

Texas Archeological Society

We must try to recover the traditions of stone age flintknappers through
carefull documented experimentation. The full-size shop drawings I make (Figure 4) can be extremely valuable in that search, for they reveal many facts about
the reaction of lithic materials to the flaking forces the flintknapper uses,
eventually telling us what the correct longitudinal and cross sectional contours
must be relative to flute length, width, and fluting platform strength.
Sept 26, 87.

Barnes type Clovis. Contour configuration,

Pedernales flint: 5800 F. Held- 2 hours.
Preform: 135.0 x 32.0 x 10.70 mm max thk.
First flute: 130.0 x 19.25mm wide. 5.mm short of tip.
Second flute: 126. mm lg, exactly to tip.
Completed lght: 130.0 x 31.5 x 7.5 mm’between flute ridges~
Final retouch: basel concavty and distal tip.
lght/thk ratio 17.34: wd/thk 4.20
Remarks: First channel face is featureless. Second has force
line marking onset of secondary compression at bulbar end.
Accept template as-is.

Figure 4. A shop drawing entitled "Fluting results from preestablished preform contours," made by the author for an individual replication specimen

BASIS FOR FLUTING TECHNIQUES
Fluting projectile points is the art of blade-making on specialized cores.
Fluting platforms are necessarily more delicate than platforms for blades. It

Sollberger m Fluted Projectile Points

11

takes about the same interval of time for the fracture of either to travel because
the contouring flakes that size the flute for width and thickness originate from
lineal edges. The Levallois percussion technique was refined by New World
Paleo-Indian craftsmen who fluted points by the addition of pressure flaking to
reduce the prominence of the percussion flake scar ridges. This was done to
straighten the flute’s lineal edges, which, in turn, straightened the swells and
lows of the fracture down the length of the ventral face.
Percussion-blade success rises with the addition of weight to the core,
because weight adds thickness and reduces the core rotation and deflection
caused by the impact. Increased thickness of the core relative to blade thickness
reduces distortion of the core mass by the percussive instrument in proportion to
the cross sectional area of the blade being struck.
The core for fluting is a biface that is much thinner and lighter than a blade
core. Percussion fluting distorts and literally bends the biface core because the
amount of flaking force cannot be reduced, so light-weight blade cores and
bifaces must be held in a vice or clamp to prevent rotation and deflection in
order to have a success ratio sufficient to sustain an industry. Deflection of the
core reduces or eliminates the flaking force. Rotation, from its very onset,
constantly changes the correct angle of applied flaking force to excessive and
more so, resulting in more and greater failures. The human hand cannot hold a
preform against deflection and rotation nearly as well as can a simple leatherpadded clamp applied to the preform’s lineal edges.
The need for fluting was predicated on the premise that the deeper the
penetration, the faster an animal was immobilized. Deeper penetration was first
accomplished by basal thinning, which reduced the hafting diameter restriction.
With some apparent success came further modifications; basal thinning gave
way to short flutes and, eventually, to full-length flutes. Each modification
resulted in increased penetration and stronger hafting, while reducing the thrust
energy requirements. Each gain, however, also increased manufacturing constraints. The longer flutes increased the losses to manufacturing failure. The
introduction of pressure fluting eventually must have replaced percussion, since
lever pressure allowed the use of minimal force with its superior advantages.
We have an analogy with modern weaponry. Shotguns and rifles at first had
very large calibers. Big-bore weapons gave way to smaller calibers, flatter
trajectories, and increased velocities as technology developed As stone age man
learned and developed his technology, so modern man has also progressed.
From the onset of fluting until the development of classic Archaic dart point
types, the halhnark of the Paleo-Indian projectile point flaking patterns is extensive pressure-flaking laid over percussion. Paleo-Indian points have a smooth,
molded feel to them. On less well made pieces, the channel scar lineal edges
weave in and out, and the channel scar faces wave up and down according to
preform thickness changes in length, width, or surface. A minor volume change
in the flute flake as it lengthens causes ripples, a larger change causes undulations, and an excessive change results in a manufacturing failure. If the flaking

12

Texas Archeological Society

force is reduced in time over the fracture length, the fracture deceleration
produces ripples at distal ends. Lever pressure fluting provides a constant force
throughout, whereas percussion provides a faster fracture in addition to the
greater distortions produced by the force required for fracture length. That is
why, for example, pressure blades can be much more uniformly flaked than can
percussion blades (Crabtree 1978; So!Iberger 1983).
MANUFACTURING TECHNIQUES
Fluting is a specialized type of blade making. A more precise fluting
platform is needed because the more fragile biface core is used.
Fluting Procedures
It is necessary to isolate a nipple to serve as the fluting platform. First, one
must bevel-shorten the base so the desired flute will not become thicker below
the nipple; if it thickens, it will result in an overshot. A low spot less than
straight below the nipple will snap-break the flute short.
To form the nipple, start small flakes at the beveled edge of each basal
comer, with the force directed toward the lineal edges (not towards the distal
end). As the midwidth is approached, make the flakes longer, so a parallel-sided
column is achieved. Next, turn the preform over and thin the backside to a sharp
edge, which must be carefully ground to the proper thickness--this thickness
determines the thickness of the resulting flute flake.
You now have your first fluting platform, but it needs to be very critically
examined. The backside should be flat, and this flat side should be parallel to the
preform width center plane. The fracture should instigate well above the center
plane of thickness. Even for a very long flute, the arc of instigation should be no
wider than 3 mm and its thickness no greater than about 2.5 mm; for small points
like Folsom, these measurements should be even smaller. Lastly, the longitudinal face below the nipple face must be only lightly convex for about two-thirds
of the desired flute length. If such conditions are not present, the preform will
have to be remodelled. If it passes inspection, then the flute can be made.
The second platform is much the same. Reverse the bevel by flaking into the
first channel face. Then reverse that bevel to leave a centered, exposed column,
the backside of which is the channel scar face of the first flute. It is important to
form an offset to separate the fluting column from the prior flute face in order to
locate the second flute instigation. This thinning of the column is done by
pressing off a flake from each lateral margin of the fluting column. The direction
of force for each thinning flake should be toward the opposite lateral margin of
the preform. Grind the second nipple and subject the preform to the same critical
examination as you did for the first flute. If it does not conform, remodel by
shortening the preform; the result will be a very deep basal concavity after
making the flute.

Sollberger m Fluted Projectile Points

13

Following the second flute, only minor retouch at the tip and within the
basal cavity is required. It is pure nonsense to suggest that preform distal tips
have to be left thick and wide and that they were heavily ground to support the
fluting force. In fact, in my opinion, the Cumberland type in particular and other
types where the objective is full-length fluting to thin the tip cannot be so fluted
from preforms left wide or thick at the distal end. Convincing proof is lacking
for this hypothesis, but if you believe otherwise, please publish your proof.
Some Observations
Bifacing is a reduction system. A "bad" flake cannot be replaced. A quickly
made point usually is nothing to be proud of. A five-hour fluted point usually is
more than satisfactory. A fraction of a millimeter becomes important, and is an
important tolerance in fluting. Later "Plano"-Indian point makers gave up fluting for thicker, heavier lanceolate and stemmed forms more suitable for atlatl
dart points. No stone age or modem man always uses perfect stone, always has
the right tool kit, or always experiences reduction success. Therefore, we often
take what we can get.
In order to reconstruct Paleo-Indian lifeways involving the making of stone
tools, logical analysis alone is not enough. We must have and use a common
knowledge of the reaction of lithic materials to flaking forces. Only then can
archeologists agree and raise lithic analysis to its greatest possible potential (see
Sollberger 1986:101-105).
With such knowledge and experience, you can look at fracture ventral faces
and interpret fracture feature formations such as radius of the ring arc, the extent
of lipping, the angle and depth of bulbar flare, the onset of acting secondary
compression, causes for undulations and ripples, tear lines, fracture most advanced centrally or lateraly or shifting between the margins, the cause for
thickening or thinning wave planes, snap breaks, diving flakes, and the various
kinds of hinge fractures as opposed to lengthwise or crosswise overshots.
If fracture feature formations cannot be explained under a noncontradictory
fracture theory, the hypothesis is wrong, and the analysis is probably also wrong.
In fluting industries, preforms were made to conform to the standard of
tradition and were given critical analysis. If the preform was too thin to flute, the
knapper did not try. If only one face was flutable, he took one flute. When the
eye of the knapper predicted failure with a single flute, he made two or more
thin, narrow flutes from the same face lateral to each other. The term for that is
multiple fluting.
Boldurian and his co-workers extended that terminology to include the
taking of a second flute from directly below the first attempt (which certainly
must have aborted in order to make a need for the second). The term multiple
fluting should not be used unless the flutes are side by side and overlapping;
where the knapper took this approach to completing the piece.

14

Texas Archeological Society
Examples

Following are some illustrations of the kinds of results that can be achieved
with preform clamping and controlled lever pressure fluting. In the first (Figure
5, obverse and reverse), only one of the four faces has the flute right to the tip;
this is a function of combined platform strength and longitudinal convexity of
the preform.

Reverse

Obverse

Figure 5. Obverse (left) and reverse (right) views of replication, showing how early flute
snap breaks from buckling shorten the flutes. Uneven faces cause lateral turns.

Another point (Figure 6, left) is a good example of a channel scar forming
free of ripples, undulations, and other problems. Such a specimen is the result of
good preforming of facial surfaces, plus the benefits of preform clamping and
controlled lever pressure flaking.
CONCLUSIONS

I have researched fluted point cultures from Clovis times onward; groups
who produced full-length channe! scars on their points that are directly comparable to the channel scars on the replications illustrated in this report. All of
these experimental examples are the result of lever pressure fluting with the
preforms held vertically in split-limb grooved clamps. Several ethnographic
reports suggest such a technique, but modern practitioners and most of the
archeological community have rejected it. Most modern replication experiments

Sollberger m Fluted Projectile Points

15

Figure 6. Two replications. The specimen on the left shows how near-perfect contours
plus pressure force result in an undulation-free, ripple-free flute, with channel scars right
to the tip of the point.

have been done with indirect percussion. I fail to find in the archeological
literature any proof that such percussion fluting is equal to or better than the
"better" work of Paleo-Indians.
If the prevailing hypothesis for indirect percussion fluting is correct, it
should be demonstrated with empirical evidence that equals the "better" specimens left by stone age flintknappers. Where is the evidence? Only when such
evidence is published will we be in a position to say that the Indians would or
would not have used pressure by lever-assist to gain the necessary force for
controlled fluting. My own experimental work has convinced me in this case,
but I am open to examining the work of others. One last caveat however--a
rebuttal to be valid must be accompanied by evidence. Flutes must have the
overall thinness of aboriginal specimens--right to the tip.

16

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Boldurain, A. T., P.T. Fitzgibbons, and P. H. Shelly
1985
Fluting Devices in the Folsom Tradition: Patterning in Debitage Formation
and Projectile Point Basal Configuration. Plains Anthropologist 30:293303.
1986

A Reply to Sollberger and Patterson on experimental Folsom Biface
Manufacture. Plains Anthropologist 31:245-248.

Boldurain, A. T., G. A. Agogino, P. H. Shelley, and Mark Slaughter
Folsom Biface Manufacture, Retooling, and Site Function at the Mitchell
1987
Locality of B lackwater Draw. Plains Anthropologist 32:299-310.
Bormichsen, Robson, Bruce Bourque, and D. E. Young
The Moosehorn Fluted Point Discovery, Northern Maine. Archeology of
1983
Eastern North America 11:37-48.
Callahan, Erret
1979
The Basics of Bifacing Knapping in the Eastern Fluted Point Tradition.
Archeology of Eastern North America 7(1).
Cambron, J. W., and D. C. Hulse
1964
Handbook of Alabama Archeology Part I, edited by David L. Dejamette,
The Archeological Research Association of Alabama.
Crabtree, D. E.
1966
A Stoneworkers Approach to Analyzing and Replicating the Lindenmeier
Folsom. Tebiwa 9(1):3 -39.
1968

Mesoamerican Polyhedral Cores and Prismatic Blades. American Antiquity
33(4):446-478.

Davis, E. L.
Associations of People and Rancholabrean Fauna of China Lake, California.
1978
Early Man in America from a Circum-Pacific Perspective. Edited by Alan
Lyle Bryan. Occasional Papers No 1 of the Department of Anthropology,
University of Alberta, Edmonton.
Ellis, H. H.
Flint-Working Techniques of the American Indians. Ohio Historical Soci1965
ety~ Columbus.
Judge, J. W.
1973
Paleoindian Occupation of the Central Rio Grande Valley in New Mexico.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Sutun, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
1954
Archeological Society 25.

Sollberger ~ Fluted Projectile Points

17

Sollberger, J. B.
1978
Lever Flaking As a Credible Alternative to Hand-Held Pressure Flaking.
Flintknappers Exchange 1(1) 6-7 and 1(2) 25.
1985

A Technique for Fluting Folsom. Lithic Technology 14(1)41-50.

1986

Lithic Fracture Analysis: A Better Way. Lithic Technology 15(3) 101-105.

Sollberger, J. B., and L. W. Patterson
1983
A Pressure Method for Microblade Manufacture. Lithic Technology 12(2)2531.
1986

Comments on Folsom Fluting Experiments by Boldurian et al. Plains Anthropologist 31 (! 13):241-244.

Storck, P. L.
1984
Research into the Paleo-Indian Occupations of Ontario: A Review. Ontario
Archaeology 41:6.
Wilmsen, E. N., and F. H. H. Roberts, Jr.
1978
Lindenmeier 1934-1974. Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology No.
24.

