A STUDY OF THE CLEAR FORK GOUGE*
CALVIN D. HOWARD

Abstract
A study was conducted in an effort to determine the probable hafting
methods, functional efficiency, and possible application of the Clear Fork
gouge. Wear patterns strongly suggest a socket hafting method. In experimental use the hafted gouge proved to be an efficient wood planing
tool. Demonstration of functional efficiency includes the felling of both
soft and hardwood trees.

INTRODUCTION
The Clear Fork gouge was first described by Cyrus Ray (1929; 1930)
from specimens found along the Clear Fork of the Brazos River near
Centerline, Texas. This artifact is included in the tool assemblage of
the Clear Fork Culture Complex (Ray 1934;1938).
Although Clear Fork gouges vary considerably in size, they most
commonly range from 5 to 10 centimeters in length and 3 to 5 centimeters in width. One surface of the implement has a concave area
which gives it a scoop-like design. Because of this feature it is commonly considered to have been a wood-working tool. A study was
conducted to determine probable halting methods which would suggest the manner in which the gouges were used. The suggested use
was then tested by actual woodworking experiments to determine
gouge functional efficiency and to identify its possible application.
Twenty-five specimens, five of which were fragmentary, were
available for the study. This collection included both biracial and
unifacia! specimens conforming to Cyrus Ray’s Types 1 and 2 (Ray
1941). All of the gouges were specimens representing surface finds
from the southeastern Texas counties of Austin, Waller, and Colorado, and the southcentral county, Bexar.

ARTIFACT EXAMINATION
The first phase of the study involved the detailed visual examination of each gouge in an effort to discern wear patterns which might
indicate the halting methods that were used. These examinations
were performed using a large rectangular magnifying glass and various magnifiers up to and including 10X.
Extreme care was exercised to prevent erroneous consideration of
wear caused by natural agencies subsequent to abandonment of the
*EDITOR’S NOTE: This manuscript submittedJbr publication in April, 1972.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

52

artifact. General polish caused by wind or water-borne grit was readily recognized and eliminated from consideration. Wear indications
located on high spots of the tools’ surfaces could have been caused by
friction between the gouge and the soil. Therefore, these areas were
not included in the wear pattern data unless they were supported by
additional evidence such as directional wear patterns or wear on
adjacent low areas. All "questionable" polish or wear was excluded
from the data considered relevant. The wear pattern data are reflected
in Figure 1.
bit
0
@
@

<
<
@

0

@

O0

o

0

~
DORSAL

@

butt
VENTRAL

FACE

CENTER

WEAR

OF

AREA

WEAR

ON

AREA

ON

FACE

FACE

EDGE

FIGURE 1. Wt’ar Pattern Data. Data are derived from a sample of 25
Clear Fork gouges. Five gouges were fragmentary, with the butt 2/3
missing. Nine (45%) of the 20 complete gouges had evidence of wear
on the butt 1/3 of the gouge.
The data indicates that use wear was concentrated in two general
areas. One area was on the bit (concave) end of the gouge and was
located on the face opposite the concavity. This was obviously caused
by direct contact with the surface being worked and does not directly
contribute to evidence of halting. The other area of wear concentration includes both faces of the opposite or butt end of the gouge. This
area involves approximately 1/3 of the total gouge length. This wear
location correlates with the location of the breaks resulting from

CLEAR FORK GOUGE

53

aboriginal use of the fragmentary gouges in the study. These breaks
indicate that considerable force was applied during aboriginal use.
The wear data and break locations suggest that hafting involved
only 1/3 of the gouge at the butt end. This is also suggested by the
frequency of unremoved high spots located forward of this area and
the contour of both faces which would make hafting at these locations
very difficult.

GOUGE HAFTING

Many hafting methods used by Indians and Eskimos (Miles 1963)
for adze type devices were considered but rejected because they did
not appear compatible with the wear data and the above noted conditions, including the force which preliminary cutting attempts indicated was required for effective gouge use.
Preliminary cutting attempts indicated that good control of the
cutting angle was required. To provide such control and apply the
necessary force to a haft that grips only the butt of the gouge strongly
suggested that socket hafting was the ancient method used. A socket
hafting method is also suggested by the tapering design of the butt
end of most gouges. This design serves to force the gouge firmly into
the socket during use. Another factor which supports socket hafting is
its simplicity which is certainly compatible with ancient technologies. All that was required was a hole of the proper size in a
handle of wood or bone.
The tip of the butt end of some gouges is flaked to a sharp edge, but
on most gouges it is unflaked with the original cobble cortex remaining. Both of these conditions are compatible with socket hafting. In
fact, with one method tested (T-Mount) the tip of the butt end may
even protrude from the aft end of the socket and serve no purpose
whatever.
Gouges may have sometimes beefi socketed in the natural hollow of
various bones or horns, but gouge designs do not necessarily support
this possibility. Most bones and horns of suitable shape and strength
have interior contours which are incompatible with the lenticular
shape of most gouges. Also, a bone of sufficient size to accept large
gouges would probably be rather awkward to handle efficiently, and
the narrow or pointed end of a horn would be impractical for the
application of force by hand.
WOODWORKING EXPERIMENTS
The efficiency of the Clear Fork gouge as a wood planing device was
apparent very early in the experiments. Hafted and unhafted gouges

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

were used. The most efficient results were obtained with the gouge
maintained at approximately 15 degrees relative to the surface being
worked. This position transferred the force to a very thin layer of the
wood. Such shallow "bites" applied with rapid strokes provided the
best results, especially on very hard woods. A deeper cutting angle
with slower, more forceful strokes was effective only on very soft
wood (willow).
When cutting hard woods such as dried oak, the gouge produced
very small shavings and powdered wood similar to those produced by
a wood rasp. The powder produced when cutting thick, hard bark
would make excellent tinder for starting fires; thus, this residue may
have been a by-product from use of the gouge. Long, narrow shavings
are produced when shaving soft woods.
A gouge which is unhafted, or poorly hafted, is more effective on
hard, dry oak than it is on soft, fresh willow. Dry wood resists the bit
and therefore shaves well, but the spongy effect of fresh, soft wood,
and the lubricating effect of its sap make shaving difficult. These
effects are overcome by the great force which can be applied by an
efficiently hafted gouge; then, of course, shaving progress is greatest
on soft wood.
Very little evidence of wear can be discerned on the gouge bit even
after considerable and severe use. No wear can be discerned on the
gouges used in the various cutting experiments. Artifacts showing
considerable wear when found must have seen lengthy use unless
they were used on materials contaminated with abrasive grits.
Several methods of socket mounting were tested to determine the
most effective. These methods are illustrated in Figure 3 and are
described below:

T-Mount
This was the first hafting method tested. This method (Fig. 3a),
which proved to be the most efficient, is similar in general design to a
carpenter’s spokeshave or cabinet plane. A wooden handle 1.8 inches
in diameter and 14.5 inches long was used. A socket was drilled
midway along the length of the handle and at right angles to the long
axis. The gouge was mounted with its cutting edge parallel to the long
axis.
Various cutting attempts were made on log surfaces. The rather
large diameter of the handle provided the leverage necessary to maintain the blade at its most effective cutting angle.
Effective removal of wood would be accomplished by either a push
or pull action; however, the push mode was significantly superior.

CLEAR FORK GOUGE

55

This was primarily because it provided better control of cutting angle
and additional force could be applied by the leg muscles and weight
of the shoulders. The pull mode was much more fatiguing, and the
lack of cutting angle control resulted in a "chattering" effect.

Wood Plane Mount
This method involved mounting the gouge in a socket which had
been drilled midway along the length of a wood handle 2 inches in
diameter and 14.5 inches long (Fig. 3b). The gouge was positioned
similar to the cutting blade of a modern carpenter’s wood plane. The
long axis of the gouge was approximately 28 degrees in relation to the
long axis of the handle. This angle is necessary to position the gouge
in the most effective cutting angle.
Although this mounting method was somewhat effective, it did not
appear to be practical. The handle had a tendency to "rock" with the
gouge serving as fulcrum. The fingers cannot grip the lower surface of
the handle because of insufficient clearance between the handle and
the surface being worked. Because the cutting edge of the gouge is
mounted at right angles, an undesirably large diameter handle is
required. These factors, and the difficulty of cutting the socket at such
an acute angle, eliminated this method as a probable aboriginal hafting method.

Knife Mount
The gouge was inserted into a socket drilled in the center of the end
of a wooden handle 1.8 inches in diameter and 4.3 inches long (Fig.
3c). This method was proved effective in both pushing and pulling
modes. The greatest control and cutting efficiency, however, was
obtained with a pushing action.
To apply the force required for cutting, it was necessary to use the
butt end of the handle. In the push mode this was accomplished by
using the heel of the hand. In the pull mode one hand must be cupped
over the handle butt, and this resulted in a clearance problem between
the small finger and the working surface. In both modes the second
hand rested on the first and provided some additional force and
control.
This mounting method appears to be feasible, especially for light
woodworking.

Adze Mount
The gouge was insta!led in a socket drilled near the end of a
cylindrical handle with the cutting edge positioned at right angles to

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the long axis of the handle (Fig. 3d). With the gouge mounted in this
manner it was impractical to use it as a wood shaving device, so it was
used in the true adze "chopping" fashion. Since the swing stroke is
curved, it is difficult to control the angle at which the gouge strikes the
wood surface. The cutting edge usually hit at too great an angle and
merely produced a "chewing" effect with very little removal of wood.
The results were less effective than any other mounting method used
in the experiments.

Hand-Held
Because some gouges are not tapered and are wide and thick at the
butt end, it appears they were designed to[3e hand-held. When held as
shown in Figure 2, they are surprisingly effective on dry woods. The
best results are obtained by light rapid strokes with the gouge
positioned very nearly horizontal to the surface being worked. The
cuttings produced are very small and similar to those produced by a
wood rasp. The cutting stroke is a pulling stroke; therefore, full
advantage of the arms strength is obtained. These experiments indicate that gouges could have been hand-held for light woodworking
tasks.
\

\

\\
\

FIGURE 2. Hand-held Use of Gouge. Left, gouge positioned on open
palm with ventral face (concavity) next to hand. Right, gouge
positioned for use.
TREE FELLING
Because many of the houses used by certain Texas Indians were
assumed to have been built using small trees and saplings, an experiment in felling trees was conducted. The most efficient mounting

CLEAR FORK GOUGE

57

b

C

f

d
FIGURE 3. Methods of Halting Clear Fork Go~ge. a, T-mount; b, wood
plane mount; c, knife mount; d, adze mount.

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

method, the T-Mount, was used. The cutting of small trees was accomplished by leaning forward with one shoulder near the tree and
the arms encircling the tree. When cutting trees 3 inches or more in
diameter, the shoulders and arms were located on the far side of the
tree (Fig. 4a-c). The shavings were removed on the side opposite the
individual performing the test and at a convenient distance from the
ground. This method allowed full use of the shoulders’ weight and
the strength of both arms. As the shaving progresses the individual
slowly rotates around the tree until its entire periphery is cut to the
point that it can easily be pushed down.
Felling small trees in this manner proved very successful. Willows
and water oaks of approximately 2 inches in diameter can be cut down
in less than four minutes. Several trees were felled during the experiment, the largest an oak 41/2 inches in diameter (Fig. 4a-d).
Because it is difficult to maintain the gouge on trees of less than 13/4
inches in diameter, a chopping technique was employed by using a
T-mounted gouge in the manner of a hatchet. The weight of the excess
handle added force to the swing. The swings were slow and short;
therefore, it was more of a hacking than a true chopping process. It
was necessary to take very shallow "bites" which generally produced
shavings rather than chips.
This technique usually required more time, but was less fatiguing
than the shaving technique. It proved effective on small, living water
oak trees, but was ineffective on dry, dead ones. It was also ineffective
on larger diameter trees, including soft willows. These results correlate with gouge design which suggests a shaving rather than a chopping device.
One might speculate that the ancient inventor of the Clear Fork
gouge was attempting to simulate the tooth of a gnawing animal, such
as the beaver. In fact, except for the lack of curvature, gouge design is
quite similar to such teeth.
CONCLUSION
The study strongly suggests that the Clear Fork gouge was the
cutting "bit" of an efficient woodworking tool. The experiments
demonstrated that the tool was most probably a shaving or planing
device. This indicates that the gouge is more closely related in function to the modern wood plane and drawing knife than it is to the
adze. Because of its demonstrated efficiency it was probably used for
numerous woodworking tasks.
The construction of many types of prehistoric structures may be
assumed to have included the use of trees and saplings. Since the

CLEAR FORK GOUGE

59

experiments demonstrated the efficiency of the gouge for felling trees,
it appears reasonable to suspect that this was one of its applications.
This possibility is supported by the absence of the stone axe from
many of the prehistoric tool assemblages which do include the Clear
Fork gouge.

b

d
FIGURE 4. Technique qf Felling Trec,s with T-Moupzted Gouge.

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Miles, Charles
1963 Indian and Eskimo Artifacts of North America. Henry Regnery Company, Chicago.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1929 A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene Section.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Vol.
1: 7-22.
1930 Report on Some Recent Archaeological Researches in the Abilene
Section. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society. Vol. 2: 45-58.
1934 Flint Cultures of Ancient Man in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Vol. 6: 107-111.
1938 The Clear Fork Culture Complex. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society. Vol. 10: 193-207.
1941 Various Types of Clear Fork Gouges. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Vol. 13: 152-162.
Houston, Texas

