The Aflatl Assessed: A Review of Recent
Anthropological Approaches to Prehistoric North
American Weaponry
D. Bruce Dickson

ABSTRACT
This paper reviews recent anthropological analyses of a basic tool in the
technical inventory of the prehistoric peoples of North America: the atlatl or
spearthrower. The atlatl is described, its major variant forms defined and the
areal distribution of these forms discussed. Experimenta! studies of atlatl
performance are reviewed with special attention paid to the contribution of
weights or "bannerstones" to that performance. Ethnographic examples of
atlatl use are noted. The general replacement of the atlatl by the bow-andarrow in North America is considered with particular reference to the reasons for that replacement and for the retention of the atlatl as a special purpose tool in some areas. The change in projectile point size occasioned by
that replacement is examined. Evidence of the ritual and symbolic retention
of the form of the atlatl subsequent to its functional supercession by the
bow-and-arrow is noted.

INTRODUCTION
Traditionally, anthropologists have approached technology and material culture in formalistic ways; they have undertaken taxonomic or classificatory studies, plotted spatial and temporal distribution patterns or focused on changes in
form and distribution over time (cf., Lane Fox 1858, 1875; Krause 1902, 1905;
Cressman and Krieger 1940; Kellar 1955; Oswalt 1973, 1976). The emerging
interest in "cultural ecology" in recent years, however, has led anthropologists
generally to turn their attention from mere formal studies and to focus instead on
the cultural strategies developed by human groups to accommodate or adapt
themselves to their environments. As a consequence, anthropologists concerned
with tools and technology have attempted to broaden their understanding of the
role of these phenomena in human adaptive strategies. To effect this broadening,
some scholars have attempted to assess tool function, performance or patterns of
wear through the experimental replication of prehistoric tools or techniques (e.g.

Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society 56 (1985)

2

Texas Archeological Society

Semenov 1964; Ahler and McMillan 1976; Hayden 1979), or by close observation of living practitioners of ancient arts (e.g. Clark 1952; Gould 1969, 1978;
Yellen 1977; Binford 1978). Far less commonly, scholars have examined the image or role of tools and technology in the symbolic system or mental universe of
their users. The "anthropocentric perspective" taken by Hall (1977) is a prime
example of this last approach.
This paper reviews some recent applications of these various approaches to
the analysis of a basic tool in the technological inventory of prehistoric North
American aboriginal peoples: the atlatl or spearthrower. In doing so I hope to
present an overview of the anthropological study of an important aspect of North
American material culture.

The Atlatl Described: The Formal Definition of the Tool and Its Major
Variant Types
Although generally known to Americanists as the atlatl, that rudimentary
tool for increasing the propulsion of aboriginal spears or darts has been variously
referred to in the literature by a host of other names. A list of alternative terms
for the weapon would have to include throwing board, throwing stick, dart
thrower, spear-sling, hand board, spear-thrower (Howard 1974: 102); the Australian aborigine name, wommera (Coon 1976: 97); the French propulseur or
propulseur a crochet (de Mortillet 1891); the German Wurfbrett (Seler 1890,
1892), Wurfstock (Uhle 1888), Wurfholz (yon Luschan 1896), Speerschleuder
(Spratz 1956) and the most Teutonically scholastic expression schleudervorrichtungenfiir Wurfwaffen (Krause 1902), which translates literally to "sling contrivances for projectile weapons." Equally exotic are the 16th and 17th century
Spanish labels such as tiradera (Noguera 1945), bohordo y amiento (Swanton
1938: 357), lanzadardo and estolica (Massey 1961: 82). According to Massey,
the last term is an hispanicization of a South American Indian name for the
weapon. Of course, the most widely accepted word, atlatl, is derived from the
Indian language Nahua, and refers to the military weapon responsible for what
Brundage (1972) aptly calls "the rain of darts" encountered by the Spanish conquistadors in their assault on the Aztec empire.
Whatever one choses to call it, the tool consists of two basic parts: (1) a
stick or board generally less than two feet in length equipped with a notch or
hook to engage a projectile shaft and (2) a "dart" or spearshaft generally 50 to
70 percent longer than the board which engages and cradles it (Peets 1960:
108-110). For consistency, we shall refer to both parts of the tool collectively
as the atlatl and its two constituent parts as the throwing board and dart or
dartshaft, respectively. The atlatl is used as follows:
These two elements are held in the thrower’s hand with the projectile in a superior
position, the long axis of both being approximately parallel. The spear is steadied
with the aid of the fingers and sometimes rests on the knuckles. Motion is imparted

Dickson-- The Atlatl Assessed

3

by an overhand throwing movement. A sharp snap of the wrist at the moment of
release initiates the independent flight of the dart. The spearthrower remains in the
hand of the user (Kellar 1955: 283).

The throwing board is generally made of a single, solid piece of wood which
ranges in cross-section from round to oval or rectangular in shape. The proxima!
end of the throwing board is generally fashioned into a hand grip of some kind
while the distal end is modified to accommodate the butt of the spear or dart.
Thus, as Cressman and Krieger (1940: 22) note:
¯ . . atlatls may be described according to three main criteria: (1) the general shape
and proportions of the body shaft, (2) the mechanism for engaging the projectile,
and (3) the provision for gripping.
These authors go on to state that, throughout the world, a "great variety of means
(are) employed to satisfy these three requirements." However, from the standpoint of classification, variation in their second criteria, "the mechanism for
engaging the projectile," has been considered most important. For example,
Krause (1902), following von Luschan (1896), states that throwing boards can be
sorted into three basic classes worldwide based on the shape of the distal end: the
male, the female, and the "hybrid" (Zwitterhaften) (see Figure 1). This latter
term has generally been translated as "mixed" (cf., Cressman and Krieger 1940;
Kellar 1955: 282; Mildner 1974: 7) or "compound" (Baker and Kidder 1937: 52)
in English.
A "male" throwing board is characterized by a projecting hook or spur at its
distal end. The butt of the dartshaft, which is often grooved or indented to receive
the spur, is placed against this projection when the dart is cradled on the throwing
board prior to being thrown. Such hooks are often carved from a separate piece
of material and then fastened to the throwing board (see Hester 1974a, b). Wood,
bone, stone, horn and antler were commonly used but Metraux (1949: 245) notes
that such hooks were also made of shell and copper. Alternatively, both hook and
throwing board may be fashioned from a single piece of wood. Mildner (1974:
19) refers to separate hooks as forming the "attached" type and to those carved
directly on the throwing board as "integral" hooks. Based on existing archeological evidence, Mildner (1974: 19) gives temporal primacy to the attached
form, at least in the Great Basin, but he notes that:
Webb (1950: 347) has suggested that the integral (wooden) spur was later replaced
by attached spurs. This development would allow for the continued use of an atlatl
that had a wooden integral hook broken off or given too much wear; or that it would
be ultimately easier to mend an atlatl with a broken or loose attached spur. Strong
(1969), however, has pointed out that an attached hook may have been difficult to
keep immobilized after throwing several large darts (Mildner 1974: 19).

In contrast to the male type, the "female" throwing board lacks a hook or

4

Texas Archeological Society

spur. In its simplest form, the female type is characterized merely by a deep
groove or channel on its dorsal surface into which the dartshaft is placed. The
tapered butt of the dartshaft is engaged to the throwing board by the terminus of
the groove. More elaborate versions of the female type occur, however. Accordin~} to Cressman and Krieger (1940: 26, 28):
¯ . . in Melanesian and Micronesian weapons, the spear itself is equipped with a
hook which engages the hollow at the back of the groove in the thrower. On the other
hand, some Greenland specimens show a hollow cup at the back of the groove into
which the spear butt fits.

As its names implies, the "hybrid," or "mixed," throwing board possesses
features of both the male and female types. This variety has both groove and spur
or hook (Krause 1902, 1905). However, the hooks are relatively small and generally set flush with the top of the groove on the dorsal surface of the throwing
board (see Baker and Kidder 1937: 52). Often such hooks are made of a separate
piece of bone that has been attached at the rear of the groove and extended forward "horizontally or at a slight upward angle to facilitate disengagement at
some point in the throwing arc" (Cressman and Krieger 1940: 28).

Cl

b

I!

c

Figure 1. Three basic classes of mechanisms for engaging the dartshaft at the distal end of
the throwing board. According to Krause (1902, 1905), atlatls worldwide may be sorted
into these three classes: (a) hybrid or mixed (Zwitterhaften) (b) female; full perforation
represented here may or may not be present (c) male with "attached" rather than "integral" spur.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

5

The proximal end of the throwing board, which is gripped by the user, shows
a great deal of variation as well (see Figure 2). Most commonly the proximal end
of the implement is left smooth and unshaped but this is by no means always the
case. According to Krause (1905: 624), to facilitate gripping, the proximal ends
of Australian throwing boards are often roughened with indentations or notches
or are covered with resin or gum or wrapped with cords of human hair. A similar
effect was achieved through the use of wrist or hand loops made of cordage
which Massey (1961: 81) reports were attached to several throwing boards recovered from archeological sites in Baja California.
A slightly more elaborate means of improving the grip of the throwing
board is illustrated in Figure 2, b. On this specimen the proximal end has been
shaped to fit the user’s hand by carving palm-sized indentations on one or both
sides of it a few inches above the butt (also cf., Krause 1905: Plate I, 16; Kellar
1955: 294, Figure 4, b-c). Often such palm-sized indentations were accompanied
by a single hole drilled just above them to accommodate the index finger. Such
carving and shaping of the proximal ends of the throwing boards seems to have
become particularly well developed among the Eskimos of the North American
arctic. A number of boards collected from the arctic in historical times are so
carefully shaped and worked that, for all the world, they seem intended as tiny,
surrealistic bass violas or fiddles. It was also common in the North American
arctic to insert one, two or even three pegs perpendicular to the throwing board’s
shaft (see Figure 2, c-d). These pegs were then gripped with the fore and middle
fingers (cf., Kellar 1955: 295,303). Small shells or stones, attached to the throwing boards with resin or gum, apparently served the same purpose in Australia
(Krause 1905: 621), and Ekholm (1962) has identified the U-shaped shell or
stone objects found throughout northern Mexico and the southwestern United
States as "fingerloops" which were formerly lashed to the proximal ends of
throwing boards there. Cord or sinew was also used to provide southwestern
throwing boards with handles (Kellar 1955: 303; see Figure 2, f). The tighter
hold on the throwing board, which such pegs, shell or stone objects, or cords or
sinew provided, was also obtained by widening the proximal end of the board,
drilling finger holes directly through it and then narrowing the stick below the
holes to fit the palm of the hand (see Figure 2, e). This latter form of atlatl grip
occurred widely in the New World (Nuttall 1891: 203, Plate II, 1-20; Krause
1905: Plate IV; Metraux 1949: 246, Peets 1906: 109, Figure 1, c).
In addition to the wide variation in the treatment of the proximal end or
grip, throwing boards vary in the degree to which they exhibit nonfunctional decoration. Certainly the most elaborate decorations are found on the throwing
boards of the Aztecs. A particularly impressive example of such decoration is
located in the Museum of Anthropology and Ethnology of Florence (Defuentes
1963: Illustration 17). The proximal end of this specimen is smooth and exhibits
no modifications for gripping but the medial portion of the throwing board all the
way to its distal end is covered with intricate carved and gilded representations of
what appear to be warriors and/or deities set within complicated fret work. It is

6

Texas Archeological Society

intricate decoration of this nature that no doubt led Cressman and Krieger (1940:
32) to the conclusion that many Aztec and Maya atlatls were too elaborate for
practical use and served instead as emblems of rank. Perhaps a singular lack or
"practical purpose" also led to the crafting of the Ecuadorian atlatl described by
Metraux (1948: 245) as "covered with artistically-wrought gold plate."
Less spectacularly decorated atlatls are found in North America¯ Read
(1891, cited in Kellar 1955: 300) illustrated a throwing board collected from the
Northwest Coast of North America. Typical Tlingit animal motifs had been
carved on this specimen and then inlaid with Haliotis shells. Carved atlatl throwing boards are also known from southeastern North America. Cushing recovered
two such specimens at the Key Marco site in Florida where,
¯ . . the remarkable preservation of normally perishable artifacts has given us one
atlatl with its spur carved as a rabbit and another with the handle grip in the outline
of the head and neck of a roseate spoonbill’s eyes (Cushing 1896: Plate XXXII-4,
cited in Kehoe, Foster and Hall, n.d.: 17-18).

Less sophisticated decorations are known from western North America. Southwestern Basketmaker throwing boards recovered from dry caves are often adorned
with what appear to be stone and feather amulets (Guernsey and Kidder 1921:
80; Palter 1976: 505; McGregor 1965: 182), while an atlatl throwing board from
Roaring Springs cave in Oregon had been painted with red ochre (Cressman and
Krieger 1940: 38).

The Atlatl Apportioned: A Brief Overview of the Spatial and Temporal
Distribution of the Weapon
No attempt will be made here to exhaustively survey the historic and prehistoric distribution of the atlatl. Readers interested in such surveys are urged
to consult the works of Krause (1905), Cressman and Krieger (1940), Kellar
(1955), Spratz (1956) and Driver and Massey (1957). For our purpose it will be
sufficient to note that the atlatl appears to be an exceedingly old weapon which
was present in Europe by at least the end of the Upper Paleolithic period. According to Campbell (1976: 398), the oldest definite evidence of the atlatl comes
from La Placard cave where the Magdalenian levels produced fragments of a
"male" type throwing board hook dated to around 14,000 B.C. However, other
scholars are willing to attribute far greater antiquity to the weapon and conclude
that it was present in Europe at a much earlier time in the Upper Paleolithic period (Krause 1905: 124; Cressman and Krieger 1940: 36; Massey 1961: 81). Actually, if the tanged points made on Levaillois flakes in Mousterian tool inventories were meant to be hafted on atlatl darts, the tool may have appeared as early
as 80,000 or more years ago.
Of course the place (or places) of origin of the atlatl are unknown¯ However, based on the widely-scattered locations of the peoples who have retained the

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

7

tool into historical times, we are probably safe in concluding that the use of the
atlatl spread broadly until, by the end of the Pleistocene or beginning of the
Holocene, it had become an important element in the technological inventory of
peoples over much of the Old World.
The recovery of atlatI parts in association with extinct ground sloth bones
and feces at Gypsum Cave, Nevada, led to the conclusion that the weapon was

a

d

o
1

to
I

e

20
1

3o
I

40
I

50
I

scale in centimeters

Figure 2. Some variations in the grip or proximal ends of atlatl throwing boards: (a) single
bark loop attached with sinew wrapping set at right angles to the plane of the "attached"
type male atlatl spur or hook and to one side of the shaft, Las Palmas culture, Baja (after
Massey 1961: 86); (b) Eskimo throwing board in which the proximal end has been slightly
shaped and narrowed to accommodate the palm of the user and a hole has been drilled for
his forefinger (after Kellar 1955: 294, Figure 4c); (c) front view of another Eskimo throwing board showing the shaft groove for aligning the dart and the carefully carved grip with
a notch for the thumb and a hole for the forefinger (after Cushing 1895: 339, Figure 29);
(d) somewhat less elaborately carved Eskimo throwing board with pegs inserted in the
proximal end for the forefinger and little finger and a carved indention for the thumb (after
Krause 1904: Plate II, 27); (e) modern Yucatecan throwing board with two carved winglike extensions which have been perforated to accommodate the user’s first two fingers
(Peets 1960: 109, Figure lc); (f) southwestern throwing board from Grand Gulch, Utah,
with rawhide cord or thong grip. A single piece of rawhide was folded and a hole drilled
through it. The throwing board was then forced into the hole until the rawhide came to rest
in a shallow groove carved on the shaft to receive it. The ends of the rawhide were then
pressed forward against the edges of the shaft and fastened with sinew to tbrm the loops
(after Pepper 1905:110-111).

8

Texas Archeological Society

also present in the New World during the Late Pleistocene (Harrington 1933;
Kellar 1955: 305). However, recent radiocarbon determinations have placed the
age of these specimens at 900 and 400 B.C. (Heizer and Berger 1970; Aikens
1978: 146). Nonetheless, the Late Pleistocene points of the Paleo-Indian tradition, such as Sandia, Clovis and Folsom, could surely have served as effective
atlatl dart tips.
According to Cressman (1977: 105), the earliest definite archeological
record of the atlatl in the New World comes from Fort Rock Cave in Oregon. At
this site, an "attached" type atlatl spur was recovered and dated to approximately 8,500 years ago. Evidence for the prehistoric use of the atlatl in North
America is best in the Southwest and Great Basin where the special conditions
found in dry caves there have resulted in the preservation and recovery of numerous complete (or nearly complete) specimens of the weapon (Mildner 1974). In
addition, the presence of the atlatl at least during the Archaic period in eastern
North America is well documented from a variety of grave lot contexts (e.g. see
Tuck 1970; Webb and Haag 1939; Webb 1946). In the absence of actual atlatl
remains, the presence of the weapon in other parts of North America is generally
inferred on the basis of projectile points present at Ventana Cave in southern Arizona by about A.D. 1. Among peoples of the Anasazi tradition on the Colorado
Plateau, the atlatl appears to have remained the primary weapon until near the
end of the Basketmaker III or Modified Basketmaker period between about
A.D. 500 and A.D. 700 (Lipe 1978: 369). In the Trans-Pecos region on the eastern margins of the Southwest, Kelley (1950: 72) reports that the bow-and-arrow
did not appear until around A.D. 900.
In the midwestern United States, this technological transition seems to have
taken place sometime after A.D. 400 (Ford 1974: 402) but may have occurred
later in the Northwest, where according to Griffin (1978: 254), the atlatl did not
give way to the bow-and-arrow until sometime between A.D. 700 and 900. Ford
(1974: 402) goes so far as to suggest that the replacement of the atlatl by
the bow-and-arrow may have been an important factor in the breakdown of the
Hopewell Interaction Sphere in the eastern United States. He proposes that the
greater efficiency of the bow as a military weapon may have heightened conflict
and reduced peaceful interaction and in turn led to the Hopewell decline. Alternatively, he suggests that the presumably greater hunting effectiveness of the bow
may have allowed loca! groups to exploit sufficient wild resources on their own
without reliance on the regional exchange of foodstuffs presumed to have been an
important function of the Hopewell Interaction Sphere. Muller (1978: 302),
however, feels both these theses to be too simplistic.
Despite the widespread acceptance of the bow-and-arrow in place of the
atlatl, the replacement was not absolute in either the New World or the Old. Perhaps due to their relative isolation, the peoples of Australia, New Guinea, Micronesia and Melanesia retained the atlatl into historical times (Krause 1905; Ketlar
1955; Cressman and Krieger 1940). Likewise, certain Arctic and Subarctic
peoples, including the Aleuts and some Eskimo groups, continued to use the
atlatl. However, northern peoples generally either possessed the bow-and-arrow
as well, or at least were familiar with it. They seem to have retained the atlatl

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

9

primarily for use in sea-mammal hunting and water fowling since, in these contexts, the atlatl has a number of advantages over the bow-and-arrow, which we
discuss below.
The atlatl was also retained by peoples at the opposite end of the scale of
social complexity from the Eskimo: the civilized societies of southern and central Mesoamerica such as the Aztecs and the Toltec-Maya. Among the former
peoples, the atlatl seems to have served as a kind of artillery weapon used to
launch heavy spears in close support of phalanxes of massed infantry (Nuttall
1891; Driver 1961: 380). On the margins of Mesoamerica, simpler peoples are
also reported to have been using the atlatl at the time of the Spanish conquest.
Massey (1961) found reference to the weapon in use in Baja California during
the 17th century, Heizer (1938) reports its historic use in the Santa Barbara channel area of southern California and throwing boards dating to the 15th century
have been recovered at the Key Marco site in coastal Florida (Gilliland 1975: 38).
In addition, Swanton (1938) reports that the DeSoto expedition was attacked by
Indians using atlatls on the Gulf Coast near the mouth of the Mississippi River. It
is uncertain whether or not the presence of the atlatl in these four coastal settings
indicates that the weapon was retained there for specialized use in marine hunting, as it was in the arctic, or whether it was abandoned in those localities also
with the coming of the bow-and-arrow and only later reintroduced by diffusion
from the high cultures of nearby Mesoamerica (cf., Sturtevant 1960: 31; Kellar
1955: 335). In this context it is interesting to note that both the atlatl darts used
against DeSoto’s men on the Gulf Coast and those used against Cortez’s army in
Mexico were reported to have been mounted with three-pronged dart points
(Swanton 1938: 358; DeFuentes 1963: 169).
Perhaps an analogous situation existed in South America. There also the
atlatl was reportedly used by the Inca and other civilized peoples as a military
weapon as well as by surrounding societies of markedly lower levels of social and
technical complexity in Ecuador and northwest Brazil as far south as the Rio de
la Plata (Metraux 1948: 244-245,247; also cf., Cressman and Krieger 1940: 28;
Uhle 1909). Despite these survivals or specialized retentions, the bow-and-arrow
had largely supplanted the atlatl in North America by historic times. By then, as
Driver (1961: 58) notes: "... the bow-and-arrow was almost everywhere the
chief weapon used .... The spearthrower is reported by European observers
only in the far north and extreme south with a huge gap in the middle."

The Atlaa Observed: Experimental Assessments of Atlaa Performance.

Although most scholars would agree that the purpose of the atlatl is to increase the amount of "thrust" or propulsive force, which a user can put behind a
spear or dart, they have disagreed as to precisely how this increase was effected.
According to Howard (1974: 102),
... archaeological literature commonly attributes increased leverage and centrifugal force as the primary factors in the thrust provided by the atlatl. Actual ex-

10

Texas Archeological Society

perimenters have enforced this consensus by implying that the atlatl raises the dart,
or spear, in a high arc above the thrower and flips, whips, or otherwise performs in a
catapulting fashion.

Howard’s own experimental work led him to a different conclusion. According to him (Howard 1974: 102), the function of the throwing board is merely to
prolong the contact between the spearman and his missile and thus allow him to
concentrate a greater percentage of the total force of his throw behind the dart. In
using the throwing board, a spearman is in effect lengthening his reach and therefore applying force to the dart for a moment longer than he would be able to do
with his arm alone.
Howard’s interpretation receives some support from Brues (1959: 465) who
notes in her classic paper, "The Spearman and the Archer," that different body
morphologies are suited to different forms of weaponry. She suggests that since
"the determining factor in the efficiency of the spear is the velocity with which
the weapon leaves the hand," individuals with long, linear, "ectomorphic" body
builds would tend to be the most effective spearmen. She too interprets the
throwing board as an artifical extension or lengthening of the human arm designed to increase that velocity. Thus, according to Brues (1959: 464-465), the
throwing board
¯ . . affords a means of compensating for the disadvantage of a short arm in the use
of the spear. Possibly it was devised as a means of adapting the spear to the use of
peoples of more lateral build, who would not have been apt to have developed the
spear themselves but might have received it from others. The possibility that the
throwing stick represents a compromise with body build finds confirmation in
the fact that the very linear spear-users of Africa generally throw the spear with the
bare hands; apparently the throwing-stick has little to offer to a physique with maximum built-in speed leverages.

However, the physics of the atlatl are of less interest to anthropologists than
the practical performance characteristics and capabilities of the weapon. Assessing the performance of the atlatl has been approached primarily in three ways.
First, by field testing actual atlatl specimens (or workshop prototypes) in what
has come to be called "experimental archeology." Second, by observing the rapidly diminishing ranks of living peoples who still make and use the atlatl. And
finally, by examining historic and ethnographic accounts of aboriginal atlatl use.
Published accounts of performance tests with the atlatl begin with the work
of Browne (1940), Davenport (1943), Hill (1948), Evans (1959), Peets (1960),
Mau (1963), Hobbs (1963) and continue into the present with the more recent
works of Spencer (1974), Howard (1974) and Palter (1976). Many of the earlier
experiments were notably unsuccessful. For example, Browne (1940:211) states
bluntly that "any close degree of accuracy is impossible with the atlatl and the
spear." Hill (1948) and Hobbs (1963) are nearly as skeptical about the accuracy
and overall utility of the weapon. Since the atlatl has been an important part of

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

11

the human technical inventory for thousands of years, we are forced by the evidence of its very persistence and ubiquitousness to conclude that it offered some
advantage to its users. However, the fact that these modern scholars appear to
have been unable to master the atlatl certainly points up the dangers and limitations inherent in any such tests. Lacking living mentors, the experimenter is
forced in a matter of weeks or months to teach himself a skill, the mastery of
which may have taken the people who actually used the weapon years of constant
and closely-supervised training and practice. Given such a limitation, can we
ever hope to simulate the actual performance capabilities of such a prehistoric
tool? Probably not, but the tests of those scholars who have managed to obtain
more positive results than Browne and company give us at least some indication
of the atlatl’s ancient capacities.
Such capacities can be measured along three lines: maximum distance, accuracy and penetration. Comparing the results of his own experiments with
those of some of his predecessors, Spencer (1974: 52) states,
¯ . . my viable dart throws averaged about 50-60 yards (46-55 meters) in distance.
I feel better distances are possible. Browne (1940) mentions distances of 81 yards
(74 meters). Hobbs (1963) reports average distances of 38.6 yards (35 meters)¯ Hill
(1948) records 46.6 yard (43 meters) average distances for what he calls "medium
weight" darts. All these distances are different and doubtless different types of
atlatls and darts were used.
In addition, Peets (1960: 109) reports distances averaging slightly more than
57 meters (62 yards) for an unweighted throwing board and Palter (1976: Figure 1,
105), who would seem to hold the World Cup for the atlatl, achieved tosses of
around 108 meters (118 yards) with a similarly unweighted board. Howard
(1974: 104) and Hobbs (1963: 6) achieved distances only about half those reported by Palter; their tosses averaged around 59 meters (64 yards) and 37 meters
(40 yards) respectively. However, their experiments are perhaps more useful
since they compare their atlatl results with the average distances they achieved
with the hand-thrown spear. Howard’s figures indicate that the use of the throwing
board resulted in a 42 percent increase in the average distance he was able to
obtain. These percentage increases are no doubt more significant indicators of
the effectiveness of the throwing board than the gross distances reported by the
other experimenters.
Krause (! 905:621-622) states that using the throwing board, one should be
able to cast a spear three or four times further than with the bare hands. He confirms this through reference to the ethnographic literature of his time noting:
. . . an Englishman saw a native of Port Jackson (Sidney) aiming the spear sling at
a mark 276 feet (84 meters) away. While spears can be thrown 50 to 75 feet (15 to
23 meters) with the bare hands, from the spear sling they easily reach 200 to 300 feet
(61 to 91 meters). Indeed, according to Clutterbuck, the Australians are said to have
made even 150 yards (137 meters) with the spear sling. Whether these last state-

12

Texas Archeological Society

ments are entirely accurate we can not decide, but one constantly sees references to
great distances attained by aid of the spear sling.
Assessing the atlatl along the second dimension, accuracy, is a still harder
task to undertake experimentally. As noted above, Browne (1940), Hiil (1948)
and Hobbs (1963) all find the atlatl to be a basically inaccurate weapon. On this
point Browne (1940: 212) is most emphatic:
I consider myself an average individual, have an expert rating with both large and
small bore rifles, a few trophies from archery tournaments, but after six months of
intensive practice with atlatl and spear I wouldn’t be sure of hitting a buffalo at thirty
yards once out of ten shots. With a bow, anyone can register eight hits out of ten
shots at this distance and on this size target after a week’s practice.

On the other hand, Evans (1959: 160) states that after a few minutes prac=
tice, "a target a foot in diameter could be pierced at 20 to 30 feet (6 to 9 meters)
about four out of five times." Davenport (1943: 33) does Evans one better when
he states that "in a short time I was hitting within a three-foot circle at a distance
of about 80 paces." And Spencer (1974: 52) states that his "subjective opinion is
that the atlatl and dart is a very accurate hunting weapon .... Accuracy with
my dart and atlatl combination seemed best at distances of 20-30 yards (18-27
meters)." Once again, the problem of learning ancient skills by oneself (combined no doubt with the varying quality of the atlatls used in the experiments),
makes the results of these tests difficult to assess.
At this point we are better served by turning briefly and selectively to the
ethnographic record. Coon (1976: 97), for example, notes that the Aleuts of the
Northern Pacific Bering Straits region used the atlatl in hunting from their skin
boats or bidarkas. According to him, "... the early Russian accounts state that
the Aleuts cast (atlatl darts) with deadly accuracy and killed men, animals, and
birds as efficiently as the Russians could with firearms." An eyewitness account
of the accuracy of the atlatl may be found in Foster’s (1948: 107) ethnography of
the central Mexican people of Tzintzuntzan. The atlatl was retained among these
people for use in a single activity--duck hunting. According to Foster (1948:
107), large numbers of villagers gather with their canoes to take part in an annual
communal duck hunt on a major lake near Janitizio. Describing the use of the
atIatl during the hunt, Foster says that "the aim of skillful men is deadly, and
literally thousands of ducks are killed on this day." The weapon is also used in the
smaller-scale hunts that precede and follow this annual event. The Aleut and
Mexican examples indicate rather clearly that, in the hands of an experienced
hunter, the atlatI can be an exceedingly accurate weapon, which is probably superior to the hand-thrown spear. At least in part, this accuracy may result from
the "superior grip and control of his spear" which, according to Howard (1974:
t04), the atlatl affords its user.
Finally, penetration, the third dimension of atlatl performance to be discussed, is surely the crucial one for any projectile weapon. After all, whatever its

Diekson--The Atlatl Assessed

13

range or accuracy, the extent to which the missile it projects is able to penetrate
and damage the target is the final measure of the utility of such a device. Recognizing the importance of this dimension, gun and archery equipment manufacturers have developed a number of techniques for measuring relative projectile
penetration. Although some of these techniques have been used by Pope (1923)
in appraising aboriginal arrow penetration, none of the experimental studies of
atlatl performance have made use of them. In fact, of all the atlatl experimental
studies cited above, only Hill (1948) and Cole (1972) are at all concerned with
this aspect of dart effectiveness. Hopefully, future performance studies will remedy this deficiency. Meanwhile, lacking empirical data, we are forced to approach the problem of atlatl dart penetration, first through the ethnographic
record, and second on theoretical grounds.
An ethnographic example of just exactly how forcefully and successfully an
atlatl dart can sometimes puncture its target is provided by Garcilaso de la Vega,
a chronicler of the DeSoto expedition in the southeastern United States during
the 16th century. Describing the effect of an atlatl dart wound on a member of
the expedition, Garcilaso relates that,
¯ . . the dart of long arrow with which they wounded our Spaniard . . . had three
barbs in the place of one, similar to the three largest fingers of the hand. The barb in
the center was a hand-breadth longer than the two on the sides, and thus it went
through the thigh from one side to the other. The two side barbs were lodged in the
middle of the thigh and in the poor Spaniard’s leg, because they were harpoons and
not smooth points. The butchery was such that he expired before they got his wound
dressed, the poor fellow not knowing whether to complain more of the enemy who
had wounded him or of the friends who had hastened his death (Swanton 1938: 358).
In the same context Garcilaso notes that the atlatl was used against the
Spanish in Peru. There, according to him, "they shoot darts with it with extreme
force, so that it has been known to pass through a man armed with a coat of
mail" (Swanton 1938: 358).
How is such penetration achieved? From basic physics we learn that the
force with which any projectile strikes its target is a product of its mass times its
velocity (Arons 1965:127-128). Cole (1972: 1) refers to this force as the "impact pressure" of the projectile. In large measure, it is the impact pressure of the
dart which determines the extent or degree of its penetration. However, as Cole
(1972: 1) notes, the contact area of the projectile point and the resistance of the
target material enter into this determination as well. Atlatl users seeking to
increase the penetration and/or range of their weapon would thus have three
options:
!. Increase the velocity of the dart without changing its mass.
2. Increase the mass of the dart without changing its velocity.
3. Increase both the velocity and mass of the dart.

It would appear that the velocity achieved by the dart is largely a function of

14

Texas Archeological Society

the human force that can be concentrated behind it when it is thrown. If Howard
(1974) is correct in asserting that the purpose of the throwing board is to prolong
contact between the dartshaft and the thrower’s arm, then one should be able to
increase the velocity of the dart by increasing the length of the throwing board.
However, there are natural constraints on such increases. Most obviously, the
overall body size, reach and strength of the individual atIatl user would place a
limit on the extent to which the throwing board would be lengthened (Davenport
1943: 34). Further, Peets (1960:110) and Evans (1959: 160) state that the size of
both the throwing board and the dart must be in proportion to one another if the
weapon is to be effective. These scholars suggest a dartshaft-to-board length
ratio of no less than about 3 to 1 is necessary if the balance of the weapon is to be
maintained (Palter [1976: 503] denies that such a limit exists).
Increasing the mass of the dart and/or the dartshaft without changing the
velocity at which it is thrown is perhaps a simpler way to increase penetration
and range, but here too, physical limitations are encountered. First, one can always increase the mass of the dart by enlarging the projectile point attached to its
tip. However, siliceous rock, of which most projectile points are made, tends to
be relatively fragile. Although larger points may weigh more, they also are more
likely to break on impact. The inconvenience of such breakage eventually would
offset performance benefits. Secondly, any enlargement of the dart’s mass heightens the friction and wind resistance encountered by the missile in its flight. At
some point the performance benefits conferred by increased mass are negated by
the decline in velocity resulting from greater friction.
The existence of these physical limitations on the expansion of the length
of the throwing board and the mass of the dart were probably discovered experimentally by atIatl users over the course of millennia. No doubt such long-term
experience also resulted in the recognition of something approximating an optimal balance between board length and dart mass. With the development and
application of this balance, the maximum range and penetration capabilities of
the simple atlatl would have been reached. Deviation from this length:mass ratio
could only have resulted in a decline in performance.
At this point the matter of the tool’s technological evolution may have come
to rest among many atlatl-using peoples. I would suggest, however, that experimental efforts at improving atlatl range and penetration did not everywhere stop
with the recognition of the optimal length:mass ratio. Instead, a new avenue of
investigation seems to have begun, at least in North America. That avenue apparently involved aboriginal experiments with the use of weights or "bannerstones"
to enhance the effectiveness of the atlatl.

The Problem of Atlaa Weights or "Bannerstones"
Bannerstones, or what Willey.(1966: Figure 5-5, 254) prefers to call
"problematical ground-and-polished stone objects," have been recovered in

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

15

North American contexts, especially in the eastern United States, virtually since
the beginnings of scientific archeology there (e.g. Fowke 1896; Jones 1873;
Holmes 1897). Such objects were made from a wide range of raw materials including slate, limestone, greenstone, quartzite, marble, jasper, galena, hematite
and steatite. According to Palter (1976: 503), they range in weight from as little
as 30 to as great as 800 grams. Bannerstones are equally variable in shape (see
Figure 3). Although many are fairly flat in cross-section, they range from rectangular, oval, sub-oval, lunate, triangular, circular, to "reel-shaped" (sic) in
plan. More bizarre cylindrical, loaf- or boat-shaped, irregular and winged forms
are also commonly reported. Grooves on or holes through the objects suggest
that they were hafted. Generally the flat bannerstone forms exhibit one or more
holes drilled or perforated through them from front to back, while the cylindrical
and winged varieties often have had holes drilled through them longitudinally.
Considering the formal variety of these "problematical" objects, it is not surprising that they have been known by a great number of terms. Alternative labels
include gorget, birdstone, boatstone, butterfly stone, forearm bow guard, charmstone, pendant, fishing weight as well as many others.
As these names imply, the objects have been variously interpreted as items
of personal adornment or luck, bow guards, fishing gear as well as atlatl weights.

a

b

c

d

f
0
I

I

I

I

r

5
I

I

I

t

I

I0
]

scele in centimeters

Figure 3. Six different examples of "problematic stone implements" often classed as
atlatl weights in the eastern United States: (a) "boatstone" from Alabama (after Willey
1966: 254, Figure 5-5, d); (b) specimen from Indiana (after Jennings 1974: 144, Figure 4.7; (c-d) perforated, bannerstones from Laurentian culture, New York (after Willey
1966: 263, Figure 5-15, 11 and kk); (e) "winged bannerstone" from Archaic context in
Indiana (after Willey 1966: 254, Figure 5-5 c); (f) "birdstone" from Archaic context in
Indiana (after Willey 1966: 254, Figure 5-5, a).

16

Texas Archeological Society

And, Curren (1977: 97) notes, evidence for all of these interpretations have been
recovered from time to time. For example, in the Southwest and Great Basin, a
limited number of atlatls have been recovered intact from dry caves with weights
still attached to their throwing boards (Mildner 1974; Hester 1974b; Guernsey
1931, Plate 50; Fenenga and Wheat 1940). However, the boat-shaped or grooved
pebbles found to have been mounted on these throwing boards represent only a
few of the types or classes of "problematical stone objects", which have been
interpreted as atlatl weights. As far as the large, winged and cylindrical bannerstones of eastern North America are concerned, the evidence for their use as
atlatl weights is much more indirect. The acceptance of the idea that they were
formerly mounted on throwing boards seems to be based on two lines of evidence. First, the longitudinal and transverse holes drilled through them would
appear to allow them to be so mounted. Second, as Palter (1976: 505) notes,
graves excavated by Webb and Haag (1939) at the Mclean 11 site and by Webb
(1946) at Indian Knoll, both in Kentucky, contained winged bannerstones apparently in linear alignment with socketed "attached type" male atlatl hooks and
atlatl handles. Although the wood of the throwing boards had long since decayed, the excavators interpreted these alignments to mean that the weights were
formerly mounted on them. Other alignments were also noted at the sites and
alternative interpretations of the mounting of the bannerstones are possible, so
more will be said of these data below.
Since the correct functional interpretation of these "problematical objects"
is crucial to the remainder of our discussion, we must digress for a moment and
consider the disagreement that currently surrounds the subject. This discord is
perhaps well illustrated by three papers: an early work by Butler and Osborne
(1959), a provocative recent paper by Curran (1977), and a spirited rejoinder to
that paper by Starna (1979). Butler and Osborne (1959) define and illustrate
three types of "atlatl weights", or bannerstones, from the northwestern United
States. The three types are reproduced in our Figure 4. Note that the classes differ so widely in form that only an archeologist steeped in the literature of his
profession would conlcude that such disparate objects as these were really made
to serve the same purpose. In fact, even members of the archeological tribe do
not entirely share Butler and Osborne’s views. For example, in eastern North
America, the perforated oval, circular and rectangular ground-and-polished
stone objects which Butler and Osborne would surely class as "Type I atlatl
weights" are more often interpreted as "stone gorgets" or even as "forearm
bowguards" (Curren 1977: 97). In his interesting and imaginative paper, Curren
(1977) adds a new interpretation by suggesting that, at least in the East, such
artifacts were used as ceramic manufacturing tools. He adduces this idea largely
by juxtaposing illustrations of classic Early Woodland period Adena "stone
gorgets" with drawings of wooden implements commonly used by modern ceramists in decorating and shaping pottery. The formal correspondence between
these two classes is striking indeed and Curren (1977: 97-99) attempts to
strengthen this identification by suggesting that the appearance of stone gorgets

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

17

is generally correlated with the rise of ceramic manufacture in the eastern North
American archeological record.
However, in a still more recent paper, Starna (1979) strongly demurs. According to him, the fornlal parallel between the ancient stone gorgets and the
modern ceramic shaping tools are spurious. To support his counterargument he
notes that, while ancient stone plummets and modern brass plumb bobs share a
formal similarity, no one is willing to conclude that the ancient tool was part of
an aboriginal land-surveying complex. He further disputes Curren’s suggestion of
a temporal correlation between the appearance of gorgets and ceramics in the
East. While conceding that data bearing on this point is not entirely clear,
he notes that gorgets have been recovered in contexts, which both pre- and
post-date the appearance of ceramics (Starna 1979: 337-338). Starna (1979:
338-340) prefers instead to interpret these stone objects as items of personal
adornment possessing both social and religious connotations, that is, as gorgers
in sensu stricto. He [’eels such an interpretation more satisfactorily accounts for
the obvious effort lavished on their manufacture, their common appearance in
mortuary contexts with individuals of both sexes and the fact that they are often
made of lightweight material, such as copper and shell, as well as stone.
No attempt is made at resolving Curren and Starna’s interpretational dispute
here. Suffice to say, both their papers strongly indicate that Butler and Osborne’s
"Type I atlatl weights" may have served very different tasks. The likelihood of
that being the case is further strengthened by the fact that, according to Mildner
(1974: 15, 21), only Butler and Osborne’s Type II and Type III atlatl weights
have actually been recovered mounted on atlatl throwing boards in archeological
contexts in the Great Basin and the Southwest.
Thus, clear archeological evidence exists to demonstrate that stone weights
were sometimes attached to atlatl throwing boards in North America. This evidence comes from the western United States where a limited number of atlatls
with such stones still attached have been recovered from dry caves. Somewhat
more ambiguous evidence from graves in the eastern United States indicates at
least an association between certain classes of bannerstones and atlatls. However, a broad range of other "problematical stone implements" have been moreor-less arbitrarily included in the functional category "atlatl weight" despite the
fact that association between many of these forms and actual atlatls has been
inferential, tenuous or nonexistent. Further, alternative functions for many of
these stone objects are highly plausible. In other words, archeologists are unable to precisely agree on what was and what was not an "atlatl weight."
With that rather unencouraging Caveat in mind, let us turn to an examination of
some recent experimental attempts at gauging the effects of weights on atlatl
performance.
The most common approach to the problem is to assume that the weights
were mounted on the atlatl throwing board. Palter (1976: 502) summarizes as
follows the results of experiments with weighted throwing boards done by a number of scholars:

18

Texas Archeological Society

Clayton Mau, as a result of his experimentation with a weighted spear thrower,
claims that he was able to increase the range of his projectiles by between 15% and
25% (Mau 1963:11). Orville Peets, on the other hand, concluded from similar experiments that the attachment of spear thrower weights made no appreciable difference in the average range of his tosses (Peets 1960: !09). Calvin Howard has
concluded that spear thrower adjuncts are disadvantageous based upon recent experiments which revealed an 18% decrease in the range of a projectile thrown with the
aid of a weighted spear thrower (Howard 1974: 104). Still another experimenter,
Malcomb Hill, concluded that the addition of weights to the shaft of a spear thrower
might be functional when employing light-weight darts, but he doubted their utility
in the case where heavier projectiles are in use (Hill 1948: 41-42).
Hobbs (1963: 6) was able to achieve an average increase in distance of about
3.2 per cent with his radically modified, weighted "super." Unfortunately, there
is not a shred of archeological evidence to suggest that an atlatl of Hobbs’ design
was ever used in prehistoric North America. Palter’s experiments revealed inverse
correlation existed between the weight of the various bannerstones, which he attached to the throwing board, and the distance he was able to hurl the dartshaft.
The greater the weight, the shorter the toss. According to him, "the minimum
weight tested which still permitted maximum efficiency comparable to the nonweighted spear thrower was 75 grams" (Palter 1976: 502). This latter conclusion
corroborates the results of Spencer (1974: 52). Spencer made an exact replica of
an atlatl, which had been recovered archeologically, with a boat-shaped weight
of approximately 60 grams attached to its throwing board. In his experiments
with this replica, Spencer found that the presence or absence of this 60 gram
bannerstone had virtually no effect on the distances he was able to toss the
dartshaft. Despite his test results, Palter (1976: 505-509) is not entirely willing
to reject the notion that throwing boards were weighted in order to improve atlatl
performance and suggests that although rigid boards do not benefit from the
weights, perhaps flexible ones might, like the type recorded in Australia (Krause
1905: 623-624). This hypothesis seems plausible and should prove easily testable. However, it fails to account for the fact that most of the atlatl weights recovered in situ in the Great Basin and elsewhere are mounted on rigid throwing
boards (cf., Hester 1974; Mildner 1974).
Thus, most experiments appear to indicate that the attachment of a bannerstone weight to a throwing board has at best a negligible, and at worst a distinctly
adverse, impact on atlatl performance. Results such as these have led some
scholars to suggest that throwing-board weights were designed to enhance performance by indirect means. Peets (1960), for example, suggests that it is necessary
to maintain a balance between the throwing board and the dartshaft on the
fulcrum of the thrower’s hand. Thus, if one were to use a heavy dartpoint or a
harpoon, it would be necessary to place a bannerstone on the end of the throwing
board to counterpoise the weight on the opposite end of the dartshaft. The notion
that bannerstones served to counterbalance the throwing board is also shared by
Lewis and Kneberg (1958) and Hobbs (1963: 6). Palter (1976: 503), however,
rejects Peets’ argument on the grounds that the exceedingly large dartshafts and

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

19

small throwing boards of the Australian aborigines do not conform to the latter’s
"balance formula" and thus suggest that is not necessary to maintain an equilibrium between throwing board and dartshaft. In fairness to Peets, however, it
must be noted that he suggests that such counterbalancing would be useful primarily where the hunter himself was precariously situated, such as in a kayak or
on slippery footing (Peets 1960:110). This suggestion is, of course, especially
difficult to test.
McGregor (1965: 182), on the other hand, concludes that atlatl weights, at
least in the Southwest, served merely as charms or good luck pieces. Both he and
Palter (1976: 505) muster evidence to demonstrate that at least some of the supposed "weights" mounted on atlatls recovered from southwestern dry caves were
too light to have served as anything but symbols or charms. Kellar (1955: 304)
considers it possible that weights mounted near the distal end of the throwing
board might aid performance but notes that, on some southwestern specimens,
such weights were "attached too near the handle for any practical benefit." Finally, Johnson (1971: 190-193) nmsters evidence to suggest that southwestern
and Mexican atlatls were sometimes decorated with clearly nonfunctional items
such as "cruciform" stones. However, these authors have yet to prove that all
bannerstones were merely talismans or embellishments. The weights recovered
in association with atlatls in eastern North America tend to be larger than those
referred to by McGregor. Therefore, instead of being intended to enhance the
performance of the atlatl, Hudson (1976: 47) suggests that such weights made
the throwing board "suitable for secondary use as a war club." Here too, the actual placement on the throwing board of those bannerstones recovered in situ argues against the interpretation.
Taking a different tack, Cole (I 972) refers to basic physics to explain why
weighted throwing boards would fail to enhance atlat! performance. He notes
that the range and penetration of the dart is largely the product of its mass times
its velocity, and that the velocity of the dart is in turn a function of the force with
which it is thrown. The force of the throw is determined by the strength of the
thrower; augmented by the lengthened contact between his arm and the dartshaft
provided by the throwing board. Increasing the weight of the throwing board by
attaching a bannerstone to it does nothing to enhance either the force of the throw
or the period of contact between arm and dart. Conversely, excessively heavy
weights can, as Palter (1976) demonstrates, reduce the force of the throw by
making the throwing board more awkward and difficult to handle.
However, since range and penetration can be increased by maintaining the
velocity and increasing the mass of the dartshaft, Cole (1972: 3-4) suggests that
bannerstones, especially the winged and cylindrical varieties known from eastern North America and the arctic, may actually have been placed on the darts’h@
rather than the throwing board. He further hypothesizes that the purpose of the
bannerstone "wings" on these specimens was to provide a real (or perhaps an
imagined) stabilizing effect on the dart’s flight. Cole strengthens his case by referring to the classic alignments of bannerstones and throwing board hooks re-

20

Texas Archeological Society

ported by Webb and Haag (1939) and Webb (1946). Although Cole concedes that
the bannerstones and hooks do occur in linear patterns in the graves at these
sites, he notes that Webb’s Indian Knoll photographs:
¯ . . are all the more impressive for the number of weights and hooks shown side-byside (Webb 1946: Figs. 17a, d, 20c, f). Webb believed that the side-by-side placement of a weight and a hook was an example of... an atlatl having been intentionally broken, with the broken parts being placed next to each other in the burial
(Webb 1946: 326-327). The same placement, however, could have resulted from a
spear, with an attached weight, having been placed in the burial with the atlatl, assuming that the weight was attached to something in the first place (Cole 1972: 4).

Cole (1972: 4) also cites the early experiments done by Parker (1917: 193)
who found that "a spear can be thrown at least 25 percent farther when assisted
by a winged weight placed on the tail end of the spearshaft." Thus the notion that
bannerstones were shaft- rather than board-mounted has the potential for resolving some of the anomalies in our current understanding and should be systematically tested through field experimentation.
In summary, North American atlatl throwing boards do in some instances
appear to have been weighted. However, only a limited number of throwing
boards have actually been recovered with the weights or bannerstones still in
place. Weights recovered in situ have generally been light and fairly limited in
formal variation. Thus, although a wide range of types of "problematical stone
objects" have been called atlatl weights, it seems probable that many of these
objects actually served very different purposes. This is especially likely to have
been true of the larger, heavier stone objects.
Experimental studies of the contribution of throwing board weights to atlatl
performance indicate, for the most part, that such weights offer little benefit and,
depending on their size and weight, may actually decrease dart range. Since
throwing board weights seem to have a largely negative effect on atlatl performance, at least five alternative hypotheses have been advanced to explain their
use in North America:
1. Although bannerstones do not seem to contribute to the performance of either
heavy darts or rigid throwing boards, perhaps the range of light-weight darts (Hill
1948) or flexible throwing boards (Palter 1976), neither of which have been sufficiently tested experimentally, may have benefited from the use of such weights.
2. Bannerstones might have been attached to the throwing board to counterbalance
an especially heavy point or harpoon head mounted on the dartshaft (Peets 1960).
3. Bannerstones, as well as other objects or materials found attached to throwing
boards and dartshafts, were really magical charms or goodluck pieces designed
to enhance the performance of the atlatl exclusively by supernatural means
(McGregor 1965: 182).
4. Bannerstones, at least in eastern North America, did not contribute to atlatl performance but allowed the throwing board to be used secondarily as a war club
(Hudson 1976: 47).
5. at least some bannerstones, notably the large, winged and cylindrical varieties of

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

21

eastern North America, were not mounted on the throwing board at all. Instead,
these weights were used on the dartshaft in order to increase the "impact pressure" of the missile and perhaps to stabilize it in its flight (Cole 1972).
Like the hypothesis which they are designed to replace, none of these five
theses provide an entirely satisfactory explanation of the bannerstone phenomenon. It would appear that "theoretical closure" in this area is impossible at
present and the rejection of any of these alternative hypotheses must await
systematic field experimentation and the recovery of additional archeological
evidence.

b
~,i -~.~

Figure 4. Three basic classes of "problematic stone implements" from the northwestern
United States interpreted as atlatl weights by Butler and Osborne (1959): (a) Type I
(b) Type II (c) Type III.

The Atlaa Abandoned: A Brief Discussion of the Reasons for Technical
Supercession of That Weapon by the Bow-and-Arrow with Some Notes on
Its Limited Retention.
As noted above, the bow-and-arrow seems to have entered the North American technical inventory sometime during the last millennium before Christ. Over
time the bow-and-arrow replaced the atlatl as the primary military and hunting
weapon on the continent. The reasons for this replacement are perhaps obvious
and will be but briefly attended to here. Less obvious are the reasons for the
retention of the atlatl by certain aboriginal peoples in the face of the widespread
acceptance of the bow-and-arrow by most. Several hypotheses regarding this retention will be advanced.
The first and most obvious advantage of the bow-and-arrow over the atlatl
would appear to be the greater "casting power" or range of the former weapon.
In an interesting study, Pope (1923, 1962) tested a large number of aboriginal
bows from various museum and private collections to determine their casting
power and penetration under controlled conditions. The thirteen bows from the
New world tested by Pope (1962: 2-21) cast arrows between 101 and 230 meters

22

Texas Archeological Society

(92 and 210 yards) with a mean distance of 167 meters (153 yards), and a standard deviation of 37 meters (34 yards). Using the distance figures presented by
the atlatl experimenters summarized earlier, the atlatl was reportedly capable of
distances ranging from about 42 to 70 meters (39 to 64 yards) for a mean distance
of 62 meters (57 yards) and a standard deviation of 16 meters (15 yards) under
controlled conditions. The mean of Pope’s arrow-cast distances is thus about 164
percent greater than the mean dart casts. However, Krause (1905: 621-622) reports atlatl casts observed by travelers and ethnographers ranging between 61
and 137 meters for a mean distance of 93 meters and a standard deviation of 31
meters. Pope’s reported mean casts are thus only about 79 percent farther than
those reported by Krause. Nonetheless, the range of the bow-and-arrow seems to
be clearly greater than that of the atlatl.
Less obvious advantages of the bow have also been noted by various authors. First, the bow-and-arrow is perhaps an easier tool to use from the cover of
an ambush or game blind. Hill (1948: 38) states that although it is not impossible
to do so, the atlatl is a difficult weapon to use in thick woods with little elbow
room. This difficulty stems, according to Mau (1963: 12), from the body movements one must utilize to launch the dartshaft. Such launching requires:
¯ . . a vigorous, and perhaps conspicuous, swing of the arm. This, one can imagine,
often was sufficiently evident to an agile animal or other game to enable it to make
good its escape from the missile. By contrast, when using the bow, the arrow can be
launched, with a minimum of movement on the part of the archer and from almost
any position (Mau 1963: 12).

Thus the bow can probably be used with less effort under such conditions and can
be done so with less body exposure. This latter advantage would be especially
important in warfare. A third major advantage of the bow-and-arrow stems from
its use of lighter, shorter shafts. As Evans (1959: 161) puts it: "... while it is
possible to carry only two or three short spears, 20 to 30 arrows can easily be
carried in a quiver." The shorter length of the arrow over the spear would also
make travel through heavily wooded terrain much easier. However, the disadvantage presented by the bulky nature of the atlatl dartshafts may have been overcome in another way. Lahren and Bonnichsen (1974) present archeological evidence to suggest that Clovis fluted points were mounted on short, cylindrical
foreshafts made of bone. The authors hypothesize that such foreshafts were in
turn stuck into socketed spearshafts. In this way, a hunter would need to carry
only one or two socketed spearshafts for use with a whole quiver full of foreshaftmounted dart points. As Lahren and Bonnichsen (1974: 149) note: "Retrieving
the lance and inserting another foreshaft and point composite could have been
done in seconds. This method would be far more efficient than carrying a number
of lances .... " If such foreshaft mountings were used with atlatl darts by Paleo:
Indian (and later) peoples, it would h.ave enabled them to overcome some of the
inconvenience of large dart shafts. Frison and Zeimens (1980: 234) however, feel
these supposed foreshafts are really bone projectile points.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

23

In any case, if one considers the greater range, weaponry and convenience
of the bow-and-arrow compared to the atlatl, it is easy to understand why the
former replaced the latter. Less obvious perhaps, are the reasons for the retention
of the atlatl by some peoples in the New World after the introduction of the bowand-arrow. For instance, the ethnographic record indicates that many peoples
who used boats to hunt marine or aquatic animals preferred the atlatl over the
bow-and-arrow. As Kellar (1955: 337) reminds us, bow strings of animal or plant
fibers tend to dampen and stretch when exposed to moisture for prolonged periods. Further, the larger size of the atlatl dartshaft would not be a particular disadvantage where extra spears could be carried in a boat rather than on the
hunter’s back. Of course, at medium range, such large shafts and projectile points
would strike the quarry with equal or greater force and penetration than the arrow. As Cressman and Krieger (1940: 30) point out, size, force and penetration
would be especially desirable in the hunting of large sea mammals such as walrus. Further, the bow-and-arrow must be used with two hands while an atlatl
dartshaft can be loaded and cast with only one hand by an experienced user. This
means that a lone hunter could hold his paddle and steady his boat with one hand
and launch a dart with the other (Cressman and Krieger 1940: 30; Mau 1963:
12). Finally, marine and aquatic hunters and fishermen commonly attach lines to
their projectiles so they will be able to recover their quarry after killing or wounding it on the water. As Peets (1960:110) notes:
¯ . . the arrow is unsuited to carrying a line such as were even the best Indian ones¯
The modern bow-fisher uses a very thin waterproof line on an efficient reel, but
some experiments I made several years ago with Indian-type equipment were spectacular failures, though at the time I had the Delaware Championship in archery and
the distance record. The arrow, though heavy and having a steel broadhead could not
handle the wet, sandy line. The first jump of the arrow was far too rapid, and the
inertia of the line seemed to be increased by it. And when there was enough line in
the air to have the wind catch it, all accuracy was lost.

The atlatl, on the other hand, apparently suffers no such disadvantage and
the ethnographic record contains numerous accounts of that tool being used to
cast shafts with lines attached to them. The Angmagsalik Eskimo used the atlatl
to launch toggle-head harpoons from their kayaks when seal hunting. The combination of the atlatl with the Angmagsalik harpoon resulted in a composite tool
consisting of 33 separate parts including the line and seal-skin floats (Oswalt
1976: 99). This composite tool brought together two of the most effective devices
in the technical inventory of early man. The harpoon is present in Europe at least
by 7,000 B.C. (Bordes 1968: 165-166) and may have been known in North
America by this time as well (Cressman 1977:115). We may perhaps surmise
from this that the combination of the atlatl and the harpoon is a very ancient
innovation indeed. With all these advantages in mind it is easy to understand
why, despite its replacement elsewhere by the bow-and-arrow, the atlatl was retained by peoples as diverse as the Aleuts of the Arctic, who used it for marine
hunting and waterfowting (Coon 1976: 97), and the Brazilian forest peoples,

24

Texas Archeological Society

who used it in hunting turtles and spearing fish from their canoes (Cressman and
Krieger 1940: 35).
Finally, as noted earlier, the atlatl was retained by peoples such as the
Aztecs and the Inca for use primarily as a military weapon. Unlike the warfare of
simpler peoples, the military operations of the civilized peoples of the Americas
depended more upon set battles between masses of troops than on ambush or
stealth. It would appear that the weight and penetration of the atlatl dart provided the damaging close support for the Aztec and Inca infantry much as artillery does for modern armies. Among the Inca levies, the bow-and-arrow had a
distinctly lower status. According to Metraux (1949: 229), it was a weapon used
primarily by auxiliary or irregular troops drawn to the Inca armies from the forested regions on the edge of the empire. Metraux surmises that the chief reason
for the Inca’s neglect of the bow was the absence of suitable wood for their manufacture in the highlands. In any event, Garcilaso de la Vega reports that the Spanish feared the atlatl far more than the bow-and-arrow in their encounters with the
Incas during the Conquest (Swanton 1938: 358).

Dart Points and Arrow Points: Are They Really Different?
As is the case with the style or form of many elements of culture, the size
and shape of stone projectile points have altered through time. As a consequence, projectile points can be sorted into types and these types arranged in
order of their appearance. This placement of projectile points into presumed
Chronological order on the basis of their formal variation is termed "seriation;" it
is the ease with which projectile points can be "seriated" that lends them their
particular charm for the archeologist. However, most scholars would agree that
projectile point morphology reflects more than mere stylistic convention and
change; variation in size and shape is also presumed to relate to variation in the
specific tasks for which points were intended.
For example, over most of North America, small projectile point types tend
to date to sometime after 500 B.C. or later (cf., Cambron and Hulse 1960; Bell
1960; Perino 1968; Ritchie 1961; Kehoe 1966; Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954;
Heizer and Hester 1979; Turner and Hester 1985). Of course this size change is
useful in seriational dating but it is generally interpreted as more than mere stylistic alteration; it is seen instead as indicating the replacement of the atlatl by
the bow-and-arrow. This interpretation is in turn based on the assumption that
atlatl dart points in general must have been larger than arrow heads due either to:
(1) technical limitations: that is, large points and shafts were simply too heavy to
be propelled by the bow-and-arrow, or (2) technical evolution: that is, "it has
been a general trend in the development of projectile weapons, from spear to
bullet, that the size of the projectile has decreased and the velocity increased"
(Brues 1959: 463).
The assumption that atlatl points were generally larger than arrow points

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

25

has become so deeply embedded in the literature that archeologists routinely assign projectile points to the atlatl dart or arrowhead category on the basis of size
or weight alone (Fenenga 1953: 309-310). Such assignment is not without empirical, or at least inferential, basis. Kidder (1938) states the evidence for the
assumption as it appeared to the last generation of archeologists:
(1) that all prehistoric stone-headed arrows so far found in the Southwest bear points
weighing less than 35 grains [2.27 grams, F.F.]; (2) that at Pecos and other former
settlements of the arrow-using Pueblo peoples there occur hundreds of points of
comparable weight for every one of large size; (3) that in Pueblo sites such large
points as have been found halted have usually been set in short handles for use as
knives, but never in arrows; (4) that small points, which can hardly have been other
than arrowheads, appear in great quantities among the bones of slaughtered buffalo
in the trap-ravines of the Great Plains, while on the other hand, the heads of all
Basketmaker spear-thrower darts that have come to light are much larger and heavier
than those which we can be sure were arrowheads. I had, of course, considered the
possibility that the ancient heavy points, from Folsom, Signal Butte and elsewhere,
were arrowheads, but I was unable to see why, if they were serviceable for that purpose, they should have been replaced by the small points apparently exclusively employed by tribes of the same region in later times (Kidder 1938: 156-157).

Fenenga (1953) attempted to test this assumption by weighing 884 chipped
stone projectile points from various sites in the western United States. His analysis revealed that the collection showed a distinctly bimodal distribution based on
weight: "the overwhelming majority of the points (92.3%) weighed less than
3.49 grams; in the other, virtually all of the points (99.6%) weighed more than
4.5 grams" (Fenenga 1953: 313). All the same, as Thomas (1978: 461) notes,
demonstrating that North American projectile point populations tend to cluster
bimodally by weight is not the same as proving that one cluster consists exclusively of atlatl darts, the other of arrowheads.
Thomas (1978) approached the problem from a different direction. He measured 142 complete stone-tipped arrows and atlatl darts drawn primarily from
the ethnographic and archeological collections of the American Museum of
Natural History. These measurements provided him with a population against
which he could quantitatively test various hypotheses about darts and arrows.
Initially he found that, while there is general correlation between the size of the
arrowshaft and the size and weight of the arrow point, this correlation is by no
means perfect. Further, there seems to be no particular relation between the size
of the atlatl dartshaft and the size of the dart point, although dartshafts as a
group are demonstrably larger than arrowshafts (Thomas 1978: 469).
To answer the most important question, "Are arrowheads smaller than dart
points?", Thomas computed the means for 5 variables (length, width, thickness,
neck width and weight) and then calculated a t-test for each. His results indicated
that all five variables differed between the dart points and the arrowheads in his
population. However, to answer the question fully, he had to turn from univariate

26

Texas Archeological Society

to multivariate statistical tests. Thomas (1978: 469) chose to use discriminant
analysis, which is a technique designed "to form linear combinations of the variables, weighted in such a way as to distinguish between preexisting groups (in
this case darts and arrows)."
This multivariate analysis led to the following conclusions: (1) dart points
are demonstrably larger than arrow points but the most important dimension in
determining this is overall width rather than weight, length, neck width or thickness; (2) a set of equations could be generated, which would classify other
projectile points of uncertain function into one or the other with about 86 percent
certainty (Thomas 1978: 470-471). Thomas’ work is both comforting and
useful. It is comforting to receive formal confirmation of the widely held assumption that dart points and arrowheads differ from one another in discernible,
measurable ways. It is useful to possess a set of equations which will allow
projectile points of unknown function to be labeled with some confidence as either dart or arrow points. Still, one question remains: when the bow-and-arrow
replaced the atlatl in North America, was the resulting change in projectile point
size merely a stylistic alteration or was it the result of technical limitations or
technical evolution?
It is possible, according to experiments by Fenenga (1953:319) and Browne
(1940: 213), to use small projectile points (or no points at all) on the tips of atlatl
darts. Further, as Ahler and McMillan (1976: 166) have pointed out, the archeological and ethnographic documentation of the use of small projectile points
against animals like bison are sufficiently abundant to demonstrate that large
projectile points are not necessary to bring down large game. Conversely, Browne
(1940: 213), an experienced archer, demonstrated experimentally that large
points, well within the size range of atlatl dart tips defined by Thomas (1978),
can be shot effectively with a bow-and-arrow. Pope (1962: 56) notes the deep
penetration of large arrow points such as the "English Broadhead" used with the
longbow in the late Middle Ages.
Atlatl performance experiments conducted by Spencer (1974: 5) suggest
that the use of large points to tip atlatl darts does have a practical advantage
since, according to him, "a point which is too light gives the dart a characteristic
uplift in its flight pattern one-third of the way into its flight." Davenport (1943:
33) also concludes that a heavy point enhances "the shaft’s ability to hold a true
flight." Further, according to Brues (1959: 463): "the amount of kinetic energy
embodied in the projectile, and consequently the amount of destruction that it
can produce in the object which brings it to a stop, is... a product of the mass
of the projectile and its velocity. Hence the size of the weapon can profitably be
decreased if its velocity increases." Or, as Browne (1940: 213) put it, "the arrow
gets its penetration by speed, the spear by weight." Assuming the bow can propel a shaft at greater velocity than the atlatl, the arrival of that tool in North
America would have meant that smaller points could have been used with the
same effect as the older, larger ones. These small points might also have traveled
farther due to their lighter weight and lower wind resistance (Brues 1959: 5) and

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

27

although Davenport’s (1943: 33) experiments indicate that large points stabilize
the flight of atlatl darts, there is no evidence to suggest that such stabilization is
necessary with arrows.
But why was the replacement of the large projectile point by the small one
so complete? Would we not expect that natural conservation of stylistic considerations might still have favored the continued use of the older forms? Perhaps so
but, given the brittle nature of most siliceous stone, larger stone points would
tend to break on impact more readily than smaller points. Thus, although the
replacement of large projectile points by smaller ones might have been stimulated initially by technological advantage, the final transformation would have
had an economic cause: when larger points ceased to confer much advantage in
performance, the greater material and labor "costs" involved in their manufacture and replacement would lead to their abandonment.
On a slightly different front, Ahler and McMillan’s (1976: 166-167) study
of wear and damage patterns on a large population of projectile points led them
to conclude that a significant percentage of the artifacts in this class actually were
sometimes used as stemmed scrapers, knives, or multipurpose tools. They further conclude: "... that extremely small (points) would not function as efficiently for hafted cutting, scraping or prying activities as would large specimens,
due to limitations in structural strength and length of usable cutting edge (of) the
smaller tools."
Thus, the blades needed for these scrapers, knives and multipurpose tools
would presumably not have been affected by the shift away from the atlatl to the
bow-and-arrow and would not have declined in size. The continued manufacture
and use of such stemmed tools after the adoption of the bow perhaps masks the
real abruptness with which the shift from large to smaller sizes took place among
points actually used as projectiles. In summary, although small points can be
used as atIatl dart tips or as hafted, multipurpose tools, the performance of such
tools declines when one does so. Likewise, although large points can be used
with the bow-and-arrow, there is no reason to do so since the increased shaft velocity, which can be achieved with the bow, allows small points to travel as far or
farther than large points and yet do the same damage on impact. Additionally,
such small points are not as fragile and need less raw material in their manufacture. It would thus appear that the bimodality in projectile point size and weight
observed by Kidder (1938), Fenenga (1953), Thomas (1978) and numerous other
scholars results from the balance struck between the demands of tool performance and efficiency on the one hand, and raw material and labor "costs" on the
other.
As we have noted, it has often been assumed that the projectile points were
reduced in size over time due to some inherent technical limitation (e.g. "bows
cannot shoot larger projectile points") or simply as a result of stylistic change or
drift. I suspect we are better served by regarding the change to have been the
result of an infinite number of informal experiments done by generations of observant, practical people. Like ourselves, these ancient Americans could learn

28

Texas Archeological Society

from their experience and make rational decisions about both the costs and the
benefits of their actions.

Hall’s Anthropocentrism: The Ritual and Symbolic Retention of the Atlatl
After Its Technical Replacement
The replacement of the atlat! by the bow-and-arrow in eastern North America was an important event, which seems to have occurred in an almost universal
fashion in the technical sphere during the first millennium after Christ (cf. Ford
1974: 402; Griffin 1964: 247, 1978: 254). However, in the ideological and religious spheres, this transformation was not nearly so complete. Robert L. Hall
(1977:514) argues, in a provocative recent paper entitled "An anthropocentric
perspective for eastern United States prehistory," that despite its technological
supercession by the bow-and-arrow, the form or image of the atlatl persisted as a
powerful element in the moral and symbolic life of eastern aboriginal peoples as
fiat-stemmed pipes, ceremonial staffs, fetishes, society emblems, and symbols of
command long after its actual technical function was forgotten. Hall explains this
symbolic retention by reference to a general notion that weapons have an ideational and symbolic value as well as a material function. Function and symbol are
to some degree separate phenomena which, it would seem, can survive and
diffuse independent of one another. Although he does not cite it, a modern example of such symbolic independence can be found on modern U.S. Army uniform insignia. One still finds the engineers represented by medieval castles, the
infantry by crossed muskets and, until quite recently, the artillery by crossed
muzzle-loading cannons. Obviously none of the aforementioned weapons are
still in our military inventory, yet they live on symbolically in our military insignia. So, it would appear, did the atlatl in the time of the bow.
One of the clearest formal survivals of the atlatl, according to Hall (1977:
504), are the long, fiat-stemmed stone pipes known historically in the eastern
United States. At least some forms of these historical pipes are traceable "stepby-step back to the Hopewell platform pipes as much as two millennia older."
The odd flat shape of the stems of these pipes provides no particular advantage to
the smoker. Since it extends in front of the tobacco bowl, it would appear to be
merely a decorative convention. However, referring both to the historic and prehistoric versions of the flat-stemmed pipe, Hall (1977: 504) notes:
¯ . . a Hopewell effigy platform pipe with an attached fiat stem looks like a flat atlatl
with effigy spur. The animal form on the bowl is almost invariably positioned to
present a nose or beak where an atlatl spur is needed. The usual curvature of the
pipe platform places this spur closer to the main axis of the atlatl. The flat stem in
ethnographic collections is almost invariably covered with a wrapping of porcupine
quill braid over the half near the mouth end, a practice I see related to the wrapping
needed to attach atlatl finger loops or possibly the fetishes sometimes found on
atlatls.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

29

In other words, Hall sees the form of the atlatl to have been conjoined with,
or transformed into, the flat-stemmed pipe in Late Woodland times or earlier.
One of the three atlatls recovered at the Key Marco site in Florida is an excellent
example of the kind of throwing boards which apparently served as the prototype
for the platform pipe (Kehoe, Foster, Hall n.d.: 18). The male spur or hook on
the distal end of specimen 40609 from the site "is carved in the form of a thumping rabbit, the handle end turned down in a graceful volute" (Gilliland 1975:
133, Plate 83). The similarity between this atlatl spur and a platform pipe is
striking indeed.
Hall (1977: 502- 515) also musters evidence to suggest that a complex symbolic and ideological association existed between smoking, tobacco, weapons,
life and water symbolism and peaceful interaction. According to him, this association of ideas and symbols centered in historic times on the smoking of the
Calumet pipe, the famous "peace pipe" so prominent in the popular image of
the American Indian. Hall suggests that the atlatl-shape of the flat-stemmed pipe
symbolically conveys the message that a weapon of war has been transformed
into an emissary of peace, a concept as evocative as the Old Testament injunction
to "beat swords into plowshares." Hall elaborates on his interpretation by suggesting that since the symbolism of the Calumet was widely shared and undertaken in eastern North America, the ceremonialism surrounding the pipe was an
effective means of fostering peaceful interaction between different peoples. As
he notes: "... one cannot ignore the economic and political values of interaction of this kind, for late prehistoric and historic Indians as well as for prehistoric
Hopewellians 2,000 years before" (Hall 1977:515).
The platform pipe, in Hall’s view (1977: 505), greased the very workings of
the Hopewell Interaction Sphere: it "may not have been merely an item exchanged; it may have been part of the very mechanism of exchange." While this
is an attractive notion, it is not without its critics. Turnbaugh (1979: 686-687),
for example, musters evidence to suggest that at least over portions of the East,
the spread of Calumet ceremonialism was a post-contact rather than an ancient
phenomenon. Yet, even if Hall is correct in identifying the origins of the Calumet
complex in the Hopewell tradition, we must still proceed with caution. Surely
religious and symbolic systems are often conservative. Witness the American
penchant for building modern versions of Gothic and Romanesque cathedrals.
Yet, how far can we extrapolate backwards from the social forms which operate
inside these modern cathedrals to the interpretations of the societies that built the
originals at Chartres, Rheims or Salisbury? Further, although symbolic systems
are often conservative, they are also designed to communicate complex ideas in a
simple fashion. When their conservatism begins to impede this communication,
the symbolism presumably will change. Hall suggests that since the atlatl eventually disappeared altogether from the weapons inventory in eastern North
America, the association between the shape of the flat-stemmed pipe and the
military weapon began to dim as well. Eventually, the atlatl-shaped pipe gave
way to the new "Hako" type pipe. This later variety was long, thin and very

30

Texas Archeological Society

much in the shape of an arrow. In adopting the form of the current military
weapon, the arrow, pipe makers sharpened the image conjoining warfare and the
sacred peace ceremony of the Calumet (cf., Turnbaugh 1975, 1977, 1979).
A parting in this regard would be to remind the reader that such "symbolic updating" occurs in our culture as well. Witness the recent transformation of uniform insignia in the air defense branch of the U.S. Army artillery: the two
crossed cannon have given way to one cannon and one guided missile.

REFERENCES CITED
Ahler, S. A., and R. B. McMillan
1976
Material Culture at Rodgers Shelter: A Reflection of Past Human Activities. In
Prehistoric Man and His" Enrivronments: A Case Study in the Ozark Highlands,
edited by W. R. Wood, and R. B. McMillian, pp. 163-199. Academic Press,
New York.
Aikens, C. Melvin
The Far West. In Ancient Native Americans, edited by Jesse Jennings, pp. 1311978
181. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.
Arons, Arnold B.
1965

Development of Concepts in Physics, From the Rationalization of Mechanics
to the First Theory of Atomic Structure. Addison-Wesley Incorporated, Reading, Mass.

Baker, W. E., and A. V. Kidder
1937

A Spearthrower from Oklahoma. American Antiquity 3:51-52.

Bell, Robert E.
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points. Okla1960
homa Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin 2.
Binford, Lewis R.
1978
Dimensional Analysis of Behavior and Site Structure: Learning from an Eskimo
Hunting Stand. American Antiquity 43 : 330-361.
Bordes, Francois
1968
The Old Stone Age. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Browne, Jim
1940
Projectile Points. American Antiquity 5: 209-213.

Brues, Alice M.
1959
The Spearman and the Archer. American Anthropologist 61:457-469.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

31

Brundage, Burr Cartwright
1972
A Rain of Darts. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Butler, B. Robert, and Douglas Osborne
1959

Archaeological Evidence for the Use of Atlatl Weights in the Northwest. American Antiquity 25 : 215-224.

Caldwell, Joseph R.
1958

Trend and Tradition in the Prehistory of the Eastern United States. American
Anthropological Association, Memoir 88.

Cambron, James, W., and D. C. Hulse
1960

Handbook of Alabama Archaeology, Part 1: Point Types. Moundville: The Archaeological Research Association of Alabama, Inc.

Clark, J. G. D.
1952
Prehistoric" Europe: The Economic Basis. Methuen, Inc., London.
Cole, G. S.
1972
The Bannerstone as a Spear Weight. Michigan Archaeologist 18(1): 1-18.
Coon, Carleton S.
1976
The Hunting People. Penguin Books, Inc., New York.
Cressman, L. S.
1977
Preshistory of the Far West. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Cressman, L. S. and A. D. Krieger
1940
Atlatls and Associated Artifacts from Southcentral Oregon. In Early Man in
Oregon: Archaeological Studies in the Northern Great Basin, edited by L. S.
Cressman et al., University of Oregon Monographs, Studies in Anthropology
3 : 16-52.
Curren, Cailup B.
1977
Potential Interpretations of "Stone Gorget" Function. American Antiquity
42:97-101.
Cushing, Frank H.
1897
Exploration of Ancient Key Dwellers’ Remains on the Gulf Coast of Florida.
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 25(153).
Davenport, J. W.
1943
Some Experiments in the Use of the Atlatl. Bullethz of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 15 : 30-37.
DeFuentes, Patricia
1963
The Conquistadors: First-Person Accounts" of the Conquest of Mexico. The
Orion Press, New York.

Texas Archeological Society

32

Driver, Harold E.
1961

bldians of North America. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Driver, Harold E. and William C. Massey
1957

Comparative Studies of North American Indians. Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society, n. s. 47(2) : 165-456.

Ekholm, Gordon F.
U-shaped "Ornaments" Identified as Fingerloops from Atlatls. American An1962
tiquity 28 : 181 - 185.
Evans, O. F.
1959
The Development of the Atlatl and the Bow. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 30 : 159-162.
Fenenga, Franklin
1953
The Weights of Chipped Stone Points: a Clue to Their Functions. Southwestern
Journal of Anthropology 9 : 309- 323.
Fenenga, Franklin and Joe Ben Wheat
An Atlatl from the Baylor Rock Shelter, Culberson County, Texas. American
1940
Antiquity 5 : 221-223~
Ford, Richard I.
Northeastern Archaeology: Past and Future Directions. Annual Review of An1974
thropology 3:385-413.
Foster, George M.
Empire’s Children: The People of Tzintzuntzan. Smithsonian Institution, Insti1948
tute of Social Anthropology, Publication 6.
Fowke, Gerard
Stone Art.
1896

13th Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology,

Pp. 47-178.
Frison, G. C. and G. M. Zeimens
Bone Projectile Points: An Addition to the Folsom Cultural Complex. American
1980
Antiquity 45 : 231-237.
Gilliland, Marion Spjut
The Material Culture of Key Marco, Florida. The University Presses of Florida,
1975
Gainesville.
Gould, Richard A.
1969

Subsistence Behavior Among the Western Desert Aborigines of Australia.

1978

Explorations in Ethnoarchaeology. University of New Mexico Press, Albu-

Oceania 39 : 251-274.
querque.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

33

Griffin, James
1964

The Northeast Woodlands Area. In Prehistoric Man in the New World. Edited
by J. D. Jennings and E. Norbeck, pp. 223-258. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

1978

The Midlands and Northeastern United States. In Ancient Native Americans,
edited by Jesse Jennings, pp. 221-279. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.

Guernsey, S. J.
1931

Explorations in Northeastern Arizona. Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Papers 12( 1 ).

Guernsey, S. J., and A. V. Kidder
1921

Basketmaker Caves of Northeastern Arizona. Peabody Museum of American
Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Papers 8(2).

Hall, Robert L.
1977

An Anthropocentric Perspective for Eastern United States Prehistory. American
Antiquity 42 : 499-518.

Harrington, M. R.
1933

Gypsum Cave, Nevada. Southwestern Museum Papers 8.

Hayden, Brian
1979

Lithic Use-WearAnalysis. Academic Press, New York.

Heizer, Robert F.
1938

An Inquiry into the Status of the Santa Barbara Spearthrower. American Antiquity 3: 137-141.

Heizer, Robert F. and Rainer Berger
1970

Radiocarbon Age of the Gypsum Culture. Contributions of the University of
California Research Facility 7 : 13-18.

Heizer, Robert F. and Thomas R. Hester
1979

Great Basin Projectile Points: Forms and Chronology. Ballena Press Publications in Archaeology, Ethnology and History 10.

Hester, Thomas R.
1974a

Archaeological Remains from Site NV-Wa-197. Western Nevada: Atlatl and
Animal Skin Pouches. Contributions, University of California Research Facility
21.

1974b

Supplementary Notes on a Great Basin Atlatl. In Great Basin Atlatl Studies.
T. R. Hester, M. P. Mildner, and L. Spencer. Ballena Press Publications in Archaeology, Ethnology and History 2: 29- 31.

Hill, M. W.
1948

The Atlatl or Throwing Stick: A Recent Study of Atlatls in Use with Darts of
Various Sizes. Tennessee Archaeologist 4(4) : 37-44.

Texas Archeological Society

34

Hobbs, H. E, Jr.
The Mystery of Bannerstones and a Possible Solution. Quarterly Bulletin, Ar1963
chaeological Society of Virginia 18 : 2- 7.
Holmes, William H.
Stone Implements of the Potomac-Chesapeake-Tidewater Province. 15th An1897
nual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, pp. 3-152.

Howard, Calvin D.
1974
The Atl-atl: Function and Performance. American Antiquity 39 : 102-104.
Hudson, Charles
1976

The Southeastern Indians. University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville.

Jennings, Jesse D.
1974

Prehistory of North America. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.

Johnson, Ann S.
1971

Finger-loops and Cruciform Objects. American Antiquity 36: 188-194.

Jones, Charles C.
Antiquities of the Southern Indians, Particularly of the Georgia Tribes.
1873
D. Appleton and Co., New York.
Kehoe, T. E.
The Small Side Notched Point System of the Northern Great Plains. American
1966
Antiquity 31 : 827- 841.
Kehoe, Alice B., Mary Le Cron Foster and R. L. Hall
n.d.

Paradigmatic Archaeology. Unpublished manuscript, files of the author.

Kellar, James H.
The Atlatl in North America. hzdiana Historical Society, Prehistory Research
1955
Series 3(3) :281-352.
Kelley, J. C.
Atlatl, Bows and Arrows, Pictographs and the Pecos River Focus. American An1950
tiquity 26 : 71- 74.

Kidder, A. V.
1938
Arrow-heads or Dart Points. American Antiquity 4:156-157.
Krause,

1902

F,

Schleudervorrichtungen for Wurfwaffen. lnternationale Archiv far Ethnographie 4(4) : 121 - 151.

1905

Sling Contrivances for Projectile Weapons. Smithsonian Institution, Annual
Report for 1904: 619-638.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

35

Lahren, Larry and Robson Bonnichsen
1974

Bone Foreshafts from a Clovis Burial in Southwestern Montana. Science 186:
147-149.

Lane Fox, Augustus H.
1858

On the Improvement of the Rifle, as a Weapon for General Use. Journal "of the
Royal United Service Institution 2 : 453-493.

1875

On the Principles of Classification Adopted in the Arrangement of his Anthropological Collection. Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain
and Ireland 4: 293-308.

Lewis, T. M. N. and M. Kneberg
1958

Tribes that Slumber. University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville.

Lipe, William D.
1978

The Southwest. In Ancient Native Americans, edited by Jesse Jennings, pp. 327401. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.

von Luschan, F.
1896

Das Wurflmlz in Neu-Holland und in Oceanien Festschrift zum 70. Geburtstag
von Adolf Bastian. S. t31-135.

McGregor, John C.
1965
Southwestern Archaeology. Second ed. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Massey, William C.
1961

The Survival of the Dart-Thrower on the Peninsula of Baja California. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 17 : 81 -93.

Mau, Clayton
1963

Experiments with the Spear Thrower. The Bulletin of the New York State Archaeological Association 29:2-13.

Metraux, A.
1949
Weapons. In Handbook of South American bMians, edited by J. H. Steward.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 143(5):229-263.
Mildner, M. R
1974
Descriptive and Distributional Notes on Atlatls and Atlatl Weights in the Great
Basin. In Great Basin Atlatl Studies. T. R. Hester, M. R Mildner, and L. Spencer. Ballena Press Publications in Archaeology, Ethnology and History 2:7-27.
de Mortillet, A.
1891

Les propulseurs a crochet modernes et prehistoriques. Revue de l’ecole anthropologie 1891:241 ft.

Muller, Jon D.
1978

The Southeast. In Ancient Native Americans, edited by Jesse Jennings, pp. 281 325. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.

36

Texas Archeological Society

Noguera, E.
1945

E1 atlatl o tirandera. Anales del Museo Nacional de Arqueologfa, Historia y
Ethnografia III.

Nuttall, Zelia
1891

The Atlatl or Spear-Thrower of the Ancient Mexicans. Archaeological and Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum, Harvard University 1 (3): 171-205.

Oswalt, Wendell H.
1973
Habitat and Technology. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York.
1976

An Anthropological Analysis of Food-Getting Technology. Willey-Interscience,
New York.

Palter, John L.
1976
A New Approach to the Significance of the "Weighted" Spear Thrower. American Antiquity 41 : 500-5 t0.
Parker, Arthur C.
1917

Problematic Polished Slate Implements and Allied Forms from New York. In
Stone Ornaments, edited by Warren K. Moorehead, pp. 179-195. The Andover
Press, Andover.

Peets, O. H.
t960
Experiments in the Use of Atlatl Weights. American Antiquity 26 : 108-110.
Pepper, George
1905
The Throwing-Stick of a Prehistoric People of the Southwest. International
Congress of Americanists, 13th Annual Session (1905) 107-130.
Perino, Gregory
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points. Okla1968
homa Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin 3.
Pope, Saxton T.
1923

A Study of Bows and Arrows. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 13(9) : 329-414.

1962
Read, C.
1891

Bows and Arrows. University of California Press, Berkeley.

H.

An Account of a Collection of Ethnographical Specimens Formed during Vancouver’s Voyage in the Pacific Ocean, 1790-1795. Journal of the RoyalAnthropological Institute XXI : 99-108.

Ritchie, William A.
A Typology and Nomenclature for New York Projectile Points. New York State
1961
Museum and Science Service Bulletin 364(21 ):99-108.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

37

Seler, E.
1890
Altmexikanische Wurfbretter. InternationaIes Archiv fiir Ethnographie 39(S) :
137-148.
1892

Das Altmexikanische Wurfbrett in Modernem Gebrauch. Globus LXI(7,S): 97.

Semenov, S. A.
1964
Preh~toricTechnology. Barnes and Noble, Inc., New York.
Spencer, L.
1974
Replicative Experiments in the Manufacture and Use of a Great Basin Atlatl. In
Great Basin Atlatl Studies. T. R. Hester, M. P. Mildner, and L. Spencer. Ballena
Press Publications in Archaeology, Ethnology and History 2:37-60.
Spratz, Bodo
1956
Die Speerschleuder in Amerika. VerSffentlichungen aus dem 10bersee-Museum
in Bremen, Museum fiir Natur-, Vdlker- und Handelskunde, Reihe B 1(2):
148-162.
Starna, William A.
1979
A Comment on Curren’s "Potential Interpretations of ’Stone Gorget’ Function."
American Antiquity 44: 337-341.
Strong, E.
1969

Stone Age in the Great Basin. Binford and Mort, Portland.

Sturtevant, William C.
1960

The Significance of Ethnological Parallels and Similarities between Southeastern North America and the Antilles. Yale University Publications in Anthropology 64.

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25.
Swanton, John R.
1938
A Historic Use of the Spear-thrower in Southeastern North America. American
Antiquity 3 : 356-358.
Thomas, David Hurst
1978
Arrowheads and Atl-atl Darts: How the Stone Got the Shaft. American Antiquity 43(3):461-472.
Tuck, J. A.
1970

An Archaic Indian Cemetery in Newfoundland. Scientific American 222( 12):
112-121.

38

Texas Archeological Society

Turnbaugh, William A.
1975

Tobacco, Pipes, Smoking and Rituals Among the Indians of the Northeast.
Quarterly Bulletin of the Archaeological Society of Virginia 30(2)59-71.

1977

Elements of Nativistic Pipe Ceremonialism in the Post-Contact Northeast.
Pennsylvania Archaeologist 47(4): 1-7.

1979

Calumet Ceremonialism as a Nativistic Response. American Antiquity 44:
685-691.

Turner, Ellen Sue and Thomas R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas b2dians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Uhle, Max
1888

Wurfstock yon Australien. Internationales Archivfiir Ethnographie I(S): 196.

1909

Peruvian Throwing Sticks. American Anthropologist 11 : 624-627.

Webb, William S.
1946

Indian Knoll. University of Kentucky, Reports in Anthropology 4(3, pt. 1).

1950

The Carlson Annis Mound. The University of Kentucky, Reports in Anthropology 7(4).

Webb, William S. and William G. Haag
1939
The Chiggerville Shell Heap in Ohio county. Department of Anthropology and
Archaeology, University of Kentucky, Publication 4(1).
Willey, Gordon R.
An Introduction to American Archaeology, Volume 1: North America. Prentice1966
Hall, Englewood Cliffs.

Yellen, John E.
1977
Archaeological Approaches to the Present. Academic Press, New York.

