The Nature of Non-Buried Archeological Data:
Problems in Northeastern Mexico
DUDLEY M.

VAIINER

ABSTRACT
Open area sites in northeastern Mexico were surveyed and artifacts
near selected individual hearths were collected in an attempt to discover significant hearth/artifact assemblages representing valid technological and cultural associations. It is suggested that future, similar
field work concentrating on isolated hearths might reveal artifact distributions which would permit a sorting out of the various activities
and participating soeio-cultural groups once occupying this and other
regions.
SURFACE SITES
Few attempts have been made to recover in a systematic manner
archeological data from surface sites. Non-buried cultural debris is
generally considered to have its greatest value in indicating the presence of a site whose contents are mostly buried and subject to excavation. Surface artifacts are presumed to be no longer in situ and of
little value for a spatial, contextual analysis. While disturbance at
open area sites is often extensive, significant distributional evidence
may still be present, and artifacts recovered from their relatively undisturbed contexts can indicate the patterned human behavior responsible for their existence.
Non-buried archeological data falls into two categories: (1) that
which has never been buried but lies approximately where discarded,
misplaced, or stored by its original owner, and (2) that which has
been buried and since uncovered by natural agents such as wind and
water.
Wind alone often produces blowouts in regions of sand or finegrained soil and little cover vegetation. Sites subjected to extensive
deflation, not uncommon in west Texas, contain a jumble of reexposed artifacts which may have suffered from several burials, uncoverings, and re-burials by the shifting sands. In consequence, vertical and even horizontal provenience of artifacts has been altered considerably since original deposition, permitting little more than reliccollecting by archeologists.
In contrast, sites apparently never buried have produced information regarding the spatial distribution of activities. For example, a
preeeramic site in east-central Arizona with Folsom and Coneho

59,

TEXAS AIICHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Complex components revealed areally separated classes of debris representing activity loci (Longacre 1962). Another site, Lone Hill, in
southeastern Arizona, also contained artifact forms spatially clustered
in a manner representing probable sexual division of labor (Agenbroad 1966). Both of these sites were divided into grids (over a thousand four-meter squares in the former, 135 ten-foot squares in the latter) from which a statistically random sample of at least 10~ was
drawn. The selected sections were carefully searched for al! cultural
lithic debris. Analysis revealed functionally specific areas of the sites.
At the Carmen site in south-central Arizona (Brown 1967), a grid
system of ten-foot squares was imposed, but no independent clusterings of surface m’tifacts occurred. It was concluded that it was not a
domestic camp site but a locale from which material for chipped
stone was procured over a 4000 year span. Activities were thus spatially patterned in relation to available natural resources rather than
to socially defined task areas.
Sites which have been buried and subsequently uncovered by gentle
water action present additional problems when the archeologist is trying to recover artifacts from their original depositional context. This
has been attempted in northeastern Mexico (Varner 1967), where
the techniques of data recovery differed considerably from those used
in Arizona. Due to the kinds of artifacts, the disturbed condition of
many of the sites, and perhaps to the techniques employed, spatial
patterning, while present, was not spectacular. A refinement of approach, however, may provide future, conclusive analyses of the nonrandom distribution of surface artifacts in this and other regions.
HEARTH INVESTIGATIONS IN NORTHEASTERN MEXICO
In the summer of 1960 during an areheological survey of northern
Neuvo Leon and eastern Coahuila, Epstein (1961) discovered 70
sites, many of which are in large open areas. One site of particular
importanee, San Isidro (NL 37) in the state of Nuevo Leon, contained
evidence of early human occupation in the now semi-arid region between Monterrey and Reynosa. Lithie artifacts, including tools and
waste flakes, were found scattered among fragments of sandstone
and limestone. Much of this fragmentary burned rock was concentrated in numerous roughly circular folTnS, three to five feet in diameter. These were presumed to be the remains of campfires, although
none contained organic materials such as burned bone or charcoal.
Both the hearth and artifacts were stil! in the process of being exposed
by slow, relatively gentle sheet erosion that had left them just below
,or on the present ground surface.

NON-BUR~D ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA

53

The artifacts recovered during this initial reconnaissance at San
Isidro included many large bifacially and unifacially flaked pebbles
("choppers") made from a hard gray limestone, now covered by a
thick tan patination. Other smaller types of artifacts, including two
Paleo-American Plahwiew projectile points, were usually of the same
material. Among the few flint objects recovered were two additional
five 0ther points resembling Archaic and NeoAmerican types of Texas.
Dtff~ng tl~e summer of 1969. students of The University of Texas
Depallment of Anthropology Field Session excavated the San Isich’o
site as part of The Northeastern Mexico Archeologieal Project dh’eeted
by Epstein. Unfortunately, no cultural stratigraphy could be determined from the few artifacts recovered in the course of the excavations (including 12 Plah~vie~t), two Lerma, and foul" To~tugas projectile points). It had been decided, however, to make an extensive
collection of surface materials. Part of the site area was divided into
hundred-foot squares and these into quadrants which served as arbitrary zones for mapping the location of all artifacts and hearths.
In addition to the excavations and collections at San Isidro, the
general survey begun in 1960 was continued. Six other areas produced similar assemblages of large artifacts and, in one instance, a
Plainvieto point. It became increasingly obvious that a significant
amount of cultural data could be obtained by the systematic mapping
and collecting of artifacts from these numerous formerly-buffed surface sites. In an important way, natural erosion was accomplishing
what could not be done by archeological excavation-the removal of
tremendous amounts of covering material so that an extensive sample
could be taken from underlying cultural deposits.
In his original survey of 1960, Epstein began development of a
new procedure for obtaining archeological data from such surface
sites. This procedure consisted essentially of careful collecting of all
archeological material scattered around individual hearths. It was
assumed that these hearths represented an 0ccnpafi0n Of a Single
roup fora ............
reiatively short period of time in contrast to d6p6sits
g] ..............
...........................
found in caves,
middens, ere,¯ which may contain the cultural remains
of Several traditions deposited over an extensive span of time. Archeologieal effort at the latter sites has been expended to identify significant differences in artifact or other material content which may
reveal important cultural changes through time (el. Johnson 1967).
Epstein believes that individual hearths might come close to representing elusive "instants in time" which could be reconstructed
through archeologieal techniques. An intensive study of hearth/arti-

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fact assemblages might provide the opportunity to more easily sort
out the activities of various separate cultures that had occupied a
single area over a period of time. The problems of determining valid
"cultural associations", i.e. relating artifacts to single cultures, might
be reduced if not resolved. This in turn could bring us closer to a
general understanding of the processes involved in prehistoric cultural changes. The small discrete archeological units in northeastern
Mexico appeared to provide an excellent area in which to attempt
such research.
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
During the field session of 1962, an attempt was made to derive
some method of determining valid artifact assemblages from hearth
areas (Epstein 1969.). However, from a systematic colleetion of all cultural materials around individual hearths in a selected portion of the
San Isidro site, few conclusions could be reached. The attempt to distinguish categories of hearths, per se, from possible differences in
material and/or structure were even less conclusive. This difficulty in
determining culturally significant hearth/artifact assemblages was
considered to be due to the small and restricted sample of hearthsonly fourteen were analyzed, and all of these came from the one site
(Whatlon 1962).
With this background in mind, the writer and Epstein began discussing the possibility of applying similar procedures to hearth concentrations from widely dispersed locations throughout northeastern
Mexico. Perhaps a more extensive sample would reveal subtle and
still undiseerned cultural or eeological distinctions.
We found several important questions could be asked about hearths,
their associated artifacts, and most importantly, about the people who
made and used them. For example, when and how long were these
hearths used? Could a tempora! sequence of hearth or site occupaney
be detmTnined by seriation or any other archeologieal techniques applied "to the rather meager two-dimensional distribution of evidence?
Does each hearth represent a single occupation by one group of people for a continuous but limited period of time? This last question
might be diffieult to test. The several projectile point types known to
occur at single sites did suggest the presence of more than one eultural grou P. On the other hand, this........
studY mi ght
be an opp~ortunit
...............
................. Y
to discover with relative certainty the use o£ several pr0jectile ,point
types
..............
b)a Singie prehiS[0iic cnlturii
.................
group.
..............................
The sheer abundance of separa[e hearths in relatively small areas
seemed to indicate construction of a new hearth each time one was

NON-BURIED A!RCHEOLOGICAL DATA

55

needed. Since re-use of hearths by diverse groups would confuse the

evidence, it might be difficult to detennine valid intrasite assemblages
or complexes on the basis of internal evidence only. But intersite
comparisons should provide sufficient data to make such distinctions.
Were these hearths used in the manner of hearths known elsewhere
from ethnographical and archeological evidence? Campfires are generally constructed for a limited range of purposes such as J cooking,
warmth, ceremony, etc. But what was going on around these6 p~:
-ti~61ai:]~-ea~hs~How many of the potential activities around a campfire could we deduce or infer as actually having occurred? Not all
possible activities would have likely taken place around the same
campfire or necessarily even in the same camp, and cultural remains
such as lithic artifacts should reflect some of these differences.
Minimally, we could determine some of the kinds of technological
activities that had occurred around individual hearths. The total archeological evidence seemed rather meager-primm’ily lithic artifacts
which could be analyzed and separated on one hand into functional
tool types, and, on the other, into mere waste debris. At least it could
be discovered which artifacts appear most frequently and which appear least frequently around hearths. Thus the evidence would indicate which kinds of artifacts were made near or around hearths versus those made elsewhere and brought into the hearth area. Such a
distribution of artifacts would contribute to identifying loci of task
performance.
ASSUMPTIONS AND Pt/OCEDUItES
The main objective of the field work was to sample as much of the
region of northeastern Mexico as possible in the time available, beginning with areas closest to Monterrey. The first area chosen was
near the village of Garcia, about thirty miles west of Monterrey.
After inspection of this site (NL 19), it was decided that the only
really adequate system for co!lecting artifacts would be to record
their exact distance from the hearth center and the approximate direction in which they lay, i.e.N.E., S.E., S.S.W., etc. Although it
would have been much faster merely to collect the artifacts dispersed
about a hearth in toto and treat them as a gross unit, this would not
explore the possibility that differences in the assemblages might be
interpretable functionally as resulting from different activities taking
place near or farther away from a campfire or in a direction determined by factors such as wind, sun, or topography.
One basic assumption under which we had to work was that most
of the hearths had undergone relatively little disturbance since their

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

original use. Hopefully, there had been no important cultural disturbances such as re-use of hearths by different groups of people. We
assumed that re-use was not the role for several reasons. There were
no apparent secondal7 additions of stone to the reasonably compact
hearths nor any scattering of old hearth stones around a hearth
proper. In fact, many small concentrated hearths of a single layer of
stone were obselwed within such proximity that they were not likely
used at the same time. The over=all appearance of the healths indicated a rather limited use of each and !ittle, jf any, disturbance-o£ a
hemth by later occupants of the vicinity. If this lack of cultural disturbanee e6uld be verified, it would raise the question: why the apparent waste of effort involved in constructing an entirely new hearth
so near another?
Of more immediate concern in our attempt to obtain culturally
meaningful artifact groupings was the geological activity that had
taken place. An important question to consider was whether the
hearths and surrounding artifacts stil! retained approximately their
original position or if they had been significantly disturbed by erosion. That the land surface had remained exposed for a considerable
length of time following use of the hearths was suggested by the
absence of organic materials such as shell, bone, and especially charcoal within the hearths excavated at San Isidro. The major problem
could perhaps be reduced to one of a mixture of cultural debris on
the original surface rather than to that plus erosional mixing.
Several facts suggested that geological disturbances in the areas
had not been severe. The concentrated clustering of burned rock
seemed to show that disturbance was not extensive. Rocks which had
been split, presumably by fire, were lying with the several separate
pieces in. situ, i.e. in their position at breakage. They had not been
disturbed after complete detachment. The reason for this gentle exposure appeared to be the gradual sheet erosion of the fine-grained
soil pro’titles from around the hem’th stones. The piles of rock had
apparently been covered in a gentle fashion by deposition over them
of sediments earried by wind and/or water. Their subsequent and
probably recent uncovering has been due to gentle diffuse runoff over
large areas, i.e. sheet erosion by water action not confined to channels. Over-grazing by goats and cattle in northeastern Mexico since
the Conquest has promoted such unintegrated fluvial activity tending
to produce general denudation rather than arroyo dissection (Fig. 1).
In some locales, however, slope washing has led to extensive arroyo
cutting which resulted in the destruction of many hearths (Fig. 2).
It is likely that every single hearth has not been covered over at

NON-BU!RIED ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA

57

FIauRE 1. Hearth NL 156.5, in an area typically denuded of ground-level
vegetation.
some time during its existence, but there is no easy way to determine
this from field observation. Since there was evidence indicating that
most of the hearths had been buried, this was regarded as the rule.
The exceptions hopefully would not significantly affect our methods
of investigation or our conclusions.
After an initial walk through and around a site, an admittedly subjective aVtempt was made to select a more or less "random" sample
of hearths. The hearths selected included a great variety-from very
small and concentrated to large and more scattered. At some sites we
selected several adjacent hearths in order to plot then ~nd their as~
s6dated
artifacts on a sin gle
map usin g plane table and alidade. In
.........................................
.................
other instances we attempted to find hearths so remote and isolated
that no other hearth was even in sighL
.....The ~eations of artifacts gathered from around any individual
hearth were plotted on graph paper or simply noted in the daily log
as to distance and direction from the hearth center. On completion
of artifact collecting at each hearth, the stones were moved aside and
a shovel and small sereen were used to search for artifacts or organic
remains not on the ground surface. Very few artifacts were buried,
however, and the only area in which we found organic material was
near Torreon, Coahuila, where there was charcoal mixed in with

) ,),

58

FIGURE 2.

TEXAS A_RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Hearth NL 158C.1 with extensive arroyo dissection behind.

hearth stones. The four radiocarbon dates obtained from this charcoal are not considered reliable because of probable contamination
from being virtually on the ground surface.

59

NON-BURIED ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA

USA

Chihuahua

/

Texas

/

it

/

M EXI CO

t

\
\

Coahuila

/

i

) w.

~ Torreon
/

FIGURE 3. Map of northeastern Mexico. Roman numerals indicate areas
investigated.

DATA
The specific sites investigated were in regions east, south, and west
of Monterrey (Fig. 3); time did not permit a survey to the north.
Some of the sites are on the banks of arroyos which may have once
contained water more often than they do today. Others occur in de~sicated regions with no evidence of present or past major water
sources. The reasons for hearth concentrations, i.e. preferred camp
sites in particular areas, are not obvious.
From the 20 open sites assigned numbers, a selection was made of
204 hearths. Artifacts were found nearby on the ground surface at
104 hearths whereas the remaining 100 hearths had no artifacts.
The 567 artifacts recovered during this investigation were all of
lithic material with an obvious predominance of heavily patinated
limestone pebble-cores and flakes. Because there were relatively few
flint artifacts, they were analayzed separately from those made of

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

limestone, sandstone, or basaltic rock. Strict attention was given to
establishing morphological categories of artifacts through analysis of
technological procedures. The analysis was based on observable artifact fO1Tn and excluded any presumed function. A similar analysis of
artifacts from Texas resulted in what has been called "lithomorphie
classes" (Johnson 1967). These are categories of lithic objects showing morphological alteration by man, but not all are tools or artifacts necessarily used by man. The resulting six major groups and the
number of artifacts recovered in the survey are:
I.
Pebbles
114 specimens
Unworked flakes
344 specimens
II.
III. Worked flakes
23 specimens
9,0 specimens
IV. Miscellaneous bifaces
V.
Thinned, pointed
bifaces
63 specimens
VI. Clear Fork gouges
3 specimens
There was no apparent alteration of any artifacts at a date later
than their original manufacture. Because of the heavy patination on
most artifacts, such reworking or resharpening would be obvious. It
should also be noted that no artifacts recovered showed deliberate
shaping by means of abrasion or grinding-there were no manos,
metates, mortars, or pestles.
ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS
Observations made in the field and analysis of the collected artifacts have unfortunately east shadows on the validity of many of our
hearth/artifact assemblages. This does not necessarily depreciate our
general approach or specific techniques. At some sites there was undoubtedly more washing about of artifacts than originally anticipated,
as attested by the presence of modern potte17, bottle caps, etc., in and
among hearth stones. At other sites there may not have been enough
erosion to expose buried hearths adjacent to those visible, thus disguising the mixture of occupational debris from different hearths. This
was especially possible where an exposed hem’th lay near a bank
or on a steep slope.
A problem that is becoming increasingly important is the difficulty
of finding open sites over which goat herders have not tramped while
searching for projectile points and other thinned bifaces as a relief
from boredom and as a means of slight financial gain. Also, Texas
relic hunters have for years been scouring much of northeastern Mexico, including our specific Coahuila sites, in search of all kinds of
flint artifacts. Unfortunately, such looters are prone to pick up projeetile points and a miscellany of what is to them spectacular. Conse-

NON-BURIED ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA

61

quently, the professional or serious amateur archeologist is left with

depleted and unbalanced patterns with which to sta~ggle,
The projectile point types which were found have such extended
temporal ranges as far as related archeological data reveal that they
are of little analytical value in establishing dates for specific associated
artifacts or hearths. For example, MacNeish (i958) found Ab~Olo, .................
,.T~)i~igas, and Nogales type points in all of his excavated cultural ....... ’i . . . . . . . .
;.,,phases dated from 7000 years ago to early historic hmeg. These are
c~mmdn types in the northeastern Mexico-southwestern Texas region
and were found at coastal plains sites during this survey. The same
open sites possessed Catar~ and Matarnoros points, which are generally
assigned a temporal range of about A.D. 500 to 1700 (Suhm et al.
assigned a temporal range of about A.D. 500 to 1700 (Suhm et al. 1954).
About half of the hearths recorded had no visible, associated artifacts and others had so few artifacts that occupation of hearth areas
was probably blief, perhaps only for one night. MacNeish (1958:138)
suggested brief occupancy for similar "temporalN open camps" in
Tamaulipas.
From this equivocal evidence the question of a single occupation
for every individual recorded hem~h is not definitely answered. But in
general, the small compact construction of most healths suggests their
use by a micro-band of related persons who built a communal fire
adequate for their size group. This is consistent with our ka~owledge
of the early historical inhabitants of the area whose socio-political organization was a simple one of exogamous, patriloeal micro-bands
( l~uecking 1955).
The presence of numerous, adjacent hearths is probably due to
each having been buried soon after use. Later hearths would be built
on a slightly higher level of the sediments. Eventually, with the
change to erosional activity, deflation of all hearths resulted in their
common placement on the present ground surface, much in the manner of desert pavement.
The total specific activities around any individual hearth remain a
matter of speculation but now within a decreased range of probabi!ity. The paucity of artifacts and their uncomplicated forms suggest
rather simple, limited activities-certainly none that would not be
expected. No doubt brush was broken off, pulled up, or chopped and
placed on the hearth stones to provide kindling for cooking and
;~
warmth. Mussel shells found among the hearth stones at on6 site , ....
show that at least part of the time these
hearths." At other times they were probably used to. roast or singe
vegetation such as cactus pears.

62

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Unfortunately, no directional distribution of activities can be determined from the locations of artifacts around individual hearths.
Many artifacts and/or tools were no doubt manufactured near hearths
and carried away, o1" away from hearths and brought in, or near one
hearth and subsequently removed to a location near another hearth.
The data available from this brief survey are insuffcient for an extensive analysis of the complicated patterns of artifact distribution
which may be present; however, the gathering of additional data and
their statistical manipulation should reveal these patterns. The potential value of careful, systematic recovery of surface artifacts from
many open area sites may ultimately be realized through the ongoing refinement of statistical analyses and through the computers
which handle huge amounts of data.
Some simple correlations of tools with debitage were discovered.
There were 22 hearths with thinned, pointed bifaces (projectile
points, knives, etc.), 33 hearths with thinning flakes, and 11 hearths
with both. With the exception of an unusual red projectile point
found at one hearth and a black one found at another, wherever
thinned, pointed bifaces and thinning flakes occurred together, there
were flakes of the same color as the bifaces. The reverse is not true,
however-there are flakes at several hearths which lack the corresponding color projectile points. This can be interpreted to mean that
some step in the manufacturing or retouching of pi~0jeetile tookp
...............
6i~ts
place around the healths, Smee there appears t6 have been a "’cache"
of n6n:thlnnecl projectile point blanks discovered at one site, it seems
likely that flint was procured and roughed out into point blanks at
its source in the mountains to be transported until needed.
The emphasis on choppers, or at least large, heavy pebble implements at many hearth sites is consistent with the technological habits
of other desert cultures such as in the adjacent southwestern United
States. But the latter usually had a wider variety of artifacts in their
assemblages, including especially the grinding implements characteristic of or essential to an efficient desert economy. The complete absence of manos, metates, etc., around the Mexican hearths suggests
that there was no extensive pre-cooking preparation of edible vegetation in the vicinity of the hearths. The presence of pounding implements made of wood instead of stone in early historic times may mean
that prehistoric peoples made equally extensive use of wooden mortars. However, wooden pounding tools have not been found in excavated rock shelters and other sites in nearby mountains where
stone manos and metates were uncovered.
On the basis of the probable absence of wooden pounding imple-

NON-BURIED ARCHEOLOCICAL DATA

63

ments around hearths and the near absence of likely flesh-cutting or

hide-working implements or animal bones, one may suspect that most

..

hearth sites had a special use to people who lived elsewhere. In many
instances this would account for what appears to be an incomplete
assemblage of artifacts. One could tentatively conclude, as has Taylor
(1966:64), that these nomadic foragers frequently searched what must
stay in g
g
have
been g
y
..........
,~i~!
m0i~l~ains; ; r6ckshelteI’s; etc.
Thus hearth sites may represent temporary, perhaps seis6naI camps
of bands which lived more often or more permanently elsewhere.
Such seasonal transhumance was a practice of desert cultures of the
western Great Basin (Davis 1963). We may suspect that prehistoric
foragers of northeastern Mexico were systematically exploiting adjacent microenvironments in a more or less regular manner. Reoccupation of sites by the same group probably occurred, perhaps annually,
but with no material framework to return to such as in Arizona where
the metates were left inverted when not in use (Agenbroad 1966).
At isolated hearths there is little doubt that we recovered truly
valid, discrete hearth/artifact assemblages. There are sometimes few
artifacts at such isolated hearths, and these do not tell us much. For
example, one site consisted of 5 hearths, of which 3 had one biracial
pebble implement each, one or two percussion flakes, and several
black flint thinning flakes.
One basic problem at these and other surface sites may be that of
low "archeological visibility" which has been observed among contemporary nomadic cultures such as the African Bushmen. The Bushmen leave surprisingly little occupational residue behind at their
campsites (Deetz 1965). Similarly, the probable short-time use of
each hearth area in Mexico may have resulted in &dtural debris c0n:
~isting 6f 6~ly a small fraction of the p6tendaiiy structured material
el&nefits wia{el~ might be correlated with the behavi0ral attributes of
Theref6re, few single, discrete hearth assemblages
might contain sufficient artifacts to permit discovery of the quantitative co-variation in the distribution of cultural items. While some patterning of artifacts can probably be found m’ound hearths in any site
that is adequately preserved, the non-random distribution of debris
may sometimes only allow interpretations that approach triviality
or pontification of the obvious.
inconclusion,-be~use s6 few investigations have attempted to
discover such basic aspects as configurations of artifact categories,
the true nature of surface archeological data remains poorly explored. However, the recent work in Arizona and northeastern Mexi-

64

TEXAS ABCHEOLOGICAL SOC£ETY

co are suggestive of the potential value of systematic surface collection and that, at the very least, mere relic-collecting from surface
sites must not be tolerated. Archeologists-professional and amateur
-cannot continue to neglect the significant paleo-anthropological information to be found in non-buried archeological data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Research discussed in this paper was supported by the National
Science Foundation (Grant GS 636) as part of the Northeastern Mexico Archaeological Project, Department of Antln’opo!ogy, The University of Texas at Austin, Jeremiah F. Epstein, Director. Field assistance to the author was provided by Donald R. Sutherland, graduate student at Tulane University, and by Lynn A. Varner, graduate
student at The University of Texas.

REFERENCES CITED
Agenbroad, Larry D.
1966 Preliminary Report on a Desert Culture Site: San Pedro Valley, Arizona.
Unpublished paper presented to the 31st Annual Meeting of the Society
for American Archaeology.
Brown, Jeffrey L.
1967 An Experiment in Problem-Oriented Highway Salvage Archaeology.
The Kiva, Vol. 33, No. 2, pp. 60-66.
Davis, Emma Lou
1963 The Desert Culture of the Western Great Basin: A Lifeway of Seasonal
Transhumance. American Antiquity, Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 202-212.
Deetz, James
1965 Hunters in Archaeological Perspective. Unpublished paper presented at
the University of Chicago "’Man the Hunter’" Conference.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1961 The San Isidro and Puntita Negra Sites: Evidence of Early Man Horizons in Nuevo Leon, Mexico. In Homenaje a Pablo Martinez del Rio,
Instituto de Antropologia e Historia, Mexico, D.F.
1962 The San Isidro Site. Typescript, Northeastern Mexico Archaeological
Project. The University of Texas.
Johnson, Leroy, Jr.
1967 Toward a Statistical Overview of the Arehaic Cultures of Central and
Southwestern Texas. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 12.
Longacre, William A.
1962 Surface Indications of a Preceramie Site (L.S. 187) in East Cenh’al
Arizona. Unpublished paper presented to the 27th Annual Meeting of
the Society for American Archaeology.
MaeNeish, Richard S.
1958 Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, n.s., Vol.
48, Pt. 6.
Rueeking, Frederick, Jr.
1955 The Social Organization of the Coahuiheean Indians of Southern Texas
and Northeastern Mexico. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 7, No. 4.,
pp. 357-388.

NON-BURIED A-RCHEOLOGICAL DATA

65

Sutml, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks

1954

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin o[ the Texas

Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Taylor, Walter W.
1966 Archaic Cultures Adjacent to the Northeastern Frontier of Mesoamerica. In Handbook of Middle American Indians, edited by Gordon
F. Ekhohn and Gordon R. Willey, pp. 59-94. The University o[ Texas
Press.
Varner, Dudley M.
1967 An Areheological Investigation of Hearths in Northeastern Mexico. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas.
Whallon, Robert
1962 Hearth Surface Survey. Typescript, Northeastern Mexico Archaeological
Project. The University of Texas.
The

University of Arizona

Tucson, Arizona

