A Preliminary Report on the Development of a
Ceramic Chronology for the Sabine Lake Area of
Texas and Louisiana
LAWItENCE E.

ATEN AND CHAItLES N. BOLLICH

ABSTRACT
An extensive site survey was undertaken in the Sabine Lake area of Texas
and Louisiana with the intention of obtaining sufficient ceramic collections
to begin development of a ceramic chronology. Approximately 5,600 sherds
were examined, although collections from only 14 sites (totalling approximately 5,000 sherds) were of sufficient size to use in the quantitative
chronologie study.
The Sabine Lake sequence of ceramic paste categories is compared and
correlated with the Lower Mississippi Valley Red River chronology by
means of the Lower Mississippi Valley type ceramics that occurred in the
Sabine Lake area collections. It is seen that although the two sequences can
be aligned, the cultural dynamics of the coastal area are masked by the
use of a stylistic classification in Louisiana on the one hand, and the use
of a technological classification in coastal southeast Texas on the other.
We urge that some accommodation be made.
The sequence is also compared and correlated with a rough sequence
for the upper Galveston Bay area. It is seen that a substantial amount of
cultural lag apparently existed between upper Galveston Bay and the Sabine
Lake area, but the nature of the barrier to diffusion of cultural traits remains
unclear at present.

INTRODUCTION
The principal obstacle to progress in investigation of the dispersion
of cultural traits across the northern coast of the Gulf of Mexico is the
lack of local culture chronologies between the upper Galveston Bay
area in Texas, and the western margin of the Mississippi River floodplain in Louisiana. An extensive site survey in the Sabine Lake area
of Texas and Louisiana (Fig. 1) was undertaken in an effort to partially remedy this circumstance.
One of the objectives of this survey was to obtain surface collections
with which we hoped to begin development of a ceramic chronology
by means of soIne seriation technique. This has been accomplished
utilizing ceramic paste categories, and since our plans for additional
kinds of analysis to refine the sequence will require substantial
amounts of effort and time, and since no literature presently exists
dealing with the Sabine Lake area, we feel it would be useful to
present an account of our findings to date.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

242

0ran

41 OR 50

410R57
410R58

miles

i

41JF26
A&41JF 31

oF

FIG. 1. Location o~ Sabine Lake area and seriated sites.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The earliest known archaeological investigation in the Sabine Lake
area was the 1940-41 site survey conducted by G. E. Arnold as part of
a WPA-University of Texas project. This survey, confined to the Texas
portion of the area, located numerous sites in Orange and Jefferson
Counties. Some of these sites are now destroyed or are impossible
to relocate, but others have been revisited and additional surface artifacts have been collected. Arnold’s collections, now housed at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, have been exanained qualitatively, but no detailed analysis has yet been undertaken.
That portion of the Sabine Lake area situated within Louisiana was
surveyed for sites by McIntire (1958). This survey located twelve sites
in western Cameron and Calcasieu Parishes, of which three were
utilized in an extension of the Red River chronology to Southwestern
Louisiana.

CERA~ICS--SABINE

LAKE

243

More recently, and in connection with this project, Bollich has
surveyed and collected surface material from sites in Orange and
Jefferson Counties, Texas and in Cameron and Caleasieu Parishes,
Louisiana.
Excavations in the area have been limited to testing at the Gaulding
Site (41 JF 27) by members of the Texas Archeological Society in
1965 (Bollich, MS in preparation). Whi!e the Gaulding Site data
has some interesting aspects, it appears that it will not contribute
significantly to the development of a ceramic chronology.
THE SITES
Sites in the area from which collections were utilized in this study
are of two kinds: shell middens, and earth middens. The shell middens
are composed ahnost exclusively of the dam Rangia cuneata and are
situated on natural levees bordering present and former channels of
the Sabine and Neches Rivers, on beaches bordering Sabine Lake,
and on cheniers (stranded shell beaches) bordering the coastline.
Generally these sites do not attain thicknesses greater than 3 feet, and
average about 1.5 feet.
The earth middens which thus far are only known from Jefferson
County, Texas, are apparently devoid of shell food remains. These
sites are situated atop geomorphie features known as pimple mounds.
which are associated in great number with meander belt ridges that
traverse the surface of the late Pleistocene Beaumont Formation.
These ridges, because of their slightly higher elevation, extend southeastward into the coastal marshes and offered drier habitation conditions for people apparently subsisting on a marsh fauna.
AtlTIFACTS
During the Bollieh survey, 5,659 artifacts were recovered. These
include 5,625 potsherds (including 74 that could be identified with
previously defined types), 9 dart points, 19 arrow points, 3 socketed
bone projectile points, 1 elbow pipe fragment, and 2 historic artifacts.
Since the chronology is based upon the ceramics, other types of artifacts are not described in this preliminary report.
Classification of the ceramics was begun by sorting them into the
two descriptive paste categories and the previously defined types that
are described below. The paste categories were then sorted into
groups based on presence or absence of decoration, and on various
vessel form traits. Since our investigations are not yet complete,
detailed artifact descriptions will be presented later.
GROC-TEMPERED PASTE CATEGORY: we are using the term "grog" to

244

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICALSOCIETY

refer to fired clay fragments used as a tempering agent (Shepard,
1963: 9.5). Often these fired clay fragments are seen to be sherds, but
usually they cannot be identified as such. Our original classification of
grog-tempered sherds provided for two sub-categories: grog-tempered
with sandy paste; and grog-tempered with fine paste. The reason for
doing this was because we knew there were Lower Mississippi Valley
decorated ceramics present in the area, and there was no reason to
think that there would not be corresponding plain sherds as well. By
subdividing our paste categories in this manner, we hoped to gain
some insight into the importance of the Lower Mississippi Valley
ceramic technology in the Sabine Lake area. Two difficulties have
caused us to abandon this subdivision, at least for the present. The
first is that we were not able to standardize our criteria sufficiently
well. Although each of us could reproduce his own classification well
enough, we were not able to reproduce the other’s classification sarisfaetorily. This is one of the inherent limitations in visually estimating
size and percentage of sand grains .
The second difficulty came to light after examining surface collections from coastal sites much closer to the Mississippi River. This
revealed that some of the indigenous Lower Mississippi Valley grogtempered sherds are actually quite sandy (at least from the coastal
area) thus defeating our purpose. It is clear, however, that Lower
Mississippi Valley ceramics are present in some quantity and during
a significant period of time along the coast as far west as the Sabine
Lake area. It is doubtful though, that the Lower Mississippi Valley
ceramics can be confidently differentiated from presumably indigenous
grog-tempered ceramics on the basis of paste characteristics alone.
It may be that the significance of the paste categories needs to be
considered in a different perspective. Let us first review some of the
salient facts of the situation.
1. The significance of sand in sandy paste ceramics is, at best
estimation, uncertain. We incline to the viewpoint, previously stated
by one of us (Aten, 1967: 10-11), that sandy paste ceramics were
made from sands and clays used in their natural associations and that
any selection for grain sizes was based on the natura! associations
available. We are presently unable to prove this viewpoint, but the
fact that many sandy paste sherds are light-colored and contain iron
concretions suggests that this is the ease, since this is also a characteristic of the late Pleistocene sediments in the area. By the same token,
we are unaware of any objective evidence suggesting that the sand
is truly a tempering material (i.e., an intentionally added aplastie).
9,. Sandy paste ceramic traditions have been recognized at a Tche-

CERAMICS--SABINE

LAKE

245

functe time level in Louisiana, and throughout pottery using time in
southeast Texas.
3. Both Aten (1967: 13) and Ambler (1967: 39) have noted the
frequent occurrence of sand and silt in addition to grog particles in
the paste of the proposed grog-tempered types San Jacinto Plain and
San Jacinto Incised from the upper Galveston Bay area. In addition,
Ambler (1967: 40) has noted (and we concur in this observation)
that grog particles are quite rare in some of these sherds.
4. Most workers have for many years acknowledged the similarity
between many of the design styles on Goose Creek Incised in the
upper Galveston Bay area to Coles Creek Period and Plaquemine
Period design styles in Louisiana (e.g., Suhm and Jelks, 1969.: 55).
However, many of the Goose Creek Incised design styles, while still
clearly in the Coles Creek-Plaquemine design tradition, combine
design elements into design styles unreported in the Coles Creek
and Plaquemine Periods. The actual transition or drift between the
two style traditions has never been documented.
Some of these Goose Creek type designs occur in the Sabine Lake
area collections as well. We also have a very few sherds showing
strange combinations of design styles. For instance, we have one sherd
which would be a good example of Harrison Bayou Incised (a Plaquemine Period type) except for the presence of a set of horizontal,
parallel ]ines incised below the cross-hatching. Another sherd has
horizontal, parallel lines incised on the exterior, cross-hatched lines on
a flat lip, and Harrison Bayou type cross-hatching on the interior.
This might be the first evidence of stylistie innovations that ultimately
become part of the inventory of Goose Creek Incised design styles.
The important point, however, is that incised designs probably were
not introduced into the upper Galveston Bay area directly from
Lower Mississippi Valley ceramics.
The possibility is thus presented that the grog-tempered (with
sandy paste) sherds actually represent the interaetion of the two
principal ceramic technologies present in the coastal area. That is,
the makers of sandy paste ceramics (in our view, a technology based
on using unmodified natural clays) were subsequently exposed to the
idea of introducing fired clay h’agments (probably crushed sherds)
into the paste to make "better" pots. Judging from the relative toughness of contemporaneous sandy paste and grog-tempered sherds in
coastal southeast Texas, we would guess that there was no observable
improvement in the pottery as a result of adding grog fragments. At
the same time, it appears that virtually no other Lower Mississippi

246

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICALSOCIETY

Valley ceramic traits directly accompanied the introduction of grogtempering into the upper Galveston Bay area.
In the Sabine Lake area, grog-tempering was of great importance
throughout most, if not all, of ceramic using time. But here grogtempering is accompanied by Lower Mississippi Valley decorated
ceramics. In tlae upper Galveston Bay area, however, such was not
the ease, with the possible exception of some Tehefunete-like ceramics,
but here we are dealing only with the sandy paste ceramic tradition.
It may be that in the absence of a clear technological advantage, and
without the reinforcement of other aspects of Lower Mississippi Valley
ceramic technology, it was not possible for grog-tempering to gain
much popularity.
We realize that many circumstances are left unexplained, but we
feel that the issue of interaction between the makers of the two major
ceramic technological traditions as expressed in grog-tempered (with
sandy paste) ceramics is worth raising.
In any event, we have combined all grog-tempered sherds into a
single group differentiated only by the presence of decoration (i.e.,
straight line incising occasionally combined with punetations, and
red-filming ).
SANDY PASTE CATEGO]:~Y: generally speaking, the morphological characteristics of this category are similar to those described by Aten
(1967: 10), Ambler (1967: 31), and Shafer (1962: 22) for sandy
paste ceramics in the Lower Trinity River area to the west. Attempts
have been made to subdivide sandy paste ceramics on the basis of sand
grain sizes at both Cedar Bayou (Ambler, 1967: fig. 19) and the
Conroe Reservoir (Shafer, 1968: 40). At Conroe Reservoir, no stratigraphic significance for grain sizes could be found (Shafer, personal
communication) and evidence for stratigraphica!ly significant changes
in the proportions of sand sizes at Cedar Bayou seem to us to be probably not significant. Recognizing the difficulties already mentioned in
visually estimating size and percentage of sand grains in sherds, and
recognizing the lack of results from nearby areas, we chose to use
only one paste category for the sandy paste sherds. Late in our
analysis, and while adding some new collections to our seriated
sequence, we noticed an increasing number of sandy paste sherds
containing granule-sized chert grains. Since sites containing such
sherds generally fell early in our sequence, and since it should be
reasonably easy to sort for such an extreme variation in grain size,
our plans for the future call for such an analysis.
Decoration techniques (as opposed to design styles) on sandy
paste ceramics are the same as those on grog-tempered ceramics,

247

CERAMICS--SABINE LAKE

i.e., straight line incising occasionally combined with punctations,
and red-filming. We have not yet investigated changes in incised
design styles through time and between paste categories. The sandy
paste red-filmed sherds are all identical to the proposed type Goose
Creek Red-Filmed (Aten, 1967: 11).
Reasonably good examples of the following pottery types were also
found in the Sabine Lake area collections.
EUROPEAN TmU)ITION: Spanish Olive Jar, early or middle style (Coggin, 1960: 9-12).
ROCKPORT FOCUS: Rockport Black-on-Gray.
LOWER MISSISSIPPI VALLEY TRADITION:
Hardy Incised, Harrison
Bayou Incised, Cotes Creek Incised, Ponchartrain Check-Stamped,
Churupa (?) Punctated, Troyville Stamped, Marksville or Yokena
Incised, Marksville Stamped, Orleans (?) Punctated, and Tchefunete Plain.
Because of erosion of the surface of some sherds, it was not always
possible to distinguish Marksville Stamped from Troyville Stamped.
For this reason they are combined in Fig. 3.
THE ANALYSIS
If a logical scheme of investigation is to be followed in an area
that is areheologieally unknown, the location of sites through surveying should be followed by an attempt to develop an historical framework which, in our situation, means a ceramic chronology. As was previously mentioned, MeIntire (1958) attempted to extend the Lower
Mississippi Valley chronology to this area. It has been our experience,
however, that diagnostic sherds from the Lower Mississippi Valley
area do not occur in suffieient numbers to serve as chronological
markers in very many sites, or zones within sites. More importantly,
such a scheme does not deal directly with the indigenous ceramics.
Indeed, it seems to us that any seriation scheme which utilizes less
than 1.5 percent of the artifacts recovered is questionable at the very
least. Rather, we have found these Lower Mississippi Valley ceramics
(along with certain other artifacts) to be useful in verifying our
sequence based upon paste categories and in correlating this sequence
with Ford’s Red River chronology (Ford, 1952: fig. 2).
Although we recorded the occurrence of designs and various kinds
of rim and base forms, it seemed clear from the start of our investigation that a sherd sequence based upon differences in proportions of the
paste categories would be most likely and most practical, since only
a relatively small percentage of the indigenous ceramics collected
exhibit decoration or some indication of vessel form. In this situation,

248

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

one is forced to rely primarily on variations in paste characteristics if
statistically reliable sample sizes are desired.
The requirements necessary for a successful seriation have been discussed by Ford (1962: 41) and are itemized below as they apply to
our Sabine Lake area collections.
1. It is essential that a consistent typology be utilized. It is for this
reason that we abandoned the subdivisions of the grog-tempered
paste category that were based upon sand content.
2. The assemblages to be ordered should represent short periods of
occupation. The shallow depth of most of the sites from which collections were made (the average was about 1.5 feet) suggested that this
might be the ease. Further, the lack of variety within the different
classes of ceramic attributes indicated that rates of change might be
rather slow, thus minimizing the effect of surface collections representing somewhat longer periods of occupation.
3. All of the collections are from a fairly restricted area (Fig. 1)
thus minimizing the effect of any spatial variation.
4. The sites from which most collections were made are located
along Holoeene geomorphie features of varying age, suggesting that
the sites and ceramic assemblages would likewise be of varying ages.
This is an obvious requirement for chronological ordering, for if the
sites are all of more or less the same age, the constituents of the
ceramic assemblages should be present in more or less the same
proportions and an ordering would not be possible.
5. In order to obtain reliable percentages, an unse!eeted sample of
suffleient size must be obtained. In other areas, best results have been
obtained with samples containing more than 100 sherds although
smaller samples have been used. Since we had 14 site collections
with more than 100 sherds in each (and totalling 5,071 sherds) we
chose to confine the ordering to these sites for the present.
Since we were attempting an ordering based on only 2 paste groups,
the graphic seriation technique advocated by Ford (1962) seemed
quite adequate for the problem,
The procedure was simple: percentages of the two major paste
categories were plotted graphically on strips of paper and these strips
were then ordered into smooth patterns of increase in one category
and decrease in the other. Based on information from the Addicks sites
(Wheat, 1953: 184) and the Jamison Site (Aten, 1967: fig. 5a), we
assumed that the sandy paste ceramics would have been dominant
early in our sequence and the grog-tempered ceramics dominant later
(Fig. 9,).
The crucial step in the analysis was to test the validity of our

CERAN£ICS--SABINE

9,49

LAKE

w

-

i

I

~J

o

(D
A

I

q~
111!

Ii l

~3
GO
O
0

#r.

~

~ ~

~

~ ~ ~

o= ~ =

~ ~ ~

~

~q

9,50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

sequence. One means would have been to dig a series of stratigraphie
tests at several sites in the area. Almost all of our sites are shell middens, however, and artifact densities are generally low. It would thus
have been necessary to excavate a large number of test squares which
was entirely beyond our resources.
In our collections we had some 20 kinds of artifacts about which
some estimation could be made of the relative time they would appear
in a cultural assemblage. These generally consisted of projectile points,
Lower Mississippi Valley ceramics, and European artifacts. Our
procedure for testing the sequence of sites based on paste categories
was to graph the occurrence of these 20 kinds of artifacts (subsequently called "diagnostic artifacts" for want of a better term) in the
sites that had been seriated.
The seriated sites were listed on a sheet of rectangular coordinate
paper along the ordinate axis, and the diagnostic artifacts were listed
along the abcissa in the order we would expect them to appear. If
the ordering of the sites was truly a chronological one, the occurrences
of the diagnostic artifacts should fall above a line running more or less
diagonally across the graph from lower left to upper right. Complete
correspondence is not to be expected, particularly in these kinds of
collections but the actual results (Fig. 3) show a remarkable correspondence to the expected results.
As was noted at the beginning of this section, sherds bearing information on vessel form and decoration were relatively few in number,
and in the interest of larger sample sizes, we felt obliged to rely primarily on paste categories in setting up the Sabine Lake sequence.
Having set up the sequence of paste categories and tested its validity,
we then proceeded to examine the distribution of rim forms, base
forms, lip modification styles, and decoration styles through the
ordered sequence of sites. The relative proportion of each trait was
plotted graphically by site on strips of paper. The strips were then
placed in the same order as the paste category seriation. The results of
this approach were practically hi!. For one thing, most traits occurred
in both paste groups and in most sites. For another, no popularity patterns could be recognized.
We do not feel that the paste category seriation is invalidated by
these results. Rather, we feel that these form and decoration traits
must be re-analyzed in a more sophisticated manner. Toward this end,
we are reworking the material for data to be used in a trait association
analysis along the lines of Deetz’s Arikara study (Deetz, 1965). This,
however, will not be fnished for quite some time. In any event, it

9,51

CERAMICS--SABINE LAKE

I’,,.
o

~o

_J
_1
)o
w

o

tu

_J
:i:
~IVP =74170
HS/NP’dS

x

/ NI 7-4N,’TD

x

A~Y3.L.LOd

o

I-

o
o

©

"d.32

773//5" 27"0 3NOG
$.l.NlOd MOa~YV
~VT/’/DNVIMI
3did AMOG 73

"~-"

x

$7M08
031VNhYV.9
03SI.gNI
~o

AO~IVH

X

X

o
tzo

x

o3sl:m mxw

~_ ~

NOS‘I~J~YVH

x

x

x

ff3d"p’l S- )lO3HO
~OL ~

~

x

< ~~ ~
0 %~ %’

M--73HD

x

X

$3700

031P’IDNM

x
X

O3S/ONI
:"

x

NIP’a/V~’H.91VOd
03$/,.9N/

x

X

P’N3.VO.(

x

x
x

~YO 377//ISM~YP’.

"~ ~ ~ "OdlS 3771AA0~II

X

X

x

¯

"~

o

X

x

x
x

C
o

x

"d.gl - sofia
’0314171-4 - 03~
-:lls"Vd ,,(O/tiP’S
’03"4/71_4 - 03~1
O3ip’i ONnd
(d) SNV37~IO
NIP’Td
~"

31D~/~_43HOi i

X

x

x

x

~.~

x
x

SINIOd "POf/d

3N08 0313NOOS
SINIOd

t7
W
I-

IHVO

x

09
w

m
w

0"~
e~

-259,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

would appear that a chronological sequence based upon the patterns
of popularity of sherd paste categories is highly practical, and viable.
CORRELATIONS AND COMPARISONS
The correlation of the Sabine Lake chronology wffh that of the
Lower Mississippi Valley Bed River chronology is clear in its broad
outline and is indicated on Fig. 3. It is necessary to remember, however, that this is a correlation of relative chronologies, and not absolute
chronologies. We have no information at this time to tell us the absolute age of the Sabine Lake Tchefuncte correlative horizon versus the
classic (i.e., Ponchartrain) Tehefunete Period in the Red River chronology, and the same applies to the other correlative horizons. Thus vce
have no idea of the time lag, if any, involved in the diffusion of
ceramics westward along the coastal plain. Indeed, it is not presently
possible to fully evaluate the occasionally heard suggestion that at
least some ceramic traits diffused eastward along the coastal plain,
having been ultimately derived from areas of Meso-Ameriea (e.g.,
Phelps, 1964: 129.).
At the present time, the Lower Mississippi Valley ceramic taxonomy
does not include any sandy paste wares except for the Tchefuncte
Period types Mandeville, O’Neal, and Alexander. Thus we have no
means of quantitatively comparing the sequence of Sabine Lake
ceramics with the sequence in use farther east in southern Louisiana
(Gagliano, 1967: 8). Moreover, the ceramic typology in use in Louisiana is largely based on stylistic considerations, whereas typology in
coastal southeast Texas is largely based on technologiea! considerations. The conclusion is fairly clear that some accommodation needs
to be made. We feel that future work in southern Louisiana should
include a more detailed quantitative consideration of paste categories
and plainwares if the necessary perspectives on cultural dynamics of
the coastal area are to be achieved.
It is also instructive to compare the Sabine Lake chronology with a
ceramic seriation we have compiled (Fig. 5) from surface and excavated material for an area approximately 50 miles to the west. This
area centers around upper Galveston Bay. To facilitate comparison
we have expanded the Sabine Lake paste category seriation to show
the decorated ceramics (Fig. 4).
For the most part, the two chronologies are based on similar ceramics although type names have been applied in the upper Galveston
Bay area. We have introduced three horizon markers to aid in comparing the two sequences. It is important to remember that use of
these markers is not an attempt to establish ceramic periods, but is

CERAlS,~ICS--SABII~E

0,53

LAKE

OI./O4SlH
- au/wanbold

¥~a~O SelO3

- alLM,fOll

i

I

|
!
/
/

0

CD
0
nCD

/

i

t"
/
/
0

.

o

L .......

--i-F-.--. ....
~= i..........
!
~.~
" ~- -- -l-;--I--)ill .... F’..... i-I-L-’-------’
oj

0

L~

k
.I

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

254

I !
,
zg~

II
I

!

/-

I

I

t

I
:I:-i-----I--_-l]:--I

---~--i--i--I---i--,

,~

r4

[

....

II
I
I

~>
//

o~

i
.I
bJ
0
0
(.9

i:
ID

0

,_

N

=

Vlllllll#11111111llll#lllllll

~

~"

<

It,)

1461JM

m

~

~

CERAIVLICS--SABINE LAKE

255

recognition of similar cultural events in both the Sabine Lake area
and the upper Galveston Bay area. These events, or horizon markers,
are then used to examine the relative differences in the ceramic assemblages from the two areas. Horizon marker "A" marks the last occurrence of assemblages associated with Tehefuncte cultural traits.
Horizon marker "B" marks the appearance of arrow points in the
upper Galveston Bay sequence and the beginning of the Troyville
correlative horizon in the Sabine Lake sequence. In Louisiana, the
introduction of arrow points is usually considered to mark the beginning of the Troyville Period. Horizon marker "C" marks the appearance of assemblages associated with historic materials.
The most striking difference is that the early part of the upper
Galveston Bay sequence (prior to Horizon marker "B") consists solely
of plain sandy paste ceramics. Plain grog-tempered ceramics (San
Jacinto Plain) appear much later (just after Horizon marker "B")
and with substantially diminished popularity when compared with
the Sabine Lake sequence. The single bar for pre-Goose Creek ceramics at Wallisville (Fig. 4) actually represents three sites and is
based on comments in Ambler (1967: 79). Ambler (personal communication) has subsequently developed a classification for this pottery but it remains unpublished at present.
Other important differences are also apparent. For one thing,
incised ceramics of both paste categories appear in our earliest Sabine
Lake site (prior to Horizon marker "A") and continue with remarkably stable proportions, up to the latest site (later than Horizon
marker "C"). In the upper Galveston Bay sequence, Goose Creek Incised (sandy paste) appears much later (around Horizon marker
"B"), reaches a popularity peak, and then steadily declines through
Horizon marker "C." San Jaeinto Incised (grog-tempered) appears
after Horizon marker "B" and disappears by Horizon marker "C." It
is important to remember, however, that this is only a comparison of
the use of the incising technique on the various paste categories, and
not a comparison of incised design styles.
In the Sabine Lake sequence, sandy paste red-filmed and grogtempered red-filmed sherds apparently have a disjunct distribution
but this is not clear because of the small number of sherds involved.
!n the upper Galveston Bay sequence, red-fihning on a grog-tempered
paste has not yet been discovered. The distribution of Goose Creek
lied-Filmed (sandy paste) shows a distinct similarity to the distribution of the corresponding material in the Sabine Lake sequence.
Another important feature of the upper Galveston Bay sequence
in contrast to the Sabine Lake sequence, is the absence of grog-

256

TEXAS AItCttEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tempered pottery and the presence of bone-tempered pottery at the
historic site of the Presidio San Agustin de Ahumada (Tunnell and
Ambler, 1967: 90). It seems probable, however, that the assemblage
at this site represents a Spanish occupation rather than an Indian occupation. For this reason, we cannot be sure if it is representative of
the pottery utilized contemporaneously by the Indians.
After comparing these two sequences, the indication is that a substantial amount of cultural lag occurred over a very short distance
(approximately 50 miles). Just what sort of barrier existed to the
diffusion of the grog-temper ceramic technology and to various decoration techniques is not known at this time.
Finally, we should note that the possibility definitely exists that the
Sabine Lake sequence can be extended somewhat farther back in
time, possibly to show a pre-Tchefuncte correlative horizon.
CONCLUSIONS
As was stated in the introduction, this is preliminary report on a
continuing investigation. Results thus far have been the establishment
of a ceramic sequence for the Sabine Lake area of Texas and Louisiana based on sandy, and grog (probably sherd)-tempered paste categories. Comparison of this sequence with the occurrence in the seriated
sites of "diagnostic artifacts" (artifacts whose relative time of first
appearance can be estimated) indicates that the paste category
seriation is viable and extends through tinae from a Tchefuncte correlative horizon to an historic horizon.
Distribution plats of rim forms, base forms, lip modification styles,
and decoration styles do not reveal any simple popularity patterns.
A more sophisticated analysis of trait associations is planned for this
material.
Correlation of the Sabine Lake sequence with the Lower Mississippi
Valley-Red River chronology can be made through identification of
Lower Mississippi Valley ceramic types, but these occur too seldom to
permit construction of a chronology around them alone.
A rough correlation can also be made with the emerging local
chronology for the upper Galveston Bay area to the west. Although
the indigenous ceramics in this area are more or less morphologically
similar to those of the Sabine Lake area, dramatic differences can
be seen in their respective popularity pattenas. The most striking of
these differences is seen in the grog-tempered ceramics. These are
abundant throughout the Sabine Lake sequence but appear much
later in the upper Galveston Bay sequence. Although we cannot
presently evaluate the nature of the barrier resulting in substantial

CERAMICS--SABI2NE

257

LAKE

cultural lag between the two areas, we are at least alerted to its
presence.

It is quite true that we still have many investigative angles remaining to pursue in the collections we have in hand. Also, many of the
sites along streams are being rapidly eroded and as a result we continue to enlarge our sample. These additional collections and analyses
wil! be reported on in due time and will no doubt require modification, to a greater or lesser degree, of the conclusions reached in this
report. For the present though, we have principally tried to present
a practical tool for the chronological analysis of ceramic assemblages
from the Sabine Lake area, and to attempt to foresee some of the
problems that additional data may pose.
REFERENCES CITED
Ambler, J. Richard
1967 Three Prehistoric Sites Near Cedar Bayou, Galveston Bay Area. Texas
State Building Connnission, Archeology Program, Report No. 8.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1967 Excavations At The ]amison Site (41 LB 2), Liberty Co., Texas. Houston
Archeological Society, Report No. 1.
Bollich, Charles N.
ms
Test Excavation at the Gaulding Site (41JF27). Ms in preparation.
Ford, James A.
1952 Measurements Of Some Prehistoric Design Developments In The Southeastern States. American Musemn Natural History, Anthrop. Papers,
Vol. 44, pt. 3.
1962 A Quantitative Method For Deriving Cultural Chronology. Pan American Union, Technical Manual No. 1.
Cagliano, Sherwood M.
1967 Occupation Sequence At Avery
Coastal Studies Series No. 9.2.

Ishlnd.

Louisiana

State

University,

Goggin, John M.
1960 The Spanish Olive Jar: An Introductory Study. Yale University Publications in Anthropology No. 62.
McIntire, William C.
1958 Prehistoric Indian Settlements of The Changing Mississippi River Delta.
Louisiana State University, Coastal Studies Series No. 1.
Phelps, David S.
ms
The Final Phases of The Eastern Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Tulane University.
Sharer, Harry J.
1966 An Archeological Sur~ey of Wallis~ille Reservoir, Chambers County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Reports, No. 2.
1968 Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin, Montgomery County, Texas. Texas Archeologieal Salvage Project, Papers
No. 13.
Shepard, Anna O.
1963 Ceramics For The Archeologist. Carnegie Institution of Washington,
Publication 609.

258

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Tunnell, Curtis D., and J. Richard Ambler
1967 Archeological Excavations at Presidio San Agustin de Ahumada. Texas
State Building Commission, Archeology Program, Report No. 6.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953 The Addicks Dam Site, An Archeological Survey o[ The Addicks Dam
Basin, Southeast Texas. River Basin Survey Papers No. 4, pt. 1.
Austin, Texas
Beaumont, Texas

