NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT
THE WHEATLEY SITE,
PEDERNALES FALLS STATE PARK,
BLANCO COUNTY, TEXAS*
JOHN W. GREER

ABSTRACT
Scallorn and Perdiz arrowpoints and pottery were found in discrete
c]usterings of cultural debris interpreted as single occupation activity
areas. The site probably dates about A.D. 1150-i 300, the suggested overlap
period for the Austin and Toyah foci.

INTRODUCTION
The Wheatley site was initially discovered in 1962 by members of
the Travis County Archeologicat Society of Austin and was found to
contain artifacts of Neo-American age. It was named after C. A.
Wheatley, the landowner, and designated 41 BC 114. Intensive
surface collection and surface stripping were conducted in 1971 in
order to verify observations made during the original survey
concerning the presence of Scallorn and Perdiz arrowpoints and
pottery in discrete areas. Work was carried out under a Permit to
Conduct Archeological Investigations, No. 8, issued by the Antiquities
Committee of the State of Texas, and funds were provided by the
State Archeologist’s Office of the Texas State Historical Survey
Committee (now the Texas Historical Commission).

THE SITE
Pedernales Falls State Park is on the Pedernales River in eastern
Blanco County, 30 miles west of Austin and 10 miles east of Johnson
City (Fig. 1). The park is typical of the hilly regions near major rivers
in central Texas. Small dry, perennial and intermittent creeks begin
as low valleys winding between eroded Cretaceous hills, becoming
slightly steeper as they approach the river. Then, typical for most of
the Pedernales River east of Johnson City, the creeks plunge suddenly
into rather impressive, though not exceptionally large, steep-walled
limestone canyons. These contain springs, flowing water, and an
abundance of vegetation (including cyprus trees and ferns) and small

*This is a revised version of the manuscript, "Archeological Investigations at the
Wheatley Site, Blanco County, Texas" (J. W. Greer, 1974), on file with the Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

90

Llano

Burnet

o

Austin
Fredericksbur(
o

City

Dripping
Springs
oSan

Narcos

WHEA TL E

oNew
Braunfels

SITE
San

Antonio

FIGURE 1. The location of the Wheatley site, Blanco County, Texas.

animals. Entry into these canyons often is somewhat limited, though
not prohibitive. Flats (erosional areas physiographically similar to
terraces) above the canyons are covered mainly with small oaks,
various grasses, and juniper.
The rate of juniper spread in the area is astonishing and has
ramifications for modern archeological interpretation. Much of the
area which was sparsely covered or clear of juniper during the 1962
survey today supports very thick growth. Few places remain, aside
from the canyon rimrock area, where one can see any appreciable
distance, and in many places even foot passage is seriously
hampered.
The Wheatley site is on the second large flat above and 500 yards
west of the Pedernales River canyon rimrock, and between the
canyons of Bee Creek and Mescal Creek (Fig. 2). At the eastern edge
of the site is a steep clay drop-off of about 20 feet, while low limestone
hills rise slowly from the site’s western edge (Fig. 3). The relatively
level and featureless surface is a windblown and slightly washed
reddish to beige sand, which overlies a compact red clay containing a
fine rolled quartz and chert sand. This is at an elevation sufficiently
above the Pedernales River and tributary canyons to prohibit the

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

91

jlO00
feet

WHEA TLE Y
SITE

canyon wall

FIGURE 2. The Wheatley site relative to geographic features.

WHEATLEY SITE

"I0
"Io
o
O)

FIGURE 3. Sketch profile looking northeast across the Pedernales
River, showing location of the Wheatley site.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

92

possibility of creek-generated alluvium. The deposition on this
basically windblown sand is presumed to be very slow, and the
present surface is probably much the same as it was 800 years ago.
Occupational debris, consisting mainly of Neo-American artifacts
and small flint flakes, is scattered Over an area about 150 x 550 feet,
with a few isolated clusterings of Archaic debris outside the main
limits of the site. Within the site, occupational materials occur on the
surface and in the surface sand and are concentrated in relatively
isolated clusters (Fig. 4). Although areas between the clusters of
_

I

I
,’

WHEATLEY SITE

,//’-~’\

iD

41BC114

Blonco
J

t.--~.

\

-..... .

County,

Texas

,;

I
L

!

,"’"

N

B

--N,0

E,©

Ggn

8o

o

I

I

~

D

I

feet

F(’.?

o

FIGURE 4. Site map of the Wheatley site, showing position of activity
areas. Area F is considered outside the Wheatley site limits.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

93

surface chipping debris were not tested, it seems unlikely that
subsurface concentrations of detritus exist where surface indications
are absent. Crass cover was minimal, and the surface in all areas
was visible.
THE INVESTIGATIONS
A North-West grid system measured in feet was employed; lines
were set up on magnetic north with N O/W O in the center of the site
and N 100/W 100 in Area A, a pottery-producing area. South and East
grid extensions were employed. Collection units generally were fivefoot squares (or portions thereof) numbered by the southeast corner.
Attention was directed toward a total collection of materials, and
artifact locations were recorded as precisely as practicable. Pottery
areas A and E were stripped for as near a total collection as possible.
A limestone cobble hearth in Area G was totally excavated. All
recognized artifacts were collected, and total flake collections were
made from the surface of most areas. Areas between recognizable
artifact clusterings were essentially void of occupational debris (e.g.,
flakes} and therefore were not excavated. The lack of materials on
the surface at this site seemed to preclude any major unrecognizable
subsurface concentrations, since wash sand or other post-occupation
depositing is minimal.
Stripping involved careful removal by trowel of the upper surface
sand (usually 2 cm thick} and the upper part of the underlying, very
compact reddish clay, to a total depth of 1.5-6 cm. Occasional artifact
intrusions into the clay layer appear to be due to burrowing by small
animals, vertical dessication cracks formed during dry periods, or
animals or people walking across the site when it was wet. Excavated
matrix was placed in burlap bags and water-screened in the
laboratory through ¼-inch mesh hardware cloth. Selected samples
were additionally passed through fine window screen. Although time
and labor did not permit all materials to be passed through window
screen, thereby undoubtedly losing such small arrowpoint fragments
as Perdiz stems, the recovered sample should adequately reflect the
distribution of artifacts.
Approximately half the sherds and flint flakes recovered from
carefully troweled areas were found during water-screening (Table
1). Sherds found during troweling total 47% of the total excavated
sherds in Area A (range 30-60% of the total excavated sherds for
samples of ten sherds or more} and 67% in Area E (range 30-72%).
Flint flakes, grouped according to size, show comparable results.
From stripped squares in Areas A and E, only 35% of the flakes less

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

than 25 mm in maximum dimension were found during troweling (31%
in Area A, 40% in Area E), as were 65% of the larger flakes over 25
mm in maximum dimension (60% in Area A, 69% in Area E). The
percentage variation by size is as would be expected. Of the total
flakes recovered from stripped squares, however, only 38% were
found during careful troweling. In general, it was very surprising to
find such a large proportion of sherds and flakes being missed,
although the specimens usually were very small and the soil very
compact. This demonstrates the need for screens during the most
careful excavation as a check or control device.

TABLE 1
TROWELING: %

Area A

Area E

Total

Sherds

47%

67%

55%

Flakes, d < 25mm

31%

40%

35%

Flakes, d

60%

69%

65%

> 25mm

Table 1. Sherd and flake recovery from squares troweled and the
deposit wash-screened. Entries indicate the percent recovered
during troweling, of the total excavated sample from the area.
Surface material is excluded.

DESCRIPTIONS OF ACTIVITY AREAS
The following individual activity or collection areas were
recognized by occupational debris lying on the surface. All flint
materials were collected from each area. Brief descriptions of the
areas are given here; evaluations are given in the Discussion section.
AREA A (Fig. 5)
This somewhat circular area contained abundant flake debris, chipped
stone artifacts, and plainware potsherds. It was probably the main activity
area in the northern part of the site. A hearth in the southeast part of the
area is indicated by thermally fractured gravel and flint flakes and a few
well-burned limestone pebbles 2-3 in. in diameter. A few mussel shell
fragments were around the burned area. Dug into the clay on the west side
of the hearth was a very shallow, circular, sand-filled depression 17 in. in
diameter and 2 in. deep. It contained most of the flint and all of the cores
from this part of the stripping. A total area of 287.5 square feet was
stripped, and all surface materials were collected.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

95

N

FIGURE 5. Distribution of artifacts in Area A, showing extent of
stripped area. Composite graph of materials recorded in situ and
those from screened debris (exact locations of screened materials
estimated from in situ distribution).
AREA B
A diffuse scattering of considerable debris was just south of Area A.
This includes mainly Neo-American artifacts (e.g. two arrowpoint
fragments, two sherds}, although a Pedernales dart point, a large scraper,
and a mane fragment, all found within a three-foot area, may date to
Archaic times. All tools and a sample of flakes were collected.

AREA C
Chipping debris was found just west of Area B on a very small eroded
and partially burned (grayed and fractured into gravel} limestone outcrop.
This was only about 10 feet across and barely higher than the surrounding
soil. All flakes and tools were collected.

AREA D
An area of about 40 x 75 ft., north of Area A, contained diffusely
scattered flakes, but no tools were observed. A sample of flakes was
collected.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

96
AREA E (Figs. 6, 7, 8)

This small area contained numerous chipped stone artifacts and
plainware potsherds. No features or distributional differences in artifact
classes were recognized in the area. An area of 131 square feet was
stripped, and all surface materials were collected.

AREA E1 (Figs. 6 and 8)
Surface debris increased in an area about 12-15 feet in diameter just
north of the Area E concentration. All the sparsely scattered flakes and
artifacts were collected. Flakes were essentially absent outside this area.

AREAF
A relatively isolated dense concentration of chipping debris and chipped
stone artifacts was on a small rimrock erosional area in dense juniper
growth 150 feet south of Area E. Vegetation precluded definition of the
limits of the occupation, and an area only about 5 x 10 feet was clear. A
total collection of materials was made, including a few mussel shell
fragments, many flint flakes, and several artifacts, among which is the
only large Cliffton-like arrowpoint found at the site. The isolation and
impressionistic differences in the area’s chipping debris (size and color of
the flint flakes} and artifacts suggest that the area is the result of Neo-

FIGURE 6. View of Wheatley site. Area E stripped i~rea in foreground;
grid superimposed over Area El; Area I in background.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

97

q
N

I

-- s 190
o

.

£

¯ snerd
P petd, z ~p
s sc~ttor~ ~

x umd arrewpomt frag
o olh~r art~Iact
~t mu~se~ shet~ frag

FIGURE 7. Distribution of artifacts in Area E showing extent of
stripped area. Composite graph of materials recorded in situ and
those from screened debris (exact locations of screened materials
estimated from in situ distribution).

So’

AREA E,

"

. J ’o’2 ," ¯

C:
"’ " " c" " P¯ ’
, ""c.’;fl"
c,’"

FIGURE 8. Distribution of flint flakes in Areas E and E and artifacts in
Area E. Composite graph of materials recorded in sith and those from
screened debris (exact locations of screened materials estimated
from in situ distribution). P, Perdiz arrowpoint; S, Scallorn
arrowpoint; X, unidentified arrowpoint fragment; C, core; o, other
artifact; dots, flint flakes. See Fig. 7 for distribution of artifacts in
Area E.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

98

American activities distinct from the main part of the site. It is, therefore,
considered a separate site not related to the other activity areas discussed
here.

AREA G (Figs. 9 and i0)
A limestone hearth was 90 feet east of Area E and distinctly separated
from other activity areas. On the surface it appeared as a dense
concentration of angular fire-cracked limestone cobbles or slabs.
Excavation indicated that the burned deposit was 5 feet in diameter and 6
inches thick. The flat limestone bedrock in the center of the hearth was
covered with thin limestone slabs. Bedrock showed no signs of having been
burned, although the uppermost cobbles were burned nearly to the point of
disintegration. Construction apparently was mostly of limestone slabs 6-12
inches wide and about 1.5-2 inches thick, but at the time of excavation, all
except the bottom ones were broken, and the appearance was that of a
burned rock midden (a common site form in the area). Fractured limestone
was most concentrated in the center of the hearth, where the soil
contained tiny bits of charcoal and was black and very dense--the
"greasy" texture often used to describe a particular kind of burned rock
midden soil in central Texas. Excavation totaled 100 square feet. Charcoal
collection for radiocarbon dating was initiated but abandoned since the
sample was very small and full of rootlets.
On the surface of the hearth and next to it were thick sherds of a
brushed-ware jar (Fig. 14) and the stem of a Scallorn arrowpoint (Fig. 16
g). Large sherds from the same vessel, some of which were burned after
breakage, were also in the center of the hearth, resting directly on the
lower slab lining (one sherd presumably from this vessel was also found
170 feet northwest in Area H). Four small flakes (all less than 25 mm in
diameter) were scattered next to the hearth. No other occupational debris
was in the area.

AREA H (Fig. 11)
An area of sparsely scattered flakes and artifacts was in the center of
the site between Areas A and E. Among the artifacts were a few plainware
and brushed sherds similar to those of Areas A (one specimen), E (2), and
G (i), beveled biface fragments, and other tools. All debitage was
collected.

AREA I (Fig. 12)
A grid of 40 five-foot squares north of Area E was set up over an area of
scattered flakes as an exercise in studying debris distribution. All
materials were collected, but the sample was too small for conclusive
results. Two possible use areas seem to be represented by flake and
artifact distributions. The eastern area contained three small biface
fragments and one utilized flake, and the western area, one flake end
scraper and three utilized flakes. Almost no chipping debris was
immediately outside the grid area.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

99

FIGURE 9. Area G hearth during excavation.

0

un

m

u~

uJ

I

5
I

I
I
feet

I

I

O surface sherd
i~l exceveted sherd
s Sce!lorn stem
o
(~
.~

AREA S

flint

flQke

hearth
stripped

area

I

FIGURE 10. Area G, showing locations of artifacts, hearth boundary,
and limit of stripped area.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i00
o

o

g

z
I

z
I

z

--W30
. ¯

"~ "
o
.

o
¯

. .’....
--W50

o " ¯ o"

C
¯

¯

--W60
T.

"
’thick
o

-

X
.

.

.

.

--WTO

X

...... s,, I

AREA

H

FIGURE 11. Distribution of artifacts in Area H. °T, triangular
(unnotched) arrowpoint; X, unidentified arrowpoint fragment; C,
core; o, other artifact; dots, flint flakes; ®, sherd.
-- W30

o i . ::¯ii
o

¯

o

,

c

.~ : .. ¯....
,

¯

..

.

-- w ao

¯

. ¯- -¯..

.

o .o

.

-- w ?o
l

FIGURE 12. Distribution of artifacts in Area I, showing extent of
collected area (almost no materials were outside this boundary). C,
core; o, other artifact; dots, flint flakes.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

101

-- N.1/,O

X

X

\

-- N.130

?

P
--

AREA J

N.120

1

FIGURE 13. Distribution of artifacts in Area J. P, Perdiz arrowpoint; X,
arrowpoint blade fragment (probably part of the Perdiz point at
bottom of distribution); dots, flint flakes; ®, sherd.
AREA I (Fig. 13)
A small concentration of thinning flakes, arrowpoints, and a single sherd
just northeast of Area A may represent a separate activity area.
Arrowpoints include two Perdiz points, a Perdiz stem, and a distal
fragment. Two fragments appear to be from the same specimen.

AREA K
East of Area B is a small, isolated, partially buried limestone hearth
about five feet in diameter. Several very small fired clay lumps on the
surface of the hearth, and extending down into the burned rocks, appear to
be similar in composition to that of the pottery from the site. Some chipping
debris was scattered south of the hearth (Fig. 4). Time did not allow
additional investigations.

THE ARTIFACTS
Artifact descriptions are generally separated from their discussion
and evaluation, which are in the discussion section of the report.
Measurements are presented in tabular form as an appendix. The

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

102

8n[~#

s~v~o~

~ ~~ g ~ ~ g ~

D

m~

mm

m~
o

,.~ a:a

o~m ~ y ouam

~

N~a~a~°

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

103

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

104

distribution Table 2 gives the order of described artifact categories.
Type names are from Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954) and Suhm and
Jelks (1962) unless otherwise specified. Projectile point names are
used here more as descriptive form designation, since cultural
affiliation is not entirely certain.

POTTERY
Sherds from three kinds of pottery were found within use areas at
the site. At least two plainware vessels are present; another single
sherd from Area J may be from a vessel or a pipe. Sherds from a
large brushed jar were also found. Sherds of the unreconstructible
plainware vessels average about 15 mm in diameter. The reconstructible portion of the brushed jar is about 170 x 105 ram.
Analysis was done with the aid of a 10-30x zoom binocular microscope and comparative laboratory materials.
PLAINWARE A
Location: Area A (418 sherds), Area E (708), Area B (2), Area ~I (3), Area J

(1).
Number of vessels: Uncertain, possibly two.
Paste:
Clay. Semi-compact, friable, fractures, easily, somewhat laminated.
Profusely impregnated with rounded quartz sand grains,
probably a natural component of the clay.

Temper. Exceedingly sparse finely ground white material, probably
bone--very soft, flakes off, color ranges to light gray mottling,
minor effervescence with HCI (identical to bone samples
tested under laboratory conditions), physical appearance and

warping identical to burned bone.
Hardness. On Moh’s scale, ca. 3.5
Color. Core probably naturally pink to orange;

central core usually

dark gray, probably reduced. Outer portions
light

gray to

orange-tan.

On many

of

core usually

sherds the core changes

from darkest just inside the interior surface (medium gray)

to

lightest (orange-tan) near the outer surface.
Form:
Overall shape. Uncertain, probably a wide-mouth globular jar with
a very slightly constricting neck, a wide mouth, and a rounded
base. The slightly everted rim tapers to a somewhat pinched,
barely flattened lip (Fig. 14).

Dimensions.
Height: Unknown, possibly about 15-30 cm.
Width: Unknown, possibly about 18-30 cm.
Wall thickness:
Area A (20 sherds measured). Range 3.7-4.9 ram, mean 4.1
mm.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

105

: Area G

Area E :

FIGURE 14. Rim profiles and hypothesized vessel reconstruction from
Area G, and rim profiles from Area E.
Area E (20 sherds). Range 4.0-5.3 mm, mean 4.5 ram.
Area B (2 sherds). 3.9 and 4.1 ram.
Area H (3 sherds). 3.7, 3.9-4.6, and 5.8 ram.
Area J (1 sherd). 5.8-6.0 ram.
Surface finish: Interior and exterior well smoothed. Interior retains a few
smoothing marks.
Remarks: Sherds from areas A, E, B, and H appear to be from the same
clay mixture and may even be from the same vessel. The three
sherds from Area H vary more in thickness than do the larger
samples from areas A and E, though possibly not beyond the normal
range within a single vessel. More than one vessel may be
represented in Area H, however.
The sherd from Area J is also probably from the same clay source,
but may be from a different vessel. Impressionistically it seems that
this tiny sherd (9 x 13 ram) may be from a pipe. It is slightly thicker
than the others, has a greater curvature (also different from the
Area E rimsherds), seems to have more fragments of a shiney black
material (limonite?) seemingly inherent in the clay (also present in
sherds from other areas), and the surface appears slightly different,
both macro- and microscopically.
PLAINWARE B

Location: Area E (86 sherds)
Number of vessels: One.
Paste:
Clay. Very fine-grained but noncohensive, soft. Looks almost like
coastal sand.
Temper. Very sparse finely ground white material, probably
shell--very soft, flakes off, profusely effervesces in HCI, but
seems to lack characteristic layering of shell.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

106

Hardness. On Moh’s scale, ca. 1.0-1.5.
Color. Dark gray to beige on interior surface, ranging to bright
orange to beige on the exterior surface.

Form:
Overall shape. Unknown. Presumably a small globular jar.
Dimensions.
Height: Unknown, possibly about 15-20 cm.
Width: Unknown, possibly about 15-20 cm.
Wall thickness (20 sherds measured}: Range 3.0-4.3 mm.,
mean 3.7 mm.
Surface Finish: Interior and exterior apparently moderately well
smoothed, but difficult to assess because material is so soft and
prone to weathering.
Remarks: Paste appears to be different from the other plainware sherds,
and the walls are thinner. It seems either insufficiently fired or the
clay is not condusive to the "normal" hardening when fired.
BRUSHED WARE (Fig.

12)

Location: Area G (15 sherds, all but one fit together), Area H (1}.
Number of vessels: One.
Paste:
Clay. A beige matrix impregnated with a very fine-grained streamrolled quartz sand. It is a little finer grained and has more
even grain size than the plainware sherds.
Temper. Uncertain, possibly grog. The reddish-orange clay
inclusions in the matrix may instead by from incomplete
mixture of two or more clays and not actually an intentionally
added tempering agent. At present no information is
available on clay mixing, and the identification of the clay
inclusions as grog is not definite.
Hardness. On Moh’s scale, ca. 3.9.
Color. The core is a discontinuous dark gray toward the interior
surface, lighter gray to orange-tan or buff toward the
exterior surface. Interior surface is a grayish buff, exterior
pinkish buff.

Form:
Overall shape. Apparently a globular, nearly spherical jar with a
wide mouth and no neck. Rim is direct-incurved; there is no
separable rim. The lip is an essentially unmodified, slightly
smoothed coil line, from which the succeeding coil was
removed during the plastic stage. This produced a slightly
rounded lip planar on the interior and a curved bevel to the
exterior. Basal form is unknown.
Dimensions.
Height. Probably about 31-33 cm.
Width. 26.5-28 cm.
Mouth diameter. 26-27 cm.
Wall thickness (20 measurements). Range 7.7-9.8 mm, mean
8.7 mm.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

107

Surface finish:
Interior. Well smoothed. Faint, nearly horizontal smoothing lines
remain.
Exterior. Well smoothed, then brushed with a fine brush, probably a
bundle of grass stems. Brushed with a slightly curved motion
(center of the curve downward} at a slight angle of about 5-10
degrees to the rim, in either direction (upper right-lower left,
or the reverse}. The resulting surface is fairly smooth, but
completely covered with brushing.
Remarks: The vessel conforms to the type Boothe Brushed (Suhm 1955: 1620; Sorrow 1970). The Area H sherd does not fit on the Area G
sherds, but it is likely from the same vessel. The brushed sherd is
flat and may be from the base; if so, the base was flat, brushed, and
8.9 mm. thick.

FIRED CLAY LUMPS (46 pieces)
Small rounded pieces of fired clay were found in the Area K hearth. All
are reddish-orange clay impregnated with rounded quartz sand and tiny
black limonite (?) grains. It appears identical to the plainware pottery from
the site, except for the exclusion of the white specks (presumably
tempering material}. The clay is most likely local. Most pieces are less than
10 mm in diameter; the largest is 25 x 20 x 15 ram.

ARROWPOINTS (89 specimens)
The descriptions of the arrowpoint sample provided methodological
problems. Since this was a manufacturing area in which other
processing activities were also performed using small flake tools, it
was often the case that arrowpoint fragments, unfinished
arrowpoints, edge-retouched flakes, and utilized flakes overlapped in
morphological characteristics. A categorization is here employed,
however, which describes in as much detail as possible the kind of
fragment involved and where that fragment likely falls within the
manufacturing process. The initial divisions essentially are finished
(contracting stem, expanding stem, parallel stem, and unnotched
forms, and barbed blade fragments); uncertain (distal blade
fragments, medial blade fragments); and presumably unfinished
(probably unfinished, medial fragments, and large unnotched). In
other words, medial fragments are presumably finished and possibly
unfinished. This gives the reader minimally an impression of the
degree of certainty he may place on the data. Likewise, unnotched
forms include probably finished, probably unfinished, and large
forms (possibly arrowpoint preforms or even small knives). As
confusing as this system may seen initially, it is hoped to prove more
useful in detailed comparative analysis or reevaluation than would a
"lumping" approach.

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Contracting stem (24 specimens; Fig. 15}
This is a heterogeneous grouping of points mainly comparable to Perdiz
forms. They generally have dully pointed bases (rarely sharply pointed or
straight}, nearly straight blade edges, and long flaring barbs. Most are
made on thin flakes with flake scars covering the entire dorsal surface and
only the ventral edges. Stems are equally flaked on both surfaces.
A relatively large, bifacially flaked Cliffton (Fig. 15 p) appears to be a
finished point and not a preform. It is from Area F and likely is unrelated to
materials on the main part of the site.
Expanding stem (13 specimens; Fig. 16 a-m)
This is a heterogenous grouping of points generally comparable to
Scallorn forms.
Parallel Stem (5 specimens; Fig. 16 n-r)
This is a heterogeneous grouping of points overlapping the descriptive
extremes of Perdiz, Scallorn, Cuney, and Bonham.

FIGURE 15. Contracting-stem arrowpoints (Perdiz, ClifftonJ.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

109

Unnotched (14 specimens)
Probably finished (one specimen; Fig. 16 s). This finely chipped basal
fragment is totally worked on the dorsal face and the margins of the
ventral face.
Probably unfinished (9 specimens; Fig. 17 a-f}. These are intentionally
shaped, but not to the extent of being stylistically classifiable as a formal
type. The flaking was stopped before the form became apparent. Although
they appear to have been abandoned during manufacture, they also could
have served on arrows.
Large (4 speciments; Fig. 17 g-j). These are larger than most other
arrowpoints from the site and generally appear to be finished products.
They are, however, likely arrowpoint preforms, or some might be very
small knives.

FIGURE 16. Arrowpoints. a-m, expanding-stem (Scallorn); n-r,
parallel-stem; s, unnotched probably finished.

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Fragments (33 specimens)
Barbed medial fragments (11 specimens; Fig. 17 k). These are fragments
retaining a portion of a barb or notch. They are presumably from
completed or nearly completed points.
Medial fragments, finished (5 specimens; Fig. 17 1). These are welt
worked and thin and are believed from complete or nearly complete
arrowpoints.
Medial fragments, unfinished (4 specimens). These are less well flaked
and appear to have been broken and/or abandoned somewhere during the
manufacturing process.

FIGURE 17. Arrowpoints. a-f, unnotched probably unfinished; g-j,
large unnotched; k, barbed medial fragment; 1, medial fragment; m-p,
distal fragments.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

111

Distal fragments (13 specimens; Fig. 17 m-q). These are well flaked, thin
tip fragments from presumably finished or nearly finished arrowpoints.

DART POINTS (6 specimens; Fig. 18)
The following points (one of each type-form) were collected from
the site, mainly during the initial survey (during which time exact
locations were not recorded). Most, if not all probably are the result
of adjacent Archaic occupations and are not part of the Neo-

FIGURE 18. Chipped stone artifacts, a-f, dart points; g-i, beveled
knives; j-p, thin bifaces.

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

American assemblage here. The small blue point from beside Area J is
the only point with known provenience and may belong to the main
assemblage at the site.
Ensor-Frio (Fig. 18a)
This seems to be a common form in central Texas and has been
described in detail by such workers as Tunnell (1962: 88-90). It is
essentially a wide side-notched Ensor with a notch in the center of the
base. Burin type facets have removed both barbs in a medial direction
(Form 5 facet of Greer 1965). This type of facet is common on points of this
general style and age in central and southwestern Texas.
Fairland (Fig, 18 b)
Marcos (Fig. 18 c)

Pedernales (Fig. 18 f)
This lightly patinated point was found near the south side of Area B.
Gower (Fig. 18 d)
This is probably related to the early Archaic forms named by Shafer
(1963: 64-65) and found in various sites in central and southwestern Texas.
It is heavily patinated, and the base and lateral stem edges have been
intentionally well smoothed.
Unidentified (Fig. 18 e)
This small point of nonpatinated blue flint is all that remains after the
blade was battered nearly down to the top of the stem. It was found
isolated 17 ft west of Area J at N 130/W 177.

BEVELED KNIVES (6 specimens; Fig. 18 g-i)
These fragments are alternately beveled along the distal portion of
the left blade edge. The proximal end (two specimens) is dully pointed
and not beveled. Estimated length is about 90-125 ram. Though these
specimens presumably are from beveled knives, the medial fragments
could be from beveled dart points (no beveled points are reported
from this or nearby sites). Beveled knives have been included as a
class separate from the descriptive grouping thin bifaces because the
beveled forms appear to be a culturally significant trait for the
Southern and Central Plains (Lehmer 1971: 108) and most Plainsinfluenced parts of Texas (Sollberger 1971).
THIN BIFACES (50 specimens; Fig. 18 j-p)
These are thin, usually pointed, well worked bifaces (i0 specimens)
estimated to have been less than 120 mm long. Use pattern studies
have not been done, but most are presumed to have served for cutting.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

113

Thin biface fragments (40 specimens) are presumed to be from
similar specimens and are thought to be mainly complete tools. Many,
however, were likely advanced preforms, or altered tools abandoned
well along the route of artifact alteration.
SCRAPERS (32 specimens)
These are characterized by unifacial, usually rather steeply
beveled retouched edges presumed to have been used or intended for
some scraping activity. Artifacts conventionally referred to as flake
scrapers are described mainly under the heading evenly edgeretouched flakes. Use studies have not been conducted to determine
how the specimens were used.
End scrapers {17 specimens; Fig. 19 a-h}
These all have convex to rounded scraping edges opposite the bulb of
percussion. The bulb on one specimen was removed by ventral thinning
from the striking platform. The distal retouched edged on one specimen is

FIGURE 19. Scrapers. a-h, end; i-j, circular; k, diagonal.

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ventrally or "reverse" flaked. Since these tools are formed on flakes
removed from the outside of pebbles or small cobbles (secondary cortex
flakes and large interior flakes), the ventral surface is longitudinally
slightly concave, thus producing better scraping characteristics than
would a flat ventral face (e.g. from tabular flint).
Side scrapers (7 specimens; Fig. 20)
These are generally larger than the end scrapers from this site and not
so well made. An edge essentially parallel to the largest dimension of the
flake is steeply retouched. These too are made on secondary cortex flakes
and large interior flakes.

cm

d
FIGURE 20. Side scrapers.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

115

Circular scrapers (?) (2 specimens; Fig. 19 i-j)
Discoidal artifacts about 30 mm in diameter seem quite distinctive. They
are generally unifacially flaked, but the cross section is barely planoconvex to very thinly bi-convex [at the edge). Their inclusion in a scraper
class is questionable, and their function is not known.
Diagonal scraper (1 specimen; Fig. 19 k)
The distal right diagonal edge is strongly unifacially retouched into a
slightly concave scraping edge 33 mm long. It is made on a secondary
cortex flake.
Scraper edge fragments (5 specimens)
These are curved edge fragments from fractured scrapers in the general
size range of the end scrapers. Edge orientation is net obvious.

FLAKE DRILLS (6 specimens; Fig. 21)
The thin, fine shafts are bifacially flaked and have biconvex cross
sections (one piano-convex). Bases are minimally altered.

BURINS (4 specimens; Fig. 22 a-b)
A small cortex flake of blue flint (Fig. 22a) has two chisel edges,
each produced by intersecting burin facets. The upper burin edge is
squared; the chisel edge has been used, and apparently also one corner of the chisel edge and one upper lateral edge. The lower burin
edge has become slightly rounded from use; use marks appear on the
chisel edge indicating a gouging motion.
Each of two small flakes (one blue, one gray) has a very narrow
chisel edge, possibly produced by a burin facet originating from a
natural break. The delicate chisel edge is slightly smoothed and bears
minute use scars.

FIGURE 21. Flake drills.

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

On a fourth specimen (Fig. 22 b} a chisel edge is again produced by
a burin facet originating at a natural break. Use marks occur in the
center of the chisel edge, which is larger than on the preceeding
specimens.
UTILIZED AND EDGE-RETOUCHED FLAKES (119 specimens)
Since various groups forming these two classes freely intergrade, it
was decided to describe them as arbitrary divisions within a
continuum of edge alteration from extremely minimal and due to use,
to fairly extensive, even, and intentional. Sortings and the following
descriptions are given as separate entities in order to attempt to
minimally quantify the degree of edge alteration.
Utilized flakes: minimal use (43 specimens)
The edge bears little evidence of use (smoothing, minute hinge fractures,
etc.}, probably from a single, very short, rapid cutting job. Scraping
undoubtedly was also done.

FIGURE 22. Chipped stone artifacts, a-b, burins; c-h, evenly edgeretouched flakes.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

117

Utilized flakes: extensive use (14 specimens)
The edges bear evidence of use (smoothing, minute hinge fractures,
areas of intensive and sometimes extensive edge retouch from use),
probably from a more intensive cutting or scraping job or multiple jobs.
Minimally edge-retouched flakes (31 specimens)
These seem to have been intentionally unifacially retouched and may be
fragments of either finished or unfinished flake knives, flake scrapers, or
arrowpoints. Many instead may be utilized flakes or flakes simply tested
for flaking characteristics and never intended as tools.
Evenly edge-retouched flakes (31 specimens; Fig. 22 c-h)
These obviously overlap with the above groups, but are intended to help
isolate more intensive and extensive retouch which produces a larger,
more even unifacial edge. Retouch still is very slight and is limited to the
edge--usually single, thin, and slightly convex. These would usually be
placed in a flake scraper category. Flakes more intensively edge-retouched
than these would be more steeply beveled; these have been described as a
separate scraper class.

CHOPPERS (6 specimens; Fig. 23)
These are mainly larger pebbles bifacially chipped to form strong
bi-convex chopping edges. One specimen is plano-convex; the lower
face is formed by two large concave flake scars, the upper face by
small short flakes. Use edges are dully pointed, convex, or nearly
straight. The degree of decortication is variable (20-100%).
UNFINISHED TOOLS (21 specimens)
Initial stage (13 specimens}
These are cores (S) and flakes (5} which show a minimal degree of initial
flaking or shaping. Manufacture was terminated before any distinguishing
shape was achieved.
Secondary stage (8 specimens; Fig. 24}
These are fairly thick, crude unfinished bifacial tool forms. They have
been shaped beyond the "initial" stage, and probably can be considered a
preform stage essentially intermediate between the unretouched core and
a finished tool.

CORES (32 specimens; Fig. 25)
Small cobbles to medium-size pebbles served as cores. The cortex
was removed to produce a platform for the removal of additional
flakes, which in turn produced platforms for the removal of
subsequent flakes from almost any available edge. These more or less
decorticated chunks do not appear to be unfinished core tools
although in many cases the removed flakes seem much too small to
have been planned for effective artifacts of the types found here. It

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

I

I
cm

FIGURE 23. Choppers.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

119

simply seems more effective to call these "cores" than anything else.
The materials appear to be mainly from local sources (cf. Ing and
Kegley 1971).
Blue (13 specimens; Fig. 25 a-c)
Medium-size pebbles ca. 30-60 mm in diameter vary in color from light to
dark blue. The fairly thick cortex is white with an orangish surface. All are
from Areas A and E.
Non-blue (19 specimens; Fig. 25 d-f)
These are mainly medium to large pebbles with a large range of colors in
browns and grays. Most are from Areas A and E, although nearly all areas
are represented.

SINGLE- AND DOUBLE-FLAKE CORES (4 specimens)
These are small chert pebbles covered with cortex. On one end one
or two flakes have been removed, forming an edge, either unifacially
(steeply beveled) or bifacially. None is obviously utilized as a tool,
and the initial cortex flakes thus removed probably were too small to
be of much use. Possibly the objects were simply rejected as unfit for
further consideration. If so, the reason for such a decision is not

FIGURE 24. Unfinished tools. Secondary stage (preforms).

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

apparent. Alternately, the pebbles could have served as chert
hammerstones, and the flakes could have been inadvertently removed
during flaking of other pebbles.
HAMMERSTONES (4 specimens)
Locally gathered medium-size quartz (3 specimens) and chert (one)
pebbles averaging 50 mm in diameter have been battered on one end.
These were probably used to remove flakes from cores, and reduce
crude preforms to shapes and sizes demanding smaller flaking tools.

FIGURE 25. Cores. a-c, blue flint; d-f, non-blue flint.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

121

The abundance of associated debitage indicates that such activities
were carried out at the site.
MANO (one specimen)
A circular bifacial mano has one flat and one slightly convex face
and steeply rounded sides. It has been completely, intentionally
shaped, but only the convex face was ground smooth; the upper face
is prepared but unused. The material is a pink granitic sandstone
from the Llano uplift area of Burnet or Llano counties.
SANDSTONE SLABS (2 specimens)
These fragments are from naturally eroded slabs of fine-grained
rust-colored sandstone fused into an elementary quartzite. The
surfaces, though presumably naturally smooth, would serve
admirably as grinding platforms (i.e., small milling slabs). Such
material was similarly used archeologically throughout central
Texas.
TABLE 3
d < 25ram

d > 25ram

Sample
Size

blue
non-blue
entire sample

94 %
91%
92 %

6%
9%
8%

509
2840
3349

Area C

blue
non-blue
entire sample

80%
82 %
82 %

20%
18 %
18 %

20
51
71

Area D

blue
non-blue
entire sample

100%
55 %
59%

45 %
41%

4
40
44

Area E

blue
non-blue
entire sample

98%
91%
92 %

2%
9%
8%

162
722
884

Area E,

blue
non-blue
entire sample

100%
64%o
67%

36%
33 %o

8
67
95

Area H

blue
non-blue
entire sample

90%
80 %
81%

10%
20 %
19 %

10
128
138

Area I

blue
non-blue
entire sample

89%
84 %
85 %

11%
16 %
15 %

54
146
200

Area

Color

Area A

Table 3. Percentage of flint flakes by size. The two size groups are
defined according to maximum dimension (d). Rows total 100o,4.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

122
UNALTERED FLAKES

Flint (4785 specimens)
Chipping debris was sorted according to size of the flakes (Table 3) and
color of the material (Table 4). An arbitrary division point of 25 mm in
maximum dimension was chosen for the size sorting: 90% of the total
flakes were less than or equal to 25 mm (d<25 mm) and 10%

were greater

than 25 mm in diameter (d > 25 mm}. Flakes of the distinctive blue color
totaled 16% of the sample, and 84% were non-blue. Most of the flakes
(3349} were from Area A.
Biface retouch flakes (17 specimens, partial sample)
This is a sampling of the most obvious edge retouch flakes produced
during the sharpening or edge alteration of thin to relatively thick bifaces.
Of the 17 sharpening flakes, five are from presumably edge-utilized bifaces
(as evidenced by edge smoothing, which also could have been intentionally
produced preparatory to flake removal), and 12 are from non-utilized
TABLE 4

d < 25ram

Entire Sample

d > 25ram

Area

Color

Area A

blue
non-blue
sample size

16%
84%
3068

11%
89%
281

15%
85%

blue
non-blue
sample size

28%
72%
58

31%
69%
13

28%
72%

blue
non-blue
sample size

15%
85%
26

100%
18

9%
91%

blue
non-blue
sample size

19%
81%
812

6%
94%
72

blue
non-blue
sample size

12%

-

88°/o
64

100%
31

Area C

Area D

Area E

Area E1

3349

71

44

18%
82%
884
8%
92%
95

25mm

Area G

one blue and three non-blue, all d

Area H

blue
non-blue
sample size

8%

4%

92°/o
112

96%
26

93%

blue
non-blue
sample size

28%
72%
170

20%
80%
30

27%
73%

Area I

7%
138

200

Table 4. Percentage of flint flakes by color. The two size groups
are defined according to maximum dimensions (d). Columns total
100%.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

12 3

bifaces or presumably non-utilized portions of bifaces. Many flakes are
lipped, and in most cases, the striking platform (i.e., the bifaee edge) is the
widest point.

Quartz (6 specimens)
Six small thin quartz flakes less than 25 mm in maximum dimension are
thought to be from quartz hammerstones, fractured during the removal of
flakes from cores. Quartz may at times have been intentionally selected for
small artifacts, although no retouch alteration is evident on these flakes.
UNALTERED CHERT COBBLE (1 specimen)
This is an unused, unaltered small cobble of fine-grained gray
chert. It is not native to the site and presumably was collected as
potential chipping material.

DISCUSSION
Previous to about 1950, Perdiz and Scallorn points generally were
thought to be contemporaneous and associated with ceramics--the
main difference being their overall geographic ranges. During the
1950’s, however, sites were excavated which indicated differences in
temporal ranges for Scallorn and Perdiz (Jelks 1953, 1962; Suhm
1957). Since that time there is a tendency to believe that Scallorn and
Perdiz forms never were contemporaneous, and that ceramics are not
culturally associated with Scallorn points in central Texas. Certainly
these beliefs seem to be supported by most excavations in the region.
A detailed review of the literature, however, leaves open an
alternate explanation--that although Scallorn forms were introduced
earlier than Perdiz, and Perdiz forms outlived Scallorn, there was a
temporal overlap between the two styles. In addition, there is a
likelihood that pottery first came into central Texas while Scallorn
points were still in use. These subjects will be reviewed later in the
discussion.
It was at that point in the archeological development that the
Wheatley site was located in 1962 and studied in 1970. The situation
here appears to be a short-term camp with well-defined activity areas
on a site cluttered with a minimum of extraneous debris. Scallorn and
Perdiz arrowpoint forms and potsherds were found together in small,
isolated use areas. Nearly all material lay relatively undisturbed on

or just under the surface. It appears then, that the VVheatley site was
occupied at a time when Scallorn and Perdiz forms and pottery were
in use together. This remains the present interpretation, and the
following discussion and evaluation revolve around this thesis.
Alternate hypotheses are considered but seem inconsistent with the
observed situation here.

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Camp Design

The site occupies a fairly large open flat area, probably essentially
clear of trees during the time of occupation, with only a few scattered
oaks. The juniper spread is demonstrably recent. Aside from
scattered cultural debris, the site is nearly featureless. The deposit
consists of dark red clay overlaid by a veneer of beige sand; these soil
characteristics usually designate a site in the area. The camp
overlooks steep-walled canyons to either side and is near the
Pedernales canyon rimrock, though not directly on it.
The nature of the site is such that occupational debris is mainly on
the surface and extends underground only into the thin layer of
surface sand. Debris also is concentrated in, and in most cases
limited to, relatively small, separate clusterings about 15-30 feet
across. The lack of complexity and the general rarity of flint debris
suggests that the occupation was a single one and that clusterings of
flint flakes and artifacts represent individual activity areas.
Fortunately, the site apparently was not collected from in the past
(according to the land owner), and it is not cluttered,by the abundant
Archaic debris so often present on central Texas sites. The exact
provenience of the few Archaic artifacts collected during the initial
survey is uncertain, though probably most came from near Area H.
Small scatterings of Archaic debris also occur off the site northeast
of Area D, northeast of Area K, and west of Area E. The degree to
which artifacts have become scattered since their initial deposition is
evident from the locations of reconstructable artifacts. Fragments
were mainly 0-10 feet apart; fragments of only one artifact were 15-18
feet apart. There is the possibility that artifacts were carried from
one activity area to another, but for the most part this seems unlikely.
Pottery likely presents a special case; sherds seemingly from the
same vessels appear in different areas (A and E, G and H).
It is therefore possible that small use areas could increase greatly
in size. If artifacts were to scatter to a maximum 10 feet distance, a
five-foot diameter hearth area might today be an area 25 feet in
diameter of scattered artifacts, presumably with artifact density
increasing toward the center. Likewise, a 30-foot scattering of flakes
might be the remains of a 10-foot chipping station. Two activity areas
originally less than 20 feet apart today could be overlapping and
appear as one large area, possibly, though certainly not necessarily,
with subareal distributional variation for different kinds of debris or
artifacts.
A few hypotheses can be made regarding size and use of activity
areas. Using the foregoing information on debris scattering at this

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

125

site, we can estimate the original sizes of the activity areas (see Fig.
26):
Areas

Present Size

A
B
C
D
E
E
G1
H
I

40 feet
20
10
40
30
12-15
5
40
15 (?)

1
K

Computed Original Size
20-40 feet
0-20
0-10
20-40
10-30
0-15
5 (hearth)
20-40
0-15

15 (?)

0-15

20
5

0.20
5 (hearth)

Additionally, artifactual debris suggests various activities, though
neither conclusive nor especially beyond the normal range of camp
activities. Following are hypothetical uses of the various activity
areas.
Area A was a living area, probably 25-35 feet in diameter, possibly with
a temporary structure. Plainware potsherds were scattered throughout

c
G
K

8

-

7

w

6

----"

,(5

-

t~

o)

El
I
I
o
,~ J
~- B

w

_-

N
H
H

-

I’
I

I
I

i

E

--

A

.1
I

I

z 2

D

I

I

1

H

I

I

5

10

15 20 25 30 35 t.0
feet

5

10

15 20 25 30 35 Z,0
feet

FIGURE 26. Graph of suggested initial sizes of activity areas before
artifact scattering. The five-foot extremes have been omitted from
each range to weight the central portions.

126

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
but were more concentrated in the western portion as if the broken pieces
had been pushed aside there, or a pot was broken there (Fig. 5). Flint cores,
flakes, and micro-flakes (1-5 mm long), representing final retouch as well
as initial flaking, were especially abundant in other parts of the area and
result from in-place chipping activities. Mussel shells and a small fragment
of burned bone (deer?) around the small fire presumably are food remains.
The use of the shallow basin in the clay beside the fire (if a result of the
occupation) is unknown, and the chipping debris contents therein are
inexplicable. The fire was on the southeast edge of the area, the sherd
concentration on the west edge, and the densest concentration of flakes
around the northeast edge. The center was cluttered mainly with
fragments of arrowpoints, utilized flakes, flake scrapers, and other small
flake tools.
Area B is near Area A and contains detritus, a few tools (e.g.,
arrowpoints and scrapers), and two sherds in an area probably originally
5-15 feet across. This may have been an outdoor activity area linked with
Area A.
Area C probably was a chipping station beside a small fire, judging from
the many small flakes found on an apparently burned limestone outcrop.
Its actual use and relationship to other areas are unknown.
Area D is a relatively large, featureless area, originally probably 25-35
feet across, of small scattered flakes. Although some flaking was done
here, the scarcity of micro-flakes suggests a minimum of final retouch. The
lack of utilized flakes limits an interpretation of a large processing area.
Area E, probably originally 15-25 feet in diameter, apparently was the
main activity area in the south part of the site and is the second area to
contain a substantial concentration of chipped stone artifacts and
plainware potsherds. Presumably it was a habitation area similar to Area
A, but less chipping debris and the rarity of micro-flakes suggest more
shaping of artifacts and less final retouch than in Area A.
Area E probably was an outdoor area next to the Area E habitation and
i
originally was about 5-10 feet across. Only a few artifacts and flakes were
found (Fig. 8), which seems to indicate a minimum of activity.
Area G was a hearth east of Area E (Fig. 10}. The fire was built on thin
slabs covering the bedrock, and slabs were used throughout. Other details
of its structure and use are unknown. The large brushed jar presumably
was used here during cooking, during which time it broke, and the broken
peices were left in the fire. Chipping was not done at this station, or was
extremely limited (e.g., minimal retouch). The horizontal relation of the
Area G hearth to occupation Area E seems comparable to that of the Area
K hearth to the Area A complex.
Area H is an area of sparsely scattered debris, with the main activity
probably originally in an area 25-35 feet across (Fig. 11). A few sherds
probably from Areas A, E, and G are scattered about as are arrowpoint
fragments, fragments of beveled knives and other thin bifaces, and flake
debris. There is no obvious center, and the appearance is totally different
from the concentrations in Areas A and E. The general inventory, however,
including the sherds presumably imported from other activity areas on the
site, together with its location in the center of the site suggest that a
dwelling or some other camp feature may have existed here. Some
chipping was done, but apparently very little final retouch.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

12 7

Area I was a large flat area containing possibly two groupings of
chipping debris and a few artifacts (Fig. 12). Originally the areas were
possibly about 5-10 feet in diameter, and both were used for some rough
shaping of tools but not for delicate retouch. Recognition of two semidistinct artifact-flake clusterings is impressionistic and may not be
significant.
Area J is next to Area A and had only two arrowpoints, a small sherd,
and a few flakes in an area originally probably 5-10 feet across (Fig. 13). Its
proximity to Area A suggests Area J was closely affiliated with Area A.
Area K is notable for its small, partially buried limestone hearth
containing many small fired clay lumps, probably residue from some
cooking technique. The hearth is small, five feet in diameter, and
presumably had some special purpose away from the habitation areas.
Although scattered flakes indicate minor resharpening, the near absence
of chipping debris seems to preclude its use as a living station or as an area
of intensive processing. This appears similar to the Area G hearth, but
details of its construction and associations are unknown because it was
found during a post-project trip to the site. It is, nonetheless, considered
one of the more important features here.

From the above evaluations of activity areas, a general camp
layout can be hypothesized. It would appear that at least three living
areas (Areas A, H, and E), possibly with temporary brush shelters,
occupied a somewhat north-south line parallel to the edge of the
terrace-like fiat. Chipping debris and tools were scattered on and
around these living areas. Nearby areas were used for various
activities, which often must have included flint flaking, presumably
percussion resharpening. Delicate secondary retouch was done
mainly in Area A. Small fireplaces were in the living areas, while
larger limestone hearths were some distance to the east. Plain and
brushed pottery vessels were used, broken, and discarded here.
Pieces of a small broken plainware jar (though possibly more) were
seemingly carried to various activity areas or living stations (Areas
A, B, E, and H; see pottery descriptions), and a sherd presumably
from the Area G brushed jar was found in Area H. Hypothesized area
interactions, based mainly on these interareal pottery distributions,
are suggested in Fig. 27. The amount of debris at the site suggests that
occupation was relatively brief, possibly for only a few weeks during
a collecting period for pecans or some other locally abundant
resource, or during an extended trip.

The Assemblage
Artifacts at this site appear to be almost entirely from the NeoAmerican period as defined for central Texas. The few Archaic
materials probably represent localized one-stop situations mainly
around the perimeter of what here is considered the site area.

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

observed~ ~G

\hypothesized
FIGL~E 27. Schematic view of area interaction. Solid lines supported
by ceramic distributions, dotted lines conjectural.

Archaic material is present all along this section of the Pedernales
River, and it is not surprising to find scattered amount’s here also.
Most Neo-American artifacts could be considered representative
of the Toyah focus (Jelks 1962): Perdiz point forms, pottery, beveled
knives, flake drills, and other fine flake tools. Scallorn forms
constitute the only artifacts found at Wheatley seemingly diagnostic
of the Austin focus. Pottery includes probably one or two small
undecorated brownware jars, and a large brushed jar of the type
Boothe Brushed (probably a local copy of Frankston focus forms).
Although several arrovrpoint forms are present, the morphological
characteristics seem similar. Heterogeneous groupings of expanding,
contracting, and parallel stem forms (descriptively referred to as
Scallorn or Perdiz forms) consist of small arrowpoints with usually
straight to very slightly convex blade edges, prominent barbs, narrow
stem "necks," plano-convex blade cross sections flaked mainly on the
dorsal face (the ventral face usually is minimally flaked around the
edges), and bifacially flaked stems. The distal end of the point was
usually formed at the proximal end of the flake, i.e., the bulb of
percussion. If nothing else, this should insure the thinnest possible
stem to go into the foreshaft notch.
Many, if not most, of the artifacts have been exposed to heat.
Detailed analysis has not been done to determine what percentage of
artifacts were intentionally heat-treated preparatory to flaking, and
which were presumably inadvertently burned. It is obvious, however,
that heat-treating at this site was a common practice. The small

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

129

depression filled with and surrounded by flakes and cores on the
south side of Area A could have served in such a practice.
Several artifacts were made from a distinctive bluish flint (Table
2). An inspection of available survey materials from the Pedernales
Falls State Park, collected both by the Travis County Archeological
Society in 1962 and later by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
in 1970 (Ing and Kegley 1971), indicates that blue flint was used
mainly during Neo-American times, possibly with large-scale
utilization beginning in the Transitional period, corresponding
roughly to the supposed beginning of intensive pressure flaking in the
area. Although this part of the artifact sample at Wheatley is too
small for more than simple observations, it is interesting that half the
expanding stem and parallel stem points and flake drills, and only two
contracting stem points were made from blue flint. Ignoring the small
sample size, 54O/o of the Scallorn points, 40O/o of the parallel stem
points, 40% of the flake drills, and only 8% of the Perdiz were made
from bluish flint. Possibly the difference is due only to the material a
person had on hand when making various tools. More likely, however,
this very fine-grained, somewhat glassy flint was selected when
pressure-flaked tools were needed. The small nodule size of the raw
material precludes its use for larger dart points and knives, but not
for the small pressure-flaked arrowpoints and delicate flake tools.
Chi-square tests on blue and non-blue flakes viewed according to
size indicate that the two classes differ significantly from chance. In
fact, nearly the entire deviation to less than a .001 level of
significance is accounted for by large blue flakes, the observed being
far less than would be expected by chance. There are also
significantly more small blue flakes than would be expected. There
are two possible explanations: (i) Blue flint was selected for the
purpose of producing smaller flakes, presumably for making smaller
artifacts, and (2) Blue flint comes from its source in forms (nodules,
chunks, etc.) too small to have produced many large flakes suitable
for fashioning into artifacts, and served instead to produce small core
tools. Gray flint, on the other hand, has many more large flakes than
would be expected, and, indeed, it appears that the cores are much
larger and were used for the removal of flakes to be fashioned into
tools. All larger tools, including both flake and core tools, are from
gray flint. Blue flint, then, was selected for small core tools and
delicate flake tools; gray flint was used for larger flake tools and
large core tools.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

130

MANUFACTURING PROCEDURE
A problem encountered during description of the, Wheatley
materials involves how to sort a sample when all levels of
manufacture are represented, and fragmentary tools often cannot be
distinguished from unfinished artifacts. The general conception of the
dynamic processes is as follows (see Fig. 28).
There are many possible avenues in the formation of chipped stone
tools. The basis for distinctions in the manufacturing procedure is the
presence or absence of alteration of various kinds at various levels.
One inevitably begins with a chunk of stone variously classified as
chert, flint, quartzite, quartz, dolomite, obsidian, agate, jasper,
basalt, rhyolite, felsite, hardened limestone, and more. At the
beginning of the process, the raw material may serve as a core,
intended either to be altered into a core tool, or for the removal of
flakes to be made into tools. The raw material may, however, be
minimally altered, such as the removal of one flake or singly
fractured to form an edge, and used as a tool. This, of course, could
be considered a core tool in its most primitive sense. The chunk of raw
material can also be used without alteration, for example, as a
hammerstone, a maul, or a chopper utilizing a natural edge. Once a
core exists, it can be used directly, spontaneously as a tool (e.g.,
a chopper), or it can be intentionally altered (through a possible
"preform" level) into an artifact with specific desired
characteristics. Likewise, a core may serve for the removal of flakes.
A flake can be removed without any sort of special preparation, or
the core can be specially prepared to produce a specific kind of flake,

RAW MA TERIAL

direct use

/
FIGURE 28. Suggested model for material manufacture and use.
Discard or storage can occur at any point. Solid lines indicate direct
use without alteration; dashed lines indicate alteration of some kind
to physically transform an object from one level to another.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

131

such as Levallois flakes, sequent or series flakes, or such blades as
come from carefully prepared obsidian polyhedral cores in central
Mexico. Such carefully produced flakes essentially serve as
preforms, which can be either altered into a desired form, or used
simply as is. The same is true for flakes removed from a core without
special preparation: They may be altered to produce particular
characteristics (possibly through a preform stage) or simply utilized
as they come from the core without additional retouch.
The preform stage mentioned here is simply a level within the
alteration of a core or flake into a desired tool form. For projectile
points and knives, the preform stage is usually considered an oval
biface form before final thinning, shaping, possible notching, and
edge retouch is done. In most cases, probably, the level is more or less
arbitrary and theoretical. It appears that sometimes, however,
preforms were specifically produced as unfinished artifacts to be
stored for later shaping, or for trade items to other groups needing
the raw material. These forms are occasionally found in supposed
storage contexts in piles suggesting mass manufacture of preforms.
Once a tool is formed, presumably it is used. Regardless of the class
of tool involved, some kind of wear is bound to be produced. Flakes
utilized as knives become dull. Bifaces become dull. Scraper edges
become rounded. Projectile points break. And so on. At this time, the
person using the tool may opt to rejuvenate it through additional
alteration, either edge retouch or more extensive shaping. This may
result in renewing the old tool form to its original condition, obviously
with some alteration of its original attributes, such as relative
thickness, edge angle, or overall dimensions (cf. Sollberger 1971). Or
it might result in the formation of a new tool form distinctly different
from the original. This might be the result of (1) the demand for a new
tool, or (2) attributes (such as size restrictions) of the original which
preclude its reformation into itself. In practice, probably, the
distinction between original and rejuvenated retouched tool forms
would be impossible, at least most of the time.
There are then the materials with which one works. Chunks of raw
material, cores, flakes, tools, rejuvenated tools, and preforms form an
interlocking system of chipped stone (and other manufactured stone
tools, for that matter). From the manufacturing standpoint, a
constant decision is available either to alter or prepare the piece at
hand, or to arrive at a new level of manufacture without alteration of
the piece. The exception, of course, is the rejuvenation procedure,
which precludes alteration.
At least as important as the materials and manufacturing
processes are the "non-manufacture" processes, discard, use, and

132

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

storage. Discard, including intentional discard, loss, and presumably
unintentional abandonment (e.g., utilitarian and nonutilitarian
objects found on excavated house floors, neither intentionally
discarded nor lost, but apparently abandoned) may occur at any time
for any reason. All objects recovered by the archeologist are byproducts of this process; otherwise they would not be found. Use
presumably would occur only at a tool level, since use would
distinguish raw material chunks, cores, and unaltered flakes as tools.
Likewise, tools may be thought of as utilized tools, and as potential or
nonutilized tools. The third process, storage, can occur at any point
within the scheme, including at a preform-unfinished level during an
alteration process.
A problem encountered during the Wheatley analysis was how to
distinguish between the various manufacturing levels while
producing some kind of understandable description of the artifacts in
a meaningful classification. For example, When does a core which is
to be fashioned into a core tool cease to be a core, and become a
preform? After how much flaking does a piece of worked flint become
a preform? What would be the possible distinction between an
arrowpoint preform and an unfinished arrowpoint? How does one
distinguish between a well-chipped preform and a finished tool
(especially relevant with thin bifaces or knives)?
It is apparent that arbitrary levels in artifact manufacture
intergrade to such an extent in the Wheatley sample that divisions
should be viewed only as a suggestion of classification units. They are
quite arbitrary. Such is also the case with minimally altered flakes,
utilized flakes, and arrowpoint fragments. Fragmentary specimens
cannot be adequately distinguished, and separation is quite
subjective.
Contemporaneity
The physical association of expanding-stem arrowpoint forms with
both contracting-stem forms and pottery is of particular interest at
this site. The association is believed to be valid, and the artifacts are
therefore considered both contemporaneous and culturally related.
There is considerable support for this explanation.
Nature of the Site
First, the nature of the site is conducive to such an interpretation.
The occupied area is large and relatively fiat and featureless. There
is, at least at present, no obvious reason to occupy one part of the site
in preference to another. Cultural materials are clearly visible on the

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

133

surface and extend into surface below and wash sand only about 5
cm. Debris occurs mostly in discrete clusterings of flake material and
artifacts, presumably constituting localized assemblages and not the
result of either random distributions nor the reoccupation of previously occupied areas. There also is no evidence for clustering due to
erosion or other natural processes.
The Artifacts
Physical attributes of the arrowpoints suggest that forms are
closely related. The heterogeneity within the types, however,
precludes detailed intertype cornparisions. Primarily, several
arrowpoints, flake drills, and other artifacts were made from a
distinctive dark variety of bluish flint, some possibly from flakes from
the same core and with nearly identical workmanship. This is
particularly suggestable with Sca!!orn and Perdiz points and a flake
drill found together in Area E. It is equally likely, however, that the
use of the blue flint simply corresponds with an intensified use of
pressure flaking.
Expectation Probabilities
Since Sca!!orn points, Perdiz points, and pottery occurred in
several activity areas, it was decided to use distributional data to
indicate the actual relationships in the form of probabilities or
expectation indices. These percentages describe the coexistence of
these artifacts and also predict what one would expect to find if new
activity areas were discovered in terms of combinations of artifact
groups.
In order to help explain the relationships between expanding-stem
(abbreviated E) and contracting-stem (C) arrowpoint forms and
pottery (P), areal locations are used without accounting for frequencies (see Fig. 29):
Perdiz
Pottery
Scallorn

K

C

E
E

i
1

J
J

A
A
A

E
E

G

E

G

B

H

Unidentifiable arrowpoint fragments also were found in pottery
Areas B and H, and in Area K with burned or fired clay. The three
classes were absent in Areas D and I.
The following symbols are used: A---~ B for "A implies B" or "If A,
then B"; and Pr(A--~B) for "What percent of the time does B occur
with A" or "If A is present, what is the probability that B also will be
present." This quantity is equal to the number of areas in which both

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

134

Perdiz
(n = 6)

t

Pottery
(n=6)

Scallorn

Scal lorn
(n =4)

(n =4)

FIGURE 29. Two ways to portray the codistributional relationship of
the three artifact groups Scallorn, Perdiz, and pottery in the nine
recognized activity areas containing at least one of these groups.
groups occur together ( ~ is the symbol for intersection) divided by
the number of areas containing group A. Thus,
Pr(A_..~B)
=

N(A ~ B)
N(A)

or the probability that C also will occur when A and B are found
together,
Pr(A ch B--~C) = N(A c~ B ~ C)
N(A ~ B)
These formulae describe how often two things occur together in
terms of one of the classes or class combinations. "Pottery implies
Scallorn, Pr (P
~E) 7.50" means that Sca!/orn occurs in 50% of
the areas containing pottery; or that if a new pottery area is found,
there is a 50% chance that Sca!!orn also will be found there,
according to the observed archeological trend at this site. This does
not take into account arrowpoint fragments in Areas B and H, which,
if Scallorn, would increase the probability of finding Scallorn in
entirely new pottery areas.
The probabilities consist of the following:
Pottery implies Scallorn, Pr(P---~E) = .50
Scallorn implies Pottery, Pr(E---’~P) = .75
Pottery implies Perdiz, Pr(P--~C) = .50
Perdiz implies Pottery, Pr(C--~P) = .50
Scallorn implies Perdiz, Pr (E--~ C) = .75

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

135

Perdiz implies Scallorn, Pr(C---~E) = .50
Pottery and Scallorn together imply Perdiz, Pr(P ~ E ---~C) = .67
Pottery and Perdiz together imply Scallorn, Pr(P ~ C----~E) = .67
Perdiz and Scallorn together imply Pottery, Pr(E ~ C--’~P) = .67
Pottery implies both Perdiz and Scallorn together, Pr(P---~C ~-~ E) =
.33
Thus, a third of the pottery is found with Perdiz and Scallorn
together (P---~C ~ E), and it occurs two-thirds of the time when
Perdiz and Scallorn are together (C ~ E--~p). This seems to indicate
an equal affiliation of pottery with Perdiz or with Scallorn: Perdiz
occurs in half the pottery areas (P---~-C) and occurs with pottery
(C--~P) half the time; while Scallorn also occurs with half the
pottery (P ~ E), and pottery is found in 75°/o of the areas containing
Scallorn (E --~P).

Theoretical Distributional Probabilities
Next an evalution of the coexistence of the three types is made from
the standpoint of theoretical distributional probabilities. In these
tests, the probabilities of chance co-occurrence are computed
following procedures outlined by Parzen (1960: 84). The null hypothesis that artifact classes (groups) are distributed randomly and
occur together only by chance is tested, and in all cases rejected.
The procedure involves determining (1) the probability that a class
would occur in any one part of the site, knowing in how many possible
areas the class would occur, then (2) the probability for classes
occurring together in one area, and finally (3) the probability that the
classes would occur together in the number of areas in which they
were actually found.
In order to make the Wheatley situation applicable to distributional
formulae, the site was theoretically partitioned into 50-foot squares,
each square large enough to include any use area determined by the
concentration and extent of cultural debris. The site "was assumed to
consist of 30 such grid units or cells. Each of the culturally defined
Areas A-K theoretically occupies a different cell.
Area F is excluded also from these computations. Inclusion of Area
F would increase the site boundaries to such an extent that
probabilities for chance codistributions would be so infinitesimally
small as to be nearly nonexistent. The area between Areas E and F
also was quite overgrown and precluded the certainty that additional
use areas were not present.
Parzen’s (1960: 84) general formula for the probability of an
artifact class to appear in one cell,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

136

can be simplified in cases of exclusion (the situation at Wheatley) to

Pr(A)l

-

n
M ’

or, the number of areas in which an artifact occurs divided by the
total number of areas for the entire site, simply the percentage which
a particular artifact class occupies of the total possible areas. The
probability that elements of two or more sets will occur in one
particular cell is equal to the product of the probabilities for each
separate set:
Pr(A ~ B~...)t = Pr(A)IPr(B)I’’"
The probability that an element or combination of elements would
occur by chance in a given number of cells (subscript; here the
number of actually occupied cells) is the above formula raised to the
power of the number of occupied cells. This is, for one class,
n

a

Pr(A)na = (-~)
for two classes,
n(A ~ B)
Pr(A~B)n(A~B)=[Pr(A~B)~ln(A~B)_ (nanb)
M2
or for three classes,

// nanbnc
)n(A ~ B ~ C)
Pr(A~B~C)n(A~B ~C) - \
M3

The general formula, then, is,

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

13 7

Pr(A~B~...X)n(A~ B~...X) =

where, A, B .... X
A~B~...X
n(A ~ B ~ ...X)
na, nb .... nx
M

n

of

classes

M(n of classes
( nanb~.., nx
);(A ~ B r-h" ’ "x)
= classes (here pottery, Perdiz, and Scallorn).
= the distributional intersection of
classes A, B .... X.
= the number of cells in which classes A,
B .... X intersect.
= the total number of cells occupied by
classes A, B .... X.
= number of possible cells in the grid; at
Wheatley the constant 30--the number
of 50-ft square grid units comprising
the site area.
= number of classes being considered in
the problem.
= symbolfor intersection.

The following indices were thereby calculated, describing the
probability that the observed codistributions would happen by
chance (figures are presented in this form for convenience only;
significance to the fifth decimal digit is not insinuated):
Pottery with Scallorn in three areas = .002 percent
Pottery with Perdiz in three areas = .006 percent
Scallorn with Perdiz in three areas = .002 percent
All three classes together in two areas = .003 percent.
These figures fall well below the arbitrary 5% minimum for
accepting the explanation of chance occurrence and strongly suggest
that the associations are valid. All indicate that the likelihood that the
observed event would happen by chance is extremely slight.
It must be stressed that this is an entirely theoretical construct.
The test can not be used as explicitly contributing data against the
hypothesis of chance coexistence, since the number of areas within
the site might be questioned; the total site was not excavated, and
unrecognized activity areas might be present which would
significantly alter the results. More important, the size of the areas
not only is arbitrary, but the occupation of a cell by an activity area is

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

theoretical and was chosen after the site was dug, and then only as an
informal part of the analysis. The results are interesting only in that
they may be used as a general guide to the chance probabilities.
Persons wishing to use this technique in future work should realize
the weaknesses in the Wheatley analysis and construct a stronger
research design and applicable statistical models anticipatory to
field work and data collection.
Actual Distribution Frequencies
The above theoretical chance figures can be compared with the actual distribution (still from a totally theoretical point of view because
of the post-collection selection of cells}, by viewing the percent of the
co-distributional relationships actually present in relation to the total
site (30 possible cells). These are,
Pottery with Scallorn in three areas, 10 percent
Pottery with Perdiz in three areas, 10 percent
Scallorn with Perdlz in three areas, 10 percent
All three together in two areas, 6.7 percent.
This means that binary relationships each occur on 10% of the site,
and all three occur together on nearly as much. Also viewing the site
as a whole, one or more of the chosen types is found in 30% of all
available cells, and all three types occur together in 18% of the
occupied portion of the site.

Summary
Briefly summarizing the supporting evidence for contemporaneity,
there are generally four areas. The nature of the site suggests
intentional groupings of artifacts--a nearly flat, featureless site with
materials limited to the surface in discrete clusterings interpreted as
activity areas within a camp. Erosional clustering seems impossible
here. The physical attributes of the arrowpoints--overall shape,
technology, and the use of the distinctive blue flint--suggest that they
are closely related. Actual relationship figures or expectation
probabilities, based on a theoretical construct, describe the
coexistence of types in the same areas as most common and show that
Scallorn points usually will be accompanied by Perdiz and/or pottery.
And finally, theoretical distribution probabilities indicate that the
types almost never would occur together by chance, and therefore
that their occurrence together is most likely intentional.
Age
The next problem is that of assigning an age to the occupation.
Certainly most of the assemblage conforms well to a full-fledged

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

139

Toyah focus. The Scallorn forms, however, may indicate some time
within early Toyah focus times and likely a time during the overlap of
the Austin and Toyah temporal ranges.
Unfortunately, the Wheatley site was not conducive to charcoal
collection for radiocarbon dating. The sample taken from the Area G
hearth--the only charcoal-bearing feature excavated at the
site--was both too small and too full of modern rootlets to produce a
reliable date.
Published radiocarbon dates, therefore, are used to help
approximate the age of the occupation. Although the designation of
the Wheatley occupation as Austin or Toyah is uncertain, a temporal
placement within the Central Texas aspect at the boundary of the
Austin and Toyah foci, at least as they have thus far been identified
on the basis of distinctive artifact styles, seems most reasonable, for
the most part, from a comparative-developmental standpoint. The
literature reveals Central Texas aspect dates from the following
sites:
Site

RADIOCARBON Listing

Excavation Report

Blum

Stipp et al. 1962:49
(TX 10)

lelks 1953

Punkinseed

Stipp et al. 1962:49
Tamers et al. 1964:151
(TX 8,75)

--

Permy
Winkle

Tamers et al. 1964:150-151
(TX 70-72]

Sharer et al. 1964:
78-85

Oblate

Tamers et al. 1964:149
(TX 29)

Tulmell 1962

Kyle

Tamers et al. 1964:145-156
(TX 98-99; CI-2,4-6,8)

Jelks 1962

Smith

Tamers et al. 1964:145-146
Valastro and Davis 1970a: 271-273
(TX 504-517, 21-26)

Suhm 1957

Pohl

Pearson et al. 1965:306
(TX 123)

--

Britton

Pearson et al. 1966:461
(TX 233-234)

Story and Shafer 1965

Barton
Springs
Road

Valastro et al. 1967
(TX 74)

Lundelius 1967

La Jita

Valastro and Davis 1970b: 633
(TX 664-665,681,684-685,687)

Hester 1971

Dobias-Vitek

Valastro and Davis 1970b: 633
(TX 804,806)

Eddy 1974, ms.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

140

First standard deviation ranges for dates from these sites were
combined so as to indicate the temporal range for each focus. Dates
were plotted on a scale of 25-year intervals, each multiple of 25 falling
within the range of a published date receiving one entry: 226 entries
from 31 published dates attributed to the Austin focus, and 90 entries
from 12 published dates attributed to the Toyah focus. The resulting
percentage graph showing the total ranges of the two loci was made
from the number of first standard deviation ranges within which a
particular date fell (Fig. 30). For example, A.D. 900 fell within 10 of
the 31 Austin focus dates and therefore was graphed as 32 percent.
Ranges were additionally computed from the central 66% of the total
entries of the analysis graph.
There seem to be three methods for viewing the ranges of the two
loci and the overlap period thus formed. These include the overall
range, the range of the central 66% of the individual date entries, and
the dates on which 20% (more or less arbitrarily chosen) or more of
the samples fall:
Range (A.D.):
Overall
Central 66%

of samples

Dates on which 20%
more of samples fall

or

Austin

Toyah

Overlap

425-1800

1125-1800

1125-1800

800-1375

1225-1700

1225-1375

800-1175

1150-1450

1150-1175

1575-1775

It would seem, therefore, that the Wheatley site probably was
occupied about A.D. 1150-1300 (Fig. 30). The dates obviously, from the

3530-

10-

FIGURE 30. Temporal ranges of the Austin and Toyah Foci taken from
published radiocarbon dates.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

141

very nature of their origin, are not restrictive, and the occupation
could have been either before or after this suggested period. The
main problem is that field investigations from which published dates
originated probably were oriented toward isolating components, and
mainly samples from as near a pure component as possible (i.e., one
arrowpoint type) were dated. This means that particular temporal
areas were tested at the expense of other parts of the total range.
This method of analysis, then, is meant only to arrive at a crude
simplifed approximation of the core range for the two foci, and their
most reasonable overlap period. A clear overlap for the two foci is
indeed indicated.

Extra-Site Comparisons
At this point a review of the archeological literature seems justified
for two problems at hand: (1) What is the evidence for an overlap
either temporally or culturally between the Austin and Toyah foci,
and (2) Is there evidence suggesting that pottery was introduced into
central Texas during Austin focus times? Neither question is
answered definitely in the negative, and the affirmative seems to be a
strong possibility. They will be taken in order, followed by some
comments on the use of focus and type names in central Texas.

Scallorn and Perdiz Contemporaneity
Before about 1950 Scallorn and Perdiz were thought to be
contemporaneous and attributable to different ethnic groups with
different geographical ranges, overlapping especially in central
Texas. It is probably safe to assume that hundreds of sites were
excavated, either well or poorly, by more than a handful of
experienced field archeologists. Yet apparently no one realized that
the two forms were not contemporaneous. Indeed, all evidence seems
to have indicated that they were. Had any of the sites been at all
sensitive to the temporal division of the two types, most likely
someone would have recognized this possibility. The older literature
is full of equivalent intuitive explanations in comparable situations.
There appears to be no evidence of unquestionable association of
the two types in a single feature. Miller and Jelks (1952: 198-201)
describe a burial excavated in Belton Reservoir in Coryell County
which contained five Perdiz points and five or six Scallorn. Although
the points were found in the fill of a single grave, the probability that
they were intentionally placed in the grave as actual grave goods is
very slight. D. B. Hill, who excavated the shelter, stated that the
points were randomly placed in the grave fill; and Harry Sharer, who

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

142

has also dug there, states that the extreme richness of the deposits
suggests that it would be impossible to dig in any part of the shelter
without finding a mixture of types (Harry J. Shafer, personal
communication 1970). No other similar features are known.
Evidence up to this time, then, consisted of the uniformity of the
assemblage and the near consistent occurrence together of Scallorn
and Perdiz points, the most diagnostic indicators for the two foci.
Miller and Jelks (1952: 202-205) best summarize the thinking:
"... there is nothing to suggest the presence of two different foci in the
Belton components of the Central Texas aspect, and since Scallorn, Perdiz,
and Cliffton are consistently associated with one another in these sites it
does not seem completely feasible to separate them on a focal basis. In
analyzing the Belton sites, then, Scallorn, Perdiz, and Cliffton, together
with the associated complex of other artifacts, are all considered traits of
the Austin Focus."

The first clear evidence that Perdiz tended stratigraphically to
overlie Scallorn was found during excavation of the Blum Rockshelter on the Brazos River northwest of Waco. Jelks (1953: 199) comments that "it was readily apparent--both in the field and in the
laboratory--that Perdiz occurred principally in the upper levels of
occupation while Scallorn was found, for the most part, at greater
depths." Unfortunately, distributional data are not completely clear.
Recovered during excavation were 69 Perdiz and Cliffton, 28 Scallorn,
and 6 Alba, distributed primarily in two cultural strata, i lower and 2
upper. Stratum 1 contained six Scallorn and no Perdiz. Five Alba
were recovered from Stratum 1-2 contact levels at the base of the
deposits. In Stratum 2 were 47 Perdiz, one Scallorn, and one Alba.
This means that no distributional data are presented for 32% of the
Perdiz and 75% of the Scallorn. Apparently, then, the principal
ranges of the two types were different, but there could have been a
temporal overlap. Pottery (possibly a Titus focus vessel, others
unknown) occurred only in Stratum 2 with Perdiz and Cliffton points,
although Alba and Yarbrough points in the lower levels indicate that
contacts have been directed eastward over a considerable length of
time (Jelks 1953: 206}.
The next site to provide information on the problem and the only
excavated site showing evidence for total distributional separation
between Scallorn and Perdiz, is the Smith Rockshelter (Suhm 1957) on
Onion Creek, a Colorado River tributary in Travis County, about 33
miles east of the Wheatley site. At Smith, several feet of Scallornbearing deposits were separated from the single, totally Perdiz zone
by a sterile layer (Zone X) about 9 inches thick. All Scallorn were

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

143

below Zone X, and all Perdiz and Cliffton above. A group of more or
less rectangular-stem points (4 Eddy, one Alba, 2 Cuney-like), both
distributionally and descriptively intermediate between Scallorn and
Perdiz, were found just below (2 specimens) and just above (3
specimens) the sterile zone and thus overlapped both major types.
Ceramics were found with Perdiz points entirely above the sterile
zone, and none with Scallorn.
The distributional data from the Smith Rockshelter do not indicate
contemporaneity for Scallorn and Perdiz. Two possible explanations
come to mind, however. First, the period of contemporaneity could
have been very short and the shelter was simply not occupied during
that period, when the sterile Layer X was perhaps deposited. A
second hypothesis is that post-Layer X occupations were by people
making only Perdiz points, but that groups making Scallorn points
were present, even if periodically, nearby. The absence of Scallorn in
the uppermost Layer XI could thus be explained as (1) Perdiz-using
people were not in contact with Scallorn-using groups, or (2) Perdizusing people were in contact with Scallorn-using groups but brought
neither the groups nor their Scallorn points to the shelter. Obviously
an unquestionable explanation for this site is impossible, but the
situation here should be regarded not only as unique, but as
incomplete in view of other investigated sites in central Texas.
The last of the three "classic" sites showing Scallorn-Perdiz
temporal separation is the Kyle Site (Jelks 1962), on the Brazos River
northwest of Waco, and in the same general area as the Blum
Rockshelter. Vertical distributional data for points of known
provenience indicate clearly that Scallorn initially appeared well
before Perdiz in Strata I and 2, and that Perdiz and Cliffton continued
in Stratum 5 after the discontinuation of Scallorn. Both Perdiz and
Scallorn, however, along with rectangular-stem forms Alba, Bonham,
and "Short Rectangular Stem," occurred together in Stratum 3 (the
Intermediate Zone) and Stratum 4 (the lowest stratum of the Toyah
focus zone and suggested by Jelks to be possibly "Toyah-Austin
transition") in a mixed context with pottery (Jelks 1962: 78-79, Table
1). These two strata combined account for 22% of the Scallorn points
of known provenience, 57% of the Perdiz/Cliffton, 98% of the sherds
(mainly in the Intermediate Zone, Stratum 3), and 80% of the flake
drills (included here because of their interesting distributional
correspondence). The Intermediate Zone is also interesting by itself,
since it is considered to be neither Austin nor Toyah focus, but
contained 16% of the Scallorn of known provenience, 12% of the
Perdiz, and 91% of the sherds.

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Thus it appears that at the Kyle Site, there are sufficient
distributional data to suggest a possible temporal overlap between
Scallorn and Perdiz, a period during which most of the pottery and
flake drills were left at the site. lelks alludes to such an explanation
several times (1962: 96, 97, 98) and seems to feel (p. 98) that the Toyah
focus somewhat gradually replaced the earlier Austin focus.
Following the excavations at Blum, Smith, and Kyle, archeologists
were keenly aware of the vertical separation which had eluded them
for so long and pushed ahead in their excavations with the knowledge
of this separation. The failure to demonstrate at new sites the
separation of the two types is important. The following sites (and
many more) were excavated and/or analyzed with that data
specifically at hand and considered in the analysis.
The Oblate Site (Tunnell 1962: 96, Table 4), a rockshelter in the
Guadalupe River hill country of Comal County about 27 miles south of
the "¢gheatley site, was carefully excavated with hopes of finding a
vertical separation between Scallorn and Perdiz distributions. Of the
excavated specimens of known provenience, 87% (34 specimens) of
the Scallorn points (39 points total) overlapped the entire Perdiz
sample (23 points). In a slightly more restrictive sense, 85% of the
Perdiz were in the uppermost excavated half-foot level, along with
36% of the Scallorn. Assuming that the deposits were not radically
mixed, this distribution suggests only that the beginning of Scallorn
occurred before the introduction of Perdiz, and that Perdiz was in use
after the discontinuation of Scallorn. It seems, however, that Oblate
does not suggest a total separation of the two arrowpoint styles, but
rather supports a period of overlap during which both types were in
use.

Very much the same situation exists at the Boy Scout Shelter
(Pollard et al. 1963) in the hill country of western Travis County on the
Colorado River about 27 miles east of the Wheatley Site. At that site

the most careful recording in the field of Scallorn and Perdiz locations
failed to even delicately suggest any sort of distributional separation,
either horizontal or vertical--most of the arrowpoint sample came
from a relatively isolated deposit 2.5 ft. thick in a limestone trough
(ibid p. 40, Fig. 5). During the excavation, the trough deposit appeared

to be undisturbed, and at least intuitively it appeared then, as now,
that all the excavated materials--Scallorn and Perdiz points, flake
drill, etc.--were contemporaneous and were deposited during a very
short period of time.
Excavations have been conducted at several sites in Belton
Reservoir in Bell County (Shafer et al. 1964). At the Garth Site, an

NE0-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

145

open terrace site, both Austin and Toyah focus artifacts were found
together with Caddoan pottery, although the authors intuitively feel
that the lack of separation was due to shallowness of the deposit (ibid:
p. 77). Caddoan sherds also occurred in the same zone and levels with
both Austin and Toyah focus materials at the Penny Winkle Site (ibid:
pp. 83-84).
Early excavations of rockshelters in the Whitney Reservoir on the
Brazos River northwest of Waco (the Blum and Kyle sites area) were
reported more recently by Stephenson (1970). Artifact distribution
tables clearly indicate overlapping distributions of Scallorn and
Perdiz points, although Stephenson interprets his data as indicating
that Perdiz is generally earlier and Scallorn generally later.
However, he feels that in Buzzard Shelter, the entire occupation is
attributable to "peoples of the same general cultural complex" and
that "The predominance of the Perdiz Points [256 points] through all
levels and the relatively rare appearance of Scal!orn Points [60
points] would indicate that this was the Toyah Focus" (ibid: p. 175).
He also describes Pictograph Cave as having "some blending of
Austin Focus traits into the occupations above," i.e., Toyah focus
(ibid: p. 157).
Hester, working in the lower Nueces River drainage of Zavala
County in south Texas, believes he has found evidence of
contemporaneous point styles. At the Tortuga Flat site, Scallorn,
Perdiz, and triangular arrowpoint forms have been found in "surface
manifestations," apparently interpreted as single component activity
areas (Hill and Hester 1973: 10-11). Points found together are thought
to be in direct association, not just fortuitous codistributions. Hester
(1974: 19-20) describes a similar situation at Chaparrosa Ranch,
where he notes the co-occurrence of Perdiz, Scallorn, triangular, and
other point forms. Again he feels this represents direct association.
In summary, various workers have expressed opinions regarding
the possibility that the two foci were ever contemporaneous. In her
review of central Texas archeology, Suhm (1960: 83) points out that at
Belton Reservoir, Miller and Jelks (1952) found that "Perdiz, Scallorn,
and Cliffton arrow point types were regularly associated with one
another." She mentions that at Belton (Miller and Jelks 1952) and at
the Collins site in Travis County (Suhm 1955) diagnostic arrowpoints
for each focus were apparently in direct association with one
another. The association would seem entirely reasonable if the Toyah
focus developed out of the Austin focus, and thereby a possible period
when Scallorn and Perdiz points were simultaneously in use by the
same group (Suhm 1960: 83). She is very reserved about the

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

possibility, and more recently has denied the likelihood that the two
loci were ever contemporaneous (Dee Ann Story, personal
communication 1970).
Stephenson (1970: 244-248) believes that at his Whitney Reservoir
rockshelters the two loci have different distributions, with Austin
early and Toyah later. His artifact distribution tables do not indicate
such an ordering. He views the change from Austin to Toyah as
evolutionary in theory, Toyah gradually replacing the Austin focus,
but probably also actually representing an influx of new and different
people. This is indicated by abrupt stylistic changes and the
introduction of new tool forms, such as the long-shafted flake drills,
four-edge beveled knives, small snub-nose end scrapers, and ovate
and bipointed knives. During this time there was greater contact with
east Texas, initially probably with the Alto and Sanders loci, as
indicated by Alba points, imported Caddoan pottery, and locallymade pottery probably influenced from the east.
Sharer (1971) has presented an excellent overview of the Central
Texas aspect, during which he discusses the Austin and Toyah units
as phases. He, like Stephenson (1970), seems to view the Austin focus
(phase) essentially as the indigenous late Archaic population with the
introduced bow and arrow and a more limited geographic range than
the later Toyah phase. The Toyah phase is marked by the introduction
of a Plains-like tool assemblage (end scrapers, four-edge beveled
knives, flake blades, flake drills, large bipointed thinned bifaces),
locally made pottery (brushed, plain, painted, polished, etc.), and
with economic emphasis on horticulture and bison hunting. Base
camps were fairly large semi-permanent villages with seasonal
dispersal to exploit the environment. He believes the orientation
toward bison hunting is responsible for the Toyah focus traits and
suggests that "The Plains-like assemblage is a likely expression of an
ecological adjustment by indigenous populations--not necessarily
genetically related to the Austin phase populations."
Shafer probably is correct in his assessment of the north-central
Texas area around Waco, but the picture farther south is not so
clear. In the south there are no kno,~m Alto focus sites like Chupek
and the east Texas trade wares are quite rare, the converse of the
Waco situation. The large wattle-and-daub villages and maize seem
to be absent in the south (Thomas R. Hester, personal communication
1975, reports the recent recovery of a corn cob from a rockshelter in
Hays County by members of the Southern Texas Archaeological
Association). The big stylistic and content schism between the Austin
and Toyah loci is not nearly so obvious in the southern and western
regions.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

147

Shafer seems to view the two foci as distinct and separated in time.
He suggests, however, that there could have been a very brief
transition, possibly during which people from both phases were living
in the same areas and presumably in contact with each other.
Actually he seems to view the Transitional period as one represented
by some sort of diagnostic artifacts and distinct from both Austin and
Toyah:
"The Toyah phase appears quite suddenly. If there is a transitional
period between the Austin and Toyah phases, it is not well accounted for
archeologically. Suhm (1957) gets a hint of a transition at Smith
Rockshelter, but this is the only stratified site where a transition might be
interpreted.
It is clearly possible that transitional sites have not been recognized
because they do not often occur in stratified context. Also, the temporal
span was obviously much shorter than the duration of either the Austin or
Toyah phases. Therefore, since most Toyah phase deposits are
archeologically represented merely as a thin veneer overlying those of the
Austin phase, a transitional period between the two would be even less
discrete. It could be that the duration was so short that it is archeologically
indistinct or inseparable."

In summary, then, there seems to be good evidence that Scallorn
and Perdiz did in fact overlap in central Texas. We know they did on
the coast (Corbin 1974: 43). Most excavations and detailed
interpretative discussions support the idea of co-occupation in time,
in space, and possibly even of the same sites by people of the two foci.
The evidence at Smith is believed incomplete and not representative
of the total occupation in the area. The separation of the two forms at
that site, however, should not be forgotten.
During this review of the literature, a possibility came to mind
which deserves further consideration. Most of the work on the
Central Texas aspect, principally the problem of the Austin and
Toyah foci, has been done in north-central or northeast-central
Texas. This is the area around Waco and Belton, principally the
Brazos River drainage and surrounding area, the region in which
Caddoan influences were the greatest, particularly from the Alto,
Sanders, and Frankston foci. This is the area in which the Toyah
focus appears most suddenly as a Plains trait-impregnated complex
probably economically oriented toward bison hunting. The focus
appears to come in around A.D. 1200 with a full array of new
assemblage traits, including intensified contacts with east Texas.
Dillehay (1974: 184-185) has pointed out the absence of bison remains
during Austin focus times and their sudden appearance around A.D.
1200. This date corresponds closely with Plains traits introduced not

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

only with the Toyah focus but also in its contact areas throughout the
Fulton aspect range and probably northward and westward as well
(see Dillehay for references and more complete discussion).
The point of interest is that if the Toyah focus represents an influx
of new people into the hill country and rolling grassland country
occupied by Austin focus groups, there was undoubtedly contact.
This, of course, assumes that Austin focus people did not mysteriously
die out or inexplicably vacate this choice area previously, and also
that the Austin focus did not simply change its material culture as
part of an economic adjustment toward bison hunting when
these animals moved back down into the area. The contact could
have been of a friendly nature in which the two groups persisted sideby-side, probably for a long time, and perhaps even lived together.
New groups moving into the area, however, would have increased the
population density, and would have created not just a population
pressure but also a directional flow--a convection-- for group
movement southward. An even stronger, more abrupt and drastic
impetus for movement would have been caused by incomparability
between the two peoples. If the Toyah focus groups were at all
warlike (of. Kelley 1955:989 on the Tonkawa; to my knowledge only
Perdiz, and not Scallorn, points have been the obvious cause of death
in Central Texas aspect burials indicating violent deaths) or for any
reason became enemies with the indigenous groups and were perhaps
stronger than they were, there likely would have been considerable movement of Austin focus groups southward, perhaps
southwestward, perhaps toward the coast. These migrating groups
could have settled unpopulated or minimally populated areas and/or
combined with other groups, i.e., become integral units of other
villages, bands, or even tribes. In such refuge situations, it is very
reasonable that material traditions in the culture would continue to
persist with minimal change, if any. Such being the case, it would be
entirely within reason to discover remains of remnant Austin focus
groups in south Texas or perhaps along the southern coast. Scallorn
points, along with other tools of the complex, could easily have been
used continuously into proto-historic or historic times. Contacts
between groups with stylistically different material assemblages,
such as during times of seasonal harvest like the big tuna gathering
festivities of south Texas (Newcomb 1960: 4), might easily result in
sites containing single component features (activity areas) with
different artifact styles.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

149

Pottery and the Austin Focus
Another related subject for review is the possibility of pottery
occurring in the Austin focus. As has been pointed out, the Austin
focus is believed, on the basis of radiocarbon dates, to occupy the
period from about A.D. 909 to at least 1300. During this time, pottery
was in use, and had been for some time, in more or less adjacent
areas, particularly to the northeast with the Alto focus (Gibson
aspect) and to the east in various coastal areas.
There seems to be evidence of influence from Alto focus groups into
central Texas, and for that reason the complex is singled out for
discussion here. Its choice, however, is by no means restrictive. It has
long been pointed out that Frankston focus pottery is widely
distributed across central Texas and occasionally farther west.
"Because of its position on the southwestern periphery of the
Caddoan area during Fulton Aspect times, Frankston Focus plainly
reveals more contact with the non-Caddoan people to the west than
any other Caddoan foci" (Suhm et al. 1954: 185; see also Krieger 1946:
166-167). The Frankston focus is characterized by Perdiz arrowpoints
and brushed pottery.
In general terms, the Alto focus is an agricultural and ceramic
complex with well-defined sedentary villages and a religious
component demonstrated in part by impressive earthworks
sometimes containing elaborate burials (Newell and Krieger 1949;
Suhm et al. 1954: 161-167; and recent excavations at the Davis Site by
D.A. Story, Texas Archeelogical Research Laboratory, Austin).
Ceramics include a variety of engraved, incised, and plainware forms
(brushed pottery is absent) with bone, clay-grit, or sand temper (no
shell). The predominant arrowpoint form is Alba, a small point
reminiscent of the central Texas form Eddy (Suhm 1955: 23-24; 1957:
36; 1959: 228) or Scallorn eddy (Jelks 1962: 28-30). Knives of the very
distinctive Copena type also are diagnostic of this complex.
Recent dates from Story’s work at the Davis Site indicate a
principal range from about A.D. 700 to sometime after 1209 (Valastro
and Davis 1970b: 629). This is remarkably close to the estimated
range of A.D. 900-1300 for the Austin focus. The possibility for
interaction between the two foci, then, is cornpatable with temporal
data.
From a material standpoint, evidence of direct contact is scarce
and usually questionable. Artifacts of seemingly Alto focus origin in
Central Texas aspect sites are found in contexts which in almost all
cases could be assigned to either the Austin or Toyah focus or to both
(either in naturally or mechanically mixed deposits or in occupational
debris of a culturally mixed complex).

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Most of the work on the Central Texas aspect has been in the
northern part of central Texas, or from Belton north. Early work in
the Belton Reservoir in Coryell County produced several sites with
evidence, albeit indirectly, of the Alto focus (Miller and Jelks 1952).
At the Urbankte Site, Alto focus sherds were found with both Scallorn
and Perdiz arrowpoints. At the Grimes-Houy Shelter, Scallorn and
Perdiz arrowpoints were found on sites with Copena knives. At the
Grimes-Houy Midden, Scallorn and Perdiz were found with Holly Fine
Engraved pottery (Alto focus} and Copena knives. At the Johnson Hole
Site, Scallorn and Perdiz were found with Ho!!y Fine Engraved,
Copena knives, and Alba points. At the Ament Shelter, Sca!!orn and
Perdiz points were found in deposits also yielding an unknown type of
Caddoan pottery, a Fulton aspect pipe, Copena knives, and obsidian
flakes.
Later work in Bell County produced additional correlations (Shafer
et al. 1964: 66). At the Penny Winkle Site, seven sherds seemed to be
associated with the Austin focus occupation. These were plainware
with clay-grit temper, and clay and bone temper. Six sherds from a
zone that yielded primarily (but not exclusively) Toyah focus material
are brushed, engraved, and plain. These include types Dunkin Incised
(Alto focus, Gibson to Fulton aspects) and Canton Incised (Sanders
focus, Gibson aspect}. One sherd from the Domino Site may be in
Austin focus context (Shafer et al. 1964: 66) although it is not
definitely assignable to either Austin or Toyah (ibid: p. 104). The
sherd appears to be Kiam Incised, an Alto focus (Gibson aspect) type
surviving with Dunkin Incised, a related type, into the Fulton aspect.
From his work in the Whitney Reservoir basin, Stephenson (1970:
246) believes that toward the end of Austin focus times there were
beginnings of intensified contact with east Texas, particularly the
introduction of Caddoan pottery. Pottery trade vessels are evidenced
in Austin focus zones at Pictograph Cave (/bid: p. 154).
Watt (1953) has indicated that in the central Brazos valley, near
Waco, there is abundant evidence of Caddoan contact in Central
Texas aspect sites. Pottery includes sherds and vessels from the Alto
and Sanders loci of the Gibson aspect, Frankston and Titus loci of the
Fulton aspect, shell-tempered plainware sherds possibly from the
Gulf Coast, and sherds of what may be Doss Red Ware, a presumably
indigenous pottery of the Toyah focus (see Kelley 1947: 123; Suhm et
al. 1954: 388). Following information supplied by Watt, Newell and
Krieger (1949: 195-196} believe that Alto focus people actually lived at
the Chupek site near Waco. This being the case, Alto focus influence
into adjacent areas, especially southward down the Balcones
escarpment, seems a reasonable possibility.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

151

Roberson (1971) also has studied sherds from the Waco area of
east-central Texas in the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
collections in Austin. His results compare favorably with those of
Watt (1953), although again, he does not discuss the association or cooccurrence of the pottery with other artifact types. His materials,
undoubtedly, were very limited and did not allow for strongly
supported conclusions of that sort. He sees the area being settled
during early Gibson aspect times, and the descendants persisting, at
least in small numbers, until the Historic period. From the beginning,
the people had a knowledge of pottery-making and continued the
tradition until the Historic period. This was a transitional area
between basically sedentary horticultural groups in eastern and
northeastern Texas and hunting peoples to the west in central Texas.
Contact with people to the south and southeast along the Gulf Coast
probably was slight until late proto-historic or historic times when
pressures from central Texas groups precipitated some migration
southeastward toward the coast (see Campbell 1960: 148).
Roberson also believes that the pottery from central Texas is not
just imported tradeware. He feels that it is very unlikely that all of the
types in the area were imported into a culture (or cultures) without
knowledge of pottery making. More likely, local residents also made
their own pottery and copied designs and techniques. The early
domestic pottery is very similar to Alto focus forms, but they are also
slightly different and are probably copies. Frankston focus vessels
also were undoubtedly imported and then copied locally. This, of
course, includes, among other forms, wide-mouth brushed jars.
Farther south, Sorrow (1970: 15)reports pottery from the Barker
Site on the North San Gabriel River in Williamson County. His Vessel
1 is very similar to some Alto focus jar forms. It is a reddish-brown
incised jar (29 sherds) of sandy paste, tempered with angular
quartzite sand and burned bone. Other pottery includes one brushed
vessel (2 sherds) and three plainware vessels (24 sherds), all bone
tempered. Arrowpoints (mostly surface collections) include 11 Perdiz
points, 3 C1iffton, 6 Young, 7 unclassified fragments, and one medial
section with part of the expanding stem (resembles Scallorn eddy of
Jelks 1962). Other artifacts include four dart points (1 Ensor, 2
Fairland, one miscellaneous form), 41 end scrapers, 17 side scrapers,
and one circular scraper. The assemblage argues closest for
affiliation with the Toyah focus. Alto focus influence may be the
expanding-stem arrowpoint form of a style similar to the Alto focus
Alba type and the incised jar. Later Frankston focus related elements
could be the single brushed vessel and the Perdiz arrowpoints. The

15 2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

expanding-stem point could be representative of terminal Austin
focus times, but its direct association with the pottery is uncertain.
In south Texas, as mentioned previously, Hester has found
evidence of plainware pottery directly associated with Scallorn,
Perdiz, and triangular arrowpoint forms in what he considers singleoccupation activity areas. This relationship has been reported from
the Tortuga Flat site (Hill and Hester 1973} and at Chaparrosa Ranch
(Hester 1974). The co-occurrence of Scallorn, Perdiz, and pottery has
been recorded for several additional sites (Hester and Hill 1971).
Corbin (1974: 45) points out that in sites on the Central Coast,
pottery has been found in good association with Scallorn, and
sometimes to the exclusion of Perdiz (Story 1968; Martin n.d.). He also
believes (Corbin 1974: 47) that pottery was introduced to the Texas
coastal areas during the period in which Scallorn and early Fresnolike arrowpoint forms were in use. Scallorn then continued in use in
the area well after the acceptance of Perdiz as the predominant form,
and the pottery went through a number of local changes.
In summary, the evidence is mostly suggestive. In central Texas
rockshelters where pottery is found in levels or zones containing
Scallorn points, the association might be accidental, that is, not direct
or intentional. Although ample evidence exists for pottery within
Central Texas aspect sites in the general Waco-Belton areas, there is
no unquestionable association of pottery with Scallorn points.
Evidence for an influx of Alto focus materials in undoubtedly present,
and on the basis of radiocarbon dates, we may propose that the influx
began during Austin focus times. The two loci are at least in part
contemporaneous. Frankston focus materials continued to come into
the area during Toyah focus times. In fact, it is possible (though
unlikely) that Toyah focus groups received all the contact with east
Texas, and that the Austin focus, although possibly present, did not
receive either contact or imported objects. The reported cooccurrence of Scallorn, Perdiz, and pottery in activity areas in south
Texas, and the association of Scallorn with pottery on the Central
Coast are perhaps the best evidence for Scallorn-pottery association.
The full acceptance and understanding of these data relative to the
core central Texas area, however, must await further study, suntheses, comparisons, and inter-regional summaries.
Foci and Types in Central Texas
The means of identification of the Austin and Toyah foci and
Sca!!orn and Perdiz arrowpoints is based on the interrelationship of
loci and types. It is a problem of seeming inconsistency between a
theoretical approach and an interpretation of observed findings.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

153

Traditionally, in central Texas, and indeed in most other parts of
the state, expanding-stem arrowpoints are called "Scallorn," and
contracting-stem points, "Perdiz". Thanks to an overwhelming
acceptance of projectile point type names, "Scallorn" points are
found and reported northward into Canada and southward well into
Mexico. "Perdiz" share a similar fate and occupy at least most of
Texas. Apparently type names are not always used in a purely
descriptive manner, which adds fuel to the fire for opponents of the
use of this typology. Although the types were originally defined on the
basis of cultural distinctiveness--e.g., being geographically and
temporally limited or restricted--their use in distant areas could be
condoned if specimens were described as being "Scallorn-like forms"
or "Scallorn forms" and not of the "Scallorn type". Such an approach
is intended in this report, since focal designations are uncertain.
Within Texas, the use or misuse of type names seems a little more
justifiable. It is assumed that expanding-stem points found in central
Texas belong to the Scallorn type because they are found in central
Texas; i.e., they conform generally to the type description and
suggested distribution. Perdiz share a similar fate, but their range is
extended at least to all the borders of the state. Likewise, Scallorn
points in central Texas designate the Austin focus, and Perdiz, the
Toyah focus.
One problem is, first, what are the boundaries of the Austin focus?
Certainly the answer cannot be "everywhere that expanding-stem
arrowpoints are found" (i.e., Scallorn), even if the presence of the
points in similar assemblages designates a similar time period and
similar level of organization and economy. Many workers have
reported Scallorn points all over south Texas and the Gulf coast [e.g.
Hester 1969; Hill and Hester 1971; Corbin 1974). Presumably these
are not representatives of the Austin focus, and the Perdiz points
reported from the same areas not Toyah focus remnants. Such is
possible but seemingly unlikely. The areas and environments are just
too distant from those originally defined for the Central Texas aspect.
Perdiz points are diagnostic of several loci in Texas, including the
Livermore focus (and Bravo Valley aspect) of west Texas, the
Frankston focus of east Texas, and the Galveston Bay and Rockport
foci of the Gulf coast. Cultural affiliation, then, is somewhat
equatable with geographic area, and is at present very difficult. The
problem is compounded with the problem of trade and other types of
contact between areas or cultures with similar lithic assemblages. In
other words, Perdiz points on a central Texas site with beveled knives
of Alibates dolomite from the Amarillo area, Frankston focus pottery,
a few coastal sherds, a couple of pieces of obsidian, and perhaps an

154

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

expanding-stem arrowpoint, do not necessarily indicate a Toyah
focus occupation simply because the site is in central Texas. Perhaps
the best focus (or phase) designation for such a site at present would
be a simple "unknown".
A directly related facet to the problem is the decision of what
constitutes "central Texas" in a cultural sense. Certainly everyone
would agree that the occupational debris in which Scallorn points are
found near Dallas might very well be attributable to peoples (in the
cultural sense) distinct from those leaving Scallorn points south of
San Antonio, east of Smithville and LaGrange, or west of Kerrville or
Uvalde. The entire area is considered central Texas, but approaching
the total area and all the included sites as a single cultural unit
should be cautioned. Such a single-unit assumption is essentially the
basis for the investigations at the Wheatley site in the first place, the
evidence of Scallorn-Perdiz-pottery contemporaneity and use within a
single camp.
Thus, a problem seems to be what defines a type, and can types be
used to distinguish cultural units? Brew’s (1946: 44-66) conception of
a type being an artificial construct of the analyst is of little use if that
construct is defined in insufficient detail and distinctiveness to
distinguish it from other similar forms in other cultures. Krieger
(1944; Newell and Krieger 1949: 71-74; Suhm et al. 1954: 3-5) argues
for subtypes or varieties being newly defined or "discovered" as the
need arises and as new data become available to distinguish these
new constructs in time and space, and therefore have cultural
distinctiveness. At present, these two arrowpoint forms might be
thought of as essentially on the series level--equivalent to a ware in
pottery studies--a group of morphologically similar types which
occupy a particular time span (Nunley, Duffield, and Jelks 1965;
Parsons 1965; Ross 1965). In other words, there exists a Scallorn
series, a grouping of arrowpoint types of a somewhat limited
temporal range, probably about A.D. 900-1200, occupying some sort
of restricted, definable geographic area, and distinguishable
primarily on the basis of their stem shape (i.e., expanding). This is the
general approach to a series, a "super-type" which is useful to show
broad, general patterns, but not restricted enough to adequately
contribute to detailed comparative studies.
Alternately, the need could be stated as the ultimate definition of
formal varieties, such as the kinds attempted by Jelks (1962), which
should be studied the same as types. No matter on which level of
taxonomy these sub-Scallorn and sub-Perdiz forms are placed, the
obvious need for such a study exists. The artifact groups thus formed

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

155

will be usable in defining cultural units--the Austin and Toyah foci,
and any others in which these forms occur.
Cultural units, on the other hand, whether referred to as
complexes, loci, or phases, must be defined not just on the basis of a
single projectile point style or a couple of pottery types, but on the
basis of the total assemblage configuration (Suhm et al. 1954: 3, 10).
This assemblage may consist of several types of weapons, utensils,
skinning and sewing implements, a particular burial practice, special
pipe forms, ornaments, houses, village locations, and the like. Any
one of the components of the assemblage, any single type or a group of
diagnostic forms, will continue through geographic space in any
number of directions and for variable distances. In other words,
several different tribes living over a large area may have shared in
the manufacture of a particular type of artifact. The type could be
borrowed by one cultural group after another, having spread by
trade or any other kind of transmission. A valid identifiable complex,
then, is a particular configuration of recognizable and describable
traits, each of which may be distributed throughout an area
containing several culturally different groups. The cultural unit thus
defined is limited in time, and is distinct in some ways from the total
assemblage of traits of any other tribe or cultural group.
This concept of a cultural unit being defined in terms of a core area
of overlapping component distributions is excellently portrayed by
Clarke’s (1968: 246, 300) polythetic model of cultura! dispersion. It
is only when as assemblage of traits exists in its entirety, however,
or "enough" of its entirety as judged by the archeologist to be
representative, that the particular focus or phase can be thought of
as existing in its pure form, or at least as originally conceived. In
addition to Clarke (1968), Rowlett and Pollnac (1970) have also shown
the applicability of culture unit definition (more or less equivalent to
the "phase") based on core areas of attributes, the geographic
boundaries and degrees of directional influences arrived at by
computer-assisted studies. A similar study (Groube and Chappell
1973) was done using a great number of attributes of artifacts of a
single class, and plotting these attributes over a very wide area to
discern where attribute clustering would occur. The separated areas
of maximum overlap indicated culture areas.
It stands to reason that modes governing the production of material
aspects of a culture will not be so strong and so formal as to totally
repel all stylistic change through space as that culture comes in
direct contact with adjacent cultures. This, of course, is the basis for
the geographic "variants" of cultural phases on the Great Plains

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Krause 1969). These modes, however, would determine the
correctness or desirability for the cultural attributes, the tools of the
culture, to assure duplicability. And this duplicability of material
patterning is what becomes the bread and butter of archeological
interpretation and reconstruction through comparative studies. But
likewise, adequately detailed phase distinctions cannot be made if the
archeologist fails to distinguish between significantly different forms
or styles. Grouping distinct styles obscures these differences, and the
interpretations can do no more than suffer.
At present, the Central Texas aspect has been divided into two loci,
the Austin and the Toyah. Other complexes (Nueces, Tradinghouse,
and maybe others) have been suggested but have not been adequately
described and are not generally used (Suhm et al. 1954: 113). The
most complete published descriptions of the Austin and Toyah foci
are those of Jelks [1962}, based mainly on his 1959-60 excavations at
the Kyle rockshelter north of Waco. Geographical differences within
the two foci remain unknown, as is the adequacy of the descriptions
themselves. The areas from Austin southward, westward, and
eastward remain practically unknown. The Smith (Suhm 1957) and
Collins (Suhm 1955} sites are the main exceptions.
In practice, archeologists continue to identify any archeological
assemblage containing Scallorn points in central Texas as the Austin
focus [or phase), and one with Perdiz points as the Toyah focus [or
phase). Various problems inherent in such a practice--geographic
differences, cultural differences, unknown age, incompletely defined
assemblages, unrecognized distinctive artifact forms or styles, and
the need to consider total assemblages--have been discussed.
Probably enough information exists at this point that a large-scale
study of the Neo-American stage in most of Texas would be possible
and very rewarding. Until then, caution must be used in assigning
materials to presently existing cultural units, i.e., loci or phases. In
practice, due more to necessity than preference, the Wheatley report
continues to refer to Scallorn and Perdiz forms as types designating
the Austin and Toyah foci. The errors involved in such use of these
names is understood.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Previous to investigations at the Wheatley site, data were
accumulating stressing the temporal dichotomy between Scallorn and
Perdiz arrowpoints. At reported stratified sites in central Texas,
such as Smith and Kyle, Scallorn points were generally below both
Perdiz and pottery. To some workers, this suggested that ceramics

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

15 7

were introduced sometime within the Toyah focus after Scallorn
points had been discontinued. Since Scallorn and Perdiz arrowpoints
are the primary indicators of the Austin and Toyah foci, temporal
separation of the points meant that the foci did not exist at the same
time, at least not in central Texas. This can be compared to work in
south Texas by Hill and Hester (1973) and by Hester (1974) in which
Perdiz, Scallorn, and triangular arrowpoint forms are found together
and interpreted as culturally associated. Similar situations exist on
the coast (Corbin 1974).
Data from the Wheatley site indicate an overlap period for
Scallorn, Perdiz, and pottery in the Pedernales River area of central
Texas. The Wheatley artifacts appear to be culturally associated
with one another and form a single assemblage. Evidence for
contemporaneity issues from (1) the nearly flat, featureless nature of
the site with artifacts limited to the surface and grouped in discrete
clusters not attributable to erosion, (2) the similarity of physical
attributes of different types of arrowpoints, (3) the use of a distinctive
blue flint on different arrowpoint forms, (4) actual relationship
figures or expectancy probabilities, and (5) the rejection of chance
occurrence explanations from theoretical distributional probability
tests.
The overall appearance of the site is that of a medium-sized,
dispersed camp with at least three habitation areas (with or without
structures) surrounded by chipping stations and other activity areas.
Small fires were in the living places, while larger limestone hearths
were separate. Apparently there was considerable material
interaction between different activity areas, and artifacts
presumably were taken from one area to another (as in, presumably,
the case of broken pottery). It is assumed that the group was small,
probably three or four families or a fairly small group of men, and
that they occupied the site for a fairly short period of time, perhaps a
week or so. The site probably served as a temporary base camp from
which the occupants hunted and gathered foodstuffs. Hunting
activities are suggested by the many flint arrowpoints, which could
have been used either for mammals (deer, rabbits, raccoons, etc.) or
fish. The single bone fragment in Area A presumably represents the
remains of a butchered deer. No other bones were found, but their
absence is most likely due to preservation factors. In addition to the
bow-and-arrow oriented hunting techniques, small nocturnal animals
(ringtail, raccoon, fox, etc.) could have been taken with snares. Fish
were available in the river either in pool traps or by spear in the
deeper pools, as well as grappling catfish by hand under the dirt
banks. It is not certain whether beaver were present along the river

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in the past as they are today. Mussels were collected from the river,
as evidenced by the numerous shell fragments in the activity areas.
Mussels are still abundant directly below the site. Water for
drinking, cooking, and processing is readily available a short distance
to either side of the site without descending the canyons. Firewood is
abundant overall. Flint is available throughout the area, though not in
the immediate vicinity of the site. The source of blue flint is
undoubtedly local, but its exact source is unknown.
Most
artifacts
are
good
examples
of
a
Toyah
focus
assemblage--Perdiz arrowpoints, pottery, flake drills, beveled
knives, small scrapers (small "turtle-back" end scrapers are absent),
utilized flakes, etc. Most knives, scrapers, utilized flakes and other
tools appear to have been made or used for a variety of purposes,
rather than conforming to a recognizable typology as they
occasionally do in other sites. Expanding-stem arrowpoints are the
major exception to the Toyah focus traits, and these are believed to
be remnant forms from Austin focus groups. The obvious possibility
exists that these points are not tools from groups culturally the same
as those responsible for Austin focus materials at other excavated
sites in central Texas. The age of the site, therefore, is considered to
be within the overlap period of the Austin and Toyah foci, sometime
after the introduction of pottery. Previously published radiocarbon
dates indicate this overlap may be about A.D. 1150-1300.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The W. L. Richmond family deserves special recognition for their
continuous help in field work, artifact processing, analysis, and illustration
preparation. Funds and general advice were provided by Curtis Tunnell,
State Archeologist (Texas Historical Commission). Laboratory space was
provided by D. A. Story (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory), David
S. Dibble (Texas Archeological Salvage Project, now Texas Archeological
Survey), and the Department of Anthropology of the University of
Missouri-Columbia. Additional technical suggestions and moral assistance
were provided by H. J. Sharer (Texas A&M University), W.M. Sorrow
(Texas Historical Commission), Earl Green and J. D. Ing (Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department), B.J. Harrison (Panhandle Plains Historical
Museum, West Texas State University), R. A. Benfer, A. N. Benfer, Pat
Treat, and W. R. Wood (University of Missouri-Columbia), T. R. Hester
(University of Texas at San Antonio), Miguel Tarrab, F. A. Moseley, and
D. E. Lasher (Department of Mathematics, West Texas State University),
Barbara Wolf, and the very tolerant park personnel of Pedernales Falls
State Park.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

159

APPENDIX A. Artifact measurement and attribute tables
Abbreviations
L

Length. Measured in a proximal-distal direction when possible, otherwise the maximum dimension. Scrapers are measured along the flake axis when possible.

W

Width. Perpendicular to length.

T

Thickness. Maximum thickness, measured to two significant
digits.

SL

Stem length.

SW

Stem width.

BW

Basal width.

REL

Retouched edge length. Measured in a straight line.

SPW

Striking platform width.

MAT

Material. Mainly color.

FIG

Figure reference in the text.
Unknown.
Approximated measure.
Total measurement is unknown, but
measurement is given as a minimum figure..

fragmentary

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ARROWPOINTS,
AR~A
L
A
30*
A
32*
E
29
A
26
A
27*
A
35*
h
32*
A
27*
A
22*
C
20
El
26*
E
22*
J
36*
El
37*
A
31
F
45*
El
47
A
A
A
38*
E
J
38*
J
K
29*
ARROWPOINTS,
ARZA
L
E
20
E
16
A
15
E
18"
E
E
G
L
25
A
28*
A
27*
L

26*

E
34
A
37
ARROWPOINTS,
AR~A
L
A
41
A
23
A
27*
A
32*
A
27*
ARRoWPOINTS,
ARLA
L
A
27*
ARROWPOINTS,
AREA
L
A
32
J
23
A
30*
A
24
32+
C
A
28*
A
26
39*
A
A
18+
ARRUWPOINTS,
L
AREA
44

A
B

30
24+

CONTRACTING STEM
W
T
SL
2.1
26
9
17
2.1
7
15"
1.9
9
17
2.3
2.5
14
2.1
9*
16’
2.5
9
18"
3.1
10"
23
3.6
9*
12"
2.4
6
10
2.0
6
15
2.3
7
15
2.0
6
19"
3.9
14
23*
3.4
12
28
2.3
8
22
4.1
7
17
3.0
20
2.6
6
1.7+ 8
9+
2.6
9+
1.6
9+
16
3.3
11’
2.9
9
14
2.7
9*
EXPANDING STEH
W
T
SL
15
2.7
5
10+
3.0
5
4
10
1.7
1.7
9
5
2.8+ 8
2.8
6
3.4
7
16
3.7
5
16
2.0
5
13
2.2
8
16’

2.9

4’

18
6
5.5
15
2.3
6
PARALLEL STEM
W
T
SL
14’
2.4
6
15
3.4
3
16
2.4
6
16
2.2
7
13’
2.1
6

SW
6
6
5
4
6
6
6
7
5
5
5
6
6
8
7
9
8
5
5
5
6
6
5
5

MAT
G R-PJd D
GRAY
BLUE
TA~
PK-YEL
GRAY
BROWN
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GR-RED
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
TAN
BLUE
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

FIG
15A
15B
15C
15D
15E
15F
15G
15H
15I
15J
15K
15L
15M
15N
150
15P
I 5Q

FIG
16A
16B
16C
16D
16E
16F
16G
16H
16I
16J
16K
16L
16M
FIG
16N
160
16P
16Q
16R

SW
5
6
7
5
8
6
4
8
6
6

BW
16
10
8
8
16
13
9
12
9
9

6

-

11
5

12
9

MAT
BLUE
BLUE
GRAY
GRAY
BLOWN
BLUE
BLUE
GRAY
BLUE
BLUE
BLUE
GRAY
GRAY

SW
4
8
6
9
7

BW
5
8
6
9
7

MAT
BLUE
BLUE
GRAY
BLUE
GRAY

UNNOTCHED, PROBABLY FINISHED
MAT
W
T
BRN-PNK
12
1.8
UNNOTCIIED, PROBABLY UNFINISHED
MAT
W
T
17
PINK
2.0
14
BLUE
2. I
15
GRAY
2.3
14
BLUE
2.7
TAN
20*
2.7
GRAY
19
2.8
BLUE
21"
2.6
GRAY
4.9
25*
TAN
3.0
13+
LARGE
W
20
25
19+
18

ii
MA,40

27*

ARiIA

DIAMETER
93X118

UNNOTCHED
T
3.1
5.5
3.6

MAT
GRAY
BROWN
TAN
BLUE

3.7

THICKNESS
AT EDGE
38X61

THICKNESS
AT CENTER
62

REMARKS

STEM BROKEN
BW=3, STRAIGHT BASE
STEM MISSING
MARGINAL RETOUCH ONLY

CLIFFTON
STEM g BATTERED BLADE
STEM
STEM g DISTAL TIP
STEM
STEM
STEM MISSING

FIG
16S
FIG
17A
17B
17C
17D
17B
17F

FIG
17G
17H
17I
17J

REMARKS

STEM
STEM
STEM

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY
ARROWPOINTS, BARBED MEDIAL FRAGMENTS
AR~ L
W
T
SW
MAT
A
31
18"
GRAY-PINK
2.5
7
A
17"
30
2.6
GRAY-PINK
5
A
17"
14’
ORA~JGE
2.0
6
A
20*
15"
2.3
5
GRAY
A
13
2.2
GRAY
A
14"
2.4
GRAY
A
2.0+
PINK
A
21
14’
2.0
GRAY
6
E
14
20*
GRAY
2,2
25*
18"
2.8
TRANSLUSCENT
6"
E
24*
18"
2.5
GRAY
ARRONPOINTS, ~IEDIAL BLADE FRAGbi~NTS
(L, W, AND T OF FRAGMENT ONLY)
AREA L
W
T
MAT
E
26+
12
3.6
GRAY
A
11 +
6
1.8
BROWN
13+
I. 9
GRAY
L
GRAY
2.7
il
21+
18"
GRAY
2.5
ARROWPOINTS, MEDIAL FRAGMENTS, POSSIBLY UNFINISHED
AREA L
W
T
MAT
A
25+
12+
GRAY
2.2
A
10+
12+
1.6
GRAY
A
I. 9
GRAY
B
11+
2.9
11+
GRAY
ARRuWPOINTS, DISTAL BLADE FRAGMENTS
AIh~A L
W
T
MAT
2g+
ti
10+
2.8
WIIITE
A
24+
13+
1.9
GRAY
F
29+
16+
3.3
GRAY
F
21+
18+
3.6
GRAY
A
17+
11+
1.8
BLUE
A
22+
11+
1.8
TAH-PINK
A
24+
14+
2.6
GRAY
A
30+
14
2.1
BLUE
A
23+
16+
2.6
BLUE
A
19+
13+
2.0
BROWN
A
12+
1.3
6+
BLUE
A
18+
12+
2.0
GRAY
J
18+
14+
2.5
GRAY

FIG
17K

161

REMARKS
PERDIZ?
PERDIZ?
PERDIZ?

BARB
PERDIZ?

FIG
17L

FIG
17M
17N
170
17P

DART POINTS
AR~A L
W
T
SL
SW
BW
FIG
MAT
56*
30
5.2
8
19
GRAY
18A
29*
37
22
5.6
BROWN-GRAY
18B
9
15
17
64*
32
6.6
12
GRAY-PINK
18C
18
27
38*
20
6.6
13
17"
GRAY
18D
15
J
28
16
5.9
10
15
15
BLUE
18E
b
68
28
7.2
18F
14
12
16’
GRAY
SIFACE RETOUCH FLAKES FROM UTILIZED BIFACES
AR!/A L
W
T
SPW
MAT
A
23+
30+
6.2
22
GRAY
A
23+
28
5.3
12
GRAY
A
12
16
4.6
13
GRAY
A
29
18+
5.3
12+
GRAY
F
3.1
28+
25
11
GRAY
BIFACE RETOUCH FLAKES FROM NONUTILIZED OR UNKNOWN BIFACES
AREA L
W
SPW
MAT
T
A
19+
21
4.7
GRAY
17
BROWN
A
12
29
9.7
29
21
GRAY
A
15
3.6
21
Ig+
A
11
2.9
10
GRAY
A
13
16
6.1
GRAY
16
BROWN
A
12
12
2.2
6
14
A
2.2
11
GRAY
9
A
19
18
GRAY
3.5
15
A
24
23
GRAY
4.8
12
E
GRAY
9+
30
9+
30
E
26
6
7.5
26
GRAY
E
23+
34
11
34
BROWN

TYPE-FORM
ENSOR-FRIO
FAIRI~ND
MARCOS
GOWER
PEDERNALES

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

162
T}iI~4 BIFACE FRAGMENTS
ARSA L
W
T
5.2
A
4.6
A
A
3.8
3.4 +
A
I. 7+
A
4.8+
A
A
2.8
5.0
A
3.9
A
21+
6.2
A
6.4
A
25
7.2
A
A
6.5
4.8
A
20+
A
4. I
A
25+
6.I
5.7
A
23+
A
31+
8.0
A
32+
25
6.0
4.4
A
28+
9.5
E
24~
7.6
E
2.6
L
8.7
E
5.2
E
24+
8.7
28+
26
9.0
E
26+
9.0
6.4
3U+
EI
4.2
~/I
9.3
El
22+
7. I
EI
21
5.9
F
20+
5.7
F
32+
7.9
I
4.0
I
31+
13+
5.7
I
30+
9.8
51+
10
26
53+
50
6.0
END SCRAPERS
AR~A L
T
W
I
42
30
5.6
33
20
10
El
26
25
9.3
57
40~
10
15
A
65
38
70
45
11
54
55
9. 7
45
7.5
C
51
A
57
45~
8.3
63
51
13
B
51
7.0
50
C
34+
7.8+
40~
6.8+
E1
74
17
89
H
17
63
54
70.
55~
15
20
105
60
SID~ SCRAPERS
AREA L
T
W
23
A
165
65~
27
C
130. 65
7.1
El
93
55
7.5
35+
30
E
90~
60~
15
42
24
A
80
18
A
38
50
CIRCULAR SCRAPERS (?)
ARhA L
W
T
39
33
9.6
A
36
33
7.6

MAT
ORANGE
ORA~4GE
GRAY
TAN
BLUE
BROWN
BLACK
GRAY
GRAY
BLUE
GRAY
GRAY
WIIITE
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
PINK-GRAY
OR/hNGE
WIiITE
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
WIIITE
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
BLUE
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

BEVELED KNIVES
MAT
T
AREA L
W
GRAY
90~
26
5.1
A
GRAY
120~ 26
7.0
GRAY
7.6
23+
BROWN
125~ 30
6.6
H
GRAY
28+
7.2
E
PINK
6.7
li
25+
THIN BIFACES (IDENTIFIABLE)
MAT
AR~A L
W
T
A
F
B
A
E
E
El
A
E

71
61
110~
44
65~
39
50
-

26
31
54
24
27
43
33
21
29.

7.1
6.5
11
4.2
7.2
8.0
9.4
3.7
6.8

~I

15+

27~

5.3

MAT
GRAY
GRAY
BROWN
GRAY
BROWN
GRAY
BROW~
GRAY
BROWN
GRAY
TAN
WHITE
TAN
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

FIG
19A
19B
19C
19D
19E
19F
19G
19H

MAT
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
TAN
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

FIG
20A
20B
20C
20F
20D
20E

MAT
GRAY
BLUE

FIG
19I
19J

RESiARKS
REVERSED FLAKED

GRAY-PINK
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY-TAN
GRAY
BLUE
GRAY-PINK
GRAY-PINK
GRAY

FIG
18G
18H
18I
18J

FIG
18K
18L
18M
18N
180
18P
18Q

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY
DIAGONAL SCRAPER
~LA L
W
T
P~EL
B
42
45
11
25
SCI~PER EDGE FRAGMENTS
AREA
A
A
A
A
g
FLAKE DRILLS
...... SHAFT .......... BASE ......
AI~A L
W
T
L
W
T
E
11+
7
2.8
21
17
6.3
E
22
5
2.7
12
14
4.2
F
11+
6
3.0
17
25
6.8
A
28
7
3. 6
A
15+
5
3.0
E
13+
7
3.2
BURINS

AP.ZA

FIG
19K

MAT
BROWN
BROWN
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

MAT
BLUE
BLUE
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

FIG
21A
21B
21C

W

T

TECHNIQUE

MAT

FIG

57

20

12

BURIN
BURIN
UNCERTAIN
UNCERTAIN
UNCERTAIN

BLUE

22A

GRAY
BLUE
GRAY

22B

~I

70+

49

F
F
F
F
F
B
tl

8.3

31
10+
31+
43
65
32
20+
56
40+

GRAY

19
15
28
25
23
32
17+
31
34
30
43

2.8
2.5
12
8.1
11
4.0
3.4
11
6.7
8.2
12

GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY
GRAY

K

MAT
GRAY

L

BURIN FACET
WIDTH
3.8
5.7
I~
45
48
15
7.8
A
26
14
5.9
1.5
A
20
14
3.5
1.8
UTILIZLD FLAKES, MINIMAL USE
AR~A L
W
MAT
T
A
18+
11
3. I
BLUE
A
10+
10+
1.9
GRAY
A
19+
13+
GRAY
3. 8
A
29
23+
5.I
GRAY
A
16+
14
2.8
PINK
A
22+
26
4.3
TAN
A
28
18
2.8
PINK
A
17+
32
5.2
GRAY
A
35+
22
GRAY
5.2
A
32
20
4.7
BLUE
A
30
21
7.8
BLUE
A
28+
20
6. I
GRAY
A
19+
21
4.7
GRAY
A
22
20
4.0
GRAY
A
43
40
8.1
GRAY
A
30+
23
GRAY
5.3
A
24+
32+
1I
BROWN
A
45
24
8. I
TAN
A
32
21
TAN
3.0
A
30+
28
3.8
GRAY
A
60+
71
11
GRAY
A
44+
39+
3.9
GRAY
B
25+
15
4.7
TAN
B
25+
27
4.3
TAN-PINK
B
28+
23
7.5
GRAY
,{3
18+
23
2.7
GRAY
B
55
37
7.9
GRAY
B
65+
46
11
GRAY
C
19+
14
2.9
BLUE
E
11
10
4.0
GRAY
/:
35+
27+
6.8
GRAY-PINK

!t

163

45

46+

UTILIZED FLAKES, EXTENSIVE USE
AR~A L
W
T
MAT
A
PINK
31+
20
3.9
GRAY
A
20+
32
2.9
A
26+
25+
2.7
GRAY
BROWN
A
38
8.2
33
lq
BROWN
A
13+
5.0
GRAY
A
46
15
60
GRAY
A
55
41
12
B
32
8.0
GRAY
50+
F
GRAY
37+
25+
5.0
GRAY
H
50
47
8.7
GRAY
I
32
19
3.5
I
46
9.3
GRAY
66
I
14
GRAY
60
37

113

67

27

GRAY

(SERIES FL., AGATIZED PETRIFIED WOOD)

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

164

MINIMALLY EDGE-RETOUCHED FLAKES
T
MAT
ARuA L
W
5.5
GRAY
A
20+
2.6
GRAY
A
21+
0 . 9 + BLUE
A
TAN
2.2
16+
A
23+
GRAY
2.8
A
GRAY
2.6
A
BROWN
2.8
A
2.3+ GRAY
A
BROWN
3. 8
A
PINK
15+
7.3
21+
A
GRAY
2.2
A
GRAY
2.8
A
GRAY
5.4
7+
A
5+
TAN
I. 3
A
ORANGE
2.5
A
TRANSLUSCENT
AGATE
GRAY
I. 8
A
GRAY
7.8
24+
A
GRAY
2.1
15+
9+
A
BLUE
I. 2
A
TAN
6.8
A
GRAY
6.2
31
A
45+
BLUE
15+
3.6
B
19+
TAN
8.0
38
25
C
GRAY
14
4.6
E
20+
BROWN
13+
2.3
27+
E
GRAY
28+
9.7
28+
E
GRAY
42
18
100
PINK-GRAY
16
2.2
13+
EI
GRAY
11+
3.3
24+
i!
BROWN
3.1
h
GRAY
7. I
30+
35
I
EVENLY EDGE-RETOUCHED FLAKES
MATERIAL
W
T
AREA L
GRAY
5.3
A
GRAY
2.3
A
GRAY
19
4.8
A
22+
GRAY
22+
3.6
A
15+
GRAY
7.0
25
A
38+
TAH
4.2
17+
A
24+
GRAY
27+
3.6
A
GRAY
21
3. I
A
23+
8.4
GRAY
34
46
A
GRAY
40
11
A
75
GRAY
8.8
37
A
55+
GRAY
12
35+
S
35+
GRAY
15
40
D
69
GRAY
35
9.6
D
62
BLUE
3.0
E
TAI~
I. 6
E
TAN
7. I
37
22
L
GRAY
4.0
E
26
20
GRAY
7.0
EI
GRAY
11
40+
33
El
GRAY
6.0
15
F
22+
GRAY
3.5
23
F
29+
GRAY
36
9.2
F
58
GRAY
6.4
46+
li
30+
GRAY
5.7
28
tt
36+
GRAY
30
3.9
B
32+
it

27+

24

5.4

J
K
K
K
-

15+
33+
38+
38+
42+

23+
34
35
35
30+

4.3
6.4
5.I
5. I
6.0

EDGE RETOUCH
SIDE
SIDE
S IDE

-, CONCAVE (10 MM WIDE, 3 MM DEEP)
SIDE

2 SIDE
SIDE (BIFACIAL)
SIDE
2 SIDE
SIDE
2 SIDE (CONCAVITY 11 MM WIDE, 2 MM DEEP)
SIDE
SIDE (REVERSE)
2 SIDE
SIDE
SIDE
SIDE (BIFACIAL)
SIDE
SIDE-END
EDGE RETOUCH, REMARKS
SIDE
SIDE
SIDE
2 SIDE
SIDE, REVERSE
SIDE, PJ:VERSE
SIDE, SEQUENT FLAKE
SIDE, REVERSE
SIDE
SIDE
2 SIDE
SIDE?
S I DE
SIDE

SIDE
SIDE
2 SIDE
SIDE
2 SIDE, ALTEI~NATE
SIDE
2 SIDE
SIDE
S IDE-END
2 SIDE, END
2 SIDE, ALTERNATE
2 SIDE, ALTEP!~ATE
GRAY
SIDE, REVERSE
GRAY-P INK
SIDE, REVERSE; BULB REMOVED
GRAY
SIDE, END; REVERSE FLAKING
GRAY
SIDE, END
GRAY
SIDE; BULB REMOVED
TRANSLUSCENT
WHITE TO ORA~GE
AGATE

FIG

22F

22H

22G
22C

22D
22E

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY
CHOPPERS
AREA L
W
T
MAT
FIG
E
113
92
35
GRAY
23A
120
90
41
GRAY
23B
El
134
115
37
GRAY
23C
70
71
30
GRAY
23D
A
56
64
38
BROWN
23E
97
110
33
GRAY
UNFINISHED TOOLS, INITIAL STAGE (ON CORES)
AP,~A L
W
T
MAT
A
43
20
17
GRAY
A
65"
28
20
GRAY
L
27
18
12
BLUE
55
39
21
GRAY
4O
24
10
GRAY
,: 1
33+
40+
16
TAN
65
52
26
GRAY
58
50
27
GRAY
UNFINISdED TOOLS, INITIAL STAGE (ON FLAKES)
AREA L
W
T
MAT
A
50
39
18
TAN
A
44
22
I0
BLUE
E
51
5O
17
GRAY
L1
80
61
18
GRAY
54
50
12
GRAY
UNFINISHED TOOLS, SECONDARY STAGE (PREFORMS)
AR~A L
W
T
!,tAT
FIG
71
55
13
TAN
24A
65
53
14
GRAY
24B
C
37
25
9.9
TAN
24C
53
20
10
GRAY
24D
E
8O
65
26
GRAY
24E
66
48
27
GRAY
24F
48
27
7.0
GRAY
24G
A
39
27
8.8
GRAY
COPES
AR~A L
W
T
FIAT
FIG
A
39
28
15
BLUE
25A
L
32
34
18
BLUE
25B
A
42
29
14
BLUE
25C
A
5O
34
20
BLUE
A
40
37
22
BLUE
A
32
22
20
BLUE
A
32
25
21
BLUE
A
43
28
29
BLUE
E
44
26
24
BLUE
E
43
20
22
BLUE
66
30
25
BLUE
E
5O
26+
25
BLUE
E
28
19
18
BLUE
A
55
38
34
GRAY
A
48
43
31
GRAY
A
40
37
23
GRAY
A
38+
65
40
GRAY
A
70
70
35
GRAY
A
38
44
28
GRAY
A
3O
30
21
GRAY
B
39
37
21
GRAY
C
105
73+
35
GRAY
E
46
27
25
GRAY
E
44
39+
18
GRAY
El
53
42
23
GRAY
El
33
50
22
GRAY
H
77
43
36
GRAY
25D
H
70
34
31
GRAY
H
48
42
20
GRAY
I
8O
72
33
GRAY
25E
64
50
38
GRAY
53
55
44
GRAY
25F

SINGLE- OR DOUBLE-FLAKE
AREA L
W
T
A
55
47
26
E
56
37
33
E
75
32
30
qO
E
80
25
HAMMERS TONES
AREA L
W
T
A
53+
33
25
E
50+
45+
25+
E
36
48
32
E
44
57
36
SANDSTONE SLABS
AREA L
W
T
B
86+
55+
20
G
105
57+
20
UNALTERED CHERT COBBLE
AREA L
W
T
A
113
90
59

165

CORES
MAT
GRAY
TAH
GRAY
GRAY
MAT
QUARTZ
QUARTZ
QUARTZ
CHERT

MAT
GRAY

166

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES

CITED

Brew, J. O.
1946 Archaeology of Alkali Ridge, Southeastern Utah. Papers of the
Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, No. 21.
Harvard University.
Campbell, T. N.
1960 Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 145-175.
Clarke, D. L.
1968 Analytical Archaeology. Methuen and Co. Ltd. London.
Corbin, J. E.
1974 A Model for Cultural Succession for the Coastal Bend Area of Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 45, pp. 29-54.
Dillehay, T. D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains.
Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 19, No. 65, pp. 180-196.
Eddy, F. W.
1974Resource Management and Locational Strategies of Certain
Prehistoric Sites in Central Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 19, No.
64, pp. 99-106.
ms Salvage Archeology in the Laneport Reservoir District, Central
Texas. Unpublished manuscript on file at the Texas Memorial
Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.
Greet, J. W.
1965 A Typology of Burin Facets on Projectile Points. E1 Palacio, Vol. 72,
No. 2, pp. 34-37.
Groube, L. M. and J. Chappell
1973 Measuring the Difference between Archaeological Assemblages. In:
The Explanation of Culture Change, by C. Renfrew (ed.), pp. 167-184.
University of Pittsburgh Press.
Hester, T. R.
1969 Archeological Investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy Counties, Texas
in August, 1967. State Building Commission Archeological Program,
Report, No. 15.
1971 Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42: pp. 51-148.
1974 Some Observations on Archaeology at Chaparrosa Ranch, 1974. La
Tierra, Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 19-22.
Hill, T. C., Jr., and T. R. Hester
1971 Isolated Archaic and Late Prehistoric Components at the Honeymoon
Site (41ZV34), Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 16, No. 51,
pp. 52-59.
1973 A Preliminary Report on the Tortuga Flat Site: A Protohistoric
Campsite in Southern Texas. Texas Archeology, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 1014.
Ing, J. D. and G. Kegley
1971 An Archeological Survey of Pedernales Falls State Park, Blanco
County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Interpretative
Planning Section. Austin.

NEe-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

167

Jelks, E. B.
1953 Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 24, pp. 189-207.
1962 The Kyle Site, A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin, Archaeology Series, No. 5.
Kelley, J. C.
1947 The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde,
and Round Rock Feel. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 18, pp. 115-128.
1955Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in Aboriginal Texas. American
Anthropologist, Vol. 57, No. 5, pp. 981-995.
Krause, R. A.
1969 Correlation of Phases in Central Plains Prehistory. In: Two House
Sites in the Central Plains: An Experiment in Archaeology, by W. R.
Wood (ed.). Plains Anthropologist, Memoir, No. 6, pp. 89-96.
Krieger, A. D.
1944 The Typological Concept. American Antiquity, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 271188.
1946Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The
University of Texas Publication 4640.
Lehmer, D.J.
1971 Introduction to Middle Missouri Archeology. Anthropological Papers,
No. 1. National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior.
Lundelius, E. L., Jr.
1967 Late-Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal History of Central Texas. In:
Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search for a Cause, by P. S. Martin and
H.E. Wright, Jr. (eds.}. Proceedings of the VII Congress of the
International Association for Quaternary Research, No. 6, pp. 287319. Yale University Press.
Martin, G. C.
n.d. Preliminary Archeological Survey of a Portion of the Texas Coast
Made by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1928-1929.
Privately printed.
Miller, E. O. and E. B. Jelks
1952 Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontologica!
Society, Vol. 23, pp. 168-217.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1960 Indian Tribes of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 29, pp. 1-34.
Newell, H. P. and A. D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the
Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Nunley, J. P., L. F. Duffield, and E. B. Jelks
1965 Excavations at Amistad Reservoir, 1962 Season. Miscellaneous
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 3.
Parsons, M. L.
1965 1963 Test Excavations at Fate Bell Shelter, Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Miscellaneous Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 4.

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Parzen, E.
1960 Modern Probability Theory and Its Applications. John Wiley and
Sons, Inc. New York. (gth printing, 1967).
Pearson, F. J., Jr., E. M. Davis, and M. A. Tamers
1966 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates IV. Radiocarbon, Vol. 8, pp.
453-466.
Pearson, F. l., E. M. Davis, M. A. Tamers, and R. W. Johnstone
1965 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates III. Radiocarbon, Voh 7. pp.
296-314.
Pollard, J. C., J. W. Greer, and H. F. Sturgis
1963 Archeological Excavations at the Boy Scout Rockshelter (41TV69),
Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Voh 34, pp. 31-56.
Roberson, W. R.
1971 Surface Collected Sherds from East Central Texas (A Description
and Study of Sherds from the Counties of Navarre, Limestone, Leon,
Freestone, Madison, and Robertson). Typescript on file at the Texas
Archeotogical Research Laboratory, Austin.
Ross, R. E.
1965 The Archeology of Eagle Cave. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, No. 7.
Rowlett, R. M. and R. B. Pollnac
1970 Multivariate Analysis of La Tene Cultural Groups. In: Mathematics in
the Archaeologica! and Historical Sciences, by F. R. Hodson, D. G.
Kendall, and A.P. Tautu (eds.), pp. 46-58. Edinburgh University
Press.
Shafer, H. J.
1963 Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace Site in
Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
34, pp. 57-81.
1971 Late Prehistory of Central Texas: 500 B.C.-1700 A.D. Paper presented
at the 74th Annual Meeting of the Texas Academy of Science.
Nacogdoches. Typescript courtesy of the author.
Shafer, H. J., D. A. Suhm, and J. D. Scurlock
1964 An Investigation and Appraisal of Archeological Resources of Belton
Reservoir, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas: 1962. Miscellaneous
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 1.
Sollberger, J. B.
1971 A Technological Study of Beveled Knives. Plains Anthropologist, Vol.
16, No. 53, pp. 209-218.
Sorrow, W. M.
1970 Archeological Investigations at the Barker Site. Research Reports of
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 1.
Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Shafer, and R. E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 11.
Stephenson, R. L.
1970 Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 41, pp. 37-286.

NEO-AMERICAN OCCUPATION AT WHEATLEY

169

Stipp, J. J., E. M. Davis, I. E. Noakes, and T. E. Hoover
1962 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates I. Radiocarbon, Vol. 4, pp. 4350.
Story, D. A.
1968 Archeological Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf Coast Sites.
State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report, No. 13.
Story, D. A. and H. J. Shafer
1965 1964 Excavations at Waco Reservoir, McLennan County, Texas: The
Baylor and Britton Sites. Miscellaneous Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 6.
Suhm, D. A.
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 7-54.
1957 Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 26-58.
1959 The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology. Texas Journal of
Science, Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 218-250.
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 63-108.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Suhm, D. A. and E. B. lelks (eds.)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas
Archeological Society Special Publications, No. 1, Bulletin of the
Texas Memorial Museum, No. 4.
Tamers, M. A., F. J. Pearson, Jr., and E. M. Davis
1964 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates II. Radiocarbon, Vol. 6, pp.
138-159.
Tunnell, C. D.
1962 Oblate: A Rockshelter Site. In: Salvage Archeology of Canyon
Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate Sites, by L.
Johnson, Jr., D. A. Suhm, and C.D. Tunnell. Bulletin of the Texas
Memorial Museum, No. 5.
Valastro, S., Jr., and E. M. Davis
1970a University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates VII. Radiocarbon,
Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 249-280.
1970b University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates VIII. Radiocarbon,
Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 617-639.
Valastro, S., Jr., F. J. Pearson, Jr., and E. M. Davis
1967 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates V. Radiocarbon, Vol. 9, pp.
439-453.
Watt, F. H.
1953 Pottery Diffusions of the Central Brazos Valley. Central Texas
Archeologist, Vol. 6, pp. 57-85.

