162

Texas Archeological Society

APPENDIX E

Chemical Analysis of Sediments

Elaine Burleigh

INTRODUCTION
The purpose of doing the chemical analysis of sediments was to test this
technique of analysis in the field with application to archeology. A barn and
stock pen were believed to have existed northeast of the existing house site.
Phosphate and pH determinations were done in an effort to locate and
define these areas. These analyses also were conducted on samples from
rockshelters submitted by the survey crew.
SAMPLING AND TESTING METHODS
The sampling methods used are as follows. The area of the barn and
stock pen were sampled on a grid. The surface was scraped clean with a
trowel about 18 in from the southeast corner stake in each unit. A handful of
sediment was scooped up with a trowel and placed in a labeled paper bag. A
second sample was taken at the 16-18 in level. The sediment was very dry
and hard. An auger was used to drill to the 16 in level and a coring tool was
used to sample the remaining 2 in. This material was bagged separately.
Samples brought in by the survey crew from rockshelter sites were taken at
various depths from surface to 90 cm.
The following testing methods were used. PH values were determined on
a Beckman model G battery operated pH meter, using a semimicro combination pH electrode (silver/silver chloride internals). The meter was standardized to a pH 7 buffer. Samples, prepared by adding two parts distilled
water to one part sediment, were stirred and allowed to settle twice. The
electrode was inserted into the liquid portion of the prepared sample and the
value read from the meter.
The method used to determine phosphates is described by Eidt (1973).
The samples analyzed were very dry, high in organic matter, and high in
carbonates. Samples were broken up inside their bags by pounding them
with a hammer on a flat surface. About half a teaspoon of pulverized sediment was placed in a small, flat, plastic container and broken up even finer
by mashing it with the handle of, a stainless steel teaspoon. A couple of
drops of distilled water were added and mixed until the sample was of a
mealy consistency. Approximately 50 mg of this mixture was placed on the
center of the filter paper and test solutions added.
The bubbles formed by the evolution of gas on addition of the acid solution usually carried the lightweight organic matter farther out from the center

Burleigh - Chemical Analysis

163

of the filter paper than was desirable. This situation tended to mask both the
color intensity and density of the color pattern. This problem was solved by
turning the filter paper over at the end of the 2 minute developing period
and reading the underside. The diameter of the circle of blue color was not
measured because a circle was rarely formed. The intensity of the blue color
and the percentage of completion of the circular pattern were chosen as the
indicators of phosphate concentration. After analyzing six to eight samples,
a value scale was established from zero phosphate to strong phosphate.

RESULTS
Very small differences were found in the pH values in the entire area
tested. Values for the 16-18 in level were a pH of 8.6 + 0.3 for the surface,
a pH of 8.3 + 0.2. PH analysis of sediments were not a useful tool for archeological site surveying at the McKinney Homestead. The values are subject to too many variables, such as uneven sediment composition, buffering
from limey sediments, and past and present vegetation.
The results of the phosphate tests agree with the results of the other tests
used on the site (Fig. 1). However, a much larger area should have been
sampled and tested to adequately define the different areas. Samples from
the rockshelter sites gave good results. Strong phosphate results were obtained on samples from the visible midden area and weak phosphate results
were obtained from below the visible midden area. The phosphate test
method could be used successfully as an aid to locating and defining sites in
the field.

REFERENCES CITED
Eidt, Robert C.
1973
A Rapid Chemical Field Test for Archaeological Site Survey. American
Antiquity, 38(2):206-210.

41TV289

Prospecting

Grid

Fig. 1 Results of phosphate testing at McKinney House.

