CADDOAN AREA AIXID CENTRAL LOUISIANA

21

Harrington, M. R.
1920. Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas. Indian Notes and Monographs, No. 10.
Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation.
Lemley, Harry J.
1936. Discoveries Indicating a Pre-Caddo Culture on Red River in Arkansas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 8,
pp. 25-55.
Lemley, Harry J., and S. D. Dickinson
1939. Evidences of the Marksville and Coles Creek Complexes at the Kirkham
Place, Clark County, Arkansas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 1i, pp. 139-189.
Moore, Clarence B.
1909. Antiquities of the Ouachita Valley. Journal of the Academy of Natural
Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. 14, pp. 1-170.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949.

The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.

Orr, Kenneth G.
1946. The Archeological Situation at Spiro, Oklahoma: A Preliminary Report.
American Antiquity, Vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 228-256.
1952. Survey of Caddoan Archeology. In: James B. Griffin (editor), Archeology
of Eastern United States, pp. 0_.39-255. University of Chicago Press.
Chicago.
Quimby, George I., Jr.
1942. The Natchezan Culture Type. American Antiquity, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp.
255-275.
1951. The Medora Site, West Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana. Field Museum of
Natural History, Anthropological Series, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 8i-135.
1957.

The Bayou Goula Site, Iberville Parish, Louisiana. Fieldiana: Anthropology, Vol. 47, No. 2, pp. 91-170.

Sears, William H.
1958. Burial Mounds on the Gulf Coastal Plain. American Antiquity, Vol. 23.
No. 3, pp. 274~-283.
V~rebb, Clarence H.
1948. Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier Focus. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19, pp. 100-147.
1959.

The Belcher Mound, A Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 16.
1560 Line Avenue
Shreveport, Louisiana

Discussion
By Alex D. Krieger
Webb has analyzed the relationships between the Caddoan cultural
block and the lower Mississippi Valley with great skill and insight.
His general correlation of Gibson Aspect with Coles Creek, and Fulton
Aspect with Plaquemine, plus the importance of Bossier Focus and

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

his qualifications about Troyville, seem to me to be as satisfactory as
is possible in present knowledge; I can do little more than emphasize
some of the points he makes.
Ford’s contention that both the Gibson and the Fulton aspects can
be correlated with Plaquemine can be refuted in many ways, as Webb
has shown; see also my review of Ford’s Greenhouse Site publication
in American Antiquity (Vol. 18, 1952:175-179). It is possible, moreover, that these divergent views might be more or less reconciled if
more emphasis (and future research) were placed on one point mentioned by Webb, namely, that utility wares and "ceremonial or
burial wares" (which I prefer to call "fine wares") present different
chronological problems. As is wel! known, these two general categories are apparent through vast areas in South America, Middle
America, and the Southwest; and wherever chronology has become
well controlled it is also apparent that the coarse or utiltiy wares
underwent stylistic changes much more slowly than the "fine" wares.
Caddoan ceramics likewise reveal this duality, perhaps more so than
any cultures in the United States outside the Southwest. In this case,
however, chronological control over the respective rates of change in
these wares is still crude, but is progressing.
Comparisons between Caddoan and lower Mississippi Valley ceramics now appear to make this matter somewhat clearer, through
Webb’s research as well as, formerly, my own. First, it now seems
rather clear that when a few pottery types are somewhat similar in
Gibson and/or Fulton Aspect loci, and Plaquemine, or still present
knotty problems in type inclusiveness and specific association with
cultural units, these types are in the utility category as Webb has
shown. Second, it seems clear that the identification of specific and
distinctive types of "fine" pottery of the Gibson Aspect, such as Holly
Fine Engraved, in a Plaquemine assemblage, is quite erroneous; a few
years ago Webb pointed out to me how far off these "identifications"
are. The position of Louisiana archeologists that all Caddoan material
belonged at the top of the Louisiana chronological column was understandable as long as no chronological depth had been claimed or demonstrated in Caddoan archeology; but I think the time is long past for
this position to be defensible.
At present it seems more important that we work on the problem of
whether the Gibson Aspect--or more specifically, the Alto Focus-was contemporaneous with all or part of the Coles Creek period, or
with both Troyville and some part of Coles Creek. The identification
of a Troyville complex or period outside of a small area in central

CADDOAI’q AREA At~/D CENTRAL LOUISIAI~A

23

Louisiana has long been a puzzle to everyone concerned. Coles Creek,
on the other hand, spread over a considerable area in central and
northern Louisiana, reaching into southern Arkansas and slightly into
northeastern Texas; trade vessels from it are found as far north as
the Spiro site in Oklahoma.
There are now some 16 radiocarbon dates which Ford has assigned
to Troyville and Coles Creek. They form two distinct groups, that for
Troyville ranging from about A.D. 500 to 1100, and that for Coles Creek
from about A.D. 800 to 1250. It is not surprising that the two series
overlap, for no one has claimed that the change from Troyville to
Coles Creek was abrupt or easy to trace.
In his paper Webb states that he favors elimination of the Troyville
concept, presumably because it has such a small distribution when
compared with Coles Creek. Others have also suggested this, but I don’t
know what should be done with it. The term Troyville marks the first
appearance of temple mounds in Louisiana, but it might be feasible
to regard the whole sequence of dates from about A.D. 500 to 1250 as
"Coles Creek," then divide this into "early" and "late" phases~ with
the "early" phase marking the introduction of temple mounds. I would
rather leave this to the people who are working in that area now.
There is but a single radiocarbon date for the Alto Focus at the Davis
site~ 1553---175 years, obtained in 1951, which would be roughly
A.D. 400 ----- 175. Considering the margin of error, this date may not be
very different from the earliest one assigned to Troyville at about
A.D. 500. Even if not completely accurate, it is hard to see how the
actual date could be as late as the block of A.D. 800 to 1250 assigned by
Ford to Coles Creek. I would rather think that an approximate date of
A.D. 500 would apply to the introduction of temple mounds both at
Troyville and at the Davis site. Here we seem to be "stuck" at present.
As for the identification of Marksville and Troyville sherds found
in Texas, I showed the Davis site sherds to several people, among them
Quimby~ Griffin, and MacNeish. Ford was then working in South
America. The aforementioned persons all agreed that some of the
Davis sherds were good examples of Marksville Stamped and Marksville Incised, and another as Chevalier Stamped of the Troyville period.
Griffin also identified two sherds as Montgomery Incised of the Adena
culture. These were all reported as such in the Davis site monograph.
Later, MacNeish identified another rocker-stamped sherd as inseparable from Hopewellian pottery in Illinois and I¥isconsin (see my
review of the Greenhouse publication mentioned above, Fig. 79).
There was no indication of a pre-Alto Focus occupation of the site, so

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

far as I could tell from Newell’s field notes, which were extremely
painstaking.
We should also remember the common occurrence of Copena
"points" or knives in the Alto, Gahagan, and other Gibson Aspect loci,
the large rectangular graves with rows of parallel skeletons and piles
of offerings in the grave corners, a trait shared only with Hopewell
and the Miraflores complex in Guatemala, and many other interesting
traits which were pointed out in the Davis site monograph and which
are all persistently ignored by those who would have the Alto Focus
begin as late as A.D. 900 or even 1400.
I no longer think that the Alto Focus could have appeared during
Marksville time, but I do think it began soon afterward with the appearance and spread of the temple-mound idea in the Southeast, and
that there were numerous trait survivals from the Hopewell-Marksville period into this early temple-mound horizon. There must have
been some individuals in early Troyville communities who were still
making Marksville pottery, and so on. I prefer to see archeological
situations as fluid rather than "layer-cakes" in which cultures suddenly end and others just as suddenly begin. In the Southeast there are
far too many preconceptions as to how things should be, even to the
point of rejecting all radiocarbon dates which don’t suit the preconceptions. This is interesting in itself, because in most parts of the world
the datings have caused a lot of reconsiderations and revisions in
previous thinking.
I have many times said that the Caddoan-lower Mississippi Valley
cultural situation is comparable to the Southwest in area, time depth°
and complexity of interrelationships; but whereas in the Southwest
scores or even hundreds of able students have worked for many years
on its problems, only six or eight have done intensive research in Caddoan archeology. Obviously, much is yet to be learned about it.
209 Lake Washington Blvd.
Seattle 22, Washington
By James A. Ford
This disagreement in cross-dating of the Caddo area boils down to
whether it was an explosive affair of four centuries or a leisurely one
of 12 centuries. The hard remarks about the Midwestern system have
been against those who try to use it to derive information. For the
central Louisiana materials Willey once suggested the term Gulf
Tradition. The argument presented by Webb is based on burial units.
In the Mississippi Valley we have used refuse statistics, so that the

CADDOAN AREA AND CENTRAL LOUISIANA

25

periods are cut from a continuum and are not discrete units as in the
Caddoan Area.
Louisiana and Florida share the meander, negative excising and
later a reversal of this, quadration, and other traits derived from Hopewell and later Mississippi. The Caddoan Area is distinguished by
engraving with pigment and bottle forms, and these are derived from
Mexico. Most of the arguments about contemporaneity are based on
the occurrence of traits shared between Louisiana and Texas. The
problem is whether they came from the Mississippi or the other way.
No carinated bowls are found in Marksville or Troyville; they enter
in late Coles Creek. In the Plaquemine period these Mexican traits
move into the Mississippi area, going up to St. Louis and across to
Alabama and Georgia, becoming part of the Mississippi pattern. This
is a different situation from that of the cult materials, which go all
over the eastern United States. We are arguing matters discussed ten
years ago and we need new information.
American Museum of Natural History
New York, N.Y.

