EVIDENCE FOR HEAT TREATING
OF SOUTHERN TEXAS
PROJECTILE POINTS
THOMAS R. HESTER AND MICHAEL B. COLLINS

ABSTRACT
Heat-treated chert was used almost exclusively in the manufacture of a
particular projectile point form in southern Texas. These specimens are
described and the evidence for thermal alteration of the raw material is
presented.

A considerable literature has appeared in recent years dealing with
the widespread practice of thermally-altering (heat-treating) siliceous
stone as an adjunct to flaking (cf. Crabtree and Butler 1964; Purdy and
Brooks 1971). It has been determined that, in North America, heattreating was a phenomenon present in various regional lithic technologies from Paleo-Indian times (cf. Davis and Shutler 1969) into the
historic era (Hester 1972; Sollberger and Hester 1972).
In the southern Texas area, the presence of heat-treated lithic material has been previously noted, in the form of both debitage and
finished artifacts (Sollberger and Hester 1972; Hester and Hill 1973).
While occasional projectile points of various types have been recognized as made on thermally altered chert, it has come to our attention
that heat-treated material was apparently preferred for the manufacture of a specific projectle point form in this region. This point form
resembles to a degree the Shumla type of Suhm, Krieger and Jelks
(1954), a style common in the Trans-Pecos area of Texas, and these
similarities have lead local amateur archaeologists and collectors to
refer to these specimens as "South Texas Shumlas". Over the past
several years, collectors have shown many of these projectile points to
the senior author, pointing out the recurring pinkish-purple color of
the chert, and the vitreous luster and "greasy" feel manifested by the
material. Mr. J. W. House, an amateur archaeologist of Carrizo
Springs, Texas, has also noted these attributes of "South Texas
Shumla" points, and he has made available to us the series of specimens analyzed in this note.
While we do not wish at this time to propose a new projectile point
type, we would like to-provide some data on the morphological
characteristics and the spatial distribution of these specimens. We
cannot offer any concrete evidence regarding the temporal span of
these artifacts. All are surface finds, and while they derive primarily
from "Archaic" sites, we do not know how they fit into the overall
chronological scheme.

220

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

b
0

f

1

2

3cm

!i¸ :~

FIGURE 1. Heat-Treated Projectile Points from Southern Texas. a,a’
has flake scars typical of heat-treated material, with the exception of
two duller scars (indicated by arrow) representing an earlier surface.

HEAT TREATING OF PROJECTILE POINTS

221

The specimens (Fig. 1) have triangular bodies, the lateral edges of
which are often slightly serrated. Basal notches have formed a rectangular stem (with a slightly convex base) and long barbs. Barbs are
sometimes squared, although on some specimens they turn in toward
the stem. The specimens are usually very finely flaked, with pressure
flaking evident. Flake scars on the body are commonly in a paralleloblique pattern, sometimes approximating the "double diagonal or
chevron" pattern illustrated by Crabtree (1972). In cross section, the
specimens are markedly biconvex. The general size range of these
points is reflected by the specimens illustrated in Fig. 1. Given the
size of these artifacts, we suspect that they functioned as dart points.
The authors estimate that perhaps as many as 90% of these projectile points exhibit three major attributes: (1) pinkish-purple color (or
similar shades); (2) vitreous sheen; and, (3) "greasy" feel. To date, we
have not made any concerted effort to trace the spatial distribution of
this projectile point style. The senior author has reviewed notes in his
files, and these generally indicate a concentration of the sp ecimens in
the northwestern sector of the Rio Grande Plain (Dimmit, Zavala,
LaSalle, Frio and Maverick Counties; the illustrated artifacts are from
Dimmit County sites). Some specimens are also known from the major
prehistoric site in the Olmos basin of Bexar County (C. D. Orchard
collection, McQueeny, Texas).
EVIDENCE OF THERMAL ALTERATION
The six small dart points (Fig. 1) supplied by Mr. House were
examined for macroscopic evidence of heat treating. These examinations were aided by the experimental heating and flaking of specimens of local chert. The three most reliable macroscopic indications
that an archaeological specimen of chipped stone has been heated are
evidence for color change, altered flake scar quality, and patterns of
luster change. When heated, many cherts change color (for example,
from shades of gray, tan, or green to shades of red or purple: see Purdy
and Brooks 1971; Crabtree and Butler 1964; Sollberger and Hester
1972; Collins 1973; and Collins and Fenwick 1974). Color, luster, and
nature of ripple marks are subjective attributes whose reliability in
interpreting archaeological evidence for heat treating varies with the
materials, the temperatures attained, and with the investigator’s
familiarity with normal (unheated) colors, textures, and flake scar
qualities of the cherts in question. Alone, the presence of any one or
more of these attributes on an artifact or in an assemblage of artifacts
may be evidence that materials had been heated but not necessarily
that the heating had been intentional. Only when a consistent pattern

222

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

emerges in the distribution of heat-induced changes is the inference
of purposeful heat alteration warranted (Bordes 1969; Collins 1973;
Collins and Fenwick 1974). It is from such patterns that the place of
heat treating in the overall knapping strategy can be discerned.
Basically, heating may be evidenced by the presence of artifacts
whose colors are apparently altered from the normal color ranges. The
fact that flake surfaces produced prior to heating are often duller in
appearance than those produced afterwards allows inferences concerning the stage of reduction at which heating was deemed appropriate in the technology under examination.
In the present sample of six dart points, all specimens exhibit
pinkish or pinkish-purple colors in contrast to the usual tans and
grays of local cherts.
Flakes from eleven pieces of chert from Dimmit County were experimentally heated beneath a wood fire for 28 hours. When the
heated pieces were rejoined with their unheated controls, six exhibited marked changes in color from light yellowish tan to pink, deep
pink and purplish pink, three exhibited similar but less marked
changes, and two exhibited no color change. The various colors found
on the six projectile points are duplicated by the colors in the nine
heated pieces exhibiting color changes.
On five of the six projectile points, all flake scar surfaces are lustrous and exhibit the wavy ripple mark qualities of heated stone.
These stand in marked contrast with the quality and texture of flake
scars experimentally produced on unheated local cherts. The flake
scars on the sixth specimen (Fig. 1,a,a’) are lustrous with the exception of two duller scars (stippled surface indicated by arrow, Figure
1,a) which represent a surface produced early in the manufacture of
the piece. When flaked the eleven experimentally heated pieces,
including those which did not change color, exhibited lustrous, wavy
flake scars entirely comparable with those seen on the six projectile
points. This pattern suggests that in the manufacture of these projectile points, materials were heated at an early stage of reduction such
that virtually all surfaces on the finished items were produced after
heating.
The nature of the early reductive steps and the exact place of heat
treating in these activities must be inferred from debitage (including
flakes, cores, rejected preforms, etc.) in secure archaeological association. At present such data are not available for the projectile points
described above. However, later reductive techniques are evidenced
on the specimens themselves.
Both percussion and pressure flaking are indicated as the means of
force application on these specimens, with pressure flaking by far the

HEAT TREATING OF PROJECTILE POINTS

223

more abundant. One specimen exhibits two broad flat flake scars of
the form usually produced by soft hammer percussion whereas the
remainder of the scars on that specimen as well as all of the scars on
the other specimens were probably produced by pressure flaking.
This is consistent with evidence from other sources where both percussion and pressure flaking are enhanced by heating, but more
clearly and consistently so in the case of pressure flaking (Collins
1973; Collins and Fenwick 1974).
Several lines of inquiry are suggested by these observations. First,
in reference to this particular form of projectile point, analysis of both
the morpho!ogy and technology of a larger sample is needed. The
spatial and temporal distributions of the form are in need of delineation, and, of course, it is necessary to test the suggestion made here
that these points were customarily made on heat treated blanks. Full
understanding of the place of heat treating in the overall technology
can come only from examination of debitage in close archaeological
association with the points.
Finally, ifa close correlation is found between this typological form
and the technological practice of heat treating it will be appropriate to
examine other chipped stone types for similar patterns in an effort to
understand more fully the cultural significance of heat treating.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Mr. J. W. House for loaning us the six projectile
points for examination, Mr. T. C. Hill, Jr., for providing the junior author with samples
of chert from Dimmit County for experimental heating, and Dr. Wes Jernigan of the
Department of Anthropology, University of Kentucky, for drawing the specimen illustrated in Figure 1,a.

224

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED

Bordes, F.
1969 Traitement thermique du silex au Solutreen. Compte Rendue des
seances menseulles de la Societe Prehistorique Francais, Vol. 66, No.
7, p. 197.
Collins, Michael B.
1973 Ethnography and Experimentation in the Study of Archaeological
Lithic Debitage. Paper presented at symposium on lithic debitage
analysis, S ociety for American Archeology, San Francisco, May 1973.
Collins, Michael B. and Jason M. Fenwick
1974 Archaeological Evidence for the Heat Treating of Chert: Methods of
Interpretation and Their Application. Plains Anthropologist (in
press).
Crabtree, D. E.
1972 An Introduction to Flint-Working. Occasional Papers, Idaho State
University Museum, No. 28.
Crabtree, D. E. and B. R. Butler
1964 Notes on Experiments in Flint-Knapping: 1. Heat Treatment of Silica
Minerals. Tebiwa, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 1-6.
Davis, E. L. and R. Shutler, Jr.
1969 Recent Discoveries of Fluted Points in California and Nevada. Neva da
State Museum, Anthropological Papers, No. 14, pp. 154-178.
Hester, T. R.
1972 Ethnographic Evidence for the Thermal Alteration of Siliceous Stone.
Tebiwa, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 63-65.
Hester, T. R. and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1973 Prehistoric Occupation at the Holdsworth and Stewart Sites on the Rio
Grande Plain of Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society (for
1972), Vol. 43, pp. 33-75.
Purdy, B. A. and H. K. Brooks
1971 Thermal Alteration of Silica Minerals: An Archaeological Approach.
Science, Vol. 173, pp. 322-325.
Sollberger, J. B. and T. R. Hester
1972 Some Additional Data on the Thermal Alteration of Siliceous Stone.
Bulletin, Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 21, pp. 181-185.
University of Texas at San Antonio
University of Kentucky, Lexington

