Two Clay Figurines from the Central
Coas[al Region of Texas
CHARLES K.

CHANDLER

ABSTRACT
Descriptive data are provided for two clay figurines from the
central coastal area of Texas. One specimen appears to be linked to
the Late Prehistoric Rockport Complex, while the cultural attribution
of the other is uncertain.

Two fired clay figurines from the central coastal area of Texas are
described. One is from San Patricio County and one is from Live Oak
County (see Fig. 1).
The first of these two figurines was discovered in 1969 by the late
D. R. Espy on the surface of an open campsite along Chiltipin Creek, San
Patricio County, Texas. The site, 41 SP 77, is one of several sites recorded
along Chiltipin Creek by the author and D. R. Espy. All of these sites are
located immediately adjacent to the existing stream channel and most are
subject to occasional flooding. Site 41 SP 77 was discovered and recorded
after severe flooding removed approximately 10 inches of topsoil. The clay
figurine was found a few weeks later after subsequent flooding.
Most of the sites along Chiltipin Creek had large amounts of lithic
debitage and artifacts, but pottery was comparatively scarce. Materials
recovered from 41 SP 77 include Perdiz and Scallorn arrow points, cornernotched expanding stem dart points, side-notched rectangular stem dart
points that most closely resemble the Darl type, triangular stemless forms
of both straight base and rounded base types, several forms of bifaces,
four different styles of drills (bi-pointed, large rounded base, reworked
Plainview dart point, and alternately beveled point on a flake), cores,
metate fragments, flake blades, flake scrapers, hammerstones, and 25
small potsherds. Of the 25 sherds, nine are about the same color as the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

342

figurine with similar amounts of sand in the paste; but, these nine sherds
have bone temper. The remaining sherds have a fine sandy appearance
with occasional bone temper. One is asphalt-coated on the interior and
two are partially asphalt-coated on the exterior. Surface and core colors
range from light gray through dark brown to black. The reddish to buff
sherds and the figurine have coarser sand grains than the gray to black
sherds. This difference in grain size is visible only under magnification.

FIGURE 1. Map Showing Locations of San Patricio and Live Oak
Counties, Texas. a, San Patricio County; b, Live Oak County.

The figurine is illustrated by both line drawings and photographs in
Figs. 2 and 3. It is hand-shaped into a small, anthropomorphic figure with
the following characteristics:
Height:
Width:
Thick:
Color:

53 mm. (estimated maximum height 56 mm.)
21 mm. near top (shoulders)
18 mm. near bottom (hips)

exterior hue 10 YR {all color determinations are based on comparisons with the Munsell color charts). Mostly resembles "grayish
orange" (10 YR 7/4) with some areas tending to "dark yellowish
orange" (10 YR 6/6).
interior paste is generally gray but ranges from "pale yellowish
Color:
brown" (10 YR 6/2) to "light olive gray" (5 Y 6/1).
Paste texture: very fine, compact, homogeneous, sandy.

FIGURINES FROM COASTAL REGION

Finish:
Temper:
Weight:

343

Smoothed but not polished, decorated with fine incised, zigzag,
vertical lines.
None.
16.91 grams.

The figurine does not appear to have had a head but does have abbreviated legs, one of which is partially missing and also has horizontally
cut indentations across the torso near the upper portions of the legs. These
appear intended to delineate the limit of the legs. There is also a cut
surface from these indentations downward to the lower limits of the legs.
These cuts were made by a sharp tool (possibly a flint flake) prior to firing.
A navel is formed on the frontal surface of the figurine. There is a slight
indentation at the top that tends to define the shoulders. There has been
some surface erosion of the figurine, but there are eight closely spaced,
vertical zigzag lines on the back and seven on the front. Five of these on the
front are on the right side. Some of these lines are barely visible and can
best be determined with magnification.
This figurine appears to be locally made. The paste is almost
identical to Rockport pottery and surface color is like much of the
reported Rockport wares (Suhm and Jelks 1962). The zigzag incised lines
are very similar to the squiggly asphalt lines found on Rockport Black on
Gray wares. It is well-fired.
The specimen is unlike the figurines reported from the !ower Pecos
area to the west. Those are unfired, and do not have appendages (legs);
see Sharer (1975 a,b) and Shafer and Speck (1974).
My original intent was to document only the San Patricio County
figurine found by Espy, but in my search for comparative information I
discovered that Jim Warren had found a clay figurine in Live Oak
County that had not been documented. This fired clay artifact (see Figs.
4-6) was found (on the surface and without other directly associated
artifacts) in the general area of site 41 LK 67 overlooking the Frio River
near Three Rivers. It appears to be anthropomorphic, but only the torso
survives. It shows evidence of having had a head, arms and legs but
these appendages are missing. It is shaped by hand. Following are data
obtained by visual and microscopic examination:

Length:
Maximum width:
Minimum width:
Thickness:
Thickness:
Color:
Paste texture:
Finish:

98 ram.
52 mm. at the upper (arm pit) area
34 mm. at the lower (hip} area
31 mm. at the upper (shoulder) area
34.5 ram. at the lower (hip) area
exterior, pale reddish brown (5 YR 5/3) to grayish red (5
YR 5/2); interior paste, dark gray (5 YR 4/1}
very coarse and not well compacted
smooth but not polished. Some areas appear to have been

TEXAS

344

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

b

a

!

cml ’11 ’21 ’31 ’4I t51

FIGURE 2. Figurine from San Patricio County, Texas. Artist’s
version; front, back and side views are shown.

a
I
cm

b
I

12

13

14

15

1

FIGURE 3. Figurine from San Patricio County, Texas. Photographs
of front and back of the specimen are shown (see Fig. 2,a,b).

FIGURINES FROM COASTAL REGION

Weight:

345

rubbed to produce a slightly faceted surface. These areas
are visible in Fig. 4.
161.3 grams

Both the surface and the interior paste have numerous small pitted
areas. There are numerous dark brown to black inclusions that appear to
be hematite and some gold angular grains that look like iron pyrite. An
occasional fragment of mica is also included. Small inclusions of an ashy
looking substance that appears to be volcanic ash (tuff} occur through the
~aste. These do not react to hydrochloric acid.

o

L

I

Icml

I

FIGURE 4. Figurine from Live Oak County, Texas. Artist’s version
front, back, and two side views are shown.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

346

o

5

IIIIII

cm

FIGURE 5. Figurine from Live Oak County, Texas. Photographs of
front and back of the specimen are shown (see Fig. 4,a,a’).

oml rll ’21 131 r4 ’51
FIGURE 6. Figurine from Live Oak County, Texas. Photographs of
¯

sides are shown (see Fig. 4,b, b’ ).

FIGURINES FROM COASTAL REGION

347

Clay figurines are almost unknown in southern Texas. The only
previous report reflecting their occurrence was by George C. Martin
(1929} who reported specimens from a site on Copano Bay:
"Two small curious objects of reddish baked clay. These could have
been of no particular use and were probably fetishes or ceremonial.
The clay composing these were baked to unusual hardness. The objects
themselves were of irregular shape, and about two-thirds of the surface
of each was coated over with a thick layer of asphalt. A third specimen
of exactly similar materials found on the banks of Inferno Creek, Baffin
Bay, Kleberg County. The three specimens appear to have been made at
one time, all by one person. The clay of all three baked to a peculiar
shade never found in pot sherds along the coast."

These three objects were reportedly donated to the Witte Museum
(San Antonio) but could not be located for comparative studies.
Fired clay figurines do occur elsewhere in Texas (e.g., Skinner 1978)
but are very scarce. Newell and Krieger (1949) report one torso fragment
from the George C. Davis site. This object is described in detail by Fritz
(1975). From this description it appears to be similar in size and surface
color to the Live Oak County figurine.
Hollow and solid body figurines of Mesoamerican origin have been
noted in central and south Texas. I have looked at illustrations of these (cf.
Krieger 1953) and none of them resemble the two artifacts described here.
The two figurines documented in this note are an insufficient sample
for any far reaching conclusions regarding their cultural implications.
However, they do add to our growing knowledge of the cultural inventories
of the prehistoric people of this area of Texas.

REFERENCES CITED

Fritz, Gayle J~
1975

Analysis of Ceramic Pipes From The George C. Davis Site.
Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
Krieger, A. D.
1953
Recent Developments in the Problem of Relationships Between the Mexican Gulf Coast and Eastern United States.
Sociedad Mexicana de Antropologia, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 497518.
Martin, George C.
n.d.
Preliminary Archeological Survey of a Portion of the Texas
coast made by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in
1927, 1928, 1929. Privately printed.
Newell, H. P. and A. D. Krieger
The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Society
1949
for American Archaeology, Memoir No. 5.

348

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Sharer, Harry J.
1975a
Functional Interpretations of the Lower Pecos Archaic Art.
Paper presented at the Programa de Arqueologia, La
Prehistoria del Noreste de Mexico y Texas. Reunion Sobre
Aspectos de Arqueologia e Historia de! Noreste, Monterrey,
N.L., 1975.
Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos Region, Texas.
1975b
American Antiquity, Vol. 40, No. 2 ,pp. 148-158.
Shafer, Harry J. and Fred Speck, Jr.
A Clay Figurine Cache from the Lower Pecos Region, Texas.
1974
Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 19, pp. 228-230.
Skinner, S. Alan
Historic Wichita Figurines from the Edge of the Llano
1978
Estacado. Great Plains Journal, Vol. 17, pp. 41-48.
Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas
Archeological Society Special Publication, No. 1 and Texas
Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 4.

