129

Division of Labor and Stress Loads
at the Sanders Site (41LR2),
Lamar County, Texas

Diane Wilson

ABSTRACT
The incidence of degenerative joint disease (commonly termed osteoarthritis)
was examined in the adult skeletal remains from the Sanders site. The location
and severity of affliction were recorded and compared with documented cases
of repeated action stress, and it was determined that the location of affliction
coincided with other Mississippian maize agriculturalists. Activity patterns evident in the skeletal remains included carrying loads, ground clearing, hoeing,
planting, paddling, skin scraping, grinding, weaving, and dancing. However,
severity scores were considerably higher among males than females, an unusual
circumstance among agricultural populations worldwide. The comparison of the
results of this osteological study to Caddoan ethnohistoric and oral accounts, as
well as to the archeological record, provide a test of methodologies used to
understand the past. It is shown that these records provide both complementary
and contradictory data, and it is only through careful use of all available sources
that an accurate reconstruction of the past is possible.

INTRODUCTION
This study examines evidence on human bone of "occupational" stress to
reconstruct the sexual division of labor for the prehistoric Caddoan occupation
represented at the Sanders site (41LR2). Repeated stress is referred to here as
occupational stress, as it typically denotes a habitual, culturally prescribed task
(Merbs 1983). This study also attempts to demonstrate the occurrence of evidence for stress loads on the body associated with the division of labor and with
particular sets of tasks.
Among the Sanders population, the division of labor was relatively traditional, although stress loads taken as a whole deviated from typical models for
agricultural populations. The majority of women in the Sanders burial population experienced lower bodily strain during their lives than did the men from
Sanders.
Because bone reacts to stimuli in a limited number of ways (through bone
growth and bone destruction) many activities and/or stressors may result in the
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65 (1994)

130

Texas Archeological Society

same bone response. This means that additional evidence of activities and/or
stressors is required in order to accurately assess that individuals performed
specific activities. In this archeological case, additional evidence has been found
in the site’s material culture remains (manos, metates, arrow points, etc.),
Caddoan ethnohistoric accounts, and oral histories. In this study, the only direct
link between the osteological remains and postulated activity patterns are the
material culture remains. Historic documents and oral histories for the Caddo
peoples do exist, but they are separated in time by several hundred years from
the archeological evidence discussed here, as well as by possible differences in
ethnic/inter-tribal affiliation.

DEGENERATIVE JOINT DISEASE
Primary degenerative joint disease is often termed osteoarthritis, however,
the former term is more accurate in its description of the condition. The changes
associated with primary degenerative joint disease (referred to as DJD) are
mechanical, in that they are associated with wear and tear from repeated action
and the aging process. The primary pathological response of DJD occurs in the
articular cartilage and synovial membrane of the affected joint. The synovial
membrane surrounds the space between articulating surfaces and is filled with
synovial fluid that serves to absorb friction of articular cartilage during movement. Osseous reaction occurs in the form of marginal bone growth
(osteophytosis, lipping, spurring, and exostosis), rarefaction (attrition, erosion),
and eburnation (polishing).
For the archeologist, the only evidence of response to stimuli in teeth,
bones, and joints is seen in the presence of new bone or the absence of normal
bone. The presence of new bone is the most common and initial osseous response to repeated stress stimuli (Miller 1985:392). Osteophytosis is defined
here as an abnormal bony outgrowth on an articular surface in response to stress
(Merbs 1969; Ortner and Putschar 1981; Miller 1985; Kennedy 1989).
Osteophytosis expands the osteological framework so the stress load may be
thus dissipated and lowered per unit area (Kennedy 1989:134); DJD is therefore
seen as a normal reaction to stress. Osseous involvement is secondary to considerable cartilage deterioration, and the condition occurs only after it has had
some time to develop (Miller 1985:392). When stress has not been sufficiently
reduced further cartilage breakdown results (Miller 1985:392). Additional cartilage breakdown may result in further osteophytic growth, or eburnation, and/or
rarefaction.
These markers of activity patterns are rarely the result of one stress factor.
Other influences that affect the condition’s presence are age, sex, handedness,
social status, life-style, nutrition, general health profile, and cultural practices
(Sakoloff 1969; Kennedy 1989). Age is the most pervasive of these factors and
involves both time-dependent molecular changes and a mechanical component

Wilson m Division of Labor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

131

associated with repeated insults to tissues. Sex has also been shown to be an
important factor in post-menopausal females who seem to be more susceptible
to DJD due to hormonal changes (Sakoloff 1969).
Duration of activity is also a factor influencing the expression of DJD. The
clearest record left on bone results from either an abnormally large amount of
stress over a short period of time (single event stress) or from a normal amount
of stress occurring over an abnormally long period of time (activity patterns)
(Merbs 1983:1). In other words, reconstruction of activities from osteological
remains can only give an indication of the activities participated in, not the
duration of time spent engaged in the activity.

THE ARCHEOLOGICAL SETTING
The term Caddo has historically been applied to at least 25 separate groups,
bands, and/or tribes that inhabited the northeastern portion of Texas, adjacent
portions of Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Louisiana. The northern Caddo groups
spoke a different dialect than the southern groups (Parsons 1941:9). By 1690,
these various groups loosely comprised three confederacies, named the Hasinai,
the Natchitoches, and the Kadohadacho (Perttula 1993:94). The Hasinai occupied the Neches and Angelina River valleys in eastern Texas; the Natchitoches
occupied the Red River Valley in the west-central portions of Louisiana; and the
Kadohadacho occupied the Red River Valley in the Great Bend region during
historic times (Perttula 1993:92).
Absolute dating of archeological sites within the Caddoan area has been
rather limited to date. The Sanders site is no exception, as it has yet not been
dated. However, it has been placed within the Gibson Aspect (Krieger 1946),
and is thus felt to represent a relatively early manifestation of Caddoan culture.
Current estimates are that the Sanders site may date between ca. A.D. 12001400.
The Sanders Focus is thought to represent one of the westernmost expressions of the Caddoan archeological culture. Components of the Sanders focus
have been found along the Red River in Lamar and Fannin counties, Texas, in
Choctaw County, Oklahoma, and from several sites in the upper Sabine and
Cypress drainages in Northeast Texas.
The Sanders site is located approximately 1.6 km west of Direct, Texas, in
the northwestern corner of Lamar County (Figure 1). The site consists of two
mounds and a low ridge of habitation midden located on the edge of a river
terrace on the eastern side of Bois d’Arc Creek. Bois d’Arc Creek is a tributary
of the Red River, flowing some 5 km northeasterly from the Sanders site to the
Red River. Excavation at the site took place in the summer of 1931 under the
direction of A. T. Jackson and B. B. Gardener from the University of Texas.
Jackson thoroughly excavated Mound 1 and trenched Mound 2 and the midden
(Figure 2).

Texas Archeological Society

132

~4

o
0

0

u
0

0

r~

[o

Wilson m Division of Labor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

133

Figure 2. The Sanders site (from Krieger 1946).

The Sanders site is considered to have been the center of a large region of
Caddoan interaction (Newkumet and Meredith 1988:39). Artifacts recovered
from the site indicates its sporadic use up to historic times. Nevertheless, while
the artifacts differ by depth, the graves are relatively homogenous in form and
burial offerings, suggesting that the burials represent a discrete period of use
during the Sanders focus. Jackson recovered some 90 individuals from two
locations in Mound 1. One group was scattered over the top of the mound, while
the other group was located on the eastern side of the mound (Figure 3). There
was no difference between the two groups in burial form or offerings. Both
single and multiple interments were found in both groups, and all individuals
were in the supine, extended position, or lying on their side. All had their heads
oriented to the east except one individual whose head was oriented to the west.
Nearly all individuals exhibit frontal and occipital deformation. Demography
within the burial population falls within the range of a normal population curve:
29 adult females, 25 adult males, 18 adults of indeterminate sex, and 20 children.
Artifact lists from the site were examined for an indication of the range of
activities that might have been participated in by individuals interred at Sanders
(Table 1). Unfortunately, due to the high number of multiple burials, no artifact
category could be clearly associated with a particular class of individuals (i.e.,
females, males, older adults, young adults), burial locations, or burial form.
The ethnohistoric literature and published Caddoan oral histories were also
consulted for evidence of activities that were possibly performed by the Sanders
population (Table 2). Unfortunately, the use of ethnohistoric accounts assumes

134

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Mound 1 and the Sanders site burials (from Krieger 1946).

continuity over several hundred years between the archeologicaL ethnohistorical,
and oral historical records. This problem is compounded by a lack of knowledge
concerning the identification of ethnic identity among the Caddo from the
archeological record. What this means is that ethnohistoric and oral histories can
only be considered indicative of likely activity patterns for the Sanders population. DJD patterns in the osteological remains are then used to test these hypothetical activity models.

METHODS
All 55 adults from the TARL collections were examined. Juveniles were
excluded from observation because DJD is primarily associated with repeated
action stress and aging. Of the 55 adults examined, 43 were selected for use on
the basis of representation of articular (joint) surfaces.
Of the adults aged less than 50 years that were examined, 12 were female,
15 were male, and nine were of indeterminate sex. Of the older adults utilized in
this study, two were female, four were male, and one was of indeterminate sex.
All three categories of DJD expression were recorded and scored from 0-2,
with 0 representing condition absent, 1 moderate expression, and 2 a severe
expression of the specific condition. Once actual observations commenced, it

Wilson ~ Division of Labor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

135

Table 1.
A Partial Lst of the Possible Activities that Members of the Sanders
Burial Population may have Participated in as Indicated
by Material Culture Remains
Artifact

Bison scapula hoes
Stone hoes
Celts
Manos and metates
Pitted grinding
slabs
Deer mandibles
with distal
end removed
Deer metapodials
Knives
Projectile points
Fish-hooks
Conch dippers
Pottery
Axes

Abrading stones
Pottery disks
Bone awls
Drills
Shell beads
Conch gorgets
Earspools
Pipes

Probable activity

Context

Soil tilling, manufacture, trade
Manufacture, soil tilling
Manufacture, ground clearing
Grinding
Chopping, cracking, crushing

Burials, midden
Midden
Burials, surface
Midden
Midden

Food preparation, sinew stretching

Midden

Food preparation
Butchering, hide working,
manufacture
Hunting, manufacture
Fishing, manufacture
Manufacture, trade
Cooking, manufacture

Midden

Manufacture, wood procurement
Sharpening
Manufacture, sewing
Incising, sewing, weaving
Punctating, sewing
Manufacture, trade
Manufacture, trade
Manufacture, trade
Manufacture, smoking

Burials
Burials, midden
Midden
Burials, adult males
Burials, midden,
surface
Midden
Midden
Midden
Burials
Surface
Burials
Burials
Burials
Burials, adult males

was determined that these categories were not sufficient, hence fractions from 02 were added to the scoring system.
To collapse the data recorded for analysis only osteophyte (lipping) scores
were quantified. Hence, in this report the term DJD is used synonymously with
bone lipping. Since bone growth (osteophytosis) is normally the first reaction to
cartilaginous destruction it may be the most useful form of DJD expression for
determining past activity patterns.

136

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2.
Accounts of Caddoan Activities and Divisions of Labor

Activity
Plant
Cultivate
Hoe
Harvest
Husk maize
Manufacture bow and arrow
Manufacture arrow points
Hunt
Accompany on hunt
Process hide and fur
Gather
Prepare food
Pound (maize, etc.)
Produce clothing

Females

Males

1, 3
1, 3
1

1
1
1
1
1
1

1

3
1, 3
3
1, 3
1, 3
1, 3
3
1
2
3

Carve wood
Chop trees
Construct residences
Construct birthing structures
Basket weave
Manufacture ceramics
Sew moccasins
Participate in warfare
Gaming (foot races, wrestling, and hockey)

3

3
3
3
3
3
3
3

Sources: (1) Newkumet and Meredith; (2) Parsons 1941; (3) Swanton 1942

Nearly all distinct articular surfaces were examined; 113 in total (Table 3).
By examining separate articular surfaces rather than regions a more accurate
account of specific activities can be gained,l

For example, the elbow was not scored as One region but the olecranon fossa,
thochlea, unlar groove, Capitulum, radial fossa, coronoid fossa, olecranon process,
trochlear notch, supinator crest, coronoid process, radial notch, radial head, articular
circumference Of the radial head, and the radial tuberosity were individually sCoredl

Wilson ~ Division of Labor attd Stress Loads at Sanders Site
Table 3.
Joint Surfaces Examined

Bone
Occipital
Temporal
Mandible
Axis
Vertebrae

Cervical vertebrae
Thoracic vertebrae
Sacrum

Ribs
Sternum
Scapula
Clavicle
Humerus

Ulna

Radius

Joint surface
occipital condyle
mandibular fossa
mandibular condyle
dens
inferior facets
superior facets
bodies
spinous process
costal demifacet
costal facet
centrum
superior articular process
auricular surface
head
clavicular facet
costal notch
glenoid cavity
sternal facet
acromial facet
head
trochlea
capitulum
otecranon fossa
coronoid fossa
radial fossa
ulnar groove
olecranon process
trochlear notch
radial notch
coracoid process
head
head
articular circumference of head
radial tuberosity
ulnar notch
carpal articular surface

137

138

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3 (Continued).

Bone
Phalanges of fingers
Ilium
Femur

Patella
Tibia

Fibula
Talus
Calcaneus

Joint surface
proximal articular surface
distal articular surface
auricular surface
trochanteric fossa
patellar articular surface
tibia articular surface
intercondylar fossa
lateral articular facet
medial articular facet
medial condyle
lateral condyle
superior fibular articular surface
inferior fibular articular surface
talus articular surface
head
lateral malleolus
Tibia articular facet
posterior tuberosity

Interobserver error was avoided since only the author made observations
and score determinations. Other experienced observers were randomly asked to
view and score approximately 10 percent of the sample. All but one of these
observations matched the author’s determinations; the one discrepancy involved
a slight reaction on the bone. In this instance it was difficult for both the author
and the other observer to decide on a score, with one opting for a score of 0.25
and the other for a 0 score. In general, then, the observations reported herein are
felt to be accurate.
Some of the joints highly affected by preservational and recovery biases
were lumped into regional categories. Regional categories were utilized for the
hands and feet. Since carpals and tarsals were rarely recovered they were omitted from analysis.
In the case of multiple bones with the same articular surface, such as ribs
and vertebrae, observations were taken as to the overall representation of DJD,
and then counted as one observation. Vertebrae were scored by region and
articular surface, and ribs were scored by articular surface.

Wilson ~ Division of Labor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

139

RESULTS
Representation
The incidence of osteoarthritis among the Sanders population was high. Of
the 43 individuals examined only nine (22 percent) were not afflicted by the
condition. This rate of occurrence was significant because so few older individuals were represented. This rate also seems high when one considers that
osteological involvement is secondary to considerable cartilage deterioration
(Miller 1985:392). Ortner (1992:5) has argued that only 15 percent of the entire
population should be expected to exhibit pathological characteristics on bone.
The other factor that makes the high incidence of osteoarthritis among the
Sanders population intriguing is that the Sanders site is a mound center. Mississippian and Caddoan mound centers are traditionally associated with elite individuals. Based on location and grave good assemblages, it was assumed that the
individuals interred at the Sanders site were of high status.
Higher male scores and the severity of DJD are unusual compared to other
Mississipian agriculturalists, regardless of social status. Pickering (1984)examined remains from both Mississippian mound center and village sites in Illinois
and found higher incidence of DJD among all the examined females:
When all individuals were accounted for, the mean score per joint surface
examined was 0.36 for females and 0.53 for males. Additionally, when considering the incidence of DJD as including those individuals exhibiting any evidence of the condition, males were more afflicted than females. Figure 4
compares the number of individuals with no sign of DJD to those with mean
scores of more than 0. Not only did males have the highest number of individuals afflicted, but the lowest number of individuals that were not afflicted with
DJD. This configuration shows that while there were more adult males than
females examined, DJD affliction was not evenly distributed among the ratios of
sex or age. If this were the case adult males would have had the highest number
afflicted as well as the highest number not afflicted. Three adult females do not
have any evidence of DJD as opposed to only one male with no evidence of
DJD stress. This difference is significant at the 0.05 level in a Chi square test.
Therefore, it was concluded that male stress loads were higher than female
stress loads in the Sanders population.
However, in the old adult category the reverse seems to be true. Higher
incidences were expected among older adult females due to post-menopausal
hormonal changes that often result in increased osteoarthritis (Sakoloff 1969).
The contradiction between adult males who had the highest incidence of DJD
and older adult males who had the lowest incidence of DJD is not expected
considering that DJD is a cumulative pathology. Figure 5 indicates that the
problem is representational. Older adult males were considerably under-represented in terms of number of articular surfaces present (29 joint surfaces present

140

Texas Archeological Society

Sex Indeterminate Older Adults
Sex

Indeterminate Adults -Male Older Adults
Female Older Adults
Male Adults
Female Adults
Total
0

8

16

24

32

40

Number of Individuals with DJD

---i Absent ~ PresentI{
Figure 4. Incidence of DJD mean scores of 0 and greater than 0.

in three individuals examined, out of a potential for 339 joint surfaces). In fact,
two of the older males were represented only by crania. Cranial joint surfaceg
were the least afflicted regions in the Sanders population.
Figure 5 also demonstrates that older females were the best represented
group in terms of articular surfaces present (two individuals and 126 joint
surfaces present). However, this is primarily due t° the presence of an individual
that was nearly complete; the other individual was poorly represented.

Stress Loads Among Individuals
Figures 6 and 7 show a bimodal distribution of DJD scores for all age and
sex categories. Both figures demonstrate that there, were relatively few joint
surfaces with a moderate degree of DJD expression. As expected, the majority
of joint surfaces examined were unaffected. However, a large number of joint
surfaces were severely afflicted. This distribution suggests either that: (1) a
majority of joint surfaces were not subjected to stress caused by activity patterns, while the joint surfaces that were influenced by such tasks were extremely
taxed, or (2) that there were a majority of individuals within the population that
were not afflicted with DJD, while those that were had severe expressions of the
condition.
The high percentage of extreme DJD expression in adult males, and the
low percentage in females (statistically significant at the 0.05 level), suggests

Wilson ~ Division of Labor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

141

OA Female Representation
n=2
Joint Surfaces Absent
Joint Surfaces Present

OA

Male

Joint Surfaces Present

Representation
n=3

(m .4%)
Adult

Joint Surfaces Absent

Female
Representation
n=11

Joint Surfaces Present

Joint Surfaces Absent

Adult

Male

Representation
n=15

Joint Surfaces Present

Joint Surfaces Absent

Figure 5. Representation of articular surfaces and individuals examined. There were a
total of 113 joint surfaces that could have been present per individua!.

142

Texas Archeological Society
q

350-

,300-

250-

200

150-

100-

50-

O0

.1 - 1.0

1.1 - 2.0

Osteophyte Score .;,
I~ Adult Females
[

m Old Adult Female~ L~-~ Adult Males

~ Old Adult Males

]
J

Figure 6. Osteophytosis scores for age and sex categories. The number of examined
articular surfaces falling ill’each scoi’e category is also given.

908070.

60

E

(2)

.

....

.........

50-

2

g

40302010-

0

[

1
Osteophyte Score

[~ Adult Females ~ OA Females

~ Adult Males

~ OA Males

Figure 7. Osteophytosis scores for age and sex categories. Percentages are given on the yaxis.

Wilson ~ Division of Labor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

143

differential distribution of activity stress within the population. However, Figure
8 demonstrates that differences within the population are not related to sex
alone. Most average individual scores for both males and females fall within the
0 - 0.8 mean range. Among the oufliers, males had much higher scores than
females. This figure demonstrates that there was some variation by individual,
however most individuals fell within a well defined range of values. It also
suggests that there was considerable variation in affliction between joint surfaces.
Although not displayed in this figure, burial location as well as position
within multiple burials were also considered in this investigation. Mean scores
ranged from 0 to 1.49 among single burials. Individuals within multiple burials
ranged from 0.4 to 0.69. Location within the graves did not correlate with
individual stress loads.
Some difference in mean scores was evident in burial location within the
mound, but this difference was not statistically significant. The mean score for
burials on the top of the mound was 0.40, while the mean for burials located on
the eastern slope was 0.56. Little social distinction was evident in grave inclusions between these groups, so it is not thought that the differences in stress
loads correspond to a distinction of social status.

M
M

M

.................... F .................................................................................................................
F

F

M
M

M

F

tl~ ................................................... FM ................................................................................................................................ M .........
F
M
xt .................. ~z ........................................................................................
M

M

...........
M
M

F

~ ........................................

~2 i°

,’o

Jo

~

~

do

do

~

do

~o

Number of Elements Examined
Figure 8. Mean individual osteophytosis score for females (F) and males (M). Number of
joint surfaces examined is given along the x-axis.

144

Texas Archeological Society
Tasks and Bodily Distribution of DJD

Since no obvious distinction among categories of individuals could be
discerned, body regions were examined to determine areas of the body most
afflicted with DJD. Figure 9 suggests that there is considerable variation in the
site of affliction. In order to demonstrate this, all joint surfaces were grouped
into nine body regions: the jaw, back, chest, shoulder, elbow, wrist, hip, knee,
and ankle. Because this simplification created an imbalance in the numbei" of
possible observations, articular surface representation was presented as a
percentage of the number of joint surfaces examined in relation to the number
of surfaces in each category. For example the shoulder region has eight possible
observations (four on each side), while the knee has 26 possible observations.
Figure 9 shows that the back was the most stricken region of the body. It
also demonstrates that the jaw region was not affected by usage stress. The DJD
readings for the temporomandibular joint were extremely low, averaging 0.01
with 90 observations (36 percent of potential observations if all individuals were
complete). This suggests that the Sanders population did not excessively process
materials with their teeth. Although dental attrition was often severe, teeth
lacked wear patterns specific to fiber processing behavior.

0.6-

3

0.7-

5
O

0.6-

O

O9

4

0.5-

9

.qo
0.4-

6

O
0,)

o

0.3-

r-

0,20.10
15

2’0

3’0

3’5

1
40

Percent Represented
1 Jaw

2 Back

3 Chest

4 Shoulder

8. Knee

5 Elbow

9. Ankle

Figure 9. Mean osteophytosis score of body regions.

6 Wrist

7 Hip

Wilson -- Division of Labor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

145

DJD in the Back and Agriculture
Osteoarthritis in the back is a manifestation of a generalized stress pattern
caused by a variety of activities and aging. Nearly all archeological populations
exhibit osteophytosis on vertebral bodies and articular facets (Ortner and
Putschar 1981:40).
The overall pattern exhibited by the Sanders populations differed by sex.
Females exhibited a pattern of decreasing stress from the lumbar, to upper
cervical, lower cervical, upper thoracic, to the lower thoracic vertebrae. Interestingly, mean scores for the back region as a whole were higher among females
than among males (0.75 versus 0.68, respectively). This difference was due
primarily to high DJD scores in the upper cervical region found in females.
Male scores decreased in severity from the lumbar to the lower thoracic, lower
cervical, upper thoracic, to the upper cervical vertebrae.
Both patterns of back stress seem indicative of North American agricultural populations in that they are found among other Mississippian agriculturalists from both mound centers and village populations. The female pattern of
high scores in the cervical region has been attributed to processing and transport
costs associated with agricultural activities (Pickering 1984:122). The pattern
exhibited by males has been attributed to activities other than participation in
the agricultural economy (Pickering 1984:121). Both Caddoan traditional and
ethnohistoric accounts described the participation of both sexes in agricultural
activities, although European accounts described far less participation by males
than females compared with the descriptions found in traditional Hasinai accounts (Newkumet and Meredith 1988; Swanton 1942).

Activities with Mean Scores of 1 or More
This category contains all activity patterns with average scores for all (or in
a few cases the majority) joints involved of 1.0 or greater. In this way activities
that were performed most often, and/or were most stressful, were specifically
examined. Males had higher stress levels than females. In examining the adults,
more than twice the number of joint surfaces were severely affected among
males (19) when compared to females (9).

Carrying Loads on the Back
Osteophyte development at the sacroiliac facet has been shown to result
from carrying heavy loads on the back (Trotter 1937). Many of the activities
discernible with the highest scores (1 or more) were associated with supporting
loads during transport. However, there was no ethnographic or ethnohistoric
documentation regarding divisions of labor for these tasks. The DJD data
indicates that males carried objects on their backs that were heavy, or were

146

Texas Archeological Society

carried often enough, to leave lasting impression on their skeletal remains.
Unfortunately, only four observations on the sacroiliac facet could be made to
indicate males carrying loads during transport. Since only one of the four males
had a score of 2, it is possible that only some members of the population
participated in this type of activity, or that it was an infrequent activity in which
one member of the population suffered an injury.
There is also evidence tfiat females carried loads on their backs, although in
a slightly different manner than males did. Carrying loads on the back also
results in stress in the lower thoracic region of the back (Merbs 1986). Females
exhibited considerable stress in this region with scores averaging 1 and also
considerable representation (9 observations).
It is interesting that the osteophyte pattern differed by sex. This suggests
that stress was dissipated across the lower back for females carrying loads,
while among males, the stress was directed downward toward the sacroiliac
facet. Perhaps devices used to transport items on the back also differed, and that
this was related to the type of items being transported.

Supporting Loads on the Head
There was considerable osteoarthritic evidence in the Sanders population
for carrying loads on the head. Use of the head in supporting objects has
resulted in cervical vertebrae spinous process bone lipping (Pickering 1984:78,
97), anterior subluxation of the body (Scher 1978:97), body compression or
shear stress (Pickering 1984:164), locked facets (Scher 1978:97), and dorsal
body compression (Merbs and Euler 1985:389). The upper cervical vertebrae
were highly affected among the Sanders adult female population, with a mean
score of 1.00 (Figures 10 and 11). Males exhibited a mean score of only 0.25.

Figure 10. Second cervical vertebra (786) with left inferior articular facet exhibiting
extreme osteophytosis (Drawing by Kaylee Stallings).

Wilson m Division of Labor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

147

Figure 11. Above: fifth cervical vertebra (787) showing fight superior articular facet bone
lipping and erosion, while the left superior articular surface is normal. Below: lower
cervical vertebrae (787) showing anterior vertebral bony lipping scored as 2 (Drawing by
Kaylee Stallings).

Additional skeletal evidence for carrying loads on the head was found in
the upper cervical vertebral bodies in females. Scores in this region increased
with age (mean score for young adult females of .0.88, and 1.25 for old adult
females). It is possible that this task increased with age, but it is more likely that
the scores represent the cumulative effects of this pathology.
There was no evidence of tumpline use among the Sanders population. The
osteoarthritic evidence was instead consistent with balancing a load on the head
in an unaided manner. Tumplines pull the head and cervical vertebrae backwards. This motion causes the cervical vertebral joints considerable stress along

148

Texas Archeological Society

the dorsal margins of the body and also affect the spinous process (Merbs and
Euler 1985:389). Balancing a load on the head, however, tends to push the head
tbreword and into the chest. This posture often results in osteophyte development along the anterior margins of the cervical vertebrae, as well as anterior
subluxation (Scher 1978:97). Osteophyte development within the Sanders population followed the latter pattern as no individual exhibited lipping on the
posterior margin of the cervical ve~ebrae. Considerable anterior subluxation
was noted among the population but could not be quantified by the scoring
procedures used here.

Ground Clearing, Planting, and Hoeing
Another activity indicated by vertebral DJD is ground clearing and soil
preparation. These low to the ground activities are associated with high levels of
stress in the lower back (lower thoracic and lumbar vertebrae). There were many
artifacts in the Sanders site assemblage indicative of these activities: bison
scapula hoes, stone hoes, celts, and axes. These activities were also discussed in
Hasinai oral histories (Newkumet and Meredith 1988) and in the ethnohistoric
accounts (Swanton 1942)
Both joint surfaces examined were well represented, thus assessments were
made with confidence. Differences between females and males were slight. Both
sexes had higher mean scores in the lumbar region than in the thoracic region;
males, however, had higher scores than females in the lumbar region, while
females had higher scores in the thoracic region. Female lower thoracic vertebral body mean scores were 1,00, while male scores were 0.94 (Figure 12). Male
lumbar vertebral body means Were i.33, while the female mean was 1.12.
Although these differences were slight, they may imply that females and
males participated in slightly different agriculturally-related activities. As stated
earlier, carrying loads across the lower back increase stress on the lower thoracic

Figure 12. Lumbar vertebra (397) with lipping on the anterior vertebral body and right
superior articular facet (Drawing by Kaylee Sta!lings).

Wilson m Division of Labor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

149

vertebrae among females. The overall scores and locations affected also suggest
that males may have participated in low to the ground agricultural activities that
would have affected the lumbar vertebrae to a greater extent than among the
females.
These scores do not indicate that males exclusively participated in soil
cultivation and planting. Traditional accounts stated that both men and women
planted and cultivated the soil (Newkumet and Meredith 1988), while
ethnohistoric accounts stated that women primarily (not exclusively) cultivated
the soil, women (exclusively) planted, and both women and men hoed (Swanton
1942). The DJD data from the Sanders site indicates that participation in these
activities was not equal; additionally, mean scores indicate that they may not
have been as female-centered as the ethnohistoric data imply.

Paddling
Evidence of paddling is inferred for the Sanders population because elbow
region lipping scores are greater on the capitulum than on the trochlea of the
same hand (Merbs 1983:151). This was the case for males from the Sanders site,
with mean capitulum scores ofl.35 and trochlea means of 1.18. (Female scores
are considerably lower, averaging 0.64 on the trochlea, and 0.50 on the capitulum.) Both are greatest on the left hand, a pattern consistent with a main grip
being formed in the left hand (and guiding with the right hand).

Long Distance Walking, Running, or Dancing
The other high scoring activity pattern found in males is for running, long
distance walking, or dancing. Females also exhibit this pattern, but with a more
bilateral distribution of affliction. The posterior calcaneal tuberosity often produces a large bony outgrowth in response to long distance travel by foot (Dutour
1986:222) (Figure 13). On males, lipping occurred on the right calcaneal tuberosity. DJD also commonly occurred in the corresponding femur at the patellar
articular surface (Figure 14), indicating considerable movement in the knee
region, probably from running, walking, and/or dancing. The Caddo are known
to have traveled great distances to attend trading fairs, but it is not known who
or how many traveled. The Caddo may also have traveled some distance to hunt.
Ethnohistoric accounts describe women accompanying men on the hunt
(Swanton 1942), and the osteoarthritis data seems to support this.
On the left side of the body, mean scores were considerably lower than on
the right. Means for the calcaneal tuberosity were 0 on the left side and 1.00 on
the right; left patellar articular surface scores averaged 1.12, and a score of 1.75
on the right. It is unlikely that the sidedness of this pathology simply reflected
handedness and consequent strength differences. Similarly, the unilateral
distribution was not the result of few observations on the calcaneus (four left

150

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 13. Right calcaneus (787) exhibiting large bony tip on the tuberosity, producing the
hook- like projection where the bone would normally be smooth (Drawing by Kaylee
Stallings).

Figure t4. Distal right femur with patella articular surface displaying severe osteophytosis
(scored as 2); normally this surface is smooth (Drawing by Kaylee Stallings).

and three right). When same individuals were compared, real differences were
evident. Although most observations were on different individuals, the patella
articular surface (four left and four right) supported findings of a unilateral
distribution based on the calcaneus.
There is one ethnohistorically and traditionally documented activity that
may account for the distribution of scores in this body region: dancing. Dancing

Wilson ~ Division of Labor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

151

with specific foot and leg movements may have caused the unilateral distribution
of DJD within the feet and legs.
Osteophyte development on the calcaneal tuberosity followed the same
pattern in old adult females from the Sanders site. Again the pattern observed is
focused on the right side of the body. Observations were higher among females
(10 right, and six left) and averaged 1.33 on the left and 2.0 on the right side of
the body.
Since the patterns were different for males and females it is likely that they
reflect the performance of different activities. Females are described in the
ethnohistoric literature as gatherers (Swanton 1942). It is possible that considerable travel went into this activity, although again, the pattern does not fit long
distance travel well enough to support this hypothesis. Again, it is more likely
that the patterns resulted from an assumed posture in dance. In this case, postures would seem to have differed by sex.
Overall, lower body stress was greater for males than females among the
Sanders population. Males exhibited mean osteophyte scores of greater than
0.50 on the patella (medial and lateral articular surfaces) and tibia articulation
of the right femur (Figure 15 and 16). Interestingly, the distribution of DJD in
the patella is bilateral, although slightly higher scores were recorded for the
right medial facet (0.75 versus 0.67 on the left). Bilateral distribution is not,
however, seen in the tibia articulation of the femur (right mean of 0.85, left
mean of 0.40).

Activities with Mean Scores of 0.75 or Greater
As the level of significance decreases, activities are highlighted that were
less stressful and/or performed less often. Again, the number of joint surfaces

Figure 15. Right patella (786) with medial and lateral facets displaying extreme marginal
osteophytosis (Drawings by Kaylee Stallings).

152

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 16. Distal right femur with marginal lipping on the tibia articular surface (Drawings
by Kaylee Stallings).

with osteophyte scores greater than or equal to 0.75 was higher among males
(38) than among females (16), implying greater male stress loads.

Wood Cutting
Evidence for ground clearing activities among males was found in a
specific stress pattern not seen in females from the Sanders site. Osteophyte
development on the olecranon process of the right ulna (0.83 mean) may
indicate that males performed wood cutting activities. Olecranon p(ocess
"spicule-like" bone growth has been correlated with wood cutting and other
activities where the arm is horizontal and the elbow is flexed (Dutour 1986:222)
(Figure 17).’ Woodcutting was documented ethnohistorically as a male task
(Swanton 1942). Additionally, many stone axes were recovered from the
Sanders site.

Carrying Loads with the Arms Bent
Males show some evidence of carrying heavy loads with their arms bent.
This activity shows up ’in radial tuberosity degeneration (Dutour 1986:222)
(Figure 18). Caddoan males were described as gathering wood for building
structures (Swanton 1942). In genera!, stress on the radial tuberosity is the direct
result of flexion of the elbow, and this could also’have been associated with
paddling and/or cutting and scraping skins (Merbs 1983:154, 156).
Interestingly the occurrence of this degeneration is found primarily on the
right side (right mean of 0.75, left mean of 0.67): The difference is small enough
to suggest that handedness may have caused this difference.

Wilson m Division of Labor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

153

Figure 17. Right ulna (787) with hook-like osteophyte on the olecranon process (Drawing
by Kaylee Stallings).

Figure 18. Right and left proximal radii (787) with degeneration in the form of bone
erosion and marginal lipping on the radial tuberosities (Drawing by Kaylee Stallings).

154

Texas Archeological Society
Skin Scraping

There was some evidence for skin scraping activities among the males at
the Sanders site. This is in contrast to the oral tradition of the Hasinai, which
describes only women processing hides and furs (Newkumet and Meredith
1988). Furthermore, the ethnohistoric literature describes members of both sexes
participating in hide work (Swanton 1942).
DJD data indicate that scrapers were held palm-down and used in a back
and forth, trough-like motion. This type of motion affects the distal humerus
(ulnar groove and trochlea), proximal ulna (olecranon and coracoid process, and
trochlear notch), and marginal areas of the radial head (Merbs 1983:154, 156;
Miller 1985).
Often the sternal and acromial facets of the clavicle are involved in the
back and forth motion associated with skin scraping. The mean scores for both
of these surfaces on the left side were greater than 0.75 (sternal facet mean of
0.9 and the acromial facet mean of 0.81), and on the right side were 0.67 and
1.67, respectively.
The above pattern could also be the result of wood working, which Parsons
(1941) documents as a male activity. The motions would be the same back and
forth movement as described for skin scraping.
Osteophyte development on the clavicular facets has been correlated with
bow and arrow and atlatl use, as well as with grinding (Angel 1966:3). Since
none of the other patterns of degeneration associated with bow and arrow use
and grinding have been thus far illuminated, clavicular facet degeneration has
been assumed to be related to skin scraping in a back and forth motion, to
paddling, and possibly to throwing objects in an over-the-shoulder manner.

Sewing, Basket Weaving, Ceramic Production,
Flint Knapping, and Shell Working
The DJD expression on the palmar side of the fingers was seen in adult
females (mean of 0.94 [n = 6]) among the Sanders population. Four of the six
females had severe expressions in this region. DJD in the finger region is
associated with activities requiring fine finger manipulation of objects. It has
been directly associated with sewing (Merbs 1983:155), an activity for which
there is ample evidence among the Caddo; at the Sanders site several bone awls
and drills were recovered. Pottery disks that may have functioned as spindle
whorls were also present in the Sanders collection. Textiles have been recovered
from other Caddoan archeological sites, including the Spiro site (Kuttruff 1993).
The only description of specific sewing in the ethnohistoric record is of
moccasin sewing as a male activity. Mean osteophyte scores indicate that if
males sewed their moccasins, it was a rare event (female mean of 0.94, male

Wilson ~ Division of Labor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

155

mean of 0.12). The Hasinai traditional history stated that women prepared the
clothing (Newkumet and Meredith 1988). Additionally, females were described
as wearing more clothing than males (Griffith 1954:105). It is logical, therefore,
to assume that females did most of the sewing.
Ceramic manufacture and basket weaving require extensive manipulation
of small objects and the use of fingers as tools. Both of these activities have
been attributed to females (see Swanton 1942) and seem the most logical causes
for the observed DJD pattern. Flint knapping is another possibility, although this
task was not ascribed to females in any of the ethnohistoric literature studied.
Additional activities suggested for the Sanders site that would require finger
manipulation include husking maize, traditionally documented as performed by
both females and males (Newkumet and Meredith 1988), and shel! working,
documented artifactually in the thousands of shell beads and many elaborate
shell gorgets recovered from the Sanders site.

Activities Evidenced by Mean Scores
of 0.5 or More: Grinding
The pattern exhibited by the Sanders females was consistent with the use
of the manos and metates recovered from the site. Grinding was performed on
small, circular grinding slabs with a smal! motion, so only a single hand was in
use at a time, and the motion was circular, rather than back and forth, or by
pounding. Degenerative patterns for this motion were found among females, and
exaggerated in older females, on the right, presumably dominant, body side. The
inclusion of the older female brought mean scores for the right capitulum,
articular circumference of the radius, and radial head up to 0.65, 0.5, and 0.75,
respectfully. The score distribution by age indicates that this activity was
probably performed by most females, although perhaps to a lesser extent among
younger females within the Sanders burial population.

Activities Not Evidenced in this Study
Several activities documented ethnohistorically, traditionally, and
artifactually, were not evidenced in the DJD observations from the Sanders
population. These include bow and arrow use and pounding. It is possible that
these activities were performed rarely and did not much impact bone, or that
they were not stressful activities. It is also possible that these activities were not
visible simply because only bone lipping was quantified in this analysis, rather
than bone lipping, erosion, and eburnation. However, since bone lipping is the
first reaction to stress on the bone, it is doubtful that if these activities impacted
the bone they would not have been visible in osteophyte development.

156

Texas Archeological Society
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS: ACTIVITY PATTERNS
AND THE DIVISION OF LABOR

Perhaps the greatest use of skeletal studies in archeology is found in the
integration of all available sources of data to test and refine hypotheses concerning ethnohistoric and archeological materials. The use of skeletal remains to
detect activity patterns at the Sanders site allowed some corroboration of the
behavioral record by lending support to specific activities not evidenced materially. For example, the use of boats among males from the Sanders site was
detected through osteological evidence of paddling activities. Many activities
described ethnohistorically for the Caddo were also evidenced in the physical
remains from the Sanders site, with some refinements. For instance, the gathering activities of females were not found solely in females from Sanders.
The traditional accounts of the Hasinai were also predominately supported
by this osteological analysis. For example, the manufacture of bows was documented as a male task (Newkumet and Meredith 1988). This activity could only
be implied indirectly through its association with other tasks documented in
DJD patterns. Males exhibit patterns consistent with chopping wood and hide
work. Although a leap of faith may be required to claim that these activities are
related to bow manufacture, this is not an unreasonable suggestion in view of
the overall context of DJD patterns.
Unfortunately, neither the traditional history, ethnohistoric accounts, nor
the archeological record indicate which individuals within the population endured hardships or enjoyed leisure. The only way to determine this at present is
through skeletal study. Measures of stress can be used to determine underlying
and fundamental relationships on which group social structure is based.
The burial population at the Sanders site was considered to be an elite one
primarily due to its placement within a mound context, and secondarily due to
the rich grave goods that accompanied these individuals. This study has demonstrated that task-oriented activities were participated in by the Sanders population. Participation in agricultura! activities was found in both females and males;
this included planting, cultivation, and hoeing. Craft work was also demonstrated among the females in sewing activities. However, participation by this
population in hunting and in some food processing techniques is less clearly
demonstrated through osteological analysis.
The DJD evidence of activity patterns may indicate the ritual importance of
agriculture among the Sanders population. This would explain participation in
activities associated with agriculture, but the limited evidence for food preparation and hunting activities. The ritual importance of agriculture among the
Caddo ’was suggested in Newkumet and Meredith’s (1988) depiction of men
beginning each day by walking the fields of maize; agricultural activities were
also described as communal.
The patterns of activity outlined by the DJD evidence also suggest a limited degree of differentiation between the elite and non-elite among the Caddo.

Wilson ~ Division of Labor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

157

Unfortunately, a village population has not yet been analyzed for comparative
pul~oses. Overall stress loads on joint surfaces were high, with 78 percent of the
population affected by DJD. The conditions evident were secondary to considerable cartilage deterioration, representing a significant amount of time spent in
these activities, or a considerable amount of stress.
Stress loads were examined for females and males. It was expected that
females would exhibit greater stress loads than males, as has been found in other
inland Mississippian populations (Bridges 1987; Pickering 1984). The opposite
was true for the Sanders population. Males exhibited higher stress loads in terms
of greater mean osteophyte scores, greater number of highly afflicted articular
surfaces, and in the greater number of afflicted joint surfaces.
These results call into question the general assumption that agricultural
adaptations result in a greater burden for females than males (Harris and Ross
1987). In the past, this idea has been used to infer gender status in agricultural
populations (Harris and Ross 1987:44). Stress differentials at the Sanders site
suggest that females enjoyed a comparatively high status. However, other evidence, such as material symbolism, and dietary reconstruction, are needed before sexual status can adequately be assigned in this Caddoan population.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to thank the many individuals who made this research possible. I am
sincerely grateful to those mentioned below, as well as many not mentioned, for
advice and support. Responsibility for errors and interpretation of the data are
mine alone.
In particular I wish to thank Dr. Tom Hester for initial encouragement and
continued support throughout the development of this project. This research was
stimulated by a course project for Dr. Hester that ballooned, with his backing,
into what is presented here.
I also wish to thank many of Dr. Hester’s colleagues at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory where the Sanders collections are housed. I especially want to thank Dr. Darrell Creel for advice and discussions that shaped this
project. Dr. Hester and Dr. Creel granted access to the Human Osteology Laboratory at TARL. A great deal of time was saved in the inventory process with the
help of Christine Lee in the lab.
Much of the analytical work presented here could not have been advanced
without the aid of Matthew Tomaso. We spent numerous days laboring over the
presentation of data in this paper. He prepared the graphs as a result of these
discussions, although any errors that may be included are mine. I am also
indebted to him and Dr. Hester for editoria! assistance.
The illustrations are Kaylee Stallings’ work. Her adeptness exceeds compliment. I wish to also thank Elizabeth Andrews for photographs and slides that
have been presented as lecture material.

158

Texas Archeological Society

In particular, Elizabeth’s work made my presentation at the 1993 Caddo
Conference possible. Grants from The Friends of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory and the Potts-Sibley funds also provided for this presentation.
I wish to thank Dr. Sam Wilson for his help with the latter, and Dr. Hester for
his help with the former.

REFERENCES CITED
Angel, J. L.
Early Skeletons from Tranquility, California. Smithsonian Contributions to
1966
Anthropology 2(1). Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Bridges, P. S.
1987
Osteological Correlates of Weapon Use. Paper presented at the 86th Annual
Meeting of the American Anthropological Association, Chicago.
Dutour, O.
Enthesiopathies (Lesions of Muscular Insertions) as Indicators of Activities
1986
of Neolithic Saharan Populations. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 71:221-224.
Griffith, W. J.
1954

The Hasinai of East Texas as Seen by Europeans, 1687-1772. Tulane University, Philological and Documentary Studies 2(3), New Orleans.

Harris, M. and E. B. Ross
Death, Set; and Fertility: Population Regulation in Preindustrial and Devel1987
oping Societies. Columbia University Press, New York.
Kennedy, K. A. R.
1989

Skeletal Markers of Occupational Stress. In: Reconstruction of Life From the
Skeleton, editied by M. Y. Iscan and K. A. R. Kennedy, pp. 129-160. Alan R.
Liss, Inc., New York.

Krieger, A. D.
1946

Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas: The University of
Texas Publication 4640, Austin.

Kuttruff, J. T.
Mississippian Period Status Differentiation Through Textile Analysis: A
1993
Caddoan Example. American Antiquity 58:125-145.
Merbs, C. F.
Patterns of Activity-lnduced Pathology in a Canadian Eskimo Isolate. Un1969
published Ph.D. dissertation, University of Wisconsin, Madison.

Wilson ~ Division of I_ztbor and Stress Loads at Sanders Site

159

Patterns of Activity-bzduced Pathology bl a Canadian bruit Population.
National Museum of Man Mercury Series 119. Archaeological Survey of
Canada, Ottawa.

1983

Merbs, C. F. and R. C. Euler
1985

Atlanto-occipital Fusion and Spondylolisthesis in an Anasazi Skeleton from
Bright Angel Ruin, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona. American Journal
of Physical Anthropology 67:381-391.

Miller, R. J.
1985
Lateral Epicondylitis in the Prehistoric Indian Population from
Nuvakwewtaqa (Chavez Pass), Arizona. In: Health and Disease in the Prehistoric Southwest, edited by C. F. Merbs and R. J. Miller, pp. 391-399.
Anthropological Papers 34. Arizona State University, Tempe.
Newkumet, V. B. and H. L. Meredith
1988
Hasinai: A Traditional HistotT of the Caddo Confederacy. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.
Ortner, D. J.
t992

Skeletal Paleopathology: Probabilities, Possibilities, Possibilities, and Impossibilities. In: Disease and Demography in the Americas, edited by J. W.
Verano and D. H. Ublaker, pp. 5-14. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Ortner, D. J. and W. G. J. Putschar
1981
Identification of Pathological Conditions in Human Skeletal Remains.
Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology 28. Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.
Parsons, E. C.
1941
Notes on the Caddo. Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association
57. American Anthropological Association, Washington, D.C.
Perttula, T. K.
1992
"The Caddo Nation": Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives. University of Texas Press, Austin.
1993

Kee-Oh-Na-Wah’-Wah: The Effects of European Contact on the Caddoan
Indians of Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Oklahoma. In: Ethnohistoty and
Archaeology, edited by J. D. Rogers and S. M. Wilson, pp. 89-109. Plenum
Press, New York.

Pickering, R. B.
1984
Patterns of Degenerative Joint Disease in Middle Woodland, Late Woodland,
and Mississippian Skeletal Series From the Lower Illinois Valley. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois.

160

Texas Archeologieal Society

Sakoloff, L.
The Biology of Degenerative Joint Disease. The University of Chicago Press,
1969
Chicago.
Scher, A. T.
1978

Injuries to the Cervical Spine Sustained While Carrying Loads on the Head.
Paraplegia 16:94-101.

Swanton, J. R.
1942
Source Material on the Histol:y and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bulletin
132. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington,
D.C.
Trotter, M.
1937

Accessory Sacro-iliac Articulations in East African Skeletons. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 22:137-142.

