The McCann Site
NOLAN E.

PRESTON

Technological Analysis by

JOEL

L. SHINER

ABSTRACT
Artifacts recovered from a deeply stratified midden in Central Texas are
analyzed both typologically and technologically. Certain traditional mythology regarding typology is questioned.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The excavation of the site could not have been possible without
the kind cooperation of the land owner, Mr. Gordon McCann. His
interest in the excavation was an inspiration and Mrs. McCann’s hot
coffee during the winter months was an added incentive.
Many hours of hard labor, digging and shoveling, were shared by
the author’s companion, Mr. Richard Pruitt.
Valuable infornaation on the classification of artifacts was furnished
by Robert Forrester of Fort Worth. Mr. R. K. "King" Harris also
helped in the identification of several projectile points, as did Mr.
Jay Blaine on the "Paleo" points.
Mr. Roy Padgett of Fort Worth kindly furnished information on
several tool types and on organizing this report.
Dura Maye Briseo was most helpful in converting the field notes
of two years excavation into publishable form.
Mr. Hubert Achor of Dallas is responsible for the photography of
the artifacts. His method is especially designed to emphasize techniques of manufacture and to play down ephemeral accents of natural
coloration.
GEOGRAPHY AND GEOLOGY
In Lampasas County, twenty miles from the Colorado River and
twelve miles from the Lampasas River, runs a broken line of hills
and mesas. On the eastern side of these hills a valley gently edges up
to the largest mesa and probes a finger up the eastern side in the
form of a deep and wide gorge. The gorge rises to 1500 feet above sea
level and terminates at a point 20 feet below the top of the mesa. Here
a rapidly flowing spring emerges and flows down the ravine. Materials that form the basis of this report were found in midden trash
and adjacent to the spring.
The topography of the area is typical of the hill country in central
Texas. The valleys have a rich tan loam, which, when cultivated,
grows bluestem, buffalo and witch grass. Along the rivers, hardwoods

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

such as pecan and walnut grow. The hills are limestone and where
soil permits, mesquite, live oak, juniper, and elm thrive. Shin oak
grows in profusion on the thin soil. Opuntias, known more commonly
as "prickly pear", grow well and are plentiful in the area. The average
annual rainfall is 30.24 inches. The average January temperature is 47
degrees and that of July is 87 degrees (Texas Almanac, 1955:577).
The site areas are located on top of a mesa that has a measured
elevation of 1580 feet above sea level. Below the crest, between 1540
and 1560 feet, are several acres of fairly level land that surround the
gorge on both sides. There are 5 different sites, each with a large
fire pit, scattered about the area. The mesa is limestone with a very
thin layer of sot! ranging from 9. to 4 inchs. Outeroppings of limestone ridges make walking an easy means of getting about, but by
automobile, following a crude trail 4 miles up the side of the mesa,
a hazard.
None of the mesa top sites are worthy of excavation due to the
thinness of the soil. Other than an occasional surface find tools are
scarce. Camp rubble such as broken manos, cores, chips and flakes
by the thousands cover the area. The sites were not well known due
to the inaccessibility of the mesa. The owner, however, has surface
hunted the area for years.
The native flint at the sites is characteristic of that of the Belton
and Stillhouse Hollow Reservoirs (Bell County) and that of a site
on the Colorado River in Mills County. Basically slate gray, it is
flecked with white and varies in shades from light gray to black.
Intrusive flints are very plentiful here. One of the most common is
the light tan and beige flint found along the Brazos River farther
north. Also very common is the chocolate brown flint common along
the Llano River. Very fine grained white, red, and black flints are the
majority of the intrusive flints. Chert, quartz, and worked obsidian
are also found.
Of the five sites checked, all have burned rock middens. The
heaviest concentration of camp rubble was found around these
burned rock areas (Fig. 1).
Site A has the largest pile of burned rock. Some 400 feet to the
southwest is site D which also has a large area of burned rock. Both
sites are 20 to 30 feet in diameter and 3 to 5 feet high. Test pits in
both areas discovered almost no artifacts. No burials were encountered during any of the excavations or tests in the area.
The McCann site is approximately 125 feet long (east to west) and
40 feet wide. Its shape is determined by the constrictions of the
stream bed and the bluff. These natural boundaries created a situa-

169

THE MCCANN SITE

1580

1560

Camp
Fire

Sites

Pits

not to scole

FmuRE 1. Site topography.

tion like that of a rockshelter where later residents were forced to
camp on top of earlier debris.
Today the vicinity supports a varied flora which would provide a
considerable portion of the subsistence. Among the wild plants that
might have been available in the past are the pecan, walnut, bull
nettle, oak (acorns), hickory, grape, dewberry, plum, persimmon,

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

clover, prickly pear, dandelion, nut grass, peppergrass, sunflower,
onion and yucca.
An exhaustive assessment of the fauna present in the area today
has not been made, but Blair (1950:93-117) is more than adequate
for study purposes.
Preliminary analysis of the bone from the midden indicates deer and
bison from all levels, but more abundant in Zones I and II.
EXCAVATIONS
It has already been mentioned that the burned rock middens on
the mesa top were not worth excavating because of the erosion and
because of the lack of artifacts. Much of the topsoil and possibly some
of the artifacts came over the cliff and were deposited on the McCann
site. Initially, it was believed that the erosion and redeposition would
create a situation which would include some reverse stratigraphy.
The artifact analysis, however, does not appear to bear this out.
The excavation was planned to cope with both vertical and horizontal differentation. Horizontal controls were maintained by a grid
system of five foot squares. Initially, vertical controls were imposed
as arbitrary six inch levels. Ahnost immediately however, natural
stratigraphy was encountered, and the arbitral7 levels were altered so
as to subdivide the natural zones (Fig. 2).
Zone I had a mean thickness of 18 inches and was excavated in three
levels, beginning at the surface of the site. The matrix was black topsoil with considerable ash. It was tightly packed and contained almost
no burned rock.
Zone II had a mean thickness of 30 inches and was subdivided
into six arbitrary levels. The matrix consisted of large amounts of
gray to white ash and a great accumulation of burned fragments of
limestone. The rocks showed no consistent structure and no clear
patterns were evident.
Zone III was approximately 18 inches thick and its horizontal
dimensions were much smaller. It was 70 feet long and 95 feet maximum in width. The soil was dark brown in contrast to the yellow clay
subsoil, and it showed little evidence of the ash and burned rock
encountered in Zone II.
CLASSIFICATION OF AtlTIFACTS
Projectile point classification was guided by the "Handbook of Texas
Archeology" (Suhm, Kreiger and Jelks, 1954), and by "Excavations
at Stillhouse Hollow" (Sorrow, Sharer and tloss, 1967). Some difficulties were encountered in the matter of the range of the various dfinen-

171

THE MCCANN SITE

Erosion

Z.one

I

Midden Zone Z
Camp

Sire

\

Zone5

Scale I"= I0 feet

FIGURE 2. Stratigraphic profile of midden.

sions of the points, and the author (Preston) accepts all responsibility
for the classification.
Other tools are classified (Shiner), as nearly as possible, into categories that reflect morphology and technique of manufacture. This
"system" recognizes that hmction can rarely be ascertained at "this
stage in American Archaeology, but shape and process can be described. This avoids the obvious trap of reading use into type names.
Scrapers are classified according to a modified European system
which identifies the position of the working edge relative to the bulb
of percussion.
THE ARTIFACTS
Severa! lists are necessary in order to indicate the changing frequencies of projectile points and other tools through the various
levels and zones. Table I indicates the numbers of projectile point

!

172

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

¢q

,..~

cO
¢.D

,.-~LO

¢.O
¢.,o

,5

¢.,O

Oq

,’~ OD

Oq

oO

lO

06
eq
¢q

lid

oo

Nco

q,

,....4

¢q

-<
[--,

cq

06

llllll~

tq

o

o

THE MCCANN SITE

173

types recovered with each level. Frequencies have been omitted
from the table because there is considerable doubt as to the validity
of many of the types and more doubt as to the ability of any two
individuals to agree on the classification of a significant number of
the points.
Not shown in the list of projectile points are 30 specimens usually
referred to as arrow points because of their small size. All were found
on the surface of the site. They include 15 Scallorn, 3 Young, 1 Alba,
1 Fresno, 1 Perdis, 2 unclassified and 7 fragmentary specimens. There
is no further information on this material, and no grounds for speculation on its relationship to the buried artifacts.
Projectile points reeovered from Zone I are exceptionally numerous
and are of many types. Of considerable interest is the presence together of significant numbers of points thought to be relatively early
and others thought to be characteristic of late Archaic. Ensor, Darl
and Yarbrough points were recovered along side Bulverde and
Pedernales; not just at the same depth, but within each substratum of
the natural zone.
There is some variety to be found in the raw material used, in the
quality of workmanship, in the range of proportions and in gross size.
The Ensor type had many specimens that were of quite superior
workmanship (Fig. 3 d, e). The Ellis type was smaller than would
have been expected. Bulverde and Pedernales types included a number of outsized specimens, many of which are exceptionally well
made (Fig. 3 In, n).
A most unusual phenomenon at the McCann Site is the frequency
of complete projectile points particularly in Zone I. Large numbers
of points are absolutely undamaged down to the smallest details of
tips and barbs. This group includes quite a few types that are long,
thin and slender. At the other extreme, 17 out of the 19 Frio specimens
had been broken. No explanations can be given for the breakage or
the preservation, for there were no burials and no caches.
Zone II consists of a natural level some 80 inches in depth. It is not
only thicker than Zone I, but it shows more apparent change in the
projectile point styles within the Zone. The types Montell, Mareos,
Frio, Castroville, Wells and Marshall are not present at the lowest
arbitrary division of the level, but become more frequent in the upper
strata (Fig. 3). Bulverde and Pedernales types are particularly frequent all through Zone II. Travis and Nolan points are most numerous
in the lower levels of Zone II as wel! as in the highest arbitrary level
of Zone III.
This is a most impressive array of projectile points. The 651 speci-

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

b
d
O

o

]~,’~cu~E 3. Points: a, Darl; b, Frio; c, Wells; d, e, Ensor; f, Castroville; g,
Travis; h, j, Nolan; i, n, Bulverde; k, Marshall; l, Montell; m, o, Pedernales.
mens from Zone I and the 737 specimens from Zone II are listed
for the purpose of illustrating typological change and the Table does
not include a large number of fragments. Neither does it include a
number of point types which are represented by extremely small
samples (Palmillas, Kent, Uvalde, Fairland, Edgewood, Williams).
Most of these types have only one to three examples at any one level,
merely overcomplieating a complicated typological morass.

THE MCCANN aTE

175

i

¯

O

d
b

g

FIGURE 4. Paleo-points. a-c, Gower; d, Plainview; e, J, unclassified; f, g,
Angostura-like; h, k, Plainview golondrina; i, Plainview-like.

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Zone III, subdivided into three arbitrary levels, covered a smaller
area and contained fewer projectile points (9.18 specimens). As a
unit, it appears to represent a more or less continuous deposition of
midden materials since there are no obvious subdivisions. There are
no apparent natural lines of stratigraphy, no lenses and no sterile layers within the larger natural zone.
The projectile points usually regarded as "Paleo" (Fig. 4) were
recovered at the same level and frequently directly above points
considered to be "Archaic". Such terms as Plainview-like and Angostura-like were used for some of the points even though half of the
specimens in each group appeared to fall within the morphological
limits of the "types" (Fig. 4 d, g). Two of the Plainview-like points
might well be called golondrina variety (Fig. 4 h, k). The meaning
of the type names and certainly the connotations thereof must differ
because of the context of the Archaic situation. Zone III, then, is
characterized by Bulverde, Travis and Nolan in its upper portion.
Lower in the Zone, and presumably earlier in time, the persistence
of the Pedernales type is noteworthy. The "Paleo" types show lateral
edge grinding, but so do all the Gower and some of the Pedernales
points at this level.
It would appear that certain types are fairly diagnostic for timemarkers as far as the McCann Site is concerned (Table II). Thus,
Darl, and Ensor seem to be late, Montell and Frio somewhat earlier,
and so forth, to Angostura and Plainview as the oldest.
Some significance might be attached to the fact that scrapers in
general increase through time, but end-scrapers show the largest
increment. More significance, however, may be seen in the virtual
absence of all flaked stone in Zone III other than incomplete bifaees
and projectile points. Single specimens of burins, bifaee foliates and
retouched flakes contrast peculiarly with the 9.11 projectile points.
Whatever was going on at the site at various periods, it is clear that
the activities of Zone III times differed greatly from later times.
Zone II and Zone I are represented by essentially the same tool
inventory. Clearly the contrast between the two can be seen in progressive change in tool frequencies.
The scrapers do not show the same characteristic pride of workmanship that is evident in the projectile points. Even so, the forms are
extremely well defined (Fig. 5, scrapers from Zone I; and Fig. 6,
scrapers from Zone II). Of the few specimens that did not "fit",
almost all show some unusual trait such as inverse retouch or placement of the bit at the proximal end. Two additional scrapers, not
listed, had been converted into burins by treating the scraping

177

THE MOCANN SITE

O9

N

cq

=

o

~

~~.~~~

.~

d
e

f

g

h

i

FIGUIXE 5. Scrapers, Zone I. a-d, end-scraper; d, transverse side scraper; e,
~, h, multiple-edge scraper; g, concave scraper; i, side scraper.

FIcuR~ 6. Scrapers and other tools from Zone II. a, f, denticulate; b, multiple graver; c, notch on scraper; d, end-scraper; e, j, side scraper; f, i,
multiple edge scraper; h, side scraper with graver; k, concave scraper.

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICALSOCIETY

edge as a truncation, and striking the burin spall from that surface.
One had been an oblique side scraper and the other a transverse side
scraper (Fig. 7 a, h). Several scrapers are made on local flint rubble,
others utilized flint river cobbles with cortex frequent. No clear preference is indicated. Approximately half of the scrapers had thinned
or truncated bulbs of percussion.
Notches are so infrequent that one doubts the wisdom of referring
to them as spokeshaves. Six specimens out of nearly 9_,400 total tools
are few indeed.
Burins are mostly on fortuitously or deliberately snapped pieces.
One is a single blow burin on a snapped piece and 3 are on truncations. Two of the truncations closely resemble edges of scrapers. Three
specimens show additional retouch along the platform in addition
to the burin blow (Fig. 7).
Gravers are carefully chipped from a single face, and many of them
show multiple bits.
Drills may have been halted since almost all of the examples are
either made on former notched or shouldered projectile points, or are
of the "T-head" shape (Fig. 8 a-d; Fig. 10 f).
Bifaces must be considered the most interesting group of all. Other
than the projectile points, the bifaees create an enigma. The one thing
that they probably are not is knives. Anyone who has worked with
stone is aware of the poor cutting characteristics of a biface. The
exceptionally large group from the McCann Site, that were available
for study, showed three sets of characteristics. One sub-group of 124
had been roughed out by percussion, but because of flaws, poor workmanship, or whatever, had not received further treatment (Fig. 9 e,
h, i). A second sub-group of 244 had been roughed out by percussion
and then thinned by billet flaking (Fig. 9 d, f, g, j). Many of this
stage broke because of (vibration?) shock, or were not finished because of hinged flake "knots" ( Fig. 11 a-d ), or were ruined by overshot
flakes (Fig. 11 e-i). The third group of 66 specimens had been percussion shaped, billet thinned and pressure retouched to complete the
job (Fig. 9 a-e). Thus these three groups of bifaees are not several
types but are stages in the process of manufacture.
There are other bifaees in the collection such as the "corner tangs"
and the "spear" point from Zone I (Fig. 19. a, e, d) as well as the
piano-convex pieces of unknown use (Fig. 12 b, e). There are also the
large stemmed pieces (Fig. 6 e, f, g) which show roughing out of the
notches and shoulders before the specimens were finished. These
three all appear to have broken during the thinning stage of the
process. Some complete bifaees from Zone II are shown in Fig. 9 d,

0

b

d
e

FIouI~E 7. Burins. a, b, h, on truncations; c-f on shaped flakes; g, single
blow.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIcURE 8. Various bifaces from Zone I. a-d drills on projectile points; e-g
unfinished points; h-j thinned, but unfinished bifaces.

183

THE MCCANN SITE

O

b

d

h

J

’

FICURE 9. Bifaces, Zone I. a-c finished but broken; d, f, g, j, thinned but
incomplete; e, h, i, percussion flaked only.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FICURE 10. Various tools, a, biface broken by impact; b, multiple graver;
c, denticulate; d, e, finished bifaces; f, drill, awl or reamer made on a
biface.
e. One biface that normally would have been classified as a knife
shows an impact fracture, suggesting use as a projectile point (Fig.

i0 a).
Artifacts other than those made of chipped and flaked stone include
a number of mano and metate fragments found at all levels of Zone
I and II. One mano fragment was recovered in the upper portion of
Zone III.

185

THE 1VICCANN SITE

¢
Q

b

d
e

g

FmURE 11. Unfinished bifaces, a-d with multiple hinge fractures; f-i,
ruined by overshot thinning flakes.

186

TEXAS ARCX-IEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Two ground-stone objects appear to be atlatl weights (Fig. 13).
One is grooved and the other (broken) is notched at the end.
Bone tools were restricted to the later portions of the midden, that
is, to the upper 94 inches (Fig. 14). As near as can be determined,
the marks on the bones are decorative, not utilitarian.
A stone gorget with at least two drilled holes was recovered in

:l-HE ~[CCANN SITE

FIGURE

13.

187

Atlatl weights?

Zone I (Fig. 15). It and a bone bead are the only certain ornanients
found at the site.
According to what we can see in the stratigraphy of tools (Table
III), other than projectile points, not many dramatic changes take
place. Since there are too few tools in Zone III to discuss, we can
only speak of that unit in terms of projectile points.
Zone II is characterized by a high frequency of retouched flakes,
foliates and side scrapers. Zone I is characterized by higher fiequencies of end-scrapers, drills and notches. Burins, truncations, corner tang "knives", gouges, and gravers are too few in number to be
highly significant, but all of these tools appear to be more characteristic of the upper portions of the site (Zone I and the higher arbitrary
levels of Zone II).
Such trends that can be observed, typologically, seem to be from
side scrapers toward end-scrapers, and toward more kinds of tools.
One important trend is in the reduction of tool size. There is a considerable and regular reduction in mean tool size from the lower
levels to the higher levels. This observation does not include projectile
points. They were left out of the calculations because so many were
broken. Table IV illustrates the change, expressed as the mean length
of all tools in each level, measured along the axis of the original strike.

188

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 15. Stone gorget?

FIGURE 14. Bone

awls?

CONCLUSIONS
A very large sample of tools and other remains were recovered
from a stratified site. Because the trash deposit (and/or living area)
was squeezed between the cliff and the water, the situation resembles
somewhat that of a cave. Stratified materials were inevitable as long
as people insisted on living there.
Fortunately, three natural levels existed in the midden. They contrasted in texture and in soil color as well as in artifact content. Excavation of the site in terms of recovering a sequence of projectile points
presented no problem other than that of long, hard labor and the
resolution to maintain rigid horizontal and vertical controls.
Unfortunately, less attention was paid to the recovery of debris and
debitage. A study of this unglamorous material might have shed
further light on the activities of the inhabitants. Especially, it might
have identified many tools as having been locally made. Also, at the

THE MCCANN SITE

189

TEXAS

190

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

time of excavation, no rational system was available for the classification of scrapers and some of the other tools. Consequently, quite a
few of these tools could not be fgured into the story. They had been
classified, or rather placed into funny categories, and then discarded
following the examples of available literature on central Texas.
TABLE IV
Mean length of complete tools other than projectile points
30-36

DEPTH

0-6

6-12

12-18

18-24

24-30

Number of
specimens

39

53

47

29

17

17

64.8

62.5

62.3

71.8

73.3

Mean length in
54.2
millimeters

36-42

8
80.6

The majority of the usable and significant data comes from the
sequence of projectile points (Table I). There is no escaping the fact
that the relative positions of the points are quite secure. Rodent holes
and all other excuses cannot be used here except to a minimal extent.
If numbers of points were moved up or down subsequent to their
deposition, the clearly demarked zones would not have remained
intact.
Some of the data are as follows: the Stillhouse Hollow point sequence (Sorrow et al., 1967) is confirmed at least in part; Bulverde
and especially Pedernales are established as "resident" types (Fig.
16); Gower or Gower-like points are confirmed as early in the sequence; "Paleo" points did occur along side of types that are considered to be "Archaic."
There is no further evidence on the meaning of projectile point
types. We cannot guess why so many types appeared, apparently
together, in the midden. We are unable to comment on the significance or even the existence of trade in projectile points. Had all of
the debris been available for study, perhaps we would know a bit
more about trade.
Less is known about the "other" tools of flaked stone, and a larger
sample would have been desirable. Nevertheless, a considerable continuity of activity is indicated, whether or not the inhabitants were in
the same ethnic "lineage" (lineage in the loose sense of the word).
No meaningful discussion is possible on the relationship of Zone III
to Zone II. On the other hand, from Zone II to Zone I there are
almost overwhelming similarities. These are in spite of very apparent
changes in point types.
The three stages of bifaees, the more frequent of the scraper types

191

THE MCCANN SITE

NV70N

~IOSN3~

0
oJ

’

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

192

are relatively consistent. Yet there is change. It can be seen in a shift
from side to end-scrapers, in artifact size and in the diversity of tool
types.
It may be speculated that the MeCann Site was a base camp for
different kinds of activities. Whatever the use of the large bifaees
may have been, one must suspect that the residents might have made
what amounts to a surplus of them; the reasoning being that if 368
of them were not finished, how many might they have completed?
How many could have been sold or traded? Was the making of bifaces
an economic activity at the site?
The presence of bones of large mammals suggests hunting, and
the presence of manos and metates suggests gathering of various
plant products. The discarding of large numbers of apparently servieable projectile points may indicate some supernatural belief. An
often repeated "folktale" in Central Texas has it that the Indians
would discard points that had killed something. Sometimes these tales
are based on authentic aboriginal beliefs.
REFERENCES CITED
Blair, Frank W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas ]ournal of Science, Vol. 11, No.
1:510-528.
Sorrow, William, Harry Sharer and Richard Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir, Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project No. 11, Austin, Texas.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Texas Almanac
1955 A.H. Belo Corporation.
Ft. Worth, Texas
Dallas, Texas

