A LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: A TEST CASE
IN THE NORTH FORK RESERVOIR AREA,
WILLIAMSON COUNTY, TEXAS
PATIENCE E.

PATTERSON

ABSTRACT
A refined model of a lithic reduction sequence designed as a
classificatory method for an in-the-field indicator of site function is
described. The model was constructed using artifacts from Site 41 WM
88 located along the North Fork of the San Gabriel River in Williamson
County, Texas. Further applications of this reduction model or sequence
in the central Texas region are discussed.

INTRODUCTION
In past years there have been publications dealing with analyses
of stages of lithic artifact manufacture (Holmes 1890; Sharrock
1966; Muto 1971; Skinner 1971, and Collins 1975, to name a few).
These various litl~ic reduction sequences or models offer a suitable
framework to study what Collins (1975: 15) refers to as "the
adaptive role of lithic technology in the broader cultural context."
In short, then, this resulted in the present study, which consists of
a synthesis and application of a sequence derived from the models
of Sharrock (1966), Muto (1971) and Collins (1975). These
utilized and refined for the analysis of materials recovered
result of the intensive archeological survey in the North
Reservoir area, Williamson County, Texas, in the summer of

were
as a
Fork
1976.

A classificatory method was needed as an in-field indicator of site
function. To this end, in this report, the application of this refined
model as both an analytical and a heuristic device is used to aid
the archeologist in making in-field judgments regarding a site’s
function.

Location and Environment of the Study Area
An archeological survey of portions of the North Fork of the San
Gabriel River area in Williamson County, Texas (Fig. 1), was
conducted by the Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, under terms of an agreement with the National Park
Service Interagency Archeological Service, Denver. The survey took
place during May and June, 1976.
The study area lies on both sides of the North Fork of the San
Gabriel River, bounded on the west by the "Fourth Crossing",

i

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

which is 2.9 miles downstream east-southeast of U.S. Highway 183.
The eastern boundary lies approximately 2 miles west-northwest of
Georgetown, Texas. The north and south boundaries of the
reconnaissance area are defined by the 850-foot contour level in
the proposed reservoir area, or the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers
boundary lines of the reservoir property. The study covers an area
of approximately 3,200 surface acres.

Edwards

Crass

(~

Past

Timbers

Oak

(~ Blackland

RES

Plateau

\

and

Prairies

Savannah

Prairies

1976

FIGURE 1. Locations of North Fork and Granger reservoirs including
the regional vegetation zones.

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

55

The reconnaissance area is just west of the Balcones
Escarpment, which divides the Comanche Plateau from the Coastal
Plain (Fenneman 1931: 50-58}. Local relief is well pronounced along
valley walls ranging from steep slopes to vertical cliffs. The
streambed is at an approximate elevation of 700 feet above mean
sea level, while the elevations on the rim of the valley rise from 750
feet to 900 feet above mean sea level. The upper reaches of the
reservoir exhibit a fairly broad floodplain; closer to the centerline
of the dam the relief is somewhat more pronounced with steeper
valley walls and less area of floodplain.
The soils are dark colored calcareous clays or sandy loams over
a limestone base, with many exposed areas of limestone (Sellards,
Adkins and Plummer 1932: 344, 346; and Godfrey, McKee and
Oakes 1973}. Much of the region is characterized by stoney soils
where the bedrock has weathered and the remaining durable
quartz and flint have mixed with the soil matrix.
The survey area is included within the Balconian biotic province
as defined by Blair (1950: 112-115}. The area represents an ecotone
of three vegetational zones: Cross Timbers and Prairies, the
Edwards Plateau, and the Blackland Prairie (Fig. 1A}. Thus the
vegetation is a mosaic of taxa, many of them common to all three
zones (Bryant and Dering n.d.). There are three generalized
regional variations which can be identified. These regional
variations are the Upland, Lowland and Riparian. The Upland
region is characterized by an understory of predominantly native
grasses, brushy plants and immature junipers and oak. The
overstory is predominantly juniper and oak. The Lowland region
has a thick growth of mesic vegetation. The overstory contains
thick growths of trees and shrubs and cleared areas contain tall
grasses with occasional trees. The understory includes much the
same flora as the Uplands region. The Riparian region is distinctive
and usually is confined to the banks of the drainages of permanent
waterways. Large trees such as sycamores, cedar, elm, and black
walnut are abundant. The understory includes grasses, composites
and numerous herbaceous taxa in the shaded areas (Bryant and
Dering 1976}. There are 57 species of animals known to the area;
for a discussion of the fauna see Blair (1950: 113-115}.

Previous Investigations
The reconnaissance area is in central Texas, which is an
arbitrary geographical unit employed in the archeological study of
the prehistory of Texas (Suhm 1960: 63-107).

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Prior to the 1976 field reconnaissance of the North Fork area
there have been sporadic archeological investigations of a testing
and survey nature. The first field reconnaissance was conducted in
1963 by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project (TASP), under the
direction of Harry I. Shafer and lames E. Corbin; it was a
preliminary survey of the areas to be affected by the proposed
North Fork Reservoir (Shafer and Corbin 1965}. In 1967, the TASP
began excavations at two sites, the John Ischy Site (41 WM 49) and
the Barker Site (41 WM 71). This was a direct result of
recommendations by Shafer’s and Corbin’s work in 1963. Although
published much later (Sorrow 1973), in 1968 further test
excavations were undertaken by TASP at eight sites within the
North Fork Reservoir area by W. M. Sorrow: 41 WM 33, WM 34,
WM 56, WM 57, WM 73, WM 87, WM 88, and WM 115. Sorrow’s
Ischy Site report was published in 1969 and the Barker Site report
in 1970. In 1970 Sorrow carried out further examination of the
area for TASP. Additional sites were identified during this latest
survey period with some testing being conducted. In 1974, Marsha
F. Jackson, representing TAS (changed from TASP to Texas
Archeological Survey in 1973}, reexamined and assessed some of
the previous documented sites and conducted a reconnaissance of
some areas which were previously inaccessible (Jackson 1974).
Chronological Constructs
Chronological constructs for central Texas have long been in
existence and have undergone constant modification through the
years (see Weir 1976 for an exhaustive historical perspective;
Prewitt 1976; and Prewitt, in press}. Weir (1976: 9-10} points out
two important events: (1) J. Charles Kelly’s (1947a, 1947b, 1959}
attempt to group central Texas archeological materials {primarily
projectile points} into units according to the Midwestern Taxonomic
System (McKern 1939), which brought about the term Edwards
Plateau Aspect, and (2) the publication of An Introductory
Handbook of Texas Archeology, by Suhm, Kreiger and lelks (1954)
in which various interpretations of Texas archeology were brought
together in a single volume. In the Handbook, projectile points and
ceramics of the state were classified into a spectrum of types, most
of which are still in use today as the primary "fossil indicators" or
index markers of cultural components (Weir 1976: 10). The
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions (Suhm and Jelks
1962), revised from 1954, is undoubtedly the most widely used
source for temporal placement of artifacts; however, more current
evidence has been found and further modification of the chronology

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

57

of central Texas has taken place. Briefly considered later in this
report, and illustrated in Table 1, is the latest chronological
construct for the central Texas region (adapted from Weir 1976;
Prewitt 1976; and Prewitt, in press). In 1962, Johnson, Suhm and
Tunnell distinguished Early, Middle, Late, and Transitional Archaic
Periods within Kelly’s Edwards Plateau Aspect. This formulation
too was based primarily on projectile point variations. In 1967
Johnson presented a construct which again utilized projectile points
as time markers. Sorrow, Shafer, and Ross (1967} developed a
temporal scheme based on projectile points which was expressed in
terms of local and occupational phases. Weir {1976: 13-14}
concludes that the periods constructed so far have been considered
ends in themselves and have not explained the prehistoric cultural
events. Accordingly, Weir {1976} offers a redefinition and division
of the Archaic in his The Central Texas Archaic. Weir’s five phase
designations of the Archaic, along with the "Circleville" phase
added by Prewitt (in press} make up the chronological construct
(Table 1) used here for the North Fork Reservoir and surrounding
areas. Weir follows the terminology of Willey and Phillips (1958:
22} in regarding a phase as:
¯ . . an archeological unit possessing traits sufficiently characteristic to
distinguish it from all other units, similarly conceived, whether of the
same or other cultures or civilizations, spatially limited to the order of
magnitude of a locality or region chronologically limited to a relatively
brief interval of time.

Weir’s phases of the Archaic correspond to intervals of stability
and change. His {Weir 1976: 5} construct of the central Texas
Archaic is seen through, "... a simplistic model of cultural change
-- dissemination to coalescence to proliferation." Weir (1976: 5-7}
utilizes Maruyama’s (1963: 164-179} ideas of cybernetics or systems
research and Birdsell’s {1968: 229-240) equilibrium systems to
investigate and explain the interrelated subsystems that regulated
stability and change during the Archaic.
As yet no manifestations of Prewitt’s Circleville phase have been
discovered in the North Fork area, but they occur in the nearby
Granger Lake Reservoir area (see Fig. 1A; Prewitt 1974: 135-147}.
No terrace sites in the North Fork area have been extensively
excavated; thus the absence of cultural remains relating to the
Circleville phase may be apparent rather than real.
Given the surficial nature of the surveys and the cursory
subsurface investigations at some sites within the North Fork area,
good primary context for the diagnostic projectile points is often

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

,,,,

,,,~,

,~

.....

,,,,,,

,,,~

o

O

o

o

,4

o

o
;]

c~

oo
~o

oo
oo
~0o

o~

o~

o~
oo
oo
coo

oo
oo
oo

oo
oo
oo

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

59

lacking. Table 1 illustrates artifact provenience and frequency of
occurrence according to the dated phase designations and their
associated index markers or projectile point types. Sites 41 WM 49,
WM 57, and WM 88 are burned rock middens with the majority of
their apparent cultural associations (e.g., index markers, other
artifacts and debris) in the Round Rock and San Marcos phases,
and some associations with the later Twin Sisters phase. The
majority of the sites noted in Table 1 are classed within these same
phases. However, at least one site, the Barker Site (41 WM 71), is
known to have later cultural associations of types of arrow points
of the Cliffton and Perdiz varieties and ceramics (see Sorrow 1970).
Weir (1976: 139) summarizes the Archaic by stating,
In the three part model for the Central Texas Archaic -- dissemination/coalescence/proliferation -- I visualize groups of people widely
dispersed over central Texas at the beginning of the Archaic, coalescing
into a cultural continuum (the Round Rock Phase), followed by proliferation
of different cultural groups over most of Texas and especially the area of
the Edwards Plateau.

The clustering of index markers on the Round Rock and San
Marcos phases would seem to substantiate Weir’s overall
projection of his model of dissemination/coalescence/proliferation
(1976: 139; see also his discussion of Birdsell’s equilibrium systems
and Maruyama’s cybernetics, 1976: 5-7). This idea of a coalescence
into a cultural continuum must be a qualified and tentative
conclusion because of the nature of the sampling of sites in the
North Fork area.

METHODOLOGY
As far back as 1890, lithic technology has been conceived of as a
stage or step-like production process. W. H. Holmes (1890) used the
term "blank" to refer to the first stage or form from which final
products are derived. Bryan (1939, 1950) took exception to Holmes’
work in many respects. However, Bryan (1939: 37) comes to the
conclusion in his analysis of the lithics near Cerro Pedernal, in
New Mexico, that, "the forms having the aspect of greatest
antiquity are merely stages in the fabrication of some modern
types."
In the logical progression of events regarding the manufacture of
lithic tools it is first necessary for man to have a knowledge of his
environment and what his utilization of that environment entails.
He must have prior knowledge of making and using stone tools and
must be familiar with what qualities particular kinds of stone have

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

which would suit his purposes {Spier 1970:3 and Clark 1952: 173}.
He must be knowledgeable as to the location and the method of
acquisition of the available lithic resources. The selection of the
proper core or nodule of stone {flint} also requires that the artisan
have an idea of his end result. This "mental template", according
to Deetz [1967: 43-49} dictates the form of artifacts. Through each
stage of an artifact’s production this culturally dictated idea is
foremost in the artificer’s mind {see Kroeber 1963: 103}. Variations
from the ideal are acceptable and recognized to some extent (Deetz
1967: 45). Since, as Deetz points out, lithic technology is a
subtractive process in which the reduction of a mass results in an
artifact, variations have a higher probability of occurring and
being acceptable than variations in an additive process such as
pottery making. A potter when making a mistake need only redo or
adjust his malleable clay to fit his mental image of the final
product. Thus, as a mechanical or technical failure the lithic reject
becomes a part of the archeological context as viewed by the
archeologist, whereas the corrected mistake on a ceramic vessel is
obliterated. The failures can become "fossilized" stages along the
continuum of lithic production, and if viewed and analyzed along
with other materials from the proper perspective can permit
meaningful inference regarding cultural processes.
A variety of cultural variables can come into play which will
dictate the outcome of the lithic process. The needs and desires,
skills and knowledge of the artisan are some of the variables which
through any particular culture direct the process utilized and the
ultimate archeological context of the lithic artifact. Ultimately, the
archeologist is dependent upon the results of behavior, as we deal
only with the objectifications of culture {Taylor 1973: 111}.
Before discussing the lithic reduction sequence it would do
well to point out that two different kinds of types are distinguished
and utilized in the classification of artifacts in archeology [Rouse
1960: 313-323). Rouse refers to "descriptive" types and
"historical" types. Julian Steward [1954} would designate those
types as "morphological" and "historical-index". Both Rouse’s and
Steward’s terms, descriptive and morphological, refer to types that
are based on form, physical or external properties. The second
type is the historical or historical-index; these are formed in order
to establish differences in time and space {see Rouse 1960: 318;
and Steward 1954: 54}. There may be some overlapping of the two
kinds of types, but they may be distinct because the modes
comprising each will have been chosen with significance relative to
special problems. This distinction applies specifically to lithic

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

61

typologies utilized in central Texas archeology and the materials
that have been dealt with in the North Fork area in particular. In
establishing a chronology for central Texas, historical types have
been created and utilized [see Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954;
Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962; Sorrow, Shafer, and Ross 1967;
Weir 1976; Prewitt 1976; and Prewitt, in press). The descriptive or
morphological types are used also (see Prewitt 1974: 82-108;
Sorrow 1973: 83-104; Sorrow 1969:26-43 and Jackson 1974: 18-43).
Describing and temporally localizing the material results of
behavior does not, however, tell us anything of the broader cultural
context. In order to ascertain these contexts the archeologist has
three sets of attributes on which to base studies: [1) spatial
relationships, (2) quantity, and (3) chemico-physical specifications
[Taylor 1973: 143}. The affinities existing between the cultural
remains and the environment are paramount in making inferences
regarding cultural processes. A functional conception of type would
also serve to bring processual inferences to fruition [Steward 1954:
55-57).
In discussing the lithic reduction sequence utilized as a
processual typological tool, five stages or artifact groups are
recognized (Fig. 2): [1) core biface or flake; (2) thick biface (blank)
or trimmed flake; {3) thinned biface [blank); [4) thinned biface with
form [preform); and (5) final product. The production of lithic
utensils should, however, be viewed as a continuum. As Collins
[1975: 16) points out, the stages or steps along the continuum are
not sharply delineated from one another but are distinct enough to
merit separation, thereby identifying certain manufacturing
processes. Within this system there are certain optional steps such
as trimming, shaping, rejuvenation, or even utilization as an option
at any given point on the continuum. In reaching each of the five
stages on the continuum it is necessary to utilize a mode of
reduction. Each stage is generally the precursor to the next stage
in the reduction sequence. Manufacturing processes required to
reach the stages in the lithic sequence are trimming, shaping, and
thinning.
As previously mentioned, one important aspect of the production
of lithic utensils is the human error factor, miscalculation, or what
is termed "technological failure". Many lithic specimens which
have been assigned to type categories and elevated to the status of
finished implements, are no more than early stages in the
manufacturing process of other "typed" implements as Muto [1971:
1) has pointed out. Some collections when inspected will show a
remarkable number of artifacts whose typological categories

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

p~ODUC+~
BL~AC~

USE
/

FIGURE 2. Lithic model or reduction sequence.

should include "technological failures" within the early stages of
production (Prewitt 1974; Shafer and Corbin 1965; Sorrow 1969;
and J.W. Edwards Collection and Notes, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL), n.d.). Within the options available to
the artisan the "failure" may be utilized as is, modified and
recycled, or discarded, then it becomes part of the unused lithic
debitage which remains as a part of the archeological context.
The Artifacts
The archeological study of the North Fork area and the central
Texas region is accomplished partly by investigating and explaining
the artifactual remains. Stone endures where organic materials
such as bone, shell and vegetal matter are claimed by the usually
high alkalic soils and humid environment of central Texas in
general and the North Fork area specifically. The sites are
afforded little or no protection against the elements. For these
reasons, lithic artifacts are practically the only source of evidence
we have with which to observe the prehistoric era of North Fork.
However, man being a very adaptive creature will exploit all
available resources for his subsistence and comfort. Assuming that
perishable items were an integral part of the technology, we can
make only predictive statements concerning the possible use of

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

63

artifacts of a perishable nature. Bone and shell often times remain
but these occurrences are minute relative to the lithic assemblage.
The lithic reduction model or sequence, described previously,
was applied to a collection from a test excavation carried out at
site 41 WM 88 {in 1968), a burned rock midden located on the
south side of the North Fork, approximately 3 miles upstream east
of the dam centerline. The sequence or model was first applied to
the existing collection to test the feasibility.
Only a small portion of the actual lithic material was intensively
used in this report. Those items utilized were the bifacial artifacts
relevant to testing the model and those implements determined to
have been taken out of the continuum of reduction through the
option of utilization. The largest proportion (93%) of the total
collection was comprised of the manufacturing debris and debitage.
These were originally divided into primary, secondary, and interior
flakes. As one might suspect, the primary flakes were smallest in
percentage {2%), with the secondary flakes at 12%, and the
interior flakes forming 86% of the total number of flakes. The
presence of lithic debitage and the stages of lithic production
suggest that the inhabitants of the site were manufacturing lithic
utensils. The low percentage of primary flakes quoted above are
meaningful in light of the nature of the flint found in the area, i.e.,
more nodular or tabular flint is found than cobble flint. Tabular
and nodular flint have less occurrence of cortex than does cobble
flint {Harry I. Shafer personal communication). Thus, the total
continuum of tithic reduction could be taking place at the site, even
with low percentages of cortex or primary flakes.
Tools. These artifacts are the utilized objects resulting from
reduction. In the case of the large unifacial tools the first stage
was reached and either the flake or the core was removed from
further reduction by the maker’s choice to utilize it as it was.
Further retouch or other specific strategies such as a steep bevel
were possibly performed in order to reach the desired utensil. It is
also possible that no further work was performed at all but the
artifact was simply utilized as it was. As seen in Figure 2, the
strategy or linear progression is diverted from the reduction
process directly into the optional "use" category. Also in this
category are those tools which were products of the reduction, that
is, smaller flakes or debitage which were used to perform scraping
or cutting functions (Figs. 3 and 4). The 16 tools considered to be
removed from the lithic reduction continuum at the first or second
stage have the following characteristics: [1) pronounced bulbs of
percussion, (2) compression rings of various magnitude, (3} cortex

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

on the dorsal surface or platform area, (4) signs of use and some
retouch on at least one edge or surface (Figs. 3 and 4). One artifact
(Fig. 4b) is a primary flake with cortex on the dorsal surface and
steep beveling along the lower and lateral edges of the artifact. In
the illustrations, the artifacts are oriented with the direction of
force from the bottom of the figures and the bulb of percussion,
where it is discernable, at the base of the photographs. The palmsized unifacial tool illustrated in Fig. 4b has a thickness of 2.2
centimeters and is 7.0 centimeters in width. The artifact shown in
Figure 4a is a fist-sized piece of tabular flint with remains of
cortex on both the dorsal and ventral surfaces. Flakes have been
knocked off bifacially, one side is beveled and shows wear along
the edge. The flake scars on the tool are bi-directional, some traces
of negative bulb scars are seen on the ventral surface of the
artifact (Fig. 4a).
FIGURE

FIGURE 3. Tools -- Optional strategies in reduction.

3

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

65

Many of these tools have prominent bulbs of percussion which
indicate the use of a hard hammer with a direct freehand
)ercussion method (Crabtree 1972: 11-12}.
FIGURE

FIGURE 4. Tools

-- Optional strategies in reduction.

4

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Unifacial tools comprise, for the most part, the major category of
tools with the exception of the Stage 5 artifacts or final products
which are dart points. There is a wide variety of shape and size
(Fig. 5). Most are irregularly shaped unifacial tools with some
possibly functioning as cutting-scraping tools. Although generally
unifacial, slight use is seen on opposing faces of some tools. Other
utensils exhibiting steeper bits (Fig. 6) appear to have a stepped
series of tiny chip scars extending over the dorsal surfaces of the
tools. Wilmsen (1968: 159) suggests that these manifestations are
the result of heavy pressured drawing of the implement (in the
fashion of an adze or plane) over a tough unyielding surface such
as wood or bone. Another use inferred by Wilmsen (1970: 70) is
tool back blunting. In Figure 6a the steeply beveled lateral edge
(83° edge angle) on the dorsal surface of the tool opposes the
ventral surface working edge (62° edge angle). It is possible that
the steeper beveled edge was utilized as a heavy duty tool as well
as a back blunted edge for the opposing working edge. Through
Wilmsen’s (1970: 71) inferences this toot (Fig. 6a) could have been
utilized in wood working, bone working, heavy cutting or shredding
and tool back blunting. Semenov (1964: 83-142) and Wilmsen (1968
and 1970) assign functional connotations to wear patterns and edge
angles exhibited on tools. If this is the case the functions of the
majority of the tools at 41 WM 88 could be assigned to skinning
and hide scraping, sinew and plant-fiber shredding, heavy cutting
(bone, wood, or horn) and tool back blunting. The more acute edges
of tools (edge angles of 26° to 35°, according to Wilmsen (1970: 7071) and Semenov (1964: 20), infer cutting operations. However, an
important consideration in this is the availability of the lithic
resource. If the resource base is minimal or some distance away
tools are more likely to get maximum use and retouch. Conservative
strategies of recycling, retouch and modification are utilized to get
the most out of the lithic utensil. Definite usage and wear patterns,
such as polish and/or striations, will be readily apparent
throughout an assemblage. Should the resource base be abundant
and easily obtainable less conservative strategies of use and
retouch could be employed. Thus the tool assemblage recovered
might show wear and/or usage, but only to a slight degree, wherein
function could only be postulated within broad limits and not
definitively stated. The strategy of maximum use of the lithic
resource and minimal retouch or modification of utensils seems to
apply in the North Fork area. Frison (1968: 149-155) suggested that
there was a maximization of tool use to a high degree in his Piney
Creek, Wyoming material. Data on the availability of lithic

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

67

resources was not discussed, making comparisons with the North
Fork material difficult.

FIGURE

o

1

2

5

cm

FIGURE 5. Unifacial tools from 41 WM 88.

5

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

68

FIGURE

0

1

2

5

cm

C

FIGURE 6. Steep beveled tools from 41 WM 88.

6

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

69

The Sequence
The lithic reduction sequence is made up of 5 stages. As
mentioned before, each successive stage is reached by a reductive
process of trimming, shaping, and thinning.
Ancillary to reaching Stage 1 of the sequence there must be an
acquisition of raw materials. The raw materials are lithic
substances {flint) having the qualities of "elasticity, homogeneity;
are cryptocrystalline, isotropic and highly siliceous" (Crabtree
1972: 4-5). The lithic materials ideally have no planes of weakness,
no inclusions that would impair conchoidal fracturing, the same
properties in all directions in the substances and are able to return
to their former state after being depressed by application of force
(Crabtree 1972: 33-71; Sememov 1964: 33).
Just as the artisan has a preconceived notion of what qualities
the raw materials must have, he also has a mental template of
what he will make from his chosen piece of flint. Then his first step
in reaching our idea of Stage 1 is to select a suitable core or
nodule of flint. The reductive processes by which Stage 1 is
reached are removal of the cortex and the initial reduction of the
mass. The artisan then has certain options open to him. He can
reject further manipulation and utilize the artifact as it is, he can
discard it completely, or he can continue to pursue the eidetic
imagery of a final product by further reducing the mass through
successive stages until it is acceptable. Inherent in this process is
the possibility of failure due to technical error or some flaw in the
material which cannot be overcome. These failures, when
identified, may occur within any of the stages of the sequence.
They should not be considered a type or category of their own, but
should be classed within the stage for which they can be identified.
Stage 1 -- Core biface or flake (Fig. 7}. This primary stage is
usually represented by a large flake or core biface. In the sample
from 41 WM 88 the artifacts measured for length had an average
of 8.31 centimeters, average width of 5.76 centimeters, and an
average thickness of 1.94 centimeters. In some instances these may
still retain evidence of cortex, but are usually bifacially reduced.
Evidence of flaking on at least one face is a criterion. Intentional
form is not necessarily introduced at this stage. In order to reach
Stage 1 the reduction process is one of a preliminary nature. The
lithic debris resulting from this reductive process can be discarded,
utilized in its present state, or if the flakes are of sufficient size
they can be saved to be further reduced to a more finalized
product (e.g., dart point, arrow point, or thin knife).

70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE

7

FIGURE 7. Stage 1 -- Lithic reduction sequence.

Stage 2 -- Thick biface or trimmed flake (blank) (Fig. 8). This
stage shows bifacial working of the stone to reduce the mass,
usually in thickness. The sample from 41 WM 88 has average

71

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

measurements of length, 6.82 cm; width, 4.43 cm; and thickness,
1.69 cm. Very often at this point the artifact has a very rough
subtriangular or lanceolate form and is still thick, relative to the
finished produce. The continuation of the reductive process toward
this stage will leave a residue of lithic debitage. This debitage can,
through the options open to the artisan, be utilized as is or it can
be discarded and left as an immediate part of the archeological
context. The debitage can contain the manufacturing errors, i.e.,
those rejects which are failures due to technical error on the part
of the artificer or some imperfection in the stone which could not
be overcome. Many times it appears that rather than taking time to
work out a useful strategy for overcoming some flaw or error, it is
more expedient {depending on the availability of resources) to start
again with another piece of stone. The rejects can be identified
through their characteristic thickness {overall, or in one area
which could not be reduced} and fracture lines.
FIGURE 8

FIGURE 8. Stage 2 -- Lithic reduction sequence.

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Stage 3 -- Thinned biface (blank) (Fig. 9). These are usually
thinned bifaces with some intentional form evident. The artifacts in
this stage are generally thinner pieces having been reduced more
in thickness than in overall size. The artifacts assigned to Stage 3
from the sample of 41 WM 88 have an average length of 9.3 cm,
average width of 5.16 cm, and an average thickness of 1.3 cm.
Once again, options are open to the artisan to discard what he will
and/or keep and utilize the debitage. Through the next stages
utilization of the debitage would be kept to only light cutting and
scraping operations most likely. This is because as reduction
proceeds the flakes become thinner and flatter; this would cause
less tensile strength in the flake. This reduction process is an ideal,
when the thinning flake hinges, runs too deep, or the artifact
breaks due to end shock, technological failures occur.

era

FIGURE 9. Stage 3 -- Lithic reduction sequence

73

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

Stage 4 -- Thinned biface with form (preform) (Fig. 10). In this
stage the artifacts, for the most part, have been thinned and a
triangular or lanceolate form is very clear. From the artifacts
measured, it was found that the average length was 7.13 cm;
average width was 3.74 cm; and the average thickness was 0.97
cm. In the sample being utilized in this paper (41 WM 88) those
artifacts assigned to Stage 4 are all rejects due to technical error
or natural imperfection. There is also the possibility of breakage
during the time the artifact is a part of the archeological context.
Here again, immediate utilization, rejection, or recycling are
options that are open to the artisan.
FIGURE

/
!

0

1

5

2

¢m

FIGURE 10. Stage 4 -- Lithic reduction sequence.

10

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Stage 5 -- Final product (Fig. 11). In the last stage of the lithic
reduction sequence the artifact takes its form usually as a dart
point, or arrow point, in the case of our sample from 41 WM 88. In
the temporal context of this sample these are the forms the
archeologist expects to see, since hunting and gathering are the
major subsistence patterns given for the archeological universe in
question. In this stage it is sometimes difficult to assess whether
the final product was broken during the last stages of manufacture
or whether indeed they were finished products being utilized and
were discarded due to impact fracture. If recovered by the artisan
or owner, he could discard it, modify the artifact and recycle it, or
simply sharpen it and use it again for the same purpose if possible.
Within this last stage there are product forms typologically
organized according to Suhm and Jelks (1962). The average
measurements of length, width, and thickness include all the types
identified and unidentified. Average length was 5.57 cm; width, 3.0
cm; thickness, 0.77 cm. There are many fragments of Stage 5
artifacts in the sample which were discernable as final products
because they consisted of the bases of specific projectile points
typical to particular types. However, no measurements were taken
and they were not counted as types. Possibilities of breakage other
than impact fractures are: (1) thermal fracturing; (2) end shock or
the stone exceeding its elastic limits during production or use; and
(3) breakage after the artifact has been lost or discarded.
As there are optional strategies along the continuum to maximize
the use of the lithic resource there are those strategies which tend
to conserve the resource during production. Due to the flint (the
artifact) lacking enough mass to withstand the stress, certain
strategies, or progressions of reduction are employed to keep the
final product intact. It is possible that there are particular
reduction strategies for specific projectile point types. Evidence of
this for Pedernales points is particularly interesting. Specific
strategies for Pedernales points occur in the fourth and fifth stages
of production.
According
to
Harry
J.
Shafer
(personal
communication) this process involves first reducing and shaping the
base before other final trimming and thinning processes continue.
This is accomplished so that end shock or amputation does not
occur when thinning the base. This stress needs a greater mass in
the blade to withstand the force. First, flute-like thinning flakes are
removed from the base, then lateral flakes are removed from the
base. Finally, the blade portion of the point is thinned by removing
flakes from the edges. This reduction strategy occurs on many
Pedernales points in the J.W. Edwards Collection (TARL). The

75

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

process of this strategy is illustrated by both the technological
failures as well as the flake scars on final products.
FIGURE 11
,t

0

1

5

2

am

/
!

f

\

FIGURE 11. Stage 5 -- Lithic reduction sequence.

\\

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The major thrust of this report has been the application of a
lithic reduction sequence as an analytical tool in the analysis of a
collection of lithic materials from site 41 WM 88 in the North Fork
Reservoir area, Williamson County, Texas. The sequence is a
synthesis of models utilized by Sharrock (1966), Muto (1971), and
Collins (1975) and has been refined to assist archeologists in
making judgments in the field regarding site function.
With the exception of a very few artifacts, the collection from 41
~NM 88 is made up of materials available in the immediate vicinity.
The lithic resource base was in such abundance as to negate any
sort of conservative strategies in utilization. Short term tool use is
apparent: wear traits such as polish, scratches, and crushing are
minimal. The unfinished artifacts throughout the lithic reduction
sequence, and the amount of debitage, support the assumption that
stone working was carried on at 41 WM 88. The preponderance of
projectile points -- intact artifacts, fragmented specimens, and
some reworked points -- indicates that hunting was routine. With
this comes the assumption that meat and hide processing were
being carried on at the site. Following the criteria set forward by
Semenov (1964: 20, 83-142) and Wilmsen (1970: 70-71), the edge
angles on many of the implements from 41 WM 88 imply functions
of this nature. Plant and fiber processing are inferences which also
can be posited due to the steep beveled tools present in the
collection. The grinding stones recovered suggest that seeds and
nuts as well as other edible plants were being processed and
consumed.
The range of projectile point types found indicates that the site
was inhabited in more than one particular era or time span. The
manufacturing of so many bifaces as well as other tools, and their
subsequent discarding, reflects the abundant local raw material
and seems to imply that the inhabitants were very mobile, utilizing
the chosen resources within their geographical range and not
carrying artifacts from place to place.
Subsistence strategies of hunters and gatherers according to Lee
(1968: 41) generally tend to rely on the most accessible and
dependable resource first, then strategies turn to alternative means
of subsistence. To illustrate the above, generalizations of hunters
and gatherers and their subsistence strategies have been taken
from ethnographic situations over the world. Lee (1968: 41) states
that,

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

77

The general view offered here is that gathering activities, for plants and
shellfish, should be the most productive of food for hunting and
gathering man, followed by fishing, where the source is available. The
hunting of mammals is the least reliable source of food and should be
generally less important than either gathering or fishing.

This importance or priority is a matter of basic subsistence; it is
not particularly a social priority. However, Lee (1968: 41} states
that there is a desire "to enjoy the rewards, both social and
nutritional, afforded by the killing of game."
The dynamics of environment and prehistoric technology in the
North Fork area and central Texas in general are such that it is
reasonable to assume that 41 WM 88, and other sites in the area,
were inhabited on a seasonal basis. However, no studies along
these lines have been conducted in the North Fork area
specifically. I am not aware of any studies which address
themselves to this question for the central Texas region in general.
Acquiring food in a natural environment is a deliberative and
rational process (just as the lithic reduction processes}, one in
which choices and decision making are definitely involved (see
Tindale 1972: 217-268; Clark 1952: 7, and Jochim 1976: 4). Eddy
(1973} illustrates this in his study of the Laneport Reservoir District
which is now known as Granger Reservoir (see Fig. 1A). Locational
strategy studies, as utilized by Eddy (1973) could be well adapted
and tested in the North Fork area. Sites are known to exist in
varied topographic settings of the North Fork area which would
lend themselves to this
type
of investigation.
Although
microenvironmental zones (Coe and Flannery 1964) may well be
present, three major environmental settings are immediately
evident: {1) riverine, {2) floodplain, and (3} upland.
How the lithic technology fits in with all these variables can be
viewed better by utilizing the lithic reduction sequence coupled
with analysis of use and wear on the lithic artifacts with good
context. Such studies combined with the use of adaptations of
predictive models of hunter-gatherer subsistence and settlement
(see Jochim 1976} can greatly enhance our present knowledge of
the processes of prehistoric culture change and development.
The viability of the lithic reduction sequence as it has been
applied here to a test case in the North Fork area is effective in
that it allows the archeologist to work along a continuum that
expands from tangible lithic artifacts to the broadest cultural
inference. Other information must be integrated with the
technological data in order to achieve explanations of the cultural

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

processes of Archaic peoples and how the populations adapted
both socially and technologically to their environments. The
ultimate results of such studies of the environment on man’s
development would allow the archeologist to see the consequent
effects on the environment due to the presence of man.
The lithic reduction sequence can be a viable research tool for
central Texas as a whole. Since lithic tool kits appear to fluctuate
in specialization and intensity of use throughout the central Texas
Archaic {Weir 1976: 124-140}, then examination of the lithic
materials {preferably with good primary context} in terms of this
sequence could add to and carry further the existing data base for
central Texas.
In summary, the lithic reduction sequence utilized as an in-field
indicator of site function gives the archeologist a basis on which to
direct further investigation. However, this reduction sequence will
not stand alone as an analytical device. It must be integrated with
other forms of analysis based on all aspects of current
archeological method. Analyses of lithic technology [in terms of a
continuum of production and strategy} coupled with studies of
environmental, spatial, and socio-cultural relationships would lead
to broader cultural inferences and interpretations for the whole of
Archaic populations.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I want to express my thanks and appreciation to those friends who
provided assistance and encouragement during the course of this
endeavor.
I would like to thank Dr. Harry I. Shafer of the Department of
Sociology and Anthropology at Texas A&M University for his helpful
criticisms and his willingness to share his ideas with me.
Drs. lames A. Neely and E. Mott Davis have been most helpful and
patient as both committee members and friends. To them, I owe a
special thank you.
During the field season at North Fork, Iohn Ippolito, Laura Hillier and
Gary Moore were able and congenial field companions. During the
preparatory phase of this study Melinda Giles and Virginia Christie took
time out from their own schedules to help me in editing and drafting; it
was much appreciated.
A very special acknowledgment goes to the Travis Family for all their
help. They have been a constant course of encouragement and aid to me
throughout many years of work and study.

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

79

REFERENCES CITED
Birdsell, Joseph E.
1968 Some Predictions for the Pleistocene System Among Recent Hunters
and Gatherers. In Man the Hunter. Richard Lee and Irven Devote,
ed., Aldine Publishing Company, Chicago. pp. 229-240.
Blair, Frank W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Iournal of Science, Vol. 2,
pp. 93-117.
Bryan, Kirk
1939 Stone Cultures Near Cerro Pedernal and Their Geological
Antiquity. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 11, pp. 9-46.
1950 Flint Quarries -- The Sources of Tools and, at the same time, the
factories of the American Indian. Papers of the Peabody Museum
of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Vol.
XVII, No. 3.
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr., and J. Phil Dering
n.d. Preliminary Overview of the Flora of North Fork Reservoir Area.
Unpublished manuscript, Texas A&M Anthropology Laboratory,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
Clark, J.G.D.
1952 Prehistoric Europe: The Economic Basis. Stanford University Press,
Stanford.
Cue, Michael D. and Kent V. Flannery
1964 Microenvironments and Mesoamerican Prehistory. Science, Vol.
143, No. 3607, pp. 650-654.
Collins, Michael B.
1975 Lithic Technology as a Means of Processual Inference. In Lithic
Technology Making and Using Stone Tools. E. Swanson, ed., Mouton
Publishers, distributed by Aldine, Chicago, pp. 15-34.
Crabtree, Don E.
1972 An Introduction to Flintworking. Occasional Papers of the Idaho
State University Museum, No. 28, Pocatello.
Deetz, James
1967 Invitation to Archeology. The Natural History Press, Garden City.
Eddy, Frank W.
1973 Salvage Archeology in the Laneport Reservoir District Central
Texas. Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1931 Physiography of the western United States. McGraw-Hill Book Co.
Inc., New York.
Frison, George C.
1968 A Functional Analysis of Certain Chipped Stone Tools. American
Antiquity, Vol. 33, No. 2: 149-155.
Godfrey, C. L., G. S. McKee, and H. Oakes
1973 General Soil Map of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station,
Texas A&M University, in cooperation with the Soil Conservation
Service, United States Department of Agriculture.

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Holmes, W. H.
1890 A Quarry Workshop of the Flaked-Stone Implement Makers in the
District of Columbia. American Anthropologist, Vol. 3, pp. 1-26.
Jackson, Marsha F.
1974 Archeological Resources of the North Fork Reservoir Area: Results
of the Survey and Testing 1970 Season. Report submitted to the
National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Jochim, Michael A.
1976 Hunter-Gatherer Subsistence and Settlement: A Predictive Model,
Academic Press, New York.
Johnson, Leroy, Jr.
1967 Toward A Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures of Central
and Southwestern Texas. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 12,
Austin.
Kelly, J. Charles
1947a The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde,
and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleonthological Society, Vol. 18: pp. 115-138.
1947b The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear
Fork Focus. American Antiquity, Vol. 13: pp. 97-108.
1959 The
Desert Cultures
and the Balcones Phase:
Archaic
Manifestations in the Southwest and Texas. American Antiquity,
Vol. 24: pp. 276-288.
Kroeber, A. L.
1963 Anthropology: Culture Patterns and Processes. First Harbinger
Books edition. Harcourt, Brace and World, Inc., New York.
Lee, Richard B.
1968 What Do Hunters Do For a Living, or, How to Make Out on Scarce
Resources. In Man the Hunter. Richard Lee and Irven Devore,
Aldine Publishing Company, Chicago. pp. 30-48.
Maruyama, Magoroh
1963The Second Cybernetics: Deviation-Amplifying Mutual Causal
Processes. American Scientist, Vol. 51: pp. 164-179.
McKern, W. C.
1939 The Midwestern Taxanomic Method as an Aid to Archaeological
Culture Study. American Antiquity, Vol. 4: pp. 301-313.
Muto, Guy R.
1971 A Technological Analysis of the Early Stages in the Manufacture of
Lithic Artifacts. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, Idaho State
University, Pocatello.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson
County, Texas. Research Report No. 49. Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
1976 Late Archaic Occupations at the Loeve-Fox Site: The San Marcos
and Twin Sisters Phases. In The Texas Archaic: A Symposium.
T.R. Hester ed., Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report No. 2.
n.d.The Rogers Spring Site: 1974 Investigations. Manuscript in press.
press Research Report No. 54, Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.

LITHIC REDUCTION SEQUENCE: TEST CASE

81

Rouse, Irving
1960 The Classification of Artifacts in Archaeology. American Antiquity,
Vol. 25: pp. 313-323.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932 The Geology of Texas, Vol. I: Stratigraphy. University of Texas
Bulletin, No. 3232.
Sememov, S. A.
1964 Prehistoric Technology: An Experimental Study of the Oldest Tools
and Artefacts from Traces of Manufacture and Wear. M.W.
Thompson, trans. Branes and Noble Books, New York.
Shafer, Harry J. and James E. Corbin
1965 An Appraisal of the Archeolocal Resources of the North Fork, South
Fork, and Laneport Reservoirs, Williamson County, Texas. Report
submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project.
Sharrock, Floyd W.
1966 Prehistoric Occupation Patterns in Southwest Wyoming and Cultural
Relationships with the Great Basin and Plains Culture Area.
University of Utah Anthropological Papers, No. 77.
Skinner, S. Alan
1971 Prehistoric Settlement of the DeCordova Bend Reservoir, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42: pp. 149270.
Sorrow, W. M.
1969 Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site: A Burnt Rock
Midden in Williamson County, Texas. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 18.
1970 Archeological Investigations at the Barker Site. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, Research Report, No. 1.
1973 Test Excavations in the North Fork Reservoir Area. Report submitted
to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Sharer, and R. E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir, Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 11.
Spier, R. F. G.
1970 From the Hand of Man: Primitive and Preindustrial Technologies.
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston.
Steward, Julian
1954 Types of Types. American Anthropologist, Vol. 56: pp. 54-57.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 29: pp. 63-108.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Volume 25.
Suhm D. A. and E. B. Jelks
1962 Handbooks of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Memorial
Museum Bulletin No. 4, Austin.

82

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
n.d.J.W. Edwards Collection and Notes. Unpublished notes on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Taylor, Walter W.
1973 A Study of Archeology. Arcturus Books Edition, Fourth Printing.
Southern Illinois University Press. Carbondale.
Tindale, Norman B.
1972 The Pitjandjara. In Hunters and Gatherers Today, M. G. Bicchieri,
ed., Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc. New York. pp. 217-268.
Weir, Frank A.
1976The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation,
Washington State University, Pullman.
Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips
1958 Method and Theory in American Archaeology. The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Wilmsen, Edwin N.
1968 Functional Analysis of Flaked Stone Artifacts. American Antiquity,
Vol. 33, No. 2: pp. 157-161.
1970Lithic Analysis and Cultural Inference: A Paleo-Indian Case.
Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona, No. 16, The
University of Arizona Press, Tuscon.

