An

Archeological Survey of Blackburn
Crossing Reservoir on the
Upper Neches River*
LE ROY JOHNSON~ JR.

/trcheological Survey
From July 8 to August 8, 1957, an archeological survey of the area
to be affected by the Blackburn Crossing Reservoir was carried out by
the Austin, Texas, Office of the National Park Service, River Basin
Surveys. This survey was conducted as a part of the inter-agency
archeological and paleontological salvage program which is being administered by the National Park Service and the Smithsonian Instituition in co6peration with the U. S. Bureau of Reclamation, the U. S.
Army Corps of Engineers, and other agencies.
Field reconnaissance--the locating and recording of archeological
sites--was carried out by the writer and Mr. ~ ¥. A. Davis under the
general supervision of Mr. Edward B./[elks. By working through co6perative local informants and by examining much of the area on foot,
the survey party succeeded in locating 35 aboriginal habitation and
burial sites, several of which promise to be of considerable aid in
unraveling and better understanding the complex archeological situation of eastern Texas and adjacent areas. Detailed notes were taken
and photographs were made at all sites located. These are now on file
at the office of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project in Austin.
Limited testing was done at several of the sites in order to ascertain
their stratigraphic structure, and samples of artifacts were collected
from the surface at all sites. Tabulations and typological studies of
these artifacts are included within this report.
* This paper was prepared by the writer in January, 1958, for the National Park
Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, under the title "Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Blackburn Crossing Reservoir, Anderson, Cherokee, Henderson,
and Smith Counties, Texas." The Region Three Office has kindly agreed to release
this report for publication in its present form.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Location and Character o] the Reservoir
The Upper Neches River Water Authority, whose main office is
Jn Palestine, Texas, is preparing to construct a large earth-work dam
across the Neches River at a point 18 air miles southwest of the city
of Tyler. This project, to be known as Blackburn Crossing Dam and
Reservoir, will provide much needed water for several cities of the
area and will aid in water conservation and flood control on the Neches
River.
Large areas in Anderson, Cherokee, Henderson, and Smith counties
(Fig. 1 ) are to be inundated by the reservoir, and several major tributary creeks of the Neches--Kickapoo Creek, Flat Creek, Ledbetter
Creek, County Line Creek, Saline Creek, and Indian Creek--will be
affected, as well as many other lesser streams and minor tributaries.

I%.’:":’

\~11

~Ik __.

f .....
_<"#tSPli>°

...... 17J{
#lst’r~

~<,,,’..t

"*~"

’:’;:~;’.f:

B<. o<BoR OROSS,,
RESERVOIR

$

T:~f~

normal

pool level

maximum flood
arc heologlc el

level
site

¯

~/~,’"f

Fig.

I. Map of Blackburn Crossing Reservoir area showing approximate locations of

thirty-flve archeological sites (pool specifications as of 1957).

The exact dimensions of the conservation pool have not been set.
It was originally anticipated that the construction of the dam would
be completed by January, 1959, but because of numerous unforeseen
difficulties work has not yet been initiated. Furthermore, specifications
for the reservoir have been changed, and a much smaller lake than

BLACKBURN

CROSSING RESERVOIR

215

originally planned is to be built. Thus most of the sites described in
this report--although they would have been affected by the larger
reservoir---will remain unaffected by the smaller one. Since the
change in reservoir specifications eliminated the need for further work
in the Blackburn Crossing area, it was deemed advisable to report here
the findings of the 195 7 survey.

Acknowledgments
To Mr. K. A. Anderson, President of the Upper Neches River Municipal Water Authority in 1957, and to Mr. Eugene Fish, past Secretary of that organization, sincere appreciation is expressed for the encouragement and assistance given in the archeological survey. Much
usefu! information and data concerning the construction of the dam
and the size and limits of the reservoir were provided by them.
To the East Texas Archeological Society and its President, Mr.
Douglas Proctor, thanks are due for general coSperation and for assistance in locating sites and recording pertinent data. To the following members of that society individual thanks are expressed: to Mr.
Sam Whiteside, who spent many days accompanying the survey party
and aiding in the reconnaissance; to Messrs. Ray Vanderpoo! and L.
A. Wallace, who conducted the investigators to several sites which
they had previously located within the reservoir area; and to Mr. John
Mulligan, who permitted examination of the material which he had
recovered from site 41SM73, the Joe Meyers Site.
The writer also wishes to express his thanks to Mr. Edward B. Jelks
of the Texas Archeological Salvage project, who aided the survey
crew in many ways, giving freely of his extensive archeological knowledge of the area.

Description of the Area
The Neches River, with its several tributaries, makes up one of the
important drainage systems of East Texas. It arises in Van Zandt
County just south of the Sabine River and runs in a general southerly
direction through eastern Texas, finally emptying into Sabine Lake
near the city of Port Arthur. Close to the Texas coast the broad Neches
bottom offers plentiful farm land of high quality and of considerable
economic value. In the region of Blackburn Crossing Reservoir, however, the Neches floodplain alternately narrows and widens so that
in some areas abundant arable land is provided, while in others the
stream is rather entrenched with narrow, constricted banks.

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

The Upper Neches, including the reservoir area, lies toward the inland limit of Fenneman’s Coastal Plains Physiographic Province
(Fenneman, 1938), an area of low hills, gently roiling plains, and
wide, sluggish streams with little gradient. The region is also included
within Dice’s Texan Biotic Province (Dice, 1943), but it is situated
on its easternmost limits and thus exhibits many of the traits of the
adjacent Austroriparian Province. An intermingling of small grassy
clearings or glades with strips of mixed deciduous and coniferous
woods characterizes the area, and post oak, blackjack oak, hickory,
loblolly pine, and short-leaf pine are quite common.
In regard to climate, the area has short and relatively mild winters
but long and excessively hot and humid summers. While the annual
precipitation is relatively high, most of the rain falls during the long
growing season and is thus unevenly distributed throughout the year.
Animal life is abundant through much of the countryside and deer,
opossum, squirrel, fox, armadillo, and many other mammals are commonly found in the more wooded areas. Bear and bison were occasionally seen in very early historic times. Likewise, the local streams
and lakes support a large variety of fish, and many fowls of varied
species can be observed in all oarts of the region.
From this brief description of the locale in which Blackburn Crossing Reservoir is to be situated one can readily see that if present conditions can be taken as an indication of what the region was like in
times past, the area must have afforded hospitable surroundings for
the aborigines. Abundant water, raw materials, arable land, and game
were on hand and easily accessible.

Archeological Sketch oJ the Area
During the 1930-1940 decade the first extensive archeological investigations in eastern Texas were undertaken by the U. S. Government, through the Works Progress Administration (later called the
Work Projects Administration), with the collaboration of The University of Texas. Many spectacular and important sites were located
and excavated, and thousands upon thousands of artifacts were recovered. Unfortunately, much of this work was done by individuals
who possessed only a nodding acquaintance with archeological field
techniques, and in many cases adequate field records were not kept.
Most of the work was concentrated on the more spectacular phases of
excavation (i. e., in uncovering burials, opening mounds, etc.), and
these early excavators were generally unconcerned with collecting

BLACKBURN CRO.SSING RESERVOIR

217

stratigraphic evidence for constructing cultural sequences or data
which might be employed in a reconstruction of the life-ways of the
aborigines.
It can be seen, therefore, that more careful work needs to be done
in this area and that many archeologically important problems remain
unsolved. Very little is known at present about details of aboriginal
life in the region, and the study of typology and culture sequence has
only iust begun. Since the first draft of this paper was written in 1958,
archeological research in the area has accelerated considerably, as the
following papers testify: Davis (1958), Davis and Davis (1960), and
Jelks and Tunnell (1959) have reported on sites in the Ferrell’s
Bridge Reservoir area on Cypress Creek; for Iron Bridge Reservoir on
the upper Sabine there are site reports by Johnson and Jelks (1958),
Duffield (1961), and Duffield and Jelks (1961); Sharrock (1960) has
recently reported on a site in nearby Oklahoma. In addition to the
aforementioned site reports, an excellent survey of the archeology of
the Caddoan Area has been published by Webb (1960).
As it is presently imperfectly understood, the archeological picture
of eastern Texas and neighboring areas is as follows (taken primarily
from Suhm, Krieger, and :[elks, 1954): The Pa]eo-American Stage is
not represented by a single known site in East Texas, although numerous Plainview, Angostura, and Meserve points are reported from
surface collections and rarely in excavated sites. To the following stage,
the Archaic, has been assigned a poorly defined East Texas Aspect (or
Red River Aspect, as it has been called by ~vVebb [19603 ), which is
represented by numerous sites, none of which, however, has been
extensively investigated or published. The Neo-American, the next
stage in the sequence of cultures or "traditions," is well represented
in the region and has attracted virtually all of the attention focused
on the area up to the present. The Neo-American Stage, here assigned
to the "Caddoan Culture," has been divided into two aspects, the Gibson and the Fulton, following the McKern terminology. The Gibson
Aspect, generally considered to be the earlier of the two, has been
divided into the following loci: Alto, Sanders, Spiro, Gahagan, and
Haley, while the later Fulton Aspect has been segmented into many
divisions, the maior ones being the Texarkana, Titus, Frankston, MidOuachita, Bossier, Belcher, and McCurtain foci.
Blackburn Crossing Reservoir is situated on the northern edge of the
Frankston Focus area and some of the major sites of this focus are
nearby: the A. C. Sanders, Cook, Daly, Connell, Ellis, and Murphy
sites in Anderson County; the Hood and Snow sites in Cherokee

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

County; and the DeRosset, Miller, and Thrasher sites in Henderson
County. No sites of other foci of either aspect have been heretofore
recognized in the vicinity.
Following the Neo-American Stage in the East Texas chronology
is the Historic Stage with its poorly defined Allen and Glendora foci.
The Allen Focus developed out of the Frankston Focus and shares
many traits with it, as well as the same geographical area. Several of
the more important Allen Focus sites, located directly south of the
reservoir, are the Alien and Hackney sites in Cherokee County, and
the Patton, Howell, and Freeman sites in Anderson County.
The Caddo were the only people who occupied the immediate area
at the time of European contact (Swanton, 1942), although in 1760
the Tawakoni and Yscani were not far away on the headwaters of the
Sabine River (Johnson and Jelks, 1958). Of the numerous Caddoan
groups in Texas, the Nabiti, Nacachau, Neche, and Nabedache of the
Hasinai Confederacy have been located by Swanton (1942) on or
near the Neches tliver to the south of the reservoir and are probably
responsible for several of the nearby Alien Focus Sites.
The Reservoir Sites
Except for one small Archaic site, all of the sites recorded by the
survey party can be assigned to the Neo-American Stage. One interesting site, 41SM73, belongs to the Alto Focus of the Gibson Aspect
and represents the first Gibson site recognized in the immediate area.
Most of the others belong to the Frankston Focus of the Fulton Aspect,
although some of them may show an earlier occupation by, or influence from, the Sanders Focus.
In designating these sites the three-part numerical system recently
adopted by The University of Texas was employed: state number (41)
followed by county abbreviation and site number within the county.
This system replaces the cumbersome five-part quadrangle system
which had been used previously by The University of Texas.
In artifact descriptions the following commonly used terms have
been employed: dart point, arrow point, knife, scraper, drill, muller,
and grinding slab. One particular class of artifacts merits special definition. This is the so-called "nut stone" or "pitted stone" which is a
medium-sized lithic artifact, most often of oxidized sandstone, which
has one or more small pits or depressions in either or both faces. These
occur both as rough, irregular blocks or as use-rounded implements
resembling manos or mullets. No generally accepted hypothesis has
yet been put forth to explain the use of these objects.

BLACKBURN CRO3SING RESERVOIR

219

All projectile point and pottery type names are those set forth in
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology ( Suhm, Krieger, and
Jelks, 1954).
Smith County
41SM73, the Joe Meyers Site, is an extremely interesting habitation
and burial site situated on a slight rise directly to the west of the floodplain of Saline Creek, one of the important tributaries which flows into
the Neches from the northeast. Occupational detritus is found scattered
over approximately five acres of a rather large field which has been
under cultivation in the past but is now in pasture.
During the spring of 1957 Mr. John Mulligan and several associates
of the East Texas Archeological Society located this site and began
limited exploratory excavations. Test trenches were run from the
southern margin of the site northward and several graves were found.
Six single interments were exposed, all containing one individual
oriented I¥N¥¥ by ESE with the head to the ESE. All were in extended supine position. Also, one multiple burial containing the remains of probably four individuals was located, and its orientation was
presumably the same as that of the single ones. The skeletal material
of all the burials was in a very deteriorated condition, and only one
skull could be removed by the excavators. It was even difficult to determine the number of individuals in the multiple burial because of
the exceedingly poor condition of the bones.
The thing that makes this site of special significance is the burial
furniture associated with the interments. In all, 15 complete or fragmentary vessels (which had been placed around the head, feet, or midsections of the skeletons) were recovered, representing ceramic types
Bowles Creek Plain, Hickory Fine Engraved, Weches Fingernail
Impressed, and Canton Incised. It can readily be seen from this array
of pottery types that here, for the first time, burials of the Alto Focus
have been uncovered, unless one wishes to assign the burials found at
Gahagan, Louisiana, to that focus (¥Vebb and Dodd, 1939).
Brief notes were taken by the survey party at the site and during an
interview with Mr. John Mulligan, and the archeological specimens
were examined.
In April of 1957, Mr. W. A. Davis, who was then engaged in conducting a supplementary archeological survey of Ferrell’s Bridge
Reservoir for The University of Texas, was notified of this discovery
on Saline Creek and soon thereafter visited the site, taking brief notes
and making a surface collection of artifacts. In the following descrip-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tions the material gathered by Mr. Davis has been included with that
collected during the present survey, making a total of 511 artifacts.

Fig. 2. Chipped stone artifacts from Blackburn Crossing Reservoir. A, blfacial blade;
B, Bonham arrow point; C-D, Perdlz arrow points; E, arrow point; F, bifacial knife; G,
Edgewood dart point; H, Yarbrough-like dart point; I, Gary dart point; J-K, dart points;
t.-O, Gary dart points. Site provenlence--41 SM73: I, O; 41SM76: H; 41 SM79: E; 41 SM82:
C; 41SM89: B, D; 41CE39: L; 41HE12: K; 41HE18: A, F, G, N; 41HE19: J, M.

Among the potsherds collected from the surface of the site are one
rim sherd of Hickory Fine Engraved, 21 Davis Incised (Fig. 3, A-B)
rim sherds (some of which have flat lips), 27 Davis Incised body
sherds, one Dunkin Incised body sherd, two Canton Incised (Fig. 3, D)
sherds, six sherds of Weches Fingernail Impressed (Fig. 3, C) (all with
flat lips), four body sherds of type Sinner Linear Punctated of the
Bossier and Haley Foci, 34 body sherds of Bullard Brushed, four Pease
Brushed-Incised body sherds, five brushed body sherds of unknown
type, nine miscellaneous incised sherds which could not be identified,
49 fingernail-punctated body sherds, one fingernail-punctated rim
sherd, 13 plain rim sherds with flat lips (probably type Bowles Creek

BLACKBURN CROSSING RESERVOIR

221

Plain), five plain sherds with rounded lips, 320 miscellaneous plain
body sherds, one plain red-filmed body sherd, one small body sherd
with a trailed design, and one engraved body sherd which could not be
assigned to a definite type.
Stone material at this site was not common, and only six lithic artifacts were fo~md: a Gary dart point (Fig. 2, I), a milling slab, two
muller fragments, an abrader with pits or small depressions on one
face, and a sandstone abrader.
This assemblage of surface artifacts indicates that the primary occupation of the site must be assigned to the Alto Focus as defined by
Newell and Krieger (!949), and it is obvious that the burials likewise
belong to the same complex.
It is interesting to note that, except for one small sherd, pottery of
the type Dunkin Incised--generally considered one of the major Alto
Focus types--is absent at this site. However, type Canton Incised, a
somewhat similar type heretofore recognized only in components of

the Sanders Focus, was associated with Alto Focus pottery types in the
burials. An examination of surface collections made by local amateurs
at Alto Focus sites within this area seems to support the hypothesis
that in the northern Alto Focus area Canton Incised frequently replaces Dunkin Incised in Alto Focus components. Controlled excavations will be necessary in order to substantiate this hypothesis.
The occurrence of pottery types Bullard Brushed and one vessel of
Poynor Engraved, found by East Texas Archeological Society members, points to a later occupation of the site by Frankston Focus people,
but this occupation was certainly not as strong as that of the Alto Focus.
In addition, influences from the Louisiana area are perhaps indicated
by the presence of sherds of Sinner Linear Punctated and Pease
Brushed-Incised, but these influences do not seem to have been of any
particular magnitude.
Test pits revealed a midden deposit, extending to a depth of two feet
below the surface, which overlies a sterile subsoil of red clayey sand.
The midden soil is quite rich in bone and shell detritus, and it is entirely possible that house floors or other important features have been
preserved in it. There is also an excellent possibility that cultural
stratigraphy can be determined from this midden. For instance, it
would be important to ascertain whether there has been a continual
habitation of the site from Gibson into Fulton Aspect times (assuming
that the Frankston Focus component overlies that of the Alto Focus),
or whether there is a stratigraphic break or hiatus between these two
components. It is hoped that questions such as these can be answered

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

by excavation and that some of the complex problems of Caddoan
Area chronology can be solved.
41SMY4 is a small ceramic habitation and burial site located on a
low hill to the south of an unnamed stream that flows into the Neches
River from the east. A total of i44 artifacts, all potsherds, were collected in an old cultivated field at the site and include the following
specimens: two small engraved rim sherds of type Ripley Engraved or
Taylor Engraved, two body sherds of type Poynor Engraved, l0 punctured and pinched sherds of Killough Pinched, one rim sherd of Maydelle Incised (Fig. 3, G), one rim sherd of Bullard Brushed, 67 body
sherds of Bullard Brushed, two plain rim sherds, 51 plain body sherds,
one incised body sherd of unknown type, one brushed-incised body
sherd which strongly resembles type Pease Brushed-Incised, five
punctured body sherds, and one unusual sherd with horizontal pinched
ridges below the rim.
During March, 1957, two members of the East Texas Archeological
Society, Ray Vanderpool and L. A. Wallace, succeeded in locating
and uncovering two burials at this site, and found vessels of types
Killough Pinched, Poynor Engraved, and La Bue Neck Banded, as
well as a typical Frankston Focus effigy bowl. Nothing could be determined with respect to the orientation of the skeletons or the graves
because they had been bady disturbed by plowing.
Both the burial furniture and the material collected by the survey
party conclusively point to a Frankston Focus occupation of the site,
with perhaps some influences from the Titus and Bossier loci.
The midden deposit here, which is fairly deep for sites of this particular area, extends to a depth of 21 inches below the surface. Much
bone, shell, and many fine particles of charcoal were observed in the
rich, artifact-bearing soil.
41SM75 is a ceramic habitation site located on a low, previously
cultivated hill to the east of site 41SM74 and to the south of the floodplain of the small unnamed stream. Forty-six artifacts were found
scattered over the northern slope and base of the hill: 21 body sherds
of Bullard Brushed, two sherds of Maydelle Incised, two cross-incised
sherds probably of type Maydelle Incised but also strongly resembling
Canton Incised, one incised body sherd of unknown type, three sherds
with random punctations, !5 plain body sherds, and one plain rim
sherd. The only lithic artifact found was a small sandstone abrader.
This site clearly belongs to the Fulton Aspect, and most likely the
Frankston Focus, although none of the characteristic engraved pottery
of that focus, necessary for positive cultural identification, was re-

Fig. 3. Pottery from Blackburn Crossing Reservoir. A-B, Davis Incised rim sherds; C, Weches
Fingernail Impressed, punctated rim sherd; D, Canton Incised rim sherd; E, Maxey Noded
Redware sherd; F, Sanders Plain rim sherd; G-I, Maydelle Incised rim sherds; J-K, Poynor
Engraved rim sherds; L-M, Bunard Brushed body sherds; N, Maydelle Incised strap handle;
0, La Rue Neck Banded rim sherd. Site Provenience--41SM73: A-D; 41SM74: G; 41SM87:
F, U; 41SM89: E; 41SM91: H; 41HE16: M; 41HE22: I-L, N-O.

covered. The midden soil is very shallow, in places having been completely removed by erosion.
41SM76 is a ceramic habitation site located directly south of the
Joe Meyers site (41SM73) on a low hill adjacent to the west floodplain
of Saline Creek. Occupational debris was found scattered over an area
of about two acres in a small cultivated field. The 196 artifacts collected by the survey party include the following specimens: 62 body
sherds of type Bullard Brushed, i 1 incised body sherds of Maydelle
Incised, three plain rim sherds, 96 plain body sherds, four incised rim
sherds of unknown type, seven fingernail-punctated body sherds, one
fingernail-punctated rim sherd~ four engraved sherds too small for
type assignment, one engraved rim sherd (very much like Sanders

Engraved except that it represents a vessel with expanded body instead of the usual Sanders carinated bowl), and two small body sherds
with white slip, type and origin unknown. The stone material includes
a Yarbrough-like dart point (Fig. 2, H), two small blades or knives,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a small grinding slab, and a pitted stone shaped like a mano or muller.
These artifacts indicate a Fulton Aspect occupation which can probably be assigned to the Frankston Focus, although none of the typical
engraved pottery of that focus was found. Since the midden soil is
relatively deep, extending to a depth of two and a half feet below the
surface, the site promises to be useful for stratigraphic investigation.
41SM77 is a small ceramic habitation and burial site situated on
the west floodplain of Saline Creek near its headwaters. Occupational
debris, including potsherds and a few scraps of shell and bone, cover
an estimated two acres of a rather large cultivated field. The artifacts
collected by the survey party include three plain body sherds, two
plain rim sherds, two sherds of Bullard Brushed, and one incised body
sherd too small for type assignment.
During 1957 Messrs. L. A. Wallace and I~ay Vanderpool of the
East Texas Archeological Society excavated a large portion of the site
and uncovered two burials which held quite a number of pottery
vessels and several other interesting artifacts. The burials were
oriented in an east-west direction with heads to the east, and the
skeletal material lay at a depth of ¢zb inches below the surface in both
cases. Five pottery vessels, mostly of type Poynor Engraved, 14 Perdiz
arrow points, a small celt, and a large knife made up the burial furniture.
The artifacts collected by the survey party and the grave furniture
recovered by the amateurs indicate a Frankston Focus occupation for
the site.
41SM78 is a ceramic habitation site located due east of 41SM77,
across the Saline and on its floodplain. Seven potsherds were found
scattered over a four acre cultivated field. These include two plain
body sherds, four sherds of Bullard Brushed, and one pinched-ridged
body sherd probably of type Killough Pinched.
From these specimens the site can tentatively be assigned to the
Fulton Aspect and probably to the Frankston Focus, but a sufficient
quantity of material is not on hand to completely substantiate this
last assignment.
41SM79, a large ceramic habitation site covering an area of approximately 35 acres, is situated on the southern slope of a low hill adjacent
to the floodplain of County Line Creek. The 108 artifacts collected by
the survey party include two body sherds of Bullard Brushed, two
sherds which are probably Maydelle Incised, one sherd of Poyner
Engraved, three unidentified engraved body sherds, four punctated
body sherds, nine small incised body sherds for which no type assign-

BLACKBURN CRO.SSING RESERVOIR

225

ment could be made, two plain rim sherds, and 76 plain body sherds.
The stone material recovered includes an arrow point of unrecognized
type (Fig. 2, E), a dart point medial fragment, a small piano-convex
scraper, a milling slab, a sandstone abrader, a muller fragment, a
pitted stone shaped like a mano, a crude pitted stone, and a fragment
of a large celt.

Fig. 4. Stone artifacts from Blackburn Crossing Reservoir. A, muller (41CE391; B, pitted
muller (41 SM79); C, rough, pitted stone (41 CE39).

These artifacts definitely indicate a Frankston Focus, Fulton Aspect
occupation of the site.
41S/VI80 is a small ceramic habitation site located on a low hill or
terrace adjacent to the floodplain of Saline Creek on its east side.
Twenty-five artifacts were collected from the badly eroded surface of
the hill. These include eight sherds of type Bullard Brushed, one plain
rim sherd, and 15 plain body sherds. Only one lithic artifact was recovered, a small pitted stone.
From these artifacts the site can be assigned to the Fulton Aspect
and most likely to the Franks ton Focus, although none of the diagnostic wares of this focus are represented. On the summit of the hill
the humus-stained sand of the occupation zone extends to a depth of
about one foot below the surface; but erosion has cut the slopes down
to the clay subsoil, and it is thus obvious that most of the occupation
zone has been destroyed.
4ISM81, located south of site 41SM80 on a hill overlooking the east
floodplain of Saline Creek, is a ceramic habitation site covering about

226

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

four acres of a previously cultivated field, now in pasture. This hill
seems to have lost its topsoil almost completely as a result of the
erosion which normally occurs on abandoned farmland in East Texas,
and the surface is now red clayey subsoil.
The eight artifacts recoverd by the survey party---indicating a
Fulton Aspect, probably Frankston Focus, occupation for the site-are as follows: five sherds of Bullard Brushed, one plain body sherd,
one pitted stone, and one muller.
41SMg2 is a Frankston Focus habitation site located on a low, flat
hill above the western floodplain of Saline Creek. The site, covering
an estimated two acres of land, has a midden zone which has been
little disturbed by erosion, although the site area is in cultivation at
the present time. The artifact-bearing midden soil extends to an average depth of 1.4 feet below the surface and overlies a yellow-tan,
sterile, sandy subsoil.
The 195 artifacts, both ceramic and lithic, collected from the surface
of this site include 65 Bullard Brushed body sherds, one Maydelle Incised body sherd, six sherds of Poynor Engraved, 114 plain body
sherds, one plain rim sherd, one incised rim sherd, one incised rim
sherd too small for type identification, and one engraved body sherd.
The stone material includes one Perdiz type arrow point (Fig. 2, C),
one flake side scraper, one pitted stone shaped like a mano or muller,
one crude, irregular-shaped pitted stone, and two mullers.
This site would be excellent for extensive excavation because it has
a deep occupation zone, exhibits numerous artifacts on the surface,
and occupies a relatively small, accessible area.
41SM83 is a small ceramic habitation site which may be assigned
to the Fulton Aspect and most likely to the Frankston Focus. It is located on a low hill to the west of the floodplain of Saline Creek just
north of site 41SM82. Thirty-five artifacts were collected from the
surface: 19 plain body sherds, six body sherds of type Bullard Brushed,
nine incised body sherds (probably Maydelle Incised), and one engraved body sherd which is too small for positive identification.
Although the site has some depth, it is felt that the surface artifacts
are of insufficient quantity or quality to justify further work.
41SM84 is a very small ceramic site of uncertain cultural affiliation
located in a small cultivated field on a rise directly to the north of the
floodplain of Saline Creek. Only five artifacts, all potsherds, were
found here: three plain body sherds, one plain rim sherd, and one
unidentified engraved body sherd.

BLACKBURN CRO,SSING RESERVOIR

227

Since this site covers only a very small area, and since so little was
found, it is quite probable that only a small campsite is represented.
41SM85 is a small ceramic habitation site of unknown cultural
affiliation situated on a hil! to the east of the Neches River floodplain.
The artifact-bearing surface sand at the site seems to have very little
depth. Only five insignificant artifacts were recovered: one plain body
sherd, one incised body sherd, one barbed dart point fragment, one
grinding slab fragment, and one small sandstone abrader fragment.
41SM86 is a ceramic habitation site of unknown cultural affiliation
on the north slope of a hill, directly east of the floodplain of the Neches
River. This site is rather small and covers only about one acre of a
previously cultivated field. The surface soil is a gray sand which extends to a depth of eight inches, at that point coming into contact with
the sterile, red, clayey subsoil.
Fifteen artifacts, none of them diagnostic, were collected from the
surface. They include eight plain body sherds, two engraved sherds
too small for type identification~ one small piano-convex end scraper~
one muller and two pitted stones. One wattle-impressed daub fragment
was also recovered from the surface.
Although only a very few artifacts were found, the occupation
zone has some depth.
41SM87 is a rather interesting ceramic habitation site covering approximately five acres of a cultivated field on the west slope of the high
ground due east of the Neches River floodplain.
The site consists of a dark midden soil--full of artifacts, mussel
shell fragments, and animal bones--which extends to a depth of
one foot below the surface. The next zone, a yellow-tan sand member,
extends from 1 foot to 2.5 feet and is also artifact bearing, although
it contains little shell or bone. The whole is underlain by a red, sandy
clay subsoil which is entirely sterile as far as could be determined by
the survey party.
A total of 197 artifacts was collected from the surface. These definitely point to a primary occupation of the site by Frankston Focus
people with certain hints of an earlier Sanders Focus component. The
artifacts include one plain sherd (Fig. 3, F) with scalloped rim and
red filming, probably of type Sanders Plain, two Poyner Engraved
body sherds, one Poyner Engraved rim sherd, 14 incised body and
rim sherds (of which seven particularly resemble type Maydelle Incised and another two resemble type Canton Incised), 156 plain body
sherds, four plain rim sherds, eight punctated body sherds, one punc-

228

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

tated rim sherd, seven engraved body sherds too small for type identification, and one incised body sherd with a lug of type Maydelle
Incised. Only two stone artifacts were recovered, a hammerstone and
a pitted stone.

Fig. 5. Grinding slab from Site 41 HE14, Blackburn Crossing Reservoir.

41SM88 is a small Fulton Aspect, probably Frankston Focus, site
which is located on high ground directly east of the Neches River
floodplain. The site covers approximately one-fourth acre of a cultivated field whose surface soil, a deep sandy loam, seems to contain a
moderate amount of artifacts. Eighteer~ specimens were collected by
the survey party and these include six brushed body sherds of type
Bullard Brushed, one incised body sherd of type Maydelle Incised,
two cross-incised body sherds (also Maydelle Incised), five plain body
sherds, one plain rim sherd, and one punctated body sherd. The lithic
material consists of one muller and one pitted stone.

BLACI~BURN CROSSING RESERVOIR

229

41SM8P is a moderately large and potentially prolific ceramic habitation site situated on the floodplain of a small unnamed creek which
flows into the Neches from the east. Although the site is now in cultivation, the surrounding area is still more or less wooded, with dense
thickets scattered throughout. The midden zone at the site is a stratum,
rich in artifacts, extending to an average depth of 2 feet below the
surface over most of the site. In it were found many potsherds, miscellaneous deer teeth and bones, and numerous small fragments of mussel
shell.
In all, 581 artifacts were recovered in the surface collection, and
these include 36 body sherds of Bullard Brushed; 30 incised body and
rim sherds, several of which could belong to either Maydelle or Canton
Incised; one punctated-incised body sherd of type Bullard Brushed;
one red-filmed body sherd with nodes of type Maze); Noded Redware
(Fig. 3, E) ; one sherd of Sinner Linear Punctated; 10 small engraved
body sherds, mostly too small for type identification, but several of
which could be type Poynor Engraved; one large body sherd of unknown type with a row of fingernail pinched punctations; one engraved body sherd of unknown type; one punctated-incised body
sherd; three punctated rim sherds; 10 punctated body sherds; three
plain rim sherds; and 281 plain body sherds. As for the lithic material,
only two artifacts, a Bonham arrow point (Fig. 2, B) and a Perdiz
arrow point (Fig. 2, D), were found.
It is apparent that the major occupation at this site was by Frankston Focus people, as is evidenced by sherds of pottery type Bullard
Brushed, Maydelle Incised, and Poynor Engraved. There is also, however, some indication of arL earlier Sanders Focus occupation, for
sherds probably assignable to type Canton Incised and one sherd of
Maxey Noded Redware were found. It would be most important if a
Sanders Focus occupation could be defined for the Upper Neches area,
and it is possible that this site contains a Sanders Focus component
in addition to the Frankston Focus one. It is interesting to note that
this site is only a short distance east of the other Frankston site which
also gave evidence for the presence of an earlier Sanders component,
41SM87.
4ISMPO is an important Frankston Focus habitation and burial site
situated just west of 41SM74 and due south of a small unnamed stream
east of the Neches River floodplain. Here in a cultivated field of some
two acres extent Messrs. L. A. Wallace and Ray Vanderpool of the
East Texas Archeologicat Society excavated three burials. All three
were oriented in an east-west direction with their heads to the east.

230

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

From the three graves were recovered three bottles of Poynor Engraved, one engraved Frankston Focus type pipe, three effigy bowls,
two large shouldered bowls of type Poynor Engraved, and 12 Perdiz
arrow points.
The survey party, in making its surface collection at the site, picked
up 282 artifacts, including 49 sherds of Bullard Brushed, 11 incised
sherds of either Maydelle or Canton Incised, one punctated-brushed
sherd of type Bullard Brushed, two punctated-incised sherds probably
of Maydelle Incised, two body sherds of Poynor Engraved, 201 plain
body sherds, one punctated rim sherd, three punctated body sherds,
and 12 unusual engraved sherds, of unknown type, characterized by
engraved triangles and vertical panels below the rim.
It can be seen from the burials and the surface collection that this
site exhibits traits of both the Frankston and Allen loci and perhaps
represents an intermediate period between those two closely related
loci. The midden deposit has a depth of about 8 inches.
41SM91 is a large Frankston Focus habitation site located in a cultivated field on the slope of a large hill to the east of the Neches floodplain. Here, in an area of 10 to 15 acres, 282 artifacts were collected,
as follows: 148 body sherds of Bullard Brushed, one incised sherd with
overhanging lines and soft paste like Coles Creek or Chase Incised of
Louisiana, two body sherds of Killough Pinched, two body sherds of
Poynor Engraved, two Frankston Focus type pipe fragments, three
punctated rim sherds, eight punctated body sherds, five engraved body
sherds too small for positive identification, 10 incised sherds, two of
which are type Maydelle Incised (Fig. 3, H), seven plain rim sherds,
and 92 plain body sherds.
It is interesting to note that the land on which the site is located is
only now being put into cultivation, and that some areas of the site yet
remain which have not been farmed and which might yield undisturbed occupational features.
41SM92 is a site reported to the survey party after work in the
reservoir area was completed and which could thus not be visited.
This site is located directly across Saline Creel( from 41SM73, the Alto
Focus site, and is said to be ceramic. Any future worker in the area
should certainly investigate this site.
Cherokee County
41CE37 is a small Fulton Aspect, probably Frankston Focus, site
situated on the sloping north bank of Stone Chimney Creek. The site,

BLACKBURN CROSSING RESERVOIR

231

which covers an area of approximately one acre, has previously been
cultivated but is now in pasture. Erosion has been quite heavy in this
particular region, and only small patches of the old surface soil remain.
The 40 artifacts recovered by the survey party include 12 body
sherds of type Bullard Brushed, three sherds of Maydelle Incised, 21
plain body sherds, two milling slab fragments, one muller, and one
small chopper.
41CE38 is another ceramic site located on the north bank of Stone
Chimney Creek. Here, as in the case of 41CE37, the topsoil is missing
and the occupation or midden stratum has been destroyed by erosion.
Only five non-diagnostic artifacts were recovered, a sample too small
for definite cultural identification. The five artifacts include one body
sherd of Bullard Brushed, one large dart point fragment of gray chert,
one oval muller, and two grinding slab fragments.
41CE39 is the largest site located during the survey. The surface
indications are most abundant over an area of 40 acres on a low bluff
between the floodplains of the Neches River and Stone Chimney Creek,
and sparsely scattered artifacts occur over a much wider area. On the
slopes of this bluff the surface soil has been eroded away and the red,
clayey subsoil exposed. But on the summit the artifact-bearing midden
soi! zone extends to an average depth of one foot below the surface
and promises to be prolific in artifacts as well as in structural features.
Almost all of the site area has been in cultivation at one time or another, but much of it lately has been allowed to revert to pasture and
now supports tall, dense grass.
The 258 ceramic and ]ithic artifacts recovered from the surface
definitely indicate the Frankston Focus. There are 85 body sherds
of Bullard Brushed, nine body sherds of Maydelle Incised, three rim
sherds of Maydelle Incised, two rim sherds of Poynor Engraved, five
punctated body sherds, three unidentified small engraved body sherds,
six miscellaneous incised body sherds, one plain rim sherd, and 112
plain body sherds. Stone material, in contrast to the other sites in the
reservoir area, is fairly abundant here. One Gary dart point (Fig.
2, L), five mullets (Fig. 4, A), two crude pitted stones (Fig. 4, C),
four use-shaped pitted stones, three crude choppers, five grinding
slabs, eight biracial blades or knives, one sandstone chopper, one small
grinding slab or hone, and two small pieces of worked stone were

found.
Henderson County
4IHE12 is a very small, insignificant site exposed in a road cut on

252

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

State Highway 155 to the west of the Neches River. Only two artifacts,
a plain body sherd and an unidentified dart point (Fig. 2, K), were
recovered.
41HE13 is a ceramic habitation site which can be assigned to the
Fulton Aspect, probably Frankston Focus. Fifty-eight artifacts were
found scattered over an area of approximately five acres in a cultivated
field located on a low hill southeast of Cobb Creek. Included are two
punctated body sherds~ five incised body sherds, probably Maydelle
Incised, 25 body sherds of Bullard Brushed, two plain rim sherds, and
25 plain body sherds. Only one lithic artifact, a crude biracial blade
or knife fragment, was found.
The site still shows two feet of humus-stained sand overlying a red
clay subsoil, although erosion is evident in the immediate area.
41HE14 is a Fulton Aspect--probably Frankston Focus--site located on a low hill directly to the north of the floodplain of Caney
Creek, a minor stream which flows into the Neches from the west. The
area is now in cultivation, and in many spots the surface zone of
artifact-bearing soil--which normally extends to a depth of one foot
below the surface has been eroded away and the red clay subsoil
exposed. The 15 artifacts collected by the survey party include three
plain body sherds, five body sherds of type Bullard Brushed, one biracia! blade or knife fragment, one muller-shaped pitted stone, one
muller, one crude, irregular-shaped pitted stone, and one milling
slab (Fig. 5).
41HE15 is a Fulton Aspect site, probably belonging to the Frankston Focus, which covers about four acres of the partly cultivated
northern slope of a hill directly to the west of the Neches River floodplain. The area has a gray humus-stained sand zone about one foot
thick over much of its surface, but deep erosion has removed this soil
in many spots. Twenty-seven artifacts were collected: one punctated
body sherd, one incised body sherd, probably of Maydelle Incised,
one incised body sherd of unknown type, one rim sherd of Bullard
Brushed, ll body sherds of Bullard Brushed, one plain rim sherd, and
10 plain body sherds. Only one lithic artifact, a hammerstone, was
found.
41HEld is a small Fulton Aspect--probably Frankston Focus--site
located on the alluvial fan of a high hil! directly to the west of the
Neches floodplain. Eleven artifacts were recovered: five plain body
sherds, three body sherds of Bullard Brush.ed (Fig. 5, M) one crude
pitted stone, and two mano-shaped pitted stones.

BLACKBURN CIiO,SSING RESERVOIR

233

41HE17 is a ceramic habitation site located west of the Neches River
floodplain on the slope of a low hill. The area is in pasture and is so
badly eroded that the normal surface soil can be seen only in a few
spots. The 15 artifacts found on the surface point to the Fulton Aspect
and most likely to the Frankston Focus, although this last assignment
cannot be fully substantiated because artifacts diagnostic of that focus
were not recovered. Artifacts collected include seven plain body sherds,
one plain rim sherd, five body sherds of Bullard Brushed, and one
punctated body sherd. One dart point, lanceolate-shaped with contracting stem, was found, but no type assignment can be made for it.
41HE18 is a very small ceramic habitation site situated on the north
and east slopes of a low hill just south of the bottom land of Kickapoo
Creek. Thirty-three artifacts were found in an area of one-half acre.
These definitely point to a Fulton Aspect, and probably a Frankston
Focus, occupation. They include 20 plain body sherds, two body sherds
of Bullard Brushed, two incised body sherds (probably Maydelle or
Canton Incised), and one engraved sherd that is too small for type
identification. The lithic artifacts include an Edgewood dart point
(Fig. 2, G), a Gary dart point (Fig. 2, N), a lanceolate, contracted
base dart point of unknown type, a flake side scraper, four small crude
bifacial knives (Fig. 2, A, F), and numerous chips and sundry artifact
fragments.
41HE19 is a very small non-ceramic site of the East Texas Aspect,
Archaic Stage, located on the badly eroded southern slope of a low
hill to the north of the Kickapoo Creek floodplain. Only five artifacts
were found: a Gary dart point (Fig. 2, M), an unidentified dart point
fragment (Fig. 2, J), a small oval bifacial blade or knife, and two miscellaneous worked stone artifact fragments. This is the only Archaic
site located by the survey party.
41HE20 is a Fulton Aspect, probably Frankston Focus, habitation
site located on the eastern and southern slopes of a hill directly to the
north of the Flat Creek bottom land. The 32 artifacts recovered include 14 plain body sherds, 16 body sherds of Bullard Brushed, and
two unidentified worked stone artifact fragments.
41HE21 is another of the small Fulton Aspect sites which probably
belong to the Frankston Focus. It is located on the east slope of a prominent hill above the west floodplain of the Neches River. Only two
artifacts, one plain and one brushed-incised body sherd, were found.

41HE22, located in an old cultivated field on the high ground di-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rectly to the west of Caney Creek and the Neches River floodplain, is
one of the most prolific sites located in the reservoir area. A total of 370
artifacts was recovered from its surface. This includes 174 Bullard
Brushed body sherds (Fig. 3, L), one Bullard Brushed rim sherd, four
body sherds of Killough Pinched~ 28 sherds of Maydelle Incised (Fig. 3,
I), three punctated-incised body sherds of type Maydelle Incised (Fig.
3, N), 15 Poynor Engraved rim and body sherds (Fig. 3, J-K), one
corrugated rim sherd of type La Rue Neck Banded (Fig. 3, O), one
effigy figure from a Frankston Focus type effigy bowl, 136 plain body
sherds, five plain rim sherds, one punctated body sherd, one engraved
body sherd too small for type identification~ and numerous chert
flakes and chips.
These specimens clearly indicate a Frankston Focus occupation~
and they exhibit a diversity of types and forms not shown at many
other Frankston Focus sites in the immediate area. The midden soil
at the site extends to a depth of 16 inches and is rich in animal and
shell remains, as well as stone flakes and artifact fragments.
41HE23 is a site reported to the survey party after the work at
Blackburn Grossing Reservoir was completed, and was therefore not
visited. It lies on the north floodplain of Ledbetter Greek, and it is said
that potsherds and other artifacts may be found over a vast area. Any
future workers in that area should certainly conduct an investigation
of this site.

Summary Statement
During the course of the 1957 survey of Blackburn Crossing the
land in and around the proposed reservoir was intensively reconnoitered, with the result that 35 archeological sites were discovered
and recorded (Table 1). Although some sites were undoubtedly overlooked, most of the area was thoroughly examined, and it is felt that
the sites found provide a representative picture of the local archeological situation.
One Archaic Stage site and 34 ceramic, Neo-American Stage sites
were located. No Paleo-American or Historic Stage sites were discovered, although several historic sites belonging to the Allen Focus
are known immediately to the south of the proposed reservoir.
The single Archaic site, 41HE19, is small and insignificant and cannot be assigned to any particular cultural unit, although nearly all of
the Archaic sites in adjacent counties seem to belong to the Red River
Aspect (the East Texas Aspect of Suhm~ Krieger, and :[elks [1954]).

BLACKBURN CROSSING RESERVOIR

0_,3~

TABLE i
Cultural Affiliations of Blackburn Crossing Reservoir Sites
Site
41SM73
41SM74
41SM75
41SM76
41SM77
41SM78
41SM79
41SM80
41SM81
41SM82
41SM83
41SM84
41SM85
41SM86
41SM87
41SM88
41SM89
41SM90
41SM91
41SM92
41 CE37
41 CE38
41 CE39
41HE12
41 HE 13
41HE14
41HE15
41HE16
41HE 17
41HE18
41HE19
41HE20
41HE21
41HE22
41HE23

Cuhural Affiliation
Gibson Aspect, Alto Focus
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Ceramic, cultural affiliation unknown
Ceramic, cultural affiliation unknown
Ceramic, cultural affiliation unknown
Gibson Aspect (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Gibson Aspect (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus
Not visited, cultural affiliation unknown
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus
Ceramic, cultural affiliation unknown
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Archaic (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus (?)
Fulton Aspect, Frankston Focus
Not visited, cultural affiliation unknown

Even in the region surrounding the reservoir, Archaic sites are comparatively rare as compared with ceramic sites.
The pottery collections from 34 ceramic sites in Blackburn Crossing Reservoir reveal a great predominance of Frankston Focus, Fulton
Aspect, types. Indeed, it seems that the reservoir is in the heart of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Frankston Focus country, even though a great quantity of sites of this
focus are known from slightly farther south, from Anderson and
Cherokee Counties. While the ceramics of this archeological complex
are already fairly well known, very little work has been done on occupationa! features within Frankston Focus sites, most of the emphasis
having been placed on burial excavation. In view of the fact that so
little has been published on this archeological unit, it is hoped that
many of the Blackburn Crossing sites can be thoroughly investigated.
This would seem to be a fruitful area for future research.
In spite of the fact that all of the 34 ceramic sites mentioned above
evidenced some Frankston Focus ceramic types, one of them (41 SM89)
showed strong Sanders Focus, Gibson Aspect, affiliation as welt. This
site is located near the southern margin of the Sanders Focus area
(although a few sherds from the Davis Site in Cherokee County
[Newell and Krieger, 1949: 137] and from the Asa Warner Sites just
south of Waco, Texas [Watt, 1956], occur slightly farther to the south
than Blackburn Crossing).
Another of the ceramic sites yielded several Alto Focus burials and
ceramic vessels in addition to some Frankston Focus ceramics. This
site, 41 SM73, has been partially excavated by various members of the
East Texas Archeological Society, but has not yet been reported in
print. The simplicity of form and design, as well as crudeness in
execution, of the ceramics from this site is in sharp contrast to the
well-made wares found at the George C. Davis Site, type site for the
Alto Focus. Also, there is an absence of large architectural structures
or occupational features at the site. This, along with crude artifact
workmanship, would lead one to think that 41SM73 is either an extremely early, proto-Alto site or else an outlying village to the big
Davis Site ceremonial center. In view of the nature of the finds made
there--no other Alto Focus sites are known from the immediate area-extensive excavations should some day be carried out at the site.
Since the efforts of the 1957 field survey crew were limited to reconnaissance and to the superficial collecting of artifacts, not a great deal
can be said about the sites which were encountered. "get since no
archeological salvage excavations are scheduled for the area in the immediate future-because the specifications for the lake have been
considerably reduced--it was deemed advisable to make available in
the present paper the small amount of useful information that has
been acquired. It is hoped that eventually many of the interesting sites
located can be thoroughly investigated by professional archeologists
and that interested amateurs and laymen will aid in preserving them

BLACI~2BURN CRO.SSI1NG RESERVOIR

for future research. Here we have an excellent opportunity to expand
our limited knowledge of Frankston Focus sites and, perhaps, to relate
this complex to the earlier Sanders and Alto loci, which also seem to
be represented in the area.

Re]erences Cited
Davis, E. Mott
1958. The Whelan Site, A Late Caddoan Component in the Ferrell’s Bridge
Reservoir, Northeastern Texas. Unpublished report to the National Park
Service, on file at the Regional Office of the National Park Service, Santa
Fe, New Mexico, and at the Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Austin.
Davis, William A., and E. Mott Davis
1960. The Jake Martin Site: An Archaic Site in the Ferrell’s Bridge Reservoir
Area, Northeastern Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 3, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Dice, L. R.
194.3. The Biotic Provinces of North America. University of Michigan Press.
Ann Arbor.
Duffield, Lathel F.
1961. The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30 (for 1959), pp. 51-116.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961. The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge t/eservoir, Rains
County, Texas. Archaeology Series No. 4, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas, Austin.
Fenneman, N. M.
1938. Physiography of Eastern United States. McGraw-Hill. New York.
Jelks, Edward B., and Curtis D. Tunnell
1959. The Harroun Site: A Fulton Aspect Component of the Caddoan Area,
Upshur County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 2, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Johnson, LeBoy, Jr., and Edward B. Jelks
1958. The Tawakoni-Yscani Village, 1760: A Study in Archeological Site Identification. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 405-422.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
t949. The George C. Davis Site. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Sharrock, Floyd W.
1960.

The Warm Site, LI-27, of the Fourche Maline Focus. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 8, pp. 7-4,8.

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Swanton, John tl.
1942. Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 132.
Watt, Frank H.
1956. Archeological Materials from the Asa Warner Sites. Central Texas Archeologist, No. 7, pp. 6-29.
~Webb, Clarence H.
1960. A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology. In: Jelks, Edward B., E. Mott
Davis, and Henry B. Sturgis (editors), A Review of Texas Archeology:
Part 1. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958),
pp. 35-62.
Webb, Clarence H., and Monroe Dodd, Jr.
1939. Further Excavations of the Gahagan Mound; Connections with a Florida
Culture. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 11, pp. 92-127.

The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

