Indian Artifacts
Artifacts made by the Indians from metal and glass are described
in the preceding section. Except for gunflints, which are described
with the gun parts, all the artifacts made by Indians from native
materials are treated in this section. The major categories are: pottery
vessels, pipes, stone tools, and bone and shell artifacts.
POTTERY VESSELS
by Dee Ann Story,

BYRON BA1RBER, ESTALEE BABBER,

EVELYN

COBB,

HERSCHEL COBB, ROBERT COLEMAN, KATHLEEN GILIVlO1RE, R. K. HAP~IS,

and

NOBMA HOFFRICHTER

The Gilbert Site has yielded 2,221 fragments of native-made earthenware, most of which compare favorably with the ceramics described
for components of the Nortefio Focus (Duffield and Jelks, 1961:
36-40; Harris et al., 1965: 299-303). Indeed, the size of the collection
and the reasonably good associational data accompanying it (see
description of the features) provide an excellent opportunity for a
close study of pottery from a Nortefio Focus site. Since the Gilbert
pottery does represent such a valuable corpus of information, considerable time has been invested in the restoration of vessels because
of the conviction that vessels are more meaninghfl units of analysis
than sherds. Of the 2,221 sherds, 810 have been assigned to 47 vessels (Table 6). These vessels, however, represent varying degrees of
completeness, and the term has been applied to essentially whole
specimens (such as Fig. 63, a) as well as to interesting rim sherds
(such as Fig. 50, d). The remaining 1,411 sherds, mainly undecorated
fragments, surely represent many more vessels, but it has been impossible to accomplish their restoration or even to assign individual
sherds to particular vessels.
Both the vessels and the sherds have been divided into two
broad categories, decorated and undecorated. Within these (admittedly at times artificial) groupings, finer sortings have been made on
the basis of differences in the mode and style of decoration, in surface
finish, in paste characteristics, and, whenever possible, in vessel
shape. Decorative techniques represented in the collection are (in
descending order of frequency) engraving, incising, brushing, punctating, combing, pinching, and appliqu6ing. Surface finish varies
from well polished to poorly smoothed; slipping is quite rare. Paste
and temper show a great deal of variation and have entered prominently into the analysis. The two most common tempering agents are

113

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

~A AA AAA A,A A~
0

b

d
FIOISRE 49.

Womack Engraved designs A, B, C, and D.

TEXAS

114

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

shell and bone. These have been distinguished from one another
largely on the basis of their differing morphological characteristics
as revealed by microscopic examination. In addition, tests were sometimes made with a dilute solution of muriatic acid. While such tests
should be viewed with caution, it is significant that clearly recognizable examples of she!l temper from the site did consistently react to
the acid, while obvious examples of bone did not. Grog, the third
most common temper occurring in the collection, "includes any fired
day-product that is crushed and utilized as an aplastie in the potter’s
clay" (Porter, 1964: 521). In most eases this appears to be crushed
sherds. Fine sand particles appear in the paste of a good many sherds,
often without the presence of any other aplastic. Since it is not
clear whether or not the sand was intentionally added, these specimens are simply said to have a sandy paste. Vessel shapes, particularly as revealed in the restorations, have provided yet another useful
attribute for analysis. Included are at least two distinctive bowl forms
and a wide variety of jars.
Most of the descriptive groups resulting from an analysis of the
above-mentioned attributes are difficult to identify with established
types. The major exception is the engraved pottery, a large percentage
of which can be related to types Womack Engraved, Simms Engraved,
and Natchitoches Engraved. In addition, two tentative new types,
Womack Plain and Emory Punctated, along with a more inclusive categolT, Womack Ware, are introduced.
In the descriptions of these various groups there has been some
lumping, but an effort has been made to organize the collection in
such a manner that individual attributes can be studied. The distributional data are detailed in Tables 5 and 6 and generalized in
Tables 7 and 8.
DECORATED

CERAMICS

Engraved
WOMACK ENGI/AVED (Figures 50, 51, and 52, a-h)
Six vessels and 80 sherds are identifiable as Womack Engraved.
Conforming closely to the original definition of the type (Duffield
and Jelks, 1961: 36-39), these comprise exclusively small to mediumsized bowls with rounded shoulders and incurved rims. The one basal
fragment is disk-shaped and concave. Decoration in all instances is
confined to the upper portion of the vessel and consists of engraved
designs delimited by two (very rarely one) horizontal lines. The
upper line consistently appears just below the lip and the lower

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

115

one just below the shoulder. Four major design variations (Fig. 49)
have been previously recognized (ibid.: 37; Harris et al., 1965: 304).
Design A, the most common at Gilbert, consists of opposing, crosshatched triangles; Design B is a negative meandering scroll motif
with a ticked line running through the center of the scroll; Design C,
typically crude in execution, features sets of parallel, curved lines; and
Design D, similar in many ways to Design B, is a negative scroll with
crosshatched triangles as well as ticks suspended from the medial line.
It is difficult to be certain, but in many cases the decoration appears
to have been applied before firing, presumably after the vessel had
been hardened by sun-drying. In their initial definition of Wornack
Engraved, Duffield and Jelks included infrequent incising as charaeteristic of the type. Here these, along with one specimen deviating
in vessel form, have been placed in a separate category, termed
"Womack Engraved variants". The typical Womack E~graved of the
Gilbert Site, represented by six vessels and eight sherd groups, is described below.
Vessel I (Fig. 50, a). Fifteen sherds ( 1 from Feature 1 and 14 from
Feature 4) have been fitted together to restore almost half of this
vessel, the most nearly complete Womack Engraved bow! recovered
from the site. Two additional sherds, both from Feature 4, cannot be
affixed but are confidently attributed to this specimen. When complete, Vessel 1 had an inside oral diameter of approximately 9_,4 cm.,
an outside maximum diameter (at the shoulders) of about 26 cm., and
a height of between 13 and 15 cm. Thickness ranged from 0.5 cm. at
the lip to 1.0 era. at the base. The lip was flat to slightly rounded and
flush with the rim.
Identifiable as Design D, the engraved decoration on Vessel 1 begins about 1.0 cm. below the lip and continues downward some 5.0
em. to just beyond the evenly rounded shoulder. Flanking each scroll
are crosshatched areas each of which contains three blank, doublelined (i.e., concentric) circles. Each scroll is partitioned by a line running longitudinally through the middle. Suspended from the bottom
margin of this line are six (in one instance, seven) crosshatched triangles (apexes pointing downward) which alternate with a series of
upward-pointing tick marks. Judging from the surviving pol~ions of
the vessel, the scroll motif was repeated six times. Possibly the number
three, and multiples thereof, had particular importance to the potter
who man\fractured Vessel 1.
Fire clouds appear on both the exterior and interior surfaces. The
former varies in color from reddish buff to very dark brown with the
darker hue prevailing. By contrast, the interior surface is a rich red-

116

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FmUR~ 50. Womac/~ Engraved. a, Vessel 1; b, c, Vessel 2; d, Vessel 3;
e-h, Vessel 4. Exterior to left on profiles.

dish buff color showing an occasional dark fire cloud. The core is
gray, turning a burnt orange toward the edges. Neither surface is

INDIAN AI~TIFACTS

117

particularly well finished, and marks left by tools used to scrape and
smooth the vessel are common. Weathering out of shell particles has
further marred the vessel’s finish.
In addition to pulverized shell, the hard and compact paste contains an occasional piece of hematite and gn’og. Shell appears in sufficient abundance to suggest that it is an intentional additive.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 50 b-c). Heavily tempered with pulverized mussel
shell, this bowl is represented by 10 sherds, al! from Feature 1.
Roughly half of the rim has been restored, and there are five loose
body sherds but no basal fragments. Vessel 2 was rather small, perhaps about 10 cm. in height and 12 cm. wide at the mouth. Its wall
thickness ranged from 0.5 to 0.8 cm.
The Design A decoration of Vessel 2 consists of opposing, crosshatched triangles bounded by two horizontal lines which encircle the
upper portion of the vessel. Apexes of the upper set of tliangles point
downward and those of the lower set point upward. By and large, the
opposing triangles are offset, although on occasion the apexes match.
On this particular vessel, and on a complete Design A vessel from the
Womack Site (Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 35, Fig. 9, c) there is a tendency for every fourth lower triangle to align with an upper one. In
addition, the lower set of triangles on both vessels is slightly larger
than the upper set. The significance of these features is uncertain,
though the difference in size of the triangles could be related to the
sequence of decoration. That is, it suggests that the lower row may
have been applied before the upper one.
Both the exterior and interior surfaces of Vessel 2 are dark grayish
black. The core is dark gray-black occasionally changing to orangeish
toward the exterior. The outside surface is fairly well smoothed, but
scraping scars are stil! apparent on the interior surface. Paste texture
is smooth and compact with fine sand, bits of mica, and moderate
amounts of shell being present. Depressions left by leaching of the
shell temper are visible in the paste and on the surface.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 50, d). Consisting of 17 sherds from Feature 1, this
partially restored bowl now includes portions of the rim, shoulder,
and upper body. Two of the sherds, both from the shoulder area,
could not be attached but can be assigned with assurance to Vessel 3
on the basis of paste, design, and surface finish. Accurate size measurements of the original bowl cannot be given although it is apparent
that Vessel 3 had approximately the same dimensions as Vessel 1. The
existing wall fragments vary in thickness from 0.5 to 0.8 cm. The lip is
essentially flat and flush with the rim.
The engraved decoration, of Design A style, begins 0.6 era. below

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SO~ETY

the lip and continues downward for a distance of 5.0 cm. below the
lip. There is no discernible pattern in the matching of the triangles,
and the upper and lower rows are about the same size. The color of
both surfaces is predominately dark grayish brown with some firemottled areas appearing on the exterior. The paste is basically gray
and contains dark to light gray particles (evidently grog) as well as a
few reddish (probably hematite or siltstone) fragments. Some shell
appears to have leached out, perhaps coming from sherds used as
temper. On the whole, the paste of this vessel is coarse and moderately
compact. The exterior surface is eroded in places but appears to have
once been fairly well smoothed; the interior was less well finished and
has a sandy texture.
Vessel 4 (Fig. 50, e-h). This bowl, when complete, was perhaps
only slightly smaller than Vessels 1 and 3. It now consists of 17 sherds,
all from Feature 12. One of the sherds has not been attached; the remainder have been restored to form three rim fragments and a section
of the shoulder. Wall thickness varies between 0.6 and 0.8 em.; the
lip is flat to slightly rounded and flush with the rim. In one of the rim
sections (Fig. 50, e) is a small, round hole and, opposite this, traces
of a second hole. Both were drilled from the exterior surface and
probably were for crack lacing.
The Design A decoration on Vessel 4 begins 0.8 to 1.1 cm. below
the lip and continues downward 4.0 to 5.5 cm. It is rather crudely
done and, unlike the other examples of this design, the apexes of the
opposing triangles are matched. Dark brownish gray is the predominating surface color with fire clouds being most prominent on the
exterior. The center of the core is generally gray, bleeding out on the
edges to a bufflsh gray. Fine-grained sand and shell (most of the
latter having leached out) are major constituents of the paste. Both
the outside and the inside surfaces have been smoothed, and both
have a sandy texture.
Vessel 5 (Fig. 51, a-b). Three small body sherds and two larger
rim/shoulder fragments from: this Womack Engraved bowl were found
in Feature 3. This was evidently a rather small vessel, probably less
than 10 cm. high. Wall thickness varies from 0.5 era. at the lip to 0.7
cm. at the shoulder. The lip is flat and flush with the rim.
Undoubtedly a variation of Design A, the decoration consists of a
single row of small triangles whose apexes point toward the lip. Both
the bases and the tips of the triangles touch the lines which encircle
the vessel. The surface colors range from dark gray to black and the
core is a uniform dark gray. Finely pulverized shell has been added
as a tempering agent, and the paste on the whole is smooth, compact,

INDIAN AIRTIFACTS

119

FIGURE 51. Womac]~ Engraved. a, b, Vessel 5; c-e, Vessel 6; f-j, Sherd
Group 1; l~, l, Sherd Group 2; m-o, Sherd Group 3; p-r, Sherd Group 4; s-u,
Sherd Group 5; v, w, Sherd Group 6; x, Sherd Group 7. Exterior to left on
profiles.

and somewhat sandy. The exterior surface is well finished, the intenor surface much less so.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Vessel 6 (Fig. 51, c-e). Twelve sherds from Feature 3 appear to be
fragments of one vessel despite the fact that only limited restoration
was achieved. Their identification as Womack Engraved, however, is
somewhat tentative as the original lip is missing and a new one has
been formed by grinding. Most of the sherds attributed to Vessel 6
are from the rim/shoulder area and they display the characteristic
Womack shape. The flat, reformed rfin has interrupted the decoration,
making it difficult to identify the original design. Crosshatching appears
as the major element, and the layout suggests Design B or D. Certainly, it is not Design A. Surface colors are buff to gray-brown while
the core is gray-buff with many darkened areas. The origin of the
darkened areas-which sometimes appear as distinct particles and at
other times as discolored splotches-is unknown. Included in the paste
are fine grains of sand, bits of soft hematite, and, rarely, pieces of
bone.
Sherd Group 1 (Fig. 51, f-j). Finely pulverized shell temper and
Design A are the attributes common to this group of 22 Womack
Engraved sherds. They are typically small rim and/or shoulder fragments which cannot be assigned to individual vessels without fear of
duplication. In addition to the shell, some have tiny hematite pellets
or possible pieces of grog in the paste. Surface colors are gray-buff
to black, while the cores tend to be light to dark gray. Approximately
half of the specimens have a slightly sandy surface texture and paste.
The interior and exterior surface finish varies from poorly to well
smoothed.
Sherd Group 2 (Fig. 51, k-l). The 12 sherds included in this group
differ from the above only in that they lack shell temper. In each ease
the paste has a fine to medium-coarse, sandy texture. No other aplastic
can be recognized.
Sherd Group 3 (Fig. 51, m-o). Each of the 18 fragments included
in this category has traces of a Design A decoration and grog temper.
Six are rim pieces with the lip intact; the remainder are shoulder/body
sherds. Included in the paste of a few specimens are tiny white particles, probably shell or bone derived from crushed sherds used as
temper.
Sherd Group 4 (Fig. 51, p-r). Like the Group 1 sherds, these four
rim pieces are shell tempered. However, the engraved decoration on
each consists of a single row of triangles, apexes pointed upward toward the lip-a modification of Design A much like that described for
Womack Engrat~ed Vessel 5. Two of the Group 5 sherds (Fig. 51, p, r)
lack the upper horizontal line, while a third (Fig. 51, q) lacks crosshatching within the engraved triangles. All four are small sherds but

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

19,1

appear to be from vessels less than 10 cm. high. Perhaps the condensing of the design is related to the vessel size. If so, it would indicate
that the proportional area of decoration was of greater importance to
the potter than uniform representation of the motif.
Sherd Group 5 (Fig. 51, s-u). Quite nondeseript, these six sherds
cannot to clearly assigned to any of the four Womack Engraved designs even though each has some crosshatching. In addition, the
temper is uncertain. Three have paste characteristics quite similar to
those described for Vesse! 6 but cannot definitely be assigned to that
vessel. The other three have a fine, sandy paste. All are from the
shoulder area and display the distinctive curve of Womack bowls.
Sherd Group 6 (Fig. 51, v-w). The two sherds included in this
group are rim/shoulder fragments that appear to have a Design B or,
less likely, Design D deeoration, and which may be grog tempered.
Positive temper identification is made difficult by the very black cores.
In spite of their common features, it is probable that these sherds are
from different vessels.
Sherd Group 7 (Fig. 51, x). Represented by only one sherd apparently having a Design B decoration, this group is differentiated from
Group 6 primarily on the basis of the presence of shell temper. Additionally, the paste is somewhat less compact than that of the Group 6
sherds, and the interior and exterior surfaces are lighter (a mottled
gray-buff) in color.
Sherd Group 8 (Fig. 52, a-h). The 15 rim, shoulder, and upper body
sherds eomprising this group are identified as Wornack Engraved
prineipalty because each appears to have been derived from bowls
with rounded shoulders and ineurved rims. Moreover, each is shell
tempered and has remnants of an engraved design. Two of the sherds
seem to have crosshatching which could represent Design A, and four
could be from Design B or D vessels. The majority, however, have
decorative motifs which cannot be linked with any of the recognized
Womack designs. The paste is generally smooth and compact and
often somewhat sandy. Two of the Group 8 sherds (Fig. 52, c-d) have
a crack-lacing hole drilled from the exterior surface. The one intact
hole (Fig. 59., c) appears 1.2 em. below the lip and has a maximum
diameter of 0.8 em.
WO~ACK ENGRAVED VAmANTS (Figure 52, i-r)
Sixty sherds clearly representing four vessels are provisionally
labeled as variants of the Womack Er~graved type. Since the significance of these variations is not presently known, this category is
established primarily for descriptive convenienee.

1"22

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 52. Womac]~ Engraved and Womac]~ Engraved variants, a-h,
Womac]~ Engraved, Sherd Group 8; i, Womac]~ Engraved variant, Vessel 1;
j-o, Womac]~ Engraved variant, Vessel 2; p, Womac]~ Engraved varianl~,
Vessel 3; q, r, Womacl~ Engraved variant, Vessel 4. Exterior to left on profile.

Vessel 1 (Fig. 52, i). The most complete of the four vessels now
consists of 25 sherds, 18 of which have been fitted together. With one
exception, the fragments were recovered from Feature 2. The sole
specimen from Feature 5 could not be fitted to the others, but it can

INDIAN AIRTIFACTS

123

confidently be assigned to Vessel 1, nevertheless. When complete, this
bqwl was roughly 9 em. high, had an inside oral diameter of about 11
or 19. cm. and a maximum diameter (at the shoulder) of approximately 14 em. Unlike the typical Womack bowl the base is flat and the
shoulder is quite angular. All other characteristics are within the range
described for the type (Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 36-39). The design
is readily recognizable as type C, and the compact paste is tempered
with abundant, fairly coarse fragments of mussel shell. Surface colors
are from light to very dark reddish brown, while the core is generally
black, becoming reddish toward the exterior. The upper portion of the
bowl exterior has been well smoothed, but the lower part and much of
the interior are poorly finished. Thickness just below the lip is 0.5 cm.,
at the shoulder 1.0 era., at the midpoint on the body 0.7 ern., and at
the base 0.8 cm. The lip is very slightly rounded and flush with the
rim.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 52, j-o). This vessel, like the one described above,
appears to have been a small carinated bowl with an incurred rim
and angular shoulder. It now consists of 25 rim and body sherds, most
of which could not be fitted together. In addition to the rather unusual
shoulder area, the paste is atypically bone tempered, the interior surface is not smoothed (Fig. 52, o), and the engraved rim decoration,
while similar to Design A, is aberrant. Bounded by two horizontal
lines, this decoration consists of a single row of crosshatched ta’iangles,
the apexes of some pointed upward, others downward. Unexpectedly,
the triangles are arranged into groups or sets, with an undecorated
area at least 3 cm. wide separating each set. Probably the apexes of
the triangles comprising each set were alternately pointed toward the
lip and away from the lip. The exterior surface is welt to poorly
smoothed and quite strikingly fire-mottled, varying in color from black
to reddish buff. The interior and the core are of more uniform coloration, being brownish gray to black. Wall thickness varies from 0.4 to
0.8 cm.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 52, p). Eight sherds from Feature 7 have been joined
to form the upper portion of a vessel which displays the characteristic
Wornack rim and shoulder profile but which has an incised rather
than an engraved decoration. While easily identified as Design A, the
motif is somewhat unusual in that the apexes of the upper and lower
triangles are joined. Vessel 3 is too fragmentary for close measurement
although the oral diameter was probably between 13 and 14 cm., and
the over-all bowl height about 10 cm. Exterior and interior surfaces
are light tan and the core is a uniform gray-black. The fine, smooth
paste contains numerous cavities formed by weathered-out temper.

19,4

TEXAS

0

ARCHEOLOGICAL

2

4
=

SOCIETY

6
_

cm.

FIGURE 53.

Simms Engraved. a, b, Vessel 1; c, Vessel 2; d, e, rim sherds.

Similar leaching scars mar the vessel’s surfaces, neither one of which
has been well finished.
Vessel 4 (Fig. 52, q-r). Two sherds from Feature 1 are from the
shoulder area of a Womack-shaped bowl. Both bear remnants of a
boldly incised Design A. They have a fine, sandy paste containing tiny
bits of shell and an occasional piece of grog, and their surface coloration is tan to black. Their cores are a uniform dark gray-black. Vessel
size is impossible to approximate, but the wail thickness varies from
0.7 to 0.9 cm,
SIRIMS ENGRAVED (

Figure 53 )

This type, with its highly distinctive carinated bowl form, is represented at the Gilbert Site by two restored Vessels and two rim sherds
which are from two additional vessels.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 58, a-b). Twenty-eight potsherds from Feature 2
have been joined to form approximately two thirds of this small bowl;
the remaining one third has been filled in with plaster. Its evenly convex base, narrow (0.9 era.) rim and upward-pointing, diagonally

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

19,5

notched lip are characteristic of the Simms Engraved type. The interior
oral diameter is 14.5 cm., the maximum diameter (at the juncture of
the rim and the body) is 16.5 cm., and the height is 6.7 cm. The engraved decoration is confined to the rim zone and consists of two
opposing, slightly curved, ticked lines (Fig. 53, b). This motif is repeated four times with each set of curved lines being separated by
three nearly parallel lines. Interior and exterior surfaces are well
polished and a fairly uniform dark brownish black in color. The paste
is also dark, has a fine, compact texture, and is tempered with finely
pulverized shell.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 53, c). Comprised of 9.9 sherds from Feature 1, this
vessel is a less striking example of the Simms bow! form. The rim does
not turn inward as sharply as that of Vessel 1, nor is the juncture with
the lip as abrupt. Other features, including fine shell temper, shallow
lip notching, a slightly convex base, and a characteristic engraved design, are typical. Though less compressed, the rim decoration is re1T
similar to that described for Vessel 1. It is confined to a space between
1.7 and 3.0 cm. below the lip. Both surfaces are polished, although
the interior is less well finished than the exterior. Surface color is predominantly brownish gray with some mottled reddish and blackbrown hues.
Sherds (Fig. 53, d-e). Two small sherds clearly represent two more
Simms Engraved bowls. Each displays a sharply bent inward rim
which merges with an inward-pointing lip. Notching is not present and
both lips are thin and rounded. The curvature and wall thickness suggest that these sherds are from bowls considerably larger than either
Vessel 1 or 2. The decoration in each ease consists of two horizontal
ticked lines (0.6 cm. apm~ on both sherds) which either encircled the
rim or, more probably, were divided into four(?) sets. One sherd (Fig.
53, e) is a light tan color with a black core; the other (Fig. 53, d) is
dark brownish black with a black core. Both have a fine, compact
paste with possible grog and shell (the shell may be from crushed
sherds) temper. Exterior surfaces are well smoothed, interior ones
less so.
NATCHITOCHES ENGRAVED (Fignre 54, a-b)
Natchitoches Engraved, generally regarded as one of the diagnostic
pottery types of the historic Caddo Indians (Webb, 1945: 63-64; Suhm
and Jelks, 1962: 113-114), is known at the Gilbert Site fi’om nine
sherds, eight of which have been fitted together to form the lower
portion of a rather large-bodied bottle (Vessel 1). It appears to have

19,6

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 54.
Natchitoches Engraved and Natchitoches Engraved variants.
a, b, Natchitochcs Engraved, Vessel 1; c-g, Natchitoches Engraved variant,
Vessel 1; h-k, Natchitoches Engraved variant, Vessel 2; l, NatchiLoches En.graved variant, Vessel 3; m-aa, Natchitocbes Engraved variant, Vessel 4;
bb, Natchitoches Engraved variant, Vessel 5. Exteriors to left on profiles.

127

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

been similar in both shape and decoration to one illustrated in Suhm
and Jelks (1962: P1. 57, A).
Folded scrolls bisected by ticked medial lines and flanked by crosshatched areas, as well as by negative disks, make up the surviving engraved design. The temper is finely pulverized shell, although tiny
bits of hematite and perhaps some grog can also be recognized in the
paste. Surface colors vary from reddish to grayish brown while the
Core is a uniform light gray. The interior surface is smoothed and the
exterior one is fairly well polished. Wall thickness ranges from 0.5 to
0.8 cm.
NATCHITOCHES VARIANTS

(Figure

54, c-bb)

An interesting group of 69 sherds from five vessels are quite relniniscent of Natchitoches Engraved; however, when examined closely
they differ from that type in design layout and execution as well as in
some paste characteristics. The significance of these seemingly minor
differences is not clear, but perhaps these vessels represent local copies
0f Natehitoches Engraved, or variations not yet recognized for the
type.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 54, c-g). Found scattered over Features 1, 3, and 4
are 9.0 sherds assignable to one vessel, evidently a small bowl or very
wide-mouthed jar. Although a nmnber of these sherds could be ftted
together, the lower and upper portions of the vessel could not be
joined. None of the lip is intact, but the outflaring rim appears to have
been low (between 2.0 and 2.5 cm.) and to have formed an almost
continuous recurve with the body wall which in turn gradually merged
with the slightly flattened base. Juncture of the rim and body is emphasized by a narrow (0.3 to 0.4 cm. wide) band or fillet formed
between two deeply engraved, ticked lines. The oral diameter is
estimated at about 13 cm. and the vessel height is less confidently
approximated at between 8 and 9 cm.
Though incompletely preserved, the rather crude, engraved decoration clearly differs from the scroll motif typical of Natchitoches Engraved. It extends over all of the body and consists primarily of panels
comprised of a series of blank disks outlined by both hachuring and
crosshatching. A vertical ticked line evidently separated each panel.
Unlike Natchitoches Engraved bowls (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 57, D,
F-K)-and, indeed, at least two of the variant forms at Gilbert-the
rim is not extensively decorated. Curiously, the lip is fractured (by
percussion chipping?) and somewhat worn. In addition to the fillet
mentioned above, there is a single engraved line encircling the vessel
just below the lip. Small triangles extend upward from this line.

19,8

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

The compact, but rather coarse paste of Vessel 1 contains a number
of white, gray, and black particles-possibly pulverized bone. A petrographic analysis made by B. J. Scull and Stanley B. McCaleb of
the Sun Oil Company Laboratory, Richardson, Texas, revealed the
mineral content of one sherd to be, in descending order of abundance,
montmorillinite, quartz, orthoclase, collophane, hematite, and limonite.
Fire clouds are quite evident on the exterior which varies in color
from grayish brown to black. The interior is a uniform gray-brovcn and
the core is light to dark gray. The exterior is eroded in places but appears to have been polished; by contrast, the interior is poorly
smoothed.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 54, h-k). Eighteen sherds from Feature 3 comprise
this vessel, apparently a large bottle similar in shape to the one good
example of Natchitoches recovered from the site. Restored portions inelude a large section of the body and about half of the base. One of
the unattached sherds (Fig. 54, h) has a narrow fillet which is presumed to mark the juncture of the rim and body. No over-all vessel
dimensions can be given, but the wall thickness is between 0.4 and 0.6
era. while the base reaches a maximum thickness of 1.3 era.
The engraved decoration covers all of the body and consists of
folded scrolls flanked by blank disks and hachured areas. In concept
it is close to that of the Natchitoches type, falling short only in execution and failure to convey fully the negative design effect. Traees of a
white substance, possibly intentional pigment, can be seen in a few of
the engraved lines. Both the exterior and interior surfaces are polished
and vary in color from light to dark gray, almost black. The core is
gray, and the paste is very firm with fine sand and perhaps a few tiny
bits of shell.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 54, 1). This vessel is represented by nine sherds (eight
from Feature 7 and one from Feature 4) which have been fitted together to form a section of the rim and a small portion of the upper
body. The lip is badly damaged (perhaps intentionally chipped) but
appears to have been rounded and turned outward while the rim is
markedly concave. Since so little of the body was recovered, the overall shape and size are uncertain, except that the rim form suggests a
wide-mouthed jar or bowl.
The engraved rim decoration deviates from that described for the
Natchitoches type (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 113). Instead of the typical
rectilinear pattern with horizontal ticked lines, there are alternating
sets of chevrons filled with blank disks and hachured areas. Faint
traces of what seems to be red pigment are present in and about several of the engraved lines. All that remains of the body decoration are

129

INDIAN At/TIFACTS

several blank disks flanked by hachured lines-possibly remnants of a
design similar to that described for Vessel 2.
Surface colors range from black to gray and the core is a uniform
dark gray. No obvious tempering material can be recognized, although
unidentified dark particles are abundant in the compact, slightly sandy
paste. Both the exterior and interior surfaces are well smoothed, and
the wall thickness is between 0.6 and 0.8 em.
Vessel 4 (Fig. 54, m-aa). Twenty-one rim and body sherds seem to
belong to Vessel 4, a small bowl with an outflaring rim. Itim diameter
is estimated at between 12 and 14 em. and the over-all height at between 10 and 11 era. A narrow (0.3 to 0.4 cm. wide) fillet formed
between two deeply engraved lines appears at the juncture of the
rim and body. The lip, like that of Vessel i and Vessel g, is badly
damaged but was probably rounded and outturned. For reasons not
readily apparent, the broken edges of the lip of this vessel, as well as
that of Vessel 1, are worn smooth.
Engraved ehew’ons outlined by crosshatching decorate the rim
while scrolls flanked by crosshatched areas and blank disks adorn the
body. The body decoration was apparently divided into panels each
of which was separated from one another by a wide (generally 0.8
em.), vertical band which tapers to a point just below the rim. Surface colors vary from black to gray-brown and the core is uniformly
black. A rather thick, sooty substance appears on the interior surface
of the rim and suggests that this bowl, unlike any of the other engraved vessels found at Gilbert, was used in cooking. The exterior
surface is polished and the interior one is well smoothed. Numerous
fragments of grog appear as the major tempering agent. Wall thickness is 0.6 era. just below the lip, 0.5 era. at about midpoint on the
body, and 0.9 era. near the juncture of the body and the base.
Vessel 5 ( Fig. 54, bb ). One body sherd with portions of an engraved
scroll motif outlined by hachuring is tentatively identified as a variant
of the Natchitoches Engraved type. An occasional piece of grog and
fine shell may be present in the compact, slight sandy paste. The well
smoothed exterior and interior surfaces are dark gray in color and the
core is a lighter shade of the stone hue. Wall thickness is 0.8 em.
N’IISCELLANEOUS

ENGRAVED

(Figures

55 and 56, a-q)

Included in this category are four very incompletely restored vessels
and 37 small rim and body sherds, all of which bear traces of an engraved decoration. The sherds are typically nondescript and do not
preserve much of the design nor the vessel form. While more can be

130

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 55. Miscellaneous engraved, a-g, Vessel 1; h-q, Vesse! 2; r, Vessel
3; s-w, Vessel 4. Exterior to left on profiles.

discerned from the partial vessels, none possesses a combination of
attributes readily identifiable with an established type.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 55, a-g). This vessel is known from 17 sherd~, 11
(10 from Feature 3 and one from Feature 4) of which have been
joined to form a portion of the rim and upper body. It appears to have

INDIAN A]RTIFACTS

131

been a large bowl (oral diameter of about 20 era. ) with a convex rim
and body which merge to form an even curve. The lip is flat and flush
with the rim. The deeply engraved decoration, evidently restricted to
the upper part of the bowl and repeated several times, consists of
concentric, sometimes ticked, eireles. In addition, a ticked line encircles the rim just below the lip. Both surfaces are well smoothed and
vary in color from light, reddish brown to brownish black. Dark fire
clouds are particularly apparent on the exterior. The paste is dark to
light gray in color, very hard and moderately fine in texture, and
tempered with finely pulverized bone. Wall thickness is from 0.4 to
0.6 era.
In general shape and decoration this vessel is similar to Patton
Engraved (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 117). However, it lacks the characteristic sandy feeling of Patton vessels and has a somewhat unusual design layout for that type.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 55, h-q). Although represented by 29 sherds (one
from Feature 1, 10 from Feature 3, one from Feature 4, and 17 from
Feature 6), very little of this vessel could be pieced together. Consequently, the shape is uncertain; however, the convexity of the sherds
suggests a small vessel. The lip is thinned and flush with the rim. Two
deeply engraved, ticked lines appear below the lip (Fig. 55, h); the
remainder of the design seems to have consisted of ticked horizontal(?) bands and perhaps widely shaped concentric circles. Vesse!
9. is quite well polished on both surfaces and has a hard, compact
paste which contains finely pulverized shell and an occasional piece
of siltstone. The exterior surface varies in color from black to reddish
brown while the interior one is a uniform reddish buff. Wall thickness
is between 0.5 and 0.6 cm.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 55, r). Four sherds from Feature 3 have been joined
to restore a portion of the rim and upper body of this shell-tempered
vessel. It appears to have been a small jar with an outflaring rim, constricted neck, and, less certainly, a globular body. The lip is slightly
rounded and flush with the rim, and the oral diameter is estimated at
about 8 cm. Remnants of an engraved decoration, including a concentric, ticked circle, appear just below the neck. Surface and core
colors are various shades of gray, and the wall thickness is between
0.8 and 1.0 cm. Vessel 3 is thick and poorly finished.
Vessel 4 (Fig. 55, s-w). This vessel also appears to have been a
small, poorly made jar. It now consists of two rim sherds, two body
sherds, and one large base sherd, all from Feature 2. The lip is
essentially fiat and flush with the rim and a raised fillet marks the
juncture of the rim and body. The base (Fig. 55, w), is disk-shaped,

132

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 56. Miscellaneous engraved and incised sherds, a-j, engraved Sherd
Group 1; k, engraved Sherd Group 2; l-o, engraved Sherd Group 3; p-q,
engraved Sherd Group 4; r-w, incised Sherd Group 1; x-z, incised Sherd
Group 2; a¢, bb, incised Sherd Group 3. Exterior to left on profiles.

concave, and slightly thicker than the vessel walls. Very crudely engraved vertical, horizontal, and diagonal lines seem to have covered

133

INDIAN AIRTIFACTS

all of the rim and body. Numerous dark particles, perhaps hematite
pellets, appear in the paste which, on the whole, is rather sandy. The
interior surface is quite irregular while the exterior one is poorly
smoothed. Surface colors are from gray-black to gray-brown.
Sherd Group 1 (Fig. 56, a-j). Eighteen rim and body sherds with
traces of engraved designs are shell tempered. Three of the rim pieces
(Fig. 56, a, b) are possibly from one carinated bowl with a vertical
rim and everted, slightly thickened lip. Two horizontal lines, one just
below the lip and the other just above the shoulder, are present on
each of these sherds. A fourth rim fragment (Fig. 56, e) possibly from
a spool-necked bottle has hachured triangles suspended downward
from two engraved lines. A fifth, much smaller rim sherd (Fig. 56, d)
has traces of red pigment in a ticked line. The remaining 13 sherds are
nondistinctive and may even include some fragments from Womack
Engraved vessels.
Sherd Group 2, (Fig. 56, k). Each of the two small sherds included
in this group is heavily tempered with grog. One has remnants of a
crosshatched design and the other has portions of a ticked scroll motif.
Sherd Group 3 (Fig. 56, 1-o). The 10 engraved sherds comprising
this group have sandy pastes containing some grog as well as unidentified dark particles. The edge of one is worn and may represent
portions of a reformed rim. Another (Fig. 56, n) is a small rim fragment which has a deeply engraved design consisting of a wavy band
and, below this, a series of vertical lines. None of the remaining sherds
exhibits any feature of particular interest.
Sherd Group 4 (Fig. 56, p-q). The six sherds making up this category also have a sandy paste, but, unlike the above, they contain some
hematite particles. None is very large and little can be said of vesseJ
shape or design.
Incised

Ninety-eight sherds from the site have portions of incised decorations. No significant restoration could be accomplished, and the majority of the incised sherds are miscellaneous body fragments. Three
groups, however, can be recognized on the basis of differences in the
aplastie used as temper.
Sherd Group 1 (Fig. 56, r-w). The 80 sherds included in this group
are tempered with crushed mussel shell. In general the paste is contorted and the shell is coarse and moderately abundant. Two of the
sherds are basal fragments (Fig. 56, w), one is a rim piece, and one
(Fig. 56, r) is a fragment of a rivet type handle; the remainder are

134

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

body sherds. Although no particulars of vessel shape can be discerned,
it is quite probable that most Group 1 sherds are from jars. The incised decorations appear to have been simple, consisting principally
of more or less parallel lines arranged into straight, slightly concentric,
diagonal, and radiating patterns. There are four examples of crosshatching (for example, Fig. 56, s) and the incised lines on the handle
fragment form a crude chevron motif. Width of the incised lines varies
from rather narrow (Fig. 56, s, v) to moderately broad (Fig. 56, t, u).
On several of the sherds the decoration has been smoothed over; however, on most the slightly mounded margins of the incised lines are
preserved. The exterior surfaces are from poorly to well smoothed.
Surface colors range from buff to dark gray and a number of the
shex’ds show indications of having come from vessels used in cooking.
Sherd Group 2 (Fig. 56, x-z). Fifteen of the incised sherds seem to
be tempered with pulverized bone. Of these, nine are body fragments
(Fig. 56, z) quite similar in decoration and other details to the Group
1 incised sherds. The remaining six Group 2 sherds, all from Feature
5, are small rim and shoulder fragments evidently from carinated
bowls with incurving rims (Fig. 56, x, y). At least two vessels appear
to be represented. Very little of the over-all design can be determined,
but specific decorative elements include a concentric circle ( Fig. 56, x),
horizontal lines flanking a blank disk (Fig. 56, y), and crosshatching.
Sherd Group 3 (Fig. 56, aa-bb). This group is comprised of three
sherds with grog temper. Two (Fig. 56, aa, bb) are rim fragments;
one (Fig. 56, aa) with the lip intact appears to have been a vessel
with a high, slightly outflaring rim. Both rim sherds bear traces of very
widely spaced crosshatched lines. Their surfaces are rather poorly
smoothed and buffish in color. The third Group 3 sherd is a tiny body
fragment with a single incised line.
Punctated
The 18 punctated sherds recovered from the Gilbert Site are rim
fragments, most with the lip intact. It is probable that these sherds
are from jars, the bodies of which may have been decorated by other
techniques, particularly incising. Like the incised sherds, they can be
subdivided into several groups on the basis of variations in temper.
Sherd Group 1 (Fig. 57, a-d). Crushed shell temper is the most distinctive attribute of this group of 13 sherds. Ten are slightly outflaring
rim fragments having one row of diagonal, gash-like punctations 1.7
era. below the rounded lip (Fig. 57, a, b). On two of these the punctations have been smoothed over, while on the others the clay is

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

135

FIGURE 57. Punctated, punctated-incised, and brushed-punctated pottery.
a-d, punctated Sherd Group 1; e, punctated Sherd Group 2; f, punctated
Sherd Group 4; g, Emory Punctated, Vessel 1; h, Emory Punctated, Vessel
2; i, Emory Punctated, Vessel 3; j-o, brushed-punctated vessel. Exterior to
left on profiles.

mounded about one or, less often, both sides of punetations. Two of
the remaining three sherds lack the lip. Each has a single row of short,

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

closely spaced punctations formed by forcing an implement into the
plastic clay at a slight angle (Fig. 57, e). When viewed in cross seetion the punetated areas on both sherds are coneavo-eonvex, the concavity being on the exterior, the convexity on the interior. The well
defined, groove-like concavity, is 0.8 cm. wide and must have encircled
the vessel. The exterior bulge is less easily delineated but is approximately l0 cm. wide.
The last of the Group i sherds (Fig. 57, d) is also from the lower
portion of a rim. It has two small, almost square punetations which
have been smoothed over. In general, all of the Group 1 sherds are
rather poorly finished and vary in surface color from buff to nearly
black. The interior surface of five have carbonaceous encrustrations
suggesting that they are from vessels used to cook foods.
Sherd Group 2 (Fig. 57, e). The two Group 2 punctated sherds
are bone tempered and possibly from the same vessel-evidently
a jar with a high vertical rim and a slightly outflafing, rounded lip.
Both have a single row of punctations formed by pressing a blunt
implement into the clay at a sharp angle, 0.8 cm. below the lip. The
interior surfaces are black and sooty, while the exterior ones vary in
color from black to buff.
Sherd Group 3. Only one of the punctated sherds, apparently a
body fragment, is definitely grog tempered. It is covered with small,
randomly placed punctations which have been smoothed over.
Sherd Group 4 (Fig. 57, f). The fourth and last group of punctated
sherds included two small rim pieces with everted and crudely
thickened lips and a row of squarish punetations 1.9 em. below the
lip. Probably from the same vessel, both have a very black core
which makes temper identification difficult. However, some quartz
sand and tiny pellets of hematite, along with a few light particles
which may be pieces of grog and/or bone, can be recognized in the
paste. On the larger of the two Group 4 sherds (Fig. 57, f) an
exterior bulge and an interior groove-like concavity coincide with
the row of punetations.
Punctated-Incised
EMORY

PUNCrATED

(Figure

57, g-i)

Twelve sherds from the site have one or two rows of punctations
at the juncture of the rim and body and, on the body and suspended
from the punctations, a series of essentially vertical, incised lines.
These sherds and, less certainly, some of the incised, punctated, and
brushed specimens described elsewhere, seem to fall well within the

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

137

range of a tentative new type Emory Punctated. Although the name
has appeared in print (Harris et al., 1965: 299), no detailed description has yet been published for the type. R. K. Harris, the first to
recognize the type, has provided the following definition for Emory.
PASTE
Temper: Sand, sand and shell, sand and clay, or sand and bone
in varying quantities.
Texture: Varies with the tempering agent used; when the temper
is sand or when sand is dominant, the paste is smooth and
compact; when clay is dominant, the texture tends to be
rough and compact.
Color: Generally black to gray cores, and tan, brown or grayish
buff exteriors. Fire clouds appear on some vessels.
Surface finish: On vessels with only rows of punctations below
the rim, the exterior body is usually smoothed. On others the
body is partially or entirely covered with brushing or incising.
Interiors vary from poorly to moderately well smoothed.
FORM
Wall thickness: Ranges from 3 to 12 mm., average 5 or 6 mm.
Lip: Rounded, bent outward slightly.
Base: Convex on small vessels and flat on large ones.
Vessel shape and size: Occurs only in the form of jars. Some
bodies are globular, others squat. Vessel capaeity varies from
an estimated one-half gallon to one gallon.
DECORATION
Treatment: Punetating, incising, and brushing.
Designs: Some vessels have only punctations arranged into One
to four rows around the vessel, usually just below the lip. If
brushing is present, it may occur ahnost anywhere on the vessel, from the lip to the base. If incising is present, it usually
consists of straight to slightly curved lines extending from below
the rim to the base or to about the middle of the body. Punetations are often combined with either incising or brushing, and
on some vessels all three decorative techniques are utilized.

CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION
Emory Punctated vessels and sherds have been found primarily
at Nortefio Focus sites but occur less frequently at late Caddo
sites. Known occurrences presently include the Womack Site
in Lamar County, the historic component at the Sanders. Site
in Lamar County, the Sam Coffman Site in Red River County,

138

TEXAS

AI~CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

and the Roseborough Lake Site (Fort St. Louis de Kadohadacho?) in Bowie County. In addition, it is probable that
some of the small punetated, incised, and brushed sherds
found at the Pearson Site (Duffleld and Jelks, 1961: 39) belong
to this type.
ESTIMATED ACE
This eeramie type is protohistoric and historic in time and appears to have lasted until at least the middle or latter part of
the 18th century.
Since Emory Punctated is a new type and the authors are not
so eonversant with the pertinent comparative material as might be
desired, only the punetated-ineised sherds from Gilbert are definitely identified as Emory. These ceramies, from three vessels, make up a
discrete group in terms of temper, mode, style of deeoration, and,
less certainly, shape. Although quite ineomplete, eaeh of the Emory
vessels is briefly deseribed below.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 57, g). This vessel is represented by a single sherd,
a small pieee from the lower rim and upper body area. It has a
single row of small, diagonal punetations which eneireled the vessel at the juneture of the rim and body. Suspended h’om this row
is a series of slightly curved, incised lines. The paste is quite friable
and contains many eavities, holes left when the shell temper leached
out. Both surfaees are poorly smoothed. The exterior is light gray in
color and the interior is dark gray. Wall thickness is 0.6 em.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 57, h). The second Emory vessel from the site is
known from two sherds whieh have been fitted together to form a portion of the rim and upper body of a jar. The rim is markedly outflaring while the lip is flat and somewhat everted. Two rows of
small, diagona! punetations appear between 1.3 and 2.3 em. below
the lip. Deeply ineised, slightly curved lines extend from these punetations down the vessel body for an undetermined distance. Coineident
with the punctated area is an exterior bulge about 1.2 era. wide and
an exterior groove 1.1 era. wide. The paste of Vessel 2 is compact,
slightly sandy, and tempered with a moderate amount of erushed
shell. A thiek, sooty substance blankets the interior surface and appears as small patches on the exterior surface. Wall thickness varies
from 0.5 to 0.6 em.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 57, i). Nine rim and body sherds have been joined
to form a section of the upper part of this vessel, a jar with low,
outflaring rim and weakly tapered, everted lip. Two centimeters below the lip, where the body and rim curve join, there is a horizontal

139

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

row of lightly smoothed-over punctations. Beginning at different
points below this row are downward-radiating lines which only partially covered the vessel body (a minimum of 5.6 era. below the
punctations). The smooth, compact paste has finely pulverized shell
temper. Both surfaces are gTayish buff in color with fire clouds and
carbonaceous staining being present on the exterior. Neither surface
is well finished and numerous horizontal striations can be observed. A
slight, rounded depression on the interior provides a quite tenuous
suggestion of the paddle and anvil technique. Interestingly, there is
a large, shell-tempered body sherd (Fig. 62, 1) from the same feature
as these sherds which could possibly be from the lower undecorated
portion of Vesse! 3. This sherd displays more definitive paddle and
anvil sears.
Brushed-Punctated
The 19 brushed-punctated sherds recovered from the site were
found in two features (13 in Feature 1, 6 in Feature 4) and can be
assigned to a single vessel (Fig. 57, j-o). Although no base sherds
are included, it is evident that this vessel was a medium-sized jar
with a high outflaring rim, a flat lip, and a somewhat squat body. Its
oral diameter is estimated at 16 era. and its height at 18 era. The
exterior of the rim and body are covered with horizontal brush marks
presumably made by dragging grass or small twigs across the plastic
clay. Where the rim and body join, approximately 3.7 era. below the
lip, there m’e two rows of horizontal stick punctations, clearly made
after the vessel had been brushed. The interior surface has been
rather well smoothed but is lumpy, apparently reflecting the coarseness of the underlying paste particles. The identity of these particles
is difficult because of the darkness of the core; however, they may
be pieces of grog. In addition, the paste contains fine quartz sand and
is quite compact. Wall thickness is 0.7 em. and surface colors range
from gray-buff to black with the latter hue resulting from cooking
stains.
While this vessel is within the range of variation of Emory Punctared, it is not so typed. Iteasons for this reservation include the differences between this vessel and three from Gilbert that are called
Emory, as well as its similarity with a previously defined type,
Boothe Brushed (Suhm, 1955: 16-20).
Brushed-Combed
One of the most unusua! vessels recovered from the site is a partially restored jar (Fig. 58, a-b) which is covered with brush marks

140

TEXAS

ARCHEOLO~CAL

SOCIETY

FIc~F,~ 5 8. Brushed-combed and brushed pottery, a, b, brushed-combed
Vessel 1; c, brushed Vessel 1; d-h, brushed Sherd Group 1; i, j, brushed
Sherd Group 2. Exterior to left on profiles.

141

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

as well as small, sometimes overlapping, incised lines. The brushing
is random, at times being horizontal and at other times diagonal and
vertical, and appears to have extended from the shoulder area over
most of the body. From immediately above the brushing to approximately 1.5 cm. below the lip the jar is covered with innumerable
small striations (generally about 0.4 cm. long) possibly made by a
fine-toothed or selTated implement. Hesitantly, this technique is referred to as combing as the short incisions are far too narrow and
numerous to be labeled punctations. At first glance the "comb" marks
appear to be cordmarks; however, upon close inspection it is clear
that they are not cordmarks nor any other textured decoration made
with a wrapped or carved paddle.
Approximately one fourth of the jar has been restored, with 36 of
the 46 sherds representing this vessel having been fitted together. It
has a constricted neck, a high, outflaring rim, and an irregular, though
essentially flat and flush, lip. A prominent bulge marks the shoulder
area and the body seems to have tapered rather sharply toward the
base. The outside oral diameter was 32 cm. and the over-all height
was probably in excess of 35 cm. In view of the size of this vessel,
the wall thickness is a surprisingly thin 0.5 to 0.6 cm. The smooth
but friable paste is tempered with moderate amounts of mussel shell.
Black, sooty, cooking stains blanket the interior surface and are fairly
common on the exterior surface. Where free of these discolorations
the exterior varies from grayish to reddish buff. Being light to dark
gray, the core is more uniform in color. The interior is smoothed
while the exterior is covered with decoration except for just below
the lip where the vesse! has been poorly smoothed.
Brushed
Eighty-five sherds in the collection are brushed only. Some, of
course, could be from vessels also decorated by other techniques,
while others are probably from vessels with all-over brushing. Ineluded are one partially restored vessel and three sherd groups.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 58, c). Seven rim and body sherds have been joined
to form roughly one third of this vessel, a rather deep, earinated-like
bowl. It has a gently rounded shoulder, a rather low inward- then
upward- pointing rim, and a tapered, slightly everted lip. The body
wall appears to have formed an even curve with the base. Outside
oral diameter is estimated at between 13 and 14 cm., height at between 11 and 12 cm. Diagonal and vertical brush marks cover all of
the body exterior. The rim and shoulder area, as well as much of the
inner surface, are badly eroded but appear to have once been well

142

TEXAS AI/CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

smoothed. Numerous, rather coarse particles of crushed mussel shell
appear in the contorted, compact paste. Surface colors range from
black to a deep orangeish red while the core is reddish black. Wall
thickness is 0.5 cm. at midpoint on the body, 0.7 cm. at the shoulder,
and 0.2 cm. at the lip.
Sherd Group 1 (Fig. 58, d-h). Comprised of 45 specimens, this
sherd group is distinguished by the presence of shell temper. Included are 36 body fi’agments (Fig. 58, d-g). The largest and most
interesting of the Group i specimens (actually five sherds glued together, Fig. 58, d) is from the rim of what appears to have been
a rather wide-mouthed jar with a high, outturned rim and a fiat,
flush lip. Deep, slightly diagonal brush marks appear about 1.5
cm. below the lip and probably covered all of the body of this jar.
None of the remaining Group 1 sherds displays any feature of particular interest.
Sherd Group 2 (Fig. 58, i-j ). This group of 29 sherds is differentiated
from the other brushed specimens solely on the basis of the presence
of bone temper. All but one - a base fi/agment - are from body areas
so that little can be determined of vessel shape or orientation and
extent of the brushing. Five sherds, all possibly from the same pot,
do merit special mention. In addition to what appear to be crude,
partially obliterated brush tam’ks, each of these sherds has an occasional impression suggestive of cordmaking (Fig. 58, j). Positive
identification, however, is not possible.
Sherd Grottp 3. The four sherds making up this category have compact, very dark cores which makes recognition of constituents in the
paste virtually impossible without retiring. Each is a small body
fragment, the exterior of which is completely covered by brushing.
The interiors are moderately well smoothed.

Combed
The exterior surfaces of two small sherds (Fig. 59, a, b ) are covered
with unusual textured decorations. One (Fig. 59, a) is a lower 15m
fragment found in Feature 7. It displays the short, vertically "combed"
incised lines described earlier. Indeed, were it not for its grog temper
this sherd could be assigned to the partially restored brushed-combed
vessel from the site (Fig. 58, a, b). The other sherd (Fig. 59, b), a
bone-tempered body fragment found in Feature 15, also has numerous
smal!, incised lines. These lines, however, are arranged into a honeycomb-like pattern. Both specimens have black cores and are basically
gTay-brown in surface coloration.

143

INDIAN AI~TIFA CTS

FIGURE 59. Combed, appliqu~d-punctated, appliqudd, and pinched pottery. a, b, combed sherds; c-e, appliqu4d-punctated sherds; f, appliqu4d
sherd; g, h, pinched vessel.

A pp liq udd-I ncised
An appliqu6d fillet decorated with deep diagonal notches or
punctations appears on the exterior surface of three shell-tempered

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

body sherds (Fig. 59, c-e). While little can be determined about
the vessel (or vessels) represented, it is quite possible that these
sherds are from a jar (or jars) similar to that found in one of the
burials at the Womack Site (Hm’ris et al., 1965: Fig. 4, E). This
particular Womaek Site vessel, identified as Ernory Punctated (ibid.),
has a notched fillet encircling the juncture of the body and rim, as
well as two opposing nodes just below the lip. The remainder of the
jar is undecorated.
AppliquSd
A tiny black body sherd (Fig. 59, f) with very fine sandy paste
has portions of two appliqu6d fillets. These fillets are spaced 0.7 cm.
apart and appear to have been parallel much like those found on
certain Case Appliqudd vessels (Suhm and Jelks, 1962, P1. 13, C-F).
This sherd, however, is too small to identify with an established
type.
Pinched

Among the small ceramic collection recovered from Feature 18
are four large sherds which have been glued together to form approximately half (the other half has been filled in) of a small bowl
(Fig. 59, g, h) with pinched decoration on the exterior surface.
Placed side-to-side, the pinched marks are alxanged into a pattern
consisting of two horizontal rows below the lip and eight more or
less equally spaced vertical rows. The vertically oriented pinching
extends from just below the second horizontal row of pinch marks to
the base. There is no well defined rim and the vessel wall tapers
gradually from the everted lip downward to the small, disk-shaped
base. The outside oral diameter is 15.5 cm. and the height a mere
5.6 cm. Wall thickness varies from 0.7 to 1.0 era., with the latter
measurement reflecting the thickness of the pinch marks. The rough
but compact paste is dark gray and heavily tempered with pulverized
bone. Both surfaces are fire mottled, ranging in color from reddish
buff to gray-buff.
UNDECORATED CEI~,AMICS

Most (1,487) of the Gilbert Site sherds, and probably many of
the vessels they represent, are undecorated. Compared with the decorated pottery from the site, these specimens display fewer variables
for technological and typological analysis or for easy recognition of

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

145

FIGu~ 60. Womac/e Plain. a, b, Vessel 1; c, Vessel 2; d-f, Vessel 3; g-j,
Vessel 4. Exterior to le]?t on profiles.

146

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

individual vessels. Thus, with the exception of Womack Plain and
Womack Ware- both proposed here as tentative new formal groups
-the plain pottery has not been formally typed. Rather, it has been
sorted into a number of broad categories based mainly upon variations in the paste. Other attributes, such as surface finish and vessel
form, have not been ignored but are of less importance in classifying
most of the plain pottery.
WO~ACK PLAIN (Figures 60 and 61, a-h)
Four partially restored vessels (Fig. 60) and 31 rim sherds (Fig.
6I, a-h) make up a distinctive ceramic group which is recognized
as a provisional new type, Womack Plain. The definition which follows is based solely upon the Gilbert Site material.
METHOD OF MANUFACTURE
Vessel walls were apparently built up by the coi! technique and
finished by scraping and smoothing.
PASTE
Temper: Fine, naturally-occurring(P) sand and slight to moderate
amounts of finely pulverized mussel shell.
Texture: Typically fine and compact with surfaces on occasion
being somewhat sandy.
Color: The core is generally a light gray contrasting with darker
gray, buffish, or even reddish surfaces. Fire clouds are common.
Surface finish: The exterior is usually well smoothed and in rare
eases may even be lightly burnished, while the interior is
eharaetelqstieally less well finished and more likely to bear
scraping and smoothing sears.
FORM
Wall thickness: 0.5 to 1.0 em. with individual vessels often showing considerable range.
Lip: One example (Fig. 60, a) is beveled inward; all others are
flat to slightly rounded and flush with the rim.
Base: The only restored base (Fig. 60, b) is small (about 4.0 em.
in diameter), disk shaped, and concave. At the juncture with
the body it is 0.6 cm. thick, but it thins out at the center to a
scant 0.3 em.
Vessel Shape and size: The only form now recognized is a smallto medium-sized modified earinated bowl with convex shoulders
and ineurved rim. Below the shoulder area the vessel wall

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

147

FIGURE 61.
Womac]¢ Plain and Womac]¢ Ware. a-b, Wo,mac]¢ Plain rim
sherds; i, Womac]¢ Ware.

tapers toward the base. The slight constriction about midway
between the base and the rim reported by Duffleld and Jelks
(1961: 36) for Womack Engraved has not been noted, although the fragmentary nature of the present samples does
not exclude the possibility that it might occur on Wornack
Plain vessels. The height of the four Gilbert bowls ranges
from 7.6 cm. to an estimated 12.0 era., the outside oral diameter from i2.0 to 29,.0 era.

148

TEXAS

AIRCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

DECORATION
None
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION
The presence of Womack Plain at Gilbert and its very obvious
kinship with Womack Engraved suggest that it should be
added to the inventory of Nortefio Focus traits. However, a
cursory examination of The University of Texas collections
from several other Nortefio components- Sanders, Pearson,
and Womack- failed to reveal additional examples of Wemack Plain. The significance of this seemingly limited distribution is not entirely clear, although it does hint at a narrow
temporal and/or spatial occurrence.
ESTIMATED AGE
The present sample evidently dates from about the middle of
the 18th century.
WO~XACK WAlaE (Figure 61, i)
The term Womack Ware is proposed as a broad grouping comprising two technologically similar ceramic types, Womack Engraved and
Womack Plain. It has as its most diagnostic character a modified
earinated bowl fon~n which features an ineurved rim, a rounded
shoulder, and a small, circular, concave base. Other attributes, including engraved decoration, surface finish, and tempering agent, are more
variable and serve primarily to differentiate the two constitutent types.
In addition to being an inclusive category which may well be the
principal resident Nortefio pottery, Womack Ware may be used
descriptively to indicate body and base sherds which could be from
either Womack Engraved or Womack Plain vessels. One hundred
sixty-five such specimens have been singled out of the undecorated
potsherds from Gilbert. How widely and accurately Womack Ware
sherds can be recognized in other collections will probably depend
upon the nature of the collection as well as the experience of the
classifier. At any rate, it appears to be a useful conceptual tool for
analyzing the Gilbei± potteiT, The Womack Ware sherds from the
site have been divided into six groups on the basis of variation in
paste.
Sherd Group 1 (Fig. 61, i). This group of sherds is distinguished
by the presence of finely pulverized shell temper, gray to grayish
black surfaces, a light gray core, generally wel! smoothed surfaces,
and a somewhat sandy paste. Included are 85 loose body sherds, and
47 body and base sherds (all from Feature 3) which have been joined
to form the lower portion of a Womack-shaped bowl (Fig. 61, i),

INDIAN

149

ARTIFACTS

possibly the lower pm’t of one of the Womack Engraved or Womack
Plain vessels mentioned earlier. The combination of att{ibutes observable in the Group 1 sherds suggests type Womack Plain; however,
there are enough overlaps with Womack Engraved to make positive
type identification impossible.
Sherd Group 2. Each of the 11 sherds making up this category is
grog tempered and gray-black to black in surface color. On the
whole they are better finished than most of the Group 1 sherds, with
both the exterior and interior being lightly polished. The paste is
compact, but rather rough, and light gray to black in color. While
it is impossible to type these sherds, their surface finish and grog
temper are more suggestive of Womack Engraved than Womack
Plain..
Sherd Group 3. Nine of the sherds believed to be from Womack
vessels are characterized by a somewhat sandy paste which is typically
light gray in color and which contains reddish particles (probably
ocher) as well as numerous dark areas. In some cases, the dark areas
appear to be particles (grog?), while in others they are more like
stains. Surface colors range from reddish buff to black. The exterior surfaces are all light to well polished and the interiors well
smoothed to lightly polished.
Sherd Group 4. The four sherds making up this group have a
sandy paste with very finely pulverized white particles, apparently
bone. Bone temper, however, is not common in the Womack pottery
at Gilbert (it is obvious and abundan(’ only in Womack Engraved
variant Vessel 2) so that the classification of these sherds as Womack
Ware is tenuous. It is based mainly on their buffish gray to gray
to gray-black coloration and well finished surfaces.
Sherd Group 5. Included in this group are nine tiny body sherds
with well smoothed to polished exteriors and poorly to well smoothed
interiors. No intentional tempering agent can be recognized, although the paste is somewhat sandy and contains unidentified dark
particles or areas. Surface hues range from gray-brown to black, core
colors from dark brownish gray to black.
Miscellaneous Plain
SHELL

TEMPERED

There are 494 undecorated, shell-tempered sherds from the site
which are not typed. Their poorly finished surfaces, moderately abundant and coarse shell temper, and probable vessel forms- largely,
if not entirely, small to medinm-sized jars- clearly exclude them
h’om Womack Ware. On the other hand, they do show similarities

150

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

151

with Nocona Plain, at least as that type is presently defined (Krieger,
1946: 109-111; Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 115). In terms of vessel shape,
surface finish, and even in the amount and chm’acter of the temper,
Nocona, however, includes quite a wide range of variation. That it
could be made into a more selMceable analytical tool by resta’icting
its definition is suggested by recent findings made by Dessamae
Lorrain at Henrietta Focus sites in Fish Creek Reservoir, Montague
County, Texas. Based upon her preliminalT analysis of the Fish Creek
material, Lorrain proposed (personal communication) that Nocona
Plain be limited to large jars with very abundant quantities of shell
temper. None of the undecorated shell-tempered sherds from Gilbert
fit this description.
Of these 494 specimens, 68 can be assigned to tba’ee vessels. The
remainder surely represent portions of many more vessels, but sorting them out has proved to be both a frustrating and fruitless task.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 62, i). Sixteen sherds from Feature 3 have been
joined to form approximately three fourths of this vessel, a small jar
with rounded body, constricted neck, and low, outflaring rim with
an everted, slightly rounded lip. The base is missing, but it was
probably slightly convex. The outside oral diameter is 8.6 cm., the
height is estimated at 10 cm., and the wall thickness varies between
0.5 and 1.0 cm.
Neither the exterior nor the interior surface is particularly well
finished and both are covered with broad, essentially horizontal
striations which were probably produced in an effort to polish the
vessel. The exterior surface is quite uneven, although shiny in spots,
while the interior is generally more regular but less polished. Surface
colors vary from reddish brown through shades of gray-brown and
black. On the whole, the interior tends more toward the darker hues
and is less fire mottled than the exterior. The core is uniformly darker
in coloration and forms a striking contrast with the particles of
crushed mussel shell used as temper. Limited amounts of fine sand
also occur in the compact but rather rough paste.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 62, a-h). Although 47 sherds found scattered over
three features (one in Feature 2, 45 in Feature 3, and one in Feature
6) seem to be from one vessel, vely little of the vessel could be
restored. It was evidently a fairly large, wide-mouthed jar with a low
(ca. 3.0 cm. high), perhaps slightly outflaring rim, rounded shoulders,
and a tapering body. The rounded lip is tapered and flush with the
FlCUR~ 62. Undecorated shell-tempered pottery, a-h, Vessel 2; i, Vessel 1;
j,/~, Vessel 3; 1, large body sherd; m-p, typical rim sherds. Exterior to left
on profiles.

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rim (Fig. 62, a). Only a tiny segment of the base (Fig. 62, f) was
recovered, but it is enough to indicate a circular, probably flat bottom which was heavily reinforced where it joined the body wall.
The paste of Vessel 9. is fairly smooth although it is not well
bonded. Rather sparse, coarse particles (as much as 0.5 cm. in maximum dimension) of mussel shell appear as the only intentionally
added aplastic. The core is orangeish toward the base, generally becoming darker, gray-buff to almost black, on the upper portion of
the vessel. Because of unevenness in firing, surface colors also exhibit a considerable range, from orange-buff to black. Much of the
interior surface is vel7 well smoothed, while the exterior is a bit
more uneven and covered with numerous horizontal to slightly diagonal striations. These striations occur in groups and could well be the
result of smoothing with the fingers. Wall thickness is 0.5 cm. just below the lip, 0.6 era. at the shoulders, and 1.4 era. at the juncture of
the body and the base.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 62, j-k). Five sherds from Feature 6 have been
joined to form a jar fragment which has been reworked into a ladle.
¯ This restored section, a rim-to-base piece representing approximately
one fourth of the original jar, either broke into a convenient cuplike shape or was so fashioned by intentional breakage. The surviving portion of the rim makes a ready handle, and a small, V-shaped
notch gouged into one edge from the interior surface forms the
pouring spout. One broken lateral edge (to the left in Fig. 69,, j) of
the rim seems to have been beveled and smoothed either intentionally or, perhaps less likely, from use. Thin, but quite distinct, dark
stains appear about the notch on both the interior and extel~or surfaces. These stains, along with surface discoloration produced by
exposure to fire, indicate that a small amount of some as yet unidentified substance was heated and then poured through the spout.
Enough remains of the original jar to indicate that it had been
a small vessel with a flat lip, a low (ca. 1.0 cm. high) outflaling rim,
a rounded body, and a convex bottom. Over-all height was 8.7 cm.,
the outside oral diameter between 6 and 7 cm. Wall thickness
ranges from 0.4 cm. at the lip to 1.0 em. at the shoulder. The fine,
compact paste is tempered with sparse amounts of pulverized mussel
shell. Both surfaces are poorly smoothed, the exterior one being
somewhat bumpy and the interior surface having numerous small
striations. These sears are most concentrated on the body and may
represent either deliberate roughening or efforts to scrape off some
of the dark substance adhering to the interior surface. Except where

153

INDIAN ABTIFACTS

darkened by exposure to heat, the surfaces are a light grayish buff.
The core is dark gray-black to black.
Sherds (Fig. 62, l-p). Included in this category are 32 rim fragments, 14 base pieees, and 80 body sherds. Although all are undecorated and shell tempered, they exhibit a fair amount of variation.
The shell in the paste ranges from fine and sparse to coarse and
moderately abundant, while the texture is from smooth and eompact
to rough and friable. Surface eolors are predominately shades of
gray, but buffish and reddish hues are also present. The eores are
consistently darker and are most often dark gray to black. Polished
surfaces are uncommon and most are either poorly smoothed or only
moderately well smoothed, with the inside tending to be less well
finished than the outside.
One large body sherd (actually three pieces glued together) stands
out beeause of the pronounced unevenness in wall thickness (Fig. 62,
e). On the exterior there are large and obvious depressions and on
the interior complementary raises. These irregularities, of eourse, suggest the paddle and anvil teehnique with the supporting tool, the
anvil, somewhat surprisingly having been held against the exterior.
Additional finishing by scraping and smoothing is indieated by fine,
horizontal striations, particularly evident on the interior.
While none of the rim sherds is very large (Fig. 62, m-p), most
appear to have come from jars with low, straight to gently outflaring
rims and flush lips, which are flat to slightly rounded. Two, however,
have everted and thinned lips and a third has a slightly thickened
lip. Each of the 14 recognizable base sherds is flat and disk shaped.
Their diameters are from a maximum of 9 cm. to an estimated minimum of 4.5 cm.
BONE TEMPEltED

(

Figure 63)

Of the 891 undecorated, untyped, bone-tempered sherds, 122 can
unhesitatingly be assigned to four vessels. These vessels and the 269
unassigned sherds are briefly described below.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 68, a). Ahnost completely restored, this vessel is
comprised of 57 sherds recovered from Feature 18. It is a large,
wide-mouthed jar with a high, markedly outflaring rim, constricted
neck, and gently rounded shoulder. Unlike most other jars from the
site, the body tapers to a small (4.6 em. in diameter) and slightly
concave, disk-shaped base. The rounded, markedly undulating lip is
flush with the rim. The orifice of the vessel is somewhat like a flattened
circle, with the oral diameter varying from 25.5 to 26.8 cm. Maximum

154

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE

63. Undecorated bone-tempered pottery, a, Vessel 1; b, Vessel 2;
c, Vessel 3; d, Vessel 4; e-g, typical rim sherds. Exterior to left on profiles.

diameter at the shoulder is approximately 24 em., and the total height
is 23.5 era.
Conspicuous particles of coarsely pulverized bone as much as 6

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

155

ram. across are fairly abundant in the paste. The grayish buff paste
is surprisingly firm, probably because of its slightly sandy nature.
Both surfaces are moderately well smoothed despite the frequent bits
of bone that protrude through them. The jar interior is predominately
gray-buff to black and the exterior is reddish buff to black. In both
cases the dark coloration is due mainly to organic stains. Portions of
the interior sm’face of the rim m’e particularly heavily coated with this
carbonaceous substance. Similar carbonaceous patches appear on the
exterior surface, positioned as they would be if some food stuff were
overheated and boiled over or the vessel were tipped and its contents
partially spilled.
Six biconically drilled crack-lacing holes are on the vessel rim. One
pair of opposing holes appears about 2.5 em. below the rim. The other
four are located on a nearly opposite side of the vessel where they
served to mend a more complex fracture. They are in two pairs, one
above the other, with the uppermost pair 9. cm. below the rim and
the bottommost 5 cm. below the rim. Each hole is approximately 0.5
era. in diameter.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 63, b). Twenty-seven sherds from Feature 3 and
one from Feature 5 have been joined to reconstruct about two thirds
of Vessel 2, a small, squat jar. An additional ten sherds, all h’om
Feature 3, are undoubtedly from the same jar but could not be
affixed. When complete, Vessel 9. stood 11.0 cm. high and had an
outside oral diameter of 11.4 cm. Its rim was low (1.7 era.), its
shoulder gently rounded, its body globular, and its base flat and disk
shaped. Thewalls reach a maximum thickness (0.8 cm.) at the
shoulder area and thin out toward the base and toward the rim (0.6
and 0.5 cm., respectively).
Finely crushed pieces of bone appear as an intentional additive to
the firm, somewhat sandy paste. Neither surface is well finished although the exterior is smoother than the interior. The inside is fairly
uniform medium grayish buff color, while the exterior ranges from
a darker gray-buff to black, the latter apparently the result of
cooking stains.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 63, c). Known from 17 sherds (16 of which have
been joined together) recovered from Feature 4, this roughly halfrestored vessel was a jar with a globular body and a low (3.0 cm.
high), outflaring rim. The base is flat and disk shaped, the shoulder
is rounded, but not prominent, and the lip is flat and flush with the
rim. Over-all height is 20.0 cm. and outside oral diameter is an estimated 19 cm. Maximum body diameter, at the shoulder, is approxi-

156

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

mately the same as the oral diameter. Wall thickness at the base is
1.0 em., at the shoulder 1.1 em., and at the lip 0.6 em.
Vessel 3 is very crudely made. The abundant, coarse particles of
crushed bone temper frequently protrude through the surface, the
finish is rough and malted by numerous tool marks, and the lip is
quite uneven. The paste is compact, gray-buff in color, and, in
addition to the many pieces of bone, contains an occasional hematite
fragment. Interior colors vary from buff to gray-buff, while the exterior
is predominately reddish buff. There is no staining to indicate use
as a cooking vessel.
Vessel 4 (Fig. 63, d). The only other partially restored, plain,
bone-tempered vessel is a small, ahnost miniature pot. It is known
from ten sherds, eight of which (six from Feature 3, two from Feature 4) have been glued together to form what appears to be the
lower two thirds of the vessel. Since no rim sherds are included, the
exact size and shape of Vessel 4 remains questionable. It is, however, clear that the body was globular (between 8.5 and 9.0 era. in
maximum diameter) and that the base was convex and not sharply
differentiated from the body wall. The most probable form is either
a cup-like bowl or a low, wide-mouthed jar which was no more than
i0 cm. high.
Numerous moderately fine particles of pulverized bone and an occasional hematite pellet appear in the compact, coarse, sandy paste.
Both surfaces are rough and ga’ainy despite the presence of a thin
veneer (intentional slip?) of fine clay. Core and surface colors are
a fairly uniform grayish black with some reddish tones. The vessel
wall is thickest at the base (1.0 era.) and thins out to 0.6 era. at the
upper portion of the body.
Sherds (Fig. 63, e-g). Among the 269 miscellaneous plain, bonetempered sherds are 31 rim pieces with lips intact, three basal fragments, and 235 body sherds. The bone temper in most cases is fairly
abundant and moderately coarse, while the paste is usually a bit
sandy.~ Surface colors are most often various shades of buff, reddish
~A petrographic analysis of a typical sherd was made by Drs. B. J. Scull and
Stanley B. McCaleb of the Sun Oil Laboratory in Richardson, Texas. They
found minerals in the paste to include, in decreasing abundance: montmorillinite, quartz, nmscovite, potash feldspar as orthoelase and mieroeline, hematite, magnetite (manganiferous hematite), elor-apatite or flour-apatite, diaspore, plagioelase. Some of the quartz, they noted, is coarsely rutilated and the
albite plagioclase has wide twin planes suggesting the Tishomingo-type granites
of the southern Afl?uckle Mountain series. The soft white inclusions are composed of about equal parts of clor-apatite (or flour-apatite) and diaspore, and
some have the outlines and fibrous structure of bone. As apatite and diaspore are
not commonly found in intimate association, the original material may have been

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

157

buff, and brown; blacks and grays do occur but are less common
than noted for the plain, shell-tempered sherds. Three body pieces
have traces of a thin, red wash, and two appear to be slipped. Surface
finish varies from poorly smoothed to lightly polished with the bonetempered sherds being, on the average, better finished than the undecorated shell-tempered ones. This may be, at least in part, a reflection
of finer paste, or it may be that a number of sherds fi’om undecorated
portions of bowls have been included. It is difficult to verify the latter
possibility as the only shapes definitely indicated are jars with slightly
to markedly outtumed rims (Fig. 63, e-g). In all eases the lip form
is simple: flush and rounded, sometimes slightly thinned. The three
small base fi’agments appear to be from two vessels. One sherd is
from a flat, disk-shaped base which was considerably thicker than
the body wall. The other ( actually two sherds which have been joined)
is also disk shaped, but it is slightly concave and not much thicker
than the body wall. Womack Ware is suggested by the latter base, but
it is not so identified because such a classification is too tenuous (for
example, Vessel 1 above also had a slightly concave base).
SHELL AND BONE TER’IPERED

The paste of five body sherds contains finely pulverized particles
of both bone and shell. In three the bone predominates, while in the
other two shell is more common. Whether or not the minor constituent is an intentional or accidental additive is not apparent. All
five sherds have grayish buff surfaces and darker, usually medium
gray, cores. Their surfaces are only moderately well smoothed. No
particulars can be determined concerning shape, although it is most
likely that all are from jars, with a minimum of three vessels being
represented. Wall thickness is 0.5 to 0.7 cm.

eBOC TE~PEBED (Figure 64)
One hundred forty-nine of the plain sherds are tempered with grog
(i.e., crushed particles of fired clay). Included are 115 loose sherds
which have been sorted into two groups, and two partially restored
vessels.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 64, a). This deep cylindrical vessel is represented by
22 sherds (18 of which have been joined) from Feature 1. As it presently stands, it is 13.6 era. high and about 17 era. in maximum diameter. This restored portion includes most of the bottom and perhaps
as much as two thirds of the body but none of the rim. Enough rebone and kaolinite, with the latter being altered to diaspore in the process of
vessel manufacture.

FIcue,E 64. Undecorated grog-tempered and grog- and shell-tempered pottery. a, grog-tempered, Vessel 1; b-e, grog-tempered, Vessel 2; f-h, typical
grog-tempered rim sherds; i, grog-tempered base sherd; j, It, grog-tempered
Sherd Group 2; l-r, grog- and shell-tempered Vessel 1. Exterior to left on
profiles.

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

159

mains to indicate that the body wall was convex and formed a sharp
angle at its juncture with the base. The base is flat, circular (7.3 era.
in diameter), and thicker than the body walls (1.6 era. versus 1.0 to
0.6 em. ).
Although only one is preserved, it is clear that there were two
appliqued strips on opposite sides of the upper body exterior. The
surviving strip is 4.5 era. long, 0.5 em. wide, and approximately 0.3
em. high. Both surfaces are grayish brown to black, moderately well
smoothed, and bear shallow indentations made by a finishing tool.
The core is quite dark, while the compact, slightly sandy paste contains numerous bits of grayish grog. Black stains and caked earbonaceous matter are present on portions of both surfaces, indicating use as a cooking vessel.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 64, b-e). Also found in Feature 1, this vessel, too,
may originally have been a deep cylindrical bowl or jar. It is, however, known only from twelve sherds, ten of which have been glued
together to form two larger sherds representing limited portions of
the base and lower body. Much uncertainty sun’ounds details of
shape, and all that can be said is that the body walls are outsloping
and rounded at their juncture with the flattened, slightly thickened
base. The upper edge of the highest projecting body sherd has been
smoothed, indicating that Vessel 9, had been broken and a new rim
formed by grinding. While the original height is impossible to reconstruct, the modified vessel stood about 9 era. high.
Both surfaces are well smoothed and much of the exterior is now
covered with black, sooty material. Less stained, the interior is predominately brownish gray. The darker core varies from black to dark
gray. Because of the numerous pieces of grog, the paste is coarse
and uneven.
Sherd Group I (Fig. 64, f-i). Most (107) of the undecorated sherds
making up this category are nondescript body fragments with
smoothed, but not polished, surfaces which are tan to gray-brown
in color. There are only two basal fragments and four rim sherds
with lips intact. The largest of the base sherds (Fig. 64, i) is a disk
about 6 cm. in diameter; the other is also disk shaped but is too
incomplete for measurement. Two of the rim fragments (Fig. 64, f,
g) appear to have come from simple vessels with essentially straight
walls. The third rim (Fig. 64, h) is scalloped and seems to be from
an undecorated red-slipped, carinated bowl. The fourth is from a low
(3.1 era. high), slightly outflaring jar rim.
Sherd Group 2 (Fig. 64, j-k). The two sherds included in this
group are separated from the above only because each shows signs

TEXAS

]60

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

of having been modified. One (Fig. 64, j) is a flat body or base sherd
which has portions of a bieonieally drilled hole. It was probably once
disk shaped, with approximately half of the specimen now missing.
None of the edges of the sherd is smoothed and it is possible that
they have been recently broken. The other worked sherd (Fig.
64, k), a rim piece, is a pie-shaped fragment of a disk which may
also have once been perforated. Portions of the lip have been left
intact to form an edge of the disk, while the remainder of the preserved disk edge was formed by grinding. The first sherd is 0.8 era.
thick, the second one 0.5 cm.
GROG AND SHELL TE~’IPEIKED

(Figure 64, l-r)

The paste of 17 sherds contains both grog and shell. While it is
conceivable that the shell is derived from crushed sherds, it occurs
in sufficient quantity to suggest that it, along with the grog, may
be an intentional additive. Among the 17 sherds are a partially restored vessel and three loose body sherds which perhaps represent
at least two more vessels.
Vessel I (Fig. 64, I-r). Thirteen sherds from Feature 6 and one
from Feature 3 appear to be from a small, crudely made jar which
had a low (approximately 2.4 cm. high), outturned rim, constricted neck, prominent shoulder, and globular body. No base or
lower body sherds seem to be included, but the over-all height
was probably less than 12 era. The poorly smoothed exterior bears
faint traces of a thin, bright red wash or slip, while the even less
well finished inside surface is quite irregular and bears striations left
by a finishing tool. Where not covered by the red wash, the exterior
is tan to gray-black. The interior is a uniform gray, and the tan to
gray core is only slightly darker than the surfaces. The walls are
thick (0.8 to 1.4 em. ) and the paste quite rough but surprisingly
compact.
Sherds. The only other grog- and shell-tempered specimens are
three small body sherds. Their well-smoothed surfaces vary in color
from gray-black to reddish tan. Two have smooth, compact pastes in
which shell is slightly more common than grog. The paste of the
third is much rougher and the particles of fired clay outnumber the
pulverized bits of shell. At least two, perhaps even three, vessels
are represented.
SANDY PASTE

(Figure

65)

The pastes of 123 ufldecorated potsherds from Gilbert contain very
fine to coarse sand gq-ains but no other recognizable aplastic. Since

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

161

FIGURE 65. Undecorated, sandy paste pottery, a-i, Vessel 1; j, It, Vessel 2;
l-t, Vessel 3; ~, Vessel 4; v-y, rim sherds. Exteriors to left on profiles.

various combinations, of sand and clay frequently occur in nature,
it is not at all certain how much, if any, of the sand is an intentional

162

TEXAS

AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

additive. To make clear this uncertainty, the term sandy paste is
utilized. Seventy-two of these sherds can be assigned to four vessels;
the remaining 51 are small and nondescript fragments impossible to
assign to individual vessels.
Vessel 1 (Fig. 65, a-i). Although this vessel is represented by 44
sherds (seven from Feature 1 and 37 from Feature 3) only limited
restoration could be accomplished. Moreover, the ~lpper edges of two
of the sherds (Fig. 65, a, b) have been ground flat forming a new lip
and quite possibly somewhat modifying the original form. It is probable that the modified form was a cylindrical bowl or jar with a
gently convex body wall and a flat circular base. While meaningful
vessel dimensions are impossible to reconstruct, the curvature of the
body sherds, the diameter of the base (6.9 era. ) and, to a lesser extent,
the wall thickness (0.6 to 1.0 cm.) suggest a vessel that originally
stood at least 13 em. high.
The paste of Vessel i is fine and sandy with bits of hematite and
dark, possibly carbonized, areas. As a result the core has a mottled
appearance with the reddish and black areas forming a marked
contrast with the predominately btfffish gray core. The surfaces are
black to brown black and poorly smoothed.
In terms of paste characteristics and surface coloration, this vessel
is strikingly similar to Womack Engraved Vessel 6 (Fig. 51, c-e),
which interestingly, and probably quite coincidentally, also has a new
lip formed by grinding. These likenesses, of course, suggest the possibility that some of the sherds from the two vessels may be incorrectly sorted. While this could be the case, it is quite clear nevertheless that two different vessels are represented, one decorated and one
plain.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 65, j-k). Vessel 9, is a small, partially restored cuplike bowl recovered from Feature 3. Its convex body wall merges with
a tapered, slightly rounded lip as well as with what appears to have
been a slightly thicker, convex base. When complete, this bowl stood
approximately 6.5 cm. high and had an outside oral diameter of about
8 cm. It is rather crudely made and may have been modeled directly
from a lump of clay rather than having been coiled. The exterior surface is smoothed but quite irregular because of the many groove-like
depressions left by a finishing tool. Although much of the interior
surface has flaked off, it appears to have been somewhat better
finished than the exterior. The soft, smooth paste contains fine, rounded
particles of sand and a fragment of what seems to be a charred twig.
The core is gray, turning yellowish toward the edges; the surfaces
are gray with faint tinges of yellow. Wall thickness varies from 0.4

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

163

cm. near the lip to 1.0 cm. at the juncture of the body and the base.
Vessel 3 (Fig. 65, l-t). Each of the 23 sherds assigned to this
vessel has a very coarse, sandy paste with numerous sand grains
protruding through the poorly smoothed interior and exterior surfaces. The eores and surfaces are so black and heavily stained with
a fugitive sooty substance that a elose analysis of the paste is impossible without retiring. Since so few of these sherds could be
joined, the exact size and shape of Vessel 3 are uncertain. It is,
however, probable that it was a small jar with an outflaring rim,
a globular body, and a convex base.
Vessel 4 (Fig. 65, u). This clearly lump-modeled miniature bowl
is known from a single sherd which, nonetheless, represents about
one third of the complete vessel. It has a tiny, somewhat outttaring
rim and a slight shoulder. The base is missing, but it appears to
have been thick and rounded. When complete, the bowl was probably
about 3.5 cm. high and had an oral diameter of between 4.0 and 4.5
cm. The paste is fine and sandy, the core black, the surfaces black to
grayish brown. Neither surface has been smoothed. A number of tiny
crescent-like sears-possibly produced by a fingernail-occur on
both surfaces.
Sherds (Fig. 65. v-y). The 51 undecorated, sandy paste sherds not
assignable to individual vessels are typically small and nondistinctive.
Included are seven rim pieces with lips intact, two base sections, and
42 body fragments. Simple direct rims with flush lips prevail; however,
one rim is low and markedly outflaring, while two are slightly outturned with thickened lips. The two base sherds are probably from the
flat, circular base of a single vessel. The only interesting body sherd
(Fig. 65, v) is one that has a small conical node which protrudes about
0.8 cm. above the exterior surface and is about 1.1 cm. in diameter at
the base. All of the sherds have a eompaet, sandy paste which varies
from fine to medium in grain size. No other partieles can be discerned
in the paste, although there are oecasional dark (carbonized?) areas.
Both surfaces are usually fairly well smoothed and range in color
from gray-black through brattish black to orange. The cores are consistently darker-most often either dark gray or black-than the surfaces.
TEMPER UNCERTAIN

A relatively small group of undecorated sherds cannot be assigned
to any of the above categories, although a few do have slightly sandy
pastes. Some, it must also be admitted, could be tempered with finely
pulverized grog which has blended imperceptibly with the paste,

164

TEXAS AItCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

while others could have contained very finely crushed shell which has
leached out. At any rate, the paste of all these sherds is smooth and
fine with no tempering agent being recognized. All of the sherds are
small, and they reveal no significant data concerning vessel form.
Included are three rim fragments, three basal pieces, and 22 body
fragments.
INTItASITE DISTRIBUTIONS

The intrasite distributions of the native-made vessels and fragments
are given in Tables 5-8. Table 5 presents the distributions in terms of
the minimal classificatory and recovery units, while Table 6 summarizes basic information obtained for individual vessels. Frequencies of
occurrence are emphasized in Tables 7 and 8, with the former being a
ranking of ceramic groups by feature and the latter a ranking of
features by ceramic group. In all four tables the frequency data are
expressed in terms of the smallest practical unit of observation, a
sherd. The principal advantage of making all counts in terms of sherds
is, quite obviously, that it makes all counts comparable. On the other
hand, vessels, not sherds, are the products of manufacture. Vessel
analysis, consequently, has a higher cultural yield and avoids some of
the sampling problems encountered in dealing with sherds (e.g., a
large pot is likely to break into more sherds than a small one, etc.).
Since the sherd sample from many of the features (Table 5) is relatively small and quite possibly subject to distortion, it is regrettable
that efforts to sort the entire sample into vessels were unsuccessful.
In spite of these limitations, the distributional data clearly reveal
that much the same ceramic complex was recovered from most parts
of the site. There are, however, some differences, the most apparent
of which is the presence of only grog-tempered pottery (59 undecorated sherds and two incised sherds) in Area B. Less striking are
differences within Area A: the near absence of Womack Plain in Feature 1; the absence of undecorated, bone-tempered pottery and Womack Plain in Feature 2; the high incidence of Wornack Plain but somewhat low incidence of undecorated, grog-tempered sherds in Feature
3; and the high frequency of undecorated, bone-tempered sherds in
Feature 18.
These distributional variations can, on theoretical grounds, be explained by one or more of the following hypotheses: (1) noncontemporaneous occupations are represented in various portions of the
site;,.(£) all parts of the site were occupied contemporaneously but by
diverse social groups, (3) all parts of the site were occupied concurrently and by the same social group but different activities were

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

165

carried out in different areas, and (4) no temporal or cultural differenees exist and the observed variations in occurrences are errors in
sampling. The best case for meaningful differences in the ceramics
can be made for Area B where the pottery is so much at variance with
a random pattern that it must surely represent a major temporal
and/or cultural variation. Fortunately, the absence of trade goods
from only this portion of the site provides a firm basis for placing the
Area B occupation (or occupations?) in prehistoric times. As for the
cultural affiliations and more exact age, the data are less conclusive.
The geographical location suggests Caddoan, a possibility which does
not conflict with the ceramic findings. However, in the absence of
diagnostic types no more percise alignment can be made.
The remainder of the differences in ceramic occurrences may well
be only vagaries in sampling. Certainly this seems to be the most
plausible explanation for Features 2 and 18, both of which yielded
only small samples of sherds. For Features i and 8, where the collections were larger, the distribution of Womack Plain tends to
complement that of Womack Engraved (see comments below), tlegardless, the most important conclusions to be reached are that all
the features (but not Area B) are essentially coeval and that each
feature reflects a similar activity-that is, the use of well defined trash
areas. Support for these conclusions is given by the basic homogeneity
of the ceramic distributions, the general agreement between the distributional expectations and the actual results (Tables 7 and 8), and
the finding of sherds from individual vessels in several different features (Table 6).

166

~XASARCHEOLOCICALSOCIETY

~D

iiiiiiili~iiii
i ! i i i i~ i i ! i i i~
!iiiiii~iiiiii
iiiiiii~iiiiii
iiiiiiiiiiiiii
>

o

>
O

iiii

,i,,

iiii

iii

iiiiiiiiiiiiii

iiii

iii

iiiiiiiili!iii

i!ii

ii

i i i i i i i~ i i i ! i

iiii
~
i

ii

i i i~ ! i i i i i i i i~

i~
.... ~ i~

i~
ii
O~

: i
i i i~~
%)
D

00000000~

167

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

,,,,,

iiiJiill

iJ

i i i i i i i i ~
i i i ] i i~ i ~
iiiiii~i
iiiiiiii
iiii~iii

i
i
i
i
i

v

~i~~

~

cqcq

.~

OO00

"~mmmmm

OO@

I~-~

0000==

~mm

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~.~ ~ ~ ~ ~

~

168

TEXAS

A!RCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

E~

I

~

I

I

I

I

I

I
I

I
I

~
~

I
I

I
I

:
I

I
I

i i i i i

iii
!iiiii!

i!~i

~ i ! i i

z

ii

ii~ii!i
i i i i

i

i

i

~ ! i

!

i

!

III~I

il~ll

o

I
I

~-~

I
I

i

I o,1
I

iiil~

~iii~

i i i i i

~ i i i

i

,~ ~ii~ ,’~i
i~~ i iii

0

,

~

~"

~

~~’~’~ N~ ~

~~

i

169

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

V-- oo V-- ~ oD.

~

¢~q cq ¢o. cq

lo

co
x~

cq

I~D

cq

~

c,]

F¸
t CQ
~D
oo,4
to

I

I

I

I

i

i!,-’~

!

E

i

i~

i~

ii!!ii~

!iiiii~

iiil

iiiili~
iiilto~
I

I

I

I

iill~

i~

,,,I

!~ii~~

~i~i
~o0

I

I

co.

,

ii~

I

~ ~-~ cq ’t"~

~’~.

c’.1

i~ io0~

i ID ,.-~

i O0 .¢0.

O0

i i ! ito’~

i i

!

ICq

tO

i

i

i

i

!

IIII~

i
~,1C-100

~’~ iI~’~

I

Ico

~D

o

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOC~TY

o

o~

o~
o~

’ >~,

~°

,

~o~ ~

~o

~

B~

,

~

~

¯

o’’~ ~0 o

.~

°~°

o o

~

°

,~
,

O,x~

~_~o

~

..~

~
~
0 ~0~

o o o

~,..~

o

,...~ ~.~

o ~

~ 0
0~--~

,x~ ~

~

,.~ .~

.~,~ ~

"~ ~
~ 0

~.~

~O

~

~.~

~

~~ ~~

-~~o~

o

v
Io

v

~q
¢0

>

>

>

>

oq
v
oq

171

INDIAN ABTIFACTS

¯

*o
=

O
o

’x~

xo

XO

L’D

IO

O
O

o

~,-~

~ .

,~

"’d
o
~-~
t.~

o
h0

h0

o

o

o ,.Q

0o

O

Cq

.£

o

0"0

o
0~ 0 0
.~
¢~ ,.,~ .~

.£

~0

~,o

O
>-,o
o

O
CO ,..-~

~q

CO~

,"-d

o

o
O

~

O,.~

o-~
o’3

~

~

o

v
03

A
CO
v

c,1
v

v

cq
v

cq

cO

o

>.

-’4
v

o’3

V--

o

~v
o,1
v

o

;>

>
o9

~>

-~

>.

>.

172

TEXAS

~

~ ~

~

~

o.o~

<

o,-.

~

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

~

~

<..~

o

o
k~

~

o

~
<
v

,.-Iv

v4

qv

v

~

v

v

e,1

;:>

173

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

¯

~
,...¢

0

o

o~

.~o~

~

s~

,~

0

0

0

0

0

O

~--~"~

~"

~

~ o

~.~
o

,~

<D

~

~

~.

oO
v
¢0

,..-i
~v

~v

c~

v

4~

o9
voO

~o

.-

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

O
"7"

o~
c.O

ZO

¢.D

¢J3

~0

¢.0

~0

r.~

O

,.o
O
~0

~o~
¯

~

0

t3Du~
0

-~ ~

.N o

.~ o

~ ~

.~

~

0,.~

F~
v

v

v

¢0

v

v¢,~

v

cO
v

v

175

INDIAN AI~T/LFACTS

o

¯n
~o

.~
o~

.~o~

r~

I

~
~

.~

_.~

v

v

-~
o~

o
~

.~

v

~o

v

v

v

v

v

co

~q

v

v

co

co

@
o,1

¢0

o

o

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 7

Sherd frequencies by site and feature.
Only features yielding at least 61 sherds are included.
Sherds
SITE AS A WHOLE
Undecorated, shell-tempered
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Womack Ware
Womack Engraved
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Undecorated, sandy paste
Womack Plain
Incised
Miscellaneous engraved
Brushed
Natchitoches Engraved variants
Womack Engraved variants
Simms Engraved
Brushed-combed
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Brushed-punctated
Punetated
Undecorated, grog- and shell-tempered
Emory Punctated
Natchitoches Engraved
Undecorated, shell- and bone-tempered
Pinched
Appliqu6d-incised
Combed
Appliqued
FEATURE 1
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Undecorated, shell-tempered
Womack Engraved
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Simms Engraved
Undecorated, sandy paste
Brushed-punctated
Miscellaneous engraved
Incised
Punctated
Brushed
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Womack Engraved variants
Natchitoches Engraved variants
Emory Punctated
Womack Plain
Appliqued
FEATURE 2
Simms Engraved
Womack Engraved variants
Undecorated, shell-tempered

2,221
494
391
165
158
149
123
115
98
91
85
69
60
59
46
28
19
18
17
12
9
5
4
3
2
1

Percent,
100.0
22.24
17.60
7.42
7.11
6.71
5.54
5.18
4.41
4.10
3.83
3.11
2.70
2.66
2.07
1.26
0.86
0.81
0.77
0.54
0.4I
0.22
0.18
0.13
0.09
0.05

376
97
83
46
42
29
27
13
9
9
5
4
4
2
2
2
1
1

100.0
25.8
22.1
12.2
11.2
7.7
7.2
3.4
2.4
2.4
1.3
1.1
1.1
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.3

89
28
24
11

100.0
31.5
27.0
12.4

177

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

TABLE 7 -- (Continued)
7
7
5
3
2
1
1

7.9
7.9
5.6
3.4
9,.3
I.I
i.i

FEATURE 3
Undecorated, shell-tempered
Womack Ware
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Womack Plain
Undecorated, sandy paste
Miscellaneous engraved
Brushed-combed
Brushed
Womack Engraved
Incised
Natchitoches Engraved
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Undecorated, grog- and shell-tempered
Womack Engraved variant
Natchitoches Engraved variant

751
148
120
108
91
48
40
37
32
25
20
9
6
6
1
23
37

I00.0
19.7
16.0
14.4
12.1
6.4
5.3
4.9
4.3
3.3
2.7
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.I
3.1
4.9

FEATURE 4
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Undecorated, shell-tempered
~gomack Engraved
Emory Punctated
Brushed
Undecorated, sandy paste
Brushed-punctated
Incised
Punctated
Miscellaneous engraved
Womack Ware
Natchitoches Engraved variants
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Appliqu6d-ineised
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Undecorated, grog- and shell-tempered
Undecorated, shell- and bone-tempered
Womack Engraved variant

178
56
46
22
9
9
7
6
5
3
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1

I00.0
31.5
25.8
12.3
5.0
5.0
3.9
3.4
2.8
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.1
1.1
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6

FEATURE 5
Undecorated, shell-tempered
Womack Ware
Incised
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Womack Engraved
Miscellaneous engraved
Punetated

224
77
37
27
24
17
9
7

100.0
34.4
16.5
12.0
10.7
7.6
4.0
3.1

Womack Engraved
Incised
Miscellaneous engraved
Undecorated, sand), paste
Brushed
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Undecorated, temper uncertain

178

TEXAS AHCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 7 - (Continued)
6
5
5
4
2
2
1
1

2.7
2.2
2.2
1.8
0.9
0.9
0.4
0.4

FEATURE 6
Undecorated, shell-tempered
Undecorated, sandy paste
Incised
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Natchitoches Engraved variants
Miscellaneous engraved
Brushed
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Undecorated, grog- and shell-tempered
Womack Engraved
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Womack Ware
Emory Punctated
Womack Plain

186
35
24
18
18
17

100.0
18.8
12.9
9.7
9.7
9.1
9.1
9.1
8.6
7.5
9..6
1.O
1.0
0.5
0.5

FEATURE 7
Undecorated, shell-tempered
Womack Plain
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Natchitoches Engraved variants
Womack Engraved variants
Brushed-combed
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Brushed
Punctated
Undecorated, shell- and bone-tempered
Womack Engraved
Simms Engraved
Miscellaneous engraved
Incised
Combed
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Undecorated, sandy paste

118

Undecorated, grog-tempered
Womack Plain
Undecorated, sandy paste
Undecorated, temper uncertain
Appliqu6d-incised
Womack Engraved variants
Simms Engraved
Brushed

17
17
16
14
4
2
2
1
1

9.
1
1
1
i
1
1
1

10O.O
37.3
13.5
11.9
8.5
6.8
6.8
3.4
2.5
1.7
1.7
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8

FEATURE 18
Undecorated, bone-tempered
Pinched
Womack Engraved
Incised
Brushed
Undecorated, shell-tempered

66
58
4
1
1
1
1

100.0
87.9
6.1
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5

AREA B
Undecorated, grog-tempered
Incised

61
59
9.

100.O
96.7
3.3

44
16
14
1O
8
8
4
3
9.

179

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

TABLE 8
Ceramic classification and frequency distributions.
ALL CLASSES
Feature 3
Feature 1
Feature 5
Feature 6
Feature 4
Feature 7
Feature 2
Feature 18
Area B
Feature 12
Uncertain provenience
Feature 15
Feature 16
Feature 10
Feature 11
Feature 13
Feature 17
Feature 8
Feature 19
Feature 20

751
376
224
186
178
118
89
66
61
35
35
31
20
14
13
7
7
4
3
3
Sherds

sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
sherds
Percent

Womack Engraved
Feature i
Feature 3
Feature 4
Feature 12
Feature 5
Feature 2
Feature 11
Feature 17
Feature 6
Uncertain
Feature 7
Feature 16
Feature 18
Feature 20
Feature 15
Natchitoches Engraved
Feature 3
Miscellaneous Engraved
Feature 3
Feature 6
Feature 1
Feature 5
Feature 2
Feature 10
Feature 12
Feature 4

158
46
25
22
18
17
7
6
6
4
2
1
1
1
1
1

100.0
29.1
15.8
13.9
11.4
10.8
4.4
3.8
3.8
2.5
1.3
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6

9
9

100.0
100.0

91
40
17
9
9
5
2
2
3

100.0
44.0
18.9
9.9
9.9
5.5
2.2
2.2
3.3

180

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

TABLE 8 -- (Continued)

Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature

7
11
15
16

I
i
i
i

i.i
i.I
i.I
i.i

Womack Engraved variants
Feature 2
Feature 3
Feature 7
Feature 1
Feature 5
Feature 4

60
24
23
8
2
2
1

10O.O
40.0
38.3
13.3
3.3
3.3
1.7

Simms Engraved
Feature 1
Feature 2
Feature 5
Feature 7

59
29
28
1
1

1O0.O
49.2
47.4
1.7
1.7

Natchitoches
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature

Engraved variants
3
6
7
4
1
1O

69
37
17
1O
2
2
1

10O.O
53.6
24.6
14.5
2.9
2.9
1.4

Punctated
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature

5
1
4
7
12

18
7
5
3
2
1

1O0.O
38.9
27.8
16.7
11.1
5.5

98
27
20
18
9
7
5
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1

100.0
27.6
20.4
18.4
9.2
7.1
5.1
3.1
2.0
2.0
L0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

46
37

10O.0
80.4

Incised
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Aa-ea B
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature

5
3
6
1
2
4
19
16
7
8
11
17
18

Brushed-Combed
Feature 3

181

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

TABLE 8 -- (Continued)
8
1

17.4
2.2

Combed
Feature 7
Feature 15

2
1
1

100.0
50.0
50.0

AppIiqudd
Feature 1

1
1

1O0.0
100.0

Appliqudd Incised
Feature 5
Feature 4

3
2
1

100.0
66.7
33.3

Emory Punctated
Feature 4
Feature 1
Feature 6

12
9
2
1

100.0
75.0
16.7
8.3

Brushed-Punctated
Feature 1
Feature 4

19
13
6

100.0
68.4
31.6

Brushed
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature
Feature

3
6
4
12
1
15
7
2
8
5
18
20

85
32
17
9
9
4
4
3
2
2
1
1
I

100.0
37.7
20.0
10.6
10.6
4.7
4.7
3.5
2.6
2.6
1.2
1.2
1.2

Womack Plain
Feature 3
Feature 7
Feature 5
Feature 1
Feature 6
Feature 15

115
91
16
5
1
1
1

100.0
79.1
13.9
4.3
0.9
0.9
0.9

Pinched
Feature 18

4

100.0

165
120
37
3

100.0
72.7
22.4
1.8

Feature 7
Feature 8

Womack Ware
Feature 3
Feature 5
Feature 4

182

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 8 - (Continued)

Feature 6
Feature 11
Uncertain

2
2
1

1.2
1.2
0.6

494
148
83
77
46
44
35
16
12
ii
4
3
2
1

100.0
30.0
16.8
15.6
9.3
8.9
7.1
3.2
2.4
2.4
2.2
.8
.6
.4
.2

5
2
2
i

100.0
40.0
40.0
20.0

Undecorated, Bone Tempered
Feature 3
Feature 1
Feature 18
Feature 4
Feature 5
Feature 6
Feature 7
Uncertain
Feature 15
Feature 10
Feature 13
Feature 11
Feature 12

391
108
97
58
56
24
16
14
6
5
3
2
1
1

lOO.O
27.6
24.8
14.8
14.3
6.1
4.1
3.6
1.5
1.3
.8
.5
.3
.3

Undecorated, Grog-Tempered
Area B
Feature 1
Feature 6
Uncertain
Feature 3
Feature 5
Feature 10
Feature 2
Feature 4
Feature 7
Feature 15

149
59
42
18
10
6
6
4
1
1
1
1

100.0
39.6
28.2
12.1
6.7
4.0
4.0
2.7
.6
.6
.6
.6

Undecorated, Shell-Tempered
Feature 3
Feature 1
Feature 5
Feature 4
Feature 7
Feature 6
Feature 16
Feature 15
Uncertain
Feature 2
Feature 12
Feature 13
Feature 10
Feature 18
Undecorated, Shell- and Bone-Tempered
Feature 7
Feature 15
Feature 4

12

183

INDIAN ARTIFACTS

TABLE 8 -- (Continued)

Undecorated, Grog- and Shell-Tempered
Feature 6
Feature 3
Feature 4
Uncertain
Undecorated, Sandy Paste
Feature 3
Feature 1
Feature 6
Feature 4
Feature 5
Feature 2
Feature 11
Feature 15
Uncertain
Feature 7
Feature 10
Feature 20
Undecorated, Temper Uncertain
Feature 3
Feature 1
Feature 5
Feature 7
Feature 4
Feature 6
Feature 13
Feature 2
Feature 10
Feature 15
Uneertain

17
14
i
1
1

100.0
82.3
5.9
5.9
5.9

123
48
27
24
7
5
3
2
2
2
1
1
1

100.0
39.0
22.g
20.0
5.7
4.1
2.4
1.6
1.6
1.6
.8
.8
.8

28
6
4
4
4
2
2
2
1
1
1
1

i00.0
21.4
14.3
14.3
14.3
7.1
7.1
7.1
3.6
3.6
3.6
3.6

INTERSITE DISTRIBUTION

The pottery from the features compares most favorably with ceramics recovered from components of the Nortefio Focus, an archeological complex that Dutqfleld and Jelks (1961: 69-75) have convincingly linked with 18th and 19th century southern Wichita-speaking
peoples, Taovayas, Tawakoni, Kichai, Yscani, Waco, and Wichita
proper. Indeed, the similarity is such that there can be no doubt that
the historic occupation at Gilbert is also a component of this focus.
Among the sites recognized as having Nortefio Focus occupations-Sanders and Womack in Lamar County, Spanish Fort and related sites
in Montague County and in nearby parts of Oklahoma, Stansbury in
Hill County, Stone in McLennan County, Vinson in Limestone

184

TEXAS

AIRCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

County, and Pearson and Gilbert in Rains County-the most frequently shared ceramic traits are types Womack Engraved and undecorated, shell-tempered pottery which is often (but not herein)
identified as Nocona Plain (Duf~eld and Jelks, 1961: 71-72). Other
ceramic comparisons are difficult as only the pottery from Pearson and
Womack have been described in any detail. Of these two sites, just
Womack has yielded a collection which is comparable in size to that
recovered from Gilbert. Pottery common to both includes, in addition
to the above, Emory Punctated, Simms Engraved, Natchitoches Engraved, untyped incised and punctated sherds, and plain grog- (or
"grit-") tempered pottery. Present at Gilbert but not recognized at
Womack are undecorated, bone-tempered pottery, Womack Plain,
and several plastic decorative techniques (combing, appliqu6ing,
brushing, and pinching). Conversely, at Womack but not at Gilbert
are types Hudso~z Engraved and Avery Engraved (both as trade
ware), as well as a high incidence of Womack Engraved Design B
(Design A was far and away the most common at Gilbert).
Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine (1965: 303) have already called
attention to the temporal and possible spatial significance of the design
variations found on Womack Engraved. Specifically, they note:
To judge from the writers’ collections, the same design (Design B ) is the
most common in the Nortefio Focus component at the Sanders Site. Significantly, Sanders and Womaek appear to he the earliest of the Nortefio sites
on Red River. While much less frequent, Design C seems to occur along
with Design A (sic*) at both of these sites. Design A, a very minor motif
at Womaek, becomes more important at Nortefio sites located on the Sabine,
Brazos, and upper Red Rivers, apparently at the cost of Designs B and C.
Design D, as far as is presently known, occurs only at the Gilbert and
Womaek sites where in both eases it is a very minor form (one and four
examples, respectively).

The other ceramic differences between the Gilbert and Womack Sites
may follow similar patterns. If so, a check would seem to be at hand
in the form of the Pearson Site pottery, as Pearson is near Gilbert but
possibly was occupied slightly later (Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 77-79).
However, in making a comparison with Pearson it must be emphasized
that this site yielded only 272 sherds. With this in mind, the two collections seem significantly similar. In addition to Womack Engraved
(design motifs not generally discernible), Pearson has undecorated
bone-tempered and shell-tempered, and sandy paste sherds in roughly
the same proportions as Gilbert. Also the same plastic decorative
techniques, exclusive of combing, are present. Absent at Pearson, but
known from Gilbert, are Womack Plain., Simms Engraved, and, less
* This should read Design B.

185

INDIAN ABTIFACTS

certainly, Natchitoches Engraved and Emory Punctated. In view of
the inequitable sample sizes, the possible absence of Natchitoches and
Emory at Pearson is probably not important. As for Simms, it almost
certainly represents trade with historic Caddoan peoples rather than
local Nortefio manufacture. Perhaps it was simply not traded for by
the historic occupants at Pearson, or, more likely, it was no longer
being made by Caddoan peoples at the time of the Nortefio stay at that
site. The apparent absence of Womack Plain is less easily disregarded,
unless it is a type unique to Gilbert. It has not been recognized in The
University of Texas collections from Sanders and Womack, a situation
which initially suggested the likelihood that it is a fairly late Nortefio
type. This does not seem to be borne out at Pearson, but perhaps the
sample is too small and fragmentary for recognition of Wornack Plain.
Cel~ainly, this and many other questions concerning the pottery can
only be answered when additional collections have been reported in
detail and particular attention has been given to specific and well defined attributes.
SUI~R,IAIRY

AND

CONCLUSIONS

The foregoing analysis of the 2,221 fragments of native-made vessels reveals that two cultural components, one prehistoric, the other
historic, are represented at the Gilbert Site. The earlier and less
intensive of the two, identified as Caddoan, was found to occupy only
Area B on the northern fringe of the site (Fig. 1). The small ceramic
collection made there consisted solely of grog-tempered sherds (59
plain and two incised), apparently from simple bowls and jars having
direct rims and fiat, circular bases. Precise cultural affiliations cannot
be assigned, although the probable vessel forms present, the seemingly high incidence of plain pottery and the temper agent used are
all suggestive of Gibson Aspect ceramics, particularly those of the
Sanders Focus.
The pottery from the remainder of the site-from 18 of the features
in Area A-is attributed to the second and later component, the
historic Nortefio Focus. It is markedly different from, and far more
diverse than, the pottery recovered from Area B. Included is a
striking variety of decorative techniques, vessel forms, and tempering materials. In spite of this diversity, few, if indeed any, significant
variations could be observed in the pottery collected from the various
features. While it is conceivable that this could be a result of inappropriate units of analysis (either the classificatory or the distributional ones, or both), it is believed that the present study has

186

TEXAS

AIRCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

resulted in an essentially valid picture of the history of the site and
the culture of its occupants. Among the inferences that can be drawn
from the ceramies found in Area A are:
1) The features represent discrete trash accumulations, a conelusion supported by the fragmentary condition of the pottery and
by the scattered distribution of many of the individual vessels.
The latter especially suggests that breakage occurred elsewhere,
presumably in a nearby dwelling area (or areas).
2) Most, if not all, of the features are generally eontemporaneous
and many were probably in use simultaneously. The eeramies from
the features are quite similar and the few differences which can be
observed are probably due mainly to errors in sampling.
3) Only in the sul~prisingly eoneentrated oeeurrenee of Womack
Plain may there be a meaningful variation in the interfeature distributions. It is possible, but not now demonstrable, that this refleets a slightly different age for Feature 3 and perhaps even for
Feature 7, where 91 per cent and 16 per eent, respectively, of the
sherds recovered were Womack Plain. Of course, it is also possible that Womack Plain was made by only one or a few persons
(presumably women) at Gilbert and, consequently, was not
characteristic of the community as a whole.
4) While the interfeature distributions overwhelmingly suggest that
a single, integrated socio-eultural group occupied the site during
historic times, the pottery seems too stylistically and technologically
diverse to represent only one locally-produced eeramie complex.
Some types, such as Simms Engraved and, less eertainly, Natchitoches Engraved (ineluding the somewhat aberrant examples found
at the site) were very probably obtained from historie Caddo Indians. How much of the remainder of the pottery represents introduced wares and how much represents locally manufactured
Nortefio wares is ve~3~ difficult to say. Ceramics common to the
late occupations at the Gilbert, Womack (Harris et al., 1965),
and Pearson (Duffield and Jelks, 196i) sites, the only eomponents
reported in stfftleient detail for consideration here, are principally
Womack Engraved, Emory Punctated (probably, but not eertainly,
present at Pearson), and an undeeorated shell-tempered ware which
is often identified as Nocona Plain. These are perhaps the major
types made by the Nortefios during the early and middle 18th
century. Other, apparently not so widespread ceramics-including
certain engraved types found at Womack (Hudson and Avery),

INDIAN AI~TIFA CTS

187

and the undecorated bone-tempered pottery and various textured
utility wares common to Gilbert and Pearson-may be the result
of exchange or dose social association (such as intermarriagecoupled with patriloeal residence pattern-with another group or
groups ).
5) Regardless of how much of the pottery was made locally, it is
unquestionable (as Duflleld and Jelks have already pointed out)
that the majority, and perhaps even all, of the decorated ceramics
are derived ultimately from the Caddoan, particularly Fulton Aspect, tradition. Many close parallels exist in the modes and styles
of decoration, paste characteristics, and vessel forms.
6) The derivation (or derivations) of the plain pottery is less
dear. Plain shell-tempered and bone-tempered jars are very common at Gilbert but are not characteristic of late Caddoan ceramics.
The shell-tempered jars could well be a reflection of Mississippian
influence, while the bone-tempered ones may be a more localized
development, one which certainly has prehistoric antecedents in the
general vicinity of the Gilbert Site.
7) Lastly, it can be noted that a striking number of the vessels
from Gilbert show signs of having been repaired or in some way
modified into serviceable containers after breakage had occurred.
This suggests that relatively few vessels were being made by the
oceupants; perhaps they were gradually being replaced by European-produeed containers.

