Cad Mound: A Stone Bead Locus
in East Central Louisiana
JON L. GIBSON
ABSTRACT
Products of the various stages of stone bead manufacture and associated tools have been recognized from the Cad Mound site in southern
LaSalle Parish, Louisiana. These have made possible the reconstruction
of industry techniques and processes. Archeological context of the
site, stratigraphic position of the beads, and relative dating of the
industry by river channel correlation ca. 1300 ~3.c. indicates the antiquity of the process. It is suggested that Cad and other similar sites
in the Catahoula Lake Basin participated in the Eastern Archaic horizon.

INTRODUCTION
During the course of an archeological survey of Indian sites in
LaSalle Parish, Louisiana in 1963-1964, an interesting stone-working
technique was discovered. Surface collecting of the Cad Mound site,
revealed numerous pieces of stone showing evidence of peeking, grinding, sawing, drilling, and polishing. These were recognized as products
of the various stages or steps in the manufacturing process of stone
beads. The completeness of the bead series, and consequently its value
in illustrating the procedure and techniques of manufacture, was
deemed noteworthy. Rather than await detailed analysis of the smwey
work, which has subsequently indicated a need for intensive excavation at several sites, this short treatise has been prepared.1
Helpful correspondence was had with James Ford, Florida State
Museum, Clarence Webb, Shreveport, Louisiana, and R. King Harris,
Southern Methodist University. John Rovik, Louisiana State University School of Geology, kindly identified stone materials. Thanks are
also due to Mrs. J. E. Allbritton, LaCrange High School, for her critical
reading of this manuscript. Several initial drafts of this paper were
typed by Claudia Gibson, and the final copy was prepared by MalT
Beth Gibson.
LOCATION AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
Cad Mound and associated village midden are located in southern
LaSalle Parish, about six miles southwest of the small settlement of
Waiters, Louisiana. The site is situated about two hundred yards south
of Indian Bayou in the large, poorly drained, periodically flooded sump
area known as the Catahoula Lake Basin.
1 A preliminary report of the LaSalle Parish smwey has been published by the
author (Gibson 1966: 193-237).

9,

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

LOUISIANA

LASALLE

PARISH

SANDY RUN

SANSON

0

1

2

3

0

4

Miles

FIGURE 1. Archaic sites in the Catahoula Lake Basin of LaSalle Parish,
Louisiana. Inset shows location of LaSalle Parish.

CAD

3

MOUND

Physiographically, the site area is very complex; a reflection of the
dynamics of structural faulting and of stream development? Cad itself
is located on the first of an old series of crescentic ridges representing
the bank-line levees of an ancient meander. Size of the scar, approximately three-quarters of a mile across, indicates that it was probably
formed by a stream the size of the Ouachita River or the Arkansas
River. Implications of this observation will be discussed in more
detail later.
Directly adjacent and partially overlapping the backslope of the old
levee system is a strand line beach composed of coarse white sand.
This beach, one of a discontinuous series of such phenomena surrounding the bed of Catahoula Lake, has been formed by sediment deposition dnring panses in the lowering of the lake level.
A small conical mound, formerly sixty feet in diameter and six feet
high, is present at the site. It has undergone considerable alteration
since 1961, due primarily to land clearing operations. The mound was
not excavated, but a three inch auger hole was put down in the west
slope of the mound. Rather homogeneous reddish-brown sandy silt
was encountered throughout with no evidence of superimposed
mantles or other features. Coarse sands of the beach ridge containing
both Marksville and Coles Creek components were found underlying
the mound base. This indicates that the mound was constructed after
deposition of the beach and puts a post-Marksville date on the mound
erection.
STRATIGRAPHY
Limited testing of the Cad site in the fall of 1963 revealed a rather
deep midden. About twenty-four inches of black organic sand filled
with refuse of the Coles Creek period overlay a lower stratum of
yellowish brown silty clay containing Marksville pottelT in the upper
six inches and flint debitage in the lower twelve to twenty-four inches.
A six inch zone of yellow sand mixed with black soil and fresh-water
mussel shells separated the strata. Although no beads were found in
the lower stratmn, this is presumably the layer in which they occur
stratigraphically. Horizontal distribution of the products of bead manufacture support this assumption. Beads have been found only where
the post-Marksville period sands of the beach ridge finger out and
the silts of the old levee system reach the surface. Lending additional
weight is the fact that some beads have ironstone accretions adhering
2 For a history of the development of the Catahoula Lake Basin, the reader is
referred to H. N. Fisk’s monograph, Geological Investigations of the Alluvial
Valley o{ the Lower Mississippi River.

4

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

to the walls of the perforations. Ironstone nodules and lenses are
known only from the lower midden stratum.
SUMMARY OF SITE COMPONENTS AND ARTIFACTS
Cultural material characteristic of Archaic, Marksville, Coles Creek
and Plaquemine periods was found intermingled on the surface and
vertically distributed in the midden cuts. Potsherds were predominately
Coles Creek types; Coles Creek Incised, Greenhouse Incised, French
Fork Incised, Mazique Incised, Chevalier Stamped, and Bhineha~
Punctated. Occasional sherds of Plaquemine Brushed, Manchac Incised, and Catahoula Incised were present, indicating a light Plaquemine occupation. Marksville Plain, MarksvilIe Stamped, MarksvilIe
Incised, and Marksville Zoned Punctated types attested to the presence of a minor Marksville component. This summary of types agrees
well with that !isted by Fisk (1938: 7) of ninety-eight percent Coles
Creek types and two percent Marksville types from Cad Mound?
The Archaic component here was represented by several artifacts
characteristic of the Eastern Archaic pelJod (Griffin 1952: 355-356)
plus some evidentally local traits. The polished stone inventory included, in addition to stone beads: a bar gorget, a qualtzite "tablet,"
a geniculate or "figure-7," a notched "net sinker," a small granite maul,
a claw pendant of jasper, celt fragments, teardrop shaped plummets,
and bar weights. Other lithics were large choppers, several varieties of
scrapers, gouges of the Clear Fork type, and dmt points of the Gary,
Kent, Epps, Delhi, Macon, Marcos, and San Patrice types. A microlithie industry of polyhedra! cores, retouched and use-retouched flakes,
double-backed flakes commonly known as "Jaketown perforators,"
edge-abraded flake saws, and peculiar notched flakes rounded out the
artifact inventory of this component.
Although most of the preceding items are known for the Poverty
Point period (Ford and Webb 1956), I prefer to refer to this assemblage as Archaic because of the conspicuous absence of baked clay
objects, steatite vessel fragments, and Motley points. It goes without
saying that the full artifact inventory present at the Povelly Point site
may not be expected to occur in toto at many other sites, provided of
course that Poverty Point does represent the aggregation of products
of many widespread subsidary or satellite villages. Enough sites are
now known from the area to postulate a localized Catahoula Lake
Archaic development which perhaps slightly preceded the classic
3 This breakdown was of a collection of sherds secured from Cad by J. A. Ford
in 1933 in preparation for his analytical report of Indian sites in Louisiana and
Mississippi (Ford 1936).

CAD

5

~iOUND

Poverty Point manifestation and which may have added certain increments to the Poverty Point trait list. Alternative explanations of the
Catahoula Lake deve!opment are that it participated in the diffusion
of Poverty Point traits from the type site, and/or it was simply a marginal manifestation tucked away in the Catahoula Lake Basin. Only
more investigation will elucidate this problem.
STONE BEAD MANUFACTURING
All the steps of the stone bead manufacturing process were found
at Cad. The process involved an intimate knowledge of peeking, grinding, sawing, &illing, and polishing techniques. Materials utilized were
vari-colored quartzites, predominately shades of red and purple, red
jasper sometimes banded with black, and brown chert. Tan and green
siltstones occasionally provided raw materials. Over sixty percent of
the worked stone was quartzite. Another twenty percent was jasper,
with chert, siltstone, and limestone furnishing about equal remaining
percentages. All of this material was available locally in the hills north
and west of Cad, from graveliferous terrace outcrops. A very small
amount, probably less than two percent, of non-local stone was
present.
The initial step in processing the stone involved rough pecking and
grinding of the edges of the selected pebble in order to achieve a
rectanguloid shape. Often pebbles occurring naturally in this general
shape were used, thereby omitting this shaping step. Quite frequently
even smaller pebbles were selected which not only enabled the maker
to by-pass initial shaping but also sawing. For convenience the products of this initial shaping step will be termed "blocks."
The roughly shaped "block" was then cut by flake saws. Depending
on the size of the block, one or two lines were cut into one face and
one end of the material usually no deeper than 2 mm (Fig. 2). A blow
from a hammerstone, perhaps concentrated along the plane of a punch
or similar instrument, was then directed about the midpoint of one of
these gTooves which served to diffuse the energy of the blow along it
and through the block, breaking off smaller rectanguloid "blanks"
(Fig. 3). Accidents, probably results of misdirected percussion strokes
or faulty material, occasionally did occur as evidenced by block flagments (Fig. 9,, f, g). Virtually the same technique is used today to
trim glass.
Blanks were subjected to further grinding until tubular or barrel
shapes were obtained (Fig. 4, a-d). One small partially finished bead
was prism-shaped (Fig. 4, e). Two other blanks were rather rectangu-

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FZCURE 2. Bead Blocks. a-b from Sanson Place, Rapides Parish, Louisiana.
c-g from Cad Mound.

CAD

~OUND

7

V:

b

~b~ I

f
d

i
h

FIGURE 3. Bead Blanks. a-i from Cad Mound.

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

b

d

CAD

9

~[OUND

lar in cross-section, but they may have been discarded before further
shaping was completed.
Holes drilled in the tubular blanks were cylindrical. Conical countersunk perforations were apparent in one finished bead (Fig. 4, f),
but they had been almost completely masked by later cylindrical
reaming. Small depressions, apparently drill seatings, pecked into both
ends of several blanks prior to drilling suggested that conical counter
drilling was concomitant with cylindrical drilling. James A. Ford (personal communication 1966) related that these drilling methods posed
a temporal difference, with counter-drilling earlier, and cylindrical
drilling later. However, evidence from Cad and from Indian Knoll
did not substantiate this assumption. Holes were drilled with a rotary
motion of the drill for encircling striations etched into the bore wall
of the bead were often visible.
Subsequent grinding and polishing completed the beads and often
gave a low lustrous finish (Fig. 4, f, g). Finished beads ranged from
30 mm. to 14 mm. in length, and 13 mm. to 7 mm. in maximum
diameter. Perforation diameter ranged from 6 ram. to 9,.5 ram. and was
usually slightly tapering. Tubular and bm’rel shapes were the only
forms found, but unfinished blanks suggested a prism form and possibly a long rectangular form. Beads observed in private collections from
Cad were flattened cylinders, oval in cross-section, but the seemingly
desired shape was some variety of the cylinder.
The cutting process was duplicated in laboratory experiments. Several pebbles of limestone and quartzite were sawed with flakes. The
flake saw after use had polished and abraded edges similar to aboriginal saws recovered from Cad. The blanks produced by striking
the sawed groove by shaq9 percussion blows were also similar. The
process was very time-eonsmning, and saw edges became dull and
useless very quickly.
TOOLS
The saws were "lamellar" flakes or blades of hard eryptocrystalline
chel± detached from prepared cores. However, considerable use was
also made of cortex flakes and other relatively lm’ge pieces of debris
(Fig. 5). Sizes varied from 38 ram. to 16 ram. in length and width
from 29, ram. to 14 ram. One side, two sides, or even all the sides were
abraded, polished and nicked with fine use sears. On all the observed
FmuR~ 4. Tubular Blanks and Finished Beads. a-b, d-g from Cad Mound.
c from Sanson Place. d-e partially finished beads with incomplete perforations, f-g finished beads.

i0

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

\

\

\

b

b

f

FIOVR~ 5. Flake saws. a-d symmetrical flakes, e-f irregular flakes. Length of
arrows shows extent of utilized edge.

CAD MOUND

ii

specimens, the utilized edge was V-shaped or slightly rounded in
cross section. No attempt was made to break down these "saws" into
styles, as has been done by Wheeler (1965: 19-20) in his description
of similar tools from Wetherill Mesa. It is sufficient to say that the
flakes were "saws" used for cutting bead blanks from prepared blocks.
Both conical and cylindrical drills were employed. These tools were
not represented in collections from the site, which may suggest that
they were made of a perishable material, utilizing sand as an abrasive.
Webb (1946: 269) desclibed the drilling process in atlatl weights
from Indian Knoll which was identical with the one used at Cad and
probably involved similar tools (cane or reed). However, flint drills
which Webb associated with conical perforations were not recognized
at Cad. Annular grooves in bore walls of some beads from Cad may
be indicative of repeated introduction of sharp, fresh, cutting sand
into perforations. However, it may be that sand grains trapped between the bore wall and the soft drill scratched these lines and is not
indicative of the "cutting-cleaning-cutting" process.
The other tools necessary for bead manufacturing, hammerstones,
were found at Cad. These undoubtedly served a dual purpose as
striking instruments and as anvils. They are typically chert or qualtzite
pebbles with battered edges and pitted faces. Several Catahoula sandstone hones found at Cad were probably the abrading and polishing
mediums.
STONE BEAD DISTRIBUTION IN LOUISIANA
Spatial distribution of stone beads in Louisiana gives full credence
to the fact that most alluvial surfaces in the Lower Mississippi Valley
were too geologically recent to have supported Archaic occupancy
(Haag 1961: 317-323). William G. McIntire (personal communication
1966) found no beads in his extensive survey of Coastal Louisiana,
although he theorized that Archaic components did exist (1958: 53).
Likewise, Sherwood M. Gagliano (1963: 105-132) in his extension of
the coastal survey to preceramic sites of the Pontchmtrain Basin and
the terrace lands of the Florida Parishes found no evidence for such a
lapidary industry. Recently reported Poverty Point sites in this area
(Gagliano and Saucier 1963: 326), yielded no beads; indeed, their
conspicuous absence was noted by the authors.
Nevertheless, stone beads are known from a few sites in geologically
old areas in South Louisiana, but they are certainly rare. One fragmentary bah’el-shaped bead was recovered from the Tchefuncte component at the Lafayette Mounds (Ford and Quimby 1945: 23). Moore
(1912: 507; 1913: 79,) reported jasper beads from a site in St. Landry

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

STONE BEAD DISTRIBUTION
IN LOUISIANA

50

o
Miles

Stone bead producing parishes outlined:
Caddo, Bossier, Webster, Claiborne,
DeSoto, Bienville, Na~chitoches, Winn,
Rapides, LaSalle, Catahoula. St. Landry,
West Carroll, St. Martin, East Baton Rouge.

A~RY ISLAND

FIGURE 6. Stone Bead Distribution in Louisiana.

Parish and one in Rapides Parish, but archeological contexts are not
fully understood. The recently- excavated Monte Sano Mound in East
Baton Rouge Parish yielded a red jasper owl e~gy bead or pendant
duplicating a similar specimen (called the Bertha Hale) from Poverty
Point. Lack of suitable stone, subsidence of old surfaces and therefore potential bead-producing sites, or possible cultural rejection may
be some of the factors influencing the distributional picture of stone
beads.
The majority of stone beads are from sites on the Quaternal3z ten’aces
and on the Arkansas River Cone (Macon Ridge) in North and Central
Louisiana. In the alluvial Mississippi Valley of Eastern Louisiana,
beads occur in sites located on the older alluvial areas primarily on
surfaces of the C~ and C2 stages (Fisk 1944: P1. 15, sheet 3) of the
Arkansas or the combined Arkansas/Ouaehita rivers. The few sites

CAD

MOUND

13

known hlrther south are all located on Prairie Terrace or perhaps

Bayou Teche deltaic surfaces.
Distributional information is only a reflection of current knowledge
and consequently is subject to revision as new data become available.
However, it certainly is a fnnction of land surfaces existent in the
Archaic and confirms the suspected antiquity of stone bead manufacturing in the area. Presently, bead producing sites occur in a broad area
of North Louisiana: eastward from a narrow band flanking the west
side of the Red River Valley to the recent alluvial Mississippi River
floodplain, and southward in quantity to Rapides Parish in the center
of the state.
CORRELATIONS, AFFILIATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS
Unfortunately, no radiocarbon dates are yet available from Cad.
However, the old channel scar on which Cad is located was apparently
a portion of the C~ course of the Arkansas River, which Fisk (1944)
estimates to have been active circa 1300 B.c. Very limited evidence
primarily h’om Poverty Point, which was apparently associated with
a precedent C~ Arkansas channel but which yielded radiocarbon dates
averaging 800 B.c. (Ford and Webb 1956: Tab. 9), hints that this date
may be of too great a magnitude. Irrespectively, I am inclined at the
present time to favor a slightly earlier temporal position of the Catahoula Lake Archaic, primarily on the basis of the artifact assemblage
and the lack of certain traits known to have persisted into more recent
cultural periods.
Both Cad and Poverty Point had bead-making industries. Ford and
Webb (1956: 101-103) describe the beads at Poverty Point, but present no data on manufacture. Most of the beads h’om Poverty Point are
finished forms, and it is my impression from a cursmT examination of
several private collections that unfinished beads, blanks, and rejects
are far too few to complement the enolTnous nmnber of completed
specimens. Nevertheless, manufacturing data are available. A remarkable cache discovered at Poverty Point by R. King Harris of Southern
Methodist University apparently represents the entire contents of a
lapidary’s tool kit. Of the eighty-three pieces of red and green talc,
over half have been worked in a fashion similar but not identical to
the Cad method. Probably due to the soft and laminar nature of the
raw material, initial preparatolT grinding was not called for, and the
blanks were completely (or nearly so) sawed from the block. Also
differing from the Cad material is the fact that the saw was a large
novaenlite biface (a Pogo spear point in classificatory terminology).
Other differences in the total bead series from Poverty Point and

14

TEXAS AIRCI:ZEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Cad include lack of cylindrical reamed perforations and edge-abraded
saws at Poverty Point and absence of the wide variety of Povelt:y Point
bead forms at Cad. Whether these differences m’e suffleient to outweigh the similiarities in the finished products can not presently be
aseel~ained.
Other comparative data are available from Archaic components in
the Pickwick Basin of Northern Alabama (Webb and DeJarnette
1942) and in the Green River area of Kentucky (Webb 1946; Webb
and Haag 1939, 1947). Tubular and barrel-shaped beads of jasper
and channel coal are persistent occurrences in these sites. Unfortunately for our purposes here, processing techniques were not found or
were not recognized. Nonetheless, Webb (1946: 267-269) does go into
considerable detail in describing atlatl weight manufacturing at Indian
Knoll, Oh2. This process provides a corollary with the Cad process,
and undoubtedly with very few alterations could be expanded to inelude stone bead making in the area. It appears that drilling of the
atlatl prism was the crucial step in manufacture and was usually done
before a great deal of effort was expended on grinding and polishing.
Conversely at Cad, drilling of the bead blank was one of the last steps
followed only by finish smoothing and polishing. Webb makes no
mention of stone sawing in this connection.
In the northwestern portion of Louisiana and perhaps spilling into
eastern Texas and southern Arkansas are several sites yielding stone
beads. These sites are collectively grouped into the Bossier (Webb
1948) or the Bellvue (Fulton and Webb 1953) foci. Although too little
is known of these loci to compare them with phases in the Red River
Mouth sequence, they do appear to fall temporally later than the
Archaic or Poverty Point periods. Even so, they have retained some of
the major traits of the Archaic, including stone beads. Nearly all of
the beads are finished products, and processual data are not available.
Archaic period precursors of these foci m’e perhaps known, but
limited information prevents a definitive statement at this time. One
of these supposed Archaic sites, Albany Landing in Caddo Parish,
may have had a bead-making industry. Two unfinished beads-one, a
red jasper disc with incomplete countersunk perforations, and the
other, a barrel-shaped, undrilled blank-are knovn~ from the site ( C. H.
Webb, personal communication 1966). The Kieffer Place in western
Winn Parish, another apparent Archaic site, is unusual because it is
a mound site. Pallia! leveling of one of the three mounds in 1964
uncovered several oval pits which contained the calcined remains of
several individuals. Apparently pits had been dug from the mound
surface and the burials had been burned in situ. Burial furniture con-

CAD

1VIOUND

15

sisted entirely of barrel-shaped and tubular stone beads of silicified
wood, brown chert, and jasper. Surrounding the mounds in isolated
spots were found a few dart points of types Elam, Evans, and Delhi,
but pottery was conspicuously absent. These few data from Kieffer
lend additional support to mounting evidence of mound construction
in the Archaic period.4
Passing mention has been made previously to an, as yet undefined,
areheo!ogieal manifestation in Central Louisiana, the Catahoula Lake
Archaic phase. Further elaboration of Central Louisiana cultural
sequences is reserved for a paper planned in the near future.
Presently, bead making data are available from four sites in the
Catahoula Lake Basin and one from the eastern peripheral margin of
the basin. These sites m’e Cad, Sandy Run, and Crooks Site in LaSalle
Parish; Sanson, or more properly Joseph Island, in tlapides Parish;
and Walters Place in Catahoula Parish. For all practical purposes,
bead production at these sites are identical; description of the Cad
industry in this paper suffices for all. None, however, appear as extensive as Cad.
Cad is certainly a bead "factory" in the stMet sense of the word.
Beads were manufactured on the spot and were not brought in by
trade. Judging from the large number of unfinished and rejected
pieces representing various stages of manufacture, the number of
finished beads is surprisingly few. The studied collections give a
ratio of approximately fifty unfinished fol~ns for every finished bead.
This tantalizingly hints that Cad may have also functioned as a distributional center for objects of the lapidary art.
Evidently, Cad had some familiarity with the trade network so well
established by Poverty Point times. Galena, crystal quartz, slate,
greenstone, granitic rocks, and possibly other exotic materials are
present in small but persistent amounts. If these exotic materials are
trade items and not the results of home-based forays, then the idea
must be entertained that Cad must have had something to trade in
return. Stone beads would fu!fill this criterion admirably.
In conclusion, Cad bead factory is recognized as a local manifestation of the Eastern Archaic period. This tentative affinity is further
supported by the broadening of the bead distribution pattern to the
north and east, toward the major Archaic centers in the east. Confinement to land surfaees, geologically no younger than around 1300 B.C.,
4 Radiocarbon 14 determinations accumulated by Ford and Webb (1956) and
by Gagliano (1964: 13) suggest that mound-building was established in the
Lower Mississippi Valley perhaps as early as 2500 B.C. and almost certainly by
1000 B.C.

16

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

suggests the antiquity of this industry, which falls well within the
temporal bounds of the Eastern Archaic period. Presently, it is felt
that Cad and consequently, the Catahoula Lake Archaic phase, are
antecedent to Poverty Point, but only more excavation and radiocarbon determinations will help elucidate this problem.

REFERENCES CITED
Fisk, H. N.
1938 Geology of Grant and LaSalle Parishes. Louisiana Department of Conservation, Geological Bulletin No. 1O.
1944 Geological Investigations of the Alluvial Valley of the Lower Mississippi
River. War Department, Corps of Engineers, U. S. Army, Mississippi
River Commission Publication, No. 52.
Ford, James A.
1936 Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and Mississippi. Louisiana Geological Survey, Anthropological Study No. 2.
Ford, James A. and George I. Quimby, Jr.
1945 The Tehefunete Culture, An Early Oceupation of the Lower Mississippi
Valley. Memoirs of the Society for American Arehaeology, No. 2.
Ford, James A. and Clarence H. Webb
1956 Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of tbe American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 45, Part 1.
Fulton, Robert L. and Clarence H. Webb
1953 The Bellvue Mound: A Pre-Caddoan Site in Bossier Parish, Louisiana.
Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Soeiety, Vol. 24, pp. 18-42.
Gagliano, Sherwood M.
1963 A Survey of Preeeramie Occupations in Portions of South Central
Louisiana. Florida Anthropologist, Vol. XVI No. 4 pp. 105-132.
1964 An Areheo!ogieal Survey of Ave~dz Island. ’Avery island, Ine.
Gagliano, Sherwood M. and Roger T. Saueier
1963 Poverty Point Sites in Southeastern Louisiana. American Antiquity, Vol.
28, No. 3, pp. 320-327.
Gibson, Jon L.
1966 A Preliminary Survey of Indian Occupation in LaSalle Parish, Louisiana.
Louisiana Studies, Vol. V, No. 3, pp. 193-237.
Griffin, James B.
1952 Culture Periods in Eastern United States Archeology. In Areheology of
Eastern United States, James B. Griffin (ed.), pp. 352-364.
Haag, William G.
1961 The Archaic of the Lower Mississippi Valley. Ameriean Antiquity, Vol.
26, No. 3, Part 1, pp. 317-323.
MeIntire, William G.
1958 Prehistoric Indian Settlements of the Changing Mississippi River Delta.
Louisiana State University Studies, Coastal Studies Series No. 1.
Moore, Clarenee B.
1912 Some Aboriginal Sites on the Red River. Journal of the Academy of
Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. 14, Pt. 4, Art. 5, pp. 482-644. ,
Some Aboriginal Sites in Louisiana and Arkansas. Journal of the Aeadem)
of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. 16, Pt. 1, Art. 1, pp. 7-99.
Webb, Clarence H.
1948 Caddoan Prehisto13z: The Bossier Foeus. Bulletin of the Texas Areheological and Paleontological Soeiety, Vol. i9, pp. 101-113.
1913

CAD

17

MOUND

Webb, William S.
1946 Indian Knoll, Site Oh 2, Ohio County, Kentucky. University of Kentueky Reports in Anthropology and Archaeology, Pt. 1, Vol. 4, No. 3.
Webb, William S. and David L. DeJarnette
1942 An Archeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in the Adjacent Portions of
the States of Alabama, Mississippi, and Tennessee. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 129.
Webb, William S. and W. G. Haag
1939 The Chiggerville Site, Site 1, Ohio County, Kentucky. The University ot~
Kentucky Reports in Anthropology, Vol. 4, No. 1.
1947 Archaic Sites in McLean County, Kentucky. The University of Kentucky
Reports in Anthropology, Vol. 7, No. 1.
Wheeler, Richard P.
1965 Edge-abraded Flakes, Blades, and Cores in the Puebloan Tool Assemblage. In Contributions of the Wetherill Mesa Archeological Project,
Douglas Osborne (ed.), Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 19, pp. 19-29.
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana

