Episodes in the History of Texas Archeology:
Excavations at Shumla and Eagle Caves,
Witte Memorial Museum
Roberta McGregor

ABSTRACT
The Witte Museum of San Antonio was involved, during the 1930s, in
early archeological research in the Lower Pecos region of Texas. These activities are summarized here and have been supplemented by interviews with
Harding Black, a participant in the field work.

INTRODUCTION
This narrative is intended to give historical insight into the Witte Museum’s
expeditions into the Lower Pecos River area of Texas in the 1930s. These explorations provided important foundations toward our understanding of the archeology of that region. The objectives, methods, and techniques, although imprecise
at best by our modern standards, were in keeping with their time and serve to
illustrate how far we have come. In this paper, one member of the early expeditions, Harding Black, furnishes a personal glimpse of those historic moments in
Texas archeology.
The involvement of San Antonio’s Witte Museum in the archeology of the
Lower Pecos River area began more than 50 years ago. In 1931 the Witte sent a
small scouting expedition to investigate a number of prehistoric sites in West
Texas including 10 rock-shelters near Langtry. A member of that early group,
Mary Virginia Carson, sketched a series of pictographs painted on the walls of
several shelters. The Witte now houses those first attempts to document the
Lower Pecos area rock art. Later, in 1933, a museum expedition excavated the
Shumla Caves (Martin 1934). The 1936 excavation of Eagle Cave (Davenport
1938) followed two testings of the shelter in 1935.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56 (1985)

128

Texas Archeological Society

THE 1933 EXCAVATION
Concern about scouting expeditions in the Lower Pecos from other institutions-particularly from the north and east--expedited the decision to excavate
the nine Shumla Caves. The San Antonio Light in 1933 quoted Mrs. Ellen
Schultz Quillin, Witte Museum Director: "Material brought from this section to
San Antonio will be invaluable, as all of the major outside institutions have their
expeditions in the same field, and soon there will be nothing left for Texas unless
the work of excavation is done now."
To finance the expedition, Mrs. Qui!lin solicited food and money from the
citizens of San Antonio who responded with donations of beans and coffee and
other food items and $90.00 in cash. The crew, all members of the newly-formed
Southwest Texas Archaeological Society, consisted of George Martin, President
of the Society and head of the expedition; Major Fletcher Gardener, Ret.; John S.
Eross, crew chief; Jack W. Davenport, "expedition artist"; and Harding Black,
now a well-known San Antonio potter. Other Society members who spent a varying amount of time at the site included Jack Specht, George C. Martin, Jr., Albert Maverick III, Everett Lehman, John Davis, George Nalle, Jr., John Ray,
Gustave Bentrup, and Burton Waters. All of the crew members volunteered their
services.
Harding Black’s association with the Witte Museum dates back to the Depression years of the 1930s when Quillin hired him to conduct children’s pottery
classes. He recalls (personal communication 1985) the early days of Texas
archeology:
Sam Woolford decided to start an archeological society at the Witte Museum. He
was editor of the San Antonio Light. The University of Texas was doing some digging out in the Big Bend area. Woolford was a good friend of George Martin--he
was sort of an amateur archeologist and so they decided to have an expedition out to
West Texas. I was selected to be one of the pick and shovel men. For some reason we
started out at midnight and ended up at Shumla, Texas; it was just a railroad siding.
We arrived there in the middle of the day--hot as blazes. We set up camp [May 28,
1933]. There was a little cave just down from the camp site where we set up the
kitchen. It was a bare cave--no ash or anything in it. We had a spring right down
below. To get to the spring we stretched a rope from the top and tied it to a bush and
let ourselves down that steep slope. (Figure 1)

Black reminisces about some of his Shumla co-workers:
Eross was a semi-professional. He worked in New Mexico and Arizona with some
archeo!ogists there. He knew where to dig so he came up usually with the best finds.
We had George Nalle--the governor’s (Ma Ferguson’s) grandson at that time. Of
course us guys were mostly poor people and they were very rich. So when we heard
he was coming, think of the consternation it caused in the camp. During the first day
of digging, someone threw a whole shovelful of ash right on top of his head. It’s a

McGregor--Shumla and Eagle Caves

Figure 1. Descent to the Shumla Caves: The 1933 Excavation

129

130

Texas Archeological Society

good thing he came up smiling or I’m afraid he would have been ostracized. Albert
Maverick III was in training for football at school so whenever they found a heavy
mortar he got to carry it out of the canyon, which was quite a job. Some of these
things weighed 30-40 pounds .... Jack Davenport was an artist--that wasn’t
enough to keep him busy so Quillin hired him here at the museum because he was a
good handyman, a good plumber, and electrician.

Davenport drew the illustrations in the Witte’s Big Bend Basket Maker Papers’.
Major Gardener returned to San Antonio before the actual digging began.
George Martin followed in a little over three weeks. Ellen Quillin (in a letter to
"Uncle Tom" dated July 12, 1933) writes: "Mr. Martin came in from the field
about three weeks ago, both to get the material in and mounted for exhibition,
and to rest. He was quite ill when he got back." John Eross remained as crew
chief and kept a log of the daily activities from June 20th to his arrival back in
San Antonio on August 25, 1933. During that time Martin, who returned to
Shumla for one day in July and three days in August, received weekly progress
reports from Eross. The crew spent long hours working in the shelters, usually
excavating from 7:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., six days a week.
This early exploration in the dry shelters yielded an unsurpassed collection
of perishable materials dating mainly to the Middle and Late Archaic. Eross and
his crew recovered hundreds of mat fragments and such rare items as hafted
knives and points, several complete baskets, woven headbands, a threaded bone
awl and a skin pouch. In addition, the crew uncovered a number of burials including one of the most elaborate burials yet found in the Lower Pecos.

1935 SURVEYS
Elated by the Shumla excavations, Ellen Quillin sent two of the museum’s
employees back to the Lower Pecos River area. On March 8, 1935, Harding
Black and J. Walker Davenport "left for the Big Bend region in a survey of caves
located around the Langtry district" (Davenport 1935a: 1). They remained at
Eagle Cave for four days "sinking test holes and trenches as cave far too big to
work without additional help" (ibid. :3). Davenport also wrote: "The eastern
museums have been sending scouts through here [Langtry area] offering cash for
information and artifacts."
In September, Black and Davenport returned to Eagle Cave for several days
of excavation. Davenport noted two artifacts in particular. The first (Figure 2,a)
was a painted slate pendant drilled with five holes. Davenport noticed traces of
painting on the face of the pendant although he could not make out the design.
When Mock (1984) examined the artifact she found red ochre patches visible on
the edges. The second object (Figure 2,b) was "the largest painted stone I have
ever seen," (Davenport 1935b :4). The same artist may have painted two other
pebbles recovered at this time since they share a strong similarity in design and
technique (Figure 3).

McGregor--Shumla and Eagle Caves

131

b

Figure 2. Artifacts from Eagle Cave, 1935. a, painted slate pendant drilled with five
holes; b, fragment of a large painted pebble.

1936 EXCAVATION
As a result of the 1935 trips, Quillin successfully solicited money and food
from the citizens of San Antonio to finance the excavation of Eagle Cave. Davenport and Black, accompanied by Edward Ritchey and Joe Bentz (Figure 4), returned "to work this rock-shelter to the bottom" in 1936 (Davenport 1936: 1).
In 1922, Sam Woolford had exp!ored Eagle Cave with Herbert Dodd, the
postmaster at Langtry. Woolford (Woolford and Quillin 1966: 198) describes the
shelter: "There it was--a great yawning opening in the canyon wall. I do not
think it had been disturbed at that time by ’pot-hunters.’ The typical large, black
arrowheads lay in clear view on the packed-down surface of the cave. When you
stamped your boots on the floor of the cave it made a thumping sound." Unfortu-

132

Texas Archeological Society

b

Figure 3. Artifacts from Eagle Cave, 1935. Two painted pebbles.

nately, by 1935 the landowner was using the cave to shelter freshly-sheared sheep
from inclement weather--as many as 5,000 at a time (ibid.). Later, in 1963,
Ross (1965: 15) found "the uppermost stratum was a light gray soil composed of
backdirt from potholes, burned rocks, sheep and goat dung and straw."

McGregor--Shumla and Eagle Caves

133

Access to Eagle Cave is possible through a cleft in the canyon walls near the
site, or by coming upstream from the mouth of Mile Canyon. However, the Witte
crew found a third way in 1936. They built a wooden ladder and braced it halfway
down the slope by wooden scaffolding (Figure 5). Davenport (1936: 3) wrote:
"Ritchey had the doubtful honor of making the first trip down." They set up the
screen and shaker--a motorized contraption built by Davenport "that shot that
ash down a shoot to the canyon to get rid of it" (Black, personal communication 1985).
Davenport drew a floor plan of the shelter. He mentioned in his field notes
that two boys named Lassiter were "doing some work in the cave--know of no
way to stop them. However, don’t think they will interfere with us" (Davenport
1936:2). In fact, Davenport (1938:4 ;’Figure 6) mapped in the local boys’
trench in his drawing. Black (personal communication) remembers: "Every day
after school, three little boys of the neighbors there would come down to where
we were digging. They were looking for painted stones because you could get
about $10.00 for these painted stones."
Davenport began excavating Eagle Cave by digging a trench 106 feet from
the south edge and about 18 feet in from the line of the two edges. The trench
measured eight-feet wide and extended to the rear wall (Davenport 1938). In
later excavations, the east-west trench was visible as an elongated depression
(Ross 1965). Davenport (1936:3) described the top layer as consisting of "limestone dust, ashes and some burnt rock. Snail shells are thickly scattered through
this layer. Bones of birds and animals are also in the layer which are being saved
for future reference." Davenport (ibid.) wrote that Layer A was about two-feet
deep towards the outside of the shelter and increased in depth to five feet at approximately 15 feet from the rear.
Davenport usually listed the daily finds in the margin of his notebook. In the
first stratum he mentioned, in addition to the chipped stone artifacts, eight
painted pebbles, miscellaneous bone and broken awls, a tubular stone pipe fragment (Schuetz 1961) and one gray stone bead.
Work began on Stratum B, which dates to the Middle Archaic, on February
24. On March 5, Davenport (1936:12) wrote: "Ritchey noticed a finger and fingernail mark on one of the cigar-shaped objects of which we have several. Several other objects, which we had collected today, upon examination prove to be
clay. Believe this to be important as every piece that we can remember came out
of B level." The crew uncovered two more clay figurines the following day.
Davenport (1938:10) later noted: "Scattered through layers A, B, and C
were 12 objects of cigar-like shapes--these appear to have been moulded (sic)
from clay." Later excavations at Eagle Cave (Ross 1965: Table 15) produced 22
additional clay objects including six clearly identified as clay figurines (Sharer
1975 : 150).
In addition to the figurines, Davenport (1936:t3) described a painted
pebble uncovered in stratum B: "Design on stone unusual--it is of spider web-have seen one other like it. It was in possession of Comstock mercantile store

134

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Excavations at Eagle Cave, 1936.

Figure 5. Excavations at Eagle Cave, 1936. View of
ladder built for descent to the site.

McGregor--Shumla and Eagle Caves

135

:::::-::::::::::

Figure 6. Plan of Eagle Cave. Drawn by J. Walker Davenport, the plan shows areas of
the Witte excavations and earlier relic-collector trenches.

136

Texas Archeological Society

owner." Davenport completed recording section 4B by taking photographs and
movie footage of the cross section.
Perishables recovered from Stratum B included three matting fragments, 13
knots, nine strings, 11 sandal fragments, two fiber rings and three basket centers.
In addition, the crew excavated bone awl fragments, two perforated shells,
17 painted pebbles and eight clay figurines. Fifteen of the pebbles were found in
the T-cut along the back wall.
The Witte crew excavated Strata C and D to a depth of 12 feet (Figures 7,
8). Before leaving Eagle Cave, Davenport (1936: 12) wrote: "Dismantled ladder
and after supper took lumber and wheelbarrow to Skiles. We had quite a little talk
with them, shortly before we started to leave Guy said he sure would like to have
the lumber from the ladder and when we told him it was outside on the truck and
that we had brought it up to give him he was pleased and as a result he gave us a
(prehistoric) Lower Pecos gee string. We feel that we got the better of that bargain." Thanks to Davenport and Black the leather "g-string" is now in the museum’s collection.
While reminiscing about the lower Pecos, Black discussed his ideas as to
how the prehistoric people cooked one of their staple foods:
I can’t remember which cave this was I found a fireless cooker. Most people didn’t
realize they didn’t have pots to cook in--even to carry water. There was no clay out
there--they didn’t make any pots--and I found this fireless cooker. I was digging
one day and I came to some rocks and I took the rocks off and I found some grass
and I removed the grass and in that was a bunch of yucca hearts. Then below that I
found some more grass and below that some more rocks. So they heated up the bottom rocks, put the wet grass on top of the hot rocks, put the hearts in, some more wet
grass and some more hot rocks and covered the whole thing up and that’s the way
they cooked the yucca hearts to eat.

Hough gives an ethnographic example for a similar cooking technique in the
American Southwest (1959:846): "Mescal pits are usually circular depressions
in the ground, a foot to three feet in depth, and lined with coarse gravel. A fire
was built in the pit, raked out after the stones became hot, and the mescal plants
put in and covered with grass. After two days steaming the pile was opened and
the mescal was ready for consumption."
Black (personal communication) also discovered how the Lower Pecos
peoples improved their sleeping quarters: "Most of the fiber was found in the top
levels where it hadn’t been burned. They used grass for bedding. We’d find this
bedding material because this ash wasn’t very good to sleep on so they’d pull this
grass and make beddings." Baker Cave (Brown 1984) and Hinds Cave (Shafer
and Bryant 1977) yielded similar grass-like features.

iVIcGregor~Shumla and Eagle Caves

Figure 7. Excavations at Eagle Cave, 1936.

137

Figure 8. Excavations at Eagle Cave, 1936.
View of stratigraphy in trench.

FINAL COMMENTS
The main reason the Witte explored the Lower Pecos area was to collect objects for the museum. Mrs. Quillin chose two of her full-time museum employees
for key positions in the excavations: Jack Davenport, an artist, carpenter and mechanic; and Harding Black, a potter. Both observant and hard working, they returned with more information than once thought. The Witte published Davenport’s report in 1938. Davenport and Black brought back soil and charcoal
samples, took photographs and filmed a portion of the excavation. The film, now
restored, resides in the collection of the Witte Museum. Harding Black looks
back to the early excavations:
We used shovels. We had to move a lot of ash in order to find anything. We screened
all the ash to make sure. Of course, at that time we weren’t too professional. Now 1
realize we should have saved seeds, leaves--because they were just as important as
some of the hard stone. We probably didn’t do too good a professional job but I guess
we got the stuff before the potholers got it, which is a good thing. At least we got it in
the museum.

In September, 1963, a Texas Archeological Salvage Project crew left Austin
to begin a three-month season in the Amistad Reservoir testing three sites: Bon-

138

Texas Archeological Society

fire Shelter; Fate Bell; and Eagle Cave. The cultural fill within Eagle Cave varied
considerably, from 2-3 feet thick approximately 50 feet from the rear wall to
9-10 feet thick at 20-25 feet from the rear (Ross 1965).
Ross began the excavation by cleaning out and profiling the old Witte Museum trench (ibid.: E-W Profile along N90, p. 18) (Figure 9). He also excavated
a 20 x 10 foot block of undisturbed soil adjacent to the north side of the trench, a
pothole in the north end of the shelter, and a deep pit to the floor of the shelter.
Table II compares the stratigraphic distribution of selected dart points from
the 1936 and 1963 excavations. If one disregards the unknown stratum and the
disturbed stratum A, we find that Ross (1965) uncovered the majority of the Pandale points from levels IIc and IId, and Davenport from level B. Ross found Langtry and Val Verde points well represented in IIa and Davenport again in B. Most
Shumla points came from the top level.
The Witte Museum’s interest in Lower Pecos prehistory continues today.
Funded by the Witte, the Center for Archaeological Research at The University of
Texas at San Antonio conducted excavations at Baker Cave in 1984 and 1985. In
January of 1987, the Witte opens a major exhibit that explores the lifeways of the
people of the Lower Pecos. In addition, the Witte has supported the production of
a book amply illustrated by color photographs Of the rock art taken by Jim Zintgraft of San Antonio over the last 20 years. The author of the book, Dr. Harry
Shafer of Texas A&M University details the ways of life of the ancient people
who produced the art and lived in the shelters.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Dr. Thomas R. Hester for his advice and for reading several
versions of this paper. My thanks also to my friends and co-workers at the Witte Museum-Roger Fry for the excellent quality of the photography and Karen Branson for her fine
typing. My special thanks to Harding Black for spending a morning with me reminiscing
about the early days at the Witte.

McGregor--Shumla and Eagle Caves

139

Texas Archeological Society

140

Table 1. Artifacts Recovered During Surveys of Eagle Cave

Artifacts
Stone, chipped
Points, perfect or good
broken or bad
Scrapers
Knives
Drills
Fist axe
Stone, ground, pecked, smooth
Manos
Metates
Stone
Painted
Smooth
Miscellaneous
Pendant, slate
Bone
Awl, whole
Awl, broken
Flakers
Miscellaneous
Bead
Wood
Point
Miscellaneous
Basketry
Burnt
Sandal
Fiber ball
Shell
Clam

March
15-18, 1935

September
17-22, 1935

53
11
57
2
1

185
432
238
30
4
1

26
6

33
9

41
17
17
1

1
31
2
3

1
23

6
1

2

McGregor--Shumla and Eagle Caves

©

<Ca

C~

O

O

;>

("4

M

t2
O

e.,

Ca
!

141

142

Texas Archeological Society

REFERENCES CITED
Brown, Ken
1984
The 1984 Season at Baker Cave. Ms. on file at Witte Museum.
Davenport, J. Walker
1935a Field Notes of March 1935 Survey of Eagle Cave. Ms. on file at Witte Museum.
1935b Field Notes of September 1935 Survey of Eagle Cave. Ms. on file at Witte
Museum.
1936
Field Notes of 1936 Excavation of Eagle Cave. Ms. on file at Witte Museum.
Archaeological Exploration of Eagle Cave, Langtry, Texas. Witte Memorial
1938
Museum, Bulletin 4, San Antonio.
Hough, Walter
Mescal. In Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico, Part I, ed. by F. W.
1959
Hodge. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 30.
Martin, George C.
1934

Archaeological Exploration of the Shumla Caves. In Big Bend Basket Maker
Papers 3, Southwest Texas Archaeological Society, Witte Museum, San
Antonio.

Mock, Shirley
1984
Analysis of Bone and Shell Artifacts from the Lower Pecos, Witte Museum Collection. Ms. on file at Witte Museum.
Moore, William E.
Archeological Investigations at Musk Hog Canyon, Crockett County, Texas.
1982
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Socieo, 53: 13-81.
Ross, Richard E.
1965
The Archeology of Eagle Cave. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Papers 7.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material: Part II. Bulletin of the Texas
1961
Archeolagical Society 31 : 167-205.
Sharer, Harry J.
1975

Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos Region, Texas. American Antiquity
40(2): 148-158.

Shafer, Harry J. and Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr.
1977
Archaeological and Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave Val Verde County, Texas.
Texas A&M University Anthropology Laboratory, Special Series 1.
Woolford, Bess and E. Quillin
1966
The Story of the Witte Memorial Museum. San Antonio Museum Association.

