ANALYSIS OF MAMMALIAN HAIR AND PLANT FIBERS IN
CORDAGE FROM A TEXAS ARCHAIC SHELTER
Glendon H. Weir

ABSTRACT
Cordage of anima! hair and plant fibers from Gobbler Shelter (41CXl17),
an Archaic site located in Crockett County, Texas, were analyzed to determine
from which species of animals and plants these materials came. Mammal hairs
were identified by comparison with modern distributions, by separation into
the rodent-lagomorph group, and by direct comparison with reference materials.
Light and scanning electron microscopy were used to confirm the identifications
of three lagomorph genera (one jackrabbit and two cottontails) which made up
the majority of the hairs in the cordage samples. By a similar methodology,
plant fibers in the cordage were identified as being of Dasylirion (sotol) species
in the majority of the samples. The advantages of using a combination of
methodologies in hair and fiber identification is discussed, and a methodology
by which archeologists can identify similar materials is described.

INTRODUCTION
Gobbler Shelter is located in a small tributary canyon of Live Oak Creek in
Crockett County, Texas. It was discovered in 1974 by Texas Highway Department archeologists who were surveying the proposed right-of-way for Interstate
Highway 10. In January 1975, small matrix samples were removed from a fiber
lens within the shelter and sent to the Texas A&M University Anthropological
Research Laboratories for analyses. The preliminary analyses of artifacts,
animal, and plant remains were reported by Dering and Shafer (1976:210-229),
and the problems of determining seasonatity of the plant remains were discussed.
This report concerns later analyses of animal hairs and plant fibers contained in
the cordage recovered from Gobbler Shelter, with primary emphasis on the
identification of mammalian hairs. The methodology described here can be
modified slightly and applied by archeologists who lack training in hair morphology to identify such materials.
BACKGROUND

The use of hair in the identification of taxonomic groups has been studied
since the nineteenth century (Fraser 1931). In archeology it has been used
most notably since 1942, when Brown (1942) developed a key to the genera of
carnivores north of the Rio Grande for the use of nonspecialists in identifying
mammalian hair.
Today a variety of approaches of varying utility and reliability are used by
archeologists for the identification of mammalian hair. It is the objective of
this paper to describe one such methodology which the writer believes to be
both reliable and useful, and to suggest a practical application of this technique
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

53:131-149

132

Texas Archeological Society

by archeologists who may lack the technical background or not have easy access
to specialists in hair identification.
The types of hairs (Figure 1) present on the bodies of the majority of mam:
reals are: (1) fur hair, which serves to insulate the body, is typically the most
abundant type of hair on the body, and is relatively short, fine, and often curly;
(2) guard hair, which protects the fur hair and the skin from abrasian, is most
abundant on the trunk of the body, least abundant on the extremities, and is
larger and more robust than fur hair; and (3) the vibrissae, or whiskers, which
are stiff, straight hairs that arise directly from special hair follicle cells and serve
as sensory probes (Trevor-Deutsch 1970). The cuticular scales of the vibrissae
are typically worn off as a result of abrasion, and thus these hairs are of little
diagnostic value.
Normally, hair consists of three concentric layers, as illustrated in Figure 2.
These layers consist of: (1) an inner central medulla, made up of shrunken
cells and air spaces, with characteristic patterns that vary widely and distinctively among mammals; (2) a surrounding cortex, which contains the pigment
giving hair its color; and (3) the cuticle, the outermost layer of overlapping
scales, the patterns of which also vary widely and characteristically among
mammals.
It is generally agreed that the medullary cell and cuticular scale patterns
of the guard hairs (Figure 3) are the most diagnostic characteristics for use
in hair identification (Trevor-Deutsch 1970).
METHODS AND MATERIALS

Hair Samples
Two different methodologies are used in identifying mammalian hair. One
involves the development and use of hair keys to make identifications, and the
other involves the direct comparison of hair samples with comparative reference
collection hair materials. Both methods accomplish the same ends, but the
writer believes the methodology of Trevor-Deutsch (1970), who uses a combination of these two methods in a four-step key for identification of mammal
guard hairs, and also uses comparative reference materials, to be the most
reliable and useful procedure.
This method uses four dichotomous steps to arrive at the identification of
hair samples (Table 1). The first step narrows the group of animals to be considered to the characteristic mammal population of a given area. The second
step separates the rodents and lagomorphs (hares, rabbits, and pikas-smatl
tailless, harelike mammals of the genus Oehotona found in the mountains of
North America and Eurasia-sometimes called conys) from the nonrodent
mammals by means of a diagnostic characteristic of the guard hair medulla
known as the rodent base (Mathiak 1938). The third step uses the length of
the guard hair to separate the larger from the smaller animals in the lagomorph
group. In archeological samples it is not always possible to use guard hair
length as a diagnostic characteristic, since guard hairs are often broken and
fragmented. The fourth step, final identification as to genus, is then accomplished by comparing the sample hairs with reference materials.
For this report, however, the initial step was the direct comparison of sample
hair with reference material, first using light microscopy, which allows "tuning
through" some layers of the hair, making it possible to detect characteristic

Weir-Analysis of Mammalian Hair

133

Fur Hair

blade

neck

Guard Hair

Figure 1.
Drawings of typical mammalian fur and guard hairs with characteristic structures identified (adapted from Williams 1938; Trevor-Deutsch 1970).

iL__
Cuticular

ii
-- Medulla
I]]i!

~~~--oor,,~

lil!

Cuticular
--Scale

-- Medulla

~
A

Figure 2. Drawings showing transverse and longitudinal cross sections of typical
mammalian hairs (adapted from Hausman 1920, 1924;Trevor-Deutsch 1970).
(a) Magnification ca. 400X; (b) magnification ca. 200X.

134

Texas Archeological Society

:

-;X=-

/’~ :N,

A

B

C

D

E

G

F

H

Cuticular Patterns

5
Medullary

Patterns

Figure 3. Drawings showing guard hair cuticular and medullary patterns used in
hair identification (adapted from Hausman 1920, 1924; Trevor-Deutsch 1970).
Magnification ca. 100X.

structures on the inside of the hair. Scanning electron microscopy, because of
its superior ability to detect details of surface structure, such as the diagnostic
scalar patterns of the cuticle, was then used to confirm these identifications.
The comparative reference material used in this study was a representative
collection of hair from mammals whose modern distribution includes the generalized area of Gobbler Shelter (Davis 1974:229, 236, 241; Hall and Kelson
1959:261, 264, 283). Although it is not certain that past and present distributions of these animals are the same, the modern fauna were believed to be
the most likely candidates for the lagomorph population of this area in the past.
A combination of methods was used to investigate the hairs and fibers in the
cordage from Gobbler Shelter. First, preserved hairs selected at random from
the cordage were examined under a Nikon SKE II light microscope equipped
with a Kohler illuminating system, in order to determine the presence or absence
of the diagnostic lagomorph hair morphology. This consists of the so-called
rodent base (Figure 4), referring to a characteristic of rodent-lagomorph guard
hair anatomy in which there is a diagnostic regularity of medullary cell size,

Weir-Analysis of Mammalian Itair

13 5

,..r,

~g
SZha~
Oq-~

I~’~ ~l I~

~l

"~"tZJ

t~

I/"

~/I

I

~.~ ~
O

~
0

°,,-i

~D

4.a
+,aq.,.~

eo
¢rJ

136

Texas Archeological Society

Medullar Cells

Figure 4. Diagram showing the structural basis of Mathiak’s rodent base, which
consists of medullary cell patterns that are small, regularly arranged, and similar
in shape. They are found in rodents and lagomorphs, but not in other mammals.
(After Trevor-Deutsch 1970). Magnification ca. 300X.

shape, and arrangement (Mathiak 1938). Next, a very dilute solution of distilled
water and liquid soap (ca. 50 parts water to 1 part soap) was used as a mounting
medium in order to view the internal medullary cell pattern under the microscope, since air within the medulla often renders its structure obscure. The small
amount of soap in the water allows the solution to penetrate the medulla,
making its fine structure visible.
The individual hairs in the sample that had the rodent base were then examined by light microscopy (scanning electron microscopy at this stage would
require specimen preparation) for the characteristic medullary cell patterns that
would confirm the identifications.
Mammalian hair samples that were in a similar state of preservation as those
treated for light microscopy, as discussed above, were then cleaned in carbon
tetrachloride (or other comparable but nontoxic solvents) and prepared for scanning electron microscopic examination, in order to further refine and confirm
the light microscopy identifications. Typical mammalian comparative reference
hairs from animals whose modern ranges include the Gobbler Shelter area, and
well-preserved samples of mammalian hair selected from representative cordage
material, were then mounted on scanning electron microscopy specimen stubs.
These standard 10 mm aluminum stubs were cleaned first with xylene to remove
any wax or grease, then with acetone and absolute (100 percent) ethanol alcohol
to remove the xylene solvent. The reference and sample specimens were then
mounted on the stubs in a polyvinyl chloride and methyl ethyl ketone adhesive
and given a gold-palladium coating in a vacuum evaporator in order to prepare
them for examination.

Weir-Analysis of Mammalian Hair

137

--Wall
Lumen
.... Wall
Figure 5. Diagrammatic longitudinal cross section of a typical plant fiber showing the wall and lumen structures (after Bell and King 1944). Greatly enlarged
for purposes of illustration.
Plan t Fibers

Various plant fibers were found in association with the mammalian hair in
the cordage samples. The more intact of these fibers were treated chemically
and viewed under the light microscope in an effort to identify individual plant
fibers, using the methodology of Bell and King (1944:152, 156-158). Samples
of the plant fibers were soaked overnight (ca. 12-16 hours) in a !0 percent
solution of potassium hydroxide (KOH), mounted on glass microscope slides,
and macerated with a spatula. When the plant fibers began to separate, they
were further separated with two dissecting needles. A drop or two of distilled
water was then added, and the slide samples covered with cover slips. The fibers
were then separated on the basis of differing morphology of the lumen (the
inner open space that runs more or less the length of the tubular fibers) (Figure
5). This difference in morphology makes it possible to use a three-step process
(Table 2) to separate the plant fibers of Dasylirion (sotol), Yucca (yucca), and
Nolina (beargrass), all of which have straight fibers. The curved fibers of Agave
(mescal) are more easily distinguished (Figures 6, 7). Identifications of the
plant fibers in the archeological cordage were then made using a light microscope.
Reference and sample specimens of hair and cordage were also examined
and photographed with a JSM-U3 scanning electron microscope. The film used
in photographing the specimens was Tri-X Pan 4 x 5 inch professional film at an
acceleration voltage of 15 kilovolts with an f-stop of 11 and a scanning speed
of 50 lines per minute.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Hair Samples

On the basis of gross hair morphology and frequency of appearance in the
cordage samples from Gobbler Shelter it was first tentatively concluded that
mammalian hair of the lagomorph group (Figure 8), together with a few plant
fibers, were the major components of the samples.
The representative sample materials were then examined under a light microscope and, based on the diagnostic features discussed above, the lagomorph
hairs were tentatively identified as cottontail and jackrabbit species. The plant
fibers were similarly identified as probable sotol and/or yucca species. The
sample materials were again examined with a scanning electron microscope, and
the probable identifications were confirmed as being mainly Lepus californieus

138

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Key for the Determination of Agave (Mescal), Yucca (Yucca),
Nolina (Beargrass), and DasylMon (Sotol) Species Plant Fibers
(after Bel! and King 1944)
Agave spp.

-Fiber
curved

-Lumen as wide as
or wider than wall. -- Yucca spp.
(thinqeaved)
Wall to lumen
ratio 1 : 1

Lumen clearly
distinct through
entire length

Sample

Lumen present and
clearly distinct
--Yucca spp.
throughout the
length of the fiber,
(thick-leaved)
but is extremely
narrow. Wall to
lumen ratio 2:1

Fiber
not
-curved

"-Average width of
fiber .015 mm or
more

Lumen not
clearly distinct
through its
entire length;
narrows at intervals to point of
apparent disappearance in
light microscopy

Average width of
fiber .014 mm or
more

--Nolina spp.

--Dasylirion spp.

o
(9

o
O0

0
0
0
o
0

000

0

0000
,") 0
0
0

0
o

B

O0
o
c:~O

0

0

0
°o
0

C

D

Figure 6.
Cross sections of fibers from Agave sp., Yucca sp., Nolina sp., and
Dasylirion sp. Fibers are curved in Agave sp. and straight in Yucca, Nolina. and
Dasylirion sp. Fibers are curved in (a) Agave sp. and straight in (b) Yucca,
(c) Nolina, and (d)Dasylirion spp. (After Bell and King 1944.) Greatly enlarged
for purposes of illustration.

Weir-Analysis of Mammalian Hair

H

A

~

C

J
K

D
E

139

--

L

F

M

G

N

Figure 7.
Drawings of plant fibers showing comparative lengths and shapes:
(a-f) Yucca; (g-i) Nolina; (j-m) Agave; and (n) Dasylirion (after Bell and King
1944). Greatly enlarged for purposes of illustration.

:-.-:..,~.:::..@..:....,.:~

Jackrabbit

Cottontail

Rabbit

Figure 8. Diagrammatic longitudinal cross sections of typical guard hairs from
jackrabbit (Lepus sp.) and cottontail (Sylvilagus sp.) (adapted from Oyer 1946).
Magnification ca. 400X.

140

Texas Archeological Society

Grey (California jackrabbit) hairs, along with a few hairs possibly of Sylvilagus
auduboni Baird (desert cottontail) and Sylvilagus floridanus Allen (eastern
cottontail), based on comparisons with reference specimens. The plant fiber
specimens were found to be mostly DasylMon (sotol) species and/or Yucca
(yucca) species, based on their diagnostic structures under both light and scanning electron microscopy.
The results of these analyses are illustrated in a series of scanning electron
photomicrographs in Figures 9 through 20. These figures are a representative
selection of the numerous reference and sample materials photographed in this
study. Figures 9, 11, 13, 15, and 17 are characteristic reference fur and guard
hairs, while Figures 10, 12, 14, 16, and 18 illustrate typical sample materials.
Figures 9 and 11 are micrographs of reference Lepus californicus Grey
(California jackrabbit) hairs illustrating typical guard hair morphology and
scalar patterns. As seen in the comparative electron micrograph series in Figures
9-10 and 11-12, the first of each pair represents reference material, and the
second, sample material. The typical scalar patterns from reference and sample
materials are displayed in this series of California jackrabbit guard hairs, the
major component of the hair materials in this study. These comparisons confirmed prior identifications by analysis of medullary cell patterns and other
characteristics from the same material by light microscopy.
Similarly, Figures 13 and 15 are micrographs of reference Syh~ilagus auduboni
Baird (Audubon or desert cottontail) guard hair morphology and scalar patterns,
while Figures 14 and 16 are typical similar sample materials from the cordage.
The materials in Figures 17 and 18 represent similar materials for Sylvilagus
floridanus Allen (eastern cottontail), a suspected component of a few of the
hair samples in this study. These comparative electron micrographs (and numerous others taken during this study) serve in Figures 9 through 20 to represent similar confirmed scalar patterns of desert and eastern cottontail guard
hairs from the same materials.
A few additional hairs, apparently from other species of mammals, were
present in the cordage specimens but were not subjected to definitive analyses
or photographed for this report, as these hairs did not have well-preserved
diagnostic features that would allow identifications. The preliminary indications
are that those hairs which lack definitive morphology are otherwise consistent
with deer guard hair morphology.
Plant Fibers
Figures 19 and 20 represent a sample of miscellaneous plant fibers viewed
with scanning electron microscopy and are examples of the cordage sample
plant fiber materials in various stages of preservation. Analyses of a representative selection of the better-preserved fibers in the cordage were made,
leading to their tentative identification as Dasylirion (sotol) or Yucca (yucca)
species, using the criteria discussed above. These plant fiber identifications were
more characteristically seen in light microscopy, as scanning electron microscopy requires special specimen preparation, which can obscure some details.
The plant fibers were found by light microscope examination to compare
favorably with samples of sotol or possibly yucca fiber material in the writer’s
reference collection. The analyses of the plant fiber materials bear out the
difficulties pointed out by Bell and King (1944:156) in distinguishing between
individual fibers of Yucca or Dasylirion species. These probable identifications,

Weir-Analysis of Mammalian Hair

141

however, are consistent with the reference material and with the known modern
plant communities in the Gobbler Shelter area, which includes both plants
(Dering and Shafer 1976). Further, ethnographic sources (Bell and Castetter
1941; Castetter 1935:14; Havard 1895:98-123; Standley 1912:447-463; and
Bourke 1895:41-71) amply document the aboriginal use of both of these plants
in similar prehistoric areas.
CONCLUSIONS
The identification of mammalian hairs preserved in archeological contexts
can be accomplished using the methodology described in this report. This
approach to hair analysis has several advantages to be realized through the use
of a combination of methodo!ogies, as opposed to analysis by means of hair
keys alone or by direct comparison alone. Among these advantages are: (1)
identification of mammalian hair by nonspecialists through initial screening
using readily determinable criteria such as known modern anfinal ranges, hair
morphology, and hair length, followed by direct comparison with hair reference
collections, using criteria that are relatively invariable, objective, and easy to
recognize; (2) a considerable saving of time realized through successive reduction in the amount of reference material to be surveyed; (3) minimal hair
sample preparation through use of simple light microscopy sample preparation
techniques; and (4) the possible further use of techniques such as scanning electron microscopy, which helps specialists obtain better diagnostic detail. In this
regard, a reference collection of scanning electron micrographs can facilitate
ready viewing and comparison of diagnostic detail in sample specimens.
Because every hair to some extent differs from every other hair, some subjectivity and possibility of error exists. The methodology for analysis described
here reduces considerably the potential for error by: (1) successively limiting
the number of animal species to be considered; (2) using broad diagnostic
characteristics that effectively separate major mammalian groups (e.g., the
rodent base); and (3) enabling determination of the range of morphological
variation between species by the use of reference collections of verified typical
hair materials.
Further, the combined use of light microscopy and scanning or other electron
microscopy by specialists would produce more reliable results. It is possible that
with some additional specimen preparation-sectioning hairs and special mounting of these samples-the entire analysis could be conducted using only scanning
electron microscopy, which makes possible a more objective determination of
diagnostic hair patterns and structures and better viewing of diagnostic detail.
This approach and methodology can be applied with similar results to identification of plant fibers-often found with hair materials in archeological contexts-through visual analyses of cross sections of vascular or other plant anatomy, and/or use of reference collections of typical plant fiber materials.
The relative ease of sample preparation and objectivity of the criteria used in
animal hair and plant fiber identification, together with the use of the light
microscopy level of analysis, makes it possible for nonspecialists to apply these
techniques in field or laboratory analyses. Thus, a slight modification of the
procedures described above will allow archeologists who are not trained in hair
morphology or plant anatomy to identify with relative ease many archeological
samples of common animal hairs and plant fibers.

142

Texas A rcheological Society

¯

"~

+.a

Weir-Analysis of Mammalian Hair

143

~o
~.~o

’~ .o

?,2

©

~

~

rm

144

Texas Archeological Society

~ ~.R
~zl ~II

Weir-Analysis of Mammalian Hair

S~z~
o’~

0

° .--.., 4-~

as~

145

146

Texas Archeological Society

~ i¸ ~

~0

,.~.~

i

¯

2:R~
o
~ ;C’,I

Weir-Analysis of Mammalian Hair

0

¯ ~: -~

~o~

~.~

co ;-.~

147

148

Texas Archeological Society
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Appreciation is expressed to Dr. D.J. Schmedly, of the Wildlife and Fisheries
Department, Texas A&M University, who furnished the typical mammalian hair
reference material, and to Dr. H.J. Shafer, of the Anthropology Program, Texas
A&M University, who made the cordage specimens available to the writer.
Facilities-including the use of the scanning electron microscope-were made
available through the courtesy of Dr. E.L. Thurston, Director of the Electron
Microscopy Center, Texas A&M University. The manuscript was reviewed by
Drs. V.M. Bryant, Jr., and Dr. H.J. Shafer, of the Anthropology Program, and
their suggestions were appreciated by the writer. However, any errors of fact
or interpretation are solely the responsibility of the author.

REFERENCES CITED
Bell, W.H., and E.F. Castetter
1941 The utilization of yucca, sotol and beargrass by the aborigines of the
American Southwest. University of New Mexico Bulletin, Biological
Series 5(5).
Bell, W.H. and C.J. King
1944 Methods for the identification of the leaf fibers of mescal (Agave),
yucca (Yucca), beargrass (Nolina) and sotol (Dasylirion). American
Antiquity 10(2): 150-160.
Bourke, J.G.
1895 The folk-foods of the Rio Grande Valley and of northern Mexico.
Journal of American Folklore 8:4 !-71.
Brown, F.M.
1942 The microscopy of mammalian hairs for anthropologists. Proceedings
of the American Philosophical Society 85:250-274.
Castetter, E.F.
1935 Uncultivated native ptant foods used as sources of food. University
of New Mexico Bulletin no. 266.
Davis, W.B.
1974 Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Bulletin 41
(rev. ed.).
Dering, J.P., and H.J. Shafer
1976 Analysis of matrix samples from a Crockett County rockshelter.
Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society 47:209-229.
Fraser, D.A.
1931 Winter pelage of the adult albino rat. American Journal of Anatomy
47:55-87.
Hall, E.R., and K.R. Nelson
1959 Mammals of North America (Vol. I). Ronald Press, New York.
Hausman, L.A.
1920 Structural characteristics of the hair of mammals. American Naturalist 54:496-523.
1924

Further studies of relationships of structural characteristics of mammarian hairs. American Naturalist 58:544-557.

Weir-Analysis of Mammalian Hair
Havard, V.
1895 Food plants of the North American Indians.
Bulletin 22:98-123.

149

Torrey Botanical Club

Mathiak, H.
1938 A key to the mammals of southern Michigan.
Management 2:251-269.

Journal of Wildlife

Oyer, Earl R.
1946 Identification of mammals from studies of hair structure.
actions of the Kansas Academy of Science 49:(2):155-160.

Tr’ans-

Standley, P.C.
1912 Some useful plants of New Mexico. Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution, 1911, pp. 447-463.
Trevor-Deutsch, B.
1970 Hair methodology and its use in the identification of taxonomic
groups. Unpublished MS thesis, McGill University, Montreal.
Williams, C.
1938 Aids in the identification of mole and shrew hairs. Journal of Wildlife Management 2:239-250.

