The Swan Lake Site (41AS16) On Copano Bay,
Aransas County, Texas: Settlement,
Subsistence, and Sea Level
Elton R. Prewitt and Jeffrey G. Paine

ABSTRACT
Archeological investigations at the Swan Lake site (41AS16) in Aransas County, Texas, yielded preliminary data regarding the cultural and
natural history of the Coastal Bend region. Cultural materials at the site
include substantial quantities of shellfish, fish, and terrestrial animal remains. These materials date from roughly 6000 B.P. to 300 or 400 B.P. and
are interpreted as residue left by prehistoric fishermen. A few black drum
(Pogonias cromis) otoliths, together with other evidence, indicate that the
Swan Lake Site was occupied seasonally, usually from late winter to early
summer. Oysters (Crassostreavirginica) and fish were the staplemeat. The
site illustrates one segment of a settlement/subsistence model that was
confined to the littoral.
Holocene eolian, storm, and tidal sediments at the site reveal much about
its natural history. Most of the cultural materials were found within two
inactive clay dunes adjacent to an abandoned wind-tidal flat. For the windtidal flat and clay dunes to have been active, relative sea level probably would
have been 0.9 to 1.2 meters higher than at present. Cultural materials in the
dunes indicate that this sea-level highstand may have begun by 4500 B.P.
After sea level fell to near its present level, the wind-tidal flat and clay dunes
became inactive, and a soil formed. Radiocarbon dates on the buried claydune soil indicate that dune growth stopped by about 2500 B.P. Since that
time, loessic sediments have blanketed the abandoned tidal flat and clay
dunes.
A preliminary version of this paper was presented at the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Texas Archeological Society at Laredo, Texas, October 31 to
November 2, 1986.

INTRODUCTION
Archeological testing of the Swan Lake site was performed in 1985 by
personnel from Prewitt and Associates, Inc. of Austin, Texas (Prewitt, Lisk, and
Howard 1987). Sponsored by the Galveston District, U. S. Army Corps of
Engineers, the testing assessed the eligibility of the site for inclusion on the National
Register. The Swan Lake site, designated 41AS 16 by the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, is in southwestern Aransas County on the Copano Ranch
owned by Dr. George Strickhausen III, of Corpus Christi. The work was supervised
by Susan V. Lisk, under the direction of Elton R. Prewitt.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

148

Texas Archeological Society

The site is on two low knolls on the western shoreline of Swan Lake, an inlet
on the south side of Copano B ay near the mouth of the Aransas River (Figure 1). The

Boyside

Rockport

PROJECT
AREA

Aronsos
Pass

¯

012
I

0

F-’-d

MEXICO

4
I

kilometers
I
2

4

miles
PSAI/SZ/SLH

Figure 1. Regional location map, Swan Lake site, 41AS16, Aransas County, Texas.

two knolls differ in size and in the amounts of cultural material on the surface. Both
the smaller, eastern knoll and the larger, western knoll are surrounded by a low,
hummocky area, except for the area where the Swan Lake shoreline truncates the
eastern knoll. Five distinct areas comprise the Swan Lake site (Figure 2). Area 1

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site

149

LEGEND
x

Backhoe Trench

o

Excavation Unit

13

+

Permanent Grid Marker

+

Grid Point

NIIO0

WIO00

6x

~::ii!~ Site Area

AREA I

/
NIO00
W/O00

N900
wl350+ /

N900

WII50

Ngo0

WlOOO.,p

14

AREA

4
52

AREA 2

/

N850/

/

GRIO

AREA 5

/////

0

25 50

f

I. . . I

I00

]

meters
Contour Interval=O.Sm
PBA//8 7/SL H

Elevations approximate mean sea level

Figure 2. Site map, Swan Lake site, 41AS16.

is on the eastern knoll; Area 2 is on the deflated shoreline, extending southwestward
from Area 1; Areas 3 and 4 are on the west-central and southern flanks of the western
knoll; Area 5 is on the shoreline just south of the larger knoll.
The Swan Lake site is contained within Holocene eolian deposits that rest on
the Pleistocene BeaumontFormation (Brown et al. 1976:16-21). Soils on the knolls
are sandy loams; clays occur in the surrounding low-lying areas (Guckian and
Garcia 1979:53-55). Vegetation is typical of the region, with thickets of mesquite
and other thorny shrubs on the knolls and a prickly pear-midlevel grass association
on the fiats (Guckian and Garcia 1979:33). The tidal marshes and shallow waters

150 Texas Archeological Society
of Swan Lake support communities of cordgrass and other salt-tolerant grasses
(White et al. 1983:70-81). The humid subtropical climate has two periods of peak
precipitation, April through June, and September through October. Persistent
southeasterly winds are interrupted during the winter by strong northerly winds
associated with the passage of cold fronts. Average temperatures vary from 92° F
in August to 45° F in January (Guckian and Garcia 1979:1-2, 82-83).
The fauna comprise both aquatic and terrestrial assemblages. A wide variety
of fish and shellfish inhabit the shallow bays and inlets. Oyster, scallop, sunray
venus, and whelk are some of the more important shellfish. Small fish such as
croaker, anchovy, and silversides are the most abundant vertebrate groups. Seatrout,
redfish, black drum, sea catfish, and porgy, which represent the economic groups
(Gunter 1944; Calnan 1980) are plentiful. Terrestrial fauna include a variety of
gastropods and vertebrates such as gopher, field mouse, skunk, deer, and other small
mammals. An array of reptiles, amphibians, and crustaceans live on and near the
site area, and there are also many species of waterfowl, including large numbers of
migratory birds.
The Swan Lake site was recorded by George C. Martin and Wendell Potter in
1929 during their extensive survey around Copano Bay and the Live Oak Peninsula
(Martin n.d.). In 1967, Edmund Page, of the Coastal Bend Archeological Society,
visited the site (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, County Files). It was
surveyed for the first time by a professional archeologist (Warren 1984) when
subdivision of the Copano Ranch was anticipated. Corps of Engineers archeologists
and the S tate Historic Preservation Officer concurred with Warren that the site was
eligible for nomination to the National Register, and, in 1985, the Corps contracted
with Prewitt and Associates, Inc. to gather data at the site with which to obtain a
determination of eligibility from the Keeper of the Register in Washington, D. C.
The Swan Lake site was studied through a program of machine and hand testing
combined. Machine testing consisted of the excavation of 32 backhoe trenches
averaging about 3 meters long and 1 meter deep. Trenches were excavated on the
knolls to supplement surface observations, and around the flanks of the knolls to
define site boundaries. Other trenches, located off the knolls, determined the
integrity of site areas 2 and 5 and exposed areas lacking cultural deposits.
After trenching was completed, one wall of each trench was cleaned, studied,
and recorded. This information was used to select areas for hand-excavated test
pits. Five 1 x l-meter units were dug adjacent to trenches, largely in 5-cm arbitrary
levels corresponding to the stratigraphy observed in the trenches. There were three
test pits in Area 1, and one each in Areas 3 and Area 4. All hand-excavated fill was
water-screened through nested quarter- and sixteenth-inch sieves.
STRATIGRAPHY
Both Pleistocene and Holocene sediments occur at the Swan Lake site. The
strata are discussed from oldest to youngest.

Prewitt and Paine -- The Swan Lake Site

151

Beaumont Formation Fluvial-deltaic Deposits
The oldest unit at the site is the late Pleistocene Beaumont Formation (Figures
3, 4), which is a fluvial-deltaic deposit (Brown et al. 1976). The Beaumont is
recognized by its tan-to--orange color, abundant caliche, and sandy clay composition. It was probably deposited during the S angamonian Interglacial (Winker 1979)
at roughly 107,000 to 128,000 B.P. (Moore 1982; Imbrie et al. 1984), when sea level
was near its present level. The formation was weathered and eroded during the
Wisconsinen Glaciation, when sea level was as much as 150 meters below present
sea level (Frazier 1974).
Before dissection by streams, the Beaumont was relatively flat lying, rising
slightly near channels. Topographic relief on the Beaumont of at least 2.5 meters
at the site (Figures 3, 4) indicates that postdepositional erosion has taken place.
Modem topography mimics the Beaumont surface; the top of the Beaumont is
higher under the two knolls comprising the Swan Lake site. The top of the
Beaumont is higher on the western knoll (3.8 meters elevation) than on the eastern
knoll (2.8 meters elevation).
Holocene Sediments
Holocene sediments cover the Beaumont across most of the site (Figures 3, 4).
They are generally coarser than Beaumont deposits, are light to dark gray, and may
contain caliche and cultural material. These sediments range between 42 cm and
more than 1.1 meter in thickness. Clay dunes, wind-tidal flats, and loessic sheets
are the three major Holocene depositional units at the site. The Holocene sediments
also contain three significant shell horizons.
Clay Dunes
The knolls are formed by clay dunes that were deposited on the eroded surface
of the Beaumont (Figures 3, 4). These silty clay dunes contain cultural material and
have abrupt upper boundaries and some soil development. At the top of the dunes
is a blocky, dark, organic-rich soil zone a few centimeters thick, underlain by a
texturally similar but less organic zone. Sparse caliche has formed in the lower part
of the 15- to 60-cm-thick dune deposit.
Though not exposed at the surface, the clay dunes can be mapped on aerial
photographs. The western knoll has an oval outline, elongate from northeast to
southwest (Figure 2). The eastern knoll has a similar shape, but the oval is truncated
at the Swan Lake shoreline. Cultural debris found within the clay dunes included
burned clay nodules, bones, charcoal flecks, and scattered marine shells.
Wind-tidal Flats

A depositional unit not found on the knolls is found in the topographic low
between the knolls. This unit is stratigraphically equivalent to the clay dunes, but
has a coarser sediment, lighter color and is locally laminated. In addition, the
elevation of the top of the unit (about 1.8 meters) is consistent across the low. These
sediments probably were deposited in a wind-tidal flat similar to Egery Flats (Figure

152 Texas Archeological Society

,4
O

~E

<

O

o
[J

~4
~0

LE

D
X

~J
i
m

la^al OaS

aAoqo S~a~aLU

Prewitt and Paine -- The Swan Lake Site

153

,4
k:I:

t~

0
CO

0

&
0

0

]::j ° /

-4

~:L’~,"

"A ;",:"

F-

q
~’-

Lr)

.!

~
rO

0
rr)

~)
~i

0
,,4
];3A~I

O~S

~
~

eAoqo

0

S~;IIB*U.I

154

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

2). The Swan Lake tidal flat is southeast of the western clay dune and was the
probable source of sediment for the growing dune. The wind-tidal flat appears to
be devoid of cultural material despite its stratigraphic equivalence to the clay dunes.
Because the tidal flat would have been periodically inundated during growth and
human occupation of the clay dunes, the absence of cultural material is consistent
with a tidal flat interpretation.
Loessic Sediments
The most recent deposit in the area is also the most uniform (Figures 3,4). This
deposit is composed of well-sorted, silt-sized particles that are bound together
weakly and rest unconformably on inactive Holocene clay dunes and wind-tidal
flats. This unit is found at the surface, is 7 to 47 cm thick, and contains relatively
few shells and other cultural materials. Its areal extent, sorting, and lack of cohesion
suggest that it is an eolian loesslike deposit, laid down when silt-laden wind was
slowed by vegetation. Deposition probably has continued to the present.
Shell Horizons
There are three significant shell horizons within the Holocene section at the
Swan Lake Site. The oldest is a dense storm-winnowed shell lens that contains
pockets of shell hash; it is a few centimeters thick and lies directly on the Beaumont
underneath the eastern clay dune in Area 1 (Figure 3). Cultural debris representing
an early occupation at the site is scattered among the whole and fragmented marine
shells comprising this deposit. Thicker but less dense accumulations of shell occur
among clay dune sediments higher in the Holocene section (Figures 3, 4). These
shell deposits, one on each knoll (Areas 1 and 4), contain abundant cultural material
and are probably contemporaneous. Their presence in clay dune sediments
indicates that humans discarded shells while the clay dune was actively expanding.
The third shell horizon is more sparsely distributed in the loessic sediments in Areas
1, 3, and 4 which overlie the clay dunes. Intermixed with other cultural debris, the
shells indicate continued human use during deposition of the loessic sediments after
growth of the clay dune had ended.
MATERIAL CULTURE AND FAUNAL REMAINS
The artifacts recovered during the testing of the Swan Lake site are divided into
four major groups: lithics, ceramics, bones, and shells. The 56 lithic pieces consist
of two arrow points, seven dart points, one drill/perforator, two biface fragments,
two unifaces, three cores, 10 pieces of edge-modified debitage, and 29 pieces of
unmodified debitage. Both arrowpoints lack their stems but are probably Perdiz
(Suhm and Jelks 1962:283; Turner and Hester 1985:187). The dart points include
four Matamoros, one Catan, one Abasolo, and one Bell (Suhm and Jelks
1962:165,175,215; Turner and Hester 1985:61,72,78,122). One arrowpoint (Fig.
5, a) is from loessic sediments in Area 1; the other (Fig. 5, b) is from the surface in
Area 5. One Matamoros point (Figure 5, c) is from dredge spoil taken from Area
1, and the other three (Figure 5, d-f) are from the surface of Area 2. The Catan

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site

155

(1

b

c

d

g

/7
0
i

I
i

2
i
centimeters

4
1

Figure 5. Lithic artifacts from 41AS16: a-b, Perdiz (?) arrowpoints; c-f, Matamoros dart
points; g, Catan dart point; h, Abasolo dart point; i, Bell dart point; j, drill/perforator; k-l,
biface fragments; m-n, unifaces; o, expended core.

156

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

e

d

G

b

C

o
I

I
I

2
l

4

I

centimeters

g
Figure 6. Ceramic, bone, and shell artifacts from 41AS 16: a. Rockport Black-on-Gray body
sherd; b, Rock.oft Ware rim sherd; c, antler billet; d, possible antler fine tool; e, asphaltumpaintedbone fragment; f, modifiedBusyconcontrarium, Group A; g, modifiedB, contrarium,
Group B

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site

157

b

f

d

I
2
I
I
centimeters

4
I

h

Figure 7.41AS16 Shell artifacts; modified Busycon contrarium., from 41AS16: a, Group
C; b, Group D; c, Group E; d, Group F; e, Group G; f, Group H; g, Group I; h, Group J; i, Group
K.

158

Texas Archeological Society

(Figure 5, g) is from the upper shell horizon of the clay dune in Area 1, and the
Abasolo (Figure 5, h) is from the shell-poor zone of the clay dune. The Bell point
(Figure 5, i) is from the surface of Area 2. The drill (Figure 5, j) and both biface
fragments (Figure 5, k-l) were found within the upper shell horizon in the clay dune,
and the two unifaces (Figure 5, m-n) are from the winnowed shell and loessic
sediments in Area 1. One core is from the upper shell horizon of the clay dune in
Area 1, and the other two are from the surface, one in Area 1 and the other (Figure
5, o) in Area 2. One piece of edge-modified debitage is from the surface of Area 1
and one is from the surface of Area 5; the remainder are from excavations in Area
1: two in the winnowed shell, one in shell-poor clay dune deposits, three in the upper
shell horizon of the clay dune, and two in the loessic sediments. All of the
unmodified debitage is from excavated contexts: one in the winnowed shell, two
in the shell-poor clay dune deposits, thirteen in the upper shell horizon of the clay
dune, and thirteen in loessic sediments. One is from loessic sediments in Area 3,
and four are from loessic sediments in Area 4; the remainder are from Area 1.
Six small ceramic sherds, five from Area 3 and one from Area 4, were found
in loessic sediments. The sherds (Figure 6, a-b) have sandy paste, and one is bone
tempered. The interiors of four are coated with asphaltum. All of them can be
classified as Rockport ware sherds (Suhm and Jelks 1962:131-136).
Three bone artifacts consist of an antler butt billet (Figure 6, c), an antler tine
flaking tool (Figure 6, d), and an unidentified bone fragment (deer size) encircled
by a single painted black asphaltum stripe (Figure 6, e). The billet is from backhoe
excavations in Area 1 and is probably from either the upper shell zone of the clay
dune or from overlying loessic sediments. The other two are from loessic sediments
in Area 3.
The 310 modified or possibly modified marine shells comprise the largest
artifact category. Five species are represented--Busycon contrarium, B. spiratum,
Pleuroploca gigantea, Fasciolaria lilium, and Macrocallista nimbosa. The 177
lightning whelks are divided into 17 categories and the 119 sunray venus clams are
divided into 10 categories. The fourpear whelks, fiveFlorida horse conchs, and five
banded tulip conchs are similar to groups within the lightning whelk categories.
Seventy-six of the lightning whelks represent variations of what traditionally have
been called kill holes (Figures 6, f-g and 7, a-i), 82 represent various columella
modifications, and 16 are combinations of whorl and columella modifications. The
columella modifications generally consist of abrasion, snapping, or both, on the
anterior ends, but some are also abraded on the posterior ends to form small pointed
implements. Functionally, these categories may represent a suite of oyster exploitation tools such as shucking wedges and picks (single-tine oyster forks). In
contrast, those with kill holes only may represent net weights for use with various
fishing devices.
Seven of the sunray venus clams are chipped into what traditionally are
recognized as scrapers (Figure 8, a). The chipping is along lateral edges and is
similar to the chipping found on lithic items. Another 27 may have served similar
functions, but are not as clearly chipped (Figure 8, b). Seven are elongated and
pointed on one or both ends (Figure 8, c). These appear to be sharpened and are

Prewitt and Paine m The Swan Lake Site

~:f. >..

159

. . ,. ~

b

\
/

d

o

o
I,

I
I

2
I
centimeters

4
I

e

Figure 8: Shell artifacts; modified Macrocallista nimbosa from 41AS 16: a, Group A; b,
Group B; c, Group E; d, Group H; e, Group J.

160 Texas Archeologicat Society
tentatively interpreted as oyster knives (they were inserted between the oyster
valves after the valves were pried open with one of the whelk shuckers and were
used to detach the animal from one valve to extract the meat). The largest category
of sunray venus artifacts is 47 small triangular pieces. Some of these apparently are
the broken ends of the presumed oyster knives (Figure 8, d), whereas others may be
shell projectile points (Figure 8, e) and other tools.
One feature revealed in the excavations was a cluster of whelk shells in an area
of burned oyster shells near the bottom of the upper shell horizon of the clay dune
in Area 1. Associated with the feature were various other shells, bone fragments,
and burned clay lumps. The association of the unburned whelk shells is difficult to
interpret, but the burned oyster shells and burned clay lumps seem to indicate the
presence of a hearth. Two other pitlike features were investigated, one in Area 1 and
one in Area4. Both were thought at first to be possible burial or storage pits but were
found later to be animal burrows.
The unmodified faunal remains consist of shells and bones. Oysters account
for more than 75 percent of the more than 183 kg of shell. The 13 remaining species
are dominated by lightning whelks (about 3 percent) and Atlantic bay scallops
(about 2 percent). Other groups comprise no more than about 1 percent each of the
total. Except for apple murex, which is a continental shelf species, all the species
represented are common in bay environments (Table 1). Most of the species prefer
low-salinity bays, but some, such as the horse oyster, prefer high-salinity habitats.
The economic species are oyster, whelk, scallop, sunray venus clam, and conch.
The hooked mussels and cross-barred venus clams are common on oyster reefs, and
their introduction to the site probably was incidental to oyster exploitation.
The snail shells recovered represent common terrestrial and aquatic species
expected in the region. These are dominated by the S outh Texas tree snail,Rabdotus
alternatus (Tables 2, 3).
The nearly 5,000 bone fragments (Table 4) represent an array of aquatic,
terrestrial, and avian species whose habitats are consistent with the site’s location
Table

1.

Names and Habitats of Mollusc Shells at 41AS16

Latin Name1

Common Namet

Fasciolaria liliurn
Pleuroploca gigantea
Busycon spiratum
B. contrarium3
Murex pomurn

Banded tulip shell
Florida horse conch
Pear whelk
Lightning whelk
Apple murex

Anadara transverso
lschadium recurvum
Argopecten arnplicostatus
Crassostrea virginica
Ostrea equestris
Rangia cuneata
Macrocallista nimbosa
Chitone cancellata
Mercenaria campechiensis texana

Transverse ark
Hooked mussel
Atlantic bay scallop
Eastern oyster
Horse oyster
Common Rangia
Sunray venus
Cross-barred venus
Texas quahog

1 Andrews 1981
2 Parker 1960
3 Abbott 1968

Habitat2
Inlet-influenced1
Inlet-influenced1
Inlet-influenced1
Bay margins3
Intermediate continental shelf
(or shallow water)3
Inlet-influenced3
Low-salinity oyster reef
Open sound or lagoon margin
Low-salinity oyster reef
High-salinity oyster reef
River-influenced, low salinity
Inletinfluenced1
Open sound orlagoon margin
Open sound or lagoon margin

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site
Table

2.

Snail

Species Recovered from Quarter-inch
Samples, Unit 1, Area 1

161

Screen

Zone
Species

5/6

Littorina irrorata
Helicina orbiculata
Truncatella pulchella1
Succinea sp.1
Helicodiscus singleyanus1
Rabdotus alternatus
Thysanophora horniI
Polygyra texasiana
Praticolella berlandieriana

4

3
3
11
8
0
7
6
8
....
....
....
0
213
69
16
....
0
0

7
56

11
5

8
5

1 Shells of this species are too small to be retained on the quarter-inch screen.

Table

3.

Snail

Species

Recovered

Samples,

Unit

from
1,

Sixteenth-inch

Area

Screen

1

Zone
Species

Littorina irrorata
ltelicina orbiculata
Truncatella pulchella
Succinea sp.
Helicodiscus singleyanus
Rabdotus alternatus
Thysanophora horni
Polygyra texasiana
Praticolella berlandieriana

4

5/6

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

3

Ad

Im

Ad

0
38
2
0
1
15
4
47
46

22
2
2
0
47
1
27
17

0
27
0
0
0
39
4
33
52

2
Im
7
1
5
0
8
5

Ad
0
37
1
0
2
48
0
20
58

Im

17
0
3
0
21
13
15

Ad-Adult
Im-Immature

on the coastal littoral (Table 5). Fish bones are the most numerous, including ray,
gar, and a variety of advanced rayfins such as sea catfish, porgy, croaker, and
burrfish. Notable among these are sheepshead, seatrout, redfish, and black drum.
With the exception of the sheepshead, which prefers a nearshore open gulf habitat,
all the species inhabit bays during some part of the year. Those useful for seasonlity
purposes include cownose ray, redfish, black drum, and striped burrfish, all of
which are most common during the spring and summer months.
An analysis of the 15 black drum otoliths recovered generally indicates late
spring-early summer harvest (Appendix), but some variation is suggested by the
vertical distribution of the otoliths. The two specimens from the winnowed shell
suggest late winter-early spring harvest, but the three from the shell-poor clay dune
deposits suggest late winter to early summer. The 10 from the upper shell horizon

162

Texas ArcheologicaI Society
Table 4.
from

Summary of Faunal Remains Recovered
Excavation Units (Raw Frequencies)
Areas 3 & 4 (Units 3, 5)
Zone

Area 1 (Units 1, 2, 6)
Zone

516

4

3

Total

513
1
12
141
39

93
4
65
4
14

12
10
4

2,951
8
16
1,101
11
132

Lizard

Snake
Alligator
Bird
Unidentified mammal
Shrew
Skunk
Javelina
Deer
Bison
Dolphin
Rat
Gopher
Rabbit

1
3
48
4
7
66
7
1
.....
10
1
34
3
5
3
g
43
7
15
148
6
1
....
1
....
1
6
4
3
16
1
.....

136
1
56
227
1
1

Common name
Unidentified
Ray
Gar/bowf’m
Rayfin
Frog/toad
Turtle

516

4

3

2

112

116

65

26

1,669
5
722
7
47

-

29
2

-

1

-

-

436
2
69

1
-

......
8
1
10
1
3
1
2
10

29
1
1
19
1
16

of the clay dune indicate a continuation of the late winter-early summer pattern, but
one specimen appears to have been harvested during the summer. The sizes of the
fish can be estimated from their age; only four of the otoliths are from fish more than
four years old. The fish probably weighed about 1 kg.
Turtles and snakes are the predominant reptiles, but one alligator bone and a
few lizard bones were found. Unfortunately, none of the bird bones are identifiable
to species, but a variety of sizes appears to be represented. Similarly, most of the
mammal bones are too fragmentary for species identification, but deer dominates
the identifiable bones. One specimen each of javelina, bison, and dolphin are
represented in the collection. Roughly equal amounts of bone were found in the
winnowed shell and shell-poor zone of the clay dune. The greatest quantity came
from the upper shell horizon of the clay dune; the second-greatest quantity came
from the loessic sediments.
NATURAL HISTORY

Sediments and soils at the Swan Lake site indicate that the depositional
environment has changed significantly during the late Pleistocene and Holocene.
At about 20,000 B.P., the Swan Lake site was an upland area 150 meters above sea
level and more than 100 km inland. Today, itis a coastal lowland essentially at sea
level. The following sequence of paleoenvironments is interpreted from the strata
exposed in trenches and soil cores.

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site
Table 5.

163

Composite Faunal List and Preferred Texas Habitats

Scientific Name

Common Name

Preferred Habitats

Cbondrichthyes
Batoidea
Rhinoptera bonasus

Sharks, rays, skates
Rays, skates,
Cownose ray

Nearshore, estuarine (warm months)

Osteichthyes
Holostei

Bony fish
Gar, bowfin
Gar
Advanced myfin fish
Sea catfish
Sea catfish
Gafftopsail catfish
Porgies

Lepisosteus sp.
Teleostei
Ariidae
Arius felis
Bagre marim~
Sparidae
Archosargus
probatocephalus
Scianidae
Bairdiella chrysto’a

Freshwater, estuarine, nearshore

Estuarine, nearshore
Estuarine, nearshore

Sheepshead
Croakers
Silver perch
Seatrout
Redfish
Black drum
Porcupinefish, burrfish
Striped burrfish
Balloonfish

Estuarine, nearshore
Estuarine, inner shelf

Amphibia
Anura

Frog, salamander
Frog, toad

Freshwater, terrestrial, arboreal

Reptilia Reptiles
Chelonia

Turtles

Freshwater, eatuarine, marine,
terrestrial

Sauria
Ophidia

Lizards
Snakes

Crocodilia
Crocodylidae

Terrestrial, arborial
Freshwater, estuarine, terrestrial,
arboreal

Crocodiles, alligators

Freshwater, estuarine

Cynoscion sp.
Scianops ocellata
Pogonias cromis
Diodontidae
Chilomycterus schoepfi
Diodon sp.

Ayes

Birds

Mammalia

Mammals
Shrews, moles
Least shrew
Carnivores
Weasels, skunks
Striped skunk
Even-toed hoof animals
Collared peccary

Soricomorpha
Cryptotis parva
Carnivora
Mustelidae
Mephitis mephitus
Artiodactyla
Dicotyles tejacu
common
Odocoiletts virginianus
Bison bison
Cetacea
Tursiops truncattts
Rodentia
Neotoma floridana
N. Micropus
Sigmodon hispidus
Geomys sp.
Lagomorpha
Sylvilagus aquaticus
S. floridam~
Lept~ californicus

White-tailed deer
marshes
Bison
Whales
Atlantic bottlenose
dolphin
Rodents
Eastem woodrat
Southern Plains woodrat
Hispid cotton rat
Pocket gophers
Rabbits, hares
Swamp rabbit
Eastern cottontail
Black-tailed jackrabbit

Nearshore
Estuarine
Estuarine, inner shelf
Estuarine, inner shelf
Estuarine

Fields with dense ground cover

Brushy or wooded areas
Brushy semidesert with prickly pear
Woody or brushy areas and coastal
Prairie, woodlands

Nearshore, irmer shelf, estuaries
Woodlands
Semiarid brushy areas
Grasslands, brushy areas
Sandy soils
Swamps and coastal marshes
Brushy areas and grasslands
Prairie and scrublands

164

Texas Archeological Society
Late Pleistocene to Early Holocene

During a period of low sea level at the end of the Pleistocene and the beginning
of the Holocene, streams cut a drainage network into the exposed and weathered
Beaumont Formation. At the Swan Lake site, a minor valley opened southward
between the two Beaumont knolls (Figure 9, a). This valley joined a larger,
eastward-opening valley (now occupied by Swan Lake) south of the site. This
valley in turn entered the deeper ancestral Aransas River valley, which had been
incised from 10 to 20 meters below present sea level under Copano Bay (Wright
1980).
Hoiocene Highstand (Early)
Sea level rose rapidly during the early Holocene, bringing the coastline closer
to the site. Estimates of when marine waters entered present-day Copano Bay
depend on both the depth of stream incision and the sea level curve used for the
calculation. Taking 20 meters as the maximum depth of incision (Wright 1980) and
the sea level curve of Frazier (1974), marine waters would have first entered Copano
Bay about 9000 to 10,000 B.P. Because the valleys near the Swan Lake site were
not deeply incised, saline water reached these areas later. By about 5000 B.P., sea
level was so high that storm waters inundated the area (Figure 9, b). A lens
composed of cultural debris, storm-winnowed marine shells, and shell hash was
deflated onto the Beaumont Formation on the eastern knoll at about this time. The
storm-winnowed shell lens in Area 1 records the first extensive occupation at the
Swan Lake site, preceded only by brief occupation of Area 2 by one or more groups
of hunters before 5000 B.P.

Figure 9: Paleoenvironmental and cultural sequence at the Swan Lake site, 41AS16
a. Small streams drain the weathered and eroded Beaumont Formation during the late
Pleistocene and early Holocene; early Archaic camp in Area 2 ca. 6000 B.P.
b. When sea level nears its present level, middle Archaic occupation occurs in Area 1, leaving
a mass of oyster shells and other cultural debris at about 5000 to 4500 B.P.
c. At the beginning of the highstand, ca. 4500 B.P., wind-tidal fiats develop, storms winnow
and deflate shell/cultural materials in Area 1 onto Beaumont Formation surface, and a low
shell berm develops along shoreline on northeast edge of Area 1.
d. During the highstand, the wind-tidal flat provides sediment for clay dune growth;
occupations occur in Areas 1 and 4 at about 4000 to 3500 B.P.; shell berm on northeast edge
of Area 1 continues to develop.
e. After the highstand, sea level retreats to near modem levels; abandonment of wind-tidal
fiats causes deposition to cease on the clay dunes and allows soil formation to begin; clay dune
depostion begins at lower elevation at about 3000 B.P.
f. Wind blown loesslike sediments blanket Swan Lake Site; occupations continue in Areas
1 through 4, about 2500 to 1000 B.P.
g. Loesslike sediments continue to accumulate across Swan Lake site; later occupations in
Areas 1, 3, 4, and 5, at about 1000 to 300 B.P.
h. Loesslike sediments continue to accumulate across Swan Lake site; Areas 2 and 5 deflate
as modem shoreline develops, beginning about 300 B.P.

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site

",qLW ->- .’;,
.-Q,’ C- ~
,~..\ \2\~ \)\-, I -.~

:>.,-,+’;,.,,,..--,,’;,_.,
, ;.- .,;, ,’~, L~, = ’_,’-

L.’~+.~ ~ ".. ,..

",-’7-,7",7:.’,’-’,"-’.?

.....,~.., ~.:~-.. : ,~ . ~.

165

166 Texas Archeologieal Society
At the end of this rise in sea level, a wind-tidal flat was established at about 1.8
meters elevation between the two knolls at the site (Figure 9, c). If the wind-tidal
flat was active, sea level probably was 0.9 to 1.2 meters higher than at present. This
highstand is also suggested by a possible beach ridge, composed of reworked shells
from the winnowed shell layer, on the northeast edge of the eastern knoll.
Holocene Highstand (Late)
After the tidal flat was established, altemate periods of wetting and drying
caused by frontal passage or other infrequent atmospheric events, produced the
sediment that formed two clay dunes at the Swan Lake site (Figure 9, d). (Clay dunes
form downwind of and adjacent to ephemeral water bodies price 1958], the dunes
receiving eolian sediment when the adjacent water body dries up.) At the Swan
Lake site, the western Beaumont knoll collected sediment from the tidal flat
between the knolls. The source of sediment for the eastern knoll probably was also
a tidal fiat; however, bay-margin erosion has removed it. Erosion of the eastern clay
dune has deflated cultural debris from the dunes onto the Swan Lake shore. The
presence of cultural material in the clay dunes implies that occupation occurred
during dune formation and, therefore, during the Holocene highstand. This
occupation probably began by 4500 B.P. and ended by 3000 B.P.
Post-Holocene Highstand
After sea level fell to near its present level, the tidal flats adjacent to the clay
dunes were abandoned, and no sediment was available to continue dune accretion.
A soil began to form on the abandoned dunes (Figure 9, e), and, although it is
difficult to estimate how long they were exposed to weathering, it was long enough
for a soil profile to develop and for calichification to begin. Radiocarbon dates on
soil fractions from the western clay dune (Tx-5594, 2270-!-_60 B.P., uncorrected) (S.
Valastro, Jr., personal communication, October 1986) indicate that dune growth
ceased by about 2500 B.P., so it appears that sea level must have fallen by that time.
The final Holocene event at the Swan Lake site is the ongoing deposition of a
loesslike sheet of silt over the inactive wind-tidal fiat and clay dunes (Figure 9, fh). Loessic deposition coincided with the most recent occupation of the site
sometime after 1500 B.P.
CULTURAL HISTORY
The data recovered from the Swan Lake site support modest conclusions on
three aspects of its history. These are site function, local settlement/subsistence
model, and regional implications. It seems clear that the site was primarily a fishing
camp. The masses of shells are evidence that shellfishing was especially important
to the inhabitants, and large quantities offish bones attest to the importance of this
food resource. The site afforded ready access to the food resources in Copano Bay
and Swan Lake and also provided limited access to terrestrial resources; the limited
availability of these resources is reflected in the site’s contents.
Primary activities on the site were food preparation and consumption. Other
activities, such as formal stone tool manufacture, were kept to a minimum, and

Prewitt and Paine -- The Swan Lake Site

167

greater emphasis was placed on tools of convenience. The size of the group
inhabiting the site at any one time probably was small, perhaps no more than 25 or
30 people. The range of activities was appropriate to small family groups and
apparently did not include a specialized endeavor such as an all male fishing station.
Based on the limited seasonality data, it is presumed that occupation occurred
primarily during the late winter to early summer or, roughly, from March through
June or July.
From these interpretations, it is possible to construct the beginnings of a local
settlement/subsistence model. The Swan Lake site represents one seasonallyspecific component of this model. Previous investigations along the south shore of
Copano Bay (summarized in Prewitt, Lisk, and Howard 1987:15-25) have revealed
several very large and dense shell midden sites and many more smaller sites on the
order of the Swan Lake site. Seasonality studies are scarce, but the apparent use of
this site as a spring-summer fishing camp indicates that seasonal transhumance,
[See Ricklis, herein, Ed.] with its attendant social implications, was an integral
aspect of the prehistoric use of the area.
It is suggested that the littoral zone around Copano Bay was inhabited by small
groups of fishermen that moved periodically on a seasonal basis or whenever the
resources at a given locality were depleted, or were perceived to be depleted. These
small groups probably joined to form maximum bands at some time between late
summer and early winter. Larger shell midden sites around Copano Bay, such as
Kent-Crane (Campbell 1952), are assumed to represent periods of the year when the
groups congregated into maximum bands--the time when goods were exchanged,
marriages were arranged, and myriad other social rites and activities were conducted.
Little is known of the early historic aboriginal groups in this area, but Campbell
and Campbell (1981:12-13) place the Quitoles in the region extending from Copano
Bay southward toward Nueces Bay. The Quitoles are thought to have stayed near
the bay all year, and they, together with three other nearby coastal groups,
apparently did not participate in the well-known summertime treks into the prickly
pear fields of southern Texas. These observations, although sketchy, tend to support
the archeological conclusions.
The regional implications of the Swan Lake site are not yet clear. Most striking
is the absence of tools such as shell adzes that are commonly associated with the
Aransas focus. The site simply does not conform well to current perceptions of the
local Archaic. The later use of the site seems to agree with extant data describing
the Rockport focus, although the materials at the Swan Lake site do not reflect the
full range of the currently defined archeological unit. The implications are that the
few excavations conducted in the Copano Bay-Live Oak Peninsula area have not
included the functional range of sites and that considerable work is needed before
a regional framework can be established with confidence.

168

Texas Archeological Society
CONCLUSIONS
Several major conclusions are drawn from the investigations at the S wan Lake

Site:
1) Temporal affiliations begin with the early Archaic period and extend into
the Late Prehistoric period. The material culture assemblage can be assigned to the
Aransas focus (Archaic) and Rockport focus (Late Prehistoric) but does not include
a great many items associated with either of the defined units. The site was occupied
intermittently from about 5000 to 6000 B. P. until about 300 or 400 B.P.
2) The site was used by small family groups. Limited seasonality data gathered
from black drum otoliths and the migratory patterns of cownose rays, red drums,
black drums, and striped burrfish indicate spring to early summer harvest. Other
terrestrial and aquatic species such as deer, bison,javelina(?), alligator, and dolphin
were harvested on an opportunistic basis;
3) Tools of convenience made from whelk shells and sunray venus clam shells
dominate the material culture assemblage. These represent a suite of simple but
effective tools for exploitation of fish and oysters.
4) Wind-tidal flats surrounding the knolls comprising the site provided a source
for eolian sediments that formed clay dunes on the knolls. To make these flats
active, sea level on the Texas Coastal Bend would have to have been 0.9 to 1.2
meters higher than at present. Stratified cultural materials within the dunes and
radiocarbon dates on dune soils indicate that this highstand occurred between about
4500 B.P. and 2500 B.P.;
5) During and after the highstand, the site functioned as a fishing camp that
provided the occupants access to fish and shellfish from the shallow waters of
Copano Bay and Swan Lake. The use of the site as a fishing camp reflects one aspect
of a local settlement/subsistence system oriented toward exploitation of littoral
resources;
6) Extensive excavations around Copano Bay are required to reexamine the
composition of the local chronological constructs and to explore the validity of the
settlement/subsistence model suggested by the data from the Swan Lake site.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Investigations at the Swan Lake site were conducted under Contract No.
DACW64-85-D-0008, Delivery Order No. 0002, with the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Galveston District. Dr. George Slrickhausen III, of Corpus Christi,
graciously allowed access to his property. This article contains original research by
several persons in addition to the authors, including Susan V. Lisk, Margaret Ann
Howard, Raymond W. Neck, James Westgate, and Michael B. Collins. Any misuse
of this information is the responsibility of the authors. The maps were prepared by
Sandra L. Hannum, and the artifact illustrations were made by E. Ellen Atha. Ed
Mokry, Jr., Tom Calnan, Chris Caran, and Meredith Dreiss were especially helpful
during our research. We thank them and numerous others who have assisted us
during this project.

Prewitt and Paine m The Swan Lake Site

169

APPENDIX

Observations on Seasonality of Selected Fish Remains from 41AS16
Elton R. Prewitt

INTRODUCTION
Two aspects of seasonality can be determined from the fish remains recovered
from the Swan Lake site. The first relies on observation of the annuli of the otoliths
of certain species (Casteel 1976:31-35); the second relies on biological observations of the habits of certain species (Hoese and Moore 1977; Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department 1984). The present observations are limited to four species of
fsh: Rhinoptera bonasus (cownose ray), Scianops ocellata (red drum), Pogonias
cromis (black drum), and Chilomycterus schoepfi (striped burrfish).
OTOLITH ANALYSIS

Fifteen otoliths from 41AS 16 are identified as Pogonias cromis (black drum).
Previous research along the Texas Coastal Bend (Smith 1983) has demonstrated
that the otoliths of this species are appropriate for analysis of seasonality as
described by Casteel (1976). According to Casteel (1976:31), this technique has
been known and used since the late nineteenth century. Otoliths, or ear stones, are
thought to be part of the system that controls equilibrium and hearing and are
composed of calcium carbonate in the form of aragonite (Castee11976:18-20). The
calcuim carbonates are deposited as alternating light and dark bands surrounding a
nucleus, forming annuli. The age of the fish is determined by counting the annuli,
and the season of death is estimated from the termination width of the outer ring.
Errors in these estimates can, of course, be introduced through variations in water
temperature and other factors, but these have not been considered in this preliminary
study.
Procedures
The procedures described by Smith (1983:479) are cumbersome and risky. A
modified system using equipment adapted to working with whelk shells was used
in this study. The equipment consists of a bench-mounted motor with a flexible
shaft and a series of attachments, including cutoff wheels, sanding drums, and felt
polishing wheels. A focal exhaust system is required to control dust generated
during the procedure (a dust mask is a less effective alternative). Additional
preparation materials include 400-grit sandpaper, jewelers rouge, modeling clay,
toothbrush, liquid soap, and water.
The procedure for slicing an otolith along its long axis is simple. Place the
otolith on a small block of modeling clay, flat or concave face down, then set the clay

170

Texas Archeological Society

adjacent to the exhaust system. Attach an extra-fine cutoff wheel to the flexible
shaft and cut the otolith along the desired axis. The cutoff wheel is most effective
between 1,500 and 2,000 rpm and will slice the otolith quickly at these speeds. The
modeling clay minimizes incidental breakage and partially dissipates the intense
heat generated by the cutoff wheel. The dust generated is removed by the exhaust
system.
The larger D-shaped part of the otolith is used for the remainder of the
preparation and analysis; the smaller piece (which breaks frequently during slicing)
should be returned to a vial or other receptacle with proper catalog information.
Smooth the cut facet of the otolith with an extra-fine smoothing drum inserted into
the flexible shaft and operated at about 1,500 rpm. Again, intense heat and dust are
generated. For final smoothing, place the 400-grit sandpaper on a flat surface and
rub the cut facet across it a few times. The otolith is now ready for polishing.
Smear a small amount of jewelers rouge on the circumference of the felt
polishing wheel after inserting it in the flexible shaft. The exhaust system should
be turned off to keep its force from sucking the otolith out of the hands (jewelers
rouge becomes very slick when heated). At about 1,500 to 2,000 rpm, gently polish
the cut facet of the otolith. Intense heat again will be generated. After polishing,
remove excess rouge by scrubbing the otolith gently with a toothbrush, liquid soap,
and water. It is now prepared for examination under a microscope.
The sample described here was examined at 30x and 64x magnification under
a binocular microscope using reflected light. The procedures described by Smith
(1983) were used to identify the nucleus and the annuli. Dark (translucent) rings are
assumed to be rapid spring and summer growth, and white (opaque) rings are
assumed to be slower fall and winter growth. This appears to contradict Casteel’s
(1976:32) comments, but his discussion of the confusion surrounding translucent
and opaque is itself confusing.
Results
All of the specimens are from Area 1, and 14 are from the first two excavation
units. The fish are not overly large forP. cromis, which commonly weigh 11 to 13
kg (5 to 6 pounds), but can reach as much as 132 kg (60 pounds), in the bays and even
330 kg (150 pounds) (and as much as 91 cm in length) in the open sea. Rather, the
age range of between less than one and eight years indicates a normal bay
population. Only 4 of the 15 otoliths indicate that the fish were more than four years
old.
The results of the determination of the apparent season of death supplied by the
15 otoliths (Table 6) are dramatic. Thirteen of the otoliths are centered around the
spring season, with seven indicating late winter/early spring and six indicating late
spring/early summer. This suggests strongly that the fish were harvested more or
less during the spring. Summer and winter seasons are indicated by only one
specimen each.

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site
Table

6.

Seasonality

Distributions

of Pagonius

cromis

Otoliths

Area 1
Zone

Winter

5/6
4
3
2
Total

....
5
4
1
1
2
1
1
1
7
6
1

Late Winter/
Early Spring

Late Spring/
Early Summer

171

Summer
Total
0
10
3
2
15

BIOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS
Less precise indications are gained from observations of the seasonal habits of
some species of fish. From observation of habitat and seasonality of four species
found at the S wan Lake site (Table 7), the general inference is that these fish are most
common, or are most easily caught, during the period from late winter through the
spring and summer.
Table 7. Seasonality Data, Selected Fish Species~
Species

Habitat

Rhinoptera bonasus
(Cownose ray)

Silty bays; browse across
mud/sand flats in schools

Scianops ocellata
(Red drum or redf’tsh)

Shallow bays; adults solitary

Pogonius cromis
(Black drum)

Bays; adults feed in large
schools, often in very
shallow water

Chilomycterus schoepfi
(Striped burrfish)

Bays

Seasonality
Especially common in May and
during the summer; migrate out of
bays at onset of cold weather.
Especially common in summer,
migrate out in fall, return in
spring; smaller fish stay in bays
all year, spring run is popular
time for modem harvest.
Common all year but usually
spawn in Gulf during late winter
or early spring; easily caught in
channels during spawning runs.
Especially common in summer.

1 Sources: Hoese and Moore (1977); Texas Parks and Wildlife Dept. (1984)

CONCLUSIONS

The otolith analysis and the biological observations for four selected species of
fish at the Swan Lake site provide complementary data suggesting that at least these
species were harvested during a limited time of the year. It is reasonable to conclude
that fishing, by whatever means, was a routine activity during the late winter through
the early summer. Obviously, this could include the period from March through
July, but it was most likely the period from April through June.

172 Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED
Abbott, R. Tucker
1968 A guide to field identification: Sea shells of North America. Golden Press, New
York.
1981

Texas shells: a field guide. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Andrews, Jean
1977 Shells and shores of Texas. The Elma Dill Russell Spencer Foundation Series 5.
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Brown, L. F., J. L. Brewton, J. H. McGowen, T. J. Evans, W. L. Fisher, and C.G. Groat
1976 Environmental geological atlas of the Texas coastal zone--Corpus Christi area.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Calnan, Thomas R.
1980 Molluscan distribution in Copano Bay, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 103.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Campbell, Thomas N.
1952 The Kent-Crane site: a shell midden on the Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paelontological Society 23:39-77.
Campbell, Thomas N., and Tommie Jo Campbell
1981 Historic Indian groups of the Choke Canyon Reservoir and surrounding area,
southern Texas. Choke Canyon Series, Vol. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Casteel, Richard W.
1976 Fish remains in archeology and paleo-environmental studies. Academic Press,
New York.
Frazier, D. E.
1974 Depositionat-episodes: their relationship to the Quaternary stratigraphic framework in the northwestern portion of the Gulf basin. Geological Circular 74-1,
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Guckian, William J., and Ramon N. Garcia
1979 SoilsurveyofSanPatricioandAransascounties,Texas. United States Department
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station.
Gunter, Gordon Pennington
1944 Studies on marine fishes of Texas: relative abundance and cyclic behavior related
to salinity and temperature. Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hoese, H. Dickson, and Richard H. Moore
1977 Fishes of the Gulf of Mexico, Texas, Louisiana, and adjacent waters. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.

Prewitt and Paine-- The Swan Lake Site

173

Imbrie, J., J. D. Hays, D. G. Martinson, A. McIntyre, A. C. Mix, J. J. Morley, N. G. Pisias,
W. L. Prell, and N. J. Shackleton
1984 The orbital theory of Pleistocene climate: support from a revised chronology of the
Marine O record. In: A. L. Berger and others (eds.), Milankovitch and Climate,
Part 1: 269-305. D. Reidel, Dordrecht.
Martin, George C
n.d.
Preliminary archaeological survey of a portion of the Texas Coast made by George
C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1929. Privately printed by the author.
Moore, W. S.
1982 Late Pleistocene sea-level history. In: M. Ivanovitch and R. S. Harmon (eds.),
Uranium series disequilibrium: applications to environmental problems: 481496. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Parker, Robert H.
1955 Changes in the invertebrate fauna, apparently attributable to salinity changes, in
the bays of Central Texas. Journal of Paleontology 29(2): 193-211.
1960

Ecology and distributional patterns of marine macro-invertebrates, northern Gulf
of Mexico, 1951-1958:302-337 American Association of Petroleum Geologists,
Tulsa.

Prewitt, Elton R., Susan V. Lisk, and Margaret Ann Howard
1987 National Register assessments of the Swan Lake site, 41AS16, on Copano Bay,
Aransas County, Texas. Reports ofinves tigations 56. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Smith, Herman A.
1983 Determination of seasonality in archaeological sites through examination of fish
otoliths: a case study. Journal of Field Archaeology 10(4):498-500).
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas archeology: type descriptions. Texas Archeological Society
Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 4. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
County files for Aransas County, Texas.
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
1984 Saltwater fishes of Texas. Bulletin 52. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Austin.
Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1985 A field guide to stone artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Warren, James E.
1984

A cultural resources survey at Copano ranch, Aransas County, Texas. Report 117.
James E. Warren, George West, Texas.

174 Texas Archeological Society
White, W. A., T. R. Calnan, R. A. Morton, R. S. Kimble, T. G. Littleton, J. H. McGowen, H.
S. Nance, and K. E. Schmedes
1983 Submergedlands of Texas, Corpus Christi area: sediments, geochemistry, benthic
macroinvertebrates, and associated wetlands. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Winker, C. D.
1979 Late Pleistocene fluvial-deltaic deposition, Texas Coastal Plain and shelf. M.A.
thesis, Department of Geological Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin.
Wright, S.S.
1980 Seismic stratigraphy and depositional history of Holocene sediments on the
CentralTexas Gulf coast. M.A. thesis, Geology, The University of Texas atAustin.

