LATE PALEO-INDIAN OCCUPATIONS AT BAKER CAVE,
SOUTHWESTERN TEXAS

Thomas R. Hester*

ABSTRACT
Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas, during the summer of
1976 have provided new data on late Paleo-Indian occupations in that region
9,000 years ago. Cultural materials and subsistence data are described. These
remains, especially floral and faunal evidence from a hearth radiocarbon-dated
at 7,000 B.C., permit an expanded view of the Golondrina complex of central
and southwestern Texas and northeastern Mexico. Paleoenvironmental data
indicate an early Holocene climate, perhaps more moist than at present and
without some of the xeric plants now found in the region.

Rock-shelter and cave deposits have provided archeologists with a variety of
evidence on early human occupations in the New World. The protection afforded by such sites often leads to the preservation of a remarkable array of ancient
cultural debris from which we can obtain detailed information on early lifeways-data that cannot be found at open camps or in kill-sites.
Dry rock-shelters and caves of the Great Basin, the Southwest, and the Southwest Texas - Northeast Mexico area have yielded particularly important samples
of fiber and wooden artifacts, subsistence data (including seeds, plant parts,
and coprolites), and other normally perishable examples of early cultural inventories. These sites have been important in dispelling the "big game hunter"
myth that has so commonly surrounded the study of Paleo-lndian cultures.
There are, of course, numerous examples of the hunting of megafauna and herd
animals during the late Pleistocene and early Holocene, but as Heizer and Baumhoff (1970) have pointed out, this activity was only one part of early subsistence
systems. In many areas of the New World we have no evidence at all of biggame hunting. It is obvious from the data derived from dry cave and rockshelter sites that broad-spectrum hunting and gathering was widely practiced by
9000-8000 B;C. and that regional or local subsistence specializations were
developing in early Postglacial times.
THE SOUTHWEST TEXAS AREA
Evidence of Paleoqndian populations has come from rock-shelters and one
open terrace site in southwestern Texas. These include Bonfire Shelter, with
bison drives of the Folsom and Plainview complexes (Dibble and Lorrain 1968;
Dibble 1970), deeply stratified late Paleo4ndian lithic assemblages from Devil’s
Mouth (Johnson 1964; Sorrow 1968), and early radiocarbon dates for cultural

*This is a revised version of a paper prepared in 1978 for a volume honoring Robert F.
Heizer. That volume, edited by Rainer Berger, is in press.

Bulletin of the Texas Areheologieal Soeiety

53:101-119

102

Texas Archeological Society

remains at Coontail Spin Rock-Shelter, Hinds Cave (Shafer and Bryant 1977),
Eagle Cave, and Arenosa Rock-Shelter (Patton and Dibble 1982). At yet another rock-shelter, 41VV162A, the possible association of lithic tools and late
Pleistocene fauna has been preliminarily reported (Collins 1969; M.B. Collins:
1977, personal communication).
Baker Cave is another site in this region with evidence of late Paleo4ndian
occupation. Excavations conducted by the author and Robert F. Heizer in 1976
produced additional information on early habitations at this site (Hester 1978,
1979). These new data are the focus of this report.

BAKER CAVE

Baker Cave is a rock-shelter site high in the western wall of Phillips Canyon
in Val Verde County, Texas (Figure 1). Just beyond the mouth of the rockshelter is a dramatic drop of 60 meters (200 feet). Phillips Canyon (or Creek)
is a tributary of the Devil’s River, which is in turn a tributary of the Rio Grande.
The shelter was first excavated in the 1960s by James H. Word;his report (Word
and Douglas 1970) provides the basic documentation on the stratigraphy and
material culture of the site. According to Word’s measurements, the site is 36
meters (120 feet) long and 17 meters (56 feet) deep (i.e., from the mouth to the
rear of the shelter). Fill within the shelter varies from 3 to 3.3 meters (9 to 11
feet) thick, most of this containing clearly stratified occupational remains (Word
and Douglas 1970).
Although most of the occupation at Baker Cave can be attributed to the
Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods, Word discovered near the base of the
deposits an occupational zone containing Paleo-Indian cultural materials. He
obtained two radiocarbon dates of 6960 B.C. and 7080 B.C. (Table 1) from this
stratum, which he labeled Zone I. Below Zone I there was additional fill,
composed largely of limestone spalls and dust; however, no clear evidence was
found for human presence at the site earlier than 7000 B.C.
In 1968 John W. Greet conducted excavations at Baker Cave under the supervision of Dee Ann Story, of the Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas at Austin. Greet excavated a triangular area along the center of the
back wall of the shelter. The results of his investigation have not yet been published (notes on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin).

THE 1976 INVESTIGATIONS
Although considerable work had been done at Baker Cave by both Word and
Greer, we estimated that as much as 80 percent of the deposits remained undisturbed (Figure !,b; 2 ;Chadderdon 1981). Three specific objectives were to
be addressed during the brief field season conducted in July 1976. First, we
wanted to test a variety of excavation and recording techniques in order to help
develop strategies for a future major excavation effort. Second, we wanted to
better evaluate the stratigraphy. Word’s excavations had a vertical orientation;
his profiles revealed textbook stratigraphy, with occupation zones separated by
sterile strata. We wanted to attempt, by using horizontal (open-area) excavation techniques, to "peel off" these strata and expose isolated occupations and
the activity areas within them. Our third goal was to learn more about the early

Hester-Baker Cave

103

a

b
Figure 1. Views of Baker Cave. (a) Surroundings and exterior of the cave; note
dust rising from screening activities at right center of the cave mouth (photograph courtesy of George K. Graves III). (b) The interior of the cave, taken
near the close of the 1976 excavation; Operation 3 is to the far right, Word’s
excavations are in the foreground, and Operation 2 is at back-center (see Figure
2).

104

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Radiocarbon Dates from Baker Cave, Texas1

Laboratory No.

Date

Context

Tx-128

8910 + !40 B.P.
(6960 B.C.)

Word’s Zone I; Golondrina
complex

Tx-129

9030 + 230 B.P.
(7080 B.C.)

Word’s Zone I; Golondrina
complex

Tx-2466

9020 + 150 B.P.
(7070 B.C.)

1976 excavations; Golondrina
complex hearth

RL-828

9180 + 220 B.P.
(7230 B.C.)

1976 excavations; Golondrina
complex hearth

Tx-2931

8080 + 80 B.P.
(6130 B.C.)

1976 excavations; lower part of
Pre-Archaic deposits

RL-829

4690 _+ 140 B.P.
(2740 B.C.)2

1976 excavations; upper part of
Pre-Archaic deposits

1All radiocarbon assays were made on wood charcoal.
2Charles S. Tucek, of Radiocarbon, Ltd., corrects this date to 3500 _+ 150 B.C. based on
tree-ring correlation studies made by the University of Pennsylvania Museum. However,
MASCA calibrations are ca. 3370-3350 B.C. (Ralph, Michael, and Han 1973) and ca.
3460 [figure obtained from records at Lrr Radiocarbon Lab] B.C. for both the Arizona
(Damon et al. 1974) and Clark calibrations (Clark 1975). Tucek estimates that correction
factors would place Tx-128, Tx-129, Tx-2466, and RL-828 at ca. 8000 B.C.

occupations. We hoped to obtain more information on tool kits, subsistence
systems (through intensive recovery of faunal and floral remains), and the environmental context. We wanted to find out if additional excavation in the
deposit reported by Word, underlying the 7000 B.C. occupation, might produce
evidence of even earlier human habitations. We were able to work on this third
problem during our brief field season because Greer’s excavations had left a
bench in the rear of the cave; in this partly excavated area, only deposits down
to the + 2600 B.C. level had been removed.
The 1976 program at Baker Cave was conducted under the auspices of the
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio
(UTSA). The writer served as field director, and Robert F. Heizer was codirector. We received funding through the Earthwatch program of the Center
for Field Research in Belmont, Massachusetts, and the Texas Archaeological
Foundation. Logistical support was provided by UTSA. Our crew consisted
of six staff members from the UTSA Center and 14 participants from Earthwatch. A detailed study of the 1976 excavations has recently been prepared
by Chadderdon (1981).
RESULTS OF THE INVESTIGATIONS
Although our access to the site was curtailed by more than 13 inches of
rainfall-a 71-year record-the !976 investigations were able to deal success-

Hester-Baker Cave

105

.:/

BAKER CAVE
41vv213
ME:TER’S
CONTOUR INTERVAL: I~ CM.

~1976 Grid
J-’-’] Partially Excavated 1962 and 1968
Excavated to Bedrock 1962 and 1968
Roof Spoil
¯-~..-" Extent of Overhang
...... Extent of Cove Floor

Figure 2.
Plan of excavations at Baker Cave. Excavation areas of the 1976
research, plus those of Word in 1962 and Greer in 1968, are shown (from
Chadderdon t 981).
fully with the three objectives outlined above. Two major areas of the site were
excavated: Operation 2 was in the bench area left by Greer and was oriented
toward exposing the early deposits; Operation 3 began 3 meters to the north
of Operation 2 and was oriented toward exposing occupational strata utilizing
open-area techniques (Chadderdon 1981).
The emphasis in this report will be on the archeological record found in the
Operation 2 area (Figure 3 ; 5a). The earlier research of Word, and then Greer,
had fairly well established the chronological sequence at the site. Just beneath

106

Texas Archeological Society

the floor of Greer’s bench near the rear of the cave we expected to find occupation remains dating from a Pandale occupation of ca. 2600 B.C. An intensive
Pandale occupation was indeed found; one of its most interesting cultural
features was a pit filled with burned rock, plant parts, discarded fiber artifacts,
and lithics.
Underlying the Pandale zone (Figure 3) was a meter or more of loose, unconsolidated deposits containing rotted fiber (one well-preserved textile fragment
was recovered) and localized occupational lenses. Chronologically, we relate
this unit to an early Holocene cultural tradition that J.B. Sollberger and the
writer have elsewhere called the Pre-Archaic (Sollberger and Hester 1972).
(Although the term Pre-Archaic is used in this report, the writer is inclined at
present to refer these materials to the initial part of the Early Archaic as defined
by Story [1980] and McKinney [1981]). In parts of the cave, the Pre-Archaic
is characterized by corner-notched dart points-known by a variety of type
names (Baker, Bandy, Early Barbed) and part of a projectile point series of this
thne frame extending over Southwest, Central, and south-central Texas-and
triangular dart points with a similar spatial and temporal distribution. Word
assigned this cultural unit to his Period 2, 6500-4000 B.C. (Word and Douglas
1970:99). In Operation 2, this loose, unconsolidated deposit yielded primarily
triangular projectile points and several aberrant stemmed specimens that do not
fit any presently known type (Chadderdon 1981). Faunal and floral remains
extracted from this deposit have been analyzed by Kenneth Lord, Harold Wooldridge, Phil Dering, Thomas Van Devender, and others (manuscripts on file
at UTSA).
The radiocarbon assay of a charcoal sample from the upper part of the PreArchaic deposits yielded a date of 2740 +_ 150 B.C. The temporal span of the
Pre-Archaic occupations at Baker Cave generally agrees with the span indicated
by radiocarbon dates from similar contexts at other sites in the region (Weir
1976:29).
Directly below the unconsolidated Pre-Archaic fill we found a
distinctive gray stratum that had been termed Zone I by Word during his earlier
excavation (Figure 3). It is this zone that is attributable to a late Paleo-Indian
occupation of the Golondrina complex. Because of the lack of time and the
danger of wall-slumping, we were able to expose only a 6-square-meter area.
However, large quantities of cultural remains were recovered.
Lithics included a Golondrina basal fragment, a probable preform made on
a blade, and a bifacial gougelike implement (Figure 4, a-c’). The gougelike implement is particularly significant because such tools (known as Clear Fork
tools) up to that time had been found in surface or otherwise inconclusive
association with Golondrina points in northeastern Mexico and southern Texas
(Epstein 1969). This first excavated association of Golondrina with Clear Fork
tools demonstrates that the Clear Fork tool form is definitely an element in the
Golondrina complex tool kit. Additionally, the implement is covered with
residues (Figure 4,c); flake scars on the bit indicate that it had been resharpened,
apparently only a short time before it was snapped from its haft (Figure 4,c’).
Residues from this tool (and from several other flake tools from later contexts)
were analyzed by Harry Shafer and his associates at Texas A&M University.
Using methods developed for analysis of residue on lithics from dry rock-shelter
and cave deposits in the region (Shafer and Holloway 1979), Shafer has provided
the following preliminary data on the residues from the Clear Fork tool from the
Golondrina stratum. The residues are essentially organic, and they contain

Hester-Baker Cave

8

107

108

Texas Archeological Society

¢1

b

cm 111 12 t3 14 15
Figure 4. Artifacts from the Golondrina stratum, Baker Cave. (a) Golondrina
basal fragment; (b) preform on a blade; (c) Clear Fork tool, dorsal view (note
residue and resharpened bit and break, from a haft, at proximal end); (c’) Clear
Fork tool, ventral view (note heavy smoothing of flake scars).

Hester-Baker Cave

109

recognizable plant fibers. However, specific identification of the fibers has not
yet been made. Shafer believes the fibers are probably from succulent plants
and that they definitely are not from wood. He notes that there is no evidence
of animal processing in the organic residues on the tool. The residues from
animal processing usually contain preserved animal hairs, and none were observed. It is possible that some of the organic materials on the tool represent a
mastic used in hafting; however, this has not been confirmed.
Of greatest importance was the discovery of a large basin-shaped hearth or
cooking pit, covered with a domelike pile of burned rock and filled with ash
and charcoal (Figure 5,b). The maximum diameter of this feature was 1.2
meters, and it was 30 cm deep. After the pit had been recorded and photographed, we decided to bag the entire fill and take it out of the cave for controlled fine-screening in the laboratory. Although some of our crew thought
we were especially crazy at the time for having them carry about 300 pounds of
hearth fill up the cliff face, we discovered during laboratory processing that the
fill was packed with fish, mammal, and reptile bones, seed remains, chert flakes,
and other debris. More than half of the fill from this feature has been preserved
unprocessed for future analysis.
An extensive array of materials from the hearth matrix has been processed
by severa! specialists. A preliminary pollen scan by Ed Luther, of the Department of Paleontology at the University of California at Berkeley, led to the
identification of sunflower, grasses, oak, Mormon tea, buckthorn, cattail, and a
variety of unidentified herbaceous plants (Table 2). Paleobotanical research on
the seeds and plant parts from the hearth fill has been conducted by Phil Dering.
The hearth matrix was passed through 1- and 6-mm screens, and a specialized
flotation method was utilized. The derived materials were hand sorted, identified, and quantified by Dering and his assistants. From the matrix came wood
charcoal, flowers, fruits, and seeds of 16 plant species. Selected wood charcoal
specimens were identified by Liz Porter, using a 40X dissecting microscope.
Identified woods included oak, juniper, buckeye, hackberry, guajillo, sycamore,
mesquite, and creosote bush. The most abundant seeds and fruits identified by
Dering were (in order of abundance) Texas black walnut, prickly pear, persimmon, two species of hackberry, mesquite, oak, mesca! bean, Mexican buckeye,
and several lesser species, including grape and little-leaf sumac.
Fauna recovered by fine-screening of samples from the hearth matrix have
been partially identified by Kenneth J. Lord and Thomas Van Devender. The
faunal list includes 12 species of mammals, 23 species of reptiles, and six species
of fish (Tables 3 and 4). Cottontai! rabbits, ground squirrels, rats, mice, and
gophers dominate the mammals; gray fox and jackrabbit are also present, a!though only a single jackrabbit bone was noted. The absence of larger fauna,
such as deer, from the hearth matrix is striking, but Word did find bones of deer
and coyote elsewhere in Zone I (Word and Douglas 1970). Two bird bones also
were noted, but these have not been conclusively identified. Among the fish,
the sucker family is predominant, with the red-horse sucker and the carp sucker
best represented. Also present is spotted bass, a species not found in the area
today. Van Devender’s analysis of the reptile remains from the hearth fill indicates the occurrence of one lizard species and 17 snake species (Table 4). The
snake remains generally represent large individuals, approaching 1.2 meters
(4 feet) in length. Three species of rattlesnakes are represented by charred
bones; other charred snake bones are from patch-nosed snakes, bullsnakes,

110

Texas Archeological Society

a

ELEV
97.00m

0

10

20

30

40

50 cm

[] GRAY CHARCOAL SPECKED ASH
[] WHITE ASH
[] PINK ASH
[] BURNED ROCK
[] CHARCOAL CONCENTRATION

b

Figure 5. Views of 1976 excavations at Baker Cave. (a) excavations in Operation 2 area; (b) north profile of Golondrina stratum hearth (radiocarbon dates
of ca. 7000 B.C. were obtained from this feature; see text). (From Chadderdon
1981.)

Hester-Baker Cave

111

glossy snakes, and milksnakes. Bones of other snake species usually were not
charred; however, they were somewhat eroded, as if they had been digested.
All of the snakes represented in the hearth matrix are found in Val Verde
County today; however, Van Devender indicates that some of the 9000-yearold specimens were larger than those in contemporary snake populations. In
reviewing the snake remains from the hearth, William Elliott (1978:personal
communication) suggests that the "top five" species may have been Crotalus

Table 2. Plant Remains from the Golondrina Complex Hearthl
Scientific Name

Common Name

Approximate
Ripening Period 2

Texas black walnut
prickly pear
persimmon
net-leaf sugar hackberry
spiny hackberry
honey mesquite
oak
Texas mountain laurel
Mexican buckeye
Plains bristlegrass
skeleton-leaf goldeneye
agarita

fall (October)
July-September
mid- to late summer
late summer
midsummer
August-September
[see footnote 3]
September
October
--June

Seeds and fruits, in
order of abundance
Juglans microcarpa
Opuntia spp.
Diospyros texana
Celtis reticulata
Celtis pallida
Prosopis glandulosa
Quercus spp.3
Sophora secundiflora
Ungnadia speciosa
Setaria lutescins
Vigueria stenolaba
Mahonia or Berberis
trifo lia ta
Vitis arizonica
Acacia berlandieri
Karwinskia
hum boMtiana
Rhus microphylla

canyon grape
guajillo (acacia)
coyotillo

July-August
June-July
October

little-leaf sumac

May-July

Wood identified from
the hearth
Quercus spp.
Juniperus spp.
Ungnadia speciosa
Celtis spp.
Acacia spp.
Platanus oeciddntalis
Prosopis glandulosa
Larrea tridentata

oak
juniper
Mexican buckeye
hackberry
guajillo
sycamore
honey mesquite
creosote bush

1Seeds and fruits identified by Phil Dering; woods identified from charcoal samples by
Liz Porter.
2Approximate ripening periods of the plants listed are based on data presented by
Vines (1960) and on the writers’ personal observations; see also Everitt and Alaniz (1981:
Table1).
Several kinds of oaks may be represented; leaves of the live oak (Quercus virginiana)
were identified. Acorns are produced by certain oaks on an annual basis; by others, bienniaUy.

112

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3. Mammalian Remains Identified from the Golondrina Hearth1

Scientific Name

Common Name

General Habitats2

Urocyon cf.
cinereoargen tus
Lepus californicus
Sylvilagus sp.

gray fox

wooded areas

black-tailed jackrabbit
cottontail

Citellus or Spermophilus variegatus
Neotoma sp.
Thomomys bottae

rock squirrel

Sigmodon hispidus
Peromyseus sp.
Perognathus sp.
Dipodomys sp.
Onyehomys sp.

hispid cotton rat
white-footed mouse
pocket mouse
kangaroo rat
grasshopper mouse

scrubland
brush areas, upland, or
streamside
cliffs, canyon walls, talus
slopes
brush, cactus thickets (dens)
adaptable; 90% time in
burrows
tall grass
woodland, creek, fivefine
alluvium along streams
creosote, acacia; gravelly soils
grasslands, open brushlands

pack rat
western pocket gopher

lIdenfificafions by Kenneth J. Lord and Thomas Van Devender; from one to three
individuals represented in each species. This should be considered a partial inventory;
much of the hearth fill has not been processed.
2Habitat data based on Davis (1974).

atrox, Pituophis melanoleucus, Elaphe guttata or obsoleta, Masticophis, and
Salvadora. These are generally the more conspicuous species in a broad range
of habitats; moreover, they attain large size and are diurnal. Others, such as
Gyalopion canum, Hypsiglena torquata, Sonora semiannulata, and Tantilla,
probably were obtained by digging under or overturning rocks and debris (i.e.,
opportunistic foraging), but because of their small size they probably made only
a minimal contribution to the subsistence regime. A lizard species, possibly
the crevice or blue spiny lizard Sceloporus sp., a large diurnal lizard, was corn:non among the reptiles; most of the bones representing this species were
charred.
There is no doubt that this hearth and its contents date from Paleo-Indian
times; it is stratigraphically sealed within the stratum representing occupations
of the Golondrina complex. Two radiocarbon assays of samples of charcoal
from the hearth fill have produced dates of 7070 +_ 150 B.C. and 7230 + 220
B.C. (Table 1).
However, many questions are posed by the hearth. What can it tell us about
subsistence preferences during this period? What does it represent in terms of
food-processing technology? Can the palynological, faunal, and floral data
provide some insights into the paleoenvn’onment of this period? These and
other interesting problems can be only partially addressed at present.
Dering, Lord, and others who have worked in the region believe that a more
mesic climate system was present in the area around 9000 years ago. Plants
characteristic of xeric conditions, such as sotol and lechuguilla, are absent from
the hearth and were not noted by Dering in other botanical samples from the
Golondrina stratum. Dering has examined part of the plant macrofossil sample
from the overlying Pre-Archaic (beginning ca. 6100 B.C.) and from the Pandale

Hester-Baker Cave

1 13

Table 4. Fish and Reptile Remains Identified from the Golondrina Hearth1
Scientific Name

Common Name

Fish
Carpiodes carpio
Cyeleptus elongatus
Moxostoma eongestum
Ictiobus sp.
Micropterus sp.
Lepomis sp.
Reptiles
Sceloporus sp.
Arizona elegans
Elaphe guttata or obsoleta
Gyalopian canum
Hypsiglena torquata
Lampropeltis getulus
Lampropeltis mexicana
Lampropeltis triangulum
Mastieophis or Coluber
Pituophis melanoleucus
Rhinoeheilus leeontei
Salvadora sp.
Sonora semiannulata
Tantilla or Diadophis punetatus
Thamnophis proximus
Crotalus atrox
Crotalus molossus
Crotalus sp.

carp sucker
blue sucker
red-horse sucker
small mouth buffalo
bass, probably spotted bass
sunfish

blue spiny lizard
glossy snake
Great Plains or Texas ratsnake
hook-nosed snake
night snake
common kingsnake
gray-banded kingsnake
milksnake
coachwhip or racer
bullsnake
longnosed snake
patch-nose snake
ground snake
blackheaded or ringneck snake
ribbon snake
western diamondback rattlesnake
blacktailed rattlesnake
rattlesnake

fIdentifications by Thomas Van Devender and Kenneth J. Lord; all reptiles were identified by Van Devender.

strata (ca. 2600 B.C.) and has observed distinct differences between those assemblages and ones from the Golondrina stratum. For example, small amounts of
lechuguilla appear in the Pre-Archaic deposits, and sotol is found in debris from
the Pandale period, indicating a continuing trend to3vard greater aridity. Also
in the Pre-Archaic, pecan is first introduced into the cave deposits, apparently
representing the initial appearance of this tree species in the area. This is the
earliest record of pecan in Texas (Grant Hal1:1982 personal communication).
The floral, faunal, and palynological data indicate an early Holocene environment. No Pleistocene fauna are represented in the extensive faunal inventory from the Golondrina stratum; apparently certain late Pleistocene fauna
(Van Devender has identified Procyon lotor sirnus, the large Pleistocene raccoon) can be found in the noncultural basal deposits underlying this early
human occupation. Indeed, most of the fauna found in the Golondrina stratum
are present in the area today; the spotted bass is apparently absent in Val Verde
County but has been recorded in a stream 70 miles to the southeast (Glen L.

1 14

Texas Archeologieal Society .

Evans: 1977, personal communication). Because the abundant plant and animal
remains from the Golondrina complex require continuing analysis, only preriminary comments can be offered on the subsistence activities of this early
occupation. The data from the hearth are supplemented by fauna recovered by
Word from elsewhere in the Golondrina stratum (Word and Douglas 1970).
In general, the subsistence regime was oriented toward broad-spectrum
hunting, gathering, and foraging. Although the climate may have been somewhat more moist, the people who rived 9000 years ago at Baker Cave had
essentially the same resources that are found in the area today, with the exception of the two major desert plant species, sotol and lechuguilla. Deer were
the only "large game" hunted; coyote and gray fox were killed, probably for
their pelts. Smaller mammals were much more extensively hunted or trapped,
especially rabbits, rats, mice, and ground squirrels. Judging from the contents
of the Golondrina hearth, rodents were dominant among the mammals eaten.
The other major faunal components of the diet appear to have been fish and
reptiles. Fish bones are particularly abundant in the hearth fill, although the
individual fish are comparatively small. Suckers were the most important fish
species. Reptiles (lizards and an amazing number of snake species) also were
favored subsistence items.
Most of the animal species were available on a year-round basis. Table 2
provides a list of the ripening times of the various fruits, berries, and nuts of
the plants that were in the hearth matrix. As indicated, most of the species
could be exploited from midsummer through early fall. This may reflect a
period during which the site was used by hunters and gatherers of the Go!ondrina complex. However, several of the plants found in the hearth produce
seeds or nuts that can be stored, for example, acorns, mesquite beans, hackberry seeds, and walnuts. Ethnohistoric data from southern Texas indicate that
pits were indeed used for storage of such plant remains (Campbell 1975:19).
The dominant plant item in the hearth matrix is the Texas black walnut, a
large grove of which is found today near the confluence of Phillips Canyon and
the Devil’s River. Some of the plants probably were exploited for other than
subsistence purposes. For example, the mescal bean derived from the Texas
mountain laurel has hallucinogenic properties (Campbell 1958), the Mexican
buckeye can be poisonous, the fruits of the coyotillo can cause paralysis, and
the agarita bush produces berries that reputedly have medicinal value (Vines
1960). Most of these plants may have been gathered for firewood.
With the extensive array of plant remains, it is likely that nutritional studies
could be made. Table 5 shows nutritional data that are available for some of
the plants found in the Golondrina hearth.
Most of the plants appear to represent collecting activities concentrated in
the riparian zones of the canyon and nearby Devil’s River, but some upland
species also are present. However, the mesquite, ubiquitous in southwestern
Texas today, has invaded the uplands only in the past 100 years or so, coming
in largely as a result of cattle raising and overgrazing (Hester 1975:108).
There is little direct evidence of food procurement and food-processing
technology from the Golondrina stratum. One assumes that the Golondrina
points were used as weapon tips in hunting, but they could have functioned
also as knives. Scrapers reported by Word and edge-modified flakes found in
1976 probably were used to process animals and plants, but we cannot yet

Hester-Baker Cave

115

Table 5. Contents, by Percentage, of Crude Protein and Minerals
in Certain Southwest Texas Plantsl
Species

Crude
Protein

Phosphorus

Calcium

Magnesium

Celtis pallida

19.89
17.07
12.53

.23
.28
.20

10.68
7.06
5.67
3.85

.32
.15
.07

5.12
.71
.66
10.36
2.43
.51

.68
.28
.10
.72

.07

.32

.06

Acacia berlandieri
Prosopis glandulosa
Celtis laevigata2
Opuntia (lindheimeri)
Quercus (virginiana)
Diospyros texana

.93
.11

Potassium
2.88
1.09
1.83
1.41
3.41
1.22
1.48

Sodium

.07
.04
.10
.05
.02
.02
.04

1From Everitt and Alaniz (1981:Table 2). Heizer and Elsasser (1980) provide some
similar data (for protein, fat, fiber, and carbohydrate percentages) for California. Texas
Prosopis apparently is higher in protein content than its California counterpart; Quereus
is lower in protein in California species. Both Prosopis and Quercus are very high in carbohydrates.
2Celtis retieulata (sugar hackberry) was identified in the Golondrina hearth; only Opuntia sp. and Quercus sp. identifications were made from the hearth, although likely species
are indicated here in parentheses.

assign them to specific tasks. To date, the work done by Shafer with residues on
the Clear Fork tool has the greatest potential for making it possible to link a
particular tool form of this horizon with a specific food-procurement or processing function. A hammerstone found in the stratum may have been used both
for stoneworking and for processing food items; unfortunately, no residues were
found on the specimen.
What does the hearth disclose about cooking technology? We are not yet
sure, and we may never be sure of how this large ash- and charcoal-filled pitwhich herein has been called a hearth-was used. Obviously, it was used for
repeated cooking tasks; the bottom of the basin was baked a pinkish red color,
and several lenses of ash and charcoal were noted within the pit. At the top of
the pit, just under the cap of burned rocks, were concentrations of charcoalsome pieces measuring more than 10 cm in diameter-as if the fire in the pit
had been quickly smothered. The pit probably had multiple uses, perhaps
for cooking a variety of fauna by a variety of methods. For example, fish
might have been prepared by barbecuing, baking, or smoking, and rabbits,
rats, lizards, snakes, and other small creatures might have been roasted or
scorched over fires built in the pit. And we should not overlook the distinct
possibility that the pit was a convenient trash receptacle, for in it are abundant
chert chips, primarily pressure flakes and biface-thinning flakes. In an ethnographic analogy drawn from northeastern California, it is interesting to note
that some aboriginal peoples there often tossed fish bones into their hearths
to keep their children from stepping on them (Voegelin 1942:178). Van Devender’s observation that some of the snake bones were not scorched, but were
eroded, as if they had passed through a digestive system (presumably human),

116

Texas Archeological Society

indicates that some of the fauna may have been eaten partially cooked or even
raw. The presence of eroded snake bones in the hearth might indicate that
feces (coprolites) ended up in the pit, again reflective of the trash-disposal
function suggested above (Bryant 1974:19). Van Devender notes that most of
snake remains come from the lower parts of the hearth. This leads me to speculate that this large cooking pit may have been used, abandoned, and reused in
a succession of seasonal visits to the site by people of the Golondrina complex.
Indeed, the profile of the hearth suggests several episodes of use (Figure 4,b).
CONCLUDING REMARKS

The 1976 excavations at Baker Cave produced a wealth of new information
on the activities of late Paleo4ndian hunters and gatherers of 9000 years ago.
Their lifeway operated during a climatic regime that was somewhat cooler
and moister than the climate in the region today (see discussions in Patton and
Dibble 1982). Major xeric plants, such as sotol and lechuguilla, used by later
Archaic occupations, are absent. Subsistence activities were focused in the
riverine and canyon environments near the site and downstream on the Devil’s
River. Small mammals, rodents, fish, and snakes (indeed there was an extensive
emphasis on snakes if not in terms of quantity at least in terms of variety) seem
to have been the most important meat sources. Walnut, prickly pear, persimmon, and hackberry were the dominant plant foods. The environment in the
vicinity of Baker Cave in 7000 B.C. certainly can be characterized as early Holocene. No vestiges of Pleistocene fauna, flora, or dramatic climatic differences
remain. The mesic conditions hypothesized above are supported by data from
earlier work in Southwest Texas (Story and Bryant 1966).
Radiocarbon dates place the Golondrina complex occupation securely in the
late Paleo-Indian period. The Paleo-Indian tradition of lanceolate projectile
points-usually carefully flaked and with lateral edge smoothing-persists here;
however, elsewhere in Texas-points of this tradition are found in other assemblages for another 1000 years. Gone, of course, are the Pleistocene mammals
and the early-to-middle Paleo4ndian hunting technologies used to exploit them.
Subsistence is geared, as it has to be, to the resources of the early Holocene.
It is perhaps misleading to say that hunting and foraging of small mammals and
reptiles, fishing, and plant-food collecting had become, at 7000 B.C., the dominant subsistence orientation; I suspect that these activities were just as prevalent
in early and middle Paleo-Indian times but are undocumented because of the
absence up to now of preserved subsistence data of the type obtained at Baker
Cave. Although I believe we should continue to separate Paleo-lndian cultural
patterns from those of the Archaic on the basis of certain technologies (especially the distinctive lithic industries), we cannot separate them on the basis of
overall subsistence regimes (Shafer 1976). This inability to separate PaleoIndian from Archaic subsistence regimes holds true for the Pre-Archaic and
Early Archaic deposits at Baker Cave. Drier climatic regimes led to the spread
of new plants-lechuguilla and sotol-but the use of resources present in the
Golondrina complex times persisted, albeit with differing emphases. By contrast, the new lithic technologies are distinctly different, but the poor preservation of fiber artifacts in the Golondrina and Pre-Archaic levels precludes any
temporal comparisons in that important area of the material cultural inventories. Only with similar samples of subsistence data from other sites and with

Hester-Baker Cave

1 17

the recovery of preserved nonlithic artifact assemblages will we be able to trace
any distinctive differences (and the reasons for them) between late Paleo4ndian
and earliest Archaic manifestations.
Although only a brief review of the !976 data has been possible here, I
believe that two major contributions have been realized. First of all, we now
have a much expanded view of the subsistence resources exploited by the people
of the Golondrina complex and, with continuing analysis, this expanded view
should have important implications for our understanding of the Golondrina
and other late Paleo-Indian complexes in Texas and adjacent areas. Second, we
can better define the Golondrina complex, knowledge of which to date has been
based essentially on its lithic technology. The Golondrina complex is widespread in Central and southern Texas and in northeastern Mexico, and the
data from Baker Cave greatly broaden our knowledge of its age, environment,
tool assemblages, and subsistence resources. With the help of the new data
from Baker Cave, the Golondfina surface sites and the accumulated distributional data referable to the Golondfina complex can be better interpreted and
can play an important role in our understanding of the final segment of the
Paleo4ndian period in the region.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am very grateful for the support Oven to the Baker Cave project by the
Earthwatch program of the Center for Field Research and by the Texas Artheological Foundation. The landowner, Mrs. Mary Baker Hughey, was most
gracious to our crew, and I wish to thank her for her cooperation and assistance. James H. Word, the original excavator of Baker Cave, provided invaluable
guidance and aid to the planning of the 1976 fieldwork; without his help, the
project could not have been accomplished. The Earthwatch volunteers and the
staff from the Center for Archaeological Research worked very hard under trying conditions, and they havemy deepest thanks. The late Robert F. Heizer
codirected the project and was a constant source of information on the problems
of rock-shelter excavation. Mary Frances Chadderdon, a crew chief in the 1976
work, recently completed a full analysis of the collections from the project as
a Master’s thesis in the anthropology program at UTSA. I am in her debt for
the assistance she has provided.

REFERENCES CITED
Bryant, V.M., Jr.
1974 The role of coprolite analysis in archeology.
Archeological Society 45:1-28.
Campbell, T.N.
1958 Origin of the mescal bean cult.
156-160.
1975

Bulletin of the Texas

American Anthropologist 60(1):

The Payaya Indians of southern Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, Special Publication 1. San Antonio.

Chadderdon, M.F.
1981 Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas: the 1976 excavations.
published MA thesis, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Un-

1 18

Texas Archeological Society

Clark, R.M.
1975 A calibration curve for radiocarbon dates. Antiquity 49:251-266.
Collins, M.B.
1969 Test excavations at Amistad International Reservoir, fall, 1967.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University
of Texas at Austin, 16.
Damon, P.E., C.W. Ferguson, A. Long, and E.I. Wallick
1974 Dendrochronologic calibration of the radiocarbon time scale. American Antiquity 39(2):350-366.
Davis, W.B.
1974 The mammals of Texas.
letin 41.

Texas~ Parks and Wildlife Department Bul-

Dibble, D.S.
1970 On the significance of additional radiocarbon dates from Bonfire
Shelter, Texas. Plains Anthropologist 15(50):251-254.
Dibble, D.S., and D. Lorrain
1969 Bonfire Shelter: a stratified bison kill-site, Val Verde County, Texas.
Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin, Miscellaneous Papers 1.
Epstein, J.F.
1969 The San Isidro site, an Early Man campsite in Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin,
Anthropology Series 7.
Everitt, J.H., and M.A. Alaniz
1981 Nutrient content of cactus and woody plant fruits eaten by birds
and mammals of south Texas. The Southwestern Naturalist 26(3):
301-305.
Johnson, Leroy, Jr.
1964 The Devil’s Mouth site: a stratified campsite at Amistad Reservoir,
Val Verde County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin, Archaeological Series 6.
Heizer, R.F. and M.A. Baumhoff
1970 Big game hunters in the Great Basin: a criticalreview of the evidence.
University of California, Archaeological Research Facility, Contribution 7 : 1-12.
Heizer, R.F., and A.B. Elsasser
1980 The natural world of the California Indians. University of California
Press, Berkeley.
Hester, T.R.
1975 Late Prehistoric cultural patterns along the lower Rio Grande of
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeologieal Society 46:107-126.

1978

Early human occupations in south central and southwestern Texas:
preliminary papers on the Baker Cave and St. Mary’s Hall sites.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

1979

Early populations in prehistoric Texas. Archaeology 32(6):26-33.

Hester-Baker Cave

119

McKinney, W,W.
1981 Early Holocene adaptations in Central and southwestern Texas: the
problem of the Paleoindian-Archaic transition. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:91-120.
Patton, P.C., and D.S. Dibble
1982 Archeologic and geomorphic evidence for the paleohydrologic record
of the Pecos River in West Texas. American Journal of Science
282:97-121.
Ralph, E.K., H.N. Michael, and M.C. Han
1973 Radiocarbon dates and reality. MASCA Newsletter 9(1).
Sharer, H.J.
1976 Defining the Archaic: an example from the Lower Pecos area of
Texas. In The Texas Archaic: a symposium, edited by T.R. Hester,
pp. 1-9.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 2.
Shafer, H.J., and V.M. Bryant, Jr.
1977 Archeological and botanical studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde County,
Texas. Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University,
Special Series 1.
Shafer, H.J., and R.G. Holloway
1979 Organic residue analysis in determining stone tool function. In
Lithic use-wear analysis, edited by Brian Hayden, pp. 385400.
Academic Press, New York.
Sollberger, J.B., and T.R. Hester
1972 The Strohacker site: a review of pre-Archalc manifestations in Texas.
Plains Anthropologist 17(58):327-344.
Sorrow, W.M.
1968 The Devil’s Mouth site: the third season-1967. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage ProJect, The University of Texas at Austin 14.
Story, D.A.
1980 Adaptive strategies of Archaic cultures of the west Gulf coastal plain.
Manuscript on file with author.
Story, D.A., and V.M. Bryant, Jr. (assemblers)
1966 A preliminary study of the Paleoecology of the Admistad Reservoir
area. Report of research, National Science Foundation, GS-667.
Vines, R.A.
1960 Trees, shrubs, and woody vines of the Southwest.
Texas Press, Austin.

University of

Voeglin, E.W.
1942 Culture element distributions, 20: northeast California.
of California Anthropological Records 7(2).

University

Weir, Frank
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.d. dissertation, Washington State University, Pullman.
Word, J.H., and C.L. Douglas
1970 Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin, Bulletin 16.

