197

A Case Study in the Interdependence of Archeology
and History: The Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River.

Elizabeth A. H. John

ABSTRACT
Astride the Red River in Montague County, Texas, and Jefferson County,
Oklahoma, just west of the Cross Timbers, a complicated cluster of sites manifests
prehistoric activity as well as historically significant villages of the Taovayas,
Wichita, and kindred groups. In 1967, anthropologists of both states collaborated
in sampling the archeological and archival evidence. Although their results fully
confirmed the potential usefulness of comprehensive excavation and analysis,
such an attack has yet to be mounted. Meanwhile, newly discovered Spanish
documents underscore the urgency of uncovering all that these sites can tell about
the formative encounter of Indian and European cultures that these sites exemplify.

Late in the nineteenth century, Anglo-American settlers on the Red River rim
of Montague County, Texas, guessed that the collapsed walls of an apparent fort
witnessed a shadowy Spanish past. How could they not have named the place
Spanish Fort? Every season’s plowing along both sides of that distinctive bend
between the ninety-eighth meridian and the Cross Timbers turned up a fresh
evidential harvest of European and aboriginal artifacts.
Unfortunately, most of the material that surfaced was lost until local rancher
Joe Benton announced in the 1920s that he would pay for such finds. Subsequently,
the collection of artifacts that Benton had begun in boyhood swelled into a
voluminous array for which he eventually built a museum beside his home on the
outskirts of Nocona.1 To support his collection, the dedicated Benton also acquired
all the pertinent literature he could locate, and generously invited scholars to
examine his materials.
Fortunately for Benton’s purposes, the phenomenon had also engaged the
interest of archeologists and historians. In 1914 and 1915, historian Herbert Eugene
Bolton published clarifying evidence from Spanish documents. The fort had been
Indian rather than Spanish, built in the 1750s by the long-forgotten Wichitan band
called Taovayas, whose strategic site on an international boundary had given them
singular importance (Bolton 1914, Vol. II: 185; 1915:90). Bolton meant to have the
story of the Taovayas developed by one of his many graduate students at the
University of California, but a paucity of accessible documents made it such an

The priv ate museum is faithfully maintained by Benton’s heirs, who welcome visitors
upon suitable advance arrangement.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

198

Texas Archeological Society

impractical research problem that none of his candidates was ever foolhardy enough
to pursue it.
In contrast to the paucity of documentary evidence, the physical evidence
presented archeologists with an embarrassment of riches. Not only was there a
bewildering accumulation of artifacts, with little record of provenience, but there
was also a complicated cluster of sites that indicated both prehistoric occupations
and historic Wichitan activity. The extent and complexity of these manifestations
demanded a more comprehensive attack than the funding of archeologists in either
Texas or Oklahoma could support. It was not until the mid- 1960s that a federal grant
from the National Science Foundation permitted anthropologists in the two states
to collaborate in a systematic sampling of the archeological and archival data. Their
results provided more than adequate justification for extensive excavation and
analysis of Montague County’s Wichitan sites and their counterpart in Jefferson
County, Oklahoma (Bell et al. 1967). But a quarter of a century later, a comprehensive study of these vitally important sites is still awaited by concerned scholars,
buffs, and, perhaps most importantly, by the Wichita tribe, whose ancestral
experience these sites embody.
Perhaps the inquiry can be revitalized now, in keeping with the Quincentenary
emphasis on the encounter of Indian and European cultures that these sites
exemplify. Coincidentally, the construction of a long-needed highway bridge
across the Red River, just downstream from Spanish Fort, is sparking a new flurry
of public interest in the historical significance of the place, which some local
citizenry view as a potential magnet for tourists. However mixed the motives, it is
surely time to find out what these intriguing sites can tell.
Not the least of the challenges is to mesh the documentary evidence with that
which has been found on the ground. A cautionary example is the matter of the
location of the Taovayas fort, which was long thought to be obvious. After all, the
place name Spanish Fort commemorates the visible remains of a fort on the right
bank, or Texas side, of the Red River in the late nineteenth century. Spanish visitors
reported the Taovayas village on the right bank of the river in 1778, and historians
found no reason to question the apparent agreement of physical and documentary
evidence.
But the official reportage of the first Spanish encounter with the Taovayas fort
in 1759 does contain ambiguities that render the exact location--left bank or fight
bank--uncertain. An Oklahoma anthropologist proposed the left bank, or Oklahoma side, as an alternative in 1965 (Duffield 1965), to the considerable skepticism
of most scholars familiar with the pertinent documents. But three decades later, we
find that the language of the 1759 reports also left contemporary authorities in
Mexico City uncertain about the exact location of the fort.
For Spanish officialdom, the question was resolved in 1763 by a crude map that
caught my eye in Seville in 1983 (Figure 1). That map and its accompanying
affidavit constitute the earliest testimony that Spaniards obtained from a witness
well acquainted with the physical structure of the fort of the Taovayas and its
environs.

John m Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River

199

Early in 1763, the commandant of Presidio San Sabfi learned that the
well-behaved Frenchman who had recently enlisted in his company was actually a
deserter from the old French fort on the Arkansas River. Since his departure from
the Arkansas Post, Pedro Tamamint had visited all the villages of the Taovayas,
Tawakonis, Yscanis, and their allies, and had been many times in the fort of the
Taovayas. Naturally, the commandant seized this providential opportunity for
first-hand news of Indians who had continued to plague the S an Sabfi enterprise ever
since destroying its infant mission in March 1758.
On January 15, 1763, Commandant Felipe de Rfibago y Terfin summoned
soldier Pedro Tamamint and ordered him to make a map with its base point at New
Orleans, showing the locations of all the Indian villages in relation to the presidios
of San Sabfi, Los Adaes, and San Antonio de Brxar) In addition, he should provide
a sworn declaration of all the distances between settlements, describe the mode of
living of each of the Indian nations, and give his view of the means of bringing them
to justice.
That was too much to demand of a thirty-two-year-old soldier who did not
know how to write. But within five days Tamamint produced a primitive map that
gives the essential relationships in the region and clearly shows the fortified
Taovayas village on the left bank of the Red River. On January 20, he reported back
to Commandant Rfibago, who interrogated him before two witnesses and, having no
official scribe available, recorded the answers himself. Presumably R~ibago also
wrote on the map the labels identifying the symbols that Tamamint had drawn. The
Frenchman swore to the accuracy of the map and to the truth of his answers to
R~ibago’s questions.
As for distances, Tamamint’s own experience was that from the houses of
French hunters near the Cadohadachos, it was a four-day journey up the Red River
to the contiguous pueblos of the Yscanis and the Taovayas. Having once been sent
to Natchitoches during his service at the Arkansas Post, he estimated the distance
from the Taovayas to Natchitoches to be a little more than a hundred leagues (about
260 miles). After deserting the Arkansas Post, Tamamint had gone to the fort of the
Taovayas, but it had been a year since he last saw it.
Tamamint’s map shows the villages of the Yscanis and the Taovayas on the left
bank of the Red River (Rio de Natchitoches), the former, downstream and the latter,
upstream, on opposite sides of an apparent tributary flowing into the Red River
(Figure 1). A small circular village symbol denotes the Yscanis; a larger rectangle
denotes the Taovayas fort, with many tiny circles inside and out, perhaps representing houses within and without the enclosure.
2 The map (Figure 1) is filed in the Archivo General de Indies (AGI), Mapas y Planos,
Mfixico, #527, as "Presidio de San Sab~i hasta Adaes, 1763." A copy is in the Texas State
Archive’s Inglis Collection of photographs of manuscript maps from the AGI, entitled
"Fuerte de los tahuallas," 1983/18-30, map #2784. The supporting documents are in AGI,
Mfixico, 1933-A; a microfilm copy is available at the Bancroft Library, University of
California at Berkeley.

200

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Presidio de San Sab~ hasta Adaes, 1763. This diagrammatic map shows New
Orleans at the lower left, and tile Mississippi River along the lower margin, with its

John -- Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River

201

\
\

\

2

/

tributaries branching off to the northeast. (Map reproduced by courtesy of the Texas
State Archives.)

202

Texas Archeological Society

Other circular symbols locate the Cadohadachos, Tawakonis, Kichais,
Tonkawas, and Yojuanes, within an arena bounded by the Spanish presidios of San
Antonio de B6xar, San Sab~, and los Adaes, and the French posts of Natchitoches
and Cadohadachos. Just east of the road from B6xar to Los Adaes, Tamamint shows
the villages of the Ais and the Nacogdoches connected to one mission and, rather
puzzling, a village of"Yndios mansos" connected to another mission. Nearest Los
Adaes, on the road to B6xar, are two"casas de Ybarbos," the only private dwellings
shown, indicating Tamamint’s awareness of that family’s prominence in the
Texas-Louisiana marchlands. His depiction of French and Indian establishments
from New Orleans to the Illinois country, together with his grasp of Texas
geography, suggests how widely Tamamint had ranged before turning up at San
Sab~i.
Asked by Commandant R~bago to describe the construction of the Taovayas
fort, Tamamint explained that it was built of thick posts stuck in the ground in the
manner of scissors, with their closed points well joined, standing more than four
varas (roughly twelve feet) above ground. Between every two pairs was a small
aperture through which the Indians could operate their weapons from inside the said
scissors, which made a passageway. On the inside, as on the outside, the stakes were
embedded in earth more than two varas high (roughly six feet). The enclosure was
as large as that of Presidio San Sab~,3 and a spring in the middle provided a pool of
easily accessible drinking water. Moreover, the villagers had shown Tamamint an
abundance of foodstuffs--corn, dried meat, beans, etc.--that they kept well hidden
within the fort. Unquestionably, these people were well prepared against a siege.
As to Indian populations, Tamamint ventured no separate counts of villages,
but he guessed that the Taovayas, Yscanis, and other pueblos could muster more
than 3,000 men, all armed with guns. Many of them had as many as four or five good
firearms, as well as plenty of arrows, small hatchets, and all sorts of Indian weapons.
They also had many axes, hoes, and bars--all of French manufacture--acquired
during their years of trade with the French. But a year earlier (1762), the governor
at New Orleans had banned that trade on pain of death. It was probably no
coincidence that Tamamint had last visited the Taovayas fort a year ago: the French
trade interdiction may well have driven him to seek alternative subsistence on a
Spanish payroll in Texas.
Commandant R~ibago hoped this new intelligence would help him win permission for another punitive expedition against the Taovayas. However, authorities in
Mexico City drew quite another conclusion. Since Tamamint’s map proved that the
villages and fort were on the left bank of the Red River, they were indisputably in

3 The copy says "el tamafio de esse Presidio"--i.e., that presidio--but the context
indicates that this should be"este presidio"--i.e., this presidio, meaning San Sab~, which was
the site of the interrogation and the only presidio that has meaning in this context. This is one
of several instances of carelessness on the part of a copyist: e.g., both witnesses are named
Antonio at the beginning of the document; at the end, one is Rafael. The declarant’s name is
written as Tamint as well as Tamamint.

John ~ Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River

203

the territory of Louisiana---close enough to the Arkansas and Cadohadacho posts
to be subdued and managed through those French jurisdictions rather than at great
expense to the treasury of New Spain.
Of course, the Taovayas could not guess that all likelihood of another Spanish
expedition against them had vanished, and they knew all too well the relentless
menace of their Osage enemies. Hence they continued to expend prodigious labor
on their defenses. In the summer of 1765, two and a half years after Tamamint’s
report, another eyewitness reported substantial elaborations of the Taovayas
fortifications.
Soldier Antonio Trevifio, lately returned from a cordial six months’ sojourn as
the honored captive of the principal chief of the Taovayas, reported that the fort’s
interior circumference was now occupied by four very large subterranean houses,
capacious enough to hold all the people who could not participate in defending the
village against invaders. The exterior defenses had also been amplified: Trevifio
described an earthen rampart all around the outside, mounded to a height of more
than a vara and a third (about four feet), which served the defenders as a cover
against enemy fire. About four paces from it, a very deep ditch ran from east to west
in order that nobody could come near it on horseback. Moreover, there was now a
third village--that of the small band called Wichitas---contiguous to the Taovayas
on the north, while that of the Yscanis was at the same distance to the south. Trevifio
estimated that all three villages together could muster about 500 men-at-arms. They
enjoyed a thriving trade with the French, especially with a beloved man they called
Antonio, who had been established for many years on the Red River, perhaps 40
leagues (about 104 miles) downstream from the villages:
However elaborate the defenses of the Taovayas were, they proved inadequate against the Osages who had driven them southward from the Arkansas
River basin in the 1750s. By 1772, less than two decades after that migration,
Osage marauders forced them out of their Red River villages. The Taovayas
took refuge in broken country much farther upstream, while the Wichitas fled to
an arid treeless plain far up the Brazos; the Yscanis may have taken refuge with
the Tawakonis much farther downstream on the Brazos. Presumably the triumphant Osage destroyed not only the three Red River villages but also the great
fort, for there are no subsequent reports of such a structure on the left bank. The
demolition was so thorough as to leave no obvious traces. Not until 1967, at the
end of the National Science Foundation Pilot Project, were archeologists able to
discern at the Longest site (34Jfl) in Jefferson County, Oklahoma, outlines of
a structure that possibly marks the long-sought mid-eighteenth-century fortification (Bell et al. 1967).
4 Declaration of Antonio Trevifio, August 13, 1765, in certified copy of proceedings
concerning return of Trevifio by the Taovayas Indiana, March 20-August 16, 1765. B6xar
Archives (BA), Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin. As noted
in Newcomb and Field (1967:270), Trevifio’s testimony also confirms the left bank location
of the Taovayas fort.

204

Texas Archeological Society

By 1778, the Taovayas and Wichitas returned to their strategic Red River locale
on the western margin of the Cross Timbers, encouraged by promises of protection
and prosperity within a system of Spanish alliances. But this time the Taovayas
planted their village of 123 houses on the right bank; only the little Wichita band
ventured back to the left bank to build their 37 houses2
So began a nearly continous 30-year occupancy, with the dominant Taovayas
presence making the right bank of the Red River the principal hub of activity.
Unhappily, the Osage menace continued, fluctuating only in greater or lesser
degree, depending on circumstances in the Osage world. Spanish authorities were
rarely able to fulfill their promises of aid and trade, much less to respond to the
repeated pleas of the Taovayas to send them soldiers, missionaries, and even
settlers, to bolster the Wichitan hold on the Red River site that crown envoy
Athanase de M6ziEres had deemed in 1778 the "master key of the north." Indeed, by 1786, the situation on the Red River was so discouraging, and the desire
for closer involvement with the new Spanish-Comanche axis so great, that the
Taovayas and Wichitas moved briefly to the Pedernales River, an ill-advised
experiment in which they persisted only half a year before retreating to their
Red River site.6
Two maps, drawn by men who visited the villages in 1787 and 1788, confirm
the return of the Taovayas, Wichitas, and Yscanis to the Red River’s distinctive
bend between the ninety-eighth meridian and the Cross Timbers. Pedro Vial’s map
shows three villages there in 1787: the "taviache" and "ouichita" [Taovayas and
Wichitas] on the right bank, and the "Yachequariches" [variation on Yscanis?] on
the left bank. In July 1788, when Vial paid a return visit with the New Mexican
officer Francisco Xavier Fragoso, the latter drew a map (Figure 2) showing at that
5 The story of the Wichitan bands is a principal thread of John (1975), and is easily
discerned from the index by researchers not concerned with the larger context addressed in
that book.
6 It is puzzling that Newcomb and Field (1967:281) warn that the"Rio de los Pedernales"
of the 1786 move should not be confused with the modem stream; official Spanish reportage
from B~xar consistently refers to the Rio Pedernales in a context agreeing with the modem
usage.
7"Mapa et tierra qe. yos. pedro Vial taingo transzitau en St. Tafee este dia 18 de octubre
de Lann. 1787." The whereabouts of the original Vial map are unknown, so it can be studied
only through photographic copies, one of which is reproduced in Carl I. Wheat (1957: facing
p. 126). Appearing on the reverse, facing p. 127, is "Mapa del Territorio Comprendido entre
la Provincia de Nuevo Mexico y el Fuerte de Natchitoches y Tex as, 1789," drawn by Frago so,
which shows the route he and Vial traveled from Santa Fe to Nachitoches, 1788-1789. The
original is in Mapas y Pianos, A.G.I. Seville; a photograph can be seen in the Inglis
Collection, Spanish Map #2781, at the Texas State Archives, through whose courtesy both
the Fragoso and Tamamint maps are reproduced in this article. A manuscript copy of the
Fragoso map can be seen in the J. P. Bryan Collection, B arker History Center, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Wheat’s (1957:238-239) discussions of the two maps reflect the paucity of knowledge
about the context of these maps in 1957.

John ~ Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River

205

bend "pueblos de los Jumaes," a slight garbling of the term "Jumanos," under w hich
New Mexicans ordinarily lumped the Wichitan groups.7
In order to ensure adequate reportage of the 1788 expedition, the governor of
New Mexico sent two literate Spanish officers with the laconic Frenchman Vial.
Still, little description of the Red River villages emerged. Fragoso’ s diary noted that
two of the villages were on one bank of the river and one on the other, in a setting
of extraordinary beauty. Santiago Fernandez remarked in his diary that there were
17 houses in the first of the Jumanos villages reached by his escort party, and roughly
the same number in each of the two other villages, which were within half a league
(about a mile and a third) of the first. All three had fields of maize, beans,
watermelons, and squashes? Perhaps more intriguing is the description of terrain,
especially by Fragoso, emphasizing the hills which figured on the Vial and Fragoso
maps and became well-known guideposts for later travelers to these villages.
Conspicuously absent in Spanish documents, either on the maps or in the
various reports of visitors to the area after the 1760s, is mention of a fort at the
Wichitan villages on the Red River. That seems odd, considering the proven skill
of the Wichitas in the construction of forts and the perennial need for protection from
Osage marauders. Moreover, some fortification would have been eminently desirable to protect on that exposed frontier the lively trade--Indian, European, and,
ultimately, Anglo-American-- that the Wichitan villagers always invited and often
enjoyed.
That the Wichitan bands on the Red River actually did continue to build
fortifications is indicated by the 1808 diary of Anthony Glass, an
Anglo-American trader who visited the Taovayas and Wichita villages on the
right bank during his sojourn of several weeks in the left bank village that he
understood to be called "Huick" (John 1982-3:422). Glass observed that "their
forts are of a very slender construction made of mud which they retire to when
attacked by an enemy.’’9
This first--and perhaps sole--description from an Anglo-American visitor
meshes with a conjecture that late eighteenth century Spanish and French visitors
considered some fortification of Wichitan villages such a routine feature that it did

SThe descriptions of the villages by Fragoso and FernS.ndez can be most conveniently-albeit cautiously---examined in the translation of their diaries published in Noel M. Loomis
and Abraham P. Nasatir (1967:322-339).
9Huick may be the first documentary occurrence of the name Anglo-Texans would later
render as Waco. The term Huico--given as a name for one of the Tawakoni villages--occurs
in a Spanish trader’s report o f the 1811 dispersal of the Wichitan villagers from the Red River,
when some of them moved south to settle near the Tawakonis (Bernardo Montero to Manuel
Maria de Salcedo, Nacogdoches, January 3, 1812, BA). Contemporary Wichitas say that the
correct pronounciation is Wee-ko rather than Way-ko. Governor Cordero noted that the left
bank villages were known at San Antonio as Yascarros (Antonio Cordero to Nemesio
Salcedo, Bfxar, July 30, 1808, BA); the name more often occurs in Bfxar documents as
Yscanis.

206

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. The map drawn by Francisco Xavier Fragoso (reproduced by courtesy of the

John w Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River

\

Texas State Archives).

207

208

Texas Archeological Society

not warrant mention in their usually meager reports. This is not to suggest that the
Wichitan bands ever again built a fort as substantial as their first one on the Red
River in the 1750s and 1760s, but it does indicate that archeologists can reasonably
expect to find fortifications on the right bank as well as the left.
Another intriguing possibility for archeological discovery would be evidence
of the earliest blacksmithing on the northern Texas frontier. Frenchman Pedro Vial,
known among Indians as Manitou, plied his trade as a blacksmith while living
illegally with the Taovayas in the early 1780s, before he found his more famous
niche in the Spanish service as an explorer and emissary to Indians. Antonio Gil
Ybarbo reported a decade later that"monsieur Manitou" had maintained a forge by
the spring from which the Taovayas drew water. Unfortunately, that clue is less
specific than it may seem, because Gil Ybarbo lumped the pueblos on both sides of
Red River under the name Taovayas.1°
After Vial had left, Spanish authorities heard worrisome reports of other smiths
operating illegally at the Taovayas villages on the Red River, repairing guns and
making knives and lances. By the 1790s, a blacksmith named La Lima had
established a forge in the middle of the Taovayas pueblo whose leader the Spaniards
knew as el Flechazo. As lieutenant governor at Nacogdoches, Ybarbo ordered La
Lima and his wife hauled back to Natchitoches, whence they came, leaving most of
his equipment with the Indians. Had any villagers learned enough from Vial and his
successors to make some use of that forge?
Here arises yet another challenge to mesh what the documents tell us with what
the ground reveals. An extraordinary number of metal objects--including many
quite baffling fragments--has been a major factor in attracting attention to these
sites ever since news of the unusual incidence of artifacts began to circulate. A
partial, but hardly sufficient, explanation survives in accounts of trade and gift
goods. Does a further explanation lie in metal-smithing, and can the site(s) of the
eighteenth century forges be found?
While archeologists await their long-overdue opportunity to tackle these
tantalizing sites, historians remain alert for further archival evidence. My own most
recent and quite unexpected discovery in Seville in 1983, the Tamamint map,
illustrates the serendipity factor in a quest that began for me in 1949, when, for an
undergraduate history thesis, I sought an explanation for the many European and
Indian artifacts that farmers had been turning up for decades in the remote
southeastern corner of Jefferson County, my home county in Oklahoma. No tyro
could have wished better luck. My first venture in primary research led to the twin
villages of the kindred Taovayas and Wichita bands, where various Indian, Spanish,
French, and Anglo-American forces met from about 1757 to 1813, an important
story that had never been told.
The ramifications were virtually unlimited. Moreover, the evidence lay prin-

1°Manuel Mufioz to Antonio Gil Ybarbo and Gil Ybarbo to Mufioz, San Antonio de
B6xar, April 27, 1794, BA.

John ~ Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River

209

cipally in the rich store of Spanish documents that I have been exploring at every
opportunity ever since, while becoming nearly as fascinated with Hispanic as with
Indian cultures. Better still, the effort to understand--as opposed to merely
documenting--the Indian experience took me into cultural anthropology and
ethnology. In effect, the momentum of the inquiry that began with those Wichitan
sites on the Red River led directly into the rather conlxoversial subdiscipline of
ethnohistory, a hybrid that was just beginning to emerge in the 1950s. It was the
beginning of a lifework in which archeologists’ generous sharing of information has
been indispensable.
REFERENCES CITED
Bell, R. E., Edward B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967
A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory. Final Report for
Grant GS-964. National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.

Bolton, Herbert E.
1914
Athanase de M&ikres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780.2 vols.
Arthur H. Clark, Cleveland.
1915

Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. The University of California Publications in History, Volume 3. Berkeley.

Duffield, L. F.
1965
The Taovayas Village of 1759: In Texas or Oklahoma? Great Plains Journal
4:39-48.
John, Elizabeth A. H.
1975

Storms Brewed on Other Men’s Worlds: The Confrontation oflndians, Spanish,
and French, 1540-1795. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

1982-

Portrait of a Wichita Village, 1808. The Chronicles of Oklahoma 60 (Winter),

1983

pp. 413-437.

Loomis, Noel M., and Abraham P. Nasatir
1967
Pedro Vial and the Roads to Santa Fe. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr., and W. T. Field
An Ethnohistoric Investigation of the Wichita Indians in the Southern Plains. In:
1967
A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, by R. E. Bell,
Edward B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb,Jr., pp. 240-354. FinalReportfor Grant
GS-964. National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.
Wheat, Carl I.
1957
Mapping the Trans-Mississippi West. The Institute of Historical Cartography,
San Francisco.

