A Preliminary Report on Excavations at
Hitzfelder Cave
R. DALE GIVENS

In the spring of 1962, Mr. Nol~nan Hitzfelder discovered a cave
shaft or sink hole on his ranch thirty miles north of San Antonio. For
a number of years thereafter Mr. Hitzfelder periodically worked at the
site removing rock and rubble that filled the shaft down to about 30
feet, at which point the opening was blocked by a soapstone boulder.
(It is worth noting that soapstone is not known to be native to the
immediate locale of the sink hole.) Mr. Hitzfelder used dynamite to
break the boulder and found human bones immediately below. Shortly thereafter, the site was visited by Robert Benfer who surveyed the
site and assigned it a number: 41-BX-26. In addition to several week
ends of work by Benfer, Mm’dith K. Sehuetz of the Witte Museum
and a party of spelunkers spent varying periods investigating the site.
In FebrualT, 1967, an unusual skull fragment (ca!otte) was recovered. At this time the cave shaft was at 35 feet at the deepest point.
Mr. Hitzfelder called this to the author’s attention and arrangements
were made for a group from Trinity University to excavate the remainder of the cave. Work in the spring of 1967 was carried out entirely
by a group of student volunteers. During the summer and the 19671968 academic year a class was organized to excavate with the help
of more volunteers.
To date, the excavation has revealed the skeletal remains of between
30 and 40 individuals, including portions of at least 30 skulls. A large
proportion of the bones are fi’agmentary and in poor condition. The
human skeletal remains are mostly represented by badly scattered
bones although ttu’ee semi-articulated burials have also been found. A
multitude of animal bones, mostly from small species, were found.
Remains of domesticated dog and most of five deer have also been
recovered.
Only a sprinkling of artifacts have been found. These include three
bone awls, one of which has been notched along one side; some 30
bone beads; a few pieces of worked shell; a spherical stone that may
or may not have been shaped; a stone pendant; three points of Frio
type; and a "stemmed knife." Two points were found by Mrs. Schuetz
with the first discovery of hnman bones-one is a Pedernales type and
the other is somewhat intermediate between the Marshall and Lange
point.
At present, excavation is at the 45 foot level. Bedrock has been

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

reached around the pm~phery of the main cavern, which is 35 feet by
15 feet, but the center is still dirt-or, in actual fact, mud. A shaft
running downward at close to a 45 ° angle extending some 20 feet was
recently discovered, but the opening is too narrow to enter at present.
A side cavern, some 18 feet deep and only a few feet wide on the east
side of the main cavern is currently being cleared. Each Saturday to
date, at least 50 bone fragments have been recovered, and there seems
to be no end in sight.
The excavation has been extremely difficult to carry out with anything like proper technique owing to continuous dripping from the
cave roof and water that runs in with every rain. Work proceeds in
a combination of mud and slush.
For much the same reasons it has been velT difficult to date the site.
Benfer collected a carbon sample at about 39. feet which gave a date
of 1000 A.D. -----190. However, there is good reason to believe that this
sample consisted largely of washed in surface carbon and gave a date
unrelated to the skeletons. Professor Ernest Lundelius of The University of Texas Geology Department has provided a report on the animal
species represented, but this has not helped the dating problem. Currently, he is worldng with a new and larger sample that may add more
information. The artifacts, few as they are, indicate an Archaic assemblage. Although dating on the basis of these artifacts is much too
broad and inaccurate, they would seem to indicate an age of about
3000 to 4000 B.C. as maximum.
The site is of significance for at least three reasons. First, Benfer and
Ruben Frank have pointed out the presence of several "burial caves"
in central Texas (personal communication), but the Hitffelder Cave
is the first of these to be scientifically excavated. Second, in other central Texas sites, skeletal remains and an Archaic artifact assemblage
have seldom been associated together, and little is known of the skeletal morphology of Archaic people. Third, the morphology of some of
the skulls is significantly different from the type generally representative of the American Indian (Fig. 1).
Little more need be said concerning the first two points at this rime,
but the third needs additional explanation. While the analysis of the
skeletal material is still in its early stages, enough of the skulls have
been reconstructed to make some generalizations possible. Approximately half of the 30 skulls either be!ong to infants or very young individuals, or else are too incomplete to study. Of the remainder, five
do not appear to be distinguishable in any way from modern and recent American Indians. The other ten, however, are remarkable in
showing a combination of morphologically "archaic" traits. In varying

HITZFELDER

CAVE

FmuR~ 1.

One of the skulls from Hitzfelder Cave.

49

degrees, these have a pronounced supra-orbital torus, marked postorbital constriction, a sloping forehead, and are dolichocranic (longheaded). Recently, Dr. T. D. Stewart, the Smithsonian Institution’s
Senior Physical Anthropologist, examined the material. He felt that
the skulls, including the more extreme ones, are within the range of
modern man (Homo sapiens sapiens), especially in regard to the size
of the mastoid process and in the presence of a well developed chin.
Other generalizations can be made at this time which raise additional questions. The teeth are markedly fi’ee of caries or other disease,
but show an extreme amount of wear even in young individuals. The
latter phenomenmn is undoubtedly related to diet. The limb bones are
equally free of disease, although there are a few eases of lesions. Life
expectancy must have been very low for the oldest individual recovered shows suture closure indicative of an age between thirty-five
and folty. The average age would have been much lower, probably
around twenty.

50

TEXAS ARCI-IEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The last point raises another problem. The remains are certainly
a sample, but of what kind? How large was the population from which
it was drawn, and over how long a time span were the bones left in
the cave? Does the accumulation represent one year or many?
Archaeologists are often prone to refer to any discovery of human
bones as a burial. In many eases this may not be the situation at all.
At Hitzfelder Cave, there are several alternative possibilities to consider. Do the bones represent bodies lowered to that level and buried,
or were they simply tossed in from the top? Do the bones represent a
primary burial or a secondary one? Was death due to natural causes
or to sacrifice or warfare?
One of the skulls shows clear evidence of having received a severe
blow which knocked a chunk out of the right parietal. The frontal
bone and facial region are split at approximately the same level, something which would occur with green bone but is not likely to occur
from a post-mortem blow on the pmJetal. It seems rather clear that
this individual, at least, met with foul play.
The range of variability in the skeleton of modern man is considerable. This, in fact, seems to be the ease with most Primates, and the
range may have been greater for ancient man than modern types.
The question can be legitimately raised as to whether the Hitzfelder
Cave skeletal material represents a single group of people (population
or deme) with an extreme amount of variation, or whether two more
or less separate groups might not be represented. It is too early to
make a fin!l judgment, but from observation alone (without the help
of anthropometrie measurements), there appear to be the "unusual"
skulls with some variation among them and the "normal" skulls with
no intermediate folzns between. Further analysis may show that the
less extreme of the "unusual" skulls fills this gap, but at present this
does not seem to be the ease.
No final interpretation is possible until a complete analysis of the
material can be made. When this is possible, our knowledge of the
early people of Texas should be greatly extended. It is already evident
that the range of variability is considerable if al! the skulls are placed
in a single population, as perhaps they should be. If no intmTnediates
are found, it might be more appropriate to consider the remains as
representing two different populations with one of them possessing a
mlmber of morphologiea!ly archaic traits. This should have a multitude of additional implications which need not be considered in this
paper.
Trinity University
San Antonio, Texas

