FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS FROM
THE MANNING FORMATION
I(. M. BROWN

ABSTRACT
Fused volcanic glass from the Manning Formation of southeast Texas
was formed when combustion of the underlying lignite beds in localized
areas melted the tuff deposits. This distinctive material was used as a
minor source of raw material for making chipped stone artifacts since the
Early Archaic and is found at various sites in the Gulf Coastal Plain.

INTRODUCTION
Virtually none of the raw materials used to manufacture chipped
stone artifacts in the Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas can be traced to a
specific outcrop. There are no beds of chert in east Texas sediments,
which consist of sandstones and poorly consolidated clays, shales,
sands, and tuff deposited during the Eocene and later. Most raw
material for chipping was obtained from relict sheets of stream
terrace gravels that were deposited high above the present river beds
during the Pleistocene and have since been extensively eroded. These
patchy gravel deposits can be found fringing east Texas river valleys
inland from the deltaic deposits of the coastal area. Chert, quartzite,
and petrified wood were selected as chipping material from these
gravels, but since essentially the same kinds of rock are found both
along and among different drainages, it is impossible to trace
artifacts to specific gravel deposits.
This paper will report one kind of raw material, fused volcanic
glass, which stands as an exception to the usual anonymity of chipped
stone resources in east Texas. Because this rock (1) is distinctive in
appearance, and (2) can be related to a known outcrop, it may be
possible eventually to define resource distribution patterns by
studying the occurrence of the material in archeolo’gical sites, even if
we cannot determine whether the material was acquired through
trade or through special extractive expeditions.

GEOLOGIC CONTEXT
Mode of formation
Near the end of the Eocene epoch, large amounts of volcanic ash
were ejected into the atmosphere by erupting volcanos that may have
been located in the Trans-Pecos area. Volcanic ash is a finely divided
chalky dust composed of microscopic, angular volcanic glass shards.
These dust showers settled down either in the contemporaneous

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

190

Eocene Gulf coastal region, or (more likely} in the headwaters of
streams draining into the coastal region, or both. As a result,
significant amounts of volcanic ash are present in the lignific sands
and clays of the Manning Formation. Some ash beds deposited in
aquatic environments have been altered to bentonite (Renick 1936:
42); elsewhere deposits with pyroclastic material vary from
tuffaceous sandstones, siltstones, and shales to massive tuff
(consolidated volcanic ash). Where relatively pure tuff beds overlie
relatively pure lignite beds, the appropriate conditions exist for
melting of the tuff by combustion of the lignite, and in fact King and
Rodda (1962) present evidence to support the hypothesis that fusion
of the tuff at various localities in the Manning Formation was caused
by the heat generated by burning of the underlying lignite beds
(perhaps due to spontaneous combustion) at some time during the
geologic past. The degree of fusion varies and where it was most
intense, actual melting of the microscopic glass shards has produced
small aggregates of brightly colored glassy material. King and Rodda
estimate that tempertatures of at least 1125°C were required for
melting (ibid: 269).
Fused tuff is, like obsidian, a volcanic glass and has a similar fracture, but the mode of formation of the two is considerably different.
Figures i and 2 contrast diagrammatically the mode of formation of
obsidian and fused tuff.
Location of outcrops
The Manning Formation crops out in a narrow band across the Gulf
Coastal Plain of southeast Texas, about 190 kin inland in Polk, Trinity,
Walker, Grimes, Brazos, Burleson, Washington, Lee, Fayette, and
Gonzales counties, and on into south Texas (Fig. 3). However, fused
volcanic glass is known only from eight localized exposures within the
outcrop: one each from Fayette, Washington, Brazos, and Grimes

.................... }

FIGURE

L,;UULIIVL3

1. Mode of formation of obsidian.

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

191

8
Q

LITHIFICATION

MAGMA

TUFF

Z--~MELTINGzZ/

FUSED
VOLCANIC
GLASS

HEAT FROM
BURNING LIGNITE

FIGURE 2. Mode of formation of fused volcanic glass.

counties, and two each from Walker and Trinity counties (one of the
Trinity County localities I recorded in 1970 and is not reported by
King and Rodda). These known exposures are indicated on Figure 3 by
crosses.
The best exposure of fused tuff in the Manning Formation is an
active quarry known as the "Chalk Pit" (Bur. Econ. Geol. sample
locality 235-T-2, Texas Arch. Res. Lab. rock sample locality
M41WAI), located between Dillard Creek and Chalk Creek in
northern Walker County. King and Rodda report the following
stratigraphic section as recorded in 1960:
Three units are exposed in the pit. The upper unit is a light colored tuff,
up to 4 feet thick, which overlies the middle unit with a marked erosional
unconformity .... Locally the upper tuff has been fused or partially fused,
but is otherwise unaltered. The middle unit is 10 to 12 feet thick, and
consists mostly of massive tuffaceous siltstone with a few sandstone beds
and channels up to 5 feet thick. A bentonite bed 1 to 2 inches thick is
present in the lower part of this unit, and is exposed along the base of the
north wall of the quarry. Fragments of silicified wood were found in the
lower part of the middle unit. Most of the tuff and tuffaceous siltstone has
been baked, hardened, partially fused, and colored shades of red, brown,
and orange. The lowest unit is a lignite of unknown thickness which is
exposed in the quarry floor (King and Rodda 1962: 266).

192

~XAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fused volcanic glass is so abundant in archeological sites
surrounding this locality as to suggest a surface exposure must have
existed prehistorically as well. Most of the other localities were
probably also exposed then, but whether they were known is
uncertain. There are also undoubtedly other as yet undiscovered
localities with fused rocks in the Manning Formation.
Baked and fused rocks in the Wilcox Group
Baked shales produced by lignite combustion are also known from
the Wilcox Group in Freestone County, near Donie (Lonsdale and
Crawford 1928; TARL rock locality M41FT1) and, apparently, in
Titus County near Winfield. Samples from the Titus County locality

FIGURE 3. Distribution of sites with fused volcanic glass from the
Manning Formation (except 41 LT 58, which has one baked shale
fragment only). Crosses represent localities with baked or fused
rocks. Open triangles are sites whose exact location is unknown. One
site at Martin Lake (41 PN 14) is not indicated.

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

193

were collected in 1971 by Olin McCormick and they appear nearly
identical to baked shales from the Chalk Pit quarry.
Rocks from the Freestone County locality tend to be either slaglike
or friable, porous, baked siltstones. Lonsdale and Crawford report
some glassy, porcelanite-like material, but since I was unable to visit
all of the exposures they recorded I have not seen it and cannot judge
how comparable it might be to the fused glass in the Manning
Formation. I doubt that it occurs in massive aggregates.
A large chunk of baked shale is present in a surface collection from
41 LT 58, west of the Freestone County locality, but it appears
identical to the Manning baked shales, and does not resemble those
from Freestone County.
Petrography of altered rocks from the Manning Formation
Rocks from the sample localities vary all the way from unaltered
tuff, tuffaceous sandstone, siltstone, and claystone or shale to
partially baked or fused examples of these rocks, to glassy,
completely fused tuff. The degree of fusion depends on two factors:
(1) the relative amounts of silica and clay minerals, carbon, or other
contaminants; (2) the temperature and duration of firing.
Fused tuff
Completely fused tuff has a vitreous luster similar to milk glass or
opal. At 30x magnification tiny gas bubbles (from gas produced
during lignite combustion) can be seen in the interior of some
specimens. On archeological specimens, gas bubbles that are
exposed on the surface may fill with soil; some artifacts from the
George C. Davis site are lightly speckled with red from being buried in
the red Amite fine sandy loam at the site. Small fault planes with
infiltrated iron oxide are frequently present, and aggregates of glass
often break along these faults, leaving a reddish-brown covering that
simulates weathering cortex but is very thin. Fused glass has an
excellent conchoidal fracture and would rival obsidian in terms of
chipping properties except for the fact that fault planes, voids, and
inclusions are common, making it difficult to manufacture anything
except small implements. Fused volcanic glass apparently patinates
rapidly since many archeological specimens are patinated, some
heavily, and could easily be mistaken for chert artifacts. Patination
produces a very dull, sometimes pitted luster and a surface color that
is generally lighter than the interior. The most common color of
geological specimens is a light blueish gray (Navy gray, Munsell
chroma 0, value 6 to 7), often with burnt sienna (5YR4.5/6) colored
streaks. Less common colors include charcoal gray (chroma 0, value

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

5), Indian red (3YR3.5/6), and sienna (5YR5.5/7). White and black
occur very rarely; black specimens could be mistaken for obsidian.
There are also one or two specimens, from the George C. Davis site,
with a flow structure that simulates petrified palm wood, but these
are also rare.
Thin sections of the fused tuff are homogeneous glass which encloses
rare grains of the same types of quartz, zircon, and plagioclase found in
the partially fused and unfused tuff and tuffaceous siltstone. Most shard
edges have fused together and the outlines of individual shards cannot be
seen. Vesicles are numerous and range in size up to 2 mm, but mostly are
less than 0.5 mm. The index of refraction of the glass varies from 1,486 to
1.501 in eight samples for which the index was measured, but mostly is
close to 1.490 (King and Rodda 1962: 268).

Distinguishing fused volcanic glass from chert
Fused volcanic glass can easily be mistaken for chert, especially if
it is patinated. The following guidelines may help in discriminating
between the two.
1. Luster. The most diagnostic macroscopic attribute is the luster, which
on a fresh break is much more glassy and bright than that of chert. The
contrast between fresh and patinated surfaces is also generally more
pronounced than for chert.
2. Isotropism. Fused volcanic glass is an isotropic or noncrystalline
substance, like obsidian, opal, or artificial glass, and a tiny chip of the
rock placed on the stage of a petrographic microscope will extinguish
under crossed nicols. Chert, a crystalline rock, will not behave this
way.

These are the simplest tests that can be applied to discriminate
between chert and fused volcanic glass, neither requiring extensive
damage to the specimen. More detailed studies might include
measuring the index of refraction and comparing it to the data given
by King and Rodda; or preparing thin sections, which would be
especially diagnostic for partially fused specimens, but would require
sacrificing the specimen.

Baked and partially fused rocks
Associated with the fused glass is baked, hardened, and partially
fused tuff and tuffaceous siltstone and baked claystone or shale. The
partially fused tuff has a chalky luster and occurs in pastel shades of
lavender, pink (10YR5.5/6-7), yellowish-orange (5YR7.5/7), yellowish
beige (7.5YR8/6) and gray. In thin section,
This rock is composed almost entirely of nearly uniform (about 2 to 4
microns} glass shards. Corners and edges of shards are fused together, but

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

195

the separate outline of each shard can be clearly distinguished. The few
vesicles range in size up to about 2 microns. There are rare grains of
quartz with beta quartz forms, euhedral to subhedral, pink to violet zircon
and euhedral plagioelase (King and Rodda 1962: 266}.

Siltstones and claystones, with a lower ash content, have been baked
and oxidized into a hard, bricklike yellowish beige (7.5YR8/6)
material. Volume reduction of the lignite beds due to combustion has
caused collapsing and extensive shattering of this rock (King and
Rodda 1962: 266). Chunks of this rock occur in collections from sites
that also have fused tuff chipping debris and artifacts. I suspect that
this material was not imported intentionally but was simply brought
in adhering to chunks of fused tuff as "cortex," although at the Davis
site the specimens indicated removal by percussion (Shafer 1973: 149-

15o}.
At some of the sites there are also soft, friable siltstones and tufts
that have been baked only enough to oxidize to shades of pink, beige,
and orange. These probably did not adhere to glass aggregates but
may have been collected as pigment sources; they resemble pigments
recovered from burials at various east Texas sites. They also
resemble baked siltstones from the Freestone County locality. Two
partially finished earspools recovered from the fill of feature 119, a
deep shaft grave in Mound C at the George C. Davis site, are made of
a similar siltstone (cf. Sharer 1973: 287-288), and two earspools worn
by the single individual buried in feature 118, another shaft grave,
are made of a white material resembling unfired or lightly fired tuff
from the Chalk Pit locality (cf. Shafer 1973: 283).
Other rock types
King and Rodda report two other kinds of rock that have not yet
turned up in archeological collections, but could conceivably be
found. These are a sandstone injected with fused tuff, resembling a
glass-cemented sandstone, and grayish black to olive-black, clinkerline pseudo-basalt. The latter is a crystalline (magnetite, plagioclase,
and pyroxene) rock with about 30% interstitial glass (King and Rodda
1962: 268).

ARCHEOLOGICALCONTEXT
The use of fused volcanic glass from the Manning Formation began
as early as the Early Archaic period, for several San Patrice points
made of this rock are known to exist. One San Patrice st. johns point
from the C. W. Ellis site (41 PK 1) in Polk County is probably made of
Manning fused glass (Fig. 5, A). Another San Patrice st. johns point

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Fig. 5, B) of Manning fused glass was found by Jack Hughes in Rusk
County but it is not certain which of the sites in the area it came from
[the approximate location is indicated by the open triangle west of the
Martin Lake area, Fig. 3). Both points are heavily patinated, and the
one from Rusk County resembles the heavily patinated specimens
from Martin Lake. In addition to these two specimens in the TARL
collections, at least two more San Patrice points are believed to exist
in private collections (Harry Shafer, personal communication).
No further use of the material is demonstrable with the evidence at
hand until the early Caddoan period. Fused volcanic glass artifacts
and chipping debris appear at the George C. Davis site, in both
surface and excavated samples, and in surface collections from the
Westerman site (41 HO 15), which is undated but could be
contemporaneous with the Davis site. Both of these are major sites
with constructed mounds. Manning fused glass also occurs at other
possible early Caddoan sites for which we have only small surface or
test pit collections; these include 41 CE 49 and 41 CE 54 in the Davis
site vicinity, and some sites in the Martin Lake locality (41 RK 30, 32,
47, and possibly 23). These, however, are only tentatively recognized
as having early Caddoan components, and they may have earlier or
later components as well.
Archeological context at the Davis site
According to Shafer (1973: 55), fused volcanic glass from the
Manning Formation accounts for about 2.28% of the sample of about
6500 flakes and cores from the site. My survey of the collections lists
178 artifacts, flakes, and cores of fused glass, plus four fragments of
baked siltstone. In general, we can say that this material appears to
have been used as a minor lithic resource throughout the Caddoan
occupation of the site, and seems to occur in all parts of the site
except the special mortuary, Mound C. It is well represented in the
Early Village (800-1000 A.D.) and Middle Village (1000-1200 A.D.)
phases as defined by Story and Valastro (1975; dates based on
radiocarbon assays with Arizona dendrochronological correction).
One flake was recovered from a midden deposit underlying feature
108, an elongate late 11th or early 12th century structure underlying
Mound B (Tx 915, Tx 916, Valastro and Davis 1970: 627). Another
flake fragment came from the vicinity of feature 112, an adjacent
circular, late 11th or early 12th century structure (Tx 910, Tx 919, Tx
924, Valastro and Davis 1970: 628) also underlying Mound B.
Other artifacts and chipping debris are associated with dated
parts of the village, but not in contexts that can be related to single
depositional events. Many parts of the village seem to have been used

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

197

or reused over long periods. Fifty-three pieces of chipping debris and
one small eccentrically chipped object were recovered from the plow
zone in Unit 10, with four pieces of chipping debris in situ at the base
of the plow zone; this is the largest sample of Manning fused glass
from any excavation unit (probably mostly due to intensive screening
at this unit; Story, personal communication). It is therefore
associated in a general way with feature 125, a circular structure
probably dating from the 10th century (Tx 1201, Tx 1202, Tx 1204, Tx
1307, Tx 1308; Valastro, Davis, and Varela 1975: 72-73) although none
of the in situ flakes and cores were found inside the structure.
In addition to these items there are others from parts of the village
that have been dated, but where the association is so nonspecific as
to be uninformative. In view of this it is perhaps more pragmatic to
look at the entire Manning fused glass sample and the entire
radiocarbon series and to state simply that use of the material
occurred during all or part of the span from 800 to 1200 A.D. and
perhaps somewhat later.
In order to study the distribution within the site, Carolyn Spock and
I plotted all of the Manning fused glass artifacts and chipping debris
for which we have records. We were particularly interested in
testing the hypothesis that since the material had to be imported from
an outcrop about 75 km distant, it might have qualified as a "scarce
good" in the prehistoric economy of the Davis site and therefore might
have been distributed differentially among different social segments
(and different parts of the site). We were hampered in this
undertaking by our inability to evaluate the contribution of different
amounts of screening to the different unit frequencies, but we can say
that fused volcanic glass seems to occur in all parts of the site except
Mound C. Its absence from the special mortuary I suspect has to do
with the physical properties of the material itself rather than with the
economy of extraction and transport. I have tried informal chipping
experiments and have found that the material tends to fracture
unexpectedly along minute fissures where aggregates have not
completely fused, so that it would be difficult to produce the finely
chipped Alba points (all of which are chert or quartzite) deposited in
Mound C as grave goods.
Evidence for continued use of Manning fused glass after the 13th
century comes primarily from the Martin Lake locality in northern
Rusk and Panola counties, about 120 km from the Manning Formation.
None of these sites have been radiocarbon dated, but the decorated
pottery from some of them is similar to that from dated sites
excavated in the Lake O’ The Pines locality farther to the north, and
this probably furnishes a basis sufficient for at least an approximate

198

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cross-date. Two sites at Martin Lake, 41 RK 19 and 41 RK 21, have
components that can be guess-dated at about the 14th century A.D.,
and another site, 41 RK 39, has a component that may date from the
same period, as well as a probable Archaic component. The small
sample of Manning fused glass from 41 RK 19 consists of five flakes or
flake fragments, with two fragments of baked tuff or siltstone, most of
which were recovered from a midden deposit on the east side of the
excavated area. The samples from 41 RK 21 and 41 RK 39 are surface
and test pit collections and include chipping debris and arrow points,
none of which can be identified with established projectile point
types.
Petrography of specimens from the Martin Lake locality
The arrow points and chipping debris from Martin Lake are of
particular interest because they form a group that is petrographically
homogeneous and distinct from almost all of the other east Texas
archeological specimens. Almost all of the Martin Lake specimens are
very heavily patinated, to an extent that is duplicated only by the San
Patrice points mentioned earlier. The patina has formed over flake
scars on the arrow points, cores, and flakes, indicating that rapid
weathering of the surface took place after the items were discarded.
In many cases the dorsal surfaces of flakes are more heavily
weathered than the ventral surfaces, just as in "cortex flakes" of
chert, indicating that considerable weathering, probably at the
outcrop, had already taken place before the material was chipped.
The rapid weathering of the Martin Lake artifacts is presumably
due either to incomplete fusion, a lower silica content, a greater
abundance of small gas bubbles in the rock, or some combination of
these factors. In any case, it seems fairly certain that virtually all of
the Martin Lake specimens were obtained from the same exposure
and that this exposure is different from that which furnished raw
material for the other east Texas specimens. More detailed lithologic
studies will be required to verify this hypothesis and pinpoint the
sources. The unweathered rock is probably most comparable to that
from locality M41TN1, an exposure with partially fused rocks in
Trinity County. Along with the chipping debris there are chunks of
soft, chalky, light blue-gray to pink, slightly baked tuff at some of the
Martin Lake sites. This material does not closely resemble any of the
Chalk Pit rocks I have seen.
There is one exception to the preceding discussion: a single
unweathered flake fragment from 41 RK 19 that is identical to the
fused glass from the Chalk Pit.

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

199

The most recent aboriginal site at which there is good evidence for
use of fused volcanic glass from the Manning Formation is the
Deshazo site (41 NA 27) in the Bayou Loco drainage near
Nacogdoches. This site appears to have minor Archaic and possibly
later prehistoric Caddoan components, but the principal component
is a protohistoric (presumably Hasinai) hamlet and cemetery. Trade
goods are very scarce in the domestic portion of the site, suggesting it
predates entry of Europeans into the immediate area. Glass trade
beads from the site correspond to the Harris’ Period 1 (1700-1740
A.D.) beads (Harris and Harris 1967: 130; Dee Ann Story, personal
communication). Several hundred flakes, cores, and chipped stone
artifacts were recovered in excavations by the Texas Archeological
Survey and the Texas Archeological Research Lab in 1975, and
among these were four flakes and one flake or shatter fragment of
fused volcanic glass from the Manning Formation. One was found in a
midden deposit inside structures 1 and 2, another in the plow zone in
the same area, another inside structures 1 and 3, another in a midden
deposit adjacent to and just outside structures 5 and 6, and the fifth
was found on the surface 40 meters east of the main excavations.
Some speculations about extractive technology
We can only speculate about what sort of exposures of fused rocks
may have existed prehistorically, and what methods were used to
recover raw material for chipping. Recent quarrying, pine
plantations, and firebreaks have extensively disturbed the Chalk Pit
locality, which I suspect was the primary source locality. On a recent
trip there I saw thoroughly fired and fractured rocks extending to the
base of the A soil horizon in the northern part of the quarry, but no
glass aggregates were present. Baked shales could be obtained there
simply by scraping off the topsoil. Most of the fused glass, however,
occurs in the middle unit {King and Rodda 1962: 266), generally well
below the surface [below the light-colored stratum in Fig. 4). It seems
likely that recovery techniques were limited to" collecting glass
aggregates exposed by erosion.
Manufacturing technology
Flakes and cores of fused volcanic glass are found at all but five of
the sites considered here, indicating that artifacts were not
introduced from the outcrop area in finished form. Instead, small
nodules were brought to the sites and there reduced to flakes and
shatter fragments, with some of the flakes being selected for shaping
into finished tools. At the George C. Davis site, for example, the
reduction process is represented by cores, flakes and shatter

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 4. Exposure of fired tuff and tuffaceous claystone in the east
wall of the Chalk Pit quarry. Glass aggregates occur at about the same
level as the rock hammer, but none are visible in this photo.

MANNING

FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

201

fragments, arrow point preform failures (Fig. 5, H-K, this paper, and
Shafer 1973: 147, Fig. 14, D2, E2), and finished Alba points (Fig. 5, G).
The only tool forms presently known are San Patrice points, arrow
points (Alba, possibly Catahoula, and unclassified), and a small
biface.
Although Sharer found in his study of Manning fused glass chipping
debris at the Davis site that the particular percussion technique
could not be conclusively identified on many flakes and cores, his
experiments with core reduction suggested that anvil (bipolar]
percussion was a major reduction technique for Manning fused glass
at the Davis site (Shafer 1973: 149}. Shafer classified the chipping
debris as follows:*
Hard hammer percussion
bipolar flake debitage
opposed ridge flakes
miscellaneous
bipolar core debitage
opposed ridge
point-base
miscellaneous
Technique uncertain
miscellaneous flake debitage
flake fragment debitage
miscellaneous core debitage

2
7
2
1
3
61
59
20

*Taken from Shafer, 1973, table 2; does not include some items tabulated in
this paper.

A surface collection of chipping debris from the Chalk Creek #1 site
(41 WA 71} made by Bill Moore provides us with an opportunity to
look at the byproducts of tool manufacture at a site near the source
area. The Chalk Creek site is a small site located on a sandy ridge
about 3 kilometers away from the Chalk Pit quarry. As would be expected at a site so close to the source area, fused volcanic glass
makes up a larger proportion of the chipping debris and frequently
occurs in the form of larger flakes than at the Davis site. Manning
fused glass comprises about 60% to 70% of the Chalk Creek surface
collection.
This assemblage of manufacturing debris is quite different from the
George C. Davis sample and suggests that manufacturing processes
differed at the two sites. It might not be legitimate to treat this
surface collection as an assemblage, since both heavily patinated and
unpatinated or lightly patinated flakes are present, but sorting of the
flakes by degree of patination shows that patination does not covary

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

202

B
A

E

D

F

@

’L

I

H

0

K

J

0.5 cm

FIGURE 5. Projectile points made of fused volcanic glass from the
Manning Formation A, San Patrice, C. W. Ellis site (41 PK 1); B, San
Patrice, Rusk County; C, Catahoula (?), Houston site (41 SJ 19); D,
unclassified arrow point, 41 TN 11, surface; E. Alba or Catahoula,
Claude Riley collection, Madison County; F, Alba, Robbin’s Ferry site
(41 HO 4), surface; G, Alba, George C. Davis site (41 CE 19), WPA
excavations, sub-Mound A wash, near features 12, 13, 14, depth 14
inches; H-K, arrow point preform failures, George C. Davis site; H, K,
surface southeast of Mound B; I, plow zone over Mound B; J, surface,
east of Highway 21.

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

A

203

B

D

C

FIGURE 6. Cores of fused volcanic glass from the Manning Formation
A, free-hand/bipolar (?) core remnant, Chalk Creek site, surface;
arrow indicates direction of possible bipolar percussion blow; B,
core, technique uncertain, Chalk Creek site, surface; C, core
remnant, technique uncertain, George C. Davis site, Unit 6 plow zone;
D, bipolar core, George C. Davis site, surface east of Highway 21,
area M5.

with the descriptive categories presented below. The Chalk Creek
sample can be partitioned into the following categories:
1. Flakes with intact platform remnants and moderately developed bulbs
of percussion (N = 42). This group of flakes is almost certainly the result

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

204

of percussion with a hard hammer on cores that were not supported on
a hard anvil. These flakes have platform remnants that are in many
cases quite broad; many flakes are short, wide, and expanding in
shape, others elongated, a few irregular; these tend to be thick in crosssection, tapering toward the distal end, but most are not markedly
arched. Nine are snapped near the distal end.
2.

3.

4.

Flakes from early stages of biface thinning? (N=15). These have
narrow, frequently battered platform remnants and are elongate and
very thin, often with a reticulate scar pattern on the dorsal surface.
Platform remnants are similar to the direct impact percussion flakes,
but the elongate shape and marked thinness suggests hard hammer
percussion from early stages of biface thinning. One has a faceted
platform remnant and falls within the range of variability of soft
hammer thinning flakes, but none have lipped platform remnants.
Flake fragments possibly from thinning flakes (N= 3). The proximal
ends of these are snapped off but their shape and thinness suggests
they are broken examples of flakes in the preceding category.
Direct impact percussion flakes (N = 92). Direct impact percussion is a
useful term introduced by Shafer (1973: 114) to describe flakes that
result from blows delivered head-on at a 90° angle to ~the striking
platform, but lacking the definitive attributes of anvil percussion (such
as bipolar battering). Direct impact flakes can result either from anvil
or free-hand percussion. These flakes are characterized by well
developed cones of percussion or by platform remnants that are
shattered, often with a jagged, ridgelike edge, or are extensively
battered. The columnar-faceted shape characteristic of bipolar
percussion is absent, however, and none of the flakes show bipolar
battering. Fourteen of these flakes have cones of percussion, including
5 snapped near the distal end, Seventy-eight have shattered platforms,
including 28 snapped near the distal end and 10 hinged through toward
the dorsal surface. These flakes have attributes that could result either
from free-hand or anvil percussion, but as a group they do not closely
resemble debris from experimental bipolar reduction of Manning fused
glass cores.

5.

Flake fragments (N = 130).

6. Angular shatter fragments (N = 28).
7. Cores (N= 5). Three are exhausted core nuclei (Fig. 6A, B); one has
what looks like a free-hand percussion scar on one face, with extensive
battering on a lateral edge, perhaps from anvil percussion (Fig. 6, A).
One is a spall from what may be a crudely worked biface.
8. Unclassified fragments (N = 3).
TOTAL: 318

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

205

This classification of the chipping debris seems to indicate that
manufacturing processes at the Chalk Creek site were directed less
toward bipolar reduction of small cores than at the Davis site and
more toward free-hand reduction of larger cores, possibly indicating
production of thinned bifaces. Aside from the possible biface
fragment mentioned above in category 7, no definite examples have
been discovered at the site. One elongate biface fragment and one
possible dart point blade fragment are made of unidentified material
that could be fused volcanic glass. In summary, the chipping debris at
Chalk Creek seems to indicate both greater availability of Manning
fused glass and the manufacture of tool types different from those
being made at the Davis site.
SUMMARY
Fused volcanic glass is a highly localized natural resource that
apparently occurs, at least in chippable form, only at a few localities
within the Manning Formation (baked shales are less readily
identifiable since they also occur at localities in the Wilcox Group).
There is clear evidence that one or more of these localities was known
as early as the Early Archaic, and by the early Caddoan period, fused
volcanic glass was being distributed as far north as the middle Sabine
drainage, 120 kilometers away, although the material was never used
in quantity except in the vicinity of the outcrop. It seems unlikely that
knowledge of the material was lost during the Middle and Late
Archaic, since many of the sites at which fused volcanic glass
chipping debris occurs also have Middle or Late Archaic dart points
made of chert, quartzite, or petrified wood. It is also worth
mentioning that many of the sites also have sandy paste pottery and
some have Catahoula sandstone, both items that could also have been
obtained in the Kisatchie Escarpment region.
While most of the sites included in this study are either undated or
poorly dated, the evidence from the Davis site and the Martin Lake
area indicates minor use of fused volcanic glass over fairly long
periods of time, suggesting some sort of long-standing resource
distribution pathway connecting these areas and the Kisatchie
Escarpment region. At the Davis site occasional use of fused volcanic
glass over a period of several centuries may be indicated.
Even more interesting, though, is the evidence already presented to
support the hypothesis that the Martin Lake fused glass was derived
from a source locality that was probably different from that
(presumably the Chalk Pit) supplying other east Texas sites. This
implies two distribution pathways, one supplying the middle Sabine

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

drainage and the other supplying the Trinity, Neches, and Angelina
drainages. Careful petrographic studies are needed to investigate
and verify this relationship.
Knowing that fused volcanic glass would have been more difficult
to obtain with increasing distance from the outcrop, we might predict
that sites farther away from the Manning Formation would show
more thorough reduction of cores, resulting in smaller exhausted
cores, smaller flakes, more reliance on anvil percussion, and more
recycling of chipping debris. In general this seems to be true, partly
illustrated by differences in chipping debris at the Chalk Creek and
George C. Davis sites. Ultimately it may be possible to plot, for each
site, weights of flakes and cores against distance from the outcrop in
order to form a regression estimate of intensified reduction with
transport distance. This might allow us actually to identify distribution centers (positive residuals} and consumer sites (negative residuals} within the distribution networks.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The research reported here was begun in 1970 and continued in 1975
with encouragement and material support from Dee Ann Story, Director,
Texas Archeological Research Lab. Mr. Gaff L. King, Jr., of Crockett first
took me to the Chalk Pit quarry in 1970. Bill Caskey and L. D. Stewart of
Houston made their collections available for study. Bill Moore of Huntsville
made his collections available for study, took me to some of the sites he has
reported, provided hospitality during my stay in Huntsville, and donated
chipping debris from some of the sites to TARL. Carolyn Spook assisted in
plotting chipping debris at the Davis site. Others who have provided
information~or assistance include Harry Shafer (Department of Sociology
and Anthropology, Texas A&M University), S. E. Clabaugh (Department of
Geology, University of Texas at Austin), Ed Garner (Bureau of Economic
Geology), and Milton Bell (Texas Highway Department).

MANNING FORMATION FUSED VOLCANIC GLASS

207

REFERENCES CITED

Davis, E. Mott and Salvatore Valastro, Jr.
1970 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates VIII. Radiocarbon, Vol. 12,
No. 2, pp. 617-639.
Harris, R. King and Inus Marie Harris
1967 Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. In: Robert E. Bell, Edward
B. Jelks, and W.W. Newcomb, A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian
Archeology and Ethnohistory. Final Report for Grant GS-964,
National Science Foundation, pp. 129-162.
King, E. A., Jr. and Peter U. Rodda
1962 Fused Rocks in the Jackson Group (Eocene), Texas. Transactions,
Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies No. 12, pp. 265-270.
Lonsdale, John T. and David J. Crawford
1928 Pseudo-Igneous Rock and Baked Shale from the Burning of Lignite,
Freestone County, Texas. In: Contributions to Geology, 1928,
University of Texas Bulletin, No. 2801, pp. 147-158.
Renick, B. Coleman
1936 The Jackson Group and the Catahoula and Oakville Formations in a
Part of the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain. University of Texas Bulletin, No.
3619.
Sharer, Harry J.
1973 Lithic Technology at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County,
Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Story, Dee Ann and Salvatore Valastro, Jr.
1975 Radiocarbon dating and the George C. Davis site. Paper presented at
the 40th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archeology,
Dallas.
Valastro, Salvatore, Jr., E. Mort Davis, and Alejandra G. Varela
1975 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates X. Radiocarbon, Vol. 17, No.
1, pp. 52-98.

