NOTES

Use of Phosphate Analysis
for
Determining Land Use Patterns*
DONALD R. LEWIS

ABSTRACT
Recent research by R. C. Eidt has indicated that both spot tests
and fractionation analysis for phosphate can be useful in identifying
areas of land use by man and the probable nature of the land use.
Phosphorus in the soil is primarily orthophosphate whether it results
from animal or vegetable tissue or bone, teeth, animal waste or
mineral sources. The relative ease of extractibility of phosphate can
be used to determine the probable types of sources and thus provide
information on land use. Additional research in this field can be
expected to enhance the value of this information for the archaeologist and to more clearly define thee limits of applicability.

INTRODUCTION
Recently R. C. Eidt (1977) has published results of phosphate analyses
which show consistent patterns in the kinds and amounts of phosphates in
the soil corresponding to past or recent uses made of the soil by man. This
paper discusses the basis for these results and the factors which may
influence the validity of the interpretations.
Soil chemists and geochemists have known for many years that phosphorus in the most common form as phosphate does not leach out or move
about in the soil (Arrhenius 1931; Smith, Posner and Quirk 1977). They
also learned that there was no simple relation between the total amount of
phosphorus in the soi! as determined by chemical analysis and the ability
of particular plants to obtain the phosphorus needed for growth from that
*Based on a lecture presented at the October 15, 1977 meeting of the Southern
Texas Archaeological Association in San Antonio.

310

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

soil (Sauchelli 1965). The approach which was taken was to determine the
amounts of phosphate which could be extracted from the soil using a
series of conditions ranging from the mildest in which the soil is leached
with water at a controlled pH, through the most severe in which the soil
minerals are destroyed by acid (Eidt 1977; Khin and Leeper 1960}. These
various classes of soil extracts, when analyzed for phosphates, give a
much more useful index of the phosphorus available for plant growth -although the problem is not yet completely solved because of the enormous
variations in the abilities of different plant species to extract phosphorus
from the soil.
From an examination of the factors which affect the amounts of phosphate in the various classes of availability it became evident that the use
which man had made of the soil was an important factor. Mans’ activities
may increase the phosphate content of the soil in areas where his occupation caused the accumulation of organic wastes as in a midden. Cultivation of plants may produce a strong reduction in the phosphate concentration in comparison with the uncultivated areas. Man may increase the
phosphate content by deliberate fertilizing of the soil for planting. He may
decrease it by mechanically removing the surface layer for construction
materials. Combinations of these processes and similar activities of man
generate phosphate extractability distributions which are characteristic
of the land use.
The bones, tissues, and wastes from undomesticated animals will
also contribute to the phosphate distribution in the soil. However, the
concentrations, patterns and the magnitude of the effects usually will
make it possible to recognize the influence of man.

BASIC PHOSPHATE CHEMISTRY
The element phosphorus never occurs free in nature. Most of the
phosphorus in the crust of the earth occurs as a member of the apatite
mineral group (McKelvey 1973). Apatite is calcium phosphate, but
commonly includes fuoride, chloride, or hydroxide as in the very
abundant mineral fluorapatite. In sediments the combination mineral
carbonate-fluorapatite, known as francolite, is common. The two
chemical factors which make phosphate determination useful to archaeology are its universality in living matter and its usually rapid
conversion to an immobilized form when it reaches the soil. The mineral
content of bones and teeth and other hard tissues of warm blooded
animals is primarily fluorapatite or hydroxyapatite. In all of these
minerals phosphorus occurs chemically in the orthophosphate radical.
Organic phosphates from soft tissue of animals or plants usually are
converted to orthophosphates in the soil very rapidly (Emsley and Hall
1976; Pierrou 1976).

PHOSPHATE ANALYSIS

311

In alkaline or calcareous softs (high pH} clacium phosphates are
rapidly formed when phosphates are added from any source. These
compounds are very insoluble and prevent the phosphate from
migrating. In acid soils (low pH} the phosphates are captured by ferric
iron or by aluminum to form very insoluble compounds which again tie
down the phosphate and prevent it from migrating.
In swamps and areas subjected to prolonged flooding the chemical
environment is reducing, the ferric iron is changed to ferrous iron and
the phosphate moves from the solid soil material into the water and can
be transported from its original location {Patrick and Khalid 1974).

TESTS FOR PHOSPHATE
The Spot Test
By far the most convenient test for phosphate is a simple spot test
(Eidt 1973; Woods 1975). This test is ordinarily carried out by placing a
small sample (approximately 50 milligrams) of soil on a piece of filter
paper (phosphate-free). The phosphate is extracted from the soil by
using hydrochloric acid and the reaction with ammonium molybdate in
the extracting solution forms phosphomolybdic acid. This compound is
then reduced by using ascorbic acid and forms "heteropoly blue", a
deep blue color whose presence probably indicates the presence of
phosphate, and whose intensity depends on the amount of phosphate
present (Boltz and Mellon 1947). The details of a typical procedure (Eidt
1973; Woods 1975) are shown in Table 1.
The spot test for phosphate has strong recommendations based on
its simplicity and the fact that it can be done in the field. This convenience is offset by a numl~er of serious limitations. These factors are
summarized in Table 2. Despite these limitations the spot test is a very
convenient and useful method for surveying an area for horizontal and
vertical patterns in phosphate. These surveys can provide the basis for
selecting samples for a more quantitative examination.

The Fractionation Procedure
The most successful procedure for extracting the soil phosphate
into fractions which can reflect land use of anthrosols has been
published by Eidt (1977}. The basic sequence of this procedure is
outlined in Table 3. In essence the process consists of starting with an
accurately known amount of soil which is subjected to a sequence of
extractions ranging from a gentle wash to a hot strong acid treatment
which will liberate any phosphate in the soil sample. These extracts are
classified in three categories depending on the ease of extracting the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

312

Table 1
SPOT TEST FOR SOl L PHOSPHATE*

1. Place approximately 50 mg. of soil on filter paper.
2. Add two drops of extractant to soil.
(HCL and ammonium molybdate solution)
3. After 30 seconds add 2 drops of reducing agent.
4. After exactly 2 minutes rate phosphate value from
1 (none) to 5 (strong) blue.
(May quench reaction with sodium citrate solution.)
*See Eidt (1977); Woods (1975).

Table 2
SPOT TEST FOR SOIL PHOSPHATE

Advantages:
Simple
Can be performed in field
Rapid
Limitations:
Qualitative
Temperature sensitive, 5° - 27° C
Variable sample size
Depends on color perception
Unequal extraction among samples
Cannot distinguish native phosphate from anthrosols.

PHOSPHATE ANALYSIS

313

phosphate from the soil. The most easily removed is labile phosphate,
the intermediate is called bound phosphate, and the strong acid extract
is classified as mineral phosphate.
Both the total amount of phosphate and the distribution among
these three groups are diagnostic of man’s use of the soil. A summary of
this type of information as reported by Eidt {1977) is given in Table 4.
This information potentially provides a powerful tool for archaeologists.
Among the areas of direct applicability are the following:
1. Determination of the nature of land use.
2. Estimation of population density.
3. Determination of changes of land use with time.
4. Determination of occupational chronology.
There is, of course, a price to be paid for the rich increase in the
detailed information content of the data. That price is the increased
complexity and demands of the procedures for obtaining the data. The
general characteristics of the phosphate fractionation analysis are
summarized in Table 5. Many of the characteristics of this analysis are

Table 3
FRACTIONATION METHOD
FOR SOIL PHOSPHATE ANALYSIS*

Basic Procedure
SOIL SAMPLE
DRIED, SIEVED,

WEIGHED

WASH WATER
SAMPLE GIVEN

TESTED FOR

GENTLE WASH

l~- PHOSPHATE IN
COLORIMETER

SAMPLE GIVEN

MILD CHEMICAl.
LEACH

SAMPLE GIVEN

ACID TREATMENT

EXTRACT TESTED
~,-FORPHOSPHATE
IN COLORIMETER

SOLUTION TESTED
~,-FOR PHOSPHATE
IN COLORIMETER

From Eidt (1977).

LABILE
~" PHOSPHATE
(1)
BOUND
--~-PHOSPHATE
(2)

MINERAL
~PHOSPHATE
(3)

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

314

Table 4
PHOSPHATE FRACTION PATTERNS
FOR DIFFERING LAND USES*
FRACT. 1

LAND USE
RESIDENTIAL

PLANTING RIDGE

SETTLEMENT

MOD. VEG. FARM

FRACT. 2

FRACT, 3

TOTALPO~

836 ppm

SPOT

4

37%

30%

33%

38

28

34

2324

5

34

34

32

3237

5

78

10

12

186

4

75

7

18

665

4

71

6

24

1084

4

48

27

25

322

4

3

2

95

355

4

28

25

702

4

47

*Da~ ~om Eidt(197~.

the opposite of those of the simple spot test. Fractionation analysis is
slow, tedious and demands considerable operator skill and training to
yield consistent, reliable results. Moreover, special equipment is
required to prepare the soil, separate the fractions and make quantitative determination of the phosphate content of each fraction. A
tabulation of commercial equipment which would be reasonably
adequate to perform these determinations is given in Table 6. The
prices shown are taken from the 1977 edition of the Fisher Scientific
Company general laboratory catalog.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Recognition of the factors which lead to immobilizing phosphates in
the soil has provided an incisive tool for studying the temporal and
spacial impact of man on his environment, and some additional details
of the nature of his utilization of his resources. Implicit in these data
are both climatological and cultural information. Moreover, it is important to recognize that the power of this approach is just beginning to
be realized. Improvements in fractionation procedures and analytical
techniques can also be expected to broaden the usefulness of the
method.
Phosphate tests of anthrosols can provide information about man’s
occupation and usage of the soil. Although highly qualitative and
subjective, the spot tests for phosphate in the field provide a useful,

PHOSPHATE ANALYSIS

315

Table 5
PHOSPHATE FRACTIONATION ANALYSIS

Advantages:
Quantitative
Provides characterization which can be interpreted
in terms of land use
Small sample size
Disadvantages:
Tedious procedure
Cannot be conveniently performed in field
Requires complex equipment
Slow
Requires special operator skills

Table 6
EQUIPMENT REQUIRED FOR PHOSPHATE
FRACTIONATION AI~$ALYSlS
ESTIMATED
PRICE
BALANCE:

Typical Model Torbal DLM-2

CENTRIFUGE:

Dynac II

SHAKER:

Wrist-Action

400

COLORIMETER:

Spectronic 20

9OO

CONSTANT
TEMP. BATH:

Freas 260

$ 3OO
1500

550
$3650

ACCESSORIES:
Sieves, Glassware, Chemicals, Timer, Electric Heaters

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

316

rapid and convenient means for identifying areas which may indicate
man’s influence on the environment. More detailed and quantitative
studies which require careful separation of phosphates into operational
fractions labile, bound, or mineral provide unique information on
whether or not the phosphate distribution is the result of man’s activities. Moreover, the nature of man’s activities throughout the time
and area associated with the soil phosphate patterns can be generally
identified. Additional work to extend the technique offers the potential
of providing much detailed information about the environment in which
man lived and the manner in which he influenced his surroundings.

REFERENCES CITED
Arrhenius, O.
Die Bodenanalyse im Dienst der Archaeologie. Zeitschrift fur
1931

Pflanzenernahrung, Dungung, und Bodenkunde, Teil B 10, pp.
427-439.
Boltz, D. E. and M. G. Mellon
1947
Determination of Phosphorous, Germanium, Silicon, and
Arsenic by the Heteropoly Blue Method. Analytical
Chemistry, Vol. 19, pp. 873-877.
Eidt, Robert C.
A Rapid Chemical Field Test for Archaeological Site Sur1973
1977a
1977b

veying. American Antiquity, Vol. 38, pp. 206-210.
Detection and Examination of Anthrosols by Phosphate
Analysis. Science, Vol. 197, pp. 1327-1333.
Soil Phosphate Analysis of Anthrosols. Unpublished manuscript.

Emsley, John and Dennis Hall
The Chemistry of Phosphorus. John Wiley and Sons, New
1976
York.
Khin, A. and G. W. Leeper
1960
Modifications in Chang and Jacksons Procedure for Fractionating Soil Phosphorus. Agrochimica, Vol. 4, pp. 246-254.
McKelvey, V.E.
Abundance and Distribution of Phosphorus in the Litho1973
sphere. In, E.J. Griffith, A. Buton, J.M. Spencer, and D. T.
Mitchell (eds.), Environmental Phosphorus Handbook, pp. 1331. Wiley-Interscience, New York.
Patrick, W. H. Jr. and R. A. Khalid
1974
Phosphate Release and Sorption by Soils and Sediments:
Effect of Aerobic and Anaerobic Conditions. Science, Vol.
186, pp. 53-55.

PHOSPHATE ANALYSIS

317

Pierrou, V.
The
1976

Global Phosphorus Cycle. In, Svensson, B.M. and
Soderlund, R. (eds.) Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Sulfur Global
Cycles, SCOPE Report 7. Ecological Bulletin, No. 22, pp. 7588.

Sauchelli, V.
1965
Phosphates in Agriculture. Reinhold Publishing Corp., New
York.
Smith, A. N., A. M. Posner and J. P. Quirk
1977
A Model Describing the Kinetics of Dissolution of
Hydroxyapatite. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science,
Vol. 62, pp. 475-494.
Woods, William I.
1975
The Analysis of Abandoned Settlements by a New Phosphate
Field Test Method. The Chesopian, A lournal of North
American Archaeololgy, Vol. !3, pp. 1-46.

