Three Caches of Guadalupe TooRs From South Texas
Kenneth M. Brown

ABSTRACT
Three caches of Guadalupe tools from south Texas are described and
compared metrically and microscopically. The Lindner cache of nine tools,
from Medina County, is an isolated find from the flood plain of Hondo
Creek, and all nine specimens appear unused (or at least freshly resharpened). The Granberg cache was found in a Bexar County occupation site,
and at least three of the four tools show some use wear in the form of edge
attrition. The Peterson cache of six tools from Atascosa County was also
apparently an isolated find, and all six show an identical configuration of
abrasive (?) polish on surfaces adjacent to the working edge. Other topics
such as recognition of caches, method of manufacture, experimental use
wear, and the problem of distinguishing percussor damage from traumatic
use wear are discussed. While the shape, size, and method of manufacture of
all three caches are quite similar, microscopic examination shows each cache
has its own microwear signature that distinguishes it from the others, suggesting these are tool sets, not simply random collections of tools, and the
differences may be due to differing stages in the use life of tool sets, or to
different hardnesses of the material being worked.

INTRODUCTION
This study began when Mr. O. R. Lindner of San Antonio visited the lab at
the Center for Archaeological Research and brought for identification a collection of nine Guadalupe tools found on his Medina County property (Figure 1).
I borrowed the tools for study and later visited the location of the find. After
studying the tools, I became curious to see what characteristics other Guadalupe
tool caches might have, and was able to examine a small cache from the Granberg II site. The study became a comparison of two caches, and there the matter
rested until Bobbie McGregor and Fred Valdez brought to my attention a third
cache at the Witte Museum, this one donated long ago in 1942. These are the
only Guadalupe tool caches I have been able to locate and study. Reportedly another cache may have been found at the Morhiss site, but I have not tried to locate
or document it. Yet another cache has been reported at the J-2 Ranch site, but on

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56 (1985)

76

Texas Archeological Society

L indner

f-

/
/
0

50 km

Figure 1. Location of Guadalupe tool caches.

examination it has proven to consist of Clear Fork tools or protoforms (see appendix). Since this study has grown in such unplanned fashion, maintaining continuity of the text and observational consistency has been a persistent problem,
especially since the Lindner tools were returned to their owner before I obtained
the Peterson cache on loan from the Witte Museum. Any inconsistencies in the
tool descriptions must be laid to this cause, and I plead nolo contendere.
I have tried to accomplish several things in this paper: 1) to explain how
Guadalupe tools were made, something that has been poorly understood for some
time; 2) to provide detailed individual descriptions of the tools, because existing
descriptions in the literature are too uncommon or inadequate; 3) to discuss some
of the realities and limitations of microwear observation, such as distinguishing
between manufacturing damage and use damage; and 4) to see what characteristics these cached tools might have in common and whether these can tell us anything about why the tools were cached.
A cache is an accumulation of useful material that is hidden away for future recovery
and utilization. Such things as food, clothing, tools, and raw materials may be
placed in a cache. Similar types of association between cultural objects are found in

-Guadalupe Tool Caches

77

human burials and trash pits, but these are not caches according to the definition above because recovery and utilization are not normally anticipated (Tunnell
1978: 1).

Caches are for the most part the product of logistically organ&ed behavior.
That is, procurement of resources in relatively large quantities, too large to be
transported at once, by special task groups at a specific, preplanned location.
Caches are an important feature of hunter-gatherers employing collector (rather
than forager) economies (Binford 1980: 10, 12; 1982) and are organized with
regard to some anticipated route or routine of behavior. The material is left behind because it is too heavy to carry, or will not be needed until some future
predictable date (see, for example, Shutler 1956), or because multiple stashes of
supplies must be provided for contingency use. A metate, for example, may be
left at a site both because it is too heavy to carry and because ptanned travel
might lead away from concentrations of the seeds that were being ground on the
metate. A cache of eight introduced chert cobbles (three of which had been
tested; Calhoun 1965) found on Hog Bayou in Calhoun County and another
cache of about 50 tested cobbles found in the Cypress Creek watershed in Harris
County (Hale and Freeman 1978: 90-98) are possible archeological examples
from Texas. Thomas (1983: 81-82) provides a useful discussion of caches and
distinguishes between resource caches and tool caches in the Great Basin, where
ethnographic sources record rabbit nets, bird nets, deadfall parts, fishing equipment, digging sticks, snares, and milling stones having been cached (see Osborne
and Riddell 1978 and Wallace 1978 for some California examples). Many of
these were put in field storage because they were needed only in certain locations
at certain times of the year. Tool caches may consist of sets of similar tools, like
the Kelly Field projectile point cache (Hester 1972) or like the caches reported in
this paper, or they may sometimes consist of tool kits, like the Hawkins cache of
Dalton points, bifacial preforms, "adzes," edge damaged flakes, end scraper,
sandstone abraders, and other items (Morse 1971). Another example, this one
from Missouri, is a cache of ten agricultural hoes and two "spades", all with
silica polish, plus a cobble hammerstone that was probably provided for retouching them. These were found in a pit about 30 cm deep with otherwise sterile fill,
associated with a Mississippian structure (Southard 1976). Occasionally caches
are found that seem to represent a series of artifacts whose manufacture was in
progress; an example is a slab-lined cache of obsidian and quartzite preforms, a
flake, a projectile point, a bone flaking tool and a lump of yellow ocher found in
the Warner Valley in Oregon (Weide and Weide 1969). In other cases, caches may
have little to do with logistically organized behavior and may in fact be special
offerings with supernatural meaning, or were ritual items stored away from
camps to shield them from contact with society members who were not privy to
their use or. meaning. The famous Mount Livermore cache of hundreds of arrow
points, both complete and fragmentary, a "large point, and a few flat beads"
(Janes !930: 8) found under a cairn on the summit of Mount Livermore, may

78

Texas Archeological Society

well be an example. The Hutton cache (Hutton 1976), an E1 Paso Polychrome
olla with an incised slate tablet, pecked pebble, and quartz crystals, found at the
edge of a playa, might be another. Other caches with diverse arrays of rare
goods, such as the Tobin Ranch cache (Moore and Wheat 195!), are sometimes
interpreted as traders’ caches, although this has never actually been demonstrated.
Caches may be left 1) marked but without a storage facility; 2) in a natural,
unprepared storage facility; or 3) in a prepared storage facility. Some kind of
marker is usually necessary to allow the material to be relocated, and some kind
of facility is usually necessary to prevent the material from being dispersed.
Cached food, for example, must be sealed from predators.
How, then, are archeologists to recognize caches: how, for example, can
cached material be distinguished from discarded material, especially since discards may also occur in a facility, such as a trash pit? This might be termed the
cache-trash problem. Some evidence of a prepared facility or a marker perhaps
ought to be expected as evidence of logistically organized behavior, if an accumulation of artifacts is to be identified as a cache. Paradoxically, though, since
caches are frequently isolated, they are rarely recovered by archeologists, who
concentrate on sites. Perhaps this very isolation should be regarded as evidence
of caching. Most caches reported to archeologists have already been removed
from the ground, and it is not clear whether a facility of some sort was present.
Finds such as the Millsap cache (Millsap and Dickson 1968), the Johnson, Palo
Duro, and Potter County caches (Witte 1942), McWilliams cache (Tunnell
1978), Brush Creek cache (Hammatt 1970b), Anadarko cache (Hammatt !970a),
and a cache at 41 FY 314 (Nightengale, Jackson, and Moncure 1985: 33 - 34) all
seem to be ambiguous with respect to the presence of a facility. Others, such as
the Whitzitt cache found under a flat rock (Witte 1942), the High Lonesome bead
cache found in a pot marked with a cairn (Kelly 1977), the Indian Mesa cache
found under a pile of rocks inside a rockshelter (Eagleton 1955); the Gibson,
Weaver-Ramage (Tunnell 1978), LeVick (LeVick 1975), Heerwald (Lintz 1978),
and Brookeen Creek (Mallouf 1981) caches, all in small, shallow pits; and Feature 8 near the Road Cut site (Hughes and Willey 1978), in a large, charcoalstained, possibly baked pit, seem to indicate a facility. The last example, like
many other finds of biface preforms or blades in north Texas and Oklahoma,
might represent material buried for heat treating, in an environment where it is
easier to transport the lithic material to a source of firewood than to carry the
extra firewood for heat treatment to an archeological site. Other caches of biface
preforms, however, seem to comprise material that would not require heattreating, such as a cache of welded tuff preforms found near Sterling, Idaho
(Pavesic 1966). Other problems of interpretation arise in areas with acidic soils
which degrade bone, introducing the possibility that "caches" may actually be
burial offerings. In such cases, definition of a facility is critical: does it have the
properties of a grave, or of a cache pit? Other "caches", such as the small tightly
packed concentrations of chert flakes sometimes found in occupation sites, may
be heat-treating loads, true caches, or simply the result of prehistoric clean-up

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

79

activities. Helm and Turner (1975) give an example from Missouri. A very similar feature was found at Skillet Mountain Four (41 MC 222) in Choke Canyon
Reservoir.
In practice, recognition of a facility such as a pit is often difficult or impossible. Most of the shallow cache pits reported in Texas and adjacent areas seem
not to have contrasting fills, so that the only way to judge whether a facility is
present at all is from the configuration of the objects themselves. The Road Cut
cache seems to be an exception. Another exception are the various-sized bellshaped, often elaborately floored pits found in excavated 18th century Wichitaspeaking villages such as the Stansbury site (Stephenson 1970: 71) and the
Vinson site. These have been termed "cache pits" in the literature, but might be
better regarded as storage pits’, since they presumably functioned to protect crops
from rodents and the like during the occupation of a sedentary village and perhaps had nothing to do with logistically organized movement.
Markers, belonging to the class of things that stick up in the air, are almost
never found (the Mount Livermore cairn and the possible cairn at the High Lonesome site serving as all too rare exceptions). Pragmatically, then, archeologists
are usually forced to turn to other circumstances of recovery for identification of
caches. In practice, single items are almost never identified as caches, while
clustered multiple items, especially multiple occurrences of the same item, may
be identified as caches. Accordingly, while there are many known instances of
Guadalupe tools found buried in sites or exposed on the surface, these are not
ordinarily regarded as being deliberately cached, but rather as discards, since
there is no prima facie evidence of intended future use. Operationally, then,
single items even if associated with a facility are not likely to be identified as
cache items, while tightly clustered arrays of identical items are most likely to be
regarded as a cache even if no facility is recognized. The condition of the item
may or may not be decisive; the Gibson and Brookeen Creek finds, for example,
were regarded as caches rather than trash even though unmodified flakes constituted the bulk of the material recovered. Here, the isolation of these finds seems
to indicate the operation of logistically organized behavior. In a few cases, the
carefully patterned or layered arrangement of items in a cache seems to indicate
they are not discarded, even when there is no evidence of a formal facility (see
Slesick 1978).
With the foregoing in mind, let us consider the three caches reviewed in this
paper. The Lindrier cache was found buried in flood plain sediment of Hondo
Creek; no pit was visible when I visited the site in 1984, although the artifacts
had already been removed from the cutbank. Nothing that could be considered an
occupation site was visible near the cache. The Peterson cache was apparently an
isolated find also, occurring about 150 meters away from the nearest occupation
site, although the information on location is not firsthand, and we have no information at all on the depth of the find or the presence of a pit. The Granberg cache
was found in an occupation site; again, a cache pit was not found, although conceivably a small one might have been overlooked in the midden fill.

80

Texas Archeological Society

MANUFACTURING SEQUENCE FOR GUADALUPE TOOLS
The manufacturing sequence given below was written as a description of the
Lindner cache, but it applies equally to all three caches insofar as can be determined, except for the details of edge angle, length, and platform width. Evidently all of the tools were made from elongate chert cobbles. In the Lindner
cache all except specimens 3, 5, and 7 have some cobble cortex remaining. In
some cases it can be seen that the craftsman took advantage of the natural shape
of the cobble, using a naturally occurring ridge on the cobble as the dorsal keel
on the finished tool. In several cases, dorsal decortification flakes have been removed from both lateral edges, stopping short of the dorsal ridge so as to leave a
narrow strip of cortex running down the spine of the tool and extending onto the
butt. Apparently the manufacturing sequence was as follows:
!] a cobble was selected and truncated by a heavy percussion blow from a
large hammerstone. In effect, the cobble was "quartered" although only the
end was removed. This left a somewhat hollow striking platform on the end
of the cobble, generally without any discernable ripple marks. The truncation surface was not produced exactly at right angles to the long axis of the
cobble, but rather at an angle of about 50-60° to the edge of the cobble
which was destined to become the dorsal ridge (Figure 2);
2] using the truncation facet as a platform, the bit was trimmed into a rounded
shape by removing a series of decortification flakes from what was to be the
dorsal surface of the tool;
3] again using a heavy hammerstone, a severe blow was struck on the truncation facet about 4 cm back from the trimmed arcuate edge, removing a long
(about 10-11 cm), narrow but thick cortex flake from the core;
4] the ventral side of this flake was used as a platform from which to remove
part or all of the cortex from the dorsal side. The aim here seems to have
been to regularize the lateral edges, and perhaps more importantly, to make
the lateral edges less acute;
5] if the ventral facet was straight when it came off the core, little further modification was done; if irregular, flakes were detached as needed from the
ventral facet so as to straighten the ventral face of the tool;
6] the bulb of percussion was removed from the ventral face by a percussion
blow delivered at one of the distal corners using the dorsally flaked surface
as a platform. Sometimes more than one flake removal was necessary to
produce a straight juncture between the bit facet and the ventral surface,
and sometimes a removal from the opposite corner was necessary to restore
the symmetry of the ventral face;
7] final trimming of the rounded bit facet was done using a light blow delivered with a small hammerstone. In many of the specimens, considerable
care was obviously taken to produce an even, carefully trimmed edge that
was symmetrically arcuate. Because of the edge angle, these final trimming

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

81

scars frequently hinged out abruptly a centimeter or two from the edge. In
some cases these trimming scars truncate dorsal flake scars.
One important observation concerning step number 1 is in order. The remnant of
the quartering facet preserved on the tool generally lacks the typical ripple marks
left by direct percussion, as noted above. The reason for this is that the fracture
type associated with cobble quartering is not a typical "cone fracture," according
to Tsirk (1979: 84), and lacks the characteristic distally-directed ripples.

@ V.nt..!

@ R.~ov.g of ~.ih

flattening

~anu#acturi~g Sequence
fop Cache Specitnens

®

Final hit tpimn~iny

Figure 2. Manufacturing sequence for cache specimens. Arrows indicate direction of percussion blows, which in stages 5 and 6 are directed toward the viewer. Abrasion of lateral
edges also occurs, but is not indicated here.

82

Texas Archeological Society

TERMINOLOGY

The truncation facet or original flake platform mentioned in steps 1 and 2
above is here termed the bit facet. The ridge- or keel-like surface is termed the
dorsal surface, and the opposite flatter face is termed the ventral face; these correspond to the dorsal and ventral surfaces of the original flake as well.
A series of standard measurements was taken on each tool in all three
caches, as follows (Figure 3):
1] dorsal length: the maximum length of the tool, from the butt (proximal)
end to the tip of the bit;
2] ventral length: distance from the butt end to the proximal edge of the bit
facet;
3] maximum bit width;
4] maximum tool width;
5] maximum tool thickness;

Figure 3. Landmarks and measurements on a Guadalupe tool. Numbered measurements
correspond to those defined in the text: 1) dorsal length; 2) ventral length; 3) maximum bit
width; 4) maximum tool width; 5) maximum tool thickness; 6) bit thickness (e.g. distance
from bit apex to intersection with ventral face); 7) maximum depth of bit concavity (the
maximum amount of "dishing" of the bit facet, usually just a millimeter or two); 8) bit
facet/ventral angle; 9) bit spine-plane angle (working edge angle).

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

83

6] bit thickness: measured parallel to the bit facet, from the tip of the bit to
the proximal edge of the bit facet (Figure 3, variable 6). Corresponds
approximately to the platform depth of the original flake, except that the
bulb of percussion has been removed;
7] maximum depth of bit facet concavity;
8] bit facet/ventral angle: the obtuse angle between the bit facet and the ventral face of the tool;
9] bit spine-plane angle: the working edge angle, between the bit facet and
the dorsal face;
10] weight.

MICROSCOPIC EXAMINATION
All of the tools were examined at low power (7x and above, usually not
above 40× but where necessary up to 80x) with a stereozoom microscope.
Edges were not opaqued but were carefully washed before examination. The
methods and goals of this study were essentially the same as an earlier examination of a stone tool assemblage from Choke Canyon (Brown et al. 1982). The bit
edge, both lateral edges, and both faces were examined microscopically. Microscopic features were measured with a microscope scale accurate to 0.1 mm;
larger features were measured with a standard set of sliding vernier calipers accurate to 0.02 mm. Edge angles were measured with a goniometer, and only one
measurement near the center of the tool was taken, rather than taking several and
averaging the results, because the working edge angle changes radically as measurement moves away from the center of the bit. Several Guadalupe tool replicas
were also made and examined microscopically for comparative purposes.

THE LINDNER CACHE
In 1982, Mr. O. R. Lindner found five Guadalupe tools lying exposed on
freshly slumped dirt at the base of a newly made bulldozer cut into the high cutbank along Hondo Creek, on property he owns ten kilometers southeast of
Hondo in Medina County (Figure 4, 5, a). Investigation of the cutbank immediately above revealed a matched pair of tools (specimens 1A and 1B, Figure 6,
a, a’, b, b’) in place, and further probing revealed a second pair (specimens 2A
and 2B, Figure 6, c, c’, d, d’), this one separated by a few centimeters. Nine
tools are present, all complete and evidently all members of a single cache that
apparently lay buried by about five meters of Hondo Creek alluvium. Mr. Lindner
marked the spot and in March, 1984, I visited the site and estimated the depth
below the terrace surface at 5.0 meters with a K+E hand level. A tenth tool has

84

Texas Archeological Society

since been found about 200-300 meters downstream, but we have no idea
whether it is related. The Lindner cache is of particular interest because there is
considerable uniformity in size, shape, and methods of manufacture, possibly
enough to justify proposing that all were made by a single craftsman. Two of the
paired tools, 1A and 1B, are almost exactly the same size and shape and are
made of very similar chert. The other pair differs in shape but both specimens are
made of similar material contrasting with that of the first pair. I thought at first
that each pair of specimens had been made from one parent cobble. Closer inspection shows that each specimen was made from a separate cobble, but that the
pairs comprise specimens that were probably deliberately selected so as to match
the color and texture of the chert as closely as possible.

Geologic Context of the Lindner Cache
While the Lindner cache was found an estimated 5 meters below the Hondo
Creek terrace surface (actually the eroded surface lies only about a meter above,
but the depth estimate was run from an uneroded area), the entire exposed terrace
section is estimated at 9.8 meters. The total thickness is unknown; the present channel is gravel choked, but Mr. Lindner reports that in the past a channel
2-3 meters deep has existed here, indicating that the alluvium may be as much
as 13 meters deep here (water is now present only in discontinuous pools, but
according to Mr. Lindner the water level in the creek is greatly depressed by excessive irrigation drawdown). All of the exposed portion is presumed to be of
Holocene age. A moderately well-developed soil is present at the top of the section, but no obvious paleosols were seen in the cutbank. The terrace surface is
covered with large hackberry and mesquite trees along with some persimmons
and sumacs. While the age of this surface is unknown, a Late Prehistoric date
would be quite consistent with analogous geomorphic settings elsewhere in South
Texas. A sample of sediment from the cache findspot consists of yellow (8YR
6.5/5), mostly medium and fine sand (1.0 to 3.0 phi) with small amounts of very
fine sand, silt, and clay, and it appears to be very representative of the section as
a whole, which is quite homogeneous except for the appearance of gravel bars
which will be discussed in more detail below. The sediment is extremely cohesive and the cutbank is resistant to slumping. The sediment reacts strongly to
dilute HC1 and is probably weakly cemented by carbonate derived from Cretaceous formations upstream, since there appears to be too little clay present to
account for its cohesiveness. In the vicinity of the cache and elsewhere in the
section are scattered, occasionally somewhat clustered snail shells. Most prominent are Rabdotus sp. snails, including both adults and juveniles; these nearly
always occurred in the cutbank with the long axis of the shell horizontal, but with
the spire oriented in various directions. Present in smaller frequencies are Helicina orbiculata tropica and Polygyra sp. shells. This is a typical semiarid south
Texas Holocene land snail assemblage. Only one aquatic snail (tentatively identi-

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

85

fled as Gyraulus parvus) was observed. None of the snails show obvious abrasion from transport.
The Hondo Creek valley is constricted at the Lindner site (from about
4.3 km wide to about 1.5 km wide) by a sandstone bedrock ridge that projects
westward into the valley from its eastern margin, following an ENE-WSW fault

/

/
Qt

~
~

0

500 M

CONTOUR INTERVAL
I0 FEE T

QUATERNARY ALLUVIUM, PROBABLY ALl
HOLOCENE
oooooeooo FAULT TREND

\
Figure 4. Topographic map of Lindner cache environs.

86

Texas Archeological Society

h
Figure 5. Lindner cache environs, a, looking east-southeast at Lindner cache findspot in
bulldozer cut through Hondo Creek alluvium. Tools were found where 50 cm scale is resting. b, looking southwest at cutbank with thick gravel deposit about 40 meters upstream
from bulldozer cut.

trend. The San Antonio sheet of the Geologic Atlas of Texas indicates the ridge is
a downthrown block and it is mapped as part of the Midway Group (Figure 4).
The ridge rises to a peak 150 meters above the terrace surface about 750 meters
back from the creek, and is covered with a thin, stony, gravelly soil supporting a
dense growth of chaparral, with occasional outcrops of brown ferruginous sandstone bedrock. Chipping debris and stone tool manufacturing failures, many of
them patinated in varying extent, occur wherever these scattered gravels occur. A
small collection by the Lindners includes few readily identifiable artifact types,
but possible examples of La Jita(?), Early Corner Notched(?), Early Triangular,
Nolan (?), Marcos (?), and Ensor (?) points and small bifacial piano-convex and
biconvex Clear Fork tools are present. Apparently most of the ridge is covered
with a thin sheet deposit of quarrying debris. The gravels are relatively small
in size and occur as lag deposits as high as the peak of the ridge 252 meters
(827 feet MSL). These gravels seem somewhat smaller in caliber than the Uvalde
Gravels mapped at the western valley margin at 265 meters (870 feet) and below
(see the San Antonio sheet), but like the Uvalde Gravels, are mostly chert. North
of this ridge a small nameless intermittent tributary of Hondo Creek flows paral-

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

87

lel to the main creek, then turns westward where it is confined by the ridge, flowing along its base to join Hondo Creek a short distance upstream from where the
cache was found.
The bedload in Hondo Creek is chert and limestone gravel, probably representing a mixture of reworked Uvalde chert gravels and limestone clasts from the
Edwards Plateau upstream. The chert ranges from rather massive cobbles (the
largest collected was 23 cm in diameter and weighed 6.35 kg) to small pebbles.
Large cobbles are fairly common. Limestone clasts were not examined but
seemed to be smaller.
About 30 to 40 meters upstream from the cache site the cutbank forms a
sheer vertical wall, and exposed here is a thick, multistoried sequence of channel
gravels filling almost the entire terrace section to within 30 cm of the surface
(Figure 5, b). Evidently Hondo Creek made a bend here, perhaps deflected by
the sandstone ridge or by enchannel boulders and flowed (speculatively) southwest into the area now masked by terrace deposits. Evidently this channel was
stable and aggrading for thousands of years, for the sequence of channel gravels
is over nine meters thick. There seems to be almost no evidence of lateral migration, except for a small bar about 40 cm thick, three meters below the surface,
which extends to the south and is exposed in the bulldozer cut. This bar is about
two meters above the level of the cache and pinches out west of it. The indicated
channel width seems to be roughly the same as the present channel, although it is
hard to be sure without knowing the orientation of the paleochannel. While the
channel stability suggested by this exposure seems quite remarkable, equally
remarkable is the relative homogeneity in caliber of the gravel. Most are about
2-3 cm in diameter, smaller than the maximum size of the modern channel load;
the largest cobble noted in the cutbank was about eight cm long. In general, the
average caliber seems to be significantly smaller than in the modern channel, and
there seemed to be no conspicuous trends in caliber and little well-defined stratification in this paleochannel sequence. Evidently a channel shift did occur near
the top of the section, however, for anywhere from about 30 cm to a meter of
overbank sands cap the channel sequence, indicating the channel had moved but
was still depositing overbank sediment. The next event in the sequence was the
beginning of the present incisive phase.
It should be noted that the presence of abundant channel gravels throughout
the aggradational history of Hondo Creek probably has less to do with the velocity or volume of stream flow than it does the relatively high gradient of the
creek and the relative nearness of the Edwards Plateau. The Balcones Escarpment lies only about 25 km upstream.
We can summarize the geologic context of the Lindner cache by noting that
it was left on the sandy flood plain of Hondo Creek, some 30 or 40 meters southeast (?) of the contemporary creek, which was gravel-floored like its modern
counterpart, although not so coarsely. At the same time or perhaps slightly later a
fire was evidently built on the flood plain nearby, for a small deposit of wood
charcoal was found in the south wall of the bulldozer cut, about a meter west of

88

Texas Archeological Society

and an estimated 20 cm or so above the level of the cache. Some time afterward~
the creek extended a marginal gravel bar near this area, but by then the cache
had been capped by a couple of meters of overbank sands. It is possible the
Guadalupe tools in the cache may have been made of chert cobbles collected
from the creek, but the average length of the tools (about 10-11 cm) seems
somewhat longer than would be afforded by most of the small chert cobbles seen
in the cutbank. Most of the gravels capping the sandstone ridge also seem too
small. Possibly the tools were made from Uvalde Gravels collected along the valley margin to the west, where Highway 173 now lies.

Description of the Lindner Specimens
In essence, microscopic examination seems to show that all nine specimens
are in nearly pristine condition. No significant edge rounding or polish was seen
on the bit edges, in fact no damage at all that can be attributed to use except for
occasional small nicks and occasional small invasive scars or short, broad step
fractures infrequently occurring on the bit facet. There is frequently extensive
percussive crushing of the edge and heavy step fracturing, at various scales, on
the dorsal face of the tool, but this is attributed to hammerstone damage left by
manufacture of the tool and is not considered use wear. It is identical to hammerstone damage on the replicas. While it seems possible that heavy use, for example in adzing hardwoods, might produce the same kind of edge crushing and
step fracturing here attributed to manufacturing damage, it is doubtful that the
two sources of modification could be distinguished microscopically. Edge crushing and battering is frequently more pronounced near the corners of the working
edge, because the bit spine-plane angle increases progressively away from the
center of the bit (it should be pointed out also that the single measurement taken
at the center of the bit does not adequately record the range of edge angles displayed by the bit) and toward the sides becomes so steep that hammerstone retouch of the edge was difficult to achieve.
A few specimens show small areas tentatively regarded as having use polish
on ventral flake scar ridges. Most likely this is some kind of hafting polish. It
was seen only on a few specimens, was never well developed, and generally occurred toward the proximal end. No polish was seen on the dorsal face.
Most specimens have at least some rounding and smoothing of lateral edges;
this does not represent platform preparation related to bifacial "thinning", since
in many cases substantial smoothing and rounding was done after final bifacing,
and in some cases rounding and smoothing are very heavy, exceeding what would
be required to prepare the edge for flake removal. This is perhaps a better argument for halting than the tentative presence of haft polish noted earlier. The term
"thinning" as used above is somewhat misleading, since it appears the craftsman
avoided actually thinning the biface and tried instead simply to increase the lateral edge angles so as to produce a thick, durable edge. In fact, most of the lat-

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

89

eral edges on these tools are fairly heavily battered, not from failed attempts to
thin the edge but from an apparent intent to produce a massive, dulled edge that
would withstand hard use.
Specimen 1A (Figure 6, a, a’)
Specimens 1A and 1 B, according to Mr. Lindner, were found paired with
the ventral surfaces in contact and with the same proximal-distal orientation.
Specimen 1A is made of light brownish-gray chert with a small patch of
yellow-brown cobble cortex at the butt end. It is the most carefully made and
symmetrical of the nine specimens, and a very close match to 1B in size and
form. The ventral face is gently concave from front to back, with flake removals
originating from both lateral edges. The dorsal side has a sharp, prominent ridge
running down the center. The small bit trimming flakes hinge out about 24 mm
from the edge of the bit.
At 7 × to 28 × the bit edge appears essentially pristine; the dorsal side has a
columnar fluted appearance from the narrow percussion flake removals that form
the bit. A few of these have hinged out at about 2-4 mm from the edge. Along
the bit edge are many microscopic flake scars on the dorsal surface, mostly short
and step fractured. One section of the edge at the left corner (oriented with the
bit away from the viewer, and with the dorsal side up) shows moderate crushing.
All this damage could have been produced by percussor scrubbing. The bit facet
has a few small nicks and some shallow step-fractured scars.
Lateral edges: major projections on both edges show heavy rounding; smaller
projections frequently show moderate rounding. Some rounding extends into reentrants somewhat. The lateral edges show more modification than the bit.
Surface polish: the only visible surface polish is on the ventral face near the
extreme proximal end, with light polishing on flake scar ridges on the last 12 mm
of the tool.
Specimen 1B (Figure 6, b, b’)
This specimen is made of light gray-brown chert, slightly lighter in color
than 1A. It has a small patch of light gray cortex at the butt end. The chert is
similar to that used for specimen 1A, but the difference in color and texture
seems adequate to indicate both did not come from the same cobble. This specimen is almost exactly the same size as specimen 1A, but less well made. The
ventral side is uneven but otherwise essentially straight from one end to the other.
The dorsal side is irregular, with a central knot. The bit is less dished than on
specimen 1A.
At 7 x and above the bit edge appears essentially pristine except for slight
rounding and polish on a very small section near the center, and another one mm
back from the edge on the right side. The bit facet has one medium-sized hinge
fracture (nine mm wide, four mm long) and a few small nicks.
Lateral edges: light to heavy smoothing is present on a few projections; on
the whole, rounding and smoothing is less well developed than on specimen 1A.
The edges are mostly just percussor-battered.
Surface polish: this sample lacks the ventral/proximal polish seen on speci-

90

Texas Archeological Society

men 1A; the dorsal ridge shows no haft wear.
Specimen 2A (Figure 6, c, c’)
Specimens 2A and 2B were also paired, reportedly with the ventral faces in
contact, but with the proximal and distal ends reversed. These two tools are made
of similar chert, possibly but not definitely from the same core. Specimen 2A is
made of light brownish-gray chert. Yellow-brown cortex is present on a small
patch on the ventral side, at the right distal corner on the bit facet, and covering
most of the dorsal ridge and extending onto the butt. The dorsal ridge is a natura!
one formed by the original shape of the cobble. The ventral face is gently
concave.
At 7x to 28 x the working edge appears essentially pristine; a couple of
small projections near the center of the edge have light rounding and polishing,
conceivably from platform preparation. The bit facet has three small nicks and a
small step fracture.
Lateral edges: show light to heavy smoothing, but with little polishing,
mostly on prominent projections but also on straight portions of one edge, beginning a short distance from the bit. The right edge has less noticeable smoothing
than the left.
Surface polish: light polishing is visible on a few ridges near the butt end
(beginning about 23 mm from the end).
Specimen 2B (Figure 6, d, d’)
This specimen is unrepresentative of the group because of its pointed bit and
acute spine-plane angle, and perhaps would not be regarded as a Guadalupe tool
had it not been associated with the others. It is made of light brownish-gray chert
similar to specimen 2A, but slightly darker. Both cherts are grainy textured. The
dorsal ridge is covered with cobble cortex just as in specimen 2A, and the cortex
also extends onto the butt end. No cortex is present on the ventral surface. The
cortex is a light yellowish tan, lighter and less brown than on specimen 2A.
At 7 x to 10x the bit edge appears pristine; the graininess of the chert has
resulted in considerable percussor crushing of the edge, but no noticeable edge
rounding was seen.
Lateral edges: show light to heavy smoothing on projections, but no real
polish developed. The right edge has somewhat less rounding. Major projections
are severely percussor-battered.
Surface polish: slight polish is visible near the butt end on ridges and facets,
and possibly near the bit, on flake scar ridges. The dorsal cortex-covered ridge
shows no polishing.
Specimen 3 (Figure 7, a, a’)
Specimen 3 is made of light gray homogeneous, relatively fine-grained
chert with no visible cortex; the ventral surface is quite flat, much of it formed by
the original ventral flake facet. This specimen is short and thick.
At 7 x to 9 x, the bit edge appears pristine except for slight rounding at the
center and in a small area on the right side. Both areas are in front of resistant

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

a

a"

h

91

h"

10 c~
I

I

I

I

I

I

~

i

~

t

I

Figure 6. Guadalupe tools from the Lindner cache. Left photo of each pair is dorsal view,
right photo is ventral view. a, a’, specimen 1A; b, b’, specimen 1B; c, c’, specimen 2A; d,
d’ specimen 2B. All specimens oriented with distal (bit) end at top.

92

Texas Archeological Society

step fractures and might represent platform modification left from attempts to
remove step fractured areas.
Lateral edges: the right edge has heavy rounding toward the.distal end with
scattered examples of light to moderate rounding toward the proximal end. The
right edge has no noticeable rounding.
Surface polish: none visible on either ventral or dorsal surface.
Specimen 4 (Figure 7, b, b’)
This tool is made of light grayish-tan fine-grained chert. The dorsal ridge is
covered with cobble cortex, extending onto the butt; the cortex is yellow-brown
subsurface, with a chalky white surface layer. Concentric lighter colored zones
of cortex parallel the bit edge, indicating that the distal end of the tool conforms
closely to the original cobble shape. The ventral face is irregular but fairly flat.
Unlike the other specimens reported here, the bit facet seems to have been
formed by a blow struck from the left bit edge.
Under magnification the bit facet can be seen to have one or two small nicks,
a few small invasive scars, and one short, broad hinged scar about 7 mm wide
and 3.5 mm long. The bit edge seems somewhat more battered and irregular (at
12x) than on the other specimens, but no significant edge rounding was seen
except at the right-hand corner.
Lateral edges: are heavily battered, with fairly heavy edge rounding in some
places, although not continuous.
Surface polish: none visible.
Specimen 5 (Figure 7, c, c’)
This example is made of light gray and gray-brown chert of variable texture;
the light gray areas are grainy, but the bit portion of the tool is formed entirely of
the more vitreous gray-brown chert. No cortex is present.
At 16x, the edge appears somewhat crushed. There is no visible edge
rounding except for a couple of minor occurrences. The bit facet has some small
nicks and invasive scars. The edge seems more irregular and crushed than most
of the specimens, but not extensively step fractured.
Lateral edges: show light to heavy rounding, especially on the grainy light
gray portion of the tool.
Surface polish: none visible.
Specimen 6 (Figure 7, d, d’)
This specimen is long and narrow, with a narrow bit. It is made of finegrained grayish-brown chert with a narrow strip of brown cobble cortex remaining on the dorsal ridge, plus another small patch on the butt. The bit is carefully
shaped. A couple of the flake scars on the ventral face reach completely across
the body of the artifact. In tranverse cross-section the specimen is triangular.
Under magnification the bit edge appears pristine except for several very
small invasive scars on the bit facet. No edge rounding is visible.
Lateral edges: are battered, but show no rounding except for light rounding
in a couple of places.
Surface polish: possible light polish is visible on several ridges central to
the ventral face.

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

93

a

c

c"

d

d"

/0 cm
Figure 7. More Guadalupe tools from the Lindner cache. Left photo of each pair is dorsal
view, right photo is ventral view. a, a’, specimen 3; b, b’ specimen 4; c, c’, specimen 5; d,
d’, specimen 6. All specimens oriented with distal (bit) end at top.
Specimen 7 (Figure 8, a, a’)
This specimen is made of light tan-gray chert. No cortex is present. The bit
facet is very acute as in specimen 4. The distal half of the dorsal ridge has been
removed by a large flake scar originating from the bit facet and hinging out at the
midpoint of the tool. One area of the remaining dorsal ridge is battered as if the

94

Texas Archeological Society

craftsman had tried to remove part of the remaining ridge by striking it from
the right side.
At 7 ×, the lefthand portion of the bit edge has a series of small, deep nicks
invading the dorsal face, perhaps from an attempt to remove an intersecting
facet. The edge as a whole appears relatively pristine and sharp. The bit facet has
a couple of small hinged scars near the center, plus one short, wide step fracture
10 mm wide and 1.5 mm long. There is no noticeable edge rounding except for
very slight rounding visible at 14× on a relatively straight section of edge on the
left side of the bit.
Lateral edges: heavy rounding is present on major projections, none or at
most light rounding visible elsewhere.

I

{
{

J

a

a"

loom

8
Figure 8. More Guadalupe tools from the Lindner cache and Guadalupe tool failures from
various other sites, a, Lindner specimen 7, dorsal view; a’, Lindner specimen 7, ventral
view; b, Guadalupe tool failure from 41 BX 228 (specimen DB2:l-2, N974 E988, level
4b; see Black and McGraw 1985: figure 32, c); c, Guadalupe tool failure from 41 BX 228
(specimen DB2:I-13, same provenience as "b," Black and McGraw 1985: figure 32, d);
d, Guadalupe tool failure from 41 ZV 183; e, Guadalupe tool failure from 41 BX 274. All
specimens oriented with distal (bit) end at top. b-e were broken, perhaps during use, by
fractures originating at the working edge and plunging into the body of the tool to emerge
on the ventral face.

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

95

Surface polish: slight polish on flake scar ridges near the proximal third of
the ventral face.

Summary Observations on the Lindner Cache
All of the tools in the Lindner cache appear to be essentially in mint condition, suggesting either that they had been prepared and never used, or else used
but resharpened shortly before being cached. The only evidence which might
suggest use consists of occasional small edge nicks and small invasive, stepped,
or hinged scars appearing in low frequency on the bit facet of most specimens,
since damage to the bit facet would not be expected as a result of manufacture.
Damage like this might result if the tool were used as an adze and, becoming
caught in the wood, had to be rocked back and forth to free it. But the frequency
of these scars is too low to make this seem likely. Other damage to the bit edge,
such as crushing, step fracturing of the dorsal face, and occasional edge rounding, especially near the corners, is attributed to percussor damage during manufacture. If any of this damage is due to use of the tool, it cannot reliably be distinguished from manufacturing damage. Possible light polishing was tentatively
identified on several of the tools, usually on the ventral side near the proximal
end. If valid, this may represent haft wear, but is only tentatively identified.
The uniformity of the specimens in the cache is substantial, at least in comparison with other known examples of Guadatupe tools (Table 1), and might justify the hypothesis that all were made by a single craftsman. At least four of the
tools were paired when found, although since the other five had already slumped
from the wall of the bulldozer cut, we do not know whether they, too, were
grouped in some way. The two known pairs seem to have been matched on the
basis of size, shape, and/or the nature of the raw material.
The evidence from the Lindner cache would seem to suggest perhaps that all
of the tools were prepared by a single craftsman and laid aside, either for hafting,
for trade, or in anticipation of some future task for which the tools were intended. Perhaps the relatively large number of tools indicates the magnitude of
the task or the severity of wear expected. That Guadalupe tools were hafted in
use seems fairly certain, judging by the consistent presence of lateral edge
smoothing. Whether these particular tools were halted when cached is unknown,
although the fact that specimens 1A and 1B were found with the ventral surfaces
in contact probably argues against it.

THE GRANBERG CACHE
Hester (1980: 147-149) and Hester and Kohnitz (1975) briefly review the
stratigraphic context of a cache of four Guadalupe tools found at the Granberg II
site (4t BX 271). During 1974 excavations by the Southern Texas Archaeologi-

96

°~

Texas Archeological Society

~g

E

N~

~.~ ~
q;,

r~
%

%

%

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

97

cal Association these were removed from the east wall of excavation unit 3S at a
depth of 2.29 meters (90 inches) below the existing ground surface (the original
depth apparently was about 1.8 meters, but a deposit of recent backfill was
present over the excavated area) in stratum 8, which is described as a compact,
charcoal-stained zone about 10 cm thick occurring near the midpoint of a thick
sequence of channel gravels. Since these tools (specimens 15, 16, 17, and 18)
were found in the profile wall rather than the excavation unit, no information on
the arrangement or spacing of the artifacts is available. Another specimen (number 12) was found in ttie 84 to 90 inch level in the excavation unit, and a sixth
Guadalupe tool (specimen 19) was found at the same level near the northwest
corner of the excavation unit, but outside it in an area cleared of overburden with
a backhoe.

Description of the Granberg Specimens
The four specimens in the Granberg cache differ in several ways from the
Lindner specimens:
1] all are smaller (the average weight of the Granberg tools is only about 60%
of that of the Lindner specimens; Table 2);
2] all have bit facets canted to left or right to some extent;
3] the average working edge angle is about 11 degrees less acute;
4] all have somewhat less cortex remaining;
5] in general the Granberg tools appear somewhat less well made and less uniform than the Lindner tools;
6] at least three of the four tools have some damage to the bit edge that is
tentatively interpreted as use wear rather than percussor damage.
The smaller size of the Granberg tools is perhaps due to the smaller caliber
of the gravels available as source material. The average weight of the four Granberg specimens (80 gm) is intermediate between that of the Lindner tools (131
gm) and that of specimens from the Panther Springs Creek site (66 gm), reported
by Black and McGraw (1985: Table 15, form 1 specimens). For the most part the
technique of manufacture appears to be the same, except perhaps in the method
of initially quartering the cobble. For the Granberg specimens a method of quartering was evidently used that resulted in the tool blank being struck off at an
angle other than 90° to the plane of the striking platform. As a result, bit facets
on the Granberg tools are canted either to left or right when viewed from the
ventral side. Somewhat less cortex is present on the Granberg tools, but when
present, usually appears as a small patch covering the proximal end. I suspect
this remnant cortex was a deliberate feature of the tool, perhaps intended as a
cushion of less brittle, shock-absorbent material left covering the point of contact
between the butt end of the tool and the haft [?]. This feature is found on tools
from both caches.

98

Texas Archeological Society

6

’~
m

%~
%
%%
%
0000

%%
%%
O0

do
%

oo

d~

.==
°~

24

%

©
©

©

~o
~Z

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

99

Although none are heavily worn, at least three of the Granberg cache specimens have some damage to the bit edge that is tentatively interpreted as use wear.
The assessment is uncertain because most of the damage to a completed edge
originates as percussor damage during the manufacture or rejuvenation of the
tool. Both hard hammer percussion and use of the tool (assuming some kind of
adzing use) can be expected to produce crushing of the edge and severe fracturing
with stepped or hinged terminations. Percussor crushing or fracturing is perhaps
more likely to create damage that is localized at restricted impact points, unless
the edge is also raked with the percussor to even it, in which case the distinction
between use wear and manufacturing damage is likely to be difficult or impossible to make. Edge rounding is probably more likely due to use wear than to
manufacture, although again if the edge is scrubbed with the percussor it may
simulate attrition through use. A certain amount of localized edge rounding also
originates through crushing of the edge. In assessing the condition of the bit
edges from all three caches, the degree of rounding, its location, and the degree
of localization of edge fracturing have been used as critical tests, but evaluation
is frankly a matter of judgment (see Vaughan 1985: 23). Another attribute which
may have some bearing is the presence of small flake scars on the bit facet. These
would probably not be expected as a result of manufacture, but might occur in
storage (either before or after excavation) or use; they seem to appear in about
equal frequency in both caches.
Another way to try discriminating between different sources of edge damage is to look at known examples of rejuvenation failures. Figure 8 (b, c) shows
two specimens from the Panther Springs Creek site (41 BX 228) and two from 41
ZV 183 and 41 BX 274 (Figure 8, d, e). All four are overshot rejuvenation fragments (or possibly tools that failed during use). Apparently in each case a resharpening flake has been struck off from the distal face using the bit facet as a platform, but the flake has overshot, passing through the body of the tool and
expanding as it emerges on the ventral side, breaking the tool in two. In these
fragments the central part of the working edge can. be expected to have only percussion damage, while the lateral remnants of edge presumably have accumulated use wear sufficient to prompt resharpening (regardless of whether the specimens broke during use or failed during attempted resharpening). In all four cases
the section of edge adjacent to the rejuvenation flake scar is sharp and undamaged; the other portions of the working edge have no diagnostic wear visible,
but show a substantial number of minute, stacked step fractures. The specimen
from Zavala County, made from a very grainy chert, has a working edge that
appears rounded and somewhat crumbled at 40 x.
Another approach is to make and use Guadalupe tool replicas in the same
way that the archeological specimens are thought to have been used (replicas pictured in Figure 14 have not been used). Severe adzing of seasoned mesquite wood
with a replica showed that the tool was more durable than expected. Heavy blows
were required to drive off flakes from the working edge. Initial use damage consisted of percussion rings of large radius (similar to Figure 14, e, a cache speci-

100

Texas Archeological Society

men), some microscale crumbling of the edge, small scale step fracturing, and
occasional small irregular flakes removed from the bit facet. Continued use resuited in more flakes being driven off the dorsal facet unti! the working edge assumed an irregular, scalloped shape. Thirteen of these tiny flakes were collected,
ranging in length from 1.5-6.0 mm and in width from 3-11 ram; seven had
feathered terminations, three were step-fractured or broken, one was hinge fractured, and two were indeterminate. The deep reentrants formed by these flake
removals generally had sharp edges, while the intervening edge projections were
either crushed and rounded or relatively sharp. Target material of different hardness, and especially different work habits would probably have produced different results. I would expect that a softer wood and less violent but more prolonged
use might produce less flaking of the edge and more generalized edge rounding.
In large part, though, the condition of the edge on the replica and on the Granberg specimens agrees fairly well.
Specimen 15 (Figure 9, a, a’)
This specimen is made of gray chert and is unusual because the truncation
facet (or bit facet) has rolled over toward the ventral face and there is no ridge
between the bit facet and ventral face; instead a small patch of brown cobble
cortex is present. The bit is rounded in plan view but narrow, almost pointed.
Viewed from the ventral face, it slants slightly to the left. Several heavy percussion blows have been delivered to the dorsal ridge of this tool from both sides in
an apparent attempt to reduce the height or acuteness of the ridge (see also specimen 18).
Under magnification most of the bit edge shows little rounding; at 40x only
light edge rounding is visible in a few places (Figure 14, c). One short segment to
the left (when viewed from the dorsal side) of the center of the bit is heavily
battered, probably from hard hammer percussion. The ends of the working edge
show somewhat more rounding; some sections of edge are minutely step fractured. The bit facet shows considerable damage from several small, deep invasive scars (note also the unresolved fracture shown in Figure 14, e).
Lateral edges: show light to heavy rounding.
Ventral face: no substantial evidence of smoothing or polish, although possible light smoothing of flake scar ridges near one lateral edge may be a byproduct or intentional edge dulling.
Dorsal ridge: in addition to the percussor damage noted above, there is
rounding and smoothing on several of the high spots on the ridge and in one location, possible incipient faceting is visible. This may be evidence of haft wear.
Specimen 16 (Figure 9, b, b’)
This specimen is made of light gray chert with a patch of cortex at the butt
end and a very small strip on the proximal part of the dorsal ridge. The ventral
surface is slightly concave from the proximal to distal ends. Viewed from the
ventral side, the bit facet slants to the left.
The bit edge of this tool is irregular because of the removal of several short,
heavy percussion flakes with step or hinge terminations from around the periph-

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

101

ery. These may be rejuvenation flake scars or use damage. At 40-60×, light to
moderate rounding and crushing of the edge can be seen. Moderate rounding of
the edge was seen where a couple of the possible rejuvenation flakes had been
removed, possibly indicating some use after resharpening.
Lateral edges: light to heavy smoothing is visible at 40×.
Ventral surface: a peak formed by intersection of flake scar facets near the
distal end shows possible rounding and smoothing visible at 14× and above.
Other flake scar ridges at the extreme proximal end and near the midpoint of the
ventral surface show definite polishing. A longitudinal scar ridge near the proximal end has a series of microscopic flakes removed from it.
Specimen 17 (Figure 9, c, c’)
This is a relatively short tool made of fine-grained tan chert with small
white inclusions, with a patch of cortex on the butt end. The bit is evenly
rounded but is asymmetrical, projecting to the left when viewed from the ventral
side, with the bit slanting downward to the right. The ventral face is essentially
straight in profile.
Under magnification, light to moderate rounding of edge projections (especially near the center of the bit) and some straight edge segments is visible, but
even more distinctive is rather continuous minute step fracturing extending onto
the dorsal surface immediately back from the edge. The lack of clustering of this
step fracturing at impact points and its small scale perhaps suggest it represents
use wear rather than percussor damage. One edge projection shows rounding and
light polish extending slightly onto the dorsal surface.
Lateral edges: have light to moderate smoothing, more pronounced than on
the bit edge, but not heavy.
Ventral surface: one very small area near the proximal end, slightly offcenter from the midline of the tool, is burnished to a mirrorlike finish. This resembles burnishing seen on Clear Fork tools from Choke Canyon (Brown et al.
1982: 68) and interpreted as haft wear, although no striations were seen at magnifications up to 80x.
Specimen 18 (Figure 9 d, d’)
This tool is made of grainy, matte-textured grayish tan chert with no cortex
present. The bit is rather acutely pointed. The tool is narrow but thick with the
dorsal ridge peaking about two-thirds of the way toward the distal end; it has been
struck both from the left and right sides on the proximal side of the peak in an
attempt to remove the high spot, but the blows produced only small hinge flakes.
The bit facet appears undamaged except for obvious, recent excavation
damage. At 40 x light to heavy edge rounding is visible, mainly on projections
and mainly at or near the corners of the working edge, but light rounding is
present on some straight edge sections and in reentrants. Moderate rounding is
present on a projection at the center of the edge, and extending back onto the
dorsal face on the corresponding flake scar ridge, suggesting that on this tool, at
least the first few millimeters of the dorsal side came into contact with the material being worked. Microscale step fracturing is present along the edge on the

102

Texas Archeological Society

dorsal face.
Lateral edges: show light to heavy rounding, with possible abrasive faceting
on one projection.
Ventral face: possible light polish is visible on one flake scar ridge in the
medial section, and on another one in the proximal third of the tool.

Figure 9. Guadalupe tools from the Granberg cache. Left photo of each pair is dorsal view,
right photo is ventral view. a, a’, specimen 15; b, b’, specimen 16; c, c’, specimen 17; d,
d’, specimen 18. All specimens oriented with distal (bit) end at top.

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

103

Isolated Specimens
The other two Guadalupe tools found at the same level in or near excavation
unit 3S are described below, for comparative purposes.
Specimen 12
This tool is made of light gray chert, with no cortex present. The ventral
face is irregular but fairly straight. Viewed from the ventral side, the bit facet
slants to the right. The bit appears to have been rounded in shape, but subsequent
damage has left it pointed at the center. The dorsal ridge has been struck from
both sides to reduce its height, as in specimens 15, 18, and 19. The bulb of percussion for the tool blank has been removed by a transverse flake scar.
This tool looks as if it has suffered severe, very percussive use. Under magnification, the bit facet shows only a couple of small invasive scars. Viewed dorsally, the bit edge left of the centerline is heavily battered, step and hinge fractured, probably representing use damage. One large hinge fracture 7 mm long
and 11 mm wide may be use damage. Another area 9 mm wide and 4 mm back
from the edge is heavily step fractured. At 40x, a few slightly rounded projections are present, but most of the edge has large scale hinge fractures present,
leaving relatively acute edges. The proximal end of the tool also has a few small
step fractures which might indicate stress against a haft.
Dorsal face: at 40×, polish can be seen on flake scar ridges near the center
of the bit, up to 7 mm back from the edge; the polish is not extensive but is well
developed, almost burnished.
Lateral edges: mostly light rounding or no rounding; moderate to heavy
rounding on just a few edge projections.
Ventral face: no evidence for abrasive modification except immediately
along one lateral edge, where a couple of smoothed flake scar ridges intersect the
edge; possibly a byproduct of intentional edge dulling.
Specimen 19
The largest by far of the six tools from the Granberg site that were examined, this is the only one comparable in size to the Lindner tools. It is narrow,
thick, and crudely made of grainy light-gray chert with no cortex remaining.
Viewed from the ventral face, the bit facet slants to the left. The dorsal ridge has
been heavily battered in an attempt to reduce its height. The bulb of percussion
for the tool blank has been removed by a transverse flake scar. The ventral face is
concave from the proximal to distal end.
The bit facet of this tool shows considerable modification. Part of the facet
at the apex of the bit has been removed by four flake scars originating from the
right side (viewed from the ventral face) and extending transversely across the
facet. These are presumably rejuvenation scars, and the rejuvenated edge appears to have experienced some battering afterward. Two of the scars appear to
overlap the other two. Other damage to the bit facet consists of a large, .deep
hinge fracture and several smaller invasive, step, or hinge fractures.
The bit edge at both corners (especially the left corner, when viewed ven-

104

Texas Archeological Society

trally) is severely crushed and step fractured, probably from percussor damage.
Elsewhere some minor step fracturing extends onto the bit facet. Edge rounding
is infrequent: one remnant projection with rounding and smoothing over small
scale step fracturing is present (the smoothing almost obliterates the fracturing),
and another projection shows moderate rounding. This tool seems to have had
fairly heavy use, although evidence of edge attrition has mostly been removed by
the postulated rejuvenation and by spalling off of short, wide, step-terminated
flakes during use. A couple of remnant projections suggest less percussive use
producing some edge rounding at some previous stage in the history of the tool.
Lateral edges: have either no rounding or light to moderate rounding.
Ventral face: light polish is present on flake-scar ridges near the proximal end.

THE PETERSON CACHE
These specimens (accession number 42-4-69-G) were donated to the Witte
Museum in 1942 by Mr. J. C. ("Poss") Peterson, now deceased, who found them
(evidently in !938) on his property north of Kyote in northwestern Atascosa
County (Figure 10). In November, 1985, Kay Hindes and I interviewed J. W.
Kenney, the present landowner, and Tobey Tomblin, who had driven Mr. Peterson
to San Antonio in a Model A Ford in 1942 to donate the specimens to the Witte
Museum. While Mr. Tomblin was not present when the tools were originally
found and did not remember the artifacts themselves, he did remember where
Peterson said he found the artifacts, and pointed out the findspot to us (Figure
t 1). Apparently one artifact, not part of the cache, was found south of Siestedero
Creek while digging a well that is still present on the property; just north of the
well, in the creek channel, some mammoth bones and teeth were found, and a
short distance upstream, a few meters from the creek, "the others were found,"
according to Mr. Tomblin. Evidently this was the findspot for the Guadalupe tool
cache, near some large live oaks pointed out by Mr. Tomblin. The location is in a
bend of the creek, with the terrain sloping gradually to the south, but with a more
abrupt cutbank about three meters or higher to the west, exposing the Reklaw
Formation sandy clay substrate. The topsoil here is similar in texture to sediment
at the Lindner site, and consists mostly of fine and medium sand (1.0 to 3.0 phi),
with some very fine sand and little silt or clay; it is mapped as part of the Sinton
series (Dittmar and Stevens 1980). The dominant vegetation consists of mesquite, an occasional retama, and large live oaks along with introduced grasses
away from the creek channel, and willows and pecans along the creek. The nearest known occupation site is farther up Siestedero Creek, about 150 meters away,
where a site now designated 41 AT 90 has produced Gower (?), La Jita (?), Langtry, Ensor, Perdiz, and a variety of other chipped stone artifacts. No occupation
debris was visible in the immediate vicinity of the reported cache findspot when

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

105

0

Figure 10. Topographic map of Peterson cache environs. Number 1 indicates location
where mammoth bones were found in creek bed; number 2 indicates location of another
unspecified artifact said to have been found during excavation of a well.

we visited the site, despite the fact that the pasture has been root plowed since
Mr. Kenney acquired it. Nothing is known about the stratigraphic context of the
cache.

106

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 11. Kay Hindes standing near the spot where the Peterson cache is believed to have
been found. Looking southwest, with Siestedero Creek in the background.

Description of the Peterson Specimens
Of the three caches studied, this one seems to show the greatest consistency
in manufacture (Table 3). The Peterson cache has the lowest coefficients of variation for seven out of nine attributes measured; only maximum thickness and bit
thickness are less variable in the other caches. The average coefficient of variation (.0939) is smaller than that for the Lindner (. 1495) and Granberg (. 1414)
caches, introducing the possibility that, as in the Lindner case, all of the components of the cache might have been made by a single craftsman. Aside from this,
the Peterson tools seem to be intermediate in most respects between the other two
caches (Table 4). We may also observe that:

1 ] all except specimen 6 are comparable to the Lindner cache in the degree to
which the bit is carefully trimmed;
2] most do not have bits markedly canted to left or right;
3] like the Granberg tools, most have little cortex remaining;
4] these tools have the most acute spine-plane angle of any of the three groups.
The most remarkable aspect of the Peterson cache is the rather uniform pattern of wear on the bit, but unlike the Granberg tools there is not much evidence

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

107

of attrition of the edge itself. Instead, abrasive (?) polish appears (usually only
weakly or moderately developed, but in the case of specimen 6, quite pronounced) chiefly on the dorsal face adjacent to the working edge and to a lesser
degree on the bit facet adjacent to the working edge. On both faces the polish is
concentrated at the center of the bit. The dorsal polish is best developed in a zone
about four to five millimeters back from the edge, but continues to diminish gradually further back. From microscopic examination it is clear that this polish favors
high spots on the tool surface, such as flake scar ridges and other small projections, but in the more pronounced examples extends into the flake scars themselves, indicating that the material being worked was a semi-yielding substance,
neither as pliable as animal tissue nor as hard and unyielding as hardwood. Some
kind of soft wood may be indicated. In a few cases poorly developed striations
were seen, usually on the dorsal face and usually parallel to the long axis of the
tool. These might have resulted from the abrasion of microflakes generated by
edge attrition, but they are generally quite shallow and poorly defned, and always occur in association with surface polish. Isolated burnished spots were
found, usually on the ventral surface, and these are perhaps infrequent indicators
of ventral haft wear.
This type of use wear seems to correspond to the "wood polish" reported by
Keeley (1980: 35-42), although Keeley describes surfaces viewed at much
greater magnifications (up to 500 x) than were used here. Keeley describes wood
polish as very bright, smooth, additive in nature, with broad, shallow striations.
Vaughan (1985: 33-34; Plates 17-18, 43-52) confirms and amplifies Keeley’s
findings, also at high magnifications. The principal development of polish on the
Peterson specimens in a zone four or five millimeters from the working edge
probably indicates the average depth of penetration of the bit. The asymmetrical
development of the polish, favoring the dorsal surface over the bit facet, probably
indicates an adzing rather than a chopping motion (see Keeley 1980: 38). Although I have interpreted the polish described here as abrasive in nature, Anderson (1980) supports Keeley in maintaining that wood may produce cumulative
silica polish in the same way that grasses produce "sickle gloss." She notes that
wood cells may contain deposits of silica, calcium carbonate, and calcium oxalate, and her scanning electron microscope studies suggest some of this material
may adhere to the working edge; another cause is localized dissolution and redeposition of silica from the tool itself, perhaps aided by friction-generated heat.
In other recent studies, Meeks et al. (1982), studying sickle gloss, maintain that
polish is not additive, while Unger-Hamilton (1984) maintains that it is both
abrasive and additive. However, neither of these studies deals with wood as a
target material.
Although the Witte Museum has not assigned individual specimen numbers, I have assigned temporary numbers for reference purposes.
Specimen 1 (Figure 12, a, a’)
This tool is made of variegated light-gray chert with no remaining cortex.
The ventral face is quite flat, and the bit is canted slightly to the left when viewed

108

Texas Archeological Society

t¢’3(’ ’~

~rZ~5

6

~

"~ ~
.~

~:~ ~

tc3r~

~

m

r~

~9

~°~.~
t._.

r’-lt"-It’~

e.l,-.~e.l

e.lt’-.le.I

=_

¯~

~,~
r.io~

~’~ ~

~’~’~’~"*~
~.lec3e¢3

e4~t-.i
L
~,~t"’~t"-~",~t’’~

~00

N

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

109

ventral side up; it is fairly evenly rounded, and is formed on the dorsal face by
shallow, parallel flake scars, many of them fairly narrow. The dorsal ridge has
been removed by a long, narrow flake scar possibly originating at the butt end
(the direction of travel is difficult to determine). On the ventral side, about three
fourths of the intersection of the bit facet and the ventral face has been removed
by a long, narrow flake scar originating from one lateral edge. Iron oxide stains
are present but not conspicuous; tool marks like these frequently indicate contact
with a plow, but there is so little recent chipping of the cache that contact with a
hand tool or some metal object during curation might be indicated.
At 40x the bit appears heavily worn, for the most part, with light to moderate edge rounding and smoothing, and moderate rounding over short, stacked
step fractures. A prominent edge projection to the right of the bit center is heavily rounded and battered. A few areas also show only light rounding, probably
where use percussion has carried away worn sections of the edge. The bit facet
has very poorly developed, weak polish visible only near the working edge, especially on one side where the texture of the chert is grainer. Similar polish is
visible in some places on the dorsal surface immediately adjacent to the working edge.
Lateral edges: battered, light to moderate rounding; the left edge (viewed
ventrally) appears more heavily battered and rounded.
Ventral face: an irregular, discontinuous, patchy area of mirrorlike burnishing was noted on the ventral face over an area 14 x 4.5 mm across, near the
midpoint of the tool on the right side (held with the distal end away from the
viewer). The polish is hard to see, and no striations were visible at magnifications up to 60x. Smaller isolated patches of the same polish were also seen on
the left side. This polish is confined to minute high spots on the grainy surface of
the chert and was evidently created by friction with a hard, unyielding substance;
it perhaps represents haft polish, although the ventral flake scar ridges do not
appear polished.
Specimen 2 (Figure 12, b, b’)
This tool is made of light gray, homogeneous chert with light brown cobble
cortex on the dorsal ridge (only on the proximal third), extending to the proximal
end. The dorsal ridge has been flattened by a long, narrow flake scar originating
from the bit facet and ending abruptly at the cortex on the proximal end. About
half of the intersection of the bit facet and the ventral face has been removed by a
flake scar originating from one lateral edge. The most interesting aspect of this
tool is the presence of pronounced polish on the dorsal face of the bit and on a
small area of the ventral side near the proximal end (see below).
The bit is somewhat narrow and arched; the bit edge is even and shows little
evidence of traumatic percussion, but does show fairly consistent light to heavy
rounding and smoothing, with some moderate rounding over short step fractures;
some edge projections show heavy rounding. The central part of the bit edge
shows less rounding and smoothing, with more battering and more damage to the

110

Texas Archeological Society

bit facet. This is also the part of the edge where use polish is most heavily developed on the dorsal face. The nature of this relationship is unclear.
A few shallow, broad flake scars with step terminations have been removed
from the bit facet. These vary in size, with the largest (4.42 mm long by 6.78
mm wide) located near the center of the bit. A few deeper, more irregular nicks
are also present.
Surface polish: this specimen has well-developed polish on the dorsal face,
originating at the bit and extending back from it up to 8.5 mm (Figure 14, d).
The polish is clearly abrasive or attritional in nature, not accretional, and covers
both the ridges and hollows formed by flake scars. It is best developed near the
center of the bit but is asymmetrical, with another well-polished area on the right
half of the bit (viewed dorsally). Faint, parallel striations can be seen originating
at the bit edge and oriented parallel to the long axis of the tool. These are by no
means well developed and can be seen only at magnifications of 40 x and above
with low-angle grazing light (Figure 15, b). One small area of the bit facet adjacent to the right edge (viewed ventrally) has a small irregular burnished area with
parallel striations running at an angle of perhaps 30° (estimated) to the trend of
the edge. A third area of polish covers a flake scar ridge on the ventral face, 17
mm from the proximal end; no striations are visible here.
Specimen 3 (Figure 12, c, c’)
This specimen is made of light gray-brown chert with a very small patch of
cream-colored cortex remaining at the proximal end and a rust stain on the bit
facet, tt has a strongly arched, very symmetrical bit, carefully trimmed with
long, narrow, parallel flake scars giving a columnar fluted appearance on the dorsal face. The ventral face is flat.
The lateral parts of the working edge appear relatively pristine, for the most
part showing only light edge rounding and shallow step fractures from percussor
trimming; the central part of the working edge, however, shows some concentrated wear consisting of heavy rounding over step fracturing and edge crushing.
Edge wear is concentrated at the apex of the working edge and is directly adjacent to polishing on the bit facet’.
Lateral edges: show heavy percussor crushing and step fracturing, for the
most part, but little evidence of edge rounding, though a few edge projections are
heavily rounded.
Surface polish: light polishing is evident on the bit facet adjacent to and as
much as 3.5 mm back from the working edge. The polish is best developed near
the edge, becoming less pronounced away from it, resembling that seen on the bit
facet of specimen 1. The dorsal surface has fairly pronounced polishing present
as much as 32 mm back from the working edge, but again concentrated chiefly
near the edge and at the apex of the bit. The polish is present both in flake scars
and on flake scar ridges but is somewhat better developed on the ridges.
Specimen 4 (Figure 12, d, d’)
This specimen is made of dark grayish-brown chert, somewhat mottled,
with a strip of brown cobble cortex covering part of the dorsal surface along the

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

a"

a

111

h"

b

10 c~
;,

i

~

i

t

;

t

;

r

~

I

Figure 12. Guadalupe tools from the Peterson cache. Left photo of each pair is dorsal
view, right photo is ventral view. a, a’, specimen 1; b, b’, specimen 2; c, c’, specimen 3;
d, d’, specimen 4. All specimens oriented with distal (bit) end at top.

112

Texas Archeological Society

midpoint of the tool. There is no dorsal ridge, the cortex providing a somewhat
rounded dorsal face. The ventral face is flat, but twists slightly from one end to
the other. The bit is symmetrical and strongly arched, slightly canted to the right.
At 20× and above, the lateral parts of the working edge show heavy crushing and step fracturing produced by percussor battering; the apex or central part
shows light to heavy rounding over crushing of the edge. Rounding occurs both in
reentrants and on edge projections but is more pronounced on the latter. Several
small flake scars are present on the bit facet; these range from rows of small nicks
0.2 mm wide and 0.2 mm long to abruptly terminated oval or D-shaped scars up
to 3.0 mm across and 1.3 mm long.
Lateral edges: light to heavy rounding, mostly on edge projections, over frequently heavy percussor crushing and step fracturing of the edge.
Ventral face: the distal third of the tool has a couple of small, irregular,
highly burnished patches in a flake scar. The proximal third has a couple of
small, highly burnished areas on flake scar ridges (Figure 15, d). All of these
probably represent haft wear.
Surface polish: like specimen 3, this tool has light to moderate surface polish on the bit facet, chiefly near the working edge, and especially near the central
part of the edge (Figure 15, a). The polish also covers most of the small nicks and
scars on the bit facet, suggesting they were also created as a byproduct of use.
Polish is best developed in a zone about 3.5 mm wide next to the edge. Some
poorly developed striations are present on this polish and are most easily seen at
about 30x with high angle lighting; these trend approximately parallel to the
long axis of the tool but there is some variety in orientation. A few of these may
originate at the working edge but the better defined examples begin about 3.5 mm
from it.
Again, as in the case of specimen 3, the dorsal surface has moderately welldeveloped polish, both in flake scars and on flake scar ridges, although it is better
developed on the latter; a few small high spots on ridges are highly burnished.
Most of the polish lies in a band about 4.5 mm wide along the edge, with the
polish heaviest near the working edge and along its center. A few weakly developed striations are present, some of them oriented at about 30° to the working
edge, others roughly at right angles to it. These are faint and quite difficult
to observe.
Specimen 5 (Figures 13, a, a’)
This tool is made of very light gray, homogeneous chert that has a very
grainy appearance under magnification. Small impurities and fissures are stained
red from contact with iron oxide in the soil. No cortex remains. The bit is symmetrical, somewhat less arched than the other examples, and is slightly canted to
the right. A dorsal ridge is present only on the proximal third of the tool, having
been removed by bit-trimming scars on the distal part. Like most of the other
tools in the cache, this one has a carefully trimmed bit, with a columnar fluted
dorsal face.
Small-scale step fracturing and crushing of the working edge extends onto

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

113

the dorsal face for about half a millimeter along most of the edge, giving it a
somewhat minutely beveled appearance under magnification; parts of this edge
are lightly rounded, with heavy rounding of only a few edge projections. Edge
attrition is less than expected, since coarse-textured cherts like this generally develop edge wear prematurely. On the dorsal face are a few flake scars about 6 mm
long with step terminations, and a couple of larger stepped or hinged scars about
3 cm long, but all of these are regarded as trimming scars, not use wear.
Lateral edges: pronounced percussor crushing and battering, a few small
lateral snap facets; as would be expected with this grainy textured chert, edge
rounding is rather pronounced, especially toward the proximal end.
Ventral face: no use wear was noted.
Surface polish: poorly developed polish is present on the bit facet, at the
same location as in the other specimens, e.g. near the edge (most of it within 4.5
mm) and concentrated at the apex of the bit (along a segment about 1 cm long).
Moderate rounding of flake scar ridges and light to moderate surface polish (predominantly on ridges) is evident on the dorsal surface, mostly within about
3.5 mm of the working edge, chiefly at its center. A few very small wellburnished high spots are visible in the same area. Also noted were a few very
small weakly polished or burnished flake scar ridges near the proximal end.
Specimen 6 (Figure 13, b, b’)
This specimen is atypical in shape, size, and in extent of use wear. It is the
smallest specimen in the cache and has the least carefully trimmed bit. It is made
of light gray variegated chert with a remnant of light brown cobble cortex on the
proximal third. The ventral face is slightly arched from front to back. The bit is
small, moderately arched, and slightly canted to the left. The facet-ventral angle
is rather pronounced. A large flake scar on the bit facet, together with a corresponding scar on the dorsal face, carrying away part of the work edge, apparently
represent damage occurring since the tool was found.
At 30 to 40× the surviving lateral part of the working edge can be seen to
have nearly continuous small-scale crushing, interspersed with small step fractures about 7-12 mm long. The center of the working edge, however, has been
modified by the removal of a series of overlapping flake scars taken off the bit
facet; these are deep, usually short and broad, with step or hinge terminations.
The largest is about 1.5 mm long and 6.7 mm wide. The surviving lateral part of
the bit edge also has a series of smaller flakes taken off the bit facet. All of the
damage probably represents traumatic percussive use wear, concentrated especially at the apex of the bit. Doubtless this tool has more damage to the bit facet
than its companions because of the angle of the working edge to the body of the
tool (as indicated by the exceptionally high facet-ventral angle). Interspersed between these crushed edge segments are other areas showing moderate rounding
and smoothing of the edge. The central part of the edge shows light rounding of
the edge where it has been modified by flake removals on the bit facet.
The most distinctive aspect of this tool is the unmistakable polish on both
the bit facet and the dorsal face. The bit facet polish is not very conspicuous

114

Texas Archeological Society

,

o

o~
0

°~

o.~ ~ -~

OG OG

o

©

o

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

115

without magnification, but at low magnification can be seen over essentially the
entire facet except where removed by recent damage. As in the other specimens
in this cache, polish is most pronounced near the working edge and especially
near the center or apex of the bit. Some of the small flake scars penetrating the
bit facet have polish developed on them, while others are free of polish.
Surface polish on the dorsal face is much more pronounced and is visible
even without magnification; it is more highly developed on this specimen than on
any of the others in the cache. Conspicuous rounding, in some places bordering
on faceting, of flake scar ridges is present on the dorsal face (Figure 15, c, e). It
is most pronounced near the working edge and especially near the center of the
bit. This abrasion of flake scar ridges is simply the result of prolonged and severe
polishing. Heavy polish is present on the dorsal face near the central working
edge both on ridges and in flake scars, but toward the sides of the dorsal face and
well back from the edge it diminishes markedly, occurring chiefly on ridges and
only faintly in flake scars. Some detectable polish occurs over the entire distal
half of the tool; only the most proximal 33 mm of the tool is free from polish. On
two or three dorsal trimming scars at the center of the bit, closely packed parallel
striations can be seen, oriented at right angles to the edge and precisely parallel
to the long axes of the trimming scars; these extend up to 6.3 mm from the edge
(Figure 15, e).
Lateral edges: severe percussor crushing and battering, with light to heavy
edge rounding. Some areas have light polishing over edge battering.
Ventral face: a few small burnished spots such as have been found on the
other tools are visible on the ventral face. Also present is light surface polish
similar to that on the rest of the tool, occurring mostly along the lateral edges
(both on flake scar ridges and in the scars themselves) and at the proximal end
(mostly on ridges). This polish is poorly developed and is noticeable only at 20 ×
and above. Nothing comparable in extent has been seen on the other tools in the
cache, where small burnished spots are generally the only ventral wear visible.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
All of the Guadalupe tool collections reported here presumably represent
caches, despite the fact that there is no evidence for a pit or other facility associated with any of the finds. The best evidence for regarding these as caches is the
fact that each group was tightly clustered when found (except for the Peterson
collection, for which we have only the notation "found in one cache" on the accession card). Moreover, the internal homogeneity of the Lindner and Peterson
groups is sufficient to suggest that, conceivably, in each case a single craftsman
might have been responsible for the knapping and deposition of the group.
All of the tools considered here are rather similar in shape and size, and
insofar as can be determined conform to the manufacturing sequence defined for

116

Texas Archeological Society

the Lindner cache. As a rough measure of the variability of each cache, we may
average all the coefficients of variation for the nine different variables measured
(omitting maximum depth of bit concavity) to obtain an average coefficient of
variation (bearing in mind also that the different variables are by no means independent). These are: Lindner, . 1495; Granberg, . 1414; and Peterson, .0939. To
get some impression of what this means in terms of absolute variability, if we
compare these to a completely unrelated tool class, we find for example an average coefficient of variation of. 1759 for Late Prehistoric two-beveled knives at
Choke Canyon (Brown et al. 1982, Table 8). All of the Guadalupe tools, then,
are less variable than the beveled knives, which are more susceptible to breakage
and resharpening.
If we may characterize all three caches as essentially the same in manufacture, then, the difference in use wear is all the more remarkable. Even more so is
the fact that for the most part each cache is coherent in terms of its microwear
characteristics. The Lindner tools appear to be essentially unused (or if not mint
specimens, then freshly resharpened ones). The Peterson tools are characterized
by a very consistent pattern of matching dorsal and bit facet polish concentrated
at the center of the bit. The target material indicated is clearly semi-yielding in
texture, possibly a substance like soft wood. The Granberg tools, on the other
hand, seem to have some traumatic, percussive bit damage, damage which is
thought to be more extensive than would be expected to be inflicted by a percussor during manufacture. The target material may be hard wood. Adzing of
mesquite with a replica did not exactly duplicate the bit weal" on the Granberg
tools, but the analogy seems close enough.
With the exception of the use-polished Peterson cache, trying to recognize
use wear on such roughly made artifacts as the Guadalupe tools reported here is a
difficult task. Hard hammer percussion, when applied to a steep platform angle
(54° for the Lindner specimens, 65° for the Granberg tools), results in severe
percussor damage to the stone being worked, leaving percussion rings, crushed
and step fractured or hinge fractured edges, and possibly even rounded, crumbled,
or nibbled edges if scrubbing or raking of the edge was done to prepare the striking platform (Figure 14, a, b). The difficulty lies in the fact that if Guadalupe
tools were used as some sort of adzelike woodworking tool (which seems to be
the best explanation advanced yet) their customary use was probably rather percussive as well. It seems very likely that a hafted tool struck forcibly against a
fairly hard wood might suffer damage which is hard to distinguish from percussor
damage (in the case of the Peterson cache, a softer wood is postulated as the
contact material, resulting in much less edge trauma). Many of the Guadalupe
tools examined microscopically show heavy step fracturing at the center of the
bit edge. Is this because it is the center of the working edge that receives the
heaviest use, or is it because particularly forceful trimming blows were delivered
here in an attempt to strike off the distal part of the dorsal ridge? Much of the
heavy step fracturing seen on some of the Granberg specimens looks just like the
sort of wear that might be produced by heavy percussive use on dense wood, but

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

117

it also tends to intergrade with the kind of edge damage seen on unused, freshly
made experimental specimens. Many of the tools show stairstepped flake scars
with hinged or stepped terminations on the dorsal face; are these manufacturing
scars, successive macroscars driven off during percussive use, or successive rejuvenation scars?
As the discussion above indicates, microwear examination for this kind of
tool class--percussive cutting tools--is weighted with uncertainty. The intersection of (presumed) stressful use and stressful manufacture means that a good deal
of overlap between use and manufacturing traces can be expected. Only where
less abusive target material was worked, as with the Peterson cache, can we have
more confidence in our ability to distinguish use wear from manufacturing traces.
In summary, then, while all the Guadalupe tools reviewed here can be considered equivalent in manufacture, each cache seems to have its own microwear
signature that distinguishes it from the others, suggesting these are tool sets, not
simply random collections of tools. It seems likely, perhaps, that each set was
made and disposed of by a single craftsman (at least in the case of the Lindner
and Peterson caches) and disposal was probably a single event, there being no
evidence that tools were added to the group over a span of time. In the case of the
Lindner cache, the original number of tools in the cache (unknown, but at least
nine) may indicate something of the scope or severity of the anticipated task. It
may be, as well, that all of the tools in a cache were intended for use with just one
haft or helve, each tool being unhafted and set aside as it became worn. This
might account for the striking uniformity of the tools. In the Peterson cache, all
the tools were worn, perhaps indicating the task was completed and the exhausted tools were set aside for future resharpening. Here, six tools were involved. Likewise, the four Granberg tools may have also been set aside for
rehabilitation.
The condition of a particular tool is probably contingent on several different
variables, such as:
1] type of target material, whether hardwood (mesquite, juniper, guayacan,
oak, walnut, pecan), soft wood (willow, sycamore, cottonwood) or some
material other than wood;
2] condition of target material (green or seasoned);
3] length of use episode;
4] force employed in use, or other relevant work habits;
5] frequency and nature of resharpening.
The observations reported here am based on a sample of only three caches. Ab
more caches of Guadalupe tools are found in the future it will be interesting to
see whether the patterns perceived here will be borne out in later studies. Will
newly discovered caches form coherent microwear groups, or will there be variability in wear that crosscuts caches?

118

Texas Archeological Society

I .... , .... L

d

I .... , .... I

Figure 14. Photomicrographs of Guadalupe tools and replicas. Scale is 1 mm long, with
small divisions tenths of a millimeter, a, unused working edge of chert replica, viewed
from dorsal face, showing percussor crushing and trimming scars; b, more oblique view
of replica edge; note percussor crushing; c, Granberg specimen 15, showing relatively
pristine section of working edge (orientation similar to "b"); d, Peterson specimen 2,
showing polish on working edge and dorsal flake scars (orientation is similar to "a’); e,
Granberg specimen 15, unresolved fracture (incipient use failure?) on bit facet.

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

119

I~,,1t,~,,I

d

Figure 15. Photomicrographs of Guadalupe tool cache specimens. Scale is 1 mm long,
with small divisions in tenths of a millimeter, a, Peterson specimen 4, polish on bit facet
truncated by D-shaped scar to right; b, Peterson specimen 2, polish and longitudinal
striations originating from working edge at apex of bit on dorsal face; c, Peterson specimen 6, polish on dorsal face near working edge; d, Peterson specimen 4, polish on flake
scar ridges, proximal end, ventral face; e, enlargement of prominent flake scar seen at
right side of "c," showing polish and weak striations, a-c, e are oriented with working
edge at top of frame.

120

Texas Archeological Society

tME, IC;HT
grim

100 -

50I

0.6

I

I

I

0.8

I

I

1.0

I

!.2

BIT THICKNESS
BI T ~iD TH

Figure 16. Scattergram showing relationship between weight and amount of bit "amh"
(expressed as the ratio of bit thickness to bit width) for all 19 tools in the study. Weight is a
variable related both to use and to availability of raw material. The amount of arching of
the bit is probably largely stylistic, a matter of craft habits of the individual knapper. The
scattergram shows that the Peterson cache is intermediate between the Lindner and Granberg caches, that there is limited overlap between caches, and that weight varies more than
bit arch. The spread of points for each cache indicates how heterogeneous or homogeneous each cache is. Weight is measured in grams; bit arch is a dimensionless ratio.

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

121

APPENDIX: DESCRIPTION OF A CACHE OF CLEAR FORK TOOLS
FROM THE J-2 RANCH SITE, VICTORIA COUNTY
It should be noted that a cache found at the J-2 Ranch site in Victoria County (Fox,
Schmiedlin, and Mitchell 1978: 9) is erroneously reported as consisting of Guadalupe
tools, but the specimens are more appropriately regarded as Clear Fork tools or protoforms. This classification has been perpetuated in subsequent literature. With the help
of Shirley Van der Veer I have been able to examine both the specimens in question (lot
82A) and the relevant field notes. Three specimens were found clustered together near the
east wall in the northeast quadrant of unit N 100/E30 (= unit K) at depths of 62.5, 61.75,
and 62.75 inches, respectively, below ground surface at the northwest corner datum.
Judging from the level plan all were grouped within a diameter of about 25 cm. A fourth
specimen was found in the northwest quadrant in the same level (60 to 66 inches) but
evidently was not found in place since it does not appear on the level plan (field notes,
October 17, 1976). Of the cached tools, one is an elongate-oval biface of yellow-brown
chert 12.8 cm long, with a slightly ridged dorsal face, and the beginnings of a recognizable bit formed on the ventral side by a few heavy percussion scars at the distal end; in
plan view the bit end is somewhat arched. This specimen is perhaps best regarded as a
Clear Fork protoform. Another is a thick, markedly piano-convex biface of light brown
chert 13.1 cm long, with a well developed bit formed on the ventral side by detachment of
several heavy percussion flakes; in plan view the bit is roughly straight with rounded corners. This specimen seems to be a representative Clear Fork tool. The third specimen in
the cache is a small elongate-oval biface of light chert with patches of cortex on the dorsal
side. In section it is piano-convex only toward the proximal end. The presumed distal end
has a slightly beveled effect created by the removal of many, fairly well-controlled flakes
from the ventral face, driven off from around the periphery of the bit. In plan view the bit
end is rounded. This specimen appears to be a small counterpart to the first one, and like it
is presumed to be a protoform. The fourth specimen, found isolated from the others, is a
short thick biface 5.9 cm long of yellow-brown chert, biconvex to piano-convex in section, with a steep, well-defined bit (rounded in plan view) formed on the ventral side. It
may be a Clear Fork tool that has been shortened by repeated resharpening.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Mr. O. R. Lindner for reporting his artifacts, for loaning them
for study, and for allowing me to visit the site. Tom Hester and Shirley Van der Veer provided crucial information on the Granberg and J-2 Ranch sites and arranged for me to
have access to the tools from both sites. Steve Black and A1 McGraw let me borrow two
specimens from the Panther Springs Creek site for study. Bobbie McGregor and Fred Valdez brought the Peterson cache to my attention and arranged for the Witte Museum to loan
them for study. Kay Hindes assisted in tracking down the original find spot of the Peterson
Cache, and Mr. Tobey Tomblin and Mr. J.W. Kenney provided access and answered
questions about the find. Harry Shafer and Rick Holloway provided access to photomicrographic equipment.

122

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Anderson, Patricia C.
t980

A Testimony of Prehistoric Tasks: Diagnostic Residues on Stone Tool Working
Edges. World Archaeology 12(2): 181 - 194.

Binford, Lewis R.
1980

Willow Smoke and Dogs’ Tails: Hunter-Gatherer Settlement Systems and Ar-

1982

The Archaeology of Place. JournalofAnthropologicalArchaeology 1(1):5-31.

chaeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45(1) : 4- 20.

Black, Stephen L. and A. Joachim McGraw
1985

The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity Within the Upper Salado Drainage, South Central Texas. CenterJbrArchaeologicaIResearch,
University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 100.

Brown, Kenneth M., Daniel R. Potter, Grant D. Hall, and Stephen L. Black
1982

Excavations at 41 LK 67: A Prehistoric Site in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
South Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San
Antonio, Choke Canyon Series 7.

Calhoun, Cecil A.
A Possible Cache of Flint From the Mouth of the Guadalupe River. Newsletter
1965
of the Houston Archeological Society 14:2-4.

Dittmar, Glenn W. and Jack W. Stevens
1980
Soil Survey of Atascosa County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Eagleton, N. Ethie
An Historic Indian Cache in Pecos County. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
1955
Society 26 : 200-2t7.
Fox, Anne A., E. H. Schmiedlin, and Jimmy L. Mitchell
Preliminary Report on the J-2 Ranch Site (41 VT 6), Victoria County, Texas. La
1978
Tierra 5(3) : 2-14.
Hale, Thomas H. Jr. and Martha Doty Freeman
1978

A Reconnaissance Survey and Assessment of Prehistoric and Historic Resources, Cypress Creek Watershed in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey, Research Report 68.

Hammatt, Hallett H.
1970a
1970b

A Paleo-Indian Butchering Kit. American Antiquity 35(2): 141-152.
A Cache of Flint Tools from Tillman County. Oklahoma Anthropological Society Newsletter 18(8-9) : 15-19.

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

123

Helm, Jeep and Betty J. Turner
1975

The Chips Feature. The Missouri Archaeological Society Newsletter 289: 1-3.

Hester, Thomas R.
1972
A Projectile Point Cache From Bexar County, Texas. Texas Archeology (Newsletter (~" the Texas Archeological Society) 16(4) : 6-7.
1980
Digging hzto South Texas Prehistory. Corona Publishing Company, San Antonio.
Hester, Thomas R. and Harvey Kohnitz
1975

Chronological Placement of "Guadalupe" Tools. La Tierra 2(2) : 22-25.

Hughes, Jack T. and Patrick S. Willey
1978

Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Office of the
State Archeologist, Archeological Survey Report 24.

Hutton, James D.
1976

A Cache From the Edge of a Dry Lake at McGregor Range. The Artifact
14(3):21-27.

Janes, Susan M.
1930

Seven Trips to Mount Livermore. West Texas Historical and Scientific Society
Publications 3:8-9. Sul Ross State Teachers College, Alpine.

Keeley, Lawrence
1980

Experimental Determination_ of Stone Tool Uses. A Microwear Analysis. The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London.

Kelly, Thomas C.
1977

The High Lonesome Bead Cache. Appendix II in An Archaeological Survey of
the Radium Springs Area, Southern New Mexico, edited by T. R. Hester. Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 26:141-171.

LeVick, Lawrence E.
1975

A Cache of Preforms From Southwestern Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society 23:177-183.

Lintz, Christopher
1978

Flake Blank Production Strategy of the Heerwald Site Cache. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society 27 : 179-206.

Mallouf, Robert J.
1981

A Case Study of Plow Damage to Chert Artifacts. The Brookeen Creek Cache,
Hill County, Texas. Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State A rcheologist
Report 33.

124

Texas Archeological Society

Meeks, N.D., G. de G. Sieveking, M. S. Tite, and J, Cook
1982
Gloss and Use-Wear Traces on Flint Sickles and Similar Phenomena. Journal of
Archaeological Science 9(4):317-340.
Millsap, Mike and Don R. Dickson
1968

The Millsap Cache. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 16:
159-160.

Moore, Mrs. Glen E. and Mrs. Joe Ben Wheat
An Archaeological Cache From the Hueco Basin. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo1951
logical Society 22: t44-163.

Morse, Dan F.
The Hawkins Cache: A Significant Dalton Find in Northwest Arkansas. The
1971
Arkansas Archeologist 12( 1 ) : 9-20.
Nightengale, Bruce A., Jack M. Jackson, and Henry B. Moncure
1985

Additional Intensive Survey of Cultural Resources in the Cummins Creek Prospect, Fayette County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 89.

Osborne, Carolyn M. and Harry S. Riddell, Jr.
1978

A Cache of Deer Snares From Owens Valley, California. Journal of California
Anthropology 5(1) : 101 - 109.

Pavesic, Max G.
A Projectile Point "Blank" Cache From Southeastern Idaho. Tebiwa (The Jour1966
nal of the Idaho State University Museum) 9(1):52-57.
Shutler, Richard
!956

A Pinon Nut Cache Near Tonopah, Nevada. Plateau 28(3) : 70-72.

Slesick, Leonard M.
A Lithic Tool Cache in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
1978
Society 49 : 3 t9-330.
Southard, Michael D.
1976

A Cache of Agricultural Implements From Towosahgy State Archaeological
Site. The Missouri Archaeological Society Newsletter 300 : 1-4.

Stephenson, Robert L.
1970

Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41 : 37-277.

Thomas, David H.
The Archaeology of Monitor Valley. 1, Epistemology. Anthropological Papers
1983
of the American Museum of Natural History 58(1).

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

125

Tsirk, Are
Regarding Fracture Initiations. In Lithic Use-Wear Analysis, edited by Brian
1979
Hayden, pp. 83-96. Academic Press, New York, San Francisco and London.
Tunnell, Curtis D.
1978
The Gibson Lithic Cache From West Texas. Texas Historical Commission,
Office of the State Archeologist Report 30.
Unger-Hamilton, Romana
1984

The Formation of Use-Wear Polish on Flint: Beyond the "Deposit Versus Abrasion" Controversy. Journal of Archaeological Science 11 (1) : 91 - 98.

Vaughan, Patrick C.
1985

Use-Wear Analysis of Flaked Stone Tools. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Wallace, William J.
1978
The Chuckwalla: a Death Valley Indian Food. Journal of California Anthropology 5(1): 109-113.
Weide, Margaret L. and David L. Weide
1969

A Cache From Warner Valley, Oregon. Tebiwa (The Journal of the hluho State
University Museum) 12(2) :28-34.

Witte, Adolph H.
1942

Certain Caches of Flints From the North Texas Area. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 14:72-76.

