EXPERIMENTAL EDGE DAMAGE ON
FLINT CHOPPING TOOLS
Leland W. Patterson

ABSTRACT
The distinctive characteristics of edge damage patterns are described for flint
tools used in experimental chopping of hardwood and bone. Comparisons are
made with patterns of edge damage resulting from the use of stone tools in other
tasks.
INTRODUCTION
It is common in archeological reports to classify certain large stone tools as
choppers and/or chopping tools, their function being inferred by artifact morphology and/or edge damage patterns. Some investigators label tools with unifacially retouched edges choppers and tools with bifacially retouched edges
chopping tools (Bordes 1968:242). Some tools are classified as choppers on the
basis of edge damage patterns alone. Although the function of chopping tools
can be inferred from specimen morphology, analysis of edge damage patterns is
a more direct method of determining whether a tool actually has been used for
this function. This paper describes edge damage patterns resulting from experimental chopping of hardwood and bone with flint tools, and compares those
patterns with other kinds of edge damage.
In actual practice, there are problems in determining if edge damage patterns
result from use of specimens as chopping tools or from other causes. For example, confusion can arise in separating chopping-tool edge damage from some
types of fortuitous edge damage. Both cases exhibit random edge fracture scars.
The random pattern of edge damage on a chopping tool occurs because edge
damage is a byproduct of hard percussive use, rather than the result of a series
of controlled fractures. The random pattern of fortuitous edge damage occurs
because the forces at work act at random, as evinced, for example, by the damage caused by stream tumbling.
Most descriptions of stone-tool edge damage patterns in the literature have
concentrated on cutting and scraping functions. For example, Tringham and
others (1974) have provided clear illustrations of predictable edge damage patterns developed by experimental cutting and scraping. The writer has been able
to reproduce these edge damage patterns in experimental deer butchering
(Patterson 1975). The literature is lacking in equally good descriptions of edge
damage patterns from chopping. In a recent symposium on lithic use-wear
analysis (Hayden 1979), some discussion was held on chopper edge damage patterns, but not in sufficient detail to aid the analyst in making consistent positive
identifications of chopping edge wear. In this symposium, Miller (1979:406)
stated that "Finally, the use damage on a flaked stone chopper can be described

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

5 3:175-183

176

Texas Archeological Society

as varied in size (relatively large flakes to microscopic fractures) and irregularly
distributed on both faces of the working edge. Such use fractures were sometimes rather deep."
The characteristics of edge damage on flint flakes from fortuitous causes have
not been well described in the literature, either. Most investigators assume that
this type of edge damage pattern is random and amorphous. It will be shown
here, however, that there is one type of fracture pattern that seems to characterize much of the fortuitous edge damage on flint specimens found in places such
as stream beds and open hillsides.
Large bffacial artifacts commonly are classified as handaxes in Central Texas,
but this classification may be too general. Many large bifaces are not finished
tools, but instead represent the initial stages of bifacial reduction and thinning
failures in the manufacture of smaller bifacial tools such as projectile points.
The identification of edge damage patterns would be useful in determining if
a large biface had actually been used as a chopping tool or cleaver. The writer’s
experience with Centra! Texas archeologicat sites has revealed that many large
bifaces do not have extensive edge damage patterns that are characteristic of
chopping use.
It should be noted that a fully developed edge damage pattern is necessary
for determining the type of edge damage on any specimen. There are many
cases in which the edge damage pattern is not diagnostic. Lightly damaged
edges with random small flake scars can result from fortuitous and natural
causes or from a variety of cursory tool uses. Examinations of edge damage
patterns should be made with at least 10-power magnification so all significant
details can be clearly observed.
CHOPPING EXPERIMENTS

Three experiments were performed to develop edge damage patterns from
chopping; one on bone and two on hardwood. All tools were made of flint from
the Lake Belton area near Temple, Texas. This flint is a fairly tough material
that requires heat treating before fine flint knapping can be done. Raw material
without heat treating was used for these experiments in order to retain the
characteristic toughness of the stone.
Experim en t I
One experiment involved chopping fresh beef bone of the type commonly
sold as marrow bone in grocery stores. Eight pieces of bone weighing a total of
0.45 kg (! pound) were sprit by chopping action, and a wooden block was used
as an anvil. At the start the bone pieces were approximately 4 cm (1.5 inches)
long and 5 cm (2 inches) in diameter. Each bone piece was split into a minimum
of four smaller pieces, with fractures following the bone grain. About equal
amounts of chopping were done on the outside and truncated surfaces of the
bone. The use of fairly small bone pieces gives a large amount of chopping tool
wear without requiring a very large bone sample.
The tool used for this experiment is shown in Figure 1. The working edge of
the tool was undamaged at the start of this experiment and had no purposeful
retouch. The angle of the undamaged working edge was approximately 50
degrees as measured with a swing-arm protractor. This large flake tool weighed
454 g (1 pound).

Patterson-Experimental Edge Damage

Figure 1.

177

Photograph of the flake chopping tool used in Experiment 1.

Figure 2.
Photomicrograph showing edge damage from chopping bone, Experiment 1.

178

Texas Archeological Society

Edge damage of this tool occurred in an irregular manner, as shown in Figure
2. Flake scars developed in an irregular manner, depending on the specific point
of impact of the tool edge. There was a wide variation in flake scar sizes, and
many small step fracture terminations occurred.
Experiment 2
Experiment 2 consisted of chopping hardwood with a large (363 g; 0.8
pounds) flake tool (Figure 3). As in Experiment 1, the working edge of the
chopping tool was undamaged at the start of the experiment and the original
edge angle was 50 degrees.
Figure 4 shows that the tool edge damage pattern developed from chopping
hardwood is similar to the pattern developed from chopping bone. Although
tool edge damage was evident after the first few blows, at least 5 minutes of
cilopping was required before a definite pattern developed. The edge damage
illustrated in Figure 4 is from about 10 minutes of chopping.
Experiment 3
Experiment 3 involved chopping hardwood with a bifacial tool that weighed
363 g (0.8 pounds) and had a starting working edge angle of 70 degrees (Figure
5). At the start of this experiment the tool working edge was sharp, but somewhat sinuous because of the large bifacial flake scars.
As shown in Figure 6, the tool edge damage pattern resulting from Experiment 3 is similar to that of the other two chopping experiments but, because of
the greater tool edge angle in this experiment, development of edge damage was
slower than in Experiment 2, where the tool edge angle was more acute. The
same piece of hardwood was used for Experiments 2 and 3. The tool edge
damage illustrated for Experiment 3 represents about 15 minutes of chopping,
or at least one and a half times the time used in Experiment 2. Even with the
longer use time, the tool edge damage in Experiment 3 is less than that in
Experiment 2.
The greater tool edge angle in Experiment 3 resulted in a slower rate of edge
damage than that of Experiment 2, but the greater tool edge angle also resulted
in a less efficient chopping tool. Even after edge damage occurred, the tool
used in Experiment 2, with a more acute edge angle, remained a more efficient
tool than the chopper used in Experiment 3. These experiments demonstrate
that a chopping tool edge angle of about 50 degrees is ideal; this edge angle is
acute enough to perform efficiently but high enough to prevent extreme edge
damage.
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS

Based on these experiments, the following statements can be made:
1
There is a wide variation in fracture scar sizes-a finding that is in agreement with observations on chopper edge wear by Miller (t979:406).
In these experiments, some resulting fracture scars were up to !.2 cm
in length.
2. There are many small step fracture terminations, giving the edge a
"chewed-up" look.
3. The larger fracture scars generally follow the contours of the tool faces,
rather than being steep transverse fractures across the edge.

Patterson-Experimental Edge Damage

Figure 3.

179

Photograph of the flake chopping tool used in Experiment 2.

Figure 4.
Photomicrograph showing edge damage from chopping hardwood,
Experiment 2.

180

Texas Archeological Society

0
L

Figure 5.

*

1
I

J

2
I

,

3
I

~

4
I

i

5
I

I

6
I

i

7 cm
I

Photograph of the bifacial chopping tool used in Experiment 3.

Figure 6. Photomicrograph showing edge damage from chopping hardwood,
Experiment 3.

Patterson-Experimental Edge Damage
4,

181

There is a wide variation in fracture scar shapes, varying from contracting to expanding distal terminations, with a wide variation in length
to width ratios.

FORTUITOUS EDGE DAMAGE
Edge damage can be caused fortuitously, and a comparison of such edge
damage with that caused by chopping is discussed here because both types are
somewhat random.
Common fortuitous causes of edge damage are stream
tumbling, pressure from trampling by man and hooved animals, and plowing.
Fortuitous edge damage has been observed by the author among a large number
of specimens, and there seems to be a typical pattern for such edge damage.
The specimen illustrated in Figure 7 is from a stream bed in Fayette County,
Texas, and is a tough alluvial chert common to the area.
Although fracture scars from natural and other fortuitous edge damage tend
to occur on both faces of specimens in a random manner, as in chopping tool
use, the following points can be made concerning the characteristic pattern of
fortuitous edge damage:
1. Fracture scars tend to be short, on the order of 2 to 5 mm in length.
2. Fracture scars tend to be wide relative to length, with scar widths commonly greater than scar lengths.
3. The majority of fracture scars have contracting dista! terminations.
4. Fractures tend to be steep and transverse across the edge, rather than
following the facia! contours of specimens.

Figure 7.

Photomicrograph showing typical edge damage from natural forces.

182

Texas Archeological Society

There is a noticeably small amount of step fracturing, with most flake
scars having clean distal terminations.
6. The occurrence of many steep fortuitous fractures gives an edge a flat or
well-rounded appearance. The ultimate outcome of stream rolling, for
¯ example, is completely rounded edges.
5.

OTHER EDGE DAMAGE PATTERNS
It has been noted here that chopping tool edge damage is characterized by
many small step fracture terminations. Trimming an edge with a small hammerstone also can produce a series of small step fracture terminations. However,
when trimmed with a small hammerstone, the termination of the edge will be
much more uniform than an edge that results from chopping. Edge trimming
with a small hammerstone produces a combination of small flake removals and
edge abrasion, which tends to cause smoothing.
Another factor to consider in determining if a tool edge is damaged from
chopping is that tools with edges modified from use are susceptible to subsequent kinds of edge damage. It is common to find tools with modified edge
damage caused by natural forces, and this must be considered by the analyst.
If soft vegetable materials were being chopped, a fairly dull working edge
might remain useful. In this case, the chopping tool might not be discarded
until the working edge became very worn, especially if a hard anvil were being
used. Some analysts might judge the worn edge to have been rounded by rolling
from natural forces rather than by dulling from chopping use. In such cases,
all edges should be examined. If only the suspected working edge is battered
and rounded, natural edge damage is less likely. Also, even though the working
edge of a chopping tool may be somewhat rounded, it should have many small
step fracture terminations and wide variation in fracture scar sizes.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
As detailed above, there are some significant typical differences between edge
damage resulting from chopping of hard materials and those from fortuitous
causes, even though both types of edge’ damage occur in a random manner.
These differences probably are due to basic differences in force application
methods. Chopping subjects the edge to hard percussive force. Natural and
other fortuitous force applications are more likely to result from pressure from
hard objects. The high degree of step fracturing in chopping tool edge damage
is caused by varying force applications being directed into the tool material
mass, instead of at a consistent oblique angle to the edge as is performed with
controlled flaking for lithic tool manufacturing.
The steep fractures common to fortuitous edge damage (Figure 7) probably
are due to the direction of application of random forces. The fortuitous actions
that produce steep, short fracture scars on edges of stone specimens can be explained in terms of physical principles. Most fortuitous fractures would occur
from forces being applied randomly to objects that were free to move or fixed
loosely. This situation would result in most force applications being applied
quite obliquely, rather than more directly, into the edges. Highly oblique forces
applied to edges give steep fractures with relatively few step terminations,

Patterson-Experimental Edge Damage

183

especially if the force application type is pressure. The lack of step terminations
is explained by the fact that steep fractures across thin edges encounter less
resistance of the material mass to the applied force. Step fracture terminations
occur when the resistance of the material mass overcomes the applied force and
does not al!ow the fracture plane to continue directly forward into the mass.
In sum, chopping tool edge damage is characterized by wide variation in
fracture scar sizes and shapes, large numbers of step fracture terminations,
and many larger fracture scars that follow the flake faces rather than being
transverse across edges. In contrast, fortuitous edge damage tends to produce
short, steep fractures, low length to width ratios of fracture scars, large numbers
of contracting fracture terminations, and small numbers of step fracture terminations. Both chopping tool edge damage and fortuitous edge damage produce
fracture scars at random on both faces of the damaged edge.
It is hoped that more studies of chopping tool and fortuitous edge damage
patterns will be published and a significant body of data will become available
in the literature.

REFERENCES CITED
Bordes, Francois
1968 The Old Stone Age. McGraw-Hi!l, New York.
Hayden, Brian (editor)
1979 Lithie use-wear analysis. Academic Press, New York.
Miller, Tom O., Jr.
1979 Stonework of the Xeta Indians of Brazil. In Lithic use-wear analysis,
edited by Brian Hayden, pp. 401-407. Academic Press, New York.
Patterson, L.W.
1975 Lithic wear patterns in deer butchering. Texas Archeology (Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society) 19(2): 10-11.
Tringham, Ruth, Glenn Cooper, George Odell, Barbara Voytek, and Anne
Whitman
1974 Experimentation in the formation of edge damage: a new approach
to lithic analysis.
Journal of Field Archaeology 1(1,2):171-196.

