The Beidleman Ranch Site: An Early Man
Kill Site in Stonewall County, Texas
DEE ANN SUHM

In the course of collecting vertebrate fossils from Pleistocene deposits along the Brazos River, the YVPA-Bureau of Economic Geology
State-Wide Paleontological-Mineralogic Survey excavated two archeological specimens from a fossil bison bone bed. At that time, November-December, 1939, the find attracted little attention, and it was not
even mentioned in the final report of the survey (Anonymous, 1941).
A re-examination of all available evidence clearly indicates that this
excavation had, by accident, uncovered the remains of an Early Man
kill site. Since the excavators were preoccupied with paleontological
remains and not with the importance of chance artifacts, their field
notes are regrettably brief. However, Early Man sites are still uncommon and unquestionably merit description. It is, therefore, the purpose of this paper to report as fully as possible this find made on the
J. T. Beidleman Ranch. In reporting the discovery, I am particularly
indebted to Richmond L. Bronaugh of Baylor University, Glen L.
Evans of Midland, and Josephine Casey of the Bureau of Economic
Geology, The University of Texas, for generously supplying me with
field notes and observations. Their cooperation has made this paper
possible.
Actually, the WPA-Bureau of Economic Geology excavated, under
the direction of Evans and Bronaugh, two sites on the Beidleman
Ranch. Only Site No. 1, hereafter referred to as the Beidleman Ranch
site, yielded evidence of Early Man. It is located in Stonewall County,
5.6 miles north of the junction of Highways 83 and 280, and two
miles northeast of Aspermont (Anonymous, 1941: 73). The site was
situated on the crest of a low divide between two minor tributaries of
the Brazos River. The bone bed (Fig. 1, B) lay in a much eroded pond
deposit, apparently of late Pleistocene age. This deposit was shallow,
probably under two feet thick. It rested on top of Permian red shale
(Fig. l, A). When the site was revisited in 1945 by Glen Evans, Rich-

208

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mond Bronaugh, and E. H. Sellards, the Quaternary deposit had
eroded away, fully exposing the Permian red shale (Bronaugh, personal communication).
All the bones collected are identified as belonging to an extinct variety of bison, and include jaws, vertebrae, leg bones, one skull, and
numerous teeth. Unfortunately, the skull lacked the horn cores and
the species remains unidentified, although Glen Evans (personal communication) thought that it might be B. antiquus. The field notes do
not indicate the extent of the bone bed, but do note that most of the
bones were in a poor state of preservation. It is likely that man, at
least in part, was responsible for this accumulation of bison bones. This
site, like so many of the other Early Man localities excavated to date,
was probably once the scene of a kill.
The first specimen, an incomplete dart point (Fig. 2, A, A’) was
found lying slightly above the bone bed and just beneath the surface.
At the time of discovery, it was thought to be intrusive and only fortuitously associated with the bison bones. However, several days later
a second, complete point (Fig. 2, B, B’) was found eighteen inches
below the surface among fragmentary bison bones. These points, the
second clearly and the first probably, were associated with the main
concentration of bone. In view of the typological characteristics displayed by both specimens, there is no reason to doubt the association,
or to believe that it was much disturbed prior to excavation.
The incomplete point measures 58 ram. in length, 21 ram. in maximum width (near the break), and 6 ram. in maximum thickness. It appears to be about two-thirds complete and probably had an original
length of about 75 ram. Dimensions of the complete point are: 73 ram.
in length, 21 ram. in maximum width (across the base), and 6 ram.
in maximum thickness. One basal edge has a projection which creates
a basal concavity; the other edge, however, is squarish. Chipping on
both specimens is predominantly collateral and, on the whole, skillful. Both specimens exhibit faint medial ridges. The complete point
flares out toward the base, giving the lateral edges a recurred appearance.
As for typological affiliations, only the complete specimen can be
considered with any assurance, although there are suggestions--especially in the uniformity of manufacture

that both points might be

classified as the same type. In a comparison with published illustrations and descriptions (Sellards, Evans, and Meade, 1947; Sellards,
1952; 1955; Wormingrmn, 1957) and with specimens housed in the
Texas Memorial Museum, the complete point appears to be within

Fig. 1. Beidleman site. A, Contact of Pleistocene deposit on the Double Mountain Permian
in a road cut adjacent to the Beidleman site. B, Exposure of extinct bison bone bed, Beldleman site.

TEXAS AIACIIEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

210

A

A’

B’
Fig. 2. Two specimens from the Beidleman site. A, AI, incomplete dart point. B, BI,
complete dart point, probably Plainview type, although it also shows affiliations with the
Pore’ales Complex.

211
the range indicated for Plainview points. It is slightly--only a millimeter or so--narrower than points from the Plainview site (Sellards,
Evans, and Meade, 1947), and only in this respect seems at variance
with that type. On the other hand, this point seems to be virtually
identical to certain specimens from the Milnesand (Williamson
Ranch) site in New Mexico (Sellards, 1955: Fig. 100, h, i). These
particular points from Milnesand are apparently related to, but not
clearly identified as, the Milnesand point type. Sellards refers to Milnesand as a square-based point, which does not accurately describe the
Beidleman specimen, or several of the points from the Milnesand
locality itself. Actually, and perhaps quite wisely, specific type identifications are somewhat vague for points from the Milnesand site
(Sellards, 1955), and from a similar assembladge found in Stratum 5
at Blackwater Draw (Sellards, 1952). The entire assemblages from
both are grouped by Sellards under the Portales Complex.
While not all of the points illustrated for the Portales Complex are
of the Milnesand type (some could be classified as Plainview, and
others are suggestive of Eden and Scottsbluff points), the presence of
Milnesand points appears to be essential for a recognition of this complex. So far as the Beidleman point is concerned, it is typologically
within the range of Plainview points and, at the same time, compares
quite favorably with certain minor forms occurring in the Portales
Complex. Thus, considered by itself, the Beidleman site raises the
question of the distinctiveness and/or interrelationship between the
Milnesand point, the Plainview point, and the Portales Complex. Actually, the Beidleman sample is too small to clarify the problem.
The approximate age of the Beidleman specimens can be inferred
from several radiocarbon dates obtained from the Plainview site and
from a Portales horizon at the Baxter Ranch site (Krieger, 1957: 322323) as falling between about 8,000 and 6,000 B.C. A late Pleistocene
date is further suggested by the extinct form of bison found at the site.

Re]erences Cited
Anonymous
i941. Final Beport Covering the Period from March 4, 1939, to September 30,
1941, for the State-Wide Paleontological-Mineralogic Survey in Texas.
A Federal Works Agency Projects Administration Project. Published by
The University of Texas Bureau of Economic Geology.
Krieger, Alex D.
1957. In: Notes and News: Early Man. American Antiquity, Vol. -22, No. B, pp.
321-323.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Sellards, E. H.
1952. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. University of Texas Press.
Austin.
1955.

Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Milnesand, New Mexico.
American Antiquity, Vol. 20~ No. 4, pp. 336-34~’K

Sellards, E. H., Glen L. Evans, and Grayson E. Meade
194,7.

Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainview, Texas (with Description of Artifacts by Alex D. Krieger). Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, Vol. 58, pp. 927-954.

Wormington, H. M.
1957. Ancient Man in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History,
Popular Series, No. 4.4th edition.

Texas Memorial Museum
Austin, Texas

