Archaeological Survey of Parts of the
Denton Creek Watershed
JON L.

GIBSON AND BLAKE L. BENI-IAiVI

ABSTRACT
Archaeological reconnaissance of two small reservoirs within the Denton
Creek watershed of north central Texas recorded three archaeological sites.
The nature of these sites as seen through the limited amount of cultura!
material presents little information concerning the activities represented or
their position within a temporal framework. The environmental data has
been used to pose inferential arguments about prehistoric adaptation and
to evaluate the data beyond mere description. In this sense, various questions have been asked and tentatively answered in the light of hypothetical
situations.

SITES AND ENVIRONMENT: A STUDY OF THE
ARCHAEOLOGY OF A PORTION OF THE DENTON CREEK
WATERSHED, WISE COUNTY, TEXAS
JON L. GIBSON

INTRODUCTION
During a two week period from January 1 to 15, 1968, a portion
of the Denton Creek Watershed was systematically surveyed. The
survey area corresponds to the lower 1,~,,’ miles of the Sweetwater Creek
alluvial plain near its confluence with Denton Creek (Fig. 1). This
tract of approximately 1000 acres is in eastern Wise County, about 8
miles east of the small town of Decatur, Texas. It is unequally divided
by State Highway 24 with the greatest portion lying south of the
highway.
The area figures prominently in the Denton Creek Watershed Flood
Prevention Project, as it is slated to become one of two nmltipurpose
structures in the Denton Creek drainage. Upon completion, this
structure, Site 28 (Soil Conservation Service 1965:20), will provide
municipal water for Decatur as well as affording recreational facilities
such as boat docks and ramps, bathing beaches, picnic areas, and
nature trails.

DESCRIPTION OF ENVIRONMENT
The survey area lies within the Grand Prairie Physiographic Province (Fenneman 1931 and 1938). This narrow strip of prairieland
is between the Eastern Cross-Timbers and the Western Cross-Timbers.
l~elief becomes more pronounced near its southern and southwestern

2OO

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FiCt~v,r 1. Distribution of sites and microenvironments in the survey area.
Key to microenvironments; !. batture sand bar, 2. natural levee, 3. floodplain, 4-5. remnant terrace and higher terrace, 6. upland escarpment-rolling prairie. Inset shows location o£ survey area in Texas.

borders as the rugged limestone country of the Edwards and Comanche plateaus is approached. To the north, the Grand Prairie
merges imperceptibly with the grasslands of the High Plains. Generally the Grand Prairie Province is characterized by wide, flat to
rolling plains dissected occasionally by small steepsided stream
valleys. It is with one of the small valleys that this report is coneerned.

A number of microenvironments (microhabitats) are contained
within the survey area. Detailed consideration of each of these small
ecologically significant zones has provided the basis of several of the
hypotheses which follow. In essence, this cultural paleoecological approach intends to offer plausible interpretations o£ the aboriginal
utilization of the natural environment. From this, inferences have
been made regarding the underlying socio-cultural requisites necessary
to have produced these archaeological data.
The assumption basic to interpretation is that the physical environ-

DENTON

201

CREEK WATERSHED

X’41W32
X41WSI

FmUe.E 2. Schematic profile of microenvironments. Identifying numbers
keyed to corresponding descriptions in text. Not to scale.

ment has remained more or less constant since the time of Indian
occupancy to the present; that is to say, that since the prolonged
aridity and widespread erosion of the Altithermal (Antevs 1962) of
ca. 7000 B.C., the climate and resultant biotic aggregates have been
relatively consistent. Of course, minor oecilations and even marked
regional droughts such as the Fairbanks, about 500 B.C., and the
Great or Pueblo Drought, ca. 1300 A.D. (Antevs 1962), have occurred
and were accompanied by eolian erosion, channe!-filling, and other
dry period landscape shaping phenomena. Nonetheless, these recurrent
elimatie episodes are not known to have produced drastic shifts in
flor!l and faunal assemblages. However, an unmeasurable factor in
assessing changes or shifts in the habitat is man, i.e., modern farmers
and ranchers whose activities have greatly modified not only the
biotic relationships, but the topography itself. This fact presents one
of the major difficulties in projecting present-day environmental conditions into the past with any reasonable degree of assurance of
comparability. However, it is believed that changes due to human
agency are predominantly quantitative rather than qualitative.
Figure 2 illustrates a generalized composite cross section of the
microhabitats or biotopes which exist today in the Sweetwater-Catlett
Creeks valley. Concise descriptions of each of these zones are provided below.
1. BAT’rUItE SAND BAR. Batture sand bars are presented in Catlett
and Sweetwater Creeks but lack the characteristic development of
corresponding phenomena in river systems to the east of the Trinity
drainage. Although similar depositional forces are operative on a
miniature scale in Catlett and Sweetwater Creeks, the general stage
seems to still be one of downcutting. Correspondingly, the batture

TEXAS ARCIIEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

walls are steep, and maximum alluvial accretion occurs only on those
slopes of the most steeply convoluting meanders. At these points, clean
white sands of true bar development are noted.
No cultural debitage, which would testify to aboriginal utilization
of these areas, was recovered from any of the accunmlations. This is
not unexpected for these features are highly unstable and theoretically
tend to migrate downstream) In such a ease, cultural refuse would
either be washed away or covered very quickly.
2. NATURAL LEVEE. Natural levees bordering Catlett and Sweetwater Creeks are very narrow and poorly developed. Characteristically, they are ahnost imperceptible rises of only a few inches to a
foot directly adjacent to the stream banks. The primary reason for distinguishing this biotope is that the loosely consolidated, better drained
sandy soils near the edges of the stream channel support a distinctive
growth of vari-storied vegetation (cf. microzones 4-5 and 6). Pecan,
blackwalnut, rattan, red oak, burr oak, elm, hackberry, locust, and
briars are the prevalent woody species. Fauna occupying this niche
are squirrel, raccoon, opossum, and various transient predators including bobcat and wolf.
3. FLOODPLAIN. The area between the natural levee and the dissected upland escarpment is the alluvial floodplain. Within the survey boundaries, the average width varies from no more than a few
hundred yards to almost three-quarters of a mile. Generally it is a
flat fertile plain dissected in a few spots by intermittent rivulets,
which are the products of upland runoff. Grassland cover is predominant today and was probably the floral condition in the past. However, it should be noted that ranchers and farmers are very active in
this zone and the extent of modification cannot be accurately measured. The zone today furnishes the habitat for several mammalian
and avian species, such as field rat, rabbit, skunk, coyote, fox, grouse,
and quail. In years past, it may have also supported some bison, as
a buffalo skull was exhumed by local residents from the bank of
Sweetwater Creek some years previous to this reconnaissance (Cody
Caraway, verbal comnmnication, 1968).
A possible deterrent factor for aboriginal settlement in this biotope
was frequent inundation. If figures compiled for the last 30 years for
the Denton Creek Watershed can be projected with any degree of
validity into the past, the area seems to have been subjected to rather
persistent flooding. Although the mean annual precipitation is only
31.56 inches and is usually distributed throughout the year, individ1 The general hypothesis of downstream migration of meanders and

therefore

of

bars

(Davis 1913:7) has not received much support from its application to the Mississippi River
(Chawner 1936:23-24).

DENTON

CREEK

WATERSHED

203

ual excessive rains may produce widespread flooding (Soil Conservation Service 1965:6). Since 1935 there have been 36 major floods
which covered more than one half of the floodplain (Soil Conservation Service 1965:9).
4-5. REMNANT TERRACE AND HICHER TERI~ACE. These mierohabitats
are discussed as one unit for the faunal and floral features are basieally
similar. Remnant terraces are physically part of the higher terraces
that have been completely isolated by erosion. Soils of these zones
are graveliferous sandy loams and red and yellow tenacious clays.
Often those members fringing the upland escarpment are littered by
limestone talus and in some areas colluvial fans are prevalent.
Although recent clearing has denuded sections of this zone, scattered
groves of oak, walnut, bois d’ are, ehn, haekberry, and various shrubs
are present, primarily near runoff gullies. Grasses grow in areas
not in woods. Native fauna include squirrel, opossum, rabbit, an
occasional Virginia deer, and rarely predators such as fox, bobcat,
and wolf.
This mierohabitat is abundant in food and material resources, is
well-drained, is almost never inundated, is sheltered from the persistent north wind, and is in proximity of every other biotope. It was
therefore not unexpected that the only site of any size in the survey
area was located in this biotope.
6. UPLAND ESCARPMENT-ROLLING PRAIRIE. This zone, which actually
consists of several microenvironments, corresponds to the grassland
portion of the Grand Prairie Physiographic Provenience (Fenneman
1938:105). It is true prairie with an aggregation of grasses including
bluestem, Indiangrass, switehgrass, dropseed, and buffalo. Prickly pear
is rarely found, and its presence may be due to recent human transportation. Woody vegetation, such as live oak, post oak, blackjack
oak, and black locust is limited to the peripheries of the escarpment
or to well-watered spots. Skunk, rabbit, coyote, quail, grouse, and
probably bison (in previous years) utilize the forage and cover provided by this zone. Prominent elevations in the upland escarpment
provide excellent panoramic views of the surrounding country.
SITES AND THE ENVIRONMENT
SITE X41WSl
Site X41WS1 is located in mieroenvironment 4-5, about 20 yards
east of the Sweetwater Creek-Catlett Creek confluence. The occupation area, which is approximately 80 feet in diameter, lies atop a
remnant terrace outlier.
Although there was a paucity of cultural refuse, 3 discrete coneen-

204

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

trations of material pointed to task-specific areas. Conforming generally to the crest of the terrace was an area approximately 40 feet
in diameter littered with burned limestone rocks. Immediately outside
this fired zone in 9. spots were accumulations of flakes. Scattered
throughout the site, including the burned area, were dart point flagments, pebble hammerstones, grinding-stones, ground axe and/or celt
fragments, and a possible plummet.
ARTIFACTS OF

CHIPPED STONE

PROJECTILE POINTS: TWO distal fragments of dart points and 1 contracting long stemmed dart point (probably Gary or possibly Wells)
were recovered. The nearly complete point was approximately 55
ram. long and 9.0 ram. wide. Several other points are noted as having
been picked up from the surface (B. C. Pitts, verbal communication,
1968). One of the fragments and the point were made of quartzite,
and the other fragment was of waxy Central Texas flint.
DEBITAGE: Debitage consisted of 20 small flakes; the majority about
equally derived krona the two flake accumulations mentioned above.
These irregular and unmodified pieces were simply thinning or trimming flakes resulting krona tool or projectile point repair. No cores
were present.
ARTIFACTS OF GROUND STONE

PEBBLE HAMMERSTONES: Eight pebbles of quartz, chert, and sandstone have marks ok attrition or battering around the peripheries
which suggests their probable function as hammerstones. The amount
of wear is variable, ranging krona slight to moderate.
AXES AND/OR CELTS: This rather inclusive heading describes 2 bit
fragments and 1 poll fragment from X41WS1. Only the poll fragment
is complete enough to identify it as a kull-grooved rectangular axe.
The other 2 pieces are too small to determine if they were axes or
celts. The objects were made ok ochreous siltstone, fossiliferous limestone, and exotic diorite.
MANO: A sub-rectangular piece ok sandstone is judged to have
functioned as a mano. The edges have been battered and only 1 face
is well-smoothed.
ABI:IADED SLAB: A small slab of wel!-consolidated laminar siltstone
had abraded surfaces. Several lightly etched grooves are present on 2
faces. The object may have served as a whetstone.
PLUMMET: An ovoid hematite concretion with a groove worn severa!
centimeters below the apex may have functioned as a plummet or
bolastone. Except for the groove, the specimen has not been modified
in any fashion.

DENTON CREEK WATERSHED

9,05

OTHER: Fire-cracked or reddened stone, fragments of fresh-water
mussels, and 1 small piece of calcined bone (deerP), complete the
entire inventory of the products or refuse of human activity at
X41WS1.
The smallness of the site, the paucity of artifacts, the limited number of task-specific areas, and the presence of tools normally considered to be masculine articles point to the probability of the site
having functioned as a short duration camp for a small number of
men. It is further suggested that a group of men minus spouses carrying on so few vital activities, certainly insufficient for total culture
maintenance, intimates by analogy with ethnographic data at least
two alternatives. The first is that the site represents an in-route stop
of a raiding party, and the second and favored alternative is that it is
simply a hunting camp.
It is deduced from the few artifacts and inferred activities at
X41WS1 that the occupants were active in exploiting several of the
contiguous mieroenvironments. Limestone talus from the higher slopes
of microenvironment 4-5 was imported for hearth stone. The residue
from limited tool repair suggests that the raw material came largely
from the few channel gravels of microenvironment 1 or from a gravel
quarry in mieroenvironment 5, some 2 miles west of the survey boundaries. A few pieces of exotic stone, i.e., Central Texas flint and diorite,
allude to extraneous connections or sources. Fragments of freshwater mussels as well as the recognized biological necessity for drinking water testify to further utilization of mieroenvironment 1. A single
scrap of calcined bone tentatively identifed as deer indicates that
at least some of the hunting endeavors were channeled into microenvironment 4-5.
The data are too inconclusive to positively assert the period of
occupancy, although they implicate an Archaic type of huntinggathering economy if not an Archaic period temporal position.
SITE X41WS2
A single other location, dubiously accorded site status, was present
within the survey area. The geographic coordinates are Longitude
97°27’51" and Latitude 33015’22" which places it north of highway
24 and approximately 150 yards north of Sweetwater Creek. The
"site" consists of an area about 10 feet in diameter which shows signs
of human activity.
ARTIFACTS

DEBITAGE: This category contains 5 flakes, of which 2 are rather

206

TEXAS AIICHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

prismatic. At least 3 different pebbles of quartz and local chert seem
to have been worked.
I-IAMMEnSTONE: One ovoid quartz pebble has slight abrasions on
one edge which may indicate its function as a hammerstone.
The confined spatial dimensions, the absence of any kind of finished
tool, and indeed the dearth of any artifactual remains point to the
utilization of this spot by a single occupant for a very short period
of time.
The site occupies a portion of an upper slope of microenvironment 4-5. Pebbles of chert are present on the crest (microenvironment 6) of the ridge above. The site overlooks one of the wooded
fingers of microenvironment 4-5 which extends along a drainage
ravine, and game could have been observed most easily. Perhaps most
importantly, the area is sheltered from the prevailing north wind.
CONCLUSIONS AND SUMMARY
Although the reservoir area was searched systematically and thoroughly, the two aforementioned sites were the only ones discovered.
Several other ideal spots were carefully examined but yielded no
indication of ever having been utilized. Congruently, the two sites
which are found appear to represent the very limited activities of a
few individuals for a short period of time. This brings us to an
interesting point; one from which departure to predictive hypotheses
of culture operation may be launched.
A number of sites are known from areas adjoining structure 28,
primarily along Denton Creek and the upper reaches of Catlett and
Sweetwater Creeks. Although only one of these sites was examined
personally, artifact assemblages from several other sites were observed
in private collections. From the holdings of assured provenience, it
is possible to induce considerably more functions for the sites from
which they were taken than for those sites within the survey boundaries by the simple fact that a considerably larger number and
variety of tool types were represented. Wider variety within the tool
kit alludes to more patterned activities of the cultural group. Hence
it is logical to assume that the sites in structure 28, from which only
cooking, stone tool maintenance, and hunting and gathering activities
may be inferred, do not appear to typify complete, self-sustaining
cultural entities. Therefore, it is posited that these small sites are
actually functionally-specific activity units, i.e., hunting camps, of a
larger socio-cultural system which perhaps centered along Denton
Creek. Of course, it goes without saying that this hypothesis is operational within the present conceptual framework, but the burden of

DENTON

CREEK

WATERSHED

9,07

validation or rejection ultimately rests with future survey and
excavation.
Assuming for a moment that the environment is responsible for the
differences in settlement and activity patterns in the two areas, then it
is feasible to look for some factor or faetors physical or cultural, which
would preclude permanent occupation in the reservoir area. It is suggested that the impermaneney of occupation in the area is basieally due
to the ephemeral availability of water. Supporting data for this proposal include: 1. a greater number of sites on Denton Creek and the
spring-freshened headwaters of Catlett and Sweetwater Creeks where
a more voluminous and more dependable water supply was assured,
and 9.. the fact that the portions of Catlett and Sweetwater Creeks
within the survey boundaries are known to have gone dry during
periods of drought.
Thus, although settlement stability was hindered, the area was still
oeeasiona!ly frequented by hunting and/or foraging parties, who were
apparently attracted by the natural bounty of the landscape. Indeed,
the necessity for permanent occupancy may never have arisen as the
area was readily accessible from the villages or base camps on Denton
Creek. Carrying the proposal further, it is conceivable that the presence of the small camp sites may be correlated with a daily or seasonal
exploitation of the abundant mast crops or game. However, this is
beyond corroboration by the available evidence and is certainly
speculative at this point.
A ease for the relationship between habitat and culture has been
proposed by Quimby (1960:382) who writes:
Under certain conditions a hunting culture will develop to the limits of its
habitat and in so doing will acquire forms determined by the habitat.

Quimby has perhaps overstated his point, for it alludes to a deterministie quality of the natural environment. Nonetheless, the general
idea, possibly more aptly expressed by Meggers (1954:801-89,4), as the
limiting effects of the environment, has provided the core of this diseussion. It is beyond question that rapport between culture and nature
must be established if the former is to survive.
If culture is viewed as man’s extrasomatie adaptation (White
1959:8), then understanding of the paleoeeologieal relationships will
assist the archaeologist in making soeio-eultural interpretations. This is
precisely the goal advocated two decades ago by Taylor (1948), but
which received concerted attention only recently (Longaere 1964;
Coe and Flannery 1967; MaeNeish 1964; Binford 1962).
This report has brought out some of the intricacies of the cultureenvironment relationship in a small area of North-Central Texas.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICALSOCIETY

~08

Additional data from excavation and from comprehensive reconnaissance in adjoining areas are required in order to test the interpretations offered herein. It is then toward these ends that this preliminary
paper is directed.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Appreciation is extended to the land owners in the survey area who
allowed access to their properties. Special thanks are expressed to
Mr. R. C. Pitts and Mr. Cody Caraway, who not only allowed entry to
their land, but who facilitated the survey endeavors in numerous
other ways. The orientation taken in the foregoing discussion is due in
large part to the advice and constructive criticism of James V. Seiscenti,
director of the Southern Methodist University Salvage Program. Dr.
Joel Shiner, Southern Methodist University, and Mr. Robert Thorne,
University of Mississippi, read rough drafts of this paper, and their
comments have helped remove certain of the ambiguities and clarify
other points. Acknowledgement is made of the National Park Service
which sponsored this research. Special thanks go to Hazel Gilboe
and Maxine Shiner for typing initial drafts of this manuscript.
REFERENCES CITED
Antevs, Ernst
1962 Late Quaternary Climates in Arizona. American Antiquity, Vol. 28,

No. 2, pp. 193-198.
Binford, Lewis
1962 Archaeology as Anthropology.

American Antiquity, Vo!.

28, No.

2,

pp. 217-225.
Chawner, W. D.
I936 Geology of Catahoula and Concordia Parishes. Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, Geological Survey No. 9.
Coe, Michael D. and Kent V. Flannery
1967 Early Cultures and Human Ecology in South Coastal Guatemala.
Smithsonlan Contributions to Anthropology, Vol. 3.
Davis, W. M.
1913 Meandering Valleys and Underfit Rivers. Annals of the Association of
American Geographers. Vol. 3.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
193i

Physiography of Western United States. McGraw-Hil! Book Company,
Inc.

Physiography of Eastern United States. McGraw Hill Book Company,
Inc.
Longacre, Wi!liam
1938

1964

Archaeology as Anthropology: A Case Study. Science, Vol. 144, pp.
1454-55.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1964 Ancient Mesoamerican Civilization. Science, Vol. 143, No. 3606, pp.
531-537.
Meggers, Betty J.
1954 Enviromnenta!

Anthropologist,

Limitations on the Deve!opment
Vol. 56, pp. 801-824.

of Culture.

American

DENTON

CREEK

WATERSHED

209

Quimby, George I.
1960 Habitat, Culture, and Archaeology, In, Essays in the Science of Culture in Honor of Leslie A. White, G. E. Dole and R. L. Cameiro (eds.),
pp. 380-390.
Soil Conservation Service
1965 Supplemental Work Plan: Denton Creek Watershed of the Trinity
River Watershed. Montague, Wise, Denton, Cooke, and Tarrant Counties, Texas. Soil Conservation Service. Temple.
Taylor, Waiter W.
1948 A Study of Archeology. Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association, No. 69.
White, Leslie A.
1959 The Evolution of Culture. McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, Texas

X41MU15, A SITE ON THE HEADWATERS
OF DENTON CREEK, MONTAGUE COUNTY, TEXAS
BLAKE L. BENHAM
INTRODUCTION
The present paper deals with a site located within the Denton Creek
Watershed. The site was loeated during a survey of multi-purpose
structure No. 1 C, a Soil Conservation Serviee dam providing rural
domestic and livestock water with incidental recreational benefits.
The specific area of study is at the headwaters of Denton Creek,
where the channels of two branehes meet, one flowing from the north,
the other from the west. The dam spans the northern branch about
a quarter of a mile upstream from the point of confluence. The reservoir lies eight miles east of Bowie and seven miles south of Montague
in the north central portion of Montague County, Texas.
SITE SETTING
Being the upper portion of the Trinity Watershed, the sixty mile
drainage of Denton Creek flows southeasterly through three major
land resource areas: the West Cross Timbers, the Grand Prairie, anJ
the East Cross Timbers (SCS Work Plan 1965:3-5). The site,
X41MU15 is located within the West Cross Timbers, a region eharacterized by rolling topography of early Cretaeeous formations which
are severely incised by Denton Creek and its tributaries (Sellards, Adkins, and Plummer 1932:278). Although the soil series for each of the
land resource areas differ in terms of their resistance to erosion, the
primary changes in ehannel forms between the upper and lower
reaches of this watershed are the result of stream dynamics. In the
upper reaches, headward erosion is evidenced by the abandonment

9,10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

of catch basins in combination with the cutting of V-shaped channels.
The catch basin remnants bear a striking resemblance to floodplains,
but are structurally dissimilar, and occupy extended areas far beyond
the channel peripheries and remain as isolate canyons that occur at
varying intervals for a distance of three miles downstream.
In sum, a transition from a youthful to a more mature channel
development is readily observable in the drainage basin. On the lower
reaches there are small, but definable natural levees and terraces
within an active floodplain. More youthful and still in the process of
headward erosion, the upper channel has become entrenched to the
extent that 30 meter high escarpments rise steeply from the sh’eam
banks confining the water course and restricting floodplain development to a minimum. The site lies atop such an escarpment to the east
of the confluence of the north and west branches of Denton Creek.
This is the location of the last abandoned catch basin from which "the
creek has since migrated.
Approximately six miles to the northwest, three variations of the
West Cross Timbers environment become apparent. These variations
are distinguished by a change in type and density of vegetation which
corresponds to changes in soil type and topography. The site is !ocated on the western fringe of a densely wooded area, composed
largely of post and blackjack oak which is restricted primarily to the
east of the 1000’ MSL contour. West of this contour and extending
north to the Red River (an area known locally as the Badlands), are
the Windthorst-Nimrod Prairie types, (Carter 1931:79-81) which
support only sparse vegetation of small mesquite trees, buffalo grass
and grama grasses. This vegetation grades almost imperceptibly into
the Rolling Plains by the Nimrod Prairie Soils, on the northeast by
the 1000’ MSL contour and reaching northward to the Red River is
a moderately open savannah that can best be described as a "transitional" area containing representative traits of the bordering vegetations.
The watershed divide which separates the Red River and Trinity
River drainages is less than three miles to the north of the site. In
addition to the vantage points afforded by the crest, within half a
mile north and east of the site, there are strategic promontories providing views over an extensive area.
Other than the deviations introduced by the presence of abandoned
catch basins and the youthful character of the upper segment of "the
drainage system, the mieroenvironmental resources described for
Catlett Creek in the preceding paper give a full account of the environs of the site proper.

DENTON

211

CREEK WATERSHED

PLAN AND PROFILE X41-MU-15
(NOT TO SCALE)

I-ix/
ROAD

/
X

/

X

X

DENTON CREF’K

DENTON

.........

CREEK CHANNEL

........

CATCH BASIN REMNANT

.... LOCATION OF PROFILE
]

UPPER CONCENTRATION

[[[]

LOWER CONCENTRATION

X

SANDY ACCUMULATIONS

Y

RED STRATUM

Z

GREY "CALICHEFIED"

SOILS

FmuR~ 1. Plan and profile of site X41MU15.

SITE DESCRIPTION
The site consists of two distinct concentrations of chipped stone
material, one along the summit, and the other on the slope of the
escarpment (Fig. 1). Both concentrations cover a maximum area of
seventy-five by thirty meters. The upper concentration contains

9,19, .

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

numerous small secondary retouch flakes in an area approximately
fifteen by three meters, with the long axis oriented east-west paralleling the edge of the escarpment. No material was eollected from the
upper area. It was decided that a collection would destroy any patterned distribution that might be present. (See Hayden 1965:272).
The lower concentration is composed of primary (cortex) and
initial flakes (Honea 1965:29). A number of these larger flakes were
collected as they were representative of resource material which
occurred in the upper concentrations. Furthermore, although the distribution of the material may be skewed by contour plowing of the
escarpment slope, the area on the summit appeared to be undisturbed
by this practice.
The resource materials included fine-grained quartzite found in
the immediate environs and on the Red River, locally derived cherts,
and opaque grey to black Central Texas flint from more distant
locales. Gravels and relatively large chunks of limestone and sandstone occur in proximity to the site, but give no indication of being
utilized by the occupants. No finished tools were recovered.
SUMMAItY AND CONCLUSIONS
Since the cultural material of X41MU15 suggests a very limited
range of activities, the problem of interpreting the site is primarily
one of relating the evidence to a larger whole or pattern of adaptation.
The available data cannot be taken to represent the remains of a
total cultural pattern; but rather, the site evidences certain activities
which are part of a round of life that encompasses a sizeable geographic area.
Although the evidence is not conclusive, it is proposed that the site
indicates the pursuance of hunting and may reflect a hunting and
gathering economy. Pending further investigation, this is a tentative
perspective. The situation of the site might be brought forward in
support of this interpretation. From the site area an accurate account
can be made of the movements of game along the canyon slopes and
within the catch basin remnant below; this argument stresses the
strategic location of the site for hunting. Decidedly, success in hunting
depends upon the vulnerability of game within certain settings,
whereas the heavily wooded uplands offer a greater amount of cover
and would put the hunter at a disadvantage.
More specifically, the site may be envisioned as a preparatory step
in the pursuance of hunting activities. A substantial number of secondary retouch and initial (Honea 1965) flakes are most closely
aligned to "sharpening" and shaping of tool forms. If tools were

DENTON CREEK ~WATERSHED

213

used on the spot, some it seems would have been found as utilized discards. It is suggested then, that the site served only an instrumental
function in the killing of game and not the goal-satisfying or end
consequences, i.e. kill site.
Further, there is the question whether one or several persons prepared tools on the site at successive occasions or whether the chipping
areas resulted from one hunt carried out by a number of persons. An
analysis of the distribution of flakes over the site area should be
conducted concerning the organization of hunting practices. One thing
seems certain: the high density of secondary retouch flakes in relation
to the other flake classes is highly suggestive that preforms and
debitage blanks received final treatment on the site and that preliminary treatment of the materials was achieved elsewhere.
This means that we are dealing with a point in time in which a
stone-working process was in operation. The material, therefore,
refers to a specific spatial dimension in which an economy operated.
In this sense, the site is a study complete within itself, for the
process of resource alteration and the economic pursuit with which
the material is so closely linked (whether hunting or gathering) has
become a matter of exploiting and accommodating to space.
Ethnologically derived models of hunting and gathering economies
provide insights into the general mechanics of their operation, but the
spatial dimensions of completed economic cycles are a perplexing
problem from the outset. The variations in enviromnents and climates,
in how particular resource users assemble a subjective picture of "the
environment (Blaut 1959:92), and in the technological orientation
of the users, are some of the classes of multivariate phenomena within
the spatial scheme. It is in how these "stage settings" are employed by
cultural-economic processes that dimensions of space become prescribed. Archaeological reconnaissance must subscribe to an unknown
spatial dimension, especially when dealing with hunting-gathering
economies, and through the location of sites provide information
necessary to synthesize and tentatively define a spatial adaptive pattern or patterns.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author wishes to acknowledge the aid rendered by James V.
Sciseenti, Princiloal Investigator of the Anthropology Itesearch Center at Southern Methodist University, who has made necessary
changes and criticisms of this report.
Appreciation is extended to the following people of the Anthropology llesearch Center: S. Alan Skinner and David Lubell, who in

214

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

many ways offered helpful assistance; R. King Harris provided useful
information on previously recorded sites in the Denton Greek Area and
Hazel Gilboe for typing this report.
Thanks are also due various personnel of the Soil Conservation
Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, particularly Mrs. J. Morgan
of the SCS Headquarters in Bowie who offered information necessary
for gaining access to privately owned property.
REFERENCES CITED
Blaut, James M.
1959 The Ecology of Tropical Farming Systems. In "Plantation Systems of
the New World", Social Science Monographs, Vol. 11, pp. 1-211.
Carter, W. T.
1931 The Soils of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin
No. 9.
Hayden, Julian D.
1965 Fragile-Pattern Areas. American Antiquity, Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 272-276.
Honea, Kenneth
1965 A Morphology of Scrapers and Their Methods of Production. Southwestern Lore, Vol. 31, No. 2.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1939. The Geology of Texas, VoI. 1, Stratigraphy. The University of Texas
Bulletin, No. 3232.
Soil Conservation Service
1965 Supplemental Work Plan: Denton Creek Watershed of the Trinity,
River Watershed, Montague, Wise, Denton, Cooke, and Tarrant Counties, Texas. Soil Conservation Service, Temple.
Southern Methodist University
Salvage Program, Dallas

