Additional Notes on the Fishing Technology
of the Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico
DAVID A.

PHILLIPS, JR.

ABSTRACT
Notched net-sinkers, described by Eaton (1976) for the Gulf Coast
of Yucatan, are also found on that peninsula’s eastern coast.
Preliminary results of an analysis of net-sinkers from the island of
Cozumel, Mexico, are discussed.

INTRODUCTION
In the 1976 Bulletin, a paper by Jack D. Eaton reported on a survey of
the north coast of Yucatan, Mexico. Eaton found over 200 notched sherds
and stones at eight coastal sites, and he concluded that they were net- and
line-sinkers used in fishing.
Such net-sinkers are common in Mesoamerica. Eaton (1976: 234-236)
notes a number of locations, including the Yucatecan east coast, where
they have been found. However, one place not mentioned by him has
yielded what is probably the largest single collection of notched sherds
and stones from the Maya area. This is the island of Cozumel (Fig. 1),
where excavations in 1972 and 1973 turned up over 1000 such items.
There, they were tentatively termed mariposas -- Spanish for "butterflies" -- in order to avoid the automatic functional implications of a
term like "net-sinker." They have been described only briefly so far
(Connor 1975: 131-133)but are now being analyzed as part of the Cozumel
Project’s artifact collections. It is already possible to add some comments
to Eaton’s report, based on findings from the 1973 season.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIMENS
1. Materials and manufacture. Eaton found more notched stones

(168) than notched sherds (58) on his survey of the north coast. The stone
and sherd sinkers also came from separate sites. On Cozumel, however,
the situation is different: of 1068 notched items from the 1973 field season,
1027 were of pottery, 23 of coral, 16 of limestone, and two of shell The
various materials are found mixed at any given site.
Analysis suggests that manufacture of notched artifacts on Cozumel
is the same as that described for the northern coast. Sherds, in particular,
were worked into shape by breaking and grinding the edges, and then the
notches were cut into the endswith a sharp blade (Eaton 1976: 234). With
softer varieties of pottery, however, cutting the sherd to shape was also
done. Four notched artifacts made of Fine Orange Ware from Cozumel still
show clear cut-marks along their edges.
Notched clay pellets (Fig. 2,h), not found by Eaton, occur rarely (7
times) in the Cozumel collections. The notch was incised into the pellet
before firing, while the clay was still wet. Such specimens are smaller and
lighter than those of pottery, coral, stone, or shell.
Sizes and weights reported by Eaton for the north coast (1976: 234)
conform to those for Cozumel. Eaton’s notched sherds ranged in weight
from 5 to 51 grams; those from the island range from 1 to 36 grams with a
mean of 6.6 grams.
2. Wear patterns. On some slipped-ware notched sherds, the slip has
worn off the convex surface of the sherd except in the zone between the

YUCATAN FISHING TECHNOLOGY

351

¢

f

h

g

FIGURE 2. Selected Notched Artifacts from Cozume!. a-g, worked sherds;
h, clay pellet notched before firing; i, coral; j, limestone. Examples d-f show
"striping"; e, fragmentary.

two notches, creating a "stripe" (Fig. 2,d, e, f). This seems to be the result
of gradual abrasion, not deliberate removal of slip. Only a small
proportion of the notched sherds (33 out of 1027) show this trait, but many
of the others were unslipped to begin with or were very weathered when
found. The "striping" trait is found on Tuluum Red Ware (20 out of 295),
Mayapan Red Ware (9 out of 123), and Puuc Slate Ware (3 out of 28).
"Striping" on these notched sherds is also known from the site of Tuluum
(Alfredo Barrera, personal communication).
The obvious interpretation of such "stripes" is that at some time
there was a cord tied around the artifact, through the notches; this cord
protected the slip beneath it as the rest of the surface of the object
gradually was being abraded. These notched artifacts have been interpreted as weft-weights for weaving (Kent and Nelson 1976), or as
door-hangings (Brunelle 1974; see Clavigero in Pollock and others 1962:
184). But neither of these functions would expose the artifacts to the
kind of regular, gradual wear suggested by "striping." Use as weights
in nets or on lines, however, would produce just this kind of wear
pattern.

352

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

3. Temporal and spatial distribution. Dating of excavation units on
Cozumel awaits completion of pottery analysis, but the wares on which
mariposas were made give an indication of their time range. Of the 272
mariposas on diagnostic sherds, 4 are from the Formative or Early
Periods, 38 are from the Florescent, and 230 from the Decadent or
Contact Periods (3 are on European wares). The increase through time
probably reflects population trends rather than more intensive use in
later periods, although other interpretations are possible.
It might be expected that these notched artifacts, as net-sinkers,
would be concentrated on the coast of Cozumel (the island is 14 kin, or
8.5 mi. wide). Actually, they are just as common at interior sites. This
suggests that fishing was a general activity practiced by a wide
segment of the population. Of course, there could have been specialists
located on the coast, and who fished, for example, out at sea. But they
probably did so in addition to farmers from interior sites, who spent an
occasional day wading in the shallows with a casting net made at home.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
Analysis of notched artifacts from Cozumel supports Eaton’s interpretation of notched potsherds and similar items as fishing weights.
Notching on such sherds is invariably functional for suspension; and a
heretofore undescribed phenomenon labelled "striping," apparently a
use-wear pattern, suggests the kind of rough-and-tumble treatment that
fishing weights would undergo. The weight range of Cozumel mariposas
is concordant with the range of lead weights used by modern-day
Yucatecan coastal fishermen (Eaton 1976: 239).
The Cozumel fishing weights, incidentally,

show

an

amazing

variability in terms of size, shape, and finish. This variability is difficult
to explain and appears not to correlate with temporal shifts. Perhaps
the ancient Cozumeleans did not really care what the artifacts looked
like, so long as they performed their assigned function.

REFERENCES CITED

Brunelle, Elise R.
Mariposas: Artifact Analysis, Cozumel
1974
Project 1972-1973. Unpublished manuscript.

Archaeological

Connor, Judith G.
1975
Ceramics and Artifacts. In, J.A. Sabloff and W. L. Rathje
(eds), A Study of Changing Pre-Columbian Commercial
Systems: The 1972-1973 Seasons at Cozumel, Mexico.
Monographs of the Peabody Museum, Harvard University,
No. 3, Cambridge.

YUCATAN FISHING TECHNOLOGY

353

Eaton, Jack D.
1976

Ancient Fishing Technology on the Gulf Coast of Yucatan,
Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 47,
pp. 231-243.

Kent, Kate P., and Sarah M. Nelson
1976

Net Sinkers or Weft Weights? Current Anthropology, Vol.
171, No. 1, p. 152.

Pollock, H.E.D., Robert L. Rays, T. Proskouriakoff, and A. Ledyard Smith
1962

Mayapan,
Yucatan,
Mexico.
Carnegie
Institution
Washington, Publication 619. Washington, D.C.

of

