A Mimbres Potter’s Grave:
An Example of Mimbres Craft-Specialization?
Harry J. Sharer

ABSTRACT
Archeological excavations beneath the floor of a Late Pithouse period
Three-Circle Phase Mimbres structure at LA 15049 in Grant County, New
Mexico, led to the discovery of a burial accompanied by an assortment of
artifacts suggesting that the female adult buried in the grave was a potter.
Among the grave items was at least one and possibly two baskets, a Boldface
Black-on-White bowl containing a red paint pigment, seven worked potsherds, two polished pebbles, and at least three unfired, red painted, Mimbres Boldface Black-on-White ollas. The archeological and cultural contexts
of the burial and artifact assemblage are described. The find is significant
because the potter was recognized for her craft skills by her own people suggesting that a level of craft specialization had been achieved in the Mimbres
culture by the Late Pithouse Period.

INTRODUCTION
The Mimbres Mogollon of southwestern New Mexico are recognized mostly
for their exquisitely painted Black-on-White pottery (Brody 1977). In fact, the
commercial collecting of the Mimbres painted pottery, which is recovered mostly
in mortuary context, has led to the total destruction of most Mimbres pueblo
villages in the Mimbres heartland. This regrettable loss in archeological sites has
promoted a fear among archeologists that we may never know the specifics about
the people who painted the pottery. In an effort to expand our knowledge about
this little known ancient Mogol!on culture, the Department of Anthropology at
Texas A&M University has been engaged in intensive, long-term archeological
investigations in the middle Mimbres River Valley in Grant County, New Mexico. Among the objectives of this research are to gain information about the evolution of the Mimbres culture, and to study the human ecology and adaptive technology by examining all aspects of their material culture such as subsistence
remains, architecture, mortuary data and skeletal remains, lithic and ceramic

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56 (1985)

186

Texas Archeological Society

technology, and agricultural technology. In short, we are seeking to find out
about them as a people, by looking beyond the pottery, in an effort to understand
why they expressed their unique symbolism so vividly in the ceramic arts; and
perhaps more importantly, we are seeking to determine what happened to their
cultural adaptation and to the people who disappeared from the archeological
record ca. A.D. 1130.
MIMBRES MOGOLLON SEQUENCE

The Mimbres Mogollon culture was an indigenous, agriculturally-oriented
tradition that began ca. A.D. 200 (Cosgrove and Cosgrove 1932; LeBlanc 1983;
Shafer and Taylor 1986). Geographically the Mimbres area is concentrated in,
but not totally confined to, the landlocked Mimbres River drainage in southwestern New Mexico (LeBlanc 1983: Figures 1 and 2). The Mogollon sequence

SITE LOCATIONS
MIMBRES VALLEY
NEW MEXICO

Figure 1. Map of the Mimbres Valley in southwestern New Mexico showing relative location of LA 15049.

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

187

began with the appearance of shallow, oval pithouses with extended entranceways
that were usually constructed on high points of land overlooking the predominant
streams. These early pithouses are associated with plain brownware pottery. This
Early Pithouse period is referred to as the Cumbre phase (Anyon et al. 1981).
About A.D. 550, oval pithouses began to be constructed in the lower elevations
of the valleys. This shift, presumably tied to an increasing commitment to agriculture is marked by other changes as well, and signals the beginning of the Late
Pithouse period (Anyon et al. 1981).
A general shift from oval to rectangular pithouse form can be traced throughout the Late Pithouse period. The appearance of decorated pottery, first the redslipped San Francisco Red, followed sequentially by Mogollon Red-on-Brown,
Three-Circle Red-on-White, Mimbres Boldface Black-on-White and the finer
transitional style, which occurred between Boldface and Classic Black-onWhite, provides the hallmarks of the Late Pithouse Period.
The ceramics and the general evolution in pithouse form and characteristics
have been used to define three cultural phases within the Late Pithouse period
(Anyon et al. 1981). These are Georgetown, San Francisco, and Three Circle.
Surface rooms began to be constructed about A.D. 950 to 1000. These may have
been surface storage rooms associated with the pithouses at first, but eventually
contiguous-room pueblos replaced pithouses altogether and marked the onset of
the Classic Mimbres period. Other changes occurred also; most notable are the
appearance of Mimbres Classic Black-on-White and polychrome pottery and the
mortuary patterns, which include numerous subfloor burials and the placement of "killed" bowls over or about the head of around half of the interments
(Gilman 1980).
SITE LA 15049
Site LA 15049, known as the NAN Ruin (Cosgrove and Cosgrove 1932;
Shafer 1982; Shafer and Taylor 1986), is located in the middle portion of the
Mimbres River valley in Grant County, New Mexico (Figure 1). The site has
been under investigation by Texas A&M University since 1978, It consists of a
pithouse village of undetermined size overlain by a large Classic Mimbres pueblo
ruin (Shafer 1982; Shafer and Taylor 1986). The Classic Mimbres ruin was first
tested by the Cosgroves in 1926 (Shafer et al. 1979) and was extensively disturbed by pothunters prior to the Texas A&M University investigations.
The occupation at LA 15049 began sometime in the Late Pithouse period,
probably about A.D. 700, based on the presence of Mogolton Red-on-Brown and
Three Circle Red-on-White pottery found in the fill of some of the older pithouses. The settlement was occupied continuously throughout the remainder of
the Late Pithouse period, through the Classic Mimbres phase, ending sometime
between A.D. 1125 and 1150, at a time when the entire Mimbres Valley was
abandoned and the Classic Mimbres period came to an end.
The emphasis of this report is on the Late Pithouse period village at LA

188,

Texas Archeological Society

15049 represented by 10 pithouse structures, eight of which have been partly or
wholly excavated. These include the floor remnant of Room 1, Rooms 14, 15,
17, 43, 52, 83, 86, 91, and 93. The "potter’s grave" was located in Room 14.

Room 14
This east-facing Three-Circle Phase pithouse was discovered beneath the
northern section of Room 12 (surface pueblo room of the Classic Mimbres
Phase) in the 1981 season. The pit was dug 1.13 meters into the Pleistocene clay
and gravel terrace underlying the cultural deposit at the site. Room 14 was not
completely excavated, but was sufficiently investigated to accurately measure the
interior size (Figure 2). The subsquare pitroom measured 3.2 meters east-west by
3.0 meters north-south, giving an overall floor space of about 9.5 square meters.
The walls were once plastered with adobe and the floor was surfaced twice, once
when the room was originally constructed and again later. Although not exposed
by excavation, the entrance faced east as indicated by the firepit placement in the
eastcentral portion of the room.
Floor features included a circular firepit in the eastcentral portion, a mano
adjacent to the firepit, portions of a Three-Circle Neck Corrugated olla in the
northwest corner and a post set into the floor along the south wall at a point
where the wall expanded outward (Figure 2). A similar outer expansion occurred
along the north wall as well.
Subfloor features included three burials; Burial 86 is the subject of this report and is described in more detail below. Burial 90 was a pit placed in the center of the north wall that contained two smashed vessels (an early Mimbres Transitional Black-on-White [Figure 6, a]), a brownware plate, a pot polishing stone,
and two worked potsherds. No skeletal material was found in this pit, but its
depth near the water table and composition (very loose large cobbles) may have
contributed to total destruction of the skeletal material. Buria! 93 was a child
placed near the entranceway close to the east wall. It was accompanied by shell
beads, turquoise and lead crystal inlays (part of an inlaid object), a smashed pallette, and three smashed pottery vessels, including a red-slipped seed jar (Figure 6, b), a small punctated jar, and a plain brownware boat-shaped bowl with tab
handles (Figure 6, c).
Burial 86
Burial 86 was placed in an oval pit 52 cm deep beneath the second or uppermost floor in the northwest corner of the room. The poorly preserved skeleton
was in a tightly flexed position with the head to the east (Figure 3, a; 3, b). The
sex of the individual in the grave, determined by Suzanne W. Patrick (personal
communication, 1986), a graduate student in human osteology at Texas A&M
University, on the basis of sexually distinctive features on the skeleton, was a
gracile female. The grave contained an assortment of artifacts associated with

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

189

!

I

[

!

I
I

I
I
!

Room 14 Pithouse
Burials 86, 90 and 93
~) Posthole

0 Burials

~Olla

~

[] Firepit

[] Unexcavated

Sherd
concentration

--- Probable Room Outline
...... Excavation Limit

0

meter

1

Figure 2. Schematic plan of Room 14, LA 15049.

pottery making; it is on the basis of these associated artifacts that the grave is
interpreted to be that of a potter.
Associated A rtifacts
Included in the grave was a coiled basket; it is possible that a twilled basket
(Figure 5) was also included, but since the body was wrapped in a twilled mat, the
fragments of which were scattered throughout the area of the corpse, it was not
possible to conclusively determine if there were two separate twilled objects in
the grave. The textiles, along with traces of other organic residue, were preserved by the damp condition due to the depth of the grave into the gravels. Also

190

Texas Archeological Society

8
,,.

tt

Pro{ile - t3urmt

8G

[~]Skull Froqm~ls

[] Left Femur -Proxpmal En~

~Tl]sl~ero

[~RiSht Potelte

[] Left Foot

[] Worxee S~erd

[’31Rieht T,bio

[] See~ Jar

[] 13one

[]Left Femur

[] Red Ochre V,~ssel
0

cm

~Text,lc

I0

b
Figure 3. A, horizontal plan of Burial 86; B, profile of Burial 86.

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

191

....

a

b
Figure 4. Views of Burial 86 during excavation; A, upper portion of pit with seed jar and
sherd of Boldface Black-on-White bowl; B, sherds of Boldface Black-on-White at middle
level of pit.

192

Texas Archeological Society

ocm2

Figure 5. Selvage fragment of twilled mat or basket from chest area of Burial 86.

in the grave was a small Boldface Black-on-White seed jar (Figure 4,a 6,d), a
smashed Boldface Black-on-White bowl (Figure 6, e), a small Boldface Blackon-White bowl containing red pigment (Figure 6, f), at least three unfired, white
slipped, red painted Boldface Black-on-White ollas (Figures 7, 8), seven worked
potsherds (Figures 9, a-d, g)’, and two polished pebbles which probably served
as pot-polishing stones (Figure 9, f). Some of the pottery making tools may have
been contained within a twilled basket. The worked sherds were presumably used
in tooling the clay while shaping the pottery. The unfired ollas were severely
crushed and because of their soft state, were extremely difficult to recover.
Nevertheless, with the delicate conservation by Elaine Hughes, enough was restored to determine the vessel forms and general design layout for three (Figures
8, a-c). All artifacts are illustrated to scale.

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

193

Smashing of the Boldface bowl and scattering the sherds in the burial pit fill
is a method of vessel-killing, characteristic of Three-Circle Phase burials. The
smashing of vessels albeit ceases in the Classic Mimbres period when the characteristic method of killing is by knocking a hole in the bottom of a bowl.
The placement of the artifacts in the grave occurred at intervals. The unfired
ollas were placed on either side of the body; the pebbles and worked sherds were
placed over the body along with the bowl containing the pigment. The baskets,
one of which may have contained the pottery-making tools, were placed over the
head and chest. The coiled basket was over part of the face but it was not possible
to determine if the basket had been inverted. Sherds of the smashed bowl were
scattered in the fill after the body and other artifacts had been covered (Figure 4,
b). The seed jar was the last item included. It was placed intact just beneath the
floor (Figure 4, a).

DISCUSSION
In a recent study of status differentiation in Mimbres burials, Anyon and
LeBlanc (1984: 183-186) concluded that there was no marked status differentiation evident in the burials from the Galaz and Swarts Ruins, both large Late
Pithouse period-Classic Mimbres sites. They compared the Mimbres data to the
Chaco Canyon and Casas Grandes areas where some indication of status differentiation and social ranking, which would be in the form of ascribed status,
existed. In a ranked society, a person is born into a particular social class and
retains that ranking throughout his or her life. Somewhat simpler tribal societies
usually do not exhibit social ranking, but often do display some differentiation in
the form of achieved status. Anyon and LeBlanc (ibid.) felt that the Mimbres fit
the expectations of a tribal society although cited no specific examples of acquired status. A study of the social implications of the mortuary remains of the
LA 15049 burials was conducted by Spreen (1983). She concluded that there was
evidence for both ascribed and achieved status among the Mimbres and postulated a social structure somewhere between the tribal and chiefdom level.
The significance of the LA 15049 find may not be obvious at first glance.
The importance lies in four things. One is that this is the first assemblage of
pottery-making tools reported with a burial in the Mimbres area, an area which is
known both archeologically and in the art world for its ancient painted pottery.
(Note that Burial 90 also included artifacts associated with potmaking.)
Secondly, the individual in the grave was a female. Most archeologists have
assumed that the Mimbres potters were women based on the early historic pattern among the southwestern Pueblo people where women were the potters.
However, LeBlanc (1983: 138) has suggested that perhaps it was the men who
painted the more exquisite Mimbres pottery. If the mortuary furniture in Burial
86 symbolized that this woman was indeed associated with ceramic production,

Texas Archeological Society

194

?

?

b

cm

10
J

0
I

a

cm

5
[__J
cm

lO
]
cm

10
I

e

o
I

5
cm

I

cm

Figure 6. Mortuary vessels from Room 14. A, Mimbres transitional Black-on-White from
Burial 90; B, red-slipped seed jar (San Francisco Red?) from Burial 93; C, boat-shaped
brownware vessel with tabs fi’om Burial 93; D-F, Mimbres Boldface Black-on-White vessels from Burial 86.

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

195

Figure 7. Sherds of unfired ollas from Burial 86.

then the burial provides the first instance of what might be interpreted as archeological proof of female potters among the Mimbres.
Thirdly, this is the first reported unmistakable evidence of baskets being included as mortuary vessels in a Mimbres grave. Traces of textiles had been found
in other graves at LA 15049 (Shafer et al. 1979) including impressions of what
may have been a basket over the head of a child. Bradfield (1931 Plates IV, 2)
illustrates traces of a textile in a Cameron Creek grave which may have been a
shroud. Poor preservation of textiles may have given a very biased impression of
vessel inclusions with Mimbres burials. Many of those lacking pottery could
have included baskets instead.
The fourth important aspect about this find is that if we can assume that
status in life is preserved in death (Binford 1971), then this woman’s status as a
potter was recognized by others in her society. This would be an example of
achieved status much like that of a shaman.
What processes can we look for in the Mimbres society that may have led to
low-level craft specialization? For one thing, craft specialization does not necessarily indicate high levels of social complexity. Good craftsmen are often sought
out for their skills, not only in primitive societies but in complex societies as

196

Texas Archeological Society

5CM

o

C

s

I
I
I

t

I

I

Figure 8. Reconstructed designs on three partially restorable unfired Mimbres Boldface
Black-on-White ollas from Burial 86.

well. Presumably every woman in the Mimbres village could make pottery to suit
their needs, but some were undoubtedly more skilled than others. Because of
their recognized skill, some craftsmen may have been called upon to produce
more of an item than they or their family would ordinarily need. When this happens in simple societies, the development of low-level craft specialization occurs. It usually begins as a cottage industry (Prentice 1983); that is, the crafts are

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

197

C

b

a

d

9

Figure 9. Worked sherds and pot polishing stone from Burial 86; A-E, G, worked sherds;
F, pot polishing stone. Worked sherds A-C were from a Boldface Black-on-White bowl;
Sherds D, E, and G, were from Boldface Black-on-White ollas.

made at the household level (Clark 1983), and, if the economic networks within
the society continue to become more complex, then more intensive levels of craft
specialization emerge (Shafer and Hester 1986).
Levels of intensity--that is, production output--among craft specialists
may be associated with another process, that involving a "second class" citizen
status. This scenario can be associated with land use and land tenure. For example, let’s assume that the Three-Circle Phase represents the zenith of Mimbres
Mogollon development (painted pottery aside). If the population had expanded
to the point that all prime land was claimed and appropriately partitioned to
those having jural access to it, what happened to those families who were late
comers and had no legitimate claim to good farm land? Presumably they attempted to work less desirable land; one alternative was for them to produce a
needed commodity, which they could exchange for products that they could not
produce themselves. Low-level craft specialization can emerge in this fashion
among second-class families. The burials in Room 14, however, do not suggest a
second-class status when compared to other Three-Circle Phase burials (e.g.
Anyon and LeBlanc 1984: 173-186), but since pottery-making artifacts were associated with Burial 90 as well, perhaps this particular household was engaging
in pottery production above that of the normal households of this period.

198

Texas Archeological Society

During the Three-Circle Phase, the Mimbres people began to make more
black-on-white pottery than they used locally. Much of this excess pottery was
traded to people, whom we identify as the Jornada Mogollon, who occupied the
desert region to the south and east of the Mimbres. The Jornada people did not
make a Black-on-White pottery although Mimbres Boldface and Classic Blackon-White are common in Jornada sites that date before A.D. 1150 as far east as
the Guadalupe Mountains in Texas (Phelps 1974; Smiley 1979). After the disappearance of the Mimbres about A.D. 1130, the desert area was supplied with
Black-on-White pottery from the Salinas area in the form of Chupadero Blackon-White and later Tabira Black-on-White.
Another item, which may have been produced by incipient craft specialists
in the Mimbres area, was the corrugated ware. LeBlanc (1983: 144-146) has
reported the use of a distinctive temper in the production of some corrugated
vessels distributed throughout the Mimbres Valley. The temper materials have a
very localized distribution in the area. One of the scenarios that LeBlanc suggests to explain the pottery distribution is localized craft production.
Craft production beyond the household needs was by no means limited to
ceramics. Cosgrove and Cosgrove (1932: Plate 69) illustrate a workshop assemblage of bead-making items including raw material, blanks, and finished
products, recovered from Burial 904 at the Swarts Ruin. Anyon and LeBlanc
(1984: 276-278) suggest that three-quarter grooved axes found throughout the
Mimbres area were made at the Galaz and Mattocks sites of a green igneous rock
that outcrops nearby. They noted that no workshops were found and that such
specialization could not be demonstrated. This is not surprising since no debitage analysis was done to define workshop activity or workshop production. I
have personally observed a noticeable amount of debitage of this distinctive
green stone at both the Galaz and Mattocks ruins. Axes of the green igneous rock
occur at LA 15049 in Classic Mimbres context but no debitage or production
failures have been found to indicate localized manufacture. In a more dramatic
example of Mimbres craft production, McCluney (1968) describes what seems to
be a Classic Mimbres turquoise workshop at the West Baker site (although interpreted by him as a shrine). These examples of craft production, together with the
recognized status of a potter by her own people as proposed for Burial 86, would
suggest that some degree of low-level craft specialization--probably at the cottage industry level--indeed existed in the Mimbres culture beginning sometime
during the Late Pithouse period. How these industries developed and how they
were structured among kinship networks and villages is not known; pursuit of
these questions will undoubtedly yield much new information about the structures of the ancient Mimbres society.

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

199

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Numerous people have contributed in various ways to the project which led to this
study. The generous cooperation and assistance of Mr. and Mrs. C. A. Hinton of Mr.
Pleasant, Texas, made this project possible. Specifically, Suzanne W. Patrick supervised
the excavation of Burial 86, established the sexual identity of the individual, and assisted
in the material conservation in the field. Elaine Hughes spent many hours meticulously
piecing together tiny sherds of the unfired ollas and assisted in conserving the textiles.
Additional assistance was provided by Marianne Marek, who aided both in the field work
and laboratory photography, Karen Gardner, Diane Young, Anna J. Taylor, and students of
the 1982 Texas A&M University field school. Support for the 1982 field season was provided by Earthwatch.

REFERENCES CITED
Anyon, R., and S. LeBlanc
1984

The Galaz Ruin: A Prehistoric Mimbres Village in Southwestern New Mexico.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Anyon, R., R Gilman, and S. A. LeBlanc
1981
A Reevaluation of the Mogollon-Mimbres Archaeological Sequence. The.Kiva
46(4) :209-25.
Binford,
197!

g. R.

Mortuary Practices: Their Study and Their Potential. In Approaches to the Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices, edited by J. A. Brown. Memoirs of the
Socieo, for American Archaeology 25:6-29.

Bradfield, W.
Cameron Creek Village: A Site in the Mimbres Area in Grant County, New Mex1931
ico. Monographs of the School of American Research 1. Santa Fe.
Brody, J. J.
1977

Mimbres Painted Pottery. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Clark, J. E.
1983
Mesoamerican Blade Workshop and Craft Specialization. Paper presented at the
48th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology.
Cosgrove, H. S., and C. B. Cosgrove
1932

The Swarts Ruin. A Typical Mimbres Site in Southwestern New Mexico.
Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University 15(1).

Texas Archeological Society

200

Gilman, R A.
1980
The Early Pueblo Period: Mimbres Classic. In An Archaeological Synthesis of
Southcentral and Southwestern New Mexico, edited by S.A. LeBlanc and
M.E. Whalen, pp. 256-343. Office of Contract Archaeology, University of
New Mexico.
LeBlanc, S. A.
1983

The Mimbres People: Ancient Painters of the American Southwest. Thames and
Hudson, London.

McCluney, E. B.
1968
A Mimbres Shrine at the West Baker Site. Archaeology 21(3): 196-205.
Phelps, A. L.
1974

An Analysis of the Ceramics of the Guadalupe Mountains National Park. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 45 : 121 - 150.

Prentice, Guy
1983

Cottage Industries: Concepts and Implications. Mideontinental Journal of Archaeology 8( 1 ) : 17-48.

Shafer, H. J.
1982

Classic Mimbres Phase Households and Room Use Patterns,

The Kiva

48(l -2): 17-37.
Shafer, H.
1986

J.,

and T. R. Hester

Maya Stone-Tool Craft Specialization and Production at Colha, Belize: Reply to
Mallory. American AntiquiO, 51 ( 1 ) : 158 - 166.

Shafer, H. J., and A. J. Taylor
Mimbres Pueblo Dynamics and Ceramic Style Change. Journal of Field Ar1986
chaeology 13 ( 1 ) : 43-68.
Shafer, H. J., A. J. Taylor, and S. J. Usrey
Archaeological Investigations at the NAN (Hinton) Ranch Ruin, Grant County,
1979
New Mexico: A Preliminary Report, Texas A&M University, Anthropology Special Series 3.
Smiley, N. K.
1979
Evidence for Ceramic Trade Specialization in the Southern Jornada Branch. In
Jornada MogoIlon Archaeology, edited by R H. Beckett and R. N. Wiseman,
pp. 53-60. New Mexico State University, Las Cruces.
Spreen, M. R. K.
1983
The Social Implications of Mortuary Remains at Two Mimbres Mogollon Sites
in Grant County, New Mexico. MA Thesis, Texas A&M University.

