123

French, Spanish, and Indian Interaction
in Colonial Texas
Kathleen Gilmore

ABSTRACT
Efforts by Spain and France to control the native peoples in Colonial Texas,
and to advance and hold their territorial borders near the present Texas-Louisiana
border, were approached differently by the two powers. Spain used the missionpresidio system, viewing the Indians as ignorant children to be taught and saved.
France used trading, with the trader becoming the Indian’s friend. Archeological
manifestations of these different forms of interaction include the mission and
presidio ruins and the presence of French trade goods such as faience and gun parts
in sites across Texas.

What is now Texas was the scene of a virtual "cold war" between France and
Spain in the first half of the eighteenth century. Spanish claims to the area were
based on Cabeza de Vaca’s long and tough trek across it in the 1520s and 1530s.
France based her rights on La Salle’s trip down the Mississippi River in 1682, when
he claimed for France the Mississippi River and all the land drained by it and its
tributaries.
La Salle’s plan was to control his claim by placing a settlement at the mouth of
the Mississippi River, but in 1685 he unintentionally sailed on past the Mississippi
and landed instead at Matagorda Bay.
Spain had neglected the exploration and settlement of Texas until after La
Salle’s expedition, when Spain suddenly realized that La Salle’s settlement on
Garcitas Creek near Matagorda Bay (Figure 1) might give France an excuse to claim
the territory crossed by Cabeza de Vaca some 150 years earlier.
La Salle hid his little colony from the Spaniards, but not from the Indians. After
a long search it was finally located, three years after it was founded, by Alonso de
Le6n in 1689; most of the inhabitants had been killed, and the village had been
sacked.Even the tough Spanish soldiers seemed to have been touched by the fate
of the colony, for one soldier wrote a poem of lament (Weddle 1973:187).
The next year de Le6n returned to the village site, burned it, and proceeded
eastward to establish missions among the Caddoan-speaking Tejas or Hasinai, who
were friends of the French, on New Spain’s eastern border (Bolton 1963:145). In
this way the Spanish in Texas began their pattern of advancing and holding the
frontier with the mission-presidio system. These missions, however, were abandoned in 1693 because of the lack of supplies and lack of interest among the Tejas.
France now began to place colonies on the Gulf Coast, acting to hold the claims
made by La Salle on the Lower Mississippi River. Frenchmen also were exploring
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

Texas Archeological Society

124

I

i

,..,".

Red

Nassonite Post

;k,~/
......
East Texas Missions

San

.~

L "k~Migue! /
~ ~.~o~h:L
Presidio’~ .....

T EXA S
San Antonio

®

/ AL°Ss
./;~’’’~ ~.--~’---~.

Presidio
Loreto

’%.,,
.,~

~ _,

~ :~-., %:~’;: ’
’ ~ .....
,~,.~ : "

San Juan Bautista ~ La’Salles Ft. St. Louis

Figure 1. Map of Louisiana and part of Texas showing settlements and missions along the
Spanish-French border in the early eighteenth century.

the rivers and making friends with the Indians. In 1714, the colorful Louis Juchereau
de St. Denis founded a trading post on the Red River among the Natchitoches
Indians, only a few miles from New Spain’s eastern border. St. Denis promptly
loaded his pack mules with merchandise and set out for San Juan Bautista, the
Spanish presidio on the Rio Grande. This trip, Weddle (1973:265) remarks, was a
blatant commercial venture, spurred by Cadillac, the French governor of Louisiana,
and abetted by the Spanish padre Hidalgo, who wanted to return to the missions of
East Texas. It was the beginning of the full-fledged French trading in Texas.
The Spanish response to the threat of a French settlement practically on their
border was to send Domingo Ramon to East Texas in 1716, guided by none other
than the wily St. Denis, who in the meantime had married the Spanish commander’s
granddaughter. The entrada established six missions and a presidio. One of the
missions, San Miguel de Linares, was in present-day Robeline, Louisiana, about 20
km (12 miles) from the French village of Natchitoches. Although the French
menace was ever present, St. Denis did not seem to be a part of this threat; he

Gilmore-- Fremch, Spanish, and Indian Interaction

125

willingly helped Spain secure the border, but at the same time he created a nearby
black market for his goods. As one author (Weddle 1973:265) put it, this plot was
"nothing more or less than the bartering of Texas to the Spaniards to establish illicit
trade--surely one of the biggest real estate giveaways in history."
Spain and France went to war in Europe in the summer of 1719, and, because
of inadequate military support, the lack of Indian cooperation, and panic after a mild
show of aggression from Natchitoches, the Spaniards again abandoned the mission
establishments of East Texas, this time until the summer of 1721. Meanwhile, in the
spring of 1719 the Frenchman, Bdnard de la Harpe, ascended the Red River past the
Great Bend (near present-day Texarkana) to establish a trading post among the
Nassonite Caddo group. This village, one of the Kadohadacho villages, had been
visited by some of the survivors of the La Salle colony in 1687 and by the Spaniard,
Ter~in de los Rios in 1691.
La Harpe was ordered to do his"utmost in order to succeed at entering into trade
with the Spaniards of the province of Texas, the Kingdom of Le6n and New
Mexico" (Smith 1959:75). To further this aim he wrote a polite letter to Father
Marsillo (which is probably French for Margil), suggesting that the opening of
commerce with Natchitoches and the Nassonite Post, whereEuropean goods would
be available at reasonable prices, could benefit the conversion of pagans. La Harpe
further suggested that Father Marsillo contact his friends in New Mexico, Paral, and
New Ledn, and that, furthermore, the padre would receive five percent of the total
sales (Smith 1959:257). Father Marsillo wrote back, probably from Mission
Dolores at present San Augustine, that he would indeed write to his friends, but since
it was not appropriate for a friar to participate in commerce, the correspondence
should be kept secret (Smith 1959:373). But the war broke out between France and
Spain, and la Harpe, instead of trading toward the south, explored the country to the
north of the Red River.
With the East Texas establishments abandoned, Spain feared that France could
take over Texas. Moreover, Frenchmen, St. Denis included, continued to be friendly
with the Indians and were trading them guns for furs. To hold the frontier that had
been abandoned in 1719, the largest expedition yet, led by Marquis de Aguayo,
started across Texas in the spring of 1721. This expedition must have created a
spectacle (and a lot of dust), for it had 500 men, almost 3,000 horses, 600 head of
cattle, 900 sheep, and almost 800 mules, 600 of which carried loads of clothing,
arms, munitions, and supplies (Forrestal 1934). The war had ended the fall before,
but Aguayo was under orders to continue with the plan to restore the missions. His
orders noted that no more than a defensive war should be waged, and then only if
the French encroached on Spanish territory (Forrestal 1934:6). The expedition
restored the six East Texas missions, founded a presidio at Los Adaes near Mission
San Miguel on the easternmost border, reestablished both the presidio for the
protection of Mission Concepcidn, and another one west of there near the Tejas and
the Neches rivers (Forrestal 1934:58).
When the expedition returned to the San Antonio River, where a presidio and
two missions had already been built, part of the expedition was sent to Garcitas

126

Texas Archeological Society

Creek near Matagorda Bay to establish a mission; across the creek they built a
presidio (employing the dominance principle) squarely atop the site of the former
French village. The diary of the expedition reported that French artifacts were found
m trenches dug for foundations of the fort (Forrestal 1934:63). Archeological
research has also confirmed French artifacts dating to the period of the French
colony at the Garcitas Creek site (Gilmore 1986a:61).
By 1722 Spain held the eastern border of Texas with two presidios, the coast
with one presidio, and the interior with one, all with associated missions. In contrast,
France held the border adjacent to Texas with two military posts, one with a fort, and
one with a small garrison. Several unofficial traders’ villages may have been along
the border. These contrasting approaches to the frontier were founded in different
viewpoints about the native peoples.
Clearly for a country to hold and control a province or colony, the native
residents must be controlled. In Spain’s mission-presidio system Spain established
control by collecting the Indians into permanent settlements at the mission. There
the padres taught them agricultural and industrial skills and instructed them in the
Catholic faith and the Spanish language, thereby making them useful Spanish
subjects. Yet many nonsedentary Indians of Texas remained in the missions only as
long as they were cold or hungry; even the sedentary Indians of East Texas preferred
their dispersed settlements to living in large groups in the missions. The Spanish
method, according to Newcomb (TunneU and Newcomb 1969:41), "was, in fact, a
broad gauged attempt to destroy every facet of native culture and replace it with the
civilization of the Spaniards."
Some scholars argue that the conversion of the Indians to Christianity was a
byproduct of the political issue of holding the frontier, and the late Father
Engelhardt (Bolton 1962:9) believed that the Spanish monarchy cared not one whit
for the success of religion except where it promoted political schemes. The
historian, Herbert E. Bolton (1962:10), argues, however, that the monarchy was
sincere enough, but it was so hard up that it could not finance religious projects
unless they served political ends as well.
Comparing the attitudes of Spain, France, and England toward the Indians,
John TePaske (1971:35) suggested that to Spain and her padres the Indian was a
noble savage whose only defects were his false religion and idleness. The English,
he noted, had little concern for the soul of the Indian and maintained the perspective
that "the only good Indian was a dead Indian."
The French attitude differed from both the Spanish and English. Missionizing
had been practiced in New France (Canada), but it was less important in Louisiana.
Bienville, writing in 1725, recognized the value of missionaries for the Indians, not
only for their missionary efforts, but also for their later-known roles as "Indian
agents." Bienville suggested that the missionaries report what was happening
among the Indians to the post commanders, that they prevent quarrels between the
traders and the Indians, and that they should see to it that the traders’ prices were not
too high (Rowland and Sanders 1932:515). Trading practices and spying seem to
have taken precedence over saving souls.

Gilmore -- Fremch, Spanish, and Indian Interaction

127

The French trader became the Indian’s friend or he lost his job, or perhaps he
lost his head, so the relationship became somewhat symbiotic, that is, of mutual
benefit. The natives furnished what the trader wanted--hides, tallow, or slaves-in return for what the Indian wanted--guns, brandy, and beads. Many of the traders
lived with or married Indian women; the traders became almost Indians themselves,
but the Indian women changed little (Rowland and Sanders 1929:207). Some of the
soldiers also married native women. At least three of the six French soldiers
stationed at the CaddoNassonite Post on the Red River had native or metfs wives
(Gilmore 1986b). On the other hand, the Spanish soldiers, who were not above
taking mistresses, seldom married natives; in fact many brought their Spanish wives
with them to the presidios. The French policy of condoning intermarriage, according to TePaske (t971:78), built "a cultural bridge which led the natives to trust the
French and give them their affection."
Are these different approaches and attitudes manifested archeologically? A
pattern left in the ground by a mission or presidio with surrounding compound walls
would differ from the less formal plan left by a village, although a trading village
might also have a fortification wall. A trading village like the Deer Creek site in
Oklahoma would yield a wide variety of trade goods (Wedel 1981). Clearly,
documentary research should be carried out before sites are excavated to provide
working concepts of the sites’ functions.
The Spanish settlements built of wood on the eastern border of Texas have long
since disappeared, and only the sites of Mission Dolores de los Ais near San
Augustine and, east of it, Presidio le los Adaes, have been systematically tested by
archeologists. B ut when other sites are found, patterns of walls left in the ground like
those at Mission Dolores (Figure 2) and San Xavier (Figure 3) should be found (see
Corbin et al. 1980; Gilmore 1969).
Other manifestations of European-Indian interaction are found in the artifacts
themselves. French gun parts are distinguishable from Spanish, and the tin-gl~ed
ceramic wares, called faience when made in France (Figure 4) and majolica when
made in Mexico (Figure 5) can be separated by country of origin. So when artifacts
of French origin are found in sites of known Spanish affiliation, they indicate some
form of French trade. We know the French post at the Nasoni Caddo (Gilmore
1986b) was a metfs village because most of the wives there were Indian or of mixed
Indian-French heritage. Archeological test excavations at the site were limited, and
few French luxury items were found, but although French gun parts were found,
nearly all the ceramics were native-made, lending support to the observation that
Indian women who married Frenchmen remained much the same and did not
become acculturated to French behavior.
French faience made up ahnost 44 percent of the tin-glazed wares found at the
Spanish presidio of Los Adaes (Gregory 1973:Tables 14 and 15), and French gun
parts and a French coin were also found in the excavations. This post--the Spanish
capital of Texas for fifty years--was more than 350 miles from its legal supply point
at San Antonio, so illicit trade was operating by necessity, but probably also by
desire, through the French post of Natchitoches only 20 km (12 miles) to the east.

128

Texas Archeological Society

o
GO

o

0

o

~

2oMET ERS

"Tm’r~ W ALL OUTLINE
Q POST MOLD.
~ TRASH PIT’.

@ WELL
Figure 2. Plan showing the excavation of the palisade wall at Mission Dolores (from Corbin
et al. 1980:Figure 6).

At Mission Dolores de los Ais, French faience made up 78 percent of the tinglazed wares (Corbin et al. 1980:215). However, since most of this faience was
recovered outside the mission compound wall, the excavators suggest the possibility that a French trader was in residence, illegally, of course.
Later Spanish colonial sites also yield strong evidence of French trade. At
Presidio Ahumada, near the eastern border of Texas on Galveston Bay, 46 percent
of the tin-glazed wares were of French faience (Tunnell and Ambler 1967).
Following the dominance principle again, this presidio was built by the Spaniards
at the 1750s trading post belonging to the Frenchmen Blancplain (Weddle 1991:293294), which may account, at least in part, for the high percentage of faience. Sherds
Qf faience were also found at Mission Concepcion in San Antonio (Scurlock and Fox
1977:57), Mission Rosario near Goliad (Gilmore 1974:Plate 14), at Mission San
Lorenzo in Real County (Tunnel l and Newcomb 1969), and at Rancho de las Cabras
near Floresville (Taylor and Fox 1985:31). Whether these small finds across Texas
reflect the presence of a French trader is unknown, but they do attest to the
widespread distribution in colonial Texas of goods manufactured in France. The
trade that la Harpe and Father Marsillo were unsuccessful in establis.hing in 1719
surely must have been successfully established not long afterward.
SUMMARY

Can each of these contrasting approaches be evaluated in terms of its
effectiveness in holding and advancing the frontier in Texas and in dealing with
the native peoples? This is difficult to do since the borders were held by the

Gilmore ~ Fremch, Spanish, and Indian Interaction

129

\
f

\

J
J

\
\

o
\
\
\

\
\

\

\
J
J
J
J
J
J

oo

J
J
J
J
J

J

O

POST MOLD

.~ WALL OUTLINE
O--

0

6 METER~

Figure 3. Plan showing file wall trenches at Mission San Xavier (from Gilmore 1969: Figure
6).
respective countries until 1763, when Louisiana was ceded to Spain. After almost
80 years of being paranoid about French aggression, Spain acquired French
Louisiana with little effort. The tattered "Pine Tree Curtain" on their common
border was no more.

130

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Some sherds of eighteenth century French faience ware.

Figure 5. Some sherds of eighteenth century Mexican majolica ware.

Gilmore ~ Fremch, Spanish, and Indian Interaction

131

As for Indian policies, it would be helpful to have some first-hand evaluations
by the Indians, but none can be found. However, French policies concerning trade
and making friends with the Indians proved advantageous to the Spaniards in at least
one instance. In 1753, an Indian uprising against the East Texas missions and
Presidio Los Adaes was narrowly averted when the French trading post called Le
Dout (possibly in present Wood County) was ordered off Texas soil by the Spanish
authorities, but the force of 500 uprising Indians was placated by their French
friends, and the order to move the post was ignored (Perttula and Gilmore 1988:93).
The fact that Spain continued the French trading system after her takeover of
Louisiana argues for the success of the system.
Regardless, both Spanish padres and French traders acted as Indian agents; the
padres viewing the Indians as children to be taught and disciplined, and the traders
viewing them as equals to be exploited. But to archeologists and ethnohistorians, the
Spanish padres are better appreciated than the French traders because the padres,
well educated and observant--albeit culturally biased--left records about the
natives and the country. There is no doubt that the padres were sincere in saving the
souls of the Indians, but unfortunately, most of the French traders could not write,
so few records of their exploits were made; it is the artifacts of French origin that
authenticate their widespread activities.
Although the mission system in East Texas was a virtual failure (three missions
were moved to San Antonio in 1731), the mission-presidio establishments managed
to hold Texas against the French aggression that prompted Spain to take action.
Thus, France provided Spain with the impetus for the initial settlement of Texas.
REFERENCES CITED
Bolton, Herbert E.
1962
The Mission as a Frontier Institution in the Spanish-American Colonies.
Academic Reprints, Texas Western College Press, E1 Paso.
1963

Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. Barnes & Noble, New York.

Corbin, James E., T. C. Alex, and A. Kalina
1980

Mission Dolores de los Ais: Archaeological Investigations of an Early Spanish
Colonial Mission, San Augustine County, Texas. Papers in Anthropology No.
2. Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches.

Forrestal, P. P.
1934
Pena’s Diary of the Aguayo Expedition. Preliminary Studies of the Texas
Catholic Historical Society, Volume 1I, No. 7. Austin.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1969
The San Xavier Missions: A Study in Historical Site Identification. Texas State
Building Commission, Archaeological Program Reports, No. 16. Austin.
1974

Mission Rosario: Archeological Investigations, 1974.TexasParksandWildlife,
Historic Sites and Restoration Branch, Archeological Report No. 14, Part II.
Austin.

132

Texas Archeological Society

1986a

La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:61-72.

1986b

French-Indian Interaction at an 18th Century Frontier Post: The Roseborough
Lake Site, Bowie County, Texas. Contributions in Archaeology No. 3,
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

Gregory, H. F.
1973

Eighteenth Century Caddoan Archaeology: A Study in Models and
Interpretations. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Perttula, Timothy K., and Kathleen Gilmore
1988

Archaeological Survey along Mill Race Creek and Tributaries, Wood County,
Texas: 1987-1988. Contributions in Archaeology No. 6, Institute of Applied
Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

Rowland, D., and A. G. Sanders
1929
Mississippi Provincial Archives 1701-1729: French Dominion, Volume 2.
Mississippi Department of Archives and ttistory, Jackson.
1932

Mississippi Provincial Archives 1704-1743: French Dominion, Volume 3.
Mississ’ippi Department of Archives and llistory, Jackson.

Scurlock, D., and Daniel E. Fox
1977

An Archeological Investigation of Mission Concetxzion, San Antonio, Texas.
Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist Report 28,
Austin.

Smith, R. A. (translator and editor)
1959

Account of the Journey of Benard de la Harpe: Discovery Made by Him of
Several Nations Situated in the West. Southwestern ttistorical Quarterly
62(1 ):75-86; 62(2):246-259; 62( 3):371-385; 62(4):525-541.

Taylor, A. J., and Anne A. Fox
1985

Archaeological Survey and Testing at Rancho de las Cabras, 41WN30,
Wilson County, Texas. Fifth Season. The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Center for Archaeological Research, Archaeological Survey Report No. 144,
San Antonio.

TePaske, J.
1971
French, Spanish, and Indian Policy on the Gulf Coast, 1513-1763: A
Comparison. In: Spain and her Rivals on the Gulf Coast, edited by E. F.
Dibble and E. W. Newton, pp. 9-39. Proceedings, Second Gulf Coast History
and Humanities Conference, tfistoric Pensacola Preservation Board,
Pensacola.

Tunnell, Curtis D., and J. Richard Ambler
Archeological Excavations at Presidio San Augustin de Ahumada. Texas
1967
State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report No. 6, Austin.

Gilmore ~ Fremch, Spanish, and Indian Interaction

133

Tunnell, Curtis D., and William. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1969
A Lipan Apache Mission, San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz, 1762-1771 Texas
Memorial Museum, Bulletin 14, Austin.
Weddle, Robert S.
1973
Wilderness Manhunt: The Spanish Search for La SaUe. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
1991

The French Thorn: Rival Explorers in the Spanish Sea 1682-1762. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

Wedel, Mildred M.
1981
The Deer Creek Site, Oklahoma. A Wichita Village sometimes called
Ferdinandina: an Ettmohistoric View. Oklahoma Historical Society, Series in
Anthropology No. 5. Oklahoma City.

