ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT THE
]ETTA COURT SITE (41 TV 151)
TRAVIS COUNTY, TEXAS
AL B. WESOLOWSKY, THOMAS R. HESTER AND DOUGLAS R. BROWN

ABSTRACT
During the course of several weekends in 1968 and 1969, students from
The University of Texas at Austin carried out test excavations at the Jetta
Court site in Travis County, central Texas. These investigations
constituted a salvage effort designed to obtain information on this site
before it was destroyed by construction activities in a housing development. The terrace deposits at Ietta Court yielded a long Archaic
sequence, including a deeply buried occupation which occurred stratigraphically below Early Archaic materials. The results of the excavations
are described, and detailed analyses of the lithic debris and faunal remains are presented.

INTRODUCTION
The Jetta Court site (41 TV 151) is located within the city limits of
Austin, Texas, buried in terrace deposits on the west side of Walnut
Creek (Figs. 1-3). The site was brought to the attention of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) of The University of
Texas at Austin in the fall of 1968 by reports of pothunting in an
area slated for a housing subdivision. Inspection of the site by TARL
personnel indicated that it should be tested before the planned construction activities were begun.
Excavations, directed by graduate students in anthropology at The
University of Texas at Austin, were carried out with volunteer help.
Work was done on weekends during a period from December, 1968,
to February, 1969. Since the site was unprotected during the week,
numerous instances of vandalism occurred. One unit of excavation
was eventually ruined, but the others were not seriously damaged.
This combination of weekend excavation and weekday vandalism
limited effective investigation to stratigraphic testing and backhoe
trenching. Exposures of horizontal tracts were not done partly because of fear that it would lead to more extensive depredations on
the part of the pothunters, and partly because the site was considerably deeper than was anticipated.
The writers would like to acknowledge the assistance and understanding of Mr. Cecil Lamour, representing Conann Construction,
Inc., in permitting the excavations. His patience with our backhoe
operations, in particular, was most helpful. We would also like to
thank the volunteer crew for their industry and enthusiasm; the

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A 41TVi51 ,~,4 )

FIGURE 1. Location of the Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151), Travis County, Texas.

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory and the Texas Archeological Salvage Project for equipment, vehicles, laboratory facilities,
and artifact processing; and, Dee Ann Story, Elton Prewitt, and
Harry J. Shafer for advice, criticism and help.
NATURAL SETTING
The Jetta Court site is located at N30°23’15’’, W97°40’40’’, in the
eastern part of the Balconian biotic province defined by Blair
(1950:112). The topography of the area is rugged, and most of the
Balconian lies on Cretaceous limestone which has been much dissected by several river systems. The reader is referred to Blair’s

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

to Walnut Creek

27

o

/
/

/

/

SCALE
m=2m

FIGURE 2. Map of the Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). One-meter contour intervals are indicated within the site area. The dotted line represents the known extent of aboriginal occupation.

work for details of physiography, flora, and fauna within this
province.
The site is located on a terrace situated on the inside of a bend in
Walnut Creek. The slope from the site to the creek is gentle, with a
much steeper slope found on the opposite side of the creek. A short
distance downstream there is a deep, entrenched gully cutting back
into the limestone outcrop that forms the bedrock of the immediate
area.
It has been traditional in central Texas archeology to treat the
ecology of prehistoric sites by a reference to whatever biotic provinces they belong, supplemented by a list of plants and animals that

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

are to be found in the area. Thorough and detailed ecological surveys designed to illuminate archeological questions are sadly lacking
(the work of Witter, 1971, in the Robert Lee Reservoir of west central Texas is an exception; cf. also Eddy 1974). The relation of man
to his environment, and changes in settlement and subsistence patterns through time, should be of continuing interest to archeologists
in the region. At an informal level, the types of studies we envision
are directed at asking, and perhaps eventually answering, the questions "Why did the Indians camp here?" and "Why did they move
elsewhere at various times of the year?". The answers of availability of local subsistence resources at certain times of the year is
simply not adequate. Specific information is needed to explain patterns in settlement archeology, which has not, as of yet, been attempted in central Texas (el. Skinner 1971:256-260).
The following commentary on the vegetation and topography of
the Jetta Court site is based on notes taken by Dan Witter while excavations were in progress.
Four zones of vegetation were observed during a brief inspection
in January, 1969, of the site area:
a. flood plain woodland
b. alluvial slope woodland
c. alluvial slope shrubland
d. limestone bluff shrubland
The floodplain is a woodland of small-sized trees approximately
50-60 feet high with a fairly continuous canopy. Sycamores (Platanus
occidentalis) were occasionally seen along the stream bank itself,
while elms (Ulmus spp.), hackberry (Celtis spp.), pecans (Carya i11inoensis), sumac (Rhus spp.) and Baccharis sp. were observed among
the plants on the flood plain. The elms and hackberries formed the
main portions of the canopy with the pecans usually occurring in
groves. Sumac and Baccharis were understory shrubs.
The site itself is in a localized woodland that has developed on
slope wash from a nearby bluff located to the south of the site. The
alluvial slope woodland is a stand of small trees usually 40-50 feet
high and is composed primarily of two species of oak; elms, pecans,
and hackberries are also present. The oaks are identified as
Quercus stellata vat. (a local variant of post oak) and Q. schumardii
var. texana (the Shumard oak). B~ckeye (Aesculus sp.) and juniper
(luniperus ashei) were also noted.
To the north of the site, where the slope was exposed and the
ground rocky, a juniper shrubland prevailed.
Above the site was an exposed limestone bluff which displayed
juniper shrubland as the main form of vegetation. Prickly pear
(Opuntia spp.) was also common.

29

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

¢/3
0~

©

O0

©

o

.+,.a
°,.-I
rd3

©

;>
,--4
tt~

b,

¢..1
.I.,,a
CD
CD

~s
O0

rD

.S°

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In general, the vegetation is typical of the Balcones Escarpment,
having two broad types of environments:
I) Limestone outcrops and rocky slopes with shrubland vegetation.
2a) Little enclaves of hardwood woodlands where the trees
are given some protection from the wind and sun and
2b) Woodlands on the floodplains of streams and canyons
which have cut into the Cretaceous limestone of the Edwards Plateau.
We suggest that the aboriginal occupation was located on the alluvial slope for several reasons: water is available and there is some
protection from the wind afforded by the bluff; the trees also serve
as wind breaks as well as giving some relief from the sun. The
actual flood plain presently has few trees on the site side of the
creek, whereas the other side has numerous trees but is on quite a
steep slope.

EXCAVATION PROCEDURES
For all practical purposes, controlled excavations consisted of
three two-meter square units. In addition, a one-meter by two-meter
unit was begun, and two backhoe trenches and a small shovel test
were made (see Fig. 2). A north-south base line, originating at the
arbitrary point North 200/West 200 (N200/~V200) was extended
north and the two-meter square units were placed along its east side
at two meter intervals. These three units are referred to as Units A,
C, and E (from north to south), and their grid designations are
N200/W200, N196/W200 and N192/W200 respectively. A one-meter
by two-meter test pit, labeled in the field as Unit X, was begun to the
southeast at approximately N165/W200, but was destroyed by vandals after a day of excavation. It was then abandoned, and consequently its contribution to our knowledge of the site is negligible.
Shovel Test 1 (a one-meter square) was performed at approximately
N192/W170. Two backhoe trenches (see Fig. 2), dug very near the
completion of controlled excavations, gave us an extensive view of
the internal structure of the site before its ultimate destruction.
A large nail driven into a telephone pole served as a horizontal
datum point, arbitrarily designated as 100 meters. Controlled excavations were carried out in arbitrary 20 centimeter levels. Units A,
C, and E had their levels measured from the northwest corner stake.
After the excavations were finished, the arbitrary levels could, with
a reasonable degree of certainty, be correlated with the natural
strata that were recognized.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

31

The site area appeared quite featureless on the surface. The
decision on where to locate the excavation units was based on avoiding (1) a disturbed area in the northeast portion of the site, (2) the
trees which dotted the terrace, and (3) the sloping ground to the
east.
The two topmost levels (0-40 centimeters) were passed through
1/4" mesh hardware cloth. The lower levels were screened through
1/2" mesh because of the necessity to accelerate the salvage activities due to continuing vandalism of the units. Digging was done primarily with pick and shovel, and recognized features were exposed
with trowels and smaller tools. Soil samples were taken.
The decision to limit excavations to stratigraphic tests involved
several considerations: (1) the vertical extent of the site was unknown; (2) it was not known how long the site would be accessible
before house construction began, leading to the destruction of the
site; (3) wider horizontal exposures would slow work with respect to
(1) and (2) above, and might have been more of an invitation to pothunters and vandals during the week.
In summary, the excavations at the ]etta Court site consisted of a
salvage effort. Three two-meter squares were dug to at least 2.602.80 meters below the surface. They were intended to give information on the stratigraphic distribution of archeological materials with
only incidental disclosures of horizontal associations. In retrospect,
we suspect that this was not the best way to sample the site, but
recalling our limited resources and time deadlines, we are
convinced that these excavations have recovered worthwhile information which would have otherwise been lost.
STRATIFICATION AND INTERNAL STRUCTURE
Broadly speaking, the internal structure of the site consists of a
basal clayey alluvium, with a similar deposition separating a higher
and lower zone of dark soil and burned rock. In the lower reaches of
the deposit the basal soil became more calcareous, but there were
no layers of gravel or other recognized changes to indicate a complicated depositional history of the terrace for its topmost 4.5 meters.
To be sure, some three meters of fill have been deposited since the
beginning of aboriginal occupation, but no radical natural depositional changes seem to be involved for this time span. The T-shaped
backhoe trench revealed that the deposits slope down to the east
and north, toward the edge of the terrace. The terrace edge is not
sharply defined, but slopes over some 20 meters to the floodplain of
Walnut Creek.

32

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Five stratigraphic zones ("A" to "E", from bottom to top) were
recognized on the basis of changes in color and matrix, including
alterations resulting from human activity (see Figs. 4,5). Although
we are not entirely certain that the maximum depth of cultural
debris was reached, the paucity of cultural materials from the
bottom 40 centimeters of each unit suggest that deeper excavation
would have only defined the lowest elevations of occupation more
precisely without appreciably increasing our understanding of the
earliest occupations. An auger test in Unit C reached 95.5 meters
below datum, and no significant soil change was noted.
Description of the Zones
Zone A: Zone A was the deepest zone investigated during excavation,
but its lowest depth was not reached at any point during the work. It may
continue down to meet bedrock (most likely a limestone formation that
outcrops in the vicinity} at some presently unknown depth; or there may
be other zones intervening between Zone A and bedrock. Should the
latter by the case, we do not think that it would change our current
understanding of the human occupation of the site.
Zone A is a light brown mixture of sand and clay, with calicbe nodules
increasing in frequency lower down in the exposed sections. Cultural remains are sparse, as compared to upper levels of the site, and consist of
lithic debris, a few animal bone fragments, and a small amount of burned
rock. In unit A, this zone seems to extend from about 98.75 meters to the
floor of the excavation at 97.20 meters without interruption except for a
concentration (lens?} of snarl shells (see Fig. 4). This concentration may
correspond to Zone B in Units C and E, but this is not at all certain. In
Units C and E, Zone A extends from the floor of the units to approximately 98.20 meters, where it contacts Zone B.
In Unit C, an auger test was made to a depth of 95.5 meters below
datum (4.5 meters below the surface) and revealed no recognized important change in composition (Fig. 5). It should be noted that there
seemed to be a band of slightly higher clay content from approximately
96.50 meters to 96.30 meters. At some time during the deposition of Zone
A, the earliest human occupation of the Jetta Court site occurred.
Zone B. Zone B, also referred to in this report as the "Lower Midden",
is definitely recognized in Units C and E. It is a midden deposit composed
of dark gray to black soil with numerous burned limestone rocks, snail
shells, and cultural debris. Approximately 40 centimeters thick, it extends
across all profiles of Unit E between ca. 98.0 meters to 98.40 meters
below the datum. To the north, in Unit C, it is clearly evident only to about
the North 194.80 line on the east profile. Only some 25 centimeters thick
at the North 194 line, it pinches out to the north and past the North 194.80
line it is visible only as a sparse scattering of burned rocks. The south
profile of Unit C shows that Zone B thins out also towards the east and
west. In Unit A there are two lenses of snail shells, the lower of which
contains a few burned rocks. The lower lens may correspond to Zone B
by virtue of its elevation, and by the amount of cultural debris recovered
from it and adjacent levels.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

[

0

II
#1
t~
tl
I

\

/

33

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

N 196 " W 198

0

E
0

~o

~0

D

C
B

A

41 TV 151
Jetta [ourt Site
Unit C
SOUTH PROFILE

"Clayey"zone

FIGURE 5. South Profile of Unit C, Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151).

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

35

Zone B is of particular interest since it is a buried midden deposit
separated from Zone E (also referred to as the "Upper Midden"} by a
very different soil. The Lower Midden may represent either a fairly intensive human occupation or a stable surface early in the human history of
the site.
Zone C: The certain presence of Zone C is identified only in Units C and
E, since there is no sure evidence of the Lower Midden in the section of
Unit A. With this lack of evidence, there is no way to assess a contact
between Zones A and C in Unit A. In appearance, Zone C is quite similar
to Zone A: light brown to tan sandy clay with snail shells and a few
burned rocks. However, there was a greater abundance of cultural materials in Zone C than in Zone A.
Zone D: The boundaries of this zone are indistinct, but it would seem to
represent a transition between Zones C and E. Zone D consists of tan and
gray sand-clay mixture with a few burned rocks and occasional concentrations of black midden soil. This zone varies in thickness from about 35
centimeters to 75 centimeters.
Zone E: Zone E, also referred to as the "Upper IvIidden", is quite
similar to Zone B (the Lower Midden}. It is composed of a dark gray to
black soil with considerable quantities of burned rocks, snail shells, and
other cultural debris. It is evident in all three units, and extends up to the
grass roots.

It should be mentioned that the notes for the abortive Unit X record a matrix similar to Zone E for the extent of that unit’s excavation. It may be assumed that Zone E extends over most of the site
and that the materials from Unit X correlate with Zone E (as
exposed in Units A, C, and E) although we cannot demonstrate an
observed stratigraphic link.
In Fig. 4 we have illustrated the stratification exposed in the north
wall of the east-west backhoe cut. In Fig. 4, stratum i is a humusstained topsoil, stratum 2 correlates with Zone E, stratum 3 appears
to equate with Zone D, and stratum 4 apparently correlates with
Zones A-C as defined for Units A, C and E.
Stratification: The Characteristics of the Two Middens
The stratification of the ]etta Court site is marked by the presence
of two zones of "intensive" occupation. The profiles of Units C and E
(Figs. 4-6) show two dark midden accumulations separated by intervening light-colored soil. In Unit A, the Upper Midden is evident
enough in the wall of the excavation, but there is no dark Lower
Midden deposit. However, the Lower Midden is present to the extent
of sharp peaks in the percentages of flint flakes and animal bones at
an elevation comparable to that of the Lower Midden in the other

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

<

37

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

,--%
tO

b,
,~ c0
~--, n::J
°,-t

¢J
~o,-,

CD

©

©

~ca

38

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

two units. In all three units there is a marked relative scarcity of
animal bones and flint flakes in the levels immediately above the
Lower Midden.
The midden zones proper are characterized by the type of
contents seen at so many other central Texas sites: dark-brown,
gray and black soil with considerable quantities of angular burned
limestone rock, lithics, and other occupational refuse. The artificial
levels used during excavation concided with the natural borders of
the middens reasonably well.
The Lower Midden. The Lower Midden is of particular interest to
central Texas archeologists since it seems to indicate an occupation
which is similar in projectile point styles and stratigraphic position
(relative to the rest of the site) to the occupational phases III and IV
(and perhaps II) at the Landslide site (Sorrow, Sharer and Ross
1967), as well as the earlier levels of the Youngsport site (Shafer
I963), the La Jita site (Hester 1971), Granburg II (Hester 1975;
Hester and Kohnitz 1975), and several other central Texas sites (cf.
Sollberger and Hester 1972). We refer specifically to the presence of
Bell and Gower points, plus our Miscellaneous I (corner notched)
and Miscellaneous II (triangular) forms in the Lower Midden or immediately below it. The early occupations at Jetta Court stratigraphically predate the previously defined "Early Archaic" of central
Texas (cf. Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962). The diagnostic point
styles of the "Early Archaic", particularly Balverde and Nolan, all
occur higher in the site deposits. None of these early occupations,
incidentally, have the characteristic artifacts assigned to the earliest known occupation of central Texas during Paleo-Indian times.
These artifactual remains found between Paleo-indian and Early
Archaic at Jetta Court and several other central and Trans-Pecos
Texas sites have been attributed to a transitional "Pre-Archaic"
phase by Sollberger and Hester (1971; the "Transitional Early Archaic" of Prewitt 1974: Fig. 7).
Diagnostic artifact forms from within the Lower Midden, as mentioned above, are Gower and Bell, and two stemmed points similar to
Bell (these from the area of contact between Zones B and C). From
below the Lower Midden, in Zone A, a single Gower point was recovered. In addition, a number of untyped dart points (Miscellaneous I and II, and specimens a-g in Fig. 15) are from the Lower
Midden.
Absolute sample size of diagnostic artifacts within the Lower
Midden is not particularly impressive. However, the stratigraphic
discreteness of certain projectile point styles, we feel, provide good
evidence for this stratum representing an occupation stratigraph-

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

39

ically, and therefore chronologically, older than the previously defined central Texas "Early Archaic". As we view it, the Lower Midden of the Jetta Court site parallels and replicates to some degree
the early occupations at Landslide, Youngsport, La Jita and other
sites, in a morphological and stratigraphic sense. We have no reason to suspect that this early occupation at Jetta Court was substantially different in subsistence patterns as compared to the later Archaic occupations. Certainly there is a change in the artifacts (else
how could we recognize it), but no data were recovered that showed
any changes in economy or deposition of materials. We are able to
see changes in the lithic technology as reflected in the relative proportions of flake categories, but remain uncertain as to the cultural
significance of such changes.

The Upper Midden
The Upper Midden, which can be traced with certainty in all
three units, represents nothing greatly out of the ordinary for the
later occupation of Central Texas. The observation that several
specimens of projectile points are "out of place" stratigraphically
may indicate some instability of the soils and consequent mixing of
deposits. The two specimens of Travis in Level 3 and the two EnsorFairlands in Level 3 are the cases in point.
Although Zone D is a "transitional zone" of dark soil lacking the
burned rocks of Zone E (the Upper Midden), it has some artifactual
continuity with the Upper Midden. For this reason it will be included
in our discussion of the Upper Midden. The diagnostic materials
from Zone D include Bulverde, Nolan, and Pedernales. Both Bulverde
and Pedernales continue up into Zone E. In the contact zone between
zones D and E were one specimen each of Darl and Montell, as well
as Pedernales and Bulverde.
Recovered from Zone E were Pedernales, Montell, Darl, Travis,
Castroville, "Ensor-Fairland", Lange, Scallorn, and Perdiz. In addition, there were Untyped dart points 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 16, 18, 21, 22,
and an Untyped arrow point 17.
The diagnostic projectile point sequence from the Upper Midden is
in general agreement with data from Stillhouse Hollow and Canyon
Reservoirs. The proverbial "thin veneer" of Neo-American occupation is present in Level 1 in all three units: five Scallorn points which
are considered diagnostic of the Austin phase; and one Perdiz point
which is associated with the Toyah phase (Shafer 1971). Another
major trait of the Toyah phase, bone-tempered pottery, was not
found at Jetta Court.

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Since only 43 diagnostic projectile points were recovered in the
Upper Midden, and these are distributed among II types, it seems
remarkable that the sequence should be as consistent as it is, within
itself and with reference to other sites.
The value of the stratigraphic data from the Jetta Court site is not
for new information on the relative placement of various point styles
in the later Archaic, but in the presence of a "pre-Archaic" phase
as a viable stratigraphic entity in its own right.

FEATURES
Of the seven intrasite structures, or features, recognized at Jetta
Court, only one is from the Upper Midden (Zone E) and none were
recorded for the Lower Midden (Zone B), although one may have
been on the upper surface of the latter.
All are concentrations of burned rock that are traditionally referred to as "hearths" in central Texas archeology. It is difficult to
say whether any features could have been recognized in the dense
concentrations of burned rock in the Upper and Lower Middens, but
the techniques of salvage excavation employed were not particularly
sensitive to features likely to be encountered in burned rock midden
deposits. Excavations directed at revealing features of occupation
would have been primarily horizontal exposures, while the excavations at Jetta Court were more concerned with vertical, stratigraphic cuts. This is not to say that the two different techniques are mutually exclusive for the information they recover, but vertical tests
are less sensitive than other techniques. Ideally, once the two midden zones were identified, there should have been a sizable horizontal tract cleared and the two studied as lateral collections of
associations. Because of the conditions under which we operated,
this could not be done. Consequently, we have only a partial record
of the occupational features at the site.
Feature 1 (Unit C, Level 5, Zone D)
This feature was a small concentration of burned limestone rocks
resting on an essentially flat surface. Most of the rocks were about fistsized, and the exposed portion of the feature was ca. 25 centimeters
thick. This concentration extended into the south and east walls of the
unit. A few charcoal flecks were noted among the rocks but were too few
for a radiocarbon sample. Except for two flint flakes, no artifactual associations were observed.
Features 2 and 4 (Unit C, Levels 7 and 8, Zone C)
These features (Fig. 7) were identified in the field as parts of the same
concentration of burned rock, while the arbitrary level technique of exca-

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

41

Jetta I~ourt Site
4llVl51
Features 2,4
H196-W’200

Horth

biface

0
I

50cm
I

Burned Limestone

FIGURE 7. Features 2 and 4, letta Court Site (41 TV 151). See description in text.

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
vation inadvertently resulted in two separate feature designations being
assigned. This feature was a semi-circular concentration of burned rocks
in the southern portion of the unit, and it appeared to continue into the
south face of the unit. Several additional rocks were scattered across the
northern half of the unit and were not definitely linked to the feature.
With the exception of a single piece of sandstone, the burned rocks were
limestone. A biface and a single flint flake were thought to be in association. Only a few bone fragments were found in Level 7, apparently not
associated with the feature, and no bone was found in Level 8. At its
thickest point, the rock concentration measured only 16 centimeters, with
the components appearing to rest on a fairly flat surface.

Feature 3 (Unit X, Levels 1 and 2, probably Zone E)
This feature was a concentration of burned, and possibly some unburned, limestone rocks at 14-21 centimeters below the surface (Fig. 8).
Although no certain stratigraphic link can be demonstrated between
Units A, C, E and the ill-fated Unit X, Zone E (the Upper Midden) surely
extends across most of the site, and we therefore think that this feature
can be assigned to it.
The portion exposed was a semi-circular cluster of limestone rocks and
two associated deer metapodial fragments. The feature was approximately 75 centimeters in maximum diameter and was primarily one layer
of rocks thick (some of the rocks were up to 30 centimeters in length). A
large triangular biface was found in Level 2, but was at the opposite end
of the unit and probably not in association with the feature.

Feature 5 (Unit A, Level 6, at the contact between Zones C and D)
Feature 5 was a small accumulation of burned rocks, among which
several flint flakes were recovered. Measuring approximately 50 centimeters in maximum horizontal dimension, there is no conventional geometric shape that can be used to describe it. The concentration was only
8 centimeters thick. Most of the stones were slightly tilted in various
directions, but all appeared to be resting on a fiat surface.

Feature 6 (Unit E, Level 7, the contact between Zones C and D)
Feature 6 consisted of several small concentrations of burned limestone
rocks strewn between 120-129 centimeters below the surface (Fig. 9). This
elevation is approximately the contact between Zones C and D. Many of
the rocks overlapped one another and the flatter ones were tilted in
various directions. There was no discernable structure to these accumulations and they may very well have been fire-cracked rocks scattered
about on a living surface. A few animal bones were recorded from this
level, but none appear to have been in definite association with the rock
clusters. However, two flint flakes and a rnano fragment were found
among the rocks.
Feature 7 (Unit A, Level 11, Zone A)
Feature 7 was an elongated, loose accumulation of burned limestone
rocks possibly representing a hearth (Fig. 10). The rocks were on a sur-

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

43

E
tt~

E

°~

,=,,=1

t-,.
ea

x
0D

, _a

©

cD
’x2
o
¢.t3
,-&
L--

o
Z

" -’4

t_~

x--4

U3

am

¢3
03
x__

O

¢D

¢6

V--4

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Jetta Court Site
41TVI51
Feature 6

A
north

~50cm~

~Burnt Limestone

’~Flint Flake

FIGURE 9. Feature 6, Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). In the northwest
corner, Q indicates a quartzite cobble, and SS, a piece of sandstone.
See description in text.

Jetta Court Site
41TVI51
Feature7

north

~50cm~

Burnt Limestone

,~Flint Flake

FIGURE 10. Feature 7, Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). See description in
text.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

45

face ranging from 203-210 centimeters below the present surface. The only
associated object was a large, unretouched flint flake.

DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS
With the exception of one polished bone, all artifacts found at the
Jetta Court site were lithic. What little shell was found was extremely friable, as was a large portion of the recovered bone. Both bone
and shell were carefully examined in the laboratory, but no other
artifacts other than the previously mentioned bone specimen were
recognized.
The following artifact descriptions are highly abbreviated because of space limitations. The projectile point typology used is
largely that of Suhrn, Krieger and Jelks (1954). Since most of the artifacts are illustrated, we have omitted data on their dimensions. This
information is on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (Austin) and at the Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio. Similarly, detailed provenience
data have been placed on file at these two institutions, and only
general comments regarding provenience are provided in the artifact descriptions.

PROJECTILE POINTS
The section describing projectile points is divided into two groups
based on the stratigraphic location of the specimens in reference to
the two midden zones. The Lower Midden points will be described
first, followed by a discription of the specimens from the Upper
Midden.
LOWER MIDDEN
Bell (2 specimens; Fig. 11, a,b)
This type was originally defined by Sorrow, Shafer and Ross (1967:12).
The stems of the two specimens expand slightly. The lateral edges of one
specimen (Fig. 11, a) are straight, while the other (Fig. 11, b) has more
jagged edges. Three barbs have been broken off of the two specimens, but
one (Fig. 11,a) has a large barb characteristic of this type.

Bell-like (2 specimens; Fig. 11,c,d)
The stem of one of these specimens (Fig. 11,c) is slightly expanding,
while the other (Fig. 11,d) is straight. Specimen 11,c has a straight base
and 2,d has a slightly concave base. Both examples have thin stems,
which are broken off, and straight lateral edges. One specimen is missing
the distal tip.
We have classified these as Bell-like as it is highly likely that they are
simply variants of the Bell type.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

46

b

g

5C \I J(

,’m

k

FIGURE 11. Artifacts from the letta Court Site (41 TV 151). a, b, Bell;
c, d, Bell-like; e, f, Gower; g-i, Miscellaneous I; j, k, Miscellaneous II.
M1 specimens are from the Lower Midden.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Cower (2 specimens; Fig. ii, e,f)
The type was originally described by Shafer (1963). Both of these specimens have expanding stems with indented bases and rounded shoulders.
One specimen (Fig. 11,e) has about one-half of its distal end broken off.
The other specimen (ll,f) has lost a small portion of its tip.
Miscellaneous I (3 specimens; Fig. 11,g,h,i)
All three specimens are corner-notched and have pronounced concavity in the base. Only one seems to be the original length (Fig. 11,g), and
it has one convex and one straight lateral edge. The others are fragmented. They are morphologically similar to the Early Corner Notched
point form found in a stratigraphically equivalent situation at the La Jita
site {Hester 1971).

Miscellaneous II (2 specimens; Fig. 11, j,k)
These specimens are large triangular bifaces. They are very similar to
the Tortugas, except for the lack of beveled lateral edges. Hester (1971)
has termed similar specimens Early Triangular at the La Jita site; other
such triangular points have been found in early contexts at Granburg II in
Bexar County (Hester and Kohnitz 1975; Hester 1975).

UPPER MIDDEN
Bulverde (3 specimens; Fig. 12,a-c)
The stems of two of these specimens are slightly contracting and flat
across the base (Fig. 12,b,c). On the third specimen (Fig. 12,a) the stem is
straight and the base is slightly concave. All three have squared shoulders. Two of them (Fig. 12,a,b) are complete, and display convex lateral
edges. The third (Fig. 12,c) lacks about one-third of the distal tip.

Castroville (3 specimens; Fig. 12, d,f)
All three specimens have expanding stems with straight bases. One
specimen (Fig. 12,d) seems exceptionally long (10 cm); it has convex
lateral edges. The other two specimens have relatively straight lateral
edges. All three are barbed.

Darl (4 specimens; Fig. 12,g-j)
Two of the specimens (Fig. 12,g,h) have concave edges on their stems.
Of the others, one (Fig. 125) has a straight stem, and an other (Fig. 12,j) a
slightly convex stem. Specimens h and j have concave bases with the base
of i being straight, and the base of g slightly convex. The lateral edges of
all the bodies are straight to slightly convex. One specimen (Fig. 12,h) is
badly thermal fractured.

Ensor-Fairland (3 specimens; Fig. 12,k-m)
The stems of all three specimens expand greatly. The bases are slightly
concave. On two the lateral body edges are slightly convex. One specimen
(Fig. 12,m) has been reworked in such a manner as to give a short, squat
appearance.

47

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

!

h
f

g

i

m

FIGURE 12. Artifacts from the Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). a-c, Bulverde; d-f, Castroville; g-j, Darl; k-m, Ensor-Fairland; n-p, Lange. All
specimens are from the Upper Midden.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Lange (3 specimens; Fig. 12,n-p)
The stem of each specimen is expanding with a straight base. The
lateral edges of the bodies are straight to slightly convex. Only one specimen (Fig. 12,n) is complete.

Montell (2 specimens; Fig. 13,a,b)
The stems of these specimens are expanding and are notched near the
middle of the basal edge. The distal tips of both specimens are broken off;
however, enough can be seen of the lateral edges to indicate that they
were straight.
Nolan (1 specimen; Fig. 13,c)
This specimen has a straight or slightly contracting stem with a mildly
convex base. The shoulders are sloping. The lateral body edges are convex and the distal tip is broken.

Pedernales (15 specimens; Figs. 13, 14,d-m)
The stems of the specimens vary considerably as can be seen in Fig. 13.
All have the characteristic notch or concavity in the base. One specimen
consists only of a stem (Fig. 13,m). The bodies are roughly triangular with
the lateral edges varying from concave to straight to convex. Only three
specimens were complete enough to get both length and width measurements.

Travis (2 specimens; Fig. 14,1,m)
The stems of these specimens are different. One (Fig. 14,1) has a
slightly contracting stem to a convex base. The other (Fig. 14,m) has an
almost parallel stem with a straight base. The complete specimen has
lateral edges that are convex, coming to a sharp point.

Perdiz (1 specimen; Fig. 14,e)
This specimen has a contracting stem with a rounded base. The lateral
edges are slightly convex and the shoulders are barbed.
Scallorn (6 specimens; Fig. 14,f-k)
These specimens are easily identified by their corner-notched stems
and long narrow bodies. The bases are straight or slightly concave. None
of the recovered specimens is complete.

Untyped Individual Projectile Points
The specimens in this category are individual projectile points that do
not fit into any of the previous categories. All but one of the specimens (a
fragmentary contracting stem dart point) are illustrated in Figures 15 and
16. Specimens in Fig. 15, a-g, are from the Lower Midden; those in Fig. 15,
h-o, and in Fig. 16, are from the Upper Midden.

49

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

@ :if::¸~ ii~

in

FIGURE 13. Artifacts from the letta Court Site (41 TV 151). a-b, Montell; c, Nolan; d-m, Pedernales. All specimens are from the Upper
Midden.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

51

d

in

FIGURE 14. Artifacts from the Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). a-d,
Pedernales; e, Perdiz; f-k, Scallorn; 1, m, Travis. All specimens are
from the Upper Midden.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

52

o

CD

2
o

.fi

d

~m

O

z
N

.<

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

5C \1 I
Ill

n

53

o

FIGURE 15. Artifacts from the Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). Untyped
projectile points, a-g, Lower Midden; h-o, Upper Midden.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

54

c

b

d

f

e

FIGURE 16. Artifacts from the letta Court Site (41 TV 151). a-f, Upper Midden.

Probable Dart Point Fragments
Because of their workmanship (thinned and retouched), 36 specimens
are believed to be distal fragments of projectile points. Six are from the
Lower Midden, and the remainder, from the Upper Midden.

OTHER BIFACES (FIGS. 17, 18)
A number of other, non-projectile point bifaces were recovered. These
include two thinned bifaces (Fig. 17,a, Upper Midden; Fig. 17,b, Lower
Midden) which may be either preforms or knives.
Thirty-nine percussion-flaked bifaces, mostly fragments, were also
found, 28 in the Upper Midden and 11 in the Lower Midden. These
specimens are of varying shapes and sizes. Many have been totally bifaced
and perhaps were preforms or knives. Others are only partially worked
and appear to have been broken during the bifacing process. No
technological differences were apparent in the samples from the two
midden zones.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

55

Perforators (Fig. 17,,c,d)
Both specimens have long, narrow bits. The base of one is similar to a
Costroville point (Fig. 17,c), while the base on the other specimen is
rectangular (Fig, 17,d). Both specimens are from the Upper Midden.

a

c

b

d

FIGURE 17. Artifacts from the Jetta Court Site (41 TV 151). a, b, bifaces; c, d, perforators.

GROUND AND PECKED STONE ARTIFACTS
Gorget (1 specimen; Fig. 19,a}
This specimen was found in the Upper Midden and appears to be a
fragment of an ovate gorget. Along the broken edge is a smoothed notch
which is suspected to be the first of a line of perhaps three holes. The
gorget is made of a reddish stone. Gorgers of this form are known from
other Archaic sites in central Texas (cf. Sharer and Corbin 1965: Fig. 12,c;
Hester 1971: Fig. 22,g).

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

’~l \1 I

FIGURE 18. Artifacts from the Ietta Court Site (41 TV 151). a-g, bifaces and biface fragments; a-c, Upper Midden; d-g, Lower Midden.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

57

Manos (16 specimens; Fig. 19,c,d)
All of these specimens show grinding wear on at least one face.
Most are fragmentary; none of the complete ones are larger than 10.5
centimeters in length and none are more than 7 centimeters in width.
Only two of the specimens are from the Lower Midden; the remaining
14 are from the Upper Midden.

FIGURE 19. Artifacts from the Ietta Court Site (41 TV 151). a, gorget;
b, bone artifact; c, d, manos.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

58

Metates (15 specimens; Fig. 20,a,b)
All of the metates or grinding slabs were broken. The fragments
showed signs of a smooth grinding basin characteristic of this artifact
form. Of the 15 specimens 12 were from the Upper Midden, and the others,
from the Lower Midden.

Hammerstones (not illustrated)
Two hammerstones were found in the Upper Midden. Both are approximately 8 centimeters long and roughly 5 centimeters in diameter.

FIGURE 20. Artifacts from the letta Court Site (41 TV 151). a, b,
metate fragments.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

59

Hematite (not illustrated)
One small piece of hematite, possibly used as a source of pigment, was
found in the Upper Midden. It was less than 1.5 centimeters square.

ARTIFACT OF BONE
Awl or Pin (1 specimen; Fig. 19,b)
The only non-lithic artifact found at Jetta Court was a small bone
specimen from the Lower Midden. It is a highly polished, rod-shaped bone
that could be a fragment of an awl or pin. It is 4 centimeters long, and has a
diameter of .5 centimeters tapering slightly to .4 centimeters at the other
end.

ARTIFACTS FROM AREAS OF LIMITED CONTROL
There were areas at the site where artifacts were collected
without complete control and therefore the information received from
these artifacts was not included in the main body of artifact descriptions. The limited control areas were surface collections, backhoe
trenches, Unit X (destroyed by pothunters), and a one meter by one
meter test pit (called Shovel Test 1) which was also aborted. The artifacts from these various proveniences are listed and briefly
described below; some are illustrated in Fig. 21.
Surface

Thirteen specimens are from surface contexts (Fig. 21,a,b). There
were four bifacially worked fragments, three fragmentary unifaces(these were the only unifacial implements found at the site) and three
possible core or chopper fragments. In addition, there were two projectile points, one Nolan-like and the other, non-diagnostic (Fig. 21,a,b).

Backhoe Trenches
Seventeen artifacts were collected during the digging of the
backhoe trenches (Fig. 21,c). These include 10 bifacially chipped pieces,
four chopper-hke implements, and three projectile points. The
points are: a Travis specimen (Fig. 21,c), found at a depth of 74 centimeters; a Scallorn arrow point (not illustrated) found at 16 centimeters; and, a possible Angastura (not illustrated) from an undetermined depth.

Unit X
Before Unit X was destroyed, eight artifacts were found. These
materials consist of three biface fragments, four projectile points, and
one knife-hke biface (Fib. 21,h). One specimen is a portion of a corner-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

60

notched point (Fig. 21,d), another is a probable Langtry (Fig. 21,e), and two
are Bulverde points (Fig. 21,f,g).

Shovel Test 1
There were five specimens. Four are biface fragments, and the fifth, a
rectangular stemmed dart point (Fig. 21,i).

ANALYSIS OF LITHIC DEBRIS
Lithic debris, a category which here includes retouched flakes,
was recovered mainly during the screening of the soil from excavations. The use of 1/4" mesh screen for the two levels of Units
A, C, and E (0-40 cm below the surface) and 1/2" mesh for the
remainder of the excavations surely had some effect on sampling for
smaller flakes. The top two levels produced the following
percentages of the entire sample of flakes from each unit: Unit A
(19o/o), Unit C (27%), Unit E (36%). Such high percentages could be
a function of more intensive occupational deposition rather than
differential sampling procedures, but we suspect that the smaller
mesh of the screen was probably a contributing factor.
The following categories, drawn from Shafer (1969: 3-5), were
used in sorting the flakes and to investigate any changes in the
relative frequencies of flake categories through time. We also noted
whether or not retouch was present, hoping to get an idea of the
amount of "waste" flakes as compared to those which were
retouched and presumable utilized.

flake: A chip or spall removed from a nodule (the parent stone) by force.
initial (primary) cortex flake: A flake with cortex covering the dorsal
surface.
secondary cortex flake: Cortex is retained somewhere on the dorsal
surface of the flake, but the amount may vary greatly. At least one flake
facet must be present on the dorsal surface.
interior flake: No cortex is retained on the dorsal surface, but the striking
platform may retain cortex.
lipped flake: Typically, these flakes have multifaceted, lenticular-shaped
striking platforms and a characteristic lip or ridge which is at right angles
to the axle of removal on the ventral side. The striking platforms are
bifacially prepared and multifaceted. The dorsal side of the flake is
multifaceted
and
rarely
exhibits
cortes.
Lipped
flakes
are
characteristically thin and arched. Similar flakes have been referred to as
"billet flakes" (Epstein 1963:29) or flakes of bifacial retouch (Frison 1968:
149,150). Lipped flakes do occur in retouch of unifacials (cf. Shafer 1970)
but these specimens reveal remnants of the fiat ventral surface of the
uniface on one side of the platform angles.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

61

¸;¸¸¸¸%¸ i:~iiiii:~i

t

g
F(I \LI
0

5t)

h

FIGURE 21. Artifacts from Areas of Limited Control, Jetta Court Site
(41 TV 151). a, b, surface; c, backhoe trench; d-h, Unit X; i, Shovel
Test 1.

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
retouched flakes: Those flakes which display "nibbling" (small flake scars)
along one or more edges. These are also known as "utilized flakes", but we
prefer to keep the designation of a technological rather than a functional
basis.

Other terms employed in the analysis are as follows:
striking platform: A surface (surfaces) on a core from which flakes are
removed. A remnant of this striking platform is also detached when the
flake is removed and is retained on the bulbar end of the flake.
natural striking platform: The cortex (patinated) surface of a core used
without modification as the striking platform.
dorsal surface: That surface of a flake opposite the bulb of percussion.
ventral surface: That side possessing the bulb of percussion.
proximal end: The bulbar end.
distal end: That end opposite the bulbar end.
chunk: Simply a piece of flint that cannot be fitted into any of the other
categories, but which is apparently derived from the lithic process (of.
Deacon 1969).

Five categories and a number of sub-categories were used in the
sorting. A number of categories were set up to assist in computation
and illustrations.
1A:
1B:
1C:
1D:

Primary cortex
Primary cortex
Primary cortex
Primary cortex

flake
flake
flake
flake

2A:
2B:
2C:
2D:

Secondary
Secondary
Secondary
Secondary

3A:
3B:
3C:
3D:

Interior
Interior
interior
Interior

4A:
4B:
4C:
4D:

Lipped flake
Lipped flake
Lipped flake
Lipped flake

5A:
5B:

Chunk -- unretouched.
Chunk -- retouched.

cortex
cortex
cortex
cortex

flake
flake
flake
flake

-----

-----

-----

flake
flake
flake
flake

bulb present -- unretouched.
bulb not present -- unretouched.
bulb present -- retouched.
bulb not present -- retouched.
-----

bulb present -- unretouched.
bulb not present -- unretouched.
bulb present -- retouched.
bulb not present -- retouched.

buld present -- unretouched.
bulb not present -- unretouched.
bulb present -- retouched.
bulb not present -- retouched.

bulb present -- unretouched.
bulb not present -- unretouched.
bulb present -- retouched.
bulb not present -- retouched.

Figure 22 shows the distribution of all flakes by level from each of
the Unites A, C, and E. Of interest is the coincidence of "peaks" in the

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

63

percentages at the elevations of the Upper and Lower Middens.
Although the dark staining and burned rock of the Lower Midden was
not apparent in Unit A, there is a peak comprising some 30% of the
sample from that Unit in Levels 8, 9, and 10. This suggests that the
cultural activities associated with the characteristic configuration of
the Lower Midden in Units C and E extended into Unit A.
The jump in level 9 of Unit C is attributed to the Lower Midden, but
the slightness of the peak in levels 9 and 10 of Unit E is puzzling. The
Lower Midden peak in Unit A and the apparent lack of one in Unit E is
replicated in the faunal collections. The scarcity of faunal remains in
the lower levels of Jetta Court was initially thought to be a function of
differential preservation. The testimony of relatively imperishable
flint flakes suggests that the scarcity of animal bone in the lower
levels may not be so simply explained away.
It could be that the materials from the Lower Midden in Units A and
C represent activity areas, and the relative lack of such materials
from Unit E might be explained by the absence of any activity area at
this spot in the site. We certainly cannot assume, as the analysis of
the distribution of the chipping debris will show, that three units of
excavation can sample as large a site as Jetta Court adequately. To
summarize, the picture presented by Units A and C is one of two
peaks in the distribution of flakes (corresponding to the Upper and
Lower Middens). Unit E shows a more-or-less gradual increasing percentage of flakes as the present is approached.
Several worksheets were prepared to organize the raw data
dealing with the distribution of the various categories as well as percentages for each level. These are too lengthy for inclusion here, but
are on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
Below level 10 in each unit, each level contributes only .01 to .02 to the
unit. These lower levels (11-14) yielded between 3 and 43 flakes
apiece, with a mean of 21.75 flakes per level. The following illustrates
the proportion of flakes in these lower levels to the flakes from the
remainder of the levels:

levels in all below level 10 produced a total of 210
flakes.
x = 21.75 flakes, range 3-43 flakes.
261 flakes = .0457 of 5707 flakes (total for all 3 units)
3 flakes = .0005 of 5707 flakes
43 flakes = .0075 of 5707 flakes

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Il
I

I

I

I

l

I

i

I

I

½

!G~I
i

~
I

1

o

L~

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

65

The foregoing should serve to illustrate that the levels below level 10
are contributing very little to the total assemblage. The fluctuations
in relative proportions of flake categories in the levels 11-14 as compared to those fluctuations in levels 1-10 may be a product of small
sample sizes, and therefore, sampling error. However, the apparent
stability of the proportions in the lower levels is surprising.
The relative proportions of the various flake categories through
time were tabulated for each unit (on file, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory). Figure 23 shows the relative frequencies of
flakes in the combined Units, A, C, and E. Categories 1 and 5 [primary
cortex flakes and chunk, respectively) are so rare as to be virtually
negligible. Category 2 flakes appear to change little through time,
while Categories 3 and 4 show an inverse relationship in their relative
proportions through time.
There are two explanations which may be presented to account for
the scarcity of initial cortex flakes:

2)

Perhaps very little initial working of flint cobbles was done at the
site.
A)
Flint cobbles were collected from spots some distance from
the site and initial flaking took place at some other point than
the site.
Perhaps very little flint was available in cobble form at all.
B)
Rather, flint in ledge outcrops was used. Since ledge flint has
no cortex, obviously no cortex flakes could be produced. Such
an explanation may also account for the apparent scarcity of
Category 2 flakes (Secondary Cortex Flakes).
Initial working of flint cobbles was done at the site, but the initial
cortex flakes were only rarely discarded. Rather, they were worked
into other forms. It does not seem likely that only 28 flakes out of
5707 could have escaped alteration.

At the La Jita site in Uvalde County (Hester 1971), one of the few
central Texas sites at which extensive debitage analysis has been
conducted, there was a similar rarity of initial cortex (Category i)
flakes throughout the site’s history. We suspect that the lack of
Category i flakes at Jetta Court (as at La Jita) indicates that the initial
phases of lithic reduction were carried out at quarry-workshops
away from the occupation site.
For analyzing the changes in the relative proportions of Categories
2, 3 and 4, statistical techniques were used to test the significance of
some of the differences suggested by simple inspection.

Tests of Homogeneity
A series of x2 tests were performed to examine various aspects of
homogeneity of the lithic debris sample. These tests were mainly

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

.o

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

67

directed at observing the statistical difference between the Upper
and Lower Middens with respect to relative proportions of flake
categories 2, 3, and 4. In addition, Spearman rank correlation coefficients were run to see if the observed "trends" in category 3 and 4
flakes (3 becoming more common in the later levels at the expense of
4) had any statistical significance (see below: Tests of Correlation).

The Upper Midden Versus the Lower Midden
In the study of the lithic debris comparing the two main occupational deposits recognized, several questions were asked:
1)
Are there differences between the two middens if the
flake counts from all three units are combined?
If there should be significant differences under 1
2)
above, is it possible that one or more of these
categories is not statistically different between the
two middens? In other words, could category 2 be
contributing no significant difference while 3 and 4 do
contribute?
CATEGORY

2

3

4

Total

Upper Midden

481

1757

703

2941

Lower Midden

205

588

392

1185

Totals

686

2345

1095

4126

With 2 degrees of freedom, a x2 value of 5.99 was needed to indicate that the proportions are dependent of provenience, and that
the lithic debris assemblages from the two middens were "different"
in a statistical sense. A value of 42.47 was obtained, indicating that
there is considerably less than a chance in a thousand that the observed proportions are the result of chance. Simply stated, the assemblages from the two middens are different with respect to relative
frequencies of flake categories.
The next question was "Do all flake categories contribute to the differences between the two middens, or might one or more categories
be distributed with insignificant differences between the middens?"
Accordingly, x2 tests were run comparing the Upper Midden to the
Lower Midden on the basis of proportions of Category x flakes versus
non-Category X flakes. The results were as follows:

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Flake Category

2

3

4

x2

3.539

35.269

36.485

(
= x2 significant at 3.84 at .05 level of
significance with i degree of freedom)

Choosing the .05 level of significance, we see that Categories 3 and
4 are different, but not Category 2. This suggests that changes in lithic
technology -- if such changes can be measured by the changing
relative frequencies of the flake categories recognized -- are confined to Categories 3 and 4. Category 2 flakes appear to have a more
constant relative frequency.
A functional approach might suggest that the origin of the Secondary Cortex Flakes remained constant through time and that there
was no "need" for the lithic assemblages to respond to any postulated
environmental or cultural changes as far as Category 2 flakes were
concerned. This does not say, however, that the lithic technology
remained undifferentiated through time with respect to other kinds of
flakes. Indeed, it appears that there are certain trends through time
in the relative frequencies of Categories 3 and 4, which are considered below ("Tests of Correlation").
Since it appears that there are differences of statistical significance between the Upper and Lower Middens for the site as a whole
(read "for Units A, C, and E"), tests were made to see if these differences existed at the level of the Unit. In other words, is the sample
from each unit consistent with the total assemblage? Can we talk
about changes in lithic technology in a statistical sense for the sample
from one unit of excavation; or are the units inconsistent, and must
they be totaled in order to speak of changes in flake category frequencies?
x2 tests were made for each unit comparing Categories 2, 3, and 4
in their Upper and Lower Middens:

Unit

A

C

E

x2

51.47

10.40

36.85

(
= x2 significant at 5.99 at .05 level of
significance with 2 degrees of freedom)

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

69

All are significantly different, indicating that the differences noted
when Units A, C, and E were combined are not the product of
differences in only one unit.
In addition, we tested the notion that one or more categories of
flakes may be contributing little to the differences as Category 2 was
seen to do earlier in this paper, x’ tests were made comparing
Category x in the Upper and Lower Middens versus non-Category
x in the Upper and Lower Middens for each unit. The x2 values are
presented below:
Unit
Category

A

C

E

2 vs n/2

1.59

2.98

2.21

3 vs n/3

43.32

1.03

36.09

4 vs n/4

42.83

9.21

25.35

(-

=

x2 significant at 6.64 at .01 level of

significance with one degree of freedom)

With one exception, Category 3 in Unit C, Categories 3 and 4 show
considerable degrees of difference while Category 2 appears to be
quite stable from unit to unit. The next logical step would be to test for
differences comparing one unit to the others.
Interunit comparisons were performed to see if the lithic debris
assemblage from the Upper Midden was consistent in its proportions
from unit to unit. The same was tested for the Lower Midden. A sample table is given below for the Upper Midden:
Category
Unit

2

A

151

640

169

960

B

175

578

137

890

C

155

539

397

1091

Totals

481

1757

703

2941

3

4

Total

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

70

The resulting x2 scores were as follows:
Upper Midden

154.557

Lower Midden

84.592

(both of these are significant at the .001 level of significance (x2 = 18.46).
Clearly, in the above cases, the distribution of flakes within a midden zone is dependent upon the unit, but we also tested to see if only
one unit was contributing most of the difference. The x? values are
presented below:
AvsC

AvsE

CvsE

Upper Midden

5.626

92.559

109.898

LowerMidden

17.588

35.592

83.226

= x2 significant at 5.99 at .05 level of
(.
significance with 2 degrees of freedom)
All the differences are highly significant at the .05 level except the
Upper Midden of A versus that of C, which lacks 0.374 of being
significant. In all except one instance, then, the individual units are
contributing considerable amounts of difference. By the same token,
the units are inconsistent in the evidence each presents of the lithic
debris of this site.
As we have seen, the middens are different from one unit to the
next, indicating that proportions of flakes is not independent of unit.
We tried two tests for levels within the Upper Midden, with the null
hypothesis that midden levels within a unit show no significant
change. For each unit we tested level 1 against level 4 (the topmost
and bottommost levels of the Upper Midden) and level 3 against level
4.
Units
E
C
Levels
A
i vs 4

48.22

8.75

4.126

3vs4

2.536

0.061

8.441

(.
significance)

= x2 significant at 5.99 at .05 level of

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

71

The results of these and other x2 tests performed on the flake
distribution from individual levels are not clear-cut. Reduced sample
size is certainly a potential source of error, and using two contiguous
levels (or levels within the same recognized stratigraphic unit) may
very well be violating independence of samples.
Summary of Tests of Homogeneity
In summary, it appears that there is considerable diversity between the two middens with reference to Category 3 and 4 flakes. The
same type of test also shows that there is a considerable amount of
variation among the three units with respect to the same
stratigraphic entity, the middens.

Tests of Correlation
If we accept (1) the premise that the two middens are significantly
different in their proportion of flakes and (2) that this difference is a
function of changing patterns of lithic technology through time, what
can we say about the existence of any statistically significant trends?
Since we have two ordinal scales -- the percentage of any category in
a level, and a time scale from level I through level 10 -- the Spearman
Rank Correlation Coefficient_r was applied.
Ideally, the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient r
would give us the clearest indication of the correlation between
changing flake proportions and time. But the Pearson test is a
parametric test and requires a fixed-interval scale and certain
assumptions about the population from which the sample was drawn.
The archeologist’s task would be simplified considerably if we could
assume a constant rate of deposition of soil. Then we could say, for instance, that the time span represented by level 3 is equal to that
represented by level 4 or level 10, and that changes in lithic
technology could be correlated to the time scale with more precision
than we can here.
However, we must regard our relative dates (our arbitrary levels
and our recognized strata) as an ordinal scale. The null hypothesis is
that there is no association between the two variables of level number
and percentage of a given flake category. That is, there is no
statistically :significant trend in increasing or decreasing proportions of any flake category through time. From simple inspection of
the percentages, it appears that category 2 shows no obvious trend,
but category 3 appears to increase in proportion as we come nearer
the present in time, while category 4 decreases.

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Levels 1 through 10 were tested in each of the units A, C, and E. In
addition, the flake counts were totaled up for the three units, percentages calculated anew, and these total percentages were tested.

6~. d2
n [n2- 11

_rs=l-

where:
differences between ranks
6= a constant
n~ number of ranks (for these calculations, there
always are 10 ranks and 10 relative percentages}
d

The equation used in the calculation of _r_s (rank correlation coefficient) is taken from Snedecor and Cochran (1967:195).
Categories
3
Unit A

-0.151

0.903

0.721

Unit C

-0.100

0.369

0.791

Unit E

0.394

0.430

0.357

Total ACE

0.046

0.713

0.921

(
significance.

=
=

significant at 0.683 at

.05 level of

significant at 0.833 at

.01

level of

significance).
Category 2, in all cases, is seen to have values so low as to indicate
that their relative frequencies are scattered almost randomly through
time (a value of 0.000 would indicate complete independence of
relative frequency and level; -i.000 would indicate a perfect negative
association). Categories 3 and 4 are significant 3 out of 9 times when
considered by unit. Both are significant when all three units are
grouped. Accordingly, we can say that the shifts seen in the relative
frequencies of Categories 3 and 4 are statistically significant when all
three units are combined.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

73

Distribution of Retouched Flakes
The lithic debris was examined on the basis of retouched flakes
versus unretouched flakes to see if this particular category of
artifacts was consistent in its distribution throughout the occupation
of the Jetta Court site. First, the individual levels from the Units were
totaled and we compared the Upper Midden versus the Lower Midden
on the basis of retouched flakes versus unretouched flakes for all
three units. This produced a x 2 value of 7.3252, which is significant at
the .01 level of significance.
The individual categories of flakes produced the following x2
values for the two middens:
Category
3

4

Combined A,C, and
E

0.1365

11.3904

2.3831

Un~ A

0.1032

16.9036

9.4435

Unit C

0.2501

3.0248

1.3598

Un~ E

0.1027

3.0849

0.0025

(.
significance)

=

x2 significant at 3.84 at .05 level of

For the combined assemblage from all three units, only Category 3 is
significantly different in its proportions between the two middens.
When we examine the individual units, Categories 3 and 4 in Unit A
show significant differences.
Spearman rank correlation coefficients were determined for each
occasion that the x2 value was significant in the above table. The
results were not significant in any test:

~s

Category 3 from Units A, C, E
Category 3 from Unit A (levels 1-10)
Category 4 from Unit A (levels 1-10)

-0.2212
-0.4667
-0.1125

In conclusion, there are some differences in the distribution of
retouched flakes versus unretouched ones, but there appears to be no
discernable pattern in their occurrence.

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Summary and Conclusions to the Analysis of the Lithic Debris
The statistical analysis of the lithic debris from the Jetta Court Site
has produced the following observations:
la.

lb.
2.
3.
4.

There is a statistical difference between the proportions of flakes
for the Upper Midden versus the Lower Midden for the total flakes
from the Upper Midden and the Lower Midden (combined totals
from Unit A, C, and E.)
The difference in proportions under la remains present if we
examine the collections from each individual unit.
There are statistically significant differences for the proportions
when one unit is compared with another.
x, values for category 2 are generally low, suggesting that proportion of category 2 flakes is independent of provenience.
Proportion of category 2 flakes is not correlated with provenience to
a significant degree. Categories 3 and 4, however, show correlations
with provenience only part of the time when studied by individual
units. When the total flake counts for the units are combined and
percentages recalculated, the proportions of categories 3 and 4
flakes are significantly correlated with provenience. Category 3
flakes (interior flakes) become more common from the bottom levels
to the top levels of the site at the expense of category 4 flakes (lipped
flakes).

The observations listed above are still at the descriptive level of
scientific investigation and have no explanatory value. Referring to
the study of the European Paleolithic, Binford (1968:49-50) comments
The most impressive schemes for the description of differences and
similarities in flint assemblages have developed in Old World prehistory
... Problems arise, however, in the explanation of differences and
similarities and in understanding changes through time. All too often
prehistorians view flint industries "evolving" through time, as though they
contained genetic materials and were capable of mutation. It is on the explanatory level that anthropological concepts are particularly valuable.
Our basic concept is culture, and it is to the understanding of functional
variability and change within culture systems that we wish to direct attention.., the description, however detailed, of assemblages does not constitute an explanation of differences and similarities.

The paper by Binford quoted above deals with changes in tool
categories rather than chipping debris, but the same logical
processes of explanation are involved. The present study, because of
a number of difficulties (not the least of which is the lack of sufficient
comparative data) was unable to generate any testable hypotheses
about the cultural of functional importance of the observed changes
in flake categories. Partly this study was attempted in the hope of
stimulating other work with similar data to see if any patterns of flake

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

75

proportions can be determined for Central Texas. If it should result
that the pattern of flakes at the Jetta Court site is consistent with the
pattern for Central Texas sites, then we may be dealing with a very
stable set of functions for lithic materials over a considerable
geographic area and through several millenia. If, however, various
patterns should be identified for various sites, we might attempt to
postulate reasons for these differences:
1)
2)

Different cultural traditions in various parts of the same currently
-- recognized "culture area" (in the sense of Willey and Phillips
1958:20, 47-48}.
Differences in the seasons of occupation of various sites. Different
sites could have been occupied at various times of the year in order
to exploit the sources of food or raw materials that were ripening at
the time. Different subsistence activities may have required different tool kits. In order to investigate this possibility, a very extensive survey of tools from various sites would have to be examined
and tabulated to see if there might be differences from one area to
another. In addition, ecological surveys of the areas of the sites
would have to be carried out (see "Natural Setting" section of this
paper).

At any rate, several comments may be offered on the study of the
chipping debris from the letta Court Site:
1)

2}

3}

The fact that differences between middens do exist is of interest since it appears to reflect changes in lithic technology other than
stylistic changes in projectile points.
The observed differences among the Units is not altogether unexpected since one would not expect the site to be homogeneous
throughout. Activity areas are certainly present, although they may
have been scattered to the point that we were unable to recognize
them during excavation. However, they were not scattered enough
to create homogeneity in the site. As a unit is excavated, one level
may intersect several such activity areas and acquire uneven samples from each. A solution to such a problem as this would be
careful horizontal excavation of sites, which might give the excavators better control over sampling techniques.
Finally, we submit that the differences between the Upper and
Lower Middens are "real" in the sense that they are not products of
the analysis, partly because of the demonstrated trends for
Categories 3 and 4. This does not say, however, that the differences
are not the results of a very small sample from a large site.

FAUNAL REMAINS
Sampling procedures for the faunal remains consisted of collecting
all bones and mussel shells that appeared on the screen or the few

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fragments that were collected in situ. For snail shells, collection consisted of gathering about 250 milliliters from each level. Since screen
sizes of 1/2" and 1/4" were used {mainly the former} larger mammals
are surely over-represented by virtue of the size of their bones and
bone fragments. Although animal bones decreased in lower levels of
the site {partly as a factor of preservation, we think}, we are confident that had more refined collection techniques been employed we
would have a more representative sample of the faunal assemblage.
Dan Witter, formerly of the Vertebrate Paleontology Laboratory at
Balcones Research Center, graciously identified the faunal remains
and suggested the following categories for analysis of the mammalian
remains:
Category A: mammals of 200 pounds or more {horse, bison, cow}
Category B: mammals within the range of 20 pounds to 200 pounds
{deer, beaver, coyote, dog, etc.}
Category C: mammals weighing between 2 ounces and 20 pounds
{rabbit, mice, opossum, etc.}
Since the faunal remains from Unit X were only from the top 80 centimeters of a one by two meter square, and since they were consistent
with those from Units A, C, and E and produced no new taxa, this
analysis will consider in detail only the remains from Unit A, C, and E.
The faunal remains from the backhoe trenches are without
provenience and produced no species not present in Units A, C, or E.
From Units A, C, and E a total of 868 bone fragments was
recovered. The upper one meter of the excavations produced 81% of
the remains, and the frequency of the remains tends to decrease with
depth. Although more intensive collecting of animals during the later
occupations is a possibility, we feel that poorer preservation in the
older deposits is also operating. The individual specimens from the
lower deposits are more friable, are more pitted and corroded, and
their edges are rounded. An exception to the decreasing frequencies
in the lower levels is somewhat greater frequencies between approximately 150 to 210 centimeters below the surface, roughly
corresponding to the Lower Midden {Zone B}. This might suggest
either more stable surfaces or more frequent occupations at these
levels, resulting in a more intensive deposition of debris.
In the main, the animal bones were quite fragmented and difficult
to assign to definite taxonomic categories. In addition, not a single articulation was recognized in the field. Consequently, only 66 fragments, mostly deer, could be identified.
Since only 7.5% of the animal bones could be assigned to some
taxonomic category, it is necessary to use the "size of animal"

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

77

categories to achieve some meaningful picture of the faunal remains.
Figure 24 indicates the relative percentages of mammal bone
fragments (by size category), and unidentified fragments. Category B
mammals contribute 56% of the total amount of animal bone,
category A some 17%, and category C contributes only 5%.
At best, these frequencies are only very rough approximations of
the economic importance of these groups because: a) these percentages are partly a function of bone breakage; and, b) small mammals, because of sampling techniques and the possibility of differential preservation, are surely under-represented. Accepting
Figure 25 at face value would support the notion that category B mammals constituted a very important source of food.
Skeletal elements present for category A and B mammals were
mostly portions of the appendicular skeleton. Of the 89 category B
bone fragments that could be identified as to anatomical position,
27% were of the axial skeleton (skull, teeth, mandible, scapulae, and
vertebrae) while the remaining 73% were of the appendicular
skeleton. Again, such distributions are partly a function of bone
breakage and are only rough estimates of the relative percentages of
axial versus appendicular elements. It does suggest, however, that
the meat associated with the appendicular skeleton was more likely to
be brought back to the site while the remainder of the bones were left
at the place of killing or dressing out.
The relative percentages of size categories by levels were
calculated for only the top meter of Units A, C and E. This accounted
for 81% of the total faunal assemblage. The rapid decrease in the occurrence of animal bones below the top one meter made the sample
size for calculation of relative frequencies rather small.
Category B mammal bone fragments vary between 77% and 45% of
the total for each level. Excepting unidentified bone fragments, the
most striking change is the 42% of category A mammals in level 2.
This is caused by a concentration of 85 category A bone fragments,
mainly small rib fragments, in Level 2 of Unit A (incidentally, these 85
fragments represent 63% of all category A bone fragments from the
upper meter of Units A, C, and E). Fifty-seven of these fragments were
burned, indicating that human activity was involved, but we are
unable to identify the animal involved.
Examination of the percentages of the faunal assemblage in each
level reveals several items of interest (Fig. 25). First, approximately
68% of all animal bone fragments are from the top 80 centimeters, for
the most part from the Upper Midden. There is a consistent low
frequency for the lower levels except for the levels that correspond to

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

~d
"o

J

¯ .~

~.

¢o

c~
~_~

o

"N"

ca

"r.

¢,q

79

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

- .~ - -

I

r .~- - 7
I
I

"’4

1
I

1
1

""4

I
I
1
I

7=

~7
""4

C’q
¢",1

¢NI

¢’q

;,,.3

.e,1

¢’,1

¢"1

~

.e’-I

©

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Lower Midden. There is a slight but perceptible increase at that
zone.
Since the Lower Midden was not apparent in the section of Unit A,
the distribution of faunal remains in each unit was calculated to see if
the increase in bone fragments between Levels 8 and 11 was restricted to Units C and E. The results were not entirely as expected. All
three units had between 62% and 72% of their animal bones in the
top four levels, corresponding to the Upper Midden. Unit A had an increase at the general Lower Midden levels, but this increase was
duplicated at even lower depths. Unit C performed as expected,
showing a considerable increase at the Lower Midden levels; but Unit
E showed no really significant increase at a similar elevation.
Assuming relatively consistent preservation across any given
elevation in the site, such differences as mentioned above indicate
that the three units are not similar to the point of homogeneity. Such
dissimilar distributions from nnit to unit are characteristic also of the
flint flakes. For the Jetta Court site, then, we cannot assume that each
unit will give us an identical picture of the contents of the site, despite
similarities in observed stratification. In summary, the vertebrate
remains from Units A, C, and E are characterized as the following:
1) They are highly fragmented and, accordingly, are quite difficult
to identify.
2) Approximately 81% of the faunal assemblage was from the top
one meter of the site, and frequency decreased with depth. Differential preservation is surely a factor here, but "intensity of occupation" may well be involved also.
3) Category B mammal bone fragments are the most common, but
Category C mammals are surely under-represented because of sampling procedures.
4) Skeletal remains that could be identified anatomically for the
Category 2 mammals indicated that fragments of the appendicular
skeleton were the more common. This suggests that the bones of the
axial skeleton were more commonly left at the site of the kill or butchering.

MOLLUSCAN REMAINS
Snail shells collected at letta Court have not yet been subjected to
analysis. Of the many thousands occurring in the deposits, most are
land snails of the Rabdotus (formerly Bulimulus) family. The presence
of snails in such great numbers, as well as in lenses or concentrations
(see Fig. 4), suggest that the gathering of snails was part of the

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

81

TABLE 2. IDENTIFIED FAUNA AT JETTA COURT (41 TV 151)

Number of
fragments
identified
CLASS: REPTILIA
ORDER: Chelonia
FAMILY: Testudinidae (turtle)

CLASS: MAMMALIA
ORDER: Marsupilia
FAMILY: Didelphiidae
Didelphis virginiana (Virginia oppossurn)
ORDER: Rodentia
FAMILY: Cricetidae
Neotoma sp. (wood rat)
Sigmodon hispidus (hispid cotton rat)
FAMILY: Geomyidae
Geomys bursarius (Plains pocket gopher)
ORDER: Lagomorpha
FAMILY: Leporidae
Lepus californicus (black-tailed jackrabbit)

Provenience*

A2(1) 3 frags.
A9(10) 1 frag.
C2(4) 2 frags.
E2 (27) 2 frags.

1

E5(90)

1

A7(17)

1

E5(90)

1

E5(90)

2

c12(88)

1

A6(7)

1

E4(36)

1

A9(72)

A13(86)
Sylvilagus cf. floridana (cottontail rabbit)
ORDER: Carnivora
FAMILY: Procyonidae
Procyon lotor (raccoon)
FAMILY: Canidae
Canis familiaris or latrans (dog or coyote)
ORDER: Artiodactyla
FAMILY: Cervidae
Odocoileus virginianus (white-tailed deer)

FAMILY: Anfilocapridae
Antilocapra americana (pronghorn)
FAMILY: Bovidae
Bos taurus (teeth only) (cow)

93

See Table 3
for distribution
of Odocoileus
fragments

1

E5(90)

3

E1(2)
E2(27)
C2(4)

Bison bison (identification supported by
stratigraphic location)

A12(37)
A4(8)
E5(90)
E7(12)

*Provenience is indicated by the unit designation (A,C,E), followed by the level (10,11,
12...), and, in parentheses, the lot number assigned during cataloging.

82

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 3.
UNIT
LEVEL

C
1

1

2

3

5

3

12

3

4

4

2

5

3

6

4

7

E
7
9
7
10
9
2
2

8
9
10

1

11
12

1

13

Total

29

16

48

Table 3. Distribution by level of deer bone fragments. The provenience of 93 fragments is indicated. All are definitely identified as
Odocoileus virginianus.
food-collecting regime (Hester and Hill 1975 have noted ethnohistoric
evidence for the eating of land snails by southern Texas Indian
groups).
Mussel shells occurred infrequently, and were usually highly
fragmented. Only in eight instances could the fragments be assigned
to the family level (Lampsilis spp. or Proptera spp.) and for only two
examples could a species be identified (Lampsilis tampicoensis).
Mussel shells were found in all levels in Units A, C, E, except for
levels 8 and 11. The two Lampsilis tampicoensis specimens were in
levels i and 2.

CONCLUDING COMMENTS
Finally, we must assess the contributions of the Jetta Court site to
the archeology of central Texas, and suggest some directions for
future research. We have to first point out that "future research" at
the Jetta Court site is impossible; houses are now constructed over the
area of the prehistoric occupation. Thus, the opportunity of obtaining
any additional information from this important locality has been lost
to central Texas archeologists. Our hurried excavations in 1968-1969
were salvage tests of a site that was of unknown age and unknown
horizontal or vertical extent. Within the limited time constraints under which we worked, the excavation goals were quite restricted. The

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

83

best we could hope to achieve was the examination of the contents,
depth, and cultural sequence of the site before it was rendered inaccessible by construction activities.
With these caveats in mind, what can we say that the Jetta Court
excavations have added to the understanding of central Texas
prehistory? We were able to establish the depth of human
habitational refuse in the terrace deposit, and it was possible to
determine the age and relative sequence of diagnostic artifacts conforms tolerably well to the defined central Texas chronology (Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962; Sorrow, Shafer and Ross 1967; Prewitt
1974). It has been argued by some that the cultural chronology of central Texas is so well-known that further concern with the succession
of diagnostic artifacts is not a viable research goal. While we realize
that there is a lot more to archeology than culture history, it is
becoming increasingly apparent that as the number of excavated
sites in the region increases, the more our chronological framework
has to be modified and adjusted. The refinement of temporal control
is, to our way of thinking, essential to the pursuit of more
sophisticated problems in archeology, including studies of site function and seasonality, settlement and subsistence, aboriginal
technology, paleoenvironmental reconstruction and so forth. One
example of the continuing adjustments and correlations necessary in
the central Texas chronological framework is presented by Prewitt
(1974: Figure 7). Another area in which refinement is required is
exemplified by the discoveries at Jetta Court. At this site, in the Lower
Midden, we have a discrete horizon representing a very early phase
of human occupation in central Texas. These materials are
stratigraphically below the diagnostics of the presently defined
"Early Archaic" of the region (see Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962).
The "Early Archaic" is represented by such horizon-markers as
Bulverde, Nolan and Travis dart points. Bulverde and Nolan are
present in the Jetta Court sequence, as indicated in Table 1. However,
occurring below them, in the Lower Midden, are distinctly different
forms,
includin~
Bell,
Bell-like,
Cower,
corner
notched
(Miscellaneous I) and triangular (Miscellaneous II) dart points.
The presence of this horizon pre-dating the "Early Archaic" is not
unique at Jetta Court. In fact, a considerable literature already exists
which notes its occurrence at other central and Trans-Pecos Texas
sites (Sharer 1963; Sorrow, Shafer and Ross 1967; Word and Douglas
1970; Hester 1971; Sollberger and Hester 1972; Prewitt 1974). A
review of the various sites in Texas in which the "pre-Archaic"
horizon is found has been published by Sollberger and Hester (1972).

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Since their compilation of data on these sites is published in a readily
available major journal, we will not re-examine it here. Suffice it to
say that the existence of a "very Early Archaic", or "pre-Archaic",
"Transitional Archaic", or whatever appellation one chooses to use,
is firmly established. Lithic traits include triangular, corner-notched,
Gower, and Bell dart points, along with Guadalupe and unifacial
Clear Fork tools in some areas, such as south-central Texas (Hester
and Kohnitz 1975).
No one has yet determined, through chronometric means, the temporal boundaries of this early cultural unit. As work continues and
more components are discovered, we may find that there will be
problems of internal sequence which will further modify our present
concepts of this horizon (cf. Sorrow, Shafer and Ross 1967; Prewitt
1974: Figure 7).
The extensive analysis of Jetta Court lithic debris produced some
interesting results, described in detail earlier in the paper. There appear to be changes in relative proportions of various flake categories
through time. The changes in the frequencies of interior flakes versus
lipped flakes (biface thinning flakes) can be correlated with level to
some degree. It is impossible to evaluate these recognized changes in
the lithic debris due to the lack of comparable analyses in the central
Texas area; the presently published flake analysis data comes from a
variety of far-flung sites.
In addition, the analysis of lithic debris at Jetta Court reveals considerable diversity from unit to unit, even though the same
stratigraphic entities are being examined. Several possible explanations for this come to mind: (1) small sample sizes from large
sites are unreliable in presenting the range of lithic debris from the
entire site; (2) the same stratigraphic unit (the Lower Midden, for
example) is not homogenous throughout its extent; rather, there may
be certain activity areas located here and there in the midden, and a
square unit of excavation has a good chance of intersecting (or even
missing) several of them in any one level. Therefore, there may be little value in horizontal comparisons of flake samples from scattered
units in a large site. Vertical comparisons, aimed at elucidating certain changes in lithic technology through time, may be more useful in
such circumstances but even here there are obvious limitations.
Although we believe that the occupants of Jetta Court were mobile
hunters and gatherers, presumably with some regularly-replicated
yearly round of subsistence activities, we see no evidence for
establishing the position of this site in their subsistence regime. Such
knowledge would have to be obtained from a thorough analysis of sur-

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

85

viving faunal and organic remains, and from a detailed acquaintance
with the prehistoric settlement pattern of Walnut Creek and surrounding areas. We have meager data for the first, and almost no information on the latter. The problem of settlement pattern data can
be solved through the use of a regional approach to archeological
inquiry (cf. Hester, Heizer and Graham 1975:15), rather than with an
over-concern with specific, productive sites. As far as the analysis of
organic debris, it is apparent that such materials are very poorly
preserved in most of the terrace and burned rock midden sites of central Texas. Further, the interpretation of the faunal and organic
evidence will never reach sophisticated levels if we continue to extract it from the ground with traditional techniques, such as those employed in our salvage work at Jetta Court. The recovery of significant
data on artifact distributions, associations of materials with functionally-specific activity areas, and the relationships of functional
units within a site, call for different kinds of excavation technologies.
Open-area, or horizontal, excavations are one such approach (cf.
Sharer 1971: Figure 18,a). Furthermore, it might be more useful to
concentrate such investigations in small, easily delineated sites
where behavioral patterns may be better preserved than in thick,
repeatedly-occupied localities like Jetta Court.
In closing, we would like to suggest that the techniques we used in
"salvaging" Jetta Court not be implemented in similar situations in
the future. We did obtain, perhaps mostly through luck, some
significant information. But, might not we have done better by
grouping our units in a block excavation, thereby getting a good sample from a particular area, an area in which at least some minor
spatial analyses could have been accomplished? As a bit of further
retrospection, could we have learned more by having the backhoe
remove the overburden from a sizeable portion the Lower Midden,
thus allowing us to examine its horizontal composition more fully? We
do not wish to engage in an extensive exercise in "hindsight archeology", as we still believe that we did the best we could, given the
available time, funds and manpower, and the state of our own archeological training at that period. We would recommend, however,
that future student archeologists, when faced with a similar
challenge, try to assess and determine certain regional problems of
prehistory that could be attacked through rapid salvage work, and
then devise the appropriate strategies for the investigation.

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED

Binford, S. R.
1968 Variability and Change in the Near Eastern Mousterian of Levallois
Facies. In: New Perspectives in Archeology (S. and L. Binford, eds.),
pp. 49-60. Aldine, Chicago.
Deacon, H. I.
1969 Melkhoutboom Cave, Alexandria District, Cape Province: a report
on the 1967 investigation. Annals of the Cape Provincial Museum,
Natura! History, Vol. 6, No. 13. Grahamstown, South Africa.
Eddy, F. W.
1974 Resource Management and Locational Strategies of Certain
Prehistoric Sites in Central Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 19,
No. 64, pp. 99-106.
Epstein, J. F.
1963 Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County,
Texas, 1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 (for
1962), pp. 1-129.
Frison, G. C.
1968 A Functional Analysis of Certain Chipped Stone Tools. American
Antiquity, Vol. 33, pp. 149-155.
Hester, T. R.
1971 Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42, pp. 51148.
1975 A Chronological Overview of Prehistoric Southern and SouthCentral Texas. Paper presented at the conference "The Prehistory
of Northeastern Mexico and Texas", Monterrey, Mexico, April.
Hester, T. R., R. F. Heizer and J. A. Graham
1975 Field Methods in Archaeology. 6th revised edition. Mayfield
Publishing Company, Pato Alto.
Hester, T. R. and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1975 Eating Land Snails in Prehistoric Southern Texas: Ethnohistoric and
Experimental Data. The Nautilus, Vol. 89, No. 2, pp. 37-38.
Hester, T. R. and H. Kohnitz
1975 The Chronological Placement of Guadalupe Tools. La Tierra, Vol. 2,
No. 2, pp. 22-25.
Johnson, L., Jr., D. A. Suhm, and C. D. Tunnell
1962 Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich,
Footbridge and Oblate Sites. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No.
5.
Prewitt, E. R.

1974 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report, No.
49.
Sharer, H. J.
1963 Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site A Stratified Terrace Site in
Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
34, pp. 57-81.
1969 Archeological Investigations at Robert Lee Reservoir, West Central
Texas. Papers, Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 17.

JETTA COURT ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

87

1970 Notes on Uniface Retouch Technology. American Antiquity, Vol. 35,
pp. 480-487.
1971 Late Prehistory of Central Texas: 500 B.C. to A.D. 1700. Paper
presented at annual meeting, Texas Academy of Science,
Nacogdoches.
Sharer, H. J. and J. E. Corbin
1965 An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of the North Fork,
South Fork, and Laneport Reservoirs, Williamson County, Texas.
Report submitted to the National Park Service. Austin.
Skinner, S. A.
1971 Prehistoric Settlement of the DeCordova Bend Reservoir, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42, pp. 149270.
Snedecor, G. W. and W. G. Cochran
1967 Statistical Methods. Iowa State University Press, Ames.
Sollberger, J. B. and T. R. Hester
1972 The Strohacker Site: A Review of Pre-Archaic Manifestations in
Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 17, No. 58, Pt. 1: 326-344.
Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Shafer and R. E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers, Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 18.
Suhm, D.A., A. D. Krieger and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Witter, D.
1971 Environment and Vegetation of the Robert Lee Reservoir Basin. In:
Investigations into South Plains Prehistory (by H. J. Sharer), pp. 145163. Papers, Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 20.
Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips
1958 Method and Theory in American Archaeology. Phoenix Books,
Chicago.
Word, J. H. and C. Douglas
1970 Excavations at Baker Cave. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No.
16.

