A Plague of Phases

LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

ABSTRACT
The phases named in the last decade by Weir (1976), Prewitt
(1981, 1983), Dibble (Turpin 1985), Bruseth and Perttula (1981),
and Thurmond (1983) are reviewed in terms of the writer’s views on
proper phase definition. The demonstration of strong contextual
associations among items in a phase’s site components is considered
a sine qua non for establishing sociocultural units that can correspond to single societies. Examples of both satisfactory and unwarranted phase definitions are discussed, and the recommendation is
made that many flawed phases can best be treated as named regional
periods or, when appropriate, general cultural patterns. The kind of
phase endorsed for much of Texas---for areas of semimobile aborigines or dispersed farmers--is a broadly construed unit allowing for
some functional and temporal variation among its components; it
should ideally represent an ethnic group or society as it existed
throughout a region. Local units should be called subphases.

THE PROBLEM

This paper is a short critique of several published descriptions of phases that
have appeared in Texas during the last 10 years. Without argument, defining
sociocultural units in the archeological record can be a step forward for the prehistorian. When established with understanding and care, the units are
representations in either of two senses--they can stand for the fairly consistent
material remains and behaviors of separate groups of bygone people, or can represent quite different periods in the history of a single society. In either case the
consequence is to set apart for scrutiny separate human groups that correspond to
multitribal, tribal, or other kinds of entities. Depending on whose system of
nomenclature and classification is followed, the smallest units are called foci,
complexes, phases, or whatever. Sadly, not many of the named phases proposed
in Texas during recent years are acceptable socioculturalunits. In many cases the
absolutely minimal methods necessary for establishing units have not been
followed, with the result that phases are named and described that are either speculative constructs or merely named regional periods. Although good integration
and interpretation of the archeological data have resulted from the use of proper
phase definitions, considerable confusion has been the result of publishing
flawed units.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeologieal Society 57 (1986)

2

Texas Archeological Society

As a matter of fact, having false or misbegotten phases in the archeological
literature is sometimes worse than having none at all, for they easily become dangerous and useless recipes for careless archeologists. This is the malady that I see
affecting the archeological community in Texas, infecting even the attitudes of
supervisory personnel who review salvage efforts. Because of the obsession to
tie new research into culture sequences, partly flawed schemes are accepted uncritically by people who should know better. So in various parts of the state,
some phases have been named in the past decade that ought to be rejected or
treated as entities of another sort. And there are rumors of even more phase
names in the works for other regions. It is my hope to inject a certain amount of
antibiotic into the literature and help slow the infection’s spread, though I am reminded of an old Spanish dicho to the effect that "it is easier to raise a devil than
to put him away." At the same time I want to encourage a scholarly search for
phases and recommend their use.
Before describing, again, the proper method for defining phases (for the first
description, see Johnson 1967:1-10), it needs to be underlined that such units are
hardly God’s gift to archeology; nor are they the Cosmic Glue that binds together
the archeological universe and keeps it from scattering to the four winds.
Problems have surrounded the use of even fairly well defined phases that have
hindered our understanding of past societies in terms of their total economies,
internal complexity, relationships to other peoples, and their rate of change
through the years. For example, as T. K. Perttula and others (1986:41-43) have
recently said, sociocultural units (in their case, in the Caddoan area) are usually
named with little appreciation for the diversity among sites of a given unit.
Sometimes sites resulting from different social and economic activities practiced
by a single society are not always placed in the same unit, and the proper variation is not allowed. E. B. Jelks (1961:74) wrestled with this problem long ago
in his work on the lower Stflphur River.
Serious problems also exist in setting unit boundaries in time, especially in
the case where a single society changed considerably but slowly through the
years, and warrants division into phases or subphases. In these instances, deciding upon phase markers, choosing the most appropriate number of phases for the
sequence, and setting phase limits in time can cause a brain snarl that will not
easily unravel. Regrettably, there are no firm guidelines to follow--only
common sense coupled with an understanding of local history. But if the age
limits of a phase are set too broadly, the result is an impression of stability and
uniformity that may belie reality. In the same vein, if the age span of a phase is
set too short, and very minor social and stylistic changes are overemphasized,
then a false picture of rapid change emerges. The recommended usage allows for
some temporal flexibility in phase definitions so that quite brief periods of
uniformity--in the neighborhood of a century or two--can be recognized as
subphases. But when a local society is replaced by interlopers, resulting in a
major cultural change, then it is relatively simple to establish main phase
boundaries that mirror this replacement.
However important functional studies may be, the importance of style in

Johnson w A Plague of Phases

3

archeological phases should never be belittled. Recent ethnoarcheological studies
(e.g., Wiessner 1983, 1984; Lemonnier 1986) have illustrated convincingly that
single societies---whether of the multitribal, tribal, or subtribal sort--often have
unique stylistic expressions in their tools, dress, etc., that furnish a means for
contemporary people, including ethnoarcheologists, to recognize ethnic identity.
As a consequence, it is perfectly legitimate for the archeologist to use cooccurring styles in defining phases, as long as he also concerns himself with reconstructing economic and other behaviors.
In spite of the foregoing problems, phases or other archeological units can
be helpful constructs for packaging masses of data, providing, albeit imperfectly,
units that should reflect past social reality. But phases will be most useful only
if certain instructions are followed: (1) use only major social and stylistic
changes for marking phase boundaries in time, (2) allow for spatial, age, and
functional variation that may be expressed, when appropriate, as subphases, (3)
recognize the dynamic nature of human life and social activity in the society
whose remains are being classified, and (4) fight the ever-present temptation to
reify a phase and consider it the prime actor in past human drama. Types, phases,
and the like do nothing. Only people act, and we should strive never to lose
sight of them in our analytic and classificatory machinations.
THE PROPER METHOD OF RECOGNIZING PHASES
With the preliminary comments about the nature and usefulness of phases
out of the way, we turn to the question of unit recognition: the mechanics of the
step-by-step definition. I beg the reader’s indulgence to repeat part of what I
wrote in 1967 (pp. 1-10), but those few lines directed at Texas archeologists
appear only rarely to have been read or pondered.
Not surprisingly, figuring out the formal content of units is the main act in
their definition. To assign a collection of artifacts to an archeological unit we
have to know, and demonstrate convincingly, that those things are truly the
residue (Gould 1980:42) of a discrete and linked series of local communities
(each a maximal group of persons in face-to-face association). Recognizing site
components is the first step, and a primary association is demanded for this kind
of assignment--a close contextual relationship among artifacts. In the best cases
of primary association, the context of the artifacts and other things that are found
together is such that there remains little doubt they were used or produced by the
same social group. For instance, if tools, ornaments, and garments were included
with a corpse at the time of burial, this provides an excellent case of primary
association; we know these items characterize a single community during one
period of time.
Even here there are lurking problems, since grave fill can fortuitously contain artifacts made in a different time period or by other societies who used the
site. So the archeologist is obliged to study the context of the grave he excavates. A group of arrowpoints lying near the corpse and all oriented alike indicates the deliberate placement of a bundle or quiver of arrows with the deceased.
For another example, stone tools found in a storage pit or as a cache can also be

4

Texas Archeologieal Society

viewed as an instance of primary association if, from their uniformity and
position, it can be inferred that they were deliberately stored there together and
were not included accidentally with fill later on.
I could continue with further examples of possible primary associations
among tools and site features: artifacts found on house floors, around and in
stone hearths, in baking ovens, and so on. The point, however, has been made.
In each case the context needs analyzing, and the archeologist should act out the
role of Sherlock Holmes or his clever brother Mycroft--carefully collecting and
weighing each piece of evidence to reach, when possible, a reasonable explanation. It is also extremely useful to recognize instances of likely secondary association so they will not be taken for primary ones. Examples of things in secondary association are tools made by different societies, or the same society
during quite distinct periods, that have come to lie together through human
agency such as pit digging, by deposition on a living surface stable for many
years, or from joint redeposition by some natural agency such as slope wash.
Returning to the main theme, when associations have been recognized in
graves, house floors, perhaps even in strata with homogeneous artifact styles,
then these associational lots are compared to see which artifact forms or types, as
well as inferred behaviors, are sufficiently similar to warrant their being lumped
together as a single phase component of the site. Physical evidence such as the
association of the features with a living surface, their similar depth below the
site’s surface, etc., may be used to verify this kind of component recognition.
The job can be difficult, but any definition of archeological units should adhere
to this approach. W. W. Taylor, in A Study of Archaeology (1948), affirms that
sociocultural units should represent given groups of people, for "since the local
human groups represented by... localized finds are the only empirical ones
with which the archaeologist.., deals, they are.., the starting point of all
archaeological taxonomy" (pp. 146, 147). In his Prehistoric Migrations in
Europe
(1950), V. Gordon Childe states that, to define cultures (his
archeological units), an archeologist must show that traits, artifacts, etc., relate
contextually to one anther in such a way that we know they are the concrete
expressions of the common social traditions of a single people.
W. C. McKern (1939:30) has stated, in presenting the procedure to be
followed in defining foci, that materials and associated data that have cultural
significance are first collected for a site; if a consistent complex of traits so determined also is found at other sites, then we have a true focus which, he says,
"may in instances correspond closely to the local tribe in ethnology" (p. 308).
Avoiding the question of whether foci represent tribes or some other social
entities, at least we see that McKern meant his focus to stand for the residue of a
definite group of people, recognizable at several archeological sites as individual
components. I can only add that there is almost no difference between a Midwestern focus and a phase as defined by Willey and Phillips (1958:22), except
that foci are explicitly required to have almost identical site components, thus
making it hard to allow for functional or other variation among the sites of a
single society. Perhaps through oversight, Willey and Phillips were not quite so

Johnson ~ A Plague of Phases

5

strict, but nonetheless failed to discuss intraphase variation and its significance.
For my purposes, the reason for discussing foci is to underline a necessary
step in defining sociocultural units: once associations are worked out at single
sites, moderately similar components need to be recognized at a number of sites.
Of course, the constituent components must be permitted to vary somewhat, to
allow for the economic, magico-religious, and other activities carried out by a
society at some sites and not others; when deemed helpful, minor variation in
age or geographic spread can be formalized in subphases, though their definition
is not required; such variation within a phase may merely be described.
In discussing their idea of phase, Willey and Phillips (1958:22) indicate that
it is an archeological unit having characteristic traits that set it apart from all
other such units, that it occurs within a locality or region, and that it is limited
in time to a relatively brief interval. And in treating the representational nature
of a phase, they say that its equivalent ought to be, and often is, society (p. 49).
Although it is obvious from their statement that phase components can be defined only by isolating archeological materials into associational units, it is
nevertheless difficult to understand why this methodology was not given more
attention by Willey and Phillips. The implications of their discussion in this
direction are perfectly clear, but Willey and Phillips’s failure to illustrate in more
detail the mechanics of phase recognition has brought more than one archeologist to grief.
THE ARCHEOLOGIST’S BANE

The siren who lures the hapless prehistorian onto the Rock of Misinterpretation uses no enticing melody; she merely presents him with site strata rich
in artifacts but obscure in origin. Clutching at the bait, the archeologist will too
often interpret the contents of the individual strata as if they were artifacts of a
single community in primary association, when very often they are not. This
temptation to misinterpret can become a curse, a true bane. So how should we
appraise artifacts discovered together in a single natural stratum lacking features
that connect them into associational lots--a situation common enough in open
middens and rockshelters? Are these tools and debris the remains of a single ethnic community or of several?
Although site strata may very well contain artifacts all made by one community and represent cases of true primary association, such zones can also result from the formation of soil horizons, clay lenses, etc., long after the original
deposition of the human tools. Artifacts and features from different peoples and
periods can come to lie in a single stratum. Then, too, artifacts migrate considerably in some soils through turbation caused by roots, animal burrowing, and
human pit digging. So even strata whose formation and origin are fairly well understood can contain artifacts that have been moved from their original places-particularly in the case of middens used continually (even off and on) over thousands of years. Generally, however, if a thin stratum preserves within it tools
that are stylistically all of a piece, it is more likely than not that they are the residue of one society. If there is much stylistic diversity, then the likelihood is

6

Texas Archeological Society

reduced that the stratum’s artifacts come from a single social group. Nevertheless, only tight associations of tools and fea~res discovered elsewhere usually
can help the archeologist decide (by interpolation) which artifacts in a homogeneous midden zone belong to which specific societies and periods. Lacking
hearths and graves, internal evidence is scarce and hard to read, and the soil itself
is often churned up. To define phases only on the bases of the association of artifacts with such a zone is to court trouble brazenly.
There is also an ethnographic explanation for the mixing together of artifacts from different social/ethnic groups in many sites. In parts of Texas away
from Formative farming communities, restricted or central-based wanderers
ranged over large areas, in some cases practicing seasonal transhumance. For
example, the Tonkawa and allied groups, the Karankawas, the so-called Coahuiltecans, and others were mainly nonhorticultural collectors and hunters without
much stability of settlement. Three patterns appear from their ethnographic
accounts dating to the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries: such
people moved their campsites readily, often traveled hundreds of miles to take
advantage of special food sources, and probably reoccupied old habitation sites.
Furthermore, there are indications that the bands were not strictly territorial and
that several different groups of people moved over some areas in certain seasons.
If the semiwandering habits of local Indians in Spanish colonial days were at
all characteristic of the prehistoric inhabitants of the state, especially during
Archaic times, then there is no support for the assumption that approximately
contemporary artifacts from a site stratum will necessarily be the relics of one
group. "Camp sites and cave sites and other stopping places of more or less transient peoples can conceivably preserve within a very limited space the products
of not a few separate cultural and political entities" (Taylor 1948:141).
But let us return to the penchant for misinterpreting site strata and their contents, although it is nothing new to the archeology of the state. Unfortunately,
the siren has been enticing her victims for many decades, and her handiwork can
be seen in numerous invalid sociocultural units from yesteryear, as well as in
mistaken beliefs about the contemporaneity of units and artifact types. For instance, J. Charles Kelley (1947, 1959) was led to believe that the Pedemales and
Nolan dart point types were of the same age because of their frequent stratigraphic cooccurrence, although he placed them in separate foci Round Rock and
Clear Fork, respectively. In 1959 (p. 282) he affirrned that "the contemporaneous
Round Rock... and Clear Fork... foci extend from very early to very late
times but are replaced locally on the west by the late Uvalde focus." The
evidence of a similar age for Pedernales and Nolan dart point was found
throughout the excavations of the 40-foot and part of the 20-foot terrace of the
Colorado River. As an aside, however, none of Kelley’s foci were defined by
careful study of primary associations in sites; they were merely areal and
temporal patterns in the distribution of artifact forms.
When Thomas C. Kelly (1960) found proof at the Crumley site that Nolan
was an earlier type than Pedernales, as this writer did soon afterwards at the
Wunderlich site (Johnson et al. 1962:15-48), resistance to this new evidence was

Johnson w A Plague of Phases

7

considerable. Some archeologists were strongly convinced of the contemporaneity of the two types because of their previous occurrence in the same
discrete terrace deposits and at the Williams site (Suhm [Story] 1959). Indeed, so
powerful was the prevailing misconception that one of the writers contributing
to the "Conclusions" of the Canyon Reservoir archeological publication spilt
considerable ink waffling about the possible meaning of the separation of the
two dart point types at Crumley and Wunderlich (Johnson et al. 1962:117-124).
Finally, however, she was willing to consider, among other possibilities, the
likelihood "that the materials from the sites analyzed by Kelley were
considerably mixed, in spite of the presence of apparently clear-cut geologic strata at most of the sites" (p. 119).
It was not until the 1970s that sondage (test) excavations were partly abandoned in the state in favor of clearing large living areas where chances were improved for finding artifacts in primary contextual association around hearths and
other activity areas, as recommended by Lewis Binford (1964). In 1971, the
Ram’s Head site of Crockett County (Young 1982) was dug in this fashion, and
in 1973 the Buckhollow site of Kimball County. Both pieces of work were
accomplished by the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation,
following techniques for stripping village and mound sites in North Carolina. It
is now fairly common to see living areas uncovered layer by layer, with the
result that more activity spots and instances of primary association among features and artifacts are being recognized; with them the likelihood increases that
sociocultural units will eventually be defined in much of the state.
The manner in which the Loeve-Fox site (Prewitt 1982) was cleared and a
fairly large area excavated stratum by stratum is an example of the proper manner
of digging sites, finding their features and activity areas, and studying in a
Holmesian fashion their cases of primary association. In the central part of Texas
there is enough evidence, right now, to recognize phases at several different
periods of time. But this has been done in an acceptable, yet minimal, way only
for the Austin and Toyah foci (Jelks 1962; Prewitt 1982), and for the Driftwood,
Twin Sisters, and Round Rock phases (Prewitt 1982). In other attempts to define
phases, sketchy or faulty procedures have been used, or else regional periods or
other units have been defined and mistakenly called phases. Five proposed phase
syntheses will be reviewed.
Weir’s Cultural Patterns
In his doctoral dissertation of 1976, Frank A. Weir presented a new framework within which the Archaic cultures of central Texas could be described in a
dynamic way. His search for intervals of stability and equilibrium, as well as
abrupt change, led Weir to name five uniform intervals that he inaccurately called
phases, borrowing some of their names from J. C. Kelley and earlier researchers:
San Geronimo (6000-2500 B.C.), Clear Fork (3000-2000 B.D.), Round Rock
(2200-600 B.C.), San Marcos (800 B.C.-A.D. 200), and Twin Sisters (A.D. 11300). Seventeen subject archeological sites, whose collections were divided
(using both function and style) into 34 artifact classes and 17 flake categories,

8

Texas Archeological Society

made up the raw material of the study, though the tallies and frequencies were
only occasionally put in the dissertation.
Weir depicts a sequence that begins with numbers of small, scattered human
groups during San Geronimo times, proceeds on to the Round Rock era of coalescense and uniformity, and finally ends in a proliferation of cultures and social
groups in the San Marcos and Twin Sisters phases. Yet Weir’s archeological
units were not proper phases, as he freely admits (1986). First, both the earliest
and latest units separately encompass the residue of several communities of
people who, though they shared some behaviors, may not have been terribly
close ethnic relatives. That can be seen, for example, in the diverse dart point
forms (Uvalde, Gower, Martindale, Early Barbed, etc.) allowed in the San Geronimo unit. Second, the units were not defined by phase-recognizing methods--by
comparing many cases of primary association to build up phase components that
wonld strongly resemble each other. Rather, since Weir’s interests were largely
behavioral, patterns or trends in the site data were discerned by general inspection. Then a numerical summary of each unit was acquired by pooling the artifact counts (by class) for all appropriate sites or parts of sites. This unusual summing of collections was quite clever, since it combined the tool classes from different kinds of specialized sites to produce a single picture of the artifact content
and range of the whole unit. Third, the final units are patterns of uniformity on a
level of conceptualization far above that represented by sociocultural phases.
Additionally, units such as San Geronimo lasted much too long ever to
represent phases. Hence, for all the foregoing reasons, they can best be labeled
cultural patterns, or simply just patterns---San Geronimo pattern, Clear Fork
pattern, and so forth. Each represents a generally uniform trend in behavior illustrated in detail in Weir’s dissertation. (No connection is implied between this
usage of the word pattern and that found in the Midwestern system of taxonomy.) So, simply by replacing the phase label with one more appropriate to the
creator’s actual interests, the scheme could easily be corrected and kept in use.
The reader should also note that some of the cul’tural patterns overlap each other
in age, which seems a reasonable phenomenon, and that they are partly dated by
interpolation using radiocarbon assays from the Lake Amistad area of the Rio
Grande (Weir 1976:Table 1), which may or may not be reasonable. Ten years,
now, after its appearance, Weir’s The Central Texas Archaic could benefit from a
general refurbishing that would incorporate recent discoveries and provide additional proofs of major social trends.
PREWITT’S CHRONOLOGIES: GOOD PHASES AND BAD
In the early 1980s, Elton R. Prewitt published a two-part synthesis for the
prehistory of central Texas, in which 13 phase names appeared. Although he
states that his purpose was to refine the culture history presented earlier by Jelks
(1962) and Weir (1976), Prewitt’s interests also touched upon population density
and prehistoric migrations. Some of his ideas regarding chronology and unit definition had appeared earlier in a manuscript (1976) on the Rogers Spring site,
while a later report (1982) actually identified several phases, component by corn-

Johnson ~ A Plague of Phases

9

ponent, at sites on Granger Lake. The major presentation was in the form of two
papers: Cultural Chronology in Central Texas (1981), which described each of
his phases briefly and gave its age span, and From Circleville to Toyah:
Comments on Central Texas Chronology (1983). This second work listed each
of the 147 radiocarbon assays consulted, revised the basic chronology in small
ways, and discussed ideas about changing demography.
As fascinating as all the studies are, it is felt here that Prewitt’s proposed
sociocultural units fall into two quality classes: a group of minimally defined,
"good" phases (Toyah, Austin, Driftwood, Twin Sisters, and Round Rock)1
(endnote) and, on the opposite shore, all the rest of the named phases (Uvalde,
San Marcos, Marshall Ford, Clear Fork, Oakalla, Jarrell, San Geronimo, and
Circleville), each seriously flawed.
When I say that some of the proposed phases are good, only one thing is
meant: that these units meet the minimal requirements for a phase--a preliminary phase. At least some associations of the primary sort have been described for
them and a number of components recognized. There is no implication that the
phase definitions are in any sense complete, that geographic boundaries have
been set, or that the full archeological content of each phase is known. The definitions of Prewitt’s good phases are quite preliminary, but will surely be added to
as additional associational information is uncovered.
The peculiar dichotomy in the quality of Prewitt’s work on phases is not
easy to understand, though it can be described as follows. When using borrowed
or published information, the treatment he gives phase data can be a bit cavalier.
But when good site data are produced by his own research, Prewitt takes all the
appropriate steps to find primary associations and recognize evidence for separate
human societies in the archeological record. His study at the Loeve-Fox site,
41WM230 (Prewitt 1982:3-229), of the distribution of features and associated
artifacts in the strata characterized by the Toyah, Austin, Driftwood, Twin
Sisters, and Round Rock phases, is a textbook example of how to go about
recognizing and presenting proof for site components, then interpreting them.
Let me cite a few examples from that insightful study.
In strata ld through lg, Austin-phase arrowpoints and marine-shell ornaments were found as grave goods or (in the case of the arrowheads) as weapons
that killed the people buried there. With two basin hearths and a burned-clay pit
were also found three Scallorn and two Granbury arrowpoints. Additionally, the
various features and concentrations of mussel shell were plotted to reveal a site
plan for the Austin phase component that was amenable to interpretation.
Among the sociological inferences and historical interpretations were these. Internecine warfare with other Austin phase people is bespoken by the Austin arrowpoints in several bodies, and various possible causes of intragroup fighting are
explored. Further, the ornaments of conch shell found in graves show that local
people acquired goods by trade or more direct methods from the Gulf of Mexico.
In earlier Driftwood times, however, the absence of marine shell from Loeve-Fox
and the lack of diagnostic Mahomet dart points near the coast can be used to
argue that the Driftwood people of eastern central Texas were an intrusive popu-

10

Texas Archeological Society

lation excluded, for some reason, from the coastal zone of the Gulf of Mexico.
To recapitulate, Prewitt has redefined the previously published Austin and
Toyah phases in a (barely) usable way, and has also presented minimal, yet
acceptable, evidence at Loeve-Fox and elsewhere (Prewitt 1981) that the
Driftwood, Twin Sisters, and Round Rock units are true sociocultural phases of
several components, though their definitions depend heavily on associational evidence from one well-studied site--Loeve-Fox. The other named Archaic phases
have to be considered false entities or else named regional periods that include the
residue of more than one human society, for published associational studies of
their artifacts and features are inadequate or lacking.
Since chronological schemes tend to be quoted often and religiously by
archeologists who never take time to review the underlying data, I think it behooves me to criticize parts of Prewitt’s study, as I have in fact done, and
suggest a few changes before the whole scheme becomes deeply embedded in
archeological folklore. Prewitt is always pleased, I believe, when his ideas stimulate interest and discussion. What I do not believe he would approve, however,
is a mindless apeing of his entire, unfinished system of Holocene phases for
central Texas. Regrettably, the parts of the system that I consider flawed are
being accepted as readily as are the five probably valid phases listed above.
I would like it better if Prewitt had researched his phases one at a time and
published them singly, rather than tossing in the ring an entire but incomplete
post-Ice Age chronology all at once. But, rather than reject the eight phase
names for which good primary associations and proved components are missing,
let us retain them as labels for provisional regional periods whenever possible.
Some, however, may be complete figments incapable of being viewed as time
units. But when feasible, the retained phases will enjoy a respectable existence as
periods through shedding their misleading "phase" labels. It is hoped that innocent bystanders will be forewarned not to judge each "phase" as a body of
information necessarily characterizing a separate society or ethnic group.
To underline the difference between regional periods and phases may seem
like academic nit-picking, but it is not. A regional period may set off the material culture and inferred behaviors of several communities or societies who,
though different, were contemporaneous or nearly so. A phase, on the other
hand, should always represent one society, or a society as it was at a certain
period in time. The definition of each kind of entity involves different processes
and requires somewhat different proofs. For regional periods one only needs evidence of rough contemporaneity or close similarity in age for the included materials, as well as a common geographic range. For phases something else is
wanted--fair evidence for the use of tools, sharing of behaviors, etc., by one
society. The reader who was not woolgathering earlier will remember the discussion of this subject in "The Proper Method of Recognizing Phases," above.
At this juncture I want to plead strongly against considering the eight flawed
phases as preliminary phases whose definitions can be improved later on with
new discoveries. This may indeed be an accurate prediction of what will transpire, but while waiting for the Christopher Columbus of Texas archeology to

Johnson ~ A Plague of Phases

11

emerge, let us not call these things phases or even preliminary phases. Why my
stubborn attitude? After all, Prewitt said that "the full configuration of a phase
need not be defined before that phase is recognized, and the key index markers are
essential for such recognition" (1981:69). Now, a preliminary definition of a
phase may certainly be published but, as said previously, in doing so some data
to prove associations are nonetheless required, though additional associated
materials may eventually be added to the phase’s definition. No associations, no
phases--not even preliminary ones. The reader must be told that such-and-such
phase component is represented, say, by dart types 4 and 7 found in burial lots A
and G, as well as by stone axes or whatever occurring on living surfaces 3 and 2.
Only when this proving is done publicly can the reader review the archeologist’s
actions and conclusions, and judge whether a true phase is involved or not. The
point to be made is that there are no published discussions of associational data
for Prewitt’s bad phases.
A preliminary phase definition may not be given if associations between
items are merely thought or expected to exist. That practice smacks of divination
and requires the reader to accept the archeologist’s intuitions on faith. If Prewitt’s
regional periods are accepted as preliminary, partially constituted phases, we
should all don the diviner’s robe, as has F. F. Schambach (1982) in Arkansas,
who sometimes names phases for regions yet to be properly researched. Phases
are a lot like pregnancies; either you have some acceptable associational information as proof (even if just a little bit) or you do not. It is a yea or nay matter.
Let me move to the argument that most of Prewitt’s bad phases are indeed regional periods. Consulting the trait list for the Circleville phase (Prewitt
1981:77), we find Angostura, Golondrina, Meserve, and Scottsbluff dart points
listed as diagnostics (see also Prewitt 1982:300-312). Given what is known
about the occurrence elsewhere of some of those dart points in pure complexes
such as Cody, it would be incredible to ask us to believe that all of those items
were the residue of one society and worthy of being encompassed within a single
phase. Where are the specific proofs of primary association among the several
dart point types? And after examining the trait list for the San Geronimo
(Prewitt 1981:77-78), Jarrell (p. 78), and San Marcos (pp. 80-81) phases, can the
reader truly sleep well at night secure in the belief that all the dart point types of
each are, together, the residue of single societies? Let us take a lesson from a
similar foul-up, and remember how convinced J. Charles Kelley (1959) once was
that Nolan and Pedernales dart points were of the same age because of their occurrence together in terraces.
I pose these rhetorical questions only to show that, in the case of Circleville, Jarrell, and some other phases, Prewitt is dealing not with sociocultural
units, but rather with historical time periods. There is no other plausible way to
explain the content of several of his phases. This being so, the main problem
with Prewitt’s scheme can be remedied easily, by calling the bad phases something else--regional periods or intervals. Then one can speak of the Jarrell period
in central Texas, the Clear Fork period, and so on should the archeologist deem
time units of relatively short duration helpful in organizing the Archaic. Regret-

12

Texas Archeological Society

tably, these periods are often too short to mirror the kinds of large-scale and longterm social patterns Weir describes with his entities, the ones I suggested calling
cultured patterns. Division has occurred to such a degree among Prewitt’s Archaic
cultures that the forest can no longer be seen for the many named coppices. Anticipatmg one kind of objection to my suggestion, above, let me say that it would
bother me not at all to use a culture-historical sequence made up of mixed phases
and periods, particularly if great accuracy were thereby gained. True phases can
also play the role of periods when one’s heuristic needs call for it.
The evidence Prewitt is very likely using to recognize the bad phases is stratigraphic. Tools that occur in the same zones and strata, or are believed to be of
the same age for other reasons, have been pigeonholed in his named units. And
whereas purely stratigraphic evidence is usually not sufficient for recognizing
phases, it is quite suitable for defining regional periods. But the success of the
units as named periods, after the matter of content is dealt with, will depend on
how well the temporal framework of each is handled. Here, most unfortunately,
we encounter the biggest snarl in Prewitt’s scheme of classification: his age data
often do not apply to the units for which they are claimed to be appropriate. In
many cases, radiocarbon assays said to date one period were in fact run on charcoal associated with the diagnostic dart points of another, or of several together. I
do not know how the problem in organizing his radiocarbon assays for each
phase arose, but it seems that the assays were put in chronological order (see
Prewitt 1983:Figure 1) with almost no regard for the artifacts associated with
each. Exceptions are the assays for the Toyah and Austin phases. Whatever the
cause of the poor correspondence of the phase assays and the phase diagnostics, it
clearly exists and places in doubt the temporal details of Prewitt’s entire central
Texas chronology.
A helpful listing of the artifact associations for all of Prewitt’s radiocarbon
assays has recently been prepared by another researcher (MS by Wayne C.
Young, n.d.), and is scheduled for publication. However, so that the reader of the
present critique will have some age data to get his teeth into, I include in Table 1
my own tabulation of dart-point associations for radiocarbon dates of six
periods/phases: Round Rock through San Geronlmo (though no dates were given
by Prewitt for the last), covering in all some 4,000 years. The sample is adequate to illustrate the serious problems in Prewitt’s assignment of many inappropriate dates to his various units.
Of the 17 assays said to belong to the Round Rock through San Geronimo
phases (Prewitt 1983:Table 1, assays 111 through 127), four (24 percent) are
from strata that have the diagnostic dart points of single units (’out not always
the one specified), seven come from mixed contexts representing two or more of
the named periods, and one comes from a zone whose diagnostic dart points are
incompletely known. Another three are soil assays thought to produce age estimates somewhat too recent for their associated artifacts (which represent several
different periods in any case, though one tends to dominate), one has no associated dart points, and the final assay was made on charcoal believed by the excavator of the site to have been introduced accidentally into the zone where it was

Johnson ~ A Plague of Phases

13

discovered. Inspection of Table 2 will show that, for all the early Archaic phases
and periods for which radiocarbon assays have been listed by Prewitt, only the
age limits of the Round Rock phase can even be estimated from the available
radiocarbon assays. The actual correspondence between the 17 assays and their
supposed phase markers, in contrast to what has been claimed, is miserable.
Table 1. Radiocarbon Assays and Associated Archaic Dart Points
(Pedernales Interval and Earlier)
ROUND ROCK PHASE
(Pedemales dart points)
SITE

ASSAY
No.

SAMPLE
No.

DATE
B.P.

CORRECTED
DATE, B.C.*

Greenhaw site
(Valastro, Davis, &
Righmaire 1968:896)

TX-453
2650-2:80
8505:95
111
28505=90
1100+_95
112
TX-451
TX-465
2900-2100
113
1165+105
41HY29 (Weir 1979:Table 6); three assays of soil containing charcoal
of several periods, possibly including recent charcoal (all pretreated to remove
humic acids); radiocarbon assays probably too recent for associated artifacts; soil
samples from midden F, zones C & D (zone D has much humic activity); C & D
plus zone of contact C/D contained 13 Pedemales, 7 Bulverde, 2 Marshall, 1 type
VII (narrow rectanguloid stem, barbs), 1 Lange; association between samples and
Pedemales points only fair.
Oblate shelter
114
Tx-104
2900-2180
1165+180
(Tamers, Pearson, &
Davis 1964:150)
41CM1
(TurmeU 1962:Table 3); lower zone 2 contained 1 Angostura,
1 Bulverde, 26 Ensor, 2 Fairland, 10 Frio, 1 Marshall, 5 Montell, 1 Pedemales;
dart points are diagnostic mainly of periods later than Round Rock.
Anthon site
115"*
Tx-2381
3~60
1295+70
31205:70
1450+_90
116"*
Tx-2385
(Valastro, Davis, &
Varela 1977)
41UV60 (Glenn T. Goode 1986); site analysis and
dating
incomplete;
assays are from lower early midden with ca. 20 Pedemales points, ca. 25 Kinney
points, and 3 points with small rectangular sterns plus long barbs (basal notches);
association of dated charcoal and Pedemales points is apparently excellent;
Pedemales and some Kinney points made by the same social group.
1585+_95
Hawes site
117
UGa-2480
3225+75
41WM56 (Hays 1982, vol.l:Table 7.1-1, Table 8.2-1; vol.2:14-27); area C,
level 5 contained 1 Darl, 1 Marcos, 1 Castroville, 2 Marshall, 4 Pedemales, 5
Bulverde, 2 Nolan, 1 Travis, and 1 group 4 (rect. stem); assayed charcoal
associated with dart points typical of several periods.

14

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1, continued
SITE

ASSAY
No.

SAMPLE
No.

DATE
B.P.

CORRECTED
DATE, B.C.*

1905+165
3470&160
Tx-1720
118
Horn shelter No. 2
(Valastro, Davis, &
Varela 1979:263)
41BQ46 (Watt 1978:122-123). Site analysis continuing; assayed charcoal
from S. half of shelter, square 52, depth 102-114 inches "in red alluvial sands that
also contained fishhooks and Pedemales points" (Watt 1978:122); other
associated dart-point types not identified, and dart point referents of assay
incompletely known.
MARSHALL FORD PERIOD
(Bulverde dart points)
1970-!--145
3520&60
119"* Tx-2442
Anthon site
(Acceptable for
(Valastro, Davis, and
Round Rock phase)
Varela 1977:306)
41UV60 (Glenn T.Goode 1986); site analysis and dating incomplete; this
assay is on charcoal from lower early midden with ca. 20 Pedemales points and 25
Kinney points from the zone, and three points with rectangular stems and basal
notches a bit like the Marshall type; no Bulverde points from the site; association
of dated charcoal and Pedernales points is apparently excellent; Pedemales and
some Kinney specimens made by one social group.
2095+145
Hawes site
120
UGa-2485
3615+60
41WM56 (Hays 1982 vol. 1: Table 7.1-1, Table 8.2-1, 8-36; vol. 2: 14-21,
14-27, 14-33); area C, level 7 contained 1 Pedemales, 2 Bulverde, 1 Buda, 1 group
2 (Travis-like), 1 group 4 (rect. stem), 1 group 5 (Buda-like), 1 group 7 (long,
rect. stem), 3 group 14 (rect. stem); assessment: points have rectanguloid stems,
related to Nolan-Travis or Bulverde time period.
CLEAR FORK PERIOD
(Nolan, Travis dart points)
Hawes site
121"* UGa-2473
37505:90
2275+130
41WM56 (Hays 1982, vol.l: Table 7.1-1, Table 8.2-1, 8-36, 8-41; vol. 2:1427, 14-33); feature 14b (hearth); area C, level 8 contained 2 Bulverde, 4 Nolan, 2
group 7 (long, rect. stem), 2 group 14 (rect. stem); assayed charcoal appears to
come from Nolan and Travis zone (level 8). However, zones 9 and 10 (below)
together produced 2 Pedernales, 2 Nolan, 2 Travis, 1 Martindale, 1 group 2 (Travislike), and 1 group 3 points.
4150&140
2790&-_175
122 Tx-2958
Bear Creek shelter
(Valastro, Davis, &
Varela 1979:268)
41HI17 (Lynott 1978, 1985); assay made from intrusive piece of charcoal;
Lynott agrees with present evaluation that charcoal does not date stratum in which
it was found.

Johnson --A Plague of Phases

15

Table 1, continued
SITE

ASSAY
No.

SAMPLE
No.

DATE
B.P.

CORRECTED
DATE, B.C.*

Cervenka site
123
RI-1087
4280-2-_240
2960+270
41WM267 (Hays 1982, vol. l:Table 7.1-1, Table 8.10-1; vol. 2:14-13, 1421, 2:14-13, 14-21, 14-27); feature 9 (hearth); area D, level 63/64; various
references in Hays do not agree as to number and type of points from level, which
at least contained 1 Bulverde, 1 Travis, 1 Dawson, 1 group 2 (Travis-like), 1
group 4 (rect. stem), and 1 group 7 (long, rect. stem); main association is with
Btdverde and Nolan-Travis periods (mixed). Hoxie and Uvalde points were found
below this level.
Cervenka site
124
RI-1086
4330-2420
3020&-_440
41WM267 (Hays 1982, vol. 1:Table 7.1-1, Table 8.10-1; vol. 2:14-13, 1421, 14-33); area D, level 69/70 contained 1 Uvalde dart point, 1 Hoxie, 1 group 1
(Nolan-like), 1 group 9 (lanceolate), 1 group 10 (Nolan-like?); main association is
with rectangular-stem and early Archaic points, mixed.
Below foregoing points
associated with assayed charcoal were 1 Travis, 1 Uvalde, 2 Wells, 2 Tortugas, 1
early expanding-stem point at several different elevations.
Evoe Terrace site

125

Tx-339

44301-_240

3145+_270

(Valastro, Pearson, &
Davis 1967:447)
41BL104 (Sorrow, Shafer, and Ross 1967:45-148); area B,

zone 7

produced

8 Bulverde and similar points with narrow and rectangular stems, 2 Travis, 5
points (groups 6, 7, 10, 12; Kent- or Yarbrough-like) with small rectangular
stems, 1 group 13 point (short expanding stem), 1 misc. point (contracting stem),
and 1 group 3 point (unidentifiable fragment); assayed charcoal associated with
artifacts of several periods mixed together.

JARRELL PERIOD
Calf Creek [Bell-Andice], Martindale, Uvalde
Tx-3684
4970-~90
Cervenka site
126
41WM267
(Hays 1982, vol. l:Table 7.1-1, Table
8.10-1);
(hearth), area D, level 117/118, large hearth with borer and graver in
feature 19, at level 103/104, was 1 Tortugas; at level 85/86, 2 Wells,
below feature 19, at level 131, was 1 expanding-stem point.

37905:140
feature 19
flU. Above
1 Tortugas;

41WM73
127
UGa-2482 5285+726
4140-2_736
(Hays 1982, vol. 1:Table 7.1-1, Table 8.4-1;
vol. 2:14-21);
charcoal from
level 19 of area B contained 1 Bulverde-like, 1 Nolan, 1 group 2 (Travis-like)
[level !8, above the assayed charcoal, contained 1 Bulverde and 1 Nolan; level 17
(above 18) yielded 4 Pedernales, 2 Bulverde, 1 group 7 (long, rect. stem), 1
unidentified]; assayed charcoal was in mixed Bulverde-Nolan zone.

16

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1, continued
SAN GERONIMO PERIOD
(Gower, Hoxie, Wells)
No assays listed
* Corrected years B.C., Arizona calibration of 1974 (Damon et al. 1974).
** Assay acceptable for periodization
Notes: Attributed phases/periods according to Prewitt 1983, Table 1

Table 2. Listing by Age of Seven Radiocarbon Assays
Known to Associate with Diagnostic Dart Points of One or Two
Periods (Mixed): San Geronimo to Round Rock Intervals.
Age in Corrected

Associated

Radiocarbon
Years B.C.*

Dart Points

Assay No.
~ewitt 1983)

Diagnostic
Interval

115, Tx-2381

1295+70

Pedernales

Round Rock

116, Tx-2385

1450-&_90

Pedemales

Round Rock

119, Tx-2442

1970£-_145

Pedernales

Round Rock

120, UGa-2485

2095+145

Nolan-Travis/
Bulverde mixed

Clear Fork/
Marshall Ford

121, UGa-2473

2275+130

Nolan-Travis

Clear Fork

123, RI-1087

2960+_.270

Nolan-Travisi
Bulverde mixed

Clear Fork/
Marshall Ford

127, UGa-2482

4140-&736

Nolan/Bulverde
mixed

Clear Fork/
Marshall Ford

*Corrected years

B.C.,

Arizona calibration of 1974

(Damon et al. 1974).

From inspecting Young’s manuscript on assays and associated dart points, I am
convinced that both major and minor adjustments will need to be made to all the
time spans set for the phases by Prewitt, and in some instances beginning and
ending dates will not be known. Consequently it is premature to estimate relative population densities for each phase by calculating a ratio of phase component occurrences to the duration of a phase in years (Prewitt 1983:216). Once
age ranges can be recalculated for some of the phases and periods, particularly the
more recent units, it may be possible to compare certain pairs by their estimated
population densities, but it will be decades, I predict, before firm age estimates
are available for the entire sequence of Archaic phases. Meanwhile, it is also too
early to try correlating phase length and the length of major climatic intervals
caused by precession and volcanism as in Gunn and Prewitt (n.d.).

Johnson m A Plague of Phases

17

As an aside, I need to add that if my recommendations are followed about
calling Wier’s phases cultural patterns and some of Prewitt’s periods, an overlap
of proper nouns will result, as in Clear Fork pattern vs. Clear Fork period. If
this transpires, one of the entities will need to be given a substitute name. That
bridge can be crossed when the water rises, although Weir’s names will take precedence because of their earlier use.
PHASES IN THE DESERT

Two first-rate publications have appeared of late that add to an understanding
of burial practices and Ice Age bone deposits in the Lower Pecos River region. I
refer to Seminole Sink: Excavation of a Vertical Shaft Tomb, Val Verde County, Texas (1985), written and compiled by Solveig A. Turpin; and Excavation
of the Late Pleistocene Deposits of Bonfire Shelter, 41VV218, Val Verde County, Texas, 1983-1984 (1986), by Leland C. Bement. To provide some historical
perspective for their readers, both workers describe and reference an unpublished
series of phases for the desert attributed to David S. Dibble, well known for his
studies of the nearby Arenosa and Bonfire shelters. Dibble (1978, n.d.) offered a
long series of phase names as follows: Aurora, Bonfire, Oriente, Viejo, Eagle
Nest, San Felipe, Cibola, Flanders, Blue Hills, Flecha, and Infierno---extending
from the end of the Ice Age to about A.D. 1725 (Turpin 1985:6-11). As things
now stand, associational and distributional information has been presented only
in part for the possibly Apachean Infierno phase (Dibble 1978), which should
perhaps be considered a valid sociocultural unit.
Some of the remaining phases also may be shown eventually to represent
proper units that stand for the residue and reconstructed behaviors of single societies, but for most, this hope is dim. They have far too many diagnostic artifact
styles. The Bonfire phase, for instance, includes both Folsom and Plainview dart
points which are known to belong to separate complexes elsewhere. I also find it
hard to believe that the Gower, Martindale, Uvalde, and Early Barbed dart points
of the Viejo unit will turn out all to be the remains of one society. Then, again,
the Perdiz and Livermore arrowpoints of the Flecha unit may be shown to belong to separate sociocultural units.
The remedy for the taxonomic problem can be the same suggested for
Prewitt’s taxonomy: for the time being, consider each of the so-called phases
regional periods or subperiods, but continue the same proper nouns. Hence Bonfire period, Eagle Nest period, Cibola period, etc. To harangue further on the
Lower Pecos taxonomy would be beating a dead horse, since Turpin has already
made the recommended shift in unit labels in a new synthesis she is composing
on the Lower Pecos region.
STRANGE PHASES ON THE SABINE RIVER

In 1981, J. E. Bruseth and T. K. Perttula published their Prehistoric
Settlement Patterns at Lake Fork Reservoir, which reports a wealth of ceramic
sites and artifact styles on the Sabine River. But in organizing the new information, the term phase was used in several different ways. First, there are some

18

Texas Archeological Society

lithic phases and ceramic phases that I take to be slightly different local styles
and patterns, each with a given span of years (Bruseth and Perttula 1981:87-96,
102-104). Finally, four cultural phases are named in the concluding section (pp.
139-143): Archaic (6000B.C.-A.D.1), Lone Oak (A.D. 1-850), Pecan Grove
(A.D. 850-1350), and Forest Hill (A.D. 1350-1650)--although an Archaic phase
of six millennia is a patent absurdity. Although the contents of the post-Archaic
cultural phases are described in some detail, associational evidence is not recapitulated for the reader’s benefit. However, settlement patterning, economic data,
age information, and stylistic modes are discussed. The trouble is, there is a hierarchy of phases here that is hard to keep straight. The lithic and ceramic phases
are each labeled I through III, but the ceramic units, especially, become part of
the local cultural phases that themselves somehow interdigitate with existing
large-scale phases (foci) such as Sanders and Titus. Perttula, however, is firmly
convinced that at least the localized Forest Hill phase (I would call it a subphase)
will be an important construct for understanding regional ethnic clustering along
streams and valleys ~erttula 1986), and one should lend an ear when such hopes
are expressed.
As useful as some of these cultural and temporal distinctions may eventually be, a great deal of associational information (as well as age data and distributional information) will have to be collected before the Lake Fork cultural phases
can be considered valid. Furthermore, it is very confusing to have such different
kinds of phenomena lithic, ceramic, cultural, etc.--all parading under the same
banner labeled phase. To remedy the problem, I hope Bruseth and Perttula will
assign easily separable labels such as facies, subphases, or subpatterns to their
small-scale phases, and free the phase label for sociocultural entities that represent the remains of major prehistoric ethnic groups. I suspect Bruseth and Perttula have already reached a similar point of view with no prompting from me.
FOCI, CLUSTERS, PHASES, AND SUBCLUSTERS
ON CYPRESS BAYOU
The most fascinating use of sociocultural units in recent years is J. Peter
Thurmond’s study (1981, 1983) of Caddoan pottery and arrowheads and their geographical clustering along Cypress Bayou and its tributaries. Using associated
batches of earthenware vessels from grave lots and potsherds from village middens, Thurmond was able to divide the old Titus focus into two phases of different ages, an earlier Whelan phase and later Titus phase, while lumping both in
the Cypress cluster. What is even more important, to me, is the recognition of
four subclusters during Titus phase times that are spatial groups of components
probably representing tribes or subtribes united at a higher level into a confederacy like those known historically on the Red River and among the Hasinai.
There are even suggestions in the preceding Whelan phase of the four geographic
groups, though those patterns may merely reflect a survey bias (Thurmond
1983:198).
In most respects, the study on Cypress Bayou imitates another useful reanalysis in the Piney Woods, this by Dee Ann Story and Darrell G. Creel (1982:30-

Johnson m A Plague of Phases

19

34). In the Hasinai area an Anderson cluster was recommended that contained the
earlier Frankston phase and later Allen phase, though there it was doubted that
"archeologists can ever command enough well-controlled data to make identification at [the subcluster] level practical" (Story and Creel 1982:33-34).
Turning to the smallest Cypress Bayou groupings, the Three Basins, Tankersley Creek, Swauano Creek, and Big Cypress Creek subclusters have slightly
different design motifs, or motif combinations, in shared pottery types, as well
as different proportions of various arrowpoint styles (Thurmond 1983:193-194).
These findings are important for people who have been following the debates
among ethnoarcheologists concerning the existence of ethnic and social-group
stylistic markers among aboriginal people (e.g., Wiessner 1985, Sackett 1985,
Lemonnier 1986). Behold, here is a case where both small- and large-scale group
marking can be discerned and used by the archeologist for ethnic-group identification-though with the aid, certainly, of a model of social relations dependent
on known historic social patterns among speakers of Southern Caddoan. A fascinating and useful contribution of Thurmond’s is that small-group ethnic marking
among his people is more a matter of differences in local combinations or proportions of styles, rather than in the simple presence of styles among one cluster
and their absence from others. Ethnoarcheologists will want to cast an eye on
these significant findings, which will probably fit Sackett’s (1982) model for ethnic styles (isochrestic variations) better than others.
Finally, I suggest a simple improvement in the system of labels Thurmond
used, stating at the outset that this is a minor point that in no way affects his
conclusions. I recommend organizing the Cypress Bayou Caddoan components
as follows:

Titus phase (Johnson)

Cypress cluster (Thurmond)

subphase I ~itus I)

Whelan phase

subphase II ~itus II)
(4 named clusters)

VS.

Titus phase
(4 named subclusters)

The advantages are two. First, the altered system is more economical in
terms of the number of proper nouns used--two usages of the term Titus take
the places of the names Cypress, Whelan, and Titus. Though a minor matter, the
fewer the number of names employed, the easier the learning and memorization
of the labels. Second, the term phase continues to be used the way it has
generally been applied (as phase or focus) elsewhere in the state, where the term
tends to correspond to fairly major ethnic or social entities. Further, by speaking
of a large-scale Titus phase divided into subphases, the terminology automatically expresses the continuity from earlier to later times. However, "That which we
call a phase, by any other name would smell as sweet"--at least almost as
sweet.

20

Texas Archeological Society

LOOKING FORWARD
The thread I have tried to trace in the foregoing lines is quite simple. Of interest to me are phases of the kind that can reflect entire hunting-gathering or
simple agricultural societies like those known from colonial days in Texas and
adjacent areas. I realize that phase can mean something different from this when
used by Mesoamerican scholars or Harvard archeologists, but those people have
their own interests that need not mesh with mine. However, the sort of phase
useful for effectively recognizing and organizing the residue and inferred behaviors of simple societies has to be treated in a special way. Phase limits in terms
of geographic range, time span, and content need to be fairly broad and variable.
If the archeologist finds it helpful also to define very small scale units in this
part of the world, then let him call them subphases (sociocultural patterns limited, say, to one river valley or range of hills, or to a brief period) instead of
phases.
What is most crucial is to define phases carefully and describe the evidence
for them to the reading audience. In doing this, the archeologist should imagine
he is truly a detective examining and interpreting all site clues that point to
primary associations among tools and features. When, in his study of the
evidence, he can prove to his readers the existence of similar components from
several sites that could be the product of a single people, at that point he has defined a new phase.
Within the last decade a plague of phases has been broadcast by the state’s
archeologists, showing--at least--that there is no little enthusiasm for doing
sociocultural integration in local archeology. But I recall the old adage, "act in
haste, repent at leisure," since many of the phase definitions will not hold as
much water as one would like. At the same time, the future of phases seems safe
and assured, since it is possible to remedy past faults and look for clues that will
reveal social units in the surviving debris and garbage of archeological sites. And
in looking for this evidence for primitive communities, it will help to recall that
we are mainly building taxonomies--social taxonomies, at that. For too long, a
series of phases has been looked upon as a chronological scheme. But the taxa
should be our main interest, even if they are floating around freely in time with
no anchors, since they are all that remains of the societies we claim to be interested in. Dating them is secondary to finding them in the first place. So I
hope the trend of the future will be toward more detailed, but flexible, taxonomies. It is at the point where we have (re)created phases that truly interesting,
large-scale comparative studies of prehistoric societies begin. As for small-scale
studies of economics, religious behavior, and so forth, they can be done with no
phases at all.
In leavetaking, let me say that the question of new phases and their worth is
merely one part of a larger matter--the criticism of archeological units in
general, of all kinds. The creation of named complexes, the application of preexisting Mexican phase names in southernmost Texas, and related actions all
want critiquing, though my purpose here has been to concentrate only upon
recently defined phases.

Johnson ~ A Plague of Phases

21

Endnote
1 To review all the evidence for each of Prewitt’s five good phases, the ones I
have judged minimally adequate, is a chore too large for the present paper, given
its restricted theme. Each serious archeologist working in the central part of the
state will, in any case, want to conduct his own review, perhaps producing judgments somewhat different from mine. In recommending that the Driftwood, Twin
Sisters, and Round Rock phases should be accepted, I rely very much on associational data from the Loeve-Fox site (Prewitt 1982). But the case of the Austin and
Toyah phases is somewhat different, since they were originally defined long
before the era of phase definition (which began in 1976) now being considered.
However, since Prewitt added to their definitions, especially by describing
associations at Loeve-Fox, these two phases warrant a short discussion.
As defined, the Toyah phase or focus (Jelks 1962; Prewitt 1981) is too broad
a unit, since traits are included in it for which primary associations have not been
discussed in print. Nevertheless, the material from stratum 5 of the Kyle site
(41HL1) is extremely consistent and may represent the residue of a social group
recognizable at other sites. At the Loeve-Fox site there is also some new evidence
for a separate Toyah component (Prewitt 1982). The described components occur
in a tight area near the eastern margin of the Edwards Plateau, as well as in
immediately adjacent areas. The Austin phase or focus suffers from all the
weaknesses of the Toyah, but has one well-defined component with examples of
primary associations at the Loeve-Fox site (Prewitt 1982). The major published
sites are found in the eastern half of the Edwards Plateau and some distance into
the prairies to the east (Jelks 1962; Prewitt 1981). Rather than citing the published trait lists, anyone wishing to make use of the Austin and Toyah phases, or
refer to them in print, needs to review very carefully the instances of good
association among the artifact forms of each. This advice applies, as well, when
using any of Prewitt’s Archaic phases.

REFERENCES CITED
Bement, Leland C.
1986 Excavation of the late Pleistocene deposits of Bonfire Shelter, Val Verde
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas at
Austin, Archeology Series 1.
Binford, Lewis R.
1964 A consideration of archaeological reserach design. American Antiquity
29(4):425-441.
Bruseth, James E., and Timothy K. Perttula
1981 Prehistoric settlement patterns at Lake Fork reservoir. Southern
Methodist University and Texas Antiquities Committee, Texas
Antiquities Permit Series, Report No. 2.
Childe, V. Gordon
1950 Prehistoric migrations in Europe. Institutet for Sammenlignende
Kulturforskning, Ser. A. Forelesninger 20(5). Oslo.

Texas Archeological Society

22

Damon, P. E., C. W. Ferguson, A. Long, and E. I. Wallick
1974 Dendrochronological callibration of the radiocarbon time scale.
American Antiquity 39(2):350-366.
Dibble, Davis S.
n.d.
Arenosa Shelter: the descriptive archeology. Report in preparation
(MS) for the U.S. National Park Service, Rocky Mountain Region.
Files of David S. Dibble, Austin.
1978

The Infierno phase: evidence for a late occupation in the lower Pecos
River region, Texas. Paper presented at the 43rd annual meeting of the
Society for American Archaeology at Tucson, Arizona.

Goode, Glenn T.
1986 Personal communication.
Gould, Richard A.
1980 Living archaeology. New Studies in Archaeology, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Gunn, Joel, and Elton R. Prewitt
n.d.
Theory of culture change on broad ecotones. Manuscript on file at
Prewitt and Associates, Austin.
Hays, Thomas R. (editor)
1982 Archaeological investigations at the San Gabriel reservoir districts,
central Texas. 4 vols. Report to U.S. Army Corp of Engineers, Fort
Worth District, by Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State
University, Denton.
Jelks, Edward B.
1961 Excavations at Texarkana reservoir, Sulphur River, Texas. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 179.
1962

The Kyle site: a stratified Central Texas aspect site in Hill County,
Texas. Department of Anthropology, University of Texas (at Austin),
Archaeology Series, No. 5.

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1967 Toward a statistical overview of the Archaic cultures of central and
Southwestern Texas. Texas Memorial Museum, University of Texas at
Austin, Bulletin 12.

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm (Story), and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962 Salvage archeology of Canyon reservoir: the Wunderlich, Footbridge,
and Oblate sites. Texas Memorial Museum, University of Texas (at
Austin), Bulletin 5.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947 The cultural affiliations and chronological position of the Clear Fork
focus. American Antiquity 13(3):97-108.

Johnson m A Plague of Phases
1959

The Desert cultures and the Balcones phase: Archaic manifestations in
the Southwest and Texas. American Antiquity 24(3):276-288.

Kelly, Thomas C.
1960 The Crumley site: a stratified burnt rock midden, Travis County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 31:239-272 (printed
1961).
Lemonnier, Pierre
1986 The study of material culture today: toward an anthropology of technical
systems. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 5(2):147-186.
Lynott, Mark J.
1978 An archaeological assessment of the Bear Creek Shelter, Lake Whitney,
Texas. Archaeological Research Program, Southern Methodist University,
Research Report No. 115. Dallas.
1985

Personal communication.

McKern, W. C.
1939 The Midwestem taxonomic method as an aid to archaeological culture
study. American Antiquity 4(4):301-313.
Perttula, Timothy K.
1986 Personal communication.
Perttula, Timothy K., Bob D. Skiles, Michael B. Collins, Margaret C. Trachte,
and Fred Valdez, Jr.
1986 ’This everlasting sand bed": cultural resources investigations at the
Texas Big Sandy project, Wood Upshur counties, Texas, Prewitt and
Associates, Austin, Report of Investigations No. 52.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1976 The Rogers Spring site: 1974 investigations (MS). Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Research Report No. 49.
1981

Cultural chronology in central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:65-89.

1982

Archeological investigations at the Loeve-Fox, Loeve, and Tombstone
Bluff sites in the Granger Lake district of Central Texas. Vol. 4 of
Archeological investigations of the San Gabriel reservoir district,
central Texas, edited by Thomas R. Hays. Report to U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, Fort Worth District, by the Institute of Applied Sciences,
North Texas State University, Denton.

1983

From Circleville to Toyah, comments on central Texas chronology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238. (printed
1985).

23

24

Texas Archeological Society

Sackett, James R.
1982 Approaches to style in lithic archaeology. Journal of Anthropological
Archaeology 1:59-112.
1985

Style and ethnicity in the Kalahari: a reply to Wiessner. American
Antiquity 50(1):154-159.

Schambach, Frank F.
1982 An outline of Fourche Maline culture in southwest Arkansas. In Arkansas
archeology in review, edited by Neal L. Trubowitz and Marvin D. Jeter,
pp. 132-197. Arkansas Archeologica! Survey, Research Series,15.
Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow reservoir. University of Texas at
Austin, Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, 11.
Story, Dee Ann, and Darrell Creel
1982 The cultural setting. In The Deshazo site, Nacogdoches County, Texas,
edited by Dee Ann Story, vol. 1, pp. 20-34. Texas Antiquities Committee
and Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin, Texas Antiquities
Permit Series, Report No. 7.
Suhm (Story), Dee Ann
1959 The Williams site and Central Texas archeology. Texas Journal of
Science 11(2):218-250.
Tamers, M. A., F. J. Pearson, Jr., and E. Mott Davis
1964 University of Texas radiocarbon dates II. Radiocarbon 6:138-159.
Taylor, Walter W.
1948 A study of archaeology. Memoir 69, American Anthropological
Association.
Thurmond, J. Peter
1981 Archeology of the Cypress Creek drainage basin, northeastern Texas and
northwestern Louisiana. M.A. thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
1983

Late Caddoan social group identification and sociopolitical organization
in the upper Cypress basin and vicinity, northeastern Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 54:185-200 (printed 1985).

Tunnell, Curtis D.
1962 Oblate: a rockshelter site. In Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir:
the Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate sites, by LeRoy Johnson, Jr.,
Dee Ann Suhm (Story), and Curtis D. Tunnell, pp. 77-116. Texas
Memorial Museum, University of Texas (at Austin), Bulletin 4.
Turpin, Solveig A.
1985 Seminole Sink: excavation of vertical shaft tomb, Vale Verde County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas at Austin,
Research Report No. 93.

Johnson ~ A Plague of Phases
Valastro, S., Jr., E. Mott Davis, and Craig T. Rightmire
1968 University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates VI. Radiocarbon
10(2):384-401.
Valastro, S., Jr., E. Mott Davis, and Alejandra C. Varela
1977 University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates XI. Radiocarbon
19(2):280-325.
1979

University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates XIII. Radiocarbon"
21(2):257-273.

Valastro, S., Jr., F. J. Pearson, Jr., and E. Mott Davis
1967 University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates V. Radiocarbon 9:439453.
Watt, Frank H.
1978 Radiocarbon chronology of sites in the central Brazos valley. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 49:111-138.
Weir, Frank A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, Department
of Anthropology, Washington State University, Pullman.
1979

Greenhaw: an Archaic site in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 50:5-67.

1986

Personal communication.

Wiessner, Polly
1983 Style and social information in Kalahari San projectile points. American
Antiquity 48(2):253-276.
1984
1985

¯

Reconsidering the behavioral basis for style: a case study among the
Kalahari San. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 3(3):190-234.
Style or isochrestic variation? A reply to Sackett. American Antiquity
50(1):160-166.

Willey, Gordon R., and Philip Phillips
1958 Method and Theory in American archaeology University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Young, Wayne C.
1982 Excavations at the Ram’s Head site, 41PC35, Pecos County, Texas.
State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Publications
in Archaeology, Report No. 23.
n.d.

Manuscript containing radiocarbon assays from Prewitt 1983: Table 1,
with counts of associated dart and arrow points. Files of Wayne C. Young
and State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

25

Texas Archeological Society
Manuscript containing radiocarbon assays from Prewitt 1983: Table 1,
with counts of associated dart and arrow points. Files of Wayne C.
Young and State Department of Highways and Public Transportation,
Austin.

