289

The Foreshaft Socket Drill
Roy E. Padgett

ABSTRACT
A broad group of Archaic and Late Prehistoric lithic a_~facts are commonly
categorized as drills. Some of these can be distinguished as a separate class that
probably functioned as socket drills used to drill out atlatl and arrow foreshaft
sockets. There is very little discussion in the literature as to why these types of drills
were crafted or how they were used. An attempt is made here to define this class
of artifact and to put these drills in their proper perspective. Also included is a
discussion of the use and advantage of the foreshaft.

INTRODUCTION

All of the shafted weapons used by prehistoric Indians--the spear, lance,
aflafl dart, arrow, and harpoon--could have had foreshafts. In most of the discussion that follows, the aflatl is used as the prime example, but the conclusions
apply as well to other foreshafted implements.
Such foreshafts are not limited to any time bracket in the contiguous United
States, since they can date from the time of Early Man until the last arrow flew
in the Indian wars. Also, the foreshaft has no geographic limitation, since its use
ranged from coast to coast at a time when there were no Mexican or Canadian
borders. Flint artifacts that I suggest are socket drills used to prepare foreshaft
sockets have been recovered from sites dating to the Paleoindian (Blaine et al.
1968), Archaic (Forrester 1964), Neo-American (Richards 1971), Late Prehistoric (Wyckoff 1973), and Historic (Schneider 1969) periods. The first documented historic contact of Europeans with Indians using foreshafted atlatls in
the United States was in the Cabeza de Vaca saga in 1528. The last recorded
account of atlatl use by Indians was from the DeSoto expedition in 1541. It seems
that the bow and arrow had completely replaced the atlatl by the time the first
European colonist arrived (Krieger 1956).
THE FORESHAFT

Almost everyone in this field of study concedes that many of the shafted
weapons were fitted with foreshafts, that on wooden shafts the foreshafts were
tapered down nearly to points on the proximal ends (Figure 1, A), and that the
main shafts had cone-shaped sockets drilled into their distal ends to accept that
pointed foreshaft (Figure 2, A, B).

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 61 (1990)

290

Texas Archeological Society

A

B

C

Figure 1. Photographs of replica foreshaft (A), and typical foreshaft socket drills (B and C).

Note that this system would work just as well if it were reversed by drilling the
socket in the proximal end of the foreshaft, but the problem here is that the foreshafts
were considered expendable whereas there was hope that the main shafts would be
reusable. Socketed foreshafts would involve drilling each one produced.
The main shaft, at this juncture, would be tightly wrapped with fresh sinew,
which, on drying, would shrink and harden, becoming nearly as strong as a metal
ferrule. This would prevent splitting, either while drilling or upon later impact.

Padgett ~ The Foreshaft Socket Drill

291

B

0

I

o

!

1

I

5

CENTIMETERS

2 INCHES

Figure 2. Replica foreshaft (A) fitted into main shaft socket 03).

The foreshaft could be easily whittled or scraped to proper taper by trial and
error and made to fit the socket as snugly as desired (Figure 1, A). Of prime
importance to this arrangement Js the fact that the main shaft of an atlatl dart
was much more valuable to the user than the throwing stick, the foreshaft, or
the projectile point.
If you would test this, try to find a perfectly straight sapling or tree limb
without flaws that could be made into a first-rate main shaft. Or better yet, cut

292

Texas Archeological Society

down a tree with stone tools and from that log split out a section that could be
dressed down into a good shaft.
Conifers grow straight and tall, but in the sapling stage they have many small
branches that fall away, leaving knots in the mature trees. Other trees tend to
grow gnarly or bushy, and limbs are seldom straight for the 1.5 to 2.5 meters (5
to 8 feet) needed for a good atlatl shaft. In areas where good wood material was
scarce or absent, cane shafts were used.
The assumption that most atlatl darts did not use foreshafts would most likely
be true in areas where choices in shaft material were easily available. And not
all dart shafts were necessarily retched. A shaft that has a center of gravity twothirds to three-fourths of the way down from the proximal end will fly nearly as
true as if it were retched (Evans 1959).
The development and use of the foreshaft was prompted by the following
needs and reasons.
1. Main shafts were highly valued some were so prized that they were even
decorated (Schuetz 1960).
2. The advantages of the fall-away foreshaft.
3. Interchangeability of points from large to small or even to the bunt (Barnett
1973).
4. Easy replacement of a damaged foreshaft.
5. Hafting of points to hollow cane main shafts (Schuetz 1960).
The foreshafts of wooden main shafts without a fall-away foreshaft could
be cemented into the socket for a more or less hard, firm joint or later loosened
by soaking or by using a little force. The cement could be the same as that used
to haft the dart point or other hafted tools.
Mentioned in many reports are mastic materials such as tar, pitch, asphaltum,
gum, resin, or even blood. It would not be surprising to find that the Indians had
developed the procedure for reducing the hooves of ungulates to a glue that would
equal the best that Stradivarius used on his violins.
Cane main shafts present an entirely different approach. Hafting a stone point
to the hollow part of cane almost required the use of a foreshaft. Two principal
methods were devised: one was to cut the cane off square, leaving 40 to 50 mm
(1.5 to 2 inches) of the hollow part beyond the last segment. This hollow cylinder was tightly wrapped with sinew or fiber to prevent splitting, and the proximal end of the foreshaft was carved into a round dowel that would fit snugly
inside the hollow cane tube. A shoulder could have been left on the foreshaft,
which would fit hard against the end of the cane and would transmit the force
of impact to the main shaft. This assembly, called the mortise and tenon method
(Schuetz 1960), could be cemented to a firm connection.
The other approach is the Plug method. Here, each end of the cane main shaft
would have been filled with a tightly fitted and glued-in wooden plug. Both ends
would be tightly reinforced externally with sinew or fiber to prevent splitting. The

Padgett m The Foreshaft Socket Drill

293

proximal end would be notched or hollowed to fit the hook of the atlatl. The distal
end could be drilled to a cone-shaped socket to fit the proximal end of a tapered,
glued-in or fall-away foreshaft (Schuetz 1960).
A great many site reports have been published in which the authors made
noble efforts to describe or classify flint artifacts that are roughly grouped as
drills. I stand on the shoulders of giants who have dug deeper and come up wiser,
and, dodging Controversy, I abstain here from naming references as I list some
of the good and some not so good descriptions of perforators.
The distal end is properly called the bit. It has been termed the stem, pointed
end, shaft, blade, or shank. Cross sections of bits have been called oval, diamond, elliptical, beveled, propeller, or nothing at all. The proximal end is properly called the base, and here the wildest forms and shapes can be found and so
too can a great many good descriptions. Base ends have been described as square,
rounded, worked, unworked, eared, notched, T-shaped, reworked projectile point
base, flake, etc. Some have tried to group a few of those that are nearly alike
into types: Type I, Type II, Type III, etc.
We need all of those good descriptions, but we should not blindly put form
over function. If we are to study the artifacts of prehistoric Indians, it is to try
to learn the how and why of this lifestyle, otherwise, we miss the main objective
of archeology and may as well stack up a pile of stream-washed gravel. The
blanket term perforator should supersede the term drill in all descriptions unless the artifact has a defined use as in socket drill, bead drill, pipe drill, fire
drill, etc., or other if unknown (R. E. Forrester, in press).
The perforators I describe as socket drills are, in general, like the wooden
thumb-turn pegs that are used on violins to adjust the tuning (Figure 3, A-F).
With eager permission, Mr. Robert E. Forrester has extended me the privilege
of quoting a full page and a table from a soon-to-be published final report, "Horn
Shelter Number 2, North End." This report, a sequel to the preliminary report
(Forrester 1985), is an exhaustive study of a deep stratified occupation site with
deposits extending from about 8000 B.C. to about A.D. 1400.
FLINT PERFORATORS
Drill is a word used to describe a flint tool apparently made to drill
holes in wood, soft stone, horn, antler, pottery and similar materials. The
term embraces too many forms and styles and some of those tools
commonly named"drills" were undoubtedly used as awls in leatherworking
and for yet other purposes.
Since it is usually impossible to demonstrate the precise use to which
any specific tool was put, it may be better to use the term perforator, which
covers any tool intended to make a hole.
To rule out perforators made of bone, often called "bone needles" one
should specify the type of material from which they are made. This is
normally flint, again often a misnomer,

294

Texas Archeological Society

0

I

o

I

I

I

1

I

I

5
jl

CENTIMETERS

2 INCHES

Figure 3. Atlatl foreshaft socket drills, A-C; Arrow foreshaft socket drills, D-F.

There are four basic forms of flint perforators. One form is made from
original intent as a perforator and has no stem or tang. Its shape when well
finished is similar to a wooden violin-peg. On occasion it consists only of
a slender bit on an unfinished flake. When made onto an existing blade, it
is difficult to determine if that was the case or if it was made onto a flake
which was then carefully dressed down all around the base. The bit may
be either slender or short and stubby.
The second form is made onto an existing projectile point. This may
be either an arrow point or a dart point. Here too the bit may be either

Padgett ~ The Foreshaft Socket Drill

295

slender or short and stubby. No evidence suggest a stem or tang for a handle
was necessary.
In each of those two forms, there is a size distinction. The small size
was unknown in the atlatl era. With the advent of the bow and arrow the
small size became almost the only form present. This has connotations
which cannot be ignored! It is believed that the larger, slender form was
made ~ifically to drill out the wooden socket in an atlatl shaft to receive
a tapered foreshaft and that the smaller slender form was used similarly in
the smaller arrow shaft. This idea was propounded by bar. Roy Padgett
(1967), with whom the author is in full agreement.
The third form, noted here as"acicular," is a slender tool with no basal
expansion, having the form of a bit from a large violin-peg perforator. It
is doubtful that the acicular form was used as a drill.
The fourth form is a strongly beveled, double- or single-pointed tool.
The double-pointed variety is similar to, and in some cases may actually
be, the Harahey "knife." The single-pointed variety appears as one-half of
a Harahey knife and this variety has no name. Neither variety was
recovered here.
Table 1. Summary of Drills: Horn Shelter Number 2, North End

Level

Violin
Total
Number

Onto
Peg
Shape

27

1

1

23

2

1

21

2

1

20

4

19

12

18

3

17

7

16

2

15

3

10
?
TOTALS

Projectiles

For
Other
Forms

For
Arrow
Socket

For
Dart
Socket

Other
Use

1
1

1

1

2

1

2

2

2

1

1

3

1

9

2

2

5
1

2

1

4

3

7

2
1

2

1

2

4

2

2

2

2

2

1

1

1

1

42

19

18

4

1

NOTES: Table by courtesy of Robert E. Forrester.
Levels are numbered from bottom to top.
Tips and fragments are omitted.

5

25

296

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Bit Lengths

Number

Range
(mm)

Average
(mm)

(n = 10)

40-51

44.3

Projectile-based bits or darts

(n =7)

21-50

Violin-peg bits for arrow shafts

(n =3)

17-27

38.3
20.7

Projectile-based bits for arrows

(n =1)

Type of Bit
Violin-peg bits for dart shafts

NOTE:

32.0

Table by courtesy of Robert E. Forrester.

Examination of the summaries above reinforce the theory that the
slender forms of both the projectile-based and the violin-peg shaped flint
perforators, in both the large and small sizes, were used as drills to form
the sockets of atlatl dart shafts and arrow shafts. One specimen, B 15-62,
was a tiny violin-peg shaped drill and was clearly out of context in Level
16. Another specimen, B 12-17, was a large violin-peg shaped drill in Level
23 (an arrow point level). All the others were in their expected positions.
It is easier to explain the dart socket drill in the arrow point level than the
arrow socket drill in the dart point level JR. E. Forrester, in press].
The above commentary and tables by Forrester put firm credibility to the use
of socket drills in the Paleoindian period and to the use and shift to the arrow shaft
size right through time to the Late Prehistoric period.
The base of a socket drill could be any size or shape as long as it was wider than
the bit, to provide mechanical leverage for turning the bit into the work. The base
could be a thumb-and-finger grip twist or it could be hafted for whole hand use.
Often, the base is no more than the remainder of the flake from which the drill
was made, and may indicate an anticipated one-time use only. Again, the base may
be carefully bifacially chipped and have smoothed sharp edges. The bases of a good
percentage of socket drills are the bases of reworked projectile points (Figure 3, A;
Table 1). These could have been hafted or they could have been complete foreshafts
hafted with their stone points before being reworked into drills. The flintknapper
here may have needed the flint in the point for a drill bit more than he needed the
point. Where it is possible to identify such a socket drill base as a named projectile
point type, we need to consider whether the type was contemporaneous with the
culture in which it was found. It could be a point that was picked up somewhere,
whose chronology predates by hundreds or even thousands of years the culture in
which it was made into a drill. We need this further insight to the man behind the
tool (Suhm et al. 1954).
The configuration of the base was actually of small consequence to the function
of the tool. When the Indian put his hands to a piece of flint to make a drill for a socket

Padgett ~ The Foreshaft Socket Drill

297

in a shaft, he would not have been concerned much about a pattern for the base. His
concern, instead, would have been directed to the optimum size and shape of the bit
for its expected performance.
On examination of the drills, it is apparent that the size of the bit is a very good
indication of the size of the shaft to be drilled. As bow and arrow weaponry came
onto the scene, the socket drills suddenly dropped down in size to accommodate the
smaller arrow Shafts ~igure 3, D-F). Although the atlatl and spear certainly carried
over into the Historic period, the small arrow shaft drills did not appear until the
introduction of the bow and arrow ~able 1). The drill bit was precisely engineered,
and meticulously designed and worked. A typical aOatl drill bit might be 38 mm (1.5
inch) long, 14 mm (7/16 inch) wide near the base, tapering to 8 mm (5/16 inch) near
the lower end and then tapering sharply to the point. The degree of taper was critical,
for if the angle was too great, the shaft could fall away too easily. Conversely,
without enough taper, the foreshaft could seize in the socket and not fall away at all.
The degree of taper can vary slightly from one drill to the next, but a general average
on several that were measured comes to about 4° ~igure 3, A-C).
The bit, while maintaining its taper, has edges that are sharp and straight, or
very slightly convex. The flaking is very fine with minimal serration on the sharp
edges.
Fundamental to the design is the thickness in the center of its cross section,
which is needed for strength but should never equal the width of the cutting edges.
This gives the edges what is known in machining terms as tool relief to do the
cutting. This has led to descriptive terms in published reports such as oval, ridged,
diamond, etc. Drills reported with steep beveling on opposite sides have what is
called a propeller-shaped cross section; the beveling gives a better angle to the
cutting edges. This beveling can also indicate left or right twist action.
None of the hafted weapons of stone age man had the explosive effect of
expanding bullets as provided by the modern day rifle, and whether used on game
or on enemies, his weapons depended solely on penetrating, cutting, and internal
bleeding for their lethal effects.
Even the modern day bow-hunter using a 32 kg (70 pound) pull compound
bow and a razor-sharp, three-bladed, broad-head arrowpoint knows he must
depend on internal bleeding to effect a kill. After making a perfect chest cavity
hit on a deer, he knows he will need to track his quarry from 45 meters (50
yards) to perhaps 100 to 300 meters (110 to 330 yards) or more. I have referred
above to a fall-away foreshaft, and more needs to be said about its advantages.
Consider now, a primitive hunter using an atlatl dart without a foreshaft. Let’s
say he makes a perfect chest cavity hit on a deer. As the animal struggles in
panic and crashes away through brush or cover, the shaft is quite likely to be
broken off. Or, say his shot was less than perfect, and the animal is wounded,
but not fatally, as the projectile has penetrated a nonvital area. Again, the shaft
is apt to be broken or carried away for some distance. In the event that the hunter
had a clean miss, the projectile could have struck a tree or rock, shattering the
point and splitting the shaft on the impact.

298

Texas Areheological Society

Now consider the same scene with the hunter using a dart with a foreshaft with
the perfect or even the imperfect shot. The first few sideways strains on the socket
connection loosen it, and the main shaft falls free. If a tree or rock is hit, the
shattering of the point and/or the splitting of the foreshaft might absorb the impact
and the main shaft might be left undamaged.
If the main shaft should fall away, the hunter could retrieve it quickly and,
from a pouch or belt, select another pointed foreshaft--one of several he might
carry--and reload. This situation would give the hunter the advantages of a
repeating rifle as compared with those of a muzzleloader; this hunter would not
be disarmed by just one shot.
Any woodworker can tell you that the most difficult hole to bore into wood
is one straight into the end of the grain. The wood auger bit will not work at all,
and a drill bit for metal tends to "walk" off center. I have been involved in tool
design engineering and have had many years of experience with hand tools for
wood- and metal-working. I find nothing in this Indian’s tool kit of bone, horn,
wood, and stone with which he could have bored out such sockets except for the
classic flint socket drill.
It is certain that these drills could be and were used to drill other materials
such as bone, horn, and teeth. Also, there were drills of other sizes and designs.
Still, I ask readers to think in terms of the socket drill when you look at a drill,
before you relegate it to some other purpose.
My grade-school history books recorded that Eli Whitney was the first to
produce interchangeable parts for cotton gins and guns. This concept of socket
drills and fall-away foreshafts that could be quickly replaced could push back
the role of interchangeable parts as many as 10,000 years with the weapons of
the American Indian.

CONCLUSIONS
Many of the shafted weapons were crafted with detachable foreshafts. Sockets
for these shafts were made with very carefully designed and shaped flint drills, made
specifically for this purpose.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
My thanks to Mr. Robert E. Forrester for his collaboration and provision of
artifacts for photographs and for the commentary and tables on drills (Tables 1 and
2) quoted herein.
REFERENCES CITED
Barnett, F.
1973
Dictionary of Prehistoric Indian Artifacts. Northland Press, Flagstaff.

Padgett ~ The Foreshaft Socket Drill

299

Blaine, J. C., R. K. Harris, W. W. Crook and J. L. Shiner
1968
The Acton Site: Hood County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 39:45-94.
Evans, O. F.
1959
The Development of the Atlatl and the Bow. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 30:159-162.
Forrester, R. E.
1964
The Ham Creek Site, an Edwards Plateau Aspect Site in Johnson County,
Texas. Edited by I. R. Lobdell. Tarrant County Archeological Society.
1985

Horn Shelter Number 2, A Preliminary Report. Central Texas Archeologist
10:21-35.

In Press Horn Shelter: Final Report.
Krieger, A. D.
1956
Historic Survival of the Atlatl in the Lower Mississippi Region. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 27:195-207.
Padgett, R. E.
1967
The Foreshaft Socket Drill. Paper presented at the annual meeting of Oklahoma Anthropological Society. Norman.
Richards, M. K.
1971
The Iw~ Site, A Late Prehistoric Manifestation in Garvin County, Oklahoma.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 20:1-82.
Schneider, F. E.
1969
The Roy Smith Site, Bv-14, Beaver County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 18:119-179.
Schuetz, M. K.
1960
An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Materials: Part H. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 31:167-205.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954
Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
25.
Wyckoff, D. G.
1973
The Lowrance Site of Murray County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society 21:1-155.

